Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_4960

Abstract:
Spectral theorems for random walks on mapping class groups and Out(FN ) François Dahmani and Camille Horbez  arXiv:1506.06790v2 [math.GR] 23 Nov 2016  November 24, 2016  Abstract We establish spectral theorems for random walks on mapping class groups of connected, closed, oriented, hyperbolic surfaces, and on Out(FN ). In both cases, we relate the asymptotics of the stretching factor of the diffeomorphism/automorphism obtained at time n of the random walk to the Lyapunov exponent of the walk, which gives the typical growth rate of the length of a curve – or of a conjugacy class in FN – under a random product of diffeomorphisms/automorphisms. In the mapping class group case, we first observe that the drift of the random walk in the curve complex is also equal to the linear growth rate of the translation lengths in this complex. By using a contraction property of typical Teichmüller geodesics, we then lift the above fact to the realization of the random walk on the Teichmüller space. For the case of Out(FN ), we follow the same procedure with the free factor complex in place of the curve complex, and the outer space in place of the Teichmüller space. A general criterion is given for making the lifting argument possible.  Contents 1 Random walks on groups acting on hyperbolic spaces  7  2 Translation lengths of random elements: abstract setting  12  3 Spectral theorem for random walks on Mod(S)  19  4 Spectral theorem for random walks on Out(FN )  26  Introduction In a famous work on random products of matrices [19], Furstenberg and Kesten proved that, under very general conditions, the norm of a random product of n matrices grows as a deterministic exponential function of n. This result was later improved by Furstenberg, who established in [18, Theorems 8.5 and 8.6] that if (Ai )i∈N is a sequence of matrices 1  chosen uniformly at random among a finite generating set for SL(N, Z), then there exists λ > 1 such that for all vectors v ∈ RN r {0}, almost surely, one has p lim n ||An . . . A1 .v|| = λ n→+∞  (and log λ is usually called the Lyapunov exponent of the random process). Furstenberg’s theorem was a starting point in the study of growth of vectors under random products of matrices, which had many further developments, including the famous multiplicative ergodic theorem of Oseledets [42]. Guivarc’h established in [22, Théorème 8] a spectral theorem, relating the asymptotics of the top eigenvalue λ(An . . . A1 ) of the matrix An . . . A1 to the Lyapunov exponent, showing that almost surely, one has p lim n λ(An . . . A1 ) = λ n→+∞  (Guivarc’h actually relates the whole spectrum of the matrix An . . . A1 to the set of all Lyapunov exponents of the process). The goal of the present paper is to establish spectral theorems for the random walks on either the mapping class group Mod(S) of a closed, connected, oriented, hyperbolic surface S – i.e. the group of all isotopy classes of orientation-preserving diffeomorphisms of S – or on the group Out(FN ) of outer automorphisms of a finitely generated free group. Mapping class groups. We fix once and for all a hyperbolic metric ρ on S. Given a simple closed curve c on S, we will denote by lρ (c) the smallest length with respect to ρ of a curve in the isotopy class of c. An important theorem of Thurston describes the possible growth rates of the lengths of essential simple closed curves on S under iteration of a single mapping class of the surface: Thurston proved in [47, Theorem 5] that for all Φ ∈ Mod(S), there is a finite set 1 ≤ λ1 < λ2 < · · · < λK of algebraic integers such that for any essential simple closed curve c on S, there exists i ∈ {1, . . . , K} such that q lim n lρ (Φn (c)) = λi . n→+∞  In addition, the mapping class Φ is pseudo-Anosov if and only if K = 1 and λ1 > 1. In [33], Karlsson proved a version of Thurston’s theorem for random products of mapping classes, describing the growth of simple closed curves on S under such products. Given a probability measure µ on Mod(S), the (right) random walk on (Mod(S), µ) is the Markov chain whose value at time n is a product Φn of n independent random mapping classes si , all distributed with respect to the law µ, i.e. Φn = s1 . . . sn . In the following statement, a subgroup of Mod(S) is nonelementary if it contains two pseudo-Anosov diffeomorphisms of the surface that generate a free subgroup of Mod(S) (equivalently [40], it is not virtually cyclic, and does not virtually preserve the isotopy class of any proper essential subsurface of S).  2  Theorem 0.1. (Karlsson [33, Corollary 4]) Let µ be a probability measure on Mod(S), with finite first moment with respect to the Teichmüller metric, whose support generates a nonelementary subgroup of Mod(S). Then there exists λ > 1 such that for all essential simple closed curves c on S, and almost every sample path (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (Mod(S), µ), one has q lim  n  n→+∞  lρ (Φ−1 n (c)) = λ.  The real number log λ > 0, which we call the Lyapunov exponent of the random walk on (Mod(S), µ), is deterministic: it is equal to the drift of the realization of the random walk on the Teichmüller space of the surface, with respect to the Teichmüller metric. On the other hand, when µ has finite support, it is known that the mapping class obtained at time n from the random walk on Mod(S) is pseudo-Anosov with probability tending to 1 exponentially fast [43, 45, 36, 9]. Using the Borel–Cantelli Lemma, this implies that almost surely, eventually all mapping classes Φn are pseudo-Anosov (and hence they have a well-defined stretching factor λ(Φn )). We prove the following spectral theorem for random walks on Mod(S), which relates the asymptotics of the stretching factors λ(Φn ) to the Lyapunov exponent of the random walk. Theorem 0.2. Let S be a closed, connected, oriented, hyperbolic surface, and let µ be a probability measure on Mod(S), whose support is finite and generates a semigroup containing two independent pseudo-Anosov elements. Then for almost every sample path (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (Mod(S), µ), we have p lim n λ(Φn ) = λ, n→+∞  where log λ is the Lyapunov exponent of the random walk. Finiteness of the support of µ can be replaced by the assumption that µ has finite second moment with respect to the Teichmüller metric, see Remarks 2.7 and 3.2 below. If µ is only assumed to have finite first moment with respect to the Teichmüller metric, then the probability that Φn is pseudo-Anosov still converges to 1 [37, Theorem 1.4] but we do not know whether the speed of convergence still ensures that eventually all Φn are pseudo-Anosov. However, in this situation, Theorem 0.2 remains valid if one replaces the limit by a limsup. We also note that Theorem 0.2 remains valid if S is a compact surface with one boundary component, in which case it may be viewed as a particular case of Theorem 0.4. At the cost of an anticipation on the tools and methods (which are detailed later in this introduction), we would like to insist on the difference in nature between Theorems 0.1 and 0.2. On the one hand, the geometric interpretation of the growth described by Theorem 0.1 is an expression of the drift of the realization of the random walk in the Teichmüller space T (S), in terms of a certain (random) limiting horofunction. On the other hand, the geometric interpretation of our main result (Theorem 0.2) is a description of the growth of the translation length log λ(Φn ) along the axis of Φn in T (S). While the 3  distance to the origin in T (S) is subadditive along the trajectories of the random walk (which allows the use of Kingman ergodic theorem to deduce the existence of the drift), the translation length log λ(Φn ) along an axis is not, in fact it can be very different for two very close elements. Therefore, the existence of the limit in Theorem 0.2 is far from obvious. The best straightforward analogue in a free group of the quantity we want to measure would be the length of a cyclic reduction of a word. However, as we are measuring all distances in the Teichmüller space T (S), which is not Gromov hyperbolic, understanding the behaviour of log λ(Φn ) is much more difficult in our setting. This being said, Karlsson formulated a wish, in [33, (iii) page 220], to compare his result “that random walk trajectories eventually look pseudo-Anosov from [the growth] perspective” to the genericity of being pseudo-Anosov. We believe that our result is a very relevant piece of comparison. We would finally like to emphasize that, although the mapping class group Mod(S) has relations with the linear group GL(N, Z) (for example through the symplectic representation), our main result cannot be deduced from Guivarch’s: in fact, Theorem 0.2 also applies to highly non-linear situations, for example it applies to generic random walks on the Torelli group of the surface. Out(FN ). The same question also makes sense for Out(FN ). An element Φ ∈ Out(FN ) is fully irreducible if no power Φk (with k 6= 0) fixes the conjugacy class of a proper free factor of FN . Every fully irreducible outer automorphism Φ ∈ Out(FN ) has a well-defined stretching factor λ(Φ) > 0, which gives the exponential growth rate of all primitive conjugacy classes in FN under iteration of Φ (an element of FN is primitive if it belongs to some free basis of FN ). The analogue of Thurston’s theorem, giving possible growth rates of conjugacy classes of FN under iteration of a single automorphism of FN , also holds true in this context – this can be established using train track theory, see [7, 35]. The second author of the present paper proved in [26, Corollary 5.4] an analogue of Karlsson’s theorem for random walks on Out(FN ), showing that all primitive conjugacy classes in FN grow exponentially fast along typical sample paths of the random walk, with a deterministic exponential growth rate λ. Here, the length ||g|| of a nontrivial element g ∈ FN should be understood as the smallest word length of a conjugate of g, written in some prescribed free basis of FN . A subgroup of Out(FN ) is nonelementary if it is not virtually cyclic, and does not virtually preserve the conjugacy class of any proper free factor of FN . Theorem 0.3. (Horbez [26, Corollary 5.4]) Let µ be a probability measure on Out(FN ), with finite first moment with respect to the Lipschitz metric on outer space, whose support generates a nonelementary subgroup of Out(FN ). Then there exists λ > 1 such that for all primitive elements g ∈ FN , and almost every sample path of the random walk on (Out(FN ), µ), we have q lim  n→+∞  n  ||Φ−1 n (g)|| = λ.  4  As above, we call log λ the Lyapunov exponent of the random walk, which is also equal to the drift of the realization of the walk on Culler–Vogtmann’s outer space, with respect to the (asymmetric) Lipschitz metric, i.e. log λ = lim  n→+∞  1 dCVN (y0 , Φn .y0 ) n  for almost every sample path (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (Out(FN ), µ) and any y0 ∈ CVN . Here again, if µ has finite support, then the automorphism Φn obtained at time n of the process is fully irreducible with high probability [43, 45, 9], and therefore it has a well-defined stretching factor λ(Φn ). We prove the following spectral theorem for Out(FN ). Theorem 0.4. Let µ be a probability measure on Out(FN ), whose support is finite and generates a semi-group containing two independent fully irreducible elements of Out(FN ). Then for P-a.e. sample path of the random walk on (Out(FN ), µ), we have q n lim λ(Φ−1 n ) = λ, n→+∞  where log λ is the Lyapunov exponent of the random walk. Contrary to the mapping class group case, the stretching factor of an outer automorphism of FN can be different from the stretching factor of its inverse. It is therefore important in the above statement to consider λ(Φ−1 n ) and not λ(Φn ). As in the mapping class group case, finiteness of the support can be replaced by the assumption that µ has finite second moment with respect to the Lipschitz metric on outer space, see Remarks 2.7 and 4.2 below. If µ is only assumed to have finite first moment with respect to the Lipschitz metric, then one should replace the limit by a limsup. Strategy of proofs. We now explain the general idea of the proofs of Theorems 0.2 and 0.4. The mapping class group Mod(S) acts both on the Teichmüller space T (S), and on the curve complex C(S), which is known to be Gromov hyperbolic thanks to work of Masur and Minsky [39]. The behaviour of the realization of the random walk of Mod(S) on the hyperbolic complex C(S) is well-understood: there is a rich literature on random walks on hyperbolic spaces [29, 9, 37]. Typical sample paths of the realization of the random walk on Mod(S) converge to a boundary point ξ ∈ ∂∞ C(S). The length of the overlap between the geodesic ray from a basepoint x0 ∈ C(S) to ξ and a quasi-axis of the mapping class Φn obtained at time n of the process grows linearly with n. In particular the translation length of Φn in C(S) grows linearly with n, with speed equal to the drift of the realization on C(S) of the random walk on Mod(S). On the other hand, the logarithm of the stretching factor of Φn is equal to the translation length of Φn on the Teichmüller space T (S), equipped with the Teichmüller metric. Therefore, we need to establish the same property as above for the realization 5  of the random walk on T (S): namely, we need to show that the translation length of Φn in T (S) grows linearly fast at a speed given by the drift of the random walk in the Teichmuller metric. The rough idea is that typical geodesics in T (S) have a hyperboliclike behaviour. To make this precise, we appeal to a contraction property established by Dowdall, Duchin and Masur in [14]. This asserts that any Teichmüller geodesic segment I whose projection to C(S) makes progress in C(S), is contracting in T (S), in the sense that every other Teichmüller geodesic with same projection as I in C(S), must pass uniformly close to I in T (S). We then prove that the realization in T (S) of a typical sample path of the random walk on (Mod(S), µ) stays close to a geodesic ray which contains infinitely many such subsegments. Since the quasi-axis of Φn in C(S) passes close to x0 , the contraction property implies that the translation axis of Φn in T (S) has to pass close to these subsegments, and hence close to the basepoint y0 (we call this a lifting argument). This implies that the translation length of Φn in T (S) grows linearly fast, at a speed equal to the drift of the realization of the random walk in T (S), as required. Our lifting argument is presented in a more abstract setting, see Theorem 2.6 for a precise statement. We require having two actions of a group G on both a metric space Y and a hyperbolic metric space X, with a coarsely G-equivariant map from Y to X, such that geodesics in Y map to unparameterized quasigeodesics in X. Typical geodesics in Y are required to contain infinitely many subsegments satisfying the above contraction property. Under such assumptions, if typical elements of G act with a translation axis in Y , then the translation length in Y of the element obtained at time n of the random walk on G grows linearly fast, with speed equal to the drift of the realization of the random walk in Y . Similarly, the group Out(FN ) acts both on Culler–Vogtmann’s outer space CVN , and on the free factor complex F FN , whose hyperbolicity was established by Bestvina and Feighn [6]. Again, the logarithm of the stretching factor of the automorphism Φn obtained at time n of the process is equal to the translation length of Φn in outer space, equipped with the (asymmetric) Lipschitz metric. We give in Section 4.3 a similar – though more technical – condition ensuring that a folding path in outer space satisfies the above contraction property, and prove that typical folding paths in CVN contain infinitely many such subsegments. Theorem 0.4 then follows from the same general criterion established in Section 2. Structure of the paper. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, we review properties of random walks on groups acting on hyperbolic spaces, which mainly come from the work of Calegari–Maher [9] and Maher–Tiozzo [37]. In Section 2, we state our general criterion for making the lifting argument possible. We check in Section 3 that typical Teichmüller geodesics in T (S) contain infinitely many subsegments that have the required contraction property, and we use this to derive Theorem 0.2. We check in Section 4 that typical folding lines in outer space contain infinitely many subsegments  6  having the required contraction property, and we use this to derive Theorem 0.4.  Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Ursula Hamenstädt for discussions during the Young Geometric Group Theory IV meeting held in Spa in January 2015, regarding contraction properties of folding lines in outer space. We also thank the anonymous referees for their careful reading of the paper and their valuable suggestions. The authors acknowledge support from ANR-11-BS01-013, from the Institut Universitaire de France (FD) and from the Lebesgue Center of Mathematics (CH).  1 1.1  Random walks on groups acting on hyperbolic spaces Random walks on groups: background and notations  General notations. Given a probability measure µ on a group G, the (right) random walk on G with respect to the measure µ is the Markov chain on G whose initial distribution is the Dirac measure at the identity element, with transition probabilities p(x, y) := µ(x−1 y). The step space for the random walk is the product probability space ∗ ∗ Ω := (GN , µ⊗N ). The position of the random walk at time n is given from its position g0 = e at time 0 by successive multiplications on the right of independent µ-distributed increments si , i.e. gn = s1 . . . sn . We equip the path space P := GN with the σ-algebra generated by the cylinders {g ∈ P|gi = g} for all i ∈ N and all g ∈ G, and the probability measure P induced by the map (s1 , s2 , . . . ) 7→ (g0 , g1 , g2 , . . . ). Elements of the path space P are called sample paths of the random walk. We will also need to work with the space P := GZ of bilateral paths g := (gn )n∈Z corresponding to bilateral sequences of independent µ-distributed increments (sn )n∈Z by the formula gn = gn−1 sn , with g0 = e. We let Ω := (GZ , µ⊗Z ), and we equip P with the probability measure P induced by the map (sn )n∈Z 7→ (gn )n∈Z . We denote by µ̌ the probability measure on G defined by µ̌(g) := µ(g −1 ) for all g ∈ G, and by (P̌, P̌) the corresponding path space. Then there is a natural isomorphism between (P, P) and the product space (P̌, P̌) ⊗ (P, P), mapping a bilateral path (gn )n∈Z to the pair of unilateral paths ((g−n )n≥0 , (gn )n≥0 ) (note that both paths are initialized by g0 = e). The Bernoulli shift σ, defined in Ω by σ((sn )n∈Z ) := (sn+1 )n∈Z , induces an ergodic transformation U on the space of bilateral paths which satisfies (U k .g)n = gk−1 gn+k for all k, n ∈ Z. Moment and drift. Assume now that G acts by isometries on a metric space (X, dX ), and let x0 ∈ X. We say that a probability measure µ on G has finite first moment with respect to dX if Z dX (x0 , g.x0 )dµ(g) < +∞. G  7  We say that µ has finite second moment with respect to dX if Z dX (x0 , g.x0 )2 dµ(g) < +∞. G  It follows from Kingman’s subadditive ergodic theorem [34] that if µ has finite first moment with respect to dX , then for P-a.e. sample path of the random walk on (G, µ), the limit 1 lim dX (x0 , gn .x0 ) n→+∞ n exists. It is called the drift of the random walk on (G, µ) with respect to the metric dX .  1.2  General definitions in coarse geometry  Given two metric spaces X and Y , and a constant K ∈ R, a K-quasi-isometric embedding from X to Y is a map f : X → Y such that for all x, x0 ∈ X, one has 1 dX (x, x0 ) − K ≤ dY (f (x), f (x0 )) ≤ KdX (x, x0 ) + K. K A K-quasigeodesic in X is a K-quasi-isometric embedding from an interval in R to X. A K-unparameterized quasigeodesic is a map τ 0 : I 0 → X, where I 0 ⊆ R is an interval, such that there exists an interval I ⊆ R and a non-decreasing homeomorphism θ : I → I 0 such that τ 0 ◦ θ is a K-quasigeodesic.  1.3  Background on Gromov hyperbolic spaces  Let (X, dX ) be a metric space, and let x0 ∈ X be some basepoint. For all x, y ∈ X, the Gromov product of x and y with respect to x0 is defined as 1 (x|y)x0 := (dX (x0 , x) + dX (x0 , y) − dX (x, y)). 2 A metric space X is Gromov hyperbolic if there exists a constant δ ≥ 0 such that for all x, y, z, x0 ∈ X, one has (x|y)x0 ≥ min{(x|z)x0 , (y|z)x0 } − δ. When X is geodesic, hyperbolicity of X is equivalent to a thin triangles condition: there exists δ 0 ≥ 0 such that for every geodesic triangle ∆ in X, any side of ∆ is contained in the δ 0 -neighborhood of the union of the other two sides. The smallest such δ 0 is then called the hyperbolicity constant of X. Let X be a Gromov hyperbolic metric space. A sequence (xn )n∈N ∈ X N converges to infinity if the Gromov product (xn |xm )x0 goes to +∞ as n and m both go to +∞. Two sequences (xn )n∈N and (yn )n∈N that both converge to infinity are equivalent if the Gromov product (xn |ym )x0 goes to +∞ as n and m go to +∞. It follows from the hyperbolicity of (X, d) that this is indeed an equivalence relation. The Gromov boundary 8  ∂∞ X is defined to be the collection of equivalence classes of sequences that converge to infinity. An isometry φ of X is loxodromic if for all x ∈ X, the orbit map Z → X n 7→ φn .x is a quasi-isometric embedding. Given K > 0, we say that a line γ : R → X is a Kquasi-axis for φ if γ is a K-quasigeodesic, and there exists T ∈ R such that for all t ∈ R and all k ∈ Z, one has dX (φk .γ(t), γ(t + kT )) ≤ K. We note that there exists K, only depending on the hyperbolicity constant of X, such that all loxodromic isometries of X have a K-quasi-axis in X. Any loxodromic isometry has exactly two fixed points in ∂∞ X and acts with north-south dynamics on X ∪ ∂∞ X.  1.4  Random walks on groups acting on Gromov hyperbolic spaces  In this section, we review work by Calegari–Maher [9], further developed by Maher– Tiozzo [37], concerning random walks on groups acting by isometries on Gromov hyperbolic spaces (these extend previous work of Kaimanovich [29] who considered the case of proper actions on proper hyperbolic spaces). We will not always seek for optimal assumptions on the measure µ, we refer to [37] for more precise statements, see also Remark 2.7 below. Let X be a Gromov hyperbolic space, and let G be a countable group acting on X by isometries. A probability measure on G is then called nonelementary (for the action on X) if the subsemigroup of G generated by its support contains a pair of loxodromic elements with disjoint pairs of fixed points in the Gromov boundary of X. Theorem 1.1. (Convergence to the boundary) (Calegari–Maher [9, Theorem 5.34], Maher–Tiozzo [37, Theorem 1.1]) Let G be a countable group that acts by isometries on a separable Gromov hyperbolic space X, and let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on G. Then for any x0 ∈ X, and P-a.e. sample path Φ := (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (G, µ), the sequence (Φn .x0 )n∈N converges to a point bnd(Φ) ∈ ∂∞ X. Theorem 1.2. (Positive drift) (Calegari–Maher [9, Theorem 5.34], Maher–Tiozzo [37, Theorem 1.2]) Let G be a countable group which acts by isometries on a separable Gromov hyperbolic metric space (X, dX ), and let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on G with finite first moment with respect to dX . Then there exists L > 0 such that for P-a.e. sample path (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (G, µ), one has lim  n→+∞  1 dX (x0 , Φn .x0 ) = L. n  As recalled above, the existence of the limit in Theorem 1.2 is an application of Kingman’s subadditive ergodic theorem and only requires that µ has finite first moment with respect to dX (without any assumption on X, in particular X need not be hyperbolic). 9  The hard part of Theorem 1.2 is to prove positivity of L, for which hyperbolicity of X and nonelementarity of µ are crucial. Theorem 1.3. (Sublinear tracking by quasi-geodesic rays) (Maher–Tiozzo [37, Theorem 1.3]) Let G be a countable group which acts by isometries on a separable Gromov hyperbolic geodesic metric space (X, dX ), and let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on G with finite first moment with respect to dX . Let L > 0 be the drift of the random walk on (G, µ) with respect to dX . Then for P-a.e. sample path Φ := (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (G, µ), there exists a quasi-geodesic ray τ : R+ → X limiting at bnd(Φ) such that 1 lim dX (Φn .x0 , τ (Ln)) = 0. n→+∞ n Theorem 1.4. (Random isometries are loxodromic) (Calegari–Maher [9, Theorem 5.35], Maher–Tiozzo [37, Theorem 1.4]) Let G be a countable group which acts by isometries on a separable Gromov hyperbolic metric space X, and let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on G with finite support. Then for P-a.e. sample path (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (G, µ), there exists n0 ∈ N such that for all n ≥ n0 , the element Φn acts loxodromically on X. Proof. Calegari and Maher prove in [9, Theorem 5.35] that the probability that Φn be loxodromic converges exponentially fast to 1. Theorem 1.4 then follows by applying the Borel–Cantelli lemma. Given κ > 0, a quasigeodesic segment γ : J → X (where J ⊆ R is a segment), and a quasigeodesic γ 0 : I → X (where I ⊆ R is an interval), we say that γ 0 crosses γ up to distance κ if there exists an increasing map θ : J → I such that dX (γ(t), γ 0 (θ(t))) ≤ κ for all t ∈ J (notice in particular that the orientations of γ and γ 0 are required to be the same on their “overlap”). The following proposition is a slight elaboration on Theorem 1.4. Proposition 1.5. (Axes of random isometries pass close to the basepoint) Let G be a group acting by isometries on a separable geodesic Gromov hyperbolic space X, and let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on G with finite support. For all K > 0, there exists κ > 0 such that for P-a.e. sample path (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (G, µ), and all  ∈ (0, 1), there exists n0 ∈ N such that for all n ≥ n0 , the element Φn acts loxodromically on X, and for all geodesic segments γ from x0 to Φn .x0 , every K-quasi-axis of Φn crosses a subsegment of γ of length at least (1 − )dX (x0 , Φn .x0 ) up to distance κ. We will now prove Proposition 1.5. Our proof follows the same argumentation as in recent work by Taylor–Tiozzo [46], and is based on the following fact. Proposition 1.6. Let G be a countable group acting by isometries on a separable Gromov hyperbolic metric space (X, dX ), let x0 ∈ X, and let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on G with finite support. Then for P-a.e. sample path (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (G, µ), and all  > 0, there exists n0 ∈ N such that for all n ≥ n0 , we have (Φn .x0 |Φ−1 n .x0 )x0 ≤ n. 10  The idea behind the proof of Proposition 1.6 is that the first increments in the product Φn are independent from the first increments in the product Φ−1 n . Hyperbolicity of X then forces the geodesic segments [x0 , Φn .x0 ] and [x0 , Φ−1 .x ] 0 to diverge rapidly with n high probability. To make this precise, we will use the following two lemmas. These basically follow from Maher–Tiozzo’s work. Lemma 1.7. (Maher–Tiozzo [37, Lemmas 5.9 and 5.11]) Let G be a countable group acting by isometries on a separable Gromov hyperbolic space (X, dX ), and let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on G with finite support. Let LX > 0 denote the drift of the random walk on (G, µ) with respect to dX . Then for all  > 0, there exists C > 0 such that for all n ∈ N, one has   LX .n n P (Φn .x0 |Φb 2 c .x0 )x0 ≥ ≥ 1 − e−Cn 4 and    LX .n −1 n P (Φ−1 .x |Φ Φ ≥ .x ) ≥ 1 − e−Cn 0 n n−b 2 c 0 x0 n 4  and   P  (Φ−1 c .x0 |Φb n c .x0 )x0 n Φn−b n 2 2  LX .n ≤ 5    ≥ 1 − e−Cn .  Proof. This is a version of [37, Lemmas 5.9 and 5.11], where basically one only replaces m = b n2 c by b n 2 c (all arguments work in the same way). As noticed in Maher–Tiozzo’s paper, the exponential rate follows from exponential decay of shadows, which was already established in [36]. The first two estimates play symmetric roles and correspond to [37, Lemma 5.11], and the third one corresponds to [37, Lemma 5.9]. Lemma 1.8. (Maher–Tiozzo [37, Lemma 5.9]) Let X be a Gromov hyperbolic space, and let x0 ∈ X. Then there exist κ1 , κ2 > 0 that only depend on the hyperbolicity constant of X such that for all a, b, c, d ∈ X, if there exists A > 0 such that (a|b)x0 ≥ A, (c|d)x0 ≥ A and (a|c)x0 ≤ A − κ1 , then |(a|c)x0 − (b|d)x0 | ≤ κ2 . Proof of Proposition 1.6. For all  > 0, there exists C > 0 such that all three events considered in Lemma 1.7 happen simultaneously with probability greater than 1 − e−Cn . −1 −1 Applying Lemma 1.8 to a := Φb n c .x0 , b := Φn .x0 , c := Φn Φn−b n c .x0 and d := Φn .x0 , 2 2  .n with A = LX 4 , one deduces that for all  > 0, there exists C > 0 such that for all n ∈ N, one has  −Cn P (Φn .x0 |Φ−1 . n .x0 )x0 ≤ n ≥ 1 − e  Proposition 1.6 then follows by applying the Borel–Cantelli Lemma. Proof of Proposition 1.5. Consider a K-quasi-axis for Φ, and y0 a closest point to x0 on it. By hyperbolicity and the minimising property for y0 , all geodesic segments [Φ−1 .x0 , Φ−1 .y0 ], [Φ−1 .y0 , Φ.y0 ] and [Φ.y0 Φ.x0 ] remain κ0 = κ0 (K, δ)-close to any geodesic [Φ−1 .x0 , Φ.x0 ]. Since the lengths of [Φ−1 .x0 , Φ−1 .y0 ], [x0 , y0 ] and [Φx0 , Φy0 ] are within 11  κ1 (K, δ) of (Φ.x0 |Φ−1 .x0 )x0 , we know that for every K > 0, there exists κ = κ(K, δ) (where δ is the hyperbolicity constant of X) such that all K-quasi-axes of loxodromic isometries Φ cross the central subsegment of length dX (x0 , Φ.x0 ) − 2(Φ.x0 |Φ−1 .x0 )x0 of any geodesic segment [x0 , Φ.x0 ], up to distance κ. Proposition 1.5 is therefore a consequence of Theorem 1.2 (Positive drift) and Proposition 1.6, together with the fact that P-a.s., the element Φn is loxodromic for all n large enough (Theorem 1.4). Given  > 0, a quasi-geodesic ray γ : R+ → X, and n ∈ N, we denote by t,γ 1 (n) (resp. t,γ (n)) the infimum of all real numbers such that d (γ(0), γ(t (n))) ≥ L 1 X X .n 2 (resp. dX (γ(0), γ(t2 (n))) ≥ (1 − )LX .n). Combining Theorem 1.1 (convergence to the boundary), Theorem 1.3 (sublinear tracking) and Proposition 1.5 (axes of random isometries pass close to the basepoint), one can establish the following. Details of the proof are left to the reader. Proposition 1.9. Let X be a separable geodesic Gromov hyperbolic metric space, with hyperbolicity constant δ. For all K > 0, the exists κ = κ(K, δ), such that the following holds. Let G be a group acting by isometries on X, and let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on G with finite support. Let LX > 0 denote the drift of the random walk on (G, µ) with respect to dX . Then for P-a.e. sample path Φ := (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (G, µ), all  > 0, and all K-quasi-geodesic rays γ : R+ → X converging to bnd(Φ), there exists n0 ∈ N such that for all n ≥ n0 , any K-quasi-axis of Φn crosses ,γ γ|[t,γ up to distance κ. 1 (n),t2 (n)]  2  Translation lengths of random elements: abstract setting  The goal of this section is to provide the general setting for the lifting argument we wish to use for proving our spectral theorems. We will establish sufficient conditions under which, if G is a group acting by isometries on two metric spaces Y and X, where X is a hyperbolic coarse Lipschitz G-equivariant image of Y , then elements obtained along a typical sample path of the random walk on G have linearly growing translation length in Y . The main result of this section is Theorem 2.6 below. Let G be a countable group acting by isometries on a (possibly asymmetric) geodesic metric space (Y, dY ) (i.e. dY need not be symmetric, but it satisfies the triangle inequality, as well as the separation property that dY (a, b) = 0 if and only if a = b). We denote by dsym the symmetrized version of the metric, defined by letting dsym Y Y (x, y) := dY (x, y) + dY (y, x) for all x, y ∈ Y . A bordification of Y is a Hausdorff, second-countable topological space Y such that Y is homeomorphic to an open dense subset of Y , and such that the G-action on Y extends to an action on Y by homeomorphisms. We let ∂Y := Y r Y . From now on, when we talk about a metric G-space (Y, dY ), we assume that the G-action is by isometries, but we do not necessarily assume that the metric dY is symmetric. Note that one can talk about geodesics in a non-symetric metric space (Y, dY ): a geodesic is a map γ : I → Y where I is an interval in R, for which, for all a < b in I, dY (γ(a), γ(b)) = b − a.  12  Definition 2.1. (Boundary convergence) Let G be a countable group, let Y be a metric G-space which admits a bordification Y . Let µ be a probability measure on G. We say that (G, µ) is Y -boundary converging if for P-a.e. bilateral sample path Φ := (Φn )n∈Z of the random walk on (G, µ), there exist bnd− (Φ), bnd+ (Φ) ∈ ∂Y such that for all y0 ∈ Y , the sequence (Φn .y0 )n∈N converges to bnd+ (Φ), and the sequence (Φ−n .y0 )n∈N converges to bnd− (Φ). Definition 2.2. (Hyperbolic electrification) A hyperbolic G-electrification is a pair of G-spaces (Y, X), together with a map π : Y → X, such that • the space (Y, dY ) is a (possibly asymmetric) geodesic metric G-space, and • the space (X, dX ) is a separable Gromov hyperbolic (symmetric) geodesic metric G-space, and • there exists K1 > 0 such that for all x, y ∈ Y and all g ∈ G, we have dX (gπ(x), π(gx)) ≤ K1 (we say that π is coarsely G-equivariant) and dX (π(x), π(y)) ≤ K1 dY (x, y) + K1 (we say that π is coarsely Lipschitz), and • there exists K2 > 0 such that for all x, y ∈ Y , there exists a geodesic segment from x to y whose π-image in X is a K2 -unparameterized quasigeodesic. We fix from now on a hyperbolic G-electrification (Y, X), a map π : Y → X, and real numbers K1 , K2 > 0 given by the above definition. We also assume that Y admits a bordification Y . From now on, nonelementarity of a probability measure on G will always be meant with respect to the G-action on X. Given an interval I ⊆ R, we say that a geodesic γ : I → Y is electric if π ◦ γ : I → X is a K2 -unparameterized quasigeodesic (the last property in the above definition states the existence of an electric geodesic between any two points in Y ). We denote by Γel Y the collection of all electric geodesics in Y . We let κ = κ(K2 , δ) be the constant given by Proposition 1.9. Definition 2.3. (Contraction) Let γ : R → Y be an electric geodesic line, and let y ∈ Y be a point that lies on the image of γ. Given B, D > 0, we say that γ is (B, D)contracting at y if the following holds. Let a ∈ R be such that γ(a) = y, and let b ∈ R be the infimum of all real numbers such that π ◦ γ([a, b]) has dX -diameter at least B. Then for all geodesic lines γ 0 : R → Y , if π ◦ γ 0 crosses π ◦ γ|[a,b] up to distance κ, then there exists a0 ∈ R such that dY (γ 0 (a0 ), γ(a)) ≤ D. The following definition was first given in [1, Definition 6.13]: roughly speaking, a point y ∈ Y is high if for all y 0 ∈ Y , it is shorter to go from y to y 0 than to go from y 0 to y. 13  Definition 2.4. (Highness) Given M > 0, we say that a point y ∈ Y is M -high if for 0 0 all y 0 ∈ Y , we have dsym Y (y , y) ≤ M dY (y , y). We define the density θ(A) of a subset A ⊆ Z as   |A ∩ [−n, 0]| |A ∩ [0, n]| θ(A) := min lim inf . , lim inf n→+∞ n→+∞ n n The following definition is inspired by [48, Theorem 6]. Definition 2.5. (Contracting pencils of geodesics) Let G be a countable group, let (Y, X) be a hyperbolic G-electrification, and let y0 ∈ Y . Let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on G, such that the random walk on (G, µ) is Y -boundary converging. Denote by ν̌ and ν the hitting measures on ∂Y for the random walks on (G, µ̌) and (G, µ). We say that (G, µ) has contracting pencils of geodesics if there exists a G-equivariant map P : ∂Y × ∂Y → P(Γel Y ) which associates to any pair of points (x, y) ∈ ∂Y a set of electric geodesics in Y joining x to y, so that • the map D : ∂Y × ∂Y (x, y)  → R 7→ supγ∈P (x,y) dsym Y (y0 , γ(R))  is measurable and ν̌ ⊗ ν-a.e. finite, and • for all θ ∈ (0, 1), there exist B, D, M > 0 such that for P-a.e. bilateral sample path Φ := (Φn )n∈Z of the random walk on (G, µ), and all geodesic lines γ ∈ P (bnd− (Φ), bnd+ (Φ)), the set of integers k ∈ Z such that for all dsym Y -closest-point projections z of Φk .y0 to γ, the point z is M -high, and γ is (B, D)-contracting at z, has density at least θ. Let Φ ∈ G be a loxodromic isometry of X. We say that Φ has an electric translation axis in Y if there exists a Φ-invariant electric geodesic line γ : R → Y such that for all y ∈ γ(R), the line γ restricts to a geodesic segment from Φ.y to y, and dY (Φ.y, y) = inf dY (Φ.y 0 , y 0 ). 0 y ∈Y  We then denote by lY (Φ) the translation length of Φ, defined as lY (Φ) := dY (Φ.y, y) for all y lying on the image of an electric axis of Φ. We notice that the translation length of Φ is well-defined, i.e. it does not depend on the choice of an axis for Φ, and in addition, for all y ∈ Y , we have lY (Φ) ≤ dY (Φ.y, y). Notice that with the above definition, the action of Φ on an electric translation axis is by translation in the negative direction. Therefore, with our definitions, any electric geodesic axis for Φ in Y projects (as an oriented line) to a K2 -quasi-axis for Φ−1 in X. These conventions may sound a bit awkward, however they will turn out to be quite natural in the context where Y is either the Teichmüller space of a surface or Culler– Vogtmann’s outer space, because the natural actions of either Mod(S) or Out(FN ) on these spaces are right actions (so that one needs to pass to inverses when considering left actions). 14  Theorem 2.6. Let G be a countable group, and let (Y, X) be a G-hyperbolic electrification, with a basepoint y0 ∈ Y . Assume that Y admits a bordification Y . Let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on G with finite support. Assume that all elements of G acting loxodromically on X have an electric translation axis in Y . If the random walk on (G, µ) is Y -boundary converging and has contracting pencils of geodesics, then for P-a.e. sample path (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (G, µ), we have lY (Φ−1 n ) = LY , n→+∞ n lim  where LY denotes the drift of the random walk on (G, µ) with respect to dY . Remark 2.7. Since the support of µ is assumed to be finite, it follows from Theorem 1.4 that for P-a.e. sample path (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (G, µ), eventually all elements Φn act as loxodromic isometries of X, which justifies that it makes sense to write lY (Φ−1 n ) in Theorem 2.6. Combining Benoist–Quint’s arguments from [4] with Maher–Tiozzo’s results on random walks on nonproper hyperbolic spaces [37], one can actually show that Proposition 1.5 remains valid if µ is only assumed to have finite second moment with respect to dX (see [28, Section 2]). Therefore, Theorem 2.6 remains true if µ is only assumed to have finite second moment with respect to dY . If the support of µ is only assumed to have finite first moment with respect to dY , then we don’t know whether infinitely many Φn fail to satisfy the conclusion of Proposition 1.5 (or even fail to be loxodromic), however the conclusion of Theorem 2.6 remains valid if one takes the limit along the subsequence corresponding to those integers n for which Φn satisfies the conclusion of Proposition 1.5. Therefore, Theorem 2.6 remains valid in this situation if one replaces the limit by a limsup. The general idea of the proof of Theorem 2.6 is the following, it is illustrated in Figure 1. Typical sample paths of the realization in Y of the random walk on (G, µ) stay close to a (random) geodesic ray τY . Using the existence of contracting pencils of geodesics, for all n ∈ N, we can find a contracting subsegment J of the image of τY , whose distance to y0 is small compared to LY .n (Step 1 in the proof below). Using the properties of random walks on isometry groups of hyperbolic spaces recalled in Section 1, one can also arrange so that every quasi-axis of Φn in X crosses π(J) up to distance κ (Step 2). The contraction property implies that Φ−1 n has an electric axis in Y that passes at small distance from y0 (Step 3). This is enough to deduce that the translation length of Φ−1 n in Y is close to LY .n, as required (Step 4). Proof of Theorem 2.6. By Theorem 1.2, the drift LX of the realization of the random walk on X (with respect to the metric dX ) is positive. Since π is coarsely G-equivariant and coarsely Lipschitz, this implies that the drift LY of the realization of the random walk on Y (with respect to the metric dY ) is also positive. Let K1 ≥ 1 be a constant (provided by the definition of a hyperbolic G-electrification) such that for all x, y ∈ Y , we have dX (π(x), π(y)) ≤ K1 dY (x, y) + K1 . 15  Figure 1: The situation in the proof of Theorem 2.6.  Let K2 ≥ 1 be a constant such that for all electric geodesics γ : I → Y (where I ⊆ R is an interval), we have that π ◦ γ : I → X is an unparameterized K2 -quasigeodesic. Let  > 0. We fix a basepoint y0 ∈ Y , and let x0 := π(y0 ). Since (G, µ) is Y -boundary converging, we have that for P-a.e. sample path Φ := (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (G, µ), the sequence (Φn .y0 )n∈N converges to a point bndY (Φ) ∈ ∂Y , and by Theorem 1.1, the sequence (Φn .x0 )n∈N converges to a point bndX (Φ) ∈ ∂∞ X. Let θ := 78 , and let B, D > 0 and M ≥ 1 be the corresponding constants provided by the definition of having contracting pencils of geodesics (Definition 2.5). Claim. For P-a.e. sample path Φ := (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (G, µ), there exists an integer n0 ∈ N and an electric geodesic ray τY : R+ → Y , such that for all n ≥ n0 , the element Φn acts as a loxodromic isometry of X, and letting τX := π ◦ τY , we have (i) |dY (y0 , Φn .y0 ) − LY .n| ≤ LY .n, and (ii) dsym Y (Φn .y0 , τY (LY .n)) ≤  min{LY ,LX } .n 6K1  (iii) |dX (τX (0), Φn .x0 ) − LX .n| ≤  LX .n 12 ,  − 1, and  and  sym (iv) there are at least 6n 7 integers k ∈ {0, . . . , n} such that for all dY -closest-point projections z of Φk .y0 to τY , the point z is M -high, and τY is (B, D)-contracting at z, and  (v) every K2 -quasi-axis of Φn in X crosses τX ([t1 (n), t2 (n)]) up to distance κ, where κ = κ(K2 , δ) is the constant provided by Proposition 1.9, and t1 (n) (resp. t2 (n)) is the infimum of all real numbers such that dX (τX (0), τX (t1 (n))) ≥ LX .n (resp. dX (τX (0), τX (t2 (n))) ≥ (1 − )LX .n). 16  Proof of the Claim. Let us explain how to choose τY . For P-a.e. bilateral path Φ of the random walk on (G, µ), Tiozzo produces in [48, Theorem 6] a bi-infinite geodesic between the boundary limit points bnd− (Φ) and bnd+ (Φ), in the pencil of geodesics D(bnd− (Φ), bnd+ (Φ)), from which the random walk has sublinear tracking. We choose τY to be a positive ray in this geodesic. Property (ii) follows from the sublinear tracking, and property (iv) follows from the properties of our pencil of geodesics. Properties (i) and (iii) come from the definition of the drifts of the random walk on Y and X. Property (v) is guaranteed by Proposition 1.9. We let Φ := (Φn )n∈N be a sample path that satisfies the conclusion of the above claim. By choosing n0 sufficiently large, we may also assume that B + K1 ≤ LX .n0 , that D ≤ LY .n0 , that dsym Y (y0 , τY (0)) ≤ LY .n0 and that 2K1 ≤ LX .n0 . Step 1: We show the existence of a point y close to y0 at which τY is contracting. Let n ∈ N be such that n ≥ n0 . Then the interval [5n, 6n] contains an integer n2 fulfilling the Property (iv) above. In addition, by Property (ii), we have dsym Y (Φn2 .y0 , τY (LY .n2 )) ≤  min{LY , LX }.n2 − 1, 6K1  so in particular we have dsym Y (Φn2 .y0 , τY (LY .n2 )) ≤  LY .n2 ≤ LY .n. 6  Let y be a dsym Y -closest point projection of Φn2 .y0 to τY . By definition of a closest-point projection, we necessarily have dsym Y (Φn2 .y0 , y) ≤ LY .n. It then follows from the triangle inequality that dsym Y (y, τY (LY .n2 )) ≤ 2LY .n, so y ∈ τY ([3LY .n, 8LY .n]). We now let a ∈ R be such that τY (a) = y, and let b ≥ a be the infimum of all real numbers such that τX ([a, b]) has diameter at least B. We let J := [a, b]. By definition for all  > 0, τX ([a, b − ]) has diameter at most B, thus τX (J) has diameter at most B + K1 . Step 2: We show that every K2 -quasi-axis of Φn in X crosses (τX )|J up to distance κ.  17  Recall from above that dsym Y (Φn2 .y0 , τY (LY .n2 )) ≤  LX .n2 − 1, 6K1  and hence by definition of a closest-point projection dsym Y (Φn2 .y0 , y) ≤  LX .n2 − 1. 6K1  Using the fact that π is coarsely Lipschitz and that dY ≤ dsym Y , we get that dX (π(Φn2 .y0 ), π(y)) ≤ LX .n. By Property (iii) above, we also have |dX (Φn2 .x0 , τX (0)) − LX .n2 | ≤  LX .n2 LX .n ≤ . 12 2  Finally, since π is coarsely G-equivariant, we have dX (π(Φn2 .y0 ), Φn2 .x0 ) ≤ K1 ≤  LX .n . 2  Together with the triangle inequality, the above three inequalities imply that |dX (π(y), τX (0)) − LX .n2 | ≤ 2LX .n. As B + K1 ≤ LX .n, and τX (J) has diameter at most B + K1 , this implies that |dX (π(y 0 ), τX (0)) − LX .n2 | ≤ 3LX .n for all y 0 ∈ τY (J). By Property (v) above, we know in addition that every K2 -quasiaxis of Φn in X crosses τX ([t1 (n), t2 (n)]) up to distance κ (where t1 (n) and t2 (n) are defined as in Property (v)). Assuming that  > 0 had been chosen small enough such that 9 ≤ 1−, we get that every K2 -quasi-axis of Φn in X crosses (τX )|J up to distance κ. Step 3: We show that the element Φ−1 n has an electric axis in Y that passes close to y0 . By hypothesis, all elements of G acting loxodromically on X have an electric axis. In particular, the element Φ−1 n has an axis in Y , whose projection to X is a K2 -quasiaxis for Φn , and hence crosses (τX )|J up to distance κ. Since τY is (B, D)-contracting at y (Property (iv)), there exists a point y 0 lying on the axis of Φ−1 n in Y such that sym 0 0 dY (y , y) ≤ D, and hence dY (y, y ) ≤ M D since y is M -high. Hence we have sym sym sym 0 0 dsym Y (y0 , y ) ≤ dY (y0 , τY (0)) + dY (τY (0), y) + dY (y, y ) sym sym ≤ dY (y0 , τY (0)) + M dY (τY (0), y) + dY (y, y 0 ) ≤ dsym Y (y0 , τY (0)) + 8M LY .n + M D ≤ 10M LY .n.  18  Notice here that the second inequality uses the fact that y is M -high. Step 4: End of the proof. sym 0 By G-invariance of dsym Y , we also have dY (Φn .y0 , Φn .y ) ≤ 10M LY .n. Using the tri0 0 angle inequality, we get dY (y , Φn .y ) ≥ dY (y0 , Φn .y0 ) − 20M LY .n. Property (i) above then implies that dY (y 0 , Φn .y 0 ) ≥ (1 − 21M )LY .n. Since y 0 belongs to the translation 1 −1 axis of Φ−1 n , we obtain n lY (Φn ) ≥ (1 − 21M )LY . As  > 0 was chosen arbitrary small, and since the above inequality holds for all sufficiently large n ∈ N, we have  lim inf  n→+∞  1 lY (Φ−1 n ) ≥ LY . n  Notice in addition that for all n ∈ N, we have 1 1 lY (Φ−1 dY (y0 , Φn .y0 ), n )≤ n n and hence  1 lim sup lY (Φ−1 n ) ≤ LY . n n→+∞  This completes the proof of Theorem 2.6.  3  Spectral theorem for random walks on Mod(S)  Let S be a closed, connected, oriented, hyperbolic surface. We will now prove our spectral theorem for random walks on Mod(S). We fix a hyperbolic metric ρ on S. We refer to Section 3.1 below for definitions. Theorem 3.1. Let S be a closed, connected, oriented, hyperbolic surface, and let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on Mod(S) with finite support. Then for P-a.e. sample path (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (Mod(S), µ), we have lim  n→+∞  1 log(λ(Φn )) = LT , n  where λ(Φn ) denotes the stretching factor of the pseudo-Anosov mapping class Φn , and LT > 0 is the drift of the random walk on (Mod(S), µ) with respect to the Teichmüller metric. Remark 3.2. We recall that when µ has finite support, then with probability equal to 1, all Φn are eventually pseudo-Anosov, so that the stretching factor λ(Φn ) is well-defined (notice also that in this context, we have λ(Φn ) = λ(Φ−1 n ), as their logarithms are the translation lenghts in Teichmüller space equipped with the Teichmüller metric which is symmetric). Theorem 3.1 will be established by applying Theorem 2.6 to the Mod(S)hyperbolic electrification made of the Teichmüller space T (S) and the curve graph C(S). In view of Remark 2.7, Theorem 3.1 remains valid if µ is only assumed to have finite 19  second moment with respect to the Teichmüller metric dT . However, if µ is only assumed to have finite first moment with respect to dT , then one has to replace the limit by a limsup in the statement. The section is organized as follows. In Section 3.1, we record the necessary background on mapping class groups. In Section 3.2, we establish a sufficient criterion for a subsegment of a Teichmüller geodesic in T (S) to have the required contraction property: namely, we prove that if the projection of this subsegment to the curve graph C(S) makes progress, then this subsegment is contracting. We prove in Section 3.3 that typical Teichmüller geodesics contain infinitely many such subsegments. This will enable us to conclude the proof of Theorem 3.1 in Section 3.4 by applying Theorem 2.6.  3.1  Background on mapping class groups  We review some rather classical background on mapping class groups of surfaces. The familiar reader may skip directly to Section 3.2. Let S be a closed, connected, oriented, hyperbolic surface. The mapping class group Mod(S) is the group of isotopy classes of orientation-preserving diffeomorphisms of S. The group Mod(S) acts on the Teichmüller space T (S), and on the curve graph C(S) of the surface, whose definitions we now recall. The Teichmüller space T (S) is the space of isotopy classes of conformal structures on S. It can be equipped with several metrics; we review the definition of the Teichmüller metric. Given x, y ∈ T (S), the Teichmüller distance dT (x, y) is defined as 1 dT (x, y) := inff log K(f ), 2 where the infimum is taken over all quasiconformal diffeomorphisms f : (S, x) → (S, y) that are isotopic to the identity, and where K(f ) denotes the quasiconformal dilatation of f . (We note that the Teichmüller metric is a true metric which satisfies the symmetry property.) Teichmüller space, equipped with the Teichmüller metric, is a uniquely geodesic space, and Mod(S) acts by isometries on (T (S), dT ). A simple closed curve c on S is essential if it does not bound a disk on S. We denote by S the collection of all isotopy classes of essential simple closed curves on S. Given c ∈ S and x ∈ T (S), we denote by lx (c) the smallest length of a curve in the isotopy class c, measured in the unique hyperbolic metric in the conformal class x. Thurston has defined a compactification of T (S) by taking the closure of the map T (S) → PRS x 7→ (lx (c))c∈S and he identified the boundary with the space PMF of projective measured foliations on S (up to Whitehead equivalence), see [16, Exposé 8]. The curve graph C(S) is the graph whose vertices are the isotopy classes of essential simple closed curves on S, two vertices being joined by an edge if there are disjoint representatives in the isotopy classes of the corresponding curves. We denote by dC the 20  simplicial metric on C(S). Masur and Minsky have proved in [39] that (C(S), dC ) is Gromov hyperbolic. There is a coarsely Mod(S)-equivariant, coarsely Lipschitz map π : T (S) → C(S), mapping every point in T (S) to one of the essential simple closed curves whose length is minimal in S. It also follows from the work of Masur and Minsky [39] that projections of Teichmüller geodesics to the curve graph of S are uniform unparameterized quasi-geodesics. We sum up the above discussion in the following proposition, with the terminology from Section 2. Proposition 3.3. Let S be a closed, connected, oriented, hyperbolic surface. Then (T (S), C(S)) is a hyperbolic Mod(S)-electrification. Teichmüller geodesics are electric. A measured foliation in PMF is arational if it does not contain any simple closed curve on S. It is uniquely ergodic if in addition, every foliation in PMF with the same topological support as F is equal to F . We denote by UE the subspace of PMF consisting of uniquely ergodic arational foliations, and by ∆ the diagonal subset of UE × UE. Given F, F 0 ∈ U E × UE r ∆, there is a parameterized Teichmüller line γ : R → T (S), unique up to precomposition by a translation of R, which is a geodesic line for the Teichmüller metric, and such that limt→−∞ γ(t) = F and limt→+∞ γ(t) = F 0 ([20], see also the exposition in [44, §2.5], for instance). We will usually denote its image by [F, F 0 ], which one may still name Teichmüller line, though unparameterized. Similarly, a point x0 ∈ T (S) together with a foliation F ∈ UE determine a unique Teichmüller ray. In addition, given a pair (F, F 0 ) ∈ UE × UE r ∆, and a sequence ((Fn , Fn0 ))n∈N ∈ (UE × UE r ∆)N that converges to (F, F 0 ), the Teichmüller lines [Fn , Fn0 ] admit parameterizations γn : R → T (S) (as geodesics) that converge uniformly on compact sets to a geodesic parameterization γ : R → T (S) of [F, F 0 ]. An element Φ ∈ Mod(S) is pseudo-Anosov if there exists a pair of transverse measured foliations (F s , µs ) and (F u , µu ) on S, together with a real number λ(Φ) > 1, such that 1 Φ.(F s , µs ) = (F s , µs ) λ(Φ) and Φ.(F u , µu ) = (F u , λ(Φ)µu ). The coefficient λ(Φ) is called the stretching factor of Φ. It was shown by Thurston [47] that Φ is pseudo-Anosov if and only if no power Φk with k 6= 0, (k ∈ N) fixes the isotopy class of an essential simple closed curve on S. The stretching factor λ(Φ) is also equal to the exponential growth rate of the length of any essential simple closed curve on S under iteration of Φ. Pseudo-Anosov mapping classes are precisely the elements of Mod(S) which act as loxodromic isometries of C(S), see [39]. When acting on T (S), every pseudo-Anosov element Φ ∈ Mod(S) preserves the Teichmüller line γ from F s to F u , and acts on γ by translation, with dT -translation length equal to log λ(Φ). With our terminology from the previous section, pseudo-Anosov mapping classes have electric translation axes. 21  We finally review work by Kaimanovich–Masur [30] concerning random walks on Mod(S). We note that a subgroup H of Mod(S) is nonelementary with respect to its action on C(S) if and only if it contains two pseudo-Anosov elements that generate a nonabelian free subgroup of H. Equivalently [40], the subgroup H is nonelementary if H is not virtually cyclic, and H does not virtually preserve the conjugacy class of any essential simple closed curve on S. As in the previous sections, we say that a probability measure on Mod(S) is nonelementary if the semigroup generated by its support is a nonelementary subgroup of Mod(S). Kaimanovich and Masur have proved the following theorem. Theorem 3.4. (Kaimanovich–Masur [30, Theorem 2.2.4]) Let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on Mod(S). Then for P-a.e. sample path Φ := (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (Mod(S), µ), there exists a point bnd(Φ) ∈ UE such that for all y0 ∈ T (S), the sequence (Φn .y0 )n∈N converges to bnd(Φ). The hitting measure ν defined by setting ν(S) := P(bnd(Φ) ∈ S) for all Borel subsets S ⊆ PMF is nonatomic. With the terminology from Section 2, the random walk on Mod(S) is T (S)-boundary converging. Kaimanovich–Masur’s theorem implies that for P-almost every bilateral sample path Φ := (Φn )n∈Z of the random walk on (Mod(S), µ), denoting by bnd− (Φ) (resp. bnd+ (Φ)) the limit of the sequence (Φ−n .y0 )n≥0 (resp. (Φn .y0 )n≥0 ), then we have (bnd− (Φ), bnd+ (Φ)) ∈ UE × U E r ∆. In particular, the Teichmüller geodesic line [bnd− (Φ), bnd+ (Φ)] is P-a.s. well-defined.  3.2  Teichmüller geodesics that make progress are contracting.  The goal of the next three sections is to prove Theorem 3.1, by applying Theorem 2.6 to the hyperbolic Mod(S)-electrification (T (S), C(S)). The key point is to prove that (Mod(S), µ) has contracting pencils of geodesics. Proposition 3.6 below will be crucial for establishing the contraction property. Let δ be the hyperbolicity constant of C(S), let K2 > 0 be a constant such that π-images of Teichmüller geodesics are K2 -unparameterized quasigeodesics in C(S), and let κ = κ(K2 , δ) be the constant provided by Proposition 1.9. The notion of (B, D)contracting geodesics will be understood with respect to this value of κ. Definition 3.5. (Progress for Teichmüller geodesics) Given B0 , C > 0, a Teichmüller line γ : R → T (S), and a point y ∈ T (S) lying on the image of γ, we say that γ is (C; B0 )-progressing at y if the π-image in C(S) of the subsegment of γ of dT -length C starting at y has diameter at least B0 . Proposition 3.6. There exists a constant B0 > 0 such that for all B ≥ B0 and all C > 0, there exists D > 0, such that for all Teichmüller lines γ : R → T (S) and all y ∈ T (S) lying on the image of γ, if γ is (C; B)-progressing at y, then γ is (B, D)contracting at y. 22  The proof of Proposition 3.6 relies on the following result, due to Dowdall–Duchin– Masur [14, Theorem A], which is stated there in terms of the -thick proportion of I. However, the important fact in the proof of [14, Theorem A] is that I makes definite progress when projected to the curve graph C(S). Proposition 3.7. (Dowdall–Duchin–Masur [14, Theorem A]) For all κ > 0, there exist B1 , B2 > 0 such that the following holds. For all C > 0, there exists D0 = D0 (C, κ) > 0 such that if [x, y] is a Teichmüller segment that contains a subsegment I of dT -length C such that diamC(S) (π(I)) ≥ B1 , then for all z ∈ T (S), if π([x, z]) crosses π(I) up to distance κ, then [x, z] contains a subsegment J at dT -Hausdorff distance at most D0 from a subsegment I 0 ⊆ I, such that π(J) has diameter at least diamC(S) (π(I)) − B2 . Sketch of proof. The proof follows the arguments from the proof of [14, Theorem A]. We only sketch the argument, and refer the reader to [14] for further details. Let τ ≥ κ be a constant so that every K2 -quasi-triangle in C(S) is τ -thin. By choosing B1 > 0 large enough, we can ensure that there exists w ∈ I such that dC (π(w), π(x)) ≥ 2τ + 6, and dC (π(w), π([y, z])) ≥ 2τ + 6. For each such w, there exists u ∈ [x, z] so that dC (π(w), π(u)) ≤ τ . Dowdall–Duchin–Masur then prove that dV (w, u) is bounded (with a bound only depending on C) for all proper subsurfaces V S (where dV denotes the distance between the projections in the curve complex of V ). Using the distance formula [14, Proposition 2.4] relating the distance in the Teichmüller space to the sum of the distances between the projections to the curve complexes of the various subsurfaces of S, this implies that dT (u, w) is bounded. The claim follows. Proof of Proposition 3.6. We let κ = κ(K2 , δ) be the constant provided by Proposition 1.9. Let B0 , C > 0, and let γ : [a, b] → T (S) be a Teichmüller segment of length C such that π ◦ γ([a, b]) has diameter at least B0 in C(S). Let γ 0 : R → T (S) be a Teichmüller line whose projection to C(S) crosses π ◦ γ up to distance κ. This implies that for all t ∈ [a, b], there exists t0 ∈ R such that dC (π(γ 0 (t0 )), π(γ(t))) ≤ κ. There exists κ0 = κ0 (K2 , δ) such that for t2 ∈ R sufficiently large, the π-image of the Teichmüller segment [γ(a), γ 0 (t2 )] crosses π ◦ γ up to distance κ0 . Let B1 = B1 (κ + κ0 ) ≥ B1 (κ0 ) and B2 = B2 (κ0 ) be the constants provided by Proposition 3.7. Assume that B0 ≥ B1 + B2 . Proposition 3.7 implies that [γ(a), γ 0 (t2 )] contains a subsegment J at Hausdorff distance at most D0 = D0 (C, κ0 ) from a subsegment of γ([a, b]), whose projection π(J) has diameter at least B1 in C(S). In particular, the segment J has diameter at most 2D0 + C in T (S). In addition, there exists t1 ∈ R (chosen sufficiently close to −∞) such that the π-image of [γ 0 (t1 ), γ 0 (t2 )] crosses the π-image of J up to distance κ + κ0 . Let D00 := D0 (2D0 + C, κ + κ0 ). Applying Proposition 3.7 again to the segment [γ 0 (t1 ), γ 0 (t2 )], we get that dT (γ 0 , J) ≤ D00 , so dT (γ 0 , γ([a, b])) ≤ D0 + D00 and hence dT (γ(a), γ 0 (R)) ≤ C + D0 + D00 .  3.3  Typical geodesics are infinitely often progressing.  We now fix once and for all the constant B0 provided by Proposition 3.6. We also fix a basepoint y0 ∈ T (S). 23  Proposition 3.8. Let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on Mod(S). Then for all θ ∈ (0, 1), there exists C > 0 such that for P-a.e. bilateral sample path Φ := (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (Mod(S), µ), the set of integers k ∈ Z such that all subsegments of [bnd− (Φ), bnd+ (Φ)] of length C in T (S) starting at a closest-point projection of Φk .y0 have a π-image of diameter at least B0 in C(S), has density at least θ. Before proving Proposition 3.8, we first establish a general lemma. Lemma 3.9. Let X be a topological space, and let f : X → R be a map. If f is locally bounded from above, then f is bounded from above by an upper semicontinuous map. Proof. Let f : X → R, and assume that f is locally bounded from above. Let fb : X → R be the map defined by fb(x) := lim sup f (x0 ) < +∞. x0 →x  Then fb satisfies the required conditions. Lemma 3.10. There exists an upper semicontinuous map C : UE × UE r ∆ → R such that for ν̌⊗ν-a.e. (F − , F + ) ∈ UE ×UE r∆, all segments of dT -length C(F − , F + ) starting at a closest-point projection of y0 to the Teichmüller line [F − , F + ] have a π-image of diameter at least B0 in C(S). Proof. Let C 0 be the map defined on UE × U E r ∆, by sending any pair (F − , F + ) to the infimum of all real numbers C > 0 such that all segments of dT -length C starting at a closest-point projection of y0 to the Teichmüller line joining F − to F + , project under π to a region of C(S) of diameter at least B0 . In view of Lemma 3.9, it is enough to check that C 0 is finite and locally bounded from above. Assume towards a contradiction that it is not. Then we can find (F − , F + ) ∈ UE × UE r ∆, and a sequence ((Fn− , Fn+ ))n∈N ∈ (UE × UE r ∆)N converging to (F − , F + ), such that for all n ∈ N, we have C 0 ((Fn− , Fn+ )) > n. The Teichmüller geodesics [Fn− , Fn+ ] converge uniformly on compact sets to [F − , F + ] (for good choices of parameterizations). For all n ∈ N, let xn be a closest-point projection of y0 to [Fn− , Fn+ ] at which [Fn− , Fn+ ] is not (n; B0 )-progressing. Then up to passing to a subsequence, we can assume that the sequence (xn )n∈N converges to a point x ∈ T (S), and x is a closest-point projection of y0 to the Teichmüller line from F − to F + . Let K1 > 0 be such that for all y, y 0 ∈ T (S), we have dC (π(y), π(y 0 )) ≤ K1 dT (y, y 0 ) + K1 . Let z ∈ T (S) be a point lying on [F − , F + ], to the right of x, such that dC (π(x), π(z)) ≥ B0 +4K1 . Let (zn )n∈N ∈ T (S)N be a sequence converging to z, with zn lying on [Fn− , Fn+ ] for all n ∈ N. For all n ∈ N, since [Fn− , Fn+ ] is not (n; B0 )-progressing at xn , we have dC (π(xn ), π(zn )) ≤ B0 for all sufficiently large n ∈ N. We choose n ∈ N sufficiently large so that we also have dT (xn , x) < 12 and dT (zn , z) < 21 . Then dC (π(xn ), π(x)) < 2K1 and dC (π(zn ), π(z)) < 2K1 . These inequalities lead to a contradiction.  24  Proof of Proposition 3.8. Let C be the map provided by Lemma 3.10, and let Ψ: P → R − Φ 7→ C(bnd (Φ), bnd+ (Φ)) (where we recall that P denotes the space of bilateral sample paths of the random walk on (Mod(S), µ)). Lemma 3.10 implies that Ψ is a Borel map and P-a.e. finite. Let U be the transformation of P induced by the Bernoulli shift on the space of bilateral sequences − of increments. Then for all k ∈ Z and all Φ ∈ P, we have bnd− (U k .Φ) = Φ−1 k bnd (Φ) + k and bnd+ (U k .Φ) = Φ−1 k bnd (Φ). Hence all subsegments of dT -length Ψ(U .Φ) starting − at a closest-point projection of Φk .y0 to the Teichmüller geodesic [bnd (Φ), bnd+ (Φ)] project under π to a region of diameter at most B0 in C(S). As Ψ is a Borel map and P-a.e. finite, we can choose M > 0 such that P(Ψ(Φ) ≤ M ) > θ. An application of Birkhoff’s ergodic theorem to the ergodic transformation U then implies that for P-a.e. bilateral sample path Φ := (Φn )n∈Z of the random walk on (Mod(S), µ), if γ denotes the Teichmüller line joining bnd− (Φ) to bnd+ (Φ) (which almost surely exists because the hitting measures are nonatomic and concentrated on UE), then the density of times k ∈ Z such that all subsegments of γ of dT -length M starting at a closest-point projection of Φk .y0 has a π-image of diameter at least B0 in C(S), is at least θ. Proposition 3.11. Let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on Mod(S). Then for all θ ∈ (0, 1), there exist B, D > 0 such that for P-a.e. bilateral sample path Φ := (Φn )n∈Z of the random walk on (Mod(S), µ), the set of integers k ∈ Z such that [bnd− (Φ), bnd+ (Φ)] is (B, D)-contracting at all dT -closest-point projections of Φk .y0 to [bnd− (Φ), bnd+ (Φ)], has density at least θ. Proof. This follows from Propositions 3.6 and 3.8.  3.4  End of the proof of the spectral theorem  Proof of Theorem 3.1. We will check that (Mod(S), µ) satisfies the hypotheses in Theorem 2.6. The pair (T (S), C(S)) is a hyperbolic Mod(S)-electrification (Proposition 3.3). All elements of Mod(S) acting loxodromically on C(S) (i.e. pseudo-Anosov mapping classes) have an electric translation axis in T (S). In addition (Mod(S), µ) is T (S)boundary converging (Theorem 3.4). The first item in the definition of contracting pencils of geodesics (Definition 2.5) was established by Tiozzo [48, Lemma 19] for the collection of Teichmüller lines between any two transverse measured foliations. In view of Proposition 3.11, the second item in this definition is also satisfied by this collection of lines (notice that all points in T (S) are 2-high since the Teichmüller metric on T (S) is symmetric). Therefore, Theorem 2.6 applies to (Mod(S), µ). Since the translation length of any pseudo-Anosov mapping class Φ on T (S) is equal to the logarithm of its 25  stretching factor, and λ(Φ) = λ(Φ−1 ), we get that for P-a.e. sample path of the random walk on (Mod(S), µ), we have 1 log λ(Φn ) = LT , n→+∞ n lim  as claimed.  4  Spectral theorem for random walks on Out(FN )  Let N ≥ 3, let FN be a finitely generated free group of rank N , and let Out(FN ) be its outer automorphism group. The goal of this section is to prove the following spectral theorem for random walks on Out(FN ). We refer to Section 4.1 below for definitions. Theorem 4.1. Let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on Out(FN ) with finite support. Then for P-a.e. sample path (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (Out(FN ), µ), we have 1 lim log(λ(Φ−1 n )) = L, n→+∞ n −1 where λ(Φ−1 n ) is the stretching factor of the automorphism Φn , and L is the drift of the random walk with respect to the Lipschitz metric on outer space.  Remark 4.2. We recall that when µ has finite support, then with probability equal to 1, eventually all automorphisms Φn are fully irreducible, and therefore the stretching factor λ(Φ−1 n ) is well-defined. Theorem 4.1 will be proved by applying Theorem 2.6 to the hyperbolic Out(FN )-electrification made of Culler–Vogtmann’s outer space CVN and the free factor graph F FN . Again, in view of Remark 2.7, if µ is only assumed to have finite second moment with respect to the Lipschitz metric on CVN , then Theorem 4.1 remains true. If µ is only assumed to have finite first moment with respect to the Lipschitz metric on CVN , then one has to replace the limit by a limsup. Remark 4.3. In the context of automorphisms of free groups, Kapovich also defined in [31] a notion of generic stretching factor λA (Φ) of an outer automorphism Φ ∈ Out(FN ) with respect to a free basis A of FN , which measures the growth under Φ of an element obtained along a typical trajectory of the nonbacktracking simple random walk on FN with respect to the generating set A. Generic stretching factors of random outer automorphisms of FN also satisfy the same spectral property as the one established in Theorem 4.1, namely 1 lim log(λA (Φ−1 n )) = L, n→+∞ n as soon as the measure µ has finite first moment with respect to the Lipschitz metric on CVN (the proof of this fact does not require to apply the arguments from the present paper: this follows from [32, Theorem 1.6], for instance). The section is organized as follows. In Section 4.1, we review background on Out(FN ) and spaces it acts on. We then establish one more property we will need concerning the 26  geometry of the free factor graph in Section 4.2. The next three sections are devoted to proving Theorem 4.1 by applying Theorem 2.6 to the actions of Out(FN ) on Culler– Vogtmann’s outer space, and on the free factor graph. In Section 4.3, we establish a sufficient condition for a subsegment of a folding line to satisfy the required contraction property, and we then check in Section 4.4 that typical folding lines contain infinitely many subsegments satisying this condition. The proof of Theorem 4.1 is completed in Section 4.5.  4.1  General background on Out(FN )  The group Out(FN ) acts on Culler–Vogtmann’s outer space CVN and on the free factor graph F FN . We start by reviewing background about these spaces. Outer space and its metric. Outer space CVN is the collection of equivalence classes of free, simplicial, minimal and isometric actions of FN on simplicial metric trees [13]. Two trees T and T 0 are equivalent whenever there is an FN -equivariant homothety from T to T 0 . Unparameterized outer space cvN is defined by considering trees up to FN equivariant isometry, instead of homothety. The group Out(FN ) acts on CVN and cvN on the right by precomposing the actions (one can also consider a left action by setting Φ.T := T.Φ−1 ). Outer space may be viewed as a simplicial complex with missing faces. The simplex ∆(S) of a tree S is the subspace of CVN obtained by making all edge lengths of S vary (we allow some edges to have length 0, as soon as the corresponding collapse map does not change the isotopy type of the graph). Given  > 0, the -thick part CVN is defined as the subspace of CVN made of those trees T ∈ CVN such that the volume one representative of T /FN contains no embedded loop of length smaller than . Given a tree T ∈ CVN and an element g ∈ FN , the translation length of g in T is defined as ||g||T := inf dT (x, gx). x∈T  Culler–Morgan have compactified outer space [12] by taking the closure of the image of the map i : CVN → PRFN g 7→ (||g||T )g∈FN in the projective space PRFN . This compactification CVN was identified by Cohen–Lustig [10] and Bestvina–Feighn [5] (see also [25]) with the space of equivariant homothety classes of minimal, very small FN -trees (i.e. trees whose arc stabilizers are either trivial, or maximally cyclic, and whose tripod stabilizers are trivial). Outer space is equipped with a natural asymmetric metric for which the action of Out(FN ) is by isometries: the distance dCVN (T, T 0 ) between two trees T, T 0 ∈ CVN is defined as the logarithm of the infimal Lipschitz constant of an FN -equivariant map from the covolume 1 representative of T to the covolume 1 representative of T 0 , see [17]. White has proved (see [17, Proposition 3.15] or [2, Proposition 2.3]) that for all FN -trees  27  T ,T 0 ∈ CVN , we also have dCVN (T, T 0 ) = log  ||g||T 0 , g∈FN r{e} ||g||T sup  where T and T 0 are identified with their covolume 1 representatives. Furthermore, the supremum is achieved for an element g ∈ FN r {e} that belongs to a finite set Cand(T ) only depending on T , made of primitive elements of FN , called candidates in T , whose translation length in the covolume 1 representative of T is at most 4. The Lipschitz metric on CVN is not symmetric. However, the following result follows from work by Algom-Kfir and Bestvina. Proposition 4.4. (Algom-Kfir–Bestvina [3]) For all  > 0, there exists M > 0 such that all trees in CVN are M -high. The Lipschitz metric on outer space is geodesic: any two points in outer space are joined by a (nonunique) geodesic segment, that can be obtained [17, Theorem 5.6] as a concatenation of a segment contained in a simplex, and a greedy folding path, as defined in the following paragraph. Folding lines. Let T and T 0 be two R-trees. A morphism from T to T 0 is a map f : T → T 0 such that every segment of T can be subdivided into finitely many subsegments, in restriction to which f is an isometry. A direction at a point x ∈ T is a connected component of T r {x}. A train track structure on T is a partition of the set of directions at each point x ∈ T . Elements of the partition are called gates at x. A pair (d, d0 ) of directions at x is illegal if d and d0 belong to the same gate. Any morphism f : T → T 0 determines a train track structure on T , two directions d, d0 at a point x ∈ T being in the same class of the partition if there are intervals (x, a] ⊆ d and (x, b] ⊆ d0 which have the same f -image. Given T ∈ cvN and T 0 ∈ cvN , and a map f : T → T 0 which is linear on edges of T , we say that f is optimal if it realizes the infimal Lipschitz constant of an FN -equivariant map from T to T 0 , and there are at least two gates at every point in T for the train track structure defined by f . An optimal folding path in unprojectivized outer space is a continuous map γ : I → cvN , where I is an interval of R, together with a collection of FN -equivariant optimal morphisms ft,t0 : γ(t) → γ(t0 ) for all t < t0 in I, such that for all t < t0 < t00 , one has ft,t00 = ft0 ,t00 ◦ ft,t0 . We say that γ is a greedy folding path if in addition, for all t0 ∈ R, there exists  > 0 such that for all t ∈ [t0 , t0 + ], the tree γ(t) is obtained from γ(t0 ) by folding small segments of length  at all illegal turns of γ(t). The projection to CVN of a (greedy) folding path in cvN will again be called a (greedy) folding path. A train track structure on a tree T ∈ CVN is recurrent if for every edge e ⊆ T , there exists a legal segment in T that crosses e, whose projection to T /FN is a (possibly non-embedded) loop. Bestvina and Reynolds have proved in [8, Lemma 6.9] that for all T ∈ CVN , and all simplices ∆ ⊆ CVN , there exists a tree T0 ∈ ∆ such that there exists an optimal morphism from a tree homothetic to T0 to T , and any such morphism induces a recurrent train track structure on T0 . As noticed in [8, Remark 6.10], this continues 28  to hold if T ∈ ∂CVN r ∆. In this situation, we will say that T0 is fully recurrent with respect to T . The free factor graph and its Gromov boundary. A free factor of FN is a subgroup A ⊆ FN such that there exists a subgroup B ⊆ FN with FN = A ∗ B. The free factor graph F FN is the graph whose vertices are the conjugacy classes of proper free factors of FN , two vertices [A] and [B] being joined by an edge if there are representatives A and B in their conjugacy classes so that either A ( B or B ( A. The group Out(FN ) has a natural left action on F FN . The free factor graph was proven to be Gromov hyperbolic by Bestvina and Feighn [6]. One can define a coarsely Out(FN )equivariant (with respect to the left actions on both CVN and F FN ), coarsely Lipschitz map π : CVN → F FN , by sending any tree T to the conjugacy class of a proper free factor that is elliptic in a simplicial tree obtained by equivariantly collapsing some edges in T to points. Bestvina and Feighn also proved that π-images in F FN of greedy folding lines in CVN are uniform unparameterized quasi-geodesics. The Gromov boundary of the free factor graph was described by Bestvina–Reynolds [8] and independently Hamenstädt [23]. Given a tree T ∈ CVN and a subgroup A ⊆ FN which does not fix any point in T , there exists a unique minimal nonempty A-invariant subtree of T , which is called the A-minimal subtree of T . A tree T ∈ ∂CVN is arational if no proper free factor of FN is elliptic in T , and all proper free factors of FN act freely and simplicially on their minimal subtree in T . We denote by AT the subspace of CVN made of arational FN -trees. Theorem 4.5. (Bestvina–Reynolds [8], Hamenstädt [23]) There exist M ∈ R and a map ψ : CVN → F FN ∪ ∂∞ F FN which agrees with π on CVN , and such that • for all T ∈ AT , and all sequences (Tn )n∈N ∈ CVNN converging to T , the sequence (π(Tn ))n∈N converges to ψ(T ), and • [8, Lemma 6.16] for all T ∈ CVN rAT , and all greedy folding lines γ : R+ → CVN , if γ(t) converges to T as t goes to +∞, then ψ(γ(t)) eventually stays at distance at most M from ψ(T ). We will fix once and for all a map ψ provided by Theorem 4.5. We denote by UE the subspace of CVN consisting of trees T ∈ AT such that ψ −1 ({ψ(T )}) = T – this notation is used to mimic the corresponding notation for uniquely ergodic foliations in the mapping class group case; more accurately, trees in UE are precisely the uniquely ergometric trees in the sense of [11]. We denote by ∆ the diagonal subset of UE × UE. We mention the following property of greedy folding paths, which follows from work by Bestvina–Reynolds. Proposition 4.6. (Bestvina–Reynolds [8, Corollaries 6.7 and 6.8, Lemma 6.11]) Let (T, T 0 ) ∈ UE × UE r ∆. Let ((Tn , Tn0 ))n∈N ∈ (UE × UE r ∆)N be a sequence that converges 29  to (T, T 0 ). For all n ∈ N, let γn : R → CVN be a greedy folding line from Tn to Tn0 . Then there exist translations τn : R → R such that the sequence (γn ◦ τn )n∈N converges uniformly on compact sets to a greedy folding line from T to T 0 . Projections to folding paths. In their proof of the hyperbolicity of the free factor graph, Bestvina and Feighn introduced a notion of projection of a free factor to a greedy folding path in the following way. Let I ⊆ R be an interval, and let γ : I → CVN be a greedy folding path in CVN determined by a morphism f . The morphism f determines a train track structure on all trees γ(t) with t ∈ I. Given a primitive element g ∈ FN , we let rightγ (g) be the supremum of all times t ∈ I such that the axis of g in the covolume 1 representative of γ(t) contains a segment of length MBF that does not contain any legal subsegment of length 3, where MBF is a fixed constant that only depends on the rank N of the free group, see [6, Section 6]. As follows from the work by Bestvina–Feighn, the projection satisfies the following property. Lemma 4.7. (Bestvina–Feighn [6]) There exists K0 > 0 (only depending on the rank N of the free group) such that the following holds. Let γ : I → CVN be a greedy folding path, let g ∈ FN be a primitive element, and let t, t0 ≥ rightγ (g) with t ≤ t0 . Then dCVN (γ(t), γ(t0 )) − log  ||g||γ(t0 ) ≤ K0 . ||g||γ(t)  Proof. Let σ be a loop obtained by projecting a fundamental domain of the axis of g to the volume 1 representative of the quotient graph γ(t)/FN . Then all subsegments of length MBF in σ contain a legal subsegment of length 3 for the train-track structure k j 1 on γ(t). It follows from the estimate in [6, Lemma 4.4] that σ contains MBF ||g||γ(t) legal segments of length 3, whose middle subsegments of length 1 all grow exponentially fast with maximal speed along the folding path γ, and never get identified with one another during the folding procedure: exponential growth is stated in [6, Corollary 4.8], and the fact that the segments never get identified also follows from Bestvina–Feighn’s arguments because these segments grow faster than their extremities get folded. The required estimate follows from this observation. Given a tree S ∈ CVN , we let rightγ (S) :=  sup  rightγ (g).  g∈Cand(S)  We then let Prγ (S) := γ(rightγ (S)) (we will sometimes also use the notation PrI (S) when it turns out to be more convenient). The following contraction property for projections of greedy folding paths to F FN was established by Bestvina and Feighn. This is stated in [6] with a slightly different notion of projection (namely, the left projection instead of the right projection), however it follows from [6, Proposition 6.4] that this other projection lies at bounded distance apart from the one we consider.  30  Lemma 4.8. (Bestvina–Feighn [6, Proposition 7.2]) There exists D1 > 0 such that for all greedy folding paths γ : I → CVN (where I ⊆ R is an interval), and all H, H 0 ∈ CVN , if dCVN (H, H 0 ) ≤ dCVN (H, Im(γ)), then dF FN (π(Prγ (H)), π(Prγ (H 0 ))) ≤ D1 . The following lemma, due to Dowdall and Taylor, relates the Bestvina–Feighn projection to the closest-point projection in F FN . Given a greedy folding path γ : I → CVN , we should denote by nπ◦γ the closest-point projection to the image of π ◦ γ in F FN . However, this is a priori a subset, and it is sometimes convenient to have chosen a single point in it, thus we rather define nπ◦γ to be the leftmost closest-point projection in the sense that, in the parametrisation of π ◦ γ as a path, it has smaller parameter value among the closest point projections. Lemma 4.9. (Dowdall–Taylor [15, Lemma 4.2]) There exists a constant D2 > 0 such that for any H ∈ CVN , and any greedy folding path γ : I → CVN , we have dF FN (π(Prγ (H)), nπ◦γ (π(H))) ≤ D2 . Fully irreducible automorphisms. An element Φ ∈ Out(FN ) is fully irreducible if no power Φk with k 6= 0 fixes the conjugacy class of a proper free factor of FN . Any fully irreducible automorphism of FN has a well-defined stretching factor λ(Φ), which satisfies that for all primitive elements g ∈ FN , we have p lim n ||Φn (g)|| = λ(Φ), n→+∞  where ||Φn (g)|| denotes the smallest word length of a conjugate of Φn (g), written in some fixed free basis of FN . Bestvina and Feighn have shown [6] that an element Φ ∈ Out(FN ) acts as a loxodromic isometry of F FN if and only if Φ is fully irreducible. Any fully irreducible element Φ ∈ Out(FN ) has a translation axis in CVN , which is a folding line [24]. The amount of translation is equal to log(λ(Φ)). With the terminology from Section 2, all elements in Out(FN ) acting as fully irreducible isometries of F FN have an electric axis. Random walks on Out(FN ). We finally record a result of Namazi–Pettet–Reynolds concerning random walks on Out(FN ). A subgroup H ⊆ Out(FN ) is nonelementary if H contains two fully irreducible automorphisms that generate a free subgroup of Out(FN ): with the terminology from Section 1, this is equivalent to nonelementarity of the Haction on F FN . We say that a probability measure on Out(FN ) is nonelementary if the subsemigroup generated by the support of µ is a nonelementary subgroup of Out(FN ). With the terminology from Section 2, the following theorem asserts that (Out(FN ), µ) is CVN -boundary converging. Theorem 4.10. (Namazi–Pettet–Reynolds [41]) Let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on Out(FN ) with finite first moment with respect to dCVN . Then for P-a.e. sample path Φ := (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (Out(FN ), µ), and any y0 ∈ CVN , the  31  sequence (Φn .y0 )n∈N converges to a point bnd(Φ) ∈ UE. The hitting measure ν defined by setting ν(S) := P(bnd(Φ) ∈ S) for all measurable subsets S ⊆ ∂CVN is nonatomic.  4.2  More on the geometry of the free factor graph  We will need to establish the following proposition concerning the geometry of the projection of folding paths to the free factor graph. We refer to the statement of Theorem 4.5 above for the definition of the map ψ. Proposition 4.11. There exists M > 0 such that for all sufficiently large D > 0, all y0 , y1 ∈ CVN , all trees T ∈ CVN and all sequences (Tn )n∈N ∈ CVNN converging to T , if (π(Tn )|π(y1 ))π(y0 ) ≥ D for all n ∈ N, then (ψ(T )|π(y1 ))π(y0 ) ≥ D − M . Proposition 4.11 follows from Theorem 4.5 in the particular case where all trees in the sequence (Tn )n∈N lie on the image of a greedy folding path in CVN . We need to extend this to arbitrary sequences. Our proof of Proposition 4.11 will make use of yet another Out(FN )-graph, namely the cyclic splitting graph F ZN . This is the graph whose vertices correspond to the splittings of FN as a graph of groups with cyclic (possibly trivial) edge groups, two splittings being joined by an edge if they have a common refinement. Hyperbolicity of F ZN was established by Mann [38], and its geometry was further studied in [27]. There is a coarsely Out(FN )-equivariant map Θ from F ZN to F FN : given any cyclic splitting T of FN , there exists a proper free factor of FN which is elliptic in a tree obtained by equivariantly collapsing some edges of T , and Θ maps T to one of these free factors. We will denote by πZ the natural map from CVN to F ZN . Images in F ZN of greedy folding paths in CVN are uniform unparameterized quasigeodesics [38]. Proof. Let f be an optimal morphism from a tree whose homothety class belongs to the closure ∆(y0 ) of the simplex of y0 , to T . Let (fn )n∈N be a sequence of optimal morphisms which converges to f for the Gromov–Hausdorff topology on morphisms introduced in [21, Section 3.2], such that for all n ∈ N, the map fn is a morphism from a tree yn0 whose homothety class belongs to ∆(y0 ), to Tn . Let γ : R+ → CVN be the greedy folding path determined by f , and for all n ∈ N, let γn : R+ → CVN be the greedy folding path from yn0 to Tn determined by fn . By [21, Proposition 2.4], the folding paths γn converge uniformly on compact sets to γ. There exists a constant M1 > 0, only depending on K2 and the hyperbolicity constant of F FN , such that the following holds. Let y2 ∈ CVN be such that π(y2 ) lies at bounded distance apart from a geodesic segment from π(y0 ) to π(y1 ) in F FN , and dF FN (π(y0 ), π(y2 )) = D − M1 . Then for all n ∈ N, the π-images in F FN of all greedy folding paths γn pass through the M1 -neighborhood U1 of π(y2 ). Recall that greedy folding paths in CVN project to uniform unparameterized quasigeodesics in both complexes F ZN and F FN . Therefore, there exists M2 > 0 (only 32  depending on the hyperbolicity constants of F FN and F ZN ), a bounded neighborhood U2 of π(y2 ) in F FN , and a tree S ∈ CVN whose π-image in F FN lies in U2 , such that for all n ∈ N, one can find a tree Sn lying on the image of γn , whose projection to F ZN lies at distance at most M2 from πZ (S). Let S∞ ∈ CVN be a limit point of the sequence (Sn )n∈N . By [21, Proposition 2.4], the tree S∞ belongs to γ(R+ ∪ {+∞}). Since the sequence (ψZ (Sn ))n∈N is bounded, the tree S∞ is not Z-averse in the sense of [27]. It follows from [27, Proposition 8.8] that there exists M3 > 0 such that the set of reducing Z-splittings of S∞ (defined in [27, Section 5.1]) lies in the M3 -neighborhood U3 of πZ (S) in F ZN , and the image of γ in F ZN meets U3 . The projection of U3 to F FN is a bounded neighborhood of π(y2 ), and the π-image of γ meets this neighborhood. The last item from Theorem 4.5 implies that all points π ◦ γ(t) with t sufficiently large belong to a bounded neighborhood of ψ(T ). The claim follows from these observations. From Proposition 4.11, where one chooses y0 such that π(y0 ) is close to ψ(T ), and y1 such that π(y1 ) belongs to the bounded region of F FN that contains all points π(Tn ), one deduces the following analogue for F FN of [27, Proposition 8.8] (which was established for F ZN there). Corollary 4.12. For all D > 0, there exists M > 0 such that the following holds. Let T ∈ CVN , and let (Tn )n∈N ∈ CVNN be a sequence of trees that converges to T . Assume that all projections π(Tn ) belong to a common region of F FN of diameter D. Then T is not arational, and for all n ∈ N, we have dF FN (π(Tn ), ψ(T )) ≤ M .  4.3  A contraction property for folding lines in outer space  Let δ be the hyperbolicity constant of F FN . Let K2 > 0 be a constant such that all π-images of greedy folding lines in CVN are K2 -unparameterized quasigeodesics in F FN , and let κ = κ(K2 , δ) be the constant provided by Proposition 1.9. We now introduce our definition of progress for folding paths in outer space, which will play the same role in our arguments as in the case of mapping class groups in the previous section. This is illustrated in Figure 2. Definition 4.13. (Progress for folding paths) Let (T, T 0 ) ∈ U E × UE r ∆. Let γ : R → CVN be a greedy folding line from T to T 0 , and let S be a tree lying on the image of γ. Given C, A0 , B0 , C0 > 0, we say that γ is (C; A0 , B0 , C0 )-progressing at S if the following holds. Let • Se ∈ CVN be a tree lying to the right of S on the image of γ, satisfying the inequality e ≤ A0 , and dF FN (π(S), π(S)) • R ∈ CVN be a tree such that nπ◦γ (π(R)) is to the right of π(S) and satisfies e nπ◦γ (π(R))) ≥ B0 for all trees Se as above, and dF FN (π(S),  33  Figure 2: Progress for folding paths.  • γ 0 : [a, b] → CVN (where [a, b] ⊆ R is a segment) be a greedy folding path from a e to R, where either S 0 = S, e or else S 0 is fully recurrent tree S 0 in the simplex ∆(S) with respect to R. 0 Then for all c ∈ [a, b], if γ 0 ([a, c]) has dsym CVN -diameter at least C, then π ◦ γ ([a, c]) has diameter at least C0 in F FN .  Remark 4.14. The above definition of progress implies in particular that the smallest subsegment on the image of γ of dsym CVN -diameter C starting at S has a projection of diameter at least C0 in F FN . This is shown by choosing R to lie sufficiently to the right on the image of γ, and letting γ 0 be a subpath of γ starting at S. We do not know however whether Proposition 4.17 below remains valid if we took the above property as a definition of progress (in other words, we do not know whether the exact analogue of Proposition 3.6 holds in the Out(FN ) context). As recalled in the proof sketch of Proposition 3.7, Dowdall–Duchin–Masur’s proof in the case of mapping class groups uses a distance formula relating the distance in T (S) to the distances in curve graphs associated to various subsurfaces of S. However, to our knowledge, finding an analogous distance formula in the Out(FN ) context is still an open question. The goal of the present section is to prove that greedy folding paths which make progress are high and satisfy the contraction property from Definition 2.3: this is the content of Propositions 4.15 and 4.17 below. We first prove that progress implies highness, using an argument of Dowdall–Taylor [15, Lemma 4.3]. Proposition 4.15. Let A0 , B0 , C0 > 0. There exists α > 0 such that if C0 > α, then the following holds. For all C > 0, there exists M > 0 such that for all (T, T 0 ) ∈ UE × UE r ∆, all greedy folding lines γ : R → CVN from T to T 0 , and all S ∈ CVN lying on the image of γ, if γ is (C; A0 , B0 , C0 )-progressing at S, then S is M -high. 34  Proof. In view of Proposition 4.4, it is enough to prove that S belongs to the thick part CVN for some value of  > 0 only depending on C. Let  < exp(−C). Assume towards a contradiction that S ∈ / CVN . Then there exists g ∈ FN whose translation length is at most  in the covolume one representative of S. By assumption (see Remark 4.14 above), there exists a tree S 0 lying on the image of γ such that dCVN (S, S 0 ) ≤ C and dF FN (π(S), π(S 0 )) ≥ C0 . If C0 has been chosen sufficiently large, then g cannot have translation length smaller than 1 in the covolume one representative of S 0 . However, this implies that ||g||S 0 1 dCVN (S, S 0 ) ≥ log ≥ log > C, ||g||S  a contradiction. We will now prove that progress implies contraction. The following lemma is an exercise in hyperbolic metric spaces; we recall that nτ and nτ 0 denote the leftmost closest-point projections to the corresponding quasigeodesics. Lemma 4.16. For all K, K2 > 0, there exists κ0 = κ0 (K2 , K, δ) such that for all y ∈ F FN , and all K2 -quasigeodesic segments τ : [a, b] → F FN and τ 0 : [a0 , b0 ] → F FN , if dF FN (τ (a), τ 0 (a0 )) ≤ K and dF FN (τ (b), τ 0 (b0 )) ≤ K, then dF FN (nτ (y), nτ 0 (y)) ≤ κ0 . Proposition 4.17. There exist α0 , β0 , γ0 such that for all A0 ≥ α0 , all B0 ≥ β0 and all C0 ≥ γ0 , there exists B > 0 such that the following holds. For all C > 0, there exists D > 0 such that for all (T, T 0 ) ∈ UE × UE r ∆, all greedy folding lines γ : R → CVN from T to T 0 , and all S ∈ CVN lying on the image of γ, if γ is (C; A0 , B0 , C0 )-progressing at S, then γ is (B, D)-contracting at S. Proof. The situation in the following proof is illustrated on Figure 3. Let K1 > 0 be such that dF FN (π(x), π(y)) ≤ K1 dCVN (x, y) + K1 for all x, y ∈ CVN . We let B := B0 + K1 + 2κ. Let a ∈ R be such that γ(a) = S, and let b ≥ a be the infimum of all real numbers b0 such that π ◦ γ([a, b0 ]) has dF FN -diameter at least B: this implies in particular that π ◦ γ([a, b]) has dF FN -diameter at least B0 + 2κ. We let I := [a, b], and let S 0 := γ(b). Let γ 0 : R → CVN be a geodesic line, whose π-image in F FN crosses π ◦ γ|I up to distance κ. It is enough to prove that the image of γ 0 in CVN passes at bounded dCVN -distance of γ(I). Step 1: Estimates coming from progress. Since π ◦ γ 0 crosses π ◦ γ|I up to distance κ, there exists a point U ∈ CVN lying on the image of γ 0 such that dF FN (π(U ), π(S)) ≤ κ. So dF FN (nπ◦γ|I (π(U )), π(S)) ≤ 2κ. Lemma 4.9 then implies that dF FN (π(PrI (U )), π(S)) ≤ 2κ + D2 . Let U 0 be the point lying to the right of U on the image of γ 0 , and such that dCVN (U, U 0 ) = dCVN (U, γ(I)). Let S0 be a point lying on γ(I) such that dCVN (U, U 0 ) = dCVN (U, S0 ). By Lemma 4.8, we have dF FN (π(PrI (U )), π(PrI (S0 ))) ≤ D1 . In view of 35  Lemma 4.9, we also have dF FN (π(S0 ), π(PrI (S0 ))) ≤ D2 . Using the triangle inequality, this implies that dF FN (π(S0 ), π(S)) ≤ 2κ + D1 + 2D2 . Both trees S and S0 lie on the image of γ (and S0 lies to the right of S). Assume that C0 ≥ 2κ + D1 + 2D2 . Since γ is (C; A0 , B0 , C0 )-progressing at S, by choosing the point R from Definition 4.13 to lie sufficiently far apart from S (see Remark 4.14), this implies that dsym CVN (S0 , S) ≤ C.  (1)  By Lemma 4.8, we also have dF FN (π(PrI (U 0 )), π(PrI (U ))) ≤ D1 . The triangle inequality then implies that dF FN (π(PrI (U 0 )), π(S)) ≤ 2κ + D1 + D2 . As above, this implies that 0 dsym CVN (S, PrI (U )) ≤ C.  (2)  Since π◦γ 0 crosses π◦γ|I up to distance κ, there exists a point U 00 lying on the image of γ 0 , such that dF FN (π(U 00 ), π(S 0 )) ≤ κ. In particular, we have dF FN (π(S), nπ◦γ (π(U 00 ))) ≥ 0 0 ^ B − 2κ = B0 . Let f be a morphism from a tree Pr I (U ) in the simplex ∆(PrI (U )) 00 00 0 ^ to U 00 , where Pr I (U ) is fully recurrent with respect to U , and let γ be the greedy ^ folding path determined by f . Notice that dF F (π(PrI (U )), π(Pr I (U ))) ≤ K0 for some N  uniform constant K0 . Applying Lemma 4.16 to τ := π ◦ γ|I and τ 0 := π ◦ γ 00 with K := 2κ + D1 + D2 + K0 , we get dF FN (nπ◦γ|I (π(U 0 )), nπ◦γ 00 (π(U 0 ))) ≤ κ0 . Therefore, it follows from Lemma 4.9 that dF FN (π(PrI (U 0 )), π(Prγ 00 (U 0 ))) ≤ κ0 + 2D2 . We also recall from the previous paragraph that dF FN (π(S), π(PrI (U 0 ))) ≤ 2κ + D1 + D2 . Assume that A0 ≥ 2κ + D1 + D2 . Since γ is (C; A0 , B0 , C0 )-progressing at S, the same argument as in 0 ^ the proof of Proposition 4.15 implies that both PrI (U 0 ) and Pr I (U ) are thick, so there exists K > 0 (only depending on C and on the rank N of the free group) such that 0 ^0 dsym CVN (PrI (U ), PrI (U )) ≤ K.  (3)  0 00 0 0 ^ Both trees Pr I (U ) and Prγ 00 (U ) lie on the image of γ (with Prγ 00 (U ) to the right of 0 0 ^ Pr I (U )). Assume that C0 ≥ κ + 2D2 . Since γ is (C; A0 , B0 , C0 )-progressing at S, we also have 0 ^0 (4) dsym CVN (PrI (U ), Prγ 00 (U )) ≤ C.  Using Equations (3) and (4) and the triangle inequality, we obtain 0 0 dsym CVN (PrI (U ), Prγ 00 (U )) ≤ K + C.  (5)  Step 2: Estimates coming from the definition of the projection to a folding path. We will now prove that the length of the concatenation of the paths from U 0 to Prγ 00 (U 0 ) and from Prγ 00 (U 0 ) to U 00 represented in plain green lines on Figure 3 is close to being equal to the distance from U 0 to U 00 (this is the meaning of Equation (8) below). This will imply in the next step of the proof that the total green length (both plain and 36  dotted) is close to being equal to the distance from U to U 00 , and therefore U 0 has to be close to the image of γ. Let α ∈ FN be a candidate in U 0 (as defined in Section 4.1, in the paragraphs before Proposition 4.4) such that dCVN (U 0 , Prγ 00 (U 0 )) = log  ||α||Prγ 00 (U 0 ) ||α||U 0  .  (6)  Lemma 4.7 applied to the folding path γ 00 implies that there exists a constant K0 (only depending on the rank of the free group) such that dCVN (Prγ 00 (U 0 ), U 00 ) ≤ log  ||α||U 00 + K0 . ||α||Prγ 00 (U 0 )  (7)  By adding Equations (6) and (7), we obtain that dCVN (U 0 , Prγ 00 (U 0 )) + dCVN (Prγ 00 (U 0 ), U 00 ) − K0 ≤ log  ||α||U 00 ≤ dCVN (U 0 , U 00 ). ||α||U 0  (8)  Step 3: End of the proof. sym 0 0 0 Recall that dsym CVN (PrI (U ), S) ≤ C (Equation (2)) and dCVN (PrI (U ), Prγ 00 (U )) ≤ K + C (Equation (5)). Together with Equation (8), this implies that there exists a constant K 0 , only depending on C (and on the rank of the free group), such that  dCVN (U 0 , U 00 ) ≥ dCVN (U 0 , S) + dCVN (S, U 00 ) − K 0 .  (9)  Hence dCVN (U 0 , S) ≤ dCVN (U 0 , U 00 ) − dCVN (S, U 00 ) + K 0 ≤ dCVN (U 0 , U 00 ) − dCVN (U, U 00 ) + dCVN (U, S) + K 0 = −dCVN (U, U 0 ) + dCVN (U, S) + K 0 ≤ −dCVN (U, U 0 ) + dCVN (U, S0 ) + dCVN (S0 , S) + K 0 ≤ C + K0 Indeed, the first inequality is Equation (9) and the second comes from the triangle inequality. The equality on the third line follows from the fact that γ 0 is a geodesic, and that the trees U , U 0 and U 00 lie in this order on the image of γ 0 (at least if B0 has been chosen sufficiently large). The inequality on the fourth line follows from the triangle inequality. The last inequality uses the definition of U 0 (which says in particular that dCVN (U, U 0 ) = dCVN (U, S0 )) and the fact that dsym CVN (S0 , S) ≤ C (Equation (1)).  4.4  Typical rays are infinitely often progressing.  Let (T, T 0 ) ∈ U E × UE r ∆. For every neighborhood U of (T, T 0 ) in UE × U E, we let Tube(U) be the collection of all greedy folding lines joining pairs in U. Given a point y0 ∈ CVN and A0 > 0, we then let Tubey0 (U; A0 ) be the set of all trees U ∈ CVN such that there exists γ ∈ Tube(U) such that 37  Figure 3: Schematic picture of the situation in the proof of Proposition 4.17. The blue parts all have uniformly bounded dsym CVN -diameter.  • the tree U = γ(t) belongs to the image of γ, and • there exists a dsym CVN -closest-point projection U0 = γ(t0 ) of y0 to the image of γ, with t0 ≤ t, such that π ◦ γ([t0 , t]) has diameter at most A0 in F FN . Lemma 4.18. Let A0 > 0, y0 ∈ CVN , and (T, T 0 ) ∈ UE × UE r ∆. There exists a neighborhood U of (T, T 0 ) in UE × UE, such that the set Tubey0 (U; A0 ) is a compact subset of CVN . Proof. Assume otherwise. Then we can find a sequence ((Tn , Tn0 ))n∈N ∈ (CVN × CVN )N converging to (T, T 0 ), together with greedy folding paths γn from Tn to Tn0 for all n ∈ N, and a sequence (Un )n∈N ∈ CVNN with the following properties: • for all n ∈ N, the tree Un lies on the image of γn , and • for all n ∈ N, there exists a dsym CVN -closest-point projection Sn of y0 to γn , such that Un lies to the right of Sn , and the π-image of the subsegment of γn joining Sn to Un has diameter at most A0 in F FN , and • the sequence (Un )n∈N leaves every compact subspace of CVN . However, in view of Proposition 4.6, the sequence (γn )n∈N accumulates on a folding line γ from T to T 0 . It follows from [8, Theorem 6.6] that the sequence (Sn )n∈N should accumulate to a dsym CVN -closest-point projection S of y0 to γ, and that the only possible accumulation points of the sequence (Un )n∈N in the compact space CVN are the trees T and T 0 . In view of Theorem 4.5, the sequence (π(Un ))n∈N has a subsequence that 38  converges to a point in ∂∞ F FN . However, the π-images of the trees Un remain in a bounded neighborhood of π(S) in F FN , which yields the desired contradiction. Let U be a neighborhood of (T, T 0 ) provided by Lemma 4.18. Recall the definition of ψ : CVN → F FN ∪ ∂∞ F FN from Theorem 4.5. Given A0 > 0 and B ≥ 0, we let Righty0 (U; A0 , B) be the subspace of CVN made of those trees U ∈ CVN such that for all γ ∈ Tube(U), the projection of ψ(U ) to the image of π ◦ γ in F FN is to the right, at distance at least B from all trees in π(Tubey0 (U; A0 )) (recall that ψ(U ) may belong to ∂∞ F FN ; we define in this case the projection of ψ(U ) to the image of π ◦ γ as the leftmost possible accumulation point of a sequence of leftmost closest-point projections of zn to the image of π ◦ γ, over all sequences (zn )n∈N ∈ F FNN converging to ψ(U )). Lemma 4.19. For all A0 > 0, there exists M > 0 such that for all sufficiently large B > 0, one has Righty0 (U; A0 , B) ⊆ Righty0 (U; A0 , B − M ). Proof. This follows from Proposition 4.11. We now fix a point y0 ∈ CVN , a neighborhood U of (T, T 0 ) provided by Lemma 4.18, and we let M be the maximum of the constants provided by Theorem 4.5 and Lemma 4.19. Given A0 , B0 > 0, we let X0 (A0 , B0 ) be the subset of CVN made of those trees U such that there exists S ∈ Tubey0 (U; A0 ) satisfying U ∈ ∆(S), and either U = S, or else U is fully recurrent with respect to some tree in Righty0 (U; A0 , B0 ). Lemma 4.20. For all A0 > 0, there exists β > 0 such that for all B0 > β, the space X0 (A0 , B0 ) ⊆ CVN is compact. Proof. Let A0 > 0, and let B0 > 0 be such that B0 − M is sufficiently large (where sufficiently large will be understood from the rest of the proof). Assume towards a contradiction that X0 (A0 , B0 ) is not contained in CVN . Then there exists a sequence (Un )n∈N ∈ X0 (A0 , B0 )N that leaves every compact subset of CVN . Since we already know that Tubey0 (U; A0 ) is compact (Lemma 4.18), we can assume that for all n ∈ N, there exists a tree Un0 ∈ Righty0 (U; A0 , B0 ) such that Un is fully recurrent with respect to Un0 . Since Tubey0 (U; A0 ) has compact closure in CVN , it meets only finitely many simplices of CVN . Hence up to passing to a subsequence, we can assume that all trees Un belong to a common open simplex in CVN , and that (Un )n∈N converges to a point U ∈ ∂CVN . Up to passing to a further subsequence, we can also assume that the sequence (Un0 )n∈N converges to a tree U 0 ∈ CVN . By Lemma 4.19, we have U 0 ∈ Righty0 (U; A0 , B0 − M ). It follows from [8, Lemma 6.11] that there exists a proper free factor of FN that is elliptic in both U and U 0 . However if B0 has been chosen so that B0 − M is sufficiently large, then ψ(U ) and ψ(U 0 ) are far apart in F FN . This is a contradiction. Let cv0 (FN ) ⊆ cvN be the subset made of those trees T such that the Lipschitz constant of an optimal map from y0 to T is equal to 1. Given subsets X ⊆ CVN and Y ⊆ CVN , we denote by Opt(X, Y ) the set of all optimal FN -equivariant maps from a tree in cv0 (FN ) representing an element in X to a tree in cv0 (FN ) representing an element in Y , which are linear on edges. This set is equipped with the equivariant 39  Gromov–Hausdorff topology introduced in [21, Section 3.2]. If X is a compact subset of CVN , then the subsets of cv0 (FN ) representing X is also compact, so there is a bound on the Lipschitz constant of elements of Opt(X, Y ). Let A0 , B0 > 0 be given by Lemma 4.20, and let X0 := X0 (A0 , B0 ). We let M := Opt(X0 , Righty0 (U; A0 , B0 )). In view of Lemma 4.20, the set M is compact, and Lemma 4.19 implies that M ⊆ Opt(X0 , Righty0 (U; A0 , B0 − M )). Given C0 > 0 and f ∈ Opt(X0 , Righty0 (U; A0 , B0 − M )), we let C(f ; C0 ) be the smallest real number C such that the smallest initial subsegment of dsym CVN -diameter C of the greedy folding path determined by f projects to a region of F FN of diameter at least C0 := B0 − 3M (here we need that B0 was chosen sufficiently large so that C0 is large enough). Using Theorem 4.5, we have C(f ; C0 ) < +∞ for all f ∈ Opt(X0 , Righty0 (U; A0 , B0 − M )) (otherwise the folding path directed by f would leave the interior of outer space before having made enough progress in F FN ). In particular, we have C(f ; C0 ) < +∞ for all f ∈ M. Lemma 4.21. There exist β1 , β2 > 0 such that if C0 > β1 and B0 > C0 + β2 , then the map C: M → R f 7→ C(f ; C0 ) is bounded from above. Proof. We proceed as in the proof of Lemma 3.10. Let K1 > 0 be such that dF FN (π(x), π(y)) ≤ K1 dCVN (x, y) + K1 for all x, y ∈ CVN . Assume towards a contradiction that C(f ; C0 ) is unbounded. Then N there exists a sequence (fn )n∈N ∈ M such that for all n ∈ N, we have C(fn ; C0 ) > n. For all n ∈ N, we denote by γn the greedy folding path determined by fn . Then for all n ∈ N, there exists a dsym CVN -closest point projection xn of y0 on the image of γn , so that the smallest subsegment σn of the image of γn of dsym CVN -diameter n starting at xn projects to a subset of F FN of diameter at most C0 . Compactness of the space M ensures that up to passing to a subsequence, we can assume that the maps fn converge to a map f ∈ M. The greedy folding paths γn then converge uniformly on compact sets to the greedy folding path γ determined by f . Thus the sequence (xn )n∈N accumulates to a point x lying on the image of γ. Let then z be to the right of x on the image of γ, such that dF FN (π(x), π(z)) ≥ C0 + 4K1 . There exists a sequence (zn )n∈N of points zn on the image of γn that converges to z. For n large enough in our subsequence, sym 1 1 we have dsym CVN (xn , x) < 2 and dCVN (zn , z) < 2 , and hence dF FN (π(xn ), π(x)) < 2K1 and dF FN (π(zn ), π(z)) < 2K1 . Therefore dF FN (π(xn ), π(zn )) > C0 . However the point zn is eventually in the segment σn , since its dsym CVN -distance to x is bounded, and this contradicts the fact that the diameter of the projection of σn to F FN is at most C0 . 0 Given A0 , B0 , C0 > 0 and (T, T 0 ) ∈ U E × UE r ∆, we let CA (T, T 0 ) be the 0 ,B0 ,C0 infimum of all real numbers C > 0 such that all greedy folding lines γ : R → CVN from  40  T to T 0 are (C; A0 , B0 , C0 )-progressing at all dsym CVN -closest point projections of y0 to γ. As a consequence of Lemma 4.21, we obtain the following fact. Corollary 4.22. For all A0 > 0, there exist β1 , β2 > 0 such that for all C0 > β1 and all B0 > 0 such that B0 > C0 + β2 , the map 0 CA : UE × UE r ∆ → R 0 ,B0 ,C0  is locally bounded from above. Corollary 4.23. There exist A0 , B0 , C0 > 0 satisfying the hypotheses from Proposition 4.17, and an upper semi-continuous map C : UE ×U E r∆ → R such that for all (T, T 0 ) ∈ UE×UEr∆, all greedy folding lines γ : R → CVN from T to T 0 are (C(T, T 0 ); A0 , B0 , C0 )progressing at all dsym CVN -closest-point projections of y0 to γ. Proof. This follows from Lemma 3.9 and Corollary 4.22. We now deduce that typical geodesic rays contain infinitely many progressing (and hence contracting and high) subsegments. We fix constants A0 , B0 , C0 > 0 provided by Corollary 4.23. Proposition 4.24. Let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on Out(FN ) with finite first moment with respect to dCVN . Then for all θ ∈ (0, 1), there exists C > 0 such that for P-a.e. bilateral sample path Φ of the random walk on (Out(FN ), µ), and all greedy folding lines γ : R → CVN from bnd− (Φ) to bnd+ (Φ), the set of integers k ∈ Z such that γ is (C; A0 , B0 , C0 )-progressing at all dsym CVN -closest-point projections of y0 , has density at least θ. Proof. We recall that P denotes the space of bilateral sample paths of the random walk on (Out(FN ), µ). By Corollary 4.23, the map e: P → C R Φ 7→ C(bnd− (Φ), bnd+ (Φ)) is measurable. Let U be the transformation of P induced by the Bernoulli shift on the space of bilateral sequences of increments. Then for P-a.e. bilateral sample path Φ of the random walk and all k ∈ Z, all greedy folding lines γ : R → CVN from bnd− (Φ) to e k .Φ); A0 , B0 , C0 )-progressing at all dsym -closest-point projections of bnd+ (Φ) are (C(U CVN Φk .y0 to γ. Let θ ∈ (0, 1). We can choose C > 0 such that e P(C(Φ) ≤ C) > θ. As in the proof of Proposition 3.11 in the case of mapping class groups, an application of Birkhoff’s ergodic theorem to the ergodic transformation U then implies that for P-a.e. sample path Φ := (Φn )n∈N of the random walk on (Out(FN ), µ), the density of integers k ∈ N such that γ is (C; A0 , B0 , C0 )-progressing at all dsym CVN -closest point projections of Φk .y0 to γ, is at least θ. 41  Proposition 4.25. Let µ be a nonelementary probability measure on Out(FN ) with finite first moment with respect to dCVN . Then for all θ ∈ (0, 1), there exist B, D, M > 0 such that for P-a.e. bilateral sample path Φ of the random walk on (Out(FN ), µ), and all greedy folding lines γ : R → CVN from bnd− (Φ) to bnd+ (Φ), the set of integers k ∈ Z such that γ is (B, D)-contracting and M -high at all dsym CVN -closest-point projections of y0 , has density at least θ. Proof. This follows from Propositions 4.15, 4.17 and 4.24.  4.5  End of the proof of the spectral theorem  Proof of Theorem 4.1. We will check that (Out(FN ), µ) satisfies the hypotheses in Theorem 2.6. The pair (CVN , F FN ) is a hyperbolic Out(FN )-electrification. All elements of Out(FN ) acting loxodromically on F FN (i.e. fully irreducible outer automorphisms) have an electric translation axis in CVN , and (Out(FN ), µ) is CVN -boundary converging (Theorem 4.10). The first item in the definition of contracting pencils of geodesics (Definition 2.5) was established by Namazi–Pettet–Reynolds [41, Lemmas 7.16 and 7.17] for the collection of greedy folding lines between any two distinct trees in UE. In view of Proposition 4.25, the second item in this definition is also satisfied by this collection of lines. Therefore, Theorem 2.6 applies to (Out(FN ), µ). Recall that the translation length of any fully irreducible outer automorphism on CVN is equal to the logarithm of its stretching factor. Therefore, for P-a.e. sample path of the random walk on (Out(FN ), µ), we have 1 lim log λ(Φ−1 n ) = L, n→+∞ n where L is the drift of the random walk on (Out(FN ), µ) with respect to dCVN .  References [1] Y. Algom-Kfir, The Lipschitz metric on Outer Space, Ph.D. thesis, University of Utah, 2010. , Strongly contracting geodesics in Outer Space, Geom. Topol. 15 (2011), no. 4, 2181–  [2] 2233.  [3] Y. Algom-Kfir and M. Bestvina, Asymmetry of outer space, Geom. Dedic. 156 (2012), no. 1, 81–92. [4] Y. Benoist and J.-F. Quint, Central limit theorem on hyperbolic groups, preprint (2014). [5] M. Bestvina and M. Feighn, Outer limits, preprint, 1994. [6]  , Hyperbolicity of the complex of free factors, Adv. Math. 256 (2014), 104–155.  [7] M. Bestvina and M. Handel, Train tracks and automorphisms of free groups, Ann. Math. 135 (1992), no. 1, 1–51. [8] M. Bestvina and P. Reynolds, The boundary of the complex of free factors, arXiv:1211.3608v2 (2013). [9] D. Calegari and J. Maher, Statistics and compression of scl, arXiv:1008.4952v4 (2012).  42  [10] M.M. Cohen and M. Lustig, Very small group actions on R-trees and Dehn twist automorphisms, Topology 34 (1995), no. 3, 575–617. [11] T. Coulbois, A. Hilion, and M. Lustig, Non-unique ergodicity, observers’ topology and the dual algebraic lamination for R-trees, Illinois J. Math. 51 (2007), no. 3, 897–911. [12] M. Culler and J.W. Morgan, Group actions on R-trees, Proc. London Math. Soc. 55 (1987), no. 3, 571–604. [13] M. Culler and K. Vogtmann, Moduli of graphs and automorphisms of free groups, Invent. math. 84 (1986), no. 1, 91–119. [14] S. Dowdall, M. Duchin, and H. Masur, Statistical Hyperbolicity in Teichmüller Space, Geom. Funct. Anal. 24 (2014), no. 3, 748–795. [15] S. Dowdall and S.J. Taylor, Hyperbolic extensions of free groups, arXiv:1406.2567v1 (2014). [16] A. Fathi, F. Laudenbach, and V. Poenaru, Travaux de Thurston sur les surfaces, Astérisque 66-67 (1979), 1–284. [17] S. Francaviglia and A. Martino, Metric Properties of Outer Space, Publ. Mat. 55 (2011), no. 2, 433–473. [18] H. Furstenberg, Noncommuting random products, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 108 (1963), 377–428. [19] H. Furstenberg and H. Kesten, Products of Random Matrices, Ann. Math. Stat. 31 (1960), no. 2, 457–469. [20] F. Gardiner and H. Masur, Extremal length geometry of Teichmüller space, Complex Variables 16 (1991), 209–237. [21] V. Guirardel and G. Levitt, The outer space of a free product, Proc. London Math. Soc. 94 (2007), no. 3, 695–714. [22] Y. Guivarc’h, Produits de matrices aléatoires et applications aux sous-groupes du groupe linéaire, Erg. Th. Dyn. Syst. 10 (1990), no. 3, 483–512. [23] U. Hamenstädt, The boundary of the free splitting graph and of the free factor graph, arXiv:1211.1630v5 (2014). [24] M. Handel and L. Mosher, Axes in Outer Space, Memoirs of the AMS 213 (2011), no. 1004. [25] C. Horbez, The boundary of the outer space of a free product, to appear in Israel J. Math. [26]  , The horoboundary of outer space, and growth under random automorphisms, to appear in Ann. Scient. Ec. Norm. Sup.  [27]  , Hyperbolic graphs for free products, and the Gromov boundary of the graph of cyclic splittings, to appear in J. Topol.  [28]  , Central limit theorems for mapping class groups and Out(FN ), arXiv:1506.07244v2 (2015).  [29] V.A. Kaimanovich, The Poisson formula for groups with hyperbolic properties, Ann. Math. 152 (2000), no. 3, 659–692. [30] V.A. Kaimanovich and H. Masur, The Poisson boundary of the mapping class group, Invent. math. 125 (1996), no. 2, 221–264.  43  [31] I. Kapovich, Currents on free groups, Topological and Asymptotic Aspects of Group Theory (R. Grigorchuk, M. Mihalik, M. Sapir, and Z. Sunik, eds.), AMS Contemp. Math. Series, vol. 394, 2006, pp. 149–176. [32] I. Kapovich and M. Lustig, Patterson–Sullivan currents, generic stretching factors and the asymmetric Lipschitz metric for Outer space, arXiv:1406.0434v3 (2015). [33] A. Karlsson, Two extensions of Thurston’s spectral theorem for surface diffeomorphisms, Bull. London Math. Soc. 46 (2014), no. 2, 217–226. [34] J.F.C. Kingman, The Ergodic Theory of Subadditive Stochastic Processes, J. Roy. Statist. Soc. B 30 (1968), no. 3, 499–510. [35] G. Levitt, Counting growth types of automorphisms of free groups, Geom. Funct. Anal. 19 (2009), no. 4, 1119–1146. [36] J. Maher, Exponential decay in the mapping class group, J. Lond. Math. Soc. 86 (2012), no. 2, 366–386. [37] J. Maher and G. Tiozzo, Random walks on weakly hyperbolic groups, arXiv:1410.4173v2 (2015). [38] B. Mann, Hyperbolicity of the cyclic splitting graph, Geom. Dedicata 173 (2014), no. 1, 271–280. [39] H.A. Masur and Y.N. Minsky, Geometry of the complex of curves I : Hyperbolicity, Invent. math. 138 (1999), no. 1, 103–149. [40] J. McCarthy and A. Papadopoulos, Dynamics on Thurston’s sphere of projective measured foliations, Comment. Math. Helv. 64 (1989), no. 1, 133–166. [41] H. Namazi, A. Pettet, and P. Reynolds, Ergodic decomposition for folding and unfolding paths in Outer space, arXiv:1410.8870v1 (2014). [42] V.I. Oseledets, A multiplicative ergodic theorem. Characteristic Ljapunov exponents of dynamical systems, Tr. Mosk. Mat. Obs. 19 (1968), 179–210. [43] I. Rivin, Walks on groups, counting reducible matrices, polynomials, and surface and free group automorphisms, Duke Math. J. 142 (2008), no. 2, 353–379. [44] C. Series, Lines of minima in Teichmüller space, Handbook of Teichmüller theory (Zürich) (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), IRMA Lectures in Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, vol. III, EMS Publishing House, 2012, pp. 123–156. [45] A. Sisto, Contracting elements and random walks, arXiv:1112.2666v2 (2013). [46] S.J. Taylor and G. Tiozzo, Random extensions of free groups and surface groups are hyperbolic, arXiv:1501.02846v1 (2015). [47] W.P. Thurston, On the geometry and dynamics of diffeomorphisms of surfaces, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 19 (1988), no. 2, 417–431. [48] G. Tiozzo, Sublinear deviation between geodesics and sample paths, Duke Math. J. 164 (2015), no. 3, 511–539.  44  François Dahmani, Université de Grenoble Alpes, Institut Fourier, F-38000 Grenoble, France. e-mail:francois.dahmani@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr Camille Horbez, Laboratoire de Mathématiques d’Orsay, Univ. Paris-Sud, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, 91405 Orsay, France. e-mail:camille.horbez@math.u-psud.fr  45

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
