Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_4327

Abstract:
arXiv:1307.7810v1 [q-bio.QM] 30 Jul 2013  Accurate Decoding of Pooled Sequenced Data Using Compressed Sensing Denisa Duma1 , Mary Wootters2 , Anna C. Gilbert2 , Hung Q. Ngo3 , Atri Rudra3 , Matthew Alpert1 , Timothy J. Close4 , Gianfranco Ciardo1 , and Stefano Lonardi1 1  Dept. of Computer Science and Eng., University of California, Riverside, CA 92521 2 Dept. of Mathematics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 3 Dept. of Computer Science and Eng., Univ. at Buffalo, SUNY, Buffalo, NY 14260 4 Dept. of Botany & Plant Sciences, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521  Abstract. In order to overcome the limitations imposed by DNA barcoding when multiplexing a large number of samples in the current generation of high-throughput sequencing instruments, we have recently proposed a new protocol that leverages advances in combinatorial pooling design (group testing) [9]. We have also demonstrated how this new protocol would enable de novo selective sequencing and assembly of large, highly-repetitive genomes. Here we address the problem of decoding pooled sequenced data obtained from such a protocol. Our algorithm employs a synergistic combination of ideas from compressed sensing and the decoding of error-correcting codes. Experimental results on synthetic data for the rice genome and real data for the barley genome show that our novel decoding algorithm enables significantly higher quality assemblies than the previous approach. Keywords: second/next-generation sequencing, pooled sequencing, compressed sensing, error-correcting codes  1  Introduction  The second generation of DNA sequencing instruments offer unprecedented throughput and extremely low cost per base, but read lengths are much shorter compared to Sanger sequencing. An additional limitation is the small number of distinct samples that these instruments can accommodate (e.g., two sets of eight lanes on the Illumina HiSeq). When the sequencing task involves a large number of individual samples, a common solution is to employ DNA barcoding to “multiplex” samples within a single lane. DNA barcoding, however, does not scale readily to thousands of samples. As the number of samples reaches the hundreds, exhaustive DNA barcoding becomes time consuming, error-prone, and expensive. Additionally, the resulting distribution of reads for each barcoded sample can be severely skewed (see, e.g., [1]). Combinatorial pooling design or group testing allows one to achieve multiplexing without exhaustive barcoding. In group testing, a design or scheme is  a set of tests (or pools) each of which is a subset of a large collection of items that needs to be tested for the presence of (a few) ‘defective’ items. The result of testing a pool is a boolean value indicating whether the pool contains at least one defective. The goal of group testing is to decode the information obtained by testing all the pools in order to determine the precise identity of the defectives, despite the fact that the defectives and non-defectives are mixed together. The challenge is to achieve this goal while, at the same time, minimizing the number of pools needed. Recently, compressed sensing (CS) has emerged as a powerful technique for solving the decoding problem when the results of testing the pools are more than boolean outcomes, for instance, real or complex values. Combinatorial pooling has been used previously in the context of genome analysis (see, e.g., [5,6,7,2,12]), but not for de novo genome sequencing. Our proposed pooling method for genome sequencing and assembly was first described in [9] and has generated considerable attention. It was used to produce one of the critical datasets for the first draft sequence of the barley genome [14]. In our sequencing protocol, thousands of BAC clones are pooled according to a combinatorial design so that, at the outset of sequencing, one can ‘decode’ each read to its source BACs. The underlying idea is to encode the identity of a BAC within the pooling pattern rather than by its association with a specific DNA barcode. We should stress that combinatorial pooling is not necessarily an alternative to DNA barcoding, and both methods have advantages and disadvantages. They can be used together to increase the number of samples that can be handled and benefit from the advantages of both. In this paper we address the problem of decoding pooled sequenced data obtained from a protocol such as the one in [9]. While the main objective is to achieve the highest possible accuracy in assigning a read to the correct BAC, given that one sequencing run can generate hundreds of millions of reads, the decoding procedure has also to be time- and space-efficient. Since in [9] we pooled BAC clones according to the Shifted Transversal Design [15] which is a ReedSolomon based pooling design, our proposed decoding approach combines ideas from the fields of compressive sensing and decoding of error-correcting codes. Specifically, given the result of ‘testing’ (in this case, sequencing) pools of genomic BAC clones, we aggregate read frequency information across the pools and cast the problem as a compressed sensing problem where the unknowns are the BAC assignments of the reads. We solve (decode) for the unknown assignments using a list recovery strategy as used in the decoding of error-correcting codes. Reed-Solomon codes are known to be good list-recoverable codes which can also tolerate a large fraction of errors. We also show that using readily available information about the reads like overlap and mate pair information can improve the accuracy of the decoding. Experimental results on synthetic reads from the rice genome as well as real sequencing reads from the barley genome show that the decoding accuracy of our new method is almost identical to that of HashFilter [9]. However, when the assembly quality of individual BAC clones is the metric of choice, the decoding accuracy of the method proposed here is significantly better than HashFilter.  2  Related Work  The resemblance between our work and the closest related research efforts using combinatorial pooling and compressed sensing ideas stops at the pooling of sequencing data. Our application domain, pooling scheme employed and algorithmic approach to decoding, are completely different. To the best of our knowledge, all compressed sensing work in the domain of genomics deals with the problem of genotyping large population samples, whereas our work deals with de novo genome sequencing. For instance in [5], the authors employ a pooling scheme based on the Chinese Remainder Theorem (CRT) to identify carriers of rare alleles in large cohorts of individuals. The pooling scheme allows the detection of mutants within a pool, and by combining information across pools one is able to determine the identity of carriers. In true group testing style, the unknown carrier identities are encoded by a boolean vector of length equal to the number of individuals, where a value of one indicates a carrier and zero a normal individual. To decode their pooling scheme and find the unknown vector, the authors devise a greedy decoding method called Minimum Discrepancy Decoder. In [6], loopy belief propagation decoding is used for the same pooling scheme. A similar application domain is described in [12], where the authors identify carriers of rare SNPs in a group of individuals pooled with a random pooling scheme (Bernoulli matrix) and use the Gradient Projection for Sparse Reconstruction (GPSR) algorithm to decode the pooling scheme and recover the unknown carrier identities. The same problem is tackled in [11] with a pooling design inspired from the theory of error correcting codes. However, this design is only able to identify a single rare-allele carrier within a group. In [2], the authors organize domain-specific (linear) constraints into a compressed sensing matrix which they use together with GPSR decoding to determine the frequency of each bacterial species present in a metagenomic mixture.  3  Preliminaries  As mentioned in the introduction, in [9] we pool DNA samples (BAC clones) according to a combinatorial pooling scheme, then sequence the pools using high-throughput sequencing instruments. In this paper we show how to efficiently recover the sequence content of each BAC by combining ideas from the theory of sparse signal recovery or compressed sensing (CS) as well as from the large body of work developed for the decoding of error-correcting codes. Formally, a combinatorial pooling design (or pooling scheme) can be represented by a binary matrix Φ with m rows (corresponding to pools) and n columns (corresponding to items to be pooled), where entry (i, j) is 1 if item j is present in pool i, 0 otherwise. The matrix Φ is called the design matrix, sensing matrix or measurement matrix by various authors in the literature. In this paper we only use the first two names to designate Φ. An important property of a combinatorial pooling design is its decodability d (also called disjunctness), which is the maximum number of ‘defectives’ it guarantees to reliably identify.  Let w be a subset of the columns (pooled variables) of the design matrix Φ and p(w) be the set of rows (pools) that contain at least one variable in w: the matrix Φ is said to be d-decodable (d-disjunct) if for any choice of w1 and w2 with |w1 | = 1, |w2 | = d and w1 6⊂ w2 , we have that p(w1 ) 6⊆ p(w2 ). In this paper, we pool BACs using the combinatorial pooling scheme called Shifted Transversal Design (STD) [15]. STD is a layered design, i.e., the rows of the design matrix are organized into multiple redundant layers such that each pooled variable appears only once in each layer, that is, a layer is a partition of the set of variables. STD is defined by parameters (q, L, Γ ) where L is the number of layers, q is a prime number equal to the number of pools (rows) in each layer and Γ is the compression level of the design. Thus, in order to pool n variables, STD uses a total of m = q × L pools. The set of L pools defines a unique pooling pattern for each variable which can be used to retrieve its identity. This set of L integers is called the signature of the variable. The compression level Γ is defined to be the smallest integer such that q Γ +1 ≥ n. STD has the desirable property that any two variables co-occur in at most Γ pools, therefore by choosing a small value for Γ one can make STD pooling extremely robust to errors. The parameter Γ is also related to the decodability of the design through the equation d = ⌊(L − 1)/Γ ⌋. Therefore, Γ can be seen as a trade-off parameter: the larger it is, the more items can be tested (up to q Γ +1 ), but fewer defectives can be reliably identified (up to ⌊(L − 1)/Γ ⌋). For more details on the pooling scheme and its properties please refer to [15]. In order to decode measurements obtained through STD (i.e., reconstruct the sequence content of pooled BACs) we borrow ideas from compressed sensing (CS), an area of signal processing that describes conditions and efficient methods for capturing sparse signals from a small number of aggregated measurements [6]. Unlike combinatorial group testing, in compressed sensing measurements can be more general than boolean values, allowing recovery of hidden variables which are real or complex-valued. Specifically, in CS we look for an unknown vector or signal x = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) which is s-sparse, i.e., has at most s non-zero entries. We are given a vector y = (y1 , y2 , . . . , ym ) of measurements (m ≪ n), which is the product between the (known) design matrix Φ and the unknown vector x, that is y = Φx. Under certain conditions on Φ, by using the measurements y, the assumption on the sparsity of x and information encoded by Φ, it is possible to recover the original sparse vector x. The latter equation corresponds to the ideal case when the data is noise-free. In practice, if the signal x is not as sparse as needed and if measurements are corrupted by noise, the equation becomes y = Φx + ǫ. In CS theory there are two main approaches for solving the latter equation, namely linear programming (LP) decoding and greedy pursuit decoding. Greedy pursuit algorithms have faster decoding time than LP-based approaches, frequently sub-linear in the length of x (although for specially designed matrices). Their main disadvantages is that they usually require a slightly larger number of measurements and do not offer the same uniformity and stability guarantees as LP decoding. Greedy pursuits are iterative algorithms which proceed in a series of steps: (1) identify the locations of the  largest coefficients of x by greedy selection, (2) estimate their values, (3) update y by subtracting the contribution of estimated values from it, and iterate (1-3) until some convergence criterion is met. Usually O(s) iterations, where s is the sparsity of x, suffice [17]. Updating y amounts to solving a least squares problem in each iteration. The most well known greedy decoding algorithm is Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (OMP) [16], which has spawned many variations. In OMP, the greedy rule selects in each iteration the largest coordinate of ΦT y, i.e., the column of Φ which is the most correlated with y. In this paper, we are interested in a variant of OMP called Simultaneous Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (S-OMP). S-OMP is different from OMP in that it approximates multiple sparse signals x1 , x2 , . . . , xK simultaneously by using multiple linear combinations, y1 , y2 , . . . , yK , of the sensing matrix Φ [17]. The unknown signals {xk }k∈{1,··· ,K} as well as measurement vectors {yk }k∈{1,··· ,K} can be represented by matrices X ∈ Rn×K and Y ∈ Rm×K . Intuitively, by jointly exploiting information provided by Y, SOMP is able to achieve better approximation error especially when the signals to be approximated are corrupted by noise which is not statistically independent [17]. The mapping from the CS setting into our problem follows naturally and we give here a simplified and intuitive version of it. The detailed model will be introduced in the next section. The variables to be pooled are BAC clones. Each column of the design matrix corresponds to a BAC to be pooled and each row corresponds to a pool. For each read r (to be decoded) there is an unknown s-sparse vector x which represents at most s BACs which could have generated r. The vector of measurements y (frequency vector ) of length m gives for each read r, the number of times r appears in each of the m pools. The use of numerical measurements (read counts) rather than boolean values indicating the presence or the absence of r from a pool is in accordance with CS theory and offers additional valuable information for decoding. To carry out the latter, we use a S-OMP style algorithm but replace the greedy selection rule by a list recovery criterion. Briefly, we obtain a list of candidate BACs for read r as those columns of Φ whose non-zero coordinates consistently correspond to the heaviest-magnitude measurements in each layer of y [10]. This allows for a finer-grained usage of the values of y on a layer-by-layer basis rather than as a whole. Additionally, by requiring that the condition holds for at least l layers with l ≤ L, one can make the algorithm more robust to the noise in vector y.  4  Decoding Algorithms  In this section we present our decoding algorithms that assign reads back to the BACs from which they were derived. Recall that we have n BACs pooled into m pools according to STD and each BAC is pooled in exactly L pools. The input data to the decoding algorithm consists of (1) m datasets containing the reads obtained from sequencing the m pools, and (2) the parameters of the pooling design, including the signatures of all n BACs. We will assume that each read  r may originate from up to s BACs with s ≪ n; ideally, we can make the same assumption for each k-mer (a k-mer is a substring of r of length k) of r, provided that k is ‘large enough’. In practice, this will not be true for all k-mers (e.g., some k-mers are highly repetitive), and we will address this issue later in this document. We start by preprocessing the reads to correct sequencing errors in order to improve the accuracy of read decoding. For this task, we employ SGA [13], which internally employs a k-mer based error correction strategy. An additional benefit of error correction is that it reduces the total number of distinct k-mers present in the set of reads. After the application of SGA, there still remains a small proportion of erroneous k-mers, which we discard because they will likely introduce noise in the decoding process. An advantage of pooled sequencing is that erroneous k-mers are easy to identify because they appear in fewer than L pools. To be conservative, we only discard k-mers appearing in fewer than γ pools where γ ≤ L is a user-defined parameter (see Section 5.1 for details on the choice of this parameter). The closer γ is to L the more likely it is that a k-mer that appears in γ pools is correct, but missing from the remaining L − γ pools due to sequencing errors. Henceforth, we will call a k-mer valid if it appears in a number of pools in the range [γ, sL] where s is the sparsity parameter. Any k-mer occurring in more than sL pools is considered highly repetitive, and will likely not be useful in the decoding process. The decoding algorithm we employ can safely ignore these repetitive k-mers. To carry out the decoding, we first compute the frequencies of all the k-mers in all the m pools. Specifically, we decompose all SGA-corrected reads into kmers by sliding a window of length k (there are |r| − k + 1 such windows for each read r). For each distinct k-mer, we count the number of times it appears in each of the m pools, and store the sequence of the k-mer along with its vector of m counts into a hash table. We refer to the vector of counts of a k-mer as its frequency vector. We are now ready to apply our CS-style decoding algorithm. We are given a large number of reads divided into m sets (pools). For each read r, we want to determine which of the n BACs is the source. Since we decomposed r into its constitutive k-mers, we can represent the pool counts of all its k-mers by a frequency matrix Yr . Matrix Yr is a non-negative integer matrix where the number of columns is equal to the number Kr of k-mers in r, the number of rows is equal to the numbers m of pools, and entry (i, j) reports the number of times the j th k-mer of r appears in pool i. The input to the decoding algorithm for read r is given by (1) the frequency matrix Yr , (2) the design matrix Φ ∈ {0, 1}m×n, and (3) the maximum number s of BACs which could have generated r. To decode r means to find a matrix Xr ∈ Zn×Kr such that Xr = argminX ||ΦX − Yr ||2 with the constrain that Xr is row-sparse, i.e., it has at most s non-zero rows (one for each source BAC). Since finding the source BACs for a read is sufficient for our purposes, we can reduce the problem of finding matrix X to the problem of finding its row support S(X), which is the union of the supports of its columns. The support Supp(X:,j )  of a column j of X is the set of indices i such that Xi,j 6= 0. In our case, the non-zero indices represent the set of BACs which generated the read (and by transitivity its constitutive k-mers). Since this set has cardinality at most s, in the ideal case, X is row-sparse with support size at most s. In practice, the same k-mer can be shared by multiple reads and therefore the number of non-zero indices can differ from s. By taking a conservative approach, we search for a good s-sparse approximation of S(X), whose quality we evaluate according to the following definition. Definition: A non-empty set S is good for X if for any column j of X, we have S ⊂ Supp(X:,j ). Our decoding Algorithm 1 finds S in two steps, namely Filter and Estimate, which are explained next. Filter (Algorithm 2) is a one-iteration S-OMP style algorithm in which multiple candidate BACs are selected (we tried performing multiple iterations without significant improvement in the results). Whereas S-OMP selects one BAC per iteration as the column of Φ most correlated (inner product) with all the columns of Y, our algorithm employs a list recovery criterion to obtain an approximation X̃r of Xr . Specifically, for each column y of Yr and for each layer l ∈ [1, . . . , L], we select a set Sl of candidate pools for that layer as follows. We choose set Sl by considering the h highest-magnitude coordinates of y in layer l and selecting the corresponding pools. BACs whose signature pools belong to all L sets Sl are kept while the rest of them are removed, i.e., their X̃-entries are set to zero. Finally, for the BACs that are not filtered out, the X̃-entry estimate follows the min-count estimate. The value of h should be chosen to be Θ(s): h = 3s is sufficient even for noisy data [10]. Next, the Estimate (Algorithm 3) algorithm determines Sr by computing a score for each BAC. Based on the computed scores, we select and return the top s BACs as the final support Sr of Xr . Read r is then assigned to all the BACs in Sr . The scoring function we employ for each BAC b is the number of k-mers “voting” for b, i.e., having a frequency of at least τ in each pool in the signature of b. The value we used for τ is given in Section 5. If we consider the rows of X̃r as vectors of length Kr , our scoring function is simply the l0 norm of these vectors, after zeroing out all the entries smaller than τ . We also tried  Algorithm 1: FindSupport (Φ, Yr , h, s) Input : Φ ∈ {0, 1}m×n , Yr ∈ Nm×Kr and sparsity s such that Xr = argminX ||ΦX − Yr ||2 for a s-row-sparse matrix Xr ∈ Nn×Kr ; h ≤ q the number of entries per layer considered by list recovery Output: A non-empty set Sr with |Sr | ≤ s which is good for Xr 1 2 3  X̃r ← Filter(Φ, Yr , h) Sr ← Estimate(X̃r , s) return Sr  Algorithm 2: Filter(Φ, Yr , h) Input : Φ ∈ {0, 1}m×n , Yr ∈ Nm×Kr , parameter h Output: An approximation X̃r for Xr 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15  // Recall that Φ has L layers with q pools each // For a column y of Yr , denote by y[l]i the ith entry in layer l X̃r ← 0 for k = 1, . . . , Kr do Let y = Yr:,k be the kth column of Yr for l = 1, . . . , L do Sl ← set of h indices i ∈ {1, . . . , q} such that the corresponding counts y[l]i are the h heaviest-magnitude counts in layer l of column y for b = 1, . . . , n do layersMatched ← 0 Let φ = Φ:,b be the bth column of Φ for l = 1, . . . , L do if the unique i such that φ[l]i = 1 belongs to Sl then layersMatched ← layersMatched + 1 if layersMatched = L then X̃b,k ← minφp =1 {yp }  l1 and l2 norms without observing significant improvements in the accuracy of read assignments. Observe that algorithms FindSupport, Filter and Estimate process one read at a time. Since there is no dependency between the reads, processing multiple reads in parallel is trivial. However, better total running time, improved decoding accuracy as well as a smaller number of non-decodable reads can be achieved by jointly decoding multiple reads at once. The idea is to use additional sources of information about the reads, namely (1) read overlaps and (2) matepair information. For the former, if we can determine clusters of reads that are mutually overlapping, we can then decode all the reads within a cluster as a single unit. Not only this strategy increases the decoding speed, but it also has  Algorithm 3: Estimate(X̃r , s) Input : X̃r , sparsity parameter s Output: Support set Sr , with |Sr | ≤ s 1 2 3 4  for b = 1, . . . , n do score(b) ← |{k : X̃b,k ≥ τ }| Sr ← set of indices b with the highest s scores return Sr  the potential to improve the accuracy of read assignments because while some of the reads in the cluster might have sequencing errors, the others might be able to ‘compensate’. Thus, we can have more confidence in the vote of high-quality shared k-mers. There is, however, the possibility that overlaps are misleading. For instance, overlaps between repetitive reads might lead one to assign them to the same cluster while in reality these reads belong to different BACs. To reduce the impact of this issue we allow any read that belongs to multiple clusters to be decoded multiple times and take the intersection of the multiple assignments as the final assignment for the read. If a read does not overlap any other read (which could be explained due to the presence of several sequencing errors) we revert to the single read decoding strategy. In order to build the clusters we compute all pairwise read overlaps using SGA [13], whose parameters are discussed in Section 5. In order to apply FindSupport on a cluster c of reads, we need to gather the frequency matrix Yc for c. Since the total number of k-mers within a cluster can be quite large as the clusters themselves can be quite large, and each kmer can be shared by a subset of the reads in the cluster, we build Yc on the most frequently shared valid k-mers in the cluster. Our experiments indicate that retaining a number of k-mers equal to the numbers of k-mers used in the decoding of individual reads is sufficient. When reads within a cluster do not share a sufficient number of valid k-mers, we break the cluster into singletons and decode its reads individually. We denote by µ the minimum number of valid k-mers required to attempt decoding of both clusters and individual reads. The choice of this parameter is also discussed in Section 5. We can also use mate pair information to improve the decoding, if reads are sequenced as paired-ends (PE). The mate resolution strategy (MRS) we employ is straightforward. Given a PE read r, (1) if the assignment of one of the mates of r is empty, we assign r to the BACs of the non-empty mate; (2) if both mates of r have BAC assignments and the intersection of these assignments is non-empty, we assign r to the BACs in the intersection; (3) if both mates of r have BAC assignments and their intersection is empty, we discard both mates. In what follows, we will use RBD to refer to the read based-decoding and CBD to refer to the cluster-based decoding versions of our algorithm. CBD with MRS is summarized in Algorithm 4.  5  Experimental Results  While our algorithms can be used to decode any set of DNA samples pooled according to STD, in this paper, we evaluate their performance on sets of BAC clones selected in such a way that they cover the genome (or a portion thereof) with minimum redundancy. In other words, the BACs we use form a minimum tiling path (MTP) of the genome. The construction of a MTP for a given genome requires a physical map, but both are well-known procedures and we will not discuss them here (see, e.g., [4] and references therein). Once the set of MTP BAC clones has been identified, we (1) pool them according to STD, (2) sequence  Algorithm 4: ClusterFindSupport(Φ, C, {Yc }c∈C , h, s) Input : Φ ∈ {0, 1}m×n , parameter h, sparsity parameter s, set C of all clusters, frequency matrix Yc for each cluster c ∈ C Output: A support set Sr with |Sr | ≤ s for each read r 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14  for each cluster c ∈ C do Sc ←FindSupport(Φ, Yc , h, s) for each read r ∈ c do if Sr = ∅ then Sr ← Sc else Sr ← Sr ∩ Sc // Take intersection of all assignments to r // MRS for each PE read (r1 , r2 ) do if Sr1 = ∅ then Sr1 ← Sr2 if Sr2 = ∅ then Sr2 ← Sr1 if Sr1 6= ∅ and Sr2 6= ∅ then Sr1 ,r2 ← Sr1 ∩ Sr2 if Sr1 ,r2 6= ∅ then Sr1 ← Sr1 ,r2 Sr2 ← Sr1 ,r2  the resulting pools, (3) apply our decoding algorithm to assign reads back to their source BACs. Step (3) makes it possible to assemble reads BAC-by-BAC, thus simplifying the genome assembly problem and increasing the accuracy of the resulting BAC assemblies [9]. Recall that CS decoding requires the unknown assignment vector x to be ssparse. Since we use MTP BAC clones, if the MTP was truly a set of minimally overlapping clones, setting s equal to 2 would be sufficient; we set it equal to 3 instead to account for imperfections in the construction of the MTP and to obtain additional protection against errors. Figure 1 illustrates the three cases (read belongs to one BAC, two BACs or three BACs) we will be dealing with during decoding, and how it affects our STD parameter choice. Next, we present experimental evaluations where we pool BAC clones using the following STD parameters. Taking into consideration the need for a 3-decodable pooling design for MTP BACs, we choose parameters q = 13, L = 7 and Γ = 2, so that m = qL = 91, n = q Γ +1 = 2197 and d = ⌊(L − 1)/Γ ⌋ = 3.  Fig. 1. The three cases we are dealing with during read decoding.  In words, we pool 2197 BACs in 91 pools distributed in 7 layers of 13 pools each. Each BAC is pooled in exactly 7 pools and each pool contains q Γ = 169 BACs. Recall that we call the set of L pools to which a BAC is assigned the BAC signature. In the case of STD, any two-BAC signatures can share at most Γ = 2 pools and any three-BAC signatures can share at most 3Γ = 6 pools. 5.1  Simulation results on the rice genome  To simulate our combinatorial pooling protocol and subsequent decoding, we used the genome of rice (Oryza sativa) which is about 390 Mb and fully sequenced. We started from an MTP of 3,827 BAC clones selected from a real physical map library for rice of 22,474 clones. The average BAC length in the MTP was ≈ 150kB. Overall the clones in the MTP spanned 91% of the rice genome. We pooled a subset of 2,197 of these BACs into 91 pools according to the pooling parameters defined above. The resulting pools were ‘sequenced’ in silico using SimSeq, which is a high-quality short read simulator used to generate the synthetic data for Assemblathon [3]. SimSeq uses error profiles derived from real Illumina data to inject “realistic” substitution errors. For each pool, we generated 106 PE reads of 100 bases each with an average insert size of 300 bases. A total of 200M usable bases gave an expected ≈ 8× sequencing depth for a BAC in a pool. As each BAC is present in 7 pools, this is an expected ≈ 56× combined coverage before decoding. After decoding however, since a read can be assigned to more than one BAC, the actual average BAC sequencing depth became 91.68× for RBD, 93× for CBD and 97.91× for CBD with MRS. To simulate our current workflow, we first performed error-correction on the synthetic reads using SGA [13] with k-mer size parameter k = 26. Then, the hash table for k = 26 was built on the corrected reads, but we only stored k-mers appearing in at least γ = 3 pools. Due to the error-correction preprocessing step and the fact that we are discarding k-mers with low pool count, the hash table was relatively small (about 30GB). In order to objectively evaluate and compare the performance of our decoding algorithms, we first had to precisely define the ‘ground truth’ for simulated reads. An easy choice would have been to consider ‘true’ only the single BAC from which each read was generated. However, this notion of ground truth is not satisfactory: for instance, since we can have two or three BACs overlapping each other in the MTP, reads originating from an overlap region are expected to be assigned to all the BACs involved. In order to find all the BACs that contain a read, we mapped all synthetic reads (error-free version) against the BAC primary sequences using Bowtie [8] in stringent mode (paired-end end-toend alignment with zero mismatches). The top three paired-end hits returned by Bowtie constituted the ground truth against which we validated the accuracy of the decoding. In our experiments we observed that although the majority of the reads are assigned to 1–3 BACs, due to the repetitive nature of the genome, a small fraction (≈ 1%) can be correctly assigned to more than 3 BACs. To account for this, rather than sorting BAC scores and retaining the top 3, we decided to  Mapped to source BAC Precision Perfect decoding  100.00%  Hashfilter [9] RBD CBD CBD + MRS  99.48% 97.45% 98.05% 97.81% 97.23% 97.74% 96.60% 97.89%  Recall F-score Not decoded  98.11% 49.62% 65.90% 99.28% 97.46% 96.35% 95.58%  98.36% 97.64% 97.04% 96.72%  0.00% 16.25% 14.58% 12.58% 7.09%  Table 1. Accuracy of the decoding algorithms on synthetic reads for the rice genome (see text for details). All values are an average of 91 pools. Boldface values highlight the best result in each column (excluding perfect decoding).  assign a read to all BACs whose score was above a certain threshold. We found that retaining all BACs whose score was at least 0.5Kr gave the best results. Recall that the score function we are using is the l0 norm, so we are effectively asking that at least half of the k-mers ‘vote’ for a BAC. Table 1 summarizes and compares the decoding performance of our algorithms. The first row of the table reports the performance of an ‘ideal’ method that always assigns each read to its original source BAC. The next four rows summarize (1) the performance of HashFilter [9] with default parameters; (2) our read-based decoding (RBD); (3) our cluster-based decoding (CBD); (4) our cluster-based decoding with mate resolution strategy (CBD + MRS). For all three versions of the decoding algorithm we used parameters h = ⌊q/2⌋ = 6 and τ = 1. To build clusters, we require a minimum overlap of 75 bases between two reads and a maximum error rate of 0.01 (SGA parameters). The resulting clusters contained on average about 5 reads. Our methods make a decoding decision if a read (or cluster) contains at least µ = 15 valid k-mers. The columns in Table 1 report the percentage of reads assigned to the original source BAC, precision (defined as T P/(T P +F P ) where T P is the number of true positive BACs across all decoded reads; F P and F N are computed similarly), recall (defined as T P/(T P + F N )), F-score (harmonic mean of precision and recall) and the percentage of reads that were not decoded. Observe that the highest precision is achieved by the cluster-based decoding with MRS, and the highest recall is obtained by Hashfilter. In general, all methods are comparable from the point of view of decoding precision and recall. In terms of decoding time, once the hash table is built (≈ 10h on one core), RBD takes on average 14.03s per 1M reads and CBD takes on average 33.46s per 1M clusters. By comparison, Hashfilter [9] takes about 30s per 1M reads. These measurements were done on 10 cores of an Intel Xeon X5660 2.8 GHz server with 12 cores and 192 GB of RAM. As a more meaningful measure of decoding performance, we assembled the set of reads assigned by each method to each BAC. We carried out this step using Velvet [18] for each of the 2,197 BACs, using a range of l-mer from 25 to 79 with an increment of 6, and chose the assembly that achieved the highest  Reads used # of contigs Perfect decoding (ideal) Hashfilter [9] RBD CBD CBD + MRS  N50 Sum/size BAC coverage  97.1%  4 136,570  107.4  87.1%  95.0% 96.5% 97.3% 97.0%  24 52,938 20 46,477 22 53,097 11 103,049  93.8 90.0 93.8 97.0  76.2% 81.1% 84.7% 82.9%  Table 2. Assembly results for rice BACs for different decoding algorithms (see text for details). All values are an average of 2197 BACs. Boldface values highlight the best result in each column (excluding perfect decoding).  N505 . Table 2 reports the main statistics for the assemblies: percentage of reads used by Velvet in the assembly, number of contigs (at least 200 bases long) of the assembly, value of N50, ratio of the sum of all contigs sizes over BAC length, and the coverage of the BAC primary sequence by the assembly. All reported values are averages over 2,197 BACs. We observe that our decoding algorithms lead to superior assemblies than Hashfilter’s. In particular, the N50 and the average coverage of the original BACs are both very high, and compare favorably with the statistics for the assembly of perfectly decoded reads. The discrepancy between similar precision/recall figures but quite different assembly statistics deserves a comment. First, we acknowledge that the way we compute precision and recall by averaging T P , F P and F N across all decoded reads might not be the best way of measuring the accuracy of the decoding. Taking averages might not accurately reflect mis-assignments at the level of individual reads. Second, our decoding algorithms makes a better use of the k-mer frequency information than HashFilter, and, at the same time, takes advantage of overlap and mate pair information, which is expected to result in more reads decoded and more accurate assemblies. 5.2  Results on the barley genome  We have also collected experimental results on real sequencing data for the genome of barley (Hordeum vulgare), which is about 5,300 Mb and at least 95% repetitive. We started from an MTP of about 15,000 BAC clones selected from a subset of nearly 84,000 gene-enriched BACs for barley (see [9] for more details). We divided the set of MTP BACs into seven sets of n = 2197 BACs and pooled each set using the STD parameters defined above. In this manuscript, we report on one of these seven sets, called HV3 (the average BAC length in this set is about 116K bases). The 91 pools in HV3 were sequenced on one flow cell of the Illumina HiSeq2000 by multiplexing 13 pools on each lane. After each sample was demultiplexed, we quality-trimmed and cleaned the reads of spurious sequencing adapters and vectors. We ended up with high quality reads of about 5  The N50 is the contig length such that at least half of the total bases of a genome assembly are contained within contigs of this length or longer.  Reads used # contigs Hashfilter [9] RBD CBD CBD + MRS  83.6% 85.7% 92.9% 94.3%  N50 Sum/size # obs unigenes % coverage  101 8,190 54 14,419 54 13,482 50 26,842  96.7% 101.0% 94.5% 126.8%  1,433 1,434 1,436 1,434  92.9% 92.4% 92.6% 92.5%  Table 3. Assembly results for barley BACs for different decoding algorithms. All values are an average of 2197 BACs. Boldface values highlight the best result in each column. Column “% coverage” refers to the coverage of known unigenes by assembled contigs.  87–89 bases on average. The number of reads in a pool ranged from 4.2M to 10M, for a grand total of 826M reads. We error-corrected and overlap-clustered the reads using SGA (same parameters as for rice). The average cluster size was about 26 reads. Computing pairwise overlaps took an average of 217.60s per 1M reads on 10 cores. The hash table for k = 26 (after discarding k-mers appearing in fewer than γ = 3 pools) used about 26GB of RAM. After decoding the reads to their BAC, we obtained an average sequencing depth for one BAC of 409.2×, 382.2× and 412.8× for RBD, CBD and CBD + MRS, respectively. The average running time was 10.25s per 1M reads for RBD and 82.12s per 1M clusters for CBD using 10 cores. The only objective criterion to asses the decoding performance on barley genome is to assemble the reads BAC-by-BAC and analyze the assembly statistics. We used Velvet with the same l-mer choices as used for rice. Table 3 summarizes the statistics for the highest N50 among those l-mer choices. As before, rows corresponds to the various decoding methods. Columns show (1) percentage of reads used by Velvet in the assembly, (2) number of contigs (at least 200 bases long), (3) value of N50, (4) ratio of the sum of all contigs sizes over estimated BAC length, (5) the number of barley known unigenes observed in the assemblies, and (6) the coverage of observed unigenes. Observe that, out of a total of 1,471 known unigenes expected to be contained in these BACs, a large fraction are reported by all assemblies. However, cluster-based decoding appears to generate significantly longer contigs than the other methods.  6  Conclusions  We have presented a novel modeling and decoding approach for pooled sequenced reads obtained from protocols for de novo genome sequencing, like the one proposed in [9]. Our algorithm is based on the theory of compressed sensing and uses ideas from the decoding of error-correcting codes. It also effectively exploits overlap and mate pair information between the sequencing reads. Experimental results on synthetic data from the rice genome as well as real data from the genome of barley show that our method enables significantly higher quality assemblies than the previous approach, without incurring higher decoding times.  Acknowledgments SL and TJC were supported by NSF [DBI-1062301 and DBI-0321756] and by USDA [2009-65300-05645 and 2006-55606-16722]. MW and ACG were supported by NSF [CCF-1161233]. HQN and AR were supported by NSF [CCF-1161196].  References 1. S. Alon, F. Vigneault, S. Eminaga, et al. Barcoding bias in high-throughput multiplex sequencing of mirna. Genome Research, 21(9):1506–1511, 2011. 2. A. Amir and O. Zuk. Bacterial community reconstruction using compressed sensing. In RECOMB, pages 1–15, 2011. 3. D. Earl and et al. Assemblathon 1: A competitive assessment of de novo short read assembly methods. Genome Research, 21(12):2224–2241, Dec. 2011. 4. F. W. Engler, J. Hatfield, W. Nelson, and C. A. Soderlund. Locating sequence on FPC maps and selecting a minimal tiling path. Genome Research, 13(9):2152–2163, 2003. 5. Y. Erlich, K. Chang, A. Gordon, et al. DNA sudoku – harnessing high-throughput sequencing for multiplexed specimen analysis. Genome Research, 19(7):1243–1253, 2009. 6. Y. Erlich, A. Gordon, M. Brand, et al. Compressed genotyping. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 56(2):706–723, Apr. 2010. 7. I. Hajirasouliha, F. Hormozdiari, S. C. Sahinalp, and I. Birol. Optimal pooling for genome re-sequencing with ultra-high-throughput short-read technologies. Bioinformatics, 24(13):i32–i40, 2008. 8. B. Langmead, C. Trapnell, M. Pop, and S. L. Salzberg. Ultrafast and memoryefficient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biology, 10(3):R25, 2009. 9. S. Lonardi, D. Duma, M. Alpert, et al. Combinatorial pooling enables selective sequencing of the barley gene space. PLoS Comput Biol, 9(4):e1003010, 04 2013. 10. H. Q. Ngo, E. Porat, and A. Rudra. Efficiently decodable compressed sensing by list-recoverable codes and recursion. In STACS, pages 230–241, 2012. 11. S. Prabhu and I. Pe’er. Overlapping pools for high-throughput targeted resequencing. Genome Research, 19(7):1254–1261, 2009. 12. N. Shental, A. Amir, and O. Zuk. Identification of rare alleles and their carriers using compressed se(que)nsing. Nucleic Acids Research, 38(19):e179–e179, 2010. 13. J. T. Simpson and R. Durbin. Efficient de novo assembly of large genomes using compressed data structures. Genome Research, 22(3):549–556, 2012. 14. The International Barley Genome Sequencing Consortium. A physical, genetic and functional sequence assembly of the barley genome. Nature, advance online publication:in press, 10 2012. 15. N. Thierry-Mieg. A new pooling strategy for high-throughput screening: the shifted transversal design. BMC Bioinformatics, 7(28), 2006. 16. J. A. Tropp and A. C. Gilbert. Signal recovery from random measurements via orthogonal matching pursuit. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 53:4655–4666, 2007. 17. J. A. Tropp, A. C. Gilbert, and M. J. Strauss. Algorithms for simultaneous sparse approximation: part i: Greedy pursuit. Signal Process., 86(3):572–588, 2006. 18. D. Zerbino and E. Birney. Velvet: Algorithms for de novo short read assembly using de Bruijn graphs. Genome Research, 8(5):821–9, 2008.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
