Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_4235

Abstract:
A Combinatorial Toolbox for Protein Sequence Design and Landscape Analysis in the Grand Canonical Model  arXiv:cs/0101015v1 [cs.CE] 17 Jan 2001  James Aspnes∗  Julia Hartling†  Ming-Yang Kao‡  Junhyong Kim§  Gauri Shah¶  December 26, 2017  Abstract In modern biology, one of the most important research problems is to understand how protein sequences fold into their native 3D structures. To investigate this problem at a high level, one wishes to analyze the protein landscapes, i.e., the structures of the space of all protein sequences and their native 3D structures. Perhaps the most basic computational problem at this level is to take a target 3D structure as input and design a fittest protein sequence with respect to one or more fitness functions of the target 3D structure. We develop a toolbox of combinatorial techniques for protein landscape analysis in the Grand Canonical model of Sun, Brem, Chan, and Dill. The toolbox is based on linear programming, network flow, and a linear-size representation of all minimum cuts of a network. It not only substantially expands the network flow technique for protein sequence design in Kleinberg’s seminal work but also is applicable to a considerably broader collection of computational problems than those considered by Kleinberg. We have used this toolbox to obtain a number of efficient algorithms and hardness results. We have further used the algorithms to analyze 3D structures drawn from the Protein Data Bank and have discovered some novel relationships between such native 3D structures and the Grand Canonical model.  ∗  Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8285, USA. Email: aspnes@cs.yale.edu. Supported in part by NSF Grant CCR-9820888. † Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8285, USA. Email: julia.kreychman@yale.edu. ‡ Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA. Email: kao@eecs.tufts.edu. Supported in part by NSF Grant CCR-9531028. § Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, and Department of Statistics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8285, USA. Email: junhyong.kim@yale.edu. Supported in part by Merck Genome Research Institute Grant and NSF Grant DEB-9806570. ¶ Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8285, USA. Email: gauri.shah@yale.edu.  1  1  Introduction  In modern biology, one of the most important research problems is to understand how protein sequences fold into their native 3D structures [23]. This problem can be investigated at two complementary levels. At a low level, one wishes to determine how an individual protein sequence folds. A fundamental computational problem at this level is to take a protein sequence as input and find its native 3D structure. This problem is sometimes referred to as the protein structure prediction problem and has been shown to be NP-hard (see, e.g., [1, 5, 6]). At a high level, one wishes to analyze the protein landscapes, i.e., the structures of the space of all protein sequences and their native 3D structures. Perhaps the most basic computational problem at this level is to take a target 3D structure as input and ask for a fittest protein sequence with respect to one or more fitness functions of the target 3D structure. This problem has been called the protein sequence design problem and has been investigated in a number of studies [3, 7, 9, 16, 27, 30, 33, 35]. The focus of this paper is on protein landscape analysis, for which several quantitative models have been proposed in the literature [7, 30, 33]. As some recent studies on this topic have done [3, 18, 24], this paper employs the Grand Canonical (GC) model of Sun, Brem, Chan, and Dill [33], whose definition is given in Section 2. Generally speaking, the model is specified by (1) a 3D geometric representation of a target protein 3D structure with n amino acid residues, (2) a binary folding code in which the amino acids are classified as hydrophobic (H) or polar (P) [8, 19], and (3) a fitness function Φ defined in terms of the target 3D structure that favors protein sequences with a dense hydrophobic core and with few solvent-exposed hydrophobic residues. In this paper, we develop a toolbox of combinatorial techniques for protein landscape analysis based on linear programming, network flow, and a linear-size representation of all minimum cuts of a network [26]. This toolbox not only substantially expands the network flow technique for protein sequence design in Kleinberg’s seminal paper [18] but also is applicable to a considerably broader collection of computational problems than those considered by Kleinberg. We have used this toolbox to obtain a number of efficient algorithms and hardness results. We have further used the algorithms to analyze 3D structures drawn from Protein Data Bank at http://www.rcsb.org/pdb and have discovered some novel relationships between such native 3D structures and the Grand Canonical model (Figure 1). Specifically, we report new results on the following problems, where ∆ is the number of terms in the fitness function or functions as further defined in Section 3.1. Many of the results depend on computing a maximum network flow in a graph of size O(∆); in most cases, this network flow only needs to be computed once for each fitness function Φ. P1 Given a 3D structure, find all its fittest protein sequences. Note that there can be exponentially many fittest protein sequences. We show that these protein sequences together have a representation of size O(∆) that can be computed in O(∆) time after a certain maximum network flow is computed (Theorem 5), and that individual fittest protein sequences can be generated from this representation in O(n) time per sequence (Theorem 9). P2 Given f 3D structures, find the set of all protein sequences that are the fittest simultaneously for all these 3D structures. This problem takes O(∆) time after f maximum network flow computations (Theorem 8). P3 Given a protein sequence x̂ and its native 3D structure, find the set of all fittest protein sequences that are also the most (or least) similar to x̂ in terms of unweighted (or weighted) Hamming distances. This problem takes O(∆) time after a certain maximum network flow is computed (Theorem 7). 2  P4 Count the number of protein sequences in the solution to each of Problems P1, P2, and P3. These counting problems are computationally hard (Theorem 17). P5 Given a 3D structure and a bound e, enumerate the protein sequences whose fitness function values are within an additive factor e of that of the fittest protein sequences. This problem takes polynomial time to generate each desired protein sequence (Theorem 12). P6 Given a 3D structure, determine the largest possible unweighted (or weighted) Hamming distance between any two fittest protein sequences. This problem takes O(∆) time after a certain maximum network flow is computed (Theorem 10). P7 Given a protein sequence x̂ and its native 3D structure, find the average unweighted (or weighted) Hamming distance between x̂ and the fittest protein sequences for the 3D structure. This problem is computationally hard (Theorem 17). P8 Given a protein sequence x̂, its native 3D structure, and two unweighted Hamming distances d1 and d2 , find a fittest protein sequence whose distance from x̂ is also between d1 and d2 . This problem is computationally hard (Theorem 18(1)). P9 Given a protein sequence x̂, its native 3D structure, and an unweighted Hamming distance d, find the fittest among the protein sequences which are at distance d from x̂. This problem is computationally hard (Theorem 18(2)). We have a polynomial-time approximation algorithm for this problem (Theorem 13). P10 Given a protein sequence x̂ and its native 3D structure, find all the ratios between the scaling factors α and β in Equation 1 in Section 2 for the GC model such that the smallest possible unweighted (or weighted) Hamming distance between x̂ and any fittest protein sequence is minimized over all possible α and β. (This is a problem of tuning the GC model.) We have a polynomial-time algorithm for this problem (Theorem 16). P11 Given a 3D structure, determine whether the fittest protein sequences are connected, i.e., whether they can mutate into each other through allowable mutations, such as point mutations, while the intermediate protein sequences all remain the fittest [2, 8, 17, 20, 22, 29, 31]. This problem takes O(∆) time after a certain maximum network flow is computed (Theorem 11). P12 Given a 3D structure, in the case that the set of all fittest protein sequences is not connected, determine whether two given fittest protein sequences are connected. This problem takes O(∆) time after a certain maximum network flow is computed (Theorem 11). P13 Given a 3D structure, find the smallest set of allowable mutations with respect to which the fittest protein sequences (or two given fittest protein sequences) are connected. This problem takes O(∆) time after a certain maximum network flow is computed (Theorem 11). Previously, Sun et. al. [33] developed a heuristic algorithm to search the space of protein sequences for a fittest protein sequence without a guarantee of optimality or near-optimality. Hart [16] subsequently raised the computational tractability of constructing a single fittest protein sequence as an open question. Kleinberg [18] gave the first polynomial-time algorithm for this problem, which is based on network flow. In contrast, Problem P1 asks for all fittest protein sequences and yet can be solved with the same time complexity. Kleinberg also formulated more general versions of Problems P11 and P12 by extending the fitness function to a submodular function and gave polynomial-time algorithms. Our formulations of these two problems and Problem P13 are directly 3  based on the fitness function of the GC model; furthermore, as is true with several other problems above, once a solution to Problem P1 is obtained, we can solve these three problems in O(∆) time. Among the above thirteen problems, those not yet mentioned in this comparison were not considered by Kleinberg. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines the GC model and states the basic computational assumptions. Section 3 describes our three basic tools based on linear programming, network flow, and an O(∆)-size representation of minimum cuts. Section 4 extends these tools to optimize multiple objectives, analyze the structures of the space of all fittest protein sequences, and generate near-fittest protein sequences. Section 5 gives some hardness results related to counting fittest protein sequences and finding fittest protein sequences under additional restrictions. Finally, Section 6 discusses our analysis of empirical 3D structures from the Protein Data Bank.  2  The Grand Canonical Model and Computational Assumptions  The Original Model Throughout this paper, all protein sequences are of n residues, unless explicitly stated otherwise. The GC model is specified by a fitness function Φ over all possible protein sequences x with respect to a given 3D structure of n residues [18, 33]. In the model, to design a protein sequence x is to specify which residues are hydrophobic (H) and which ones are polar (P ). Thus, we model x as a binary sequence x1 , . . . , xn or equivalently as a binary vector (x1 , . . . , xn ), where the i-th residue in x is H (respectively, P ) if and only if xi = 1 (respectively, 0). Then, Φ(x) is defined as follows, where the smaller Φ(x) is, the fitter x is, as the definition is motivated by the requirements that H residues in x (1) should have low solvent-accessible surface area and (2) should be close to one another in space to form a compact hydrophobic core. Φ(x) = α  X  g(di,j ) + β  i,j∈H(x),i<j−2  = α  X  g(di,j )xi xj + β  X  X  si  (1)  i∈H(x)  si xi , where  (2)  i  i<j−2  • H(x) = {i | xi = 1}, • the scaling parameters α < 0 and β > 0 have default values −2 and require tuning for specific applications (see Section 4.4),  1 3  respectively and may  • si ≥ 0 is the area of the solvent-accessible contact surface for the residue (in Å) [10, 11], • di,j > 0 is the distance between the residues i and j (in Å), and • g is a sigmoidal function, defined by g=  (  1 1+exp(di,j −6.5)  0  when di,j ≤ 6.5 when di,j > 6.5.  Extending the Model with Computational Assumptions Let opt(Φ) be the set of all protein sequences x that minimize Φ. This paper is generally concerned with the structure of opt(Φ). Our computational problems assume that Φ is given as input; in other words, the computations of α, β, si , g(di,j ) are not included in the problems. Also, for the sake of computational generality and notational simplicity, we assume that α may be any nonpositive number, β any nonnegative number, 4  si any arbitrary number, and g(di,j ) any arbitrary nonnegative number; and that the terms g(di,j ) may range over 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n, unless explicitly stated otherwise. Thus, in the full generality of these assumptions, Φ need not correspond to an actual protein 3D structure. Note that the relaxation that si is any number is technically useful for finding Φ-minimizing protein sequences x that satisfy additional constraints. We write ai,j = −α·g(di,j ) ≥ 0 and bi = β·si and further assume that the coefficients ai,j and bi are rational with some common denominator, that these coefficients are expressed with a polynomial number of bits, and that arithmetic operations on these coefficients take constant time. With these assumptions, we define the following sets of specific assumptions about Φ to be used at different places of this paper. P  P  F1 Let Φ(x) = − 1≤i<j≤n ai,j xi xj + 1≤i≤n bi xi , where ai,j ≥ 0, bi is arbitrary, and m of the coefficients ai,j are nonzero. Let ∆ = n + m. P  F2 For each β ≥ 0, let Φβ (x) = − 1≤i<j≤n ai,j xi xj + β of the coefficients ai,j are nonzero. Let ∆ = n + m.  P  1≤i≤n si xi ,  F3 For each ℓ from 1 to f , let the ℓ-th fitness function Φℓ (x) = − where aℓi,j ≥ 0 and bℓi is arbitrary. Let ∆ = f n2 .  P  where ai,j ≥ 0, si ≥ 0, and m  ℓ 1≤i<j≤n ai,j xi xj  +  P  ℓ 1≤i≤n bi xi ,  Sometimes we measure the dissimilarity between a fittest protein sequence x and a target protein sequence x̂ in terms of Hamming distance. This distance is essentially the count of the positions i where xi 6= x̂i and can be measured in two ways. The unweighted Hamming distance is |x − x̂|, where P P |y| denotes the norm of vector y, i.e., ni=1 |yi |. The weighted Hamming distance is ni=1 wi ·|xi − x̂i |. Throughout this paper, the weights w1 , . . . , wn are all arbitrary unless explicitly stated otherwise.  3  Three Basic Tools  This section describes our basic tools for computing fittest and near-fittest protein sequences. For instance, Lemma 1 gives a representation of the problem of minimizing Φ as a linear program. Lemma 2 further gives a representation of this problem as a minimum-cut problem, which generalizes a similar representation of Kleinberg [18]. Theorem 5 gives a compact representation of the space opt(Φ) using a Picard-Queyranne graph [26].  3.1  Linear Programming  From Equation 2, minimizing Φ(x) is an optimization problem in quadratic programming. Fortunately, because all the coefficients ai,j are nonnegative, it can be converted to a linear program, as shown in Lemma 1. Lemma 1 (characterizing Φ via linear program) Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F1. Consider the following linear program whose variables consist of the variables xi , together with new variables yi,j for all i, j with ai,j 6= 0: P  minimize Φ′ (x, y) = − ai,j yi,j + subject to 0 ≤ xi ≤ 1  ∀i 0 ≤ yi,j ≤ 1   yi,j ≤ xi ∀i, j : ai,j 6= 0   yi,j ≤ xj 5  P  bi x i (3)  There is a one-to-one correspondence that preserves x between the protein sequences that minimize Φ(x) and the basic optimal solutions to Linear Program (3). Proof: First, we show that for each 0-1 assignment to x there is a unique value of y that minimizes Φ′ (x, y). Choose some yi,j , and suppose that either xi or xj is 0. Then yi,j is also 0 by the constraint yi,j ≤ xi or yi,j ≤ xj . Alternatively, suppose xi and xj are both 1; then if yi,j is 0, Φ′ can be decreased by ai,j by setting yi,j to 1 without violating any constraints. Thus, in any optimal integral solution to Linear Program (3), yi,j = min(xi , xj ) = xi xj . P P Note that substituting xi xj for yi,j in Φ′ gives precisely − i,j ai,j xi xj + i bi xi = Φ(x); thus minimizing Φ′ (x, y) is equivalent to minimizing Φ(x). We now must show that all solutions to Linear Program (3) are integral. Every element of the constraint matrix is either zero or ±1. Each row has either a single nonzero element (e.g, for the 0-1 bounds) or consists of zeroes and exactly one +1 and one −1. Thus the matrix is totally unimodular, e.g., using [25, Theorem 13.3]. Since the right-hand side is integral, any vertex of the polytope defined by Linear Program (3) is integral [25, Theorem 13.2]. Thus, all basic feasible solutions to Linear Program (3) are 0-1 vectors. So if (x, y) is a basic optimal solution to Linear Program (3), then x ∈ opt(Φ). Conversely, if x ∈ opt(Φ), then the vector (x, y) in which yi,j = xi xj whenever ai,j is nonzero is an optimal solution to Linear Program (3), which is a basic optimal solution since an appropriate subset of the constraints 0 ≤ xi ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ yi,j ≤ 1 form a basis. Note that any xi with a negative coefficient bi is set to 1 in any optimal solution, as in this case all terms containing xi have negative coefficients and are minimized when xi = 1. So an alternative to allowing negative coefficients is to prune out any xi with a negative coefficient. This process must be repeated recursively, since setting xi to 1 reduces terms of the form −ai,j xi xj to −ai,j xj , and may yield more degree-1 terms with negative coefficients. To simplify our discussion, we let the linear program (or, in Section 3.2, the minimum-cut algorithm) handle this pruning.  3.2  Network Flow  Recall that an s-t cut is a partition of the nodes of a digraph into two sets Vs and Vt , with s ∈ Vs and t ∈ Vt . Also, a minimum s-t cut is an s-t cut with the smallest possible total capacity of all edges from nodes in Vs to nodes in Vt . In Kleinberg’s original construction [18], Φ(x) was minimized by solving an s-t minimum cut problem in an appropriate digraph G. Lemma 2 describes a more general construction that includes additional edges (s, vi ) to handle negative values for bi . Lemma 2 (characterizing Φ via network flow) Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F1. Let GΦ be a graph with a source node s, a sink node t, a node vi for each i, and a node ui,j for each i, j with ai,j 6= 0, for a total of n + m + 2 = ∆ + 2 nodes. Let the edge set of GΦ consist of • (s, ui,j ) for each ui,j , with capacity ai,j , • (vi , t) for each vi with bi > 0, with capacity bi , • (s, vi ) for each vi with bi < 0, with capacity −bi , and • (ui,j , vi ) and (ui,j , vj ), for each ui,j , with infinite capacity,  6  for a total of Θ(∆) edges. There is a one-to-one correspondence between the minimum s-t cuts in GΦ and the protein sequences in opt(Φ), such that vi is in the s-component of a cut if and only if xi = 1 in the corresponding protein sequence. Proof: We will show that the minimum s-t cuts in GΦ correspond to Φ-minimizing protein sequences via Linear Program (3) of Lemma 1. Given a minimum s-t cut in G, let xi be 1 if vi is in the s component, and 0 otherwise. Similarly, let yi,j be 1 if ui,j is in the s component, and 0 otherwise. Since no infinite-capacity edge (ui,j , vi ) or (ui,j , vj ) can appear in the cut, if ui,j is in the s-component then vi and vj are as well. In terms of the x and y variables, we have yi,j ≤ xi and yi,j ≤ xj whenever ai,j is nonzero, precisely the same constraints as in Linear Program (3). Conversely, any 0-1 assignment (x, y) for which these constraints hold defines an s-t cut that does not include any infinite-capacity edge. Turning to the objective function, the total capacity of all edges in the cut is X  ai,j (1 − yi,j ) +  ai,j 6=0  =  X i,j  ai,j −  X  X  bi >0  bi −  bi <0  bi xi + X  X  −bi (1 − xi )  bi <0  ai,j yi,j +  X  bi xi = K + Φ′ (x, y),  i  i,j  where K is a constant and Φ′ (x, y) is the objective function of Linear Program (3). Thus, the capacity of the cut is minimized when Φ′ (x, y) is. The rest follows from Lemma 1. Lemma 3 Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F1. Given Φ as the input, we can find an x ∈ opt(Φ) in O(∆2 log ∆) time. Proof: Given a digraph G = (V, E) as input, the Goldberg-Tarjan maximum-flow algorithm takes O(|V ||E| log(|V |2 /|E|)) time [14]. We first apply Lemma 2 to Φ to obtain GΦ . We next use this maximum-flow algorithm to find a minimum s-t cut in GΦ and then an optimal x from this cut. All these steps take O(∆2 log ∆) total time.  3.3  A Compact Representation of Minimum Cuts  A given Φ may have more than one fittest protein sequence. Theorem 5 shows that opt(Φ) can be summarized compactly using the Picard-Queyranne representation of the set of all minimum s-t cuts in a digraph G [26], which is computed by the following steps: 1. computing any maximum flow φ in G; 2. computing strongly connected components in the residual graph Gφ whose edge set consists of all edges in G that are not saturated by φ, plus edges (v, u) for any edge (u, v) that has nonzero flow in φ; 3. contracting Gφ by contracting into single supernodes the set of all nodes reachable from s, the set of all nodes that can reach t, and each strongly connected component in the remaining graph. The resulting graph Gs,t is a dag in which s and t are mapped to distinct supernodes by the contraction. Furthermore, there is a one-to-one correspondence between the minimum s-t cuts in G and the ideals in Gs,t , where an ideal is any node set I with the property that any predecessor of a node in I is also in I. 7  Lemma 4 (see [26]) Given a digraph G with designated nodes s and t, there is a graph Gs,t together with a mapping κ from V (G) to V (Gs,t ) with the following properties: 1. |V (Gs,t )| ≤ |V (G)|. 2. The node κ(s) has out-degree 0 while κ(t) has in-degree 0. 3. Given G as the input, Gs,t and κ can be computed using one maximum-flow computation and O(|E(G)|) additional work. 4. A partition (Vs , Vt ) of V (G) is an s-t minimum cut in G if and only if Vt = κ−1 (I) for some ideal I of Gs,t that contains κ(t) but not κ(s). Combining Lemmas 2 and 4 gives the desired compact representation of the space of all fittest protein sequences, as stated in the next theorem. Theorem 5 (characterizing Φ via a dag) Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F1. There exists a ′ ′ Φ dag GΦ s,t with designated nodes s and t and a mapping ρ from {1, . . . , n} to V (Gs,t ) with the following properties: 1. GΦ s,t has at most n + 2 nodes. 2 2. Given Φ as the input, GΦ s,t and ρ can be computed in O(∆ log ∆) time.  3. There is a one-to-one correspondence between the protein sequences x ∈ opt(Φ) and the ideals of b Φ = GΦ − {s′ , t′ }, in which xi = 0 if and only if ρ(i) = t′ or ρ(i) is in the ideal corresponding G s,t s,t to x. Proof: The graph GΦ s,t is obtained by applying Lemmas 2 and 4. Let κ be the contraction map from Lemma 4. Let s′ = κ(s) and t′ = κ(t). The mapping ρ(i) is defined as κ(vi ). Φ To show that GΦ s,t has at most n + 2 nodes, consider any node ui,j in G . Let φ be the maximum Φ flow used to define Gs,t . If φ(s, ui,j ) = 0, then ui,j is reachable from s in the residual graph GΦ φ , and ui,j is contracted onto the κ(s) supernode; if φ(s, ui,j ) > 0, then at least one of φ(ui,j , vi ) or φ(ui,j , vj ) is nonzero and ui,j is in the same strongly connected component in GΦ φ as at least one of vi and vj . In either case ui,j is contracted onto a supernode that contains s or some vi ; since the same thing happens to all ui,j , there are at most n + 2 supernodes in GΦ s,t : one for each vi , plus one for each of s and t. b Φ is justified by the observation that requiring t′ to be in an ideal and s′ to be Using ideals of G s,t out of it has no effect on the presence or absence of other nodes, as t′ has no predecessors and s′ has ′ ′ no successors in GΦ s,t ; thus there is a one-to-one correspondence preserving all nodes except s and t Φ ′ ′ Φ b . between the ideals of Gs,t containing t but not s and the ideals of G s,t Remark. At some additional cost in time, Assumption F1 can be replaced in Theorem 5 by the weaker assumption that Φ is submodular (i.e., that Φ(X ∪ Y ) + Φ(X ∩ Y ) ≤ Φ(X) + Φ(Y ) for all X, Y , where each protein sequence x in Φ’s domain is regarded as the set X = {i | xi = 1} for the purposes of taking unions and intersections). The reason is that a representation similar to the Picard-Queyranne graph exists for the set of minima of any such submodular function. These minima form a family closed under union and intersection, and any such family corresponds to the ideals of an appropriate digraph [15, Proposition 10.3.3]. Such a representation can be computed efficiently, as shown by Gabow [12]. 8  Intuitively, what Theorem 5 says is the following. For any Φ, the residues in fittest protein sequences are grouped into clusters, where the cluster ρ−1 (s) is always H, the cluster ρ−1 (t) is always P , and for each of the remaining clusters, all residues in the cluster are either all H or all P . In b Φ , such that if a cluster corresponding to the addition, there is a dependence given by the edges of G s,t source of an edge is all H then the cluster at the other end is also all H. There is no additional restriction on the structure of the space of all fittest protein sequences beyond those that follow from correspondence with the ideals of some digraph. As shown in Theorem 6, b Φ , with any number of residues mapped to each supernode. any graph may appear as G s,t Theorem 6 (characterizing a dag via Φ) Let Ĝ be an arbitrary digraph with n nodes, labeled 1 to n, and m edges. Let Ĝ0 be the component graph of Ĝ obtained by contracting each strongly connected component of Ĝ to a single supernode through a contraction map κ. Then, there exists some Φ as defined in Assumption F1 such that for the GΦ s,t and ρ defined in Theorem 5, an isomorphism exists Φ b between Gs,t and Ĝ0 mapping each ρ(i) to κ(i).  Proof: Represent each node i in Ĝ by the variable xi . For each i, j, let ei,j = 1 if there is a directed edge (i, j) in Ĝ, and 0 otherwise. To define Φ, let ai,j = ei,j + ej,i for each i < j; and, for P each i, let bi equal i’s out-degree δ+ (i) = j ei,j . Apply Lemma 2 to the resulting function Φ to get a graph GΦ . Define a flow φ in GΦ as follows: φ(s, ui,j ) φ(ui,j , vi ) φ(ui,j , vj ) φ(vi , t)  = = = =  ei,j + ej,i ei,j ej,i δ+ (i)  ∀ui,j ∀ui,j ∀ui,j ∀vi  Note that this flow is a maximum flow because it saturates all edges leaving s as well as all edges entering t. (It happens that this is the unique maximum flow, but we do not need this fact, as the Picard-Queyranne construction works for any maximum flow.) Φ Our next goal is to show that the residual graph GΦ φ of this flow contracts to Ĝ0 . Gφ has the following classes of edges: (ui,j , s) (ui,j , vi ) (ui,j , vj ) (vi , ui,j ) (vj , ui,j ) (vi , t)  ∀ui,j when (i, j) ∈ Ĝ when (j, i) ∈ Ĝ ∀vi  Φ Since s has no successors and t has no predecessors in GΦ φ , the supernodes in Gs,t containing s and t consist of only s and t, respectively. Each node ui,j is in the same strongly-connected component as at least one of vi or vj , so no other supernodes exist in GΦ s,t that do not contain at least one of the nodes vi . Note that every node-simple path from vi to vj in GΦ φ is of the form vi , ui,q1 , vq1 , uq1 ,q2 , . . . , uqk−1 ,j , vj (with the subscripts of each uqi ,qi+1 possibly reversed), which corresponds to a node-simple path i = q1 , q2 , . . . , qk = j in Ĝ. The converse also holds. Therefore, i and j are in the same strongly connected component in Ĝ if only if vi and vj are in the same strongly connected component in GΦ s,t . Φ Now recall that for each i, ρ(i) is defined in Lemma 2 as the supernode in Gs,t containing vi . So an Φ edge from ρ(i) to ρ(j) in GΦ s,t corresponds to a node-simple path from vi to vj Gs,t . By the above Φ path-to-path correspondence, every directed edge from ρ(i) to ρ(j) in Gs,t corresponds to an edge  9  b Φ is isomorphic to Ĝ0 , with the correspondence from κ(i) to κ(j), and vice versa. In summary, G s,t ρ(i) ↔ κ(i) for all i.  4  Further Tools for Protein Landscape Analysis  4.1  Optimizing Multiple Objectives  We can extend the results of Section 3 beyond optimizing a single fitness function. With more than one fittest protein sequence to choose from, we may wish to find a fittest protein sequence x that is the closet to some target protein sequence x̂ in unweighted or weighted Hamming distance. Theorem 7 shows that this optimization problem is as easy as finding an arbitrary fittest protein sequence. We may also wish to consider what protein sequences are simultaneously the fittest for more than one fitness function. Theorem 8 shows how to compute a representation of this set similar to that provided by Theorem 5. Theorem 7 (optimizing Hamming distances and H-residue counts over opt(Φ)) Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F1. 1. Given a target protein sequence x̂, some weights wi , and Φ as the input, we can find in P O(∆2 log ∆) time an x ∈ opt(Φ) with the minimum weighted Hamming distance i wi |xi − x̂i | over opt(Φ). 2. Given Φ as the input, we can find in O(∆2 log ∆) time an x ∈ opt(Φ) with the largest (or smallest) possible number of H residues over opt(Φ). Proof: The statements are proved as follows. Statement 1. Let ǫ be a positive constant at most 4W1nc , where W ≥ max |wi | and c is the common denominator of all coefficients ai,j and bi . Below we show how to find a desired fittest protein sequence P by minimizing Φǫ (x) = Φ(x) + i ǫwi |xi − x̂i |. First of all, since x and x̂ are 0-1 sequences, |xi − x̂i | = (xi − x̂i )2 = xi − 2x̂i xi + x̂i . Then, since x̂ is given, Φǫ (x) can be minimized using Lemma 3 in O(∆2 log ∆) time. Now suppose that y and z are two protein sequences with y ∈ opt(Φ) and z 6∈ opt(Φ). Then, P 1 1 . Therefore, Φǫ (z) − Φǫ (y) ≥ 1c − 2W n ≥ 2c . Φ(z) − Φ(y) ≥ 1c . Also, | i wi |xi − x̂i || ≤ W n ≤ 4c Thus every x that minimizes Φǫ (x) must also minimize Φ(x). The Hamming distance term in Φǫ guarantees that from all x that do minimize Φ(x), minimizing Φǫ (x) selects one that also minimizes this distance. Statement 2. To find an x ∈ opt(Φ) with the largest (respectively, smallest) possible number of H residues, apply Statement 1 with all wi = 1 and all x̂i = 1 (respectively, x̂i = 0). Suppose we are given fitness functions Φ1 , . . . , Φf corresponding to multiple 3D structures, and we wish to find protein sequences that are simultaneously optimal for each 3D structure. A simple approach is to observe that the function Φ∗ = Φ1 + · · · + Φf satisfies Assumption F1, and that any protein sequence that simultaneously optimizes each Φℓ optimizes Φ∗ . However, we must check any minimum solution for Φ∗ to see that it is in fact a minimum solution for each Φℓ , as it may be that the sets of minimum solutions of the Φℓ have empty intersection. Performing both the optimization of Φ∗ and of the f individual fitness functions requires f + 1 network flow computations. It turns out that we can reduce this cost to f network flows at the cost of some additional work ∗ Φℓ to compute a composite Picard-Queyranne graph GΦ s,t directly from the individual graphs Gs,t . This 10  approach, described in Theorem 8, is especially useful if we have already computed the individual graphs for some other purpose. Theorem 8 (minimizing multiple fitness functions) Let Φ1 , . . . , Φf be as defined in Assumpℓ ℓ ℓ tion F3. For each ℓ, let GΦ s,t and ρ be the dag and map computed from Φ in Theorem 5. Given ℓ ℓ all GΦ s,t and ρ as the input, there is an O(∆)-time algorithm that either (a) determines that there ∗ is no protein sequence x that simultaneously minimizes Φ1 through Φf , or (b) constructs a dag GΦ s,t ∗ with designated nodes s′ and t′ and a mapping ρ∗ from {1, . . . , n} to V (GΦ s,t ), such that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the protein sequences x that simultaneously minimize all Φℓ (x) b Φ∗ = GΦ∗ − {s′ , t′ }, in which xi = 0 if and only if ρ∗ (i) = t′ or ρ∗ (i) is in the ideal and the ideals of G s,t s,t corresponding to x. Proof: By Theorem 5, the conditions below are necessary and sufficient for x to minimize Φℓ : • xi = 1 if ρℓ (i) = s′ . • xi = 0 if ρℓ (i) = t′ . • xi = xj if ρℓ (i) = ρℓ (j). b Φℓ . • xi ≤ xj if (ρℓ (i), ρℓ (j)) is an edge in G s,t  We will build a graph G whose nodes are s, t, and 1, . . . , n, and put in an edge (u, v) between any nodes for which the constraint u ≤ v is required to minimize some Φℓ . In particular, we have the following classes of edges, for each ℓ, where each class represents one of the above conditions: • (s, v) and (v, s) whenever ρℓ (v) = s′ . • (t, v) and (v, t) whenever ρℓ (v) = t′ . • (u, v) and (v, u) whenever ρℓ (u) = ρℓ (v). ℓ  b Φ )). • (u, v) whenever (ρℓ (u), ρℓ (v) ∈ E(G s,t  An assignment of 1 to s, 0 to t, and xi to each node i satisfies u ≤ v whenever (u, v) ∈ E(G) if and only if all of the constraints required for x to simultaneously minimize all Φℓ are satisfied. Note that such an assignment might not exist. ∗ To convert G into the desired graph GΦ s,t , and to check whether there exist any assignments meeting the constraints, contract each strongly connected component of G. If s and t are in the same ∗ strongly connected component, no simultaneous fittest solutions exist. Otherwise, let s′ in GΦ s,t be the supernode that contains s from G; let t′ be the supernode that contains t. Also, for each u in 1, . . . , n, let ρ∗ (u) be the supernode into which u is contracted. Then x simultaneously minimizes all Φℓ if and only if xi = 1 when ρ∗ (i) = s′ , xi = 0 when ρ∗ (i) = t′ , and xi ≤ xj when (ρ∗ (i), ρ∗ (j)) is an ∗ Φ∗ edge in GΦ s,t —precisely the condition that the zeroes in x correspond to nodes in some ideal of Gs,t that contains t′ but not s′ . To show the running time, observe that constructing the graph G takes O(∆) time, which dominates the contraction step.  11  4.2  The Space of All Fittest Protein Sequences  This section discusses some applications of the representation of the space opt(Φ) given by Theorem 5. Theorem 9 gives an algorithm to enumerate this space. Theorem 10 gives an algorithm to compute the diameter of the space in nonnegatively weighted Hamming distance. Theorem 11 gives an algorithm to determine connectivity properties of the space with respect to various classes of mutations. Theorem 9 (enumerating all protein sequences) Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F1. Given the GΦ s,t and ρ defined in Theorem 5 as the input, the protein sequences in opt(Φ) can be enumerated in O(n) time per protein sequence. b Φ |) = O(n) b Φ in time O(|V (G Proof: An algorithm of Steiner [32] enumerates the ideals of G s,t s,t per ideal. For each ideal, invert the mapping ρ (in O(n) time) to recover the corresponding protein sequence x.  Theorem 10 (computing the diameter) Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F1. Given the GΦ s,t and ρ defined in Theorem 5 as the input, it takes O(n) time to compute the diameter of opt(Φ) in weighted Hamming distance where the weights wi are all nonnegative. Proof: Any two fittest protein sequences x and y can differ only at indices i where ρ(i) ∈ / {s, t}. b Φ )). Then, d is an upper bound on the diameter. Let d be the total weight of indices i ∈ ρ−1 (V (G s,t b Φ ) are both ideals of G b Φ , and these ideals correspond to two It is also a lower bound, as ∅ and V (G s,t s,t protein sequences at distance d from each other.  b Φ to determine whether opt(Φ) is connected for various models of mutations. For We can use G s,t instance, we can determine whether the space is connected for one-point mutations, in which at most one residue changes with each mutation and all intermediate protein sequences must remain the fittest. More generally, we can determine the minimum k so that the space is connected where each mutation modifies at most k residues. We adopt a general model proposed by Kleinberg [18]. In the model, there is a system Λ of subsets of {1, . . . , n} that is closed downward, i.e., if A ⊆ B ∈ Λ, then A ∈ Λ. Two protein sequences x and y are Λ-adjacent if they are in opt(Φ) and differ exactly at the positions indexed by elements of some member of Λ. A Λ-chain is a sequence of protein sequences in opt(Φ) where each adjacent pair is Λ-adjacent. Two protein sequences x and y are Λ-connected if there exists a Λ-chain between x and y. A set of protein sequences is Λ-connected if every pair of elements of the set are Λ-connected. We would like to tell for any given Λ and Φ whether particular protein sequences are Λ-connected and whether the entire opt(Φ) is Λ-connected. Kleinberg [18] gives polynomial-time algorithms for these problems that take Λ as input (via oracle calls) and depend only on the fact that Φ is submodular. We describe a much simpler algorithm b Φ from Theorem 5. This algorithm not only determines whether two protein sequences that uses G s,t (alternatively, all protein sequences in opt(Φ)) are connected for any given Λ, but also determines the unique minimum Λ for which the desired connectivity holds. Almost all of the work is done in b Φ ; once we have this representation, we can read off the connectivity of opt(Φ) the computation of G s,t directly.  Theorem 11 (connectivity via mutations) Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F1. The following problems can both be solved in O(n) time.  12  ′ 1. Given the GΦ s,t and ρ defined in Theorem 5 and two protein sequences x and x in opt(Φ) as the input, compute the maximal elements of the smallest downward-closed set system Λ such that x and x′ are Λ-connected.  2. Given the GΦ s,t and ρ defined in Theorem 5 as the input, compute the maximal elements of the smallest downward-closed set system Λ such that opt(Φ) is Λ-connected. Proof: The statements are proved as follows. b Φ such that the sets of zeros in x, x′ are ρ−1 (I), ρ−1 (I ′ ), Statement 1. Let I, I ′ be the ideals in G s,t respectively. Let the maximal elements of Λ be the sets ρ−1 (v) over all v ∈ I ⊖ I ′ , where ⊖ is the symmetric difference operator. Thus, Λ consists of these sets and all of their subsets. We will show that Λ is the smallest downward-closed set system such that there is a Λ-chain between x and x′ in opt(Φ). First, consider some set system Λ′ where for some v ∈ I ⊖ I ′ , A = ρ−1 (v) is not in Λ′ . Recall that x must be constant at the positions indexed by elements of A, where the constant depends on b Φ corresponding to x. Partition opt(Φ) into sets Ω0 and Ω1 , whether or not v is in the ideal in G s,t j where Ω consists of all z with zi = j for all i ∈ A. Since x and x′ differ on ρ−1 (v), one of them is in Ω0 and the other is in Ω1 . However, since A ∈ / Λ′ , no protein sequence in Ω0 is Λ′ -adjacent to one in 1 ′ ′ Ω . So there is no Λ -chain between x and x . Conversely, to exhibit a Λ-chain from x to x′ , it suffices to show by iterations a Λ-chain from x to the protein sequence y whose zeroes are given by ρ−1 (I ∩ I ′ ); the case of x′ is symmetric. Let I0 = I. If at any iteration Ii = I ∩ I ′ , we are done. Otherwise, let v be a maximal element in Ii − (I ∩ I ′ ). Then, Ii+1 = Ii − {v} is also an ideal. Since v ∈ I ⊖ I ′ , ρ−1 (v) ∈ Λ and the protein sequences corresponding to Ii and Ii+1 are Λ-adjacent. After at most n such iterations, we reach y. Statement 2. Let x and x′ be the protein sequences in opt(Φ) with the largest and the smallest b Φ and its possible numbers of H residues, respectively. In other words, x and x′ correspond to G s,t −1 Φ b empty ideal, respectively. If Λ includes ρ (v) for all v ∈ V (Gs,t ), then by Statement 1, there are Λ-chains between any y ∈ opt(Φ) and x′ and thus between any two protein sequences in opt(Φ). If it does not, then there is no Λ-chain between x and x′ . In summary, the maximal elements of Λ are b Φ ). the sets ρ−1 (v) over all v ∈ V (G s,t  4.3  Generating Near-Fittest Protein Sequences  Finding good protein sequences other than the fittest is trickier, as Lemma 1 breaks down if we are not looking at the fittest protein sequences. This section gives two algorithms that avoid this problem. Theorem 12 describes an algorithm to generate all protein sequences x in order of increasing Φ(x). Theorem 13 describes an algorithm to generate the fittest protein sequences at different unweighted Hamming distances, which is useful for examining the trade-off between fitness and distance. The algorithm for generating all protein sequences x in increasing order by Φ(x) is based on Lemma 3 and a general technique for enumerating suboptimal solutions to combinatorial optimization problems due to Lawler [21]. It is similar to an algorithm of Vazirani and Yannakakis [34] for enumerating suboptimal cuts. We cannot use the Vazirani-Yannakakis algorithm directly because suboptimal cuts in GΦ might include cuts corresponding to assignments in which yi,j is not equal to xi xj for some i, j. Theorem 12 (enumerating all protein sequences) Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F1. With Φ as the input, we can enumerate all protein sequences x in order of increasing Φ(x) in time O(n∆2 log ∆) per protein sequence. 13  Proof: For any length-k 0-1 sequence y = y1 , y2 , . . . , yk , let Ay be the set of all length-n 0-1 sequences x with xi = yi for each yi with 1 ≤ i ≤ k. Let ε be the empty sequence. Then, Aε is the set of all length-n sequences. Observe that we can find an element z ∈ Ay that minimizes Φ(z) over Ay in time O(∆2 log ∆) by setting zi = yi in Φ(z) for each yi and applying Lemma 3. Furthermore, the set Ay − {z} is the disjoint union of the sets Ari for k + 1 ≤ i ≤ n, where ri = z1 , z2 , . . . , zi−1 , (1 − zi ). To enumerate x in order of increasing Φ(x), we maintain a data structure that represents all protein sequences less those already returned as a disjoint union of sets of the form Ay , together with an Φ-minimizing element z for each, organized as a priority queue with key Φ(z). Initially, the queue contains only (Aε , z), where z ∈ opt(Φ) is computed using Lemma 3 in time O(∆2 log ∆). At each step, the smallest pair (Ay , z) is removed from the priority queue and is replaced by up to n pairs (Ari , pi ), where pi is an Φ-minimizing element of Ari ; z is then returned. Each such step requires no more than n applications of Lemma 3, and the cost of the at most n + 1 priority queue operations is at most O(n log(2n )) = O(n2 ), giving a total cost of O(n∆2 log ∆) per value returned. Let x̂ be a target protein sequence. For d ∈ {0, . . . , n}, let F (d) be the smallest Φ(x) over all protein sequences x at unweighted Hamming distance d from x̂. A basic task of landscape analysis is to plot the graph of F . As Theorem 18(2) in Section 5 shows, this task is computationally difficult in general. Therefore, one way to plot the graph of F would be to use Theorem 12 to enumerate all protein sequences x in order of increasing Φ(x) until for each d, at least one protein sequence at distance d from x̂ has been enumerated. This solution may require processing exponentially many protein sequences before F is fully plotted. As an alternative, Theorem 13 gives a tool for plotting F approximately in polynomial time. Theorem 13 (approximately plotting the energy-distance landscape) Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F1. For each ǫ, let Φǫ (x) = Φ(x) + ǫ·|x − x̂|. Let Φ(ǫ) be the minimum Φǫ (x) over all x. 1. Φ is a continuous piecewise linear concave function defined on R with at most n + 1 segments and thus at most n + 1 corners. 2. Let (ǫ1 , Φ(ǫ1 )), . . . , (ǫk , Φ(ǫk )) be the corners of Φ, where ǫ1 < · · · < ǫk . Let di be the slope of the segment immediately to the right of ǫi . Let d0 be the slope of the segment immediately to the left of ǫ1 . Then, n = d0 > d1 > · · · > dk = 0. 3. Let d ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}. (a) F (d0 ) = Φ(ǫ1 ) − ǫ1 ·d0 . F (dk ) = Φ(ǫk ) − ǫk ·dk . For 0 < i < k, F (di ) = Φ(ǫi ) − ǫi ·di = Φ(ǫi+1 ) − ǫi+1 ·di . (b) For di > d > di+1 with 0 ≤ i < k, F (d) ≥ λF (di ) + (1 − λ)F (di+1 ), where λ =  d−di+1 di −di+1 .  4. Given Φ and x̂ as the input, we can compute (ǫ1 , Φ(ǫ1 )), . . . , (ǫk , Φ(ǫk )) and d0 , . . . , dk in O(n∆2 log ∆) time. Proof: The statements are proved as follows. Statement 1. The concavity follows from the minimality of Φ(ǫ) and the fact that for any fixed x, Φǫ (x) is linear in ǫ with slope |x − x̂|. Then, the continuous piecewise linearity and the counts of segments and corners follow from the fact that |x − x̂| ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}. P P Statement 2. By the concavity of Φ, d0 > d1 > · · · > dk . Let W = 1 + 1≤i<j≤n ai,j + ni=1 |si |. For all ǫ ≤ −W , Φǫ (x) is minimized if and only if x is at distance n from x̂. Similarly, for all ǫ ≥ W , Φǫ (x) is minimized if and only if x is at distance 0 from x̂. Therefore, d0 = n and dk = 0. 14  Statement 3. Case 3a is straightforward. To prove Case 3b, let x be a protein sequence that has the smallest Φ(x) over all protein sequences at distance d from x̂. Then, F (d) = Φ(x), and Φǫi+1 (x) = F (d) + ǫi+1 ·d. On the other hand, by the minimality of Φ, Φǫi+1 (x) ≥ Φ(ǫi+1 ). Furthermore, by Case 3a, Φ(ǫi+1 ) = F (di+1 ) + ǫi+1 ·di+1 = F (di ) + ǫi+1 ·di . Thus, F (di+1 ) ≤ F (d) + ǫi+1 ·d − ǫi+1 ·di+1 ; F (di ) ≤ F (d) + ǫi+1 ·d − ǫi+1 ·di . Case 3b follows from algebra and these two inequalities. Statement 4. For given ǫ and x, let line(ǫ, x) be the line through the point (ǫ, Φǫ (x)) and with slope |x − x̂|. Let Lǫ (respectively, Rǫ ) be the protein sequence x such that |x − x̂| is the largest (respectively, smallest) possible over opt(Φǫ ). Note that Lǫ , Rǫ , line(ǫ, Lǫ ), and line(ǫ, Rǫ ) can be computed in O(∆2 log ∆) total time using Theorem 7. Furthermore, line(ǫ, Lǫ ) and line(ǫ, Rǫ ) contain the segments of Φ immediately to the left and the right of ǫ, respectively. Consequently, ǫ is a corner of Φ if and only if line(ǫ, Lǫ ) 6= line(ǫ, Rǫ ). To compute the corners and slopes of Φ, we first describe a recursive corner-slope finding subroutine as follows. The subroutine takes as input an interval [ǫ′ , ǫ′′ ] where ǫ′ < ǫ′′ together with line(ǫ′ , Rǫ′ ) and line(ǫ′′ , Lǫ′′ ). It outputs all the corners (ǫ, Φ(ǫ)) of Φ together with slopes |Lǫ − x̂| and |Rǫ − x̂| where ǫ′ < ǫ < ǫ′′ . There are two cases. Case 1: line(ǫ′ , Rǫ′ ) = line(ǫ′′ , Lǫ′′ ). Then, there is no corner over the interval (ǫ′ , ǫ′′ ), and thus the subroutine call ends without reporting any new corner or slope. Case 2: line(ǫ′ , Rǫ′ ) 6= line(ǫ′′ , Lǫ′′ ). Then, compute ǫ′′′ at which line(ǫ′ , Rǫ′ ) and line(ǫ′′ , Lǫ′′ ) intersect; by the concavity of Φ stated in Statement 1, ǫ′ < ǫ′′′ < ǫ′′ . Also, compute line(ǫ′′′ , Lǫ′′′ ) and line(ǫ′′′ , Rǫ′′′ ). There are two subcases: Case 2a: line(ǫ′′′ , Lǫ′′′ ) 6= line(ǫ′′′ , Rǫ′′′ ). Then the subroutine returns (ǫ′′′ , Φ(ǫ′′′ )) as a new corner together with slopes |Lǫ′′′ − x̂| and |Rǫ′′′ − x̂| and recurses on the intervals [ǫ′ , ǫ′′′ ] and [ǫ′′′ , ǫ′′ ]. Case 2b: line(ǫ′′′ , Lǫ′′′ ) = line(ǫ′′′ , Rǫ′′′ ). The subroutine returns no new corner or slope but recurses on the intervals [ǫ′ , ǫ′′′ ] and [ǫ′′′ , ǫ′′ ]. In this case, the subroutine has found the line containing a new segment of Φ, i.e., the segment through the point (ǫ′′′ , Φ(ǫ′′′ )). This completes the description of the subroutine. The running time of this subroutine is dominated by that for computing Lǫ′′′ and Rǫ′′′ and thus is O(∆2 log ∆). With this subroutine, we can find the corners and slopes of Φ as follows. Recall W from the proof of Statement 2. Note that if ǫ ≤ −W or ǫ ≥ W , then Φ has no corner at ǫ. So we compute line(−2W, R−2W ) and line(2W, L2W ) and apply the subroutine to the interval [−2W, 2W ] to find all the corners and slopes of Φ. This algorithm makes O(n) recursive calls to the subroutine since by Statement 1, there are only O(n) corners and segments, and each recursive call finds at least one new corner or segment. The running time of the algorithm is dominated by the total running time of these calls and thus is O(n∆2 log ∆) as stated in the statement.  4.4  Tuning the Parameters of the GC Model  This section shows how to systematically tune the parameters α and β so that a fittest protein sequence for a given 3D structure matches the 3D structure’s native protein sequence as closely as possible in terms of unweighted or weighted Hamming distance. For this purpose, we assume si ≥ 0. Furthermore, since the fitness function does not have an absolute scale, we may fix α at −1 and vary β. In summary, this section adopts Assumption F2. Let ΠΦ be the set of indices i with si 6= 0. The next lemma shows that for any fittest protein sequence x of Φβ , the set H(x) ∩ ΠΦ of H residues with nonzero surface area si is monotone in β. 15  Then, as shown in Theorem 16, to tune β, we only need to consider at most n + 1 possible values of β. Lemma 14 Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F2. Let y and z be any fittest protein sequences for Φβ1 and Φβ0 , respectively. If β1 < β0 , then H(y) ∩ ΠΦ ⊇ H(z) ∩ ΠΦ . Proof: Let H1 = H(y) and H0 = H(z). Let H10 = H1 − H0 , i.e., the set of indices i for which xi changes from 1 to 0 when β changes from β1 to β0 . Similarly, let H01 = H0 − H1 . Further, let P P B10 = i∈H10 si and B01 = i∈H01 si . P P Let A = i,j∈H0 ai,j − i,j∈H1 ai,j . Then, Φβ (z) − Φβ (y) = −A + β(B01 − B10 ). Let A01 = P i,j∈H0 ∧ {i,j}∩H01 6=∅ ai,j . Let A10 = −(A − A01 ), which is the sum of the terms ai,j that Φβ loses when xi changes from 1 to 0. Similarly, A01 is the sum of the terms ai,j that Φβ gains when xi changes from 1 to 0. To show H(y) ∩ ΠΦ ⊇ H(z) ∩ ΠΦ , we need to prove H01 ∩ ΠΦ = ∅ or equivalently B01 = 0. To do so by contradiction, suppose B01 > 0. There are two cases: Case 1: −A01 + β0 B01 > 0. Notice that the protein sequence z ′ with H(z ′ ) = H0 − H01 has a smaller fitness value for β0 than z does, contradicting the minimality of z. Case 2: −A01 + β0 B01 ≤ 0. Then, −A01 + β1 B01 < 0. Therefor, the protein sequence y ′ with H(y ′ ) = H1 ∪ H01 has a smaller fitness value for β1 than y does, contradicting the minimality of y. Let Φ(β) be the minimum Φβ (x) over all x. The next lemma characterizes the structure of Φ(β). This structure is then used to tune β in Theorem 16. Lemma 15 Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F2. 1. Φ is a continuous piecewise linear concave function defined on [0, ∞) with at most n+1 segments and thus at most n + 1 corners. 2. For all β1 < β3 < β4 < β2 where (β1 , Φ(β1 )) and (β2 , Φ(β2 )) are adjacent corners of Φ, we have opt(Φβ3 ) = opt(Φβ4 ), opt(Φβ3 ) ⊆ opt(Φβ1 ), and opt(Φβ3 ) ⊆ opt(Φβ2 ). Similarly, for all β1 < β3 < β4 where (β1 , Φ(β1 )) is the rightmost corner, we have opt(Φβ3 ) = opt(Φβ4 ) and opt(Φβ3 ) ⊆ opt(Φβ1 ). 3. Given Φ as the input, it takes O(n∆2 log ∆) time to find the set of all β such that (β, Φ(β)) is a corner of Φ. Proof: The statements are proved as follows. Statement 1. The concavity follows from the minimality of Φ(β) and the fact that for any fixed P x, Φβ (x) is linear in β with slope i∈H(x)∩ΠΦ si . Then, the continuous piecewise linearity and the counts of segments and corners follow from Lemma 14. Statement 2. The proofs for the case that (β1 , Φ(β1 )) is the rightmost corner and the complementary case are similar. So we only detail the proof for the former. Note that (β3 , Φ(β3 )) is not a corner. So for every fixed x ∈ opt(Φβ3 ), the line Φβ (x) goes through the corner (β1 , Φ(β1 )) and the point (β4 , Φ(β4 )). Thus, x ∈ opt(Φβ1 ) and x ∈ opt(Φβ4 ). By symmetry, for every y ∈ opt(Φβ4 ), we have y ∈ opt(Φβ3 ). In summary, opt(Φβ3 ) = opt(Φβ4 ) and opt(Φβ3 ) ⊆ opt(Φβ1 ). Statement 3. For any given β and x, let line(β, x) be the line through the point (β, Φβ (x)) P and with slope i∈H(x)∩ΠΦ si . For each β, let Lβ (respectively, Rβ ) be the protein sequence x such that H(x) has the largest (respectively, smallest) possible cardinality over opt(Φβ ). Note that Lβ , Rβ , line(β, Lβ ), and line(β, Rβ ) can be computed in O(∆2 log ∆) total time using Theorem 7. 16  Furthermore, line(β, Lβ ) and line(β, Rβ ) contain the segments of Φ immediately to the left and the right of β, respectively. Consequently, for β > 0, β is a corner of Φ if and only if line(β, Lβ ) 6= line(β, Rβ ). Also, (0, Φ(0)) is the leftmost corner, and the segment of Φ to the right of 0 is contained by line(0, R0 ). To compute the corners of Φ, we first describe a recursive corner-finding subroutine as follows. The subroutine takes as input an interval [β1 , β2 ] where β1 < β2 together with line(β1 , Rβ1 ) and line(β2 , Lβ2 ). It outputs all the corners (β, Φ(β)) of Φ with β1 < β < β2 . There are two cases. Case 1: line(β1 , Rβ1 ) = line(β2 , Lβ2 ). Then, there is no corner over the interval (β1 , β2 ), and thus the subroutine call ends without reporting any new corner. Case 2: line(β1 , Rβ1 ) 6= line(β2 , Lβ2 ). Then, compute β3 at which line(β1 , Rβ1 ) and line(β2 , Lβ2 ) intersect; by the concavity of Φ stated in Lemma 15(1), β1 < β3 < β2 . Also, compute line(β3 , Lβ3 ) and line(β3 , Rβ3 ). There are two subcases: Case 2a: line(β3 , Lβ3 ) 6= line(β3 , Rβ3 ). Then the subroutine returns (β3 , Φ(β3 )) as a new corner and recurses on the intervals [β1 , β3 ] and [β3 , β2 ]. Case 2b: line(β3 , Lβ3 ) = line(β3 , Rβ3 ). The subroutine returns no new corner but recurses on the intervals [β1 , β3 ] and [β3 , β2 ]. In this case, the subroutine has found the line containing a new segment of Φ, i.e., the segment through the point (β3 , Φ(β3 )). This completes the description of the subroutine. The running time of this subroutine is dominated by that for computing Lβ3 and Rβ3 and thus is O(∆2 log ∆). With this subroutine, we can find the corners of Φ as follows. If every si = 0, then (0, Φ(0)) is P the only corner. Otherwise, let β∞ be 1 + 1≤i<j≤n ai,j divided by the smallest nonzero si . Note that for every β ≥ β∞ , Φ has no corner at β, Then, we compute line(0, L0 ) and line(0, Rβ∞ ). We report the leftmost corner (0, Φ(0)) and apply the subroutine to the interval [0, β∞ ] to find all the other corners of Φ. This algorithm makes O(n) recursive calls to the subroutine since by Lemma 15, there are only O(n) corners and segments, and each recursive call finds at least one new corner or segment. The running time of the algorithm is dominated by the total running time of these calls and thus is O(n∆2 log ∆) as stated in the lemma. Theorem 16 (tuning α and β) Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F2. Given a target protein sequence x̂ and Φ as the input, we can find in O(n∆2 log ∆) time the set of all β where the closest unweighted (or weighted) Hamming distance between x̂ and any protein sequence in opt(Φβ ) is the minimum over all possible β. Proof: The proofs for the cases of unweighted and weighted Hamming distances are similar. So we only detail the proof for the unweighted case. Our algorithm for finding all distance-minimizing choices of β has three stages. Stage 1. Use Lemma 15(3) to find all the corners of Φ. Stage 2. For each corner (β, Φ(β)), use Theorem 7 to compute the closest Hamming distance dβ between x̂ and any protein sequence in opt(Φβ ). Let dmin be the smallest dβ over all corners. Then, by Lemma 15(2), report all β with dβ = dmin as desired choices of distance-minimizing β. Stage 3. Consider each segment of Φ. Let β1 and β2 be the vertical coordinates of the left and right endpoints of the segment. Find a suitable β3 in the open interval (β1 , β2 ) as follows. If β2 is finite, then set β3 = (β1 + β2 )/2; otherwise, set β3 = β1 + 1. Then use Theorem 7 to compute the closest unweighted or weighted Hamming distance dβ3 between x̂ and any protein sequence in opt(Φβ3 ). If dβ3 = dmin , then by Lemma 15(2), report that every β in the interval (β1 , β2 ) is a desired distance-minimizing β. 17  This completes the description of the algorithm. By Lemma 15(3), Stage 1 takes O(n∆2 log ∆) time. By Theorem 7 and Lemma 15 (1), Stages 2 and 3 also take O(n∆2 log ∆) time. Thus, the total running time is as stated in the theorem.  5  Computational Hardness Results  Theorem 17 (hardness of counting and averaging) Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F1. The following problems are all #P-complete: 1. Given Φ as the input, compute the cardinality of opt(Φ). 2. Given Φ1 , . . . , Φf as the input, where f is any fixed positive integer and Φ1 , . . . , Φf are as defined in Assumption F3, compute the number of protein sequences x that simultaneously minimize Φℓ (x) for all ℓ = 1, . . . , f . 3. Given Φ as the input, compute the average norm |x|, i.e., the average number of H residues in x, over all x ∈ opt(Φ). 4. Given Φ and a target protein sequence x̂ as the input, compute the average unweighted Hamming distance |x − x̂| over all x ∈ opt(Φ). 5. Given Φ, a target protein sequence x̂, and an integer d as the input, compute the number of protein sequences in opt(Φ) at unweighted Hamming distance d from x̂. Proof: Note that each of the problems is in #P, because we can recognize an element of opt(Φ) in polynomial time using Lemma 3. So to prove #P-completeness we must only show that each problem is #P-hard. Statement 1. Reduce from the problem of counting the number of ideals in a dag, which is #Pb Φ is isomorphic to Ĝ. hard [28]. Given a dag Ĝ, apply Theorem 6 to get a function Φ for which G s,t bΦ ∼ By Theorem 5, counting opt(Φ) is then equivalent to counting the number of ideals of G s,t = Ĝ. Statement 2. The problem in Statement 1 is a special case of the problem in this statement. Statement 3. Using the same construction as in Statement 1, we can reduce from the problem of computing the average cardinality of an ideal in Ĝ. To see that this latter problem is #P-hard, suppose that we can compute the average cardinalities of ideals in an n-node Ĝ and in an augmented graph Ĝ′ obtained from Ĝ by adding a single new node s and edges from every v ∈ V (Ĝ) to s. Let c be the average for Ĝ and c′ the average for Ĝ′ . Let N be the number of ideals in Ĝ. Then c = K/N for some K, while c′ = (K + n + 1)/(N + 1), since the only new ideal in Ĝ′ consists of s and all other nodes, and thus has size n + 1. Solving for N gives N = (n + 1 − c′ )/(c′ − c), which can be computed from c, c′ , and n. Statement 4. This problem has the problem in Statement 3 as a special case with all x̂i = 0. Statement 5. To reduce the problem of counting protein sequences in opt(Φ) to counting protein b Φ given by Theorem 5, and add sequences at a given unweighted Hamming distance, take the dag G s,t to each node vi a node qi with edges (vi , qi ) and (qi , vi ). Apply Theorem 6 to this new graph Ĝ′ to obtain a function Φ′ for which opt(Φ′ ) is in one-to-one correspondence with the set of ideals of the strongly-connected component graph Ĝ′0 of Ĝ′ . Each strongly connected component of Ĝ′ consists b Φ . Now we choose x̂ with x̂v = 0 and x̂q = 1. of vi and qi for some i, so Ĝ′0 is isomorphic to G s,t i i Then, the contribution to |x − x̂| of each pair xvi , xqi is 1 regardless of their common value. Thus, the 18  number of Φ-minimizing protein sequences equals the number of Φ′ -minimizing protein sequences at bΦ . distance d from x̂, where d is the number of nodes in G s,t  Theorem 18 (hardness of plotting the energy-distance landscape) Let Φ be as defined in Assumption F1. 1. Given Φ and two integers d1 , d2 as the input, it is NP-complete to determine whether there is an Φ-minimizing x with d1 ≤ |x| ≤ d2 . 2. Let x̂ be a target protein sequence. For d ∈ {0, . . . , n}, let F (d) be the smallest Φ(x) over all protein sequences x at unweighted Hamming distance d from x̂. Given Φ and d as the input, it is NP-hard to compute F (d). Proof: Statement 2 follows from the fact that the problem in Statement 1 can be reduced to the problem in this statement in polynomial time. Statement 1 is proved as follows. Since we can recognize Φ-minimizing protein sequences using Lemma 3, the problem is clearly in NP. To show that it is NP-hard, we reduce from PARTIALLY ORDERED KNAPSACK, problem MP12 from Garey and Johnson [13, pp. 247–248]. The input to PARTIALLY ORDERED KNAPSACK consists of a partially-ordered set U , each element u of which is assigned a size s(u) ∈ Z+ and a value v(u) ∈ Z+ , together with a upper bound B1 on total size and a lower bound B2 on total value. The problem is to determine whether there P P exists an ideal I in U such that u∈I s(u) ≤ B1 and u∈I v(u) ≥ B2 . Garey and Johnson note that the problem, even with s(u) = v(u) for all u ∈ U , is NP-complete in the strong sense (meaning that there is some polynomial bound on the size of all numbers in the input with which it remains NP-complete). Given an instance of PARTIALLY ORDERED KNAPSACK with s(u) = v(u) for all u and all numbers bounded by some polynomial p, build a graph Ĝ where each u ∈ U is represented by a clique C(u) of s(u) nodes, and there is an edge from C(u) to C(u′ ) if and only if u ≺ u′ . Note that because s(u) ≤ p, Ĝ has polynomial size. Apply Theorem 6 to generate a function Φ (in b Φ is isomorphic to the component graph Ĝ0 obtained by contracting polynomial time) such that G s,t all strongly connected components of Ĝ. Since the strongly connected components of Ĝ are precisely bΦ ∼ bΦ the cliques C(u), G U , interpreted as a dag. In particular any ideal of G s,t = Ĝ0 is isomorphic to s,t P corresponds to an ideal I of U . Let N = u∈U s(u). The norm of the corresponding vector |x| is P P P N − u∈I |C(u)| = N − u∈I s(u) = N − u∈I v(u). Set d1 = N − B1 , d2 = N − B2 , and we have the problem stated in the theorem.  6  Applications to Empirical Protein 3D Structures  To demonstrate our algorithms, we chose 34 proteins with known 3D structures from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) at http://www.rcsb.org/pdb. These 3D structures included 8 from Kleinberg’s study [18] but excluded the protein fragments and multimeric proteins used in that study. The chosen 3D structures were then represented by centroids for each side chain calculated from the coordinates of each atom in the side chain; in the case of 3D structures solved by NMR, hydrogen atoms were included into centroid calculations. For glycine, the centroid was taken to be the position of Cα . For each side chain, the area of solvent accessible surface was computed via the Web interface of the ASC program with default parameters [10]. In accordance to the GC model, each of the chosen native  19  Name 1a7m 1a8y 1ab3 1ab7 1agi 1air 1b71 1ble 1bpi 1bw3 1clh 1ehs 1gym 1nar 1prn 1thv 1xnb 2aak 2bnh 2cba 2erl 2stv 6yas 8cho 9rat 1aaj 1aba 1bba 1brq 1cis 1hel 1ifb 3cln 3rn3  Solvent/Length 51.23 81.37 399.05 451.48 384.30 173.96 374.23 498.45 1453.75 732.31 607.48 2178.29 392.97 447.48 498.38 741.41 871.63 1130.39 412.43 773.98 5064.83 1153.80 904.99 2054.72 2126.95 51.89 125.39 584.25 272.54 780.88 539.14 583.57 835.80 1018.66  Length 180 338 88 89 125 352 191 161 58 125 166 48 296 289 289 207 185 150 456 258 40 184 256 125 124 105 87 36 174 66 129 131 143 124  α/β -295.8 -155.7 -326.7 -79.5 -93 -0.3 -23.7 -269.4 -31.5 -33.9 -9.3 -32.1 -4.5 -6.3 -2.7 -10.5 -135.6 -149.1 -253.8 -2.4 -47.7 -3.6 -12.6 -423.6 -89.4 -155.1 -245.4 -69.6 -27.3 -454.8 -18.6 -40.5 -309.9 -88.8  % Similarity 74.44 73.37 78.41 80.90 77.60 69.89 69.11 72.67 68.97 70.40 69.28 72.92 73.99 75.78 56.40 71.01 65.95 78.67 78.51 73.64 80.00 64.67 67.19 72.80 75.00 70.48 (72) 78.16 (70) 66.67 (58) 72.99 (71) 69.70 (64) 76.74 (78) 79.39 (70) 72.03 (70) 72.58 (69)  Description cytokine Ca binding protein ribosomal protein ribonuclease inhibitor endonuclease pectate lyase electron transport phosphotransferase proteinase inhibitor lectin cyclophilin enterotoxin phospholipase plant seed protein porin sweet tasting protein glycosidase ubiquitin conjugation ribonuclease inhibitor lyase pheromone viral coat protein lyase isomerase ribonuclease A electron transport electron transport pancreatic hormone retinol transport lysozyme fatty acid bind protein Ca binding protein ribonuclease electron transport  Table 1: This table gives some statistics of our computed fittest H/P protein sequences for the 34 empirical protein 3D structures chosen from PDB. Column 1 contains the PDB name of the native protein sequence, where the proteins from Kleinberg [18] are in bold. Column 2 shows the length P normalized solvent accessibility, i.e., i∈H(x) si /n, of the computed fittest protein sequence. Column 4 lists the protein sequence length n, i.e., the count of amino acids. Column 4 provides the computed optimal ratio of the α and β parameters (see text). Column 5 displays the percentage of similarity of the computed fittest protein sequence to the native protein sequence. Column 6 describes the function of the native protein.  20  %Similarity  80  2bnh  70  G N  60  0  100  200  PFAM Figure 1: This plot displays the relationship between the percent similarity of computed fittest protein sequences to native protein sequences versus the PFAM family size of native protein sequences. Globular native proteins are shown as open circles while nonglobular ones are shown as crosses. protein sequences was converted into a binary H/P sequence following Sun et. al. [33], where A, C, F, I, L, M, V, W, Y are H, and the other amino acids are P . We used Equation 1 in the GC model to calculate fitness values of protein sequences to determine minimal energy values and consequently to compute the “fittest” protein sequences. These fitness values consist of two terms in Equation 1. The first term accounts for the idea that hydrophobic residues tend to cluster together due to stacking forces from the solvent. The second term accounts for the idea that hydrophobic residues tend to avoid solvent accessible surfaces of the molecule. The arbitrary parameters α and β represent scaling factors for the relative importance of these two tendencies. We expected the appropriate ratio of these two values to depend on the type of a protein (globular, nonglobular, and membrane) and the length of the protein. Therefore, we optimized the scale of the two parameters to find a ratio that maximizes the similarity of a fittest protein sequence to the native protein sequence, similarly in spirit to Kleinberg’s scaling algorithm [18]. Results of this optimization are shown in Table 1. As anticipated, our algorithms computed fittest protein sequences that are closer to native protein sequences than found by Kleinberg [18], whose results are shown in parenthesis in Table 1. (Note that protein 1aaj is an exception to this improvement on proximity—perhaps due to the fact that the input data are not exactly the same.) However, proximity to native protein sequences is not a good proxy for biological relevance of the algorithms. Determination of protein 3D structure involves an energy landscape given by a statistical thermodynamic energy function E(X , D) where X is the set of amino acid sequences and D is the set of possible folded 3D structures. On the one hand, for a fixed protein sequence x, the 3D structure D 21  is determined by a temperature-dependent folding process that minimizes E(x, D) over D. Ab initio solutions to this problem for protein sequences of practical length currently do not exist. On the other hand, for a fixed 3D structure D, no known thermodynamic reasons connect the folding process with a protein sequence x that minimizes E(x, D) over X . However, we can invoke evolutionary processes as possibly selecting for those protein sequences that produce the most stable 3D structures, i.e., those with the lowest E(x, D), at a given temperature. In other words, given a suite of protein sequences that fold into a particular 3D structure to perform a biological function, there might be selection for the most thermodynamically stable protein sequences. From the view point of evolutionary selection, the difference between computed fittest protein sequences and native protein sequences may be attributed to three factors. First, the GC toy thermodynamic model is inappropriate. Second, the biological function of a protein actually requires structural lability. Last, a native protein is part of a diverse family and other members of the family lie closer to the computed fittest protein sequence. This last factor can be augmented by the argument that if a computed fittest protein sequence exists in nature but is very different from the native protein sequence, it is likely that many other protein sequences (thus a diverse family of protein sequences) exist in nature and fold into the same or similar 3D structures. All of these factors are likely to play in the data shown in Table 1. However, we conjectured a significant relationship between a computed fittest protein sequence’s similarity to a native protein sequence and the diversity of the native protein in nature. Such a relationship would be highly intriguing biologically. We examined this conjecture by assessing the diversity of native proteins using the database PFAM at http://pfam.wustl.edu, which is a database of protein families determined through Hidden Markov Models [4]. The database contained information on the putative family size of 25 of our 34 chosen native proteins. Figure 1 shows the plot of the percent similarity of computed fittest protein sequences to native protein sequences versus the PFAM family size of native proteins. In the figure, globular proteins are shown as circles and nonglobular ones as crosses. There is a negative linear trend as suggested by our conjecture. Linear regression is nearly significant at 0.05 level with p = 0.088. The figure shows three outliers, 2bnh, 2stv, and 8cho. Of these, 2bnh is an exceedingly strange 3D structure with a protein sequence of alpha helixes forming a horseshoe shaped sheet, resulting in a 3D structure that is very deviant from globular proteins which are the genesis of the original thermodynamic model. Leaving out this outlier results in a significant linear regression with p = 0.015. There is still considerable uncertainty about the appropriateness of the GC toy model. The average percentage of the hydrophobic residues is 42% in the native protein sequences compared to 35% in the computed fittest protein sequences. More importantly, the standard deviation of the percentage of hydrophobic residues is 0.054 in the native protein sequences compared to 0.143 for the computed fittest protein sequences. Thus, the percentage of hydrophobic residues is relatively constant in the native protein sequences, reflecting perhaps a functional need or unknown structural factors. In contrast, the percentage of hydrophobic residues in a computed fittest protein sequence tends to vary depending on the 3D structure. This suggests that it might be important to introduce a hydrophobic residue percentage constraint into optimization algorithms in the future as suggested in the sliding algorithm of Kleinberg [18]. Nevertheless, our preliminary results show that even such a simplified toy model might be useful for exploratory investigations of protein evolution especially when coupled to computationally efficient algorithms to allow systematic investigation of the roughly 13,000 empirical protein 3D structures. We are currently planning a large-scale analysis of further empirical protein 3D structures; the results will be reported in a subsequent paper.  22  Acknowledgments We wish to thank Jon Kleinberg for generously providing LATEX entries for many of the references; thank Lisa Fleischer and Hal Gabow for their help in tracking down references used to generalize Theorem 5 for submodular functions; and thank Mark Gerstein for helpful discussions.  References [1] J. Atkins and W. E. Hart. On the intractability of protein folding with a finite alphabet of amino acids. Algorithmica, 25(2-3):279–294, 1999. [2] A. Babajide, I. Hofacker, M. Sippl, and P. Stadler. Neutral networks in protein space: A computational study based on knowledge-based potentials of mean force. Folding and Design, 2:261–269, 1997. [3] J. Banavar, M. Cieplak, A. Maritan, G. Nadig, F. Seno, and S. Vishveshwara. Structure-based design of model proteins. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Genetics, 31:10–20, 1998. [4] A. Bateman, E. Birney, R. Durbin, S. R. Eddy, K. L. Howe, and E. L. L. Sonnhammer. PFAM– A database of protein domain family alignments and HMMs. Nucleic Acids Research, 28:263–266, 2000. [5] B. Berger and T. Leighton. Protein folding in the hydrophobic-hydrophilic (HP) model is NPcomplete. Journal of Computational Biology, 5(1):27–40, 1998. [6] P. Crescenzi, D. Goldman, C. Papadimitriou, A. Piccolboni, and M. Yannakakis. On the complexity of protein folding. Journal of Computational Biology, pages 423–466, 1998. [7] J. M. Deutsch and T. Kurosky. New algorithm for protein design. Physical Review Letters, 76:323–326, 1996. [8] K. A. Dill, S. Bromberg, K. Yue, K. Fiebig, D. Yee, P. Thomas, and H. S. Chan. Principles of protein folding — A perspective from simple exact models. Protein Science, 4:561–602, 1995. [9] K. E. Drexler. Molecular engineering: An approach to the development of general capabilities for molecular manipulation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 78:5275–5278, 1981. [10] F. Eisenhaber and P. Argos. Improved strategy in analytic surface calculation for molecular systems: Handling of singularities and computational efficiency. Journal of Computational Chemistry, 14(N11):1272–1280, 1993. [11] F. Eisenhaber, P. Lijnzaad, P. Argos, C. Sander, and M. Scharf. The double cube lattice method: Efficient approaches to numerical integration of surface area and volume and to dot surface contouring of molecular assemblies. Journal of Computational Chemistry, 16(N3):273–284, 1995. [12] H. N. Gabow. Applications of a poset representation to edge connectivity and graph rigidity. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 812–821, 1991. [13] M. Garey and D. Johnson. Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NPCompleteness. Freeman, New York, NY, 1979. 23  [14] A. V. Goldberg and R. E. Tarjan. A new approach to the maximum-flow problem. Journal of the ACM, 35(4):921–940, Oct. 1988. [15] M. Grötschel, L. Lovász, and A. Schrijver. Geometric Algorithms and Combinatorial Optimization, volume 2 of Algorithms and Combinatorics. Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, 1988. [16] W. E. Hart. On the computational complexity of sequence design problems. In Proceedings of the 1st Annual International Conference on Computational Molecular Biology, pages 128–136, 1997. [17] M. Kimura. The Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 1983. [18] J. M. Kleinberg. Efficient algorithms for protein sequence design and the analysis of certain evolutionary fitness landscapes. In Proceedings of the 3rd Annual International Conference on Computational Molecular Biology, pages 226–237, 1999. [19] K. F. Lau and K. A. Dill. A lattice statistical mechanics model of the conformational and sequence spaces of proteins. Macromolecules, 22:3986–3997, 1989. [20] K. F. Lau and K. A. Dill. Theory for protein mutability and biogenesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 87:638–642, 1990. [21] E. L. Lawler. A procedure for computing the k best solutions to discrete optimization problems and its application to the shortest path problem. Management Science, 18:401–405, 1972. [22] D. Lipman and W. Wilbur. Modeling neutral and selective evolution of protein folding. Proceedings of Royal Society of London Series B, 245:7–11, 1991. [23] K. M. Merz and S. M. L. Grand, editors. The Protein Folding Problem and Tertiary Structure Prediction. Birkhauser, Boston, MA, 1994. [24] C. Micheletti, F. Seno, A. Maritan, and J. Banavar. Design of proteins with hydrophobic and polar amino acids. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Genetics, 32:80–87, 1998. [25] C. H. Papadimitriou and K. Steiglitz. Combinatorial Optimization: Algorithms and Complexity. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1982. [26] J.-C. Picard and M. Queyranne. On the structure of all minimum cuts in a network and applications. Mathematical Programming Study, (13):8–16, 1980. [27] J. Ponder and F. M. Richards. Tertiary templates for proteins. Journal of Molecular Biology, 193:63–89, 1987. [28] J. S. Provan and M. O. Ball. The complexity of counting cuts and of computing the probability that a graph is connected. SIAM Journal on Computing, 12(4):777–788, Nov. 1983. [29] C. Reidys, P. Stadler, and P. Schuster. Generic properties of combinatory maps: Neutral networks of RNA secondary structures. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, 59:339–397, 1997. [30] E. I. Shakhnovich and A. M. Gutin. A new approach to the design of stable proteins. Protein Engineering, 6:793–800, 1993.  24  [31] J. M. Smith. Natural selection and the concept of a protein space. Nature, 225:563–564, 1970. [32] G. Steiner. An algorithm to generate the ideals of a partial order. Operations Research Letters, 5:317–320, 1986. [33] S. J. Sun, R. Brem, H. S. Chan, and K. A. Dill. Designing amino acid sequences to fold with good hydrophobic cores. Protein Engineering, 8(12):1205–1213, Dec. 1995. [34] V. V. Vazirani and M. Yannakakis. Suboptimal cuts: Their enumeration, weight and number (extended abstract). In W. Kuich, editor, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 623: Proceedings of the 19th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, pages 366–377. Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, 1992. [35] K. Yue and K. A. Dill. Inverse protein folding problem: Designing polymer sequences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 89:4163–4167, 1992.  25

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
