Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_4104

Abstract:
An Approximation Algorithm for the Art Gallery Problem∗ Édouard Bonnet†1 and Tillmann Miltzow‡1 1  Institute for Computer Science and Control Hungarian Academy of Sciences (MTA SZTAKI)  arXiv:1607.05527v1 [cs.CG] 19 Jul 2016  Abstract Given a simple polygon P on n vertices, two points x, y in P are said to be visible to each other if the line segment between x and y is contained in P. The Point Guard Art Gallery problem asks for a minimum set S such that every point in P is visible from a point in S. The set S is referred to as guards. Assuming integer coordinates and a specific general position assumption, we present the first O(log OPT)-approximation algorithm for the point guard problem.1 This algorithm combines ideas of a paper of Efrat and Har-Peled [16] and Deshpande et al. [13, 14]. We also point out a mistake in the latter.  1  Introduction  Given a simple polygon P on n vertices, two points x, y in P are said to be visible to each other if the line segment between x and y is contained in P. The point-guard art gallery problem asks for a minimum set S such that every point in P is visible from a point in S. The set S is referred to as guards. A huge amount of research is committed to the studies of combinatorial and algorithmic aspects of the art gallery problem, such as reflected by the following surveys [19, 30, 32, 33]. Most of this research, however, is not focused directly on the art gallery problem but on variants, based on different definitions of visibility, restricted classes of polygons, different shapes and positions of guards, and so on. The most natural definition of visibility is arguably the one we gave above. Other possible definitions are: x sees y if the axis-parallel rectangle spanned by x and y is contained in P; x sees y if the line segment seg(x, y) intersects P at most c times, for some value of c; x sees y if there exists a straight-line path from x to y within P with at most c bends. Common shapes of polygons include: simple polygons, polygons with holes, simple orthogonal polygons, x-monotone polygons and star-shaped polygons. Common placements of guards include: vertex guards and point guards as defined above, but also edgeguard (guards are edges of the polygon), segment guards (guards are interior segments of the polygon) and perimeter guards (guards must be placed on the boundary of P). The art gallery problem variants, also distinguish the way that the polygon is covered. For example, it might be required that every point is seen by two different guards; sometimes it might be required that every point is covered by one guard of each color; and recently the community gets also interested in conflict-free guard colorings. That is, every point has a color such that it sees ∗  supported by the ERC grant PARAMTIGHT: ”Parameterized complexity and the search for tight complexity results”, no. 280152. † edouard.bonnet@lamsade.dauphine.fr ‡ t.miltzow@gmail.com 1 For the benefit of the reviewers, we uploaded on youtube a video that describes informally the main ideas of the paper: https://youtu.be/k5CDeimSuBM. The video is meant as supplementary material and is not required for anything that is coming.  1  exactly one guard of that color. In 1978, Steve Fisk proved elegantly that bn/3c guards are always sufficient and sometimes necessary for a polygon with n vertices [18]. Five years earlier, Victor Klee has posed this question to Václav Chvátal, who soon gave a more complicated solution. This constitutes the first combinatorial result related to the art gallery problem. On the algorithmic side, very few variants are known to be solvable in polynomial time [15, 29] and most results are on approximating the minimum number of guards [13, 14, 16, 20, 25, 26]. Many of the approximation algorithms are based on the fact that the range space defined by the visibility regions has bounded VC-dimension for simple polygons [21, 22, 34]. This makes it easy to use the algorithmic ideas of Clarkson [8, 12]. On the lower bound side, Eidenbenz et al. [17] showed NP-hardness and inapproximability for most relevant variants. In particular, they show for the main variants that there is no capproximation algorithm for simple polygons, for some constant c. For polygons with holes, they can even show that there is no o(log n)-approximation algorithm. Also, their reduction from Set-Cover implies that the art gallery problem is W[2]-hard on polygons with holes and that there is no no(k) algorithm, to determine if k guards are sufficient, under the Exponential Time Hypothesis [17, Sec.4]. Recently, a similar result was shown for simple polygons (without holes) [6, 7]. Despite, the large amount of research on the art gallery problem, there is only one exact algorithmic result on the point guard variant. The result is not so well-known and attributed to Micha Sharir [16]: One can find in nO(k) time a set of k guards for the point guard variant, if it exists. This result is quite easy to achieve with standard tools from real algebraic geometry [3] and apparently quite hopeless to prove without this powerful machinery (see [4] for the very restricted case k = 2). Despite the fact that the algorithm uses remarkably sophisticated tools, it uses almost no problem-specific insights and no better exact algorithms are known. Some recent ETH-based lower bounds [6, 7] suggest that there might be no better exact algorithm even for simple polygons. Regarding approximation algorithms for the point guard variant, the results are similarly sparse. For general polygons, Deshpande et al. gave a randomized pseudo-polynomial time O(log n)-approximation algorithm [13, 14]. However, we show that their algorithm is not correct. Efrat and Har-Peled gave a randomized polynomial time O(log |OP Tgrid |)-approximation algorithm by restricting guards to a very fine grid [16]. However, they could not prove that their Sgrid grid solution is indeed an approximation of an optimal guard placement. Developing the ideas of Deshpande et al. in combination of the algorithm of Efrat and Har-Peled, we attain the first randomized polynomial-time approximation algorithm for simple polygons. Here, OP T denotes an optimal set of guards and OP Tgrid an optimal set of guards that is restricted to some grid. At last, we want to mention that there exist approximation algorithms for monotone and rectilinear polygons [27], when the very restrictive structure of the polygon is exploited. To understand the lack of progress, note that the art gallery problem can be seen as a geometric hitting set problem. In a hitting set problem, we are given a universe U and a set of subsets S ⊆ 2U and we are asked to find a smallest set X ⊆ U such that ∀r ∈ S ∃x ∈ X : x ∈ r. Usually the set system is given explicitly or can be at least easily restricted to a set of polynomial size. In our case, the universe is the entire polygon (not just the boundary) and the set system is the set of visibility regions (given a point x ∈ P, the visibility region Vis(x) is defined as the set of points visible from x). The crucial point is that the set system is infinite and no one has found a way to restrict the universe to a finite set (see [1, 11] for some attempts). We also wish to quote a recent remark by Bhattiprolu and Har-Peled [5]: ”One of the more interesting versions of the geometric hitting set problem, is the art gallery problem, where one is given a simple polygon in the plane, and one has to select a set of points (inside or on the boundary of the polygon) that “see” the whole polygon. While much research has gone into variants of this problem [30], nothing is known as far as an approximation algorithm (for the general problem). The difficulty arises from the underlying set system being  2  infinite, see [16] for some efforts in better understanding this problem.” Here, we present the first approximation algorithm for simple polygons under some mild assumptions. Assumption 1 (integer vertex representation). Vertices are given by integers, represented in binary. An extension of a polygon P is a line that goes through two vertices of P. Assumption 2 (general position assumption). No three extensions meet in a point of P which is not a vertex and no three vertices are collinear. Note that we allow that three (or more) extensions meet in a vertex or outside the polygon. Theorem 1. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, there is a randomized O(log |OP T |)-approximation algorithm for Point Guard Art Gallery for simple polygons that runs in polynomial time in the size of the input. The main technical idea is to show the following lemma: Lemma 2 (Global Visibility Containment). Let P be some (not necessarily simple) polygon. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, it holds that there exists a grid Γ and a guard set Sgrid ⊆ Γ, which sees the entire polygon and |Sgrid | = O(|S|), where S is an optimal guard set. To be a bit more precise, let M be the largest appearing integer. Then the number of points in Γ is polynomial in M . This is potentially exponential in the size of the input. Thus algorithms that rely on storing all points of Γ explicitly do not have polynomial worst case running time. The algorithm of Efrat and Har-Peled [16] does not store every point of Γ explicitly and, with the lemma above, the algorithm gives an O(log |OP T |)-approximation on the grid Γ. While Lemma 2 tells us that we can restrict our attention to a finite grid, when considering constant factor approximation, the same is not known for exact computation. In particular, it is not known whether the Point Guard problem lies in NP. Recently, some researchers popularized an interesting class, called ∃R, being somewhere between NP and PSPACE [9, 10, 28, 31]. Many geometric problems, for which membership in NP is uncertain, have been shown to be complete for this class. This suggests that there might be indeed no polynomial sized witness for these problems as this would imply N P = ∃R. The history of the art gallery problem suggests the possibility that the Point Guard problem is ∃R-complete. If N P 6= ∃R, then this would imply that there is indeed no hope to find a witness of polynomial size for the Point Guard problem. In computational geometry and discrete geometry many papers assume that no three points lie on a line. Often this assumption is a pure technicality, in other cases the result might indeed be wrong without this assumption. In our case, we do believe that Lemma 2 could be proven without Assumption 2, but it seems that some new ideas would be needed for a rigorous proof. See [2] for an example where the main result is that some general position assumption can be weakened. The idea of general position assumptions is that a small random perturbation of the point set yields the assumption with probability almost 1. In case that the points are given by integers small random perturbations, destroy the integer property. But random perturbations could be performed in a different way, by first multiplying all coordinates by some large constant 2C ∈ N and then add a random integer x with −C 6 x 6 C. The integer representation assumption (Assumption 1) seems to be very strong as it gives us useful distance bounds not just between any two different vertices of the polygon, but also between any two objects that do not share a point (see Lemma 5). On the other hand, real computers work with binary numbers and cannot compute real numbers with arbitrary precision. 3  The real-RAM model was introduced as a convenient theoretical framework to simplify the analysis of algorithms with numerical and/or geometrical flavors, see for instance [24, page 1] and [23, Remark 23.1]. Also note that Assumption 1 can be replaced by assuming that all coordinates are represented by rational numbers with specified nominator and denominator. (There could be other potentially more compact ways to specify rational numbers.) Multiplying all numbers with the smallest common multiple of the denominators takes polynomial time, makes all numbers integers and does not change the geometry of the problem. Given a polygon P, we will always assume that all its vertices are given by positive integers in binary. (This can be achieved in polynomial time.) We denote by M the largest appearing integer and we denote by diam(P) the largest distance between any two points in P. Note that diam(P) < 2M . We denote L = 20M > 10. Note that log L is linear in the input size. We define the grid Γ = (L−11 · Z2 ) ∩ P. Note that all vertices of P have integer coordinates and thus are included in Γ. Theorem 3 (Efrat, Har-Peled [16]). Given a simple polygon P with n vertices, one can spread a grid Γ inside P, and compute an O(log OP Tgrid )-approximation for the smallest subset of Γ that sees P. The expected running time of the algorithm is 2 log OP Tgrid log(n OP Tgrid ) log2 ∆), O(n OP Tgrid  where ∆ is the ratio between the diameter of the polygon and the grid size. The term OP Tgrid refers to the optimum, when restricted to the grid Γ. For the solution S that is output by the algorithm of Efrat and Har-Peled holds |S| = O(|OP Tgrid | log |OP Tgrid |). However, Efrat and Har-Peled make no claim on the relation between |S| and the actual optimum |OP T |. Note that the grid size equals w = L−11 , thus ∆ 6 L11+1 = L12 and consequently log ∆ 6 12 log L, which is polynomial in the size of the input. Efrat and Har-Peled implicitly use the real-RAM as model of computation: elementary computations are expected to take O(1) time and coordinates of points are given by real numbers. As we assume that coordinates are given by integers, the word-RAM or integer-RAM is a more appropriate model of computation. All we need to know about this model is that we can upper bound the time for elementary computations by a polynomial in the bit length of the involved numbers. Thus, going from the real-RAM to the word-RAM only adds a polynomial factor in the running time of the algorithm of Efrat and Har-Peled. Therefore, from the discussion above we see that it is sufficient to prove Lemma 2. Organization. In Section 2, we will describe the counterexample to the algorithm of Deshpande et. al. This will be also very useful as a starting point of Section 3, where we will give an elaborate overview of the forthcoming proofs. Detailed and formal proofs are presented at Section 4, where they can be read in logical order without references to Section 3. Finally in Section 5, we briefly indicate the remaining open questions.  2  Counterexample  In this section, we will point out a mistake in the algorithm of Deshpande et al. [13, 14]. This mistake though constitutes an interesting starting point for our purpose. The algorithm by Deshpande et al. can be described from a high level perspective as follows: maintain and refine a triangulation T of the polygon until for every triangle ∆ ∈ T holds the so called local visibility containment property. The local visibility containment property of ∆ certifies that every point p ∈ ∆ can only see points that are also seen by the vertices of ∆. 4  However, we will argue that it is impossible to attain the local visibility containment property with any finite triangulation; hence, the algorithm never stops. Again, we want to mention that the paper of Deshpande et al. has ideas that helped to achieve the result of the present paper. In particular, we will show that the local visibility containment property does indeed hold most of the time.  a1 a2 a3  t  Figure 1: Illustration of the counterexample to the algorithm of Deshpande et al. [13, 14] Example 4 (Refutation of Deshpande et al. [13, 14]). See Figure 1, for the following description. We have two opposite reflex vertices with supporting line `. The points (ai )i∈N are chosen closer and closer to ` on the right side of the polygon. None of the ai ’s can see t, as this would require to be actually on `. Further, it is easy to see that the visible interval next to t gets smaller and smaller as well. In fact, we can choose the points (ai )i∈N in a way that their intervals will be all disjoint. Consider now any finite collection of points C in the vicinity of the (ai )i∈N . We will show that there is some ai , which sees some interval close to t, that is not seen by any point in C. Recall that no point sees the entire interval around t, but the visibility of the ai ’s come arbitrarily close to t. Thus, there is some ai that sees something that is not visible by any of the points of C.  3  Proof Overview  In this section, we will describe all the proof ideas without going into too much technical details. Definitions are given by figures and some technical conditions are not stated at all. The reader who feels uncomfortable with this is deferred to Section 4, where all definitions are rigorously made and all lemmas are presented with formal, detailed proofs. Some readers might also be concerned with the wrong proportions of the figures. Some distances which are supposedly very small are displayed fairly large and vice versa. The reader has to keep in mind that all figures only indicate principal behavior. Our high level proof idea is that the local visibility property holds for every point x that is far enough away from all extension lines. (Recall that the extension of two vertices is the line that contains these vertices.) In a second step, we will show that it is impossible to be close to more than 2 extensions at the same time. We will add one vertex for each extension that x is close two. Recall that vertices are also in Γ. It turns out that the first step is considerably more tedious than the second one. The reason for that is that many of the elementary steps are not true in the naive way, one might think of at first. Thus we have to carefully define the sense in which they are true and handle the other case in a different manner. The tricky bit is usually to identify these cases and to carefully define them. All proofs are elementary otherwise.  5  3.1  Benefit of integer coordinates  The integer coordinate assumption implies not just that the distance between any two vertices is at least 1 but it also gives useful lower bounds on distances between any two objects of interest that do not share a point. For example the distance between an extension ` and a vertex v not on ` is at least L−1 . Also the angle between any two non-parallel extensions is at least L−2 . (Recall that L is an upper bound on the diameter and the largest appearing integer.) As these bounds are important for the intuition of the forthcoming ideas, we will proof one of them. Claim. Let ` = `(w1 , w2 ) be the extension of the two vertices w1 , w2 of P and v ∈ / ` some other vertex of P. Then, it holds d = dist(v, `) > L−1 . Here dist(v, `) denotes the euclidean distance between v and `. w1  `  u :=  w2 w2 − w1 kw2 − w1 k2  d = u⊥ · (v − w2 ) v  Figure 2: Computing the distance between a line and a vertex. Proof. The distance d can be computed as d=  |(v − w1 ) · (w2 − w1 )⊥ | 1 1 > > . kw2 − w1 k diam(P) L  See Figure 2 for a way to derive this elementary formula. Here · denotes the scalar product and x⊥ is the vector x rotated by 90◦ and kxk2 is the euclidean norm of x. The key inside is that the nominator of this formula is at least 1 as it is a non-zero integer by assumption. The denominator is upper bounded by the diameter of P, which is in turn upper bounded by L. All other lower bounds are derived in the same spirit, however with worth bounds. As we choose our grid width smaller than any of these bounds, we will be in the very fortunate situation that everything looks very simple from a local perspective.  3.2  Surrounding Grid Points  ≤ L−1  Figure 3: The red point indicates a point of the original optimal solution. The blue points indicate the surrounding grid points that we choose. The polygon is indicated by bold lines. From left to right, we have the three cases: interior case, boundary case and corner case. To the very right, we indicate that in every case vertices of P with distance less than L−1 are also included in α-grid∗ (x).  6  Given a point x ∈ OP T we define α-grid(x) as some grid points around x, as displayed in Figure 3. The parameter α  1 determines how far away these points are. As the grid-width w is much smaller than α, we have a choice on how exactly to place these points. See Section 4.3 for a precise definition. If there is any vertex v of P with dist(x, v) 6 L−1 , then this point will be included into α-grid∗ (x).  3.3  Local Visibility Containment  For any extension ` we define an s-bad region, see the gray area in Figure 4a for an illustration. Note that the bad region consists of two connected components, each being a triangle. The parameter s = tan(β) as indicated in the figure. Further, for each point x, the visibility region can be decomposed into triangles as indicated in Figure 4b.  ∆  r2 ≤ sL  r1  x β slope = s  (a) A polygon with two opposite reflex vertices and their (b) The star triangle decomposition of the s-bad region. visibility region of x.  Figure 4 Let ∆ be some triangle of the visibility region of x (in blue in Figure 4b). Then the main lemma asserts that α-grid∗ (x) sees ∆ except, if x is in an s-bad region of the vertices defining ∆, see Lemma 11. (With the right choice of α and s.) Important is the one-to-one correspondence between the triangles that cannot be seen and the extension line that we can make responsible for it. The first technical lemma concerns the possibility that there is a reflex vertex q that blocks the visibility of the points of α-grid(x) onto ∆, see Figure 5. We can show that this can happen only in a negligible amount. For this recall that α-grid(x) is very close to x, but q must have distance at least L−1 , as otherwise it would be included into α-grid∗ (x). We call this phenomenon limited blocking.  −2  ray1  ≤L  ≤ L−2  ray2  Figure 5: The visibility of the grid points g ∈ α-grid(x) can be blocked, but we can bound the amount by which it is blocked. The key idea to show that R2 can be seen by α-grid(x) is to show that the region indicated in solid black is empty. Further the triangle ∆ is split into a small triangle (R1 ) and a trapezoid(R2 ), as indicated 7  in Figure 6a. We show separately, for R1 and R2 that α-grid∗ (x) sees these two regions.  r1 x  R1  R2  r2  x (a) To show that each triangle of the visibility region is visible by α-grid∗ (x), we treat the small triangle R1 and the trapezoid R2 individually. In particular, as we do not make use of the finiteness of R2 , we just assume it is an infinite cone.  (b) The point x is not in an s-bad region implies that α-grid(x) is not in an s/2 bad region.  Figure 6 To prove that α-grid∗ (x) sees R1 is not so difficult. We have already argued that reflex vertices v (with dist(x, v) > L−1 ) can only block a small part of the visibility of α-grid(x). (Recall that any vertex v with dist(x, v) < L−1 is included in α-grid∗ (x).) With some simple case distinctions, we can argue that this visibility is sufficient to see R1 . In particular, the argument does not rely on x being outside a bad region. To prove that R2 can be seen by α-grid∗ (x) is more demanding. As it seems not useful to use the boundedness of R2 , we just assume it to be an infinite cone and we try to show that α-grid∗ (x) sees this cone. Obviously, the part of ∂P “behind” seg(r1 , r2 ) is not considered blocking. The crucial step to show that R2 can be seen by α-grid∗ (x) is to show that the black region as indicated in Figure 5 does not exist. The idea is that this is implied if ray1 and ray2 diverge. In other words if ray1 and ray2 never meet and the black region is empty. For this purpose, we make use of the fact that dist(g1 , g2 ) ≈ α, for any g1 , g2 ∈ α-grid(x) by definition, while dist(r1 , r2 ) > 1, because of integer coordinates. Thus intuitively, the distance of ray1 and ray2 is closer at its apex than at the segment seg(r1 , r2 ). For the proof to gp through we further need α-grid∗ (x) not to be in an s/2-bad region, which follows from x not being in an s-bad region, see Figure 6b. The proof becomes technically even more tedious as we have to take into consideration that the visibility of α-grid∗ (x) might be partially blocked. This also forces us to introduce embiggened bad regions, which differ only marginally from bad regions as defined above.  3.4  Global Visibility Containment  ⇒  γ β  Figure 7: Three bad regions meeting in an interior point implies that the extensions must meet in a single point. No two bad regions intersect in the vicinity of a vertex, as they are defined by some angle β  L−2 . But the angle γ between any two extensions is at least L−2 . Given a minimum solution OP T , we describe a set G ⊆ Γ of size O(|OP T |). We will also 8  show that G sees the entire polygon. For each x ∈ OP T , G contains α-grid∗ (x). Further if x is contained in an s-bad region, G contains at least one of the vertices defining it. It is clear by the previous discussion that G sees the entire polygon, as the only part that is not seen by α-grid∗ (x) are some small regions, which are entirely seen by the vertices bounding it. It remains to show that there is no point in three bad regions. For this, we heavily rely on the integer coordinates and the general position assumption. Note that the integer coordinate assumption implies not just that the distance between any two vertices is at least 1 but also that the distance between any extension ` and a vertex v not on ` is at least L−1 . Also the angle between any two extensions is at least L−2 . (Recall that L is an upper bound on the diameter and the largest appearing integer.) These bounds and other bounds of this kind imply that if any three bad regions meet in the interior, then their extension lines must meet in a single point, see Figure 7. We exclude this by our general position assumption. Close to a vertex, we use a different argument: No two bad regions intersect in the vicinity of a vertex, as bad regions are defined by some angle β with tan(β)  L−2 . But the angle γ between any two extensions is at least L−2 . This implies that each x is in at most 2 bad regions and |G| = (7 + 2)|OP T | = O(|OP T |).  Figure 8: The red dots indicate the optimal solution. The blue dots indicate the The red dot on the top is in the interior case and four grid points are added around it. The red dot on the left is too close to two supporting lines and we add one of the reflex vertices of each of the supporting lines. The red dot to the right has distance less than L−1 to a reflex vertex, so we add that vertex as well to G.  4 4.1  Proofs Preliminaries  Polygons and visibility. For any two distinct points v and w in the plane, we denote by seg(v, w) the segment whose two endpoints are v and w, by ray(v, w) the ray starting at v and passing through w, by `(v, w) the supporting line passing through v and w. We think of `(v, w) as directed from v to w. Given a directed line `, we denote by `+ the half-plane to the right of ` bounded by `. We denote by `− the half-plane to the left of ` bounded by `. We also denote by disk(v, r) the disk centered in point v and whose radius is r, and by dist(a, b) the distance between point a and point b. We denote by diam(P) the diameter of P and by M the largest appearing integer of any vertex of P. We further assume that all coordinates are represented by positive integers. (As already stated earlier, this can be achieved in polynomial time.) We define L = 20M . This implies diam(P) 6 2M and 10 diam(P) 6 L. A polygon is simple if it is not self-crossing and has no holes. For any point x in a polygon P, Vis(x), denotes the visibility region of x within P, that is the set of all the points y ∈ P such that segment seg(x, y) is entirely contained in P. 9  symbol P Vis(x) diam(P) M L Γ seg(v, w) v(p, q) ∈ S 1 ray(p, q) ray(p, v) `(v, w) `+ , `− disk(v, r) dist(a, b) disthorizontal (a, b) distvertical (a, b) α-grid (x) α-grid ∗ (x) cone(x, r1 , r2 ) cone(x) apex(x, y)  definition denotes underlying polygon (we assume all coordinates to be positive) visibility region of x the largest distance between any two points in P largest appearing integer of P = 20M (it holds diam(P) 6 10L.) the grid (L−11 · Z2 ) ∩ P. segment with endpoints v and w direction from p to q p, q points in the plane: ray with apex p in direction v(p, q) p points in the plane, v ∈ S 1 direction: ray with apex p in direction v line through v and w directed from v to w the half-plane to the right respectively to the left of line ` disk centered in point v with radius r euclidean distance between a and b. |ax − bx | |ay − by | some grid points around x, see Figure 11 α-grid(x) and including a possible vertex v with dist(r, x) 6 L−1 a cone with apex x bounded by ray(x, r1 ) and ray(x, r2 ) we use this notation, when r1 and r2 are clear from context. see Figure 18b and Definition 15  Figure 9: This is a glossary of all used notation. Not all of which is introduced in the Preliminaries.  4.2  Benefit of Integer Coordinates  The way we use the integer coordinate assumption is to infer distance lower bounds between various objects of interest. The proofs are technical and not very enlightening. Fortunately they are short. Lemma 5 (Distances). Let P be a polygon with integer coordinates and L as defined above. Let v and w be vertices of P, ` and `0 supporting lines of two vertices, and p and q intersections of supporting lines. 1. dist(v, w) > 0 ⇒ dist(v, w) > 1. 2. dist(v, `) > 0 ⇒ dist(v, `) > L−1. 3. dist(p, `) > 0 ⇒ dist(p, `) > L−5 . 4. dist(p, q) > 0 ⇒ dist(p, q) > L−4 . 5. Let ` 6= `0 be parallel. Then dist(`, `0 ) > L−1 . 6. Let ` 6= `0 be any two non-parallel supporting lines and α the smaller angle between them. Then holds tan(α) > 8L−2 . 7. Let a ∈ P be a point and `1 and `2 be some non-parallel lines with dist(`i , a) < d, for i = 1, 2. Then `1 and `2 intersect in a point p with dist(a, p) 6 dL2 . Proof. Case 1 seems trivial, but follows the same general principal as the other bounds. All these distances, are realized by geometric objects, and these geometric objects are represented with the help of the input integers. In order to compute theses distances some elementary calculations 10  are performed and solutions can be expressed as fractions of the input integers. Using the lower bound one and the upper bound L or L/2 on these integers or derived expressions give the desired results. Consider Case 2. Let ` be the supporting line of w1 and w2 . The distance d between v and   ⊥ x2 x1 ⊥ 1 )·(w2 −w1 ) | represents the orthogonal vector = ` can be expressed as |(v−wkw , where −x x −w k 1 2 2 1 to x and · indicates the dot product. As v is not on ` the nominator is lower bounded by one. The denominator is upper bounded by the diameter diam(P). Consider Case 3. Let p be the intersection of `1 = `(v1 , v2 ) and `2 = `(u1 , u2 ). Then p is the unique solution to the linear equations (u2 − u1 ) · (p − u1 ) = 0 and (v2 − v1 ) · (p − v1 ) = 0. So let i) us write this as an abstract linear equation A · x = b. By Cramer’s rule holds xi = det(A det(A) , for i = 1, 2. Here det(.) is the determinant and Ai is the matrix with the i-th column replaced by b. It is easy to see that det(A) is bounded by L2 . Let ` = `(w1 , w2 ) be a different line. Observe that the points w1 , w2 and p lie on a grid Γ∗ of width 1/ det(A). After scaling everything with det(A) the diameter diam(P) of this grid becomes det(A)L 6 L3 . Thus by Case 2 the distance between the line ` and the grid point p is lower bounded by (1/L∗ ) > 1/L3 . Scaling everything back by 1/det(A) > L−2 yields the claimed bound. Consider case 4. Let p be the intersection of `1 = `(v1 , v2 ) and `2 = `(u1 , u2 ). And likewise let q be the intersection of `3 = `(w1 , w2 ) and `2 = `(t1 , t2 ). Then p is the unique solution to the linear equations (u2 − u1 ) · (p − u1 ) = 0 and (v2 − v1 ) · (p − v1 ) = 0. So let us write this as an i) abstract linear equation A · x = b. By Cramer’s rule holds xi = det(A det(A) , for i = 1, 2. Thus the a coefficients of p − q can be represented by det(A)·det(A 0 ) for some value a 6= 0 and some matrices 0 0 A and A . Note that det(A) and det(A ) are bounded by L2 from above. Case 5 follows from Case 2. Let `0 = `(w1 , w2 ). Then dist(`, `0 ) = dist(`, w1 ) > 1/L. Consider case 6. We assume ` = `(v1 , v2 ) and `0 = `(w1 , w2 ). The expressions tan(α) can be computed by k(v2 − v1 ) × (w2 − w1 )k 1 8 > > 2. 2 k(v2 − v1 )k · k(w2 − w1 )k diam(P) L  d  ` p  α β  ≤ 2d a  d  0  `  x  Figure 10 For case 7, see Figure 10 and the notation therein. Without loss of generality we assume α > β. It follows from elementary calculus that z 6 tan(z) 6 2z, for any sufficiently small z. This implies 8L−2 6 tan(α + β) 6 2(α + β) 6 4α 6 4 tan α. We follow from x tan α 6 2d, it holds x 6 2d/ tan α 6 dL2 .  4.3  Defining surrounding grid points  The point of this section is to define for a point x some grid-points α-grid(x) surrounding x. Morally, α-grid(x) should see whatever x sees. However, this cannot be achieved in general. Definition 6 (Rounding). Given a point x ∈ P, we define the point round(x) = g ∈ Γ ⊂ P as the closest grid-point to x. In case that there are several grid-points with the same minimum 11  ≤ L−1  Figure 11: The red point indicates a point of the original optimal solution. The blue points indicate the surrounding grid points that we choose. The polygon is indicated by bold lines. From left to right, we have the three cases: interior case, boundary case and corner case. To the very right, we indicate that in every case vertices of P with distance less than L−1 are also included in α-grid∗ (x). distance to x, we choose the one with lexicographic smallest coordinates. The important point here is that round(x) is uniquely defined. Definition 7 (Surrounding Grid points). Given a point x ∈ P and a number α ∈ [0, L−2 ], we define α-grid(x) as a set of grid points around x. The definition depends on the position of x and the value α. Let c be a circle with radius alpha and center x. Then there exists a unique triangle ∆(x) inscribed c such that the lower side of ∆(x) is horizontal. We distinguish three cases. In the interior case, ∆(x) and ∂P are disjoint. In the boundary case, ∆(x) and ∂P have a non-empty intersection, but no vertex of P is contained in ∆(x). In the corner case, on vertex of P is contained in ∆. It is easy to see that this covers all the cases. We also say a point x in the interior case, and so on. In the interior case α-grid(x) is defined as follows. Let v1 , v2 , v3 be the vertices of ∆. Then the grid points round(vi ), for all i = 1, 2, 3 form the surrounding grid points. In the boundary case α-grid(x) is defined as follows. Let S be the set of vertices of ∆ and all intersection points of ∂P with ∂∆(x). Then the grid points round(v), for all v ∈ S ∩ P form the surrounding grid points. In the corner case α-grid(x) is defined as follows. Let S be the set of vertices of ∆. all intersection points of ∂P with ∂∆ and the vertex of P contained in ∆. Then the grid points round(v), for all v ∈ S ∩ P form the surrounding grid points. In any case, if there is a reflex vertex r with dist(x, r) 6 L−1 then we include r in the set α-grid∗ (x) = r ∪ α-grid(x) as well. We will usually denote the points in α-grid(x) with g1 , g2 or just g. As we will choose α  w, the difference between x and round(x) is negligible and thus we will assume that x = round(x).  4.4  Local Visibility Containment  Definition 8 (Local Visibility Containment property). We say a point x has the α-local visibility containment property if [ Vis(x) ⊆ Vis(g). g∈α-grid∗ (x)  Definition 9 (Opposite reflex vertices and bad regions). Given a polygon P and two reflex vertices r1 and r2 , consider the supporting line ` = `(r1 , r2 ) restricted to P. We say r1 is opposite to r2 if both incident edges of r1 lie on the opposite side of ` as the edges of r2 , see Figure 12a, for an illustration. Given two opposite reflex vertices r1 and r2 , we define their s-bad region as the union of the two triangles as in Figure 12a, where we set the slope to s. Alternatively, let β be the angle at ri , then we define tan(β) = s.  12  We denote by pi the point on seg(r1 , r2 ) with dist(pi , ri ) = L−2 , for i = 1, 2. We define the embiggened s-bad region of r1 and r2 as the union of the two triangles ∆1 and ∆2 , one of which is displayed in Figure 12b. Formally triangle ∆i has one corner pi . The two edges incident to pi form a slope of s. One of these edges is part of `(r1 , r2 ) the other is in the interior of P. The last remaining edge is part of ∂P.  r2 ≤ sL  L−2  r1  r1  β  p1  slope s  slope = s (a) A polygon with two opposite reflex vertices and their s-bad regions.  (b) The embiggened s-bad region.  Figure 12: Illustration of bad regions and embiggened bad regions. Definition 10 (Triangle decomposition of visibility regions and cones). Given a polygon P and some point x, we define the star triangle decomposition of Vis(x) as follows. Let v1 , . . . , vt be the vertices visible from x in clockwise order. Then any two consecutive vertices u, v together with x define a triangle ∆ of Vis(x). Note that u, v are not necessarily the vertices of ∆, see Figure 13a. Also note that the definition does not require the polygon to be simple. (The polygon could have holes.) We denote by cone(x, u, v) = cone(x) the cone with apex x that is bounded by ray(x, u) and ray(x, v), see Figure 13b. We will assume that u and v are implicitly known and omit to mention them if there is no ambiguity. Note that cone(x) is unbounded and not contained in P. Let u, v be vertices, not necessarily visible from some other point g. Let s ⊆ seg(u, v), the part of the segment that is visible from g. Then we define [ cone(g) = ray(g, t). t∈s  See the blue cone in Figure 13b. We say α-grid(x) sees cone(x) if [ [ cone(x) ⊆ Vis(g) ∪ cone(g). g∈α-grid(x)  g∈α-grid(x)  Note that cone(g) is not contained into Vis(g) as the cone is unbounded, whereas the visibility region is contained in P. We define α-grid∗ (x) sees cone(x) in the same fashion. The purpose of this Section is to prove Lemma 11. Lemma 11 (Special Local Visibility Containment Property). Let r1 and r2 be two consecutive vertices in the clockwise order of the vertices visible from x ∈ P and let x be outside the s-bad region of the vertices r1 and r2 . We make the following assumptions: 1. s 6 L−3 2. α 6 L−7 . 3. 16Lα 6 s Then α-grid∗ (x) sees cone(x).  13  x ∆ g x  (b) The cone of x and g are displayed. Both (a) The star triangle decomposition of the vis- cones are unbounded. The cone of g is not ibility region of x. bounded by the vertices that define it.  Figure 13: Illustration of the star triangle decomposition and cones. Note that, we do not exclude that x is outside any s-bad region but only outside the bad region of r1 and r2 . This subtlety makes the proof more complicated, as it might be that x is in an s-bad region with respect to some other pair of reflex vertices. For instance q, r1 , could be such a pair. It is not difficult to construct an example such that q blocks part of the visibility of α-grid(x). The proof idea is to show that this blocking is very limited (see Lemma 13) and then use only this partially obstructed visibility. Seeing cone(x) implies obviously also that the triangle ∆ ⊆ cone(x) is seen by α-grid(x). An immediate consequence is the following nice lemma. Lemma 12 (Local Visibility Containment Property). Every point x ∈ P outside any s-bad region has the α-local visibility containment property. We make the following assumptions: 1. s 6 L−3 2. α 6 L−7 . 3. 16 L α 6 s Proof. By Lemma 11, every triangle ∆ defined by the star triangle decomposition of Vis(x) is seen by α-grid∗ (x). For Lemma 13, see Figure 14a for an illustration of the setup. The next Lemma deals with the very special situation that there exists a reflex vertex q blocking the visibility of some g ∈ α-grid(x), although q ∈ / cone(x). The critical assumption is dist(q, x) > L−1 . Lemma 13 (Limited Blocking). Let x ∈ P, let r1 , r2 be two vertices and g ∈ α-grid(x) such that g ∈ / cone(x) and α 6 L−7 . Further, let q ∈ cone(g) be a reflex vertex with dist(x, q) > L−1 . We denote by p the intersection point between `(g, q) and seg(r1 , r2 ). Let g and r2 be on the same side of cone(x). Then holds: d = dist(p, r2 ) 6 L−2 . Proof. We show first dist(g, `(r1 , r2 )) > L−1 . Let ` be the line parallel to `(r1 , r2 ) containing the point q. Clearly, these two lines have distance at least L−1 , by Lemma 5 Item 2. And thus also g has at least this distance to `(r1 , r2 ), see Figure 14a. For the other part of the proof let us assume that `(r1 , r2 ) is vertical. We denote by c the vertical distance between g and `(q, r2 ) and by s the point realizing this distance, see Figure 14a. Note that dist(g, q) > dist(x, q) − dist(x, g) > L−1 − α > 1/(2L). By Thales Theorem we know: c c d = 6 = 2cL. dist(p, q) dist(g, q) 1/(2L) 14  r1 x  p  s  d ≤ L−2 r2  q  g  (a) The reflex vertex q blocks the visibility of g. Fortunately, we can show that only a very small part of the visibility is actually blocked. r2 r1 p d γ q s γ  c  g e≤α  (b) This Figure illustrates the proof of Lemma 13.  Figure 14 This implies d 6 2cL dist(p, q) 6 2cL2 It is sufficient to show c 6 αL2 , as α 6 L−7 . For this purpose, we rotate `(r1 , r2 ) again so that it becomes horizontal, see Figure 14b. Now c is the vertical distance between g and `(q, r2 ). We define e = dist(g, `(r2 , q)) and we denote by γ the angle at r2 formed by `(r2 , q) and `(r1 , r2 ). We consider here only the case that γ < 90◦ , the other case is symmetric. We note that γ appears again at s. This implies e = sin(γ). c It is also easy to see that sin(γ) =  L−1 dist(`(r1 , r2 ), q) > = L−2 . dist(r2 , q) L  Further note that `(r2 , q) must intersect seg(g, x) as q blocks the visibility of g but not of x. Thus e = dist(g, `(r2 , q)) 6 α. This implies c=  e 6 αL2 . sin(γ)  And thus it holds d 6 2cL2 6 2(αL2 )L2 = αL5 6 L−7 L5 = L−2 . Lemma 14 (Small Triangle). Let x ∈ P and let r1 and r2 be two vertices such that ∆ = ∆(x, r1 , r2 ) ⊆ P. Then it holds that ∆(x, r1 , r2 ) is seen by α-grid∗ (x), with α 6 L−7 . Proof. We consider first the case that dist(x, `(r1 , r2 )) 6 L−1 /2. Note that there is at least one g ∈ α-grid(x) on the same side of `(r1 , r2 ) as x. It follows by Lemma 5 that there can be no vertex of P blocking the visibility of g to ∆(x, r1 , r2 ). Thus from now on, we can assume that dist(x, `(r1 , r2 )) 6 L−1 /2 and this implies in particular that x and α-grid(x) are on the same side of `(r1 , r2 ). 15  Q2  g1  r1 p1 x  x p α  q  m  T  f  p2 r2  g2  g2  Figure 15: Illustration to the proof of Lemma 14. At first consider the case that there is a grid point g ∈ α-grid(x) inside ∆. This implies the claim immediately, as ∆ is convex and it must be empty of obstructions, as ∆ can be seen by x. So, let us assume that there exist two other grid points g1 , g2 ∈ α-grid(x) as in Figure 15. Let us first consider the case that there is no other vertex q with dist(x, q) 6 L−1 . This implies, we can use Lemma 13 and infer that the visibility regions of g1 , g2 are only slightly blocked, as indicated in Figure 15. In particular this implies that there exists a point m ∈ seg(r1 , r2 ) that is visible from g1 and g2 , as dist(r1 , r2 ) > 1 > 2L−2 . We define the quadrangle Q1 = Q(g1 , m, r2 , x) and Q2 = Q(g2 , m, r1 , x). Here Q(t1 , t2 , t3 , t4 ) indicates the quadrangle with vertices t1 , . . . , t4 . Clearly it holds ∆ ⊆ Q1 ∪ Q2 . Thus it is sufficient to show that gi sees Qi , for i = 1, 2. We define the point p = seg(g2 , r1 ) ∩ seg(x, r2 ) and the triangle T = ∆(x, g2 , p). Inside T is the only region where part of P could block the visibility of g2 to see Q2 fully. As g2 can be assumed to see x this blocking part would correspond to a hole of P. But note that a whole has at least 3 vertices and area at least 1/2. The area of T is bounded by αL, as one of its edges has length α and the height is trivailly bounded by L. It remains to consider the case that there exists one vertex q with dist(x, q) < L−1 . This immediately implies q ∈ α-grid∗ (x). If q does not block the vision of either g1 or g2 , we are done. Otherwise, note that q can block the vision of at most one of them, say g1 and there is at most one vertex q with dist(x, q) < L−1 . Thus after removal of q the previous argument above can be applied. Now as q blocks g1 it must be either the case that q ∈ cone(g1 ) or q ∈ T . In the first case q sees the part of cone(g1 ) that is inside P. In the second case, we denote by f the point seg(g1 , x) ∩ `(r1 , q). As dist(x, f ) 6 dist(x, g2 ), we can conclude that f and g1 see ∆ by the same argument as above applied to g1 and f instead of g1 and g2 , under the assumption that q would not block f . Now however holds that q ∈ cone(f ) and thus sees what f would have seen and we are done.  v(g2 , r1 )  r1  v(g1 , p1 )  p1  g1 a  v(g2 , p2 ) v(g1 , r2 )  g2  p2 r2  Figure 16: Illustration to Definition 15.  Definition 15 (Cone-Property). Given points g1 , g2 , two reflex vertices r1 and r2 and two points p1 , p2 ∈ seg(r1 , r2 ) with dist(p1 , r1 ) 6 L−2 and dist(p2 , r2 ) 6 L−2 , see Figure 16. We denote by C1 the cone with apex g1 bounded by the rays ray(g1 , r2 ) and ray(g1 , p1 ) and we 16  denote by C2 the cone with apex g2 bounded by the rays ray(g2 , r1 ) and ray(g2 , p2 ). We say two points g1 , g2 have the cone-property with respect to two reflex vertices r1 , r2 if there exists some ray contained in C1 ∩ C2 . We define a = apex(g1 , g2 ) = seg(g1 , r2 ) ∩ seg(g2 , r1 ). The definition of C1 and C2 might seem a little odd, but in spirit of Lemma 13, we see that Ci ⊆ cone(gi ), for i = 1, 2, if the conditions of Lemma 13 are met. Lemma 16 (New Cone). Let g1 , g2 have the cone-property and assume the notation of Definition 15. Then the cone C with apex a bounded by the rays ray(a, r1 ) and ray(a, r2 ) is contained in C1 ∪ C2 . Proof. The directions v with ray(gi , v) ⊆ Ci , denoted by Ii , form an interval in S 1 for i = 1, 2. We define I as the set of directions v such that ray(a, v) ⊆ C. It is easy to see that I = I1 ∪ I2 , because the cone-property implies that I1 ∩I2 6= ∅. Note that for all b ∈ Ci holds ray(b, v) ⊆ Ci , for all i = 1, 2 and v ∈ Ii . The fact a ∈ C1 ∩ C2 implies C ⊆ C1 ∪ C2 . Lemma 17 (Cone-Property). Given two points g1 , g2 with dist(g1 , g2 ) 6 d 6 4s 6 14 such that g1 and g2 are outside of the embiggened s-bad region of the reflex vertices r1 and r2 . Then g1 and g2 have the cone-property. r2  r1 α r1 α  `  r2 C  g1  g1  d g2  h h  g2  (a) Definition of α and h. r1 α C  (b) Definition of ` and C. `  g1  s-bad region f d α g2  (c) Illustrations for the case α < 45  r1  α  v r2  g1 ◦  (d) Illustrations for the case α < 45◦  Figure 17: Illustrations to the proof of Lemma 17 Proof. It is sufficient to show that the rays ray(g1 , p1 ) and ray(g2 , p2 ) will not intersect, this is they are either parallel or diverge from one another. Note that dist(p1 , p2 ) > dist(r1 , r2 ) − dist(r1 , p1 ) − dist(r2 , p2 ) > 1 − L−2 − L−2 > 1/2. Here, we used the fact that all vertices have integer coordinates. If we move r1 towards p1 and r2 towards p2 then this does not change whether ray(g1 , p1 ) and ray(g2 , p2 ) will intersect or not. Now, the assumption that g1 and g2 are not contained in the embiggened s-bad region, becomes just that g1 and g2 are not contained in the (ordinary) s-bad region.  17  Thus from now on, we assume r1 = p1 and r2 = p2 . We cannot make the assumption anymore that r1 and r2 have integer coordinates, but we can assume that dist(r1 , r2 ) > 1/2, which is sufficient for the rest of the proof. Without loss of generality, we assume that the supporting line of the two reflex vertices is horizontal. We can assume that the distance dist(g1 , g2 ) = d, as this is the worst case. Further, we assume that g1 is closer to r1 than to r2 . For this purpose, we distinguish two different cases. Either the angle α between `(r1 , r2 ) and the ray ray(g1 , r1 ) is > 45◦ or < 45◦ degree, see Figure 17a. In the first case, we compare the horizontal distance between the lines at two different locations. To be precise, we will show disthorizontal (`(g1 , r1 ), g2 ) < disthorizontal (`(g1 , r1 ), r2 ). This shows that the rays are in fact diverging. The horizontal distance between r2 and `(g1 , r1 ) equals dist(r1 , r2 ) > 1/2 as was remarked √ above. The horizontal distance h between the `(g1 , r1 ) and g2 can be upper bounded by 2d < 2d as follows. See Figure 17b for an illustration. At first let ` be a line parallel to `(g1 , r1 ) containing g2 . Then any point p on ` has the same horizontal distance to `(g1 , r1 ). Further g2 has distance d to g1 and thus lies on the circle C = ∂disk(g1 , d) indicated in Figure 17b. The line ` parallel to `(g1 , r1 ) and furthest away from it that is still intersecting C is indicated in Figure 17b. We can assume that g2 lies on the intersection of C and `, as h would be smaller in any other case. We draw the horizontal segment t realizing the horizontal distance between g2 and `(g1 , r2 ). Note that the angle between `(g1 , r2 ) and t equals α. It is easy to see that seg(g1 , g2 ) and ` are orthogonal. This implies that seg(g1 , g2 ) and `(g1 , r1 ) are orthogonal as well. It follows sin α = Here we used the fact that sin α >  √ d 6 2d < 2d. sin α  d h  ⇒  √1 , 2  for α > 45◦ . In summary we have  h=  disthorizontal (`(g1 , r1 ), g2 ) 6 2d 6 s/2 6 1/2 6 disthorizontal (`(g1 , r1 ), r2 ). In the second case, we compare the vertical distance v between `(g1 , r1 ) and r2 and `(g2 , r2 ) and g1 . We will show distvertical (`(g1 , r1 ), g2 ) 6 distvertical (`(g1 , r1 ), r2 ). By the same argument as in case one, we can conclude that √ f = distvertical (`(g1 , r1 ), g2 ) 6 2d 6 2d. We repeat the argument to avoid potential confusion, see Figure 17c. Let ` be a line parallel to `(g1 , r1 ). Then every point p on ` has the same vertical distance to `(g1 , r1 ). Further g2 has distance d to g1 and thus lies on the circle C = ∂disk(g1 , d) indicated in Figure 17c. The line ` parallel to `(g1 , r1 ) and furthest away from it that is still intersecting C is indicated in Figure 17c. We can assume that g2 lies on the intersection of C and `, as f would be smaller in any other case. We draw the vertical segment t realizing the vertical distance between g2 and `(g1 , r2 ). Note that the angle between ` and t equals α. It is easy to see that seg(g1 , g2 ) and ` are orthogonal. This implies that seg(g1 , g2 ) and `(g1 , r1 ) are orthogonal as well. It follows cos α = Here we used the fact that cos α >  d f √1 , 2  ⇒  f=  √ d 6 2d < 2d. cos α  for α < 45◦ . 18  Now, we give some bounds on the vertical distance v between `(g1 , r1 ) and r2 . See Figure 17d. Note that tan α > s by the assumption that g1 is not contained in an s-bad region. This implies s 6 tan α =  v v 6 6 2v. dist(r1 , r2 ) 1/2  In summary we have (1)  distvertical (`(g1 , r1 ), g2 ) 6 2d 6 s/2 6 v = distvertical (`(g1 , r1 ), r2 ). For (1) we used the assumption of the lemma. Definition 18 (Cone Containment and Cutting Cones). We say cone(x) is contained in cone(y) behind r1 and r2 if cone(x) ∩ `+ ⊆ cone(y) ∩ `+ , where `+ is the half-plane bounded by `(r1 , r2 ) and does not contain the points x and y. When r1 and r2 are clear from context, we just say cone(x) is contained in cone(y). In the same fashion, we define cone(z) = cone(x) ∪ cone(y) behind r1 and r2 . We say some cone C is cut by a line segment s if the line segment s0 = C ∩ s is non-empty and contains neither end point of s. It is easy to see that for any cone(x) either holds that there exists a point g ∈ α-grid(x) with g ∈ cone(x) or there exists two points g1 , g2 ∈ α-grid(x) such that cone(x) cuts seg(g1 , g2 ), see Figure 11.  g1  apex(g1 , g2 ) r1  s x  r1 x  s0 g2  g  r2 r2 `+  (b) The line segment s cuts cone(x), as s0 is non-empty and contains neither endpoint of s. Thus cone(x) contains apex(x, y).  (a) The point g is contained in cone(x) and thus cone(g) contains cone(x) behind `+ .  Figure 18: Illustrations to cone containment and cone cutting. Lemma 19 (Cone-Containment). Consider the cones of x and g with respect to r1 and r2 . Let g ∈ cone(x) then cone(x) is contained cone(g) behind r1 and r2 . Lemma 20 (Cut-Segments). Consider the cones of g1 , g2 and x with respect to r1 and r2 . Let g1 , g2 have the cone-property and assume that cone(x) is cut by seg(g1 , g2 ). Then cone(x) is contained in cone(a), where a = apex(g1 , g2 ) behind r1 and r2 . Further cone(a) = cone(g1 ) ∪ cone(g2 ) behind r1 and r2 . Proof. We will show that a ∈ cone(x). See Figure 18b for an illustration of the proof. Let h1 be the half-plane bounded by `(x, r1 ) containing r2 and let h2 be the half-plane bounded by `(x, r2 ) containing r1 . Recall that a = apex(g1 , g2 ) = seg(g2 , r1 ) ∩ seg(g1 , r2 ). Then it is clear that a ∈ seg(g2 , r1 ) ⊆ h1 and a ∈ seg(g1 , r2 ) ⊆ h2 . Thus a ∈ h1 ∩ h2 = cone(x).  19  e2 e1  p1 L−1 /4  d2  R  h  r1  f  d1  slope s/2 B x  2α  slope s  Figure 19: Illustrations to Lemma 21. ` = `(r1 , r2 ) is horizontal; B is an axis parallel box around x with side length 2α; R is an embiggened (s/2)-bad region; e1 is the horizontal distance between x and r1 ; e2 = e1 +α+L−2 ; d1 is the vertical distance between ` and x; d2 is the vertical distance between ` and B; f = d2 − (s/2)e2 . Lemma 21 (Grid Outside Bad Region). Let x be a point not in the s-bad region of r1 , r2 , seeing r1 and r2 , and dist(x, ri ) > L−1 , for i = 1, 2. Further we assume s 6 8Lα and L−3 6 s. Then it holds that α-grid(x) is not in the embiggened 2s -bad region of r1 and r2 . Proof. Refer to Figure 19 for an illustration of this proof and the notation therein. We assume that `(r1 , r2 ) is horizontal and x is closer to r1 then to r2 . As every point of α-grid(x) has distance at most α from x, it is sufficient to show that the box B with sidelength 2α centered at x does not intersect the embiggened 2s -bad region R. For the proof it is sufficient to assume that x is outside the box C of sidelength L−1 /2 centered at r1 . We denote by h the largest width of R. It is easy to see that h 6 (s/2)L 6 L−2 . In case that e1 < L−1 /2 holds d2 = d1 − α > L−1 /4  h. Thus, we assume from now on e1 > L−1 /2. In this case, it holds e2 = e1 + L−2 + α <  3e1 2 .  It suffices to show f > 0. f = d2 −  e2 s (1) 3e1 s (2) 3e1 s (3) 3e1 s > d2 − = d1 − α − > e1 s − α − = 2 4 4 4  e1 s 4  (4)  −α >  (5) L−1 s − α > 0. 8  Inequality (1) was just shown above. Equality (2) can be easily seen in Figure 19. Inequality (3) applies the fact that the s-bad region does not contain x and has slope s. Inequality (4) follows the assumed lower bound e1 > L−1 /4. Inequality (5) is the main assumption of the lemma. We are now ready to proof Lemma 11. Lemma 11 (Special Local Visibility Containment Property). Let r1 and r2 be two consecutive vertices in the clockwise order of the vertices visible from x ∈ P and let x be outside the s-bad region of the vertices r1 and r2 . We make the following assumptions: 1. s 6 L−3 2. α 6 L−7 . 3. 16Lα 6 s Then α-grid∗ (x) sees cone(x).  20  g1 x  w  r q  g2  Figure 20: In this scenario there exists a vertex q, which blocks the visibility g1 . Luckily, we can define another point w, which is not blocked by q. And q can see the cone of w. Proof of Lemma 11. Note first that the triangle ∆(x, r1 , r2 ) is seen by α-grid∗ (x) by Lemma (Small Triangle) 14. So, we are only interested in cone(x) behind r1 and r2 . The easiest case to be ruled out is that there exists g ∈ α-grid∗ (x) such that g ∈ cone(x), as by Lemma (Cone-Containment) 19 this implies the claim. So from now on, we assume for all g ∈ α-grid∗ (x) holds g ∈ / cone(x). We know that there exists two grid points g1 and g2 such that cone(x) cuts the segment seg(g1 , g2 ). By Lemma (Cut-Segments) 20 it remains to show that g1 and g2 have the ConeProperty. For this purpose, we want to invoke Lemma (Cone-Property) 17. To this end, we have to invoke a series of other lemmas. Note that r1 , r2 ∈ cone(x) and dist(x, ri ) < L−1 , for i = 1 or i = 2 implies ri is included in α-grid∗ (x). Thus by the argument above, we assume from now on dist(x, ri ) > L−1 for all i = 1, 2. There might still be a different vertex q 6= r1 , r2 with dist(x, q) < L−1 . We deal first with the case that there are no vertices q with dist(x, q) < L−1 . By Lemma (Grid Outside Bad Region) 21 holds that α-grid(x) is not contained in the embiggened s0 -bad region with s0 = s/2 with respect to r1 and r2 . We can apply Lemma (Limited Blocking) 13 as α < L−7 and what is said above. From Lemma (Limited Blocking) 13 follows that cone(gi ) contains Ci , for i = 1, 2 as defined in Definition (Cone-Property) 15, see also Definition (Cone-Property) 10 to recall the definition of cone(gi ). It remains to show that g1 and g2 satisfy the Cone-Property. To this end, we need to show that the assumptions of Lemma (Cone-Property) 17 is met. Here, we consider the embiggened s0 -bad region with s0 = s/2. Note that dist(g1 , g2 ) 6 2α 6 s/(8L) < s0 /4 = s/8 < 1/4. This shows the claim together with Lemma (New Cone) 16. It remains to consider the case that there exists one vertex q with dist(x, q) < L−1 , see Figure 20. This immediately implies q ∈ α-grid∗ (x). If q does not block the vision of either g1 or g2 , we are done. Otherwise, note that q can block the vision of at most one of them, say g1 and there is at most one vertex q with dist(x, q) < L−1 . We define w = `(q, r) ∩ seg(g1 , g2 ). As the edges incident to q block g1 at least partially, we know that w exists. As dist(w, g2 ) 6 dist(g1 , g2 ) and cone(x) cuts the segment seg(w, g2 ), we can use the same arguments as above. By definition of w holds q ∈ cone(w). And behind r1 , r2 the cone(q) contains cone(w).  4.5  Global Visibility Containment  This simple lemma quantifies (as a function of s and L) the maximum width of s-bad regions. Lemma 22 (distance bad region to supporting line). Let p be a point of P inside an s-bad region associated to opposite reflex vertices r1 and r2 . Then dist(p, `(r1 , r2 )) 6 sL. 21  Proof. See Figure 12a. Although it is not possible to achieve a local visibility containment property for all points in P, the exceptions only involve bad regions. Under Assumption 2 (and Assumption 1), we can give a fairly short proof of Lemma 2. As preparation, we need the following technical lemma which heavily relies on Lemma 5.  ⇒  γ β  Figure 21: Three bad regions meeting in an interior point implies that the extensions must meet in a single point. No two bad regions intersect in the vicinity of a vertex, as they are defined by some angle β  L−2 . But the angle γ between any two extensions is at least L−2 . Lemma 23 (no three bad regions intersect). Under Assumption 1 and 2, for any s 6 L−9 , no point in the interior of P belongs to three different s-bad regions. Proof. We consider now the case that there exists a point x with dist(x, v) 6 L−2 , for some vertex v. We show that x is contained in at most one bad regions, see to the right of Figure 21. note first that any extension ` with v ∈ / ` has distance at least L−1 from v, by Lemma 5. And thus x cannot be in any bad region belonging to ` by Lemma 22. By Lemma 5 the angle between any two extensions must be at least L−2 . As we have at most two vertices contained on any line, the bad regions belonging to the extensions through v must start at v, see Definition 9. For the angle β defining the bad regions holds tan(β) = s  L−2 and thus all bad regions in the vicinity of v are disjoint. (Note that v itself is not considered as part of the bad region.) Let `1 , `2 , `3 be supporting lines of three distinct pairs of opposite reflex vertices. As we assumed that no three points lie on a line, those three lines are also distinct. We first consider the case where two of those supporting lines, say `1 and `2 are parallel. By Lemma 5 Item 5, dist(`1 , `2 ) > L−1 . Also, by Lemma 22, any point of an s-bad region is at distance at most sL of the corresponding supporting line. Therefore, any point in the intersection of the s-bad region associated to `1 and the one associated to `2 is at distance at most L−8 from those two lines; a contradiction to dist(`1 , `2 ) > L−1 . We now show that any intersection of two supporting lines (among `1 , `2 , `3 ) should be in the interior of P. Such an intersection cannot be on the boundary of P deprived of the vertices of P, since it would immediately yield three supporting lines meeting in a point. If two supporting lines, say `1 and `2 , meet in a vertex of P, then this vertex is one of the opposite reflex vertices for both `1 and `2 (otherwise there would be three vertices on a line). Assume now that the intersection p of say, `1 and `2 is outside P. By Lemma 5 Item 4, the distance of p to any point in P is at least L−5 . Let p0 be a point of P in the intersection of two s-bad regions associated to `1 and to `2 . By Lemma 22, the distance of p0 to both `1 and `2 is at most L−8 . That implies, by setting d to L−8 in Lemma 5 Item 7, that dist(p0 , p) 6 L−8 L2 = L−6 ; a contradiction to dist(p, P) > L−5 Thus, we can suppose that `1 , `2 , `3 pairwise intersect in three distinct points p = `1 ∩ `2 , q = `1 ∩ `3 , r = `2 ∩ `3 in the interior of P; this is because we assumed that no three extensions meet in a point. Let p0 be in the s-bad regions associated to `1 and `2 . As explained in the end of the previous paragraph, dist(p0 , p) 6 L−6 . By Lemma 5 Item 3, dist(p, `3 ) > L−5 . By Lemma 22 any point in the s-bad region associated to `3 is at distance at most L−8 . As L−6 + L−8 < L−5 ,  22  p0 can not be in the s-bad region associated to `3 . Which means that the intersection of the three s-bad regions associated to `1 , `2 , and `3 is empty.  Figure 22: The red dots indicate the optimal solution. The blue dots indicate the The red dot on the top is in the interior case and four grid points are added around it. The red dot on the left is too close to two supporting lines and we add one of the reflex vertices of each of the supporting lines. The red dot to the right has distance less than L−1 to a reflex vertex, so we add that vertex as well to G. Proof Lemma 2 using Assumptions 1 and 2. We denote by OP T an optimal solution of size k. We assume that no point of OP T is actually contained in Γ as we can just take that point into our grid solution. In particular this implies OP T contains non of the vertices of P. Let α = L−11 and s < L−9 . Let x ∈ P be some point and R(x) some set of size at most 2 that contains a reflex vertex for each s-bad region, that x is contained in. As no point is contained in three bad regions R(x) having size 2 is enough, see Lemma 23. We define [ G= α-grid∗ (x) ∪ R(x). x∈OP T  It is easy to see that G ⊆ Γ has size |G| 6 (7 + 2)k. We want to argue that G sees the entire polygon. For each x ∈ OP T the local containment property holds, except for the bad regions it is in, see Lemma 11. These parts are seen by the reflex vertices we added.  5  Conclusion  We presented an O(log |OP T |)-approximation algorithm for the Point Guard Art Gallery problem under two relatively mild assumptions. The most natural open question is whether Assumption 2 can be removed. We believe that this is possible but it will require some additional efforts and ideas. Another improvement of the result would be to achieve an approximation ratio of O(log n) for polygons with holes. This would match the currently best known algorithm for the Vertex Guard variant and known lower bounds. In that respect, it might be very useful that Lemma 2 does not require the polygon to be simple. One might also ask about the inapproximability of Point Guard Art Gallery for simple polygons. For the moment, the problem is only known to be inapproximable for a certain constant ratio (quite close to 1), unless P=NP. It would be interesting to get superconstant inapproximability under standard complexity theoretic assumptions or improved approximation algorithms.  23  References [1] E. S. Ayaz and A. Üngör. Minimal witness sets for art gallery problems. EuroCG, 2016. [2] J. Barát, V. Dujmovic, G. Joret, M. S. Payne, L. Scharf, D. Schymura, P. Valtr, and D. R. Wood. Empty pentagons in point sets with collinearities. SIAM J. Discrete Math., 29(1):198–209, 2015. [3] S. Basu, R. Pollack, and M.-F. Roy. Algorithms in real algebraic geometry. AMC, 10:12, 2011. [4] P. Belleville. Computing two-covers of simple polygons. Master’s thesis, McGill University, 1991. [5] V. V. S. P. Bhattiprolu and S. Har-Peled. Separating a voronoi diagram via local search. In SOCG 2016, pages 18:1–18:16. [6] É. Bonnet and T. Miltzow. The parameterized hardness of the art gallery problem. In ESA 2016, page to appear, 2016. [7] É. Bonnet and T. Miltzow. The parameterized hardness of the art gallery problem. CoRR, abs/1603.08116, 2016. [8] H. Brönnimann and M. T. Goodrich. Almost optimal set covers in finite vc-dimension. Discrete & Computational Geometry, 14(4):463–479, 1995. [9] J. Canny. Some algebraic and geometric computations in pspace. In STOC, pages 460–467. ACM, 1988. [10] J. Cardinal. Computational geometry column 62. SIGACT News, 46(4):69–78, Dec. 2015. [11] K. Chwa, B. Jo, C. Knauer, E. Moet, R. van Oostrum, and C. Shin. Guarding art galleries by guarding witnesses. Int. J. Comput. Geometry Appl., 16(2-3):205–226, 2006. [12] K. L. Clarkson. Algorithms for polytope covering and approximation. In WADS 1993, pages 246–252, 1993. [13] A. Deshpande. A pseudo-polynomial time O(log2 n)-approximation algorithm for art gallery problems. Master’s thesis, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, 2006. [14] A. Deshpande, T. Kim, E. D. Demaine, and S. E. Sarma. A pseudopolynomial time O(log n)-approximation algorithm for art gallery problems. In WADS 2007, pages 163– 174, 2007. [15] S. Durocher and S. Mehrabi. Guarding orthogonal art galleries using sliding cameras: algorithmic and hardness results. In MFCS 2013, pages 314–324. Springer, 2013. [16] A. Efrat and S. Har-Peled. Guarding galleries and terrains. Inf. Process. Lett., 100(6):238– 245, 2006. [17] S. Eidenbenz, C. Stamm, and P. Widmayer. Inapproximability results for guarding polygons and terrains. Algorithmica, 31(1):79–113, 2001. [18] S. Fisk. A short proof of chvátal’s watchman theorem. J. Comb. Theory, Ser. B, 24(3):374, 1978. [19] S. K. Ghosh. Visibility algorithms in the plane. Cambridge University Press, 2007. 24  [20] S. K. Ghosh. Approximation algorithms for art gallery problems in polygons. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 158(6):718–722, 2010. [21] A. Gilbers and R. Klein. A new upper bound for the vc-dimension of visibility regions. Computational Geometry, 47(1):61–74, 2014. [22] G. Kalai and J. Matoušek. Guarding galleries where every point sees a large area. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 101(1):125–139, 1997. [23] H. Kim and G. Rote. abs/1603.07269, 2016.  Congruence testing of point sets in 4 dimensions.  CoRR,  [24] H. Kim and G. Rote. Congruence testing of point sets in 4-space. In Symposium on Computational Geometry, volume 51 of LIPIcs, pages 48:1–48:16. Schloss Dagstuhl - LeibnizZentrum fuer Informatik, 2016. [25] J. King. Fast vertex guarding for polygons with and without holes. Comput. Geom., 46(3):219–231, 2013. [26] D. G. Kirkpatrick. An O(log log OP T )-approximation algorithm for multi-guarding galleries. Discrete & Computational Geometry, 53(2):327–343, 2015. [27] E. A. Krohn and B. J. Nilsson. Approximate guarding of monotone and rectilinear polygons. Algorithmica, 66(3):564–594, 2013. [28] J. Matousek. Intersection graphs of segments and ∃R. CoRR, abs/1406.2636, 2014. [29] R. Motwani, A. Raghunathan, and H. Saran. Covering orthogonal polygons with star polygons: The perfect graph approach. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 40(1):19–48, 1990. [30] J. O’rourke. Art gallery theorems and algorithms, volume 57. Oxford University Press Oxford, 1987. [31] M. Schaefer. Complexity of Some Geometric and Topological Problems, pages 334–344. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010. [32] T. C. Shermer. Recent results in art galleries. Proceedings of the IEEE, 80(9):1384–1399, 1992. [33] J. Urrutia et al. Art gallery and illumination problems. Handbook of computational geometry, 1(1):973–1027, 2000. [34] P. Valtr. Guarding galleries where no point sees a small area. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 104(1):1–16, 1998.  25

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
