Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 7
ArXiv ID: hf_4264

Abstract:
1  Coexistence of RF-powered IoT and a Primary Wireless Network with Secrecy Guard Zones  arXiv:1705.07237v1 [cs.IT] 20 May 2017  Mustafa A. Kishk and Harpreet S. Dhillon  Abstract This paper studies the secrecy performance of a wireless network (primary network) overlaid with an ambient RF energy harvesting Internet of Things (IoT) network (secondary network). The nodes in the secondary network are assumed to be solely powered by ambient RF energy harvested from the transmissions of the primary network. We assume that the secondary nodes can eavesdrop on the primary transmissions due to which the primary network uses secrecy guard zones. The primary transmitter goes silent if any secondary receiver is detected within its guard zone. Using tools from stochastic geometry, we derive the probability of successful connection of the primary network as well as the probability of secure communication. Two conditions must be jointly satisfied in order to ensure successful connection: (i) the signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) at the primary receiver is above a predefined threshold, and (ii) the primary transmitter is not silent. In order to ensure secure communication, the SINR value at each of the secondary nodes should be less than a predefined threshold. Clearly, when more secondary nodes are deployed, more primary transmitters will remain silent for a given guard zone radius, thus impacting the amount of energy harvested by the secondary network. Our results concretely show the existence of an optimal deployment density for the secondary network that maximizes the density of nodes that can harvest an amount of energy above a predefined threshold. Furthermore, we show the dependence of this optimal deployment density on the guard zone radius of the primary network. In addition, we show that the optimal guard zone radius selected by the primary network is a function of the deployment density of the secondary network. The interesting coupling between the performance of the two networks is studied using tools from game theory. In addition, we propose an algorithm that can assist the two networks to converge to Nash equilibrium. The convergence of this algorithm is verified using simulations. Overall, this work is one of the few concrete works that symbiotically merge tools from stochastic geometry and game theory.  M. A. Kishk and H. S. Dhillon are with Wireless@VT, Department of ECE, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA. Email: {mkishk, hdhillon}@vt.edu. The support of the U.S. NSF (Grants CCF-1464293, CNS-1617896, and IIS-1633363) is gratefully acknowledged. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE WCNC 2017, San Francisco, CA [1]. Last updated: May 23, 2017.  2  Index Terms Stochastic geometry, wireless power transfer, physical layer security, game theory, coverage probability, Poisson Point Process, Poisson hole process.  I. I NTRODUCTION Owing to rapid technological advances, wireless communication networks are undergoing unprecedented paradigm shifts. One of the most interesting amongst them is the attempt to make wireless networks virtually self-perpetual in terms of their energy requirements. This is especially gaining importance in internet-of-things (IoT) realm where it may not be economical to charge or replace batteries periodically in billions of devices worldwide [2]. In order to achieve this vision of self-perpetual operation, it is necessary to provide energy harvesting capability to such networks in addition to reducing energy expenditures through energy-efficient communication policies [3], [4] and energy efficient hardware [5]. While, in principle, we can use any available source of energy to power these networks, ambient RF energy harvesting is considered a preferred option due to its ubiquity [6]. Further, due to the need of deploying these ambient RF energy harvesting nodes/devices (referred to as energy receivers or ERs in the rest of this paper) close to the sources of RF signals, concerns on the secrecy of these RF signals were recently raised in the literature [7]–[13]. While the RF signal source (referred to as primary transmitter or PT in this paper) transmits confidential messages to legitimate information receivers (IRs), the existence of ERs close to the PT may enable them to decode these messages. Consequently, careful study of physical layer security in such systems is required to glean insights on the new secrecy performance limitations in the presence of ERs. The importance of physical layer security lies in ensuring the ability of legitimate receivers to decode the confidential messages while preventing illegitimate receivers from decoding these messages [14]. Many solutions were proposed to enhance physical layer security including: (i) using protected zones in order to ensure an eavesdropper-free regions around the transmitters [15], [16], (ii) using artificial noise in order to degrade the confidential signal’s SNR at the energy receiver [9], [17], (iii) beamforming in multi-antenna systems [10]–[12], and (iv) using guard zones to stop information transmission whenever an eavesdropper is detected within a specific region around the transmitter [18], [19]. In this paper, we limit our attention to single-antenna transmitters and receivers, which means beamforming is not applicable to our setup. In addition, using protected zones assumes some physical control over the eavesdroppers, which will not be considered in this paper. Thus, we have  3  two options to choose from: either use artificial noise or guard zones. In [20], it was recently shown that the guard zone technique outperforms the artificial noise technique in the noise limited regime when the link distance is higher than a specific threshold. No such performance comparison between the two techniques is known when interference is taken into account. Regardless, we focus on the guard zone technique in this paper while leaving the artificial noise technique as a promising direction of future work. In particular, modeling the interaction between a primary network using guard zones to enhance secrecy and an IoT network using RF signals transmitted by the primary network to harvest energy is the main focus of this paper. A. Related Work In this subsection, we will provide a brief summary of the related works in three general directions of interest to this paper: (i) stochastic geometry-based analysis of secrecy and/or energy harvesting wireless networks, (ii) game theory-based analysis of secrecy and/or energy harvesting wireless networks, and (iii) analysis of secure wireless power transmission. Stochastic geometry-based work. Stochastic geometry has emerged as a powerful mathematical tool for the modeling and analysis of variety of wireless networks [21]–[24]. Out of numerous aspects of wireless networks that have been studied using stochastic geometry, two that are most relevant to this paper are: (i) secrecy [18], [25], [26], and (ii) energy harvesting [27]– [31]. We first discuss the related works on secrecy. The work presented in [18] quantified the loss in network throughput that results from ensuring a specific level of secrecy performance. In addition, possible performance enhancement using guard zones was also studied. Authors in [25] studied the physical layer security of downlink cellular networks assuming that all the existing users in the network are potential cooperating eavesdroppers. In [26], authors studied the secrecy of downlink transmission when the transmitter adopts transmit antenna selection. In particular, they derived the secrecy outage probability for the cases of independent and cooperating eavesdroppers, considering both half and full duplex legitimate receivers. Stochastic geometry has also been applied to analyze the performance of energy harvesting cellular networks with emphasis on either the downlink channel [27]–[29] or the uplink channel [30]. The work presented in [27] provided a comprehensive framework for analyzing heterogeneous cellular networks with energy harvesting base stations (BSs). The primary focus was on characterizing optimal transmission policies as well as quantifying the availability of different tiers of BSs. In [28], [29], the joint analysis of the downlink signal quality and the  4  amount of energy harvested at an RF-powered user was performed. In [30], [31], the uplink counterpart of this problem was explored in which the RF-powered node first harvests energy from ambient RF signals and then uses it to perform data transmission. The work presented in [32] focused on the secrecy analysis of wireless networks where the legitimate transmitters are powered by energy harvesting. To the best of our knowledge, our work provides the first stochastic geometry-based secrecy analysis of wireless power transmission with energy receivers acting as potential eavesdroppers. More details will be provided shortly. Game theory-based work. Tools from game theory have been widely used in the analysis of secrecy in wireless networks [33]–[36]. Using these tools, in [33] authors modeled the interaction between cognitive networks and eavesdroppers, where a channel selection algorithm was proposed to reach the Nash equilibrium. In [34], authors studied the problem of optimizing the uplink path in multi-hop networks in order to maximize the secrecy rate. In [35], authors used matching theory to develop an algorithm that enhances the secrecy of source-destination pairs using jamming nodes. In [36], authors proposed a distributed algorithm that enhances the achievable secrecy rates in wireless networks with cooperative wireless nodes. These tools have also been used in the analysis of energy harvesting wireless networks. For instance, authors in [37] provided different approaches to manage energy trading among energy harvesting small cell BSs in order to minimize the consumption of non-renewable energy. Authors in [38] used theses tools to model the relay interference channels where the relay divides the received power from the source into two parts: (i) the first part is used to charge its own battery, and (ii) the rest of the received power is used to forward the received packet to its destination. In [39], these tools were used to determine optimal probability of switching from listen to active modes and from sleep to active modes for a solar powered wireless sensor network. Secure wireless power transmission. While the idea of having the energy receiver as a potential eavesdropper has not been studied yet in the stochastic geometry literature (with randomly located ERs and legitimate transmitters), recent works have explored this idea for the deterministic system setups [7], [8], [40]–[42]. These works assume that the transmitter aims to maximize secrecy performance with the constraint of providing ERs with the required wireless power. In [7], [8], authors focused on a single point-to-point link with one ER (potential eavesdropper) in the system. An artificial noise-based solution was proposed to improve secrecy without reducing the amount of wireless power received by the ER. In [40], authors studied the use of a friendly jammer to enhance the performance of the point-to-point system. The friendly jammer  5  increases the amount of received power by the ER. In addition, it reduces the decodability of the confidential message by the ER. The single link system was extended in [41] to consider one multi-antenna transmitter, one legitimate receiver, and K ERs. Optimal beamforming schemes were provided to either maximize secrecy subject to constraints on harvested energy by the ERs or to maximize harvested energy by the ERs subject to secrecy constraints. Similar approach was adopted in [42] for a more general system model of one macro BS serving M users, N femto BSs each serving K users, and L ERs. Unlike all these works, we will model the locations of ERs and legitimate transmitters using point processes, which will enable us to draw general conclusions that will not be restricted to particular topologies. In this paper, we study the secrecy performance of a primary network that consists of PTs and information receivers (which will also be referred to as primary receivers or PRs), overlaid with an IoT network that consists of RF-powered devices (energy receivers or ERs). Guard zones are assumed to be present around PTs in order to improve secrecy. The only sources of ambient RF signals for ERs are the PT transmissions. The PT transmits information (becomes active) to the PRs only when the guard zone is free of ERs, otherwise it remains silent. On one hand, the IoT network would prefer a dense deployment of ERs so as to increase the overall energy harvested by the IoT network. However, on the other hand, more dense deployment of ERs will mean that more PTs will stay silent (due to the higher likelihood of ERs lying in the guard zones of the PTs) that will ultimately reduce the amount of ambient RF energy harvested, and hence degrade energy harvesting performance. Modeling and analysis of this setup is the main focus of this paper. We summarize the contributions of this paper next. B. Contributions Primary network performance analysis. Modeling the locations of PTs and ERs by two independent Poisson point processes (PPPs), we show that the locations of active PTs (PTs with ER-free guard zones) follow Poisson hole process. For this setup, we define the probability of successful connection (Pcon ) between the PT and its associated PR by the joint probability of the PT being active and the SINR at the PR being above a predefined threshold. We derive Pcon as a function of the density of ERs and the guard zone radius rg . We concretely derive a threshold on the density of the PTs below which Pcon is a decreasing function of rg . Above this threshold, we prove the existence of an optimal value of rg that maximizes Pcon . For the secrecy analysis, we derive the probability of secure communication (defined by the probability  6  of having the SINR value at any ER less than a predefined threshold). Referring to this metric as Psec , we provide several useful insights on the effect of the PT transmission power as well as the density of ERs on the value of Psec . IoT network performance analysis. For the IoT network (secondary network), we derive the probability of harvesting a minimum amount of energy Emin by the ERs. We define the density of ERs that satisfy this condition as the density of successfully powered ERs. We prove the existence of an optimal deployment density of ERs that maximizes this density of successfully powered ERs. In order to capture the relation between this optimal density and the guard zone radius, we derive a useful lower bound on the the density of successfully powered ERs. We show that the optimal deployment density that maximizes this lower bound is a decreasing function of rg . Although this conclusion is drawn using a lower bound, we use numerical results and simulations to demonstrate that it holds for the exact expressions as well. Modeling the interaction between the two networks. Building on the above results, we show that the interaction between the two networks can be modeled using tools from game theory. In particular, we show that this system can be modeled by a two player non-cooperative static game. The first player is the primary network with the guard zone radius representing its strategy. Its utility function is modeled to capture the successful connection probability as well as the probability of secure communication. The second player is the IoT network with the deployment density representing its strategy. Its utility function is modeled to capture the main performance metric of this network, which is the density of successfully powered ERs. We propose a best response-based learning algorithm that helps in achieving the Nash equilibrium of this game. II. S YSTEM M ODEL We consider a system that is composed of two wireless networks: (i) a primary network, and (ii) an IoT network (will be referred to as secondary network in the rest of this paper). The primary network is constructed of PTs and primary receivers (will be referred to as either PRs or legitimate receivers interchangeably throughout the paper). The locations of the PTs are modeled by a homogeneous PPP ΦP ≡ {xi } ⊂ R2 with density λP . In order to enhance secrecy performance, each PT is surrounded by a circular guard zone of radius rg centered at the PT. We assume that each PT is able to detect the presence of any illegitimate receiver within its guard zone [43]. Various detecting devices can be used for this purpose including metal detectors and leaked local oscillator power detectors [15]. The benefits of using secrecy guard zones and their  7  Guard Zone Active PT ER  PR  Silent PT Information Transmission  Guard Zone  Wireless Charging  Fig. 1. The PT stops transmission (becomes silent) if any ER is detected within its guard zone.  effect on secrecy performance were discussed in [18]. As shown in Fig. 1, before the PT transmits data to its associated PR, it scans the guard zone for any illegitimate receivers. If the guard zone is clear, the PT transmits the confidential data, otherwise, the PT stops transmission (becomes silent). The secondary network is constructed of RF-powered nodes that harvest RF energy from the signals transmitted by the primary network. We refer to these nodes as energy receivers (will be referred to as either ERs or eavesdroppers interchangeably throughout the paper). The locations of the ERs are modeled by a homogeneous PPP ΦS ≡ {yi } ⊂ R2 with density λS . From the primary network’s perspective, the ERs are considered illegitimate receivers. Hence, applying the guard zone scheme, the PT stops transmission whenever at least one ER exists within its guard zone. We assume that ERs are the only potential eavesdroppers in the system. We focus our analysis on the typical PT whose intended PR is located at a given distance r1 from the PT. Drawing analogy from the Poisson bipolar model, we call this the typical link and its constituent PT and PR as typical PT and typical PR, respectively. Note that this terminology is indeed rigorous if we assume a Poisson bipolar model in which each PT has an associated PR at a fixed distance. However, since the same setup can be used for cellular networks by treating r1 as the conditional value of the serving distance, we leave the setup general. Overall, the assumption of fixed r1 enables us to gain several useful insights. In particular, this enables us to better understand how the rest of the system parameters (e.g. rg , λS , and PT’s transmission power) affect the interaction between the two networks. Due to the stationarity of PPP, the typical PR can be assumed to be located at the origin without loss of generality. The typical PT is located at x1 at distance r1 = kx1 k from the typical PR. In case the guard zone is clear of ERs, the typical PT transmits the confidential message to the typical PT. In that case, the received power at the typical PR is Pt h1 r1−α , where Pt is the PT transmission power, h1 ∼ exp(1) models  8  TABLE I TABLE OF N OTATIONS  Notation  Description  ΦP ; λP  PPP modeling the locations of the PTs; density of the PTs  ΦS ; λS  PPP modeling the locations of ERs; density of the ERs  EH  Amount of energy harvested by ER (in Joules)  Pcon  The probability of successful connection between a PT and its associated PR  Psec  The probability of secure communication  Penergy  The density of successfully powered ERs  h; g; w  Fading gains for the link between the typical PR and an arbitrary PT; the typical PT and an arbitrary ER; an ER and its nearest active PT  rg ; R e  Guard zone radius; distance between a PT and its nearest ER  1(Ξ)  An indicator function such that 1(Ξ) = 1 if the condition Ξ is satisfied and equals zero otherwise  Pt ; σP2 ; σS2  PT transmission power; noise power at the PR; noise power at the ER  ; α  Minimum required value for Psec ; path loss exponent (α > 2)  βP ; βS  Minimum required SINR value at the PR to ensure successful connection; threshold on SINR at ERs to ensure perfect secrecy  Rayleigh fading gain, and r1−α models power law path-loss with exponent α > 2. A. Primary Network Modeling According to Wyner’s encoding scheme [14], [44] and the approach used in [18], the PT defines the rate of codewords and the rate of confidential messages, Ct and Cs respectively. The difference, Ce = Ct − Cs , can be interpreted as the cost paid to secure the confidential messages. Let the mutual information between PT’s channel input and PR’s channel output be It and between PT’s channel input and ER’s channel output be Ie . Then, the objective is to ensure that the following two conditions are satisfied: (i) Ct ≤ It to ensure successful decoding at the PR, and (ii) Ce ≥ Ie to ensure perfect secrecy. Equivalently, we can define two SINR thresholds at the legitimate receiver and at the eavesdropper. To ensure successful decoding of the received confidential message at the PR, the condition SINRP ≥ βP should be satisfied, where βP = 2Ct − 1. Similarly, to ensure perfect secrecy, the SINR at any eavesdropper should satisfy the condition SINRS ≥ βS , where βS = 2Ct −Cs − 1. In order to mathematically define the instantaneous value of SINR at the legitimate receiver, we need to capture the effect of adopting the guard zone scheme on the interference level at the typical PR. According to the guard zone scheme, an interfering PT located at xi is active only if its guard zone is clear of ERs. Hence, denoting the random variable representing the distance between the typical PT and its nearest  9  After each PT scans its guard zone for ERs: Locations of retained (active) PTs are modeled by PHP  Before each PT scans its guard zone for ERs: Locations of PTs are modeled by PPP  PTs inside holes are removed (turn silent)  Arbitrary PT  ER  Active PT  Hole with radius 𝑟𝑔  Silent PT  Fig. 2. The locations of active PTs is modeled by a PHP where the locations of ERs represent the centers of the holes.  eavesdropper by Re , the probability of a typical PT being active is 2  Pactive = P(Re ≥ rg ) = e−λS πrg .  (1)  Next, we formally define the value of SINR at the typical PR as Pt h1 r1−α , −α + σ 2 P xi ∈ΦP \x1 δi Pt hi kxi k  SINRP = P  (2)  where hi ∼ exp(1) models Rayleigh fading gain for the link between the typical PR and the PT located at xi , and σP2 is the noise power at the PRs. The indicator function δi is used to capture only the active interfering nodes. Hence, δi = 1 if the PT located at xi is active and equals zero otherwise. The expected value of δi is E[δi ] = Pacitve . The locations of the active PTs can be modeled using Poisson hole process (PHP) Ψ [45], [46]. A PHP is constructed using two independent PPPs: (i) Baseline PPP Φ1 , and (ii) the PPP modeling the locations of the hole centers Φ2 . All points of Φ1 that are within distance D from any point in Φ2 are carved out. The remaining points of Φ1 represent the PHP. In our system, as shown in Fig. 2, we can use the same approach to model the locations of the active PTs. Any PT in ΦP that is within a distance rg from any ER in ΦS is inactive. Hence, the locations of the remaining (active) PTs are modeled by PHP. This can be formally defined as follows ( ) [ Ψ = x ∈ ΦP : x ∈ / B(y, rg ) , y∈ΦS  (3)  10  where B(y, rg ) is a ball of radius rg centered at y. Since the probability of retention of any point in ΦP is Pactive , the density of the resulting PHP Ψ is λP Pacitve . The primary network tries to jointly optimize two main performance metrics: (i) successful connection probability, and (ii) secure communication probability. While the former is related to the successful delivery of the data from the PT to the PR, the latter is related to the security of the transmitted data when the PT is active. Both metrics are formally defined below. Definition 1 (Probability of successful connection). In order to ensure successful connection between the typical PT and PR, two conditions need to be satisfied: (i) the typical PT is active, and (ii) the SINR at the typical PR is greater than the threshold βP . Therefore, the probability of successful connection is Pcon (rg , λS ) = P(Re ≥ rg , SINRP ≥ βP ).  (4)  When a PT is transmitting confidential data (active PT), the condition of SINRS ≤ βS needs to be satisfied at each ER in order to ensure perfect secrecy. Focusing on the signal transmitted by the typical PT, the SINR value at an ER located at yj is Pt g1,j kx1 − yj k−α , −α + σ 2 S xi ∈ΦP \x1 δi Pt gi,j kxi − yj k  SINRS (yj ) = P  (5)  where gi,j ∼ exp(1) models Rayleigh fading gain for the link between the PT located at xi and the ER located at yj , and σS2 is the noise power at the ERs. We now define the second performance metric for the primary network, the secure communication probability, next. Definition 2 (Secure communication probability). Given that a PT is active, the probability that its transmitted data is perfectly secured is   Psec (rg , λS ) = E 1    [  SINRS (yj ) ≤ βS Re ≥ rg  .  (6)  yj ∈ΦS  For a given value of λS , the primary network selects the value of rg = rg∗ that maximizes the value of Pcon while ensuring Psec ≥ , where 0 <  ≤ 1. The selection of rg∗ is mathematically formulated next. Definition 3 (Guard zone radius selection). The primary network selects the guard zone radius rg∗ that satisfies the following rg∗ = arg max Pcon (rg , λS ), rg ∈G(λS )  11  G(λS ) = {rg : Psec (rg , λS ) ≥ }.  (7)  Remark 1. By observing Eq. 7, we note that the value of rg∗ selected by the primary network is a function of the density of the secondary network λS . In addition, while Pactive is obviously a decreasing function of rg , the exact effect of rg on either Pcon or Psec is harder to describe than one expects. It might seem intuitive to expect that as rg increases the average distance between any PT and its nearest ER will increase, leading to an increase in the probability of secure communication. However, this is actually not always correct. The reason for that is the effect of rg on the density of the PHP Ψ, λP Pacitve , which is the density of active interferers. As the guard zone radius increases, the density of interferers decreases, which means that the interference level at any ER will decrease on average leading to a larger SINR value. To better understand the behavior of all the aforementioned performance metrics, we will derive some insightful expressions that will, with the help of the numerical results, provide a complete picture for the effect of the system parameters on these metrics. B. Secondary Network Modeling For an ambient RF energy harvesting device, the distance to the nearest source is critical and has major effect on the average harvested energy value, as shown in [29]. The energy harvested from the nearest source is frequently used in the literature to study the performance of ambient RF energy harvesting wireless devices. For instance, in [47], authors proposed the concept of harvesting zone where an ER is able to activate its power conversion circuit and harvest energy only if it is within a specific distance from the active PT. Consequently, we focus our analysis of the energy harvested from the nearest PT since it is the dominant source of ambient RF energy. Hence, the energy harvested by the ER located at yj is EH = ηT Pt kxj,1 − yj k−α wj ,  (8)  where η models the RF-DC efficiency of the ER, T is the duration of the transmission slot (assumed to be unity in the rest of the paper), xj,1 is the location of the nearest active PT to the ER located at yj , and wj ∼ exp(1) models Rayleigh fading gain for the link between the ER located at yj and its nearest active PT. Most of the relevant existing works use one of two performance metrics for the anlysis of energy harvesting wireless networks: (i) the expected value of the harvested energy E[EH ] as in [31], or (ii) the energy coverage probability P(EH ≥  12  Emin ) as in [30], where Emin is the minimum required value of EH at each ER. We will use a modified version of the latter metric. In order to maximize the density of ERs that harvest the minimum amount of energy Emin , the secondary network selects the network density λS = λ∗S that maximizes Penergy = λS P(EH ≥ Emin ).  (9)  The above metric represents the density of the successfully powered ERs. Remark 2. Note that the distance between an ER and its nearest active PT increases, on average, as the density of active PTs, λP Pacitve , decreases. Recalling, from Eq. 1, that Pactive is a decreasing function of both rg and λS , we can expect P(EH ≥ Emin ) to be a decreasing function of both rg and λS . This implies two things: (i) the performance metric defined in Eq. 9 has a local maximum at λS = λ∗S , and (ii) the value of the selected density λ∗S that maximizes Eq. 9 is a function of rg . From Remarks 1 and 2 we can get some initial observations on the coupling between the two networks. To better understand the relation between the parameters selected by each of the networks (rg for the primary network, and λS for the secondary network), we first need to derive an expression for each of Pcon and Psec for the primary network, and Penergy for the secondary network. III. P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS A. Primary Network 1) Probability of Successful Connection: As stated earlier, for a given value of λS , the primary network selects the optimal guard zone radius rg∗ that maximizes Pcon while ensuring that Psec ≥ . The process of rg selection was mathematically formulated in Definition 3. In the following Theorem we derive Pcon . Theorem 1 (Probability of successful connection). For a given value of λS , the probability of successful connection defined in Definition 1 is "  2  2π 2 λP Pactive βPα r12 σ2 Pcon (rg , λS ) = exp − λS πrg2 + βP P r1α + Pt α sin( α2 π)  Proof: See Appendix A.  #! .  (10)  13  Remark 3. According to Definition 1 of Pcon , the effect of rg on Pcon is two fold. On one hand, increasing the value of rg decreases the probability of the PT being active, which decreases Pcon . This effect appears in the first term in the exponent in Eq. 10. On the other hand, increasing the value of rg decreases the density of active interferers. Hence, the probability of having SINR higher than βP increases, which increases Pcon . This effect appears in the third term in the exponent in Eq. 10 implicitly in the value of Pactive . To better understand the effect of rg on Pcon , we derive the value of r̂g that maximizes Pcon in the following Theorem. 2  Theorem 2. Defining A1 = • •  2π 2 λP βPα r12 2 α sin( α π)  then:  If A1 ≤ 1, then Pcon is a decreasing function of rg , and r̂g = 0. q 1) If A1 > 1, then r̂g = ln(A . πλS Proof: See Appendix B.  Remark 4. From the above Theorem, we conclude that when A1 ≤ 1 the effect of rg on the density of active interferers is negligible. This is consistent with intuition. Observing the expression of A1 in Theorem 2, we note that it is an increasing function of λP , βP , and r1 . Hence, A1 ≤ 1 results from one or more of the following conditions: (i) λP is too small to take the effect of interference into consideration (the system is noise limited), (ii) r1 is too small such that the received signal power from the intended PT is hardly attenuated by the path-loss, and (iii) βP is a very relaxed threshold. These three consequences of having A1 ≤ 1 make the condition of Re ≥ rg in Definition 1 of Pcon dominate the other condition of SINRP ≥ βP . This eventually makes Pcon a decreasing function of rg , similar to P(Re ≥ rg ). In the following corollary, an upper bound on the value of Pcon (rg∗ , λS ) is provided. Corollary 1. Using the result in Theorem 2, the value of Pcon (rg∗ , λS ) is upper bounded as follows s Pcon (rg∗ , λS ) ≤ Pcon  where A1 is defined in Theorem 2.   ln (max{A1 , 1}) , λS  , πλS  (11)  14  Proof: The proof follows by observing that r̂g is the value of rg that maximizes Pcon without any constraints, while rg∗ is the value of rg that maximizes Pcon with the constraint of rg ∈ G(λS ), as explained in Definition 3. 2) Secure Communication Probability: The secure communication probability, formally defined in Definition 2, is derived in the following theorem. Theorem 3 (Secure communication probability). For a given value of rg and λS , the probability of secure communication is Z Psec (rg , λS ) = exp −2πλS rg   where LI2 (s) = exp −2πλP Pactive  R srg−α 0  !   2 σS βS ryα LI2 (βS ryα )ry dry , exp − Pt  2 sα . 2 dz  ∞  (12)  α(1+z)z α  Proof: See Appendix C. Remark 5. The intuitive observations provided in Remark 1 can now be verified using Theorem 3. For instance, the effect of rg on the distance between the PT and its nearest ER is captured in the integration limits in the above equation. Obviously, as we increase rg , the integration interval will decrease, which increases the value of Psec . On the other hand, the effect of rg on the density of active interferers at the ER is captured in the term LI2 (βS rxα ). As we mentioned earlier, increasing the value of rg decreases the interference levels at the ER, which increases the value of SINRS , which eventually reduces Psec . This is verified here by observing that LI2 (s) is an increasing function of rg . Due to the complexity of the expression provided in Theorem 3 for Psec , it is not straightforward to derive expressions for either G(λS ) or rg∗ . However, using the results for Pcon and Psec in Theorems 1 and 3, it is easy to compute rg∗ numerically. In order to better understand the behavior of the system, we will provide expressions for Pcon and Psec in both noise-limited as well as interference-limited regimes. In the discussion section, results for both regimes will be compared with the results of the system at different values of rg resulting in several meaningful insights. In the case of a noise limited regime, the interference terms in the expressions of both Pcon and Psec will be removed leading to the following corollary.  15  Corollary 2. In the noise limited regime, Pcon will be a decreasing function of rg , while Psec will be an increasing function of rg as follows    σP2 α 2 Noise limited , = exp − λS πrg + βP r1 Pcon Pt !  2 Z ∞ α σ β r S y S Noise limited Psec = exp −2πλS exp − ry dry Pt rg   α2  ! Pt 2 rgα βS σS2 2πλS Γ , . = exp − α σS2 βS α Pt And the value of rg∗ is presented by the following equation         1 ∗ α 2 αLn  2 (rg ) βS σS 2  Γ = min ,   α2 , Γ α  .  α Pt  2πλ  Pt S σ 2 βS  (13)  (14)  (15)  S  Proof: Eq. 13 and 14 follow directly by removing the interference terms from the results in Noise Theorem 1 and Theorem 3. Since Pcon  limited  Noise is a decreasing function of rg , and Psec  limited  is an increasing function of rg , the primary network picks the minimum value of rg that satisfies the condition Psec ≥ . Substituting for Psec using Eq. 14 in the inequality Psec ≥  leads to Eq. 15. In the case of an interference-limited regime, the noise terms in the expressions of both Pcon and Psec will be ignored leading to the following corollary. Corollary 3. In the interference limited regime, expressions for Pcon and Psec are provided below. #! " 2 2 α 2 2π λ P β r P active Int. limited P 1 , (16) Pcon = exp − λS πrg2 + α sin( α2 π) ! Z ∞ Int. limited (17) Psec = exp −2πλS LI2 (βS rxα )rx drx . rg  Proof: These results follow by substituting for σP2 = σS2 = 0 in Theorems 1 and 3. The main take-away from this subsection is that each of Pcon and Psec are functions of λS , which consequently implies that rg∗ is a function of λS . In the next subsection, we will show that optimal density λ∗S selected by the secondary network is also a function of rg . B. Secondary Network The objective of the secondary network is to maximize the density of successfully powered ERs Penergy , introduced in Eq. 9, which is derived in the following Theorem.  16  Theorem 4 (Density of successfully powered ERs). For a given value of rg and λS , the density of successfully powered ERs is   Z ∞ Emin rpα 2 2 2πλP Pactive rp exp −πλP Pactive (rp − rg ) − Penergy (rg , λS ) = λS drp . Pt η rg  (18)  Proof: See Appendix D. The above equation is a product of two terms: (i) the density of ERs λS , and (ii) the integral term, which is the expression derived for the probability P(EH ≥ Emin ). Consequently, we can claim the existence of an optimal value of λS that maximizes the density of successfully powered ERs Penergy . The reason behind that is the dependence of the density of active sources of RF energy (active PTs) on the density of ERs. This interesting trade-off arises due to the use of secrecy guard zones by the primary network. Obviously, the value of Penergy is a function of rg . Hence, the value of λ∗S , that maximizes Penergy , is also a function of rg . Unfortunately, λ∗S can not be computed from the above expression due to its complexity. Hence, to get more insights on the relation between λ∗S and rg , we derive a lower bound on Penergy in the following corollary. We use this lower bound to compute λ∗S as a function of rg . Corollary 4. The value of Penergy is lower bounded as follows   Z ∞ Emin rpα 2 2 drp . Penergy ≥ λS 2πλP Pactive rp exp −πλP (rp − rg ) − Pt η rg  (19)  The value of λS that maximizes the lower bound is λ∗S =  1 . πrg2  (20)  Proof: The lower bound follows by simply replacing Pactive inside the exponent in Eq. 18 with unity. The value of λ∗S follows by differentiating Eq. 19 with respect to λS . Remark 6. It can be noted from Eq. 20 that the value of λ∗S is a decreasing function of rg . This agrees with intuition since when the value of rg increases, the secondary network needs to decrease λS in order to maintain the density of active PTs, which are the sources of RF energy. The mutual coupling between rg∗ and λS as well as λ∗S and rg can be best modeled using tools from game theory. This will be the core of the next section.  17  IV. G AME T HEORETICAL M ODELING Building on all the insights and comments given in the previous section, we can model the interaction between the two networks using tools from game theory. For a given value of λS , the primary network selects rg∗ as presented in Definition 3, which can be rewritten as rg∗ = arg max Pcon (rg , λS )1(Psec (rg , λS ) ≥ ), rg ≥0  (21)  where 1(Ξ) = 1 if the condition Ξ is satisfied, and equals zero otherwise. On the other hand, for a given value of rg , the secondary network selects λ∗S as follows λ∗S = arg max Penergy (rg , λS ). λS ≥0  (22)  Observing Eq. 21 and 22, it is fairly straightforward to see that the system setup can be modeled as a non-cooperative static game with two players: (i) the primary network is player 1, and (ii) the secondary network is player 2. The utility function of player 1 is U1 (rg , λS ) = Pcon (rg , λS )1(Psec (rg , λS ) ≥ ),  (23)  while the utility function of player 2 is U2 (rg , λS ) = Penergy (rg , λS ).  (24)  For this game, the main objective is to find the values of rg∗ and λ∗S where each of the two networks has no tendency to change its tuning parameter. This is the definition of Nash equilibrium (NE). This can be mathematically modeled as rg∗ = arg max Pcon (rg , λ∗S )1(Psec (rg , λ∗S ) ≥ ), rg ≥0  λ∗S = arg max Penergy (rg∗ , λS ). λS ≥0  (25)  Unfortunately, due to the complexity of the expressions of Pcon in Theorem 1 and Psec in Theorem 3, it is challenging to provide a closed-form solution for NE. However, based on the comments given in Remark 2 and the result in Theorem 2, we provide a learning algorithm that assists both networks to find NE. The proposed learning algorithm is a simple best-response based algorithm [48]–[50]. In each iteration, each network updates its parameters according to the opponent’s network parameter in the previous iteration. This can be mathematically presented as follows:   (n−1) rg(n) = rg∗ λS ,  18   (n) λS = λ∗S rg(n−1) ,  (26)    (n) (n) (n−1) where rg and λS are the outputs of the algorithm in the n-th iteration, rg∗ λS is computed   (n−1) (n−1) (n−1) is computed using Eq. 22 for rg = rg . using Eq. 21 for λS = λS , and λ∗S rg Assuming that the secondary network has a maximum possible deployment density, λS ≤ λS,max , the algorithm is provided next.  Algorithm: Proposed algorithm for finding the NE network parameters rg∗ and λ∗S input: λP , λS,max , βP , βS , Pt , α, η, and Emin . output: rg∗ , λ∗S . (0)  (0)  Initialization: rg = 0 for all PTs in ΦP , λS = λS,max , n = 1 1: Repeat  3:    (n−1) (n) rg = rg∗ λS   (n−1) (n) ∗ λS = λS rg  4:  n=n+1  2:  (n)  (n−1)  5: Until rg = rg  (n)  (n−1)  & λS = λS  Note that we assume the ability of each network to estimate perfectly the opponent’s action in the previous iteration. Including the possibility of the estimation error and its effect on convergence is left as a promising direction of future work. In the next section, we will show using simulations the convergence of the proposed algorithm to the NE of the modeled game. V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION In this section, we will use both theoretical and simulation results (obtained from Monte-Carlo trials) to analyze the performance of both primary and secondary networks. The values of the system parameters used for the simulation setup are: λP = 1, η = 0.75, Emin = 10−4 Joules, α = 4, λS,max = 2, Pt = 1, βP = 3 dB, βS = 0 dB, r1 = 0.1, and  = 0.8. The values of the rest of the parameters will be defined either on the figures or in their captions. We also refer to the SNR values at the primary and secondary receivers as γP =  Pt 2 σS  and γS =  In addition, we define the ratio of λS to its maximum value by δS =  λS . λS,max  Pt 2 σS  respectively.  Our main goals  in this section are: (i) to validate the approximations used in our derivations, (ii) to get further  Probability of successful connection Pcon(rg,λS )  19  1 Theorem 1 Simulation  0.8 Increasing λS : [0.5, 0.65, 0.8, 0.95] 0.6  0.4  0.2  0 0  0.5  1 1.5 Guard zone radius rg  2  Fig. 3. The effect of λS on the behavior of Pcon against different values of rg . The SNR value at the legitimate receiver is γP = 7 dB.  insights on the behavior of both the networks, and (iii) to verify the comments provided in the Remarks throughout the paper. We first study the successful connection probability Pcon in Fig. 3. First note that the simulation parameters chosen above are such that we get A1 < 1, where A1 is defined in Theorem 2. The results in Fig. 3 show that increasing the density of ERs decreases Pcon . Although increasing λS decreases the density of active interferers (which should increase Pcon ), it also decreases the probability of the PT being active (which decreases Pcon ). Ultimately, for this setup, Pcon is a decreasing function of λS because of having A1 < 1. As explained in Remark 4, A1 < 1 leads to a noise limited system from the perspective of the successful connection probability, which means that the effect of λS on the density of active interferers is negligible compared to its effect on the probability of the PT being active. Further, note that because of having A1 < 1, Pcon is also a decreasing function of rg . As a result, rg∗ will be the minimum value of rg that ensures Psec ≥ . The value of Psec as a function of rg is plotted in Fig. 4 for different values of γS . Consistent with the intuition, increasing γS decreases Psec . We also note that at low values of rg the effect of γS is hardly noticeable, while at higher values of rg , the effect of γS becomes significant. Furthermore, we note that rg∗ is an increasing function of γS . To better understand the effect of γS on the behavior of Psec , we plot in Fig. 5 the value of Psec for both the noise limited and the interference limited regimes, which are derived in Corollary 2 and 3, respectively. These results lead to the following key insights:  Secure communication probability Psec(rg,λS)  Secure communication probability Psec(rg,λS)  20  1 Increasing γS : [1, 3, 5, 8] dB 0.8  0.6 r*g  0.4  Theorem 3 Simulation  0.2 0  0.5  1  1.5  2  2.5  3  1  Increasing γS : [1, 3, 5, 8] dB  0.8 0.6 0.4  Theorem 3 Interference limited Noise limited  0.2 0 0  0.5  1  1.5  2  2.5  3  Guard zone radius rg  Guard zone radius rg  NoiseLimited Int.Limited Fig. 5. Comparing Psec , Psec , and Psec  Fig. 4. The effect of γS on the behavior of Psec against  as functions of rg for different values of γS . The density  different values of rg . The density of ERs is λS = 0.6.  of ERs is λS = 0.6.  •  At lower values of rg , the density of active interferers is relatively high. Hence, we observe that from the secure communication probability perspective, the system is interference limited in this regime. Furthermore, increasing the SNR value γS has a negligible effect. This is a direct consequence of being in the interference-limited regime.  •  At higher values of rg , the density of active interferers decreases, which drives the system to the noise limited regime. As a result, the noise power has more noticeable effect on Psec . Equivalently, increasing value of γS decreases the value of Psec at higher values of rg .  •  Int. Obviously, Psec  Limited  Noise is a decreasing function of rg , while Psec  Limited  is an increasing  function of rg . However, the behavior of Psec is harder to describe. We note the existence Int. of a local minimum of Psec below which it behaves more like Psec Noise this local minimum, Psec behaves similar to Psec  Limited  Limited  , whereas above  .  In Fig. 6, we study the effect of λS on the behavior of Psec against different values of rg . We note that rg∗ increases with λS . We also note that, unlike γS , the effect of λS is more prominent at the lower values of rg . As explained above, the reason is that the system is interference limited at lower values of rg , where increasing λS decreases the density of interferers, which in Int. turn decreases Psec  Limited  Int. . We plot Psec , Psec  Limited  Noise , and Psec  Limited  in Fig. 7 to verify these  arguments. We also note that at higher values of rg , as we stated earlier, the system is noise Noise limited, where λS has less effect on Psec  Limited  Int. compared to Psec  Limited  . This can be verified  1  Increasing λS : [0.5, 0.65, 0.8, 0.95]  0.8  0.6 r*g  0.4  Theorem 3 Simulation  0.2 0  0.5  1  1.5  2  Guard zone radius rg  Secure communication probability Psec(rg,λS)  Secure communication probability Psec(rg,λS)  21  1 0.8  Increasing λS : [0.5, 0.8]  0.6 0.4 Theorem 3 Interference limited Noise limited  0.2 0 0  0.5  1  1.5  2  Guard zone radius rg  Fig. 6. The effect of λS on the behavior of Psec against  NoiseLimited Int.Limited Fig. 7. Comparing Psec , Psec , and Psec  different values of rg . The SNR value at ERs is γS = 4.8  as functions of rg for different values of λS . The SNR  dB.  value at ERs is γS = 4.8 dB.  from Fig. 6 by observing that the gaps between the Psec curves for different values of λS get tighter as rg increases. Now that we have better understanding of the behavior of Pcon and Psec , we study the energy harvesting performance of the secondary network. In Fig. 8, we illustrate the behavior of Penergy against λS for different values of rg . We note that at lower values of rg , the optimal value of λS is its maximum value λS,max . This is consistent with intuition that at lower values of rg , the density of active PTs (sources of RF energy) will hardly get affected by increasing λS . As rg increases, the impact of λS on the density of active PTs becomes noticeable. As shown in Fig. 8, this eventually leads to the existence of a local maximum of Penergy . We also note that as the value of rg increases, the optimal value λ∗S decreases. This is also consistent with our comments in Remark 6 that as rg increases, the secondary network needs to decrease its density in order to maintain the density of active PTs that provide the RF energy to the ERs. Taking a second look at Figs. 6 and 8, we can easily verify our earlier comments that the parameters selected by each of the networks (rg for the primary network and λS for the secondary network) affect the value of the optimal parameter of the other network. Using the procedure provided in Sec. IV, we simulate the interaction between both networks by simulating the relations between rg∗ and δS as well as δS∗ and rg , where δS =  λS λS,max  is the normalized value  of the density of ERs. In Fig. 9, we plot rg∗ (on the y-axis) for different values of δS (on the  Density of successfully powered ERs Penergy(rg,λS)  22  2  Theorem 4 Simulation  1.5 Increasing r g:  λ*S =2  [0.6, 0.8, 1, 1.2] 1  λ*S =0.4 λ*S =1.4  0.5 λ*S =0.85 0 0.5  1  1.5  2  Density of ERs λS  Fig. 8. The density of successfully powered ERs Penergy against λS for different values of rg .  Output of the proposed algorithm  2  r*g/rg  1.5  1 NE: r*g=1.48, δ*s=0.33 0.5  r*g using Eq. 21 λ*S  using Eq. 22  0 0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1  2 r(n) g δ(n) S  1.5  Algorithm converged to  1  r(n) =1.48,δ(n) =0.33 g S 0.5  0 2  δS/δ*S  4  6  8  10  12  14  Number of iterations n  Fig. 9. Plotting both rg∗ against δS and δS∗ against rg on  Fig. 10.  the same plot to compute the NE values.  equilibrium in a finite number of iterations.  The proposed algorithm converges to Nash  x-axis). On the same figure, we plot δS∗ (on the x-axis) for different values of rg (on the y-axis). The intersection of both curves represents the value of NE where each of the two networks has no intention to deviate as explained in Eq. 25. In Fig. 10, we evaluate the performance of the algorithm proposed in Sec. IV. The results demonstrate the convergence of the proposed algorithm to the NE found from Fig. 9 after less than 13 iterations.  23  VI. C ONCLUSIONS The emergence of IoT regime is characterized by the deployment of billions of devices some of which may be equipped with energy harvesting capability. Due to the ubiquity of RF signals, harvesting energy from the ambient RF signals is perhaps the most attractive option for such devices. This raises the possibility of some of these devices acting as eavesdroppers, which motivates the need to study secure wireless power transfer to energy receivers acting as potential eavesdroppers. While this problem received some attention in the literature, the existing works are limited to simple point-to-point or simple deterministic topologies, which are not sufficient to accurately model the massive scale of IoT. In this paper, we developed the first comprehensive stochastic geometry-based model to study the performance of an ambient RF energy harvesting network (secondary network) when the sources of RF signals are transmitters with secrecy guard zones (primary network). First, using tools from stochastic geometry, we derived the successful connection and secure communication probabilities of the primary network. Next, we derived the density of successfully powered nodes in the secondary network. Furthermore, we showed that the performance metrics of the two networks are coupled. In particular, we showed that the optimal guard zone radius (that maximizes the successful connection probability while maintaining the secure communication probability above a predefined threshold) is a function of the deployment density of the secondary network. In addition, we showed that the optimal deployment density of the secondary network (that maximizes the density of successfully powered nodes) is a function of the guard zone radius of the primary network. Hence, we used tools from game theory to model this interesting coupling between the two networks. In particular, we showed that such system can be modeled as a two player non-cooperative game. In addition, we proposed a best-response based algorithm and demonstrated with simulations its convergence to Nash equilibrium. This paper is one of the few concrete works that symbiotically merge tools from stochastic geometry and game theory. It can be extended in many directions. From the secrecy perspective, it will be useful to extend the proposed model to incorporate other secrecy enhancing techniques, such as beamforming and artificial noise technique. From the modeling perspective, it is worthwhile to investigate other meaningful morphologies, such as the one in which ERs are clustered around the RF sources. From game theory perspective, it will be interesting to consider the effect of imperfect estimation of the opponent’s action on the performance of the proposed algorithm.  24  A PPENDIX A P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1 Recalling the expression for SINRP given in Eq. 2, specifically the indicator function δi that indicates which interferer is active and which is silent, we concluded that the locations of active PTs can be modeled by PHP Ψ in Eq. 3. However, before using Ψ in our analysis, we need to make it clear that δi for different xi ∈ ΦP are correlated. This implicit correlation arises from the dependence of δi for all i on the PPP ΦS . However, capturing this correlation in our analysis will significantly reduce the tractability of the results. Hence, this correlation will be ignored in our analysis for the sake of tractability. The tightness of this approximation will be verified in the Numerical Results section. Now revisiting the expression of Pcon in Eq. 4, we note that the correlation between δ1 at the typical PT and δi values at each of the interferers in the expression of SINRP is the only source of correlation between the events (Re ≥ rg ) and (SINRP ≥ βP ). Hence, ignoring this correlation will lead to the following Pcon = P(Re ≥ rg )P(SINRP ≥ βP ).  (27)   The first term in the above expression represents Pactive = exp −πλS rg2 (please recall Eq. 1 where Pactive was derived). To derive the second term in the above expression, characterizing the statistics of the interference from a PHP modeled network at a randomly located reference point (the typical PR) is required. However, ignoring the correlation between {δi }, for the sake of tractability as explained above, is equivalent to approximating the PHP Ψ with a PPP ΨP of P equivalent density λ̃P = λP Pactive . Defining I = xi ∈ΨP hi kxi k−α , then !      σP2 h1 r1−α (a) = EI exp −βP I + r1α P(SINRP ≥ βP ) = P 2 ≥ βP σP P t I + Pt     σP2 α σP2 α α (b) = exp −βP r1 EI [exp (−βP Ir1 )] = exp −βP r1 LI (βP r1α ) , (28) Pt Pt where h1 ∼ exp(1) leads to step (a), and in step (b) we use the definition of Laplace transform of I which is LI (s) = E [exp (−sI)]. The Laplace transform of the interference in PPP is a well established result in the literature [23]. For completeness, the derivation of LI (s) is provided next. " LI (s) = EΨP ,{hi } exp −s  !# X xi ∈ΨP  hi kxi k−α  " = EΨP ,{hi }  # Y xi ∈ΨP  exp −shi kxi k   −α  25  " (c)  Y  = EΨP  xi ∈ΨP   Z (e) = exp −2π λ̃P 0  ∞  #     1 = exp −λ̃P 1− dx 1 + skxk−α x∈R2 !  2 2π 2 λ̃P s α csc 2π srx−α (f ) α , rx drx = exp − 1 + srx−α α  1 1 + skxi k−α  (d)  Z  (29)  where knowing that the set of fading gains hi are i.i.d with hi ∼ exp(1) leads to step (c), step (d) results from using the probability generating function (PGFL) of PPP [24], step (e) results from converting to polar co-ordinates, and step (f) follows after some mathematical manipulations. Substituting Eq. 29 in Eq. 28 and then in Eq. 27 leads to the final result in Theorem 1. A PPENDIX B P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2 Observing the expression of Pcon in Theorem 1, we note that it can be rewritten as a function of Pactive = exp(−λS πrg2 ) as follows   σP2 α Pcon = exp −βP r1 Pactive exp (−Pactive A1 ) , Pt  (30)  2  where A1 =  2π 2 λP βPα r12 . 2 α sin( α π)  To get more information about the behavior of Pcon against Pactive , we  compute the first derivative (with respect to Pactive ). Given that Pactive is a decreasing function of rg (recall Eq. 1), we conclude the following 1) If 1 − A1 Pactive ≥ 0, then Pcon is a decreasing function of rg , 2) If 1 − A1 Pactive ≤ 0, then Pcon is an increasing function of rg . Consequently, we can infer that, since 0 ≤ Pacitve ≤ 1, Pcon is a decreasing function of rg as long as A1 ≤ 1. In the case of A1 ≥ 1, the relation between Pcon and rg can be explained as q 1) ), and follows: (i) Pcon is an increasing function of rg as long as Pactive ≥ A11 (or rg ≤ ln(A λS π q 1) (ii) Pcon is a decreasing function of rg as long as Pactive ≤ A11 (or rg ≥ ln(A ). This concludes λS π the proof. A PPENDIX C P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3 From Definition 2 of Psec , we observe that we need to jointly analyze the values of SINRS (yj ) at all the locations yj ∈ ΦS . Despite the usual assumption throughout most of the stochastic geometry-based literature on secrecy analysis that these values are uncorrelated, this is actually not precise. The reason for that is the dependence of SINRS (yj ), by definition, on the PPP  26  ΦP for all yj ∈ ΦS . Some recent works started working on characterizing the correlation between intereference levels at different locations [51]. However, most of these works focus on characterizing the correlation between only two locations assuming the knowledge of the distance between them. Unfortunately, these results will not be useful for our analysis. Hence, aligning with the existing literature, we will ignore this correlation in our analysis with the knowledge that this will provide an approximation. Furthermore, the accuracy of this approximation is expected to get worse as the value of λS increases. This is due to the fact that the distances between ERs decrease as λS increases, which was shown in [51] to increase the correlation. For notational simplicity, and without any loss of generality due to the stationarity of PPP, we will assume that the typical PT is placed at the origin, i.e. x1 = o, in the rest of this proof. All the analysis provided in this section is conditioned on the event Re ≥ rg . Following the same approach as in Appendix A of approximating the PHP Ψ with a PPP ΨP , and defining P I2 (yj ) = xi ∈ΨP \x1 gi,j kxi − yj k−α , Psec can be derived as follows     ! −α Y [ g1,j kyj k−α g ky k  (g) = EΦS ,I2 ,{g1,j }  1 1,j j σ2 ≤ βS  Psec = EΦS ,I2 ,{g1,j } 1  2 ≤ βS σS I2 (yj ) + PSt yj ∈ΦS yj ∈ΦS I2 (yj ) + Pt       2 σS β I (y ) + Y S 2 j Pt (h) 1 − exp −  = EΦS ,I2  −α ky jk yj ∈ΦS  2      σS    β Y S Pt (i) 1 − exp −  E exp − βS I2 (yj )  , = EΦS  (31) −α −α ky ky jk jk y ∈Φ j  S  where step (g) (and step (i)) follow from assuming that the values of SINRS (yj ) (and I2 (yj )) are uncorrelated, as we discussed earlier in this Appendix. Step (h) is due to assuming the set of fading gains {g1,j } to be i.i.d with g1,j ∼ exp(1). Defining the Laplace transform of I2 (yj ) by LI2 (yj ) (s) = E[exp(−sI2 (yj ))], we note that there is only one difference in the derivation of LI2 (yj ) (s) compared to that of LI (s) in Eq. 29. The difference is in the reference point from where we are observing the interference. In Appendix A, the reference point was the PR, which does not have a minimum distance from any active interfering PT. In the current derivation, the reference point is an ER, which has a minimum distance of rg from any active interfering PT. Hence, the derivation of LI2 (yj ) (s) will be exactly the same as in Eq. 29 until step (e), where the minimum distance effect will appear in the lower limit of the integral as follows ! Z ∞ srx−α r drx . LI2 (yj ) (s) = exp −2π λ̃P −α x rg 1 + srx  (32)  27  Note that the above expression is not a function of yj , so we drop it from the notation of Laplace transform. The final expression for LI2 (s) as provided in Theorem 3 follows after simple mathematical manipulations. Substituting Eq. 32 in Eq. 31, we get       2 Y  σS Psec = EΦS  1 − exp −βS kyj kα LI2 (βS kyj kα )  Pt y ∈Φ j  (k)  S  = exp −2πλS  !   2  σS exp −βS kykα LI2 (βS kykα ) dy , P 2 t y∈R ∩B(o,rg )  Z  (33)  where step (k) results from applying PGFL of PPP, and the integration is over y ∈ R2 ∩ B(o, rg ) because the analysis in this section is conditioned on the event Re ≥ rg , which means that the typical PT is active. Since we assumed that the typical PT is placed at the origin in this derivation, the ball B(o, rg ) is clear of ERs. Converting from Cartesian to polar co-ordinates leads to the final result in Theorem 3. A PPENDIX D P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4 The density of successfully powered ERs can be derived as follows     (l) Emin Rpα −α , Penergy = λS P ηPt Rp w ≥ Emin = ERp exp − ηPt  (34)  where Rp is the distance between the ER and its nearest active PT, and step (l) is due to w ∼ exp(1). The distance Rp represents the contact distance of a PHP observed from a hole center. Unfortunately, the exact distribution of this distance is unknown. However, the approach of approximating the PHP Ψ with a PPP ΨP is known to provide fairly tight approximation of the contact distance distribution of PHP [52]. Given that the nearest active PT to the ER is at a distance of at least rg , the distribution of Rp is   2 fRp (rp ) = 2π λ̃P exp −π λ̃P (rp − rg ) ,  rp ≥ rg .  (35)  Using this distribution to compute the expectation in Eq. 34 leads to the final result in Theorem 4. R EFERENCES [1] M. A. Kishk and H. S. Dhillon, “Modeling and analysis of ambient RF energy harvesting in networks with secrecy guard zones,” in Proc., IEEE Wireless Commun. and Networking Conf. (WCNC), March 2017. [2] H. S. Dhillon, H. Huang, and H. Viswanathan, “Wide-area wireless communication challenges for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 168–174, Feb. 2017.  28  [3] H. S. Dhillon, H. C. Huang, H. Viswanathan, and R. A. Valenzuela, “Power-efficient system design for cellular-based machine-to-machine communications,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 5740 – 5753, Nov. 2013. [4] ——, “Fundamentals of throughput maximization with random arrivals for M2M communications,” vol. 62, no. 11, pp. 4094 – 4109, Nov. 2014. [5] V. Jelicic, M. Magno, D. Brunelli, V. Bilas, and L. Benini, “Analytic comparison of wake-up receivers for WSNs and benefits over the wake-on radio scheme,” in Proc., ACM workshop on Perform. Monit. and Measurement of Heterog. Wireless and Wired Netw., Oct. 2012, pp. 99–106. [6] P. Kamalinejad, C. Mahapatra, Z. Sheng, S. Mirabbasi, V. C. Leung, and Y. L. Guan, “Wireless energy harvesting for the internet of things,” IEEE Commun. Magazine, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 102–108, 2015. [7] H. Xing, L. Liu, and R. Zhang, “Secrecy wireless information and power transfer in fading wiretap channel,” IEEE Trans. on Veh. Technology, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 180–190, Jan. 2016. [8] Q. Li, W. K. Ma, and A. M. C. So, “Robust artificial noise-aided transmit optimization for achieving secrecy and energy harvesting,” in Proc., IEEE Intl. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech, and Sig. Proc. (ICASSP), May 2014, pp. 1596–1600. [9] M. Zhang, Y. Liu, and R. Zhang, “Artificial noise aided secrecy information and power transfer in OFDMA systems,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 3085–3096, 2016. [10] M. R. Khandaker and K.-K. Wong, “Robust secrecy beamforming with energy-harvesting eavesdroppers,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Letters, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 10–13, 2015. [11] D. W. K. Ng, E. S. Lo, and R. Schober, “Robust beamforming for secure communication in systems with wireless information and power transfer,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 4599–4615, 2014. [12] J. Xu, L. Liu, and R. Zhang, “Multiuser miso beamforming for simultaneous wireless information and power transfer,” IEEE Trans. on Signal Processing, vol. 62, no. 18, pp. 4798–4810, 2014. [13] K. Banawan and S. Ulukus, “Mimo wiretap channel under receiver-side power constraints with applications to wireless power transfer and cognitive radio,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 3872–3885, 2016. [14] A. D. Wyner, “The wire-tap channel,” The Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1355–1387, Oct. 1975. [15] S. H. Chae, W. Choi, J. H. Lee, and T. Q. S. Quek, “Enhanced secrecy in stochastic wireless networks: Artificial noise with secrecy protected zone,” IEEE Trans. on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 1617–1628, Oct. 2014. [16] W. Liu, Z. Ding, T. Ratnarajah, and J. Xue, “On ergodic secrecy capacity of random wireless networks with protected zones,” IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Technology, vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 6146–6158, Aug. 2016. [17] X. Zhou and M. R. McKay, “Secure transmission with artificial noise over fading channels: Achievable rate and optimal power allocation,” IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Technology, vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 3831–3842, 2010. [18] X. Zhou, R. K. Ganti, J. G. Andrews, and A. Hjorungnes, “On the throughput cost of physical layer security in decentralized wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 2764–2775, Aug. 2011. [19] P. C. Pinto, J. Barros, and M. Z. Win, “Secure communication in stochastic wireless networks–Part I: Connectivity,” IEEE Trans. on Info. Forensics and Security, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 125–138, Feb. 2012. [20] M. A. Kishk and H. S. Dhillon, “Stochastic geometry-based comparison of secrecy enhancement techniques in D2D networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Letters, to appear. [21] H. ElSawy, E. Hossain, and M. Haenggi, “Stochastic geometry for modeling, analysis, and design of multi-tier and cognitive cellular wireless networks: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 996 – 1019, 2013. [22] H. ElSawy, A. Sultan-Salem, M. S. Alouini, and M. Z. Win, “Modeling and analysis of cellular networks using stochastic geometry: A tutorial,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 167–203, Firstquarter 2017.  29  [23] J. G. Andrews, A. K. Gupta, and H. S. Dhillon, “A primer on cellular network analysis using stochastic geometry,” available online: arxiv.org/abs/1604.03183. [24] M. Haenggi, Stochastic geometry for wireless networks.  Cambridge University Press, 2012.  [25] G. Geraci, H. S. Dhillon, J. G. Andrews, J. Yuan, and I. B. Collings, “Physical layer security in downlink multi-antenna cellular networks,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 2006–2021, 2014. [26] G. Chen, J. P. Coon, and M. Di Renzo, “Secrecy outage analysis for downlink transmissions in the presence of randomly located eavesdroppers,” 2017, available online: arxiv.org/abs/1701.00982. [27] H. S. Dhillon, Y. Li, P. Nuggehalli, Z. Pi, and J. G. Andrews, “Fundamentals of heterogeneous cellular networks with energy harvesting,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 2782 – 2797, May 2014. [28] M. Di Renzo and W. Lu, “System-level analysis and optimization of cellular networks with simultaneous wireless information and power transfer: Stochastic geometry modeling,” IEEE Trans. on Veh. Technology, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 2251–2275, March 2017. [29] M. A. Kishk and H. S. Dhillon, “Downlink performance analysis of cellular-based IoT network with energy harvesting receivers,” in IEEE GLOBECOM, Dec. 2016. [30] A. H. Sakr and E. Hossain, “Analysis of k-tier uplink cellular networks with ambient RF energy harvesting,” IEEE Journal on Sel. Areas in Commun., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 2226–2238, 2015. [31] I. Flint, X. Lu, N. Privault, D. Niyato, and P. Wang, “Performance analysis of ambient RF energy harvesting with repulsive point process modeling,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 5402–5416, 2015. [32] Y. Liu, L. Wang, S. A. R. Zaidi, M. Elkashlan, and T. Q. Duong, “Secure D2D communication in large-scale cognitive cellular networks: A wireless power transfer model,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 329–342, Jan. 2016. [33] A. Houjeij, W. Saad, and T. Basar, “A game-theoretic view on the physical layer security of cognitive radio networks,” in Proc., IEEE Intl. Conf. on Commun. (ICC), June 2013, pp. 2095–2099. [34] W. Saad, X. Zhou, B. Maham, T. Basar, and H. V. Poor, “Tree formation with physical layer security considerations in wireless multi-hop networks,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 3980–3991, Nov. 2012. [35] S. Bayat, R. H. Y. Louie, Z. Han, B. Vucetic, and Y. Li, “Physical-layer security in distributed wireless networks using matching theory,” IEEE Trans. on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 717–732, May 2013. [36] W. Saad, Z. Han, T. Başar, M. Debbah, and A. Hjørungnes, “Distributed coalition formation games for secure wireless transmission,” Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 231–245, 2011. [37] N. Reyhanian, B. Maham, V. Shah-Mansouri, W. Tusher, and C. Yuen, “Game-theoretic approaches for energy cooperation in energy harvesting small cell networks,” 2017, IEEE Trans. on Veh. Technology, to appear. [38] H. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Jiang, Y. Ma, and B. Vucetic, “Distributed power splitting for SWIPT in relay interference channels using game theory,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 410–420, Jan. 2015. [39] D. Niyato, E. Hossain, M. M. Rashid, and V. K. Bhargava, “Wireless sensor networks with energy harvesting technologies: a game-theoretic approach to optimal energy management,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 90–96, Aug. 2007. [40] M. Liu and Y. Liu, “Power allocation for secure SWIPT systems with wireless-powered cooperative jamming,” IEEE Commun. Letters, to appear. [41] L. Liu, R. Zhang, and K. C. Chua, “Secrecy wireless information and power transfer with MISO beamforming,” IEEE Trans. on Signal Processing, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1850–1863, April 2014. [42] Y. Ren, T. Lv, H. Gao, and Y. Li, “Secure wireless information and power transfer in heterogeneous networks,” 2017, IEEE Access, to appear. [43] Y. Zhou, Z. Z. Xiang, Y. Zhu, and Z. Xue, “Application of full-duplex wireless technique into secure MIMO communication: Achievable secrecy rate based optimization,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters, vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 804–808, July 2014.  30  [44] A. Thangaraj, S. Dihidar, A. R. Calderbank, S. W. McLaughlin, and J. M. Merolla, “Applications of LDPC codes to the wiretap channel,” IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 2933–2945, Aug. 2007. [45] Z. Yazdanshenasan, H. S. Dhillon, M. Afshang, and P. H. J. Chong, “Poisson hole process: Theory and applications to wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 7531–7546, Nov. 2016. [46] C. h. Lee and M. Haenggi, “Interference and outage in Poisson cognitive networks,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 1392–1401, April 2012. [47] S. Lee, R. Zhang, and K. Huang, “Opportunistic wireless energy harvesting in cognitive radio networks,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 4788–4799, Sept. 2013. [48] W. H. Sandholm, Population games and evolutionary dynamics.  MIT press, 2010.  [49] A. Cortes and S. Martinez, “Self-triggered best-response dynamics for continuous games,” IEEE Trans. on Automatic Control, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1115–1120, April 2015. [50] E. Barron, R. Goebel, and R. Jensen, “Best response dynamics for continuous games,” Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 138, no. 3, pp. 1069–1083, 2010. [51] S. Krishnan and H. S. Dhillon, “Spatio-temporal interference correlation and joint coverage in cellular networks,” available online: arxiv.org/abs/1606.05332. [52] M. A. Kishk and H. S. Dhillon, “Tight lower bounds on the contact distance distribution in Poisson hole process,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Letters, to appear.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 7. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
