Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 9
ArXiv ID: hf_4168

Abstract:
A model of reward-modulated motor learning with parallel cortical and basal ganglia pathways Ryan Pyle1 ,∗ and Robert Rosenbaum1,2,∗ 1: Department of Applied and Computational Mathematics and Statistics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA. 2:Interdisciplinary Center for Network Science and Applications, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA.  arXiv:1803.03304v1 [q-bio.NC] 8 Mar 2018  * rpyle1@nd.edu, Robert.Rosenbaum@nd.edu  Acknowledgments This work was supported by National Science Foundation grants DMS-1517828, DMS-1654268, and DBI-1707400. The authors thank Jonathan Rubin, Robert Turner, and Robert Mendez for helpful discussions.  Abstract Many recent studies of the motor system are divided into two distinct approaches: Those that investigate how motor responses are encoded in cortical neurons’ firing rate dynamics and those that study the learning rules by which mammals and songbirds develop reliable motor responses. Computationally, the first approach is encapsulated by reservoir computing models, which can learn intricate motor tasks and produce internal dynamics strikingly similar to those of motor cortical neurons, but rely on biologically unrealistic learning rules. The more realistic learning rules developed by the second approach are often derived for simplified, discrete tasks in contrast to the intricate dynamics that characterize real motor responses. We bridge these two approaches to develop a biologically realistic learning rule for reservoir computing. Our algorithm learns simulated motor tasks on which previous reservoir computing algorithms fail, and reproduces experimental findings including those that relate motor learning to Parkinson’s disease and its treatment.  1  Introduction Even simple motor tasks require the generation intricate, dynamical patterns of muscle activations. Understanding how the brain generates this motor output is a central problem in neuroscience that can inform the development of brain-machine interfaces, treatments for motor diseases, and control algorithms for robotics. Recent work is largely divided into addressing two distinct questions: How are motor responses encoded and how are they learned? From the coding perspective, it has been shown that the firing rates of cortical neurons exhibit dynamics that do not always code for specific stimulus or movement parameters [15]. A prevailing theory poses that these firing rate patterns are part of an underlying dynamical system that serves as a high-dimensional “reservoir” of dynamics from which motor output signals are distilled [42, 44]. This notion is formalized by reservoir computing models, in which a chaotic, recurrent neural network serves as a reservoir of firing rate dynamics and synaptic readout weights are trained to produce target time series [44, 30, 26, 45, 29, 47]. Reservoir computing models can learn to generate intricate dynamical responses and they produce firing rate patterns that are similar to those of cortical neurons [48, 31, 28, 21, 16, 7]. However, most reservoir computing models rely on biologically unrealistic, fully supervised learning rules. Specifically, they must learn from a teacher signal that can already generate the target output. Many motor tasks are not learned in environments in which such a teacher signal is available. Instead, motor learning is at least partly realized through reward-modulated, reinforcement learning [25]. Another body of studies is committed to understanding how reinforcement learning is implemented in the motor systems of mammals and songbirds [25, 12, 37, 27, 5, 18]. The basal ganglia and their homolog in songbirds play a critical role in reinforcement learning of motor tasks through dopamine-modulated plasticity at corticostriatal synapses. This notion inspired the development of a reward-modulated learning rule for reservoir computing [22]. However, we found that this learning rule fails to converge on many simulated motor tasks. We propose that the shortcomings of previous reservoir computing models can be resolved by a closer inspection of the literature on biological motor learning. A large body of evidence across multiple species supports a theory of learning in which dopamine-modulated plasticity in the basal ganglia or its homologs is responsible for early learning and this pathway gradually trains a parallel cortical pathway that takes over as tasks become well learned or “automatized” [8, 13, 11, 39, 4, 36, 2, 6, 50, 17, 38]. This model of motor learning has only been tested computationally in discrete choice tasks [4] that do not capture the intricate, dynamical nature of motor responses. Inspired by this theory of automaticity from parallel neural pathways, we derived a new architecture and learning rule for reservoir computing. In this model, a reward-modulated pathway is responsible for early learning and serves as a teacher signal for a parallel pathway that takes over the production of motor output as the task becomes well-learned. This algorithm is applicable to a large class of motor learning tasks to which fully supervised learning models cannot be applied and it outperforms previous reward-modulated models. We additionally show that our model reproduces experimental and clinical findings that relate Parkinson’s disease and its treatment to motor learning [4, 6, 50]. Hence, incorporating contemporary biological theories of motor learning improves the effectiveness and clinical relevance of reservoir computing models. In summary, we bridge previous work on motor coding and motor learning to derive a new framework for reservoir computing that is more computationally effective and biologically realistic 2  than previous models.  Results We first review two previous learning rules for reservoir computing, then introduce a new, biologically inspired learning rule that combines their strengths.  FORCE learning One of the most powerful and widely used reservoir computing algorithms is first-order reduced and controlled error or FORCE [45], which is able to rapidly and accurately learn to generate complex, dynamical outputs. The architecture for FORCE is schematized in Fig. 1A. The reservoir is composed of a recurrently connected population of “rate-model” neurons. The output of the reservoir is trained to produce a target time series by modifying a set of readout weights, and the output affects the reservoir through a feedback loop. The reservoir dynamics are defined by τ  dr = −r + tanh(Jr + Qz) +  dt  (1)  Here, r(t) is a vector representing the activity of units within the reservoir, τ is a time constant,  is a small noise term, z = Wr is the reservoir output, J is the recurrent connectivity matrix, Q the feedback weights and W the readout weights. A feedforward input term is also commonly included [45], but we do not use one here. When the spectral radius of J is sufficiently large, the intrinsic dynamics of r(t) become rich and chaotic [43]. The goal of FORCE is to utilize these rich dynamics by modifying readout weights, W , in such a way that the output, z(t), matches a desired target function, f (t). The most commonly used learning algorithm for FORCE, recursive least squares (RLS), is defined by dW = −erT P dt  (2)  e(t) = z(t) − f(t)  (3)  τw where  is the error vector and τw is the learning time scale. The matrix, P , is a running estimate of the inverse of the correlation matrix of rates, r (see Materials and Methods). FORCE excels at generating a target time series by harvesting reservoir dynamics, but is incomplete as a model of motor learning. As a fully supervised learning rule, FORCE must have access to the correct output to determine its error (see the presence of f in Eq. (3)). Since the correct output must already be generated to compute the error, FORCE can only learn target functions that are already known explicitly and can be generated. Many motor learning tasks require the generation of an unknown target using a lower-dimensional error signal [25]. We consider examples of such tasks below. A potential solution for these issues is provided by appealing to biological motor learning, which is controlled at least in part by dopamine-modulated reinforcement learning in the basal ganglia [50, 5, 25]. 3  A  FORCE recurrent net  RMHL B recurrent net output  Fully supervised plasticity Reward-modulated plasticity Unsupervised plasticity  C  SUPERTREX recurrent net  output  exploratory noise  output  exploratory noise  Figure 1: Network diagrams for three reservoir computing algorithms. A) In FORCE learning, readout weights are trained to match a target using a fully supervised error signal. Output is fed back to the reservoir. B) RMHL is similar to FORCE, but learning is driven by a rewardmodulated plasticity and exploratory noise. C) SUPERTREX combines elements of FORCE and RMHL. The exploratory pathway (green) is driven by noise, and acts similarly to RMHL. The mastery pathway (purple) is analogous to FORCE, but uses the output of the exploratory pathway in place of the fully supervised signal used by FORCE. The sum of both pathways provides the total output.  Reward modulated Hebbian learning Reward-modulated Hebbian learning (RMHL) [23] is a reinforcement learning rule for reservoir computing in which reward is indicated by a one-dimensional error signal using a plasticity rule inspired by dopamine-dependent Hebbian plasticity observed in the basal ganglia. RMHL uses the same reservoir dynamics (Eq. (1)) and the same basic architecture as FORCE (Fig. 1B), but the learning rule is fundamentally different. The original RMHL algorithm [23] used a binary error signal, despite potentially poorer performance than other options, to demonstrate that the algorithm could learn with minimal information. We implement a modified version of RMHL with an error signal, e(z(t), t), that can be any timedependent, non-negative function of the output, z, which the algorithm will seek to minimize. Equivalently, e is proportional to the negative of reward. In contrast to the fully supervised error signal, e, used in FORCE learning, e is scalar (onedimensional) even when z is a higher-dimensional vector. Moreover, e can quantify any notion of “error” or “cost” associated with the output, z, and does not assume that a target output is known or even that there exists a unique target output. This allows RMHL to be applied to a large class of learning tasks to which FORCE cannot be applied, as we demonstrate below. To decrease error, RMHL makes random perturbations to the reservoir output as a form of exploration. Specifically, the output, z, is given by z = W r + Ψ(e)η where η(t) is exploratory noise and Ψ is a sublinear function that serves to damp runaway oscillations during learning. The learning rule is then given by dW = Φ(ê)ẑrT dt where x̂ denotes a high-pass filtered version of x, which represents recent changes in x. Here, Φ is a sublinear function that controls when to update the weights. We assume that Ψ is an increasing τw  4  function and Φ an odd function with Ψ(0) = Φ(0) = 0. This assures that exploration and learning are effectively quenched when the error is consistently near zero. Intuitively, the learning rule can be understood as follows: If a random perturbation from η has recently decreased e, this perturbation is then incorporated into W .  SUPERTREX: A new learning algorithm for reservoir computing Unfortunately, on many tasks, the weights trained by RMHL fail to converge to an accurate solution, as we show below. RMHL models dopamine-modulated learning in the basal ganglia, but does not account for experimental evidence for the eventual independence of well-learned tasks on the activity of the basal ganglia: It has been proposed that the basal ganglia are responsible for early learning, but train a parallel cortical pathway that gradually takes over the generation of output as tasks become well-learned and “automatized” [39, 4, 5, 50, 20]. This could explain why some neurons in the basal ganglia are active during early learning and exploration, but inactive as the task becomes well-learned [14, 34, 39, 40, 4, 49, 5, 20]. It could also explain why patients or animals with basal ganglia lesions can perform previously learned tasks well, but suffer impairments at learning new tasks [35, 36, 50]. This idea is also consistent with many findings suggesting that the basal ganglia homolog in song birds is responsible for early learning and exploration of novel song production, but not for the vocalization of well-learned songs [10, 27, 3, 2, 17]. The FORCE and RMHL algorithms could be seen as analogous to the individual pathways in this theory of motor learning: RMHL learns through reward-modulated exploration analogous to the basal ganglia, while FORCE models cortical pathways that learn from the output produced by the basal ganglia pathway. Inspired by this analogy, we next introduce a new algorithm, Supervised Learning Trained by Rewarded Exploration (SUPERTREX), that combines the strengths RMHL and FORCE to overcome the limitations of each. The architecture of SUPERTREX (Fig. 1C) is different than the architectures of FORCE and RMHL: There are now two distinct sets of weights from the reservoir to the outputs, and each is trained with a separate learning rule. The “exploratory pathway” learns via an RMHL-like, reinforcement learning algorithm, requiring only a one-dimensional metric of performance rather than an explicit error signal. The “mastery pathway” learns through a FORCE-like algorithm. The key idea is that the activity of the exploratory pathway can act as a target for the mastery pathway to learn, replacing the supervised error signal required by FORCE. Hence, SUPERTREX does not need the explicit supervisory error signal that FORCE does. Importantly, the convergence issues we have found with RMHL are not problematic for SUPERTREX because weights in the RMHL-like exploratory pathway do not need to converge to a correct solution because weights in the mastery pathway converge instead. SUPERTREX uses the same reservoir dynamics (Eqs. (1)), but the outputs are determined by z1 = W1 r + Ψ(e)η z2 = W2 r z = z1 + z2 . Here, z1 is the output from the exploratory pathway, z2 from the mastery pathway, and z is the  5  total output. The learning rules are defined by dW1 = Φ(ê)ẑ rT dt dW2 τw2 = (z − z2 )rT P. dt  τw1  Intuitively, the first learning rule works like RMHL to quickly minimize the total error, as it uses the error of the total output, z. However, it only controls the z1 component of z, resulting in z1 + z2 ≈ f. Error between the z2 component and f is therefore just z1 , which replaces the error in the second learning rule since z − z2 = z1 . As z2 approaches f, learning in the exploratory pathway causes z1 to approach 0 in order to keep the total z correct. Note that the learning rule for W1 is local in the sense that it only involves values of the presynaptic and postsynaptic variables in addition to the error signal, e. The learning rule for W2 would be local if it were not for the computation of P , which is biologically unrealistic. However, P can be replaced by the identity matrix to make the learning rules for SUPERTREX purely local. This slows down learning, but is otherwise not detrimental (see [24] and the disrupted learning example below). In summary, RMHL-like learning in the exploratory pathway uses a one-dimensional error signal, e, to track the target while FORCE-like learning in the mastery pathway uses the exploratory pathway as a teacher signal until it learns the output and takes over. This models current theories of biological motor learning in which early learning is dominated by dopamine-dependent plasticity in the basal ganglia, which gradually trains parallel cortical pathways as the task becomes welllearned. We next test SUPERTREX on three increasingly difficult motor tasks, comparing the performance of SUPERTREX to that of FORCE and RMHL.  Task 1: Generating a known target output We first consider a task in which the goal is to draw a parameterized curve of a butterfly by directly controlling the coordinates of a pen (Fig. 2A). Specifically, the target is given by f (t) = (x(t), x(t)) where x(t) and y(t) parameterize the x- and y-coordinates of a pen that successfully traces out the butterfly. The reservoir output, z(t), controls the coordinates of the pen, so the goal is to train the weights so that z(t) closely match the target, f (t). The learning algorithms are first allowed to learn for ten repetitions of the task. As a diagnostic, weights are then frozen for a further five repetitions. This provides a way to check the accuracy of the final solution, demonstrating whether or not the algorithm has converged to an accurate solution. During this testing phase, feedback to the system comes from the true solution [46]. Specifically, Qz is replaced by Qf in Eq. (1). This avoids a drift in the phase of the solution that otherwise occurs when weights are frozen (see Discussion). Additionally, for SUPERTREX, the exploratory pathway was shut off during these last five repetitions (z1 set to zero) to test how well the mastery pathway converged. This simple task is well suited to FORCE, which requires a known target, f , in order to compute the fully supervised error signal, e=z−f 6  Learning  x=z1  Distance from Target  B y=z2  Task 1  A  Testing  FORCE RMHL SUPERTREX  0.1 0.01  0.001 1s  x(t)  Cii  ||W||  FORCE  Ci  Output  y(t)  Target  Dii  y(t) ||W||  RMHL  x(t)  Di  y(t)  x(t)  Eii  ||W||  SUPERTREX  Ei  Mastery  Exploratory  Figure 2: Performance of three learning algorithms on Task 1. A) Task 1 is to draw a butterfly curve by directly controlling the x- and y-coordinates of a pen. Specifically, the outputs of the reservoir is z(t) = (x(t), y(t)) where x(t) and y(t) are the Cartesian coordinates of the pen. B) Euclidean distance of pen from target for FORCE (orange), RMHL (green), and SUPERTREX (purple). Learning was halted by freezing weights and exploration after ten periods, so the remaining five periods represent a testing phase. Ci) Target butterfly curve (red) versus the butterfly drawn by FORCE (blue) during the testing phase. Cii) Target (red) and actual (blue) outputs, 1 x(t) and y(t), and the norm of the weight matrix, k(W W T ) 2 k2 , produced by FORCE. Di-ii) Same as C, but for RMHL. Di-ii) Same as C, but for SUPERTREX and the norm of each matrix, W1 (exploratory; green) and W2 (mastery; purple) are plotted separately. Vertical gray bar indicates the time at which weights were frozen.  7  FORCE was able to quickly find the correct solution to the task and maintained the correct result even after weights were frozen (Fig. 2B,C). Another measure of convergence is the activity of weight matrix, W , which quickly converged then stabilized (Fig. 2Cii, bottom). Error also remained low after learning was disabled (Fig. 2B). In summary, as expected, FORCE learned this task quickly and accurately. To apply RMHL and SUPERTREX to this task, we set e = kz − f k2 where k · k is the Euclidean norm, i.e. the distance of the pen from its target. This error contains strictly less information than the fully supervised error used by FORCE. RMHL performed well during learning, but the performance after weights were frozen (Fig. 2B,D) along with the cyclical changes in kW k during learning (Fig. 2Dii) demonstrate that the RMHL algorithm never actually converged. Instead, RMHL relied on rapid changes in W to mimic the correct output at each time point without truly learning it. SUPERTREX performed well on this task. During learning SUPERTREX performed slightly worse than FORCE and similar to RMHL (Fig. 2B,E). Unlike RMHL, though, SUPERTREX continued to track the target after learning was disabled, and performed similarly to FORCE during that phase (Fig. 2B). This, combined with the apparent convergence of kW k during learning (Fig. 2Eii, purple and green curves converge), indicates that the SUPERTREX algorithm did converge - albeit more slowly than FORCE. Interestingly, SUPERTREX produced less error during the testing phase than during learning (Fig. 2B). This is because exploration introduces random errors during learning, but exploration was turned off during testing so that output was produced only by the well-trained mastery pathway. This is comparable to findings in song birds in which natural or artificial suppression of neural activity in brain areas homologous to the basal ganglia reduce exploratory song variability and vocal errors [27]. An interesting illustration of how SUPERTREX works is provided by suddenly changing the target from a butterfly to a circle during learning (Fig. 3). The relative contributions from the exploratory pathway and the mastery pathway show that the exploratory pathway initially tracks the new target (Fig. 3B). Since the exploratory pathway is equivalent to RMHL, we know from above that the pathway is only mimicking the output through rapid weight changes. Over time, the mastery pathway learns from the activity of the exploratory pathway and begins taking over the generation of the output. This “handoff” from the exploratory to the mastery pathway produces a damped oscillation around the target (Fig. 3B).  Task 2: Generating an unknown target from a scalar error signal Task 1 is a simple introductory task to compare the three learning algorithms, but it is also unrealistic in some ways that play towards FORCE’s strengths. Specifically, the task involves producing an output, z, to match a known target, f , and error is compute in terms of the difference between z and f . In many tasks, motor output has indirect effects on the environment and the target and error are given in terms of these indirect effects. For example, consider a human or robot performing a drawing task. Motor output does not control the position of the pen directly, but instead controls the angles of the arm joints, which are nonlinearly related to pen position. On 8  A  B  change target  change target  exploratory mastery  y(t)  y(t)  x(t)  x(t)  total output target  1s  1ms  Figure 3: The dynamics of SUPERTREX with an abruptly changed target. A) Target (red) and actual (blue) output. Same as Task 1, but the target was changed from a butterfly to a circle after ten periods. B) Detail around the time of change. Same colors as (a), with addition of exploratory (green) and mastery (purple) components of the output. Note that exploratory + mastery = total output. the other hand, error might be evaluated in terms of the distance of the pen from its target. Task 2 models this scenario. The goal in Task 2 is to draw the same butterfly from Task 1, parameterized by the same target coordinates f (t) = (x(t), y(t)). However, the reservoir output controls the angles of two arm joints (Fig. 4A), z(t) = (θ1 (t), θ2 (t)). We assume that the subject does not have access to the target angles that draw the butterfly. Instead, they only have access to the target pen coordinates, f , and its distance to the actual pen coordinates, which are related to the angles through a nonlinear function, h(θ1 , θ2 ) = (x, y). FORCE cannot be applied directly to this task since the fully supervised error required for FORCE would need to be computed in terms of target angles instead of target pen position. RMHL and SUPERTREX can be applied to this task since they only require a signal that provides enough information to determine whether error recently increased or decreased. In particular, this is accomplished by setting e = kh(z) − f k2 where h(z) = (x, y) is the pen position. Once again, the task is divided into 10 learning cycles and 5 test cycles, with learning algorithms and the exploratory pathway of SUPERTREX disabled during the test cycles. Since the target angles, z(t), are unknown, feedback during testing cannot be replaced by the target as was done for Task 1. Instead, it is provided by the output from five previous periods. RMHL performed poorly on this task. It eventually mimicked the target (Fig. 4B), but once again failed to converge (Fig. 4B,C). SUPERTREX was able to track the target, and continue to produce it even after weight changes ceased (Fig. 4B,D). Hence, the combination of FORCE-like learning and RMHL-like learning implemented by SUPERTREX is able to learn a task that neither FORCE nor RMHL can learn on their own.  9  B  Task 1  z 2 =θ 2  z1=θ1  Learning  1  Distance from Target  A  0.01  1s  Cii  ||W||  θ 2 (t)  θ1(t)  Output  RMHL  Ci  RMHL SUPERTREX  0.1  Target  Testing  θ 2 (t)  θ1(t)  Dii  ||W||  SUPERTREX  Di  Mastery  Exploratory  Figure 4: Performance of RMHL and SUPERTREX on Task 2. A) Task 2 is to draw the same butterfly (red) as in Task 1, but the reservoir output now controls the arm joint angles, z1 (t) = θ1 (t) and z2 (t) = θ2 (t). Error is still computed in terms of pen coordinates. FORCE is not applicable to this task. B) Euclidean distance of pen from target for RMHL (green) and SUPERTREX (purple). Learning was halted by freezing weights after ten periods, so the remaining five periods represent a testing phase. C-D) Same as Fig. 2D-E except that angles, θ1 (t) and θ2 (t) are plotted in place of pen coordinates.  10  z 3 =θ 3  Learning  B Distance  A  Task 3  z 2 =θ 2  0.1  0.01  RMHL SUPERTREX  Cost  0.01 z1=θ1  0.001 0.0001  1s  10 -5  D  SUPERTREX  Target Output  RMHL  C  Testing  1  Figure 5: Performance of RMHL and SUPERTREX on Task 3. A) Task 3 is to draw the same butterfly (red) as in Tasks 1 and 2, but the reservoir output now controls three arm joint angles, z1 (t) = θ1 (t), z2 (t) = θ2 (t), and z3 (t) = θ3 (t) with a different cost function associated to moving each joint. Error is computed in terms of pen coordinates and cost of moving joints. FORCE is not applicable to this task. B) Euclidean distance of pen from target (top) and cost (bottom; C(θ10 , θ20 , θ30 )) for RMHL (green) and SUPERTREX (purple). C,D) Same as Di and Ei in Fig. 2.  Task 3: Learning and optimizing a task with multiple candidate solutions While FORCE cannot be applied to Task 2 as it is currently defined, it could be applied if the inverse of h were explicitly computed off-line to provide the target angles, (θ1 , θ2 ) = h−1 (f ), from which to compute a fully supervised error signal. This approach assumes that the subject knows the inverse of h and therefore does not easily extend to learning tasks in which h is difficult or impossible to invert. We now consider a task in which the error is not an invertible function of the motor output. Specifically, we consider an arm with three joints (Fig. 5A) and a cost function, C(θ10 , θ20 , θ30 ), that penalizes the movement of some joints more than others. Here, θj0 is the time-derivative of θj . The penalties are larger for the angles controlling larger arm lengths, so the cost is lowest for the wrist joint, θ3 , and largest for the shoulder joint, θ1 . For this task, there are infinitely many candidate solutions that successfully draw the butterfly, differing by the cost of joint movement. This turns our learning task into an optimization problem. Using FORCE for this task does not make sense, as it would require prior, explicit knowledge of the desired time series of joint angles. Essentially, it would require that the optimization problem had already been solved offline. RMHL and SUPERTREX can be applied to this problem by setting e = kh(z) − f k2 + C. In this context, RMHL and SUPERTREX works as greedy search algorithm that make local changes to the angular output to reduce error and cost. Note, however, that the solution they find may not be globally optimal. 11  We applied RMHL and SUPERTREX to this task using the same protocol for the learning and testing phases that we used for Task 2. RMHL performed poorly on this task (Fig. 5B,C), which is not surprising considering its poor performance on Task 2. SUPERTREX performed much better than RMHL: It was able to track the target, and continue to produce it even after weights were frozen (Fig. 5B,D). In summary, SUPERTREX can solve motor learning tasks in which there are multiple “correct” solutions with different costs.  Disrupted learning as a model of Parkinson’s disease The design of SUPERTREX was motivated in part by observations about the role of the basal ganglia in motor learning and Parkinson’s disease (PD). PD is caused by the death of dopamine producing neurons in the basal ganglia, resulting in motor impairment. A common treatment for PD is a lesion of basal ganglia output afferents. Such lesions alleviate PD symptoms and impair performance on new learning tasks more than well-learned tasks [36, 50]. These and other findings have inspired a theory of motor learning in which the basal ganglia are responsible for early learning, but not the performance of well-learned tasks and associations [50, 20]. SUPERTREX is consistent with this theory if the exploratory pathway is interpreted as a basal ganglia pathway and the mastery pathway the cortical pathway. To test this model, we next performed an experiment in SUPERTREX that mimics the effects of PD and its treatment with basal ganglia lesion. The handoff of learning from the exploratory to mastery pathway occurs extremely quickly in SUPERTREX due to the powerful, but biologically unrealistic RLS learning rule used in the mastery pathway (see, e.g., Fig. 3). To make SUPERTREX more biologically plausible for this experiment, we replaced the RLS learning rule with a least-mean-squares (LMS) rule by replacing P in Eq. (2) with the identity matrix [24]. This modified rule is more realistic because it avoids the complicated computation of the matrix, P , it makes the learning rules local, and it causes the mastery pathway to learn more slowly, which slows the handoff from the exploratory pathway. We applied this modified SUPERTREX algorithm to Task 1. For 100 trials, learning proceeded normally. SUPERTREX learned the target more slowly than in Fig. 2 and with a slight degradation in performance due to the use of LMS instead of RLS learning in the mastery pathway (Fig. 6, early and late learning). This phase models normal learning before the onset of PD. By the end of this phase (Fig. 6, late learning), the task has become “well-learned” in the sense that output is generated by the mastery pathway instead of the exploratory pathway. For the next five trials, we corrupted the error signal to model the effects of PD. Since e models the error or cost of motor output, it is negatively related to dopamine release. Specifically, ê ∝ Dmax − D where D quantifies dopamine release and Dmax is the maximum possible value of D. Hence, PD-induced dopamine depletion is modeled by artificially increasing ê, which we achieve by setting e = kf − zk2 + p where p(t) increases over time. Here, p = 0 corresponds to a healthy subject and, as p increases, SUPERTREX falsely evaluates more of its actions as being in error or costly. Even though the mastery pathway had taken over motor output before the error signal of the exploratory pathway was corrupted, the perceived increase in error caused the exploratory pathway to take over during the corrupted learning phase because the contribution of the exploratory pathway increases with error. The mismatch between actual error and perceived error during the corrupted 12  Distance from Target  A  0.6  late learning  corrupted learning  post-lesion  0.1  1s  y(t)  x(t)  0.01  B  early learning  C  Figure 6: SUPERTREX with a corrupted error signal models Parkinson’s disease and its treatment. A) Euclidean distance of pen from its target for a modified version of SUPERTREX on Task 1. Learning proceeded normally for 100 trials. First five trials (early learning) and last five trials (late learning) are shown. The error signal was corrupted over the following five trials (corrupted learning) and the exploratory pathway was lesioned for the last five trials (post-lesion). B) Target (red) and actual (blue) outputs. C) Target butterfly (red) versus drawn curve during each of the plotted groups of five trials. learning phase results in highly inaccurate motor output (Fig. 6, corrupted learning phase). These results model the motor impairments associated with PD. Indeed, PD symptoms are believed to be caused, at least in part, by aberrant learning in the basal ganglia [50, 5]. In the last five trials, we disabled the exploratory pathway, modeling basal ganglia lesion, and the feedback term, Qz, was replaced by Qf in Eq. (1) (see Discussion). SUPERTREX recovered nearly correct output during this last stage (Fig. 6, post-lesion phase) because the output had been stored in the mastery pathway before learning in the exploratory pathway was corrupted. Interestingly, correct motor output was recoverable in the mastery pathway despite the fact that learning continued to be transferred from the incorrect exploratory pathway to the mastery pathway during the corrupted learning stage. Hence, this transfer did not corrupt the stored “correct” motor output in the mastery pathway. This is explained by noting that incorrectly rewarded exploration caused weight perturbations to the mastery pathway during corrupted learning to be effectively random. Random perturbations to the high-dimensional weight matrix are approximately orthogonal to the task-relevant dimensions of the weights, and therefore have an approximately mean-zero effect on task performance. This is the same mechanism that allows FORCE and other algorithms to learn a new task without severely affecting performance on previously learned tasks [45].  Discussion We presented a novel, reward-modulated method of reservoir computing, SUPERTREX, that performs nearly as well as fully supervised methods. This is desirable as there are a broad class or problems where traditional supervised methods are not applicable, such as Tasks 2 and 3 that 13  we considered. Moreover, humans can learn motor tasks from reinforcement signals alone [25]. In place of a supervised error signal, SUPERTREX bootstraps from a dopamine-like, scalar error signal to a full error signal using rewarded exploration. This serves as an approximate target solution which is then transferred to a more traditional reservoir learning algorithm. This transfer of learned behavior to a mastery pathway, along with continued rewarded exploration, automatically creates a balanced system where the total output is correct, but the composition shifts over time from exploration to mastery. SUPERTREX performed similarly to FORCE on tasks where both were applicable, but also worked well on tasks where FORCE was not applicable. SUPERTREX also outperformed RMHL, a previously developed reward-modulated algorithm, on all tasks we considered. SUPERTREX models the complementary roles of cortical and basal ganglia pathways in motor learning. Under this interpretation, dopamine concentrations play the role of the reward signal, and the basal ganglia is the site of the RMHL-like, exploratory learning. Direct intracortical connections would then learn from Hebbian plasticity in the mastery pathway. Consistent with this interpretation, SUPERTREX produces inaccurate motor output when the reward signal is corrupted, modeling dopamine depletion in PD, but recovers the generation of well-learned output when the exploratory pathway is removed, modeling basal ganglia lesions used to treat PD. Hence SUPERTREX provides a model for understanding the role of motor learning in PD and its treatments. As models of motor learning, reward-modulated algorithms like SUPERTREX and RMHL assume no knowledge of the relationship between motor output and error. In contrast, fully supervised algorithms like FORCE require perfect perfect knowledge of this relationship. In reality, we learn through some combination of supervisory and reward-modulated error signals [25]. To account for this, SUPERTREX could potentially be extended to incorporate both one-dimensional reward and higher-dimensional sensory feedback. The FORCE-like learning algorithm used for the mastery pathway of SUPERTREX is biologistically unrealstic in some ways. The presence of the matrix, P , causes the rule to be non-local. However, we showed that SUPERTREX still works when P is removed to implement a local, LMS learning rule (Fig. 6). Indeed, one can replace the FORCE-like learning rule used in the mastery pathway of SUPERTREX with any supervised learning rule. Hence, SUPERTREX provides a way to produce a reward-modulated learning rule for reservoir computing from any supervised learning rule. This opens the way for an implementation of SUPERTREX with spiking neural networks using existing learning rules [30, 9, 1, 41]. SUPERTREX does not address some remaining challenges present in reservoir computing. One of these issues is that reservoir computing algorithms such as FORCE or SUPERTREX excel at encouraging reservoir neurons to produce target frequencies (leading to a correct power spectrum), but are not as effecitive at getting the phase correct. Indeed, a frequent failure in reservoir computing algorithms is that they tend to “drift” in phase when weights are frozen. We resolved this issue in our testing phase and our post-lesion model by replacing feedback, Qz, with correct output (either Qf or the feedback from previous learning trials). This feedback works as a “clock” to keep the system in-phase, but this is a somewhat artificial solution. This difficulty could potentially be overcome by sensory feedback signals or a pattern generating circuit to keep time [32, 51]. As with most other reservoir computing algorithms, SUPERTREX implements online learning 14  in which a local error signal is provided and used at every time step. This is partly by design - SUPERTREX learns extremely (even unrealistically) quickly as weights are updated at a high frequency. This learning is slowed by some extent by switching to the more realistic LMS learning rule (as in Fig. 6). For some biological learning tasks, however, error signals are temporally sparse or reflect temporally non-local information. Trial-based learning rules for reservoir computing [19, 33] are applicable in the presence of sparse or non-local rewards. At least one of these algorithms learns very slowly, requiring thousands of trials [33], which may be an inevitable consequence of learning from sparse rewards. In reality, biological motor learning likely makes use of both online and sparse feedback. An extension of SUPERTREX that accounts for both types of feedback could be more versatile and realistic. SUPERTREX is conceptually an extension of SPEED [4], which has a similar framework for categorization and other discrete tasks. SPEED learns to map discrete inputs to discrete outputs, such as in catagorization tasks. While the architecture and learning rule are similar to SUPERTREX, SPEED cannot produce continuous, dynamical outptut and requires a seperate pathway for each possible input-output pairing. In summary, SUPERTREX incorporates contemporary biological theories of motor learning and automaticity to produce a framework for reservoir computing that is more effective than its predecessors. Moreover, SUPERTREX offers a computational formalization of widely supported theories of motor learning and reproduces several experimental and clinical findings. Hence, SUPERTEX establishes a two-way exchange in which the study of biological motor learning advances the study of reservoir computing algorithms and vice versa.  Methods Simulation and Reservoir Parameters All simulations were performed using a forward euler method, with dt = 0.2ms. Each task period or “trial” was 104 ms long and all simulations except those in Fig. 6 had 15 trials. Fig. 6 had 110 trials. The reservoir equation used in all algorithms was τ  dr = −r + tanh(Jr + Qz) + αη dt  where η was uniformly drawn from [−1, 1], τ =10, and α = 2.5 × 10−2 during training and α = 0 during testing. Reservoir size was set to N = 1000 neurons, with connection probability p = 0.1. Connection strengths were normally distributed with mean 0 and variance λ2 /(pN ) with λ = 1.5. Initial readout weights for RMHL and SUPERTREX exploratory pathway were drawn uniformly between −1 and 1, while weights for FORCE and the SUPERTREX mastery pathway were initialized at 0. Initial voltages were set uniformly between −0.5 and 0.5, while initial rates were the hyperbolic tangent of initial voltages. Displayed outputs and errors were low pass filtered according to dM SE(t) = −M SE(t) + M SE(t) τM SE dt dz(t) τbar = −z(t) + z(t) dt 15  where τM SE = 1000, τbar = 10, and x represents √ a low pass filtered version of the variable x. The plotted “distance from target” was computed as M SE where M SE(t) is the squared distance of the pen from its target.  FORCE Reservoir output was z = W r and the learning rule is dW = −[z − f ]rT P dt with τw = 0.02. The matrix P is a running estimate of the inverse of the correlation matrix of rates r, initialized to 1 P (0) = I γ and updated according to dP P r rT P τp =− dt 1 + rT P r where τP = dt, γ = 10 is a constant and I is the identity matrix. The matrix P is only updated every 10 time steps in order to save on computing time. τw  RMHL For RMHL, outputs were given by z = W r + Ψ(e)η and the learning rule was dW = Φ(ê)(ẑ)rT dt where τw = 0.02, η is uniformly distributed noise on [−1, 1], and the high-pass filtered version, x̂, of variable x was computed as dx τ = −x + x dt x̂ = x − x. τw  SUPERTREX Updates to P were identical to the method used in FORCE above. Relevant other changes are z1 = W1 r + Ψ(e)η z2 = W2 r z = z1 + z2 for η uniformly drawn from [−1, 1]. For the learning algorithm, dW1 = Φ(ê)ẑrT dt dW2 τw = −kz1 rT P dt τw  16  with τw remaining 0.02 and constant learning rate k which varies per task. Finally, an extra condition was imposed on updates to P , W2 . Both updates were multiplied by (−0.5 ∗ tanh(5 × 105 ∗ (e − (1.5 × 10−3 ))) + 0.05), which acts as a soft threshold around e = 1.5 × 10−3 . Effectively, for errors larger than this the mastery pathway would not activate. Performance was similar, but slightly slower, without this thresholding.  Tasks In all tasks, the target was to draw a butterfly, given by a polar curve x(t) = r(t) cos(t) and y(t) = r(t) sin(t) where r(t) =c[9 − sin(qt) + 2 sin(3qt)+ 2 sin(5qt) − sin(7qt) + 3 cos(2qt) − 2 cos(4qt)] and c = 1/ maxt [r(t)] is a normalizing constant. For a single repetition, t went from 0 to 104 ms, 2π and q = 10 4 scales the system such that qt goes from 0 to 2π over the duration. In task 2, the task is instead to draw a butterfly by controlling two angles, representing radians from y axis, and radians from the first joint. The arm is positioned at (0,-2), and each arm segment has fixed length of 1.8. h(z) is therefore   1.8 sin(z1 π) + 1.8 sin((z1 + z2 )π) h(z) = −2 + 1.8 cos(z1 π) + 1.8 cos((z1 + z2 )π) In task 3, now there are three angles to control. The arm is positioned at (0,-2), and each arm segment has fixed length. The first segment has length 1.8, the next 1.2, and the final .6. h(z) is therefore   1.8 sin(z1 π) + 1.2 sin((z1 + z2 )π) + .6 sin((z1 + z2 + z3 )π) h(z) = −2 + 1.8 cos(z1 π) + 1.2 cos((z1 + z2 )π) + .6 cos((z1 + z2 + z3 )π) √ √ In the first task, Ψ(x) = 0.025 × 4 10x and Φ(x) = −5 4 x for both RMHL and SUPERTREX. √ When testing for swapping targets, Ψ(x) = 0.1×(−5x)0.3 and Φ(x) = 2.5× 4 x. For SUPERTREX, learning rate k was 0.5. √ For the second task, SUPERTREX learning rate k was still 0.5, Ψ(x) = 0.01 × 5 10x, and √ Φ(x) = 5 × 4 x. √ For the third task, SUPERTREX learning rate was k = 0.9, Ψ(x) = .025 × 4 10x, and Φ(x) = √ 5 × 4 x. The error metric was changed slightly, to e = ||h(z) − f||2 + α|zˆ1 | + β|zˆ2 | + γ|zˆ3 | for α = 0.1, β = 0.05, γ = 0. This implemented an additional cost for moving joints; highest for the longest arm segment, and 0 for the smallest arm segment. For the corrupted learning example, LMS learning was used, which is obtained by setting P = I. The learning rate was changed to k = 0.003. Other parameter values were the same as in the first task. The perturbation, p(t), increased linearly from 0 to 0.1 over the corrupted learning timeframe. 17  References [1] L F Abbott, Brian Depasquale, and Raoul-martin Memmesheimer. Building Functional Networks of Spiking Model Neurons. Nat. Neurosci., 19(3):1–16, 2016. [2] Aaron S Andalman and Michale S Fee. A basal ganglia-forebrain circuit in the songbird biases motor output to avoid vocal errors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 106(30):12518–23, jul 2009. [3] Dmitriy Aronov, AS Andalman, and MS Fee. A specialized forebrain circuit for vocal babbling in the juvenile songbird. Science (80-. )., 320(May):630–635, 2008. [4] F Gregory Ashby, John M Ennis, and Brian J Spiering. A neurobiological theory of automaticity in perceptual categorization. Psychol. Rev., 114(3):632–56, jul 2007. [5] F Gregory Ashby, Benjamin O Turner, and Jon C Horvitz. Cortical and basal ganglia contributions to habit learning and automaticity. Trends Cogn. Sci., 14(5):208–15, may 2010. [6] F Gregory Ashby, Benjamin O Turner, and Jon C Horvitz. Cortical and basal ganglia contributions to habit learning and automaticity. Trends Cog. Sci., 14(5):208–215, 2010. [7] Omri Barak. Recurrent neural networks as versatile tools of neuroscience research. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., 46:1–6, 2017. [8] S W Bottjer, E a Miesner, and a P Arnold. Forebrain lesions disrupt development but not maintenance of song in passerine birds. Science (80-. )., 224(4651):901–903, 1984. [9] Ralph Bourdoukan and Sophie Deneve. Enforcing balance allows local supervised learning in spiking recurrent networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 982–990, 2015. [10] Michael S Brainard. Contributions of the anterior forebrain pathway to vocal plasticity. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1016(1):377–394, 2004. [11] MS Brainard and AJ Doupe. Interruption of a basal gangliaforebrain circuit prevents plasticity of learned vocalizations. Nature, 404(April), 2000. [12] MS Brainard and AJ Doupe. What songbirds teach us about learning. Nature, 417(May):351– 358, 2002. [13] R M Carelli, M Wolske, and M O West. Loss of lever press-related firing of rat striatal forelimb neurons after repeated sessions in a lever pressing task. J. Neurosci., 17(5):1804–1814, 1997. [14] Regina M Carelli, Martin Wolske, and Mark O West. Loss of lever press-related firing of rat striatal forelimb neurons after repeated sessions in a lever pressing task. Journal of Neuroscience, 17(5):1804–1814, 1997. [15] Mark M Churchland, John P Cunningham, Matthew T Kaufman, Justin D Foster, Paul Nuyujukian, Stephen I Ryu, and Krishna V Shenoy. Neural population dynamics during reaching. Nature, 487(7405):51–6, jul 2012. 18  [16] Pierre Enel, Emmanuel Procyk, René Quilodran, and Peter Ford Dominey. Reservoir Computing Properties of Neural Dynamics in Prefrontal Cortex. PLOS Comput. Biol., 12(6):e1004967, 2016. [17] M S Fee and J H Goldberg. A hypothesis for basal ganglia-dependent reinforcement learning in the songbird. Neuroscience, 198:152–70, dec 2011. [18] Michale S Fee. The role of efference copy in striatal learning. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., 25:194– 200, apr 2014. [19] Ila R Fiete and H Sebastian Seung. Gradient learning in spiking neural networks by dynamic perturbation of conductances. Physical review letters, 97(4):048104, 2006. [20] Sébastien Hélie, Erick J Paul, and F Gregory Ashby. A neurocomputational account of cognitive deficits in Parkinson’s disease. Neuropsychologia, 50(9):2290–302, jul 2012. [21] Guillaume Hennequin, Tim P Vogels, and Wulfram Gerstner. Optimal control of transient dynamics in balanced networks supports generation of complex movements. Neuron, 82(6):1394– 406, jun 2014. [22] Gregor M Hoerzer, Robert Legenstein, and Wolfgang Maass. Emergence of complex computational structures from chaotic neural networks through reward-modulated hebbian learning. Cereb. Cort., 24(3):677–690, 2012. [23] Gregor M Hoerzer, Robert Legenstein, and Wolfgang Maass. Emergence of complex computational structures from chaotic neural networks through reward-modulated Hebbian learning. Cereb. Cortex, 24(3):677–90, mar 2012. [24] Gregor M Hoerzer, Robert Legenstein, and Wolfgang Maass. Emergence of complex computational structures from chaotic neural networks through reward-modulated Hebbian learning. Cereb. Cortex, 24(3):677–90, mar 2014. [25] Jun Izawa and Reza Shadmehr. Learning from sensory and reward prediction errors during motor adaptation. PLoS Comput. Biol., 7(3):1–11, 2011. [26] Herbert Jaeger and Harald Haas. Harnessing nonlinearity: predicting chaotic systems and saving energy in wireless communication. Science, 304(5667):78–80, apr 2004. [27] Mimi H Kao, Allison J Doupe, and Michael S Brainard. Contributions of an avian basal ganglia–forebrain circuit to real-time modulation of song. Nature, 433(7026):638–643, 2005. [28] Rodrigo Laje and Dean V Buonomano. Robust timing and motor patterns by taming chaos in recurrent neural networks. Nat. Neurosci., 16(7):925–33, jul 2013. [29] Mantas Lukoševičius, Herbert Jaeger, and Benjamin Schrauwen. Reservoir Computing Trends. KI - Künstliche Intelligenz, 26(4):365–371, may 2012. [30] Wolfgang Maass, Thomas Natschläger, and Henry Markram. Real-time computing without stable states: a new framework for neural computation based on perturbations. Neural Comput., 14(11):2531–60, nov 2002. 19  [31] Valerio Mante, David Sussillo, Krishna V Shenoy, and William T Newsome. Context-dependent computation by recurrent dynamics in prefrontal cortex. Nature, 503(7474):78–84, nov 2013. [32] Eve Marder and Dirk Bucher. Central pattern generators and the control of rhythmic movements. Curr Biol, 11(23):R986–R996, 2001. [33] Thomas Miconi. Biologically plausible learning in recurrent neural networks reproduces neural dynamics observed during cognitive tasks. E-Life, 6, 2017. [34] Shigehiro Miyachi, Okihide Hikosaka, and Xiaofeng Lu. Differential activation of monkey striatal neurons in the early and late stages of procedural learning. Exp Brain Res, 146(1):122– 126, 2002. [35] Shigehiro Miyachi, Okihide Hikosaka, Kae Miyashita, Zoltán Kárádi, and Miya Kato Rand. Differential roles of monkey striatum in learning of sequential hand movement. Experimental brain research, 115(1):1–5, 1997. [36] J a Obeso, M Jahanshahi, L Alvarez, R Macias, I Pedroso, L Wilkinson, N Pavon, B Day, S Pinto, M C Rodrı́guez-Oroz, J Tejeiro, J Artieda, P Talelli, O Swayne, R Rodrı́guez, K Bhatia, M Rodriguez-Diaz, G Lopez, J Guridi, and J C Rothwell. What can man do without basal ganglia motor output? The effect of combined unilateral subthalamotomy and pallidotomy in a patient with Parkinson’s disease. Exp. Neurol., 220(2):283–92, dec 2009. [37] Bence P Olveczky, Aaron S Andalman, and Michale S Fee. Vocal experimentation in the juvenile songbird requires a basal ganglia circuit. PLoS Biol., 3(5):e153, may 2005. [38] Bence P Ölveczky, Timothy M Otchy, Jesse H Goldberg, Dmitriy Aronov, and Michale S Fee. Changes in the neural control of a complex motor sequence during learning. J. Neurophysiol., 106(1):386–97, jul 2011. [39] Anitha Pasupathy and Earl K Miller. Different time courses of learning-related activity in the prefrontal cortex and striatum. Nature, 433(7028):873–876, 2005. [40] Russell A Poldrack, Fred W Sabb, Karin Foerde, Sabrina M Tom, Robert F Asarnow, Susan Y Bookheimer, and Barbara J Knowlton. The neural correlates of motor skill automaticity. Journal of Neuroscience, 25(22):5356–5364, 2005. [41] Ryan Pyle and Robert Rosenbaum. Spatiotemporal dynamics and reliable computations in recurrent spiking neural networks. Physical Review Letters, 118(1):018103, 2017. [42] Krishna V Shenoy, Maneesh Sahani, and Mark M Churchland. Cortical control of arm movements: a dynamical systems perspective. Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 36:337–59, jul 2013. [43] H. Sompolinsky, a. Crisanti, and H. J. Sommers. Chaos in random neural networks. Phys. Rev. Lett., 61(3):259–262, 1988. [44] David Sussillo. Neural circuits as computational dynamical systems. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., 25:156–163, 2014. [45] David Sussillo and L F Abbott. Generating coherent patterns of activity from chaotic neural networks. Neuron, 63(4):544–57, aug 2009. 20  [46] David Sussillo and Larry F Abbott. Generating coherent patterns of activity from chaotic neural networks. Neuron, 63(4):544–557, 2009. [47] David Sussillo and Omri Barak. Opening the black box: low-dimensional dynamics in highdimensional recurrent neural networks. Neural Computation, 25(3):626–649, 2013. [48] David Sussillo, Mark M Churchland, Matthew T Kaufman, and Krishna V Shenoy. A neural network that finds naturalistic solutions for the production of muscle activity. Nat. Neurosci., 18(7), 2013. [49] C. C. Tang, D. H. Root, D. C. Duke, Y. Zhu, K. Teixeria, S. Ma, D. J. Barker, and M. O. West. Decreased Firing of Striatal Neurons Related to Licking during Acquisition and Overtraining of a Licking Task. J. Neurosci., 29(44):13952–13961, 2009. [50] Robert S Turner and Michel Desmurget. Basal ganglia contributions to motor control: a vigorous tutor. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., 20(6):704–16, dec 2010. [51] Rafael Yuste, Jason N MacLean, Jeffrey Smith, and Anders Lansner. The cortex as a central pattern generator. Nat Rev Neurosci, 6(6):477, 2005.  21

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 9. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
