Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_4234

Abstract:
Revisiting Exception Handling Practices with Exception Flow Analysis Guilherme B. de Pádua  Weiyi Shang  Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering Concordia University - Montreal, QC, Canada Concordia University - Montreal, QC, Canada Email: g bicalh@encs.concordia.ca Email: shang@encs.concordia.ca  Prior studies on exception handling aim to understand the practices of exception handling in its different components: exception sources and handling code. Yet, the observed findings were scattered and diverse. Recent empirical studies on exception handling practices have advocated the suboptimal use of exception handling features in open source software [9], [10], [11], [12]. Moreover, in our previous research, we observe the prevalence of exception handling anti-patterns. These research findings imply the lack of a thorough understanding of the practice of exception handling [13].  Abstract—Modern programming languages, such as Java and C#, typically provide features that handle exceptions. These features separate error-handling code from regular source code and aim to assist in the practice of software comprehension and maintenance. Having acknowledged the advantages of exception handling features, their misuse can still cause reliability degradation or even catastrophic software failures. Prior studies on exception handling aim to understand the practices of exception handling in its different components, such as the origin of the exceptions and the handling code of the exceptions. Yet, the observed findings were scattered and diverse. In this paper, to complement prior research findings on exception handling, we study its features by enriching the knowledge of handling code with a flow analysis of exceptions. Our case study is conducted with over 10K exception handling blocks, and over 77K related exception flows from 16 open-source Java and C# (.NET) libraries and applications. Our case study results show that each try block has up to 12 possible potentially recoverable yet propagated exceptions. More importantly, 22% of the distinct possible exceptions can be traced back to multiple methods (average of 1.39 and max of 34). Such results highlight the additional challenge of composing quality exception handling code. To make it worse, we confirm that there is a lack of documentation of the possible exceptions and their sources. However, such critical information can be identified by exception flow analysis on welldocumented API calls (e.g., JRE and .NET documentation). Finally, we observe different strategies in exception handling code between Java and C#. Our findings highlight the opportunities of leveraging automated software analysis to assist in exception handling practices and signify the need of more further in-depth studies on exception handling practice. Index Terms—source code analysis; exception flow analysis; exception handling; software engineering  Therefore, in this paper, we re-visit exception handling practices by conducting an in-depth study on 16 open-source Java and C# libraries and applications. To understand and analyze the state-of-the-practice of exception handling in these projects, we perform source code analysis to track the flow of exceptions from the source of exceptions, through method invocations, to the attempting blocks of exceptions (try block) and the exception handling block (catch block). With such flow analysis, we extract information about exception handling practice in over 10K exception handling blocks, and over 77K related exception flows from the studied subject systems. Our case study focuses on four aspects of the exception handling practices: 1) the quantity of exceptions, 2) the diversity of exceptions, 3) the sources of exceptions and 4) the exception handling strategies and actions. Table I summarizes our findings and their corresponding implications. Such results confirm the challenge of composing quality exception handling code. For example, we find a considerable amount of potentially recoverable yet propagated exceptions. However, more importantly, we highlight the opportunities of leveraging our automated source code analysis to complement the information that is valuable for developers when handling exceptions. More in-depth analyses are needed to ensure and improve the quality and usefulness of exception handling in practice.  I. I NTRODUCTION Modern programming languages, such as Java and C#, typically provide exception handling features, such as throw statements and try-catch-finally blocks. These features separate error-handling code from regular source code and are leveraged widely in practice to support software comprehension and maintenance [1], [2]. Having acknowledged the advantages of exception handling features, their misuse can still cause catastrophic software failures, such as application crashes [3], or reliability degradation, such as information leakage [4], [5]. A large portion of systems has suffered from system crashes that were due to exceptions [6]. Additionally, the importance of exception handling source code has been illustrated in prior research and surveys [7], [8].  The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses the related prior research of this work. Section III presents the methodology of the exception flow analysis through an illustrative example and our case study setup. Section IV to VII presents the results of our case study. Section VIII discusses the threats to the validity of our findings. Finally, Section IX concludes the paper and discusses potential future research directions based on our research results.  1  TABLE I O UR FINDINGS AND IMPLICATIONS ON EXCEPTION HANDLING PRACTICES .  Quantity of Exceptions (Section IV)  Implications  (1) There often exist multiple possible exceptions in each try block, and, out of those, many are propagated.  Current state-of-the-practice may not provide information to developers about all possible exceptions. Automated techniques may help developers be aware of all possible exceptions to make exception handling decisions.  (2) There exists a considerable amount of potentially recoverable exceptions that are propagated, even though they are recommended to be handled by Java and C#.  Exception flow analysis can provide automated tooling support to alert developers about not handling potentially recoverable exceptions.  Diversity of Exceptions (Section V)  Implications  (3) With a significant amount of exceptions existing in each project, many possible exception types appear in only one try block.  Developers may not need to be aware of all exception types in a project by receiving automated suggestions of the exceptions that he/she needs to understand.  Sources of Exceptions (Section VI)  Implications  (4) Over 22% of the exceptions are traced from different methods.  Automated tools are needed to help developers understand the source of the exception if it is traced back to different methods.  (5) The libraries used by the systems can provide documentation to most of the possible exceptions.  Developers should leverage automated analyses to understand possible exceptions.  Exception Handling Strategies and Actions (Section VII)  Implications  (6) Only a small portion of the exceptions are handled with the Specific strategy.  Developers should be guided to prioritize on handling exceptions with the Specific strategy, since developers cannot optimize the handling of the exception without knowing its exact type information.  (7) Java and C# have differences in leveraging various actions when handling exceptions.  More in-depth analysis and user studies are needed to further understand the rationale of differences of Java and C# exception handling practices.  (8) Actions that are taken when handling exceptions with specific or subsumption manners are not statistically significantly different.  Research and tooling support are needed to guide how to handle exceptions, especially with the specific strategy.  (9) With statistical significance, all top 10 Java and 2 out of top 10 C# exceptions have at least one action that is taken differently from the rest of the exceptions.  Developers may consider leveraging automated suggestion of exception handling actions.  II. R ELATED W ORK A. Empirical studies on exception handling practices Prior research studied exception handling based on source code and issue trackers. Cabral and Marques [14] studied exception handling practices from 32 projects in both Java and .Net without considering the flow of exceptions. Prior work by Jo et al. [15] focuses on uncaught exceptions of Java Checked exceptions. They proposed an inter-procedural analysis based on set-based framework without using declared exceptions. Coelho et al. [16] assessed exception handling strategy with exception flows from Aspect-oriented systems and objectoriented systems. They evaluated the number of uncaught exceptions, exceptions caught by subsumption, and exceptions caught with specialized handlers. Sena et al. [17] investigated sampled exception flows from 656 Java libraries for flow characteristics, handler actions, and handler strategies. We extend their work by looking into a higher number of flows per system (e.g. in Apache ANT we identified 930 catch blocks, compared to 2), by considering applications besides libraries and including C# .NET systems. Some studies reveal that developers consider exception handling hard to learn and to use and tend to avoid it or misuse it [9], [10], [11]. Bonifacio et al. [12] also surveyed C++ developers encountering revelations of educational issues.  It also has been noted that there is a lack of documentation of exceptions. Kechagia and Spinellis [18] found that 69% of the methods had undocumented exceptions and 19% of crashes could have been caused by insufficient documentation. Sena et al. [17]’s findings confirm that API runtime exceptions are poorly documented. Cabral and Marques [19] identify that infrastructure (20%) and libraries (15%) have better exception handling documentation when compared to applications (2%). Significant research aimed to indicate exception handling problems and their impacts. Sinha et al. [20] leveraged exception flow analyses to study the existence of 11 anti-patterns in four Java systems. Other research [2], [8], [7] classified exception-handling related bugs by mining software issue tracking. In our previous research, we observe the prevalence of exception handling anti-patterns [13]. Cacho et al. [21], [22] studied the evolution of the behavior of exception handling in Java and C# source code changes. Their results highlight the impact of the programming language design differences in the maintenance and robustness of exception handling mechanisms. Our study revisits and combines different aspects of the studies mentioned above. Moreover, we present new findings (see Table I) that are not yet highlighted in prior research.  2  They do analysis in call stack levels per caught exception, but not at the try block level. It cannot be told what is the level in a common scenario. Although Coelho et al. [9] considered the exception flows in Aspect oriented systems, they introduced measurements that we extended in our work. Similar measurements were applied at the try handling block perspective, and in different programming B. Improving exception practices languages. Robillard and Murphy [23]Murphy created a toola tool to analyze exRobillard and [10] created to analyse exception flows in Java programs at at point of the system. Ourinwork ception flows in Java programs, including a graphical user is similar in terms of approach since we also use AST and call terface. Similarly,graph Garcia and Cacho proposed differentthe navigation. We also [24] share the ability ofaidentifying approach for .NET related languages. Garcia Cacho’s tool flows at any point of the program. Weand complement their work by including other different analysis and including different supports visualization of metrics over the application history. projects and programming languages in our datasets. They To support thestudied software development lifecycle, Sinha et subsumption but did not relate to the actions. al. [20] provided automated for [11] development, mainteA tool calledsupport eFlowMining uses a different approach .NET related languages, and exception focus on thehandling. evolution of nance and testingforrequirements related to exception handling code. They applied their tool in smaller To improve how developers would deal with exception systems, with a maximum of 45 try blocks, using different handling complexity, Kechagia et al. [25] discuss and propose measurements. Java control inappropriate coding patterns improvements in the designflows, of including exception handling mechawere evaluated in [12]. They also provide schematic views of nisms. Zhang andpossible Krintzexception [26] propose an as-if-serial exception types at any point in the program, however handling mechanism for parallel programming. they don’t present any relation with documentation or data at the try block level. The burden ofanalysis writing exception handling code has been  pointed out by Cabral and Marques [27]. They showed that a system with an automated set of recovery actions is capable of achieving better error resilience than a traditional system. Barbosa et al. developed strategies with heuristics for recommending exception handling code as a semi-automated approach. Zhu et al. [28] proposed an approach that suggests logging decisions for exception handling. By conducting an in-depth study on 16 open source projects, our findings illustrate the opportunities of leveraging various analysis to combine information from different sources to understand and assist in exception handling flows and practices. Our results are valuable to complement and assist in improving existing exception handling techniques.  A requires execute a method other means,to has the knowledge otherissues: means, has thea knowledge two 1) having invalid pa two issues:instead 1) having a invalid pa Therefore, of executing a Therefore, instead executing possibly throw two of types of excea possibly throw twowhich types of exce and IOException, corresp and with IOException, deal the two which possiblecorres exce deal needs with the two possible exce oper to either handle the oper needsactions to either handle alternative when suchthe exc alternative actions exc the exception such when that asuch differe source of exception 2: method declaration the exception suchexample, that a differe exception. In our devel public void by A() IOException is propagated A, throws that is IOException, represented by the InvalidPathException exception. In our example, deve exception a { is propagated by A,arrow that is IOException, represented by the InvalidPathException bottom double line in Figure ??. exception a 2) Raising method call and propagating ex try bottom double line arrowcomplements: in Figure ??. raising, documenting velopers 2) Handling practice 2) Raising andknowledge propagating have the thatex { exception Handling raising, documenting and2)propagating practice:complements: We mentioned that the developer sponding velopers have thepossible knowledge that B();practice to two exceptio flow(s) and propagating Wetwo mentioned that the However, developer be } already know that practice: B can throw exception types. sponding to tworaised possible exceptio either newly or propaga catch (InvalidPathException already know that B can two exception types. source ofnewly such exception types are throw not always so clearex) at the However, develop- Bbecalls either raisedCorand propaga (e.g., method the m { such moment. exception types are Bnot always so clear at thefunctions develop- can ment Moreover, could be executing other B exception calls methodblocks C and to then use (e.g., the throws e.printStackTrace(); mentare moment. Moreover, B could be executing other functions our that the issues. can example, use the throws blocks to IO n developers raise }propagating documentation that issues. consult the source code of B block In}are ourpropagating example, if the a developer our example, developers raise I in the method C. Such new In our??) example, if aidentify developer the source code of B propagated } (listing he would the consult propagation of IOException block in thetomethod Such new all the C. methods tha (listing ??) heblocks. wouldHe identify IOException in the throws wouldthe alsopropagation discover theofcalls to C and propagated to all the methods thI 3) Documenting exceptions: Listing 1. An exception handling example. in the throws blocks. He would alsoconsulted. discover the to C and can3)consult IOException getPath. These methods are then C iscalls represented Documenting exceptions: the source code of B getPath. These methodsthat areBthen is represented InvalidPathException in listing ??.exceptions can consult the source code of B in the throw stateme The two can consulted. throw are Cexception flows IOException in listing IOException in the throw always available for a statem metho that arrive??. at A. Figure ?? represents such flows. One exception not public void B() throws IOException not always available for aBmetho source of exception 4: getPath called in method is de flow A, that is InvalidPathException, represented {is handled public void at B() throws IOException getPath called in method B is d external Developers would need to consul by the top single line arrow in Figure ??. One exception flowdocumentation { C(); Developersofwould need totoconsu fileSystem.getPath(invalidPath); JavaDoc) the method disc C(); getPath can throw } fileSystem.getPath(invalidPath); JavaDoc)InvalidPathException. of the method to disc possible InvalidPathException } possible InvalidPathException. There could be cases when an Listing 2. An exception handling example. B propagates two exceptions from two different couldin be cases when anT Listing 2. Anmethods. exception handling example. B IOException propagates two exceptions from notThere available documentation. two different methods. not available in (like documentation. ming languages Java), a poss /** ming languages (like Java), a pos the method declaration. For exam /*** source of exception 3: the possible method declaration. Forisexam the exception that prop * @throws IOException documentation in comment the possible exception that is prop method declaration. However, som Method called when disk failed. IOException * @throws method declaration. However, so Method called when disk failed. undeclared (like InvalidPathExce * */ undeclared (like InvalidPathExce B. Exception flow analysis public static void C() throws IOException */ { B.InException flow analysis public static void C() throws IOException the previous subsection, w a function called A. This function requires to execute the function B. However, the developer, by other means, already know that B can potentially face two issues and, in that case, instead of executing as expected, B would possibly throw two exception types. To deal with the possible exception types the developer needs to either determine the alternative actions that A will execute or propagate the exception so that a different method IOException would take care it. The listing Fig. 1.ofFlows related to A.?? depicts the above scenario. Fig. 1. Flows related to A.  { } }  throw new IOException(); In the previous subsection, w throw new IOException(); source of exception 1: a exception handling scenario w a exception handling w section, we present our scenario methodolo throw statement  Listing 3. An exception handling example. C raises and propagates one exception. Listing 3. An exception handling example. C raises and propagates one Fig. 1. An illustrative example. exception. III. M ETHODOLOGY III. M ETHODOLOGY  section, we exceptions present ourand methodol all possible their fl all possible exceptions Our automated tool is and builttheir by lfl Our.NET automated toolPlatform is built by and Compiler (“R 2) Raising and propagating exceptions: As mentioned, the respectively. andsource .NET Compiler Platform (“R C# code, As In this section, we present the methodology of our study. In C# source code, respectively. As tool consistent of three steps. S developer knows that B can have two issues, corresponding In this section, present theofmethodology of our study. In order to ease the we explanation our methodology, we first tool consistent of of three steps.ex all sources possible touse two possible exceptions. These two be order ease the explanation of our methodology, weexceptions first identifycan antoillustrative example with which we then introduce identify all sources of blocks possible the exception handling (cae use exception an newly illustrative example which we from thentheintroduce our flow analysis. Finally, we present subject the either raised or with propagated another method that exception handling are handled. Finally, weblocks recover(ca th our exception flow analysis. Finally, we present the subject of our study. are handled. Finally, we is recover t structing call graph that relevan Bprojects calls (e.g., method C and method getPath). Developers projects of our study. 1structing call graph that is releva A. An illustrative example of exception handling practices can use a throw statement tohandling raise practices an exception. In our 1 A. InAnthis illustrative example of exception subsection, we explain an illustrative example that 1  III. M ETHODOLOGY In this section, we present the methodology of our study. Aiding the explanation of our methodology, we first consider an illustrative example. Second, we introduce our exception flow analysis. Finally, we discuss the subject projects used.1  code, binaries and Tablea example, developers newly raise The IOException with1Our thesource throw In thisraises subsection, we explain an illustrative example also that available handles, and propagates exceptions. example online code, at https://guipadua.github Our source binaries and Table statement in and thepropagates methodexceptions. C. Moreover, if the happens, handles, raises The example alsoissue available online at https://guipadua.githu such exception will propagate to all the methods that call C. 3) Documenting exceptions: From our example, a developer could consult the source code of B and C to identify the rise of IOException in the throw statement. However, the source code is not always available for a method. For example, the method getPath called in method B is declared by an external API. Developers would need to consult the documentation (such as JavaDoc) of the method to discover the propagation of the possible InvalidPathException. There could be cases when an exception is thrown but still not available in the documentation. Therefore, in some programming languages (like Java), a possible exception can be part of the method declaration. For example, method A, B, and C declares that a possible exception can propagate in the throws block of the method declaration. However, some exceptions can remain undeclared (like InvalidPathException).  A. An illustrative example of exception handling practices In this subsection, we explain an illustrative example that handles, raises and propagates exceptions (see Figure 1). The example also illustrates the means of documenting exceptions. 1) Handling possible exceptions: In this example, a developer would like to implement a method named A. The method A requires to execute method B. The developer, by other means, has the knowledge that B can face two issues: 1) having an invalid path as input and 2) I/O faults. Therefore, instead of executing as expected, method B would possibly throw two types of exceptions: InvalidPathException and IOException, which correspond to the two issues, respectively. To deal with the two possible exceptions in method B, the developer needs to either handle the exception, i.e., determine the alternative actions when such exception happens, or propagate the exception such that a different method would manage the issue. In our example, the developer decides to handle InvalidPathException only and to propagate IOException.  B. Exception flow analysis In the previous subsection, we presented an example of an exception handling scenario with its related flows. In this section, we present our methodology that automatically  1 Source  code, binaries, statistical tests and Tableau visualizations with raw data are available online at https://guipadua.github.io/scam2017.  3  extracts possible exceptions and their flows in Java and C# projects. We build an automated tool using Eclipse JDT Core and .NET Compiler Platform (“Roslyn”) to parse the Java and C# source code, respectively. As an overview, our analysis consists of three main steps. First, we identify the exception handling blocks (catch blocks). Second, we recover the flow of exceptions by constructing the call graph that is relevant to the identified catch blocks. Finally, by traversing the flow of exceptions, we identify the sources of possible exceptions. As a building block, we obtain the abstract syntax tree (AST) from the source code. In this step, we include not only the source code but also the binary files of dependencies from the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) for Java or the .NET Global Assembly Cache (GAC) for C#. The dependencies of third party libraries used by the projects are also included. These dependencies enrich the analysis by providing binding information, which draws connections between the different parts of a program (i.e. any method call and its origin, either if part of an internal declaration or external dependency). Also, we enrich the AST by parsing the documentation of the dependencies mentioned above as another source of information. 1) Identifying the handling of exceptions: We collect all the exception handling scenarios through all the catch blocks available in the AST. At the catch block, we use the AST elements to identify the methods that are executed to handle each exception as handling actions. We also obtain the related try blocks, which provide a list of called methods. These methods are necessary since they might raise or propagate the exceptions that the catch block potentially handles. In our example, we identify the catch block in method A. The method printStackTrace is the handling action of the exception InvalidPathException. From this catch block, we obtain the try block in which we find the call to method B. Method B can potentially propagate InvalidPathException and IOException. 2) Constructing call graph: Exceptions are propagated in method calls. Therefore, we leverage call graphs to recover the flow of exceptions. To handle polymorphism without risking over-estimation, we only consider the possible exceptions of the method that is declared in the parent class, since they are more generic and often called within the derived methods. Based on the previous step, for each identified method we traverse its call graph in a depth-first manner to find its possible exceptions. In our example, we traverse the call graph of method B and find two possible exceptions: IOException from method C and InvalidPathException from method getPath. Hence, based on the examples’ catch block, we know that the InvalidPathException is handled in method A while IOException is propagated without handling. 3) Identifying sources of exceptions: During the call graph traverse and based on the AST, we identify four sources of exceptions. They are: 1) The newly raised exception by the throw statement, 2) the declared exception in the throws of the method declaration (only for Java), 3) the documentation as comments in the source code (like JavaDoc comments), and 4) the external documentation. In our illustrative example, we can identify the newly raised IOException in a throw statement  TABLE II A N OVERVIEW OF THE SELECTED SUBJECT PROJECTS . Project  C#  Java  Release Version Type # Try # Catch # Method (K) KLOC  Glimpse  1.8.6  App.  56  57  1  31  Google API  v1.15.0  Lib.  22  30  16  628  OpenRA  release-20160508 App.  138  143  7  125  ShareX  v11.1.0  App.  334  341  7  177  SharpDevelop  5.0.0  App.  940  1060  41  923  SignalR  2.2.1  Lib.  94  105  2  38  Umbraco-CMS  release-7.5.0  App.  595  615  15  362  Apache ANT  rel/1.9.7  App.  Eclipse JDT Core  I20160803-2000 Lib.  Elasticsearch  v2.4.0  Guava  934  1139  11  158  1,424  1655  25  383  App.  385  408  12  108  v19.0  Lib.  263  317  10  79  Hadoop Common  rel/release-2.6.4  Lib.  975  1144  14  147  Hadoop HDFS  44  rel/release-2.6.4  App.  525  586  4  Hadoop MapReduce rel/release-2.6.4  App.  293  367  6  57  Hadoop YARN  rel/release-2.6.4  Lib.  1,192  1529  29  257  Spring Framework  v4.3.2.RELEASE Lib.  1,940  2301  30  349  Total 10,110 11,797  230 3,866  in method C (source 1), the declaration of the IOException in methods A, B, and C (source 2), and the JavaDoc documentation of method C for IOException (source 3). In addition, since we include the information from external libraries, our tool can also identify that the method getPath called in method B is a source of a possible InvalidPathException (source 4). Some exceptions can be identified from multiple sources. For example, IOException is identified by three separate sources. We do not consider the multiple sources as different exceptions if the exceptions are associated with the same method call (e.g. method B). We label the separate sources of an exception as detailed information for each method call. C. Subject projects Table II depicts the studied subject projects. Our study considers Java and C# due to their popularity and prior research (see Section II). Moreover, we include C# because of its different approach compared to Java exception handling. To facilitate replication of our work, we chose open source projects that are available on GitHub. We leverage GitHub filters on the number of contributors (i.e. projects with multiple contributors) and the number of stargazers (i.e. projects with more than ten stargazers), as they can achieve a good precision for selecting engineered software projects [29]. To narrow down the number of projects we also sorted the projects in descending order of the number of stargazers. Moreover, to potentially investigate the differences in exception handling practices and increase generalizability, we picked projects based on the filtering mentioned above. After reading the official description of the projects, we selected multiple applications and multiple libraries (i.e. project type), as well as multiple projects for different business domains (i.e. project purpose). From each project, we selected the most recent stable version of the source code at the moment of data collection for analysis.  4  IV. Q UANTITY OF E XCEPTIONS In this section, we study the quantity of all possible exceptions that are in each try block.  B. Potentially recoverable yet propagated exceptions In the previous subsection, we find that a significant amount of the possible exceptions are propagated. However, not all exceptions are easy to recover or, more importantly, should even be recovered. For example, exceptions such as ThreadDeath in Java, and OutOfMemoryException in C# cannot feasibly be recovered. In fact, both Java and C# define the recoverability level of exceptions in their documentation [31], [32]. In particular, they suggest that developers should handle potentially recoverable exceptions while developers may not handle potentially unrecoverable ones. Hence, we first group all the propagated exceptions into either potentially recoverable or potentially unrecoverable, according to the specific guidance on Java or C# documentation. Then we count the number of propagated exceptions with potential recoverability. We find that almost 8% (117) of C# and more than 19% (1,359) of Java try blocks have at least one potentially recoverable yet propagated exception. For example, a method named rename in Hadoop HDFS for file renaming features has a possible and potentially recoverable exception called FileAlreadyExistsException. This exception indicates the situation where a file is renamed to another existing file. However, this potentially recoverable exception is not handled by any catch block in that method. ⇤  A. All and propagated possible exceptions Ideally, developers should be aware of all possible exceptions to decide between handling or propagating them. To do that, developers need to navigate the call graph of a system that could extend to multiple ramifications. Hence, the more exceptions there are, the more challenging (i.e. exponential growth) it is for developers to comprehend and decide about exception handling. Besides that, missing possible exceptions can be a reason for the lack of a handler that should exist, which is considered one of the top causes of exception handlings bugs [8]. For those reasons, we study the quantity of total and propagated possible exceptions in each exception handling block. As described in our methodology (see Section III), we collect all the methods called in each try block. For those methods, we can recover the possible exceptions. Afterward, we can measure the quantity of possible exception by counting the unique types of exceptions in each try block. We find that there typically exist multiple possible exceptions in each try block (see Figure 2). The median number of distinct possible exception per try block is four and two, for C# and Java respectively. More than 48% (C#) and 38% (Java) of try blocks can throw in between two and five exceptions. Moreover, more than 36% (C#) and 24% (Java) of the try blocks have six or more possible exceptions. For example, an important method named processCompiledUnits(int,boolean) in Eclipse JDT Core in the Compiler class has a try block with 33 distinct possible exceptions. Developers should properly handle exceptions in such an important method, to ensure reliability. Among all possible exceptions, there often exist possible exceptions that are not handled by any of the catch blocks that are associated with a try block [30]. These unhandled exceptions may increase the challenge of exception handling practice since they will be propagated and will need to be handled elsewhere. If the propagated exceptions remain uncaught across the whole system, there could be a risk of system failures [20], [7], [8]. Therefore, we identify the possible exceptions that are not handled by the catch block. Figure 2 presents the possible propagated exceptions for each try statement. We find that there may exist a large number (up to 34) of possible exceptions that are unhandled in each try block. For example, a method execute(List,int) from class org.apache.tools.ant.taskdefs.optional.junit.JUnitTask in Apache ANT has 25 possible exceptions while the corresponding catch block only handles IOException. ⇤  ⇥  ⇥  Finding 2: There exists a considerable amount of potentially recoverable exceptions that are propagated, even though they are recommended to be handled by Java and C#. Implications: Exception flow analysis can provide automated tooling support to alert developers about not handling potentially recoverable exceptions.  V. D IVERSITY OF E XCEPTIONS There can be a diverse set of exceptions being used across try blocks. Prior research discusses that the use of a high number of distinct exception types might represent a greater concern with exception handling [12]. Therefore, in this section, we study the diversity of exceptions in our subject projects. We count the total number of distinct exception types in each project, and the amount of try blocks in which each type of exception appears. Table III shows the percentage of the exception types of each project that appear in different quantities of try blocks. Despite the large number (up to 97 in C# and 249 in Java) of distinct exception types, there exist a considerable amount of exception types that only appear in few try blocks. In fact, over half of the exception types in C#, and almost 1/3 of the exception types in Java only appear in one try block. Such results imply that although the high number of distinct exception types may be a burden to developers, the burden may not be as high since a considerable amount of the exception types would only affect a small portion of the code.  Finding 1: There often exist multiple possible exceptions in each try block, and, out of those, many are propagated. Implications: Current state-of-the-practice may not provide information to developers about all possible exceptions. Automated techniques may help developers be aware of all possible exceptions to make exception handling decisions.  5  Language / Project  # Propagated  # Prop. and Potenti..  C#  Java  20 15 10 5 0 20  Median: 0  Median: 0  15 10 5 0 20  Median: 1  Median: 0  # Total  15 10 5  Median: 4 Median: 2  0 Glimpse  Google API  OpenRA  ShareX SharpDe.. SignalR Umbraco Apache ANT  E. JDT Elasticse.. Guava Core  H. H. HDFS H. MapR H. YARN Common educe  Spring  Fig. 2. Number of possible exceptions per try block for each project broken down by Propagated and Potentially Recoverable, Propagated, and Total.  A. Multiple sources of the same exception  TABLE III T OTAL AMOUNT OF DISTINCT EXCEPTION TYPES AND THE PERCENTAGES  The multiple sources of exceptions may increase the complexity of exception handling. Consequently, a developer would need to comprehend and investigate more methods in the source code to effectively handle exceptions. For example, developers may encounter a FileNotFoundException due to missing an input file or configuration file. However, developers may need different actions to handle such an exception since missing an input file may be caused by users’ mistake while missing a configuration file is a critical issue of the software. Multiple sources of the same exception may also impact testers since they would need to properly test the exception behavior as well as the multiple possible paths of control flow. We group each possible exception by the distinct methods that act as a source of exceptions. We only consider distinct methods since the same method may not need different ways to handle the exception while the exception propagated from various methods may need to be handled differently. In Table IV, we present the percentage of possible exceptions that are traced back from zero, one, two and more than two distinct methods. The first group is from zero methods, which means that these possible exceptions were traced back to explicit throw invocations, not method invocations. Although most of the possible exceptions (above 76%) are traced back to a single method, we observe that more than 22% of the exceptions are traced back to multiple invoked methods. The try blocks with the highest number of methods can have from two to 17 among C# projects; while, for Java, it is between five and 34. For example, the Umbraco C# class called TypeFinder performs lazy accesses to all assemblies inside a single try block and therefore System.ArgumentNullException can be traced back from 14 different invoked methods. We also noticed that exceptions that are super classes of other exceptions (e.g., IOException) have a higher than average chances of being from multiple sources.  OF DISTINCT EXCEPTION TYPES THAT APPEAR IN DIFFERENT QUANTITY OF TRY BLOCKS .  C#  Java  ⇤  ⇥  Try blocks  Project  1  2  3  Glimpse  27.78%  38.89%  11.11%  Google API  28.00%  40.00%  12.00%  OpenRA  35.71%  4.76%  7.14%  ShareX  13.04%  8.70%  SharpDevelop  19.59%  SignalR  4  5  >5  Total  22.22%  18  4.00%  16.00%  25  16.67%  2.38%  33.33%  42  6.52%  2.17%  6.52%  63.04%  46  8.25%  6.19%  4.12%  2.06%  59.79%  97  56.67%  16.67%  3.33%  6.67%  16.67%  30  Umbraco  27.69%  9.23%  4.62%  1.54%  56.92%  65  Total  55.88%  25.00%  13.97%  9.56%  5.15%  47.79%  214  Apache ANT  15.73%  6.74%  6.74%  3.37%  3.37%  64.04%  89  E. JDT Core  5.56%  2.78%  2.78%  4.17%  1.39%  83.33%  72  Elasticsearch  27.78%  12.50%  16.67%  9.72%  4.17%  29.17%  72  Guava  24.00%  12.00%  16.00%  2.00%  10.00%  36.00%  50  H. Common  14.53%  15.12%  9.88%  11.63%  8.14%  40.70%  172  H. HDFS  27.50%  13.75%  16.25%  7.50%  1.25%  33.75%  80  H. MapReduce  21.74%  8.70%  4.35%  8.70%  2.17%  54.35%  46  H. YARN  17.53%  4.12%  11.34%  6.19%  3.09%  57.73%  97  Spring  22.09%  12.05%  7.63%  10.04%  4.82%  43.37%  249  Total  32.93%  17.76%  15.97%  14.77%  8.38%  42.32%  662  37.83%  19.31%  15.54%  13.66%  7.69%  43.49%  876  Grand Total  Finding 3: With a large amount of exceptions exist in each project, many possible exception types appear in only one try block. Implications: Developers may not need to be aware of all exception types in a project by receiving automated suggestions of the exceptions that he/she needs to understand.  VI. S OURCES OF E XCEPTIONS  The same exception may be traced back from different sources. In this section, we study the sources of exceptions per try block.  6  TABLE IV P ERCENTAGE OF DISTINCT EXCEPTIONS THAT ARE TRACED BACK TO ONE , TWO OR OVER TWO METHODS . 0  ⇤  Distinct methods 1 2  >2  Total  C#  1.05%  76.11%  14.05%  8.80%  7,638  Java  0.61%  77.18%  13.00%  9.20%  28,854  Finding 4: Over 22% of the exceptions are traced from different methods. Implications: Automated tools are needed to help developers understand the source of the exception if it is traced back to ⇥ different methods.  (a) Java Unchecked Exceptions.  B. Sources of exception documentation  Prior studies revealed that lacking immediate documentation is one of the challenges of exception handling [14], [17], [18]. Prior studies observed a small number of documented exceptions. As shown in our illustrative example (see Section III-A), possible exceptions can be recovered from up to four different sources. They are: 1) the newly raised exception by the throw statement in the source code, 2) the declared exception in the throws of the method declaration (only for Java), 3) the documentation as comments in the source code (like JavaDoc comments) and 4) the external documentation. By recovering the sources of each possible exception using exception flow analysis, we may be able to provide the documentation of possible exceptions. For Java, we only recover documentation for unchecked exceptions since checked exceptions must be specified in method declarations. We find that, from all the possible exceptions that we identify, 93% for Java and 71% for C# can be retrieved from the external documentation of dependencies. Figure 3 depicts the sets of possible exceptions per try block that were retrieved by our exception flow analysis. Our findings show that the challenge of having a low amount of documented exceptions can be well addressed by applying exception flow analysis with the information from external documents of libraries. We find that such rich documents are typically from the exceptions that are provided by the system libraries. Therefore, the high availability of such documentation can be expected to assist developers not only for our subject systems but also for the majority of Java and C# projects. ⇤ ⇥  (b) C# Exceptions Fig. 3. Quantity of identified possible exceptions per source of information.  A. Exception handling strategies Exception handling strategy describes the manner in which an exception is handled. In particular, the relationship between the possible exception in a try block and the handler exception in the corresponding catch blocks. There exist in total two handling strategies: • Specific, is the strategy when the type of a possible exception is exactly the same as the handler exception. • Subsumption, is the strategy when the handler exception is a superclass of a possible exception. Since there can be multiple possible exceptions, it can be overwhelming for a developer to handle each possible exception with a Specific strategy. On the other hand, the Subsumption strategy may introduce uncertainty to the caught exception. To study the handling strategies, we compare each possible exception with the handler exception in the corresponding catch block. Figure 4 depicts the quantity of distinct possible exception per try block that is handled according to each strategy. The majority of the exceptions are handled with a subsumption strategy, while only a small portion of the exceptions are handled specifically. The results show that developers  Finding 5: The libraries used by the systems can provide documentation to most of the possible exceptions. Implications: Developers should leverage automated flow analysis to understand possible exceptions.  VII. E XCEPTION H ANDLING S TRATEGIES AND ACTIONS  In this section, we study the strategy and actions in exception handling practices considering the exception flows of each handler.  7  using each type of action in each C# and Java project. Hence, we examined if there exists statistically significant difference (i.e. p-value < 0.05) between Java and C#. A p-value < 0.05 means that the difference is likely not by chance. We choose Wilcoxon Rank Sum test since it does not have an assumption on the distribution of the data. We find statistically significant difference between Java and C# for exception handing with actions “Throw Wrap”, “Throw New”, “Nested Try”, “Continue” and “Todo”. Among these actions, “Throw Wrap”, “Throw New”and “Todo” may indicate that the exceptions are not effectively handled but rather propagated or ignored. All these three actions show up more in Java than C#. We consider the reason may be that Java compiler forces developers to explicitly manage checked exceptions while developers may not have the knowledge of how to handle them properly. To simply make the program compile, developers potentially take these actions. Further studies should investigate why such actions are chosen more in Java than C#. ⇤  Lang.. Project  C#  Glimpse Google API OpenRA ShareX SharpDevel.. SignalR Umbraco Total  Java  Median: 2  Median: 0  Apache ANT E. JDT Core Elasticsearch Guava H. Common H. HDFS H. MapRedu.. H. YARN Spring Total  Median: 0  0  5 10 Subsumption  Median: 1  15 0  5 10 Specific  15  Fig. 4. Quantity of possible exceptions per try block per project by handling strategy.  tend to over-catch exceptions. The extreme case of subsumption strategy is the “Catch Generic” exception handling anti-pattern [13], where developers simply use an exception type which can catch any exceptions in the software, e.g., Exception in Java. Such practice is heavily discussed in prior research [20], [17] and is considered to be harmful since developers cannot optimize the handling of the exception based on the exact type of the exception, but rather only know that there may exist some exceptions during run-time. ⇤  ⇥  ⇥  Finding 7: Java and C# have differences in leveraging various actions when handling exceptions. Implications: More in-depth analysis and user studies are needed to further understand the rationale of differences of Java and C# exception handling practices.  We also compare the actions that are taken when the exceptions are handled with either specific or subsumption strategy. We perform Wilcoxon Rank Sum test similar as when comparing Java and C#. This time, for each particular programming language and type of action, the test compared the percentage of specific handling in each project with subsumption handling in each project. Nonetheless, we observe only one action, i.e., Log, that is handled differently (statistically significant) with specific or subsumption strategy. ⇤  Finding 6: Only a small portion of the exceptions are handled with the Specific strategy. Implications: Developers should be guided to prioritize on handling exception with the Specific strategy, since developers cannot optimize the handling of an exception without knowing its exact type information.  ⇥  B. Exception handling actions  Finding 8: Only one action, Log in Java, is taken differently when exceptions are handled with specific or subsumption strategy. Implications: Research and tooling support are needed to guide how to handle exceptions, especially with the specific strategy.  We would like to know if any particular actions are taken when handling some special possible exception. With such knowledge, we may be able to suggest actions automatically to developers handling exceptions. We gather a list of the ten most handled types of possible exceptions in Java and C#, respectively (see Table VI). We also obtain the percentage of possible exceptions that are handled using each action for each exception type. Similarly, we use Wilcoxon Rank Sum test to compare. For each particular programming language, action, and exception type, the test compared the percentage of the given type in each project with the combined value of all other types of exceptions in each project. We find with statistical significance that, for Java, all top exceptions have at least one action that is taken differently from the rest of the exceptions, and, for C#, two top exceptions has such difference.  During the exception flow analysis (see Section III), we collect a set of method calls in each catch block to know how each exception is handled. Prior studies [3], [17], [14], [16], [28] propose a list of actions based on the combination of method calls in the catch block as Exception handling actions. Table V presents the list of actions that are defined in prior research and are used in this paper. To further understand how exceptions are handled, we study the exception handling actions in our subject projects. Figure 5 presents the percentages of possible exceptions of each project that are handled using a particular type of action. We observe that Java and C# have differences in executing various actions when handling exceptions. To determine the differences, we perform Wilcoxon Rank Sum test [33] to compare the percentage of possible exceptions that are handled  8  Language  Method  TABLE VI L IST OF TOP 10 COMMON EXCEPTION TYPES IN THE STUDIED PROJECTS .  Java C#  Throw Wrap  50.78%  Java  C#  C# Log  Java C#  Throw New  26.64%  Java C#  Throw Current  19.56%  Java C#  Return  11.85%  Java C#  Nested Try  10.24%  Java C#  Empty  4.67%  Java C#  Continue  4.23%  Java  java.lang.IllegalArgumentException†  System.NotSupportedException†  java.lang.NullPointerException†  System.ArgumentOutOfRangeException  java.lang.IndexOutOfBoundsException†  System.InvalidOperationException  java.lang.SecurityException†  System.FormatException  java.lang.IllegalStateException†  System.IO.IOException  java.lang.ExceptionInInitializerError†  System.IO.PathTooLongException†  java.lang.ArrayStoreException†  System.Security.SecurityException  java.lang.IllegalAccessException†  System.ObjectDisposedException  java.lang.ClassNotFoundException†  0.26%  C#  generalize to other projects, languages or commercial systems. Replicating our study on other subjects may address this threat and further understand the state-of-the-practice of exception handling. Internal validity. We aim to include all possible sources of information in our automated exception flow analysis. However, our analysis may still miss possible exceptions, if there is a lack of documentation or the source code is not compilable. Also, the documentation of the exception may be incorrect or outdated. In our analysis, we trust the content of documentation. Therefore, we cannot claim that our analysis fully recovers all possible exceptions nor that the recovered information is impeccable. Further studies may perform deeper analysis on the quality of exception handling documentation to address this threat. Construct validity. Our study may not cover all possible handling actions. We selected actions based on the previous research in the subject [3], [17], [14], [16], [28]. Some actions are not included in our study if they are either 1) require heuristic to detect or 2) are not well explained in details in related work. Our possible exception identification approach is based on a call graph approximation from static code analysis. We may still miss possible exceptions due to under-estimation for polymorphism or unresolved method overload. Although such approximation may impact our findings, our choice of under-estimation would not significantly alter the existence of observed challenges of exception handling, i.e., the challenge may appear even worse without the under-estimation. Nevertheless, to complement our study, dynamic analysis on the exception flow may be carried out to understand the system exceptions during run-time.  0.13%  Java C#  Default  0.09%  Java C#  0.00%  0.00%  5.00%  10.00% 15.00% 20.00% 25.00% 30.00% 35.00% 40.00% 45.00% 50.00% 55.00% 60.00% 65.00% 70.00% Value  Fig. 5. Percentage of possible exceptions that are handled using each type of action.  ⇥  java.io.IOException†  System.ArgumentException  Java  Todo  ⇤  System.ArgumentNullException  †The exception has at least one actions that taken statistically significantly differently from the rest exceptions.  C# Abort  Java  48.08%  Finding 9: All top 10 Java and 2 out of top 10 C# exceptions have at least one action that is taken statistically significantly differently from the rest exceptions. Implications: Developers may consider leveraging automated suggestions of exception handling actions. TABLE V L IST OF THE DETECTED ACTIONS . Action  Short Description  Abort  The handler contains an abort statement [3].  Continue  The handler contains a continue statement [14].  Default  The handler contains the IDE suggested method (Java only).  Empty  The handler is empty [3], [17], [14], [16].  Log  The handler displays or logs some information [17], [14], [16].  Method  The handler contains a method invocation different than the other actions listed in this table. [14], [17].  Nested Try  The handler contains a new try statement [28].  Return  The handler contains a return statement [17], [14].  Throw Current  The handler contains a throw statement without a new exception instantiation [17], [14], [16].  Throw New  The handler contains a throw statement with a new exception instantiation [17], [14], [16].  Throw Wrap  The handler contains a throw statement using the original exception or its associated information [16].  Todo  The handler contains TODO or FIXME comments [3].  IX. C ONCLUSION Exception handling is an important feature in modern programming languages. However, prior studies unveil the suboptimal usage of exception handling features in practice. In this paper, we revisit practice of exception handling in 16 open source software in Java and C#. Although we confirm that there exist suboptimal manners of exception handling,  VIII. T HREATS TO VALIDITY In this section, we discuss the threats to validity of our findings. External validity. Our study is based on a set of open source Java and C# projects from GitHub. Our findings may not  9  more importantly, we highlight the opportunities of performing source code analysis to recover exception flows to help practitioners tackle various complex issues of handling exceptions. In particular, the contributions of our paper are: 1) We design an automated tool that recovers exception flows from both Java and C#. 2) We present empirical evidence to illustrate the challenges and complexity of exception handling in open source systems. 3) Our exception flow analysis, as an automated tool, can already provide valuable information to assist developers better understand and make exception handling decisions. This paper highlights the opportunities and urgency of providing automated tooling to help developers make exception handling decisions during the development of quality and reliable software systems.  [16] R. Coelho, A. Rashid, A. Garcia, F. Ferrari, N. Cacho, U. Kulesza, A. von Staa, and C. Lucena, “Assessing the Impact of Aspects on Exception Flows: An Exploratory Study,” in ECOOP 2008 – ObjectOriented Programming: 22nd European Conference Paphos, Cyprus, July 7-11, 2008 Proceedings, 2008, vol. 5142 LNCS, pp. 207–234. [17] D. Sena, R. Coelho, U. Kulesza, and R. Bonifácio, “Understanding the exception handling strategies of Java libraries,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Mining Software Repositories - MSR ’16, 2016, pp. 212–222. [18] M. Kechagia and D. Spinellis, “Undocumented and unchecked: exceptions that spell trouble,” in Proceedings of the 11th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories - MSR 2014. New York, New York, USA: ACM Press, 2014, pp. 312–315. [19] B. Cabral, P. Sacramento, and P. Marques, “Hidden truth behind .NET’s exception handling today,” Software, IET, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 233–250, 2007. [20] S. Sinha, A. Orso, and M. Harrold, “Automated support for development, maintenance, and testing in the presence of implicit flow control,” in Proceedings. 26th International Conference on Software Engineering, no. September, 2004, pp. 336–345. [21] N. Cacho, T. César, T. Filipe, E. Soares, A. Cassio, R. Souza, I. Garcia, E. A. Barbosa, and A. Garcia, “Trading robustness for maintainability: an empirical study of evolving c# programs,” Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering - ICSE 2014, no. iii, pp. 584–595, 2014. [22] N. Cacho, E. A. Barbosa, J. Araujo, F. Pranto, A. Garcia, T. Cesar, E. Soares, A. Cassio, T. Filipe, and I. Garcia, “How Does Exception Handling Behavior Evolve? An Exploratory Study in Java and C# Applications,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution, no. 1. IEEE, sep 2014, pp. 31–40. [23] M. P. Robillard and G. C. Murphy, “Analyzing Exception Flow in Java Programs,” in Proceedings of the 7th European Software Engineering Conference Held Jointly with the 7th ACM SIGSOFT International Symp. on Foundations of Software Engineering, 1999, pp. 322–337. [24] I. Garcia and N. Cacho, “eFlowMining: An Exception-Flow Analysis Tool for .NET Applications,” in 2011 Fifth Latin-American Symposium on Dependable Computing Workshops, no. i. IEEE, apr 2011, pp. 1–8. [25] M. Kechagia, T. Sharma, and D. Spinellis, “Towards a context dependent java exceptions hierarchy,” in Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Software Engineering Companion, ser. ICSE-C ’17. Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2017, pp. 347–349. [26] L. Zhang and C. Krintz, “As-if-serial exception handling semantics for Java futures,” Sci. of Computer Programming, vol. 74, pp. 314–332, 2009. [27] B. Cabral and P. Marques, “A transactional model for automatic exception handling,” Computer Languages, Systems and Structures, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 43–61, 2011. [28] J. Zhu, P. He, Q. Fu, H. Zhang, M. R. Lyu, and D. Zhang, “Learning to Log: Helping Developers Make Informed Logging Decisions,” in 2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering, vol. 1. IEEE, may 2015, pp. 415–425. [29] N. Munaiah, S. Kroh, C. Cabrey, and M. Nagappan, “Curating GitHub for engineered software projects,” Empirical Software Engineering, pp. 1–35, 2017. [30] M. P. Robillard and G. C. Murphy, “Static analysis to support the evolution of exception structure in object-oriented systems,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 191–221, 2003. [31] “Chapter 11. Exceptions - Java SE Specification.” [Online]. Available: http://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se8/html/jls-11.html, accessed 2017-03-29 [32] “Handling and Throwing Exceptions - .NET Framework Documentation.” [Online]. Available: https://msdn.microsoft.com/enus/library/5b2yeyab(v=vs.110).aspx [33] F. Wilcoxon and R. A. Wilcox, Some rapid approximate statistical procedures. Lederle Laboratories, 1964.  R EFERENCES [1] P. M. Melliar-Smith and B. Randell, “Software Reliability: The Role of Programmed Exception Handling,” Reliable Computer Systems, pp. 143–153, 1985. [2] C.-T. Chen, Y. C. Cheng, C.-Y. Hsieh, and I.-L. Wu, “Exception handling refactorings: Directed by goals and driven by bug fixing,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 82, no. 2, pp. 333–345, feb 2009. [3] D. Yuan, Y. Luo, and X. Zhuang, “Simple Testing Can Prevent Most Critical Failures,” 11th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 14), 2014. [4] T. Cargill, C++ Gems, S. B. Lippman, Ed. New York, NY, USA: SIGS Publications, Inc., 1996. [5] B. Zhang and J. Clause, “Lightweight automated detection of unsafe information leakage via exceptions,” Proceedings of the 2014 International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis - ISSTA 2014, pp. 327–338, 2014. [6] F. Cristian, “Exception Handling and Software Fault Tolerance,” Computers, IEEE Transactions on, vol. C-31, no. 6, pp. 531–540, 1982. [7] E. A. Barbosa, A. Garcia, and S. D. J. Barbosa, “Categorizing Faults in Exception Handling: A Study of Open Source Projects,” in 2014 Brazilian Symposium on Software Engineering, no. September. IEEE, sep 2014, pp. 11–20. [8] F. Ebert, F. Castor, and A. Serebrenik, “An exploratory study on exception handling bugs in Java programs,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 106, pp. 82–101, aug 2015. [9] S. Nakshatri, M. Hegde, and S. Thandra, “Analysis of exception handling patterns in Java projects,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Mining Software Repositories - MSR ’16. New York, New York, USA: ACM Press, 2016, pp. 500–503. [10] M. B. Kery, C. Le Goues, and B. A. Myers, “Examining programmer practices for locally handling exceptions,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Mining Software Repositories - MSR ’16. New York, New York, USA: ACM Press, 2016, pp. 484–487. [11] M. Asaduzzaman, M. Ahasanuzzaman, C. K. Roy, and K. A. Schneider, “How developers use exception handling in Java?” in Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Mining Software Repositories - MSR ’16. New York, New York, USA: ACM Press, 2016, pp. 516–519. [12] R. Bonifacio, F. Carvalho, G. N. Ramos, U. Kulesza, and R. Coelho, “The use of C++ exception handling constructs: A comprehensive study,” in 2015 IEEE 15th International Working Conference on Source Code Analysis and Manipulation (SCAM). IEEE, sep 2015, pp. 21–30. [13] G. B. de Pádua and W. Shang, “Studying the Prevalence of Exception Handling,” 25th IEEE International Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC ’17), pp. 1–4, 2017. [14] B. Cabral and P. Marques, “Exception Handling: A Field Study in Java and .NET,” in ECOOP 2007 Object-Oriented Programming, vol. 4609, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 151–175. [15] J. W. Jo, B. M. Chang, K. Yi, and K. M. Choe, “An uncaught exception analysis for Java,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 59–69, 2004.  10

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
