Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_4423

Abstract:
STRATIFICATIONS OF AFFINE DELIGNE-LUSZTIG VARIETIES  arXiv:1802.02225v1 [math.AG] 6 Feb 2018  ULRICH GÖRTZ Abstract. Affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties are analogues of Deligne-Lusztig varieties in the context of affine flag varieties and affine Grassmannians. They are closely related to moduli spaces of p-divisible groups in positive characteristic, and thus to arithmetic properties of Shimura varieties. We compare stratifications of affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties attached to a basic element b. In particular, we show that the stratification defined by Chen and Viehmann using the relative position to elements of the group Jb , the σ-centralizer of b, coincides with the Bruhat-Tits stratification in all cases of Coxeter type, as defined by X. He and the author.  0. Introduction Affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties are closely related to moduli spaces of p-divisible groups (so-called Rapoport-Zink spaces), and hence to the reduction of Shimura varieties and their arithmetic properties. They are also interesting in their own: Similarly as with classical Deligne-Lusztig varieties, their cohomology gives rise to representations (of certain p-adic groups). For instance, one can hope that this gives an approach to the local Langlands correspondence, compare the papers by Chan [Ch] and Ivanov [Iv1], [Iv2]. In general, the geometric structure of affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties is hard to understand. Even foundational properties such as the dimension and the sets of connected and irreducible components are not yet fully understood in general. See the survey papers by Rapoport [Ra] and He [He] and the references given there. A general approach to understanding the geometry and cohomology of an affine Deligne-Lusztig variety is to stratify it as a union of better understood varieties. In [CV], Chen and Viehmann define a stratification (which we below call the J-stratification) of affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties in a very general setting, using the relative position to elements of the group J, the σ-centralizer of the underlying element b. While in their paper they consider the case where the level structure is hyperspecial (and so in particular the underlying algebraic group G is assumed to be unramified), it is clear that their underlying definition applies in the general case, as well. However, it is extremely difficult to give a good description of this stratification: Neither the index set of the stratification nor the geometric structure of the strata are easy to understand. Also, the J-stratification is a stratification only in the loose sense that it is a decomposition into disjoint locally closed subsets; in general, the closure of a stratum is not a union of strata. Nevertheless, Chen and Viehmann are able to give a convincing justification of their definition by showing that in several specific cases their stratification coincides with stratifications which were studied previously and which have nice properties. One of these is the so-called Bruhat-Tits (BT) stratification, a stratification indexed in terms of the Bruhat-Tits building of the algebraic group J (whence the name), whose strata are classical Deligne-Lusztig varieties. This stratification exists only in particular 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 11G18, 14G35, 20G25. Key words and phrases. Affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties. The author was partially supported by DFG Transregio-Sonderforschungsbereich 45. 1  2  U. GÖRTZ  cases, called of Coxeter type in [GH], where the situation was discussed in detail from the point of view of affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties; see also [GHN]. Even though this is quite a special situation, it includes many important cases and this phenomenon had been studied extensively in the context of Rapoport-Zink spaces and Shimura varieties (see e. g. [Ka], [VW], [RTW]) where it plays an important role, for instance in the Kudla-Rapoport program. The purpose of this paper is to provide the technical result ensuring that the Jstrata are locally closed subsets of F lagK without the restriction to hyperspecial level structure, and to prove that the J-stratification coincides with the BT stratification in all cases of Coxeter type, as conjectured in [CV]. To describe the results in more detail, we fix some notation. Let F be a nonarchimedean local field, i.e., a finite extension of Qp , the field of p-adic numbers for a prime p, or of the form Fq ((t)) where Fq denotes the finite field with q elements. Let F̆ be the completion of the maximal unramified extension of F , and let σ be the Frobenius automorphism of F̆ with fixed field F . Let G be a connected semisimple group of adjoint type over F . We denote by W̃ the extended affine Weyl group over F̆ , and by S̃ ⊂ W̃ the set of simple affine reflections. Let K ⊂ S̃ (a “level structure”), and let K̆ ⊂ G(F̆ ) be the corresponding parahoric subgroup (see Section 1.2 for more details). For b ∈ G(F̆ ) and w ∈ W̃ we have the affine Deligne-Lusztig variety Xw (b) = {g ∈ G(F̆ )/K̆; g −1 bσ(g) ∈ K̆wK̆}, a locally closed subscheme of the ind-scheme G(F̆ )/K̆ (in the case of mixed characteristic, we view G(F̆ )/K̆ and Xw (b) as ind-perfect schemes in the sense of Zhu [Zh] and Bhatt and Scholze [BS]). We also have the variant X(µ, b)K for µ a translation, the union of the above Xw (b) for w in the µ-admissible set. See Section 1.5. To state the definition of the J-stratification, denote by J := {g ∈ G(F̆ ); g−1 bσ(g) = b} the σ-centralizer of b. (Since b is usually fixed in the discussion, we mostly omit it from the notation.) By definition, two points g, g′ ∈ F lagK lie in the same J-stratum, if and only if for all j ∈ J, invK (j, g) = invK (j, g′ ). Here invK denotes the relative position map for level K̆ (see Def. 2.1). For the definition of the Bruhat-Tits stratification, we refer to Section 3 and to [GH]. The main theorem in this paper is Theorem 0.1. ([CV], Conj. 4.2; Theorem 3.4, Remark 3.5) Let (G, µ, K) be of Coxeter type. Then the Bruhat-Tits stratification on X(µ, b)K coincides with the J-stratification. See Section 3.1 for details on the setup, including the (important) choices of the particular elements b. To prove that the Bruhat-Tits stratification is a refinement of the J-stratification we use a result of Lusztig (Prop. 1.1) saying that a classical DeligneLusztig variety attached to a twisted Coxeter element is contained in the open cell of the ambient flag variety. The converse is more difficult and relies, in addition, on combinatorial arguments on the affine root system and the building of G; one of the ingredients is the theory of acute cones developed by Haines and Ngô, [HN]. Before we come to the main theorem, we generalize the following finiteness property of the J-stratification which was proved for hyperspecial level in [CV], Prop. 2.6. Theorem 0.2. (Theorem 2.8) Let b ∈ G(F̆ ), let Jb be its σ-centralizer, and let J = Jb (F ). Fix a parahoric level K ⊂ S̃ and a quasi-compact subscheme S ⊂ F lagK in the partial flag variety for K.  STRATIFICATIONS OF AFFINE DELIGNE-LUSZTIG VARIETIES  3  There exists a finite subset J ′ ⊂ J such that for all g, g ′ ∈ S with inv(j, g) = inv(j, g′ ) for all j ∈ J ′ , we have inv(j, g) = inv(j, g ′ ) for all j ∈ J. The result of the theorem ensures that the J-stratification has certain reasonable finiteness properties; in particular, the J-strata are locally closed. See [CV] Cor. 2.10, Prop. 2.11. Outline of the paper. In Section 1, we recall Lusztig’s result on classical DeligneLusztig varieties mentioned above, give the details for the setup concerning affine DeligneLusztig varieties and recall some properties of the Bruhat-Tits building that we are going to use. In Section 2, we discuss the definition and general properties of the Jstratification, including the finiteness property stated in the introduction. Finally, in Section 3 we recall the notion of data of Coxeter type and the Bruhat-Tits stratification, and prove that it coincides with the J-stratification. 1. Preliminaries 1.1. Deligne-Lusztig varieties. Let k0 be a finite field, and let k be an algebraic closure of k0 . We consider a connected reductive group G0 /k0 together with a maximal torus and a Borel subgroup T0 ⊂ B0 ⊂ G0 . By T , B and G, resp., we denote the base change of these groups to k. Let σ denote the Frobenius automorphism on k with fixed field k0 , and likewise the isomorphism induced on G(k), etc. In the following, we often implicitly identify a variety over an algebraically closed field k with its k-valued points. We denote by W the Weyl group of T , and by w0 its longest element. Let S ⊂ W denote the set of simple reflections defined by B. This defines the Bruhat order and the length function ℓ on W . For any w ∈ W , we have the Deligne-Lusztig variety attached to w: X(w) = {gB ∈ G/B; g −1 σ(g) ∈ BwB}. This is a smooth locally closed subvariety of the flag variety G/B of dimension ℓ(w). Now σ acts on S since T and B are defined over k0 , and we call an element w ∈ W a twisted Coxeter element, if w can be written as the product of elements of S which lie in different σ-orbits, and such that every σ-orbit occurs among the factors. Proposition 1.1. (Lusztig, [Lu] Cor. 2.5) Let X ⊂ G/B the Deligne-Lusztig variety attached to a twisted Coxeter element. Then X ⊆ Bw0 B/B. Example 1.2. Let us explain the case of G = GLn , k0 = Fp . We identify the Weyl group for the diagonal torus with the symmetric group in the usual way, and use the transpositions si = (i, i + 1), i = 1, . . . , n − 1, as Coxeter generators corresponding to the Borel subgroup of upper triangular matrices. As explained in [DL] 2.2, the Deligne– Lusztig variety X for the (twisted) Coxeter element w = s1 s2 · · · sn−1 consists of those flags (Fi )i in kn such that Fi =  i X  σ j (F1 )  for all i.  j=1  P Looking at the Moore determinant, we see that a line of the form h ai ei i gives rise to a point in X (i.e., all sums on the right hand side of the displayed formula are in fact direct sums) if and only if the ai are linearly independent over Fp , or in other words, if and only if this line is not contained in a rational hyperplane.  4  U. GÖRTZ  From this, it is easy to see that a point (Fi )i ∈ X satisfies dim Fi ∩ he1 , . . . , ej ik = max(0, i + j − n). This is precisely the Schubert condition which ensures that X is contained in the open cell Bw0 B/B. See the paper [RTW] by Rapoport, Terstiege and Wilson, Section 5, and Wu’s paper [Wu], Examples 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, for further examples for other classical groups. 1.2. Notation. Now we return to the setting of the introduction: Let F be a nonarchimedean local field, F a separable closure of F , and F̆ the completion of its maximal unramified extension F un . We denote by ε ∈ F a uniformizer, by κ the residue class field of F , and by κ the residue class field of F̆ , an algebraic closure of κ. Let σ denote the Frobenius automorphism of F̆ over F . Let G/F be a connected semisimple group of adjoint type. (It is easy to extend the results below to reductive groups, but we restrict to the key case of semisimple adjoint groups here.) We have the Kottwitz homomorphism κG : G(F̆ ) → π1 (G)Gal(F /F un ) , where π1 (G) denotes the algebraic fundamental group of G. See [Ko2] §7, [RR]. Its kernel G(F̆ )1 := Ker(κG ) is the subgroup of G(F̆ ) generated by all parahoric subgroups. The analogous result also holds over F , and we again denote the concerning subgroup by G(F )1 . See [Ri] Lemma 4.3. Fix a maximal F̆ -split torus of G over F and denote by T its centralizer, a maximal torus in G (because G is quasi-split over F̆ ). Let N be the normalizer of T in G. These choices give rise to the (relative) finite Weyl group W0 = N (F̆ )/T (F̆ ) and the IwahoriWeyl group W̃ = N (F̆ )/T (F̆ )1 , where T (F̆ )1 ⊂ T (F̆ ) is the unique parahoric subgroup, or equivalently the kernel of the Kottwitz homomorphism for the group T . We denote by B̆ = B(G, F̆ ) the building of G over F̆ . Associated with S ⊂ G, there is the “standard apartment” A˘, an affine space under the vector space V = X∗ (T )Gal(F /F un ) ⊗Z R on which W̃ acts by affine transformations. The Frobenius σ also acts on A˘, and we fix a σ-invariant alcove a which we call the base alcove. We fix a special vertex 0 in the closure of a which is fixed under the Frobenius automorphism of the unique quasi-split inner form of G, and using this vertex as the base point, we identify A˘ with V . This choice of special vertex also gives rise to a decomposition of W̃ as a semi-direct product W̃ = X∗ (T )Gal(F /F un ) ⋊ W0 (but note that the inclusion W0 ⊂ W̃ is not σ-equivariant in general). Inside W̃ we have the affine Weyl group Wa ; we can define it as the extended affine Weyl group of the simply connected cover of the derived group of G. In terms of the Kottwitz homomorphism κG , we can express Wa as Wa = (N (F̆ ) ∩ G(F̆ )1 )/T (F̆ )1 , see [Ri]. From the choice of a base alcove, we obtain a system of simple affine reflections S̃ ⊂ Wa . Then S̃ generates Wa and (Wa , S̃) is a Coxeter system. We extend the length function and the Bruhat order to W̃ in the usual way; an element has length 0 if and only if it fixes the base alcove a. For a subset P ⊆ S̃, we denote by WP ⊆ Wa the subgroup generated by the elements of P , and by P W̃ the set of minimal length representatives in W̃ of the cosets in WP \W̃ . The set P also gives rise to a standard parahoric subgroup P̆: It is the subgroup of G(F̆ ) generated by Ĭ and (lifts to N (F̆ ) of) the elements of P . We denote by Φ the set of finite roots in the unique reduced affine root system in V attached to the relative affine root system of G over F̆ , and for α ∈ Φ and k ∈ Z, we denote by Hα,k = {v ∈ V ; hα, vi = k} the corresponding affine root hyperplane.  STRATIFICATIONS OF AFFINE DELIGNE-LUSZTIG VARIETIES  5  2 1  3  0 Figure 1. The base alcove in the building B(G, F̆ ) (gray lines) and part of the standard apartment in the rational building B(J, F ) (black line). We denote by Λ the lattice of translations of A˘ which arise from the action of W̃ . Since G is assumed to be of adjoint type, X∗ (T )Gal(F /F un ) is torsion-free, so that Λ = X∗ (T )Gal(F /F un ) . For λ ∈ Λ, we denote by ελ the corresponding element in W̃ . 1.3. The Bruhat-Tits building of G. We now come back to the building of G and discuss it in a little more detail. The extended affine Weyl group W̃ acts on the set of alcoves of Ă. Having chosen a base alcove a, mapping w ∈ Wa to wa, we can identify the affine Weyl group Wa with the set of alcoves in A˘. The Frobenius σ acts on the building B̆ = B(G, F̆ ) of G over F̆ . If we consider the building as a metric space (which carries a simplicial structure), then we can identify the set of fixed points of σ with the rational building B = B(G, F ) of G over F . Note that in general the embedding B ⊂ B̆ is not induced by a morphism of simplicial complexes, i.e., a vertex of B does not necessarily map to a vertex of B̆ (see the example below). The same situation is, of course, obtained if we pass to another form of G over F . In particular, for τ ∈ N (F̆ ) with τ Ĭτ −1 = Ĭ, i.e., τ gives a length 0 element in W̃ , we can consider the twisted Frobenius σJ := Int(τ ) ◦ σ : x 7→ τ σ(x)τ −1 on G(F̆ ) and the corresponding inner form J of G over F (where the notation is chosen in view of the applications to affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties, see below). In this situation, the affine and extended affine Weyl groups over F can be identified with the subgroups of Wa and W̃ , respectively, consisting of the elements fixed by the Frobenius automorphism (induced by) σJ . We denote the rational affine Weyl group corresponding to J by WaJ . For the buildings, we get B(J, F ) ⊂ B(J, F̆ ) = B(G, F̆ ). See [Ri] for a detailed discussion of the relation between the affine Weyl groups over F and over F̆ . See also [RZ]. Example 1.3. Let G/F be a quasi-split unitary group of rank 3 which splits over an unramified quadratic extension of F . The affine Dynkin diagram of G then is a circle with 4 vertices 0, 1, 2, 3, on which the Frobenius acts by exchanging 1 and 3, and fixing 0 and 2. In W̃ , there is a length 0 element τ which acts on S̃ (by conjugation) by mapping 1 7→ 2 7→ 3 7→ 0 7→ 1. The twisted Frobenius Int(τ ) ◦ σ exchanges 0 and 1, and 2 and 3. The fix points of the twisted Frobenius inside the base alcove are the points on the line from the midpoint of the edge connecting 0 and 1 to the midpoint of the edge connecting 2 and 3. See the figure. In particular, the origin of the apartment over F̆ does not lie in the rational apartment. (As the origin of the rational apartment we choose the unique vertex of the rational base alcove such that closure of corresponding F̆ -face contains the F̆ -origin.)  6  U. GÖRTZ  1.4. The gate property. In this section we recall a number of building theoretic concepts and results. Our reference is the book [AB] by Abramenko and Brown. For any two alcoves x, y in B̆, we have the relative position or Weyl distance δ(x, y) ∈ Wa , which we can obtain by choosing an apartment containing x and y, identifying the set of alcoves in the apartment with the affine Weyl group, and setting δ(x, y) = x−1 y, where x, y ∈ Wa are the elements corresponding to x and y, resp., under this identification. This element is independent of all choices. Let (t1 , . . . , tr ) with ti ∈ S̃ be the type of a gallery from x to y which is contained in one apartment (which is always the case if the gallery is minimal). Then δ(x, y) = t1 · · · tr . For K ⊂ S̃, we also define the K-Weyl distance δK (x, y) := WK δ(x, y)WK ∈ WK \W̃ /WK . With this notation, δ = δ∅ . If M and N are sets of alcoves, we define δ(M, N ) := {δ(x, y); x ∈ M, y ∈ N }. We also define the distance dist(x, y) := ℓ(δ(x, y)) between alcoves x and y as the length of their Weyl distance. Given an alcove x and a set S of alcoves, we write dist(x, S) := miny∈S dist(x, y). Definition 1.4. ([AB], Def. 5.26) Let P ⊆ S̃. For an alcove x we call the set {y; δ(x, y) ∈ WP } the P -residue of x. A set of alcoves is called a P -residue, if it is of the above form for some alcove x. The set P is called the type of the residue. It is easy to see that every residue has a unique type. In fact, we have δ(R, R) = P , and more generally one easily checks: Lemma 1.5. ([AB], Lemma 5.29) Let R be a P -residue, and R′ a P ′ -residue for subsets P, P ′ ⊆ S̃. Then there exists w ∈ Wa such that δ(R, R′ ) = WP wWP ′ . Example 1.6. For P ⊂ S̃ with associated parahoric subgroup P̆, we can consider the quotient P̆/Ĭ as a set of alcoves, and this set is a P -residue. If R is a residue of type P , and g ∈ G(F̆ )1 , then gR is also a residue of type P (since the action of G(F̆ )1 on the building is type-preserving). All residues of type P have the form g P̆/Ĭ for some g ∈ G(F̆ )1 . A key property of residues is the following proposition, called the gate property. The main ingredient in its proof, see loc. cit., is the following fact: For w ∈ W̃ and P, P ′ ⊆ S̃, there exists a unique element of minimal length in the double coset WP wWP ′ which we denote by min(WP wWP ′ ); see [AB] Prop. 2.23. Proposition 1.7. ([AB], Prop. 5.34) Let R be a residue, and b an alcove. There exists a unique alcove g ∈ R such that dist(b, g) = min{dist(b, x); x ∈ R}. The alcove g is called the gate from b to R and is denoted by projR (b). It has the following properties: (1) δ(b, g) is the unique element of minimal length in δ(b, R). (2) For all alcoves x ∈ R, we have δ(b, x) = δ(b, g)δ(g, x). (3) For all alcoves x ∈ R, we have dist(b, x) = dist(b, g) + dist(g, x).  STRATIFICATIONS OF AFFINE DELIGNE-LUSZTIG VARIETIES  7  We obtain a “projection” projR from the set of all alcoves in B(G, F̆ ) to R by mapping each alcove b to the gate from b to R. With the notation of the proposition, we can interpret part (2) as saying that for every x ∈ R, there exists a minimal gallery from b to x passing through g. Note however that usually there will also exist other minimal galleries from b to x not passing through g. Remark 1.8. The uniqueness of the gate from b to R implies that every automorphism which preserves b and R also fixes the gate from b to R. In particular, if b and R are defined over F (i.e., stable under all Galois automorphisms), then so is the gate. We will also need the following generalization of the gate property: Proposition 1.9. ([AB], Prop. 5.37) Let R be a P -residue, and R′ a P ′ -residue for subsets P, P ′ ⊆ S̃. Let w1 = min(δ(R, R′ )), R1 = projR (R′ ), R′1 = projR′ (R). (1) The set R1 is a residue of type P ∩ w1 P ′ w1−1 , and likewise R′1 is a residue of type w1−1 P w1 ∩ P ′ . (2) The maps projR′ |R1 : R1 → R′1 and projR|R′1 : R′1 → R1 are inverse to each other and hence induce a bijection R1 ∼ = R′1 . ′ ′ (3) Let x ∈ R1 . The alcove x ∈ R1 corresponding to x under the bijection in (2) is the unique alcove in R′1 such that δ(x, x′ ) = w1 . 1.5. Affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties. We fix a triple (G, K, µ), where G is a connected semisimple group of adjoint type over F , as above, K ⊂ S̃ and µ ∈ Λ is a translation element of the corresponding affine root system. Attached to µ, we have the µ-admissible set Adm(µ) := {w ∈ W̃ ; there exists v ∈ W0 : w ∈ εv(µ) }. From K ⊂ S̃ we obtain the parahoric subgroup K̆ ⊂ G(F̆ ), and in case K is stabilized by σ, a rational parahoric subgroup K ⊂ G(F ). We denote the corresponding partial affine flag variety by F lagK (this is the ind-scheme representing the sheaf quotient of the loop group of G by the positive loop group scheme corresponding to K̆). For K = ∅, K̆ is the standard Iwahori subgroup Ĭ which we fixed by fixing a base alcove in the standard apartment. We write F lag for F lag∅ . In the case of mixed characteristic, the notion of ind-scheme here has to be understood in the setting of perfect schemes, see [Zh], [BS]. The affine Deligne-Lusztig variety attached to w ∈ W̃ and b ∈ G(F̆ ) is Xw (b) = {g ∈ G(F̆ )/Ĭ; g −1 bσ(g) ∈ ĬwĬ}. More precisely, the right hand side denotes the set of κ-valued points of a unique reduced locally closed subscheme of the affine flag variety F lag, which we also denote by Xw (b). As before, in the mixed characteristic case, Xw (b) is a perfect scheme. Then Xw (b) is (perfectly) locally of finite type over κ and is finite-dimensional. We also consider the following variants: For K ⊆ S̃ and w ∈ WK \W̃ /WK , we have Xw (b) = {g ∈ G(F̆ )/K̆; g −1 bσ(g) ∈ K̆wK̆}, where again b ∈ G(F̆ ). Often it is better to consider the space [ K̆wK̆}, X(µ, b)K = {g ∈ G(F̆ )/K̆; g −1 bσ(g) ∈ w∈Adm(µ)  a finite disjoint union of usual affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties which is more directly related to the corresponding Rapoport-Zink space if the group-theoretic data arises from a suitable (local) Shimura datum, see [Ra].  8  U. GÖRTZ  In the case considered in [CV], K = S̃ \ {0} corresponds to a hyperspecial parahoric group and µ is minuscule, and then X(µ, b)K is an affine Deligne-Lusztig variety in the S usual sense, because the union w∈Adm(µ) K̆wK̆ is equal to the K̆-double coset K̆εµ K̆. In the general case, we will formulate the results in Section 3 for the union X(µ, b)K , as in [GH], but it will be clear from the statements and proofs that we could also consider the individual affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties in the union X(µ, b)K separately. Definition 1.10. Let b ∈ G(F̆ ). We denote by Jb the σ-centralizer of b: Jb (R) = {g ∈ G(R ⊗F F̆ ); g−1 bσ(g) = b} (where R is any F -algebra). This defines an algebraic group Jb over F . We usually fix b and write J = Jb (F ). The element b, or its σ-conjugacy class, is called basic, if the algebraic group J is an inner form of G. See [Ko1], [RR], [GHN] Section 1.2 for a more detailed discussion. 2. The J-stratification 2.1. Definition of the J-stratification. To state the definition of the J-stratification, we introduce the relative position map: Definition 2.1. Let K ⊂ S̃, and let K̆ be the corresponding parahoric subgroup. We denote by invK the relative position map invK : G(F̆ ) × G(F̆ ) −→ K̆\G(F̆ )\K̆ ∼ = WK \W̃ /WK ,  (g, h) 7−→ K̆g −1 hK̆,  where the identification K̆\G(F̆ )\K̆ ∼ = WK \W̃ /WK comes from the “parahoric IwahoriBruhat decomposition” for K̆. For K = ∅, K̆ = Ĭ, this is the usual Iwahori-Bruhat decomposition, for K̆ hyperspecial, it is the Cartan decomposition. See [HR] Prop. 8. The map invK factors through F lag × F lag (and even through F lagK × F lagK ). Remark 2.2. Note that the relative position map is closely related to the Weyl distance δ defined above. In fact, if G(F̆ )1 denotes the kernel of the Kottwitz homomorphism, then the action of G(F̆ ) on the building B̆ gives us a commutative diagram G(F̆ )1 × G(F̆ )   Alc(B̆) × Alc(B̆)  inv  // W̃  δ   // Wa ,  where Alc(B̆) denotes the set of alcoves in B̆, the vertical map on the left is (g, h) 7→ (ga, ha), and the vertical map on the right is the projection W̃ = Wa ⋊ {w ∈ W̃ ; ℓ(w) = 0} → Wa . We need to restrict the values in the first factor of the top left corner to G(F̆ )1 , because the action of G(F̆ ) is not type-preserving in general. Projecting to the double quotients by WK , we get a similar diagram for invK and δK , K ⊂ S̃. Definition 2.3. ([CV] Section 2) Fix b ∈ G(F̆ ) and denote by Jb its σ-centralizer, J := Jb (F ). For K ⊂ S̃ and a family w = (wj )j∈J , we let SJ (w) = {x ∈ G(F̆ )/K̆; ∀j ∈ J : invK (j, x) = wj }. The strata of the J-stratification (of G(F̆ )/K̆ = F lagK (κ)) are those sets SJ (w) which are non-empty. By intersecting SJ (w) with X(µ, b)K , we obtain the J-stratification on X(µ, b)K .  STRATIFICATIONS OF AFFINE DELIGNE-LUSZTIG VARIETIES  9  As explained in [CV] Section 2, it follows from Theorem 2.8 below that each stratum is equal to the set of κ-valued points of a (unique) reduced locally closed subscheme of F lagK , and we usually identify the set of κ-valued points and this scheme. 2.2. A finiteness property of the J-stratification. We start with some general preparations which are independent of the group J. Definition 2.4. Let x be an alcove in the apartment A˘. We denote by DR (x) the set of walls of x separating x from the base alcove a. So the elements if DR (x) are the affine root hyperplanes which intersect the closure of x in a face of codimension 1. Their types in S̃ form the right descent set DR (x) of x (considered as an element of the affine Weyl group). Recall that in our terminology the maximal simplices in the affine building are called alcoves, while the notion of chamber is used for the finite Weyl chambers, i.e., the chambers of the spherical building given by our choice of origin. If v is any vertex in the standard apartment A˘, the collection of affine root hyperplanes passing through v is a (finite) root system in the vector space with origin v obtained from A˘. We call this the root system obtained by change of origin to v. Note that if v is not special, then this root system will have a different Dynkin type. Cf. [GHN] 5.7. Lemma 2.5. Let x be an alcove in the standard apartment A˘, and let H be an affine root hyperplane which is a wall of x. Let v be a vertex of x not lying in H. Let C be the chamber opposite to the chamber containing x with respect to the root system given by change of origin to v. Let H be a finite set of affine root hyperplanes in A˘. Then there exists a translation λ ∈ Λ with the following property: For all alcoves y = εµ x (for some µ ∈ Λ) such that H is a wall of y and such that y is not contained in ελ C, DR (y) 6⊆ H . Note that typically H will contain H and H ∈ DR (x) (otherwise the statement is trivially satisfied). If the affine Dynkin diagram of G is connected, then v in the lemma is unique; but otherwise, alcoves will be products of simplices (polysimplices), and v is not unique. Proof. We first prove the lemma in the case that H = {H}, and will discuss the general case afterwards. In this case, we choose λ such that ελ C contains the base alcove a. Let us check that the conclusion of the lemma is then satisfied. Denote by v ′ the vertex of y obtained by translating v by µ, and denote by C ′ the “chamber” with vertex v ′ which contains y. (So up to translation C and C ′ are opposite to each other.) Because v ′ 6∈ ελ C, one of the walls of ελ C separates v ′ from the base alcove, say Hα,k . Replacing α by −α and k by −k, if necessary, we may assume that k > 0. Let k′ be such that Hα,k′ passes through v ′ (and hence is a wall of y). Then Hα,k′ has “larger distance” to the base alcove than Hα,k , i.e., k′ > k, and Hα,k′ separates y from the base alcove (because up to translation the “chambers” ελ C and the one with apex v ′ and containing y are opposite to each other). Thus Hα,k′ ∈ DR (y) \ {H}. We now discuss how to modify the choice of λ in order to deal with the general case. By changing λ, we may replace the number k in the above argument by any given larger number. The walls of the alcoves y not in ελ C which we produce will have the form Hα,k′ with k′ > k. For k sufficiently large, no Hα,k′ can be in H . Choosing λ which works simultaneously for all α, it is then clear that we may ensure that the wall of y we find is not in the set H .   10  U. GÖRTZ  Proposition 2.6. Let H be a finite set of affine root hyperplanes in the apartment A˘. Then there are only finitely many alcoves x in this apartment with DR (x) ⊆ H . Proof. Let H ∈ H . Since H is finite and the set DR (x) is empty only if x is the base alcove, it is enough to show that there are only finitely many alcoves x with H ∈ DR (x) ⊆ H . Let M denote the set of all of these alcoves. Call two alcoves in M equivalent, if one is mapped to the other by some translation element. In view of the above lemma, it is enough to show that there are only finitely many equivalence classes for this equivalence relation. (Because, with the notation of the lemma, only finitely many alcoves which have H as a wall lie in all the finitely many chambers ελ C produced by the lemma for x and the different choices for v.) This finiteness assertion follows from the fact that H ∩ Λ is a lattice of full rank in the space H: Hence a fundamental mesh for this lattice is bounded, and meets only finitely many alcoves. In fact, every finite root is part of some system of simple roots for the root system. Say H = Hα,k for α ∈ Φ. Choosing a system of simple roots α = β1 , β2 , . . . , βr , and denoting the corresponding fundamental coweights by ω1∨ , . . . , ωr∨ , we find linearly independent  points kω1∨ + ωi∨ , i = 2, . . . , r, in H ∩ Λ. Corollary 2.7. Given a bounded subset S ⊂ B̆, there exists c > 0 such that for all alcoves j in B̆ with dist(j, a) > c, there exists an adjacent alcove j′ of the alcove j such that every alcove in S can be reached from j by a minimal gallery passing through j′ . Proof. We may replace S by a larger subset, so we may assume that S is the set of all alcoves of distance 6 dS to the base alcove a, for some dS . Let j be an alcove with dist(j, a) > dS , and let A ′ be an apartment containing j and the base alcove a. Every minimal gallery from j to an alcove in S passes through an alcove y in A ′ with dist(j, y) = dS . In fact, consider such a minimal gallery. Looking at the retraction from the building onto A ′ fixing a (cf. [AB] Def. 4.38), we see that as soon as this gallery leaves A ′ , the distance to a increases with each step. Therefore it is enough to find a wall of j such that the half-space of A ′ containing j contains none of the alcoves in S. By the defining axioms of buildings ([AB] Def. 4.1), there is an isomorphism A ′ ∼ = A˘ fixing a pointwise, we may just as well assume that A ′ = A˘. Let c1 > 1 be so large that for all affine root hyperplanes Hα,k with |k| > c1 , all alcoves in S contained in A˘ lie on the same side of Hα,k . Now apply Prop. 2.6 in A˘ for the finite set H of affine root hyperplanes Hα,k with |k| 6 c1 . Choose c > dS such that dist(j, a) 6 c for all j with DR (j) ⊆ H .  Theorem 2.8. Let b ∈ G(F̆ ), let Jb be its σ-centralizer, and let J = Jb (F ). Fix a parahoric level K ⊂ S̃ and a quasi-compact subscheme S ⊂ F lagK in the partial flag variety for K. There exists a finite subset J ′ ⊂ J such that for all g, g ′ ∈ S with invK (j, g) = invK (j, g ′ ) for all j ∈ J ′ , we have invK (j, g) = invK (j, g′ ) for all j ∈ J. Equivalently, we can express the theorem as saying that there exist only finitely many families (wj )j∈J of the form (inv(j, g))j with g ∈ S, i.e., only finitely many J-strata intersect S.  STRATIFICATIONS OF AFFINE DELIGNE-LUSZTIG VARIETIES  11  For G unramified, and K = S̃ \ {0} hyperspecial, this is [CV] Prop. 2.6. We give a new proof of this result which works for general G and which proceeds solely in terms of the building of G. Proof. We begin by some reduction steps which simplify the situation. Since the inverse image of S in the full affine flag variety is again a quasi-compact subscheme, and the invariant inv = inv∅ for the Iwahori subgroup is finer than invK , it is enough to prove the theorem in the case K = ∅. Assume that we can show the existence of a finite set J ′ ⊆ G(F̆ ) with the property of the theorem, but without requiring J ′ ⊂ J. It still follows that there are only finitely many families (inv(j, g))j∈J with g ∈ S. These finitely many families can then be separated by finitely many suitably chosen elements of J, so that we obtain the theorem as stated. In particular, this implies that we may replace J = Jb (F ) by a larger group. For s sufficiently large, the base change of Jb to the unramified extension Fs of F of degree s is a subgroup of GFs (more precisely, the centralizer of a 1-parameter subgroup depending on b). It is therefore enough to prove the statement for G(Fs ) in place of J. Increasing s further, we may assume that σ s acts trivially on S̃ and fixes the standard apartment A˘, i.e., GFs is residually split. To ease the notation, we keep the notation J and assume that it is residually split over F . Furthermore, it is easy to check that inv(j, g) = inv(j, g′ ) for all j ∈ J if this is true for all j ∈ J1 . It follows that we can just as well replace S by the set {sa; s ∈ S(κ)} of alcoves in B(G, F̆ ), and inv(j, g) by the Weyl distance δ(ja, ga). It is then enough to show the existence of a finite set J ′ of alcoves j in B(G, F̆ ) such that the values δ(j, ga) for j ∈ J ′ determine all δ(j, ga) for j in B(J, F ). Claim. There exists a finite set J ′ of alcoves in B(G, F̆ ) such that for every alcove j in B(J, F ) there exists an alcove j′ ∈ J ′ such that for every (*) x in S there exists a minimal gallery from j to x passing through j′ . The claim implies the theorem: for j ∈ B(J, F ) and j′ ∈ J ′ chosen with this property, and x ∈ S, δ(j, x) = δ(j, j′ )δ(j′ , x), so if x, x′ ∈ S have δ(j′ , x) = δ(j′ , x′ ), it follows that δ(j, x) = δ(j, x′ ). Therefore J ′ has the desired property. To prove the claim, let J ′ be the set of alcoves in B(J, F ) of distance 6 c to the base alcove, where c is as in Cor. 2.7. Then J ′ is a finite set, because we can view it as a subset of the set of κ-valued points of some Schubert variety over the finite field κ. To show that J ′ satisfies the above property (*), it is enough to prove that the alcove j′ produced by the corollary is again a J-rational alcove, i.e., lies in B(J, F ). Then we can inductively apply the corollary until we reach an alcove of distance 6 c to a. Looking at the proof of the corollary, we see that in our situation we can work with a rational apartment A ′ containing j and the base alcove. Since J is residually split by our previous reductions, every F̆ -alcove in A ′ lies in B(J, F ), and we are done.  3. The Coxeter case 3.1. The setting. We begin by recalling some of the results of [GH]. We start with a group G over a local non-archimedean field F as above, see Section 1.2, a translation element µ ∈ Λ and a “level structure” K ⊂ S̃. We assume that the affine Dynkin diagram of G is connected.  12  U. GÖRTZ  Let K = S̃ \ {v} be a subset fixed by σ, i.e., the parahoric subgroup K̆ is a rational, maximal parahoric subgroup. We are interested in the geometry of the spaces X(µ, b)K , as defined in Section 1.5, the most interesting case being the case where b is basic. For w ∈ Wa , we denote by supp(w) ⊆ S̃ the set of simple affine reflections occurring in a reduced expression for w. Note that this set is the same for each reduced expression; it is called the support of w. Let τ ∈ W̃ be an element of length ℓ(τ ) = 0. Then τ acts on S̃ by conjugation. We define the σ-support suppσ (wτ ) of wτ as the smallest τ σ-stable subset of S̃ which contains supp(w), or equivalently, as the smallest τ σ-stable subset P of S̃ with w ∈ WP . We call an element w ∈ W̃ a σ-Coxeter (or twisted Coxeter) element (with respect to its σ-support), if exactly one simple reflection from each τ σ-orbit on suppσ (w) occurs in every (equivalently, some) reduced expression for w. Note that we do not require that every τ σ-orbit in S̃ occurs in w; for example, the identity element is σ-Coxeter with respect to its σ-support. So there is a slight difference to the terminology of Section 1.1. Attached to these data, we have the set K EOK σ,cox := {w ∈ Adm(µ) ∩ W̃ ; suppσ (w) 6= S̃, and w is σ-Coxeter for suppσ (w)}.  Here EO stands for Ekedahl-Oort; the above set is the index set for the set of “EkedahlOort strata” contained in the basic locus. Now assume that the triple (G, µ, K) is “of Coxeter type” as defined in [GH] Section 5, i.e., we require that for b basic, G X(µ, b)K = π(Xw (b)), w∈EOK σ,cox  where π : F lag → F lagK is the projection. This is a strong condition with a number of pleasant consequences. Loc. cit. Theorem 5.1.2 contains a complete classification of these triples. Also compare with [GHN]. This implies that for b non-basic, X(µ, b)K , if non-empty, is equal to a union of π(Xw (b)) for elements w ∈ Adm(µ) ∩ K W̃ which are σ-straight (see [GH] Section 1.4), and dim Xw (b) = 0. For b basic, w ∈ Adm(µ) ∩ K W̃ , we have Xw (b) 6= ∅ if and only if w ∈ EOK σ,cox ; the resulting decomposition is discussed in more detail in the next section. As proved in [GH], we have a very explicit description of the elements in EOK σ,cox in terms of the affine Dynkin diagram of G. For our purposes, we note the following consequences: If ′ ′ for w, w′ ∈ EOK σ,cox we have suppσ (w) = suppσ (w ), then w = w . We identify the set of vertices of the affine Dynkin diagram with S̃, and for w ∈ EOK σ,cox denote by Σw ⊂ S̃ the set of vertices of the affine Dynkin diagram which are adjacent to suppσ (w) (but do not lie in suppσ (w)). If suppσ (w) = ∅, i.e., ℓ(w) = 0, we define Σw to be the τ σ-orbit of v. It is shown in loc. cit., that Σw determines w, and is either a single τ σ-orbit, or the union of two τ σ-orbits. Instead of repeating further details from [GH], we spell out the above objects in two examples: Example 3.1. We start with the case of a unitary group which splits over an unramified quadratic extension, with µ = ω1∨ (“signature (n − 1, 1)”), cf. [GH] 6.3. This is the case considered by Vollaard and Wedhorn [VW]. The affine Dynkin diagram of type Ãn−1 is a circle with vertices 0, 1, . . . , n − 1, on which σ acts by fixing 0, and exchanging i and n − i for i = 1, . . . , n − 1. (So if n is even, σ has another fix point at n/2.) As level structure, we choose K = S̃ \ {0}; the corresponding parahoric subgroup is hyperspecial.  STRATIFICATIONS OF AFFINE DELIGNE-LUSZTIG VARIETIES  13  8  0  7 1 6 2 5 3  4  Figure 2. Example 3.1 for n = 9, w = s0 s8 τ , Σw = {3, 7}. Conjugation by τ acts by i 7→ i + 1 and n − 1 7→ 0, so the composition τ σ exchanges 0 and 1, 2 and n − 1, etc. Cf. Example 1.3 above (where n = 4). The elements in EOK σ,cox are the elements τ , s0 τ , . . . , s0 sn−1 · · · s⌈ n+3 ⌉ τ , and the 2  corresponding sets Σw are the τ σ-orbits in S̃, i.e., {0, 1}, . . . , {⌈ n2 ⌉, ⌈ n+1 2 ⌉}. In the figure, the situation for n = 9, w = s0 s8 τ , and Σw = {3, 7} (the two vertices marked with gray circles), suppσ (w) = {8, 0, 1, 2} (the vertices marked with black circles) is shown. Example 3.2. Second, we give an example where one of the sets Σw is the union of two τ σ-orbits. This case arises from a unitary group which splits over a ramified quadratic extension, see [GH] 6.3, 7.1.2, 7.4.2 and [RTW] for an analysis of the Rapoport-Zink space pertaining to this case. In this case, the affine Dynkin diagram is of type B̃m with vertices 0, 1, . . . , m, and σ acts by exchanging 0 and 1, and fixing all other vertices. Conjugation by τ also exchanges 0 and 1 and fixes the other vertices, so that τ σ = id. The level K in this example is given by S̃ \ {m}. It corresponds to a non-special rational maximal parahoric subgroup. Let µ = ω1∨ . The set EOK σ,cox consists of τ , sm τ , . . . , sm sm−1 · · · s2 τ , sm sm−1 · · · s2 s1 τ , sm sm−1 · · · s2 s0 τ . The corresponding σ-supports are just the usual supports (∅, {m}, . . . , {2, . . . , m}, {1, 2, . . . , m}, {0, 2, . . . , m}). The sets Σw are the sets {i} for i = 0, . . . , m, and the set {0, 1} (the latter case for m = 6 is shown in the figure; w = s6 s5 s4 s3 s2 τ , Σw = {0, 1} (the two vertices marked with gray circles), suppσ (w) = {2, 3, 4, 5, 6} (the vertices marked with black circles). 0 2  3  4  5  6  1 Figure 3. Example 3.2 for m = 6, w = s6 s5 s4 s3 s2 τ , Σw = {0, 1}. Now we return to the general case. The choice of representative of the σ-conjugacy class. The most interesting among the spaces X(µ, b)K is the one where the σ-conjugacy class of b is basic. In this case, we choose as a representative (an arbitrary lift of) the unique length 0 element τ ∈ W̃ such that εµ ∈ Wa τ . Equivalently, τ is the unique length 0 element such that X(µ, τ )K is non-empty. This is the choice made in [GH], as well, and the  14  U. GÖRTZ  choice suggested as a reasonable one in [CV] Remark 2.1. (As explained there, the J-stratification varies significantly if a different representative, and correspondingly, a different group J, is used. But note that also the treatment in [GH], e.g. Prop. 2.2.1 there, relies on the use of the particular representative τ .) Lemma 3.3. For w ∈ W̃ , any two lifts of w to N (F̆ ) ⊂ G(F̆ ) are T (F̆ )1 -σ-conjugate and hence the J-stratification is independent of the choice of lift. Proof. We use Lang’s theorem for the parahoric subgroup T (F̆ )1 of T (F̆ ) (equipped with a “twisted” Frobenius Int(w) ◦ σ, where w is a fixed lift), see [Gr], Prop. 3. We obtain that the map T (F̆ )1 → T (F̆ )1 , g 7→ g−1 wσ(g)w−1 is surjective. But an element t is in the image if and only if tw is σ-conjugate under T (F̆ )1 to w. As pointed out in [CV] Remark 2.1, elements b1 , b2 ∈ G(F̆ ) which are σ-conjugate under K̆ give rise to the same J-stratification, in the following sense: for b2 = k−1 b1 σ(k), the isomorphism X(µ, b2 )K → X(µ, b1 )K , g 7→ kg identifies Jb2 -strata with Jb1 -strata. This is clear using the isomorphism Jb2 → Jb1 , j 7→ kjk−1 .  3.2. The Bruhat-Tits stratification. As above, let π : F lag → F lagK be the projection. By definition of the notion of Coxeter type in [GH] (right before Theorem 5.1.2) we obtain a decomposition of X(µ, τ )K as a disjoint union G X(µ, τ )K = π(Xw (τ )) w∈EOK σ,cox  Further, each π(Xw (τ )) can be decomposed as G π(Xw (τ )) =  iY (w),  i∈J/(J∩P̆S̃\Σw )  with Y (w) = π({g ∈ P̆suppσ (w) /Ĭ; g−1 τ σ(g) ∈ ĬwĬ}). The resulting stratification of X(µ, τ )K , G X(µ, τ )K = w∈EOK σ,cox  G  iY (w)  i∈J/(J∩P̆S̃\Σw )  is called the Bruhat-Tits stratification of X(µ, τ )K . Here P̆S̃\Σw denotes the parahoric subgroup of G(F̆ ) attached to S̃ \ Σw ⊂ S̃. Since we identify J(F̆ ) = G(F̆ ), we can intersect it with J = J(F ). The term Bruhat-Tits stratification is used because the index set can be described in terms of the Bruhat-Tits building for J. In the most common case where Σw is a single τ σ-orbit, J ∩ P̆S̃\Σw is the stabilizer of the corresponding vertex of the base alcove in the rational building of J and hence J/(J ∩ P̆S̃\Σw ) can be identified with the set of all vertices of “type Σw ”. The Bruhat-Tits stratification is a stratification in the strict sense that the closure of each stratum is a union of strata. In fact, the closure relations between strata can be described explicitly in terms of the building, see [GH] Section 7. Note that Y (w) is (isomorphic to) a classical Deligne-Lusztig variety. Indeed, the projection π induces an isomorphism {g ∈ P̆supp (w) /Ĭ; g −1 τ σ(g) ∈ ĬwĬ} ∼ = Y (w) σ  since w is a σ-Coxeter element (with respect to suppσ (w)). The quotient P̆suppσ (w) /Ĭ can be identified with the finite-dimensional flag variety for the maximal reductive quotient Gw of the reduction of the parahoric subgroup P̆suppσ (w) (with respect to its Borel  STRATIFICATIONS OF AFFINE DELIGNE-LUSZTIG VARIETIES  15  subgroup induced by Ĭ). Equipping Gw with the Frobenius x 7→ τ σ(x)τ −1 , we find that Y (w) is defined by the usual Deligne-Lusztig condition for the Weyl group element wτ −1 ∈ Wsuppσ (w) . The Dynkin diagram of Gw is given by the part of the affine Dynkin diagram with vertices suppσ (w), and the Frobenius action on this Dynkin diagram is given by τ σ. The finite Weyl group of Gw can be identified with Wsuppσ (w) and the element wτ −1 is a twisted Coxeter element in this group. For instance, in the situation of Example 3.1, we obtain classical Deligne-Lusztig varieties in a special unitary group. Theorem 3.4. Let (G, µ, K) be of Coxeter type, and let τ ∈ W̃ be the length 0 element representing the unique basic σ-conjugacy class such that X(µ, τ )K 6= ∅. Then the Bruhat-Tits stratification on X(µ, τ )K coincides with the J-stratification. The theorem will be proved in the following sections. In particular we see that in these special cases, the J-stratification is a stratification in the strict sense and has many nice properties. In the case of G = GSp4 with hyperspecial level structure, and in the case of Example 3.1, the Theorem was proved in [CV], 4.2.1 and 4.2.2, resp., by direct considerations in terms of Dieudonné modules. Note that in the case where K is not assumed to be hyperspecial, X(µ, b)K will in general be a disjoint union of several affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties. Of course, as a corollary we see that the statement of the theorem also holds for these usual affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties contained in X(µ, b)K . Remark 3.5. If b is not basic, then under the above assumptions, X(µ, b)K , if nonempty, is 0-dimensional (see [GH] Thm. 5.2.1, cf. also [GHN], Theorem 2.3). The strata of the Bruhat-Tits stratification are the S individual points of this scheme. More precisely, X(µ, b)K is a union of the form i π(Xwi (b)) for certain σ-straight elements wi ∈ Adm(µ), where π : F lag → F lagK denotes the projection. The group J = Jb (F ) acts transitively on each Xwi (b), and hence on its image π(Xwi (b)). In particular, if the index set for the above union has only one element w, then J acts transitively. In this case it is immediate that the strata of the J-stratification are the individual single points of X(µ, b)K , if we choose the element w as the representative of the σ-conjugacy class [b]. However, in certain cases, the index set for the above union has more than one element. In this case, the J-action on X(µ, b)K is not transitive (contrarily to what is claimed in [GH] Thm. B (2)). See [GH] 6.4 and 6.6 for the two cases where this occurs. As one checks from the data given in loc. cit., the index set then consists of exactly two elements w1 , w2 with w2 = τ w1 τ −1 , and conjugation by τ stabilizes the subset K ⊂ S̃, and hence conjugation by τ stabilizes the parahoric subgroup K̆. We choose one of the σ-straight elements w1 , w2 as the representative of the σ-conjugacy class of b. Since conjugation by τ stabilizes K̆, it is again easy to check that the J-stratification obtained in this situation has as its strata the individual points of X(µ, b)K . 3.3. The BT-stratification is finer than the J-stratification. We start by proving the easier direction of Theorem 3.4. Recall that J is an inner form of G since τ is basic. We fix an identification G(F̆ ) = J(F̆ ). We have the action of σ on G(F̆ ) with fixed points G(F ), and the twisted action by Int(τ ) ◦ σ, x 7→ τ σ(x)τ −1 , with fixed points J. Given w ∈ EOK σ,cox , we have P := suppσ (w) and the corresponding parahoric subgroup P̆. We need to show that for all j ∈ J, the value invK (j, −) is constant on each BT stratum j ′ Y (w). We may pass to Iwahori level and will show the stronger statement that inv(j, −) is constant on j ′ Y (w) ⊂ j ′ P̆/Ĭ.  16  U. GÖRTZ  Since inv(j, j ′ h) = inv((j ′ )−1 j, h), we may assume that j ′ = 1. Similarly, given j ∈ J, there exists ̃ ∈ J1 such that ja = ̃a; then conjugation by j −1 ̃ preserves Ĭ and so Ĭj −1 hĬ = j −1 ̃Ĭ̃−1 hĬ. This allows us to restrict ourselves to the case that j ∈ J1 . Altogether we see that it is enough to show that for every alcove j in B(J, F ), δ(j, h) is independent of h ∈ Y (w), where we now consider the latter set as a set of alcoves in B(J, F̆ ) = B(G, F̆ ). Now let g be the gate from j to the residue P̆/Ĭ in the sense of Section 1.4. It is an alcove inside the rational building B(J, F ) (Remark 1.8), and hence Lusztig’s result about Deligne-Lusztig varieties attached to twisted Coxeter elements, Proposition 1.1, give us that δ(g, h) = w0,P , the longest element of WP , for all h ∈ Y (w). We then have that δ(j, h) = δ(j, g)δ(g, h) = δ(j, g)w0,P is independent of h ∈ Y (w). 3.4. Acute cones and extension of galleries. We recall some definitions and results from [HN] Section 5. The notion of acute cone and the discussion until and including Definition 3.9 applies to a fixed apartment A (and the corresponding finite Weyl group W0 , set of positive roots Φ+ , and the affine root hyperplanes Hα,k , . . . ) in some affine building. We will eventually apply it to the rational building of the group J. Let w ∈ W0 . An affine root hyperplane H = Hα,k (= H−α,−k ) defines two halfspaces in A. To distinguish between them, let us assume that α ∈ w(Φ+ ). Then we let H w+ = {v ∈ A; hα, vi > k} and call this the w-positive half-space. We call the other half-space the w-negative half-space and denote it by H w− . Definition 3.6. ([HN] Def. 5.2) Let w ∈ W0 . We say that a non-stuttering gallery Γ = (b0 , . . . , bℓ ) in A goes in the w-direction, if for all i = 1, . . . , ℓ, denoting by Hi the wall separating bi−1 and bi , the alcove bi lies in Hiw+ . Proposition 3.7. ([HN] Lemma 5.3, Cor. 5.6) (1) Let Γ be a gallery going in the w-direction (w ∈ W0 ). Then Γ is a minimal gallery, and every minimal gallery between the two end alcoves of Γ goes in the w-direction. (2) Let Γ be a minimal gallery in A. Then there exists w ∈ W0 such that Γ goes in the w-direction. Corollary 3.8. Let w ∈ W0 , and let Γ1 , Γ2 be galleries which both go in the w-direction, and such that the final alcove of Γ1 is the first alcove of Γ2 . Then the concatenation of Γ1 and Γ2 is minimal. Proof. By the proposition, it is enough so show that the concatenation of Γ1 and Γ2 again goes in the w-direction, and this is clear by definition.  Definition 3.9. ([HN] Def. 5.4) Let b be an alcove in A, and let w ∈ W0 . The acute cone C(b, w) is the set of all alcoves b′ in A such that there exists a gallery from b to b′ going in the w-direction. Now we will apply these general notions to the situation at hand. Below, when we say that a translation element ελ in A˘ lies far from all F̆ -walls, we mean that it lies far from all finite root hyperplanes, in other words: |hα, λi| ≫ 0 for all α ∈ Φ. Similarly, we have the notion of an alcove lying far from all F̆ -walls. (Another way to say this would be to say that the alcove lies in a “very shrunken” Weyl chamber.) Lemma 3.10. Suppose that the affine Dynkin diagram of G is connected, and that J has F -rank > 0. There exists a J-rational translation of the base alcove which is far from all F̆ -walls.  STRATIFICATIONS OF AFFINE DELIGNE-LUSZTIG VARIETIES  17  Proof. According to our setup, the J-rational apartment contains the barycenter v of the F̆ -base alcove. Since rkF J > 0, the origin v ′ of the J-rational standard apartment is the barycenter of some proper facet of the F̆ -base alcove. It follows from a simple computation (relying on the assumption that the affine Dynkin diagram is connected, i.e., that alcoves and their faces are simplices, not just “polysimplices”) that for all roots α, hα, vi = 6 hα, v ′ i. Therefore for N sufficiently divisible, v ′ + N (v − v ′ ) is a rational translation element which is far from all F̆ -walls.  Lemma 3.11. Suppose that the affine Dynkin diagram of G is connected, and that rkF J > 0. Let Γ = (b0 , b1 , . . . , bℓ ) be a minimal gallery in B̆ such that bℓ and δ(b0 , bℓ ) are fixed by σJ . Then there exists a minimal gallery Γ′ in A˘ which starts in bℓ , ends in an alcove which is fixed by σJ and which is far away from all F̆ -walls, and such that the concatenation of Γ and Γ′ is a minimal gallery. Proof. Applying a suitable element of J to the whole situation, we may assume that bℓ = a. We have the canonical retraction ρ from the building to the standard apartment with respect to a (cf. [AB] Def. 4.38). If A ′ is any apartment containing a, it induces an isomorphism between A ′ and the standard apartment. Since Γ is minimal, there exists an apartment A ′ containing Γ, and ρ thus maps Γ to a minimal gallery in the standard apartment. Therefore it is enough to extend the image of Γ under ρ inside the standard apartment. In other words, we may assume that Γ is contained in the standard apartment and ends in a. Since δ(b0 , bℓ ) and bℓ = a are fixed by σJ , b0 is also fixed by σJ (not necessarily point-wise). Here we use that we have reduced, in the first step, to the case that Γ is contained in a J-rational apartment. We apply Prop. 3.7 to the building B(J, F ) (i.e., we consider δ(b0 , bℓ ) as an element of the Coxeter group WaJ , and accordingly get a minimal gallery in the standard apartment of B(J, F )): There exists w in the corresponding finite Weyl group such that Γ goes in the w-direction. All the alcoves in the acute cone C(a, w) (understood inside the standard apartment of B(J, F )) can, by definition, be reached from a by a gallery in the w-direction, and concatenating such a gallery with Γ gives us another minimal gallery, by Cor. 3.8 (equivalently, a reduced word in WaJ with initial piece δ(b0 , bℓ )). So it is enough to show that C(a, w) contains alcoves arbitrarily far from all F̆ -walls. Since C(a, w) contains a translate of the finite Weyl chamber corresponding to w (cf. [HN] Prop. 5.5), and the finite Weyl group of the J-rational standard apartment acts transitively on the set of J-rational finite Weyl chambers, the desired statement follows from Lemma 3.10.  Example 3.12. Clearly, the hypothesis that the affine Dynkin diagram of G is connected e1 × A e1 with Z/2Z acting on the first factor is required in the above lemmas: Consider A by the non-trivial diagram automorphism, and on the second factor as the identity. Then the rational apartment is parallel to one of the walls. Lemma 3.13. Let u, u′ ∈ W̃ such that uWK 6= u′ WK , and let w ∈ W̃ such that wa is sufficiently far away from the walls (depending on u, u′ ). Then WK wuWK 6= WK wu′ WK . Proof. For K = S̃ \ {v}, we define the set of K-walls as the set of root hyperplanes of the (finite) root system obtained by changing the origin to v, i.e., the set of affine root hyperplanes passing through the vertex of the base alcove a corresponding to K (this construction also appeared in Section 2.2). E.g., if v = s0 , then the K-walls are precisely the finite root hyperplanes. The K-walls are the root hyperplanes of a root system with Weyl group WK . The chambers of this root system will be called the K-chambers.  18  U. GÖRTZ  Since the origin we fixed in A˘ is by assumption a special point, every K-wall is parallel to some finite root hyperplane. It follows that an alcove which is far from all finite root hyperplanes is also far from all K-walls. If w is far away from the K-walls, the finite sets wuWK and wu′ WK are contained in the same K-chamber. Therefore to show the claim it is enough to ensure that wuWK 6= wu′ WK which follows directly from the assumption uWK 6= u′ WK .  3.5. Subexpressions. Given a Coxeter system (W, S) and w ∈ W , we say that a reduced expression w = f1 , . . . fℓ(w) (with the fi being simple affine reflections) has a tuple (t1 , . . . , tr ) ∈ Sr as a subexpression, if the tuple (t1 , . . . , tr ) can be obtained from (f1 , . . . , fℓ(w) ) by omitting some of the entries (but without changing their order). Lemma 3.14. Let (W, S) be a Coxeter system. Let t0 , . . . , tr ∈ S be pairwise different elements such that ti ti−1 6= ti−1 ti for all i = 1, . . . , r. Let w ∈ W such that t0 · · · tr 6 w. (1) Every reduced expression for w has (t0 , . . . , tr ) as a subexpression. (2) Let s ∈ S, s 6= t0 . Then t0 · · · tr 6 sw. In particular tr is contained in the support of sw. Proof. We start by proving the following special case of part (1): The element t0 · · · tr ∈ W has a unique reduced expression (namely the specified one). This follows immediately from the result of Tits that any two reduced expressions for an element of a Coxeter group can be obtained from each other by a sequence of “elementary homotopies” (see [AB] Prop. 3.24), i.e., by applying the braid relations for a pair s, s′ ∈ S of simple reflections (including the case where s, s′ commute). To prove (1) in the general case, assume t0 · · · tr 6 w for some w. The subword property of the Bruhat order (see e.g., [BB] Thm. 2.2.2) states that starting from any reduced expression for w we can obtain some reduce expression for t0 · · · tr by omitting certain factors. By the special case proved already, this implies part (1). Now part (2) follows easily: If ℓ(sw) = ℓ(w) + 1, then there is nothing to prove. But if ℓ(sw) = ℓ(w) − 1, then w has a reduced expression starting with s, and sw can then be obtained by omitting the first s in that reduced expression. Since s 6= t0 , the assertion follows from (1).  3.6. The J-stratification is finer than the BT-stratification. We will now show that given EO types w, w′ and j ′ ∈ J with Y (w) 6= j ′ Y (w′ ), there exists j ∈ J such that invK (j, −) has different values on Y (w) and j ′ Y (w′ ). (We know already that these values are constant on Y (w) and j ′ Y (w′ ), resp.) This clearly implies that any two strata can be separated by the relative position with respect to some element of J. We may and will also assume without loss of generality that P = P ′ or P ′ 6⊆ P . It is easy to see that for j ′ ∈ J \ J1 and arbitrary j, the values of invK (j, −) on Y (w) and j ′ Y (w′ ) lie in different Wa -cosets within W̃ (i.e., the length 0 component is different). Therefore we will assume from now on that j ′ ∈ J1 , and we will find j ∈ J1 separating the two strata. This means that we may rephrase the problem by saying that we search an alcove j in the J-rational building such that the K-Weyl distance δK (j, −) separates the strata Y (w) and j ′ Y (w′ ). Remark 3.15. (1) It is easy to separate different strata in the full affine flag variety, using the Iwahori-Weyl distance. To ensure that the relative positions remain different after passing to K̆-double cosets, we will use Lemma 3.13 to reduce to a problem of comparison of left cosets rather than double cosets. This can eventually be handled using Lemma 3.14. (2) The elements j ∈ J produced by the proof below which separate different BruhatTits strata will typically lie far away from the origin (when considered as alcoves).  STRATIFICATIONS OF AFFINE DELIGNE-LUSZTIG VARIETIES  19  It seems difficult to give an explicit bound on this distance. It is easy to check in examples that the identity element j = 1 does not necessarily separate all BruhatTits strata of the form Y (w), Y (w′ ), w 6= w′ . Denote by P and P ′ , resp., the σ-supports of w and w′ , and by P̆, P̆ ′ the corresponding parahoric subgroups, so Y (w) ⊆ P̆/Ĭ, j ′ Y (w′ ) ⊆ j ′ P̆ ′ /Ĭ. We consider P̆/Ĭ and j ′ P̆ ′ /Ĭ as sets of alcoves in B(G, F̆ ). Both sets are residues in the sense of Section 1.4 and we apply Prop. 1.9 with R = P̆/Ĭ, R′ = j ′ P̆ ′ /Ĭ. Denote by w1 the “minimal distance” between R and R′ , i.e., w1 = min(δ(R, R′ )) ∈ WaJ , and let R1 = projR (R′ ), R′1 = projR′ (R). The proposition gives us a bijection between R1 and R′1 such that the relative position between any two alcoves corresponding to each other is w1 . Let h ∈ Y (w), h′ ∈ j ′ Y (w′ ). Fix any J-rational alcove b in R1 , and let b′ ∈ R′1 be the element corresponding to b under the above bijection. By Rmk. 1.8, b′ lies in the rational building. We obtain (using Prop. 1.1), denoting by w0,P ′ the longest element in WP ′ , δ(b, h′ ) = δ(b, b′ )δ(b′ , h′ ) = w1 w0,P ′ and ℓ(w1 w0,P ′ ) = ℓ(w1 ) + ℓ(w0,P ′ ), i.e., choosing reduced expressions for w1 and w0,P ′ we obtain a minimal gallery starting at the alcove h′ with end point the alcove b. We extend this minimal gallery to a minimal gallery from h′ to an alcove j ∈ B(J, F ) which is far from the K-walls. Here the element is sufficiently far away from the walls as soon as we can apply Lemma 3.13 for any u ∈ WP and u′ ∈ WP w1 w0,P ′ . This imposes only finitely many conditions and can therefore be achieved by Lemma 3.11 (the affine Dynkin diagram is connected, and the F -rank of J is > 0 in all Coxeter type situations). If we replace the part from b to j in our gallery by any other minimal gallery from b to j, the resulting gallery will still be minimal. Therefore we may assume that the gate g from j to R is one of the alcoves of the gallery. This is a J-rational alcove, and writing w3 = δ(j, g) we have δ(j, h) = δ(j, g)δ(g, h) = w3 w0,P . Let w2 := δ(g, b) be the relative position between g and b. Note that w2 ∈ WP because R is convex and thus contains every minimal gallery between any two of its elements. Summarizing, we have δ(j, h) = δ(j, g)δ(g, h) = w3 w0,P , δ(j, h′ ) = δ(j, g)δ(g, b)δ(b, b′ )δ(b′ , h′ ) = w3 w2 w1 w0,P ′ . The inequality δK (j, h) = 6 δK (j, h′ ) which we would like to show thus amounts to the inequality WK w3 w0,P WK 6= WK w3 w2 w1 w0,P ′ WK . By Lemma 3.13 we see that it is enough to show that w0,P WK 6= w2 w1 w0,P ′ WK , or in other words that w0,P w2 w1 w0,P ′ 6∈ WK . Another equivalent reformulation of this condition is that sv ∈ supp(w0,P w2 w1 w0,P ′ ) (where {v} = S̃ \ K as above). To prove this, we distinguish cases. 3.6.1. The case j ′ Y (w′ ) = Y (w′ ). In this case, we may assume that j ′ = 1, and have that w1 = 1. Since Y (w) 6= Y (w′ ), we have w 6= w′ , P 6= P ′ , and by the reduction step in the very beginning, we then have P ′ 6⊆ P . There exist simple reflections sv = tr , tr−1 , . . . , t0 ∈ WP ′ such that the ti are pairwise different, ti ∈ WP if and only if i > 0, and such that ti ti−1 6= ti−1 ti for all i. In fact, to find such elements, choose an arbitrary element of P ′ \ P , and connect it in the affine  20  U. GÖRTZ  Dynkin diagram to v. Now define the ti starting with tr = sv and following the chosen path until it leaves P for the first time. Then t0 t1 · · · tr 6 w0,P ′ . Applying Lemma 3.14 multiple times and using that t0 6∈ WP , we see that for every element u ∈ WP , the product uw0,P ′ also has (t0 , t1 , . . . , tr ) as a subexpression, and in particular its support contains tr = sv . We apply this to u = w0,P w2 and obtain that w0,P w2 w1 w0,P ′ = uw0,P ′ 6∈ WK . 3.6.2. The case j ′ Y (w′ ) 6= Y (w′ ). We use the notation introduced in Section 3.2. Specifically, let Σ = Σw and Σ′ = Σw′ denote the τ σ-stable subsets of S̃ consisting of the vertices in the affine Dynkin diagram adjacent to P but 6∈ P (resp., P ′ ). The assumption that j ′ Y (w′ ) 6= Y (w′ ) in F lagK means that j ′ 6∈ P̆S̃\Σ′ . In other words, supp(w1 ) ∩ Σ′ 6= ∅. Claim. There exist simple reflections sv = tr , . . . , t1 ∈ WP ′ and t0 6 w1 , t0 6∈ WP such that the elements tr , . . . t0 satisfy the assumptions of Lemma 3.14. Let us first show that with elements as in the claim, we can finish the proof. Since ℓ(w1 w0,P ′ ) = ℓ(w1 ) + ℓ(w0,P ′ ), t0 6 w1 and t1 · · · tr 6 w0,P ′ imply that t0 t1 · · · tr 6 w1 w0,P ′ . We also have that t0 6∈ supp(w0,P w2 ) since the latter set is a subset of P . By Lemma 3.14 it follows that sv = tr ∈ supp(w0,P w2 w1 w0,P ′ ), as desired. It remains to prove the claim. We have already seen that Σ′ ∩ supp(w1 ) 6= ∅, and if Σ′ ∩ P = ∅, we can choose any element in Σ′ ∩ supp(w1 ) as t0 , and then define t1 , . . . , tr ∈ WP ′ by “connecting” the vertex corresponding to t0 with v in the affine Dynkin diagram. It remains to discuss the case Σ′ ∩ P 6= ∅. Since we have also (in the very beginning of the proof) reduced to the case P ′ 6⊆ P , this can only happen in the case where the sets suppσ (u), u ∈ EOK σ,cox , are not linearly ordered by inclusion. More precisely, we must be in the case of Example 3.2 (the affine Dynkin diagram is of type B̃, and σ and τ both act by exchanging 0 and 1 and fixing all other vertices), and we have either Σ = {0}, Σ′ = {1}, or Σ = {1}, Σ′ = {0}. We then want to choose as t0 the simple reflection associated with the element of Σ. Looking at the affine Dynkin diagram in this case, we see immediately that we then find t1 , . . . , tr as required in the claim. To justify this choice, we need to show that t0 6 w1 . We know that w1 is the minimal length element in WP w1 WP ′ , and that it is 6= 1. Therefore, we cannot have supp(w1 ) ⊆ P . Since S̃ \ P = Σ = {t0 } consists of only one element in the case at hand, it follows that indeed t0 ∈ supp(w1 ). References [AB] [BB] [BS] [BT1] [BT2] [Ch] [CV] [DL]  P. Abramenko, K. Brown, Buildings: Theory and Applications, Springer Graduate Texts in Math. 248 (2008). A. Björner, F. Brenti, Combinatorics of Coxeter Groups, Springer Graduate Texts in Math. 231 (2005). B. Bhatt, P. Scholze, Projectivity of the Witt vector Grassmannian, Invent. Math. 209 (2017), no. 2, 329–423. F. Bruhat, J. Tits, Groupes réductifs sur un corps local. I. Données radicielles valuées, Publ. Math. IHES 41 (1972), 5–251. F. Bruhat, J. Tits, Groupes réductifs sur un corps local. II. Schémas en groupes. Existence d’une donnée radicielle valuée, Publ. Math. IHES 60 (1984), 197–376. C. Chan, Deligne-Lusztig constructions for division algebras and the local Langlands correspondence, Adv. Math. 294 (2016), 332–383. M. Chen, E. Viehmann, Affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties and the action of J, to appear in J. Alg. Geom., arXiv:1507.02806 (2015). P. Deligne, G. Lusztig, Representations of reductive groups over finite fields, Ann. Math. (2), 103 no. 1 (1976), 103–161.  STRATIFICATIONS OF AFFINE DELIGNE-LUSZTIG VARIETIES  21  [GH]  U. Görtz, X. He, Basic loci in Shimura varieties of Coxeter type, Cambridge J. Math. 3 (2015), no. 3, 323–353. [GHN] U. Görtz, X. He, S. Nie, Fully Hodge-Newton decomposable Shimura varieties, arXiv:1610.05381 (2016). [Gr] M. Greenberg, Schemata over local rings II, Ann. Math. (2), 780, No. 2. (1963), 256–266. [HN] T. Haines, B.-C. Ngô, Alcoves associated to special fibers of local models, Amer. J. Math. 124 (2002), 1125–1152. [HR] T. Haines, M. Rapoport, On parahoric subgroups, Appendix to: G. Pappas, M. Rapoport, Twisted loop groups and their affine flag varieties, Adv. math. 219 (2008), 118–198. [He] X. He, Hecke algebras and p-adic groups, to appear in Current Developments in Mathematics, arXiv:1511.01386 (2015). [Iv1] A. Ivanov, Affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties of higher level and the local Langlands correspondence for GL2 , Adv. in Math. 299 (2016), 640–686. [Iv2] A. Ivanov, Ramified automorphic induction and zero-dimensional affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties, Math. Z. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00209-017-1896-x, (2017), 52. pp. [Ka] C. Kaiser, Ein getwistetes fundamentales Lemma für die GSp4 , PhD Thesis Bonn 1997. [Ko1] R. Kottwitz, Isocrystals with additional structure, Compos. Math. 56 (1985), 201–220. [Ko2] R. Kottwitz, Isocrystals with additional structure. II, Compositio Math. 109 (1997), 255–339. [La] E. Landvogt, Some functorial properties of the Bruhat-Tits building, J. Reine Angew. Math. 518 (2000), 213–241. [Lu] G. Lusztig, Coxeter Orbits and Eigenspaces of Frobenius, Invent. math. 38 (1976), 101–159. [Ra] M. Rapoport, A guide to the reduction modulo p of Shimura varieties, Astérisque 298 (2005), 271–318. [RR] M. Rapoport, M. Richartz, On the classification and specialization of F -isocrystals with additional structures, Compos. Math. 103 no. 2 (1996), 153–181. [RTW] M. Rapoport, U. Terstiege, S. Wilson, The supersingular locus of the Shimura variety for GU (1, n − 1) over a ramified prime, Math. Z. 276 (2014), 1165–1188. [RZ] M. Rapoport, Th. Zink, A finiteness theorem in the Bruhat-Tits building: an application of Landvogt’s embedding theorem, Indag. Math., N.S., 10 (3) (1999), 449–458. [Ri] T. Richarz, On the Iwahori-Weyl group, Bull. Soc. Math. France 144 (2016), no. 1, 117–124. [VW] I. Vollaard, T. Wedhorn, The supersingular locus of the Shimura variety of GU(1,n-1) II, Invent. Math. 184 (2011), 591–627. [Wu] H. Wu, The supersingular locus of unitary Shimura varieties with exotic good reduction, PhD thesis, University of Duisburg-Essen, arXiv:1609.08775 (2016). [Zh] X. Zhu, Affine Grassmannians and the geometric Satake in mixed characteristic, Ann. Math. 185 (2017), Issue 2, 403–492. Ulrich Görtz, Institut für Experimentelle Mathematik, Universität Duisburg-Essen, 45117 Essen, Germany E-mail address: ulrich.goertz@uni-due.de

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
