Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_4038

Abstract:
arXiv:0807.1475v1 [cs.CE] 9 Jul 2008  Simulations of Large-scale WiFi-based Wireless Networks: Interdisciplinary Challenges and Applications  Maziar Nekovee and a,b Radhika S. Saksena b a Mobility b Centre  Research Centre, British Telecom, Polaris 134, Adastral Park, Martlesham, Suffolk IP5 3RE, UK  for Computational Science, University College London, 20Gordon Street, London WC1H 0AJ, UK  Abstract Wireless Fidelity (WiFi) is the fastest growing wireless technology to date. In addition to providing wire-free connectivity to the Internet WiFi technology also enables mobile devices to connect directly to each other and form highly dynamic wireless adhoc networks. Such distributed networks can be used to perform cooperative communication tasks such ad data routing and information dissemination in the absence of a fixed infrastructure. Furthermore, adhoc grids composed of wirelessly networked portable devices are emerging as a new paradigm in grid computing. In this paper we review computational and algorithmic challenges of high-fidelity simulations of such WiFi-based wireless communication and computing networks, including scalable topology maintenance, mobility modelling, parallelisation and synchronisation. We explore similarities and differences between the simulations of these networks and simulations of interacting many-particle systems, such as molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. We show how the cell linked-list algorithm which we have adapted from our MD simulations can be used to greatly improve the computational performance of wireless network simulators in the presence of mobility, and illustrate with an example from our simulation studies of worm attacks on mobile wireless adhoc networks.  Key words: Wireless Computer Networks, Large-scale Simulations, Interacting Many-Particle Systems, Wireless Grids PACS:  Preprint submitted to Elsevier  9 July 2008  1  Introduction  Modern world has become increasingly mobile. As a result, traditional ways of connecting users to the Internet (and to each other) via physical cables have proved inadequate. Wireless communications [1], on the other hand, poses no restrictions on the user’s mobility and allows a great deal of flexibility, both on the part of users and service providers. Wireless connectivity for voice via mobile telephony made it possible for people to connect to each other regardless of location. This has had a profound influence on the business of telecommunications, as well as the society as a whole [2]. New wireless technologies targeted at computer networks promise to do the same for Internet access, connecting wirelessly not only laptops and portable devices but also millions of cars, sensors, consumer devices, etc to each other and to the global Internet. The most successful, and fastest growing, example of such wireless technologies is WiFi (Wireless Fidelity)[3]. Like cellular technology, WiFi uses a number of base stations to connect user devices to an existing fixed network (these base stations are called access points). However, unlike cellular systems which are centralised, WiFi systems operate in a highly distributed fashion. Each WiFi device is responsible for managing its own connectivity, mobility and access to the radio spectrum. Furthermore, unlike cellular systems, nearby WiFi devices can directly connect to each other and form self-organising wireless adhoc networks [4,5]. Such networks are highly dynamic and flexible. They can be created (and torn down) on the fly in order to route data packets between participating devices, or to the closest Internet gateway. Adhoc technology can also be used to connect together a collection of WiFi accesspoints which then form a so-called mesh network [6]. This can help to greatly extend the range of WiFi coverage without the need for connecting every single accesspoint to the fixed network. Initially WiFi technology was used to provide connectivity to “nomadic” users in coffeshops, airports etc, and for wire-free Internet access in homes and offices. The last few years, however, have seen the emergence of much more ambitious applications of this technology. For example, it is expected that WiFibased wireless access will enable the coverage of entire cities, thus providing citizens on the move with high-speed (11-54 megabits per second) connectivity. Other frontiers in WiFi technology include high-speed Internet access to automobile users, and WiFi-based vehicular adhoc networks and vehicular grids [7]. In addition to the above applications in telecommunications, wireless adhoc grids based on WiFi and related technologies are emerging as a new paradigm in grid computing [8,9]. Adhoc grid environments enable mobile users to join together wirelessly and share computing resources, services and information 2  [9]. One example of such adhoc grids are wireless sensor grids for medical, industrial and environmental monitoring. Another one are wireless computational grids where WiFi-enabled devices are networked together in order to perform complex computing and data aggregation tasks, which are beyond the capabilities of a single device [7]. The increasing complexity and the very large scale of such emerging WiFi systems has created a need for scalable high-fidelity simulation platforms that can help scientists, engineers and network planners accurately predict and optimise their performance prior to large-scale deployment. The aim of this paper is to review computational challenges that are involved in creating such simulation platforms, including scalable topology construction and mobility, parallel and distributed simulations on grid platforms, and synchronisation. We also show that there are interesting similarities between the simulations of WiFi-based wireless networks and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of interacting many-particle systems, and illustrate how these could be exploited in practice. The rest of this paper is organised as follows. In section 2 we give a brief description of the main ingredients for simulations of WiFi-based networks. This is followed by an examination of the computational and algorithmic challenges of such simulations, and how to address these. Section 4 describes, as an example, aspects of our simulation studies of computer worm attacks on mobile wireless adhoc networks. We close the paper in section 5 with conclusions.  2  Modelling Ingredients  There has been significant previous research in modelling [12] and simulations of wired communication networks [10,11]. However, modelling of wireless networks is very distinct from modelling of wired networks in that the physical medium properties, i.e. radio propagation and interference, cannot be separated from the higher layer network protocols, because strong interactions impact performance and drive engineering design decisions. Furthermore the ability of users to (rapidly) change their physical location while maintaining connectivity greatly increases the dynamism of these networks, in comparison to fixed networks. In this section we shall focus on describing these distinctive ingredients for the modelling of WiFi-based wireless networks. Other components in high-fidelity simulations of these networks, which are outside the scope of the current paper include modelling of various packet routing mechanisms [1,14] and transport protocols [13] in WiFi environments. Building on the idea of creating parallels between these networks and interacting many-particle systems, we first consider the simplest building block of 3  such networks, namely a single pair of communicating WiFi devices. We then consider many such pairs operating in the vicinity of each other, and discuss the interaction topologies and operational rules of the resulting systems.  2.1 A single pair of WiFi devices At present WiFi devices are constrained by regulators to operate in pre-defined frequency bands. Depending on the IEEE standard used in the device these frequency bands are either in the 2.4-2.5 GHz or in the 5.2-5.8 GHz range. Each of these bands is divided into a number of frequency channels. Consider two WiFi devices i and j which communicate with each other using a common frequency channel, fi . The received radio signal strength at device j resulting from a transmission by device i depends on a variety of effects. These include free space attenuation of radio waves, the response of the environment and mobility; the latter will be neglected for clarity of presentation but will be picked up in section 2.5. Effects due to the environment include reflection at surfaces, diffraction due to obstacles, and transmissions through walls. Phenomenologically, in the absence of detailed information on the environment, these effects can be described using the so-called pathloss model [15], which states that signal power at a receiving device j is related to the signal power of the transmitting node i via the following equation: P ij =  Pi . cfi rijα  (1)  In the above equation rij is the distance between node i and node j, P i and P ij are the transmit power and the received power, respectively, and cfi is a frequency-dependent constant. For free space propagation α = 2, but depending on the specific indoor/outdoor propagation scenario it is found empirically that this exponent can vary typically between 2 and 5. A data transmission by node i is correctly received at node j, i.e. i can establish a communication link with j, provided that: P i /cfi rijα P ij = ≥ βth . ν ν  (2)  In the above equation βth is a sensitivity threshold and ν is the noise level at node j. Condition (2) translates into a maximum transmission range for node i: rti  =  Pi cfi βth ν 4  !1/α  ,  (3)  such that device i can establish a wireless link with device j only if j is within a circle of radius rti . 2.2 A collection of WiFi devices: Interference effects In the above we considered a stand-alone sender-receiver pair of WiFi devices. In reality, however, many pairs of nearby wireless nodes may simultaneously attempt to establish links, either between themselves or to nearby access points. Due to the broadcast nature of radio transmissions, a radio signal transmitted towards a specific node can interfere with communications of many nearby network nodes and contribute to their noise level. Consequently, a successful transmission from node i to node j depends not only on the transmit power of node i and its distance to node j but also on the activity of all other nearby nodes. In particular, aggregate transmission of nearby devices may result in a situation where a transmitter-receiver pair cannot establish a link despite the fact that they are within the range of each other. Such interference effects need to be accurately taken into account in modelling data communications in wireless networks in order to obtain realistic results [16]. To model interference, for each signal transmitted from a sender i to a receiver j the aggregate received power resulting from all other nearby sender devices needs to be computed. Signal arrival at node j is then considered successful only if the ratio of the received power from i to aggregate noise is above the sensitivity threshold, βth . Computing the impact of interference on the transmissions of devices is one of the most computationally expensive components in the simulations of wireless networks as it requires the computation of O(N 2 ) pairwise interactions. However, taking advantage of the fact that the interference effect decays as 1/r α with the distance between two devices, one usually limits the computation of the interference terms to devices which are within a so-called interference range of a given device. Conventionally the interference range is chosen to be rij = 2rtj 1 . 2.3 Medium Access Control (MAC) The interference problem is perhaps the most important issue in deployment of high-density WiFi networks. WiFi technology attempts to mitigate this problem using a distributed random access mechanisms called Medium Access Control (MAC). The MAC protocol used by WiFi-based wireless devices 1  The precise choice of the interference range depends on both the decay exponent α and the density of nodes in the system and may have to be increased significantly in order to obtain accurate results [17]  5  follows the IEEE 802.11 standard [3], which specifies a set of rules that enable nearby devices to coordinate their transmissions in a distributed manner, in such a way that devices whose radio transmissions may interfere with each other do not get access to the same frequency channel at the same time. The IEEE 802.11 MAC is a complex protocol and we do not attempt to describe here the full model of this protocol. Instead we focus on the most relevant aspect of this protocol, the so-called listen-before-talk (LBT) rule. This rule dictates that each device should check the occupancy of the wireless medium before starting a data transmission and refrain for a random time from transmitting if it senses that the medium is busy. Roughly speaking, the net effect of this mechanism is to create an interference-free “exclusion zone” around each transmitting device (which is roughly of the size ∼ π(2rti)2 ), thereby reducing (but not entirely eliminating) the possibility of packet collisions. The presence of the MAC introduces novel spatio-temporal correlations in the dynamics of data communications which need to be taken into account in realistic simulations of these networks [35].  2.4 Graph representation of interactions in WiFi Networks  From the above models of radio propagation, an abstract communication graph for a collection of WiFi devices can be constructed. This is achieved by creating an edge between node i and all other nodes in the plane that are within the transmission range of i, and repeating this procedure for all nodes in the network. In general wireless devices may use different transmit powers such that the existence of a wireless link from i to j does not imply that a link from j to i also exists. Consequently the resulting communication graph is directed. Assuming, however, that all devices use the same transmit power P , and a corresponding transmission range rt , the topology of the resulting network can be described as a two dimensional random geometric graph (RGG) [18]. Similarly, one constructs an interference graph for the network by creating an edge between any two nodes which are within a radius ri of each other. Fig 1. shows, as an examples, the communication and interference graphs created by a collection of WiFi devices distributed randomly in a 1000 × 1000 m2 rectangular area. Mathematically, a graph is represented by a corresponding adjacency matrix A, where the element aij = 1 if two nodes are connected, and zero otherwise. Since the adjacency matrices corresponding to the communication and interference graphs of WiFi networks are usually sparse, they can be efficiently encoded in the computer memory in the form of neighbour lists. 6  Fig. 1. The communication (left panel) and the corresponding interference graph (right panel) of a wireless adhoc network created by WiFi devices uniformly distributed in a 1000 × 1000 m2 rectangular area.  2.5  Modelling User Mobility  The movement of users carrying WiFi devices can greatly influence the performance of WiFi systems. The impact of user mobility is twofold. First of all, as a result of mobility, devices continuously move in and out of each others’ transmission and/or interference ranges and this will result in time-dependent network topologies. Secondly, mobility causes spatio-temporal variations in the user density, and consequently, the traffic load offered to each access point. Accurately modelling user mobility is therefore of great importance in highfidelity simulations of WiFi system. Several mobility models have been presented in recent simulation studies of WiFi and Bluetooth-based mobile wireless networks. The most widely used of such models assume random and uncorrelated movements of individual devices. These include the random walk model and variations thereof, such as the random-waypoint model [19]. However, such simple models are unable to reproduce important features of user mobility patterns, which result from a combination of correlations [22], environmental constraints [22] and social interactions between users [20]. Fortunately there has been much previous research on agent-based realistic modelling of both human and vehicular mobility [22,21], and such models can be coupled to network simulators in order to examine in detail the impact of user mobility. Very recently, for example, we used microscopic car-following models to investigate various properties of vehicular adhoc networks operating in realistic highway traffic scenarios [27]. A computational issue in coupling high-fidelity mobility simulators to wireless network simulators is the large difference in the time scales of the two types of 7  simulations. For example, car-following models typically update the position of vehicles every second. On the other hand, a typical timestep of wireless network simulations is ∼ 1 µs. To ensure accurate results the combined simulations of mobility and wireless communication should be performed using the smallest time-step in the problem. In the above example, this means a 106 increase in the update frequency of the vehicular traffic simulator [25].  3  Computational Challenges  3.1 Network topology construction and maintenance One of the most computationally intensive portion of the simulations of WiFi networks is the construction of the neighbour lists which encode the topology of the network. In static networks these neighbour lists can be constructed once and for all at the beginning of each simulation. In networks comprising mobile nodes, the neighbour lists need to be updated with every update of nodes’ positions. Consequently, optimisation of neighbour list construction algorithm becomes critical to the performance of the simulation code. A brute force implementation of the neighbour list construction involves checking the distance of each node from all the other nodes in the system in order to determine its neighbours. This approach involves a double nested loop iteration over all the nodes in the system and scales as O(N 2 ), where, N is the number of nodes in the network. The computation becomes very expensive as we go to larger networks, higher node densities and to networks with highly dynamic nodes (such as vehicular networks). A similar issue is faced in simulations of interacting many-particle systems such as molecular dynamics simulations, where, for each particle in the system, the interaction forces with the remaining particles need to be calculated to simulate its dynamics. Analogous to the transmission/interference range in WiFi networks, in MD simulations of liquids with short-range interaction potentials, the interaction force computation is truncated at a cut-off radius, rc . When rc is equal to or smaller than one-third of the linear dimension of the simulation box, a cell-linked list method is often adopted which brings down the force computations from an O(N 2 ) calculation to O(N) (in this case N is the number of particles in the many-particle simulation system). The cell-linked list approach [28] applied to the construction of network topology in WiFi systems works as follows. First the two-dimensional network area/simulation cell is divided into sub-cells such that the linear dimension of each sub-cell is equal to the transmission (interference) range. Any node in 8  Fig. 2. Figure illustrating the cell linked list method [28] applied to a simulation of WiFi networks. The network area is sub-divided into sub-cells with a linear dimension equal to the the transmission range, rt . For the central node in cell 5, only the other occupants in its own sub-cell and those in the immediate neighbouring sub cells (1,2,3,4,6,7,8,9) feature in its neighbour list.  a sub-cell can only interact with nodes in its own sub-cell and in the immediate neighbouring sub-cells and is invisible to nodes in all other sub-cells in the network. This is illustrated in Figure 2, where, in order to determine the neighbour list for the central node in cell 5, one only needs to consider nodes within cell 5 and in the immediate neighbouring cells (1,2,3,4,6,7,8,9). The brute force method of constructing neighbour lists with two nested loops over all particles in the system is replaced by 1) a loop over all nodes to determine which sub-cells they lie in - an O(N) operation and 2) a loop over all nodes to find their neighbour nodes in the immediate neighbouring sub-cells - an O(N × Nc ) algorithm, where Nc is the average number of nodes per sub-cell. We note that the above decomposition of the simulation system into linked cells is naturally suited to domain decomposition parallelisation of the simulations, which we shall discuss in the next section.  3.2 Parallel and distributed simulations on grid platforms Due to the short-range nature of wireless communications, parallel simulations of WiFi-based systems on massively parallel computers or tightly coupled grid platforms can be performed most effectively using domain decomposition. The area in which WiFi devices operate is divided into a number of regular subdomains with dimensions larger than the maximum interference radius of the wireless devices that comprise the network. The entire communication stack of all devices within each subdomain is then allocated to one processor and inter-processor communications are only performed when nodes move from one processor to another, or there are radio signal propagation across sub-domain 9  boundaries. Several parallel simulators tools for WiFi-based mobile wireless networks which exploit the domain decomposition strategy have been proposed and implemented in recent years [23,24,25,30]. However, there is very limited published work in examining the performance of these simulators in the context of largescale parallel simulations. Benchmark studies performed on relatively small number of processors (6 − 12 PEs) however, indicate that only sub-linear parallel speedups can be achieved, presumably due to a combination of communications and synchronisation overheads. In addition to domain-decomposition, a task farming strategy can be exploited in simulations of large-scale wireless networks in order to perform Monte Carlo runs over an ensemble of network realisations and/or to explore the performance for a range of system parameters. In this case multiple runs of the same code are spawned on a set of slave processors and the results are collected and further processed by the master processor at the end of computation. Unlike domain decomposition, task farming requires no synchronisation and very limited interprocess communications. Therefore linear parallel speedups can be achieved even for simulations performed on loosely coupled grid platforms.  3.3 Synchronisation  A WiFi network consists of a number of devices each having its own internal set of states (e.g. the number of data packets in the incoming queue of a laptop, or the random backoff time of the MAC protocol). These states change stochastically (and therefore asynchronously) in response to events which are generated either internally or due to interactions with other devices in the system. For example, the arrival of a voice call will change the state of the outgoing data queue of a WiFi-enabled mobile phone. Parallel simulations of interacting systems with such asynchronous dynamics (also known as Parallel Discrete Event Simulations) requires the use of a synchronisation protocol among the processing elements (PES) in order to ensure that causality errors are not introduced in the simulation results. An overview of the synchronisation of parallel discrete event simulation and a comprehensive discussion of commonly used synchronisation schemes can be found in [29]. Conservative synchronisation schemes are conventionally used in parallel simulations of wireless networks [17,31]. Each PE defines its own lookahead as the minimum duration (measured using the simulation clock) for which it will not send any message on its outgoing links. Periodically, a global minimum of all PE’s simulation time plus their lookahead values is computed. Each PE can then process all events inside its own domain that take place within this 10  time window safely without the need of additional synchronisation. When the number of processing elements becomes large, conservative synchronisation schemes may result in large fluctuations in the rates at which different PES progress, hence greatly reducing the computational scalability of the parallel discrete event simulation [32]. It has been demonstrated recently [32] that by changing the communication topology of PES from a regular grid to a small-world-type topology, the above problem can be eliminated and high parallel efficiency achieved. We are currently in the process of implementing such schemes in the parallel version of our wireless network simulator and the results will be reported elsewhere.  4  Case Study: Simulations of Worm Attacks on Mobile Wireless Adhoc Networks  Worms are self-replicating computer viruses which can propagate through computer networks without any human intervention [26]. With wireless networks becoming increasingly popular, many security experts predict that these networks will soon be a main target of attacks by worms and other type of malware [33,34]. In addition to individual devices, open resource sites in wireless information or computational grids could well be the next wave of targets for such wireless worm attacks. A qualitative understanding of such attacks is of great importance, both in assessing their risk and for the design of effective detection and prevention strategies. Worm and virus attacks on the Internet have been the subject of extensive empirical, theoretical and simulation studies, and there have been a number of studies on securing conventional wired grids against such attacks [37]. Investigation of virus spreading in wireless networks and wireless grids in general and worms in particular is, however, at its infancy. In a recent study [35] we used Monte Carlo simulations to investigate the spreading of worm epidemics in static wireless adhoc networks. These studies point out to important differences between the propagation patterns of worms in wired and wireless networks and highligh the importance of incorporating interference effects, network topology and medium access control for realistic modelling of data communications in these networks. In this section we briefly describe aspects of these simulations and further advance them by incorporating the impact of device mobility in the dynamics of worm propagation. 11  4.1 Worm propagation model Following [35] we assume that wireless worms primarily utilise multihop forwarding for their propagation in adhoc networks, a mechanism which does not require any Internet connectivity. With respect to an attacking worm we use the so-called susceptible-infected-removed (SIR) model from mathematical biology [36], adapted to the context of wireless communications. We assume that nodes in the network to be in one of the following three states: vulnerable, infected, or immune. Infected nodes try to broadcast the worm to their neighbours at every possible opportunity. Vulnerable nodes can become infected with probability λ when they receive a transmission containing a copy of the worm from an infected neighbour. Finally, infected nodes get patched and become immune to the worm with probability δ. We denote by S(t), I(t) and R(t) the population of vulnerable, infected and immune nodes, respectively.  4.2 Simulation details We simulated the propagation of worms in mobile wireless adhoc networks comprising N devices in a L2 = 1000 × 1000 m2 area. At the start of each simulation the devices were spread randomly in the simulation area, after which they were allowed to move following simple random walks (Periodic boundary conditions were used at the edges of the simulation area). The worm spreading dynamics was simulated on top of the resulting time-dependent network using Monte Carlo simulations. Each Monte Carlo run starts by infecting a single randomly chosen node and proceeds for a certain number of simulation timesteps, iupdate , after which the positions of the nodes are updated according to the random walk model. We use this form of updating in order to mimic the difference in the timescales between the spreading process and the user mobility. Each simulation continues in this fashion until the epidemic dies out (i.e. no infected node is left in the network). We typically average our results over 500 Monte Carlo runs in order to obtain statistically significant data. Furthermore, the results were also averaged over simulations starting from different initial infected seeds.  4.3 Results First we consider the improvement in computational performance gained from using the cell linked-list algorithm for updating the network topology. A comparison of the performance of the cell-linked list and brute force method for different movement update frequencies, ν = 1/iupdate , is shown in Figure 3. It 12  5000 brute force cell linked-list  CPU Time (seconds)  4000  3000  2000  1000  0 0  10  5  15  20  iupdate  Fig. 3. Scaling of the computational cost vs. inverse update frequency for the simulation of an adhoc network composed of dynamic nodes whose positions are updated periodically with frequency ν. The CPU times are compared for two simulations in which, respectively, the brute force method and the cell linked list method were used.  can be seen that using the cell-linked list algorithm greatly reduces the computational cost associated with updating network topology and, as expected, this reduction becomes more significant as the update frequency increases. Next we consider the impact of node mobility on the dynamics of worm propagation in the network. As an example, the time evolution of the population of infected nodes, I(t), is plotted in Figure 4. The results were obtained for mobile wireless adhoc network composed of 4000 nodes and using λ = 0.3 and δ = 0.1. The nodes’ positions were updated every 1, 2, 5, 10 and 20 time-steps during the worm propagation, i.e ν1 = 1, 2, 5, 10, 20. It can be seen that node mobility has a significant impact on the spreading dynamics. In particular, as mobility increases (i.e. the network is updated more frequently) the epidemic peak (the maximum number of infected devices) becomes more pronounced and also occurs at earlier times. These results indicate that dynamic adhoc networks are more vulnerable to worm attacks than static networks. Qualitatively, we can explain the above behaviour in the following way. In a fixed wireless adhoc network the maximum number of nodes to which an infected device can spread the worm in the course of its infection is limited by the total number of devices which are within its transmission range. On average this is given by nA, where n is device density and A = πrt2 is the total area covered by device’s transmission. Switching on mobility enables infected devices to sweep on a larger area than A, hence increasing the maximum number of nodes that each device can infect before getting patched. Consequently, both the speed and the magnitude of the epidemic are increased with increased 13  1/υ = 1 1/υ = 2 1/υ = 5 1/υ = 10 1/υ = 20  0.5  I(t)  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.1  0  0  20  40  60  80  100  t  Fig. 4. Population of infected nodes vs. simulation time in an adhoc network composed of dynamic nodes whose positions are updated periodically with frequency ν. The evolution of the infected node population for different update frequencies is plotted.  device mobility.  5  Conclusions  WiFi and related technologies not only allow users to access the Internet on the move, they are also enabling mobile devices to connect directly to each other and form adhoc networks for distributed voice, video and data communication. Such adhoc networks also form a flexible communication backbone for wireless adhoc grids, an emerging paradigm in distributed and grid computing. With the proliferation of WiFi-enabled mobile devices such grids will enable innovative applications based on sharing and federating computing and information resources of billions of wireless devices such as sensors, smartphones, PDAS and laptops. In this paper we described aspects of computational modelling of such WiFibased wireless networks, and examined some of the important computational challenges which are involved in high-fidelity simulations of these networks. We argued that viewing these networks in terms of interacting many-particle systems provides a useful framework for understanding and addressing some of these challenges. We demonstrated this point by using the cell-linked list technique, which is widely used in simulations of such systems, for scalable updating of network topology in large-scale simulations of mobile wireless adhoc networks. Furthermore, we discussed parallel simulations of WiFi-based wireless networks and showed that conventional parallelisation strategies used in 14  parallel simulations of interacting many-particle systems, such as domain decomposition, are readily applicable to such simulations. However, these strategies need to be complimented with scalable inter-processor synchronisation schemes in order to deal with the asynchronous nature of interactions in wireless networks. High-fidelity simulation platforms for WiFi-based wireless networks capable of effectively utilising the power of computational grid and massively parallel computing are currently at their infancy. Such platforms, however, will be necessary in planning and optimising the highly complex next generation WiFi networks. They are also important in realistically analysing the potentials and challenges of future adhoc grid platforms [8,9], such as security, scalability, and intermittent network connectivity resulting from mobility. Our experience shows that in designing such platforms one can greatly benefit from computational and algorithmic techniques developed in other branches of computational science. In addition to scalable network topology construction and parallelisation, which were discussed in the current paper, another example that comes to mind is the use of fast multipole expansion techniques for O(N) interference computation in wireless networks with long-range radio signal propagation [38]. At the same time, high-fidelity simulations of WiFibased wireless networks presents an array of new computational challenges which are the subject of our ongoing and future research.  Acknowledgements M.N. acknowledges support from the Royal Society through an Industry Fellowship. He thanks the Centre for Computational Science at UCL for hospitality and his colleagues at BT’s Mobility Research Centre for stimulating discussions.  References [1] A. Goldsmith Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press, 2005. [2] Nomads at last: A special report on mobile telecoms, The Economist, 1-18, April 12th, 2008. [3] M. S. Gast 802.11 Wireless Networks, Second Edition, O’Reily, 2005; W. Stalling, Wireless Communications Networks, Prentice Hall, 2005. [4] R. Hekmat, Adhoc networks: Fundamental properties and network topologies, Springer, 2006.  15  [5] D. Grigoras and M. Riordan, Future Generation Computer Systems 23, 990996, 2007. [6] Y. Zhang, J. Luo, H. Hou (eds.), Wireless Mesh Networking: Architectures,Protocols and Standards, Auerbach Publications, NY, 2007. [7] M. Nekovee, Proc. Workshop on Ubiquitious Computing and e-Research, Edinburgh, UK, May 2005. [8] L. W. McKnight, J. Howison, S. Bradner, Wireless grids: Distributed resource sharing by mobile, nomadic, and fixed devices, IEEE Internet Computing, Special Issue on Wireless grids, 24-31, July/August 2004. [9] R. Moreno-Vozmediano, A hybrid mechanism for resource/service discovery in ad-hoc grids, Future Generation Computer Systems, 2008 (article in press). [10] The Network Simulator – ns-2, www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns. [11] G. Riley, Proc. of the 2003 ACM Winter Simulation Conference, 2003. [12] R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, Evolution and Structure of the Internet: A Statistical Physics Approach, Cambridge University Press, 2006. [13] U. O. Ibom, Proc. of the IEEE Information Networking, 1-5, 2008. [14] J. J. Garcia, Future Generation Computer Systems, 81-93,1988. [15] T. Rappaport, Wireless Communications, Principle and Parctice, Prentice-Hall, 2000. [16] M. Takai, J. Martin, and R. Bagrodia, Proc. of ACM MOBIHOC’01, 87-94, 2001. [17] Z. Ji, J. Zhou, M. Takai, J. Martin, and R. Bagrodia, Proc. of the 18th Workshop on Parallel and Distributed Simulation (PASDs’04). [18] M. Penrose, Random Geometric Graphs, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003. [19] See, e.g., T. Camp, J. Boleng, and V. Davis, Wireless Communication and Mobile Computing, Special Issue on Mobile Adhoc Networking: Research, Trends and Applications 2, 483-502, 2002. [20] M. Musolesi and C. Mascolo, Mobile Computing and Communications Review 1, 1-12,2006. [21] P. Ball, Critical Mass: How One Things Leads to Anorther, Arrow Books, 2006. [22] D. Helbig, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 1067-1141 (2001). [23] X. Zeng, R. Bagrodia, M. Gerla, Proc. 12th Workshop on Parallel and Distributed Simulations (PADS 98), 154-161, 1998. [24] www.scalable-networks.com  16  [25] L. Bononi, M. Di Felice, G. D. Angelo, M. Bracuto, L. Donatiello, Computer Networks 52, 155-179, 2008. [26] P. Szor, The Art of Computer Virus Research and Defense, Symantec Press, 2006. [27] M. Nekovee, Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology Conferenc (VTC07-Spring), 2486-2490, 2007. [28] M. P. Allen and D.J. Tildesley, Computer Simulations of Liquids, Clarendon, Oxford, 1987. [29] R. Fujimoto, Parallel Interscience,NY, 1999.  and Distributed Simulation  Systems  ,  Wiley-  [30] Z. Ji, J. Zhou, M. Takai, J. Martin, R. Bogardia, Proc. 18th IEEE Workshop on Parallel and Distributed Simulations (PADS’04), 2004. [31] L. Bononi, M. Di Felice, M. Bertini, E. Croci, Proc. of MSWIM’06, Torremolinos, Spain, 28-35, 2004. [32] G. Korniss, M. A. Novotny, H. Guclu, Z. Toroczkai and P. A. Rikvold, Science 299, 677 (2003). [33] M. Hypponen, Scientific American, 70–77, November 2006. [34] J. Kleinberg, Nature 449, 287-288, 2007. [35] M. Nekovee, New J. Phys. 9, 189, 2007. [36] N. T. J. Bailey, The Mathematical Theory of Epidemics, Hafner Publishing, 1957. [37] K. Hwang, Y-k Kwok, S. Song, M. C. Y. Chen, Y. Chen, R. Zhou and X. Lou, GridSec: Trusted grid computing with security binding and self-defence against network worms and DDoS attacks, Proc. International Conference on Grid Computing Security and Resource Management (GSRM’05), Atlanta, USA, may 2005. [38] L. F. Perrone and D. M. Nicol, Proc. IEEE MASCOTS 2000.  17

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
