Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_490

Abstract:
TRUTH VALIDATION WITH EVIDENCE Papis Wongchaisuwat and Diego Klabjan Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL Abstract In the modern era, abundant information is easily accessible from various sources, however only a few of these sources are reliable as they mostly contain unverified contents. We develop a system to validate the truthfulness of a given statement together with underlying evidence. The proposed system provides supporting evidence when the statement is tagged as false. Our work relies on an inference method on a knowledge graph (KG) to identify the truthfulness of statements. In order to extract the evidence of falseness, the proposed algorithm takes into account combined knowledge from KG and ontologies. The system shows very good results as it provides valid and concise evidence. The quality of KG plays a role in the performance of the inference method which explicitly affects the performance of our evidence-extracting algorithm.  1.INTRODUCTION Accessing information online is expanding tremendously in various domains as reported in a study by the Pew Internet Project’s research (Anderson and Perrin, 2016). According to the study, offline  1  population in the U.S. has declined significantly since 2000 to the extent that in 2016 only 13% of U.S. adults did not use the internet. Internet usage gives people an opportunity to extensively seek information online; however, posted contents available on web pages are not necessarily reliable. As online information spreads rapidly, its quality is considerably crucial. Misinformation potentially leads to serious consequences significantly affecting internet users. The main motivation of our study is to validate the truthfulness of textual information obtained from various sources as well as to provide supporting evidence. Humans can identify the truthfulness of a statement particularly for common fact cases. Nevertheless, manually inspecting statements is a time-consuming process that becomes impossible for large-scale data. Determining the truthfulness of each statement in an automated fashion is a promising alternative solution. This problem is highly challenging due to the lack of an encompassing and comprehensive corpora of all true statements. Despite of its challenges, it draws a lot of attention from prior studies to develop truthfulness-validating systems. The previously proposed systems mainly rely on web search engines to verify whether statements are true or false. Additional information regarding sources which statements are extracted from is also taken into account in most algorithms. In comparison to these truthfulness-validating systems, our work relies on knowledge from reliable sources rather than web search engines. Statements gathered from reliable sources have various length and may be verbose and thus we represent each of these statements as triplets consisting of a subject entity, an object entity, and their relation. These triplets capture the main contents embedded within statements. A Knowledge Graph (KG) is then constructed from these triplets where nodes are entities and arcs represent the relationships between nodes. In our algorithm, a relation extraction method is used to extract triplets from the statement we aim to 2  verify the truthfulness of. We call this statement and its corresponding triplets as “a lay statement” and “lay triplets.” The truthfulness of each lay triplet is verified based on an inference method corresponding to KG constructed from reliable sources. After identifying the truthfulness of lay triplets, our algorithm additionally provides supporting evidence. Determining evidence for true triplets is relatively straightforward compared to identifying the evidence of falseness. Considering a true triplet, a supporting evidence is a set of paths between the subject and object entities inferred from KG associated with reliable sources. On the other hand, it is unclear how to obtain evidence for false triplets. Reasonable evidence for each false triplet should be a collection of relevant triplets extracted from KG under a specific condition. We explain our key idea with an example. Consider the false triplet (“property”, “has_a”, “space rocket”). We find in KG all triplets (“property”, “has_a”, 𝑜̅ ). In this case, a set of all possible candidates 𝑜̅ denoted as 𝑂̅ can be {“bedroom,” “kitchen,” “bathroom,” “roof,” “garden,” “shed,” “swimming pool”}. A long proof of evidence can be this candidate evidence set and the fact that “space rocket” ∉ 𝑂̅. The drawback here is that the size of 𝑂̅ can be very large. Summarizing the candidate collection into a concise but meaningful evidence set is challenging especially when the size of the collection is large. In order to overcome this difficulty, we develop a novel algorithm to extract supporting evidence from concepts in ontologies. For any false triplet, we rely on the idea of representing each candidate with its broader concepts in ontologies given that the false triplet concept is not part of these broader concepts. Considering our example, an ontology could provide us with the fact that the first four terms in 𝑂̅ are related to “house” and the remaining terms correspond to “backyard.” Finally, as an evidence we provide (“property”, “has_a”, “house”) and (“property”,  3  “has_a”, “backyard”) and the facts “space rocket” is not “house,” “space rocket” is not “backyard.” Given the false triplet and its candidates, matching concepts in ontologies are considered. Then, we gather a set of potential evidence which includes candidate concepts and their broader concepts (satisfying some conditions). Evidence of various levels of granularity is constructed by a graph based algorithm on the subsumption tree of the ontology. We select an optimal collection of evidence from the potential evidence set. The optimized set of evidence is the smallest subcollection of the potential evidence set under the assumption that all candidates 𝑜̅ have to be covered by themselves or their broader concepts which leads to a set covering problem. In the rest of the paper, we consider the following running example. Given a false triplet (“Google”, “OfficeLocationInUS”, “Minneapolis”), we generate the evidence of falseness based on its relevant triplets from KG. The relevant triplets retrieved from KG have the “OfficeLocationInUS” relation associated with the “Google” or “Minneapolis” entity. In particular, we first find locations of Google’s offices such as “Atlanta,” “Chicago,” “Los Angeles,” “Miami,” “Mountain View,” etc. Also, companies whose office is located in Minneapolis such as “Target Corporation,” “U.S. Bancorp,” “Xcel Energy” are considered. These retrieved entities are used as the falseness evidence as we claim that “Minneapolis” is not part of all retrieved locations and similarly “Google” is not part of the set of retrieved companies. We rely on knowledge from ontologies to generate a concise set of evidence. For example, an ontology about geography is used to state that “Google” has offices in many states across U.S. while “Minneapolis” is located in Minnesota which is not one of these states. Our main contribution is to provide supporting evidence for a given lay triplet after its truthfulness has been identified. If the triplet is true, then paths in KG provide evidence, however if false, then it is much more challenging to come up with the concept of evidence. To the best of 4  our knowledge, no prior work provided supporting evidence of any given false lay statement by taking into account KG and ontologies. Our proposed system which combines knowledge from ontologies with predicate triplets from a KG contributes in this space. We specifically focus on selecting a complete set of falseness evidence to be as concise as possible. Also, our system relies mainly on both KG and ontologies which are constructed from reliable sources instead of knowledge from unverified web pages. Our algorithm to provide supporting evidence along with the truthfulness of the lay triplet is applicable in various domains such as politics, sciences, news, and health care. Our work focuses on the health care domain as a case study mainly because of abundant health-related information available online and the importance of information quality. Specifically, a large number of medically related web sites are easily accessible online but only half of these sites have content reviewed by professionals (Gottleb, 2000). In addition, distorted information related to health conditions potentially causes devastating effects. We summarize the literature in Section 2. In Section 3, we describe relevant background information, problem definitions, and thoroughly discuss our main algorithm. Data preparation and results of the algorithm based on our case study are reported in Section 4 while further discussions are provided in Section 5. Conclusion and future work are stated in Section 6.  2.RELATED WORK Our algorithm verifies the truthfulness of any lay statement based on a KG thus we survey prior work in truth discovery-related fields. Substantial work exists in truth discovery for determining  5  the veracity of multi-source data. In particular, the truth discovery problem aims to identify whether assertions claimed by multiple sources are true or false. Reliability of sources is also determined. Waguih and Berti (Waguih and Berti-Equille, 2014) provide an extensive review and an in-depth evaluation of 12 truth discovery algorithms. Additional truth discovery methods are proposed varying in many aspects to jointly estimate source reliability and truth statements (Li et al., 2014; Ma et al., 2015; Meng et al., 2015; Mukherjee et al., 2014; Xiao et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2014; Zhi et al., 2015). These methods rely on a common assumption that information provided by a reliable source tends to be more trustworthy and the source providing trustworthy information is likely to be more reliable. TruthOrRumor, a web-based truth judgment system, determines the truth based on results from a search engine (Liu et al., 2014). It considers reliability of data sources based on historical records and the copying relationship. Also, it implements currency determination techniques to take into account out-of-date statements. Wang et al. (2013) propose an algorithm to determine the truthfulness of a given statement based on a combination of a support score and credibility ranking value. While the support score measures how a web search result supports the statement, the credibility ranking computes the reliability of web pages. The t-verifier system (Li et al., 2011) requires users to pre-determine specific parts of statements to be verified. These systems take into account additional information of a data set or its source when determining the truthfulness of the statement. Yin and Tan aim to distinguish true from false statements given a small set of ground truth facts (Yin and Tan, 2011). A graph optimization method is used in (Yin and Tan, 2011) where each node in the graph represents a statement and each edge connects a pair of relevant statements. Statements in the set of ground truth facts are labeled as 1. The algorithm assigns a truthfulness 6  score ranging from -1 to 1 to each unlabeled statement. The scores of unlabeled statements not directly related to any labeled statements are possibly close to 0. This implies that the truthfulness of these statements remains undefined. Yamamoto and Tanaka propose a system to determine the credibility of a lay statement and extract aspects necessary to verify the factual validity from web pages (Yamamoto and Tanaka, 2009) whenever the statement is true. In order to estimate validity of a lay statement, the system collects comparative fact candidates using a web search engine. Fact candidates are sentences retrieved from the search engine that match a pattern specified by the lay statement. Then the validity of each candidate is computed based on the relation between the pattern and the entity contained in the candidate. In comparison to the previous work, a focus of our algorithm is to provide concise but reliable supporting evidence in addition to identifying the truthfulness of a lay statement. The algorithm proposed by Yamamoto and Tanaka is similar to our system when the statement is true. In particular, both (Yamamoto and Tanaka, 2009) and our work use comparative candidate facts in order to assess the credibility of any lay statement. Instead of using web search engines, we rely on an inference method with respect to a KG to collect candidate triplets. A truthfulness score for the lay triplet is computed and compared against scores from those candidate triplets in order to determine whether the lay triplet is true or false. None of these works provide evidence of false statements which is the main contribution of our work.  3.METHODOLOGY Content commonly found in textual documents especially online texts can be unreliable. In this study, we aim to identify whether a given lay statement is true or false and provide supporting 7  evidence. We collect lay statements from many web pages publicly available online. We use a relation extraction algorithm (Rindflesch and Fiszman, 2003) to extract triplets consisting of subject entity 𝑠, object entity 𝑜 and their relation 𝑟(𝑠, 𝑜) embedded within lay statements. Our problem is scoped down to identifying the truthfulness of triplets representing the original lay statements. Knowledge obtained from reliable sources is an important factor in determining the trustworthiness of the lay triplets. We assure that the reliable resources are structured in a form of triplets (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜) which are used to construct a knowledge graph. Nodes and edges in KG represent entities and their relations, respectively. We write (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜) ∈ KG to mean that 𝑠, 𝑜 are nodes in KG and 𝑟 corresponds to an edge between them. An evidence of falseness is obtained based on knowledge from various ontologies in related domains. In order to properly discuss falseness evidence and the main algorithm, we first provide a brief overview of a knowledge base (KB) or ontology and relevant background information. According to terminological knowledge, elementary descriptions are concept names (atomic concepts) and role names (atomic roles). Concept descriptions are built from concept and role names with concept and role constructors. All concept names and concept descriptions are generally considered as concepts. A deeper knowledge of ontologies can be obtained from (Franz et al., 2003). Let KB = (𝒯, 𝒜) be a knowledge base with 𝒯 being a TBox and 𝒜 an ABox as defined in (Franz et al., 2003). An interpretation ℐ = (∆ ℐ ,∙ ℐ ) is a model of KB corresponding to an ontology. We assume that KB is consistent. We assume that for each (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜) ∈ KG there are concepts 𝐷, 𝐸 in KB such that 𝑠 = 𝐷 ℐ , 𝑜 = 𝐸 ℐ . We denote 𝑠 = 𝐷 ℐ if and only if 𝐷 = 𝐶(𝑠), where 𝐷 is a concept, i.e., given entity 𝑠 ∈ KG, 𝐶(𝑠) is the corresponding concept. We define special concepts T and ⊥  8  as top (universal) and bottom (empty) concepts. Concept constructors such as an intersection ⊓, a union ⊔, and a negation ¬ combined with concept names are used to construct other concepts. Let 𝑉𝐶 be the set of all concept names. We also define 𝑎 ⋢ 𝑏 for concepts 𝑎 and 𝑏 if and only if ∃𝑦, 𝑦 ≠ ⊥ where y is a concept such that 𝑦 ⊑ 𝑎 ⊓ ¬𝑏 . A KB classification algorithm computes a partial order ≤ on a set of concept names with respect to the subsumption relationship, that is, 𝐴 ≤ 𝐵 ⟺ 𝐴 ⊑ 𝐵 (𝐴 sub-concept of 𝐵) for concept names 𝐴 and 𝐵. The classification algorithm incrementally constructs a graph representation in a form of a direct acyclic graph, called the subsumption tree, of the partial order induced by KB (Baader et al., 1994). Note that in this paper we use the term “tree” to use the term consistent with past literature. The underlying structure is actually an acyclic graph. Given 𝑋 as a set of concepts, computing the representation of this order is equivalent to identifying the precedence relation ≺ on 𝑋, i.e., 𝑎 ≺ 𝑏 for 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈ 𝑋 if and only if 𝑎 ⊑ 𝑏 and if there exists 𝑧 ∈ 𝑋 such that 𝑎 ⊑ 𝑧 ⊑ 𝑏, then 𝑧 = 𝑎 or 𝑧 = 𝑏. Given the precedence relation ≺𝑖 for 𝑋𝑖 ⊆ 𝑋, the incremental method defined in (Baader et al., 1994) computes ≺𝑖+1 on 𝑋𝑖+1 = 𝑋𝑖 ∪ {c} for some element c ∈ 𝑋 \ 𝑋𝑖 . The method consists of two main parts which are a top and a bottom search. The top and the bottom search identify sets 𝑋𝑖 ↓ 𝑐 = {𝑥 ∈ 𝑋𝑖 | 𝑐 ⊑ 𝑥 and 𝑐 ⋢ 𝑦 for all 𝑦 ≺𝑖 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝑋𝑖 } and 𝑋𝑖 ↑ 𝑐 = {𝑥 ∈ 𝑋𝑖 | 𝑥 ⊑ 𝑐 and 𝑦 ⋢ 𝑐 for all 𝑥 ≺𝑖 𝑦, 𝑦 ∈ 𝑋𝑖 }. At the 𝑖 𝑡ℎ iteration, arcs corresponding to ≺ between 𝑐 and each element in 𝑋𝑖 ↓ 𝑐 as well as 𝑐 and each element in 𝑋𝑖 ↑ 𝑐 are added. Also, some existing arcs between elements in 𝑋𝑖 ↓ 𝑐 and 𝑋𝑖 ↑ 𝑐 are eliminated. At the end we have 𝑎 ≺ 𝑏 if and only if there is an arc in the constructed subsumption tree.  9  Our proposed system is built as a pipeline involving two main steps. We denote by (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜) the lay statement triplet that requires evidence. 1. Determining the truthfulness of the triplets: We rely mainly on the inference method called the Path Ranking Algorithm (PRA) introduced by Lao et. al. (2011) to verify whether each triplet (𝑠̅, 𝑟̅ , 𝑜̅ ) in KG is true or false. The PRA produces 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑃𝑅𝐴 for every pair of nodes. A PRA model is trained at each relation level. Particularly, the PRA model for a relation type 𝑟̅ is trained to retrieve other nodes which potentially have a relation 𝑟̅ (s̅ , ∙) given node 𝑠̅. We retrieve 𝑜̃ related to (s̅ , 𝑟̅ , 𝑜̃) with 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑃𝑅𝐴 (𝑜̃; s̅ ) ≥ 𝜀1. All such object candidates 𝑜̃ are denoted by 𝑂̅ = 𝑜̅ (s̅ ). A subject candidate set 𝑆̅ is extracted in a similar way. The triplet (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜) is labeled as “True” if 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑃𝑅𝐴 (s; o) ≥ 𝜀2 or 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑃𝑅𝐴 (o; s) ≥ 𝜀2 , and “False” otherwise. In addition, paths corresponding to high PRA scores are provided as supporting evidences of truthfulness if (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜) is true. 2. Extracting the evidence of falseness: We now assume that (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜) has been labeled as False in step 1, and either 𝑠 ∉ 𝑆̅ for extracting a subject evidence of falseness or 𝑜 ∉ 𝑂̅ for extracting an object evidence of falseness. Set 𝑂̅ is the set of all objects that verify 𝑠 and 𝑟. If (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜) is false, then it has to be the case that 𝑜 ∉ 𝑂̅ as otherwise (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜) would be true. Same holds for 𝑆̅. We only discuss in detail the object evidence while the subject evidence is defined similarly. Our validation for false statements do not rely on PRA, i.e. any inference algorithm on KG can be used. We found PRA to work best on our data. We next formally define evidence for false triplets. Recall that 𝑂̅ is the set of all objects 𝑜̅ for which (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜̅ ) ∈ KG. It is important that these are all. In essence as a proof of falseness we can provide 𝑂̅ together with the fact o ∉ 𝑂̅ . However, 10  this in many cases would provide a very long evidence since |𝑂̅| is typically large. Instead we want to “aggregate” 𝑂̅ into some smaller set 𝛼 and still claim that o ∉ 𝛼. Wrapping these intuitions in the ontology formalism yields the following definition. Definition 1: An object evidence of falseness is a collection 𝛼 = {𝛼1 , 𝛼2 , … , 𝛼𝑘 } of concept names in KB such that 1) for each 𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑂̅ there exists 𝑖 ∈ {1, … , 𝑘} such that 𝐶(𝑜̅ ) ⊑ 𝛼𝑖 , 2) there exists a concept 𝑦, 𝑦 ≠⊥ such that 𝑦 ⊑ 𝐶(𝑜) ⊓ ¬(∐𝑖 𝛼𝑖 ) for all 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑘. The second condition can be rewritten as 𝐶(𝑜) ⋢ 𝛼1 ⊔ … ⊔ 𝛼𝑘 which in turn is equivalent to 𝐶(𝑜) ⋢ 𝛼1 and…and 𝐶(𝑜) ⋢ 𝛼𝑘 . In words, the second condition is equivalent to the requirement that 𝐶(𝑜) is not part of any element in the evidence set 𝛼. The collection 𝛼 is considered as an aggregated set of 𝑂̅. We further define “potential evidence” 𝛼𝑖 if there exist object evidence of falseness 𝛼 such that 𝛼𝑖 ∈ 𝛼. From the definition, 𝑂̅ is a set of object candidates having a relation 𝑟(s, 𝑜̅ ) for the given triplet (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜). The first requirement in Definition 1 assures that each candidate 𝐶(𝑜̅ ) has to be subsumed by at least one potential evidence 𝛼𝑖 (𝛼 is an aggregation of all elements in 𝑂̅). As an example, letting 𝛼 = 𝑂̅ satisfies the first requirement as each 𝐶(𝑜̅ ) for 𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑂̅ is always subsumed by itself. According to the second requirement, concept 𝐶(𝑜) is not subsumed by any potential evidence 𝛼𝑖 . This ensures that concept 𝐶(𝑜) obtained from the false triplet (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜) does not belong to the evidence collection 𝛼 (it mimics o ∉ 𝛼). Among all collections 𝛼 we want to find the smallest one which is formalized later. Referring to the false triplet example (“Google”, “OfficeLocationInUS”, “Minneapolis”), we let 𝑂̅ be all object candidates retrieved from KG which have the relation 11  “OfficeLocationInUS” associated with subject “Google.” Given 𝑂̅ = {“Ann Arbor,” “Atlanta,” “Austin,” “Birmingham,” “Boulder,” “Cambridge,” “Chapel Hill,” “Chicago,” “Irvine,” “Kirkland,” “Los Angeles,” “Miami,” “Mountain View,” “New York,” “Pittsburgh,” “Playa Vista,” “Reston,” “San Bruno,” “San Francisco,” “Seattle,” “Sunnyvale,” “Washington DC”}, selecting 𝛼 = 𝑂̅ satisfies both requirements in Definition 1. The second requirement is satisfied as 𝐶(𝑜) associated with 𝑜 = “Minneapolis” is not subsumed by any element in the evidence collection 𝛼. Moreover, the collection {"West region,” “Northeast region,” “South region,” “Michigan,” “Illinois”} is an example of a smaller evidence set which satisfies both requirements. We propose Algorithm 1 to extract the evidence of falseness as defined in Definition 1. It is based on the subsumption tree (originally defined only for concept names 𝑉𝐶 ) which is expanded with negation concepts 𝑉𝑁𝐶 and specific concepts 𝑉𝐹 . The set 𝑉𝑁𝐶 is formally defined as 𝑉𝑁𝐶 = { ¬𝑣 | 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 }. Recall that we define 𝑎 ⋢ 𝑏 for concepts 𝑎 and 𝑏 if and only if ∃𝑦, 𝑦 ≠⊥ where y is a concept such that 𝑦 ⊑ 𝑎 ⊓ ¬𝑏 which involves ¬𝑏 and mandates 𝑉𝑁𝐶 . Even though infinitely many concepts can be constructed from concept names and concept constructors, we only focus on specific concepts 𝑉𝐹 which ensure the second requirement in Definition 1. A concept 𝑓 ∈ 𝑉𝐹 corresponds to 𝑓 = 𝑥 ⊓ ¬𝑐 for 𝑐 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 , 𝑥 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 and no proper concept name or concept name negation between ⊥ and 𝑓. Algorithm 1 extracts potential evidence by considering nodes along paths in the tree which satisfy both requirements in Definition 1. In order for Algorithm 1 to check the satisfiability of the requirements, not only 𝑉𝐶 but also both 𝑉𝑁𝐶 and 𝑉𝐹 have to be included in the subsumption tree. Hence, the standard tree consisting of concept names 𝑉𝐶 only has to be expanded. An algorithm to add 𝑉𝑁𝐶 and 𝑉𝐹 to the existing standard tree is provided in Appendix A. The subsumption tree used in Algorithm 1 is of the form 𝒢 = (𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝐹 , 𝐴) where 𝒢 is a  12  directed acyclic graph with root T (top concept). We also define paths and nodes associated with the subsumption tree used in Algorithm 1 as follows. Definition 2: 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑖𝑗 is a set of all possible paths from node 𝑗 to node 𝑖 in the subsumption tree. For 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑖 T we denote by 𝑃𝑚 the 𝑚𝑡ℎ node in 𝑃 starting from T. Let 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑖𝑗 be the set of all nodes along all paths in 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑖𝑗 . Algorithm 1 (𝑜, 𝑂̅) with 𝒢 = (𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝐹 , 𝐴):  1  Set 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) = ∅  2  For each 𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑂̅:  3  Set 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅ ) = ∅  4  For each 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶(𝑜̅) T :  5 6  For 𝑚 = 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ(𝑃) to 1: If 𝑃𝑚 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 :  7  Ω𝑚,𝑃 = {𝑦 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 | 𝑦 ∈ 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒⊥𝐶(𝑜) ∩ 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒⊥¬𝑃𝑚 , 𝑦 ≠⊥}  8  If Ω𝑚,𝑃 ≠ ∅: Add 𝑃𝑚 to 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅)  9 10  Else:  11 12  Break 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) = 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) ∪ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅)  13  Remove duplicate nodes in 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜)  14  Return 𝛼 = SetCover (𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) )  In Algorithm1, we assume that ∃𝑦 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 , 𝑦 ≠⊥ such that 𝑦 ⊑ 𝐶(𝑜) ⊓ ¬𝐶(𝑜̅ ) for all 𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑂̅ and 𝑜 in KB. This assumption implies that 𝐶(𝑜) cannot be part of 𝐶(𝑜̅ ) for an element in 13  𝑂̅. If 𝐶(𝑜) ⊑ 𝐶(𝑜̅ ) for an 𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑂̅, then the statement is true. It assures that 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅) incremented in step 9 for each 𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑂̅ is not empty. Algorithm 1 repeats steps 3-11 to compute potential evidence 𝛼i ′𝑠 for each 𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑂̅ and stores them in 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) . All 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅) ′𝑠 are combined in 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(o) according to step 12. The set 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(o) is  equivalent to the set of all potential evidences. Note that for every 𝑎 ∈ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) there is 𝑜̅ such that 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶(𝑜̅) T contains 𝑎 due to steps 2-12. Algorithm 1 is specifically constructed to ensure that every element in 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(o) is one of nodes along at least one path from 𝐶(𝑜̅ ) to the root. This implies that elements in 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(o) can be considered as broader concepts of candidate evidence 𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑂̅. The first requirement in Definition 1 requires that any 𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑂̅ has at least one corresponding 𝛼i that subsumes 𝐶(𝑜̅ ). Hence, the algorithm considers nodes along all possible paths from 𝐶(𝑜̅ ) to the root (top concept T) for every 𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑂̅ in order to extract potential evidence 𝛼i . The second requirement in Definition 1 is directly associated with Ω computed and verified in  steps 7 and 8. Both 𝑉𝑁𝐶 and 𝑉𝐹 in the subsumption tree used in Algorithm 1 are necessary to compute Ω, i.e., 𝑉𝑁𝐶 and 𝑉𝐹 guarantee that 𝑦 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝐹 . Particularly, Ω𝑚,𝑃 ≠ ∅ implies that 𝐶(𝑜) ⋢ 𝑃m ; therefore, 𝑃m in this case can be considered as potential evidence 𝛼i . Algorithm 1 then computes Ω𝑚,𝑃 for each node 𝑃𝑚 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 in path 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶(𝑜̅)T corresponding to each 𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑂̅. If Ω𝑚,𝑃 is not empty, 𝑃𝑚 (considered as potential evidence 𝛼i ) is added to 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅) in step 9. Elements in 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅) correspond to nodes in 𝑉𝐶 and thus to concept names. They also correspond to potential evidence 𝛼i ′𝑠. Each Ω𝑚,𝑃 computed in Algorithm 1 considers concept names and negation of concept names but Definition 1 considers any concept. Algorithm 1 consequently provides an approximate evidence set while an exact algorithm is discussed later.  14  Figure 1 illustrates Algorithm 1. The path from 𝐶(𝑜) to the root T is highlighted in blue. Nodes along red paths are collected as potential evidence 𝛼i ′𝑠 as 𝐶(𝑜) is not subsumed by these nodes (Ω corresponding to these nodes are not empty).  Figure 1: Illustration of Algorithm 1  Regarding the run time analysis, the proposed algorithm consists of nested loops in steps 2, 4 and 5. Let 𝑁 be the number of nodes in 𝒢 and 𝑀 the maximum number of paths between any node and the root T. The most outer loop in step 2 considers each element 𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑂̅ which is O(𝑁) while the middle loop in step 4 processes each path 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶(𝑜̅) T corresponding to 𝑜̅ in step 2, i.e., O(𝑀). Also, each node along all paths from 𝐶(𝑜̅ ) to the root is considered in the most inner loop in step 5, which is O(𝑁). Computing Ω𝑚,𝑃 for each node 𝑃𝑚 requires O(𝑁 2 ). Hence, the computational complexity of Algorithm 1 is O(𝑁 4 ∙ 𝑀). Algorithm 1 can be sped up by using bisection. The more efficient version is provided in Appendix B. Referring to the running example, we let 𝑜 = “Minneapolis” and consider 𝑜̅ = “Mountain View.” We consider paths from 𝐶(“Mountain View”) to the root as well as all nodes along these 15  paths. Node 𝑃𝑚 = 𝐶(“Mountain View”) is added to 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅) as 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒⊥𝐶("Minneapolis") ∩ 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒⊥¬𝐶("Mountain View") is not empty. Particularly, there exists a node which belongs to both sets, i.e., 𝐶("Minneapolis") ∈ 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒⊥𝐶("Minneapolis") and 𝐶("Minneapolis") ∈ 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒⊥¬𝐶("Mountain View") . According to a natural geography ontology associated with the example, 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅) = {𝐶(“Mountain View”), 𝐶(“Santa Clara”), 𝐶(“California”), 𝐶(“West region”)} is retrieved. Note that 𝐶(“USA”) is not in 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅) since 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒⊥𝐶("Minneapolis") ∩ 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒⊥¬𝐶("USA") is empty. Intuitively, “Minneapolis” is a location in “USA” (“Minneapolis” is part of “USA”) and therefore, “USA” cannot be counted as an evidence of falseness. After obtaining the set of all potential 𝛼 across all possible evidences, we aim to compute an optimal set of evidence with the smallest cardinality. We formally define the object evidence of falseness problem 𝐸𝑃 as 𝑍𝐸𝑃 =  min  𝛼 object evidence of falseness  |𝛼|. A set covering problem is proposed  to find an optimal set of evidence. We later give a condition when it solves it optimally. The set covering problem is formulated as follows. SetCover(𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) ): Universe 𝑈 = {𝑜̅1 , 𝑜̅2 ,…, 𝑜̅ |𝑂̅|} For any node 𝑎 ∈ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) , we define 𝑇𝑎 = {𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑈|𝑎 ∈ 𝑃 where 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶(𝑜̅) T} The set covering problem 𝑆𝐶 reads 𝑍𝑆𝐶 = min |𝐼| subject to ⋃𝑖∈𝐼 𝑇𝑖 = 𝑈. For any node 𝑎 ∈ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) , we know that 𝑇𝑎 ⊆ 𝑈 which is necessary for the feasibility of 𝑆𝐶. The set covering problem aims to find a minimum number of set 𝑇𝑎 ′𝑠 for 𝑎 ∈ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) so that selected sets contain all elements in the universe 𝑈, i.e. they cover 𝑂̅. A feasible solution to the set covering problem satisfies the first requirement of Definition 1. The set 𝑇𝑎 for each 𝑎 ∈ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) is specifically  16  constructed based on 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) . Note that the set 𝑇𝑎 ≠ ∅ because of the fact that for every 𝑎 ∈ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) there is 𝑜̅ such that 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶(𝑜̅) T contains 𝑎 and the construction of 𝑇𝑎 . All elements in 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) added in Algorithm 1 are guaranteed to satisfy the second requirement of Definition 1. According to the false triplet (“Google”, “OfficeLocationInUS”, “Minneapolis”) example, we consider 𝑜 = “Minneapolis” and the set 𝑂̅ given previously. A set of generated 𝑇𝑎 ′𝑠 which yields a feasible solution to the set covering problem is given in Table 1. The left column lists 5 elements from 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) .  Table 1. An example of feasible 𝑇𝑎 ′𝑠 sets for the set covering problem 𝑇𝐶("West region")  “Boulder,” “Irvine,” “Kirkland,” “Los Angeles,” “Mountain View,” “Playa Vista,” “San Bruno,” “San Francisco,” “Seattle,” “Sunnyvale”  𝑇𝐶("Northeast region")  “Cambridge,” “New York,” “Pittsburgh”  𝑇𝐶("South region")  “Atlanta,” “Austin,” “Chapel Hill,” “Miami,” “Reston,” “Washington DC”  𝑇𝐶("Michigan")  “Ann Arbor,” “Birmingham”  𝑇𝐶("Illinois")  “Chicago”  Propositions 1 and 2 stated next establish the relationship between 𝐸𝑃 and 𝑆𝐶. Proofs of Propositions 1 and 2 are provided in Appendix C.  Proposition 1: 𝑆𝐶 is feasible and a feasible solution to 𝑆𝐶 yields a feasible solution to 𝐸𝑃 of same or smaller cardinality.  17  This implies that 𝑍𝑆𝐶 ≥ 𝑍𝐸𝑃 . Due to Proposition 1, a solution to 𝑆𝐶 is always a feasible solution to 𝐸𝑃 and thus an object evidence of falseness obtained from 𝑆𝐶 can be used as a representative of the evidence set from 𝐸𝑃. We consider either concept names or negation of concept names when Ω𝑚,𝑃 is computed in Algorithm 1. An exact algorithm replaces Ω𝑚,𝑃 defined in step 7 of Algorithm 1 with Ω′𝑚,𝑃 = {concept 𝑦 |𝑦 ⊑ 𝐶(𝑜) ⊓ ¬𝑃𝑖 , 𝑦 ≠⊥}. All concepts constructed from concept names and concept constructors are considered in Ω′𝑚,𝑃 . We also observe that checking Ω′𝑚,𝑃 ≠ ∅ is equivalent to checking satisfiability of the concept 𝐶(𝑜) ⊓ ¬𝑃𝑚 , i.e. if 𝐶(𝑜) ⊓ ¬𝑃𝑚 is satisfiable, then Ω′𝑚,𝑃 ≠ ∅ as stated in (Baader, 2003).  Proposition 2: If Ω𝑚,𝑃 in step 7 of Algorithm 1 is substituted with Ω′𝑚,𝑃 , then 𝑍𝑆𝐶 = 𝑍𝐸𝑃 . In the proof for Proposition 2, we show that a feasible solution to 𝐸𝑃 is also a feasible solution to 𝑆𝐶 when replacing Ω𝑚,𝑃 with Ω′𝑚,𝑃 . This implies that 𝑍𝐸𝑃 ≥ 𝑍𝑆𝐶 and combined with Proposition 1 it yields 𝑍𝑆𝐶 = 𝑍𝐸𝑃 .  We define a subject evidence 𝛽 = {𝛽1 , 𝛽2 , … , 𝛽𝑘 } in the same way. In order to identify the subject evidence of falseness 𝛽, Algorithm 1 is applied where all definitions and propositions are defined similarly with respect to (𝑠̅, 𝑟, o). A domain under consideration can have multiple ontologies. In such a case, we implement the proposed algorithms to identify the evidence of falseness for each ontology. The minimum cardinality of subject/object evidence is selected across all ontologies. Finally, the problem to identify the evidence of falseness for each triplet (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜) is  18  formulated min {  by  min  considering (  min  both  𝑜𝑛𝑡 ∈ ontologies 𝛼 object evidence in 𝑜𝑛𝑡  subject  |𝛼|)  ,  min  and  object (  min  evidence  𝑜𝑛𝑡 𝑜𝑛𝑡 ∈ ontologies 𝛽 subject evidence in o𝑛𝑡  sets  |𝛽|)  as  }.  𝑜𝑛𝑡  4. CASE STUDY We apply the proposed algorithm to the health care domain as a case study. A reliable source in our case is obtained from biomedical publications stored in the MEDLINE database. In order to construct KG, SemRep (Rindflesch and Fiszman, 2003) is used to extract semantic predicate triplets from biomedical texts. SemRep matches subject and object entities in triplets with concepts from the UMLS Metathesaurus and matches relationship with respect to the UMLS Semantic Network. It also takes into account a syntactic analysis, a structured domain knowledge, and hypernymic propositions extensively. The data contains both the extracted triplet and the corresponding sentence from MEDLINE. We first train the PRA model based on KG constructed from SemRep. We further compare its performance with the evaluation metrics reported in (Lao et al., 2011) where PRA has been trained on the NELL data set. The average mean reciprocal rank (MRR) across different relation types reported in (Lao et al., 2011) is 0.516 while the average MRR of PRA on SemRep is 0.25. The MRR is computed based on the rank of the first correctly retrieved triplet; however we aim to correctly retrieve all triplets that are in KG. As a result, we additionally compute the mean average precision (MAP) which considers the rank position of each triplet in KG. The MAP based on our trained PRA model is 0.1. This implies that on average every 10th retrieved result is correct. We then manually inspect the original statements and their corresponding predicate triplets extracted from SemRep. Even though a preliminary evaluation of SemRep reported in (Rindflesch and 19  Fiszman, 2003) states 83% precision, extracted predicate triplets in KG contain many errors based on our manual observation. Examples of predicate triplets incorrectly extracted from original statements are provided in Appendix D. The issue is that the sentences are clearly correct but the extracted triplets are often wrong. Hence, we pre-process KG by verifying each extracted predicate triplet with the PRA model and additional relation extraction systems. Detailed explanations are provided in the following data preparation section. 4.1 Data Preparation We aim to re-construct KG containing only triplets with high precision. After manually observing results from the trained PRA model, triplets with high PRA scores tend to be more accurate than those with low PRA scores. Hence, PRA is one of models used to verify triplets in KG. We further employ other relation extraction systems to filter out incorrect triplets from the original KG. Ollie (Mausam et al., 2012) is an open information extraction software which aims to extract binary relationships from sentences. According to open information extraction, a schema of relations does not need to be pre-specified. In addition, we train a recurrent neural network model called LSTMER proposed by Miwa and Bansal (Miwa and Bansal, 2016) on a publicly available training data set having gold standard labels. Each instance in the training data consists of a statement and its predicate triplet. The training data set used to train the LSTM-ER model includes the ADE corpus (Gurulingappa et al., 2012), SemEval-2010 (Hendrickx et al., 2010), BioNLP (Kim et al., 2011), and the SemRep Gold standard annotation (Kilicoglu et al., 2011).  20  In order to pre-process the original KG, we propose a strategy to combine triplets with high PRA scores and triplets matching with the Ollie or LSTM-ER models. A flow diagram of the proposed strategy in order to construct an adjusted KG is depicted in Figure 2.  Figure 2: The flow diagram of the strategy to pre-process KG According to the proposed strategy, we infer the trained PRA model on KG and rank the results from high to low PRA scores. The triplets positioned in the top 10 percent of the ranked PRA scores are retrieved. Additionally, we collect all possible matches between triplets in KG and results from Ollie. We also use the trained LSTM-ER model to infer possible relations from statements associated with triplets in the original KG. Each triplet from KG is collected if its relation matches with the relation inferred from the LSTM-ER model. We conduct a preliminary experiment by extracting matched triplets using Ollie, and the LSTM-ER model based on 10,000 randomly selected triplets. Based on the experiment, we observe a small proportion of matching  21  triplets among different relation extraction models. A detailed discussion of the experiment is provided in Appendix E. Additionally, we observe that many statements in the original KG involve studies with nonhuman subjects such as “Effects of acetylcholine, histamine, and serotonin infusion on venous return in dogs.” In order to filter out these statements, we consider the UMLS semantic type, a categorization of concepts represented in the UMLS Metathesaurus, tagged in the statements. In particular, we eliminate statements which contain “Amphibian,” “Animal,” “Bird,” “Fish,” “Mammal,” “Reptile,” and “Vertebrate” semantic types. We provide the number of nodes and edges in the original KG and in the adjusted KG in Table 2. The average MRR and the average MAP based on the PRA model on the adjusted KG are 0.44 and 0.29, respectively  Table 2: Number of nodes and edges in the original KG and the adjusted KG  The original KG  The adjusted KG  Number of nodes  229,063  161,930  Number of edges  15,700,435  4,107,296  4.2 Results We run the whole pipeline of Algorithm 1 to validate the truthfulness and provide supporting evidence of lay triplets with the adjusted KG. Based on 2,084 lay triplets consisting of 20 relation types collected from health-related web pages, we identify the truthfulness of each triplet and extract evidence candidates as summarized in Appendix F. Across all relation types, there are 501 false triplets which account for 24 percent of all lay triplets. 22  Instead of directly specifying thresholds 𝜀1 and 𝜀2 in step 1 of the process, we identify the rank threshold 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝜀1 and 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝜀2 based on the ordered PRA scores. To identify 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝜀1 corresponding to subject entity 𝑠 and relation type 𝑟, we retrieve a set of all object entities which have relation 𝑟(s,∙) identified by the PRA model. This set is denoted as 𝑂𝑎𝑙𝑙 . The set 𝑂𝐾𝐺 = {𝑜̃ |(𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜̃) ∈ 𝐾𝐺}  is |𝑂  also  retrieved.  |  𝐾𝐺 𝟏|𝑂𝐾𝐺 |>0 𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑛(𝑃𝑅𝐴 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑜𝑓 𝑂  𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝜀1  𝐾𝐺 )  A  parameter  𝑥  which  is  defined  as  𝑥=  is used to specify the rank threshold 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝜀1 as follows:  5 10 ={ 15 20  if 𝑥 ≤ 0.25 |𝑂𝑎𝑙𝑙 | if 0.25 < 𝑥 ≤ 0.5 } + 5 − 10000 . if 0.5 < 𝑥 ≤ 0.75 if 𝑥 > 0.75  The parameter 𝑥 captures how well the PRA model gives high ranks to triplets in KG. The higher the value of 𝑥 is, the better the PRA model performs. This implies that 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝜀1 should vary proportionally to 𝑥. The middle term is a hyper parameter calibrated in the experiment in order to obtain the best performance. The last term in the 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝜀1 formula takes into account how |𝑂𝑎𝑙𝑙 | affects 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝜀1 . Having high |𝑂𝑎𝑙𝑙 | indicates that many object entities are predicted to have 𝑟(s,∙) with respect to subject s. Therefore, it is more challenging for the PRA model to correctly rank retrieved object entities. This implies that high |𝑂𝑎𝑙𝑙 | leads to low value of the threshold 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝜀1 as expressed in the formula. We extract entity 𝑜̅ whose rank based on PRA score is higher than 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝜀1 as candidates in 𝑂̅. Moreover, we specify 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝜀2 as max( 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝜀1 , 0.005 ∗ 𝑂𝑎𝑙𝑙 ) to identify the truthfulness of (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜). If the rank of 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑃𝑅𝐴 (o; s) is higher than 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝜀2 , we specify (𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑜) as true. Among 501 false lay triplets, we first eliminate triplets whose object 𝑜 does not match with concepts in ontologies. Candidates are then used to compute the evidence set based on the remaining 395 triplets by using Algorithm 1. We only perform evaluations on object candidates 23  while subject candidates can be done similarly. The average cardinality of object candidates ̅| and the average cardinality of their corresponding evidence sets |𝛼| across all relation types |𝑂 are 11.65 and 2.24, respectively. A histogram of the produced object evidence |𝛼| of all relation ̅ is provided in Figure 3. types based on candidates 𝑂  |α| distribution 300  Frequency  250 200 150 100 50 0 0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  16  |α|  Figure 3: A histogram of object evidence |𝛼|  In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm, we choose 3 relation types representing high, medium and low MAP computed from the PRA model which are “TREATS,” “DIAGNOSES,” and “CAUSES,” respectively. For each relation type, we select 5 cases to compare the evidence sets resulting from the algorithm (denoted as “Al”) against the evidence sets constructed manually (denoted as “Ma”) as illustrated in Table 3. A complete comparison of elements in evidence sets “Al” and “Ma” is provided in Appendix G.  24  Table 3: Evidence sets obtained from the algorithm and the evidence sets constructed manually |Al|  |Ma|  |Al ∩ Ma|  |Al\Ma|  |Ma\Al|  Heparin TREATS Fever  1  1  1  0  0  Amiodarone TREATS Hepatitis C  1  1  1  0  0  Stress management TREATS Mitral  1  1  1  0  0  Capoten TREATS Coughing  1  1  1  0  0  Losartan TREATS Varicose Ulcer  3  2  1  2  1  1.4  1.2  1.0  0.4  0.2  1  1  1  0  0  Platelet Size DIAGNOSES Anemia  1  2  1  0  1  Esophageal pH Monitoring  5  3  3  2  0  5  2  2  3  0  1  1  1  0  0  2.6  1.8  1.6  1.0  0.2  Caffeine CAUSES Gout  1  3  1  0  2  hypercholesterolemia CAUSES  2  2  2  0  0  Leukemia CAUSES Gout  2  2  2  0  0  Harpin CAUSES Cardiomegaly  2  1  1  1  0  False triplets Relation type: TREATS  Valve Prolapse  Average of TREATS Relation type: DIAGNOSES Echocardiography DIAGNOSES Hyperlipidemia  DIAGNOSES Malignant breast neoplasm Cholesterol measurement test DIANOSES Malignant breast neoplasm Electrocardiogram DIAGNOSES Muscle strain Average of DIAGNOSES Relation type: CAUSES  Neuropathy  25  Ascorbic Acid CAUSES Senile  2  2  1  1  1  Average of CAUSES  1.8  2.0  1.4  0.4  0.6  Average across 3 relation types  1.9  1.7  1.3  0.6  0.3  Plaques  5.CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK In this work, we develop a system to validate the truthfulness of lay triplets and provide supporting evidence. Our system employs the PRA algorithm inferred on KG re-constructed from reliable sources to identify whether a lay triplet is true or false. In our experiment, we train the PRA model based on KG constructed from biomedical literature. The original KG contains incorrect triplets due to the relation extraction process. We attempt to re-construct KG consisting of more accurate triplets by verifying each triplet in the original KG with additional relation extraction algorithms. The trained PRA model on the adjusted KG yields 0.44 MRR and 0.29 MAP averaged across all relation types. The performance of the PRA model based on the adjusted KG is improved. However, the adjusted KG still contains errors due to the challenge of complicated biomedical text and limited resources in training additional relation extraction algorithms. We use a combination of knowledge from ontologies and triplets in the adjusted KG to extract a concise supporting evidence set. Specifically, Algorithm 1 aims to find the supporting evidence set which does not overlap with an entity in a lay triplet. The evidence set is aggregated from candidates obtained from triplets in the adjust KG by using knowledge of ontologies. We apply Algorithm 1 to extract evidence sets based on each ontology and repeatedly consider all possible ontologies. It is reasonable to select the ontology which yields the minimum cardinality of evidence sets. According to our algorithm, we first match object (subject) entity in a lay triplet 26  with concepts within all ontologies. Non-matching ontologies are not taken into a consideration when object (subject) candidates are paired with concepts in ontologies. We assume that candidates that cannot be matched with concepts in the same ontology as the lay triplet’s are disregarded. ̅| extracted from the PRA model and compare it We consider the number of candidates |𝑂 ̅| is against the cardinality of the evidence set |𝛼| resulted from the algorithm. The average of |𝑂 larger than the average of |𝛼| by a factor of 5 across all relation types. This implies that our proposed algorithm provides valid and concise evidence sets. To evaluate the performance of our algorithm, we compare the evidence set extracted from our proposed algorithm with a manuallyconstructed evidence set. The average number of overlap between the evidence set from the algorithm and the manually constructed set is 74% across the 3 relation types. Our proposed algorithm performs very well especially with some specific relation types such as “TREATS” with the overlap of 87%. The problem is challenging due to limited resources to construct a complete and accurate KG. An imperfect KG plays a significant role in the inferior performance of the PRA model which directly impacts the performance of Algorithm 1 to extract evidence sets. A better quality of KG would lead to a higher performance of the proposed system. Hence, future work should focus on improving relation extraction algorithms to construct KG. We believe that this is of utmost importance, not just for our work, but all systems that rely on SemRep.  27  REFERENCES Anderson M. and Perrin A. 2016. 13% of Americans don't use the internet. Who are they? Retrieved from http://pewrsr.ch/2caqLi3 website Baader F. 2003. The description logic handbook: Theory, implementation and applications. Cambridge University press, Cambridge, UK. Baader F., Hollunder B., Nebel B., Profitlich H.-J., and Franconi E. 1994. An empirical analysis of optimization techniques for terminological representation systems. Applied Intelligence, 4(2): 109-132. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf00872105 Franz B., Diego C., Deborah L. M., Daniele N., and Peter F. 2003. The description logic handbook: theory, implementation, and applications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK Gottleb S. 2000. Health information on internet is often unreliable. British Medical Journal, 321(7254): 136. Gurulingappa H., Rajput A. M., Roberts A., Fluck J., Hofmann-Apitius M., and Toldo L. 2012. Development of a benchmark corpus to support the automatic extraction of drug-related adverse effects from medical case reports. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 45(5): 885892. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2012.04.008 Hendrickx I., Kim S. N., Kozareva Z., Nakov P., Seaghdha D., Pado S., Pennacchiotti M., Romano L, and Szpakowicz, S. 2010. SemEval-2010 task 8: Multi-way classification of semantic relations between pairs of nominals. In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation. Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 3338.  28  Kilicoglu H., Rosemblat G., Fiszman M., and Rindflesch T. C. 2011. Constructing a semantic predication gold standard from the biomedical literature. BMC Bioinformatics, 12(1): 486. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-12-486 Kim J., Pyysalo S., Ohta T., Bossy R., Nguyen N., and Tsujii J. i. 2011. Overview of BioNLP shared task 2011. In Proceedings of the BioNLP Shared Task 2011 Workshop. Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1-6. Lao N., Mitchell T., and Cohen W. W. 2011. Random walk inference and learning in a large scale knowledge base. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 529539. Li Q., Li Y., Gao J., Su L., Zhao B., Demirbas M., Fan W., and Han J. 2014. A confidence-aware approach for truth discovery on long-tail data. Proceedings Very Large Data Base Endowment, 8(4): 425-436. https://doi.org/10.14778/2735496.2735505 Li X., Meng W., and Yu C. 2011. T-verifier: Verifying truthfulness of fact statements. In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE 27th International Conference on Data Engineering, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, pages 63-74. Liu G., Wang H., Chen C., and Gao H. 2014. TruthOrRumor: Truth judgment from web. In Proceedings of Web Technologies and Applications: 16th Asia-Pacific Web Conference, APWeb 2014. Springer International Publishing, pages 674-678. Ma F., Li Y., Li Q., Qiu M., Gao J., Zhi S., Su L., Zhao B., Ji H., and Han J. 2015. FaitCrowd: Fine grained truth discovery for crowdsourced data aggregation. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Association for Commputing Machinery, pages 745-754.  29  Mausam Schmitz M., Bart R., Soderland S., and Etzioni O. 2012. Open language learning for information extraction. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning. Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 523-534. Meng C., Jiang W., Li Y., Gao J., Su L., Ding H., and Cheng Y. 2015. Truth discovery on crowd sensing of correlated entities. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems. Association for Commputing Machinery, pages 169-182. Miwa M., and Bansal M. 2016. End-to-end relation extraction using lstms on sequences and tree structures. arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.00770. Mukherjee S., Weikum G., and Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil C. 2014. People on drugs: Credibility of user statements in health communities. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. Association for Commputing Machinery, pages 65-74. Rindflesch T. C., and Fiszman M. 2003. The interaction of domain knowledge and linguistic structure in natural language processing: Interpreting hypernymic propositions in biomedical text. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 36(6): 462-477. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2003.11.003 Waguih D. A., and Berti-Equille L. 2014. Truth discovery algorithms: An experimental evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.6428. Wang T., Zhu Q., and Wang S. 2013. Multi-verifier: A novel method for fact statement verification. In Proceedings of the Web Technologies and Applications: 15th Asia-Pacific Web Conference, APWeb 2013. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pages 526-537.  30  Xiao H., Gao J., Li Q., Ma F., Su L., Feng Y., and Zhang A. 2016. Towards confidence in the truth: A bootstrapping based truth discovery approach. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Association for Commputing Machinery, pages 1935-1944. Yamamoto Y., and Tanaka K. 2009. Finding comparative facts and aspects for Judging the credibility of uncertain facts. In Proceedings of the Web Information Systems Engineering - WISE 2009: 10th International Conference. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pages. 291-305. Yin X., and Tan W. 2011. Semi-supervised truth discovery. In Proceedings of the 20th international conference on world wide web. Association for Commputing Machinery, pages 217-226. Zhao Z., Cheng J., and Ng W. 2014. Truth discovery in data streams: A single-pass probabilistic approach. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM International Conference on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. Association for Commputing Machinery, pages 1589-1598. Zhi S., Zhao B., Tong W., Gao J., Yu D., Ji H., and Han J. 2015. Modeling truth existence in truth discovery. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Association for Commputing Machinery, pages 1543-1552.  31  Appendix A Algorithm A1 presented next adds negation nodes 𝑉𝑁𝐶 to the existing subsumption tree by implementing the incremental methods defined in (Baader et al., 1994). An augmented tree is of the form 𝒢 = (𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝐹 , 𝐴) where nodes 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 are concept names, nodes 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 are negation concepts of concept names and nodes 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉𝐹 are specific concepts which ensure the second requirement in Definition 1. Arc (𝑏, 𝑎) ∈ 𝐴 between node 𝑎 and 𝑏 has the following properties. 1.  𝑎 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 and 𝑏 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 => 𝑎 ≺ 𝑏, i.e. 𝑎 ≤ 𝑏 and if there exists 𝑧 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 such that 𝑎 ≤ 𝑧 ≤ 𝑏, then 𝑧 = 𝑎 or 𝑧 = 𝑏  2.  𝑎 ∈ 𝑉𝐹 and 𝑏 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 => 𝑎 ≤ 𝑏  Concept names and concept constructors are combined in order to construct concepts. This consequently yields a significant number of concepts. Nodes in 𝑉𝐹 may have ≤ relation with many concepts which are not added to the subsumption tree. Note that we only add necessary concepts required for Algorithm 1. Therefore, the first property only takes 𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 into a consideration, i.e., we are not able to assume ≺ relation between nodes in 𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 and nodes in 𝑉𝐹 .  Algorithm A1 to generate 𝒢 = (𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝐹 , 𝐴):  1  Initially set 𝑋 = 𝑉𝐶  2  For each concept name 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 :  3  create node 𝑐 = ¬𝑣  4  compute set 𝑋 ↓ 𝑐 = {𝑥 ∈ 𝑋| 𝑐 ≤ 𝑥 and 𝑐 ≰ 𝑦 for all 𝑦 ≺ 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ 𝑋}  5  compute set 𝑋 ↑ 𝑐 = {𝑥 ∈ 𝑋| 𝑥 ≤ 𝑐 and 𝑦 ≰ 𝑐 for all 𝑥 ≺ 𝑦, 𝑦 ∈ 𝑋} 32  6  add arcs between 𝑐 and each element of 𝑋 ↓ 𝑐, and between 𝑐 and each element of 𝑋 ↑ 𝑐  7  remove all arcs between elements of 𝑋 ↑ 𝑐 and 𝑋 ↓ 𝑐  8  compute set 𝑋 𝑉𝐶 ∥ 𝑐 = {𝑥 ∈ 𝑋, 𝒙 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 | ⊥ ≤ 𝑐 ⊓ 𝑥 }  9  For each element 𝑑 ∈ 𝑋 𝑉𝐶 ∥ 𝑐 ∶  10  create artificial node 𝑎𝑑 = 𝑐 ⊓ 𝑑 and add an arc (𝑎𝑑 , ⊥) connecting ⊥ to 𝑎𝑑  11  add an arc (𝑑, 𝑎𝑑 ) connecting 𝑎𝑑 to 𝑑 and (𝑐, 𝑎𝑑 ) connecting 𝑎𝑑 to 𝑐 𝑋 = 𝑋 ⋃ {𝑐}  12  To extract the evidence set, Algorithm 1 computes Ω′s in order to ensure the second requirement in Definition 1. Any set Ω𝑚,𝑃 depends on an overlap between two set of nodes corresponding to 𝐶(𝑜) and ¬𝑃𝑚 . To verify the overlap of these two sets, both 𝑉𝑁𝐶 and 𝑉𝐹 are necessary. Algorithm A1 adds 𝑉𝑁𝐶 and 𝑉𝐹 to the standard subsumption tree which only includes concept names 𝑉𝐶 . It relies mainly on an incremental method involving the top and bottom search computed in steps 4 and 5. As arcs in the tree only represent the subsumption relationship, steps 8-11 further take into account an overlap case which involves nodes in 𝑉𝐹 .  Appendix B As a more efficient version of Algorithm 1, we propose Algorithm B1 using a bisection method based on Ω𝑚,𝑃 as of follows. Algorithm B1 (𝑜, 𝑂̅ ) with 𝒢 = (𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝐹 , 𝐴):  1  Set 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) = ∅  2  For each 𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑂̅:  3  Set 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅ ) = ∅ 33  4  For each 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶(𝑜̅) T : 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ(𝑃) ⌋ 2  5  𝑚=⌊  6  While True:  7  Ω𝑚,𝑃 = {𝑦 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 | 𝑦 ∈ 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒⊥𝐶(𝑜) ∩ 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒⊥¬𝑃𝑚 , 𝑦 ≠⊥}  8  If Ω𝑚,𝑃 ≠ ∅:  9  Ω𝑚−1,𝑃 = {𝑦 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 | 𝑦 ∈ 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒⊥𝐶(𝑜) ∩ 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒⊥¬𝑃𝑚−1 , 𝑦 ≠⊥}  10  If Ω𝑚−1,𝑃 = ∅: For 𝑚′ = 𝑚 to 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ(𝑃):  11  Add 𝑃𝑚′ to 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅)  12 13  Break  14  Else: 𝑚  𝑚=⌊ ⌋ 2  15 Else:  16  𝑚  𝑚 = 𝑚+⌊ ⌋ 2  17 18  𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) = 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) ∪ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅)  19  Remove duplicate nodes in 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜)  20  Return 𝛼 = SetCover(𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) )  Note that as in Algorithm 1 ∀𝑎 ∈ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) there is 𝑜̅ such that 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶(𝑜̅) T contains 𝑎 due to steps 2-18. For any 𝑜̅𝑖 ∈ 𝑂̅, Algorithm B1 identifies the 𝑚𝑡ℎ position in each path 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) T such that Ω𝑚,𝑃 ≠ ∅ and Ω𝑚−1,𝑃 = ∅ by the bisection search method. We know that 𝑃𝑚 ⊑ 𝑃𝑚−1 ⇔ ¬𝑃𝑚−1 ⊑ ¬𝑃𝑚 for any concepts 𝑃𝑚 and 𝑃𝑚−1 . Hence, Ω𝑚−1,𝑃 ≠ ∅ implies that Ω𝑚,𝑃 ≠ ∅. Step 12 adds all nodes which are subsumed by 𝑃𝑚 to 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) if conditions in steps 8 and 10 are satisfied  34  As in the run time analysis of Algorithm 1, we let 𝑁 be the number of nodes in 𝒢 and 𝑀 the maximum number of paths between any node and the root T. Similarly to Algorithm 1, the most outer loop in step 2 is O(𝑁) while the middle loop in step 4 is considered as O(𝑀). Algorithm B1 relies on the bisection search which is accounted for O(log 2 𝑁). Computing Ω𝑚,𝑃 for each node 𝑃𝑚 requires O(𝑁 2 ). Therefore, the computational complexity of Algorithm B1 is O(log 2 𝑁 ∙ 𝑁 3 ∙ 𝑀) compared to O(𝑁 4 ∙ 𝑀) corresponding to Algorithm 1.  Appendix C Proof of Proposition 1: We first argue that 𝑆𝐶 is feasible. For any path 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) T of 𝑜̅𝑖 ∈ 𝑂̅, 𝑃𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ(𝑃) = 𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) ∈ 𝑉𝐶 . According to the assumption that ∃𝑦 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 , 𝑦 ≠⊥ such that 𝑦 ⊑ 𝐶(𝑜) ⊓ ¬𝐶(𝑜̅ ) for all 𝑜̅ ∈ 𝑂̅ and 𝑜 in KB, there exists node 𝑦 in 𝒢 which yields paths from ¬𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) to 𝑦 and 𝐶(o) to 𝑦 for any 𝑜̅𝑖 ∈ 𝑂̅. This implies that 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒⊥𝐶(𝑜) ∩ 𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒⊥¬𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) ≠ ∅ which corresponds to nonempty Ω 𝑚,𝑃 of 𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) for any 𝑜̅𝑖 ∈ 𝑂̅ and any path 𝑃 for an 𝑚. Hence, 𝑇𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) is a set in 𝑆𝐶 for every 𝑜̅𝑖 ∈ 𝑂̅. This implies that 𝑆𝐶 is feasible. Let 𝑇𝛼1 , 𝑇𝛼2 , … , 𝑇𝛼𝑘 be a feasible solution to 𝑆𝐶. We know that ⋃𝑖 𝑇𝛼𝑖 = 𝑈 and 𝛼𝑖 ∈ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) . For each 𝑜̅𝑖 , there exists 𝑗(𝑖) such that 𝑜̅𝑖 ∈ 𝑇𝛼𝑗(𝑖) . Let 𝛼 = {𝛼𝑗(𝑖) } 𝑛𝑖=1 . We next argue that 𝛼 is an object evidence of falseness. The definition implies that 𝛼𝑗(𝑖) ∈ 𝑃 where 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) T which implies that 𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) ⊑ 𝛼𝑗(𝑖) . The first requirement in Definition 1 is therefore satisfied.  35  We next show the second property in Definition 1. Each 𝛼𝑗(𝑖) ∈ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) which is added in step 9 has to satisfy conditions in steps 6 and 8 according to Algorithm 1. For any path 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) T , Ω 𝛼𝑗(𝑖) ,𝑃 ≠ ∅ implies that ∃𝑦 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 , 𝑦 ≠⊥ such that there is a path from 𝐶(𝑜) to 𝑦 and a path from ¬𝛼𝑗(𝑖) to 𝑦. Hence, ∃𝑦 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 ∪ 𝑉𝑁𝐶 , 𝑦 ≠⊥ such that 𝑦 ⊑ 𝐶(𝑜) and 𝑦 ⊑ ¬𝛼𝑗(𝑖) which is equivalent to 𝐶(𝑜) ⋢ 𝛼𝑗(𝑖) . As 𝐶(𝑜) ⋢ 𝛼𝑗(𝑖) is assured for all 𝑗(𝑖), the second requirement in Definition 1 is satisfied. It is clear by construction that 𝑘 ≥ |𝛼|. Proof of Proposition 2: Let 𝛼 = {𝛼1 , 𝛼2 , … , 𝛼𝑘 } be feasible to 𝐸𝑃. By requirement 1 of 𝐸𝑃, for every 𝑜̅𝑖 ∈ 𝑂̅ there exists 𝛼𝑖 such that 𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) ⊑ 𝛼𝑖 . From TBox classification which is used to construct the subsumption tree, we know that 𝑎 ⊑ 𝑏 if and only if there is a path from 𝑏 to 𝑎 for 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈ 𝑉𝐶 . Hence, a path 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) T is one of the paths in step 4. The requirement 2 of 𝐸𝑃 corresponds to Ω′ computed and substituted to step 7 in Algorithm 1. If Ω′𝑚,𝑃 ≠ ∅ which is verified (by checking satisfiability of the concept 𝐶(𝑜) ⊓ ¬𝑃𝑚 ) in Step 8, 𝑃𝑚 considered as evidence 𝛼𝑖 is added to 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) in step 9. By step 12 in Algorithm 1, 𝛼𝑖 ∈ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) and thus 𝛼𝑖 ∈ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) . Hence, there exists 𝑇𝛼𝑖 for each 𝛼𝑖 ∈ 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝐶(𝑜) . Since 𝛼𝑖 ∈ 𝑃 where 𝑃 ∈ 𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) T, 𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) ∈ 𝑇𝛼𝑖 . We have ⋃𝑖 𝑇𝛼𝑖 ⊇ ⋃𝑖 𝐶(𝑜̅𝑖 ) = 𝑂̅ = 𝑈. This implies that 𝛼 is feasible to 𝑆𝐶. Since a feasible solution to 𝐸𝑃 yields a feasible solution to 𝑆𝐶, it implies that 𝑍𝑆𝐶 ≤ 𝑍𝐸𝑃 . As 𝑍𝑆𝐶 ≤ 𝑍𝐸𝑃 and 𝑍𝑆𝐶 ≥ 𝑍𝐸𝑃 (from Proposition 1), 𝑍𝑆𝐶 = 𝑍𝐸𝑃 is directly followed.  Appendix D We manually observe extracted triplets in KG and compare them with their original statements. Based on our manual observation, incorrectly extracted triplets are provided in Table D1. 36  Table D1: Examples of incorrectly extracted triplets in KG based on SemRep Original statements  Extracted triplets  Six additional imino derivatives of pyridoxal  (Pyridoxal ; same as ; Prolactin Release-  have been studied, but none of these new  Inhibiting Hormone | PEE1)  compounds was as effective as PIH. There was no significant different in the  (Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase  levels of G6PD activity in subjects with GdA  measurement, quantitative ; USES ; GDA)  or GdB. Two methods for the removal of erythrocytes  (Erythrocytes ; PRODUCES ; human  from buffy coats for the production of human  leukocyte interferon)  leukocyte interferon.  Appendix E According to the experiment, we observe matches among KG, Ollie and LSTM-ER models. Table E1 illustrates the number of matches among the different models. Table E1: Number of matches among KG, Ollie and LSTM-ER models based on 10,000 triplets Number of triplets 160 160 525 1500  KG  Ollie  LSTM-ER  ×  × × ×  × ×  × ×  ×  Appendix F  37  We first identify the truthfulness of a lay triplet based on the PRA model for each relation type. A proportion of false triplets which is equivalent to the number of false triplets divided by total number of triplets is computed. Object candidates are computed for false triplets only. The total number of triplets, the false triplet proportion and the average number of object candidates for each relation types are summarized in Table F1. Table F1: Statistics of truthfulness and object candidates obtained from the PRA model Number of triplets  False triplets proportion  ̅| 𝑨𝒗𝒈 |𝑶  LOCATION_OF  378  0.15  12.19  ISA  319  0.07  10.43  PREDISPOSES  292  0.33  8.68  TREATS  207  0.26  10.80  CAUSES  179  0.39  11.50  AFFECTS  116  0.41  14.69  COEXISTS_WITH  114  0.30  17.29  PREVENTS  110  0.25  7.86  PART_OF  69  0.25  7.65  INTERACTS_WITH  46  0.30  3.79  INHIBITS  45  0.20  7.67  ASSOCIATED_WITH  37  0.22  8.63  AUGMENTS  35  0.46  11.75  USES  35  0.09  7.67  PRODUCES  30  0.17  8.20  DIAGNOSES  22  0.14  14.00  DISRUPTS  21  0.48  9.70  PRECEDES  16  0.25  17.25  METHOD_OF  13  0.38  19.2  Relation type  38  Appendix G We compare the cardinality of candidates, the cardinality of evidence, and all elements in the set corresponding to “Al” and “Ma” in Table G1. Table G1: A complete comparison of elements in evidence sets “Al” and “Ma” Al False Triplets  Heparin TREATS Fever Amiodarone TREATS Hepatitis C Stress management TREATS Mitral Valve Prolapse Capoten TREATS Coughing Losartan TREATS Varicose Ulcer Echocardiography DIAGNOSES Hyperlipidemia Platelet Size DIAGNOSES Anemia  Esophageal pH Monitoring DIAGNOSES Malignant breast neoplasm  Ma  ̅| |𝑶  |𝛂|  ̅| |𝑶  |𝛂|  2  1  5  1  'hemic system symptom' 'disease of anatomical entity'  3  1  9  1  1  'nervous system disease'  2  2  1  12  1  'Disease, Disorder or Finding'  9  1  9  2  4  1  5  2  8  3  5  3  4  1  4  11  1  5  𝛂  'insulin resistance', ‘hypertrophy', ‘disease' 'disease of anatomical entity' 'Cardiovascular Diseases'  'Biological Process', ‘Finding', ‘Non-Neoplastic Disorder', ‘Neoplasm by Morphology', ‘Digestive System Disorder' 39  𝛂  'hemic system symptom' 'disease of anatomical entity' 'nervous system disease' 'Disease, Disorder or Finding' 'ischemia', ‘disease' 'disease of anatomical entity' 'Blood Platelet Disorders', ‘Cardiovascular Diseases' ‘Finding', ‘NonNeoplastic Disorder', ‘Neoplasm by Morphology'  Cholesterol measurement test DIANOSES Malignant breast neoplasm  Electrocardiogram DIAGNOSES Muscle strain  15  5  1  1  Caffeine CAUSES Gout  Leukemia CAUSES Gout  'Non-Neoplastic Disorder by Site', ‘Finding' 4  2  1  1  'Cell Physiological Phenomena'  2  hypercholesterolemia CAUSES Neuropathy  'Biological Process', ‘Mouse Disorder by Site', ‘Finding', ‘NonNeoplastic Disorder', ‘Dependence' 'cardiac disorder AE'  1  7  2  3  2  Harpin CAUSES Cardiomegaly 7  2  Ascorbic Acid CAUSES Senile Plaques 2  'Finding', ‘NonNeoplastic Disorder' 'genetic disease', ‘neoplasm (disease)' 'Pathologic Processes', ‘Phenomena and Processes Category' 'Atherosclerosis', 'Abnormality of the cerebral ventricles'  2  8  3  6  2  2  2  2  1  4  40  2  'cardiac disorder AE' 'Phenomena and Processes Category', ‘Behavior and Behavior Mechanisms', ‘Signs and Symptoms, Digestive' 'Finding', ‘NonNeoplastic Disorder' 'genetic disease', ‘neoplasm (disease)' 'Cell Death'  'Abnormality of digestive system physiology', 'Abnormality of nervous system physiology'

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
