Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_4469

Abstract:
Localization in mobile networks via virtual convex hulls  arXiv:1504.01207v2 [cs.SY] 21 Jan 2017  Sam Safavi, Student Member, IEEE, and Usman A. Khan, Senior Member, IEEE  Localization is a well-studied problem, which refers to the collection of algorithms that estimate the location of nodes in a network. Relevant applications include traffic control, industrial automation, robotics, and environment monitoring [1]– [4]. In terms of the information used for estimating the locations, localization schemes in Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) can be classified as range-based, [5]–[7], and rangefree, [8]–[11]. While the former depends on measuring the distance and/or angle between the nodes, the latter makes no assumptions about the availability of such information and relies on the connectivity of the network. The literature on localization also consists of centralized and distributed approaches. Centralized algorithms, [12]–[15], despite their benefits, are impractical in large networks where each node has limited power and communication capability. Some notable distributed localization techniques include successive refinements, [16]–[18], multilateration, [19]–[21], estimation based methods, multidimentional scaling [22], and graph-theoretical methods, [23]–[25].  When ranging data is noisy, the following estimation-based localization techniques are widely used. Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) methods estimate the most probable location of a mobile node based on prior statistical models. MLE only requires (current) measured data and does not integrate prior data. Sequential Bayesian Estimation (SBE) methods use the recursive Bayes rule to estimate the likelihood of an agent’s location. The solution to SBE is generally intractable and cannot be determined analytically. An alternative approach is Kalman-based techniques, which are only optimal when the uncertainties are Gaussian and the system dynamics are linear, [26], [27]. However, localization has always been considered as a nonlinear problem and hence the optimality of Kalman-based solutions are not guaranteed. To address the nonlinear nature of localization problems, other suboptimal solutions to approximate the optimal Bayesian estimation include Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) and Particle Filters (PF), [27]. In particular, Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) method is a PF that exploits posterior probability to determine the future location of an agent. Localization algorithms specifically designed for mobile networks have been proposed in [8]–[11]. Ref. [8] introduces the Monte Carlo Localization (MCL) method, which exploits mobility to improve the accuracy of localization. Inspired by [8], the authors in [10] propose Mobile and Static sensor network Localization (MSL*) that extends MCL to the case where some or all nodes are static or mobile. Ref [11] proposes variations of MCL, namely dual and mixture MCL to increase the accuracy of the original MCL algorithm. On the other hand, Ref [9] provides Range-based Sequential Monte Carlo Localization method (Range-based SMCL), which combines range-free and range-based information to improve localization performance in mobile sensor networks. In this paper, we consider localization of a mobile network, assuming that each agent measures a noisy version of its distances to the nodes (agents and/or anchors) in its communication radius1 , and the motion it undertook, e.g., by using an accelerometer. We focus on scenarios where GPS (or related positioning system) is compromised and/or unavailable, and develop a collaborative algorithm for a network of agents/robots to find their locations in order to implement a location-aware task or a mission. As an example, consider a network of mobile robots with no central or local coordinator and with limited communication, whose task is to transport goods in an indoor facility where GPS signals are not avail-  The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Tufts University, 161 College Ave, Medford, MA 02155, {sam.safavi@,khan@ece.}tufts.edu. This work is partially supported by an NSF Career award: CCF # 1350264.  1 In wireless networks, the distance may be estimated with, e.g., Received Signal Strength (RSS), Time of Arrival (ToA), Time Difference of Arrival (TDoA) measurements, [28]. We further note that the distance information can also be obtained using a camera at each agent, [29].  Abstract—In this paper, we develop a distributed algorithm to localize an arbitrary number of agents moving in a bounded region of interest. We assume that the network contains at least one agent with known location (hereinafter referred to as an anchor), and each agent measures a noisy version of its motion and the distances to the nearby agents. We provide a geometric approach, which allows each agent to: (i) continually update the distances to the locations where it has exchanged information with the other nodes in the past; and (ii) measure the distance between a neighbor and any such locations. Based on this approach, we provide a linear update to find the locations of an arbitrary number of mobile agents when they follow some convexity in their deployment and motion. Since the agents are mobile, they may not be able to find nearby nodes (agents and/or anchors) to implement a distributed algorithm. To address this issue, we introduce the notion of a virtual convex hull with the help of the aforementioned geometric approach. In particular, each agent keeps track of a virtual convex hull of other nodes, which may not physically exist, and updates its location with respect to its neighbors in the virtual hull. We show that the corresponding localization algorithm, in the absence of noise, can be abstracted as a Linear TimeVarying (LTV) system, with non-deterministic system matrices, which asymptotically tracks the true locations of the agents. We provide simulations to verify the analytical results and evaluate the performance of the algorithm in the presence of noise on the motion as well as on the distance measurements.  I. I NTRODUCTION  2  able. In order to perform a delivery task, each mobile robot has to know its own location first. In such settings, we are interested in developing an anchor-based distributed algorithm that uses only the distance and angle measurements to track the agent locations such that the convergence is invariant to the initial position estimates. However, the implementation and analysis of such distributed algorithm in mobile networks is not straightforward, because: (i) an agent may not be able to find nearby nodes at any given time to implement a distributed algorithm; (ii) an agent may not be in the proximity of an anchor at any given time; (iii) the neighborhood at each agent is dynamic, resulting into a time-varying distributed algorithm. In this context, the main contribution of this work is to develop a linear framework for localization that enables us to circumvent the challenges posed by the predominant nonlinear approaches to this problem. This linear framework is not to be interpreted as a linearization of an existing nonlinear algorithm. Instead, the nonlinearity from range to location is embedded in an alternate representation provided by the barycentric coordinates. However, forcing this linear update comes at a price, i.e., a location update is only possible when an agent lies in a triangle (convex hull in R2 ) formed by three neighboring nodes. Since such neighbors may never exist, see (i) above, we introduce the notion of a virtual convex hull. We then show that localization in mobile networks can be achieved with exactly one anchor when the total number of nodes (agents and anchors) is at least 4 in R2 . This is in stark contrast to the requirement of at least 3 anchors that is prevalent in the triangulation-based localization literature. See [30] for a recent survey on localization approaches with single vs. multiple anchor nodes. As we will discuss in Section V, we abstract the corresponding localization algorithm as a Linear Time-Varying (LTV) system whose system matrices may be: identity–when no location update occurs; stochastic–when there is no anchor among the neighbors of the updating agent; and, strictly sub-stochastic–when the neighborhood includes at least one anchor. Note that the order in which the updates occur and the weights assigned to the neighbors are not known a priori. To address these challenges, we apply a novel method to study LTV convergence by partitioning the entire chain of system matrices into slices and relating the convergence rate to the slice lengths. In particular, we show that the algorithm converges if the slice lengths do not grow faster than a certain exponential rate. Since our localization scheme is based on the motion and the distance measurements, it is meaningful to evaluate the performance of the algorithm when these parameters are corrupted by noise. Therefore, we study the impact of noise on the convergence of the algorithm and provide modifications to counter the undesirable effects of noise. Owing to the linear representation, we are able to provide a few simple yet comprehensive modifications to the proposed approach, which as shown in the simulations lead to a bounded error in the location estimates. We now describe the rest of the paper. In Section II, we formulate the problem. We introduce the geometric approach to track the distances in Section III. We then provide our localization algorithm that relies on the notion of virtual convex  hull in Section IV, followed by the convergence analysis in Section V. In Section VI, we examine the effects of noise on the algorithm. We provide simulation results and compare the performance of the algorithm with MCL, MSL*, Dual MCL, and Range-based SMCL algorithms in Section VII. Finally, Section VIII concludes the paper. II. P RELIMINARIES AND P ROBLEM FORMULATION Consider a network of N mobile agents, in the set Ω, with unknown locations, and M anchor(s), in the set κ, with fixed known locations, all located in R2 ; let Θ = Ω ∪ κ be the set of 2 all nodes. Let xi∗ k ∈ R be a row vector that denotes the true location of the i-th agent, i ∈ Ω, at time k, where k ≥ 0 is the discrete-time index. Regardless of what motion modality (aerial, ground, kinematics) is employed by the agents, their motion can be expressed as the deviation between the current and next locations, i.e., i∗ eik+1 , xi∗ k+1 = xk + x  i ∈ Ω,  (1)  eik is the true motion vector at time k. We assume that where x the agents move along straight lines, or otherwise the motion trajectories can be approximated by a piecewise linear model. This is a common assumption in robotics literature [31], e.g., a simple differential wheeled robot whose wheels run in the same direction and speed, will move in a straight line. We bik , of this also assume that agent i measures a noisy version, x motion, e.g., by using an accelerometer: bik = x eik + nik , x  (2)  where nik is the accelerometer noise at time k. We assume that the motion is restricted in a bounded region in R2 . We define the distance between any two nodes, i and j, measured at the time of communication, k, as deij k . We assume that the ij b distance measurement, dk , at node i is not perfect and includes noise, i.e., ij eij dbij (3) k = dk + rk , in which rkij is the noise in the distance measurement at time k. The problem is to find the locations of the mobile agents in the set Ω given any initialization of the underlying algorithm. We then consider the minimal number of anchors required for such a process to work. Main idea: We now describe the main idea behind our approach. In order to avoid nonlinearity in the solution2 , we consider a barycentric-based linear representation of positions; the advantage of a linear approach is that the convergence is independent of the initial location estimates. Let Θi (k) denote a set of three agents such that agent i lies inside their convex hull, C(Θi (k)), at time k. In the barycentric-representation, the location of node i is described by a linear-convex combination of the nodes in Θi (k), i.e., i1 1∗ i2 2∗ i3 3∗ xi∗ k = ak xk + ak xk + ak xk ,  Θi (k) = {1, 2, 3} (4)  2 When only distances to at least m+1 anchors are known in Rm , trilateration, e.g., in R2 , requires 3 anchors and solves 3 circle equations, [32]. Clearly, trilateration is nonlinear and coupled in the coordinates; while an iterative procedure built on these nonlinear updates does not converge in general.  3  in which xi∗ k represents the true location of node i at time k, and the coefficients, aij k ’s, are the barycentric coordinates, associated to Möbius, [33], given by AΘi (k)∪{i}\j aij , (5) k = AΘi (k) where AΘi (k)∪{i}\j denotes the area of the convex hull formed by the agents in the subscript set. To implement this update, agent i has to lie inside the convex hull of the (three) neighbors in the set Θi (k). Appendix F provides a simple procedure, [34], to test if an agent lies inside or outside of the convex hull formed by the nearby nodes. Finally, note that the barycentric coordinates are always positive and they sum to 1. Challenges and our approach: To implement the above barycentric-based procedure, agent i must acquire the mutual distances among the 4 nodes (in the set {i∪Θi (k)}). However, an agent may never find such a convex hull because the nodes are mobile, in a region possibly full of obstacles, with limited communication and/or visual radius. To address this challenge, we provide a geometric approach that allows an agent to track its distance to any location, where it has exchanged information with the other nodes in the past (Section III-A). We further show that at the time of communication an agent can compute the distance between a neighbor and any such locations (Section III-B). Using these methods, we introduce the notion of a virtual convex hull, which is a triangle whose vertices are located at the virtual locations where the agent exchanged information in the past (Section IV). The described approach results in a rather opportunistic algorithm where an update occurs only when a certain set of real and virtual conditions are satisfied. The subsequent analysis is to characterize the convergence of such LTV algorithms whose system matrices are non-deterministic. In this paper, we rigorously develop the conditions of convergence and study the locationtracking performance of this procedure (Section V). We now enlist our assumptions: i∗ A0: Each anchor, i ∈ κ, knows its location, xi∗ k = x0 , ∀k. i bk , of its A1: Each agent, i ∈ Ω, has a noisy measurement, x eik , see Eq. (2). motion vector, x A2: Each agent, i ∈ Ω, has a noisy measurement, dbij k , of the distances to nodes, j ∈ Θ within a radius, r, see Eq. (3). Under the above assumptions, we are interested in finding the true locations of each agent in the set Ω, without the presence of any central coordinator. In the process, we study what is the minimal number of anchors required and in particular: does mobility reduce the number of anchors3 from 3 in R2 (Section V). In the following, we first discuss the ideal scenario when the motion and distance measurements are not affected by noise. We then evaluate the performance of the algorithm in the presence of noise on the motion as well as on the distance measurements, and present a modified algorithm to counter the undesirable effects of noise (Section VI).  the true location of the i-th agent, i ∈ Ω in R2 , be decomposed i∗ i∗ as xi∗ k = [xk yk ]. We then describe the motion of agent i as: ! k+1 X i∗ i∗ i i i xk+1 = xk + dk→k+1 cos θk0 →k0 +1 + θ0 , i∗ yk+1  =  yki∗  +  dik→k+1  k0 =1 k+1 X  sin  ! θki 0 →k0 +1  +  θ0i  , (6)  k0 =1 i where dik→k+1 and θk→k+1 denote the distance and angle traveled by agent i, between time k and k + 1, and θ0i is agent i’s initial orientation4 , see Fig. 1. Let us also consider  𝜃0𝑛 𝐱 0𝑛  𝜃0𝑖  ∗  ∗  ∗  𝑗  𝐱 0𝐴  𝐱 0𝑖  𝜃0  𝜃0𝑙  𝑗∗  𝐱0  𝑙∗  𝐱0  Fig. 1. Initial orientations of N = 4 agents; filled colored circles and red triangle indicate the initial locations of the agents, i, j, l, n and the anchor, A, respectively; red circle shows the communication radius of agent i.  a vision-based distance measurement process, where an agent needs to see another agent with its camera in order to find the mutual distance, as opposed to wireless-based distance measurements that are prone to extremely large errors. When agent i moves to a new location at time k, it first scans the neighborhood, i.e., rotates by an angle, 0 ≤ βki < 2π, in order to find (and make visual contact with) another node (agent or anchor). If the agent does not find any neighbor at time k, then βki = 0. If on the other hand, agent i finds another node within the communication radius, it exchanges information with that node, then makes another rotation by an angle, 0 ≤ αki < 2π, which is randomly chosen at each iteration, and travels the distance of dik→k+1 in the new direction. Thus, the angle traveled by agent i between time k i and k + 1, θk→k+1 , can be represented as i θk→k+1 = αki + βki  k ≥ 0.  (7)  III. A G EOMETRIC A PPROACH TOWARDS L OCALIZATION In this section, we consider the motion and distance in the noiseless case, i.e., nik = 0 and rkij = 0, in Eqs. (2) and (3). Let  Before we proceed, note that under perfect motion and noiseless distance measurements, an agent cannot find its position by direct communication with an anchor, unless it knows its angle towards the anchor with respect to a mutual frame; in contrast, the proposed framework in this paper assumes that only relative angles are known to each agent. For example, agent i in Fig. 1 initially finds anchor A in its communication radius. However, in order to find its exact location, agent i needs to know θ0i , in addition to xA∗ and deiA 0 0 . We assume that such angles are not available to the agents. In what follows, we first explain the procedure to track the distance between an agent and the locations where it has exchanged information with other nodes in the past. We  3 The minimal number of anchors required to solve a localization problem, without ambiguity, given only distance measurements is m in Rm , [32].  4 Note that these initial orientations, θ i ’s, are arbitrary and we neither 0 assume any global synchronization nor we know what the true angles are.  4  then show how an agent can compute the distance between a neighbor and any such location at the time of communication. A. Tracking the distance after a direct communication Consider an agent, i ∈ Ω, to fall within a distance, r, of node, j ∈ Θ, at some time kj ; by Assumption A2, agent i can measure its distance, deij kj to node j, and receive j-th node’s location estimate, hereinafter denoted as xjkj . Once this information is acquired at time kj , agent i tracks the distance to the true position, xj∗ kj , for all k ≥ kj , even when the two agents move apart. In other words, agent i, has the following information for each node it has communicated with: {j, kj , deij , xj }, k ≥ kj , j ∈ Θ, (8) k  kj  where kj is the instant of the most-recent contact, and deij k is j∗ the distance between the true positions, xi∗ and x , k ≥ kj . k kj This procedure is illustrated in Fig. 2. Note that in order to  𝑗∗  We now show how agent i can use the distance/angle information to find the distances between a neighbor and any virtual location, where it has previously communicated with another node. Lemma 2. Suppose agent i has previously made contact with node, j, hence possesses the following information: j {j, kj , deij k , xkj },  k ≥ kj ,  Suppose agent i finds a neighbor, say agent `, at time k` > kj . `∗ Agent i can then find the distance between xj∗ kj and xk` as follows: q 2 ei` 2 eij ei` eij ei` (deij (10) dej` = k` ) + (dk` ) − 2dk` dk` cos ∠(dk` , dk` ), k` j∗ i∗ in which deij k` is the distance between xk` and xkj , ei` and ∠(deij k` , dk` ) is the angle between the two lines connectj∗ `∗ ing xi∗ k` to xkj and xk` .  𝑗∗  𝐱 𝑘𝑗  𝑗∗  𝐱 𝑘𝑗  𝜷𝑖𝑘𝑗  𝐱 𝑘𝑗  𝑖𝑗  𝒅𝑘𝑗  𝜶𝑖𝑘𝑗  ∗ 𝐱 𝑘𝑖 𝑗  𝑖𝑗  𝒅𝑘𝒋+1  ∗  𝐱 𝑘𝑖 𝑗 ∗  𝐱 𝑘𝑖 𝑗 +1  (𝒂)  (𝒃) 𝑗∗  𝐱 𝑘𝑗 𝑖𝑗 𝑑𝑘𝑗 +1  𝒅𝑘𝑗  𝜶𝑖𝑘𝑗  𝑗∗  ∗ 𝐱 𝑘𝑖 𝑗  𝒅𝑖𝑘𝑗→𝑘𝑗+1  𝜑1  𝒅𝑖𝑘𝑗 +1→𝑘𝓁  ∗  𝐱 𝑘𝑖 𝑗  ∗ 𝐱 𝑘𝑙 𝑗 +1  𝒅𝑘𝒋 ∗  𝐱 𝑘𝑖 𝑗 𝜑3 ∗ 𝐱 𝑘𝑖 𝓁  ∗  𝐱 𝑘𝑖 𝑗 +1  𝑖𝑗  𝜶𝑖𝑘𝑗  𝜑2  𝜶𝑖𝑘𝑗 +1 𝐱 𝑘𝑗  𝑖𝑗  ∗ 𝐱 𝑘𝑖 𝑗 +1  (𝒄)  B. Finding the distance with indirect communication  𝑖𝑗  𝒅𝑘𝓁  𝓁𝑗  𝒅𝑘 𝓁  𝜑4 𝒅𝑖𝓁 𝑘𝓁 𝜷𝑖𝑘𝓁  ∗  𝐱 𝑘𝑙 𝓁  ∗  𝐱 𝑘𝑙 𝑗 +1  𝜷𝑖𝑘𝑗 +1  (𝒅)  Fig. 2. Distance tracking after a direct communication; agent i is indicated by red filled circle; agents j and l are represented by blue and green circles, respectively; red circle indicates the communication radius.  make contact with agent j, agent i has changed its orientation by βki j at time kj , see Fig. 2 (a). After the two agents exchange information, agent i changes its orientation by αki j , Fig. 2 (b), and travels the distance of dikj →kj +1 in the new direction, Fig. 2 (c). We now show how an agent tracks the distance to a virtual location, where it has exchanged information with another node in the past. Lemma 1. Consider agent, i ∈ Ω, with true position, xi∗ kj . Suppose agent i communicates with node, j ∈ Θ, at time kj . Let deij kj be the distance between i and j at the time of communication. Suppose agent i and j move apart at time kj + 1, where the motion is given by dikj →kj +1 and θki j →kj +1 , both known to agent i. The distance between the true posij∗ tions, xi∗ kj +1 and xkj , is  Fig. 3. At time k` , agent i finds the distance between a new neighbor, node `, and the virtual location, xj∗ kj , where it exchanged information with node j at time kj < k` .  See Appendix C for the proof. In the next section, we use these distance tracking methods to describe the position tracking algorithm. IV. D ISTRIBUTED M OBILE L OCALIZATION : A LGORITHM Consider a network of N agents with unknown locations and M anchors, according to the motion model introduced in Section II. Let Vi (k) ⊆ Θ be the i-visited set, defined as the set of distinct nodes visited by agent, i ∈ Ω, up to time k; and call an element in this set as i-visited node. We start by introducing the notion of a virtual convex hull. A. Virtual convex hull  Suppose agent i communicates with node j at time kj , and obtains the distance, deij kj to j, along with j’s current location j estimate, xkj , i.e., j ∈ Vi (kj ). At any time, k > kj , agents, i  1 and j, may move apart but agent i now knows deij k ∀k > kj , 2 ij ij 2 i 2 ij i i e e e dkj +1 = (dkj ) + (dkj →kj +1 ) − 2dkj dkj →kj +1 cos(αkj ) . (9) using the geometric framework discussed in Section III-A. See Appendix B for the proof. Note that at time kj + 1, At some later time, k` > kj , agent i makes contact with ` i` agent i finds agent l in its communication radius, hence another node, `, and thus obtains xk` and dek` , and keeps i i` e changes its direction by βkj +1 in order to make contact with track of dk , ∀k > k` , thus j, ` ∈ Vi (k), ∀k ≥ k` . Using agent l, see Fig 2 (d). the approach described in Section III-B, at time k` , agent i  5  j∗ `∗ also computes dej` k` , i.e., the distance between xkj and xk` . Finally, agent i meets agent n at some kn > k` , and thus now possesses the location estimates: xjkj , x`k` , xnkn ; and the distances: deiq k , k > kn , with q = j, `, n (computed by Lemma 1), enj en` along with the following distances: dej` kn , dkn , and dkn (computed by Lemma 2). At this point j, `, n ∈ Vi (k), ∀k ≥ kn , and agent i can use the 6 distances to perform the inclusion test, described in Appendix F, to check if the three visited nodes forms a virtual convex hull in which agent i lies at time k. If the test is passed, the set, Θi (k) , {j, `, n} ⊆ Vi (k), forms the virtual convex hull; otherwise, agent i continues to move and add nodes in Vi (k) until some combination passes the convexity test. Note that the distance between the agent and each of the virtual locations is updated every time agent i moves to a new location. However, the distance between the virtual locations does not change unless agent i revisits any of the previously visited nodes.  Fig. 4 (a) shows the trajectories of four agents: #, 2, D, 7, over k = 1, . . . , 9; the time-indices are marked inside the agent symbols. From the perspective of agent #, see Fig. 4 (b): it first makes contact (communicates) with agent , at time k = 2, and then they both move apart; next, it makes contact with agents, D at kD = 4, and 7 at k7 = 6. We have V# (2) = {2}, V# (4) = {2, D}, and V# (6) = {2, D, 7}, where a non-trivial convex hull becomes available at k = 6. However, agent # does not lie in the corresponding convex hull, C(V# (6)), and cannot update its location estimate D 7 with the past neighboring estimates: x k , xk , xk7 . At this D point, agent # must wait until it either moves inside the convex hull of 2, D, 7, or finds another agent with which the convexity condition is satisfied. Fig. 4 illustrates this process in four frames. The former is shown in Fig. 4 (d), where agent # has moved inside C(V# (6)) at some later time, k = 9; we have Θ# (9) = {2, D, 7}. The notion of a virtual convex hull is evident from this discussion: an agent may only communicate with at most one agent at any given time; when the convexity condition is satisfied eventually, the updating agent may not be in communication with the corresponding nodes. Once Θ# (k) is successfully formed, agent # updates its location linearly using the barycentric representation in Eq. (4), where the coefficients are computed using the distance equations in Lemmas 1, 2, and the Cayley-Menger determinant to compute areas. After this update, agent # removes Θ# (k) from Vi (#), as the location estimates of the nodes in Θ# (k) have been consumed5 . The following result will be useful in the sequel.  B. Algorithm We now describe the localization algorithm6 in this case according to the number, |Vi (k)|, of i-visited nodes in the ivisited set, Vi (k). There are two different update scenarios for any arbitrary agent, i: (i) 0 ≤ |Vi (k)| < 3: Agent, i, does not update its current location estimate. (ii) |Vi (k)| ≥ 3 : Agent, i, performs the inclusion test; if the test is passed the location update is applied. Using the above, consider the following update: X ij j eik+1 , xik+1 = αk xik + (1 − αk ) ak xk + x (11) j∈Θi (k)  xik  where is the vector of the i-th agent’s coordinates at eik+1 is the motion vector, aij time k, x k is the barycentric coordinate of node i with respect to the nodes j ∈ Θi (k), and αk is such that  1, ∀k | Θi (k) = ∅, αk = (12) ∈ [β, 1) , ∀k | Θi (k) 6= ∅, where β is a design parameter and Θi (k) is a virtual convex hull. As we explain later, an updating agent receives the valuable location information only if it updates with respect to an anchor, or another agent that has previously communicated with an anchor. The non-zero self-weights assigned to the previous state of the updating agent guarantees that the agent does not completely forget the valuable information after receiving them, e.g., by performing an update where none of the agents in the triangulation set has previously received anchor information. Note that Θi (k) = ∅ does not necessarily imply that agent i has no neighbors at time k, but only that no set of neighbors meet the (virtual) convexity. The above algorithm can be written in matrix form as ek+1 , xk+1 = Pk xk + Bk uk + x  5 We  choose this simple strategy to remove information from Vi (k) for convenience. Another candidate strategy is to use a forgetting factor, which chooses the past used nodes less frequently.  (13)  where xk is the vector of agent coordinates evaluated at time k, uk is the vector of anchor coordinates at time k, ek+1 is the change in the location of agents at the and x beginning of the k−th iteration according to the motion model. Also Pk and Bk are the system matrix and the input matrix of the above LTV system. We denote the (i, j)-th element of the matrices, Pk and Bk , as (Pk )i,j and (Bk )i,j , respectively. We can now rewrite Eq. (11) as   X j xik+1 = αk xik + (1 − αk )  aij , k xk j∈Θi (k)∩Ω    Lemma 3. For each i ∈ Ω, there exists a set, Θi (k) ⊆ Vi (k), such that |Θi (k)| = 3 and i ∈ C(Θi (k)), for infinitely many k’s. See Appendix D for the proof.  k > 0,  +  (1 − αk )    X  m eik+1 , aim +x k uk  (14)  m∈Θi (k)∩κ  where um k denotes the known coordinates of the m-th anchor at time k. Thus, (Pk )i,i = αk as defined in Eq. (12), and (Pk )i,j  =  (1 − αk )aij k if j ∈ Θi (k) ∩ Ω,  (Bk )i,m  =  (1 − αk )aim if m ∈ Θi (k) ∩ κ, k  6 Main  steps of the algorithm are summarized in Appendix E.  (15)  6  1  1 3  1  2 5 4  4 5  3  1  4  4 5  3  1  2  2  6  6  5  4 3  4  6  6  5  (b)  (c)  6  4  9  7 5 (d)  5  3  1  2  1  5  6  8  2 6  (a)  5  3  1  2  7  1  5  6  3 4  2  4  4 8  5 4  9  1  2  6  4  5  1  5  1  2  6  4  6  3 4  1  2 5  1  5  6  2 3  3  6  4  3  7  2  3  1  9  3  2  3 6  8  1  3 2  3 4  2  2 6  6 7  5 8  9  Fig. 4. Virtual convex hull with four agents: #, 2, D, 7; with respect to agent #: (a) Agent trajectories and time-indices; (b) # ↔  at k = 4, # ↔ D at kD = 4, # ↔ 7 at k7 = 6; circles indicate communication radius of agent #; (c) Virtual convex hull of agents, 2, D, 7, available at agent # at k = 6; (d) Trajectories at k > 6, test passed at k = 9.  If the triangulation set for agent i at time k does not contain the j-th agent or the m-th anchor, the corresponding elements in system and input matrices, (Pk )i,j and (Bk )i,m are zero. Note that Eq. (12) immediately implies that the self-weight at each agent is always lower bounded, i.e., 0 < β ≤ (Pk )i,i ≤ 1, ∀k, i.  (16)  Since accurate information is only injected via the anchors, it is reasonable (and necessary) to set a lower bound on the weights assigned to the anchor states. In particular, we make the following assumption. A3: Anchor contribution. For any update that involves an anchor, i.e., for any (Bk )i,m 6= 0, we assume that 0 < α ≤ (Bk )i,m ,  ∀k, i ∈ Ω, m ∈ Θi (k) ∩ κ,  (17)  where α is the minimum anchor contribution, see Section V-B. Assumption A3 implies that if there is an anchor in the (virtual) convex hull, it always contributes a certain amount of information. In other words, the updating agent has to lie in an appropriate position inside the convex hull. Assumption A3 states that the weight assigned to the anchor (which comes from barycentric coordinates) should be at least α. Therefore, the area (in R2 ) of the triangle corresponding to the anchor must take an adequate portion of the area of the whole convex hull triangle. This is illustrated in Fig. 5, where the updating agent lies inside a virtual convex hull, consisting of an anchor (node j), and two other agents, m and `. Node i has communicated with the anchor and the two other agents, at time instants, kj , km , and k` , respectively. 𝑗∗ 𝐱 𝑘𝑗  𝐱 𝑘𝑚∗ 𝑚  Definition 1. A non-negative, stochastic matrix is such that all of its row sums are one. A non-negative, strictly sub-stochastic matrix is such that it has at least one row that sums to strictly less than one and every other row sums to at most one. V. D ISTRIBUTED M OBILE L OCALIZATION : A NALYSIS  𝐱 𝑘𝑚∗ 𝑚  𝐱𝑘𝑖∗′  𝐱 𝑙∗ 𝑘𝑙  Fig. 5 (Right) on the other hand shows that if the agent lies i∗ l∗ in xi∗ k0 (or any other position within the triangle of xk , xkl , and xm∗ ), the left hand side of Eq. (18) becomes less than α, km and Eq. (17) does not hold. Since the corresponding update does not provide enough valuable information for agent i, no update occurs in this case. With the lower bounds on both the self-weights, Eq. (16), and the anchor weights, Eq. (17), we note that at time k, the matrix of barycentric coordinates with respect to agents with unknown locations, i.e., the system matrix Pk , is either (i) identity, when no update occurs; or, (ii) identity except a stochastic i-th row, when there is no anchor in the virtual convex hull, i.e., Θi (k) ∩ κ = ∅; or, (iii) identity except a strictly sub-stochastic i-th row, when there is at least one anchor in the virtual convex hull7 . In the next section, we provide sufficient conditions under which the iterative localization algorithm, Eq. (13), tracks the true agent locations. Before we proceed, let us make the following definitions to clarify what we mean by (strictly sub-) stochasticity throughout this paper:  In this section, we address the challenge on the analysis of LTV systems with potentially non-deterministic system matrices. We borrow the following result on the asymptotic stability of LTV systems from [35].  𝑗∗ 𝐱 𝑘𝑗  𝐱 𝑘𝑖∗  Fig. 5 (Left) illustrates the position of agent i at time k, xik on the threshold boundaries, such that AΘi (k)∪{i}\j (Bk )i,j = = α. (18) AΘi (k)  𝐱 𝑙∗ 𝑘𝑙  Fig. 5. (Left) At time k, agent i is located on the threshold boundaries, which assigns the minimum weight, α, to the anchor. (Right) At time k0 agent i is located in an inappropriate location inside the convex hull.  A. Asymptotic stability of LTV systems Consider an LTV system: xk+1 = Pk xk such that the system matrix, Pk , is time-varying and non-deterministic. The 7 Note that if an agent lies inside a virtual convex hull of three anchors, then practically by assigning a zero weight on its past, the agent can find its exact location and take the role of an anchor, which could subsequently increase the convergence rate of the algorithm.  7  system matrix, Pk , represents at most one state update, say the i-th state, for any k, i.e., at most one row, i, of Pk is different from identity and can be either stochastic or strictly sub-stochastic, not necessarily in any order and with arbitrary elements as long as the bounds in (A3), (B0), and (B1) in the following are satisfied: B0: If the updating row, i, in Pk sums to 1, then 0 < β1 ≤ (Pk )i,i ,  β1 ∈ R,  (19)  B1: If the updating row, i, in Pk does not sum to 1, then X (Pk )i,j ≤ β2 < 1, β2 ∈ R. (20) j  To analyze the asymptotic behavior of an LTV system with such system matrices, we utilize the notion of a slice, Mj , which is the smallest product of consecutive system matrices, such that the entire chain of systems matrices Q Q is covered by non-overlapping slices, i.e., t Mt = k Pk , and each slice has a subunit infinity norm (maximum row sum), i.e., kMt k∞ < 1, ∀t.  𝑀𝑀0  𝑃𝑃𝑚𝑚0−1  ⋯  𝑃𝑃1  𝑃𝑃0  𝑀𝑀1  𝑃𝑃𝑚𝑚1−1  ⋯  𝑃𝑃𝑚𝑚0+1  𝑃𝑃𝑚𝑚0  𝑀𝑀𝑗𝑗  𝑃𝑃𝑚𝑚𝑗𝑗−1  ⋯  𝑃𝑃𝑚𝑚𝑗𝑗−1+1  𝑃𝑃𝑚𝑚𝑗𝑗−1  Fig. 6. Slice representation.  ⋮  ⋮  Slices are initiated by strictly sub-stochastic system matrices, and terminated after all row sums are strictly less than one. Slice representation is depicted in Fig. 6, where the rightmost system matrices (encircled in Fig. 6) of each slice, i.e., P0 , Pm0 , . . . , Pmj−1 . . ., are strictly sub-stochastic. The length of a slice is defined as the number of matrices forming the slice, and for the j-th slice length we have |Mj | = mj − mj−1 , m−1 = 0. Ref. [35] also shows that the upper bound on the infinity norm of a slice is further related to the length of the slice, i.e., the number of matrices forming the slice. The following theorem characterizes the asymptotic stability of the above LTV system. Theorem 1. With Assumptions, B0-B1, the system, xk+1 = Pk xk , converges to zero, i.e., limk→∞ xk = 0N , if for every i ∈ N, there exists a subset, J, of slices such that ! −γ1 1 1 − e(−γ2 i ) ∃Mj ∈ J : |Mj | ≤ ln + 1, (21) ln (β1 ) 1 − β2 for some γ1 ∈ [0, 1], γ2 > 0. For any other slice, j ∈ / J we have |Mj | < ∞. The proof is available in our prior work, [35]. Here, we explain the intuition behind the above theorem. The asymptotic  stability of the system is guaranteed if all (or and infinite subset of) slices have bounded lengths. Theorem 1 states that the system is asymptotically stable even in the non-trivial case, where there exist an infinite subset of slices whose lengths are not bounded, but do not grow faster than the exponential growth in Eq. (21). As detailed in [35], if the lengths of an infinite subset of slices follow Eq. (21), the infinite product of slices goes to a zero matrix, and the system is asymptotically stable. Note that in the RHS of Eq. (21), the first ln is negative; for the bound to remain meaningful, the second ln must also −γ1 be negative that requires β2 < e(−γ2 i ) , which holds for any value of β2 ∈ [0, 1) by choosing an appropriate γ2 > 0. Please see [35] for a detailed discussion on Eq. (21) and its parameters. With the help of this theorem, we now analyze the convergence of Eq. (13) in the following section. B. Convergence Analysis We now adapt the above LTV results to the distributed localization setup described in Section II. Recall that the ith row of the system matrix, Pk in Section V-A, collects the agent-to-agent barycentric coordinates corresponding to agent i and its neighbors. We now relate the slice representation in Theorem 1 to the information flow in the network: Each slice, Mj , is initiated with a strictly sub-stochastic update, i.e., when one agent with unknown location directly receives information from an anchor by having this anchor in its virtual convex hull. On the other hand, a slice, Mj , is terminated after the information from the anchor(s) is propagated through the network and reaches every agent either directly or indirectly. Here, directly means that an agent has an anchor in its virtual convex hull; while indirectly means that an agent has a neighbor in its virtual convex hull, which has previously received the information (either directly or indirectly) from an anchor. Once the anchor information reaches every agent in the network, the slice notion and Theorem 1 provide the conditions on the rate, Eq. (21), at which this information should propagate for convergence. We proceed with the following lemma. Lemma 4. Under the conditions A0-A3 and no noise, the product of system matrices, Pk ’s, in the LTV system, Eq. (13), converges to zero if the condition in Theorem 1 holds. Proof. First, we need to show that the Assumptions B0-B1 follow from A0-A3. First, note that B0 is immediately verified by Eq. (16), assuming β1 = β. Next, we note that B1 is implied by A3. This is because if Θi ∩ κ is not empty, we can write X X (Pk )i,j = 1 − (Bk )i,m , (22) j∈Θi (k)∩Ω  m∈Θi (k)∩κ  where we used the fact that the barycentric coordinates sum to one. When there is only one anchor among the nodes forming the virtual convex hull, and the minimum weight is assigned to this anchor, Eq. (17), the right hand side of Eq. (22) is maximized. This provides an upper bound on the i-th row sum: X (Pk )i,j ≤ 1 − α < 1, (23) j∈Θi (k)∩Ω  8  which ensures B1 with β2 = 1 − α. In addition, Lemma 3 ensures that each agent updates infinitely often with different neighbors. Subsequently, each slice is completed after all agents receive anchor information (at least once) either directly or indirectly, and the asymptotic convergence of Eq. (13) follows under the conditions in Theorem 1.  Theorem 3. Under Assumptions A0-A3 and no noise, Eq. (13) tracks the true agent locations in R2 , when the number of agents, N , and the number of anchors, M , follow:  Note that Assumption B0, which is equivalent to Eq. (16), implies that each agent remembers its past information. If a lower bound on the self-weights is not assigned, an agent may lose valuable information when it updates with other agents that have not previously updated (directly or indirectly) with an anchor. On the other hand, Assumption B1 restricts the amount of unreliable information added in the network by the agents, when an anchor is involved in an update. The following theorem completes the localization algorithm for mobile multi-agent networks.  Proof. Let us first consider the requirement of at least one anchor. Without an anchor, a strictly sub-stochastic row never appears in Pk , making Pk stochastic at each time and hence the infinite product of Pk ’s is also stochastic and not zero. With at least one anchor, strictly sub-stochastic rows, following Eq. (23), appear in Pk ’s, and zero convergence of the error dynamics, Eq. (25), follows. Next, exactly 3 nodes (agents and/or anchors) are required to form a (virtual) convex hull in R2 . Thus, when the total number of nodes, N + M , is 3 or less, no agent can find 3 other nodes to find (virtual) convex hulls. Using the same argument as the one in the proof of Lemma 3, we can show that with at least one anchor and at least 4 total nodes, any agent with unknown location infinitely finds itself in arbitrary (virtual) convex hulls. Thus, Theorem 1 is applicable and the proof follows.  Theorem 2. Under the Assumptions A0-A3 and no noise, for any (random or deterministic) motion that satisfies Eq. (21), Eq. (13) asymptotically tracks the exact agent locations. Proof. In order to show the convergence to the true locations, we show that the error between the location estimate, xk , and the true location, x∗k , goes to zero. To find the error dynamics, note that the true agent locations follow: ek+1 . x∗k+1 = Pk x∗k + Bk uk + x  (24)  Subtracting Eq. (13) from Eq. (24), we get the network error ek+1 , x∗k+1 − xk+1 = Pk (x∗k − xk ) = Pk ek ,  (25)  which goes to zero when lim  k→∞  k Y  Pl = 0N ×N ,  M  ≥  1,  (27)  N +M  ≥  4.  (28)  VI. M OBILE LOCALIZATION UNDER IMPERFECT MEASUREMENTS  The noise on distance measurements and motion degrades the performance of the localization algorithm, as expected, and in certain cases the location error is as large as the region of motion; this is shown experimentally in Section VII-B. In what follows, we discuss the modifications, M1-M3, to the proposed bik , and on algorithm to address the noise in case of motion, x ij the distance measurements, dbk .  (26)  l=0  from Lemma 4. Before we proceed, it is reasonable to comment on the choice of parameter α; The proposed localization algorithm is proved, both in theory and simulations, to converge for any value of 0 < α < 1. However, the convergence rate of the algorithm is affected by the choice of α as follows. Choosing α arbitrarily close to zero corresponds to an infinitely large upper-bound on the length of a slice (this can be verified by replacing α = 1 − β2 by zero on the right hand side of Eq. (21). On the other hand, by setting α arbitrarily close to one, an agent has to get arbitrarily close to an anchor in order to perform an update with respect to the anchor (see Fig. 5), which again leads to arbitrary large number of iterations required for each slice to complete. In summary, there is a trade-off in the choice of α, between receiving more information from an anchor at the time of an update, which is the case for α values closer to 0, and increasing the chance of an update with an anchor, which requires for α to be closer to 1. A proper choice can be made by considering the motion model, the communication protocol, and the number of available anchors in the network. The following theorem characterizes the number of anchors.  A. Agent contribution If an agent is located close to the boundaries of a (virtual) convex hull, noise on distance measurements may lead to incorrect inclusion test, Appendix F, results, i.e., a set of visited neighbors may fail the convexity test while the agent is indeed located inside the convex hull, or vice versa. To avoid such scenarios, we generalize Assumption A3 to non-anchor agents. In particular, we restrict an agent from performing an update, unless it is located in a proper position inside a candidate (virtual) convex hull. We augment Assumption A3 by the following: M1: For any agent, j ∈ Ω, involved in an update, i.e., for any (Pk )i,j 6= 0, we assume that 0 < α0 ≤ (Pk )i,j ,  ∀k, i ∈ Ω, j ∈ Θi (k) ∩ Ω,  (29)  where i is the updating agent’s index, and α0 is the minimum agent contribution. In other words, for agent i to perform an update, the area of the corresponding inner triangle has to constitute a minimum proportion, α0 , of the area of the convex hull triangle. This is shown in Fig. 7 (Left); At time k1 , agent i is located in the virtual convex hull of the nodes j, m and `, such that the ratio of the area of the shaded triangle to the area of the convex hull triangle is α0 . Agent i can perform an update at time k1 . The upper side of the shaded trapezoid in  9  𝑗∗  A. Localization without noise  𝐱 𝑘𝑖∗1  𝐱𝑘𝑖∗2 𝐱 𝑘𝑚∗ 𝑚  𝐱 𝑙∗ 𝑘𝑙  𝐱 𝑙∗ 𝑘𝑙  𝐱 𝑘𝑚∗ 𝑚  Fig. 7. (Left) Agent i is located on the threshold boundaries, which assigns the minimum weight, α, to the anchor. (Right) Agent i is located in an inappropriate location inside the convex hull.  Fig. 7 (Right) is the threshold boundary. If agent i remains in the same virtual convex hull, but moves inside the shaded trapezoid, e.g., to xi∗ k2 at time k2 , Eq. (29) will not hold and no update will occur at that time. Clearly, Assumption M1 can be relaxed if the noise is negligible. Otherwise, the value of α0 can be adjusted according to the amount of noise on distance measurements.  B. Inclusion test error Even if Assumption M1 is satisfied, the inclusion test results may not be accurate due to the noise on the motion, which corresponds to imperfect location updates at each and every iteration. To tackle this issue, we propose the following modification to the algorithm: M2: If the inclusion test is passed at time k by a triangulation set, Θi (k), agent i performs an update only if P j∈Θi (k) AΘi (k)∪{i}\j − AΘi (k) i | ≤ , (30) k = | AΘi (k) in which ik ≥ 0 is the inclusion test relative error for agent i at time k, and  ≥ 0 is a design parameter.  C. Convexity Finally, recall that if the inclusion test is passed at time k, by a triangulation set, Θi (k), the updating agent, i, updates its location estimate, xi∗ k , as a convex combination of the location estimates of the nodes in Θi (k). In order to guarantee the convexity in the updates in presence of noise, we consider the following modification to the algorithm: M3: If the inclusion test is passed at time k by a triangulation set, Θi (k), and Eq. (30) holds at time k, agent i (randomly) chooses one of the i-visited nodes from the triangulation set Θi (k), say agent j, and finds the corresponding im in weight, aij k , as follows: assuming that ak + ak < 1,  We now consider the noiseless scenarios, i.e., we assume that nik = 0 and rkij = 0, in Eqs. (2) and (3). In the beginning, all nodes (agents and anchor(s)) are randomly deployed within the region of x ∈ [−5 15], y ∈ [−5 15] in R2 . For the simulations, we consider random waypoint mobility model, [36], for the motion in the network, which has been the predominant motion model in the localization literature over the past decade, see e.g., [7]–[10], [37]. We note that better performance may be achieved if the agents follow some deterministic (mission-related) motion model. However, our localization algorithm converges if the motion is such that the slice lengths grow slower than the exponential rate in Eq. (21). i For all mobile nodes, i ∈ Θ, we chose dik→k+1 and θk→k+1 in Eq. (6) as random variables with uniform distributions over the intervals of [0 5] and [0 2π], respectively. Each agent can only communicate with the nodes within its communication radius, which is set to r = 2 for all simulations. For each simulation, we assume exactly one fixed anchor, i.e., M = 1. In all simulations, we set αk = 0.2 to ensure that the agents do not completely forget the past information and α = 0.1 to guarantee an adequate contribution from the anchor(s). Fig. 8 (Left) shows the random trajectories of N = 3 mobile agents and M = 1 anchor for the first 25 iterations. To characterize the convergence, we choose the 2-norm of the error vector normalized with respect to the dimensions of the region as follows:  2  2 ! 12 xk − x∗k yk − yk∗ 1 + , (32) kek k2 = 2 ∆x ∆y in which ∆x = 20 and ∆y = 20 denote the lengths of the region, which is a square in this case. The division by ∆x and ∆y is done to obtain a normalized error. It can be verified that the maximum error with this normalization is √12 . The algorithm converges when kek k2 → 0. As shown in Fig. 8 (Right), the localization algorithm, Eq. (13), tracks the true agent locations. The simulation results for a network of 10 3 agents, 1 anchor 0.35 0.3 0.25  kek k2  𝐱 𝑘𝑗  y  𝑗∗  𝐱 𝑘𝑗  0.2 0.15 0.1 0.05 0 0  x  200  400  600  800  1000  k→  (31)  Fig. 8. A network of 3 mobile agents and 1 anchor; (Left) Motion model; (Right) Convergence; red triangle indicates anchor and filled circles show the initial positions of the agents.  In this section, we first provide simulation in noiseless scenarios and then examine the effects of noise.  and 100 mobile agents and one mobile anchor is illustrated in Fig. 9 (Left) and (Right), respectively. Before we examine the effects of noise on the proposed localization algorithm, let us study the case where there is no anchor in the network, i.e., Eq (27) is not satisfied; In most  aij k  in = 1 − aim k − ak ,  {j, m, n} ∈ Θi (k).  VII. S IMULATIONS  10  0.6  0.6  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.4  10 agents,1 anchor  10 agents, 1 anchor  kek k2  kek k2  normalized localization error is reduced to less than 5% for one simulation.  100 agents, 1 anchor  10 agents, 1 anchor 0.7  5  0.5  4  0.4  3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.1 0 500  0  1000  50  100  150  200  k→  1  Fig. 9. Convergence of a network with one anchor; (Left) 10 mobile agents (Right) 100 mobile agents.  400  600  800  0 0  1000  200  400  600  800  1000  k→  Fig. 11. Effect of noise on the convergence of a network of 10 mobile agents and 1 mobile anchor with ±10% noise on distance measurements and ±1% noise on the motion; (Left) Original algorithm (Right) Modified algorithm.  Finally, in Fig. 12 we provide 20 Monte Carlo simulations for a network of M = 1 mobile anchor and N = 10 and N = 20 mobile agents in presence of noise. 10 agents, 1 anchor, 20 Monte Carlo trials  20 agents, 1 anchor, 20 Monte Carlo trials  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.6  0.5  0.5  0.4 0.3  0.4 0.3  0.2  0.2  0.1  0.1  0.2  5  0.1  0 −5 1100 1120  200  400  600  800  1000  0 0  200  400  600  800  1000  k→  Fig. 12. 20 Monte Carlo trials; ±10% noise on distance measurements, ±1% noise on the motion; (Left) N = 10, M = 1 (Right) N = 20, M = 1.  10  0.3  k→  200  k→  x  kek k2  0.4  1000  0.1  k→  0 0  15  500  0.2  20  0.5  0 0  0 0  maxi (keik k2)  localization algorithms, m + 1 anchors are required to localize an agent with unknown location in Rm without ambiguity. However, when the nodes are mobile, exactly one anchor is sufficient to inject valuable information and the motion of the agents provides the remaining degrees of freedom. When there is no anchor in the network, all updates are stochastic, and we get ek+1 = Pk ek , with ρ(Pk ) = 1, ∀k, where ρ(.) denotes the spectral radius, i.e., a neutrally stable system, which leads to a bounded steady-state error in location estimates. In other words, relative locations are tracked because the motion removes certain ambiguity from the locations. However, absolute tracking without any ambiguity requires at least one anchor. This is illustrated in Fig. 10 for a network of M = 4 agents and no anchor. 4 agents, 0 anchor  2  250  k!  maxi (keik k2)  0.1 0 0  kek k2  0.2  kek k2  0.2  1140 1160  x1 x1∗ 1180 1200  k→  Fig. 10. Steady state error for a network of 4 mobile agents and no anchor; (Left) 2-norm (Right) Red and blue curves represent the exact and estimated values of x coordinate, for the last 100 iterations of a simulation.  B. Localization with noise To examine the effects of noise on the proposed localization algorithm, we let the noise on the motion of agent i ∈ Θ at time k, nik to be ±1% of the magnitude of the motion eik , and the noise on distance measurements, rkij to vector, x be ±10% of the actual distance between nodes i and j, dij k. As shown in Fig. 11 (Left) this amount of noise leads to an unbounded error, which is due to incorrect inclusion test results and the continuous location drifts because of the noise on the distance measurements and the noise on motion, respectively. However, by modifying the algorithm according to Section VI, it can be seen in Fig. 11 (Right) that the  C. Performance evaluation We now evaluate the performance of our algorithm in contrast with some well-known localization methods; MCL [8], MSL* [10], Dual MCL [11], and Range-based SMCL [9]. Please refer back to Section I for a brief description of these methods. In Fig. 13, we compare the localization error in the Virtual Convex Hull (VCH) algorithm with MCL, MSL*, and Range-based SMC. As shown in Table I, in these algorithms node density, nd , and anchor (seed) density, ns , denote as the average number of nodes and anchors in the neighborhood of an agent, respectively. Total number of agents and anchors can therefore be determined by knowing these densities as well as the area of the region. We consider N = 20 agents and M = 2 anchors, and use the same metric as used in [8]–[10], i.e., the location error as a percentage of the communication range. Each data point in Fig. 13 is computed by averaging the results of 20 simulation experiments. We keep the other parameters the same as described earlier in this section. With high measurement noise, i.e., in the presence of 10% noise on the range measurements and 1% noise on the motion, our algorithm outperforms MCL, MSL* and Range-based  11  algorithm in presence of noise and provide modifications to the proposed algorithm to address noise on motion and on distance measurements.  Mean Error (%r)  2 MSL* MCL Range-based SMCL Proposed VCH  1.5  A PPENDIX A TABLE OF PARAMETERS  1  Table II summarizes the important notation.  0.5  A PPENDIX B P ROOF OF L EMMA 1  0 0  10  20  30  40  50  Time  Fig. 13. Accuracy comparison  SMCL after 20 iterations. Clearly, the localization error in our algorithm decreases as the amount of noise decreases, and our algorithm converges to the exact agent locations in the absence of noise. Table I summarizes the performance of the proposed VCH algorithm in comparison to the above methods.  Localization algorithm  Simulation environment, Network size, Communication range  Average error %r  MCL  500*500, nd=10, ns=1, r =50  0.2 - 0.6  Dual MCL  250*250, nd=10, ns=2, r =25  0.4 - 0.6  MSL*  500*500, nd=10, ns=2, r =100  0.1 - 0.5  Range-based SMCL  1*1, nd=13.9, ns=1.3, r =0.125  0.2 - 0.4  Proposed VCH  20*20, N=20, M=2, r=2  < 0.1  TABLE I C OMPARATIVE PERFORMANCE OF LOCALIZATION ALGORITHMS  VIII. C ONCLUSIONS In this paper, we provide a distributed algorithm to localize a network of mobile agents moving in a bounded region of interest. Assuming that each agent knows a noisy version of its motion and the distances to the nodes in its communication radius, we provide a geometric framework, which allows an agent to keep track of the distances to any previously visited nodes, and find the distance between a neighbor and any virtual location where it has exchanged information with other nodes in the past. Since agents are mobile, they may not be able to find neighbors to perform distributed updates at any time. To avoid this issue, we introduce the notion of a virtual convex hull, which forms the basis of a range-based localization algorithm in mobile networks. We abstract the algorithm as an LTV system with (sub-) stochastic matrices, and show that it converges to the true locations of agents under some mild regularity conditions on update weights. We further show that exactly one anchor suffices to localize an arbitrary number of mobile agents when each agent is able to find appropriate (virtual) convex hulls. We evaluate the performance of the  i∗ Proof. Consider the triangle, whose vertices are at xi∗ kj , xkj +1 j∗ and xkj . To find the current distance of agent i, from the position of agent j at time kj , we can use the law of cosines, which connects the length of an unknown side of a triangle to the lengths of the two other sides and the angle opposite to the unknown side. This triangle is depicted in Fig. 2 (c), in which the two known side lengths are deij kj  and dikj →kj +1 . Thus, knowing the angle between these sides of the triangle, αki j →kj +1 , the length of the third side can be determined according to the following 2 (deij kj +1 )  =  2 i 2 (deij kj ) + (dkj →kj+1 )  −  i i 2deij kj dkj →kj+1 cos(αkj ),  (33)  which corresponds to Eq. (9), and completes the proof.  A PPENDIX C P ROOF OF L EMMA 2 Proof. We illustrate this procedure in Fig. 3, where all known/measured distances and angles are distinguished from the unknowns by bold lines and bold arcs, respectively. After agent i makes contact and exchange information with node j at time kj , it moves the distance of dikj →kj +1 to the new location, xi∗ kj +1 . At this point, agent i can (use the law i eij of cosines to) find deij kj +1 as a function of dkj , dkj →kj +1 , i and αkj , which are all known to this agent, i.e., deij kj +1 = ij ij i i e e f (dkj , dkj →kj +1 , αkj ). Knowing dkj +1 , agent i can then i eij find φ1 = g(deij kj , dkj →kj +1 , dkj +1 ). Note that given the three sides of a triangle, each angle can be computed. Since agent i cannot find any neighbor at time kj + 1, we have βki j +1 = 2π. Agent i then changes its direction by αki j +1 and travels the distance of dikj +1→k` to the new location, xi∗ k` , where k` = kj +2. ij i e At this point, agent i can find dk` = f (deij kj +1 , dkj +1→k` , φ2 ), i note that φ2 = π − αkj +1 + φ1 . Agent i can then find φ3 = i eij g(deij k` , dkj +1→k` , dkj +1 ) at time k` . Since agent i finds node ` within the communication radius at time k` , it changes its direction by βki ` in order to make a contact with agent `. Fii eij eij ei` nally, knowing dei` k` , dk` , and, φ4 = ∠(dk` , dk` ) = π−φ3 −βk` , j∗ agent i can find the distance between xkj and xk`∗` according to Eq. (10).  12  TABLE II PARAMETERS AND DESCRIPTIONS ; RANDOM PARAMETERS ARE DISTINGUISHED BY ?.  ∗ 𝐱 𝑘𝑖 1  𝑗∗∗  𝐱𝑘1  lies inside the corresponding virtual triangle. The probability of such event at any given time, k > k3 , is given by ∗  𝐱 𝑘𝑖 3 𝑙∗  𝐱 𝑘3  m∗ l∗ area(4(xj∗ k1 , xk2 , xk3 ) , n2 which corresponds to a non-zero probability for agent i to find a triangulation set. m∗ l∗ P(i ∈ C(xj∗ k1 , xk2 , xk3 )) =  ∗  𝐱 𝑘𝑖 2  Fig. 14. Existence of a virtual convex hull; Agent i can perform an update if it lies inside the blue triangle at any time k > k3 .  A PPENDIX D P ROOF OF L EMMA 3 Proof. Consider a network of 4 agents, {i, j, m, l}, and let us focus on finding a triangulation set for agent i. Suppose all agents are moving in an n by n region, and the communication radius for each agent is r. In order for agent i to communicate with another agent, say j, at time k1 , agent j has to lie inside a circle with radius r centered at agent i’s location, xi∗ k1 , see Fig. 14. The probability of such event at time k1 , is 2 8 therefore given by P(j ∈ Vi (k1 )) = πr n2 . Similarly, the probability that agent i communicates with agent m at a later time, k2 > k1 , and with agent l, at time k3 > k2 > k1 can 2 πr 2 be given by P(m ∈ Vi (k2 )) = πr n2 and P(l ∈ Vi (k3 )) = n2 , respectively. Note that the probability of agent m being exactly at xj∗ k1 at time k2 is zero, and therefore we can draw a virtual line (the dotted line in Fig. 14) between the locations at which agent i has communicated with agents j and m, i.e., m∗ between xj∗ k1 and xk2 . Similarly the probability of agent l lying on the aforementioned line at time k3 is zero. Thus, the locations where agent i can meet the other three agents at different times with nonzero probability, form a virtual convex hull. Therefore, the three agents j, m and l can pass the inclusion test for agent i at any given time k > k3 , if agent i 8 This expression assumes that agents are uniformly distributed over the region at any given time. This assumption can be justified by considering random initial deployment and motion. However, the proof follows as long as there is a nonzero probability for each agent to communicate with other agent(s) in the network.  A PPENDIX E P SEUDOCODE Algorithm 1 Localize N agents in R2 in the presence of M anchors with precision p Require: M ≥ 1 and N + M ≥ 4 k←0 x0 ← random initial coordinates for i = 1 to N do Vi (0) = ∅ end for while k < termination criterion9 do k ←k+1 for i = 1 to N do Vi (k) ← nodes in the communication radius of agent i at time k if 0 ≤ |Vi (k)| < 3 then do not update else perform inclusion test on (all possible combinations of) 3 neighbors if no triangulation set found then do not update else update location according to Eq. (11) end if end if end for end while 9 The termination criterion can be designed according to the number of iterations typically needed given the size, mobility, models, and noise parameters, as evident from the simulation figures in Section VII.  13  A PPENDIX F C ONVEX HULL INCLUSION TEST In R2 , a convex hull inclusion test is as follows i ∈ C(Θi (k)),  if  X  AΘi (k)∪{i}\j = AΘi (k) ,  (34)  AΘi (k)∪{i}\j > AΘi (k) ,  (35)  j∈Θi (k)  i∈ / C(Θi (k)),  if  X j∈Θi (k)  in which “ \ ” denotes the set difference, C(·) is the convex 1 𝐴𝑖12  1  𝐴𝑖13  𝑖  𝑖 3  2  2  3  𝐴𝑖23  Fig. 15. R2 : (Left) Robot i lies inside the triangle formed by the neighboring nodes, 1, 2 and 3 (Right) Inclusion test is not passed.  hull, and AΘi (k) represents the area of C(Θi (k)), see Fig. 15, and can be computed by using the Cayley-Menger determinant, [38]. Thus, AΘi (k)∪{i}\j is the area of the set Θi (k) with node i added and node j removed. R EFERENCES [1] D. Estrin, L. Girod, G. Pottie, and M. Srivastava, “Instrumenting the world with wireless sensor networks,” in Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 2001. Proceedings.(ICASSP’01). 2001 IEEE International Conference on, vol. 4. IEEE, 2001, pp. 2033–2036. [2] G. J. Pottie and W. J. Kaiser, “Wireless integrated network sensors,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 51–58, 2000. [3] D. Estrin, R. Govindan, J. Heidemann, and S. Kumar, “Next century challenges: Scalable coordination in sensor networks,” in Proceedings of the 5th annual ACM/IEEE international conference on Mobile computing and networking. ACM, 1999, pp. 263–270. [4] D. C. Steere, A. Baptista, D. McNamee, C. Pu, and J. Walpole, “Research challenges in environmental observation and forecasting systems,” in Proceedings of the 6th annual international conference on Mobile computing and networking. ACM, 2000, pp. 292–299. [5] S. Pandey and S. Varma, “A range based localization system in multihop wireless sensor networks: A distributed cooperative approach,” Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 86, no. 2, pp. 615–634, 2016. [6] Y. Zhang, W. Wu, and Y. Chen, “A range-based localization algorithm for wireless sensor networks,” Journal of Communications and Networks, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 429–437, 2005. [7] S. A. Mageid, “Autonomous localization scheme for mobile sensor networks in fading environments,” in IEEE International Conference on Selected Topics in Mobile Wireless Networking (MoWNeT), April 2016, pp. 1–8. [8] L. Hu and D. Evans, “Localization for mobile sensor networks,” in Proceedings of the 10th annual international conference on Mobile computing and networking. ACM, 2004, pp. 45–57. [9] B. Dil, S. Dulman, and P. Havinga, “Range-based localization in mobile sensor networks,” in Wireless Sensor Networks. Springer, 2006, pp. 164–179. [10] M. Rudafshani and S. Datta, “Localization in wireless sensor networks,” in Information Processing in Sensor Networks, 2007. IPSN 2007. 6th International Symposium on. IEEE, 2007, pp. 51–60. [11] E. Stevens-Navarro, V. Vivekanandan, and V. W. Wong, “Dual and mixture monte carlo localization algorithms for mobile wireless sensor networks,” in IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference. IEEE, 2007, pp. 4024–4028. [12] N. Patwari, A. O. Hero, M. Perkins, N. S. Correal, and R. J. O’dea, “Relative location estimation in wireless sensor networks,” Signal Processing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2137–2148, 2003. [13] F. Thomas and L. Ros, “Revisiting trilateration for robot localization,” Robotics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 93–101, 2005. [14] S. T. Roweis and L. K. Saul, “Nonlinear dimensionality reduction by locally linear embedding,” Science, vol. 290, no. 5500, pp. 2323–2326, 2000.  [15] J. Aspnes, T. Eren, D. K. Goldenberg, A. S. Morse, W. Whiteley, Y. R. Yang, B. D. Anderson, and P. N. Belhumeur, “A theory of network localization,” Mobile Computing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 5, no. 12, pp. 1663–1678, 2006. [16] J. Albowicz, A. Chen, and L. Zhang, “Recursive position estimation in sensor networks,” in Network Protocols, 2001. Ninth International Conference on. IEEE, 2001, pp. 35–41. [17] C. Savarese, J. M. Rabaey, and J. Beutel, “Location in distributed ad-hoc wireless sensor networks,” in Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 2001. Proceedings.(ICASSP’01). 2001 IEEE International Conference on, vol. 4. IEEE, 2001, pp. 2037–2040. [18] S. Čapkun, M. Hamdi, and J.-P. Hubaux, “Gps-free positioning in mobile ad hoc networks,” Cluster Computing, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 157–167, 2002. [19] A. Savvides, H. Park, and M. B. Srivastava, “The bits and flops of the n-hop multilateration primitive for node localization problems,” in Intl. Workshop on Sensor Networks and Applications, Atlanta, GA, Sep. 2002, pp. 112–121. [20] R. Nagpal, H. Shrobe, and J. Bachrach, “Organizing a global coordinate system from local information on an ad hoc sensor network,” in Information Processing in Sensor Networks. Springer, 2003, pp. 333– 348. [21] A. Savvides, C.-C. Han, and M. B. Strivastava, “Dynamic fine-grained localization in ad-hoc networks of sensors,” in Proceedings of the 7th annual international conference on Mobile computing and networking. ACM, 2001, pp. 166–179. [22] X. Ji and H. Zha, “Sensor positioning in wireless ad-hoc sensor networks using multidimensional scaling,” in INFOCOM 2004. Twenty-third AnnualJoint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies, vol. 4. IEEE, 2004, pp. 2652–2661. [23] B. D. Anderson, P. N. Belhumeur, T. Eren, D. K. Goldenberg, A. S. Morse, W. Whiteley, and Y. R. Yang, “Graphical properties of easily localizable sensor networks,” Wireless Networks, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 177– 191, 2009. [24] M. Deghat, I. Shames, B. D. Anderson, and J. M. Moura, “Distributed localization via barycentric coordinates: Finite-time convergence,” in 18th World Congress of the International Federation of Automatic Control,(IFAC 2011), Milan, Italy, 2011, pp. 7824–7829. [25] S. Lederer, Y. Wang, and J. Gao, “Connectivity-based localization of large-scale sensor networks with complex shape,” ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks (TOSN), vol. 5, no. 4, p. 31, 2009. [26] D. Fox, J. Hightower, L. Liao, D. Schulz, and G. Borriello, “Bayesian filtering for location estimation,” 2003. [27] I. Amundson and X. D. Koutsoukos, “A survey on localization for mobile wireless sensor networks,” in Mobile Entity Localization and Tracking in GPS-less Environnments. Springer, 2009, pp. 235–254. [28] N. Patwari, “Location Estimation in Sensor Networks,” Ph.D., University of Michigan–Ann Arbor, 2005. [29] Y.-G. Kim, J. An, and K.-D. Lee, “Localization of mobile robot based on fusion of artificial landmark and RF TDOA distance under indoor sensor network,” International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 203–211, September 2011. [30] G. Han, J. Jiang, C. Zhang, T. Q. Duong, M. Guizani, and G. K. Karagiannidis, “A survey on mobile anchor node assisted localization in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 2220–2243, 2016. [31] H. M. Choset, Principles of robot motion: theory, algorithms, and implementation, 2005. [32] A. Boukerche, H. Oliveira, E. Nakamura, and A. Loureiro, “Localization systems for wireless sensor networks,” Wireless Communications, IEEE, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 6–12, December 2007. [33] A. F. Möbius, Der barycentrische calcul, 1827. [34] U. A. Khan, S. Kar, and J. M. Moura, “Distributed sensor localization in random environments using minimal number of anchor nodes,” Signal Processing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 2000–2016, May 2009. [35] S. Safavi and U. A. Khan, “Asymptotic stability of stochastic LTV systems with applications to distributed dynamic fusion,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, provisionally accepted. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.8018 [36] T. Camp, J. Boleng, and V. Davies, “A survey of mobility models for ad hoc network research,” Wireless communications and mobile computing, vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 483–502, 2002. [37] W. Wang and Q. Zhu, “Sequential monte carlo localization in mobile sensor networks,” Wireless Networks, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 481–495, 2009. [38] M. J. Sippl and H. A. Scheraga, “Cayley-menger coordinates,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 83, no. 8, pp. 2283–2287, 1986.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
