Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 9
ArXiv ID: hf_4247

Abstract:
A Genetic Algorithm for solving Quadratic Assignment Problem (QAP) H. Azarbonyada, R. Babazadehb a  b  Department of Electrical and computers engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, h.azarbonyad@ece.ut.ac.ir Department of industrial engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, r.babazadeh@ut.ac.ir  Abstract— The Quadratic Assignment Problem (QAP) is one of the models used for the multi-row layout problem with facilities of equal area. There are a set of n facilities and a set of n locations. For each pair of locations, a distance is specified and for each pair of facilities a weight or flow is specified (e.g., the amount of supplies transported between the two facilities). The problem is to assign all facilities to different locations with the aim of minimizing the sum of the distances multiplied by the corresponding flows. The QAP is among the most difficult NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems. Because of this, this paper presents an efficient Genetic algorithm (GA) to solve this problem in reasonable time. For validation the proposed GA some examples are selected from QAP library. The obtained results in reasonable time show the efficiency of proposed GA. Key words- Genetic Algorithm, QAP, Multi-row layout problems  optimization problems. The QAP is NP-hard optimization problem [7], so, to practically solve the QAP one has to apply heuristic algorithms which find very high quality solutions in short  computation  time.  And  also  there  is  no  known algorithm for solving this problem in polynomial time, and even small instances may require long computation time [2]. The location of facilities with material flow between them was first modeled as a QAP by Koopmans and Beckmann [3]. In a facility layout problem in which there are n facilities to be assigned to n given location. The QAP formulation requires an equal number of facilities and locations. If there are fewer than n, say m<n, facilities to be assigned to n locations, then to use the QAP formulation, n-m dummy facilities should be created and a zero flow between each of these and all others must be  1. INTRODUCTION  assigned ( including the other dummy facilities). If there are  Some multi-row layout problems are the control layout problem, the machine layout problem in an automated manufacturing system and office layout problem also the Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP) may be seen as a  fewer locations than facilities, then the problem is infeasible [4]. Considering previous works in QAP ([2],[8] and [9]) this paper is developed to solve this problem with GA in short computation time.  special case of QAP if one assumes that the flows connect all facilities only along a single ring, all flows have the same non-  In the next section the QAP is described and formulated. After  zero  of  introducing GA in Section 3, the encoding scheme, solution  standard combinatorial optimization problems may be written  representation and GA operators are described in this section.  in this form (see [1] and [2]).  The computational results are reported in Section 4. Finally,  The Quadratic Assignment Problem (QAP) is one of the  Section 5 concludes this paper and offers some directions for  classical combinatorial optimization problems and is known  further research.  for its diverse applications and is widely regarded as one of  2. Mathematical model  (constant)  value.  Many  other  problems  the most difficult problem in classical combinatorial The following notation is used in formulation of QAP [4]:  parameters total number of facilities and locations n flow of material from facility I to facility k fik distance from location j to location l djl Variable 1 If facility I is assigned to location j = xij 0 Otherwise  individuals and happens in generations. In each generation, the fitness of every individual in the population is evaluated, multiple individuals are stochastically selected from the current population (based on their fitness), and modified (recombined and possibly randomly mutated) to form a new population. The new population is then used in the next iteration of the algorithm. Commonly, the algorithm  n  n  n  i  j  k  (1)  n  ∑∑∑∑  Min  f ik d jl x ij x kl  terminates when either a maximum number of generations has been produced, or a satisfactory fitness level has been reached  l  for the population. If the algorithm has terminated due to a n  ∑x  ij  =1  (2)  ∀i  maximum number of generations, a satisfactory solution may or may not have been reached [5].  j n  ∑x  ij  =1  (3)  ∀j  i  (4)  xij is binary  3.1. Encoding scheme In this section we describe the encoding scheme for different component of proposed GA when n=5. For creating initial  The objective function (1) minimizes the total distances and flows between facilities. Constraints (2) and (4) ensure that each facility I is assigned to exactly one location. As well as Constraints (3) and (4) assure that each location j has exactly one facility which assigned to it. The term quadratic stems  population we consider a chromosome with n gene, as any gene is depictive of assignment each facility to exactly one location. For example the chromosome in Figure 1 show that facilities 2,4,3,1 and 5 is assigned to locations 1,2,3,4 and 5 respectively that it is a feasible solution.  from the formulation of the QAP as an integer optimization problem with a quadratic objective function.  3. Genetic Algorithm  2  4  3  1  5  1  2  3  4  5  Fig.1. chromosome representation  Genetic Algorithms (Gas) are routinely used to generate useful  For making above chromosome (feasible solution) to create  solutions to optimization and search problems. Genetic  initial population, firstly we assume that all content of  algorithms belong to the larger class of evolutionary  chromosome are placed equal to 1, then random integer  algorithms (EA), which generate solutions to optimization  number from 1 to 5 is produced, say that 3, and then it is  problems using techniques inspired by natural evolution. In a  compared with the content of corresponding square, so if the  genetic  (called  corresponding content is equal to 1, facility 3 is assigned to  chromosomes or the genotype of the genome), which encode  location 1 and then this content is set equal to zero (see figure  candidate solutions (called individuals, creatures) to an  2). Again a random integer number from 1 to 5 is produced,  optimization problem, evolves toward better solutions.  then If it is equal to 3 because of the corresponding content is  Traditionally, solutions are represented in binary as strings of  zero (it means that facility 3 is assigned) so, another number  0s and 1s, but other encodings are also possible. The evolution  should be produced. This way continues until all facilities are  algorithm,  a  population  of  strings  usually starts from a population of randomly generated  assigned to locations and also the determined number of initial  2  5  3  1  4  2  4  3  1  5  population of chromosomes is satisfied.  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  0  1  1  Fig.4. Mutation representation  3.1.3. Selection Fig.2. making chromosome (feasible solution)  In selection operator the number of chromosomes required to  3.1.1. Crossover  complete next generation from crossover, mutation and  We use two point crossovers for implementation of GA. For making child 1 and child 2, two points are randomly selected from 1 to 5 and between these points is hold fixed. Then, child 1 is created according to orders of parent 2 and fixed components of parent 1, as well as child 2 is produced  previous generation are determined special mechanism that we use roulette wheel mechanism. In roulette wheel selection, candidate solutions are given a probability of being selected that is directly proportionate to their fitness. The selection probability of a candidate solution I is  Fi  , where Fi is  P  ∑  according to order of parent 1 and fixed components of parent  Fj  j  2 (see Figure 3). After tuning the crossover probability is  the fitness of chromosome I (objective function in QAP  determined equal to 0.8. This means that 80% of selected  formulation) and P is the population size.  parents participate in crossover operation. 3  5  2  4  1  5  3  4. Computational Results  PARENT 1 2  1  4 PARENT 2  For validation the proposed GA some examples are selected from QAP library. The proposed GA was programmed in Java net beans 6.9.1 on a Pentium dual-core 2.66 GHZ computer with 4 GB RAM. The objective function values of the best  1  5  2  4  3  As it is illustrated in Table 1 the proposed GA results in  CHILD 1 3  2  4  known solutions are given by Burkard et al. [6].  5  1  the short computational time with acceptable GAP.  CHILD 2 Table 1: Computational results of proposed GA  FIG.3. CROSSOVER REPRESENTATION  3.1.2. Mutation Mutation operator changes the value of each gene in a chromosome with probability 0.2. For mutation two genes are randomly selected from selected chromosome and then their locations are substituted (see Figure 4).  Test Problems Nug 12 Nug 17 Nug 20 Nug 24 Nug 28 chr12a.dat chr12b.dat chr15a.dat  Global/local optimum global local local local local local local local  Gap% 0 .0034 0 .0034 .012 0 0 1  Run time (second) 1 3 3 4 5 1 2 4  5. Conclusion In this paper at first QAP as a special type of multi-row layout problem with facilities of equal area is introduced and its various applications in different fields are described. Then, due to NP-hard nature of QAP an efficient GA algorithm is developed to solve it in reasonable time. Finally, some computational results from data set of QAP library are provided to show the efficiency and capability of proposed GA. Comparing outcome results with those works available in literature justify the proficiency of proposed GA in achieving acceptable solutions in reasonable time. For future research direction, developing other heuristic and/or meta-heuristic such as simulated annealing (SA) algorithm and PSO algorithm and then comparison results of them with results of this paper can be attractive work.  References [1] Burkard R.E.(1984). Location with spatial interaction – Quadratic assignment problem in discrete location theory edited by R.L. Francis and P.B. Mirchandani. New York: Academic. [2] Ravindra K. Ahuja, James B. Orlin, Ashish Tiwari (2000). A greedy genetic algorithm for the quadratic assignment Problem. Computers & Operations Research 27. 917-934. [3] Koopmans T.C. and Beckmann M. (1957). Assignment problems and the location of economic activities. Econometrica 25, 1:53-76. [4] Heragu S. (1997). Facilities Design. Boston, PWS Publishing company. [5] Eiben, A. E. et al (1994). Genetic algorithms with multi-parent recombination. PPSN III: Proceedings of the International Conference on Evolutionary Computation. The Third Conference on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature: 78–87. [6] Burkard RE, Karisch SE, Rendl F. (1997). QAPLIB – A quadratic assignment program library. J. Global Optim.10:391- 403. [7] S. Sahni and T. Gonzales, P-Complete Approximation Problems, J. ACM, vol. 23, pp. 555-565, 1976. [8] V. Maniezzo and A. Colorni. The Ant System Applied to the Quadratic Assignment Problem. Accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 1999. [9] P. Merz and B. Freisleben. A Genetic Local Search Approach to the Quadratic Assignment Problem. In T. B¨ack, editor, Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Genetic Algorithms (ICGA’97), pages 465–472. Morgan Kaufmann, 1997.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 9. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
