Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_4386

Abstract:
arXiv:1508.04865v6 [math.GR] 30 May 2017  SUBGROUPS OF RELATIVELY HYPERBOLIC GROUPS OF BREDON COHOMOLOGICAL DIMENSION 2 EDUARDO MARTÍNEZ-PEDROZA  Abstract. A remarkable result of Gersten states that the class of hyperbolic groups of cohomological dimension 2 is closed under taking finitely presented (or more generally FP2 ) subgroups. We prove the analogous result for relatively hyperbolic groups of Bredon cohomological dimension 2 with respect to the family of parabolic subgroups. A class of groups where our result applies consists of C ′ (1/6) small cancellation products. The proof relies on an algebraic approach to relative homological Dehn functions, and a characterization of relative hyperbolicity in the framework of finiteness properties over Bredon modules and homological Isoperimetric inequalities.  1. Introduction It is a remarkable result of Gersten that the class of hyperbolic groups of cohomological dimension at most 2 is closed under taking finitely presented subgroups, see Theorem 1.1. The dimension assumption is sharp since Brady exhibited a hyperbolic group of cohomological dimension 3 containing a finitely presented subgroup which is not hyperbolic [5]. Theorem 1.1 (Gersten). [15, Theorem 5.4] Let G be a hyperbolic group and suppose cd(G) ≤ 2. If H is a subgroup of type FP2 , then H is hyperbolic.  In this article we show that such subgroup phenomena hold in the class of relatively hyperbolic groups of Bredon cohomological dimension 2 with respect to parabolic subgroups. We use the approach to relative hyperbolicity by Bowditch [4] which is equivalent to the approach by Osin [27] for finitely generated groups [27, Theorem 6.10]. Definition 1.2. (Bowditch relatively hyperbolic groups)[4] A graph Γ is fine if every edge is contained in only finitely many circuits (embedded closed paths) of length n for any integer n. A finitely generated group G is hyperbolic relative to a finite collection of subgroups P if G acts on a connected, fine, hyperbolic graph Γ with finite edge stabilizers, finitely many orbits of edges, and P is a set of representatives of distinct conjugacy classes of vertex stabilizers (such that each infinite stabilizer is represented). Subgroups of G which are conjugate to a subgroup of some P ∈ P are called parabolic subgroups. A family of subgroups F of a group G is a non-empty collection of subgroups closed under conjugation and subgroups. The theory of (right) modules over the orbit category OF (G) was established by Bredon [8], tom Dieck [29] and Lück [20]. In the case that F is the trivial family, the OF (G)-modules are ZG-modules. In this context, the notions of cohomological dimension cdF (G) and finiteness properties FPn,F for the pair (G, F ) are defined analogously as their counterparts cd(G) and FPn , see Section 3. 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification. 20F67, 20F65, 20J05, 57S30, 57M60, 55N25. Key words and phrases. Isoperimetric Functions, Dehn functions, Hyperbolic Groups, Relatively Hyperbolic groups, Finiteness properties, Cohomological dimension, Homological isoperimetric inequalities, Orbit category, Bredon modules. 1  2  E. MARTÍNEZ-PEDROZA  To simplify the notation in our statements we introduce the following non-standard terminology. A group G is hyperbolic relative to a family of subgroups F if there is a finite collection of subgroups P generating the family F , such that G is hyperbolic relative to P. If H ≤ G and F is a family of subgroups, we denote by F ∩ H the family of subgroups {K ∩ H : K ∈ F }. Our main result is the following. Theorem 1.3. Let G be hyperbolic relative to a family F containing all finite subgroups. If cdF (G) ≤ 2 and H ≤ G is of type FP2,F ∩H , then H is hyperbolic relative to F ∩ H. Given a group G and a family of subgroups F , a model for EF G is a G-complex X such that stabilizers of all the isotropy groups of X belong to F , and for every Q ∈ F the fixed point set X Q is a non-empty contractible subcomplex of X. The geometric dimension gdF (G) is defined as the smallest dimension of a model for EF G. It is known that cdF (G) ≤ gdF (G) ≤ max{3, cdF (G)},  see the work of Lück and Meintrup [21, Theorem 0.1]. Examples of Brady, Leary and Nucinkis [6], and Leary and Fluch [12] show that the equality of cdF (G) and gdF (G) fails for some non-trivial families. For the case that F is the trivial family, whether this equality holds is the outstanding Eilenberg-Ganea conjecture. The use of cohomological dimension instead of geometric dimension in Theorem 1.3 is justified by the unknown Eilenberg-Ganea phenomena for general families. In practice, we expect most applications of Theorem 1.3 to be in the geometric case gdF (G) ≤ 2 which lies outside the abstract framework of Bredon modules. 1.1. A version of Theorem 1.3 outside the framework of Bredon modules. By a toral relatively hyperbolic group we mean a finitely generated torsion-free group G which is hyperbolic relative to a finite collection P of abelian subgroups. By [27, Theorem 1.1], all subgroups in P are finitely generated. Theorem 1.4. Let G be toral relatively hyperbolic group, let F be the family of parabolic subgroups, and suppose gdF (G) ≤ 2. If H ≤ G is finitely presented with finitely many conjugacy classes of maximal parabolic subgroups, then H is toral relatively hyperbolic. Theorem 1.4 follows from cdF (G) ≤ gdF (G) and Proposition 1.5 below. Recall that a collection of subgroups P of a group G is malnormal (almost malnormal) if for any P, P′ ∈ P and g ∈ G, either g−1 Pg ∩ P′ is trivial (respectively, finite), or P = P′ and g ∈ P. Proposition 1.5 (Proposition 3.10). If G is finitely presented and F is a family generated by a malnormal finite collection of finitely generated subgroups, then G is FP2,F . Proof of Theorem 1.4. Since G is torsion-free, any two maximal parabolic subgroups of G have either trivial intersection or they are equal [25, Lemma 2.2]. Hence the same statement holds for the maximal parabolic subgroups of H. Since all parabolic subgroups of H are finitely generated, Proposition 1.5 implies that H is FP2,F ∩H . Then Theorem 1.3 implies that H is toral relatively hyperbolic.  We raise the following question on the hypothesis of Theorem 1.4, remark on an simple example that might shed some light on the situation, and quote a related result. Question 1.6. Let G be a toral relatively hyperbolic group, let F be the family of parabolic subgroups, and suppose cdF (G) ≤ 2. Suppose that H is finitely presented. Is H toral relatively hyperbolic?  3  Remark 1.7. There is a toral relatively hyperbolic G with cdF (G) ≤ 2, where F is the family of parabolic subgroups, and such that G contains a free group of finite rank with infinitely many conjugacy classes of maximal parabolic subgroups. In particular, H is not hyperbolic relative to F ∩ H, the group H is not FP2,F ∩H as a consequence of [28, Proposition 3.6.1], but H is hyperbolic and hence toral relatively hyperbolic. Indeed, let H be a free group of rank 2, and let G be hyperbolic free by cyclic group H ⋊ϕ Z; for the existence of an automorphism ϕ ∈ Aut(H) such that the resulting semidirect product is hyperbolic we refer the reader to [2]. Let g be a non-trivial element of H that is not a proper power, and let F be the family generated by P = hgi. Then G is hyperbolic relative to F by [4, Theorem 7.11]. Since H is normal in G, the subgroup H has non-trivial intersection with any conjugate of P. Hence H has infinitely many conjugacy classes of maximal parabolic subgroups, and in particular is not hyperbolic relative to F ∩ H. It is left to remark that gdF (G) ≤ 2. Since H has rank two, G is the fundamental group of a finite 2-dimensional locally CAT(0) complex X, see [7]. Let γ be a closed geodesic in X representing the conjugacy class of g, and let Y be the space obtained by taking the e of X and coning-off each geodesic of X e covering γ. Observe that G acts universal cover X on Y and that Y is a 2-dimensional model for EF G. A CAT(-1) version of Theorem 1.4 was known by Hanlon and the author [18, Theorem 5.15]. This result addresses Question 1.6 in a particular geometric setting. We quote this result in the framework of toral relatively hyperbolic groups, and remark that the statement in the cited reference is slightly more general. Theorem 1.8. [18, Theorem 5.15] Let G be a toral relatively hyperbolic group, let F be the family of parabolic subgroups, and suppose there is a cocompact 2-dimensional CAT(-1) model of EF G with trivial edge stabilizers. If H ≤ G is finitely presented, then H is toral relatively hyperbolic. 1.2. An application to small cancellation products. The studies on small cancellation groups by Greendlinger imply that a torsion-free C ′ (1/6) group has cohomological dimension 2, see [11]. An analogous statement holds for all small cancellation products as defined in [22, Chapter V]. Theorem 1.9 (Theorem 6.3). Let G be the quotient of a free product ∗m i=1 Pi /hhRii where R is a finite symmetrized set. If R is satisfies the C ′ (1/6)-small cancellation hypothesis and G is torsion-free, then gdF (G) ≤ 2 where F is the family generated by {Pi : 1 ≤ i ≤ m}. A group G as in the proposition is hyperbolic relative to {Pi }m i=1 , see [27, Page 4, (II)]. Theorems 1.3 and 1.9 yield Corollary 1.10 below. The statement of the corollary for finitely presented C ′ (1/6)-small cancellation groups was known [15, Theorem 7.6]. m Corollary 1.10. Let G be a torsion-free quotient ∗m i=1 Pi /hhRii of a free product ∗i=1 Pi where R is a finite set satisfying the C ′ (1/6)-small cancellation condition. Let F be the family generated by {Pi }m i=1 . If H ≤ G is FP2,F ∩H , then H is hyperbolic relative to F ∩ H.  1.3. A characterization of relative hyperbolicity. The proof of Theorem 1.3, relies on a characterization of relatively hyperbolic groups stated below. The homological Dehn function of a space is a generalized isoperimetric function describing the minimal volume required to fill cellular 1–cycles with cellular 2–chains, see Section 4 for definitions. The homological Dehn function FVG : N → N of a finitely presented group G is the homological Dehn function of the universal cover of a K(G, 1) with finite 2-skeleton; the growth rate of this function is an invariant of the group [1, 13, 15].  4  E. MARTÍNEZ-PEDROZA  Recall that a pair of functions f and g from N to N ∪ {∞} have equivalent growth rate if f  g and g  f , where f  g means that there exists 0 < C < ∞ such that f (n) ≤ Cg(Cn + C) + Cn + C for all n ∈ N. Gersten observed that one can define FVG only assuming that G is an FP2 group, and discovered the following characterization of word-hyperbolic groups. Theorem 1.11 (Gersten). [15, Theorem 5.2] A group G is hyperbolic if and only if G is FP2 and FVG (n) has linear growth. Given a group G and a family of subgroups F , under the assumption that G is FP2,F , we define the homological Dehn function of G relative to F which we denote by FVG,F . The growth rate of FVG,F is an invariant of the pair (G, F ), see Theorem 4.4. In the case that F consists of only the trivial subgroup and G is finitely presented (or more generally FP2 ), the definition of FVG,F coincides with the homological Dehn function FVG . Theorem 1.12. Let G be a group and let P be a finite collection of subgroups generating a family F . (1) Suppose that P is an almost malnormal collection. If G is FP2,F and FVG,F (n) has linear growth, then G is hyperbolic relative to P. (2) Suppose that F contains all finite subgroups of G. If G is hyperbolic relative to P then G is F2,F and FVG,F (n) has linear growth. This result could be interpreted as an algebraic version of [17, Prop. 2.50] or [23, Theorem 1.8]. The proof of Theorem 1.12(1) is given in Section 6. Theorem 1.12(2) is a result of Przytycki and the author [24, Corollary 1.5]. Remark 1.13. The assumption that P is an almost malnormal collection in Theorem 1.12(1) can not be removed from the statement. Let G = Z ⊕ Z, let P = Z ⊕ 0, and let F be the family of subgroups of P. The real line is a cocompact model for EF G when considering the action on which Z ⊕ 0 acts trivially and 0 ⊕ Z acts by translations. In this case, G is FP2,F , the function FVG,F is trivial, and G is not hyperbolic relative to P. 1.4. The proof of Theorem 1.3. The main step in the proof of Theorem 1.3 is the following subgroup theorem for homological Dehn functions. The proof of Theorem 1.14 will be given in Section 5.2. Theorem 1.14. Let G be a group and F a family of subgroups. Suppose that G admits a cocompact EF G and cdF (G) ≤ 2. If H ≤ G is of type FP2,F ∩H , then FVH,F ∩H  FVG,F . Remark 1.15. In the case that F is the trivial family, a version of this result is implicit in the work of Gersten [15]. Another version in the case that F is the trivial family is [19, Theorem 1.1] which assumes that there is a 2-dimensional compact K(G, 1) and H is finitely presented. Recall that finite presentability is not equivalent to FP2 , see [3, Example 6(3)]. Theorem 1.16. [24, Theorem 1.1] Let G be a hyperbolic group relative to a family F containing all finite subgroups. Then there is a cocompact model for EF G. Proof of Theorem 1.3. By Theorems 1.12(2) and 1.16, the function FVG,F (n) has linear growth, and that G admits a cocompact EF G, respectively. Theorem 1.14 implies that FVH,F ∩H  FVG,F , and hence FVH,F ∩H has linear growth. Since H is FP0,F ∩H , the family F ∩ H is generated by a finite collection Q of subgroups [28, Prop. 3.6.1]. Assume that the collection Q has minimal size; observe that no pair of subgroups of Q are conjugate in H. Since the collection of maximal parabolic subgroups of G is almost malnormal [25, Lemma 2.2], then Q is an almost malnormal collection of subgroups in H. By Theorem 1.12(1), H is hyperbolic relative to Q.   5  1.5. Outline. The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 contains preliminary material including a brief review of Bredon modules. Section 3 contains a combinatorial proof that FP1,F is equivalent to F1,F , an expected result for which we could not find a proof in the literature. Section 4 introduces the notion of homological Dehn function FVG,F for a pair (G, F ) and discuss its algebraic and topological approaches. Section 5 contains the proof of Theorem 1.14. Section 6 discuss relative hyperbolicity and contains the proofs of Theorem 1.9 and Theorem 1.12. Acknowledgments. The author thanks Gaelan Hanlon, Tomaz Prytuła and Mario Velasquez for comments. We would also like to thank Dieter Degrijse for pointing out an error in an earlier version of the article, Ian Leary for consultation at the Conference on Finiteness Conditions in Topology and Algebra 2015 and Denis Osin for a conversation suggesting the example in Remark 1.7 at the Geometric and Asymptotic Group Theory with Applications Conference 2016. We specially thank the referees for suggestions, feedback, and pointing out necessary corrections. The author acknowledges funding by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, NSERC. 2. Preliminaries 2.1. G-spaces and G-maps. In this article, all group actions are from the left, all spaces are combinatorial complexes and all maps between complexes are combinatorial. All group actions on complexes are by combinatorial maps. Moreover, all group actions are assumed to have no inversions; this means that if a cell is fixed setwise, then it is fixed pointwise. A G-complex X is cocompact if there are finitely many orbits of cells. For a G-complex X, the G-stabilizer of a cell σ is denoted by Gσ , and the fixed point set of H ≤ G is denoted by X H . Since there are no inversions, the fixed point set X H is a subcomplex of X. A path I → X in a complex X is a combinatorial map from an oriented subdivided interval; in particular a path has an initial vertex and a terminal vertex. Definition 2.1 (Combinatorial Complexes and Maps). [9, Chapter I Appendix] A map X → Y between CW-complexes is combinatorial if its restriction to each open cell of X is a homeomorphism onto an open cell of Y. A CW-complex X is combinatorial provided that the attaching map of each open cell is combinatorial for a suitable subdivision. 2.2. Modules over the Orbit Category. Let F be a family of subgroups of G. The orbit category OF (G) is the small category whose objects are the G-spaces of left cosets G/H with H ∈ F and morphisms are the G-maps among them. The set of morphisms from G/K to G/L is denoted by [G/K, G/L]. The category of right OF (G)-modules is the functor category of contravariant functors from OF (G) into the category of abelian groups AB. More concretely, a right module over OF (G) is a contravariant functor OF (G) → AB, and a morphism M → N between right modules over OF (G) is a natural transformation from M to N. For a OF (G)-module M and H ∈ F , we denote by M[G/H] the image of the object G/H by the functor M. The abelian group M[G/H] is called the component of M at G/H. For the rest of this article by an OF (G)-module we shall mean a right OF (G)-module. Since the category of OF (G)-modules is a functor category, several constructions of the category of abelian groups AB can be carried out in OF (G)–modules by performing them componentwise. As a consequence it is a complete, cocomplete, abelian category with enough projectives. In particular, computing kernels, images, and intersections reduces to  6  E. MARTÍNEZ-PEDROZA  componentwise computations in AB. For instance, a sequence K → L → M of OF (G)– modules is exact if and only if for every H ∈ F the sequence K[G/H] → L[G/H] → M[G/H] of abelian groups is exact. 2.3. Free OF (G)-modules. Let S be a (left) G-set. Consider the contravariant functor S  OF (G) → SET that maps the object G/H to the fixedpoint set S H and maps a morϕ phism G/H → G/K given by ϕ(H) = gK to the function X K → X H given by x 7→ g.x. s The OF (G)-module induced by S , denoted by Z[·, S ], is the composed functor OF (G) → SET → AB where the second functor is the free abelian group construction X 7→ Z[X]. For a subgroup K ≤ G, the module induced by the G-set G/K is denoted by Z[·, G/K]. The module Z[·, G/G] is denoted by ZG,F . Note that each component Z[G/K, G/G] is an infinite cyclic group with canonical generator the only element of G/G. An OF (G)-module F is free if F is isomorphic to Z[·, S ] for S a G-set with isotropy groups in F . If, in addition, the G-set S has finitely many orbits then Z[·, S ] is a finitely generated free OF (G)-module. 2.4. Augmentation maps. Let S be a G-set and consider the OF (G)-module Z[·, S ]. For K ∈ F , the component Z[G/K, S ] is by definition the free abelian group Z[S K ] with S K as a free basis. The augmentation map of Z[·, S ] is the morphism ǫ : Z[·, S ] → ZG,F whose components ǫG/K : Z[S K ] → Z are defined by mapping each element of S K to the canonical generator of Z[G/K, G/G]. The main observation is that ǫ is surjective if and only if the fixed point set S K is not empty for every K ∈ F . 2.5. Schanuel’s Lemma. The following proposition is a well known result of homological algebra that is used several times through the article. Proposition 2.2 (Schanuel’s Lemma). [10, Ch.VIII, 4.2] Let 0 → Pn → Pn−1 → · · · → P0 → M → 0 and 0 → P′n → P′n−1 → · · · → P′0 → M → 0 be exact sequences of OF (G)–modules such that Pi and P′i are projective for i ≤ n − 1. • If n is even then P0 ⊕ P′1 ⊕ P2 ⊕ P′3 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Pn ≃ P′0 ⊕ P1 ⊕ P′2 ⊕ P3 ⊕ · · · ⊕ P′n • If n is odd then P0 ⊕ P′1 ⊕ P2 ⊕ P′3 ⊕ · · · ⊕ P′n ≃ P′0 ⊕ P1 ⊕ P′2 ⊕ P3 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Pn . 2.6. The cellular OF (G)-chain complex of a G–CW-complex. Let G be a group, let F be a family of subgroups, and let X be a G-complex. These data induce a canonical contravariant functor OF (G) −→ TOP that maps the object G/H to the fixed point set X H = {x ∈ X : ∀h ∈ H h.x = x}, and maps a ϕ G-map G/H → G/K given by ϕ(H) = gK to the cellular map X K → X H given by x 7→ g.x. Observe that X H is a subcomplex of X since we are assuming that our actions are cellular and without inversions. The composition of the contravariant functor OF (G) −→ TOP with any covariant functor TOP → AB (as a homological functor) is a right OF (G)-module.  7  The augmented cellular OF (G)–chain complex of X, denoted by C∗ (X, OF (G)), is the contravariant functor OF (G) −→ TOP −→ Chain–Complexes G/H  7→  XH  C∗ (X H , Z),  7→  where the second functor is the standard cellular augmented Z–chain complex functor. Remark 2.3. If X is a cocompact G–cell-complex such that X K is n-acyclic for every K ∈ F and all the isotropy groups of X belong to F , then the induced chain complex of OF (G)modules (2.1)  ∂n  ∂2  ∂1  ǫ  Cn (X, OF (G)) −→ . . . −→ C1 (X, OF (G)) −→ C0 (X, OF (G)) −→ ZG,F → 0,  is an exact sequence of finitely generated free OF (G)-modules. 3. Finiteness properties Let G be a group and let F be a family of subgroups. Definition 3.1. The group G is of type Fn,F if there is a cocompact G–complex X such that all the isotropy groups of X belong to F , and for every K ∈ F the fixed point set X K is a non-empty and (n − 1)-connected subcomplex of X. A complex X satisfying these conditions is called an an Fn,F -complex for G. The group G is of type FF if there is a cocompact model for EF (G). Definition 3.2. The group G is of type FPn,F if there is a resolution of OF (G)–modules ∂n  ∂2  ∂1  · · · → Pn −→ . . . −→ P1 −→ P0 −→ Z → 0, such that for 0 ≤ i ≤ n the module Pi is finitely generated and projective. Such a resolution is called an FPn,F –resolution. It is equivalent to require that for 0 ≤ i ≤ n, the module Pi is finitely generated and free, see for example [10, Ch.VIII 4.3]. The main result of the section is the following proposition whose proof, as well as the proof of its corollary, are postponed to Subsection 3.1. Proposition 3.3. If G is FP1,F then G is F1,F . Definition 3.4. The family generated by a collection of subgroups P of G consists of all subgroups K ≤ G such that that g−1 Kg ≤ P for some g ∈ G and P ∈ P. Corollary 3.5. If G is FP1,F and F is a family generated by a finite and almost malnormal collection P, then there is an F1,F -graph with finite edge G-stabilizers. The second part of the section will recall the definition of the coned-off Cayley complex of a relative presentation, and observe that these complexes provide F2,F -complexes in some cases. 3.1. Proof of Proposition 3.3. Take an FP1,F –resolution consisting of only free OF (G)modules, see for example [10, Ch.VIII 4.3], p  ǫ  Z[·, T ] −→ Z[·, V] −→ ZG,F → 0 ǫ  where Z[·, V] → ZG,F is the augmentation map. Then T and V are G-sets with isotropy groups in F and finitely many G-orbits. For each K ∈ F the sequence of abelian groups arising by taking the G/K-component p  ǫ  Z[T K ] −→ Z[V K ] −→ Z → 0  8  E. MARTÍNEZ-PEDROZA  is exact. Step 1. For each t ∈ T there is a finite directed Gt -graph Γt = (Vt , Et ) such that Vt is a subset of V and (1) Γt is connected when considered as an undirected graph, (2) the Gt -action on Vt is the restriction of the G-action on V, (3) the Gt -stabilizer of an edge e ∈ Et is the intersection of the Gt -stabilizers of its endpoints, and P (4) e∈Et (e+ − e− ) = p(t). Proof. Since T has isotropy groups in F , we have that Gt ∈ F and hence the sequence p  ǫ  Z[T Gt ] −→ Z[V Gt ] −→ Z → 0 is exact. Therefore the fixed point set V Gt is non-empty. Choose ⋆t ∈ V Gt . Consider the expression X p(t) = nt,v v, v∈V  where each nt,v is an integer. Define Wt = {v ∈ V : nt,v , 0}. Define Vt = Wt ∪ {⋆t }, and observe that Vt is a finite Gt -invariant subset of V. The edge set Et is defined as the following subset of Vt × N,  Et = v × j : v ∈ Vt and 1 ≤ j ≤ |nt,v| . For e = v × j define e+ = v and e− = ⋆t if nt,v > 0, and e+ = ⋆t and e− = v if nt,v < 0. Since each edge of Et has ⋆t as one of its endpoints, Γt = (Vt , Et ) is connected (when considered as a 1-complex). The Gt -action on Vt induces an action on Et by g.(v × j) = g.v × j respecting the adjacency relation. Since ǫ ◦ p(t) = 0 and ǫ is the augmentation map, we P have that v∈Vt nt,v = 0. Therefore, X X  nt,v (v − ⋆t ) = p(t). (e+ − e− ) = e∈Et  v∈Vt  Step 2. Let K be a subgroup of G, and let E be a K-set. Then there is G-set Ê and an injective and K-equivariant map ı : E ֒→ Ê with the following properties: (1) The map ı induces a bijection of orbit spaces E/K → Ê/G. (2) For each e ∈ E, the K-stabilizer Ke equals the G-stabilizer Gı(e) . (3) If V is a G-set and f : E → V is K-equivariant, then there is a unique G-map fˆ : Ê → V such that fˆ ◦ ı = f . ` Proof. Observe that E is isomorphic to the K-space i∈I K/Ki where I is a complete set of representaives of K-orbits of E and K/Ki denotes the K-space of left cosets of Ki in ` K. Define Ê as i∈I G/Ki and observe that the assignment Ki 7→ Ki induces an injective K-map E ֒→ Ê. The three statements of the lemma are observations.  Step 3. There is a directed G-graph Γ with vertex set V with the following properties. (1) For each K ∈ F , the fixed point set ΓK is a non-empty connected subgraph of Γ. (2) Γ has finitely many orbits of vertices and edges. (3) All isotropy groups of Γ belong to F . In particular, as a complex, Γ is an F1,F -space for G.  9  Proof. Let Γ be the directed G-graph whose vertex set is the G-set V, and edge G-set E is defined as follows. Let RT be a complete set of representatives of G-orbits of T . For t ∈ RT , let Γt = (Vt , Et ) be the directed Gt -graph of Step 1. Let Êt be the G-set provided by Step 2 for the Gt -set Et . The Gt -maps (−)t : Et → V and (+)t : Et → V defining initial and terminal vertices extend to G-maps (−)t : Êt → V and (+)t : Êt → V. Let E be the disjoint union of G-sets ` E = t∈RT Êt and let (+) : E → V and (−) : E → V be the induced maps. Note that E has finitely many G-orbits. By construction, the group G acts on the directed graph Γ = (V, E) with finitely many orbits of vertices and edges. Moreover, the G-action on Γ as a complex has no inversions (if an edge is fixed setwise, the it is fixed pointwise). The stabilizer Ge of an edge e ∈ E is the intersection of two subgroups in F , hence Ge ∈ F . It remains to show that the fixed point sets ΓK are non-empty and connected for K ∈ F . P Let h : Z[T ] → Z[E] be the morphism of ZG-modules given by t 7→ e∈Et e for t ∈ RT . Note that h is well defined since the subgroup Gt preserves Et setwise. Since X (e+ − e− ) = p(t) e∈Et  by definition of Et , it follows that for each K ∈ F the following diagram commutes (3.1)  Z[T✤ K ] ✤ ✤h  Z[E K ]  p  / Z[V K ]  ǫ  /Z  /0  Id ∂   / Z[V K ]  where ∂ is the standard boundary map from 1-chains to 0-chains of Γ. Since the top row is an exact sequence, it follows that H0 (ΓK , Z)  Z and hence ΓK is non-empty and connected.  ` Proof of Corollary 3.5. Consider the G-set V = P∈P G/P. Observe that V/G is finite, every isotropy group of V is in F , and for every K ∈ F the fixed point set V K is non-empty. The first two properties imply that Z[·, V] is a finitely generated free OF (G)-module, and ǫ the third property implies that the augmentation map Z[·, V] → ZG,F is surjective. Since p ǫ G is FP1,F , there is a partial FP1,F -resolution Z[·, T ] → Z[·, V] → ZG,F → 0. Then the proof of Proposition 3.3 provides an F1,F -graph Γ with vertex set V. Since P is an almost malnormal collection, the intersection of the G-stabilizers of two distinct vertices is finite, and hence stabilizers of edges of Γ are finite.  3.2. Coned-off Cayley complexes and F2,F . For this subsection, let G be a group, let P be a collection of subgroups of G, and let F be the family generated by P. Definition 3.6 (Finite relative presentations). [27] The group G is finitely presented relative to P if there is finite subset S of G, and a finite subset R of words over the alphabet S ⊔ F P∈P P such that the natural homomorphism from the the free product F = (∗P∈P P) ∗ F(S ) into G is surjective and its kernel is normally generated by the elements of R (considered as elements of F); here F(S ) denotes the free group on the set of letters S . In this case, the data hS , P|Ri is called a finite relative presentation of G. Definition 3.7 (Cayley graph). Let S be a subset of G closed under inverses. The directed Cayley graph Γ = Γ(G, S ) is the directed graph with vertex set G and edge set define as follows: for each g ∈ G and s ∈ S , there is an edge from g to gs labelled s. It is an  10  E. MARTÍNEZ-PEDROZA  observation that if S generates G then Γ is connected, and that if S is finite then the quotient Γ/G is a finite graph. The undirected Cayley graph is obtained from Γ(G, S ) by first ignoring the orientation of the edges, and then identifying edges between the same pair vertices. Observe that any combinatorial path in the undirected Cayley graph is completely determined by its starting vertex and a word in the alphabet S . If the path is locally embedded, the corresponding word is reduced. From here on, we will only consider the undirected Cayley graph which we will denote by Γ(G, S ), and we will call it the Cayley graph of G with respect to S . The definition of coned-off Cayley complex as well as Lemma 3.9 below are based on [17, Definition 2.47, Lemma 2.48] respectively. In the cited article, the definition of coned-off Cayley complex has some minor differences, and the constructions assume that each P ∈ P is finitely generated. We do not require this last assumption for our arguments Definition 3.8 (Coned-off Cayley Graph and Coned-off Cayley Complex). Let hS , P|Ri be a finite relative presentation of G. The coned-off Cayley graph Γ̂ of G relative to P and S is the G-graph obtained from the Cayley graph of G with respect to S ∪ S −1 , by adding a new vertex v(gP) for each left coset gP with g ∈ G and P ∈ P, and edges from v(gP) to each element of gP. The vertices of the form v(gP) are called cone-vertices, and any other vertex a non-cone vertex. The G-action on the cone-vertices is defined using the G-action on the corresponding left cosets, and this action extends naturally to the edge set. Observe that each locally embedded path in Γ̂ between elements of G has a unique label F corresponding to a word in the alphabet S ⊔ P P, since edges between vertices in G have a label in S ∪S −1 , and for each oriented and embedded path of length two with middle vertex a cone point v(gP) corresponds a unique element of P. The label of a path that consists of a single non-cone vertex is defined as the empty word. The coned-off Cayley complex X induced by hS , P|Ri is the 2-complex obtained by equivariantly attaching 2-cells to the coned-off Cayley graph Γ̂ as follows. Attach a 2cell with trivial stabilizer to each loop of Γ̂ corresponding to a relator r ∈ R in a manner equivariant under the G-action on Γ̂. Lemma 3.9. Let hS , P|Ri be a finite relative presentation of G. The induced coned-off Cayley complex X is simply-connected. Proof. Let T be the coned-off Cayley graph of F = (∗P∈P P) ∗ F(S ) with respect to P and S . Observe that T is simply-connected since it is a tree. Let Γ̂ be the coned-off Cayley graph of G with respect to P and S . Observe that Γ̂ is recovered as the quotient T/N. The main observation is that T → Γ̂ is a normal covering space with N as a group of deck transformations. Indeed, the edge stabilizers of T with respect to N are trivial by definition; the vertex stabilizers of T with respect to N are trivial since each factor P of F embeds in G an therefore N ∩ P is trivial for every P ∈ P. It follows that the 1-skeleton of X has fundamental group isomorphic to N, and since N is the normal closure of {r1 , . . . , rm } in F the definition of X implies that π1 (X) is trivial.  Proposition 3.10. Suppose P is a finite and malnormal collection of subgroups of G, and hS , P|Ri is a finite relative presentation of G. Then the induced coned-off Cayley complex X is an F2,F -space with trivial 1-cell G-stabilizers. In particular, for each K ∈ F the fixed point set X K is either a point or X.  11  Proof. The space X is simply-connected by 3.9, and since the relative presentation is finite, the G-action on X is cocompact. Let K ∈ F be a non-trivial subgroup. Since the Gstabilizers of 1-cells and 2-cells of X are trivial, the fixed point set X K consists only of 0-cells. Since P is a malnormal collection and K fixes at least one cone-vertex, it follows that X K is a single cone-vertex of X. Therefore X is an F2,F -space with trivial 1-cell stabilizers.  4. The relative homological Dehn function Thoughtout this section, G is a group, F is a family of subgroups, and G is FP2,F . Definition 4.1. If F is a free ZG–module with ZG−basis B, then {gb : g ∈ G, b ∈ B} is a basis for F as a free Z-module inducing a G-equivariant ℓ1 -norm k · k1 . We call a free ZG−module based if it is understood to have a fixed ZG-basis and we use this basis for the induced ℓ1 –norm k · k1 . Definition 4.2. Let η : F → M be a surjective homomorphism of ZG-modules and suppose that F is free, finitely generated, and based. The filling norm on M induced by η and the based free module F is the G-equivariant norm defined by kmkη = min { kxk1 : x ∈ F, η(x) = m} . Definition 4.3 (Algebraic Definition of Relative Homological Filling Function). The homological filling function of G relative to F , is the function FVG,F : N → N defined as follows. Let P∗ be a resolution of OF (G)–modules for ZG,F of type FP2,F and let ∂2 ∂1 P2 −→ P1 −→ P0 −→ Z → 0 be the resolution of finitely generated ZG–modules obtained by evaluating P∗ at G/1. Choose filling norms for the ZG–modules P1 and P2 , denoted by k · kP1 and k · kP2 respectively. Then  FVG,F (k) = max kγk∂2 : γ ∈ ker(∂1 ), kγkP1 ≤ k where k · k∂2 is the filling norm on ker(∂1 ) given by  kγk∂2 = min kµkP2 : µ ∈ P2 , ∂2 (µ) = γ . Theorem 4.4. The growth rate of FVG,F is an invariant of the pair (G, F ). The rest of the section is divided into two parts, first the proof of Theorem 4.4, and then a discussion on a topological approach to FVG,F . 4.1. Proof of Theorem 4.4. The proof in the case that F consists only of the trivial subgroup was proved in [19, Theorem 3.5]. The argument below is essentially a translation of the argument in [19, Proof of Theorem 3.5] from the category of ZG-modules to the category of OF (G)-modules up to using Lemma 4.6 instead of [19, Lemma 2.8]. Lemma 4.5. [15, Lemma 4.1][19, Lemma 2.9] Any two filling norms k · kη and k · kθ on a finitely generated ZG–module M are equivalent in the sense that there exists a constant C ≥ 0 such that C −1 kmkη ≤ kmkθ ≤ Ckmkη for all m ∈ M. Lemma 4.6. Let ϕ : P → Q be a homomorphism between finitely generated ZG−modules. Let k · kP and k · kQ denote filling norms on P and Q respectively. There exists a constant C > 0 such that kϕ(p)kQ ≤ CkpkP for all p ∈ P.  12  E. MARTÍNEZ-PEDROZA  Proof. Consider the commutative diagram ϕ̃  /B A❄ ❄❄ ψ ❄ ❄❄ ρ ❄❄    P ϕ /Q constructed as follows. Let A and B be finitely generated and based free ZG-modules, and let A → P and B → Q be surjective morphisms inducing the filling norms k · kP and k · kQ . Since A is free and B → Q is surjective, there is a lifting ϕ̃ : A → B of ϕ. Since ϕ̃ is morphism between finitely generated, free, based ZG−modules, by [19, Lemma 2.7], there is a constant C such that kϕ̃(a)k1 ≤ Ckak1 for every a ∈ A. Let p ∈ P and let a ∈ A such that ρ(a) = p. It follows that kϕ(p)kQ ≤ kϕ̃(a)k1 ≤ Ckak1 . Since the above inequality holds for any a ∈ A with ρ(a) = p, it follows that kϕ(p)kQ ≤ C · min {kak1 } = CkpkP . ρ(a)=p    Proof of Theorem 4.4. Let P∗ and Q∗ be two resolutions of OF (G)–modules for ZG,F of type FP2,F . For i = 1, 2, let k · kPi and k · kQi be filling norms of the components Pi [G/1] Q P and Qi [G/1] respectively. Denote by FVG,F and FVG,F the homological filling functions induced by P∗ and Q∗ respectively. By symmetry, it is enough to prove that there is C ≥ 0 such that for every k ∈ N, Q P FVG,F (k) ≤ C · FVG,F (Ck + C) + Ck + C.  (4.0)  Define C as follows. Since the category of OF (G)-modules is an abelian category with enough projectives, any two projective resolutions of an OF (G)–module are chain homotopy equivalent. Therefore, there are chain maps fi : Qi → Pi , gi : Pi → Qi , and a map hi : Qi → Qi+1 such that ∂i+1 ◦ hi + hi−1 ◦ ∂i = gi ◦ fi − id. From here on, we only consider the components at G/1 of these resolutions and morphisms, so we are in the category of ZG-modules. We have two exact sequences of finitely generated ZG-modules δ2  δ1  P2 → P1 → P0 → Z → 0,  ∂2  ∂1  Q2 → Q1 → Q0 → Z → 0  and the morphisms fi : Qi → Pi , gi : Pi → Qi , and hi : Qi → Qi+1 . Let C be the maximum of the constants given by Lemma 4.6 for g2 , h1 , and f1 and the filling-norms provided . Inequality (4.0) is proved exactly as in [19, Proof of Theorem 3.5] by using Lemma 4.6 instead of [19, Lemma 2.8]. We include the short argument for completeness. Fix k. Let α ∈ ker(∂1 ) be such that kαkQ1 ≤ k. Choose β ∈ P2 such that δ2 (β) = f1 (α) and k f1 (α)kδ2 = kβkP2 . Then α = g1 ◦ f1 (α) − ∂2 ◦ h1 (α) + h0 ◦ ∂1 (α) = g1 ◦ δ2 (β) − ∂2 ◦ h1 (α) = ∂2 ◦ g2 (β) − ∂2 ◦ h1 (α) = ∂2 (g2 (β) − h1 (α))  13  It follows that kαk∂2 ≤ kg2 (β) − h1 (α)kQ2 ≤ kg2 (β)kQ2 + kh1 (α)kQ2 ≤ C · kβkP2 + C · kαkQ1 = C · k f1 (α)kδ2 + C · kαkQ1 P ≤ C · FVG,F (k f1 (α)kP1 ) + CkαkQ1  P ≤ C · FVG,F CkαkQ1 + CkαkQ1 P (Ck) + Ck ≤ C · FVG,F  Since α was arbitrary, inequality (4.0) holds for every k ∈ N completing the proof.    4.2. Topological approach to FVG,F . Definition 4.7. Let X be a cell complex. The homological Dehn function of X is the function FVX : N → N ∪ {∞} defined as FVX (k) = max { kγk∂ : γ ∈ Z1 (X, Z), kγk1 ≤ k } , where kγk∂ = min { kµk1 : µ ∈ C2 (X, Z), ∂(µ) = γ } , and the maximum and minimum of the empty set are defined as zero and ∞ respectively. Recall that a cell complex X is n-acyclic if its reduced homology groups with integer coefficients H̃k (X, Z) are trivial for 0 ≤ k ≤ n. Definition 4.8. The group G is FHn,F if there is a cocompact G–complex X such that all isotropy groups of X belong to F and for every K ∈ F the fixed point set X K is a non-empty (n − 1)-acyclic subcomplex of X. Such a complex is called an FHn,F -complex. Definition 4.9 (Topological Definition of Relative Homological Dehn Function). Let X be an FH2,F -complex for G. The homological filling function FVG,F of G relative to F , is the (equivalence class of the) homological filling function FVX : N → N ∪ {∞}. Proposition 4.10. Suppose that G is of type FH2,F . Then the algebraic and topological definitions of relative homological Dehn function are equivalent. Proof. Let X be an FHn,F -complex for G, see Definition 4.8. It follows that induced augmented cellular chain complex of OF (G)-modules C∗ (X, OF (G)) is an FP2,F resolution of ZG,F . By Theorem 4.4, FVX and FVG,F are equivalent.  Proposition 4.11. Suppose that G is of type FP2,F (1) If X is an F1,F -graph then there is a 1-acyclic F1,F -space Y with 1-skeleton X and finitely many G-orbits of 2-dimensional cells. (2) If Y is a 1-acyclic F1,F -space then FVG,F and FVY are equivalent. The proof of Proposition 4.11 requires the following lemma. Lemma 4.12. If G is of type FP2,F and X is an F1,F -space then the OF (G)-module of cellular 1-cycles Z1 (X, OF (G)) is finitely generated. Proof. Consider the exact sequence of OF (G)-modules 0 → Z1 (X, OF (G)) → C1 (X, OF (G)) → C0 (X, OF (G)) → ZG,F → 0.  14  E. MARTÍNEZ-PEDROZA  The assumptions on X imply that each Ci (X, OF (G)) is finitely generated and free. Since G is FP2,F , there is an exact sequence of OF (G)-modules 0 → K → P1 → P0 → ZG,F → 0 where each Pi is finitely generated and projective, and K is finitely generated. Applying Schanuel lemma 2.2 to these sequences shows that Z1 (X, OF (G)) is finitely generated.  Proof of Proposition 4.11. We claim that there are finitely many circuits γ1 , . . . , γn of X such that the corresponding 1-cycles form a generating set of the ZG-module Z1 (X, Z). By Lemma 4.12 the OF (G)-module of cellular 1-cycles Z1 (X, OF (G)) is finitely generated, hence Z1 (X, Z) is finitely generated. The claim follows by observing that each cellular P 1-cycle of X can be expressed as a finite sum of 1-cycles i αi where each αi is induced by a circuit [16, Lemma A2]. Let Y by the 2-dimensional G-complex with 1-skeleton X obtained as follows. For each circuit γi , attach to X a 2-dimensional cell with boundary γi and trivial G-stabilizer, and extend equivariantly. By construction, Y is an F1,F -space with trivial H1 (Y, Z), and finitely many G-orbits of 2-cells. To prove the second statement, Lemma 4.12 implies that Z1 (Y, OF (G)) is finitely generated. Hence there is an FP2,F resolution of the form · · · → Q2 → C1 (Y, OF (G)) → C0 (Y, OF (G)) → ZG,F → 0 where Q2 is finitely generated and free. The expression defining FVG,F using this resolution and the definition of FVY differ only on the chosen filling norm on Z1 (Y, Z). Since any two filling norms are equivalent, Lemma 4.5, we have that FVG,F and FVY are equivalent.  5. Proof of Theorem 1.14. The section is divided into two parts. In the first part, we introduce the notion of submodule distortion and prove a technical result relating retractions and module distortion, Proposition 5.6. In the second part, this proposition is used to prove Theorem 1.14. Through the rest of the section G is a group and F is a family of subgroups. 5.1. Submodule distortion and retractions. Definition 5.1. The distortion function of a finitely generated ZG-submodule P in a finitely generated ZG-module L is defined by DistLP (k) = max { kγkP : γ ∈ P and kγkL ≤ k } ,  where k · kP and k · kL are filling norms for P and L, and DistLP (k) is allowed to be ∞. Remark 5.2. The equivalence of filling norms on a finitely generated ZG-module, Lemma 4.5, implies that the growth rate of DistLP (k) is independent of the choice of filling norms. Remark 5.3. In the framework of Definition 4.9, the homological filling function of G P1 . relative to F is the distortion function of Ker(∂1 ) in P1 , specifically, FVG,F = DistKer (∂1 ) Definition 5.4. A ZG-module M is F -free if there is a G-set S with all isotropy groups in F such that the induced ZG-module Z[S ] is isomorphic to M. Remark 5.5. Let M be a free OF (G)-module. Then the G/1-component M[G/1] is an F free ZG-module. If M is finitely generated as an OF (G)-module, then M[G/1] is finitely generated as a ZG-module.  15  Proposition 5.6. Let H be a subgroup of G. Consider a commutative diagram /L O  MO Q  ı  /P  where • • • •  L and P are finitely generated ZG-modules and P is a submodule of L, M and Q are finitely generated ZH-modules and Q is a submodule of M, as ZH-modules, Q is a submodule of P, and M is a submodule of L, all the arrows in the diagram are inclusions.  Let k · kL and k · k M be filling norms on L and M respectively. Suppose there is an integer C0 ≥ 1 such that for every x ∈ M kxkL ≤ C0 · kxk M . Suppose that P is F -free and there is a commutative diagram of ZH-modules P ⑧? ❅❅❅ ⑧ ❅❅ρ ı ⑧⑧ ❅❅ ⑧ ⑧ ❅ ⑧⑧ / Q. Q Id  Then M  DistLP . DistQ  Proof of Proposition 5.6. Since P is a finitely generated F -free ZG-module, there is a Gset S with isotropy groups in F and finitely many G-orbits such that P  Z[S ]. Denote by k · kP the ℓ1 -norm on P induced by the free Z-basis S ; observe that this norm is a filling norm on P as a ZG-module. Since Q is a finitely generated ZH-module, there is a partition S = S 1 ∪ S 2 where each S i is an H-equivariant subset of S , the quotient S 1 /H is finite, and the inclusion ı : Q → P factors through the inclusion P1 ֒→ P as in the commutative diagram below P1 ⑦? ⑦ ⑦ ⑦⑦  ⑦⑦ Q ı /P where P1 = Z[S 1 ], and P2 = Z[S 2 ]. Equip the ZH-module P1 with the ℓ1 -norm k · kP1 induced by the free Z-basis S 1 , and observe that this norm is a filling norm on P1 as a finitely generated ZH-module. We have that kxkP1 = kxkP for every x ∈ P1 . Moreover, if p = x ⊕ y is an element of P  P1 ⊕ P2 , we have that kxkP ≤ kpkP . Observe that we can assume that ρ : P → Q restricts to the trivial morphism when restricted to P2 . Simply redefine ρ on P2 as the zero morphism and observe that the commutative diagram of the statement of the proposition still holds.  16  E. MARTÍNEZ-PEDROZA  Consider the morphism of finitely generated ZH-modules ρ : P1 → Q. By Lemma 4.6 there is an integer C1 such that for every x ∈ P1 , kρ(x)kQ ≤ C1 kxkP1 . Let p ∈ P be arbitrary and suppose p = x ⊕ y where x ∈ P1 and y ∈ P2 . Then kρ(p)kQ = kρ(x)kQ ≤ C1 kxkP1 = C1 kxkP ≤ C1 kpkP , where the first equality follows from ρ being trivial on P2 . Let C = max{C0 , C1 }. Let x ∈ Q be an arbitrary element and observe that kxkQ = kρ ◦ ı(x)kQ ≤ C · kı(x)kP ≤ C · DistLP (kı(x)kL ) ≤ C · DistLP (C · kı(x)k M ) , where the last inequality follows from the hypothesis that kxkL ≤ Ckxk M for every x ∈ M. Therefore for every positive integer k, M (k) ≤ C · DistLP (Ck) DistQ    5.2. Proof of Theorem 1.14. Definition 5.7. The Bredon cohomological dimension of G relative to F is at most n, denoted by cdF (G) ≤ n, if there is a projective resolution of OF (G)–modules 0 −→ Pn −→ · · · −→ P1 −→ P0 −→ ZG,F → 0. Proposition 5.8. If G is of type FF and cdF (G) ≤ 2, then there is an F1,F -complex X such that Z1 (X, OF (G)) is finitely generated and free. The proof of Proposition 5.8 requires the following definition and lemma. Definition 5.9. An OF (G)-module M is stably free if there is a finitely generated free OF (G)-module F such that M ⊕ F is a free OF (G)-module. Lemma 5.10. Let X be a G-graph and let v be a vertex of X with G-stabilizer K ∈ F . Let X⋆ be the G-graph obtained from X by adding a new G-orbit of edges with representative an edge e such that Ge = K and both endpoints are equal to v. Then the OF (G)-module of cellular 1-cycles Z1 (X⋆ ) is isomorphic to Z1 (X) ⊕ Z[·, G/K]. Proof. For each J ∈ F , the component Z1 (X⋆ )[G/J] is identified with Z-module of cellular 1-cycles of the fixed point set X⋆J . Hence there are natural isomorphisms Z1 (X⋆ )[G/J] → Z1 (X J ) if J is not a subgroup of a conjugate of K, and Z1 (X⋆ )[G/J] → Z1 (X J ) ⊕ Z if J is a subgroup of a conjugate of K. One verifies that these isomorphisms of Z-modules are the components of an isomorphism of OF (G)-modules Z1 (X⋆ ) → Z1 (X) ⊕ Z[·, G/K].  Proof of Proposition 5.8. Let X be a cocompact model for EF (G), and let n be its dimension. Consider the exact sequences of OF (G)-modules (5.1)  0 → Z1 (X) → C1 (X) → C0 (X) → ZG,F → 0,  and (5.2)  0 → Cn (X) → · · · → C1 (X) → C0 (X) → ZG,F → 0.  The assumptions on X imply that each Ci (X) is a finitely generated and free OF (G)-module. Since cdF (G) ≤ 2, there is an exact sequence of projective OF (G)-modules (5.3)  0 → P2 → P1 → P0 → ZG,F → 0.  Applying Schanuel’s lemma to the exact sequences (5.1) and (5.3) implies that Z1 (X) is projective. Then Schanuel’s lemma can be applied to the exact sequences (5.1) and (5.2), which yields that Z1 (X) is stably free and finitely generated. Let Y be the complex obtained  17  by adding finitely many new orbits of edges to X in such a way that Lemma 5.10 implies that Z1 (Y) is a finitely generated free OF (G)-module. Then Y is an F1,F -space for G.  Proposition 5.11. Let Γ be an F1,F -complex for G. If H is a subgroup of G of type F1,F ∩H , then Γ contains an H-equivariant subgraph ∆ which is an F1,F ∩H -complex. Proof. Since H is FP1,F ∩H , Proposition 3.3 implies that there is an F1,F ∩H -complex ∆. Let {vi : i ∈ I} and {e j : i ∈ J} be complete sets of representatives of H-orbits of vertices and edges of ∆ respectively. For each i ∈ I, choose a vertex wi in the fixed point set ΓHvi which is non-empty since Hvi ∈ F . The set assignment vi 7→ wi induces an H-map φ from the vertex set of ∆ to the one of Γ. For each j ∈ J, let H j be the (pointwise) H-stabilizer of e j and let v− and v+ be the endpoints of e j . Let γ j be an edge path in the fixed point set ΓH j from φ(v− ) to φ(v+ ); ΓH j is connected since H j ∈ F . After subdividing ∆, the assignment e j 7→ γ j extends φ to an H-map of graphs φ : ∆ → Γ. Replacing ∆ with the image of φ proves the claim.  Proof of Theorem 1.14. By Proposition 5.8, there is an F1,F -complex Γ for G such that Z1 (Γ, OF (G)) is free and finitely generated. By Proposition 5.11, Γ contains an H-equivariant subgraph ∆ which is an F1,F ∩H -complex for H. Since H is FP2,F ∩H , we have that Z1 (∆, OF ∩H (H)) is finitely generated. From here on, all considered modules are OF ∩H (H)-modules. Consider Γ and ∆ as H-graphs. Then there is a short exact sequence of cellular OF ∩H (H)–chain complexes (5.4)  0 → C∗ (∆) → C∗ (Γ) → C∗ (Γ, ∆) → 0  where Ci (Γ, ∆) is the quotient Ci (Γ)/Ci (∆). Consider the induced long exact homology sequence. Observing that H2 (Γ, ∆) is trivial, and that the reduced homology H̃0 (∆) is trivial (since ∆K is connected for all K ∈ F ∩ H), we obtain that the sequence (5.5)  0 → Z1 (∆) → Z1 (Γ) → Z1 (Γ, ∆) → 0  is exact. Considering once more the long exact sequence induced by (5.4), one verifies that (5.6)  0 → Z1 (Γ, ∆) → C1 (Γ, ∆) → C0 (Γ, ∆) → 0  is an exact sequence of OF ∩H (H)-modules. Since ∆ is an H-equivariant subgraph of Γ, we have that Ci (∆) is a free factor of Ci (Γ); hence Ci (Γ, ∆) is free. Therefore, the sequence (5.6) implies that Z1 (Γ, ∆) is projective. The exact sequence (5.5) together with Z1 (Γ, ∆) being projective implies that there is a commutative diagram of OF ∩H (H)-modules Z1 (Γ)❍ ❍❍ ρ ✇; ✇ ❍❍ ✇ ı ✇ ❍❍ ✇ ✇ ❍❍ ✇ # ✇✇ / Z1 (∆). Z1 (∆) Id  The proof concludes by invoking Proposition 5.6 as follows. Considering the H/1 component of the above commutative diagram, we obtain the analogous diagram for the ZHmodules of integral cellular 1-cycles of Γ and ∆. Since Z1 (Γ, OF (G)) is finitely generated and free, it follows that P := Z1 (Γ, Z) is a finitely generated and F -free ZG-module. Analogously, since Z1 (∆, OF ∩H (H)) is finitely generated, Q := Z1 (∆, Z) is a finitely generated ZH-module. Moreover, Q is a submodule of the finitely generated ZH-module M := C1 (∆, Z), and analogously P is a submodule of the finitely generated ZG-module L := C1 (Γ, Z). Observe that we can assume that M ≤ L. Considering the natural ℓ1 -norms k·kL and k·k M on L and M induced by the collection 1-cells (with a chosen orientation) of Γ  18  E. MARTÍNEZ-PEDROZA  and ∆ respectively, we have the equality kσkL = kσk M for every σ ∈ M. Then Remark 5.3 implies FVH,F ∩H = DistQM and FVG,F = DistLP . By Proposition 5.6, FVH,F ∩H  FVG,F .  6. Relatively Hyperbolic Groups 6.1. Proof of Theorem 1.12(1). Let G be a group and let P be a collection of subgroups generating a family F . Suppose that P is a finite and almost malnormal collection, that G is FP2,F , and that FVG,F (n) has linear growth. By Corollary 3.5, there is an F1,F -graph X with finite edge stabilizers. By Proposition 4.11, there is an F1,F -space Y with 1-skeleton X, with finitely many G-orbits of 2dimensional cells, and such that FVG,F and FVY are equivalent. To conclude that G is hyperbolic relative to F , it is enough to prove that X is fine and hyperbolic. Since FVG,F has linear growth, the proof concludes by invoking the following result. Lemma 6.1. [23, Corollary 3.3] Let Y be a 1-acyclic 2-dimensional cell complex such that there is a bound on the length of attaching maps of 2-cells. If FVY (n) has linear growth then the 1-skeleton of Y is a fine hyperbolic graph. 6.2. A Class of Relatively Hyperbolic Groups of Bredon Cohomological Dimension 2. This last subsection relies on small cancellation theory over free products; our main reference is Lyndon-Schupp texbook on Combinatorial group theory [22, Chapter V, Section 9]. The following remark recalls some well known facts on small cancellation products. Remark 6.2. Suppose that P = {Pi } is a finite collection of groups, let F = ∗Pi be the corresponding free product, and let R be a symmetrized subset of F satisfying the C ′ (1/6)small cancellation condition. Let N be the normal closure of R in F. (1) The collection P can be regarded as a collection of subgroups of F/N. Indeed, Greendlinger’s lemma [22, Ch. V. Theorem 9.3] implies that N does not contain elements of length less than three. In particular, the natural map F → F/N embeds each factor Pi of F, and no two factors are identified. (2) The group F/N is hyperbolic relative to P; this is a direct consequence of [22, Ch. V. Theorem 9.3] using Osin’s approach to relative hyperbolicity [27, Page 4, (II)]. (3) If each P ∈ P is torsion-free, then P is malnormal in F/N, [27, Proposition 2.36]. Theorem 6.3. Suppose that P = {Pi } is a finite family of torsion-free groups, that R is a finite symmetrized subset of the free product F = ∗Pi satisfying the C ′ (1/6)-small cancellation condition and with no proper powers, and that G = F/N where N is the normal closure of R. If X is the coned-off Cayley complex of a relative presentation hP|R′ i where R′ is a minimal subset of R with normal closure N in F, then X is a cocompact EF G-complex where F is the family generated by P. In particular gdF (G) ≤ 2. Proof. In view of Proposition 3.10 and Remark 6.2, it is left to prove that X is contractible. We argue that every spherical diagram S → X is reducible as explained below. It follows that X has trivial second homotopy group by a remark of Gersten [14, Remark 3.2]. Since X is 2-dimensional and simply-connected, an application of Hurewicz and Whitehead theorems from algebraic topology imply that X is contractible. A spherical diagram is a combinatorial cellular map S → X where S is topologically the 2-sphere. Roughly speaking, the diagram is reducible in the sense of Gersten if there are two distinct faces (2-cells) of the 2-sphere S that have an edge in common and map to the same 2-cell of X by a mirror image, see [14, Sec. 3.1] for a precise definition. The  19  small cancellation condition implies that every spherical diagram S → X is reducible; we sketch an argument below following Ol’shanskiı̆ [26, Proof of Theorem 13.3]. Let γ be a path in X whose endpoints are non-cone vertices. We observed in DefiniF tion 3.8 that γ has as a label a reduced word in the alphabet Pi . If α is a subpath of γ then the label of α is defined as the label of the minimal length subpath of γ such that its endpoints are non-cone vertices and it contains α as a subpath. In particular, if α is a trivial path then either α is a non-cone vertex and its label is the empty word, or α is a cone-vertex v(gP) and its label is a non-trivial element of the group P ∈ P. Now we remark two direct consequences of Greendlinger’s lemma [22, Ch. V. Theorem 9.3] together with their interpretations/consequences on the cell structure of X. We leave some of the details to the reader. • If r ∈ R has semi-reduced form r = ab and a is not the empty word, then b < N. As a consequence, any closed curve γ → X in the 1-skeleton of X with label r ∈ R is an embedded circle. • Let r, r′ ∈ R. If r and r′ have semi-reduced forms asbt and aubv respectively, and su−1 is a reduced form such that su−1 ∈ N, then r = r′ . As a consequence, if D and D′ are a pair of 2-cells of X whose boundaries intersect, then either D = D′ or their boundaries intersect in a single path (possibly a trivial path) whose induced label (as a subpath of the boundary of D) is a piece. This last statement relies on the minimality of R′ and the assumption that R has no proper powers, and not only on the stated consequence of Greendlinger’s lemma. Suppose that there is a pair of distinct 2-cells D and D′ of X such that their boundary intersection contains a path whose label is not a piece. Then from the definition of piece, it follows that the labels r and r′ of the boundaries of D and D′ respectively are the same reduced word up to taking the inverse and a cyclic conjugation. By minimality of R′ , the words r and r′ correspond to the same element of R′ , say r. By definition of X, since D and D′ are distinct and have the same boundary path labelled by r, the word r is a proper power. But this contradicts that R has no proper powers. In particular, the consequence of Greendlinger’s lemma is only used to show that if the boundary intersection of D and D′ is non-empty then it is connected. This is obtained by observing that for a suitable orientations of the boundary paths of D and D′ , if their intersection is not connected their labels have have semi-reduced forms asbt and aubv respectively, and such that su−1 is the label of an embedded closed path. Suppose that S → X is a spherical diagram that is not reducible. Let Φ be the graph whose vertices are the 2-cells of S ; and given two vertices, there is an edge between them for each connected component of the intersection of the boundary paths of the corresponding 2-cells. It is immediate that Φ is planar. Below we argue that every vertex of Φ has degree at least six, and that Φ is simplicial, i.e., no double edges and no loops. Since every finite planar simplicial graph has a vertex of degree at most five, the existence of Φ yields a contradiction. Hence a non-reducible spherical diagram S → X can not exist. The first bullet statement above implies that Φ has no edges that connect a vertex to itself. Since S → X is not reducible, the second bullet statement above implies that if D and D′ are two distinct 2-cells of S and their boundaries have non-empty intersection, then they intersect in a single path whose induced label is a piece. This implies that Φ has no two distinct edges connecting the same vertices. Hence Φ is simplicial. Finally, the C ′ (1/6)-condition implies that every r ∈ R′ can not be the concatenation of less than six pieces, and we observed that the intersection of any pair of 2-cells of S is along a path with label a piece; it follows that every vertex of Φ has degree at least six.   20  E. MARTÍNEZ-PEDROZA  References [1] Aaron Abrams, Noel Brady, Pallavi Dani, and Robert Young. Homological and homotopical Dehn functions are different. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 110(48):19206–19212, 2013. [2] M. Bestvina and M. Feighn. A combination theorem for negatively curved groups. J. Differential Geom., 35(1):85–101, 1992. [3] Mladen Bestvina and Noel Brady. Morse theory and finiteness properties of groups. Invent. Math., 129(3):445–470, 1997. [4] B. H. Bowditch. Relatively hyperbolic groups. Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 22(3):1250016, 66, 2012. [5] Noel Brady. Branched coverings of cubical complexes and subgroups of hyperbolic groups. J. London Math. Soc. (2), 60(2):461–480, 1999. [6] Noel Brady, Ian J. Leary, and Brita E. A. Nucinkis. On algebraic and geometric dimensions for groups with torsion. J. London Math. Soc. (2), 64(2):489–500, 2001. [7] Thomas Brady. Complexes of nonpositive curvature for extensions of F2 by Z. Topology Appl., 63(3):267– 275, 1995. [8] Glen E. Bredon. Equivariant cohomology theories. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, No. 34. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1967. [9] Martin R. Bridson and André Haefliger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature, volume 319 of Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999. [10] Kenneth S. Brown. Cohomology of groups, volume 87 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1994. Corrected reprint of the 1982 original. [11] Ian M. Chiswell, Donald J. Collins, and Johannes Huebschmann. Aspherical group presentations. Math. Z., 178(1):1–36, 1981. [12] Martin G. Fluch and Ian J. Leary. An Eilenberg-Ganea phenomenon for actions with virtually cyclic stabilisers. Groups Geom. Dyn., 8(1):135–142, 2014. [13] S. M. Gersten. Homological Dehn functions and the word problem. Available at http://www.math.utah.edu/˜sg/Papers/df9.pdf. [14] S. M. Gersten. Reducible diagrams and equations over groups. In Essays in group theory, volume 8 of Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ., pages 15–73. Springer, New York, 1987. [15] S. M. Gersten. Subgroups of word hyperbolic groups in dimension 2. J. London Math. Soc. (2), 54(2):261– 283, 1996. [16] S. M. Gersten. Cohomological lower bounds for isoperimetric functions on groups. Topology, 37(5):1031– 1072, 1998. [17] Daniel Groves and Jason Fox Manning. Dehn filling in relatively hyperbolic groups. Israel J. Math., 168:317–429, 2008. [18] Richard Gaelan Hanlon and Eduardo Martı́nez-Pedroza. Lifting group actions, equivariant towers and subgroups of non-positively curved groups. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 14(5):2783–2808, 2014. [19] Richard Gaelan Hanlon and Eduardo Martı́nez Pedroza. A subgroup theorem for homological filling functions. Groups Geom. Dyn., 10(3):867–883, 2016. [20] Wolfgang Lück. Transformation groups and algebraic K-theory, volume 1408 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1989. Mathematica Gottingensis. [21] Wolfgang Lück and David Meintrup. On the universal space for group actions with compact isotropy. In Geometry and topology: Aarhus (1998), volume 258 of Contemp. Math., pages 293–305. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2000. [22] Roger C. Lyndon and Paul E. Schupp. Combinatorial group theory. Classics in Mathematics. SpringerVerlag, Berlin, 2001. Reprint of the 1977 edition. [23] Eduardo Martı́nez-Pedroza. A note on fine graphs and homological isoperimetric inequalities. Canad. Math. Bull., 59(1):170–181, 2016. [24] Eduardo Martı́nez-Pedroza and Piotr Przytycki. Dismantlable classifying space for the family of parabolic subgroups of a relatively hyperbolic group. Journal of the Institute of Mathematics of Jussieu, 2017. [25] Eduardo Martı́nez-Pedroza and Daniel T. Wise. Relative quasiconvexity using fine hyperbolic graphs. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 11(1):477–501, 2011. [26] A. Yu. Ol’shanskiı̆. Geometry of defining relations in groups, volume 70 of Mathematics and its Applications (Soviet Series). Kluwer Academic Publishers Group, Dordrecht, 1991. Translated from the 1989 Russian original by Yu. A. Bakhturin. [27] Denis V. Osin. Relatively hyperbolic groups: intrinsic geometry, algebraic properties, and algorithmic problems. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 179(843):vi+100, 2006.  21  [28] Simon St. John-Green. Cohomological Finiteness Properties of Groups. PhD thesis, University of Southampton, UK, 2014. [29] Tammo tom Dieck. Transformation groups, volume 8 of de Gruyter Studies in Mathematics. Walter de Gruyter & Co., Berlin, 1987. Memorial University, St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada E-mail address: emartinezped@mun.ca

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
