Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_4843

Abstract:
Three Colors Suffice: Conflict-Free Coloring of Planar Graphs Zachary Abel∗ Victor Alvarez† Erik D. Demaine‡ Sándor P. Fekete†  arXiv:1701.05999v1 [cs.DM] 21 Jan 2017  Aman Gour§ Adam Hesterberg∗  Phillip Keldenich†  Abstract A conflict-free k-coloring of a graph assigns one of k different colors to some of the vertices such that, for every vertex v, there is a color that is assigned to exactly one vertex among v and v’s neighbors. Such colorings have applications in wireless networking, robotics, and geometry, and are well-studied in graph theory. Here we study the natural problem of the conflict-free chromatic number χCF (G) (the smallest k for which conflict-free k-colorings exist), with a focus on planar graphs. For general graphs, we prove the conflict-free variant of the famous Hadwiger Conjecture: If G does not contain Kk+1 as a minor, then χCF (G) ≤ k. For planar graphs, we obtain a tight worst-case bound: three colors are sometimes necessary and always sufficient. In addition, we give a complete characterization of the algorithmic/computational complexity of conflict-free coloring. It is NP-complete to decide whether a planar graph has a conflict-free coloring with one color, while for outerplanar graphs, this can be decided in polynomial time. Furthermore, it is NP-complete to decide whether a planar graph has a conflict-free coloring with two colors, while for outerplanar graphs, two colors always suffice. For the bicriteria problem of minimizing the number of colored vertices subject to a given bound k on the number of colors, we give a full algorithmic characterization in terms of complexity and approximation for outerplanar and planar graphs. 1  Introduction  Coloring the vertices of a graph is one of the fundamental problems in graph theory, both scientifically and historically. Proving that four colors always suffice to color ∗ Mathematics Department, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA † Algorithms Group, TU Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany ‡ Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT, Massachusetts, USA § Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India  Christian Scheffer†  a planar graph [5, 6, 26] was a tantalizing open problem for more than 100 years; the quest for solving this challenge contributed to the development of graph theory, but also to computers in theorem proving [29]. A generalization that is still unsolved is the Hadwiger Conjecture [18]: A graph is k-colorable if it has no Kk+1 minor. Over the years, there have been many variations on coloring, often motivated by particular applications. One such context is wireless communication, where “colors” correspond to different frequencies. This also plays a role in robot navigation, where different beacons are used for providing direction. To this end, it is vital that in any given location, a robot is adjacent to a beacon with a frequency that is unique among the ones that can be received. This notion has been introduced as conflict-free coloring, formalized as follows. For any vertex v ∈ V of a simple graph G = (V, E), the closed neighborhood N [v] consists of all vertices adjacent to v and v itself. A conflict-free k-coloring of G assigns one of k different colors to a (possibly proper) subset S ⊆ V of vertices, such that for every vertex v ∈ V , there is a vertex y ∈ N [v], called the conflict-free neighbor of v, such that the color of y is unique in the closed neighborhood of v. The conflict-free chromatic number χCF (G) of G is the smallest k for which a conflict-free coloring exists. Observe that χCF (G) is bounded from above by the proper chromatic number χ(G) because in a proper coloring, every vertex is its own conflictfree neighbor. Conflict-free coloring has received an increasing amount of attention. Because of the relationship to classic coloring, it is natural to investigate the conflictfree coloring of planar graphs. In addition, previous work has considered either general graphs and hypergraphs (e.g., see [25]) or geometric scenarios (e.g., see [20]); we give a more detailed overview further down. This adds to the relevance of conflict-free coloring of planar graphs, which constitute the intersection of general graphs and geometry. In addition, the subclass of outerplanar graphs is of interest, as it corresponds to subdividing simple polygons by chords.  There is a spectrum of different scientific challenges when studying conflict-free coloring. What are worstcase bounds on the necessary number of colors? When is it NP-hard to determine the existence of a conflictfree k-coloring, when polynomially solvable? What can be said about approximation? Are there sufficient conditions for more general graphs? And what can be said about the bicriteria problem, in which also the number of colored vertices is considered? We provide extensive answers for all of these aspects, basically providing a complete characterization for planar and outerplanar graphs. 1.1 Our contribution. We present the following results. 1. For general graphs, we provide the conflict-free variant of the Hadwiger Conjecture: If G does not contain Kk+1 as a minor, then χCF (G) ≤ k. 2. It is NP-complete to decide whether a planar graph has a conflict-free coloring with one color. For outerplanar graphs, this question can be decided in polynomial time. 3. It is NP-complete to decide whether a planar graph has a conflict-free coloring with two colors. For outerplanar graphs, two colors always suffice. 4. Three colors are sometimes necessary and always sufficient for conflict-free coloring of a planar graph. 5. For the bicriteria problem of minimizing the number of colored vertices subject to a given bound χCF (G) ≤ k with k ∈ {1, 2}, we prove that the problem is NP-hard for planar and polynomially solvable in outerplanar graphs. 6. For planar graphs and k = 3 colors, minimizing the number of colored vertices does not have a constant-factor approximation, unless P = NP. 7. For planar graphs and k ≥ 4 colors, it is NPcomplete to minimize the number of colored vertices. The problem is fixed-parameter tractable (FPT) and allows a PTAS. 1.2 Related work. In a geometric context, the study of conflict-free coloring was started by Even, Lotker, Ron, and Smorodinsky [15] and Smorodinsky [27], who motivate the problem by frequency assignment in cellular networks: There, a set of n base stations is given, each covering some geometric region in the plane. The base stations service mobile clients that can be at any point in the total covered area. To  avoid interference, there must be at least one base station in range using a unique frequency for every point in the entire covered area. The task is to assign a frequency to each base station minimizing the number of frequencies. On an abstract level, this induces a coloring problem on a hypergraph where the base stations correspond to the vertices and there is an hyperedge between some vertices if the range of the corresponding base stations has a non-empty common intersection. If the hypergraph is induced by disks, Even et al. [15] prove that O(log n) colors are always sufficient. Alon and Smorodinsky [4] extend this by showing that each family of disks, where each disk intersects at most k others, can be colored using O(log3 k) colors. Furthermore, for unit disks, Lev-Tov and Peleg [23] present an O(1)-approximation algorithm for the number of colors. Horev et al. [21] extend this by showing that any set of n disks can be colored with O(k log n) colors, even if every point must see k distinct unique colors. Abam et al. [1] discuss the problem in the context of cellular networks where the network has to be reliable even if some number of base stations fault, giving worst-case bounds for the number of colors required. For the dual problem of coloring a set of points such that each region from some family of regions contains at least one uniquely colored point, Har-Peled and Smorodinsky [19] prove that with respect to every family of pseudo-disks, every set of points can be colored using O(log n) colors. For rectangle ranges, Elbassioni and Mustafa [14] show that it is possible to add a sublinear number of points such that a conflict-free coloring with O(n3/8·(1+ε) ) colors becomes possible. Ajwani et al. [2] complement this by showing that coloring a set of points with respect to rectangle ranges is always possible using O(n0.382 ) colors. For coloring points on a line with respect to intervals, Cheilaris et al. [10]  present a 2-approximation algorithm, and a 5 − k2 approximation algorithm when every interval must see k uniquely colored vertices. Hoffman et al. [20] give tight bounds for the conflict-free chromatic art gallery problem under rectangular visibility in orthogonal polygons: Θ(log log n) are sometimes necessary and always sufficient. Chen et al. [13] consider the online version of the conflict-free coloring of a set of points on the line, where each newly inserted point must be assigned a color upon insertion, and at all times the coloring has to be conflict-free. Also in the online scenario, Bar-Nov et al. [9] consider a certain class of k-degenerate hypergraphs which sometimes arise as intersection graphs of geometric objects, presenting an online algorithm using O(k log n) colors. On the combinatorial side, some authors consider the variant in which all vertices need to be colored; note  thus χCF (G) ≤ χP (G). For some k, we define the k conflict-free domination number γCF (G) of G to be the minimum number of vertices that have to be colored in a k conflict-free k-coloring of G. We set γCF (G) = ∞ if G is not conflict-free k-colorable. Because the set of colored vertices is a dominating set, the conflict-free domination k number satisfies γCF (G) ≥ γ(G) for all k, where γ(G), the domination number of G, is the size of a minimum dominating set of G. Moreover, for any graph, there is k a k ≤ γ(G) such that γCF (G) = γ(G). We denote the complete graph on n vertices by Kn := ({1, . . . , n}, {{u, v} | u, v ∈ {1, . . . , n}, u 6= v}), and the complete bipartite graph on n and m vertices as Kn,m . We define the graph Kn−3 := (V (Kn ), E(Kn )\ E(K3 )), which is obtained by removing any three edges forming a single triangle from a Kn . We also provide a number of results for outerplanar graphs. An outerplanar graph is a graph that has a planar embedding for which all vertices belong to the outer face of the embedding. An outerplanar graph is called maximal iff no edges can be added to the graph without losing outerplanarity [8]. Maximal outerplanar graphs can also be characterized as the graphs having an embedding corresponding to a polygon triangulation, which illustrated the particular relevance in a geometric context. In addition, maximal outerplanar graphs exhibit a number of interesting graph-theoretic properties. Every maximal outerplanar graph is chordal, a 2-tree and a series-parallel graph. Also, every maximal outerplanar graph is the visibility graph of a simple polygon. For some of our NP-hardness proofs, we use a variant of the planar 3-SAT problem, called Positive 2 Preliminaries Planar 1-in-3-SAT. This problem was introduced and For every vertex v ∈ V , the closed neighborhood is shown to be NP-complete by Mulzer and Rote [24], and denoted by NG [v] := NG (v) ∪ {v}. A partial k-coloring consists of deciding whether a given positive planar 3of G is an assignment χ : V 0 → {1, . . . , k} of colors to a CNF formula allows a truth assignment such that in subset V 0 ⊆ V (G) of the vertices. χ is called conflict- each clause, exactly one literal is true. free k-coloring of G iff, for each vertex v ∈ V , there is a vertex w ∈ NG [v] ∩ V 0 such that χ(w) is unique in Definition 2.1. (Positive planar formulas) NG [v], i.e., for all other w0 ∈ NG [v] ∩ V 0 , χ(w0 ) 6= χ(w). A formula φ in 3-CNF is called positive planar iff it We call w the conflict-free neighbor of v. is both positive and backbone planar. A formula φ In order to avoid confusion with proper k-colorings, is called positive iff it does not contain any negation, i.e., colorings that color all vertices such that no adja- i.e. iff all occurring literals are positive. A formula cent vertices receive the same color, we use the term φ, with clause set C = {c1 , . . . , cl } and variable set proper coloring when referring to this kind of coloring. X = {x1 , . . . , xn }, is called backbone planar iff its The minimum number of colors needed for a proper col- associated graph G(φ) := (X ∪C, E(φ)) is planar, where oring of G, also known as the chromatic number of G, E(φ) is defined as follows: is denoted by χP (G), whereas the minimum number • xi cj ∈ E(φ) for a clause cj ∈ C and a variable of colors required for a conflict-free coloring of G (G’s xi ∈ X iff xi occurs in cj , conflict-free chromatic number ) is written as χCF (G). Note that, because every vertex sees itself, every proper coloring of G is also a conflict-free coloring of G, and • xi xi+1 ∈ E(φ) for all 1 ≤ i < n.  that this does not change asymptotic results for general graphs and hypergraphs: it suffices to introduce one additional color for vertices that are left uncolored in our constructions. Regarding general hypergraphs, Ashok et al. [7] prove that maximizing the number of conflictfreely colored edges in a hypergraph is FPT when parameterized by the number of conflict-free edges in the solution. Cheilaris et al. [11] consider the case of hypergraphs induced by a set of planar Jordan regions and prove an asymptotically tight upper bound of O(log n) for the conflict-free list chromatic number of such hypergraphs. They also consider hypergraphs induced by the simple paths√of a planar graph and prove an upper bound of O( n) for the conflict-free list chromatic number. For hypergraphs induced by the paths of a simple graph G, Cheilaris and Tóth [12] prove that it is coNP-complete to decide whether a given coloring is conflict-free if the input is G. Regarding the case in which the hypergraph is induced by the neighborhoods of a simple graph G, which resembles our scenario, Pach and Tárdos [25] prove that the conflict-free chromatic number of an n-vertex graph is in O(log2 n). Glebov et al. [17] extend this from an extremal and probabilistic point of view by proving that almost all G(n, p)graphs have conflict-free chromatic number O(log n) for p ∈ ω(1/n), and by giving a randomized construction for graphs having conflict-free chromatic number Θ(log2 n). In more recent work, Gargano and Rescigno [16] show that finding the conflict-free chromatic number for general graphs is NP-complete, and prove that the problem is FPT w.r.t. vertex cover or neighborhood diversity number.  The path formed by the latter edges is also called the 1 on the vertices of J can be removed. Therefore, we backbone of the formula graph G(φ). can assume each of the two copies of J to be colored in a conflict-free manner using the colors {2, . . . , k}. 3 Conflict-Free Coloring of General Graphs Observe that, due to χCF (J) = k − 1, each of these In this section we consider the Conflict-Free k- colors must be used at least once in each copy. This Coloring problem on general simple graphs. In implies that both u and v see each color at least twice: Section 3.1, we prove that this problem is NP-complete The two copies of J enforce two occurrences of the colors for any k ≥ 1. In Section 3.2, we provide a sufficient {2, . . . , k}, and color 1 is assigned to both u and v, which criterion that guarantees conflict-free k-colorability. In are connected by an edge. This is a contradiction, and Section 3.3, we consider the conflict-free domination therefore, both u and v must be colored with distinct  number and prove that, for any k ≥ 3, there is no colors. k constant-factor approximation algorithm for γCF . Next, we give an inductive construction of graphs, Gk , with χCF (Gk ) = k. The proof of NP-hardness relies on 3.1 Complexity this hierarchy. Theorem 3.1. Conflict-Free k-Coloring is NP1. The first graph G1 of the hierarchy consists of a complete for any fixed k ≥ 1. single isolated vertex. G2 is a K1,3 with one edge subdivided by another vertex, or, equivalently, a Membership in NP is clear. For k ≥ 3, we prove NPpath of length 3 with a leaf vertex attached to one hardness using a reduction from proper k-Coloring. of the inner vertices. For k ∈ {1, 2}, refer to Section 4, where we prove Conflict-Free k-Coloring of planar graphs to be 2. Given Gk and Gk−1 , Gk+1 is constructed as follows NP-complete for k ∈ {1, 2}. for k ≥ 2: Central to the proof is the following lemma that enables us to enforce certain vertices to be colored, and • Take a complete graph G = Kk+1 on both ends of an edge to be colored using distinct colors. k + 1 vertices. • To each vertex v ∈ V (Kk+1 ), attach two Lemma 3.2. Let G be any graph, u, v ∈ V (G) and disjoint and independent copies of Gk , adding vu = e ∈ E(G). If N (v) contains two disjoint and an edge from v to every vertex of both copies independent copies of a graph H with χCF (H) = k, not of Gk . adjacent to any other vertex w ∈ G, every conflict-free • For each edge e = vw ∈ E(Kk+1 ), add k-coloring of G colors v. If the same holds for u and two disjoint and independent copies of Gk−1 , in addition, NG (u) ∩ NG (v) contains two disjoint and adding an edge from v and w to every vertex independent copies of a graph J with χCF (J) = k − 1, of both copies. not adjacent to any other vertex w ∈ G, every conflictfree k-coloring of G colors u and v with different colors. The number of vertices of the graphs Gk obtained by Proof. Assume towards a contradiction that there was a the above construction satisfies the recursive formula conflict-free k-coloring χ that avoids coloring v. Then, due to the copies of H being independent, disjoint and not connected to any other vertex, the restriction of χ to the vertices of each of the two copies must induce a conflict-free coloring on H. As χCF (H) = k, this implies that χ uses k colors on each copy. Therefore, in the open neighborhood of v, there are at least two vertices colored with each color. This leads to a contradiction, because v cannot have a conflictfree neighbor. For the second proposition, suppose there was a conflict-free coloring assigning the same color to u and v. Without loss of generality, let this color be 1. As every vertex of the two copies of J now sees two occurrences of color 1, color 1 can not be the color of the unique neighbor of any vertex of J, and any occurrence of color  |G1 | = 1, |G2 | = 5, |Gk+1 | = (k+1)·(2|Gk |+k|Gk−1 |+1),   which is in Ω 2k and O 2k log k . Figure 1 depicts the graph G3 , which in addition to being planar is a seriesparallel graph. Lemma 3.3. For Gk constructed in this manner, χCF (Gk ) = k. Proof. The proof uses induction over k. Application of Lemma 3.2 implies that all vertices of the Kk+1 underlying Gk+1 have to be colored using different colors. Therefore, χCF (Gk+1 ) ≥ k + 1. By coloring all k + 1 vertices of the underlying Kk+1 with a different color, we obtain a conflict-free (k + 1)-coloring of Gk+1 , implying χCF (Gk+1 ) ≤ k + 1.   G2  G2  G1 G1  Figure 1: The graph G3 . Lemma 3.4. For k ≥ 2, k-Coloring 4 ConflictFree k-Coloring. Therefore, for k ≥ 3, ConflictFree k-Coloring is NP-complete. Proof. Given a graph G for which to decide proper kcolorability for a fixed k. We construct a graph G0 that is conflict-free k-colorable iff G is k-colorable. G0 is constructed from G by attaching two copies of Gk to each vertex v ∈ V (G), by adding an edge from v to each vertex of the copies of Gk . For each edge uv ∈ E(G), we attach two copies of Gk−1 to both endpoints of uv by adding an edge from u and v to all vertices of both copies. As k is fixed, |Gk | and |Gk−1 | are constant, implying that G0 can be constructed in polynomial time. A proper k-coloring of G induces a conflict-free kcoloring of G0 by leaving all other vertices uncolored. On the other hand, by Lemma 3.2, a conflict-free k-coloring χ of G0 colors all vertices v ∈ V (G) and for every edge, the colors of both endpoints are distinct. Therefore, the restriction of χ to V (G) is a proper k-coloring of G.  3.2 A Sufficient Criterion for k-Colorability. In this section we present a sufficient criterion for conflictfree k-colorability together with an efficient heuristic that can be used to color graphs satisfying this criterion with k colors in a conflict-free manner. This heuristic is called iterated elimination of distance-3-sets and is detailed in Algorithm 1. The main idea of this heuristic is to iteratively compute maximal sets of vertices at pairwise (link) distance at least 3, coloring all vertices in one of these sets using one color, and then removing these vertices and their neighbors until all that remains is a collection of disconnected paths, which can then be colored using one color.  conflict-free k-coloring that can be found in polynomial time using iterated elimination of distance-3 sets. Proof. For k = 1, a graph G with neither a K3 nor a K4−3 = K1,3 minor consists of a collection of isolated paths. A path on 3n vertices can be colored with one color by coloring the middle vertex of every three vertices. This does not color the vertices at either end, so up to two vertices can be removed from the path to get colorings for paths on 3n − 1 and 3n − 2 vertices. For k ≥ 2, we use induction as follows: First, we color an inclusion-wise maximal subset D ⊆ V of vertices at pairwise distance at least 3 to each other using color 1. This provides a conflict-free neighbor of color 1 to every vertex in N [D]. Therefore, the vertices in N [D] are covered and can be removed from the graph. The remaining graph consists of vertices at distance 2 to some vertex in D; we call these vertices unseen in the remainder of the proof. We show that −3 the remaining graph has no Kk+1 and no Kk+2 as a minor. By induction, iterated elimination of distance 3 sets requires k − 1 colors to color the remaining graph, and thus k colors suffice for G. If the graph is disconnected, iterated elimination of distance 3 sets works on all components separately, so we can assume G to be connected. We claim that there is no set U of unseen vertices that is a cutset of G. Suppose there were such a cutset U and let H be any component of G \ U not containing v, the first selected vertex during the construction of D. At least one vertex of H is colored: every vertex in U is at distance at least two from every colored vertex not in H, therefore, every vertex in H is at distance at least three from every colored vertex not in H. Consider the iteration where the first vertex w of H is added to the set of colored vertices D. At this point, w is at distance exactly 3 from some colored vertex not in H. However, this implies w is adjacent to some vertex from U , contradicting the fact that all vertices in U are unseen. Now, suppose for the sake of contradiction that the −3 set W of unseen vertices contains a Kk+1 or Kk+2 minor. W is not the whole graph, because at least one vertex is colored, so there must be a vertex v not in the Kk+1 or −3 Kk+2 minor. For every vertex w ∈ W , there is a path from v to w that intersects W only at w. Otherwise, W \ {w} would be a cutset separating v from w. So, if −3 the graph induced by W had a Kk+1 or Kk+2 minor, we could contract G \ W to a single vertex, which would be −3 adjacent to all vertices in W , yielding a Kk+2 or Kk+3 minor of G, which does not exist.   −3 Observe that Gk+1 contains a Kk+3 as a minor, but not Theorem 3.5. Let G be a graph and k ≥ 1. If G a Kk+2 , proving that just excluding Kk+2 as a minor −3 has neither Kk+2 nor Kk+3 as a minor, G admits a does not suffice to guarantee k-colorability. Moreover,  Algorithm 1 Iterated elimination of distance-3-sets 1: i ← 1, χ ← ∅ 2: Remove all isolated paths from G 3: while G is not empty do 4: D←∅ 5: For each component of G, select some vertex v and add it to D 6: while there is a vertex w at distance ≥ 3 from all vertices in D do 7: Choose w at distance exactly 3 from some vertex in D 8: D ← D ∪ {w} 9: ∀u ∈ D : χ(u) ← i 10: i←i+1 11: Remove N [D] from G 12: Remove all isolated paths from G 13: Color all removed isolated paths using color i −3 note that Kk+1 is a minor of Kk+2 and Kk+3 . This G, or adjacent to just one vertex of G. Conversely, let χ yields the following corollary, which is the conflict-free be a conflict-free coloring of G0 , coloring just n vertices. If χ did not assign a color to some vertex v of G, it would variant of the Hadwiger Conjecture. have to color all M ≥ n + 1 neighbors of v. If χ assigned Corollary 3.6. All graphs that do not have Kk+1 as the same color to any pair v, w of vertices adjacent in G, a minor are conflict-free k-colorable. it would have to color all M vertices adjacent only to v and w. Therefore, χ is a proper coloring of G. Running a c-approximation algorithm on G0 results in a conflict3.3 Conflict-Free Domination Number. In this free coloring using at most c · n < M vertices if G is section we consider the problem of minimizing the k-colorable, and using at least M vertices if G is not; number of colored vertices in a conflict-free k-coloring thus we could decide k-colorability in polynomial time. k for a fixed k, which is equivalent to computing γCF . We  call the corresponding decision problem k-ConflictFree Dominating Set. We show that approximating 4 Planar Conflict-Free Coloring the conflict-free domination number in general graphs is hard for any fixed k. In Section 5 we discuss the k- This section deals with the Planar Conflict-Free kConflict-Free Dominating Set problem for planar Coloring problem which consists of deciding conflictfree k-colorability for fixed k on planar graphs. Due to graphs. the 4-color theorem, we immediately know that every Theorem 3.7. Unless P = NP, for any k ≥ 3, planar graph is conflict-free 4-colorable. This naturally there is no polynomial-time approximation algorithm for leads to the question of whether there are planar graphs k (G) with constant approximation factor. γCF requiring 4 colors or whether fewer colors might already suffice for a conflict-free coloring, which we address in Proof. We use a reduction from proper k-Coloring the following two sections. for the proof. Assume towards a contradiction that there was a polynomial-time approximation algorithm 4.1 Complexity. For k ∈ {1, 2} colors, we show that k for γCF (G) with approximation factor c ≥ 1. Let the problem of deciding conflict-free k-colorability on G be a graph on n vertices for which we want to planar graphs is NP-complete. This implies that 2 colors decide k-colorability. For each vertex v of G, add are not sufficient. M := (n + 1)(c + 1) vertices uv to G and connect them to v. For each edge vw of G, add M vertices uvw to Theorem 4.1. Deciding planar conflict-free 1-colorG and connect them to both v and w. Let G0 be the ability is NP-complete. resulting graph. Clearly, the size of G0 is polynomial in the size of G. Additionally, G0 is planar if G is, Proof. Membership in NP is obvious. The proof of and G0 has a conflict-free k-coloring of size n iff G is NP-hardness is done by reduction from the problem properly k-colorable: Any proper k-coloring of G is a Positive Planar 1-in-3-SAT. From a positive planar conflict-free k-coloring of G0 , as every vertex added to 3-CNF formula φ with clauses C = {c1 , . . . , cl } and G is either adjacent to two distinctly colored vertices of variables X = {x1 , . . . , xn } we construct in polynomial  time a graph G1 (φ) such that φ is 1-in-3-satisfiable iff G1 (φ) admits a conflict-free 1-coloring. First, find and fix a planar embedding d of G(φ). G1 (φ) is constructed from G(φ) and d as follows: For every variable xi , there is a cycle Zi = (zi,1 , . . . , zi,12 ) of length 12. The vertices zi,1 , zi,4 , zi,7 , zi,10 are referred to as true vertices of Zi , all other vertices are false vertices. Moreover, vertices zi,1 , zi,2 , zi,3 are called upper vertices of Zi , and vertices zi,7 , zi,8 , zi,9 are called lower vertices of Zi . Additionally, vertices zi,4 , zi,5 , zi,6 are called right vertices of Zi and zi,10 , zi,11 , zi,12 are called left vertices of Zi . For each clause cj , there is a cycle (cj,1 , . . . , cj,4 ) of length 4 in G1 (φ). To each variable xi for i ∈ {2, . . . , n − 1}, we associate two disjoint se|Ui | |Li | quences Ui = uj j=1 and Li = lj j=1 of clauses xi appears in. The sequences are constructed using a clockwise (with respect to d) enumeration of the edges of xi in G(φ), starting with xi−1 xi . Let (xi−1 xi , xi cj1 , . . . , xi cjλ , xi xi+1 , xi cjλ+1 , . . . , xi cjµ ) be the sequence of edges encountered in this manner and set Ui := (cj1 , . . . , cjλ ) and Li := (cjλ+1 , . . . , cjµ ). For i ∈ {1, n}, Li is empty and Ui contains all clauses xi appears in, again in clockwise order. In G1 (φ), the clauses and variables are connected such that for each clause cj that xi occurs in, either the upper or the lower true vertex of xi is adjacent to cj,1 . More precisely, for variable xi , if cj = um , we add the edge cj,1 zi,1 to connect the upper true vertex to the clause. If cj = lm , we add cj,1 zi,7 to connect the lower true vertex to the clause. Because the order of edges around each vertex is preserved by the construction, the graph G1 (φ) obtained in this way can be embedded in the plane by a suitable adaptation of d. See Figure 2 for an example of the construction. Now we prove that G1 (φ) is conflict-free 1-colorable iff φ is 1-in-3-satisfiable. Regarding necessity, a valid truth assignment b : X → B yields a valid conflictfree coloring by coloring the vertex cj,3 of every clause, coloring all true vertices of variables with b(xi ) = 1 and coloring the false vertices zi,3 , zi,6 , zi,9 , zi,12 of all other variables. Thus, in every cycle Zi , every third vertex is colored, providing a conflict-free neighbor to every vertex of Zi . Moreover, in each clause, by virtue of cj,3 being colored, vertices cj,2 , cj,3 , cj,4 have a conflict-free neighbor. Because b is a valid truth assignment, for each clause, the vertex cj,1 is adjacent to exactly one colored true vertex. Therefore, the coloring constructed in this way is conflict-free. Regarding sufficiency, we first argue that the vertices cj,1 , cj,2 , cj,4 can never be colored: If cj,1 receives a color, then cj,3 still enforces that one of cj,2 , cj,3 , cj,4 is colored, leading to a contradiction in either case. If  c1 c1,3  c2  c1,1  z1,1  z1,3 x1  c3  x2  x3  x4  x5  c4  Figure 2: A formula graph G(φ) (dashed) and the corresponding G1 (φ) (solid). cj,2 receives a color, then cj,4 cannot have a conflict-free neighbor and vice versa. Therefore, no clause vertex can be the conflict-free neighbor of any vertex of Zi . Thus, the conflict-free neighbor of every vertex of Zi must itself be a vertex of Zi . Moreover, the conflictfree neighbor of every vertex cj,1 must be a true vertex. Thus, there are exactly three ways to color each cycle Zi : either by coloring the true vertices (one possibility), or by coloring every other false vertex (two possibilities). A valid conflict-free 1-coloring of G1 (φ) satisfies the property that for each clause cj , exactly one of the true vertices adjacent to cj,1 is colored. Hence, a valid conflict-free 1-coloring of G1 (φ) induces a valid truth assignment b by setting b(xi ) = 1 iff all true vertices of xi are colored.  Theorem 4.2. It is NP-complete to decide whether a planar graph admits a conflict-free 2-coloring. The proof requires the gadget G≤1 depicted in Figure 3. G≤1 consists of three vertices v, w1 , w2 forming a triangle. Each edge ux of the triangle has two corresponding 1 2 vertices yux , yux , each connected to u and x. Furthermore, both w1 and w2 are attached to two copies of a cycle on 4 vertices, where every vertex of both cycles is adjacent to the corresponding wi . G≤1 can be used to enforce that the vertices connected to its central vertex v are colored using at most one distinct color: Lemma 4.3. Let G = (V, E) be any graph, let v ∈ V and let G0 be the graph resulting from adding a copy of G≤1 to G by identifying v in G with v in G≤1 . Then (1) G0 is planar if G is, and (2) every conflict-free 2coloring of G0 leaves v uncolored and uses at most one color on NG [v].  Proof. The planarity of G0 follows from the planarity of G by the observation that G≤1 is planar and can be embedded in any face incident to v in a planar embedding of G. Now consider a conflict-free 2-coloring χ of G0 . χ must color both w1 and w2 . Otherwise, χ restricted to each of the two 4-cycles adjacent to wi must be a valid conflict-free 2-coloring. However, as C4 requires at least 2 different colors, wi then sees two occurrences of both colors, and thus cannot have a conflict-free neighbor anymore. Furthermore, χ(w1 ) 6= 1 2 χ(w2 ), as otherwise, yw and yw must both be 1 w2 1 w2 colored with the other color; but then, w1 and w2 again see two occurrences of both colors. By an analogous argument, χ must not color v. Moreover, χ cannot use more than one color on NG [v], because v already sees one occurrence of each color, so adding another occurrence of both colors would yield a conflict at v.  1 yw 1 w2  w1  w2  ≤1  v ...  ...  NG [v]  Figure 3: Gadget G≤1 cj,3 cj,1  cj  ≤1  upper t f  f  right  left  Zi−1  ≤1  ≤1  ≤1  Zi+1  cycle and between the right and left vertices of two adjacent variable cycles Zi and Zi+1 . This is depicted in Figure 4. More precisely, for every cycle Zi , we add one copy of gadget G≤1 , and connect its central vertex v to all vertices of the cycle. In a planar embedding of G2 (φ), these gadgets can be embedded within the face defined by the cycles Zi and thus do not harm planarity. By Lemma 4.3, this enforces that on every cycle, only one color can be used. Moreover, for every edge xi xi+1 in G(φ), we add one copy of G≤1 that we connect to the right vertices of xi and the left vertices of xi+1 . This preserves planarity because these gadgets and the added edges can be embedded in the face crossed by xi xi+1 in some fixed embedding d of G(φ). As one of the right vertices of xi and one of the left vertices of xi+1 must be colored, this enforces that the same single color must be used to color all cycles Zi . Finally, we add a copy of G≤1 to every clause cj and connect it to cj,1 , . . . , cj,4 . Again, this preserves planarity because the gadget may be embedded in the face defined by (cj,1 , . . . , cj,4 ). We now argue that G2 (φ) is conflict-free 2-colorable iff G1 (φ) is conflict-free 1-colorable. A 1-coloring of G1 (φ) induces a 2-coloring of G2 (φ) by copying the color assignment and coloring the internal vertices of the added gadgets as described in the proof of Lemma 4.3. Now, let G2 (φ) be conflict-free 2-colorable and fix a valid 2-coloring χ. In each clause, χ must color cj,3 and neither of cj,1 , cj,2 nor cj,4 can be colored. Therefore, no clause vertex can be the conflict-free neighbor of any vertex of Zi . Thus, the conflict-free neighbor of every vertex of Zi must itself be a vertex of Zi . Moreover, the conflict-free neighbor of every vertex cj,1 must be a true vertex. As there is only one color available to color all cycle vertices of all variables, the restriction of χ to the vertices of G1 (φ) yields a valid 1-coloring except for the fact that some cj,3 might use a different color than the one used for the variables. However, this can be fixed by simply replacing all occurring colors with one single color. Hence, G2 (φ) is conflict-free 2-colorable iff G1 (φ) is conflict-free 1-colorable.   Zi lower  Figure 4: Clause and variable gadget for k = 2 Proof. [Proof of Theorem 4.2] NP-hardness is proven by constructing, in polynomial time, a planar graph G2 (φ) from the graph G1 (φ) used in the hardness proof for k = 1, such that G2 (φ) is conflict-free 2-colorable iff G1 (φ) is conflict-free 1-colorable. The construction is carried out by adding a gadget G≤1 to every variable cycle Zi of G1 (φ), to every clause  4.2 Sufficient Number of Colors. As shown above, it is NP-complete to decide whether a planar graph has a conflict-free k-coloring for k ∈ {1, 2}. On the positive side, we can establish the following result, which follows from the more general results discussed in Section 3.2.  Corollary 4.4. (of Theorem 3.5) Every outerplanar graph is conflict-free 2-colorable and every planar graph is conflict-free 3-colorable. Moreover, such colorings can be computed in polynomial time.  Outerplanar graphs are not the only interesting graph class for which one might suspect two colors to be sufficient. Two other interesting subclasses of planar graphs are series-parallel graphs and pseudo-maximal planar graphs. However, each of these classes contains graphs that do not admit a conflict-free 2-coloring: The graph G3 as defined in Section 3 is an example of a series-parallel graph requiring three colors. Figure 5 depicts a maximal outerplanar graph O9 satisfying χCF (O9 ) = 2. This graph can be used to obtain a pseudomaximal planar graph M with χCF (M ) = 3 by adding two copies of O9 to the neighborhood of every vertex of a triangle, similar to the construction of G3 , and adding gadgets on the inside of the triangle as depicted in Figure 6.  5  Minimizing the Number of Colored Vertices in Planar Graphs  In this section we consider the decision problem kConflict-Free Dominating Set for planar graphs. In Section 5.1, we deal with the cases when k ∈ {1, 2} for planar and outerplanar graphs, and we give a polynomial time algorithm to compute an optimal conflict-free coloring of outerplanar graphs with k ∈ {1, 2} colors. Section 5.2 discusses the problem for k ≥ 3. 5.1 At Most Two Colors. We start by pointing out that, for every conflict-free 1-colorable graph G, 1 γCF (G) = γ(G) holds. Moreover, Corollary 5.1 discusses the complexity of k-Conflict-Free Dominating Set and Theorem 5.2 states positive results for outerplanar graphs. Corollary 5.1. (of Theorems 4.1 and 4.2) k-Conflict-Free Dominating Set is NP-complete for k ∈ {1, 2} for planar graphs. Theorem 5.2. Let k ∈ {1, 2} and let G be an outerplanar graph. We can decide in polynomial time whether χCF (G) ≤ k. Moreover, we can compute a conflict-free k-coloring of G that minimizes the number of colored vertices in O(n4k+1 ) time.  The proof of Theorem 5.2 relies on a polynomialtime algorithm that computes a k-coloring of the input outerplanar graph G if and only if such a coloring exists (which thus solves the decision problem). In the following, we describe our algorithm. Let G = (V, E) be an outerplanar graph. Let χ : V 0 ⊆ V (G) → {0, 1, . . . , k} be a partial coloring of the vertices of G and let v ∈ V . Observe that χ defined like this differs from the definition given earlier in the introduction. We call a pair Cv = [χ(v), Sv ] a configuration of v, where χ(v) ∈ {0, 1, . . . , k} denotes the color of v. If χ(v) = 0, we regard v as uncolored. The set Sv ⊆ N [v] is the set of conflict-free neighbors of v, along with their colors. That is, every w ∈ Sv is a conflict-free neighbor of v under χ. For e = uv ∈ E we call a pair Ce = [Cu , Cv ] a configuration of e. By Cew we denote the configuration of an endpoint w ∈ {u, v} of e. Observe that if χ was conflict-free, then Sv 6= ∅, Figure 6: The pseudomaximal planar graph M , without and Cu and Cv do not conflict with each other. For the the O9 gadgets. latter property we say that Cu and Cv are compatible and we denote this by Cu ↔ Cv . If Cev = Cev0 for a pair e = uv, e0 = vw of incident edges, then we say Furthermore, observe that Theorem 4.4 does not C 0 is compatible with C . The following observation e e hold if every vertex must be colored. In this case, there is straightforward: are outerplanar graphs requiring 3 colors for a conflictfree coloring. One can obtain an example of such a Observation 5.3. Let G be an outerplanar graph. Let graph by adding a chord to a cycle of length 5. C = {C1 , . . . , C|E| } be a set of configurations over the Figure 5: The maximal outerplanar graph O9 .  edges of G using k colors. If for every pair e = uv, e0 = vw of incident edges, Cu ↔ Cv and Cv ↔ Cw holds and Ce0 is compatible with Ce , then a conflict-free kcoloring can be obtained from C. Now let v ∈ V (G). Observe that the number of different configurations Cv = [χ(v), Sv ] is upperbounded by O(nk ), as there cannot be more than  |N [v]| · k! different sets Sv . Thus the following k observation is straightforward.  f2  f1  r  f1∗  Ge  f2∗  e b  Observation 5.4. Let G = (V, E) be an outerplanar Figure 7: Graph construction of faces, windows, and graph and let e = uv ∈ E. The number of different the corresponding dual (sub)graphs. The shaded are configurations Ce = [Cu , Cv ] is upper-bounded by O(n2k ). corresponds to already processed faces of G (the past). The face f1 is the face to be processed next (the We can now describe our algorithm, which is based present). Edge b is the window between f1 and f2 . The on non-serial dynamic programming. For the sake of rest of the graph corresponds to faces to be processed simplicity, let us assume that the weak dual G∗ = in the future. (V ∗ , E ∗ ) of the outerplanar graph G is connected. This means that G∗ is a tree. It is well-know that, in general, the weak dual graph of an outerplanar graph G is a consist of the edges he1 = (u1 , v1 ), . . . , e` = (u` , v` )i forest [28]. We discuss later how to convert this forest where, without loss of generality, w = e1 if w is an edge. Otherwise w = u1 if w is a vertex. Also, let into a tree as long as G is connected. Let us root G∗ at an arbitrary dual vertex r ∈ V ∗ . L(ei ) be the setS of all possible configurations of the Thus, each dual vertex has a unique parent vertex on edge ei . By Cu1 we denote the number of conflictconfiguration Cu1 , i.e., if the path from the vertex to r. For an edge e = vw ∈ E ∗ , free neighbors of u1 given the S where v is the parent of w, we consider the subtree Te Cu1 = (χ(u1 ), Su1 ), then Cu1 = |Su1 |. The algorithm rooted at w. Let Ge be the primal subgraph of G whose populates a family {Pi } of sets containing pairs of compatible configurations and their scores. In the dual graph is Te . We define a window b as the edge or vertex in the algorithm GenerateScore, δ(Cei , Cei−1 ) is the number primal graph G separating two faces f1 , f2 . Observe of newly-colored vertices resulting from combining the that b corresponds to an edge e in the dual graph G∗ . two compatible configurations Cei and Cei−1 .  If f1∗ and f2∗ are two (dual) vertices in the dual graph, then the corresponding faces f1 and f2 only have b in common, see Figure 7. Assume that f2 has been conflict-free k-colored. Then, to color f1 in a conflictfree manner, we would need all the possible configurations of the window b allowed by the conflict-free coloring of the face f2 . The algorithm performs dynamic programming starting by computing all possible configurations of the leaves of G∗ and propagating them towards the root in a compatible manner (conflict-freely). Let f be a face of G and f ∗ be the corresponding dual vertex in G∗ . Let b be the window of f and let e = b∗ be the dual edge of b connecting f ∗ to its parent p = p(f ∗ ). For any configuration Cb , we compute the score S(Cb ), which is the number of colored vertices corresponding to Cb in the conflict-free k-coloring  of the subgraph Ge . We store the pairs Cw , S(Cw ) which are then combined with the other children of p to compute the compatible configurations of p. Given a window w of a face fl , the algorithm GenerateScore computes S(Cw ) for a given configuration Cw . Let fl  Lemma 5.5. For a fixed k ≥ 1, we can compute the scores S(Cb ) for all configurations Cb of all windows b in O(n4k+1 ) time. Proof. We process the dual graph G∗ starting from the leaves. Let b be the window between the two faces f1 and f2 . The window corresponds to an edge between the a dual vertex and its parent in the dual graph. Let f1 = he1 = (u1 , v1 ), . . . , e` = (u` , v` )i such that e1 = b, v` = u1 , and vi = ui+1 for i ∈ {1, . . . , ` − 1}. We compute S(Cb ) by applying Algorithm 2. Inductively, we can compute the score for all configurations of all windows going up in the dual graph in this manner. For each window there are at most O(n2k ) configurations. This implies that for each pair of edges, there are at most O(n4k ) pairs of configurations. As Algorithm 2 considers O(n) pairs of edges overall, we obtain a running time of O(n4k+1 ) for the algorithm.  Proof. [Proof of Theorem 5.2] By applying the approach of Algorithm 2 we can compute the scores of all windows  Algorithm 2 Processing a configuration of a window 1: function GenerateScore(C e1 , f = he1 = (u1 , v1 ), . . . , e` = (u` , v` )i)  2: P1 ← Ce1 , CuS1 3: for i = 2, . . . , ` do 4: Pi ← ∅ 5: for (Cei−1 , h) ∈ Pi−1 do 6: for Cei ∈ L(ei ) do 7: if Cei−1 is compatible with Cei then 8: Pi ← Pi ∪ {(Cei , h + δ(Cei , Cei−1 ))} 9: 10: 11: 12:  S(Ce1 ) ← ∞ for (Ce` , h) ∈ P` do if Ce` is compatible with Ce1 then S(Ce1 ) ← min{S(Ce1 ), h}  of the graph G. At the root node we have a set of configuration for each window that results in the minimum number of colored vertices in the whole graph. Such a set can be obtained by backtracking. Combining this with Observation 5.3, we get a conflict-free coloring with a minimal number of colored vertices for the graph G, if and only if χCF (G) ≤ k.  What remains to be discussed is how we treat the case in which G∗ is not a tree but a forest (assuming G is connected). The dual G∗ becomes disconnected if G has cut edges or cut vertices. In such a case, we use the following construction depicted in Figure 8 to connect the components of G∗ to obtain a tree. (1) For a cut vertex v, let hf1 , . . . , ft i be the t faces containing v. Let hf1∗ , . . . , ft∗ i be the corresponding vertices in G∗ . We make one of fi∗ a parent to all the others by adding an edge between them. Note that this does not create a cycle because G is outerplanar.  5.2 Approximability for Three or More Colors. In Section 4.2 we stated that every planar graph is conflict-free 3-colorable. In this section we deal with conflict-free 3-colorings of planar graphs that, additionally, minimize the number of colored vertices. Theorem 5.6. Let k ≥ 3 and let G be a planar graph. The following holds: (1) Unless P = NP, there is no polynomial-time approximation algorithm providing a constant3 factor approximation of γCF (G) for planar graphs. 3-Conflict-Free Dominating Set is NPcomplete for planar graphs. (2) For k ≥ 4, k-Conflict-Free Dominating Set k is NP-complete. Also, γCF (G) = γ(G), and the problem is fixed-parameter tractable with paramek (G). Furthermore, there is a PTAS for ter γCF k γCF (G). k (3) If G is outerplanar, then γCF (G) = γ(G) and there k is a linear-time algorithm to compute γCF (G).  (2) If we have a cut edge, we consider the cut edge as a face. In this way, for a cut edge, we have a vertex The proof of Theorem 5.6 is based on the following in the dual graph. polynomial-time algorithm, which transforms a dominating set D of a planar graph G into a conflict-free k-coloring of G, coloring only the vertices of D: Let D ... ... be a dominating set of a planar graph G. Every verfi tex v ∈ V (G) \ D is adjacent to at least one vertex in D. Pick any such vertex u ∈ D and contract the edge f1 v ft f1 f2 uv ∈ E(G) towards u. Repeat this until only the verv w tices from D remain. Because G is planar, the graph G0 = (D, E 0 ) obtained in this way is planar, as G0 is a (1) (2) minor of G. By the 4-coloring theorem, we can compute a proper 4-coloring of G0 . Figure 8: Two cases leading to a forest: (1) a cut vertex, (2) a cut edge. Lemma 5.7. The 4-coloring generated by this procedure induces a conflict-free 4-coloring of G.  Proof. Every vertex u ∈ D is a conflict-free neighbor to itself as its color does not appear in NG (u). Let v ∈ V (G) \ D be some uncolored vertex, and let u ∈ D be the vertex that v was contracted towards by the algorithm. In G0 , this contraction made u adjacent to all other vertices in NG (v) ∩ D, which guarantees that the color of u is unique in NG (v) ∩ D. As V (G) \ D remains uncolored, the color of u is thus unique in NG [v].  Proof. [Proof of Theorem 5.6] Proposition (1) follows from Theorem 3.7 of Section 3.3: The reduction used there preserves planarity and proper planar 3-coloring k is NP-complete. For (2), γCF (G) = γ(G) implies NPhardness in planar graphs because planar minimum dominating set is NP-hard. Moreover, the coloring algorithm lets us apply any approximation scheme for planar dominating set to conflict-free k-coloring. We obtain a PTAS for the conflict-free domination number by applying our coloring algorithm to the dominating set produced by the PTAS of Baker and Hill [8]. Additionally, Alber et al. [3] proved that planar dominating set is FPT with parameter γ(G), implying that computing the planar conflict-free domination number for k ≥ 4 is FPT k with parameter γCF (G). For (3), the class of outerplanar graphs is properly 3-colorable in linear time and closed under taking minors. Kikuno et al. [22] present a linear time algorithm for finding a minimum dominating set in a series-parallel graph, which includes outerplanar graphs. The result follows by combining this linear time algorithm with the coloring algorithm mentioned above, but using just three colors instead of four.  6  Conclusion  A spectrum of open questions remain. Many of them are related to general graphs, in particular with our sufficient condition for general graphs. For every k ≥ 2, Gk+1 provides an example that excluding Kk+2 as a minor is not sufficient to guarantee k-colorability. However, for k ≥ 2 we have no example where excluding −3 Kk+3 as a minor does not suffice. Variants of our problems arise from modifying the considered neighborhoods. In our definition of the neighborhood N [v] of a vertex v ∈ V , we allow the vertex itself to serve as the one that is uniquely colored. In some settings (e.g., for guiding a robot to other locations), it is also interesting to require that another vertex must be uniquely colored. This distinction has been dubbed “closed” neighborhood (N [v], including v) and “open” neighborhood (N (v), excluding v) by Gargano and Rescigno [16]. It would be interesting to expand our positive results to the case of open neighborhoods; another proof of NP-completeness seems straightforward. Another distinction arises from requiring that all ver-  tices must be colored. It is clear that one extra color suffices for this purpose; however, it is not always clear that this is also necessary, in particular, for planar graphs. Adapting our argument to this situation does not seem straightforward, especially since there are outerplanar graphs requiring three colors in this setting. In addition, there is a large set of questions related to geometric versions of the problem. What is the worst-case number of colors for straight-line visibility graphs within simple polygons? It is conceivable that Θ(log log n) is the right answer, just like for rectangular visibility, but this is still an open problem, just like complexity and approximation. Other questions arise from considering geometric intersection graphs, such as unit-disk intersection graphs, for which necessary and sufficient conditions, just like upper and lower bounds, would be quite interesting. Acknowledgments We thank Bruno Crepaldi, Pedro de Rezende, Cid de Souza, Stephan Friedrichs, Michael Hemmer and Frank Quedenfeld for helpful discussions. Work on this paper was partially supported by the DFG Research Unit “Controlling Concurrent Change”, funding number FOR 1800, project FE407/17-2, “Conflict Resolution and Optimization”. References  [1] M. A. Abam, M. de Berg, and S.-H. Poon. Faulttolerant conflict-free colorings. In Proc. 20th Canadian Conference on Computational Geometry (CCCG’08), pages 13–16, 2008. [2] D. Ajwani, K. Elbassioni, S. Govindarajan, and S. Ray. Conflict-free coloring for rectangle ranges using O(n.382 ) colors. In SPAA ’07: Proc. 19th ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures, pages 181–187, 2007. [3] J. Alber, M. R. Fellows, and R. Niedermeier. Polynomial-time data reduction for dominating set. Journal of the ACM, 51(3):363–384, 2004. [4] N. Alon and S. Smorodinsky. Conflict-free colorings of shallow discs. In Proc. 22nd Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry, pages 41–43. ACM, 2006. [5] K. Appel and W. Haken. Every planar map is four colorable. Part I. Discharging. Illinois J. Math., 21:429– 490, 1977. [6] K. Appel and W. Haken. Every planar map is four colorable. Part II. Reducibility. Illinois J. Math., 21:491–567, 1977. [7] P. Ashok, A. Dudeja, and S. Kolay. Exact and FPT algorithms for max-conflict free coloring in hypergraphs. In Proc. 26th International Symposium on Algorithms and Computation, pages 271–282, 2015.  [8] B. S. Baker. and M. Hill. Approximation algorithms for NP-complete problems on planar graphs. Journal of the ACM, 41(1):153–180, 1994. [9] A. Bar-Noy, P. Cheilaris, S. Olonetsky, and S. Smorodinsky. Online conflict-free colouring for hypergraphs. Combinatorics, Probability and Computing, 19(04):493–516, 2010. [10] P. Cheilaris, L. Gargano, A. A. Rescigno, and S. Smorodinsky. Strong conflict-free coloring for intervals. Algorithmica, 70(4):732–749, 2014. [11] P. Cheilaris, S. Smorodinsky, and M. Sulovsky. The potential to improve the choice: list conflict-free coloring for geometric hypergraphs. In Proc. 27th Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry, pages 424– 432. ACM, 2011. [12] P. Cheilaris and G. Tóth. Graph unique-maximum and conflict-free colorings. Journal of Discrete Algorithms, 9(3):241–251, 2011. [13] K. Chen, A. Fiat, H. Kaplan, M. Levy, J. Matousek, E. Mossel, J. Pach, M. Sharir, S. Smorodinsky, U. Wagner, and E. Welzl. Online conflict-free coloring for intervals. SIAM J. Computing, 36:1342–1359, 2007. [14] K. Elbassioni and N. H. Mustafa. Conflict-free colorings of rectangles ranges. In Annual Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, pages 254– 263. Springer, 2006. [15] G. Even, Z. Lotker, D. Ron, and S. Smorodinsky. Conflict-free colorings of simple geometric regions with applications to frequency assignment in cellular networks. SIAM Journal on Computing, 33(1):94–136, 2003. [16] L. Gargano and A. A. Rescigno. Complexity of conflict-free colorings of graphs. Theoretical Computer Science, 566:39–49, 2015. [17] R. Glebov, T. Szabó, and G. Tardos. Conflict-free coloring of graphs. Combinatorics, Probability and Computing, 23:434–448, 2014.  [18] H. Hadwiger. Über eine Klassifikation der Streckenkomplexe. Vierteljschr. Naturforsch. Ges. Zürich, 88:133–143, 1943. [19] S. Har-Peled and S. Smorodinsky. Conflict-free coloring of points and simple regions in the plane. Discrete & Computational Geometry, 34(1):47–70, 2005. [20] F. Hoffmann, K. Kriegel, S. Suri, K. Verbeek, and M. Willert. Tight bounds for conflict-free chromatic guarding of orthogonal art galleries. In 31st International Symposium on Computational Geometry, volume 34 of LIPIcs, pages 421–435, 2015. [21] E. Horev, R. Krakovski, and S. Smorodinsky. Conflictfree coloring made stronger. In Proc. 12th Scandinavian Symposium and Workshop on Algorithm Theory, volume 6139, pages 105–117, 2010. [22] T. Kikuno, N. Yoshida, and Y. Kakuda. A linear algorithm for the domination number of a seriesparallel graph. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 1983. [23] N. Lev-Tov and D. Peleg. Conflict-free coloring of unit disks. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 157(7):1521– 1532, 2009. [24] W. Mulzer and G. Rote. Minimum-weight triangulation is NP-hard. Journal of the ACM, 55(2):11, 2008. [25] J. Pach and G. Tárdos. Conflict-free colourings of graphs and hypergraphs. Combinatorics, Probability and Computing, 18(05):819–834, Sept. 2009. [26] N. Robertson, D. Sanders, P. Seymour, and R. Thomas. The four-colour theorem. J. Combinatorial Theory Series B, 70:2–44, 1997. [27] S. Smorodinsky. Combinatorial Problems in Computational Geometry. PhD thesis, School of Computer Science, Tel-Aviv University, 2003. [28] M. M. Sysło. Characterizations of outerplanar graphs. Discrete Mathematics, 26:47–53, 1979. [29] R. Wilson. Four colours suffice: How the map problem was solved. Princeton University Press, 2013.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
