Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_4330

Abstract:
arXiv:1701.03856v1 [cs.DM] 14 Jan 2017  The flip Markov chain for connected regular graphs  ∗†  Colin Cooper‡  Martin Dyer‡  Department of Computer Science King’s College London London WC2R 2LS, U.K.  School of Computing University of Leeds Leeds LS2 9JT, U.K.  colin.cooper@kcl.ac.uk  m.e.dyer@leeds.ac.uk  Catherine Greenhill§  Andrew Handley¶  School of Mathematics and Statistics UNSW Australia Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia  School of Computing University of Leeds Leeds LS2 9JT, U.K.  c.greenhill@unsw.edu.au  jobriath@gmail.com  14 January 2017  Abstract Mahlmann and Schindelhauer (2005) defined a Markov chain which they called kFlipper, and showed that it is irreducible on the set of all connected regular graphs of a given degree (at least 3). We study the 1-Flipper chain, which we call the flip chain, and prove that the flip chain converges rapidly to the uniform distribution over connected 2r-regular graphs with n vertices, where n ≥ 8 and r = r(n) ≥ 2. Formally, we prove that the distribution of the flip chain will be within ε of uniform in total variation distance after poly(n, r, log(ε−1 )) steps. This polynomial upper bound on the mixing time is given explicitly, and improves markedly on a previous bound given by Feder et al. (2006). We achieve this improvement by using a direct two-stage canonical path construction, which we define in a general setting. This work has applications to decentralised networks based on random regular connected graphs of even degree, as a self-stablising protocol in which nodes spontaneously perform random flips in order to repair the network. ∗  An earlier version of this paper appeared as an extended abstract in PODC 2009 [6]. This research was partly performed while the first three authors were visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing. ‡ Supported by EPSRC Research Grant EP/M004953/1. § Supported by the Australian Research Council Discovery Project DP140101519. ¶ Supported by EPSRC Research Grant EP/D00232X/1. †  1  1  Introduction  Markov chains which walk on the set of random regular graphs have been well studied. The switch chain is a very natural Markov chain for sampling random regular graphs. A transition of the switch chain is called a switch, in which two edges are deleted and replaced with two other edges, without changing the degree of any vertex. The switch chain was studied by Kannan et al. [14] for bipartite graphs, and in [4] for regular graphs. Although a switch changes only a constant number of edges per transition, it is not a local operation since these edges may be anywhere in the graph. Random regular graphs have several properties which make them good candidates for communications networks: with high probability, a random ∆-regular graph has logarithmic diameter and high connectivity, if ∆ ≥ 3. (See, for example, [20].) Bourassa and Holt [3] proposed a protocol for a decentralised communications network based on random regular graphs of even degree. Since then, Markov chains which sample regular graphs using local operations have been applied to give self-stabilising or healing protocols for decentralised communications networks which have a regular topology. To help the network to recover from degradation in performance due to arrivals and departures, clients in a decentralised network can spontaneously perform local transformations to re-randomize the network, thereby recovering desirable properties. Mahlmann and Schindelhauer [16] observed that the switch operation is unsuitable for this purpose, since a badly-chosen switch may disconnect a connected network. Furthermore, since the switch move is non-local there are implementation issues involved in choosing two random edges in a decentralised network. (If the network is an expander then this problem can be solved by performing two short random walks in the network and taking the final edge of each for the next operation [3].) To overcome these problems, Mahlmann and Schindelhauer proposed an alternative operation which they called a k-Flipper. When k = 1, the 1-Flipper (which we call the flip) is simply a restricted switch operation, in which the two edges to be switched must be at distance one apart in the graph. Figure 1 illustrates a switch and a flip. a  d  b  c  ⇒S  a  d  a  d  b  c  b  c  ⇒F  a  d  b  c  Figure 1: Left: a switch operation, denoted by ⇒S . Right: a flip, denoted by ⇒F . By design, the flip operation preserves the degree of all vertices and preserves connectivity. Indeed, it is the smallest such randomising operation: no edge exchange on fewer than four vertices preserves the degree distribution, and the only shallower tree than the 3-path is the 3-star, which has no degree-preserving edge exchange. In order to use flips as a self-stabilising protocol, each peer waits for a random time period using a Poisson clock, after which it instigates a new flip. This involves communication only with peers at distance at most two away in the network. 2  We will show that flips have asymptotic behaviour comparable to switches, in that both operations randomise a network in polynomial time. Simulations also suggest that they operate equally fast, up to a constant factor (see [11, Section 2.3.6]). A discussion of a distributed implementation of the flip operation is given in [6]. Our approach will be to relate the mixing time of the flip chain MF to an intermediate chain MSC , which is the switch chain restricted to connected graphs. In turn, the mixing time of the connected switch chain MSC will be related to the mixing time of the (standard) switch chain MS , using the analysis from [4]. Each of these two steps will be performed using a technique which we call “two-stage direct canonical path construction”, described in Section 2. Specifically, we prove the following result. This is a corrected version of the bound given in [6], which failed on certain rare graphs. Theorem 1.1. For each n ≥ 8 let r = r(n) ≥ 2 be a positive integer such that n ≥ 2r + 1. The mixing time of the flip Markov chain MF on the set of 2r-regular graphs with n vertices is at most  480 (2r)35 n15 2rn log(2rn) + log(ε−1 ) , of which the two-stage direct construction is responsible for a factor of 480 (2r)12n7 .  Section 3 relates the flip chain and the connected switch chain, while Section 4 relates the connected switch chain and the switch chain. The proof of Theorem 1.1 can be found at the end of Section 4. The rest of this section contains some background material, some helpful graph theory results, precise definitions of the flip and switch Markov chains, and some definitions regarding canonical paths. We remark that a “one-stage direct analysis” of the flip chain seems difficult. Furthermore, the multicommodity flow defined for the switch chain in [4] does not apply directly to the connected switch chain, since the flow may pass through disconnected graphs, even when both end-states are connected. It may be possible to circumvent this problem by using an alternative multicommodity flow argument, but we do not explore that option here.  1.1  Notation, terminology and history  We will use the notation (ab, cd ⇒ ac, bd) to denote the switch operation as illustrated in Figure 1. The switch chain MS applies a random switch at each step, and the flip chain MF applies a random flip at each step. (We define both chains formally in Section 1.4.) The state space ΩS for the switch chain is the set of all ∆-regular graphs on the vertex set [n] = {1, 2, . . . , n}, while the state space ΩF for the flip chain is the set of all connected graphs in ΩS . The switch chain is known to be ergodic, and has uniform stationary distribution on ΩS . Mahlmann and Schindelhauer [16] showed that the flip chain is ergodic on ΩF . They also proved that the transitions of the flip chain are symmetric, so that the stationary distribution of the flip chain is uniform on ΩF . (We use a slightly different transition procedure, described in Section 1.4, which is also symmetric.) The mixing time of a Markov chain is a measure of how many steps are required before the Markov chain has a distribution which is close to stationary. Kannan et al. [14] considered 3  the mixing time of the switch Markov chain on “near regular” bipartite graphs. Cooper et al. [4] gave a polynomial bound on the mixing time τCDG (ε) of the switch chain for all regular simple graphs. The result of [4] allows the degree ∆ = ∆(n) to grow arbitrarily with n: it is not restricted to regular graphs of constant degree. In Section 3 we extend the result of [4] from switches to flips, using a method which we call two-stage direct canonical path construction. We restrict our attention to even degree, since working with an odd degree would force the network size to take only even values. So for the rest of the paper we assume that ∆ = 2r for some r ≥ 2, unless otherwise stated. It happens that even-degree graphs have some other desirable properties, as will we see in Section 1.2, which will simplify parts of our argument. However, we see no reason why the flip chain would fail to be rapidly mixing for odd degrees. Mahlmann and Schindelhauer [16] do not provide a bound for the mixing time of MF , though they do show [16, Lemma 9] that a similar chain with the flip edges at a distance of Θ(∆2 n2 log ε−1 ) apart will give an ε-approximate expander in time O(∆n). However, these moves are highly non-local and therefore are unsuitable for the application to self-stabilisation of decentralised networks. An upper bound for the mixing time of MF was given by Feder et al. [9] using a comparison argument with the switch Markov chain, MS . Applying a comparison argument to relate these chains is a difficult task, since a switch may disconnect a connected graph and a flip cannot. Feder et al. [9] solve this difficulty by embedding MS into a restricted switch chain which only walks on connected graphs. They prove that this can be done in such a way that a path in MS is only polynomially lengthened. Their result relaxes the bound in [4] by O(∆41 n45 ). By employing a two-stage direct construction, we give a much tighter result, relaxing the bound on τCDG (ε) by a factor of O(r 12 n7 ) in the case of 2r-regular graphs with √ r ≥ 2. 2 2 Recently, Allen-Zhu et al. [1] proved that after at most O(n d log n) steps of the flip chain, the current graph will be a good expander. This is not directly comparable with the results here, since it does not address the distribution of the output graph. It appears more closely related to the result of Mahlmann and Schindelhauer [16, Lemma 9].  1.2  Graph-theoretical preliminaries  For further details see, for example, Diestel [8]. Unless otherwise stated, G denotes a simple graph G = (V, E) with V = {1, 2, . . . , n}. The set of neighbours in G of a vertex v is denoted by NG (v). A vertex set S ⊆ V has edge boundary ∂E S = {uv | u ∈ S, v ∈ / S}, which contains the edges crossing from inside to outside of S. A graph G is 2-edge-connected if it is connected and every edge of G lies in a cycle. More generally, an edge-cut in G is a set F ⊆ E of edges of G such that the graph G − F (which is G with the edges in F deleted) is disconnected. If |F | = k then F is a k-edge-cut. If vertices v, w belong to distinct components of G − F then we say that F separates v and w in G. A cut vertex in a graph G is a vertex v such that deleting v disconnects the graph. If p is a path from v to w then we say that p is a (v, w)-path. Further, if p = v · · · a · · · b · · · w then we write p[a : b] to denote the (inclusive) subpath of p with endvertices a and b. We make use of the following structural properties of 2r-regular graphs with r ≥ 2. 4  Lemma 1.2. Let r ≥ 2 be an integer and let G = (V, E) be a 2r-regular graph on n ≥ max{8, 2r + 1} vertices. Then G satisfies the following properties: (i) For any S ⊆ V , the edge boundary ∂E S of S is even. (ii) Every edge of G lies in a cycle; that is, every connected component of G is 2-edgeconnected. (iii) G has fewer than n/(2r) connected components. (iv) Let u, v be distinct vertices in the same connected component of G. The number of 2-edge-cuts in G which separate u and v is at most n2 /(15r 2 ). Proof. For (i), we argue by contradiction. Assume that there is an odd number k = 2k ′ + 1 of edges incident upon some set S. Let G[S] be the subgraph induced by S. Let |S| = s and suppose that G[S] has m edges. Denote the sum of degrees of the vertices in S by dG (S). Clearly dG (S) = 2rs. Exactly k edges incident with S have precisely one endvertex in S, so 2m = dG[S] (S) = 2rs − k = 2rs − 2k ′ − 1 = 2(rs − k ′ ) − 1, but no integer m satisfies this equation. Hence our assumption is false, proving (i). For (ii), it suffices to observe that every component of G is Eulerian, as all vertices have even degree. Next, (iii) follows since the smallest 2r-regular graph is K2r+1 , and G can have at most n/(2r + 1) < n/(2r) components this small. The proof of (iv) is deferred to the Appendix, as it is somewhat lengthy.  1.3  Canonical paths  We now introduce some Markov chain terminology and describe the canonical path method. For further details, see for example Jerrum [12] or Sinclair [17]. Let M be a Markov chain with finite state space Ω and transition matrix P . We suppose that M is ergodic and has unique stationary distribution π. The graph underlying the Markov chain M is given by G = (Ω, E(M)) where the edge set of G corresponds to (non-loop) transitions of M; specifically, E(M) = {xy | x, y ∈ Ω, x 6= y, P (x, y) > 0} We emphasise that G has no loops. The mixing time τ (ε) of a Markov chain is given by τ (ε) = max min {T ≥ 0 | dTV (Pxt , π) ≤ ε for all t ≥ T }, x∈X  where Pxt is the distribution of the random state Xt of the Markov chain after t steps with initial state x, and dTV is the total variation distance between two probability distributions. Let the eigenvalues of P be 1 = λ0 > λ1 ≥ λ2 · · · ≥ λN −1 ≥ −1. 5  Then the mixing time satisfies τ (ε) ≤ (1 − λ∗ )−1 ln(1/π ∗) + ln(ε−1 )    (1.1)  where λ∗ = max{λ1 , |λN −1 |} and π ∗ = minx∈Ω π(x) is the smallest stationary probability. (See [17, Proposition 1].) The canonical path method, introduced by Jerrum and Sinclair [13], gives a method for bounding λ1 . Given any two states x, y ∈ Ω, a “canonical” directed path γxy is defined from x to y in the graph G underlying the Markov chain, so that each step in the path corresponds to a transition of the chain. The congestion ρ̄(Γ) of the set Γ = {γxy | x, y ∈ Ω} of canonical paths is given by X π(x)π(y)|γxy | ρ̄(Γ) = max Q(e)−1 e∈E(M)  x,y∈Ω e∈γxy  where Q(e) = π(u) P (u, v) when e = uv ∈ E(M). If the congestion along each transition is low then the chain should mix rapidly. This can be made precise as follows: if λ∗ = λ1 then (1 − λ1 )−1 ≤ ρ̄(Γ).  (1.2)  (See [17, Theorem 5] or [12] for more details.) In many applications the chain M is made lazy by replacing its transition matrix P by (I + P )/2: this ensures that the chain has no negative eigenvalues and hence that λ∗ = λ1 . However, in many cases it is easy to see that (1 + λN −1 )−1 is smaller than the best-known upper bound on (1 −λ1 )−1 , such as that provided by the canonical path method (1.2). In this situation, combining (1.1) and (1.2) gives an upper bound on the mixing time without the need to make the chain lazy. The multicommodity flow method is a generalisation of the canonical path method. Rather than send π(x)π(y) units down a single “canonical” path from x to y, a set Pxy of paths is defined, and the flow from x to y is divided among them. The congestion can be defined similarly, and low congestion leads to rapid mixing: see Sinclair [17]. Cooper et al. [4] gave a multicommodity flow argument to bound the mixing time of the switch chain MS . For every pair of distinct states x, y, a set of paths from x to y was defined, one for each vector (φv )v∈[n] , where φv is a “pairing” of the edges of the symmetric difference of x and y incident with the vertex v. Then the flow between x and y was shared equally among all these paths. In our analysis below, we assume that a pairing has been fixed for each distinct pair of states x, y, leading to one canonical path γxy between them. We will work with the set of these canonical paths for the switch chain, ΓS = {γxy }. Since our congestion bounds will be independent on the choice of pairing, the same bound would hold if the original multicommodity flow from [4] was used.  1.4  The switch and flip Markov chains  Given ∆ ≥ 3 and n ≥ ∆ + 1, the switch chain MS has state space ΩS given by the set of all d-regular graphs on n vertices. The flip chain MF has state space ΩF given by the set of all connected ∆-regular graphs on n vertices. We restrict our attention to regular graphs of even degree, setting ∆ = 2r for some integer r ≥ 2. 6  Let PS (respectively, PF ) denote the transition matrix of the switch (respectively, flip) Markov chain. The stationary distribution of the switch (respectively, flip) chain is denoted by πS (respectively, πF ). The graph underlying the Markov chain will be denoted by GS = (ΩS , E(MS)) and GF = (ΩF , E(MF )), respectively. The transition procedure for the switch Markov chains is given in Figure 2. From G ∈ ΩS do choose non-adjacent distinct edges ab, cd, u.a.r., choose a perfect matching M of {a, b, c, d} u.a.r., if M ∩ E = ∅ then delete the edges ab, cd and add the edges of M, otherwise do nothing end if; end; Figure 2: The switch Markov chain MS . The switch chain is irreducible [15, 18]. Furthermore, as PS (x, x) ≥ 1/3 for all x ∈ ΩS , the switch chain is aperiodic, and hence ergodic. Using an approach of Diaconis and SaloffCoste [7, p. 702], this also implies that the smallest eigenvalue λN −1 of MS satisfies (1 + λN −1 )−1 ≤  1 max P (x, x)−1 2 x∈Ω S  ≤ 3/2.  Since the upper bound on (1 − λ1 )−1 proved in [4] is (much) larger than constant, this proves that we can apply the canonical path method to the switch chain without making the switch chain lazy. If x, y are distinct elements of ΩS which differ by a switch then PS (x, y) = 1/(3an,2r ) where (see [4])     2r rn , (1.3) −n an,2r = 2 2  Hence the transition matrix PS is symmetric and the stationary distribution of the switch chain is uniform over ΩS . Figure 3 gives the transition procedure of the flip chain. Here we start from a randomly chosen vertex a and perform a random walk from a of length 3, allowing backtracking. There are (2r)3 n choices for the resulting walk (a, b, c, d), and we choose one of these uniformly at random. Mahlmann and Schindelhauer proved that the flip chain is irreducible on ΩF [16]. For all states x ∈ ΩF we have P (x, x) ≥ 1/(2r), since in particular the proposed transition is rejected when c = a. Therefore the flip chain is aperiodic, and hence ergodic. Again, by [7, p. 702], this implies that the smallest eigenvalue λN −1 of MF satisfies (1 + λN −1 )−1 ≤ r. This in turn allows us to apply the canonical path method without making the chain lazy, since the upper bound we obtain on (1 − λ1 )−1 will be (much) bigger than r. 7  From G ∈ ΩF do choose a vertex a ∈ [n] u.a.r., choose a walk (a, b, c, d) of length 3 from a, u.a.r., if |{a, b, c, d}| = 4 and E ∩ {ac, bd} = ∅ then delete the edges ab, cd and add the edges ac, bd, otherwise do nothing end if; end; Figure 3: The flip Markov chain MF . Now suppose that x, y are distinct elements of ΩF which differ by a flip, and that this flip replaces edges ab, cd with ac, bd. Then If exactly one of the edges bc, ad is present in x, say bc, then the transition from x to y takes place if and only if the chosen 3-walk is (a, b, c, d) or (d, c, b, a). Hence in this case PF (x, y) =  2 = PF (y, x). (2r)3n  If both of the edges bc and ad are present then either of them could take the role of the “hub edge” of the flip, and 4 = PF (y, x). PF (x, y) = (2r)3n Hence PF is a symmetric matrix and the stationary distribution of the flip chain is uniform, as claimed. (Mahlmann and Schindelhauer use a slightly different transition procedure, and must argue about the number of triangles which contain a given edge in order to show that their transitions are symmetric: see [16, Lemma 3].)  2  Two-stage direct canonical path construction  Suppose M is an ergodic Markov chain whose mixing time we would like to study, and M′ is a chain for which a canonical path set Γ′ has been defined, with congestion bounded by ρ̄(Γ′ ). Let P , π and Ω (respectively, their primed counterparts) be the transition matrix, stationary distribution and state space of M (respectively, M′ ). Guruswami [10] proved that under mild conditions on M′ , a bound on the mixing time of M′ implies the existence of an appropriate set Γ′ with bounded congestion. We wish to “simulate” transition in M′ using sequences of transitions in M, and showing that not too many transitions in M can be involved in any one such simulation. Together with ρ̄(Γ′ ) this results on a bound of the congestion of Γ, and hence on the mixing time of M. Here we assume that Ω ⊆ Ω′ . If Ω is a strict subset of Ω′ then canonical paths in Γ′ that begin and end in Ω may travel through states in Ω′ \ Ω. (This will be the case in Section 4.) To deal with this, we must 8  define a surjection h : Ω′ −→ Ω such that h(u) = u for any u ∈ Ω, and such that the preimage of any y ∈ Ω is not too large. This means that each state in Ω “stands in” for only a few states in Ω′ . If Ω = Ω′ then h is the identity map, by definition. ′ Suppose that γwz ∈ Γ′ is a canonical path from w to z in G ′ . Write ′ γwz = (Z0 , Z1 , . . . , Zj , Zj+1 , . . . , Zℓ ),  with Z0 = w, Zℓ = z and (Zj , Zj+1) ∈ E(M′ ) for all j ∈ [ℓ − 1]. We now define the two-stage direct canonical path γw,z with respect to the fixed surjection h : Ω′ → Ω. ′ For each (Zj , Zj+1) ∈ γwz , construct a path σZj Zj+1 = (X0 , X1 , . . . , Xi , Xi+1 , . . . , Xκ ), with X0 = h(Zj ) and Xκ = h(Zj+1), such that Xi ∈ Ω for i = 0, . . . , κ and (Xi , Xi+1 ) ∈ E(M) for i = 0, . . . , κ − 1. We call σZj Zj+1 a (M, M′)-simulation path (or just a simulation path, if no confusion can arise), since this path simulates a single transition in M′ using edges of M. These simulation paths are concatenated together to form a canonical path γwz from w to z in G, as follows: γwz = (σZ0 Z1 , σZ1 Z2 , . . . , σZℓ−1 Zℓ ). The following algorithmic interpretation of γwz may be useful as an illustration. Begin by ′ querying γwz for the first transition (Z0 , Z1 ) to simulate. Beginning from h(Z0 ), perform ′ transitions in the corresponding simulation path until state h(Z1 ) is reached. Now query γwz for the next transition (Z1 , Z2 ) and simulate that; and so on, until you have simulated all of ′ γwz , completing the simulation path γwz . Denote the set of all (M, M′)-simulation paths as Σ = {σxy | (x, y) ∈ E(M′ )} . For these simulation paths to give rise to canonical paths for M with low congestion, no transition in M can feature in too many simulation paths. For each t ∈ E(M), let Σ(t) = {σ ∈ Σ | t ∈ σ} be the number of simulation paths containing the transition t. The measures of quality of Σ are the maximum number of simulation paths using a given transition, B(Σ) = max |Σ(t)|, t∈E(M)  and the length of a maximal simulation path, ℓ(Σ) = max |σ|. σ∈Σ  Note that the simulation paths all depend on the fixed surjection h, and so the same is true of the bounds B(Σ) and ℓ(Σ). In particular, the quality of the surjection h is measured by maxy∈Ω |{z ∈ Ω′ | h(z) = y} and this quantity will be needed when calculating B(Σ) in particular (as we will see in Section 4). 9  Some chains are ill-suited to simulation. For instance, a transition in M′ with large capacity might necessarily be simulated in M by a simulation path that contained an edge with small capacity. Hence we define two quantities that measure the gap between π and π ′ , and P and P ′. We define the simulation gap D(M, M′) between M and M′ by D(M, M′) =  max  uv∈E(M) zw∈E(M′ )  π ′ (z) P ′ (z, w) . π(u) P (u, v)  We combine these ingredients in the following lemma. The key point is that the congestion across transitions in E(M′ ) (and hence across the simulation paths) is already bounded. If the number of simulation paths making use of any given transition in E(M) is bounded, and the graphs are not too incompatible then the congestion of each two-stage direct canonical path in Γ will also be bounded. Theorem 2.1. Let M and M′ be two ergodic Markov chains on Ω and Ω′ . Fix a surjection h : Ω′ → Ω. Let Γ′ be a set of canonical paths in M′ and let Σ be a set of (M, M′)-simulation paths defined with respect to h. Let D = D(M, M′) be the simulation gap defined above. Then there exists a set Γ of canonical paths in M whose congestion satisfies ρ̄(Γ) ≤ D ℓ(Σ) B(Σ) ρ̄(Γ′ ). Proof. We begin with the definition of congestion of the set of paths Γ for M), and work towards rewriting all quantities in terms of the set of canonical paths Γ′ for M′ , as follows: ρ̄(Γ) = max  uv∈E(M)  X 1 π(x)π(y) |γxy | π(u)P (u, v) x,y∈Ω uv∈γxy  = max  uv∈E(M)  ≤ max  uv∈E(M)  1 π(u)P (u, v) 1 π(u)P (u, v)  X  X  π(x)π(y) |γxy |  (2.1)  X  X  π(x)π(y) |γxy |.  (2.2)  zw∈E(M′ ) x,y∈Ω σzw ∈Σ(uv) σzw ∈γxy  x,y∈Ω ′ σzw ∈Σ(uv) zw∈γxy  zw∈E(M′ )  Line (2.1) splits the two-stage canonical paths into simulation paths. By a slight abuse of notation, we write σzw ∈ γxy to mean that σzw is one of the simulation paths which was concatenated together to make γxy . Here we assume that each edge uv occurs at most once in any given simulation path σ ∈ Σ. Otherwise, the second use of uv in any σ forms a cycle which may be pruned: continue pruning until no edge appears more than once in any simulation path. We also assume that no self-loops appear in any simulation path (these may also be ′ pruned.) Line (2.2) uses the one-to-one correspondence between γxy and γxy for all x, y ∈ Ω. ′ Note that this correspondence is still one-to-one even when Ω ⊂ Ω , since the endpoints are identical (as h acts as the identity map on Ω) and each canonical path is determined by its endpoints. 10  Now we observe that for all uv ∈ E(M) and zw ∈ E(M′ ), by definition of the simulation gap D, 1 1 ≤D ′ . π(u)P (u, v) π (z)P ′ (z, w) Similarly, for all x, y ∈ Ω′ ,  ′ |γxy | ≤ ℓ(Σ) |γxy |.  Therefore, as each summand of (2.2) is nonnegative and Ω ⊆ Ω′ , we obtain X X 1 ′ π ′ (x)π ′ (y) |γxy | ρ̄(Γ) ≤ D ℓ(Σ) max ′ (z)P ′ (z, w) uv∈E(M) π ′ ′ zw∈E(M ) σzw ∈Σ(uv)  ≤ D ℓ(Σ)  max  uv∈E(M)  X  x,y∈Ω ′ zw∈γxy  ρ̄(Γ′ )  zw∈E(M) σzw ∈Σ(uv)  ≤ D ℓ(Σ) B(Σ) ρ̄(Γ′ ), as required. We remark that the surjection h does not play much role in the proof of Theorem 2.1, since it is only needed to construct the simulation paths between two elements of Ω.  3  Analysis of the flip chain  Our aim is to define canonical paths in the flip chain that simulate canonical paths defined in the switch chain. There are two main differences between the switch and flip chains which cause difficulties. The state space of the flip chain is restricted to connected graphs, and no flip can disconnect a connected graph. However, a switch can increase or decrease the number of components in a graph by one. Hence, from a connected graph, the set of available flips may be strictly smaller than the set of available switches. Following [9] we overcome these difficulties in two steps, using an intermediate chain to bridge the gap. Define the connected switch chain MSC to be the projection of the switch chain MS onto state space ΩF . A transition of MSC is a connected switch, which is a switch on a connected graph that preserves connectedness. To be precise, if PSC denotes the transition matrix of MSC and PS denotes the transition matrix of MS , then for all x 6= y ∈ ΩS , ( PS (x, y) if x, y ∈ ΩF , (3.1) PSC (x, y) = 0 otherwise. Self-loops take up the slack, so for all x ∈ ΩF , PSC (x, x) = PS (x, x) +  X  PS (x, y).  y∈ΩS \ΩF  Transitions are symmetric, and so the stationary distribution πSC of MSC is the uniform stationary distribution on ΩF (that is, πSC = πF ). 11  We proceed as follows. In Section 3.1 we show that a connected switch can be simulated by sequences of flips, which we will call a long-flip. This gives a set of (MF , MSC )-simulation paths. Here the surjection h is the identity map, since these chains share the same state space. We apply Theorem 2.1 to this set of simulation paths. Then in Section 4 we apply the theorem again to relate MSC and MS . We use a construction of Feder et al. [9] to define a surjection h : ΩS → ΩF . We then define (MSC , MS )simulation paths with respect to this surjection and apply Theorem 2.1. Theorem 1.1 is proved by combining the results of these two sections. The two-stage direct method has lower cost, in the sense of relaxation of the mixing time, than the comparison method used in [9]. Both approaches have at their heart the construction of paths in MF to simulate transitions in MS , but the two-stage canonical path analysis is more direct and yields significantly lower mixing time bounds than those obtained in [9].  3.1  Simulating a connected switch: the long-flip  We must define a set of (MF , MSC )-simulation paths, as defined Section 2. The two Markov chains have the same state space ΩF , and so we use the identity map as the surjection. Let S = (Z, Z ′ ) be a connected switch which we wish to simulate using flips. Then Z and Z ′ are connected graphs which differ by exactly four edges, two in Z \ Z ′ and two in Z ′ \ Z. We say that the two edges ab, cd ∈ Z \ Z ′ have been switched out by S, and the two edges ac, bd ∈ Z ′ \ Z have been switched in by S. Given an arbitrary labelling of one switch edge as ab and the other as cd, these four permutations of the vertex labels ( ),  (a b)(c d),  (a c)(b d),  (a d)(b c)  (3.2)  preserve the edges switched in and out by (ab, cd ⇒ ac, bd). To simulate the connected switch S = (Z, Z ′) we will define a simulation path called a long-flip, which consists of a sequence of flips σZZ ′ = (X0 , X1 , . . . , Xi−1 , Xi . . . , Xκ ) with X0 = Z and Xκ = Z ′ , such that (Xi−1 , Xi ) ∈ E(MF) for i = 1, . . . , κ. We define these simulation paths in this section, and analyse their congestion in Section 3.2. A long-flip uses a hub path p = (b, p1 , p2 , . . . , pν−1 , c) from b to c. In the simplest case (in which p does not contain a or d and no internal vertex of p is adjacent to either of these vertices) we will simply reverse p using flips, which has the effect of deleting the edges ab, cd and replacing them with ac, bd, as desired. This process is described further in Section 3.1.1 below. The choice of hub path is important, and we now explain how the hub path will be (deterministically) selected. Suppose that (ab, cd ⇒ ac, bd) is the connected switch which takes Z to Z ′ , which we wish to simulate using flips. We say that a path p is a valid hub path for the switch (ab, cd ⇒ ac, bd) in Z if it satisfies the following (a, b, c, d) path conditions: (i) p is a (b, c)-path in Z; (ii) a and d do not lie on p; and 12  (iii) the vertices of p are only adjacent through path edges; that is, there are no edges in Z of the form pi pj with |i − j| = 6 1 for i, j ∈ {0, . . . , |p|}. We refer to condition (iii) as the no-shortcut property. Given a path p which satisfies conditions (i) and (ii), it is easy to find a path with the no-shortcut property, by simply following the shortcuts. A shortest (b, c)-path is a valid (a, b, c, d) path provided it avoids a and d. Given Z and the switch edges ab, cd, we perform the following procedure: • Let p be the lexicographically-least shortest (b, c)-path in Z which avoids a and d, if one exists; • If not, let p be the lexicographically-least shortest (a, d)-path in Z which avoids b and c, if one exists, and apply the vertex relabelling (a b)(c d). (The result of this relabelling is that now p is the lexicographically-least shortest (b, c)-path in Z which avoids a and d.) • If a path p was found, return the path p. Otherwise, return FAIL. If a path p was found by the above procedure then we will say that we are in Case 1. Otherwise we are in Case 2. Suppose that if p is a lexicographically-least shortest path between vertices α and β in a graph Z. We treat p as a directed path from α to β, with α on the “left” and β on the “right”. Suppose that vertices γ, δ lie on p, with γ to the “left” of δ. Then the lexicographically-least shortest (γ, δ)-path in Z is a subpath of p (or else we contradict the choice of p). This important property, satisfied by hub paths, will be called the recognisability property. It will enable us to reconstruct the hub path cheaply, as we will see in Section 3.2. We now define the simulation path for Case 1 and Case 2 separately. Recall that since flips cannot disconnect a connected graph, the simulation paths always remain within ΩF . 3.1.1  Case 1: the long-flip, and triangle-breaking  We must define a simulation path σZZ ′ for the connected switch from Z to Z ′ given by (ab, cd ⇒ ac, bd). The path p selected above (the lexicographically-least shortest (b, c)-path which avoids a and d) is a valid hub path for this switch, and we refer to it as the hub path. If p has length 1 then this switch is a flip, and so we assume that p has length at least two. We simulate the connected switch (ab, cd ⇒ ac, bd) by reversing the path p, as shown in Figure 4. In (A), the switch (ab, cd ⇒ ac, bd) is shown with alternating solid and dashed edges, with solid edges belong to Z and dashed edges belonging to Z ′ . Write the hub path as p = (b, p1 , . . . , pν−1 , c), where b = p0 and c = pν . The reversal of p proceeds in runs, in which successive vertices are moved along the path one at a time into their final position. The run that moves vertex pi into place is called the pi -run, during which pi is referred to as the bubble due to the way it percolates along path p. The first stage of the path reversal is the b-run, which moves b adjacent to d. Next is the p1 -run, and then the p2 -run, until the pν−2 -run, which puts c adjacent to a and completes the reversal of p. Specifically, the pi -run consists of the sequence of flips (a, pi , pi+1 , pi+2 ), (pi+1 , pi , pi+2 , pi+3 ), (pi+2 , pi , pi+3 , pi+4 ), . . . , (pν−1 , pi , c, pi−1 ), 13  (A)  a b  ⇒∗F  p1  p2  d pν−1  c  p1  p2  p3  ⇒F  p1  d c  ⇒∗F  b  d  p2  b  (C)  a  (B)  a  c  pν−1 (D)  a c  d  pν−1 pν−2  p1  b  Figure 4: A hub path reversed by flips.  where p0 = b, pν = c (and in the case of the b-run, p−1 is understood to denote d). After the pi run, c has moved one step closer to a on path p. See Figure 4, where the current bubble is shown as a diamond. The result of the first flip of the b-run is shown in (B), and the situation at the end of the b-run is shown in (C), At this stage, b is in its final position, adjacent to d. Finally in (D) we see the graph after all runs are complete, with the path reversed. (Note that ⇒F denotes a single flip while ⇒∗F denotes a sequence of zero or more flips.) Since the distance from c to a decreases by one after each run, the total number of flips used to reverse the path p is 12 ν(ν + 1). The no-shortcut property of hub paths is required so that no flip in any run is blocked by parallel edges within p. However, the first flip of the b-run is blocked if p1 is adjacent to a. Before we can reverse the path p, we must break this triangle [a, b, p1 ] using the following procedure. Choose the least-labelled vertex x that is adjacent to b but not p1 . The (a, b, c, d) path conditions imply that p2 is adjacent to p1 , but not to b, so the existence of x follows from 2r-regularity. Then the triangle [a, b, p1 ] can be removed by performing a flip on the path (x, b, p1 , p2 ), as shown below. a  a  x  b  p1  p2  ⇒  x  p1  b  p2  Now p1 is still adjacent to a, but it is no longer on the (b, c)-path, and the length of the (b, c)-path has been reduced by 1. However, it is possible that p2 is also adjacent to a, so we may still have a triangle. If so, we must repeat the process, as indicated below, successively shifting b to the right on the (b, c)-path, and reducing its length. To break the triangle [a, b, p2 ] we flip on (p1 , b, p2 , p3 ).  14  a  a  x  p1  b  p2  p3  ⇒  x  p1  p2  b  p3  More generally, if the edges ap1 , . . . , apk are all present but the edge apk+1 is not then the k’th triangle [a, b, pk ] is broken with the flip (pk−1 , b, pk , pk+1 ). After this flip, b is adjacent to pk and pk+1 . We call these triangle-breaking flips. The no-shortcut property of the (b, c)-path guarantees that all the triangle-breaking flips after the first one are valid. The triangle-breaking process must end when bc becomes an edge, at the very latest. This implies that k ≤ ν − 1. Furthermore, since a has degree 2r we also have k ≤ 2r − 1. When the process terminates, the edge apk+1 is absent and bpk+1 is the first edge on the (b, c)-path. Now the long-flip can be performed on this new (b, c) hub path. If k = ν − 1 then pk+1 = c and this long-flip is a single flip. After the path is fully reversed we must undo the triangle removals, by reversing each triangle-breaking flip, in reverse order. That is, if k triangle-breaking flips were performed, then performing these flips in order will reinstate these triangles: (pk−1, pk , b, pk+1), (pk−2 , pk−1 , b, pk ), . . . (p1 , p2 , b, p3 ), (x, p1 , b, p2 ). (When k = 1, only the last flip is performed.) We call these triangle-restoring flips. These flips are not blocked because the only edges whose presence could block them are guaranteed not to exist by the no-shortcut property of p, and by the fact that these edges were removed by the triangle-breaking flips. 3.1.2  Case 2: The detour flip  In Case 2, we know that there are no paths from b to c in Z which avoid both a and d, and that there are no paths from a to d in Z which avoid b and c. It follows that Z must have the structure illustrated in Figure 5. In this figure, each Zij (shown as a grey ellipse) is an a Zab  Zac  c  b  Zbd  Zcd d  Figure 5: The structure of a graph Z in Case 2. 15  induced subgraph of Z, with i, j ∈ Zij . There are no edges from Zij \ {i, j} to Zkℓ \ {k, ℓ} whenever {i, j} 6= {k, ℓ}, by the assumption that Z is in Case 2. Furthermore, Zab and Zcd are both connected, since Z is connected and ab, cd ∈ E(Z). At most one of Zac or Zbd may be empty or disconnected, since Z is connected. A deterministic procedure will now be described for constructing a 3-path (u, d, w, z) in Z which will be used for the first flip in the simulation path. There are two subcases to consider for the choice of w: • First suppose that, after applying the relabelling (a b)(c d) if necessary, Zac is empty or disconnected. Since cd is not a bridge in Z, by Lemma 1.2(ii), there exists a cycle in Zcd which passes through the edge cd. It follows that d has at least one neighbour in Zcd \ c which is connected to c by a path in Zcd \ cd. Let w be the least-labelled such neighbour of d in Zcd \ cd. • Secondly, suppose that both Zac and Zbd are nonempty and connected. (So far, we have not performed any relabelling.) Then at most one of Zab \ ab, Zcd \ cd may be disconnected, or else the graph Z ′ will be disconnected, a contradiction. Applying the relabelling (a c)(b d) if necessary, we can assume that Zcd \ cd is connected. Hence there is a path from c to d in Zcd \ cd, so d has a neighbour in Zcd \ c which is joined to c by a path in Zcd \ cd. Let w be the least-labelled such neighbour of d in Zcd \ c. In both subcases, we have established the existence of a suitable vertex w. Next, observe that since (in both the above subcases) Zbd is nonempty and connected, there is a path from b to d in Zbd of length at least two (as bd 6∈ E(Z)). This implies that d has a neighbour in Zbd which is joined to b by a path in Zbd \ d. Let u be the least-labelled such neighbour of d in Zbd \ b. Finally, since all neighbours of w belong to Zcd and u 6∈ Zcd , it follows that {u, w} ⊆ NZ (d) \ NZ (w). Since Z is regular, this implies that |NZ (w) \ NZ (d)| = |NZ (d) \ NZ (w)| ≥ 2. Hence there is some vertex other than d in NZ (w) \ NZ (d). Let z be the least-labelled such vertex. Then z ∈ Zcd \ {c, d}, since c ∈ NZ (d) and every neighbour of w belongs to Zcd . Now we can define the simulation path σZZ ′ from X0 = Z to Xκ = Z ′ . The first step in the simulation path is the flip on the path (u, d, w, z), giving the graph X1 . We call this the detour flip, as it will give us a way to avoid d. See the first line of Figure 6. After the detour flip, there is a path from b to u in X1 \ {a, d}, by choice of u, and there is a path from c to w in X1 \ {a, d}, by choice of w. It follows that there exists a (b, c)-path in X1 which avoids {a, d}: let p be the lexicographically-least shortest such path. Note that p necessarily contains the edge uw. (See X1 in Figure 6: the path p is indicated by the dotted lines together with the edge from u to w.) We proceed as in Case 1, simulating the switch (ab, cd ⇒ ac, bd) from X1 using a long-flip with hub path p. At the end of the long-flip the path p is reversed and we reach the graph Xκ−1 shown at the bottom left of Figure 6. For the final step of the simulation path, we reverse the detour flip by performing a flip on the path (u, w, d, z). This produces the final graph Xκ = Z ′ shown at the bottom right of Figure 6, completing the description of the simulation path in Case 2. 16  a  a  d  b  u  ⇒F  c  w  a c  b  u  z  X0  ⇒∗F  d  u  z  a  ⇒F  b  Xκ−1  c  X1  d  w  w  c  z  d  w  u Xκ  b z  Figure 6: Case 2: the simulation path  3.2  Bounding the congestion  The previous section defines a set ΣF of (MF, MSC )-simulation paths. First, we prove an upper bound on the maximum length ℓ(ΣF ) of a simulation path in ΣF . Lemma 3.1. If r ≥ 2 then ℓ(ΣF ) ≤ 21 n2 . Proof. Since hub paths are simple and do not include a or d, every hub path contains at most n − 2 vertices. Therefore, at most 21 (n − 2)(n − 3) path-reversing flips will be required. Furthermore, we may have up to 2r − 1 triangle-breaking flips, and up to 2r − 1 trianglerestoring flips. Additionally, if we are in Case 2 then we also have a detour flip and its inverse. Therefore (n − 2)(n − 3) ℓ(ΣF ) ≤ + 4r, 2 and this is bounded above by 21 n2 whenever r ≥ 2, since n ≥ 2r + 1. For the remainder of this subsection we work towards an upper bound on B(ΣF ), the maximum number of simulation paths containing a given flip. A given flip t = (X, X ′ ) could perform one of a number of roles in a simulation path for a connected switch S = (Z, Z ′): • a triangle-breaking flip;  • a triangle-restoring flip;  • a flip on the path reversal (that is, part of the long-flip); • in Case 2, the detour flip (u, w, d, z);  • in Case 2, the inverse detour flip (u, d, w, z).  We bound the number of simulation paths that could use t in each of these roles separately, in Lemmas 3.2–3.4 below. Summing over these bounds over all roles yields an upper bound 17  for B(ΣF ). In our exposition, we attempt to uniquely determine a given simulation path σZZ ′ which contains t, by “guessing” from a number of alternatives. Since the number of possible alternatives is precisely the number of simulation paths σZZ ′ that use t, this approach gives the desired bound. The simulation path is determined once we have identified the switch (ab, cd ⇒ ac, bd) and either Z or Z ′ (since each of these can be obtained from the other using the switch or its inverse). Observe that in order to uniquely identify the switch it is not enough to just identify the two edges e1 , e2 which are switched out (or to just identify the two edges that are switched in). This follows since there are up to two possible switches on these edges: if e1 = ab and e2 = cd then we could switch in either the edges ac, bd or the edges ad, bc. We pay a factor of 2 to distinguish between these two possibilities, and will describe this as orienting one of the switch edges. Finally, suppose that the current flip t = (X, X ′ ) switches out the edges αβ, γδ and replaces them by αγ, βδ. If both αδ and βγ are present in X (and hence, both present in X ′ ) then either one of these could have been the middle edge of the 3-path chosen for the flip. In this case, if we wish to identify β, say, then there are 4 possibilities. However, if we know a priori that the edge αδ is not present in X, say, then we can guess β from two possibilities. Lemma 3.2. If t = (X, X ′ ) is a detour flip then we can guess the connected switch S = (Z, Z ′) from at most 8r 2n possibilities. The same bound holds if t is an inverse detour flip. Proof. First suppose that t is a detour flip. This is the first flip in the simulation path, so Z = X. • The flip is on the 3-path (u, w, d, z), and uz 6∈ E(X) by construction, so we can guess d from 2 possibilities. • Next, we can guess c ∈ NX (d) from at most 2r possibilities.  • Finally, guess the edge ab ∈ E(X) and orient it, from 2rn possibilities.  From the switch edges and Z we can obtain Z ′ . Hence we can guess the switch S from at most 8r 2n possibilities overall when t is a detour flip. The same argument holds when t is an inverse detour flip, replacing X and Z by X ′ and Z ′ and exchanging the roles of b and c. Lemma 3.3. Suppose that t = (X, X ′ ) is a triangle-breaking flip. Then we can guess the connected switch S = (Z, Z ′) from at most 4(2r)8n possibilities. The same bound holds if t is a triangle-restoring flip. Proof. Suppose that t is a triangle-breaking flip. • One of the vertices involved in the flip t is b, so we can guess it from 4 alternatives. (If t is not the first triangle-breaking flip then by the no-shortcuts property, we can guess b from 2 alternatives. But in the first triangle-breaking flip xp2 may be an edge of Z, in which case there are 4 possibilities for b.) • We can guess a by adjacency to b, from 2r possibilities.  • We can guess the edge cd ∈ E(X) and orient it, from 2rn possibilities. 18  We now know the switch vertices, so recovering Z will give us the rest of the path. There may have been some other triangle-breaking flips which took place before t, and if we are in Case 2 then there was also a detour flip at the start of the simulation path. We continue our accounting below. • First suppose that we are in Case 1, and that t is the kth triangle-breaking flip which has been performed (so far). Then k ≥ 1. Let p′ = (x, p1 , . . . , pk , b) denote the path containing vertices which were removed from the hub path by the first k triangle-breaking flips. Now (a, p1 , x) is a 2-path in X, so we can guess x and p1 from 2r(2r − 1) ≤ (2r)2 alternatives. • Next, pk belongs to NX (b) \ a, so we can guess pk from at most 2r alternatives. (Here we allow the possibility that p1 = pk , which covers the case that t is the first triangle-breaking flip.) Then we can reconstruct p′ using the fact that (p1 , . . . , pk ) is the lexicographically-least shortest (p1 , pk )-path in X \ {a, d}, by the recognisability property. Using p′ , we can reverse these k triangle-breaking flips to obtain Z from X. • Finally, we must guess whether we are in Case 1 (1 possibility) or Case 2. If we are in Case 2 then we must also reverse the detour flip before we obtain Z. Since u and w are neighbours of d and z is a neighbour of w, in this step we guess from at most 1 + (2r)2 (2r − 1) < (2r)3 possibilities. Overall, we can guess the switch S from a total of at most 4(2r)8 n possibilities, when t is a triangle-breaking flip. The argument is similar when t is a triangle-restoring flip: • First, suppose that we are in Case 1. Guess b, then guess d from the neighbourhood of b, then guess and orient the edge ac ∈ E(X). This gives the switch edges, guessed from at most 4 (2r)3 alternatives. • Recover p′ = (x, p1 , . . . , pk , b) as in the triangle-breaking case, from at most (2r)3 alternatives. Now we can Z ′ uniquely by performing the remaining triangle-restoring flips to move b past p1 . • Again, there at most (2r)3 possibilities for deciding whether or not we are in Case 2 and if so, guessing the inverse detour flip and applying it to produce Z ′ . Hence there are at most 4(2r)8 n possibilities for the connected switch S when t is a trianglerestoring flip. Lemma 3.4. Suppose that t = (X, X ′ ) is a flip on the path-reversal. We can guess the connected switch S = (Z, Z ′) from at most 4(2r)8 ((2r)2 − 1) n3 possibilities. Proof. Suppose that t is a flip on the path-reversal with respect to the hub path p = (b, p1 , . . . , pν−1 , c), where b = p0 and c = pν . Then t is part of a pi run, for some i. The path-reversal may have been preceded by some triangle-breaking flips, and (if we are in Case 2) a detour flip. We need to guess the switch edges and reconstruct Z. First suppose that we are in Case 1. The typical situation is shown in Figure 7, which shows that graph X ′ produced by the flip t. The current bubble pi is shown as a diamond, and the flip t has just been performed on the 3-path (pj , pi , pj+1, pj+2 ), moving pi past pj+1 . 19  a  x  p1  p2  pk  ′  d pj  pj+1  pi  pj+2  a  p[a′ : pj+1 ]  p[pj+2 : c]  c  c′  pk+1 b  rev p[pk+1 : c′ ]  Figure 7: Reconstruction of Z from X ′ , the flip edges and some guessed information. • The current bubble pi is one of the four vertices involved in the flip, so it can be guessed from four possibilities. • Next we guess a, c and d from n3 alternatives. • We recover b as follows: if the current run is the b-run then b is the bubble; otherwise, b is already adjacent to d, and we can guess it from the 2r neighbours of d. This gives 2r + 1 possibilities for b. • Vertices a′ and c′ can be guessed from at most 2r alternatives each, by their adjacency to a and c. Now we know the switch (ab, cd ⇒ ac, bd), and it remains to recover Z. In order to do that, we must recover the path p, reverse the path-reversal flips and then reverse the triangle-breaking flips, if any. Observe that having identified pi , the identities of pj+1 and pj+2 can be inferred. To see this, note that pi pj+2 is one of the two edges switched in by the flip t, which identifies pj+2 , while pj+1 pj+2 is one of the two edges switched out by the flip t, which identifies pj+1 . Next, observe that a′ = pi+1 , and so the subpath pi+1 · · · pj+1 is the lexicographically-least shortest (pi+1 , pj+1 )-path in X ′ \ {a, d}, by the recognisability property. This holds since the flips made on the path-reversal so far, between Z and X ′ , have not altered this section of the original path. Similarly, the subpath pj+2 · · · c can be recovered as the lexicographically-least shortest (pj+2 , c)-path in X ′ \ {a, d}. If the current bubble is b then c′ = c. Otherwise, observe that c′ = pi−1 , since c′ is the most recent bubble that successfully completed its run. We continue our accounting below. • Guess pk+1 from NX ′ (b) \ d, from at most 2r − 1 possibilities. Reconstruct the subpath pk+1 · · · pi−1 as the lexicographically-least shortest (pk+1 , pi−1 )-path in X ′ \ {a, d}. • By now we have recovered all sections of the path between a′ and b as shown in Figure 7, and we can reverse all path-reversing flips. Now there may have been no trianglerestoring flips, in which case we have constructed Z, or else we may need to reverse the triangle-breaking flips as explained earlier, after guessing the identities of x, p1 and pk−1 from at most (2r)2(2r −1) possibilities. This gives a factor of at most 1+(2r)2(2r −1) ≤ (2r)3 . • Finally, multiply by 1 + (2r)2 (2r − 1) ≤ (2r)3 to account for the fact that we may be in Case 1 or Case 2, as explained in Lemma 3.3. 20  Overall, we have guessed the switch S from at most  4(2r + 1)(2r − 1)(2r)8 n3 = 4(2r)8 (2r)2 − 1 n3  possibilities, when t is a flip on a path-reversal.  Now we apply the two-stage direct canonical path theorem to our (MF , MSC )-simulation paths. Let ρ̄(ΓSC ) denote the congestion of some set of canonical paths for the connected switch MSC . We will define such a set of canonical paths in Section 4 below. Lemma 3.5. The (MF , MSC )-simulation paths defined in Section 3.1 define a set of canonical paths for MF with congestion ρ̄(ΓF ) which satisfies ρ̄(ΓF ) ≤ 8 (2r)11n4 ρ̄(ΓSC ). Proof. Firstly, we bound the maximum number B(ΣF ) of simulation paths which contain a given flip t, by adding together the number of possibilities from each of the five roles that t may play. Using Lemmas 3.2– 3.4, we obtain  B(ΣF ) ≤ 4(2r)8 (2r)2 − 1 n3 + 8(2r)8n + 16r 2n  ≤ 4 (2r)10 − (2r)8 + 2(2r)6 + 1 n3 ≤ 4(2r)10 n3 , since n ≥ 2r ≥ 4. Next, we calculate the simulation gap DF = D(MF , MSC ). Since MF and MSC share the same state space ΩF , and both have uniform stationary distribution, DF =  max  uv∈E(MF ) zw∈E(MSC )  PSC (z, w) |ΩF | PSC (z, w) = . |ΩF | PF(u, v) PF (u, v)  Let uv ∈ E(MF) and zw ∈ E(MSC ). Then u 6= v, as self-loop transitions are not included in E(MF ) or E(MSC ). Hence 1 (2r)3 n ≤ PF (u, v) 2  and  PSC (z, w) =  1 2 ≤ 2 2 3an,2r r n  using (1.3), since n ≥ 8. Therefore DF ≤ 8r/n. Substituting these quantities into Theorem 2.1, using Lemma 3.1, we obtain ρ̄(ΓF ) ≤ DF ℓ(ΣF ) B(ΣF ) ρ̄(ΓSC ) ≤ 8 (2r)11 n4 ρ̄(ΓSC ), as claimed.  21  4  Disconnected graphs  Next, we must define a set of (MSC , MS )-simulation paths and apply the two-stage direct canonical path method. The process is similar to the approach introduced by Feder et al. [9]: the chief difference is in the analysis. We begin by defining a surjection h : ΩS → ΩF such that maxG∈ΩF |h−1 (G)| is polynomially bounded. Using this we construct short paths in MSC to correspond to single transitions in MS . In [9] this step is responsible for a factor of O(r 34 n36 ) in the overall mixing time bound. In contrast, by using the two-stage direct method we construct canonical paths with a relaxation of only a factor of 120rn3 . First we must define the surjection h. Let GS ∈ ΩS and let {H1 , . . . , Hk } be the set of components in GS . Let vi the vertex in Hi of highest label, for i = 1, . . . , k. By relabelling the components if necessary, we assume that v1 < v2 < · · · < vk . We call each vi an entry vertex. By construction, vk is the highest-labelled vertex in GS . In each component we will identify a bridge edge ei = vi vi′ , where vi′ is the neighbour of vi with the highest label. We call edge vi′ an exit vertex. The graph G = h(GS ) is formed from GS by removing the bridge edges e1 , . . . , ek and replacing them with chain edges e′1 , . . . , e′k , where ei = vi′ vi+1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ k − 1, and e′k = vk′ v1 . We call e′k the loopback edge and we call this procedure chaining. (When discussing the chain, arithmetic on indices is performed ′ with v1′ .) cyclically; that is, we identify vk+1 with v1 and vk+1 By construction we have vi′ < vi < vi+1 for i = 1, . . . , k − 1. Hence the “head” vi+1 of the chain edge e′i is greater than the “tail” vi′ , except for possibly the loopback edge: v1 may or may not be greater than vk′ . We prove that G = H(GS ) is connected in Lemma 4.1 below. An example of a chained graph G is shown in Figure 8 in the case k = 3. Here G = H(GS ) for a graph GS with three components H1 , H2 , H3 . The shaded black vertices are the entry vertices v1 , v2 and v3 , and the white vertices are the exit vertices v1′ , v2′ and v3′ . After chaining, H1 contains two cut edges (shown as dashed edges), because e1 = v1 v1′ was part of a cut cycle in H1 . Similarly, H3 contains one cut edge. Note that these dashed edges are not chain edges. The loopback edge is e′3 and v1 < v2 < v3 . Lemma 4.1. Let h be the map defined above. Then h(GS ) is connected for all GS ∈ ΩS , and h : ΩS → ΩF is a surjection.  Proof. Let GS ∈ ΩS and suppose G = h(GS ). Lemma 1.2(ii) implies that each connected component Hi remains at least 1-connected after removal of bridge edges. The chain edges then connect these components in a ring, forming a connected graph. Additionally, h preserves degrees since each vertex vi , vi′ is adjacent to exactly one bridge edge that is removed and exactly one chain edge that is added. Hence, G ∈ ΩF . Finally, observe that h(G) = G whenever G is connected, which proves that h is a surjection since ΩF ⊂ ΩS . Lemma 4.2. Let h : ΩS → ΩF be defined as above. Then max |h−1 (G)| ≤ 2rn.  G∈ΩF  22  e′3  v1′  v1  e′1  v2 v2′ H2  H1  e′2  v3′  v3  H3  Figure 8: A connected graph h(GS ) ∈ ΩF obtained by chaining a disconnected graph GS ∈ ΩS with three components H1 , H2 , H3 . Proof. Let GF ∈ ΩF be given. First we prove that given an edge e = {v, w} of GF and an orientation (v, w) of e, there is a unique disconnected graph GS ∈ h−1 (GF ) such that when the chaining procedure is performed with input GS (producing GF ), the loopback edge e′k equals e and v1 = v. We recover GS from GF and the oriented edge e using the unchaining algorithm which we now describe. To identify e′1 given e′k and v1 , begin by searching the graph GF \ e′k , starting from v1 , until a vertex is reached with a label greater than v1 . By construction, this vertex must be v2 , as v1 has the greatest label of any vertex in H1 . The edge traversed to reach v2 must be e′1 . Repeat this process until the chain edges e′1 , . . . , e′k−1 have been discovered. Then GS is recovered by deleting all chain edges (including the loopback edge) from GF and replacing them with the bridge edges e1 , . . . , ek . For future reference, note that this unchaining algorithm will still correctly recover GS so long as vi′ is any neighbour of vi in GS (that is, vi′ does not need to be the neighbour with largest label). Hence the number of choices for the oriented loopback edge gives an upper bound on |h−1 (GS )| − 1. We use the naive estimate of 2r(n − 1) as an upper bound on this quantity, since the loopback edge could be any oriented edge which does not originate in vk (the highest-labelled vertex in GF ). Since GF is the only connected graph in h−1 (GF ), we obtain |h−1 (GS )| ≤ 2r(n − 1) + 1 ≤ 2rn. (It should be possible to obtain a tighter bound with a little more work, though we do not attempt that here.)  4.1  Simulating general switches  Now we must construct a set of (MSC , MS )-simulation paths ΣSC with respect to the surjection h defined above. Given a switch S = (W, W ′ ) ∈ E(MS ), with W, W ′ ∈ ΩS , we must simulate it by a path σW W ′ in ΓSC , consisting only of connected switches. We then give an upper bound on the congestion parameters for the set ΣSC of simulation paths, and apply Theorem 2.1. The main difficulty is that switches in MS may create or merge components, whereas connected switches in MSC cannot. In this section we refer to transitions in E(MS ) as general switches, to distinguish them from connected switches. We say that a general switch S = (W, W ′ ) is 23  • neutral if W and W ′ have the same number of components; • disconnecting if W ′ has one more component than W ; • reconnecting if W ′ has one fewer component than W .  The general switch S = (ab, cd ⇒ ac, bd) is disconnecting if ab, cd form a 2-edge-cut in the same component of W and ac, bd do not. If S is a reconnecting switch then ab and cd below to distinct components of W . Finally, S is a neutral switch if ab and cd both belong to the same component of W , but do not form a 2-edge-cut, or if ab and cd form a 2-edge-cut in a component of W , and ac and bd form another 2-edge-cut in the same component. To simulate the general switch S = (W, W ′ ), we must define a path σW,W ′ = (Z0 , Z1, . . . , Zq ), in E(MSC ), where Z0 = h(W ) and Zq = h(W ′ ), such that Zi ∈ ΩF for i = 0, . . . , q and (Zi , Zi+1 ) ∈ E(MSC ) for i = 0, . . . , q − 1. Here are the kinds of connected switch that we will need in our simulation paths. • Suppose that a bridge edge vj vj′ of W is one of the edges to be removed by the switch S. This is a problem, since all bridge edges have been deleted and replaced by chain edges during the chaining process used to construct Z0 = h(W ). To deal with this, we first perform a connected switch called a bridge change switch. The bridge change switch reinstates the edge ej e′j (so that the desired switch S can be performed) and changes the choice of exit vertex (previously e′j ) in Hj . Importantly, the resulting chain structure can still be unwound using the algorithm in Lemma 4.2. Specifically, to reinstate the ′ bridge edge ej = vj vj′ in component Hj , let vj∗ ∈ NW (vj ) \ vj−1 be the highest-labelled ∗ neighbour of vj in W [Hj ] and perform the connected switch (vj vj , vj′ vj+1 ⇒ vj vj′ , vj∗ vj+1 ). (Clearly vj∗ 6= vj′ since the edge vj vj′ is absent in Z0 , and vj+1 vj∗ is not an edge of Z0 due to the component structure of W , so this connected switch is valid.) The new chain edge is vj∗ vj+1 and the new bridge edge is vj vj∗ . We denote the bridge change switch by B∆. See Figure 9.  vj′  vj  ′ vj+1  vj+1  vj∗ Hj  Hj+1  Figure 9: A bridge change in component Hj .  • We will need a connected switch to simulate the general switch S. We denote this switch as NS, DS or RS if S is neutral, disconnecting or reconnecting, respectively, and call it the neutral (respectively, disconnecting or reconnecting) simulation flip. It removes the same two edges that S removes, and inserts the same two edges that S inserts. 24  • Let Z be the current graph after the DS, RS or NS has been performed. We say that component Hj is healthy in Z if there is no neighbour of the entry vertex vj in Z with an label higher than the exit vertex vj′ . We must ensure that all components of Z are healthy before performing the unchaining algorithm, or else we lose the guarantee that Z = h(W ′ ). A component Hj can only become unhealthy if some switch along the simulation path involves the entry vertex vj and introduces a new neighbour of vj , say vj∗ , which has a higher label than the (current) exit vertex vj′ . In this case, vj∗ also has the highest label among all current neighbours of vj . (In fact, the switch that makes Hj unhealthy will be the switch which simulates S, namely, the DS, RS or NS.) Note, if there has been a bridge change in component Hj at the start of the simulation path, then vj′ might not be the exit vertex originally produced in Hj by the chaining procedure. But this will not cause any problems, as we will see. We can make Hj healthy by performing the bridge change switch (vj vj∗ , vj′ vj+1 ⇒ vj vj′ , vj∗ vj+1), precisely as described above. (Now the main purpose of this switch is not to reinstate an edge, but to ensure the correct vertex of Hj becomes the exit vertex before unchaining.) When this bridge change is performed at the end of the simulation path we will refer to it as a bridge rectification switch, denoted BR. • If S is a disconnecting switch then performing this switch will produce a disconnected graph (and destroy the chain structure) by splitting Hj into two components, one of which is not chained. In order to avoid this, we perform a disconnected housekeeping switch, denoted DHK, before the disconnecting simulation flip (DS). The DHK is defined in detail in Section 4.1.2 below. • Similarly, if S is a reconnecting switch then performing this switch destroys the chain structure, by merging Hi and Hj together, forming one component which is incident with four chain edges instead of two. To fix the chain structure we perform a reconnecting housekeeping switch, denoted RHK, after the reconnecting simulation flip (RS). More detail is given in Section 4.1.3 below. We now define simulation paths for the three types of general switch S = (W, W ′ ). The paths are summarised in Table 1, with optional steps denoted by square brackets. Here “optional” means that these steps may or may not appear in the simulation path for a general switch of that type. However, given a particular switch S, the definition of the simulation path complete determines whether or not these “optional” switches are required. Neutral switch Disconnecting switch Reconnecting switch  −→ −→ −→  [B∆] NS [BR] [B∆] DHK DS [BR] [BR] [B∆] [B∆] RS RHK [BR]  Table 1: Simulation path for a general switch S ∈ ΩS using connected switches.  25  4.1.1  The simulation path for a neutral switch  Suppose that the general switch S is a neutral switch. The simulation path for S is formed using the following procedure. • Let Hi be the component of W that contains all vertices involved in S.  • If the bridge edge vi vi′ is switched away by S then perform a bridge change.  • After the bridge change, if any, perform a connected switch NS which switches in and out the the edges specified by S.  • If a bridge edge is unhealthy after this switch then perform a bridge rectification. 4.1.2  The simulation path for a disconnecting switch  Suppose that the general switch S is a disconnecting switch. The simulation path for S is formed using the following procedure. • Let Hj contain the 2-edge-cut ab, cd and let B1 , B2 be the subgraphs of Hj separated by this cut. Without loss of generality, suppose that B1 contains vj . • If a bridge change is required in Hj then perform the bridge change. In that case, vj vj′ is one of the edges forming the 2-edge-cut, so all other neighbours of vj must lie in B1 . Therefore the new exit vertex vj∗ also belongs to B1 . • After the bridge change, if any, notice that switching in and out the edges specified by S would split Hj into two components B1 and B2 . Of these, B1 is already in the correct place in the chain, but B2 is not connected to the chain at all. This is not allowed, since we are restricted to connected switches. Therefore we must first perform the disconnected housekeeping switch (DHK) to place B2 into the correct position in the chain. This switch is described in more detail below. • After the DHK has been performed, we perform the disconnecting switch specified by S. (This is now safe, as the DHK ensures that the resulting graph is not disconnected.) • Up to two bridge edges may now be unhealthy. If so, then perform up to two bridge rectification switches. For definiteness, if two BR switches are required, perform the one with the lower component index first. It remains to specify the disconnected housekeeping switch DHK. See Figure 10. Let v+ be ′ ′ the vertex in B2 with the highest label and let v+ be its greatest neighbour. Then e+ = v+ v+ must become the bridge edge of B2 . Find i such that vi < v+ < vi+1 , so B2 belongs in the chain between Hi and Hi+1 in the chain. (Note that vk is the highest-labelled vertex in the graph, so v+ ≤ vk , but it is possible that v+ < v1 , in which case B2 must become the first component in the chain and vk′ v+ must become the new loopback edge.) Then DHK is the ′ ′ switch (v+ v+ , vi′ vi+1 ⇒ v+ vi′ , v+ vi+1 ), which inserts B2 into the correct position in the chain as required.  26  vi  vi′  Hi  ′ vi+1  vi+1  vj a  vj′ c  b  d  Hi+1 Hj  v+  ′ v+  Figure 10: The situation just before a disconnecting housekeeping switch (DHK).  4.1.3  The simulation path for a reconnecting switch  Suppose that the general switch S is a reconnecting switch. The simulation path for S is defined using the following procedure. • Suppose that ab ∈ Hi and cd ∈ Hj where, without loss of generality vi < vj . Up to two bridge changes may be necessary, as this switch involves two components. If both are necessary, perform the bridge change in Hi first. • Then perform the reconnecting switch RS that switches in and out the edges specified by S. At this point, the component formed by linking Hi and Hj is incident with four chain edges, so the chain structure is not correct. In effect, this new component is occuping both position i and position j in the chain. Since vi < vj , vertex vj must be the entry vertex of the new component, so the correct position for this component is between Hj−1 and Hj+1. ′ ′ • The reconnecting housekeeping switch (RHK) (vi vi−1 , vi′ vi+1 ⇒ vi vi′ , vi−1 vi+1 ) restores the chain by placing the new component in position between Hj−1 and Hj+1 , linking Hi−1 directly to Hi+1 (which is now the next component in the chain) and reinstating ′ the bridge edge vi vi′ . Here vi′ and vi−1 refer to endvertices of the current chain edges, after the at most two bridge changes have been performed. (These may differ from the endvertices of the original chain edges, before the bridge rectification steps.)  • Finally, at most one bridge rectification may be required to ensure that the single bridge edge vj vj′ is healthy. In the special case when the reconnecting switch S = (W, W ′ ) results in a connected graph W ′ , we must have i = 1 and j = 2: here the reconnecting housekeeping switch reinstates both bridge edges, and no bridge rectification is required.  27  4.2  Bounding the congestion  Let us calculate upper bounds for B(ΣSC ) and ℓ(ΣSC ). From Table 1, the longest possible simulation path consists of five connected switches, so ℓ(ΣSC ) = 5.  (4.1)  We spend the rest of this subsection bounding B(ΣSC ). Each connected switch t = (Z, Z ′) can play a number of roles in a simulation path. We consider each kind of general switch separately (neutral, disconnecting, reconnecting). As in Section 3.2, the number of simulation paths (of a given kind) containing t is equal to the amount of extra information required to identify a general switch S of this kind uniquely, given t (and assuming that t belongs to the simulation path for S): we speak of “guessing” this information. Again, it is enough to identify one of W or W ′ , together with the edges switched in/out by S, and then the other graph (W ′ or W ) can be inferred. 4.2.1  Neutral switches  A connected switch t = (Z, Z ′) in MSC could take on three possible roles when simulating a neutral switch S = (W, W ′ ). We consider each separately below. (B∆) First, suppose that the connected switch t is a bridge change in a simulation path for a neutral (general) switch S. • Since t is a bridge change, one of the edges which is switched in by t is also an edge which is switched out by S. Guess which one, from 2 alternatives. • The other edge which is switched out by S is an edge of Z ′ , so this edge and its orientation can be guessed from fewer than 2rn alternatives. • Also guess whether W is connected and if not, guess the oriented loopback edge from at most 2rn alternatives (as in the proof of Lemma 4.2). If W is connected then W = Z. Otherwise, we must apply the unchaining algorithm from Lemma 4.2 to the graph Z with respect to the chosen oriented loopback edge. This produces the graph W , and then using the switch edges we can determine W ′ . In all we guessed S from 2 · (2rn)2 = 8r 2 n2 alternatives. (NS) Next, suppose that the connected switch t is a neutral simulating switch for a neutral (general) switch S. • The edges switched in/out by t are precisely the edges switched in/out by S. This gives us the vertices {a, b, c, d} involved in the switch. Guess the (current) oriented loopback edge in Z from at most 2rn alternatives, and perform the unchaining algorithm to reveal the chain structure of Z. In particular, we now know the entry vertex and (current) exit vertex of every component.  28  • If t was not preceded by a bridge change then Z = Z0 . Otherwise, a bridge change has been performed before t, which implies that Z = Z1 . In this case, one of the edges switched out by t was originally a bridge edge in W , and hence is incident with vi for some component Hi of W . Since S is a neutral switch, all vertices involved in the switch belong to the same component Hi , and hence vi has the largest label among a, b, c, d. Without loss of generality, if a = vi then b = vi′ , while our knowledge of the chain structure of Z gives us the current exit vertex vi∗ . Hence we can uniquely reverse the bridge change switch to determine Z0 . Therefore we can find Z0 by guessing between just two alternatives, namely, whether or not a bridge change was performed. From Z0 we obtain W by deleting the chain edges and reinstating the bridge edges (taking care to adjust the exit vertex of Hi if a bridge change has been performed). Since we know W and the switch edges, we can determine W ′ . We have guessed S from 4rn alternatives, when t is a neutral simulating switch. (The above analysis holds even if the switch S replaces one 2-edge-cut in W by another.) (BR) Finally, suppose that t is a bridge rectification switch in a simulation path for a neutral (general) switch S. Then t is the final switch in the simulation path. • Guess the oriented loopback edge in Z ′ , from at most 2rn alternatives, and perform the unchaining algorithm on Z ′ to produce W ′ . (Again, this includes the possibility that W ′ is connected, in which case W ′ = Z ′ .) • Since t is a bridge rectification, the switch S switches in an edge which is incident with the entry vertex vi of Hi , giving it a new neighbour with a higher label than the current exit vertex in Hi . This edge is one of the two edges switched out by t: guess which one, from 2 alternatives. • The other edge which is switched in by S, together with its orientation, can be guessed from the (oriented) edges of Z: at most 2rn possibilities. Now W can be inferred from W ′ and the switch edges. We have guessed S from at most 2rn · 2 · 2rn = 8r 2 n2 alternatives. Adding the contributions from these three roles, a connected switch t may be part of at most 8r 2 n2 + 4rn + 8r 2n2 ≤ (8r 2 + 1)n2 (4.2) simulation paths for neutral general switches. Before we move on to consider disconnecting and reconnecting switches, we make a couple of comments. The analysis of the neutral simulation switch (NS) shows that once the edges of the general switch S have been guessed, we have enough information to decide whether a bridge rectification switch is required and if so, its specification. Since these bridge rectification switches do not affect the number of choices for S in each subcase below, we only mention them when t itself is playing the role of a bridge rectification, and otherwise we omit them from our accounting. 29  In every situation we must guess the oriented loopback edge, so that we can perform the unchaining algorithm. In some cases we must also be careful to specify which graph is given as input to the unchaining algorithm. In particular, we must not perform the unchaining algorithm immediately after a disconnecting housekeeping switch or immediately before a reconnecting housekeeping switch, since in those graphs the chaining structure has been temporarily compromised. 4.2.2  Disconnecting switches  A connected switch t = (Z, Z ′) in MSC could take on five possible roles when simulating a disconnecting switch S = (W, W ′ ). We consider each separately below. (B∆) If t is a bridge change then we can guess S from at most 8r 2n2 alternatives, as explained in Section 4.2.1. (DHK) Next, suppose that t is a disconnecting housekeeping switch. • Guess the (current) oriented loopback edge as an edge of Z from at most 2rn possibilities. Perform the unchaining algorithm on Z to reveal the chain structure of Z. Again, this tells us the entry and (current) exit vertex of every component of W . • Decide whether or not a bridge change was performed before t, from 2 possibilities. As described in Section 4.2.1, we can uniquely determine the bridge change from the chain structure of Z, so in both cases we can find Z0 (note that Z = Z0 if there was no bridge change, and Z = Z1 if a bridge change was performed before t). By reversing the bridge change if necessary we obtain Z0 , and then from our knowledge of the chain structure we can determine W . (If a bridge change was performed then we must use the original exit vertex for that component: this vertex is revealed by reversing the bridge change.) Since t is a disconnected housekeeping switch, it switches out a chain edge vj′ vj+1 , for ′ which is entirely contained within a component Hi , for some some j, and an edge v+ v+ i 6= j. Hence we can distinguish between these two edges of t and identify which is the ′ chain edge and which is v+ v+ , also determining i and j. Furthermore, we can identify ′ v+ uniquely as it has a higher label than v+ . • Let vi be the entry vertex in Hi . A disconnected housekeeping switch is only performed when the disconnected simulation flip (DS) representing S would switch out the two edges of a 2-edge-cut separating v+ and vi , say. By Lemma 1.2(iv), we can guess which 2-edge-cut is switched out by S from at most n2 /(15r 2 ) possibilities. The orientation of the switch S is uniquely determined, since there is only one possibility which would disconnect Hi . Now we know W and the switch edges, we can determine W ′ . We have guessed S from at most 2rn · 2 · n2 /(15r 2) = 4n3 /(15r) possibilities. (DS) Now suppose that t is a disconnecting simulation switch. The edges switched in/out by t are precisely the edges switched in/out by S, so we do not need to guess these. Note that Z does not have a valid chain structure, but Z ′ does. 30  • We know that W ′ is not connected, so we guess the oriented loopback edge from the (oriented) edges of Z ′ : at most 2rn possibilities. Perform the unchaining algorithm on Z ′ , revealing the chain structure of Z ′ . Suppose that Hi and Hj are the two components of Z ′ which contain an edge which was switched in by t, and suppose that i < j. Then the disconnecting housekeeping switch (DHK) is uniquely determined: it is the ′ ′ switch (vi vi′ , vi−1 vi+1 ⇒ vi vi−1 , vi′ vi+1 ). • Guess whether or not a bridge change was performed before the disconnecting housekeeping switch: if so, it is uniquely specified (as explained earlier), so we guess from 2 possibilities. Reverse this bridge change to obtain Z0 and hence find W . From W and the switch edges we can determine W ′ .  We have guessed the general switch S from at most 4rn possibilities. (The first BR) Now suppose that t is the first bridge rectification switch in the simulation path for a disconnecting (general) switch S. There may or may not be a second bridge rectification switch after t. The calculations are similar to the bridge rectification case in Section 4.2.1. • Guess the oriented loopback edge in Z ′ , from at most 2rn alternatives, and perform the unchaining algorithm to reveal the chain structure of Z ′ . (Note, we know that W ′ is disconnected when S is a disconnecting switch.) • Since t is a bridge rectification switch, one of the edges switched in by S is vi vi∗ , where vi is the entry vertex of some component Hi and vi∗ has a higher label than the current exit vertex vi′ in that component. This edge is then switched out by t. (It is possible that this condition is satisfied by both edges of S, but if so, we know that the first bridge rectification will act on the component Hi with the lower index first.) Guess which edge of t is vi vi∗ , for a factor of 2. • Guess the other edge switched out by S, and the orientation of the switch, from at most 2rn possibilities. (The other edge switched out by S must lie in a distinct component from Hi , but for an upper bound we ignore this.) Whether or not a second bridge change will be needed after t is completely determined by the switch edges and the chain structure, as described in Section 4.2.1. If a second bridge rectification is needed, perform it to produce Zq . From Zq we may determine W ′ using our knowledge of the chain structure of Z ′ (and adjusting the exit vertex of the component in which the second bridge rectification was performed, if necessary). From W ′ and the switch edges we may deduce W . We have guessed S from at most 2rn · 2 · 2rn = 8r 2 n2 alternatives. (The second BR) Here we assume that one bridge rectification has been already performed to produce Z. The connected switch t is the last one in the simulation path. • Again, we guess the oriented loopback edge for Z ′ , from at most 2rn possibilities. Apply the unchaining algorithm to produce W ′ .  31  • Choose which edge switched out by t is an edge switched in by S, out of 2 possibilities. The endvertex of this edge with the higher label is vi , for some i. • Since this is the second bridge rectification, the other edge switched in by S was vj vj∗ for some other component Hj , and this edge has been made into the bridge edge in Hj , using the first bridge rectification. Therefore we can identify and orient this edge once we guess Hj , from at most n/r possibilities (using Lemma 1.2(iii)). This determines the edges switched in by S. From W ′ and the switch edges, we can determine W . We have guessed S from at most 2rn · 2 · n/r = 4n2 possibilities. Summing over these five roles, a connected switch t can be included in at most 8r 2 n2 + 4n3 /(15r) + 4rn + 8r 2 n2 + 4n2 ≤ 9rn3  (4.3)  simulation paths for disconnecting general switches. (The upper bound follows since 2 ≤ r ≤ n/2.) 4.2.3  Reconnecting switches  A connected switch t = (Z, Z ′) in MSC could take on give possible roles when simulation a reconnecting (general) switch S = (W, W ′ ). We consider each separately below. (The first B∆) When t is the first bridge change we can guess S from at most 8r 2 n2 alternatives, using arguments very similar to those given in Section 4.2.1. (The second B∆) Now suppose that t is the second of two bridge changes in the simulation path for some reconnecting (general) switch S. • Guess the oriented loopback edge in Z, from at most 2rn possibilities. Perform the unchaining algorithm to reveal the chain structure of Z. • Since t is a bridge change, one of the edges switched in by t is an edge which will be switched out by S. Choose which, from 2 possibilities. This edge is incident with the entry vertex vj of some component Hj . • Since t is the second bridge change, the other edge which will be switched out by S must be incident with the entry vertex of some other component Hi , with i < j. (It has been put back into Z by the first bridge change.) By Lemma 1.2(iii) there are at most n/(2r) components, so we choose one to determine vi . • Choose a non-chain edge incident with vi and orient it, from 2(2r − 1) possibilities. This determines the edges switched in and out by S. From these edges and W , we may determine W ′. We have guessed S from at most 2rn · 2 · n/(2r) · 2(2r − 1) < 8rn2 possibilities. (RS) Suppose that t is a reconnecting simulation switch. The edges switched in/out by t are precisely the edges switched in/out by S. 32  • Guess the oriented loopback edge for Z from at most 2rn possibilities. Perform the unchaining algorithm on Z to reveal the chain structure of Z. • Up to two bridge changes may have been performed before t, corresponding to the up to two edges switched out by S which are incident with entry vertices in some component of Z. If two bridge changes have been performed then their order is uniquely determined. As argued in Section 4.2.1, we must just decide whether or not a bridge change has been performed in each component, and then the rest is specified, so there are 22 = 4 possiblities for the bridge changes before t, including the possibility that there were none. Once the bridge change switches are known, they can be reversed, which reveals W . Together with the switch edges, this determines W ′ and hence S. We have guessed S from at most 8rn possibilities. (RHK) Suppose that t is a reconnecting housekeeping switch. Then Z ′ has a valid chain structure, though Z does not. • Guess the oriented loopback edge for Z ′ from at most 2rn possibilities. Perform the unchaining algorithm on Z ′ to reveal the chain structure of Z ′ . • The switch t involves entry vertices vi and vj , where i < j. Since t is a reconnecting housekeeping switch, the edges switched in by S form a 2-edge-cut in Z ′ which separate vi and vj . By Lemma 1.2(iv) we can guess this 2-edge-cut from at most n2 /(15r 2) possibilities. This specifies the edges switched out by S. The orientation of the switch is determined by the fact that one edge switched out by S is contained in Hi and the other is contained in Hj . • Finally, we must decide whether or not a bridge rectification is needed to produce W ′ , giving 2 possibilities. If a bridge rectification is needed then it is uniquely determined: perform it to obtain W ′ , and then W can be obtained using the switch edges. We have guessed S from a total of at most 2rn · n2 /(15r 2 ) · 2 = 4n3 /(15r) possibilities. (BR) Suppose that t is a bridge rectification for a reconnecting (general) switch S. Then t is the final switch in the simulation path. In particular, W ′ is disconnected, since otherwise the reconnecting housekeeping switch produces W ′ , and no BR or unchaining is necessary. • Guess the oriented loopback edge and perform the unchaining algorithm in Z ′ to produce W ′ , from at most 2rn alternatives. • One of the edges switched in by S is an edge which was switched out by t: choose one, from 2 possibilities, and call it e. • Let eb be the other edge which is switched in by S. Recall that the edges removed by the ′ RHK are ei−1 = vi vi−1 and ei = vi′ vi+1 , where e′i , e′i−1 are the chain edges in the graph Zq obtained after the (at most two) bridge changes were performed. (See Section 4.1.3.) Let Zq+1 be the result of performing the RS simulating S, starting from Zq . Since the edges switched in by the RS must be disjoint from the edges of Zq , we conclude that eb 6∈ {e′i−1 , e′i }: the three edges b e, e′i−1 , e′i are distinct and all belong to Zq+1 . Next, 33  the RHK (Zq+1 , Zq+2) removes precisely two edges, namely e′i−1 , e′i , and hence eb is still present in Z = Zq+2 . Therefore we can guess and orient b e from among the 2rn oriented edges of Z. (In fact, the two edges switched in by S form a 2-edge-cut in Z, but we do not use that fact here.) Now we know W ′ and the switch edges, we can determine W . We have guessed S from at most 2rn · 2 · 2rn = 8r 2 n2 possibilities. Summing the contribution from these five roles, a connected switch t can be included in at most 8r 2 n2 + 8rn2 + 8rn + 4n3 /(15r) + 8r 2 n2 ≤ 11rn3 (4.4)  simulation paths for reconnecting general switches. (The upper bound follows since 2 ≤ r ≤ n/2.)  4.3  Completing the analysis  Now we apply the two-stage direct canonical path construction to our set of (MSC , MS )simulation paths. Here ρ̄(ΓS ) denotes the congestion of any set of canonical paths, or multicommodity flow, for the switch chain. We will use the bound given in [4]. Lemma 4.3. The (MSC , MS)-simulation paths defined in Section 4.1 define a set of canonical paths for MSC with congestion ρ̄(ΓSC ) which satisfies ρ̄(ΓSC ) ≤ 120 rn3 ρ̄(ΓS ). Proof. First, by adding together (4.2) – (4.4), the maximum number B(ΣSC ) of simulation paths containing a given connected switch satisfies B(ΣSC ) ≤ (8r 2 + 1)n2 + 9rn3 + 11rn3 ≤ 24rn3 , using the fact that r ≥ 2 and n ≥ 2r + 1 ≥ 5. Next we calculate the simulation gap DSC = D(MSC , MS). Recall that for all uv ∈ E(MSC ) and zw ∈ E(MS ) we have u 6= v and z 6= w, and hence 1 PSC (u, v) = PS (z, w) = , 3an,r by definition of both chains. The state space of MS is ΩS and the state space of MSC is ΩF , with ΩF ⊆ ΩF . Since both MS and MSC have uniform stationary distribution, DSC =  PS (z, w) |ΩF | PS (z, w) ≤ max = 1. uv∈E(MSC ) PSC (u, v) uv∈E(MSC ) |ΩS | PSC (u, v) max  zw∈E(MS )  zw∈E(MS )  Substituting these values and (4.1) into Theorem 2.1 gives ρ̄(ΓSC ) ≤ DSC ℓ(ΣSC ) B(ΣSC ) ρ̄(ΓS ) ≤ 120 rn3 ρ̄(ΓS ), as required. 34  Finally, we may prove Theorem 1.1. Proof of Theorem 1.1. Combining the bounds of Lemma 3.5 and Lemma 4.3 gives ρ̄(ΓF ) ≤ 480 (2r)12n7 . ρ̄(ΓS )  (4.5)  The upper bound on the mixing time of the switch chain given in [4, 5] has (an upper bound on) ρ̄(ΓS ) as a factor. Therefore, multiplying this bound by the right hand side of (4.5), we conclude that the mixing time of the flip chain is at most  480 (2r)35 n15 2rn log(2rn) + log(ε−1 ) ,  completing the proof of Theorem 1.1. (This uses the fact that |ΩS | ≤ (rn)rn , which follows from known asymptotic enumeration results [2].)  It is unlikely that the bound of Theorem 1.1 is tight. Experimental evidence was presented in an earlier version of this work [6] which provides support for the conjecture that the true mixing time for the flip chain is O(n log n), when r is constant. Perhaps O(rn log n) is a reasonable conjecture when r grows with n.  A  Maximising 2-edge-cuts separating two vertices  We now present the deferred proof of Lemma 1.2(iv). Our aim here is to present a simple upper bound on Λ(u, v) which holds for all relevant values of n and r, though our proof establishes tighter bounds than the one given in the statement of Lemma 1.2(iv). Proof of Lemma 1.2(iv). Let Λ(u, v) denote the number of 2-edge-cuts in G which separate u and v. By considering the connected component of G which contains u, if necessary, we may assume that G is connected. Consider the binary relation ∼ on V defined by w1 ∼ w2 if and only if there are three edge-disjoint paths between w1 and w2 in G. Then ∼ is an equivalence relation [19] which partitions the vertex set V into equivalence classes U0 , . . . , Uk . For j = 0, . . . , k let Hj = G[Uj ] be the subgraph of G induced by Uj . Each Hj is either a maximal 3-edge-connected induced subgraph of G, or a single vertex. Without loss of generality, suppose that u ∈ H0 and v ∈ Hk . Note that the number of edges from Hi to Hj is either 0, 1 or 2 for all i 6= j, by construction. e of G by replacing each Hj by a single vertex hj , which we Define the node-link multigraph G call a node, and replacing each edge from a vertex of Hi to a vertex of Hj by an edge from hi to hj , which we call a link. In particular, if there is a 2-edge-cut from Hi to Hj in G then e Each node has even degree in G, e by Lemma 1.2(i). the link hi hj has multiplicity 2 in G. e belongs to a cycle (possibly a 2-cycle, which is a double link), Furthermore, every link in G e must be edge-disjoint, or the corresponding edge of by Lemma 1.2(ii), and these cycles in G e is a planar multigraph (with edge multiplicity G cannot be part of a 2-edge-cut. Therefore G at most two) which has a tree-like structure, as illustrated in Figure 11: the black squares e A node of G e which belongs to more than one cycle is a join node. represent the nodes of G. 35  hk h0 e Figure 11: The node-link graph G  e have degree two. The join nodes each have degree 4, and all other nodes of G Since we seek an upper bound on Λ(u, v) for a given number of vertices n, we may assume e lie on some path from h0 to hk in G. e (This corresponds to trimming all that all nodes of G e which do not lie on the unique “path” from h0 to hk in G, e viewed as a tree.) “branches” of G This only removes 2-edge-cuts of G which do not separate u and v. Hence for an upper bound, e consists of ℓ cycles C1 , . . . , Cℓ , by relabelling the nodes if necessary, we can assume that G where h0 belongs only to C1 and hk belongs only to Cℓ , such that Cj and Cj+1 intersect at a single join node hj , for j = 1, . . . , ℓ − 1, while all other cycles are disjoint. This situation is illustrated in Figure 12. (In particular, h0 and hk are not join nodes.)  C1 h0  C2  C3  h1  h2  C4  hk  h3  Figure 12: The node-link graph after trimming: an example with ℓ = 4 cycles. Each cycle Cj can be considered as the disjoint union of two paths between hj−1 and hj , or between hℓ−1 and hk if j = ℓ. Denote by aj , a′j the lengths of these two paths around e which Cj . Any 2-edge-cut which separates u from v in G corresponds to a pair of links in G both belong to some cycle Cj , with one link from each of the two paths which comprise Cj . P Hence Λ(u, v) = ℓj=1 aj a′j . If the length aj + a′j of each cycle is fixed then the quantity aj a′j P is maximised when |aj − a′j | ≤ 1. Therefore Λ(u, v) ≤ ℓi=1 s2i , where sj = |Cj |/2 ≥ 1. (This upper bound holds P evenwhen some cycles have odd length.) Now, the total number of nodes ℓ e in G is N = 2 j=1 sj − (ℓ − 1), by inclusion-exclusion. Thus, for a given number of nodes N and a given value of ℓ, the bound S is maximised by setting sj = 1 for j = 2, . . . , ℓ, and s1 = (N − ℓ + 1)/2. Therefore (N − ℓ + 1)2 + ℓ − 1. Λ(u, v) ≤ T = 4  (A.1)  First suppose that r ≥ 3. Then every subgraph Hj must contain a vertex which is only 36  e has degree at most 4. Therefore each adjacent to other vertices of Hj , since every node in G e Note that Hj must contain at least 2r + 1 vertices, so there are N ≤ n/(2r + 1) nodes in G. dT /dℓ = −ℓ + 1 which equals zero when ℓ = 1 and is negative when ℓ > 1. So T is largest when ℓ = 1, giving Λ(u, v) ≤ T ≤ N 2 /4 ≤ n2 /(4r + 2)2 , as claimed. An extremal graph G is shown in Figure 13: each grey block is K2r+1 minus an edge. This construction gives an extremal example for any positive n = 0 mod (4r + 2), so this upper bound is asymptotically tight. Certainly the weaker bound Λ(u, v) ≤ n2 /(15r 2 ) also holds when r ≥ 3.  v u  Figure 13: Extremal graph when r ≥ 3. Now suppose that r = 2 and consider the induced subgraphs H0 , . . . , Hk . Again we may e then Hj may be as assume that s2 = · · · = sℓ = 1, giving (A.1). If hj is a join node of G e has degree 4. We call such a join node small as a single vertex, since each join node of G hj a singleton. Otherwise, if Hj contains a vertex whose neighbourhood is contained within Hj then Hj contains at least 2r + 1 = 5 vertices. In particular, this must hold for hk and for all nodes in C1 except h1 . A final option (only available when r = 2) is that a join node hj corresponds to to a subgraph Hj which is isomorphic to K4 , and hence has precisely four vertices: two of these vertices are joined to a vertex in Hj−1 and two are joined to Hj+1 (or Hk , if j = ℓ − 1). Here we use the fact that any part Uj of the partition of V with more than one vertex must have at least 4 vertices, as G[Uj ] must be 3-edge-connected. Since G has no repeated vertices, at most every second join node can be a singleton, with the remaining join nodes contributing at least 4 vertices to G. It follows that Λ(u, v) ≤ T = s21 + ℓ − 1 and    (  10s1 + 5(ℓ − 1)/2 if ℓ is odd, ℓ−1 ℓ−1 +4 = n ≥ 10s1 + 2 2 10s1 + 5ℓ/2 − r if ℓ is even. For an upper bound on Λ(u, v) we take equality the above expression for n and assume that ℓ is even, leading to Λ(u, v) ≤ T = s21 − 4s1 + 2(n + 4)/5. (If ℓ is odd then only the term which is independent of s1 changes.) Hence dT /ds1 is negative when s1 = 1, zero when s1 = 2 and positive for s1 ≥ 3. It follows that for a given value of n, the maximum possible value of T occurs when s1 = 1 or when s1 is as large as possible. When s1 = 1 we have Λ(u, v) ≤ ℓ ≤ 2(n − 6)/5, at least when ℓ is even. A graph G on n vertices which meets this bound can be constructed whenever n ≥ 11 and n = 1 mod 5. The example shown in Figure 14 has n = 21 vertices and ℓ = 6 2-edge-cuts between u and v. Since 2(n − 6)/5 ≤ n2 /60 for all values of n, this establishes the required bound. 37  u  v  Figure 14: Maximum number of separating 2-edge-cuts for n = 21 Next, consider the subcase when s1 is as large as possible, for a fixed value of n. This is achieved by setting ℓ = 1, so there are no join nodes. Then every Hj has at least 5 vertices, so for an upper bound we take s1 = n/10 and Λ(u, v) ≤ s21 = n2 /100 < n2 /60. This completes the proof.  References [1] Z. Allen-Zhu, A. Bhaskara, S. Lattanzi, V. Mirrokni and L. Orecchia, Expanders via local edge flips, in Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, New York–Philadelpha, 2016, pp. 259–269. [2] E. Bender and E.R. Canfield, The asymptotic number of labelled graphs with given degree sequences, Journal of Combinatorial Theory (Series A) 24 (1978), 296–307. [3] V. Bourassa and F. Holt. Swan: Small-world wide area networks. In Proceedings of International Conference on Advances in Infrastructure (SSGRR 2003w), L’Aquila, Italy, 2003. Paper #64. [4] C. Cooper, M. Dyer, and C. Greenhill. Sampling regular graphs and a peer-to-peer network. Comb. Probab. Comput., 16(4):557–593, 2007. [5] C. Cooper, M.Dyer and C. Greenhill, Corrigendum: Sampling regular graphs and a peer-to-peer network. arXiv:1203.6111 [6] C. Cooper, M. Dyer, and A. Handley. The flip Markov chain and a randomising P2P protocol. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, ACM Press, New York, 2009. [7] P. Diaconis and L. Saloff-Coste. Comparison theorems for reversible Markov chains. Annals of Applied Probability, 3:696–730, 1993. [8] R. Diestel, Graph Theory (4th edn.), Springer, Berlin, 2010. [9] T. Feder, A. Guetz, M. Mihail, and A. Saberi. A local switch Markov chain on given degree graphs with application in connectivity of peer-to-peer networks. FOCS, 2006. [10] V. Guruswami. Rapidly mixing Markov chains: A comparison of techniques (a survey). Unpublished manuscript, 2000. arXiv:1603.01512  38  [11] A.J. Handley, Self-organising, self-randomising peer-to-peer networks, Ph.D. thesis, University of Leeds, 2013. [12] M. Jerrum. Counting, Sampling and Integrating: Algorithms and Complexity. Birkhäuser, 2003. [13] M. Jerrum and A. Sinclair. 18(6):1149–1178, 1989.  Approximating the permanent.  SIAM J. Comput.,  [14] R. Kannan, P. Tetali, and S. Vempala. Simple markov-chain algorithms for generating bipartite graphs and tournaments. Random Struct. Algorithms, 14(4):293–308, 1999. [15] J. Petersen, Die Theorie der regulären graphs, Acta Mathematica 15 (1891), 193–220. [16] P. Mahlmann and C. Schindelhauer. Peer-to-peer networks based on random transformations of connected regular undirected graphs. In SPAA ’05: Proceedings of the 17th Annual ACM Symposium on Parallelism in algorithms and architectures, pages 155–164, New York, NY, USA, 2005. ACM. [17] A. Sinclair. Improved bounds for mixing rates of Markov chains and multicommodity flow. Combinatorics, Probability and Computing, 1:351–370, 1992. [18] R. Taylor, Constrained switching in graphs, in Combinatorial Mathematics VIII, Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics vol. 884, 1981, pp.314–336. [19] W.T. Tutte, Connectivity in Graphs, University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1966. [20] N. C. Wormald. Models of random regular graphs. In J.D. Lamb and D.A. Preece, editors, Survey in Combinatorics, London Mathematical Society Lecture Notes 276. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999.  39

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
