Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_4301

Abstract:
A STENCIL SCALING APPROACH FOR ACCELERATING MATRIX-FREE FINITE ELEMENT IMPLEMENTATIONS∗  arXiv:1709.06793v1 [cs.NA] 20 Sep 2017  S. BAUER† , D. DRZISGA‡ , M. MOHR† , U. RÜDE§ , C. WALUGA‡ , AND B. WOHLMUTH‡ Abstract. We present a novel approach to fast on-the-fly low order finite element assembly for scalar elliptic partial differential equations of Darcy type with variable coefficients optimized for matrix-free implementations. Our approach introduces a new operator that is obtained by appropriately scaling the reference stiffness matrix from the constant coefficient case. Assuming sufficient regularity, an a priori analysis shows that solutions obtained by this approach are unique and have asymptotically optimal order convergence in the H 1 - and the L2 -norm on hierarchical hybrid grids. For the pre-asymptotic regime, we present a local modification that guarantees uniform ellipticity of the operator. Cost considerations show that our novel approach requires roughly one third of the floating-point operations compared to a classical finite element assembly scheme employing nodal integration. Our theoretical considerations are illustrated by numerical tests that confirm the expectations with respect to accuracy and run-time. A large scale application with more than a hundred billion (1.6 · 1011 ) degrees of freedom executed on 14 310 compute cores demonstrates the efficiency of the new scaling approach. Key words. matrix-free, finite-elements, variable coefficients, stencil scaling, variational crime analysis, optimal order a priori estimates AMS subject classifications. 65N15, 65N30, 65Y20  1. Introduction. Traditional finite element implementations are based on computing local element stiffness matrices, followed by a local-to-global assembly step, resulting in a sparse matrix. However, the cost of storing the global stiffness matrix is significant. Even for scalar equations and low order 3D tetrahedral elements, the stiffness matrix has, on average, fifteen entries per row, and thus a standard sparse matrix format will require thirty times as much storage for the matrix as for the solution vector. This limits the size of the problems that can be tackled and becomes the dominating cost factor since the sparse matrix must be re-read from memory repeatedly when iterative solvers are applied. On all current and future computing systems memory throughput and memory access latency can determine the run-time more critically than the floating-point operations executed. Furthermore, energy consumption has been identified as one of the fundamental roadblocks in exa-scale computing. In this cost metric, memory access is again more expensive than computation. Against the backdrop of this technological development, it has become mandatory to develop numerical techniques that reduce memory traffic. In the context of partial differential equations this is leading to a re-newed interest in so-called matrix-free techniques and – in some sense – to a revival of techniques that are well-known in the context of finite difference methods. Matrix-free techniques are motivated from the observation that many iterative solvers, e.g., Richardson iteration or Krylov subspace methods, require only the result of multiplying the global system matrix with a vector, but not the matrix itself. The former can be computed by local operations in each element, avoiding to set up, store, and load the global stiffness matrix. One of the first papers in this direction is [9], which describes the so called element-by-element approach (EBE), in which the global matrix-vector-product (MVP) is assembled from the contributions of MVPs of element matrices with local vectors of unknowns. The element matrices are either pre-computed and stored or recomputed on-the-fly. Note that storing all element matrices, even for low-order elements, has a higher memory footprint than the global matrix1 itself. ∗ Submitted  to the editors September 21, 2017. Funding: This work was partly supported by the German Research Foundation through the Priority Programme 1648 ”Software for Exascale Computing” (SPPEXA) and by WO671/11-1. † Dept. of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München ‡ Institute for Numerical Mathematics (M2), Technische Universität München § Dept. of Computer Science 10, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg 1 However, it requires less memory than storage schemes for sparse direct solvers which reserve space for fill-in, the original competing scenario in [9]. 1  2  S. BAUER, D. DRZISGA, M. MOHR, U. RÜDE, C. WALUGA, AND B. WOHLMUTH  Consequently, the traditional EBE has not found wide application in unstructured mesh approaches. However, it has been successfully applied in cases where the discretization is based on undeformed hexahedral elements with tri-linear trial functions, see e.g. [29, 1, 7, 13]. In such a setting, the element matrix is the same for all elements, which significantly reduces the storage requirements, and variable material parameters can be introduced by weighting local matrix entries in the same on-the-fly fashion as will be developed in this paper. Matrix-free approaches for higher-order elements, as described in e.g., [19, 25, 22, 23], differ from the classic EBE approach in that they do not setup the element matrix and consecutively multiply it with the local vector. Instead, they fuse the two steps by going back to numerical integration of the weak form itself. The process is accelerated by pre-computing and storing certain quantities, such as e.g., derivatives of basis functions at quadrature points within a reference element. These techniques work for arbitrarily shaped elements and orders, although a significant reduction of complexity can be achieved for tensor-product elements. However, these matrix-free approaches have also disadvantages. The element-based approach for evaluating the global MVP can lead to significant extra cost caused by redundant operations and redundant accesses to the solution vector. Also, by their design they do not provide direct access to individual matrix rows or the diagonal entries of the matrix. This information is required in classical relaxation methods and in many preconditioners. Additionally, while the low-order settings [29, 1, 7, 13] require structured hexahedral meshes, modern techniques for unstructured meshes only pay off for elements with polynomial orders of at least two; see [19, 22]. In this paper we will present a novel matrix-free approach for low-order finite elements designed for the hierarchical hybrid grids framework (HHG); see e.g. [4, 3, 5]. HHG offers significantly more geometric flexibility than undeformed hexahedral meshes. It is based on two interleaved ideas. The first one is a special discretization of the problem domain. In HHG, the computational grid is created by way of a uniform refinement following the rules of [6], starting from a possibly unstructured simplicial macro mesh. The elements of this macro mesh are called macro-elements and the resulting sub-triangulation reflects a uniform structure within these macro-elements. The second aspect is based on the fact that each row of the global finite element stiffness matrix can be considered as a difference stencil. This notion and point of view is classical on structured grids and recently has found re-newed interest in the context of finite elements too; see e.g., [12]. In combination with the HHG grid construction this implies that for linear simplicial elements one obtains stencils with identical structure for each inner node of a macro primitive, i.e., vertex, edge, face, and element of the macro mesh. If additionally the coefficients of the PDE are constant per macro-element, then also the stencil entries are exactly the same. Consequently, only a few different stencils (one per primitive) can occur and need to be stored. This leads to extremely efficient matrix-free techniques, as has been demonstrated e.g., in [3, 16]. Let us now consider the setting of an elliptic PDE with piecewise smooth variable coefficients, assuming that the macro mesh resolves jumps in the coefficients. In this case, a standard finite element formulation is based on quadrature formulas and introduces a variational crime. According to [10, 27], there is flexibility how the integrals are approximated without degenerating the order of convergence. This has recently been exploited in [2] with a method that approximates these integral values on-the-fly using suitably surrogate polynomials with respect to the macro mesh. The resulting two-scale method is able to preserve the convergence order if the coarse and the fine scale are related properly. Here we propose an alternative which is based on the fine scale. For this article, we restrict ourselves to the lowest order case of conforming finite elements on simplicial meshes. Then the most popular quadrature formula is the one point Gauss rule which in the simplest case of div(k∇u) as PDE operator just weights the element based reference stiffness matrix of the Laplacian by the factor of k(xT ) where xT is the barycenter of the element T . Alternatively, one can selectPa purely vertex-based quadrature formula. Here, the weighting of d+1 the element matrix is given by i=1 k(xiT )/(d + 1), where d is the space dimension and xiT are the vertices of element T . Using a vertex-based quadrature formula saves function evaluations and is, thus, attractive whenever the evaluation of the coefficient function is expensive and it pays off to  STENCIL SCALING FOR FINITE ELEMENTS  3  reuse once computed values in several element stiffness matrices. Note that reusing barycentric data on general unstructured meshes will require nontrivial storage schemes. In the case of variable coefficient functions, stencil entries can vary from one mesh node to 1 d` 2 + another. The number of possibly different stencils within each macro-element becomes d! O(2(d−1)` ), where ` is the number of uniform refinement steps for HHG. Now we can resort to two options: Either these stencils are computed once and then saved, effectively creating a sparse matrix data structure, or they are computed on-the-fly each time when they are needed. Neither of these techniques is ideal for extreme scale computations. While for the first option O(2d` ) extra memory is consumed and extensive memory traffic occurs, the second option requires recomputation of O(2d` ) local contributions. The efficiency of a numerical PDE solver can be analyzed following the textbook paradigm [8] that defines a work unit (WU) to be the cost of one application of the discrete operator for a given problem. With this definition, the analysis of iterative solvers can be conducted in terms of WU. Classical multigrid textbook efficiency is achieved when the solution is obtained in less than 10 WU. For devising an efficient method it is, however, equally critical to design algorithms that reduce the cost of a WU without sacrificing accuracy. Clearly, the real life cost of a WU depends on the computer hardware and the efficiency of the implementation, as e.g., analyzed for parallel supercomputers in [16]. On the other side, matrix-free techniques, as the one proposed in this article, seek opportunities to reduce the cost of a WU by a clever rearrangement of the algorithms or by exploiting approximations where this is possible; see e.g., also [2]. These preliminary considerations motivate our novel approach to reduce the cost of a WU by recomputing the surrogate stencil entries for a matrix-free solver more efficiently. We find that these values can be assembled from a reference stencil of the constant coefficient case which is scaled appropriately using nodal values of the coefficient function. We will show that under suitable conditions, this technique does not sacrifice accuracy. However, we also demonstrate that the new method can reduce the cost of a WU considerably and in consequence helps to reduce the time-to-solution. The rest of this paper is structured as follows: In section 2, we define our new scaling approach. The variational crime is a analyzed in Section 3 where optimal order a priori results for the L2 and H 1 -norm are obtained. In section 4, we consider modifications in the pre-asymptotic regime to guarantee uniform ellipticity. Section 5 is devoted to the reproduction property and the primitive concept which allows for a fast on-the-fly reassembling in a matrix free software framework. In section 6, we discuss the cost compared to a standard nodal based element-wise assembling. Finally, in section 7 we perform numerically an accuracy study and a run-time comparison to illustrate the performance gain of the new scaling approach.  2. Problem setting and definition of the scaling approach. We consider a scalar elliptic partial differential equation of Darcy type, i.e., −div K∇u = f,  in Ω,  tr u = 0  on ∂Ω  where tr stands for the boundary trace operator and f ∈ L2 (Ω). Here Ω ⊂ Rd , d = 2, 3, is a bounded polygonal/polyhedral domain, and K denotes a uniformly positive and symmetric tensor specified by the coefficient functions km , m = 1, . . . , M , where M ≤ 3 in 2D and M ≤ 6 in 3D due to symmetry. For the Darcy operator with a scalar uniform positive permeability, i.e., − div(k∇u), we can set M = 1 and k1 := k. The above setting also covers blending finite elements approaches [17]. Here K is related to the Jacobian of the blending function. For example, if the standard Laplacian model problem is considered on the physical domain Ωphy but the actual assembly is carried out  4  S. BAUER, D. DRZISGA, M. MOHR, U. RÜDE, C. WALUGA, AND B. WOHLMUTH  on a reference domain Ω := Φ(Ωphy ), we have Z Z (DΦ)(DΦ)> (1) a(v, w) = ∇w dx, ∇vphy · ∇wphy dxphy = ∇v · |det DΦ| Ωphy Ω where DΦ is the Jacobian of the mapping Φ, and vphy := v ◦ Φ, wphy := w ◦ Φ. 2.1. Definition of our scaling approach. The weak form associated with the partial R differential equation is defined in terms of the bilinear form a(v, w) := Ω ∇v · K∇w dx, and the weak solution u ∈ V0 := H01 (Ω) satisfies: a(u, v) = (f, v),  v ∈ V0 .  This bilinear form can be affinely decomposed as (2)  a(v, w) :=  M X  Z am (v, w),  am (v, w) :=  km (x)(Dm v, Dm w) dx,  v, w ∈ V := H 1 (Ω)  Ω  m=1  where Dm is a first order partial differential operator and (·, ·) stands for some suitable inner product. In the case of a scalar permeability we find D1 := ∇ and (·, ·) stands for the scalar product in Rd . Let TH , H > 0 fixed, be a possibly unstructured simplicial triangulation resolving Ω. We call TH also macro-triangulation and denote its elements by T . Using uniform mesh refinement, we obtain Th/2 from Th by decomposing each element into 2d sub-elements, h ∈ {H/2, H/4, . . .}; see [6] for the 3D case. The elements of Th are denoted by t. The macro-triangulation is then decomposed into the following geometrical primitives: elements, faces, edges, and vertices. Each of these geometric primitives acts as a container for a subset of unknowns associated with the refined triangulations. These sets of unknowns can be stored in array-like data structures, resulting in a contiguous memory layout that conforms inherently to the refinement hierarchy; see [5, 16]. In particular, the unknowns can be accessed without indirect addressing such that the overhead is reduced significantly when compared to conventional sparse matrix data structures. Associated with Th is the space Vh ⊂ V of piecewise linear finite elements. In Vh , we do not include the homogeneous boundary conditions. We denote by φi ∈ Vh the nodal to P basis functions associated P the i-th mesh node. Node i is located at the vertex xi . For vh := i νi φi and wh := j χj φj , we define our scaled discrete bilinear forms ah (·, ·) and ahm (·, ·) by (3a)  ah (vh , wh ) :=  M X  ahm (vh , wh ),  m=1  (3b)  ahm (vh , wh ) :=  Z 1 X X (km |T (xi ) + km |T (xj ))(νi − νj )(χj − χi ) (Dm φi , Dm φj ) dx. 4 T i,j T ∈TH  This definition is motivated by the fact that am (vh , wh ) can be written as Z 1 X X (4) am (vh , wh ) = (νi − νj )(χj − χi ) km (x)(Dm φi , Dm φj ) dx. 2 T i,j T ∈TH  Here we have exploited symmetry and the row sum property. It is obvious that if km is a constant restricted to T , we do obtain ahm (vh , wh ) = am (vh , wh ). In general however, the definition of ah (·, ·) introduces a variational crime and it does not even correspond to an element-wise local assembling based on a quadrature formula. We note that each node on ∂T is redundantly existent in the data structure and that we can easily account for jumps in the coefficient function when resolved by the macro-mesh elements T . Similar scaling techniques have been used in [30] for a generalized Stokes problem from Geodynamics with coupled velocity components. However, for vectorial equations such a simple scaling  STENCIL SCALING FOR FINITE ELEMENTS  5  does asymptotically not result in a physically correct solution. For the computation of integrals on triangles containing derivatives in the form of (2), cubature formulas of the form (3b) in combination with Euler-MacLaurin type asymptotic expansions have been applied [24, Table 1]. Remark 1. At first glance the Definition (3b) might not be more attractive than (4) regarding the computational cost. In a matrix free approach, however, where we have to reassemble the entries in each matrix call, (3b) turns out to be much more favorable. In order see this, we have to recall that we work with hybrid hierarchical meshes. This means that for each inner node i in T , we find the same entries in the sense that Z Z (Dm φi , Dm φj ) dx = (Dm φl , Dm φxj +δx ) dx. T  T  Here we have identified the index notation with the vertex notation, and the vertex xl is obtained from the vertex xi by a shift of δx, i.e., xl = xi + δx. Consequently, the values of R (D φ m i , Dm φj ) dx do not have to be re-computed but can be efficiently stored. T For simplicity of notation, we shall restrict ourselves in the following to the case of the Darcy equation with a scalar uniformly positive definite permeability; i.e., M = 1 and drop the index m. However, the proof can be generalized to conceptually the same type of results for M > 1. In Subsection 7.3, we also show numerical results for M = 6 in 3D. 2.2. Stencil structure. We exploit the hierarchical grid structure to save a significant amount of memory compared to classical sparse matrix formats. Any direct neighbor xj ∈ NT (xi ) can be described through a direction vector wj such that xj = xi + wj . The regularity of the grid in the interior of a macro-element T implies that these vectors remain the same, when we move from one node to another node. Additionally, for each neighbor xj ∈ NT (xi ) \ {xi } there is a mirrowed neighbor x0j of xi reachable by wj = −wj 0 ; see Fig. 1. Let ni = |NT (xi )| denote the stencil size at mesh node xi . We define the stencil ŝTxi ∈ Rni associated to the i-th mesh node xi restricted on T as Z (ŝTxi )j := (∇φxi +wj , ∇φxi ) dx . T  The symmetry of the bilinear form yields (ŝTxi )j = (ŝTxi +wj )j 0 . We recall that for each mesh node xi we have ni ≤ 7 in 2D and ni ≤ 15 in 3D. Out of these entries only 3 in 2D and 7 in 3D have to bePcomputed since the remaining ones follow from symmetry arguments and the observation that j (ŝTxi )j = 0. Due to the hierarchical hybrid grid structure, two stencils ŝTxi1 and ŝTxi2 are exactly the same if xi1 and xi2 are two nodes belonging to the same primitive; i.e., we find only 15 different kinds of stencils per macro-element in 3D (one for each vertex, edge, face, and volume primitive) and 7 in 2D. This observation allows for an extremely fast and memory-efficient on-the-fly (re)assembly of the entries of the stiffness matrix in stencil form. For each node xi in the data structure, we save the nodal values of the coefficient function k. With these considerations in mind, the bilinear form (3b) can be evaluated very efficiently and requires only a suitable scaling of the reference entries; see Sec. 6 for detailed cost considerations. 3. Variational crime framework and a priori analysis. In order to obtain order h and h2 a priori estimates of the modified finite element approximation in the H 1 - and L2 -norm, respectively, we analyze the discrete bilinear form. From now on, we assume that k|T ∈ W 2,∞ (T ) for each T ∈ TH . Moreover, we denote by k · k0 the L2 -norm on Ω and k · k∞ := supT ∈TH k · k∞;T defines a broken L∞ -norm. We recall that the coefficient function is only assumed to be elementwise smooth with respect to the macro triangulation. Existence and uniqueness of a finite element  6  S. BAUER, D. DRZISGA, M. MOHR, U. RÜDE, C. WALUGA, AND B. WOHLMUTH 5  4 6  7  3  2  10  0  1  20  30  70  60 40  50  Fig. 1: From left to right: Exemplary local indices j and their corresponding direction vectors of a 15 point stencil in 3D; Six elements attached to one edge; Four elements attached to one edge  solution uh ∈ Vh ∩ V0 of ah (uh , vh ) = f (vh ),  vh ∈ Vh ∩ V0  is given provided that the following assumption (A1) holds true: (A1) ah (·, ·) is uniformly coercive on Vh ∩ V0 (A2) |a(vh , wh ) − ah (vh , wh )| . hk∇kk∞ k∇vh k0 k∇wh k0 ,  vh , wh ∈ Vh  Here and in the following, the notation . is used as abbreviation for ≤ C, where C < ∞ is independent of the mesh-size h. The assumption (A2), if combined with Strang’s first lemma, yields that the finite element solution results in O(h) a priori estimates with respect to the H 1 norm; see, e.g., [10, 27]. We note that for h small enough, the uniform coercivity (A1) follows from the consistency assumption (A2), since for vh ∈ Vh ah (vh , vh ) ≥ a(vh , vh ) − |ah (vh , vh ) − a(vh , vh )| ≥ C(1 − ch)k∇vh k20 . Remark 2. As it is commonly done in the finite element analysis in unweighted Sobolev norms, we allow the generic constant C to be dependent on supΩ k/ inf Ω k, knowing that for large contrast applications this estimate is overly pessimistic and can be improved; cf. [26] and the references therein. However, since we are mainly interested in showing alternative assembly techniques to the standard finite element method and in comparing them to the well-established approaches in standard norms, we shall not work out these subtleties here. 3.1. Abstract framework for L2 -norm estimates. Since (A2) does not automatically guarantee optimal order L2 -estimates, we employ duality arguments. To get a better feeling on the required accuracy of ah (·, ·), we briefly recall the basic steps occurring in the proof of the upper bound. As it is standard, we assume H 2 -regularity of the primal and the dual problem. Restricting ourselves to the case of homogeneous Dirichlet boundaries, the dual PDE and boundary operators coincide with the primal ones. Let us denote by Ph u the standard Galerkin approximation of u, i.e., the finite element solution obtained as the solution of a discrete problem using the bilinear form a(·, ·). It is well-known that under the given assumptions ku − Ph uk0 = O(h2 ). Now, to obtain an L2 -estimate for uh , we consider the dual problem with uh − Ph u on the right-hand side. Let w ∈ V0 be the solution of a(v, w) = (uh − Ph u, v)0 for v ∈ V0 . Due to the standard Galerkin orthogonality, we obtain (5)  kuh − Ph uk20 = a(uh − Ph u, w) = a(uh − Ph u, Ph w) = a(uh , Ph w) − ah (uh , Ph w).  This straightforward consideration shows us that compared to (A2), we need to make stronger assumptions on the mesh-dependent bilinear form ah (·, ·). We define (A3) by  7  STENCIL SCALING FOR FINITE ELEMENTS  (A3) |a(vh , wh ) − ah (vh , wh )| . h2 kHkk∞ k∇vh k0 k∇wh k0 + hk∇kk∞ k∇vh k0;Sh k∇wh k0;Sh , where Hk denotes the Hessian of k and Sh := ∪T ∈TH Sh (T ) with Sh (T ) := {t ∈ Th ; ∂t ∩ ∂T 6= ∅}; see Fig. 2 for a 2D illustration. The semi-norm k · k0;Sh stands for the L2 -norm restricted to Sh .  Fig. 2: Elements in Sh (T ) (left) and Sh (right) for d = 2  Lemma 3. Let the problem under consideration be H 2 -regular, h be sufficiently small and (A3) be satisfied. Then we obtain a unique solution and optimal order convergence in the H 1 - and the L2 -norm, i.e., (6)  kuh − uk0 + hk∇(uh − u)k0 . h2 (kHuk0 + kHkk∞ k∇uk0 + k∇kk∞ (k∇uk0 + kHuk0 )). Proof. Given that h is small enough, (A1) follows from (A3). In terms of (5) and (A3), we  get (7)  kuh − Ph uk20 . h2 kHkk∞ k∇uh k0 k∇Ph wk0 + hk∇kk∞ k∇uh k0;Sh k∇Ph wk0;Sh .  The stability of the standard conforming Galerkin formulation yields k∇Ph wk0 . kuh − Ph uk0 . By Definition (3), we find that the discrete bilinear form ah (·, ·) is uniformly continuous for a coefficient function in L∞ (Ω), and thus k∇uh k0 . k∇uk0 . To bound the two terms involving k∇ · k0;Sh , we use the 1D Sobolev embedding H 1 ((0, 1)) ⊂ L∞ ((0, 1)) [28]. More precisely, for an element in H s (Ω), s > 0.5, we have kvk0;Sh . kvkH s (Ω) ; see [21]. Here we use s = 1 and in terms of the H 2 -regularity assumption, we obtain √ k∇uh k0;Sh ≤ k∇(u − uh )k0;Sh + k∇uk0;Sh . k∇(u − uh )k0;Sh + h(k∇uk0 + kHuk0 ), √ √ k∇Ph wk0;Sh ≤ k∇(w − Ph w)k0;Sh + hkuh − Ph uk0 . hkuh − Ph uk0 . Using the above estimates, (7) reduces to 3  kuh − Ph uk0 . h2 (kHkk∞ k∇uk0 + k∇kk∞ (k∇uk0 + kHuk0 )) + h 2 k∇kk∞ k∇(u − uh )k0 . Applying the triangle inequality and using the approximation properties of the Galerkin finite element solution results in the extra term h2 kHuk0 in the upper bound for ku − uh k0 . The bound for hk∇(uh − u)k0 follows by a standard inverse estimate for elements in Vh and the best √ approximation property of Vh ∩ V0 . Since for h small enough it holds c1 hk∇kk∞ ≤ 1/2 where c1 < ∞ is a suitably fixed positive constant, the upper bound (6) follows. 3.2. Verification of the assumptions. It is well-known [10] that assumptions (A1)-(A3) are satisfied for the bilinear form (8)  ãh (uh , vh ) :=  X t∈Th  d+1 X Z |t| X t t t k|t (xi )∇uh |t (xi ) · ∇vh |t (xi ) = k̄t ∇uh · ∇vh dx, d + 1 i=1 t t∈Th  Here xti denotes the vertices of the d-dimensional simplex t, i.e., we approximate the integral by a Pd+1 nodal quadrature rule and k̄t := ( i=1 k|t (xti ))/(d + 1). Thus, to verify the assumptions also for  8  S. BAUER, D. DRZISGA, M. MOHR, U. RÜDE, C. WALUGA, AND B. WOHLMUTH  ah (·, ·), it is sufficient to consider ah (vh , wh ) − ãh (vh , wh ) in more detail with ah (·, ·) given by (3). Let  t    t t t t t a1,1   at1,2 Ât :=   ... at1,d+1  a1,2 at2,2 .. . at2,d+1  ... ...  ...  a1,d+1 at2,d+1  , ..  . t ad+1,d+1  k1,1  t  k1,2  Kt :=  .. . t k1,d+1  k1,2 t k2,2 .. . t k2,d+1  ... ...  ...  k1,d+1 t k2,d+1  , ..  . t kd+1,d+1  R be the local stiffness matrix associated with the nodal basis functions φti , i.e., ati,j := t ∇φti ·∇φtj dx t and the local coefficient function with ki,j := 21 (k|t (xti ) + k|t (xtj )), i 6= j. The diagonal entries of Kt are defined differently as t ki,i :=  (9)  −1 X t t ki,j ai,j . ati,i j6=i  We introduce the component-wise Hadamard product between two matrices as (B ◦C)ij := Bij Cij and define the rank one matrix K̃t by (K̃t )ij := k̄t . Due to the symmetry of Ât and the fact that the row sum of Ât is equal to zero, we can rewrite the discrete bilinear forms. With vh , wh ∈ Vh , we associate locally elements vt , wt ∈ Rd+1 with (vt )i := vh (xti ), (wt )i := wh (xti ). We recall that if vh , wh ∈ Vh ∩ V0 and xti is a boundary node, then vh (xti ) = 0 = wh (xti ). Lemma 4. The bilinear forms given by (3) and (8) have the algebraic form (10)  ah (vh , wh ) =  d+1 1 X X ((vt )i − (vt )j ) (Kt ◦ Ât )ij ((wt )j − (wt )i ) , 2 i,j=1  vh , wh ∈ Vh ,  d+1 1 X X ((vt )i − (vt )j ) (K̃t ◦ Ât )ij ((wt )j − (wt )i ) , 2 i,j=1  vh , wh ∈ Vh .  t∈Th  (11)  ãh (vh , wh ) =  t∈Th  Proof. We note that (9) yields that the row sum of Kt ◦ Ât is equal to zero. Moreover, Kt ◦ Ât is by construction symmetric. Introducing for T ∈ TH the set Thi,j;T of all elements T ⊃ t ∈ Th sharing the global nodes i and j, we identify by it the local index of the node i associated with the element t and by jt the local index of the global node j. Then the standard local to global assembling process yields that the right hand side in (10) reads X 1 X X kitt jt atit jt . (νi − νj )(χj − χi ) 2 i,j;T i,j T ∈TH  t∈Th  Comparing this result with the definition (3b), we find equality since the coefficient function is assumed to be smooth within each T . The proof of (11) follows with exactly the same arguments as the one for (10). Although the proof of the previous lemma is straightforward, the implication of it for large scale simulations cannot be underestimated. In 2D, the number of different edge types per macroelement is three while in 3D it is seven assuming uniform refinement. All edges in 3D in the interior of a macro-element T share only four or six elements; see Fig. 1. We have three edge types that have four elements attached to them and four edge types with six adjacent elements. The algebraic formulations (11) and (10) allow us to estimate the effects of the variational crime introduced by the stencil scaling approach. Lemma 5. Assumptions (A2) and (A3) hold true. Proof. The required O(h) bound for (A2) is straightforward and also holds true for any unstructured mesh refinement strategy. Recalling that Kt = K̃t if the coefficient function k restricted  STENCIL SCALING FOR FINITE ELEMENTS  9  to t is a constant, (11) and (10) yield d+1   1 X X ((vt )i − (vt )j ) (Kt − K̃t ) ◦ Ât ((wt )j − (wt )i ) 2 ij t∈Th i,j=1   . h2−d max λmax (Kt − K̃t )λmax (Ât ) k∇vh k0 k∇wh k0 t∈Th   . max λmax (Kt − K̃t ) k∇vh k0 k∇wh k0 . hk∇kkL∞ k∇vh k0 k∇wh k0 ,  |ah (vh , wh ) − ãh (vh , wh )| =  t∈Th  where λmax (·) denotes the maximal eigenvalue of its argument. To show (A3), we have to exploit the structure of the mesh Th . Let EhT be the set of all edges in T̄ and The;T the subset of elements t ⊂ T which share the edge e having the two global nodes i and j as endpoints. As before, we identify the local indices of these endpoints by it and jt . We note that the two sets EhT and EhT̂ , T 6= T̂ are not necessarily disjoint. Observing that each element t ⊂ T is exactly contained in 21 d(d + 1) elements of The;T , we find ah (vh , wh )−ãh (vh , wh ) =   X X X 1 ((vt )it − (vt )jt ) (Kt − K̃t ) ◦ Ât ((wt )jt − (wt )it ), d(d + 1) it j t T e;T T ∈TH e∈Eh t∈T h  and thus it is sufficient to focus on the contributions resulting from t ∈ The;T . We consider two cases separately: First, we consider the case that the edge e is part of ∂T for at least one T , then we directly find the upper bound hk∇kkL∞ (t) k∇vh kt k∇wh kt . Second, we consider the case that e is in the interior of one T . Then for each element t ∈ The;T there exists exactly one tm ∈ The;T such that tm is obtained by point reflection at the midpoint of the edge e; see Fig. 3. In the following, we exploit that the midpoint of the edge is the barycenter of t ∪ tm . Here the local indices it and jt are associated with the global nodes i and j, respectively. m Without loss of generality, we assume a local renumbering such that it = 1, jt = 2 and that xtim t is the point reflected vertex of xtit ; see also Fig. 3. j 3  2 1 t  tm 1  3  2  i  (a) Local numbering along an inner edge e in 2D  (b) Local numbering along an inner edge e in 3D  Fig. 3: Local numbering in element t and its point reflected element tm in 2D and 3D  10  S. BAUER, D. DRZISGA, M. MOHR, U. RÜDE, C. WALUGA, AND B. WOHLMUTH  Let us next focus on t Eij (vh , wh ) := ((vt )1 − (vt )2 )((Kt − K̃t ) ◦ Ât )1,2 ((wt )2 − (wt )1 )  +((vtm )2 − (vtm )1 )((Ktm − K̃tm ) ◦ Atm )2,1 ((wtm )1 − (wtm )2 ) . t (·, ·) by the local H 1 -seminorms Exploiting the fact that (Ât )1,2 = (Âtm )2,1 , we can bound Eij d+1  t Eij (vh , wh ) .k∇vh k0;t∪tm k∇wh k0;t∪tm (k|T (xi ) + k|T (xj )) −  m 1 X (k|T (xtl ) + k|T (xtl )) . d+1  l=1  m  A Taylor expansion of k in 12 (xt1 + xt1 ) = 12 (xi + xj ) guarantees that the terms of zeroth and first order cancel out and only second order derivatives of k scaled with h2 remain, i.e., t Eij (vh , wh ) .h2 kHkkL∞ (t∪tm ) k∇vh k0;t∪tm k∇wh k0;t∪tm .  Then the summation over all macro elements, all edges, and all elements in the subsets Tle;T in combination with a finite covering argument [14] yields the upper bound of (A3). 4. Guaranteed uniform coercivity. While for our hierarchical hybrid mesh framework the assumptions (A2) and (A3) are satisfied and thus asymptotically, i.e., for h sufficiently small, also (A1) is satisfied, (A1) is not necessarily guaranteed for any given mesh Th . Lemma 6. If the matrix representation of the discrete Laplace operator is an M-matrix, then the scaled bilinear form ah (·, ·) is positive semi-definite on Vh × Vh for k globally smooth. Proof. Let Âh be the matrix representation of the discrete Laplace operator, P then the Mmatrix property guarantees that (Âh )ij ≤ 0 for i 6= j. Taking into account that T ∈TH ŝTij = (Âh )ij , definition (3) for the special case M = 1 and k globally smooth yields ah (vh , vh ) =  −1 X (k(xi ) + k(xj ))(νi − νj )2 (Âh )ij ≥ 0. 4 i,j  Remark 7. In 2D it is well-known [11] that if all elements of the macro mesh have no obtuse angle, then Âh is an M-matrix and we are in the setting of Lemma 6. 4.1. Pre-asymptotic modification in 2D based on (A2). Here we work out the technical details of a modification in 2D that guarantees uniform ellipticity assuming that at least one macroelement T has an obtuse angle. Our modification yields a linear condition on the local mesh-size depending on the discrete gradient of k. It only applies to selected stencil directions. In 2D our 7-point stencil associated with an interior fine grid node has exactly two positive off-center entries if the associated macro-element has an obtuse angle. We call the edges associated with a positive reference stencil entry to be of gray type. With each macro-element T , we associate the reference stiffness matrix ÂT . Without loss of generality, we assume that the local enumeration is done in such a way that the largest interior angle of the macro-element T is located at the local node 3, i.e., if T has an obtuse angle then aT1,2 > 0, aT1,3 < 0, and aT2,3 < 0 and otherwise aTi,j ≤ 0, 1 ≤ i < j ≤ 3. By λTmin we denote the smallest non-degenerated eigenvalue of the generalized eigenvalue problem  T    a1,1 aT1,2 aT1,3 2 −1 −1 2 −1  x, x ∈ R3 . ÂT x := aT1,2 aT2,2 aT2,3  x = λ  −1 T T T −1 −1 2 a1,3 a2,3 a3,3 We note that both matrices in the eigenvalue problem are symmetric, positive semi-definite and have the same one dimensional kernel and thus λTmin > 0.  11  STENCIL SCALING FOR FINITE ELEMENTS  Let e be a gray type edge. For each such edge e, we possibly adapt our approach locally. We denote by ωe;T the element patch of all elements t ∈ Th , such that t ⊂ T and e ⊂ ∂t. Then we define 1 ke;min := mine kẽ , kẽ := (k|T (xẽ1 ) + k|T (xẽ2 )) ẽ∈Eh 2 where Ehe is the set of all edges being in ω̄e;T , and xẽ1 and xẽ2 are the two endpoints of ẽ. In the pre-asymptotic regime, i.e., if (ke − ke;min )aT1,2 > ke;min λTmin  (MA2)  we replace the scaling factor ke = 12 (k|T (xe1 ) + k|T (xe2 )) in definition (3) by ! λTmin mod ke := ke;min 1 + T . a1,2 Then it is obvious that ke;min < kemod < ke . We note that 2aT1,2 is the value of the 7-point stencil associated with a gray edge and thus trivial to access. Lemma 8. Let the bilinear form be modified according to (MA2), then it is uniformly positive definite on Vh ∩ V0 × Vh ∩ V0 for all simplicial hierarchical meshes. Proof. As it holds true for standard bilinear forms also our modified one can be decomposed into element contributions. The local stiffness At matrix for t ⊂ T associated with (3) reads At = t t t t t Kt ◦ Ât = Kt ◦ ÂT and can be rewritten in terms of kmin := min1≤i<j≤3 ki,j and δki,j := ki,j − kmin as (12)   −aT1,2 t t  T At = kmin ÂT + δk1,2 a1,2 0  aT1,2 −aT1,2 0      0 −aT1,3 t 0 + δk1,3  0 aT1,3 0  0 0 0      0 aT1,3 t  0 0  + δk2,3 0 −aT1,3  0 −aT2,3 aT2,3  0    aT2,3  −aT2,3  t where we use a consistent local node enumeration. We note that each δki,j ≥ 0. Now we consider two cases separately.  First, let t ⊂ T and T be a macro-element having no obtuse angle then we find that all four t matrices on the right of (12) are positive semi-definite. Thus, we obtain At ≥ kmin ÂT and no modification is required. Second, let t ⊂ T and T be a macro-element having one obtuse angle. Then the second matrix on the right of (12) is negative semi-definite while the three other ones are positive semi-definite. Now we find   T −a1,2 aT1,2 0 t t  T a1,2 −aT1,2 0 x x> At x ≥ kmin x> ÂT x + x> δk1,2 0 0 0 t t t ≥ λTmin kmin ((x1 − x3 )2 + (x2 − x3 )2 ) + (λTmin kmin − aT1,2 δk1,2 )(x1 − x2 )2 t ≥ λTmin ke;min ((x1 − x3 )2 + (x2 − x3 )2 ) + (λTmin ke;min − aT1,2 δk1,2 )(x1 − x2 )2 ,  where e is the edge associated with the two local nodes 1 and 2. Provided (MA2) is not satisfied, we have x> At x ≥ λTmin ke;min ((x1 − x3 )2 + (x2 − x3 )2 ) ≥ cke;min x> ÂT x. If (MA2) is satisfied, we t do not work with the bilinear form (3) but replace k1,2 with kemod . With this modification it is now obvious that the newly defined bilinear form is positive semi-definite on Vh × Vh and moreover positive definite on Vh ∩V0 ×Vh ∩V0 . The coercivity constant depends only on the shape regularity of the macro-mesh, min k, and the Poincaré–Friedrichs constant. Remark 9. From the proof it is obvious that any other positive scaling factor less or equal to kemod also preserves the uniform ellipticity.  12  S. BAUER, D. DRZISGA, M. MOHR, U. RÜDE, C. WALUGA, AND B. WOHLMUTH  Remark 10. We can replace in the modification criterion the local condition (MA2) by lT 2−(`+1) k∇kkL∞ (ωe;T ) aT1,2 ≥ inf k(x)λTmin , x∈ω̄e;T  where Th is obtained by ` uniform refinement steps from TH , and lT is the length of the second longest edge in T . Both these criteria allow a local marking of gray type edges which have to be modified. To avoid computation of ke;min each time it is needed, and thus further reducing computational cost, we set the scaling factor for all gray type edges in a marked T to (13)  1 (kmin (xe1 ) + kmin (xe2 )), 2  kmin (xi ) := min {k(xj ) | xj ∈ NT (xi )}  where NT (xi ) denotes the set of all mesh nodes that are connected to node xi via an edge and belonging to the macro element T̄ including xi itself. The quantity kmin can be pre-computed for each node xi once at the beginning and stored as a node based vector such as k is. For non-linear problems where k depends on the solution itself, kmin can be updated directly after the update of k. The presented pre-asymptotic modification based on (A2) yields a condition on the local meshsize and only affects edge types associated with a positive stencil entry. However, the proof of (A3) shows that a condition on the square of the mesh-size is basically sufficient to guarantee (A1). This observation allows us to design an alternative modification yielding a condition on the square of the local mesh-size and involving the Hessian of k, except for the elements which are in Sh . However, in contrast to the option discussed before, we possibly also have to alter entries which are associated with negative reference stencil entries, and therefore we do not discuss this case in detail. It is obvious that for piecewise smooth k there exists an `0 such that for all refinement levels ` ≥ `0 no local modification has to be applied. This holds true for both types of modifications. Thus, all the a priori estimates also hold true for our modified versions. Since we are interested in piecewise moderate variations of k and large scale computations, i.e., large `, we assume that we are already in the asymptotic regime, i.e., that no modification has to be applied for our 3D numerical test cases, and we do not work out the technical details for the modifications in 3D. 4.2. Numerical counter example in the pre-asymptotic regime. In the case that we are outside the setting of Lemma 6, it is easy to come up with an example where the scaled bilinear form is not positive semi-definite, even for a globally smooth k. For a given mesh size h, one can always construct a k with a variation large enough such that the scaled stiffness matrix has negative eigenvalues. Here we consider a 2D setting on the unit square with an initial mesh which is not Delaunay; see left part of Fig. 4. For the coefficient function k, we use a sigmoid function defined as k(x, y; m, η) =  η + 1, 1 + exp(−m(y − x − 0.2))  with m = 50 which yields a steep gradient. Further, we vary the magnitude of k by setting η ∈ {1, 10, 100, 1000}. Now, we assemble the global stiffness matrix and report in Tab. 1 for the different choices of η its minimal and maximal eigenvalue over a sequence of uniform refinement steps. We show the eigenvalues for our scaling approach (3) with and without modification (MA2) and for the standard nodal integration assembly (8). We find that for η > 100 the stiffness matrix of the scaling approach has negative eigenvalues in the pre-asymptotic regime. In these cases three or four refinement steps are required, respectively, to enter the asymptotic regime. However, the positive definiteness of the matrix can be recovered on coarser resolutions if (MA2) is applied. Asymptotically, the minimal or maximal eigenvalues of all three approaches tend to the same values. In Fig. 4, we illustrate the action of the modification and show how the region of elements where it has to be applied is getting smaller and finally vanishes with increasing number of refinement  13  STENCIL SCALING FOR FINITE ELEMENTS  Table 1: Minimal and maximal eigenvalues of the global stiffness matrix A. Italic entries highlight application of (MA2).  η\ ` 1 10 100 1000  0 2.7 2.8 -8.9 -128  1 0.72 0.89 -10.6 -148  2 0.18 0.24 -5.5 -94.5  η\ ` 1 10 100 1000  0 2.7 3.8 4.0 4.4  1 0.72 1.1 1.3 1.3  2 0.18 0.26 0.30 0.33  η\ ` 1 10 100 1000  0 2.8 5.7 27.7 247  1 0.72 1.3 1.8 1.9  2 0.18 0.27 0.34 0.38  scaling approach λA min 3 4 5 0 1 0.046 0.011 0.0029 9.1 13.3 0.063 0.016 0.0039 40.0 69.3 0.066 0.018 0.0045 353 633 -3.0 0.019 0.0049 3486 6265 scaling approach modified with (MA2) λA min 3 4 5 0 1 0.046 0.011 0.0029 9.1 13.3 0.063 0.016 0.0039 40.8 69.4 0.072 0.018 0.0045 364 634 0.078 0.019 0.0049 3598 6278 standard nodal integration λA min 3 4 5 0 1 0.046 0.011 0.0029 9.0 12.8 0.065 0.016 0.0040 36.6 64.9 0.076 0.018 0.0045 316 590 0.084 0.020 0.0049 3116 5840  λA max 2 3 15.1 17.4 80.7 93.2 739 853 7317 8450  4 19.8 108 985 9759  5 21.3 116 1066 10562  λA max 2 3 15.1 17.4 80.7 93.2 739 853 7321 8453  4 19.8 108 985 9759  5 21.3 116 1066 10562  λA max 2 3 14.7 17.1 78.4 90.7 717 829 7104 8211  4 19.7 107 977 9682  5 21.2 116 1064 10549  steps. To further illustrate how the region that is affected by (MA2) changes, we show a second example where all initial elements have an obtuse angle. The underlying color bar represents the coefficient function k with η = 1000 for the first (left), and η = 100 for the second (right) example. The location of the steepest gradient of k is marked by a dashed line. Note that the gradient of k is constant along lines parallel to the dashed one. For all edges that are modified by (MA2) the adjacent elements are shown. The color intensity refers to the refinement level and goes from bright (initial mesh) to dark.  Fig. 4: Application of (MA2): Mesh with two critical macro elements used for Tab. 1 (left) and mesh where all macro elements have an obtuse angle (right).  4.3. The sign of the stencil entries in 3D. In contrast to the 2D setting, a macro-mesh with no obtuse angle does not yield that Âh is an M-matrix. Here the uniform refinement rule yields that for each macro element three sub-classes of tetrahedra (gray, blue, green) exist. To each of these we associate one interior edge type (gray, blue, green) defined by not being parallel to any of the six edges of the respective tetrahedron type. Fig. 5 shows the sub-classes and as example the gray edge type. The coloring of the sub-classes is up to now arbitrary. We always associate the gray color with the macro-element and call the associated interior edge, a gray type edge. The  14  S. BAUER, D. DRZISGA, M. MOHR, U. RÜDE, C. WALUGA, AND B. WOHLMUTH  interior edges associated with the blue and green elements are called blue and green type edges, respectively. All other remaining edges are by notation red type edges. If the macro-element  Fig. 5: Uniform refinement of one macro-element T (left) into three subclasses (middle); gray edge between blue and green sub-tetrahedra (right).  T has no obtuse angle between two faces, then it follows from [20, 18] that the reference stencil entries, i.e., the entries associated with the Laplace operator, associated with gray type edges have a positive sign; see Fig. 6. However, it can be shown by some simple geometrical considerations that not both, green and blue type edges, can have a positive sign. If one of these has a positive sign, we call this the blue- and the other one the green-type edge. Conversely, if both have a negative sign, the coloring is arbitrary. In case the macro-element T has no obtuse angle, the sign associated with all red type edges is automatically not positive. Thus, we find for such elements in our 15-point stencil either two or four positive off-diagonal entries. Then a modification similar to the one proposed for the 2D case can be now applied to the edges of gray and possibly blue type. The situation can be drastically different if the macro-element T has an obtuse angle between two faces. In that case, we find up to four edge directions which carry a positive sign in the stencil. 5. Reproduction property and primitive concept. As already mentioned, our goal is to reduce the cost of a WU and the run-times while preserving discretization errors that are qualitatively and quantitatively on the same level as for standard conforming finite elements. Here we focus on the 3D case, but similar results can be obtained for the 2D setting. The a priori bounds of Lemma 3 do not necessarily guarantee that for an affine coefficient function k and affine solution u the error is equal to zero. In the upper bound (6) a term of the form k∇kk∞ k∇uk0 remains. A closer look at the proof reveals that this non-trivial contribution can be traced back to the terms associated with nodes on the boundary of a macro-element. This observation motivates us to introduce a modification of our stencil scaling approach. As already mentioned, all nodes are grouped into primitives and we have easy access to the elements of these primitives. Recall that ãh (·, ·) defined as in (8) is associated with the standard finite element approach with nodal quadrature. Let us by WV , WE , and WF denote the set of all nodes associated with the vertex, edge, and face primitives, respectively. Now we introduce a modified stencil scaling approach, cf. (3) and (8),  ãh (vh , φi ), i∈I (14) ah;I (vh , φi ) := . ah (vh , φi ) i 6∈ I Replacing ah (·, ·) by ah;I (·, ·) with I ⊂ W := WV ∪ WE ∪ WF still yields that all node stencils associated with a node in a volume primitive are cheap to assemble. The number of node stencils which have to be more expensively assembled grow only at most with 4` while the total number of nodes grows with 8` . Remark 11. The modification (14) introduces an asymmetry in the definition of the stiffness matrix to which multigrid solvers are not sensitive. Moreover, the asymmetry tends asymptotically  15  STENCIL SCALING FOR FINITE ELEMENTS  +8.3e-02  -5.9e-02  -3.3e-01  +8.3e-02  -8.3e-02  -8.3e-02  -1.7e-01  -2.9e-01  -3.3e-01  -8.3e-02  +8.3e-02  +2.4e+00  -2.9e-01  -2.9e-01  -2.9e-01  +1.2e-01  +8.3e-02  (a) Unit reference tetrahedron: x1 = (0, 0, 0), x2 = (1, 0, 0) x3 = (0, 1, 0), x4 = (0, 0, 1)  -5.9e-02  -5.9e-02  -8.3e-02  -3.3e-01  +1.2e-01  -2.9e-01  -1.7e-01  +1.7e+00  -3.3e-01  -2.9e-01  -2.9e-01  -2.9e-01  -5.9e-02  (b) Regular tetrahedron: √ √ x1 = (1, 0, −1/ 2) , x2 = (−1, 0, −1/ 2) √ √ 1 1 x3 = (0, 1, + / 2) , x4 = (0, −1, + / 2)  Fig. 6: Stencil entries colored by their sign at an inner node of two times refined tetrahedra, each without any obtuse angles between faces. On the left (A), the stencil of the unit reference tetrahedron and on the right (B), the stencil of a regular tetrahedron is depicted. The gray edge corresponds to the interior edge through 21 (x1 + x3 ) and 21 (x2 + x4 ). The green edge is the one in direction between x1 and x3 and the blue one in direction between x2 and x4 . All other edge directions are marked in red.  to zero with O(h2 ). Lemma 12. Let I = W or I = WV ∪ WE , then an affine solution can be reproduced if k is affine, i.e., uh = u. Proof. For i 6∈ W, associated with a node in the macro-element T and k affine, we have kij (ŝTi )j = (sTi )j , and thus the bilinear form ah;I (·, ·) is identical with ãh (·, ·) for I = W. Since then no variational crime occurs, we find uh = u for any affine solution u. The case I = WV ∪ WE is more involved. Here the bilinear forms ah;I (·, ·) and ãh (·, ·) are not identical. However, it can be shown that for any affine function vaff we find ah;I (vaff , ·) = ãh (vaff , ·) on Vh ∩ V0 . To see this, we follow similar arguments as in the proof of Lemma 5. This time we do not use a point reflected element tm but a shifted element ts ; see Fig. 7. We note that ∇vaff is constant and s 1 1 (k(xi ) + k(xi + wj )) − (k(xi ) + k(xi + wj 0 )) = k(xtc ) − k(xtc ). 2 2  (15) s  Here xtc and xtc stand for the barycenter of the elements t and ts , respectively. Two of the four vertices of element t are the nodes xi and xi + wj . The shifted element ts is obtained from t by a shift of −wj . This observation yields for a node i 6∈ WV ∪ WE that the sum over the nodes can be split into  16  S. BAUER, D. DRZISGA, M. MOHR, U. RÜDE, C. WALUGA, AND B. WOHLMUTH  Used bilinear form to define FE approximation  Discretization error in discrete L2 -norm  ãh (·, ·) standard FE ah;I (·, ·), I = W ah;I (·, ·), I = WV ∪ WE ah;I (·, ·), I = WV ∪ WF ah;I (·, ·), I = WE ∪ WF ah;I (·, ·), I = WV ah;I (·, ·), I = WE ah (·, ·) stencil scaling  3.85104e-15 2.10913e-15 1.75099e-15 6.82596e-04 9.19145e-07 6.82032e-04 9.17523e-07 6.81942e-04  (a) Element t and shifted one ts  (b) Reproduction property  Fig. 7: Illustration of the effect of the hierarchical mesh structure.  two parts ah;I (vaff , φi ) = ah (vaff , φi ) =  1 X (k(xj ) + k(xi ))(vaff (xj ) − vaff (xi ))(ŝTxi )j 2 j∈W  1 X (k(xj ) + k(xi ))(vaff (xj ) − vaff (xi ))(ŝTxi )j . + 2 j6∈W  For the second sum on the right, we have already shown equality to the corresponding term in the bilinear form ãh (vaff , φi ). We recall that each node j in W such that xi and xj form an edge has a point mirrored node xj 0 , i.e., xi = 0.5(xj + xj 0 ). For the first term on the right, we find that for a node j ∈ W it holds (ŝTxi )j = (ŝTxi )j 0 . In terms of vaff (xi + wj ) − vaff (xi ) = vaff (xi ) − vaff (xi + wj 0 ), the first summand on the right can thus be further simplified to  ni  1 1X (k(xi + wj ) + k(xi ) − (k(xi + wj 0 ) + k(xi )))(vaff (xi + wj ) − vaff (xi )) (ŝTxi )j . 2 j=1 2 Together with (15), this yields the stated equality. To illustrate Lemma 12, we consider a 3D example on the unit cube Ω = (0, 1)3 . We use as solution u(x, y, z) = −7x + y + 3z and k(x, y, z) = 2x + 3y + 5z + 1 for the coefficient function. The standard finite element solution reproduces the exact solution up to machine precision. We test the influence of the stencil scaling approach on different sets of primitives. In the right of Fig. 7, we report the discretization error in the discrete L2 -norm for different combinations. Note that the macro triangulation of the unit cube consists of 12 tetrahedral elements and of one non-boundary macro vertex at (0.5, 0.5, 0.5). These considerations show that the choice I = WV ∪ WE is quite attractive. The number of stencils which have to be expensively evaluated grows only with 2` while we still can guarantee the reproduction property for an affine solution in the case of an affine coefficient function. 6. Cost of a work unit. The stencil scaling has been introduced as means to reduce the cost of a WU and thus help to design less expensive and thus more efficient PDE solvers. We will now resort to a cost metric based on operation count. While we are aware that real run-times will be influenced by many additional factors, including e.g. the quality of the implementation, compiler settings, and various hardware details, the classic measure still provides useful insight. A hardware-aware performance analysis, as conducted in [16] to evaluate the efficiency on real  17  STENCIL SCALING FOR FINITE ELEMENTS  computers, is beyond our current scope. Since asymptotically the contributions from the element primitives dominate the cost, we restrict ourselves to the study of stencils for nodes located in the interior of a macro element T . 6.1. Cost for stencil scaling. Let ŝTi be the 15-point stencil associated with the Laplacian at an inner node i of T which is independent of the node location within T . Recall that the scaled stencil is given by sTij :=   1 κ(xi ) + κ(xj ) ŝTij , 2  ∀j ∈ NT (i) \ {i} ,  X  sTii := −  sTij  j∈NT (i)\{i}  where κ(xi ) represents either the value of the parameter k at node xi or a modified version of it as suggested in (13). Note that this definition is the direct translation of the approach described in Sec. 2.1 from the bilinear form to the pure stencil. Assuming that the constant 1/2 factor is incorporated into the stencil ŝTi at setup and taking into account the number of edges emanating from xi , being six in 2D and 14 in 3D, we can compute the non-central stencil entries with 12 and 28 operations, respectively. The computation of the central entry via the zero row-sum property takes 5 and 13 additions, respectively. This is summarized in Tab. 2. We next compare the cost for the stencil scaling approach to an on-the-fly computation based on classic FEM techniques which, however, exploits the advantages of hierarchical hybrid grids, see also [15]. Remark 13. The cost to approximate the stencil coefficients with the two-scale interpolation method of [2] amounts to q operations per stencil entry when the polynomial degree is chosen as q. When the coefficients are locally smooth, q = 2 delivers good results in [2]. The cost of this method becomes 2 × 7 = 14 operations in 2D, and 2 × 15 = 30 operations in 3D, respectively. This is slightly cheaper than the stencil scaling of this paper, but it neglects the setup cost that is necessary to construct the polynomials and completely ignores the fact that for a fixed macro mesh size no asymptotic optimality can be achieved. 6.2. Cost of the on-the-fly computation for the classical FEM. Employing the bilinear form (8) we can write the stencil coefficients as (16)  s̃Tij = ãh (φj , φi ) =  d+1 d+1 X X X X k(xt` ) ∇φjt · ∇φit |t| = k(xt` ) (E t )it ,jt (d + 1) e;T e;T  t∈Th  `=1  t∈Th  `=1  where t  (E )it ,jt  1 := (d + 1)  Z ∇φjt · ∇φit dx t  denotes the local stiffness matrix including the volume averaging factor 1/(d+1). The regularity of the mesh inside a macro element implies that there exist only a fixed number of differently shaped elements t. Thus, we can compute stencil entries on-the-fly from one (2D) or three (3D) precomputed stiffness matrices and the node-based coefficient values2 . In 2D, always six elements t are attached to an interior node. Summing nodal values of k for each element first would require 12 operations. Together with the fact that two elements are attached to each edge, computing all six non-central stencil entries via (16) would then require a total of 30 operations. This number can be reduced by eliminating common sub-expressions. We pre-compute the values k(xi ) + k(j2 ) ,  k(xi ) + k(j4 ) ,  k(xi ) + k(j6 ) ,  2 Note that in our HHG implementation, we use six element-matrices as this is advantageous with respect to local to global indexing; see [3] for details.  18  S. BAUER, D. DRZISGA, M. MOHR, U. RÜDE, C. WALUGA, AND B. WOHLMUTH  j5 j4 j6  j3  j1  j2  Fig. 8: Neighborhood of node i and edges [red/dashed] selected for common sub-expression elimination.  i.e., k for the vertices at the ends of the edges marked red in Fig. 8. Then, we obtain P3 we sum t `=1 k(x` ) by adding the value of k at the third vertex of t to the pre-computed expression. In this fashion, we can compute all six sums with 9 operations and obtain a total of 27 operations for the non-central entries. The situation in 3D is more complicated. This stems mainly from the fact that the number of elements sharing the edge from node i to node j is no longer a single value as in 2D. Instead we have in 3D that |The;T | = 4 for the gray, blue, and green type edges that emanate from node i, while |The;T | = 6 for the remaining 8 red type edges. Thus, for the computation of the non-central stencil entries we obtain the cost 6(4 + 3) + 8(6 + 5) + 40 = 170 . The factor 40 represents the operations required for summing the nodal k values employing again elimination of common sub-expressions; see [15] for details. Assembling the central entry involves contributions from 6 elements in 2D and 24 in 3D. Thus, executing this via (16) cannot require less operations than using the row-sum property. 6.3. Cost of stencil application. The cost of the application of the assembled stencil is independent of the approach to compute the stencil. Using the first expression in X X sTi v = sTij v(xj ) = sTij (v(xj ) − v(xi )) j∈NT (i)  j∈NT (i)\{i}  results in 13 operations in 2D and 29 in 3D. Exploiting the row-sum property avoids computing the central entry, but increases the cost for the stencil application, cf. second expression, so that in total only a single operation is saved. Tab. 2 summarizes the results of this section. We observe that assembling the stencil and applying it once in the scaling approach requires only about 1/3 of the operations compared to a classical on-the-fly variant. approach  dimension  non-central entries  central entry  assembly + application  stencil scaling  2D 3D  6 add / 6 mult 14 add / 14 mult  5 add / 0 mult 13 add / 0 mult  17 add / 12 mult 41 add / 28 mult  on-the-fly FEM  2D 3D  15 add / 12 mult 98 add / 72 mult  5 add / 0 mult 13 add / 0 mult  26 add / 18 mult 125 add / 86 mult  Table 2: Comparison of operation count for assembling and applying the stencil using either stencil scaling or on-the-fly assembly.  In 3D, the stencil scaling approach results in a total of 69 operations per node, and is thus only  STENCIL SCALING FOR FINITE ELEMENTS  2.4 times more expensive than save a factor of 3 compared to mized on-the-fly assembly and variants of on-the-fly-assembly  19  the constant-coefficient case treated in e.g. [3]. The 69 operations the 211 operations per node for the conventional, yet highly optiroughly an order of magnitude when compared with unoptimized techniques.  To which extent a factor three savings in floating point operations will be reflected in run-time (or other practical cost metrics, such as e.g., energy consumption), depends on many details of the hardware and system software. For instance, we note that in the above algorithms, the addition and multiplication operations are not ideally balanced and they do not always occur such that the fused multiply-add operations of a modern processor architecture can be used. Furthermore, advanced optimizing compilers will restructure the loops and will attempt to find a scheduling of the instruction stream that avoids dependencies. Thus, in effect, the number of operations executed on the processor may not be identical to the number of operations calculated from the abstract algorithm or the high level source code. Nevertheless, though the operation count does not permit a precise prediction of the run-times, we will see in the following that our effort to reduce the number of operations pays off in terms of accelerated execution. 7. Numerical accuracy study and run-time comparison. In this section, we provide different numerical results which illustrate the accuracy and run-time of the new scaling approach in comparison to the element-wise finite element assembling based on nodal integration within a matrix free framework. We consider different cases such as scalar and tensorial coefficient functions k and the scenario of a geometry mapping. Throughout this section, we denote the time-to-solution by tts and by the relative tts we always mean the ratio of the time-to-solution of the stencil scaling approaches with respect to the nodal integration. From our theoretical considerations for one stencil application from Tab. 2, we expect a relative tts of roughly one third. Further, we denote the estimated order of convergence by eoc and the asymptotic convergence rates of the multigrid 1/i∗ −5 ∗ solver by ρ defined as ρ = r(i ) /r(5) where r(i) is the L2 residual at iteration i, and i∗ the final iteration of the solver. Each of the following 3D computations was conducted on SuperMUC Phase 2 using the Intel 17.0 compiler together with the Intel 2017 MPI library. For all runs, we specify the compiler flags -O3 -march=native -xHost. Note that the serial runs using only a single compute core are not limited to run on large machines like SuperMUC but can also be run on usual modern desktop workstations with enough memory. The peak memory usage by our largest serial run was at about 4.46 GiB. 7.1. A quantitative comparison in 2D for a scalar permeability. In this example, we consider as domain the unit-square Ω = (0, 1)2 and use a non-polynomial manufactured solution u(x, y) =  x4 y . xy + 1  We consider as coefficient function k(x, y; m) = 2 + sin(mπx) sin(mπy) with m ∈ {2, 4, 8}. The right hand side is computed by inserting the above definitions into the equation. This construction has the advantage that we can study the effect of the magnitude of ∇k in a systematic fashion by adjusting m. We perform a study on a regular triangular mesh comparing errors of the discrete solutions obtained by two standard Galerkin finite element approaches and our proposed scaling approach. Results are listed in Tab. 3. Here, unh denotes the approximation obtained by employing a nodal quadrature rule resulting in bilinear form (8), while ubh uses a quadrature rule that evaluates k at the triangle’s barycenter. 7.2. A quantitative comparison in 3D for a scalar permeability. As a second test, we consider a non-linear solution similar to the 2D tests in the previous section u=  x3 y + z 2 , xyz + 1  20  S. BAUER, D. DRZISGA, M. MOHR, U. RÜDE, C. WALUGA, AND B. WOHLMUTH  midpoint integration L ku − ub eoc |u − ub h k0 h |1  eoc  0 1 2 3 4  3.75e-03 9.61e-04 2.42e-04 6.06e-05 1.51e-05  0.00 1.96 1.99 2.00 2.00  9.13e-02 4.60e-02 2.31e-02 1.15e-02 5.77e-03  0.00 0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00  0 1 2 3 4  3.61e-03 9.14e-04 2.30e-04 5.77e-05 1.44e-05  0.00 1.98 1.99 2.00 2.00  9.25e-02 4.62e-02 2.31e-02 1.15e-02 5.78e-03  0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00  l 0 1 2 3 4  ku − ub h k0 4.06e-03 9.16e-04 2.32e-04 5.97e-05 1.50e-05  eoc |u − ub h |1 0.00 1.01e-01 2.15 4.87e-02 1.98 2.35e-02 1.96 1.16e-02 1.99 5.78e-03  eoc 0.00 1.06 1.05 1.02 1.01  nodal integration ku − un k eoc |u − un h 0 h |1 m=2 3.25e-03 0.00 9.15e-02 8.59e-04 1.92 4.61e-02 2.18e-04 1.97 2.31e-02 5.50e-05 1.99 1.15e-02 1.37e-05 2.00 5.78e-03 m=4 3.64e-03 0.00 9.32e-02 1.02e-03 1.83 4.70e-02 2.81e-04 1.87 2.33e-02 7.27e-05 1.95 1.15e-02 1.83e-05 1.99 5.78e-03 m=8 ku − un eoc |u − un h k0 h |1 4.71e-03 0.00 1.07e-01 1.14e-03 2.04 5.09e-02 4.02e-04 1.51 2.55e-02 1.21e-04 1.73 1.20e-02 3.20e-05 1.92 5.84e-03  eoc  stencil-approach ku − ush k0 eoc |u − ush |1  eoc  0.00 0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00  3.34e-03 8.65e-04 2.18e-04 5.48e-05 1.37e-05  0.00 1.95 1.98 2.00 2.00  9.14e-02 4.61e-02 2.31e-02 1.15e-02 5.78e-03  0.00 0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00  0.00 0.99 1.02 1.01 1.00  3.54e-03 9.40e-04 2.43e-04 6.13e-05 1.53e-05  0.00 1.91 1.95 1.98 2.00  9.36e-02 4.67e-02 2.31e-02 1.15e-02 5.78e-03  0.00 1.00 1.01 1.00 1.00  eoc |u − ush |1 0.00 1.03e-01 2.04 5.23e-02 1.73 2.44e-02 1.90 1.17e-02 1.97 5.80e-03  eoc 0.00 0.98 1.10 1.06 1.02  eoc ku − ush k0 0.00 4.47e-03 1.08 1.09e-03 1.00 3.29e-04 1.08 8.80e-05 1.04 2.24e-05  Table 3: Results for a regular triangular mesh. Here, L denotes the (uniform) refinement level and eoc the estimated order of convergence.  with a parameter dependent scalar coefficient function k(x, y, z; m) = cos(mπxyz) + 2 on the unitcube Ω = (0, 1)3 discretized by six tetrahedra. We employ a multigrid solver with a V(3,3) cycle on a single compute core and stop after 10 multigrid iterations, i.e., i∗ = 10, which is enough to reach the asymptotic regime. In Tab. 4, we report convergence of the discretization error for the three approaches, i.e., classical FE with nodal integration, stencil scaling on volumes and faces, but classical FE assembly on edges and vertices, and stencil scaling on all primitives. The refinement is given by L where L = −2 denotes the macro mesh. We observe quadratic convergence of the discrete L2 error for all three approaches and a relative tts of about 32% on level L = 6. nodal integration  scale Vol+Face  L  DOF  error  eoc  ρ  1 2 3 4 5 6  3.43e+02 3.38e+03 2.98e+04 2.50e+05 2.05e+06 1.66e+07  2.46e-03 7.06e-04 1.80e-04 4.46e-05 1.11e-05 2.75e-06  – 1.80 1.97 2.01 2.01 2.01  0.07 0.13 0.16 0.18 0.17 0.16  1 2 3 4 5 6  3.43e+02 3.38e+03 2.98e+04 2.50e+05 2.05e+06 1.66e+07  3.17e-03 1.50e-03 4.83e-04 1.31e-04 3.32e-05 8.30e-06  – 1.08 1.63 1.89 1.98 2.00  0.07 0.15 0.19 0.19 0.20 0.21  error  eoc m=3 2.42e-03 – 5.97e-04 2.02 1.46e-04 2.03 3.59e-05 2.02 8.88e-06 2.01 2.21e-06 2.01 m=8 5.43e-03 – 1.54e-03 1.82 4.04e-04 1.93 1.01e-04 1.99 2.52e-05 2.01 6.29e-06 2.01  scale all  ρ  rel. tts  error  eoc  ρ  rel. tts  0.06 0.12 0.15 0.15 0.14 0.13  1.13 0.45 0.34 0.30 0.31 0.32  2.51e-03 6.05e-04 1.47e-04 3.59e-05 8.88e-06 2.21e-06  – 2.05 2.05 2.03 2.02 2.01  0.07 0.12 0.15 0.15 0.14 0.13  0.70 0.45 0.28 0.29 0.32 0.32  0.09 0.15 0.17 0.16 0.16 0.16  1.33 0.53 0.31 0.30 0.31 0.33  5.21e-03 1.56e-03 4.06e-04 1.02e-04 2.53e-05 6.29e-06  – 1.74 1.94 2.00 2.01 2.01  0.08 0.15 0.16 0.17 0.17 0.16  0.70 0.45 0.36 0.29 0.32 0.32  Table 4: 3D results in the case of a scalar coefficient function with errors measured in the discrete L2 -norm.  7.3. A quantitative comparison in 3D for a permeability tensor. As a third test, we consider a full symmetric and positive definite permeability tensor K with non-linear components.  21  STENCIL SCALING FOR FINITE ELEMENTS  L 1 2 3 4 5 6  DOF 8.55e+02 7.47e+03 6.26e+04 5.12e+05 4.15e+06 3.34e+07  nodal integration error eoc ρ 1.92e-03 – 0.07 4.40e-04 2.13 0.16 1.06e-04 2.05 0.24 2.60e-05 2.02 0.30 6.47e-06 2.01 0.35 1.61e-06 2.00 0.37  scale Vol+Face error eoc ρ 2.21e-03 – 0.07 5.19e-04 2.09 0.16 1.27e-04 2.03 0.24 3.15e-05 2.01 0.30 7.86e-06 2.00 0.35 1.96e-06 2.00 0.37  rel. tts 0.60 0.35 0.25 0.26 0.30 0.31  Table 5: 3D results in the case of a tensorial permeability with discretization errors measured in the discrete L2 -norm.  The off-diagonal components are negative or zero:  2 x + 2y 2 + 3z 2 + 1 −y 2 2 2  −y 2x + 3y 2 + z 2 + 1 K= 2 −z −x2   −z 2  −x2 2 2 2 3x + y + 2z + 1  The manufactured solution is set to u=  x4 y + 2z , xyz + 1  and we consider as domain the unit-cube discretized by twelve tetrahedra. We employ the same multigrid solver as in the previous subsection on a single compute core, but stop the iterations if the residual is reduced by a factor of 10−9 . We denote the final iteration by i∗ . The results for the classical FE approach and the stencil scaling approach on volumes and faces with classical FE assembly on edges and vertices are reported in Tab. 5. We observe quadratic convergence of the discrete L2 error for both approaches and a relative tts of 31% on our finest level L = 6. 7.4. Application to a blending setting and large scale results. To demonstrate the advantages of our novel scaling approach also for a more realistic scenario, we consider an example using a blending function, as mentioned in Sec. 2. To this end, we consider a half cylinder mantle with inner radius r1 = 0.8 and outer radius r2 = 1.0, height z1 = 4.0 and with an angular coordinate between 0 and π as our physical domain Ωphy . The cylinder mantle is additionally warped inwards by w(z) = 0.2 sin (zπ/z1 ) in axial direction. The mapping Φ : Ωphy → Ω is given by p  x2 + y 2 + w(z) √ Φ(x, y, z) = arccos (x/ x2 +y2 ) z with the reference domain Ω = (r1 , r2 ) × (0, π) × (0, z1 ). Using (1), it follows for the mapping tensor K  0 2  w (z) + 1 0 w0 (z) > p (DΦ)(DΦ) 1/x2 +y 2 0 0 . K= = x2 + y 2  |det DΦ| w0 (z) 0 1 Obviously, this tensor is symmetric and positive definite. In addition to the geometry blending, we use a variable material parameter a(x, y, z) = 1 + z. On the reference domain Ω this yields the PDE − div aK∇u = f . As analytic solution on the reference domain we set   x̂ − r1 π cos (4ŷ) exp (ẑ/2) . u(x̂, ŷ, ẑ) = sin r2 − r1 The analytic solution mapped to the physical domain is illustrated in the right part of Fig. 9.  22  S. BAUER, D. DRZISGA, M. MOHR, U. RÜDE, C. WALUGA, AND B. WOHLMUTH  Fig. 9: Macro mesh of the reference domain Ω (left) and analytic solution u (right) mapped to the physical domain Ωphy .  For our numerical experiments, we employ a macro mesh composed of 9540 hexahedral blocks, where each block is further split into six tetrahedral elements; see Fig. 9 (left). The resulting system is solved using 14 310 compute cores, i.e., we assign four macro elements per core. For the largest run we have a system with O 1011 DOF. We employ a multigrid solver with a V(3,3) cycle. The iteration is stopped when the residual has been reduced by a factor of 10−8 . In Tab. 6, we report the resulting discretization error, the asymptotic multigrid convergence order ρ, and the time-to-solution. L 1 2 3 4 5 6  DOF 4.7e+06 3.8e+07 3.1e+08 2.5e+09 2.0e+10 1.6e+11  error 2.43e-04 6.00e-05 1.49e-05 3.72e-06 9.28e-07 2.32e-07  nodal integration eoc ρ tts 0.522 2.5 2.02 0.536 4.2 2.01 0.539 12.0 2.00 0.538 53.9 2.00 0.536 307.2 2.00 0.534 1822.2  error 2.38e-04 5.86e-05 1.46e-05 3.63e-06 9.06e-07 2.26e-07  scale Vol+Face eoc ρ 0.522 2.02 0.536 2.01 0.539 2.00 0.538 2.00 0.536 2.00 0.534  tts 2.0 2.6 4.5 15.3 88.9 589.6  rel. tts 0.80 0.61 0.37 0.28 0.29 0.32  Table 6: Results for large scale 3D application with errors measured in the discrete L2 -norm.  These results demonstrate that the new scaling approach maintains the discretization error, as is expected on structured grids from our variational crime analysis, as well as the multigrid convergence rate. For small L we observe that the influence of vertex and edge primitives is more pronounced as the improvement in time-to-solution is only small. But for increasing L this influence decreases and for L > 4 run-time is reduced to about 30%. Acknowledgments. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Gauss Centre for Supercomputing (GCS) for providing computing time on the supercomputer SuperMUC at Leibniz-Rechenzentrum (LRZ). REFERENCES [1] P. Arbenz, G. H. van Lenthe, U. Mennel, R. Müller, and M. Sala. A scalable multi-level preconditioner for matrix-free µ-finite element analysis of human bone structures. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 73(7):927–947, 2008. [2] S. Bauer, M. Mohr, U. Rde, J. Weismller, M. Wittmann, and B. Wohlmuth. A two-scale approach for efficient on-the-fly operator assembly in massively parallel high performance multigrid codes. Applied Numerical Mathematics, 122:14 – 38, 2017. [3] B. Bergen. Hierarchical Hybrid Grids: Data Structures and Core Algorithms for Efficient Finite Element Simulations on Supercomputers. PhD thesis, Technische Fakultät der Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 2006. SCS Publishing House.  STENCIL SCALING FOR FINITE ELEMENTS  23  [4] B. Bergen and F. Hülsemann. Hierarchical hybrid grids: Data structures and core algorithms for multigrid. Numer. Linear Algebra Appl., 11:279–291, 2004. [5] B. Bergen, G. Wellein, F. Hülsemann, and U. Rüde. Hierarchical hybrid grids: achieving TERAFLOP performance on large scale finite element simulations. International Journal of Parallel, Emergent and Distributed Systems, 22(4):311–329, 2007. [6] J. Bey. Tetrahedral grid refinement. Computing, 55(4):355–378, 1995. [7] J. Bielak, O. Ghattas, and E.-J. Kim. Parallel octree-based finite element method for large-scale earthquake ground motion simulation. Computer Modeling in Engineering & Sciences, 10(2):99–112, 2005. [8] A. Brandt. Barriers to achieving textbook multigrid efficiency (TME) in CFD. Institute for Computer Applications in Science and Engineering, NASA saidLangley Research Center, 1998. [9] G. F. Carey and B.-N. Jiang. Element-by-element linear and nonlinear solution schemes. Communications in Applied Numerical Methods, 2(2):145–153, 1986. [10] P. G. Ciarlet. The finite element method for elliptic problems. Studies in Mathematics and its Applications. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam-New York-Oxford, 1978. [11] P. G. Ciarlet and P.-A. Raviart. Maximum principle and uniform convergence for the finite element method. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 2(1):17–31, 1973. [12] C. Engwer, R. D. Falgout, and U. M. Yang. Stencil computations for pde-based applications with examples from DUNE and Hypre. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, page 13, 2017. [13] C. Flaig and P. Arbenz. A highly scalable matrix-free multigrid solver for µfe analysis based on a pointerless octree. In I. Lirkov, S. Margenov, and J. Waśniewski, editors, Large-Scale Scientific Computing: 8th International Conference, LSSC 2011, Sozopol, Bulgaria, June 6-10, 2011, Revised Selected Papers, pages 498–506. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012. [14] L. E.-R. Gariepy and L. C. Evans. Measure theory and fine properties of functions, 1992. [15] B. Gmeiner. Design and Analysis of Hierarchical Hybrid Multigrid Methods for Peta-Scale Systems and Beyond. PhD thesis, Technische Fakultät der Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 2013. [16] B. Gmeiner, U. Rüde, H. Stengel, C. Waluga, and B. Wohlmuth. Towards textbook efficiency for parallel multigrid. Numer. Math. Theor. Meth. Appl., 8(01):22–46, 2015. [17] W. J. Gordon and C. A. Hall. Transfinite element methods: blending-function interpolation over arbitrary curved element domains. Numer. Math., 21:109–129, 1973/74. [18] S. Korotov, M. Křı́žek, and P. Neittaanmäki. Weakened acute type condition for tetrahedral triangulations and the discrete maximum principle. Math. Comp., 70(233):107–119, 2001. [19] M. Kronbichler and K. Kormann. A generic interface for parallel cell-based finite element operator application. Computers and Fluids, 63:135–147, 2012. [20] M. Křı́žek and L. Qun. On diagonal dominance of stiffness matrices in 3d. East–West J. Numer. Math., 3:59–69, 1995. [21] J. Li, J. M. Melenk, B. Wohlmuth, and J. Zou. Optimal a priori estimates for higher order finite elements for elliptic interface problems. Appl. Numer. Math., 2010. [22] K. Ljungkvist. Matrix-free finite-element computations on graphics processors with adaptively refined unstructured meshes. In Proceedings of the 25th High Performance Computing Symposium, HPC ’17, pages 1:1–1:12. Society for Computer Simulation International, 2017. [23] K. Ljungkvist and M. Kronbichler. Multigrid for matrix-free finite element computations on graphics processors. Technical Report 2017-006, Department of Information Technology, Uppsala University, 2017. [24] J. Lyness and U. Rüde. Cubature of integrands containing derivatives. Numerische Mathematik, 78(3):439– 461, 1998. [25] D. A. May, J. Brown, and L. L. Pourhiet. A scalable, matrix-free multigrid preconditioner for finite element discretizations of heterogeneous stokes flowc. Computer methods in applied mechanies and engineering, 290:496–523, 2015. [26] C. Pechstein and R. Scheichl. Weighted Poincaré inequalities. IMA Journal of Numerical Analysis, 33(2):652, 2013. [27] G. Strang and G. Fix. An analysis of the finite element method. Wellesley-Cambridge Press, Wellesley, MA, second edition, 2008. [28] H. Triebel. Interpolation theory, function spaces, differential operators. Second edition. Johann Ambrosius Barth, Heidelberg, 1995. [29] B. van Rietbergen, H. Weinans, R. Huiskes, and B. Polman. Computational strategies for iterative solutions of large fem applications employing voxel data. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 39(16):2743–2767, 1996. [30] W.-S. Yang. Variable viscosity thermal convection at infinite Prandtl number in a thick spherical shell. PhD thesis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1997.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
