Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_4318

Abstract:
Approximation Algorithms for Multi-Multiway Cut and Multicut Problems on Directed Graphs  arXiv:1610.02336v3 [cs.DS] 7 Feb 2018  Ramin Yarinezhad a Department  ✩a  , Seyed Naser Hashemia,∗  of Mathematics and Computer Science, Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran  Abstract In this paper, we present two approximation algorithms for the directed multi-multiway cut and directed multicut problems. The so called region growing paradigm [1] is modified and used for these two cut problems on directed graphs. By using this paradigm, we give for each problem an approximation algorithm such that both algorithms have the approximate factor O(k) the same as the previous works done on these problems. However, the previous works need to solve k linear programming, whereas our algorithms require only one linear programming. Therefore, our algorithms improve the running time of the previous algorithms. Keywords: Approximation algorithm, Computational complexity, NP-hard problems, Directed multi-multiway cut, Directed multicut cut  1. Introduction In the following, we first review some of the important cut problems which serve as a background for the problems focused in this paper. The undirected multiway cut problem is defined on an undirected graph G = (V, E) with a given set S = {s1 , ...s2 } ⊆ V of vertices called terminals and a weight function ce , e ∈ E. Here, the goal is to find the minimum weight subset of edges so ✩  Email address: yarinezhad@aut.ac.ir (Ramin Yarinezhad) author Email address: nhashemi@aut.ac.ir (Seyed Naser Hashemi )  ∗ Corresponding  Preprint submitted to ..  February 9, 2018  that by deleting them, all terminals in S are disconnected. In other words, there is not any path between any two considered terminals. It is proved that this problem, for k ≥ 3, is NP-hard and MAX SNP-hard, for which a 2 − 2/k factor approximation algorithm is given [5]. In [6], using a geometric relaxation, an algorithm with an approximate factor of 1.5 − 1/k is introduced and it is improved to 1.3438 − ǫk in [7]. For directed graphs, the version of the directed multiway cut problem is defined. Likewise, given a set of terminals S = {s1 , ...s2 } ⊆ V and a weight function ce , e ∈ E, we look for a minimum weight subset of edges which their deletions disconnect all directed paths between each pair of terminals. Vazirani and Yannakakis [3] showed that a directed multiway cut problem is also NP-hard and MAX SNP-hard. They introduced an algorithm with a 2 log k approximate factor. The best known approximation algorithm, presented by Noar and Zosin [4], used a novel relaxation multiway flow to have an approximation algorithm within a factor of 2. The problem of undirected multicut is another well-known problem defined on undirected graphs with a non-negative cost function ce , e ∈ E, and a set of ordered pairs of vertices, namely; (s1 , t1 ), ..., (sk , tk ), which are called sourceterminal vertices. In this case, the attempt is to achieve a minimum cost subset of edges so that removing them all sources become inaccessible from their corresponding terminals. For k ≥ 3 , it is shown that the problem is NP-hard and MAX SNP-hard [5]. Garg, Vazirani, and Yannakakis [1] give, by the region growing technique, an approximation algorithm with the O(log k) approximate factor. In [18] for this problem with more constraints, an approximation algorithm has been proposed with approximation factor O(rlog 3/2 k), where r is a part of the input instance. The directed multicut problem is defined as follows: given a directed graph G = (V, E), |V | = n with a non-negative function ce > 0, e ∈ E, and a set of ordered pairs of vertices (s1 , t1 ), ..., (sk , tk ), we find a subset F ⊆ E with minimum cost function so that their removal from the graph makes each pair disconnected. That is, for any i, 1 ≤ i ≤ k, there is not any directed path from 2  si to ti in the graph G(V, E − F ). Furthermore, if the desire is also to disconnect the paths from ti to si , for any i, 1 ≤ i ≤ k, we have an alternative version of the multicut problem called directed symmetric multicut problem. As shown in [3], for k ≥ 2, the directed multicut problem is NP-hard and MAX SNP-hard. In some papers have been shown that another version of this problem is NP-hard [13]. In literature, most of the works on directed multicut have been focused on the directed symmetric multicut problem [9, 10, 11, 12]. Even, Noar, Schieber and Sudan [11] presented an approximation algorithm with a factor O((log)loglogk). In general, for a non-symmetric version, using the √ technique region growing, an algorithm with the approximate factor O( nlogk) is given [14]. For the general case, Gupta [15] introduced a simpler algorithm √ and improved the approximate factor to O( n). Both problems above, studied by [14, 15], use a linear programming relaxation to approximate the solution. In the work of Saks, Samorodnitsky, Zosin [17], it is shown that the integrality gap for the linear programming relaxation is O(k). A more general problem on undirected graphs is the multi-multiway cut problem in which the weight function w : E → ℜ+ and k sets S1 , S2 , ..., Sk are given. Here, our aim is to obtain a minimum weight subset of edges whose removal from the graph will disconnect all connections between the vertices in each set Si , for 1 ≤ i ≤ k. For K = 1, this problem is an undirected multiway cut problem, and if |Si | = 2, (1 ≤ i ≤ k), an undirected multicut problem is obtained. Avidor and Langberg [2] showed that the undirected multi-multiway cut problem is NP-hard and MAX SNP-hard, and by using the region growing technique they could present an approximation algorithm within the factor of O(logk). When the input graph is a tree, in [16] has been shown that this problem is solvable in polynomial time, if the number of terminal sets is fixed √ and in [8] has been presented an approximation algorithm with a factor O( k). A directed version of the above problem is also defined namely as a directed multi-multiway cut problem. Similarly, for this problem a weight function w : E → ℜ+ on edges and k sets S1 , S2 , ..., Sk are given. We attempt to find 3  a minimum weight subset of edges whose removal from the graph will disconnect all paths between the vertices in each set Si , for 1 ≤ i ≤ k. This problem generalizes the problems of directed multiway cut and directed symmetric multicut (when k = 1 and |Si | = 2, respectively). Since every instance of the directed multiway cut is defined as an instance of the directed multi-multiway cut problem when k = 1, so the hardness proof for the multiway cut problem implies that the directed multi-multiway cut problem is also NP-hard and MAX SNP-hard. Note that the problem of directed multi-multiway cut cannot be viewed as a generalization of the undirected multi-multiway cut problem only by replacing each undirected edge by two unparalleled directed edges. For example, consider a tree with a root r, containing three leaves a, b, c, and assuming the weight of each edge is equal to one. In this case, we get the optimal value, OP T = 2, whereas substituting each edge by two directed edges gives OP T = 3, and this proves that two problems above are not equivalent. As described above, it is clear that the problems of directed multicut and directed multi-multiway cut can be approximated by a factor O(k). But for each of these problems, we require k linear programming to be solved in order to obtain the desired approximation solution. In this paper, we show that we can achieve the same result, i.e. an approximation with the factor O(k), by solving only one linear programming. To achieve this goal, the so called paradigm of region growing, introduced in [1] for undirected cut problems, is modified so that it can be useful to produce an approximate solution of the multicut and multi-multiway cut problems on directed graphs. 1.1. Organization The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In section 2 we present a linear programming relaxation for the Directed Multi-Multiway Cut problem which is used in [2] and [3]. Section 3 contains necessary definitions and lemmas for the algorithm Directed Multi-Multiway cut which proposed in section 4. Directed Multicut Algorithm presented in section 5 and Conclusion is brought in section 4  6.  2. Linear Programming Relaxation for the Directed Multi-Multiway Cut We define a decision variable x(e) for each edge e which is as following: if e belongs to directed multi-multiway cut, x(e) = 1, otherwise x(e) = 0. The purpose is to find a directed multi-multiway cut with the minimum cost which disconnects every directed path between two vertices in a group. We call that the set of all directed paths between any two vertices belongs to a group, with P . An integer program for the problem is given by: minimize  X  w(e)x(e)  e∈E  subject to  X e∈p  x(e) ≥ 1,  ∀p ∈ P  x(e) ∈ {0, 1}, ∀e ∈ E By relaxing this IP we obtain the following linear programming relaxation: minimize  X  w(e)x(e)  e∈E  subject to  X e∈p  x(e) ≥ 1, ∀p ∈ P x(e) ≥ 0, ∀e ∈ E  In this LP, there is a constraint for each path. On the other hand, we may have an exponential number of paths with respect to the input size and as a result, exponential number of constraints. Nevertheless, we can solve this LP in polynomial time, using the ellipsoid algorithm. For this LP, the separation oracle operates as following: we get a solution x and assume that the length of each edge e is equal to x(e). Then, we find the shortest directed path between two vertices which are needed to be disconnected from each other. For example (u, v), if the shortest path between u and v (either v → u or u → v) is more P than 1, then this constraint e∈p x(e) ≥ 1 is true for all paths between these  two vertices. Therefore, this LP can be solved in polynomial time. 5  To express the approximation algorithm for directed multi-multiway cut, we need several definitions and lemmas which are presented in the next section.  3. Definitions and Lemmas To round the solution of the mentioned LP and obtain a directed multimultiway cut, we use the region growing technique [1, 2]. Note that definitions in [1, 2] are related to undirected graphs while definitions presented here, are related to directed graphs. We define a distance on edges and assume x is an optimal solution for the LP. Let x(e) be the length of edge e. The distance between two vertices u and v (either v → u or u → v), which is defined based on x(e), is the length of the shortest path between them. We represent this shortest path with dist(u, v). If there is no directed path between two vertices u and v, the value of dist(u, v) is equal to the length of the shortest path in the graph, regardless of the direction of edges. We define:  Bx (sij , r) = {v ∈ V : dist(sij , v) ≤ r}, where 1 ≤ i ≤ k, 1 ≤ j ≤ |Si | and r ∈ R. Bx (sij , r) is an area like a ball with center sij and radius r. Assume that δ(s) is the set of all edges which only one of their heads is in the set s. For a given radius r, let wt(δ(Bx (sij , r))) be the sum of weights of all edges which one of their heads is in Bx (sij , r). wt(δ(Bx (sij , r))) is defined as follows:  wt(δ(Bx (sij , r))) =  X  w(e),  e∈δ(Bx (sij ,r))  where w(e) is the weight of edge e. The same as [2], let ci (r) be the sum of weights of directed edges whose one head only is inside these balls, where 1 ≤ i ≤ k. ci (r) is defined as follows:  6  |Si | X  ci (r) =  wt(δ(Bx (sij , r))).  j=1  Assume that each edge e in the graph as being a pipe with cross-sectional area w(e) and length x(e). Then, the product w(e)x(e) is equal to the volume of edge e. Thus, the solution of LP is the minimum volume of edges such that dist(u, v) ≥ 1, where u and v are in the same group, and there is a path between them (either v → u or u → v). Let x be an optimal solution for the LP, and P V ∗ = e∈E w(e)x(e) be the volume of all edges. We know that V ∗ ≤ OP T such that OP T is the optimal value for the IP. vi (r) is defined as follows:  vi (r) = βV ∗ +  |Si | X j=1  (  X  w(e)x(e) +  X  e=(u,v)∈E u∈Bx (sij ,r) v ∈B / x (sij ,r)  e=(u,v)∈E u,v∈Bx (sij ,r)  w(e)(r − dist(sij , u))),  where β > 0 and is independent from r. We have to notice that an edge may appear in ci (r) more than once. That means we may have δ(Bx (sij , r)) ∩ ′  δ(Bx (sij ′ , r)) 6= ∅, for 1 ≤ j 6= j ≤ |Si |. Thus, ci (r) is an upper bound on the cut. According to these definitions, we can express the Lemma 1, which is used in the proof of Lemma 2. Lemma 1: The function vi (r) is differentiable in (0, ∞) except some finite number of points. The derivative of this function is ci (r). Proof: The function vi (r) is not differentiable in points which the value of function Bx (sij , r) changes. The function Bx (sij , r), changes for the values of r in which there is a vertex v such that dist(sij , r) = r. Thus the number of points in which the function vi (r) is not differentiable, is finite. Beside this, according to the definition done for the function vi (r), the derivative of this function is ci (r).  Lemma 2 says in directed graphs, we can always find a radius r < 12 , such that the cost vi (r) is an upper bound for ci (r). 7  Lemma 2: Let x be a feasible solution for the LP, for every sij there is a r<  1 2  and at least an α (α > 0) such that the following inequality is true: ci (r) ≤ αvi (r).  The proof of this lemma is brought in the Section 4.1. We first present the algorithm using this lemma.  4. Approximation Algorithm for Directed Multi-Multiway Cut Our polynomial time approximation algorithm for directed multi-multiway cut is described in Algorithm 1. The algorithm solves the LP first and finds the optimal solution x. Then, the algorithm enters to a repetition loop and till there exists a path between two vertices in a group, the algorithm works as follows: assume that the set Si is chosen in this iteration. In the beginning, it finds an r which satisfies the inequality of Lemma 2, and then it finds the set of balls with the center of vertices inside the Si with the radius of r. Then it puts the edges, which have been cut by these balls, in the answer set F . Now the algorithm checks whether there are two vertices from another group which are connected by a path and are in the same ball. If there are such vertices, only the vertex in the center of each ball and its incident edges will be deleted from the graph. Otherwise, all of the vertices in balls and incident edges with them will be deleted from the graph.  8  Algorithm 1 Approximation Algorithm for Directed Multi-Multiway Cut Result: A Directed Multi-Multiway Cut F ←∅ Solve the LP and get the optimal solution x while there is a path between sij ∈ Si and sij ′ ∈ Si , where 1 ≤ i ≤ k and ′  1 ≤ j 6= j ≤ |Si | do Find ri such that ci (ri ) ≤ αvi (ri ) S|Si | δ(Bx (sij , ri )) to F Add j=1 S|Si | if j=1 Bx (sij , ri ) contains two vertices u, v such that u, v ∈ Bx (sij , ri ),  where 1 ≤ j ≤ |Si | AND u, v ∈ Sm , where 1 ≤ m ≤ k and m 6= i AND  there is a path between u and v then Remove sij , where 1 ≤ j ≤ |Si |, and incident edges with it form the graph else Remove  S|Si |  j=1  Bx (sij , ri ) and incident edges with it form the graph  end ∀l ∈ {1, ..., k}, Sl ← Sl ∩ V end Return F  Lemma 3: Algorithm 1 returns a Directed Multi-Multiway Cut. Proof: For each ball like Bx (sij , r), where 1 ≤ i ≤ k, 1 ≤ j ≤ |Si |, there is no vertex with the same group with sij in Bx (sij , r) because the radius of each ball is smaller than  1 2.  The only case may lead to problems is that there are  two vertices u and v in one ball, which are the members of another group and there is a path between them. In this case, only the central vertices and their incident edges will be deleted from the graph. Therefore, the path between the two vertices u and v will not be deleted from the graph. In the next iterations, at least one of the edges of the path between u and v will be put in the answer set. 9   Theorem 1: Algorithm 1 is a (α(1 + β)k)-approximation algorithm for Directed Multi-Multiway Cut. Proof: According to Lemma 2, we have ci (r) ≤ αvi (r), for every 1 ≤ i ≤ k. Pk Pk Thus, i=1 ci (r) ≤ α i=1 vi (r). Besides, according to the definition of vi (r) P and algorithm, we have ki=1 vi (r) ≤ (kV ∗ + kβV ∗ ) .Thus: F ≤  X  w(e) =  k X i=1  e∈F  ci (r) ≤ α  k X i=1  vi (r) ≤ α(1 + β)kV ∗ ≤ α(1 + β)kOP T.   4.1. The proof of Lemma 2 and finding the best values for α and β The proof of Lemma 2: We use the contradiction method. Assume that for every value of r <  1 2  and every α (α > 0) we have ci (r) > αvi (r). Thus we  have:  Z  0  1 2  ci (r) > αvi (r) Z 12 ci (r) dr > α dr vi (r) 0  According to Lemma 1, the function vi (r) is not differentiable at only a finite number of point. We call these points r0 = 0 ≤ r1 ≤ ... ≤ rl ≤ rl+1 = 12 . Thus we have: Z  0  1 2  X 1 dvi (r) ( )dr = vi (r) dr j=0 1  Z  ≤ lnvi (  10  rj+1  rj  1 dvi (r) ( )dr vi (r) dr  1− ) − lnvi (0). 2  Since vi (r) is an increasing function, we have 1 ≤ lnvi ( ) − lnvi (0), 2 as well vi (0) = βV ∗ as vi ( 12 ) ≤ βV ∗ + V ∗ . Thus, we have:  ln(  vi ( 12 ) βV ∗ + V ∗ α ) ≥ ln( )> βV ∗ vi (0) 2 α β+1 )> . ln( β 2  (*)  In order to reach a contradiction, we have to choose values for α and β such that the inequality (*) will not be true. On the other hand, the approximation factor of the algorithm is dependent on these two parameters directly. So we have to choose the appropriate value for α and β. Indeed, to find the best value for α and β, we should solve the following nonlinear program:  minimize α(1 + β) subject to ln(  β+1 α )≤ β 2  α, β > 0. We have solved this nonlinear program using Matlab software and found the optimal value of α and β. These values are as follows α = 0.1 and β = 20.504. If we put these values in the inequality (*), the contradiction is reached and Lemma 2 is proved. Using these values for α and β, the algorithm is an approximation algorithm with factor (2.1504)k for the Directed Multi-Multiway cut problem.   5. Approximation Algorithm for Directed Multicut Similar to the LP presented in the previous section can be provided an LP for the Directed Multicut problem. We define a decision variable x(e) for each edge  11  e which is as follows. If e belongs to the directed multicut, x(e) = 1, Otherwise x(e) = 0. The purpose is to find a directed multicut with the minimum weight which cuts each directed path from si to ti for 1 ≤ i ≤ k. We represent the set of all directed paths from si to ti for 1 ≤ i ≤ k with P . An linear programming for the problem is as follows: minimize  X  w(e)x(e)  e∈E  subject to  X e∈p  x(e) ≥ 1, ∀p ∈ P x(e) ≥ 0, ∀e ∈ E.  In this LP, there is a constraint for each path. On the other hand, we may have an exponential number of paths with respect to the input size and as a result, an exponential number of constraints. Nevertheless, we can solve this LP in polynomial time, using the ellipsoid algorithm. For this LP, the separation oracle operates as following: we get a solution x and assume that the length of each edge e is equal to x(e). Then, we find the shortest directed path from si to ti , for 1 ≤ i ≤ k. If the shortest path from si to ti , is more than 1, then the P constraint e∈p x(e) ≥ 1 is true for all paths from si to ti . So this LP can be  solved in polynomial time.  We provide a direct version of definitions like those used in region growth technique in [1]. We define a distance on edges, assume that x is an optimal solution for LP, let x(e) be the length of edge e. We show the shortest path from u to v, which is based on x(e), with dist(u, v). If there is not any directed path from u to v, the value of dist(u, v) is the shortest path between u and v in the graph, without noticing the direction of edges. Now we define:  Bx (si , r) = {v ∈ V : dist(si , v) ≤ r}. Bx (si , r) is an area like a ball with center si , where 1 ≤ i ≤ k, and radius r ∈ R. Assume that the product of w(e)x(e) is equal to the volume of edge e. Thus, the solution of the LP is the minimum volume of edges such that 12  dist(si , ti ) ≥ 1, for 1 ≤ i ≤ k. Assume that x is an optimal solution for the LP. P Let V ∗ = e∈E w(e)x(e) be the volume of all edges, indeed V ∗ is the optimal  value of LP. We know that V ∗ ≤ OP T such that OP T is the optimal value for  the IP. vx (si , r) is defined as follows: X  vx (si , r) = βV ∗ +  X  w(e)x(e) +  e=(u,v)∈E u∈Bx (si ,r) v ∈B / x (si ,r)  e=(u,v)∈E u,v∈Bx (si ,r)  w(e)(r − dist(si , u)).  Let δ(s) be the set of all edges which only one of their heads is in the set s. For a given radius r, we define:  wt(δ(Bx (si , r))) =  X  w(e).  e∈δ(Bx (si ,r))  According to these definitions, we can express Lemma 4, which is used in the proof of Lemma 5. Lemma 4: The function vx (si , r) is differentiable in (0, ∞) except some finite numbers of points. The derivative of this function is wt(δ(Bx (si , r))). Lemma 5 demonstrates that in directed graphs, we can always find a radius r < 21 , such that the cost vx (si , r) is an upper bound for wt(δ(Bx (si , r))). Lemma 5: Assume that x is a feasible solution for LP. For every si there is a r <  1 2  and at least an α (α > 0) such that the following inequality is true:  wt(δ(Bx (si , r))) ≤ αvx (si , r). The proof of Lemma 4 and Lemma 5 is similar to the proof of Lemma 1 and Lemma 2, respectively. In the rest of the paper, for simplicity we assume that wt(r) = wt(δ(Bx (si , r))) and v(r) = vx (si , r). Our polynomial time approximation algorithm for directed multicut is described in Algorithm 2. The algorithm first solves the LP and finds the optimal solution x. In every iteration, the algorithm finds a pair which there is a path 13  between and finds an area with a radius that satisfies the condition in Lemma 5. Then, the algorithm puts the edges, which have been cut by the area, in set F . If the area includes another pair (sj , tj ), and there is a path from sj to tj , then the algorithm removes only the central vertex of the area. Therefore, we can cut the path between sj and tj in the next iterations. Algorithm 2 Approximation Algorithm for Directed Multicut Result: A Directed Multicut F ←∅ Solve the LP and get an optimal solution x while there is a path between si to ti , where 1 ≤ i ≤ k do Grow a region S = Bx (si , r) until wt(r) ≤ αv(r) Add δ(S) to F if S contains a pair (sj , tj ), where 1 ≤ j ≤ k and i 6= j AND there is a path form sj to tj then Remove si and incident edges with si form the graph else Remove S and δ(S) form the graph end end Return F  Lemma 6: Algorithm 2 returns a directed multicut. Proof: Consider the ball Bx (si , r). The center of this ball is si . Vertex ti cannot be in this ball because the radius of the ball is less than  1 2  (r < 21 ).  Beside this, according to the LP constraint, we know that the distance between every pair (si , ti ), where 1 ≤ i ≤ k, should be more than 1. The only case may lead to problems is that there is a pair (sj , tj ), where 1 ≤ j ≤ k and i 6= j, in Bx (si , r) such that there is a path from sj to tj . In this case, the algorithm only removes the central vertex si from the graph, thus the pair (sj , tj ) and also the  14  path between these vertices are still in the graph. In the rest of iterations, the algorithm will make them disconnected.  Theorem 2: Algorithm 2 is an O(k)-approximation algorithm for the Directed Multicut problem. Proof: We demonstrate the set of vertices in the ball Bx (si , r) with Bi . We assume that Bi = ∅ when no ball is selected for vertex si . We also demonstrate the set of cut edges for Bi with Fi . It means Fi is equal to δ(Bi ). Thus, we have Sk F = i=1 Fi . Assume that Vi is equal to the volume of all edges which are in  the ball Bi and also the volume of edges which have one head in Bi . According  to this definition, we have Vi ≥ vx (si , r) − βV ∗ because Vi includes the volume of all edges in Fi . But vx (si , r) is contained only some part of these edges and an addition value βV ∗ . According to Lemma 5 and the value chosen for r in the algorithm, we have wt(Fi ) ≤ αvx (si , r) ≤ α(Vi + βV ∗ ). We know that the algorithm may not remove the edges which are incident with vertices in Bi in this iteration. Thus, an edge may belong to more than one area, on the other Pk hand, there are at most k areas. Therefore, i=1 Vi ≤ kV ∗ . So we have the following inequalities: X  w(e) =  e∈F  k X i=1  wt(Fi ) ≤ α  k X i=1  (Vi + βV ∗ ) ≤ α(1 + β)kV ∗ ≤ α(1 + β)kOP T.   Similar to section 4, the optimal value for α is 0.1 and β is 20.504. So Algorithm 2 is an (2.1504)k-approximation algorithm for the Directed Multicut problem.  6. Conclusions In this paper, we design approximation algorithms for the directed multimultiway cut and directed multicut problems using the region growing technique 15  [1, 2]. By this paradigm, we give for each problem an O(k)-approximation algorithm. The works previously done on these problems need to solve k linear programming, whereas our algorithms require only one linear programming. Both algorithms use the same linear programming relaxation. A question of interest is to find the integrality gap of the linear programming relaxation for these problems.  References [1] Garg, N., Vazirani, V. V., Yannakakis, M. (1996). Approximate max-flow min-(multi) cut theorems and their applications. SIAM Journal on Computing, 25(2), 235-251. [2] Avidor, A., Langberg, M. (2007). The multi-multiway cut problem. Theoretical Computer Science, 377(1-3), 35-42. [3] Garg, N., Vazirani, V. V., Yannakakis, M. (1994, July). Multiway cuts in directed and node weighted graphs. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (pp. 487-498). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. [4] Naor, J., Zosin, L. (2001). A 2-approximation algorithm for the directed multiway cut problem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 31(2), 477-482. [5] Dahlhaus, E., Johnson, D. S., Papadimitriou, C. H., Seymour, P. D., Yannakakis, M. (1992, July). The complexity of multiway cuts. In Proceedings of the twenty-fourth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing (pp. 241-251). ACM. [6] Clinescu, G., Karloff, H., Rabani, Y. (1998, May). An improved approximation algorithm for multiway cut. In Proceedings of the thirtieth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing (pp. 48-52). ACM. [7] Karger, D. R., Klein, P., Stein, C., Thorup, M., Young, N. E. (2004). Rounding algorithms for a geometric embedding of minimum multiway cut. Mathematics of Operations Research, 29(3), 436-461. 16  [8] Zhang, P., Zhu, D., Luan, J. (2012). An approximation algorithm for the Generalized k-Multicut problem. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 160(7-8), 1240-1247. [9] Even, G., Naor, J. S., Rao, S., Schieber, B. (2000). Divide-and-conquer approximation algorithms via spreading metrics. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 47(4), 585-616. [10] Leighton, T., Rao, S. (1988, October). An approximate max-flow min-cut theorem for uniform multicommodity flow problems with applications to approximation algorithms. In Foundations of Computer Science, 1988., 29th Annual Symposium on (pp. 422-431). IEEE. [11] Even, G., Naor, J. S., Schieber, B., Sudan, M. (1998). Approximating minimum feedback sets and multicuts in directed graphs. Algorithmica, 20(2), 151-174. [12] Klein, P. N., Plotkin, S. A., Rao, S., Tardos, E. (1997). Approximation algorithms for Steiner and directed multicuts. Journal of Algorithms, 22(2), 241-269. [13] Bang-Jensen, J., Yeo, A. (2014). The complexity of multicut and mixed multicut problems in (di) graphs. Theoretical Computer Science, 520, 8796. [14] Cheriyan, J., Karloff, H., Rabani, Y. (2005). Approximating directed multicuts. Combinatorica, 25(3), 251-269. [15] Gupta, A. (2003). Improved approximation algorithm for directed multicut. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual ACMSIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA) (pp. 12-14). [16] Kanj, I., Lin, G., Liu, T., Tong, W., Xia, G., Xu, J., ... Zhu, B. (2015). Improved parameterized and exact algorithms for cut problems on trees. Theoretical Computer Science, 607, 455-470.  17  [17] Saks, M., Samorodnitsky, A., Zosin, L. (2004). A lower bound on the integrality gap for minimum multicut in directed networks. Combinatorica, 24(3), 525-530. [18] Chuzhoy, J., Makarychev, Y., Vijayaraghavan, A., Zhou, Y. (2016). Approximation algorithms and hardness of the k-route cut problem. ACM Transactions on Algorithms (TALG), 12(1), 2.  18

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
