Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 9
ArXiv ID: hf_4426

Abstract:
1  Deep D-bar: Real time Electrical Impedance Tomography Imaging with Deep Neural Networks  arXiv:1711.03180v1 [math.NA] 8 Nov 2017  S. J. Hamilton and A. Hauptmann  Abstract—The mathematical problem for Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) is a highly nonlinear ill-posed inverse problem requiring carefully designed reconstruction procedures to ensure reliable image generation. D-bar methods are based on a rigorous mathematical analysis and provide robust direct reconstructions by using a low-pass filtering of the associated nonlinear Fourier data. Similarly to low-pass filtering of linear Fourier data, only using low frequencies in the image recovery process results in blurred images lacking sharp features such as clear organ boundaries. Convolutional Neural Networks provide a powerful framework for post-processing such convolved direct reconstructions. In this study, we demonstrate that these CNN techniques lead to sharp and reliable reconstructions even for the highly nonlinear inverse problem of EIT. The network is trained on data sets of simulated examples and then applied to experimental data without the need to perform an additional transfer training. Results are presented on experimental EIT data from the ACT4 and KIT4 EIT systems. Index Terms—electrical impedance tomography, D-bar methods, deep learning, conductivity imaging  I. I NTRODUCTION LECTRICAL IMPEDANCE TOMOGRAPHY (EIT) images traditionally display the tissue-dependent conductivity distribution of a patient in the plane of the attached measurement electrodes allowing, e.g., visualization of heart and lung function as well as injuries [1]–[6]. The resulting images are of high-contrast and data acquisition is done by harmless electrical measurements without the need for contrast agents or ionizing radiation. However, the image recovery process of forming the EIT image from the current/voltage measurement data is a severely ill-posed nonlinear inverse problem, and thus requires a noise-robust regularization strategy for stability. The ‘D-bar method’, the only proven regularization strategy for the full nonlinear problem [7], provides real-time noise-robust image recovery by using a low-pass filter of the associated nonlinear Fourier data. Unfortunately, this results in images that suffer a loss of sharp features often important in medical imaging applications. In this work, we propose combining Dbar with Deep Learning, specifically with a Convolutional Neural Network, to ‘learn’ and undo the image blurring resulting in real-time sharp EIT images. EIT reconstructions are typically computed with iterative algorithms that are based on minimizing a penalty functional, such as [8], [9]. These methods perform very well in reconstruction quality due to a flexibility of incorporating prior  E  S. J. Hamilton is with the Department of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science, Marquette University, Milwaukee, WI, 53233 USA (email: sarah.hamilton@marquette.edu). A. Hauptmann is with the Department of Computer Science; University College London, London, United Kingdom, (email: a.hauptmann@ucl.ac.uk)  knowledge, but require careful modeling of the boundary shape in the repeated simulation of the forward problem. Possibilities to overcome the boundary sensitivity are proposed in [10], [11], but tend to be computationally demanding. On the other hand, direct (non-iterative) reconstruction algorithms do not need the simulation of the forward operator. One such method is known as the D-bar algorithm which is based on a nonlinear Fourier transformation of the measured surface current/voltage data. The method employs a low-pass filtering of this transformed data as a regularization strategy to stabilize the image reconstruction process against noise in the measured data. This filtering results in reconstructed images that suffer from a significant loss of sharpness, but unlike other modalities (such as CT) the D-bar method does not suffer from undersampling artefacts. Furthermore, unlike iterative methods, the direct D-bar method is robust to incorrect or incomplete knowledge of electrode locations as well as errors in boundary shape [12], therefore removing the need for meticulously specific forward models that make or break most EIT methods for absolute EIT imaging. Recent advances in the larger field of image reconstruction have demonstrated the power of Deep Learning and Neural Networks for improving low quality or corrupted images. In particular, combining fast direct reconstruction procedures with deep neural networks can provide high quality images with low latency, leading to prospective real-time imaging in many applications. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are especially suitable for post-processing initial reconstructions that come from algorithms based on, or related to, Fourier transforms, as suggested in [13]. Such initial reconstructions typically suffer from a loss of spatial resolution, due to some sort of low-pass filtering, as well as additional undersampling artefacts. Training a CNN to remove these artefacts to improve the information content of the reconstructed image has been studied for several linear inverse problems in medical imaging, including CT [13], [14], MRI [15], and PAT [16], [17]. Although the EIT problem is nonlinear in nature, the low-pass filtered images from the low-passed D-bar method naturally fit into this setting. In this study we formulate a real-time capable reconstruction algorithm that produces high quality sharp EIT images by combining the D-bar algorithm with subsequent processing by a CNN. For this task we utilize an established CNN architecture, known as U-net, adjusted to cope with the typical image structures of D-bar EIT reconstructions. We train the network on simulated training data and directly apply the trained network to experimental data with no training on experimental data itself. This successful transition to experimental  2  data underlines the robustness of the D-bar algorithm and is especially important as the need for good training data is often the bottleneck for the success of such network-based approaches for other imaging modalities, [13], [17], [18]. This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a brief review of the mathematical problem of EIT and the Dbar solution method. The deep learning CNN for D-bar, coined ‘Deep D-bar’ is introduced in Section III. The experimental setup as well as simulation of training data are described in Section IV and results presented in Section V. A discussion of the results is given in Section VI and conclusions drawn in Section VII. The reader is encouraged to view the manuscript on a computer screen as details in the image contrast may be masked in printed versions. II. E LECTRICAL I MPEDANCE T OMOGRAPHY AND THE D- BAR RECONSTRUCTION METHOD Electrical impedance tomography is a nonlinear inverse problem in which we aim to determine the interior conductivity from current-to-voltage measurements at the boundary. The problem can be formulated as a generalized Laplace equation  ∇ · σ∇u = 0 in Ω, (1) σ ∂ν u = ϕ on ∂Ω, modeling the electrical potential u inside the domain Ω ⊂ Rn for a given conductivity σ, with the Neumann boundary condition describing the boundary voltage occurring from the applied mean-free current ϕ. The measurement data consists of pairs of current and voltage measurements and is modeled by the current-to-voltage map Rσ defined by Rσ ϕ := u|∂Ω .  conductivity σ is then recovered directly from the solution to the D-bar equation. The D-bar approach [20] is to transform the physical conductivity equation ∇ · σ∇u = 0 into a nonphysical Schrödinger equation, solve that problem instead using the D-bar methods popularized by Beals and Coifman [21], and then transform back to the physical setting. The change of variables ũ = σ 1/2 u and q(z) = σ −1/2 (z)∆σ 1/2 (z) produces the desired Schrödinger equation [−∆ + q(z)]ũ(z) = 0, where z ∈ Ω. Provided that σ(z) is constant in a neighborhood of the boundary, without loss of generality σ = 1 near ∂Ω, the conductivity can be extended from Ω to the entire plane by setting σ(z) ≡ 1 for z ∈ C \Ω. Note that this gives the potential q(z) compact support in Ω. We make use of special solutions ψ(z, k) to the Schrödinger equation z ∈ C, k ∈ C \{0},  [−∆ + q(z)]ψ(z, k) = 0,  (2)  called Complex Geometrical Optics (CGO) solutions, that have a specific asymptotic behavior for large |z| or |k|, ψ(z, k) ∼ eikz . Note that we associate R2 with C via the mapping z = (z1 , z2 ) 7→ z1 + iz2 and thus kz = (k1 + ik2 ) (z1 + iz2 ) denotes complex multiplication. The CGO solutions µ(z, k) = e−ikz ψ(z, k) ∼ 1 solve a D-bar equation in the nonphysical scattering variable k ∂ k µ(z, k) =  1 t(k)e(z, −k)µ(z, k), 4π k̄  (3)  where e(z, k) := exp{i(kz + k̄z̄)} and t(k) is the nonlinear scattering data defined by  This measurement operator is also known as the Neumannto-Dirichlet (ND) map, and knowledge of it allows one to predict the resulting voltage for any injected current pattern for n = 2, 3. In practice, an approximation to the ND map is formed by applying a basis of current patterns and tracking the responses of the voltages. The D-bar algorithm we use below requires the corresponding Dirichlet-to-Neumann (DN) map, which can be obtained as the inverse of the ND map, −1 Λσ = (Rσ ) , for full (vs. partial) boundary data. In this work we consider the n = 2 case as the D-bar reconstruction framework is further developed in 2D. However, we expect a natural extension to 3D [19].  Note that this scattering data t can be thought of as nonlinear Fourier data by the following observation. Replacing the CGO solutions µ(z, k) in (4) with the asymptotic behavior 1 yields  A. Real-time reconstructions using an approximate D-bar method  and thus the ‘Born’ approximation texp is essentially a shifted Fourier transform of the potential q. A connection to the measurement data Λσ can be established via Alessandrini’s identity [22]  By the D-bar method, we refer to the regularized D-bar method [7] based on the theoretical proof given in [20]. The approach uses a nonlinear Fourier transform, called a scattering transform, tailor-made for the EIT problem which is applied to the measured current/voltage data in the form of the DN map Λσ . That scattering data is then used as input data into a partial differential equation, a ∂ k or ‘D-bar’ equation, giving the method its name. Note that the derivative operators ∂ z and ∂ z are defined as ∂ z = 21 (∂z1 − i∂z2 ) and ∂ z = 12 (∂z1 + i∂z2 ), where z = z1 + iz2 ∈ C. The  Z t(k) :=  e(z, k)q(z)µ(z, k) dz.  (4)  C  Z texp (k) =  e(z, k)q(z)(1) dz = q̂(−2k1 , 2k2 ), C  Z texp (k) =  Z e(z, k)q(z)dz =  C  eik̄z̄ (Λσ − Λ1 )eikz dz.  ∂Ω  In this work we use this ‘Born’ approximation texp to the scattering data, first presented in [23], as it allows the D-bar method to solve the EIT problem fast enough to be considered ‘real-time’ [24] and is robust against noisy data. The main steps in the algorithm are outlined below:  3  σ exp =  =σ e  ReLU(conv5×5 ) maxpool2×2 ReLU(convt5×5 ) ReLU(conv1×1 ) concat Fig. 1. Deep D-bar network structure. The input is given by the D-bar reconstruction σ exp with a resolution of 64 × 64 and the output is denoted by σ e. The numbers on top of the blue bars denote the channels for each layer. The resolution for each multilevel decomposition is shown in gray on the left. Each convolutional layer is equipped with a Rectified Linear Unit as nonlinearity, given by ReLU(x) = max(0, x).  1 2 Current/Voltage Data Scattering Data Conductivity −→ −→ (Λσ , Λ1 ) texp (k) σ(z)  Step 1: For each k ∈ C \{0}, evaluate the approximate scattering data exp  t (k) =  (R ∂Ω  0  eik̄z̄ (Λσ − Λ1 ) eikz dS(z), 0 < |k| ≤ R |k| > R. (5)  Step 2: For each z ∈ Ω, solve the D-bar equation (3) using the integral equation µexp (z, κ) = 1 +  1 4π 2  Z C  texp (k)e(z, −k) exp µ (z, k) dκ1 dκ2 , (κ − k)k̄ (6)  and recover the approximate conductivity 2  σ exp (z) = [µexp (z, 0)] .  (7)  III. D EEP D- BAR The aim of this study is to formulate a real-time reconstruction algorithm for electrical impedance tomography that produces sharp and robust images. To achieve this we combine the D-bar algorithm, described in Section II-A, with a convolutional neural network (CNN). This idea relies on a network architecture known as U-Net [25], originally developed for image segmentation. It has been shown for several linear inverse problems [13]–[17] that this particular network structure can be modified to successfully remove artefacts in medical image reconstructions. The basic recipe is to use a fast and simple reconstruction algorithm to obtain corrupted images and then train the network to remove those artefacts. A related study for electrical impedance tomography is [26],  where the authors used artificial neural networks to postprocess initial reconstructions from one step of a linear GaussNewton algorithm. This approach is fundamentally different, since it requires the simulation of a forward model. The network architecture we have chosen relies on the established U-Net [25], which consists of a multilevel decomposition and several skip connections to avoid singularities in the training procedure, see Figure 1 for an illustration of our specific architecture. The output of our network is the sharpened image, since the main goal is to identify organ boundaries and deconvolve the reconstruction, similar to the original purpose of U-Net for image segmentation. This is in contrast to the studies in [13]–[17], where the authors learn a residual update to the initial reconstruction. As an additional modification to the original architecture we needed to increase the convolutional filter size to 5 × 5 (compared to 3 × 3), presumably to deal with the nonlinearity of the reconstructions and enforce consistency of the reconstructions.  A. Training of the network Given the true conductivity σ, we simulate measurement data, as will be described in Section IV-A, and reconstruct the approximate conductivity σ exp with the D-bar method outlined in II-A. Since the reconstruction step (6) in the Dbar algorithm can be done for any z ∈ R2 we reconstruct σ exp on the square [−1, 1]2 to obtain a square image as input to the network. The resolution is chosen to be 64 × 64. The ground truth σ is similarly extended to [−1, 1]2 by extending the background conductivity. Having obtained the training set {σi , σiexp }i , we train the Deep D-bar network, denoted by Dθ , for the set of network parameters θ, i.e. the convolutional filters and biases in each convolutional layer. Given the output of the network  4  HLSA H EALTHY  I NJURY 1  σ e = Dθ (σ ) we seek to minimize the ` -error of network output to phantom, given by the loss exp  2  loss(e σ ) := ke σ − σk22 . The network is implemented with the Python library TensorFlow and the optimization is performed for 60 epochs in batches of 16, with TensorFlow’s implementation of the Adam algorithm and an initial learning rate of 10−4 . The training procedure takes 4 hours on a single Titan XP GPU with 12GB memory. As we will discuss in the following section, we do not need to perform a transfer training to apply the trained Deep D-bar network to experimental data, the training on simulated data proved to be sufficient.  I NJURY 2  I NJURY 3  IV. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP AND C OMPUTATIONAL N OTES We will demonstrate the new Deep D-bar method using experimental data from two different EIT machines: ACT4 [27], [28] from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) as well as KIT4 [29] from the University of Eastern Finland (UEF). The ACT4 data uses agar (4%) based targets with added graphite (10%) to simulate a heart, two lungs, an aorta, and a spine. All images are shown in DICOM orientation, meaning that the right lung corresponds to the viewer’s left, as if we are looking up through the patient’s feet. Injuries were simulated in the right (DICOM) lung away from the heart by removing a portion of the lung and (1) replacing the missing portion with a piece of agar/graphite with the same conductivity as the heart to simulate an injury such as a pleural effusion, (2) placing three plastic tubes in the missing region to simulate an area of very low conductivity such as a pneumothorax, and (3) replacing the missing portion with three metal tubes. The experiments are shown in Figure 2. The approximate conductivities of the targets are displayed in Table I. The admittivity spectrum of the agar/graphite targets were measured on testcells with Impedimed’s SFB-7 bioimpedance meter1 . Note that the ACT4 system applies voltages and measures currents rather than vice-versa. In these experiments, trigonometric voltage patterns of maximum amplitude 0.5V (and frequency 3kHz) were applied on a circular tank (radius 15cm), with 32 electrodes (width 2.5cm), filled with saline (0.3 S/m) to a height of 2.25cm. When reconstructing the conductivity via the D-bar method described in Section II-A, a change of basis was performed on the measured ACT4 currents and voltages to synthesize the voltages that would have occurred if 1mA maximum amplitude trigonometric current patterns had been applied.  Fig. 2. Experimental Setups for test phantoms taken on the ACT4 system from RPI. Agar/graphite targets were used to simulate a chest phantom with a heart, two lungs, aorta, and spine. The first image shows the healthy phantom. Three injuries are explored: ‘Injury 1’, replaced the cut portion of the right lung with agar/graphite of the same conductivity as the heart target to simulate a potential pleural effusion, ‘Injury 2’, replaced the cut portion of the right lung replaced with three plastic tubes, and‘Injury 3’, replaced the cut portion with three copper tubes.  The KIT4 data was taken on a circular tank of radius 14cm with 16 electrodes of width 2.5cm and tap water with conductivity 0.03 S/m filled to a height of 7cm. Conductive (metal) and resistive (plastic) targets were placed in the tank, as shown in Figure 3, and adjacent current patterns with amplitude 2mA were applied. P HANTOM 1.1  P HANTOM 2.2  P HANTOM 3.4  P HANTOM 4.4  TABLE I C ONDUCTIVITY VALUES FOR ACT4 TARGETS AT 3 K H Z  H EART /AORTA L UNGS /S PINE S ALINE BACKGROUND I NJURY 1: AGAR /G RAPHITE I NJURY 2: P LASTIC T UBES I NJURY 3: C OPPER T UBES  M EASURED VALUES (S/m) 0.67781 0.056714 0.3 0.67781 0 infinite  S IMULATED VALUES Ranges (S/m) [0.5, 0.8] [0.01, 0.2] [0.29, 0.31] [0.01, 1.5] [0.01, 1.5] [0.01, 1.5]  1 https://www.impedimed.com/products/sfb7-for-body-composition/  Fig. 3. Experimental Setups with conductive and resistive targets on the KIT4 EIT system from UEF. The white objects are made of solid plastic and are resistive. The hollow circular objects are conductive metal rings.  5  A. Simulation of 2D EIT data The boundary conditions of (1) assume a continuum model for the boundary measurements, completely ignoring discrete positioning of the electrodes. When simulating the training data, we use a modified version of the continuum model, called the continuum electrode model introduced in [30], which was developed to simulate realistic electrode data in a continuum setting. In essence, the continuum current/voltage traces are optimally projected onto subsets of the boundary corresponding to the electrode locations. The training could be done with a more complicated electrode model, such as the Complete Electrode Model (CEM) [31], however our simplified continuum electrode model proved sufficient for this proof of concept study. We aim to represent the ND map as matrix approximation Rσ with respect to an orthonormal basis on the boundary. Let L be an even number of electrodes, then the basis functions are chosen for n ∈ {−L/2, · · · − 1, 1, . . . , L/2} as ( √1 sin(nθ) if n < 0, π ϕn (θ) = √1 cos(nθ) if n > 0. π The ACT4 system uses L = 32 electrodes and the KIT4 system uses L = 16. The measured voltages are then projected to a continuum trace gn , see [30], [32], and we obtain the ND matrix Rσ by evaluating inner products in L2 (∂Ω) as follows Z (Rσ )n,` = (gn , ϕ` ) = gn (s)ϕ` (s)ds. (8) ∂Ω  for each included target by generating a random number from a uniform distribution in the ranges shown in Table I, last column. A total of 2048 such simulations were made. Elementary injuries were simulated by generating a horizontal dividing line in the lung and assigning randomly generated values in each of the two portions of the divided lung from the uniform distribution of values in [0.01, 1.5]. Each lung had an independent chance of such an injury (60%). More complex injuries could be simulated but are outside the scope of this study. An additional 2048 of such simulations were performed for this approach and combined with the 2048 above giving a total of 4096 phantoms for the ACT4 training. ACT 4  T RUE & A PPROXIMATE B OUNDARIES  HLSA H EALTHY  T RUE VS . N OISY B OUNDARIES  N OISY B OUNDARIES WITH I NJURIES 0.55  1.2  0.5  The matrix approximation of the DN map, Lσ , is then formed −1 by inverting the ND matrix, i.e. Lσ = (Rσ ) . If the radius r of the domain is not 1, the DN matrix can be scaled by r to correspond to the data that would be obtained if the radius were 1. Similarly, if σ = σ0 6= 1 near ∂Ω, the DN matrix is scaled by σ10 to produce the DN matrix that would correspond to σ = 1 near the boundary. If an estimate for σ0 is not available, the best constant conductivity approximation to the data can be formed as described in [23]. The scaling is undone at the end of the D-bar algorithm by multiplying the conductivity by σ0 .  0.45  1  0.4 0.8 0.35 0.3  0.6  0.25 0.2  0.4  0.15 0.2 0.1  Fig. 4. Depiction of the simulation of the training data for the ACT4 experiments of Figure 2. The first image shows the healthy phantom from which the ‘true boundary’ (black dots) and ‘approximate boundary’ (red stars) were extracted, shown in the second image. The third and fourth images display sample simulated phantoms using in the training data with and without injuries with the true boundaries overlaid in black dots.  B. Simulation of Training Data Training data for the neural network was created using solely simulated data: one group for the ACT4 data and another group for the KIT4 data. The ACT4 training data was created as follows. Using the ‘HLSA Healthy’ image, shown in Figure 2 (top left), approximate organ boundaries were extracted by clicking around the targets in the image for the heart, aorta, left lung, right lung, and spine (Fig. 2, top right). Random numbers were generated to decide whether each individual target was included, heart (95%), aorta (95%), left lung (90%), right lung (90%), spine (100%). If a given target was included, white Gaussian noise (25db) was added to the approximate boundary points of the target using the awgn command in M ATLAB to create ‘noisy’ boundary locations. Figure 4 shows the effect of the white noise on the boundary locations. Noise was added to each target/organ independently. Conductivities were assigned  After each conductivity phantom was constructed, the mathematical forward problem (1) was solved to recover the corresponding theoretical boundary voltages and currents using a FEM mesh with 65,536 triangular elements using the continuum electrode model described in Section IV-A. Relative white noise with variance of 10−4 was added to the measured voltages. The resulting simulated voltages/currents were used to solve the inverse problem using the D-bar method described in Section II-A with a low-pass filtering radius of R = 4.5 in the scattering domain using the procedure outlined in [33] and uniformly spaced 64 × 64 k and z-grids on [−4.5, 4.5]2 with stepsize hk = 0.3234, and [−1, 1]2 with stepsize hz = 0.0317, respectively. A non-uniform cutoff threshold was enforced on the scattering data for frequencies such that texp (k) = 0 if either |<(texp (k)| or |=(texp (k)| exceeds 24. Then, the 4096 pairs of data in the form of ‘Truth’ and ‘Low-pass D-bar  6  Reconstruction’ were used to train the convolutional neural network described in Section III. Training data for the KIT4 experiments was simulated in a similar manner. In this case, one to three circular inclusions of varying radii drawn from the uniform distribution on [0.2, 0.4] were simulated. Inclusions were not allowed to overlap and each inclusion had an equal probability of being ‘conductive’ or ‘resistive’, and values were assigned from the Uniform distributions [0.05,0.12] and [0.005,0.015] in S/m, respectively. The conductivity of the background drawn from [0.027, 0.033] S/m. The conductivity ranges for the inclusions were determined from initial higher-pass (larger filtering radius in the scattering domain) D-bar reconstructions of the KIT4 current/voltage data. While we note that the infinite (metal) conductors should have much higher conductivities, this range was observed in the initial testing and proved sufficient for classifying objects as conductors/resistors in our study. Note that such infinite conductors/resistors violate the theory of Dbar which requires inclusions to have non-negative conductivities bounded away from zero and infinity. Nevertheless, the method provides useful conductor/resistor information. The same k and z grids were used in the D-bar reconstructions of the KIT4 example as in the ACT4 example. However, we reduced the non-uniform cutoff threshold of the scattering data from 24 to 8 to reduce oscillatory artefacts that can result from noise in the scattering data for higher frequencies. Figure 5 shows sample phantoms used in the training data for the KIT4 example. A total of 4096 simulations were performed and pairs of ‘Truth’ vs. ‘Low-pass D-bar Reconstruction’ used to train the network.  KIT 4 S AMPLE P HANTOMS  Using the approach introduced in [23], the (m, n) entry of the ND matrix Rσ was formed as the discrete inner product Rσ (m, n) =  L X φm v n `  `  |e` |  `=1  ,  1 ≤ m, n ≤ L − 1 1≤`≤L  (9)  where φm denotes the m-th normalized current pattern, v n the voltage resulting from applying the m-th current pattern (normalized such that the voltages sum to zero and are scaled by the `2 norms of the applied current patterns), and |e` | denotes the area of the `-th electrode. This formula holds for a system with L electrodes where L − 1 linearly independent current patterns have been applied. The discrete DN matrix Lσ was then formed by Lσ = −1 (Rσ ) and scaled by σr0 as described above. As the scattering data texp (5) requires the difference in DN matrices (Lσ − L1 ), the discrete DN matrices L1 must be formed for both the ACT4 and KIT4 system with L = 32 and L = 16 electrodes, respectively. To this end, the conductivity equation in (1) was solved with boundary conditions given by the Complete Electrode Model [31] on a FEM mesh with 3,493 triangular elements simulating injected trigonometric current patterns of amplitude 1mA and non-optimized constant contact impedances of 0.00024. The scattering data texp (5) was evaluated as a simple Simpson’s rule approximation  h i  2π ik̄z T e φ [Lσ − L1 ] eψ (k) 0 < |k| ≤ R exp t (k) ≈ L 0 |k| > R where z is the vector of the positions of the centers of the electrodes, T denotes the traditional matrix transpose, and eψ` (k) :=  L X  aj (k)φj` ≈ eikz`  `  is the expansion of the asymptotic behavior ψ ∼ eikz at the center of the `-th electrode, z` , in the basis of normalized applied current patterns φ. Then, the d-bar equation (6) can be solved using Fast Fourier Transforms using Vainikko’s method [34]. The interested reader is referred to [33] for further details. Fig. 5. Depiction of the simulation of the training data for the KIT4 experiments of Figure 3. The images shown are sample simulations of inclusions present in the training data. Zero to three, non-overlapping, circular inclusions were allowed in each simulation.  V. R ESULTS We now demonstrate the effect of the Deep D-bar method on simulated as well as experimental data. A. Reconstructions from Simulated Data  C. Computational Notes for D-bar Reconstructions from Experimental EIT Data The D-bar reconstructions from the experimental ACT4 and KIT4 data were computed in the same manner as the simulated data case described above in Section IV-B with the exception of the formation of the DN matrices Lσ and L1 , which now come from discrete vs. continuous measurements. For convenience, for both the ACT4 and KIT4 data, we synthesized the current/voltage measurements that would have occurred if trigonometric current patterns of amplitude 1mA had been applied by using a change of basis.  We begin with purely simulated data for the ACT4 and KIT4 examples. For the ACT4 setting, we consider three scenarios, as shown in Figure 6: one consistent with the training data but not used in the training (top), and two examples violating the training data - one with horizontally divided regions in the left lung (middle) and the final with a vertical division in the left lung (bottom). Note that the ‘Low-pass D-bar’ and ‘Deep D-bar’ images are shown on the same scale for visual comparison. The complete ‘input’ and ‘output’ of the CNN are on the unit square [−1, 1]2 . Reconstructions here are clipped to the disc for visualization purposes only. Next, Figure 7 shows  7  the results of the new algorithm on simulated data for the KIT4 example. Three scenarios consistent with the training data, but not used in the training, are presented. L OW- PASS D- BAR I MAGE  D EEP D- BAR I MAGE  0.1 0.08  S IM 1  P HANTOM  L OW- PASS D- BAR I MAGE  P HANTOM  D EEP D- BAR I MAGE  0.06 0.04 0.02  0.6 0.4  0.1  0.2  0.08  S IM 2  S IM 1  0.8  0.06  0.04  0.8  S IM 2  0.02  0.6 0.035  0.4 0.03  0.2  S IM 3  0.025 0.02 0.015  2.5 0.01  1.5  0  Fig. 6. Results for simulated test data from the ACT4 geometry. The phantom in the first row conforms with the training data and the phantoms in the second and third row include pathologies not supported by the training data. The initial D-bar image is compared to the Deep D-bar image. The D-bar images, on the full square are used as the ‘input’ images for the CNN. Images are displayed here on the circular geometry of the tank, for presentation only. Each row is plotted on its own scale.  Structural Similarity Indices (SSIMs) were computed for the ACT4 and KIT4 examples, shown in Figures 8 and 9, respectively. Additionally, we evaluated the minimized `2 -loss by computing the mean relative error for a test set of 16 samples drawn from the same distribution as the training data. The For the ACT4 simulations we improved from 28.05% to 9.92% and for the KIT4 test data from 16.82% to 9.12% relative `2 -error. B. Reconstructions from Experimental Data Now we proceed to the reconstructions from experimental data. Figure 10 depicts the results of the Deep D-bar approach on four experiments with ACT4 data: H EALTHY and I NJURIES 1-3 as shown in Figure 2. The black dots represent the approximate boundaries of the ‘healthy’ organs, extracted from the photograph. SSIMs (Figure 11) were computed for the experimental reconstructions with the exception of I NJURY 3, which has the infinite conductors (copper tubes). The SSIM comparisons used approximate ‘truth’ images formed by assigning the measured conductivity values (Table I) in the respective regions. Lastly, Figure 12 shows results of the method on the four KIT4 scenarios shown in Figure 3. The overlaid black dots depict the approximate ‘true’ locations of the targets as  SSIM C OMPARISON FOR ACT4 S IM . R ECONS D-bar Deep D-bar  ‘S IM 1’  0.5  Fig. 7. Results for simulated test data from the KIT4 geometry. All phantom are drawn from the same distribution as the training data. The initial D-bar image is compared to the Deep D-bar image. The D-bar images, on the full square are used as the ‘input’ images for the CNN. Images are displayed here on the circular geometry of the tank, for presentation only. Each row is plotted on its own scale.  ‘S IM 2’  1  ‘S IM 3’  S IM 3  2  0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1  SSIM Fig. 8. SSIM measurements are compared for the D-bar method and the new ‘Deep D-bar’ method for the ACT4 reconstructions for the simulated data shown in Figure 6.  extracted from their corresponding photographs. No SSIMs were computed here since the objects are infinite conductors and resistors. VI. D ISCUSSION The reconstructions shown in Figures 6, 7, 10, and 12 demonstrate that Deep D-bar provides superior reconstructions giving both visual and quantitative improvements. In partic-  8  SSIM C OMPARISON FOR KIT4 S IM . R ECONS E XPERIMENT  L OW PASS D- BAR I MAGE  D EEP D- BAR I MAGE  ‘S IM 1’  D-bar Deep D-bar 0.7  ‘S IM 2’  H EALTHY  0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1  ‘S IM 3’  0.7  0.8  0.85  0.9  0.95  1  I NJURY 1  0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2  SSIM  0.1  Fig. 9. SSIM measurements are compared for the D-bar method and the new ‘Deep D-bar’ method for the KIT4 reconstructions for the simulated data shown in Figure 7.  0.8 0.7  0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1  0.8 0.7 0.6  I NJURY 3  ular, the SSIMs (Figs. 8, 9, and 11 show significant SSIM increases for the Deep D-bar vs. Low-pass D-bar. Note that for the SSIM computation for ACT4 Injury 2 (plastic tubes), the ‘truth’ image was unrealistically set to zero in the lower portion of the right lung, even though the tubes do not entirely fill that region. We remind the reader that no experimental (truth, reconstruction) pairs were used in training the network and no adaptation to the experimental system was necessary, apart from the number of electrodes in the system. The training was done purely with simulated data. In most applications, either a transfer training [17] or training with a golden standard from the same system must be performed. This demonstrates the robustness of our approach. Additionally, we expect further improvements in the ACT4 reconstructions if more complicated injuries are included in the training and remind the reader that the Low-pass D-bar and Deep D-bar reconstructions are shown on the same scale, which does mask the true dynamic range of the Low-pass D-bar images. We review additional simplifications used in our process: 1) we used the continuum electrode model for the boundary conditions in the training data, 2) the FEM solver used to form L1 for the ACT4 and KIT4 experimental data examples was not finely tuned to either EIT device (which is required for iterative minimization-based methods), and 3) the D-bar solver was not optimized for the respective ACT4/KIT4 data. Rather it was used merely to provide the low-pass reconstructions used as inputs in the CNN. These simplifications were used to demonstrate the robustness of the approach to both noise in the data and tolerance to modeling errors at multiple stages of the reconstruction process. Furthermore, evaluation of the CNN is highly efficient on a GPU and takes in average 7.65ms for a single sample, hence we expect Deep D-bar to be real-time capable. This can be done by combining the D-bar reconstruction, as outlined in [24], with the application of the CNN in a unified framework  I NJURY 2  0.6  0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1  Fig. 10. ACT4 Results for the various test scenarios: Healthy, Injuries 1-3 corresponding to conductive agar, plastic tubes, and conductive copper tubes, respectively. The initial D-bar image is compared to the Deep D-bar image. The D-bar images, on the full square are used as the ‘input’ images for the CNN. Images are displayed here on the circular geometry of the tank, for presentation only. Each row is plotted on its own scale.  to reduce overhead due to data transmission.2 An important aspect for medical imaging is the robustness and consistency of reconstructions. The successful transition to experimental data suggests that the proposed Deep Dbar method is robust to changes in the system. Furthermore, Figures 6 and 10 illustrate that the network can handle reconstructions of phantoms that do not conform with the training data. Additionally the robustness of obtaining the reconstructions as input to the network is crucial, here we point out that the D-bar algorithm is known to be robust with respect to perturbations of electrode positions or domain shapes [12]. VII. C ONCLUSION The D-bar method for 2D EIT provides reliable reconstructions of the conductivity but suffers from a blurring due to a low-pass filtering of the scattering data. Sharp improvements in image quality can be achieved by coupling the D-bar reconstruction method with a convolutional neural 2A  simplified version of our codes will be published at a later point.  9  SSIM C OMPARISON FOR ACT4 R ECONS E XPERIMENT  L OW PASS D- BAR I MAGE  D EEP D- BAR I MAGE  H EALTHY  P HANTOM 1.1  D-bar Deep D-bar 0.03  0.025  0.02  I NJURY 1  0.015  I NJURY 2  P HANTOM 2.2  0.03  0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4 SSIM  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.025  0.02  0.015  0.01  P HANTOM 3.4  0.07  Fig. 11. SSIM measurements are compared for the D-bar method and the new ‘Deep D-bar’ method for the ACT4 experimental data reconstructions shown in Figure 10. Note that meaningful SSIMs could not be computed for ‘Injury 3’ due to the copper inclusions which have infinite conductivity.  0.06 0.05 0.04  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation of the Titan Xp GPU used for this research. The authors would like to thank the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge, for support and hospitality during the programme ’Variational methods and effective algorithms for imaging and vision’ where work on this paper was undertaken, EPSRC grant no EP/K032208/1. AH acknowledges support from EPSRC project EP/M020533/1, ’Medical image computing for next-generation healthcare technology’. We additionally thank the EIT group at RPI [https://www.ecse.rpi.edu/homepages/saulnier/eit/eit.html] for their assistance and for providing the ACT4 tank data. R EFERENCES [1] Gilda Cinnella, Salvatore Grasso, Pasquale Raimondo, Davide D’Antini, Lucia Mirabella, Michela Rauseo, and Michele Dambrosio. Physiological effects of the open lung approach in patients with early, mild, diffuse acute respiratory distress syndromean electrical impedance tomography study. The Journal of the American Society of Anesthesiologists, 123(5):1113–1121, 2015. [2] C.A. Grant, T. Pham, J. Hough, T. Riedel, C. Stocker, and A. Schibler. Measurement of ventilation and cardiac related impedance changes with electrical impedance tomography. Critical Care, 15(1):R37, 2011.  P HANTOM 4.4  0.03  network. We demonstrated that a CNN can effectively learn the deblurring using only simulated data and still transition to experimental data without including any experimental data in the training itself. As the training can be done offline ahead of time, and the D-bar method provides real-time conductivity reconstructions [24], the post-processing step by the trained CNN adds minimal time to the overall image recovery process, due to the highly efficient evaluation on a GPU. While this work is shown in 2D, we expect the approach to extend to 3D once the D-bar computational framework has been further developed.  0.05  0.04  0.03  0.02  0.01  Fig. 12. KIT4 Results for the various phantoms with conductive and/or resistive targets, as shown in the first column. The initial D-bar image is compared to the Deep D-bar image. The D-bar images, on the full square are used as the ‘input’ images for the CNN. Images are displayed here on the circular geometry of the tank, for presentation only. Each row is plotted on its own scale.  [3] Christian Karagiannidis, Andreas D. Waldmann, Carlos Ferrando Ortolá, Manuel Muñoz Martinez, Anxela Vidal, Arnoldo Santos, Peter L. Róka, Manuel Perez Márquez, Stephan H. Bohm, and Fernando SuarezSpimann. Position-dependent distribution of ventilation measured with electrical impedance tomography. European Respiratory Journal, 46(suppl 59), 2015. [4] Antonio Pesenti, Guido Musch, Daniel Lichtenstein, Francesco Mojoli, Marcelo B. P. Amato, Gilda Cinnella, Luciano Gattinoni, and Michael Quintel. Imaging in acute respiratory distress syndrome. Intensive Care Medicine, 42(5):686–698, 2016. [5] H. Reinius, J. B. Borges, F. Fredén, L. Jideus, E. D. L. B. Camargo, M. B. P. Amato, G. Hedenstierna, Larsson A., and F. Lennmyr. Realtime ventilation and perfusion distributions by electrical impedance tomography during one-lung ventilation with capnothorax. Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica, 59(3):354–368, 2015. [6] A. Schlibler, T.M.Y. Pham, A.A. Moray, and C. Stocker. Ventilation and cardiac related impedance changes in children undergoing corrective open heart surgery. Physiological Measurement, 34:1319–1327, 2013. [7] K. Knudsen, M. Lassas, J.L. Mueller, and S. Siltanen. Regularized Dbar method for the inverse conductivity problem. Inverse Problems and Imaging, 3(4):599–624, 2009. [8] Zhou Zhou, Gustavo Sato dos Santos, Thomas Dowrick, James Avery, Zhaolin Sun, Hui Xu, and David S Holder. Comparison of total variation algorithms for electrical impedance tomography. Physiological measurement, 36(6):1193, 2015. [9] Gerardo González, Ville Kolehmainen, and Aku Seppänen. Isotropic  10  [10]  [11]  [12]  [13]  [14]  [15]  [16]  [17]  [18] [19]  [20] [21]  [22] [23]  [24]  [25]  [26]  [27]  [28]  [29]  [30]  [31]  and anisotropic total variation regularization in electrical impedance tomography. Computers & Mathematics with Applications, 2017. Jérémi Dardé, N Hyvönen, A Seppänen, and Stratos Staboulis. Simultaneous reconstruction of outer boundary shape and admittivity distribution in electrical impedance tomography. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences, 6(1):176–198, 2013. A. Nissinen, V. Kolehmainen, and J. P. Kaipio. Compensation of modelling errors due to unknown domain boundary in electrical impedance tomography. IEEE Transaction on Medical Imaging, 30(2):231–242, 2011. E. K. Murphy and J. L. Mueller. Effect of domain-shape modeling and measurement errors on the 2-d D-bar method for electrical impedance tomography. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 28(10):1576– 1584, 2009. Kyong Hwan Jin, Michael T McCann, Emmanuel Froustey, and Michael Unser. Deep convolutional neural network for inverse problems in imaging. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 26(9):4509–4522, 2017. Eunhee Kang, Junhong Min, and Jong Chul Ye. A deep convolutional neural network using directional wavelets for low-dose x-ray ct reconstruction. Medical Physics, 44(10), 2017. Christopher M Sandino, Neerav Dixit, Joseph Y Cheng, and Shreyas S Vasanawala. Deep convolutional neural networks for accelerated dynamic magnetic resonance imaging. preprint. Stephan Antholzer, Markus Haltmeier, and Johannes Schwab. Deep learning for photoacoustic tomography from sparse data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04587, 2017. Andreas Hauptmann, Felix Lucka, Marta Betcke, Nam Huynh, Ben Cox, Paul Beard, Sebastien Ourselin, and Simon Arridge. Model based learning for accelerated, limited-view 3d photoacoustic tomography. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.09832, 2017. Jonas Adler and Ozan Öktem. Solving ill-posed inverse problems using iterative deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04058, 2017. Fabrice Delbary, Per Christian Hansen, and Kim Knudsen. Electrical impedance tomography: 3d reconstructions using scattering transforms. Applicable Analysis, 91(4):737–755, 2012. A. I. Nachman. Global uniqueness for a two-dimensional inverse boundary value problem. Annals of Mathematics, 143:71–96, 1996. Richard Beals and Ronald R. Coifman. Multidimensional inverse scatterings and nonlinear partial differential equations. In Pseudodifferential operators and applications (Notre Dame, Ind., 1984), pages 45–70. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1985. G. Alessandrini. Stable determination of conductivity by boundary measurements. Applicable Analysis, 27:153–172, 1988. D. Isaacson, J. L. Mueller, J. C. Newell, and S. Siltanen. Reconstructions of chest phantoms by the D-bar method for electrical impedance tomography. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 23:821–828, 2004. Melody Dodd and Jennifer L Mueller. A real-time D-bar algorithm for 2-D electrical impedance tomography data. Inverse problems and imaging, 8(4):1013–1031, 2014. Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pages 234–241. Springer, 2015. Sébastien Martin and Charles TM Choi. A post-processing method for three-dimensional electrical impedance tomography. Scientific Reports, 7, 2017. N. Liu, G.J. Saulnier, J.C. Newell, D. Isaacson, and T-J. Kao. Act4: a high-precision, multi-frequency electrical impedance tomograph. Presented at 6th Conference on Biomedical Applications of Electrical Impedance Tomography, June 2005. London, U.K. G. Saulnier, N. Liu, C. P. Tamma, H. Xia, T.-J. Kao, J. Newell, and D. Isaacson. An electrical impedance spectroscopy system for breast cancer detection. Proc. 29th Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc, (1):4154–4157, Aug. 2007. Andreas Hauptmann, Ville Kolehmainen, Nguyet Minh Mach, Tuomo Savolainen, Aku Seppänen, and Samuli Siltanen. Open 2d Electrical Impedance Tomography data archive. arXiv:1704.01178, 2017. Andreas Hauptmann. Approximation of full-boundary data from partialboundary electrode measurements. Inverse Problems (accepted), arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.05550, 2017. Erkki Somersalo, Margaret Cheney, and David Isaacson. Existence and uniqueness for electrode models for electric current computed tomography. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 52(4):1023–1040, 1992.  [32] N. Hyvönen. Approximating idealized boundary data of electric impedance tomography by electrode measurements. Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences, 19(07):1185–1202, 2009. [33] J. Mueller and S. Siltanen. Linear and Nonlinear Inverse Problems with Practical Applications, volume 10 of Computational Science and Engineering. SIAM, 2012. [34] Gennadi Vainikko. Fast solvers of the Lippmann-Schwinger equation. In Direct and inverse problems of mathematical physics (Newark, DE, 1997), volume 5 of Int. Soc. Anal. Appl. Comput., pages 423–440. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 2000.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 9. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
