Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_4912

Abstract:
A 4/5 - Approximation Algorithm for the Maximum Traveling Salesman Problem∗  arXiv:1512.09236v2 [cs.DS] 20 Mar 2016  Szymon Dudycz†, Jan Marcinkowski‡, Katarzyna Paluch§, and Bartosz Rybicki¶ Institute of Computer Science, University of Wrocław  Abstract In the maximum traveling salesman problem (Max TSP) we are given a complete undirected graph with nonnegative weights on the edges and we wish to compute a traveling salesman tour of maximum weight. We present a fast combinatorial 45 - approximation algorithm for Max TSP. The previous best approximation for this problem was 97 . The new algorithm is based on a novel technique of eliminating difficult subgraphs via half-edges, a new method of edge coloring and a technique of exchanging edges. A half-edge of edge e = (u, v) is informally speaking “a half of e containing either u or v”.  ∗  Partly supported by Polish National Science Center grant UMO-2013/11/B/ST6/01748 szymon.dudycz@gmail.com ‡ jasiekmarc@stud.cs.uni.wroc.pl § abraka@cs.uni.wroc.pl ¶ rybicki.bartek@gmail.com †  1  Introduction  The maximum traveling salesman problem (Max TSP) is a classical variant of the famous traveling salesman problem. In the problem we are given a complete undirected graph G = (V, E) with nonnegative weights on the edges and we wish to compute a traveling salesman tour of maximum weight. Max TSP, also informally known as the “taxicab ripoff problem” is both of theoretical and practical interest. Previous approximations of Max TSP have found applications in combinatorics and computational biology: the problem is useful in understanding RNA interactions [21] and providing algorithms for compressing the results of DNA sequencing [20]. It has also been applied to a problem of finding a maximum weight triangle cover of the graph [19] and to a combinatorial problem called bandpass-2 [22], where we are supposed to find the best permutation of rows in a boolean-valued matrix, so that the weighted sum of structures called bandpasses is maximised. Previous results. The first approximation algorithms for Max TSP were devised by Fisher, Nemhauser and Wolsey [5]. They showed several algorithms having approximation ratio 21 and one having a guarantee of 23 . In [10] Kosaraju, Park and Stein presented an improved algorithm having 19 ([2]). This was in turn improved by Hassin and Rubinstein, who gave a 57 - approximation a ratio 27 ([7]). In the meantime Serdyukov [18] presented (in Russian) a simple and elegant 34 -approximation algorithm. The algorithm is deterministic and runs in O(n3 ), where n denotes the number of vertices in the graph. Afterwards, Hassin and Rubinstein ([6]) gave a randomized algorithm having expected 2 1/ǫ )), where ǫ is an arbitrarily small approximation ratio at least 25(1−ǫ) 33−32ǫ and running in O(n (n + 2 constant. The first deterministic approximation algorithm with the ratio better than 43 was given in [3] by Chen, Okamoto and Wang. It is a 61 81 -approximation and a nontrivial derandomization of the algorithm from [6] and runs in O(n3 ). The currently best known approximation has been given by Paluch, Mucha and Madry [13] and achieves the ratio of 79 . Its running time is also O(n3 ). Related Work. It is known that Max-TSP is max-SNP-hard [23], so there exists a constant δ < 1, which is an upper bound on the approximation ratio of any algorithm for this problem. The geometric version of the problem, where all vertices are in Rd and the weight of each edge is defined as the Euclidean distance of its endpoints, was considered in [24]. The algorithm presented in this paper solves the problem exactly in polynomial time, assuming that the number d of dimensions is constant. Moreover, it is quite fast for real-life instances, in which d is small. Regarding the path version of Max TSP - Max-TSPP (the Maximum Traveling Salesman Path Problem), the approximation algorithms with ratios correspondingly 12 and 23 have been given in [12]. The first one is for the case when both endpoints of the path are specified and the other for the case when only one endpoint is given. Another related problem is called the maximum scatter TSP (see [25]). In it the goal is to find a TSP tour (or a path) which maximizes the weight of the minimum weight (lightest) edge selected in the solution. The problem is motivated by medical imaging and some manufacturing applications. In general there is no constant approximation for this problem, but if the weights of the edges obey the triangle inequality, then it is possible to give a 21 -approximation algorithm. The paper studies also the more general version of the maximum scatter TSP – the max-min-m-neighbour TSP. The improved approximation results for the max-min-2-neighbour problem have been given in [4]. In the maximum latency TSP problem we are given a complete undirected graph with vertices v0 , v1 , . . . , vn . Our goal is to find a Hamiltonian path starting at a fixed vertex v0 , which maximizes the total latency of the vertices. If in a given path P the weight of the i-th edge is wi , then the  2  P P latency of the j-th vertex is Lj = ji=1 wi and the total latency is defined as L(P ) = nj=1 Lj . A ratio 12 approximation algorithm for this problem is presented in [26]. Our approach and results. We start with computing a maximum weight cycle cover Cmax of G. A cycle cover of a graph G is a collection of cycles such that each vertex belongs to exactly one of them. The weight of a maximum weight cycle cover Cmax is an upper bound on opt, where by opt we denote the weight of a maximum weight traveling salesman tour. By computing a maximum weight perfect matching M we get another, even simpler than Cmax , upper bound – on opt/2. From Cmax and M we build a multigraph G1 which consists of two copies of Cmax and one copy of M , i.e., for each edge e of G the multigraph G1 contains between zero and three copies of e. Thus the total weight of the edges of G1 is at least 52 opt. Next we would like to path-3-color G1 , that is to color the edges of G1 with three colors, so that each color class contains only vertex-disjoint paths. The paths from the color class with maximum weight can then be patched in an arbitrary manner into a tour of weight at least 56 opt. Technique of eliminating difficult subgraphs via half-edges. However, not every multigraph G1 can be path-3-colored. For example, a subgraph of G1 obtained from a triangle t of Cmax such that M contains one of the edges of t (such triangle is called a 3-kite (of G1 )) cannot be path-3-colored as, clearly, it is impossible to color such seven edges with three colors and not create a monochromatic triangle. Similarly, a subgraph of G1 obtained from a square s (i.e., a cycle of length four) of Cmax such that M contains two edges connecting vertices of s (such square is called a 4-kite (of G1 )) is not path-3-colorable. To find a way around this difficulty, we compute another cycle cover C2 improving Cmax with respect to M , which is a cycle cover that does not contain any 3-kite or 4-kite of G1 and whose weight is also at least opt. An important feature of C2 is that it may contain half-edges. A half-edge of an edge e is, informally speaking, a half of the edge e that contains exactly one of its endpoints. Half-edges have already been introduced in [14]. Computing C2 is done via a novel reduction to a maximum weight perfect matching. It is, to some degree, similar to computing a directed cycle cover without length two cycles in [14], but for Max TSP we need much more complex gadgets. From one copy of C2 and M we build another multigraph G2 with weight at least 23 opt. It turns out that G2 can always be path-2-colored. The multigraph G1 may be non-path-3-colorable - if it contains at least one kite. We notice, however, that if we remove one arbitrary edge from each kite, then G1 becomes path-3-colorable. The edges removed from G1 are added to G2 . As a result, the modified G2 may stop being path-2-colorable. To remedy this, we in turn remove some edges from G2 and add them to G1 . In other words, we find two disjoint sets of edges - a set F1 ⊆ G1 and a set F2 ⊆ G2 , called exchange sets such that the multigraph G′1 = G1 \ F1 ∪ F2 is path-3-colorable and the multigraph G′2 = G2 \ F2 ∪ F1 is path-2-colorable. Since G1 and G2 have the total weight at least 4 opt, by path-3-coloring G′1 and path-2-coloring G′2 we obtain a 45 - approximate solution to Max TSP. Edge coloring. The presented algorithms for path-3-coloring and path-2-coloring are essentially based on a simple notion of a safe edge, i.e., an edge colored in such a way that it is guaranteed not to belong to any monochromatic cycle, used in an inductive way. The adopted approach may appear simple and straightforward. For comparison, let us point out that the method of path-3-coloring the multigraph obtained from two directed cycle covers described in [9] is rather convoluted. Generally, the new techniques are somewhat similar to the ones used for the directed version of the problem - Max ATSP in [15]. We are convinced that they will prove useful for other problems related with TSP, cycle covers or matchings.  3  The main result of the paper is Theorem 1 There exists a 45 -approximation algorithm for Max TSP. Its running time is O(n3 ).  2  Path-3-coloring of G1  We compute a maximum weight cycle cover Cmax of a given complete undirected graph G = (V, E) and a maximum weight perfect matching M of G. We are going to call cycles of length i, i.e., consisting of i edges i-cycles. Also sometimes 3-cycles will be called triangles and 4-cycles – squares. The multigraph G1 consists of two copies of Cmax and one copy of M . We want to color each edge of G1 with one of three colors of K3 = {1, 2, 3} so that each color class consists of vertex-disjoint paths. The graph G1 is a subgraph of the multigraph G1 that contains an edge (u, v) iff the multigraph G1 contains an edge between u and v. The path-3-coloring of G1 can be equivalently defined as coloring each edge of (the graph) G1 with the number of colors equal to the number of copies contained in the multigraph G1 . From this time on, unless stated otherwise, G1 denotes a graph and not a multigraph. We say that a colored edge e of G1 is safe if no matter how we color the so far uncolored edges of G1 e is guaranteed not to belong to any monochromatic cycle of G1 . An edge e of M is said to be external if its two endpoints belong to two different cycles of Cmax . Otherwise, e is internal. We say that an edge e is incident to a cycle c if it is incident to at least one vertex of c. We prove the following useful lemma. Lemma 1 Consider a partial coloring of G1 . Let c be any cycle of Cmax such that for each color k ∈ K3 there exists an edge of M incident to c that is colored k. Then we can color c so that each edge of c and each edge incident to one of the edges of c is safe. Proof. The proposed procedure of coloring c is as follows. If there exists an edge of c that also belongs to M , we color it with all three colors of K3 . For each uncolored edge of M incident to c, we color it with an arbitrary color of K3 . Next, we orient the edges of c (in any of the two ways) so that c becomes a directed cycle c. Let e = (u, v) be any uncolored edge of c oriented from u to v. Then, there exists an edge e′ of M incident to u. If e′ is contained in c, then we color e with any two colors of K3 . Otherwise e′ is colored with some color k of K3 . Then we color e with the two colors belonging to K3 \ k. First, no vertex of c has three incident edges colored with the same color, as for each vertex its outgoing edge is colored with different colors than an incident matching edge. Second, as for each color k ∈ K3 there is a matching edge incident to c colored with k, there exists an edge of c that is not colored k, thus c does not belong to any color class, i.e. there exists no color k ∈ K3 such that each edge of c is colored with k. Let us consider now any edge e = (u, v) of M incident to some edge of c and not belonging to c. The edge e is colored with some color k. Suppose also that vertex u belongs to c (v may belong to c or may not belong to c.) Let u′ be any other vertex of c such that some edge of M \ Cmax colored k is incident to it (u′ may be equal to v if e is internal). To show that e is safe, it suffices to show that there exists no path consisting of edges of c ∪ M that connects u and u′ and whose every edge is colored k. However, by the way we color edges of c we know that the outgoing edges of u and u′ are not colored with k because of the way we oriented the cycle, there is no path connecting u and u′ contained in c that starts and ends with incoming edge. ✷  4  For each cycle c of Cmax we define its degree of flexibility denoted as f lex(c) and its colorfulness, denoted as col(c). The degree of flexibility of a cycle c is the number of internal edges of M incident to c and the colorfulness of c is the number of colors of K3 that are used for coloring the external edges of M incident to c. From Lemma 1 we can easily derive Lemma 2 If a cycle c of Cmax is such that f lex(c) + col(c) ≥ 3, then we can color c so that each edge of c and each edge incident to one of the edges of c is safe. Sometimes, even if a cycle c of Cmax is such that f lex(c) + col(c) < 3, we can color the edges of c so that each of them is safe. For example, suppose that c is a square consisting of edges e1 , . . . , e4 and there are four external edges of M incident to c, all colored 1. Suppose also that each external edge incident to c is already safe. Then we can color e1 with 1 and 2, e3 with 1 and 3 and both e2 and e4 with 2 and 3. We can notice that e1 is guaranteed not to belong to a cycle colored 1 because external edges incident to e1 are colored 1 and are safe. Analogously, we can easily check that each other edge of c is safe. However, for example, a triangle t of Cmax that has three external edges of M incident to it, all colored with the same color of K3 , cannot be colored in such a way that it does not contain a monochromatic cycle. Consider a cycle c of Cmax such that every external edge of M incident to c is colored. We say that c is non-blocked if and only if (1) f lex(c) + col(c) ≥ 3 or (2) c contains at least 3 − f lex(c) − col(c) vertex-disjoint edges, each of which has the property that it has exactly two incident external edges of M and the two external edges of M incident to it are colored with the same color of K3 or (3) c is a square such that f lex(c) = 1. Otherwise we say that c is blocked. We can see that a cycle c of Cmax is blocked if • c is a triangle and all external edges of M incident to c are colored with the same color of K3 , • c is a square with two internal edges of M incident to it (f lex(c) = 2), • c is a cycle of even length, f lex(c) = 0 and there exist two colors k1 , k2 ∈ K3 such that external edges of M incident to c are colored alternately with k1 and k2 . Among blocked cycles we distinguish kites. We say that a cycle c is a kite if it is a triangle such that f lex(c) = 1 and then we call it a 3-kite or it is a square such that f lex(c) = 2 - called a 4-kite. A cycle of Cmax which is not a kite is called unproblematic. Now, we are ready to present the algorithm for path-3-coloring G1 . Lemma 3 Let c be an unproblematic cycle of Cmax that at some step of Algorithm Color G1 has the fewest uncolored external edges incident to it. Then, it is always possible to color all uncolored external edges incident to c so that no unproblematic cycle of Cmax becomes blocked. Moreover, if c has at least two uncolored ext. edges incident to c then, additionally, it is always possible to do it in such a way that f lex(c) + col(c) ≥ 3. If c has exactly one uncolored external edge e of M incident to it, then we can color e so that f lex(c) + col(c) ≥ 3 or so that e is safe. Proof. If c has at least two uncolored external edges of M incident to it, then we can use at least two different colors for coloring the edges. Moreover if f lex(c) = 0, then we can choose them in such a way that col(c) = 3, i.e. so that for every color k ∈ K3 at least one external edge of M incident 5  Algorithm 1 Color G1 while ∃ an uncolored external edge e of M do c ← an unproblematic uncolored cycle of Cmax with the fewest uncolored external edges incident to e color uncolored external edges incident to c so that no unproblematic cycle of Cmax becomes blocked and if possible, so that f lex(c) + col(c) ≥ 3 color c using Lemma 4 and internal edges incident to it in such a way, that each edge incident to c is safe end while while ∃c – an unproblematic, uncolored cycle of Cmax do color c and internal edges incident to it in such a way, that each edge incident to c is safe end while to c is colored with k. At this stage, every other uncolored cycle c′ of Cmax has also at least two uncolored external edges of M incident to it. Therefore c′ is in danger of becoming blocked only if it has an even number of incident external edges of M , all of them are colored with the same two colors, say k1 and k2 , in an alternate way and it has exactly two incident uncolored external edges e1 , e2 of M . However, even if we would like to also use k1 and k2 for coloring the external edges of M incident to c, we can do it in such a way that c′ does not become blocked, because, as one can easily see, one of the ways of coloring e1 and e2 with k1 and k2 does not make c′ blocked. If c has exactly one uncolored external edge e of M incident to it and c is in danger of becoming blocked, then either c is a triangle whose two other incident external edges are colored with the same color of K3 or c has even length and all of its incident external edges of M are colored with the same two colors in an alternate way. In each of these cases we have a choice and can color e with one of two colors so that c does not become blocked. If e is incident to a cycle c′ that is also in danger of becoming blocked, then with respect to c′ we can also color e with one of two colors of K3 so that it does not become blocked. As the intersection of two two-element subsets of K3 is always nonempty, we can color e, say with k, so that no cycle of Cmax becomes blocked. As all other external edges of c were safe, then e is also safe. ✷ From the above lemma we get Corollary 1 After all external edges are colored, each of them is incident to a cycle c of Cmax such that f lex(c) + col(c) ≥ 3 or is safe. We say that a cycle c of G1 is a subcycle of cycle c′ of Cmax if it goes only through vertices that belong to c′ . Lemma 4 Let c be an unproblematic and non-blocked cycle of Cmax whose all incident external edges of M are already colored and safe. Then it is always possible to color c and internal edges incident to c in such a way that each edge incident to c is safe. Proof. If c is such that f lex(c) + col(c) ≥ 3, then by Lemmas 1 and 2, the claim holds. Now let us first prove that if c is not blocked and f lex(c) + col(c) < 3, then it is always possible to color the edges of c so that no color class contains all edges of any subcycle of c. 6  Case 1: All edges of M incident to c are colored with the same color, say k. We can then assume that all edges of M incident to c are external. (Otherwise we would have colored internal edges of M with a different color than k.) c must have length at least 4. (Otherwise it would be blocked.) Let k1 , k2 denote the two colors of K3 \ k. We choose two nonadjacent edges of c, color one of them with k and k1 and the other with k and k2 . The remaining edges of c are colored with k1 and k2 . Case 2: All edges of M incident to c are colored with two colors, say k1 and k2 . We can assume that either (1) c has no incident internal edges of M or (2) that it has exactly one incident internal edge of M and all external edges of M incident to c are colored in the same way. Let k denote the color belonging to K3 \ {k1 , k2 } and assume that c goes through vertices v1 , v2 , . . . , vs in the given order. Then let vi denote a vertex of c such that edges of M incident to vi−1 and vi are colored in the same way, say with k1 , and vi+1 is colored with k2 . Then for each j 6= i we color edge (vj , vj+1 ) of c with colors belonging to K3 \ k′ , where k′ denotes the color used on an edge of M incident to vj . Edge (vi , vi+1 ) is going to be colored with k1 and k2 . We colored the edges, so that there is no monochromatic cycle on edges of c and internal matching edges. Therefore, together with the safety of all external edges, it ensures the safety of all internal edges. ✷  3  A cycle cover improving Cmax with respect to M  Since Cmax may contain kites, we may not be able to path-3-color G1 . Therefore, our next aim is to compute another cycle cover C2 of G such that it does not contain any cycle of Cmax which is problematic and whose weight is an upper bound on OP T . Since computing such C2 may be hard, we relax the notion of a cycle cover and allow C2 to contain half-edges. A half-edge of the edge e is informally speaking a half of the edge e that contains exactly one of the endpoints of e. Let us also point out here that C2 may contain kites which do not belong to Cmax . To be able to give a formal definition of such a relaxed cycle cover, we introduce a graph G̃. We say that an edge (u, v) is problematic if u and v belong to the same kite. An edge connecting vertices of a kite c is also said to be a problematic edge of c. A 3-kite has no diagonals and a 4-kite has two diagonals. G̃ = (Ṽ , Ẽ) is the graph obtained from G by splitting each problematic edge (u, v) with a vertex x{u,v} into two edges (u, x{u,v} ) and (x{u,v} , v), each with weight 21 w(u, v). Each of the edges (u, x{u,v} ) and (x{u,v} , v) of G̃ is said to be a half-edge of the edge (u, v) of G. In what follows, when we speak of an edge of a kite, we mean an edge of the original graph G. Definition 1 A relaxed cycle cover improving Cmax with respect to M is a subset C̃ ⊆ Ẽ such that (i) each vertex in V has exactly two incident edges in C̃; (ii) for each 3-kite t of Cmax the number of half-edges of the edges of t contained in C̃ is even and not greater than four; (iii) for each 4-kite s of Cmax the number of half-edges of the edges or diagonals of s contained in C̃ is even and not greater than six.  7  To compute a relaxed cycle cover C2 improving Cmax with respect to M we construct the following graph G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ). The set of vertices V ′ is a superset of the set of verices V of G. For each problematic edge (u, v) of G we add two vertices xu{u,v} , xv{u,v} to V ′ and edges (u, xu{u,v} ), (xv{u,v} , v) to E ′ . For each problematic edge (u, v) which is not a diagonal of a 4-kite we add also an edge (xu{u,v} , xv{u,v} ). The edge (xu{u,v} , xv{u,v} ) has weight 0 in G′ and each of the edges (u, xu{u,v} ), (xv{u,v} , v) has weight 12 w(u, v). Each of the vertices xu{u,v} , xv{u,v} is called a splitting vertex of the edge (u, v). For each edge (u, v) of G which is not problematic we add an edge (u, v) to E ′ with weight w(u, v). xzw  z w  xw v  xw z  xzv xzu  q xw u  xw u  pz  xvu  pu  xu z  xu v  pv  xvw  xu w  u  u (a) b(u) = b(v) = b(w) = 2, ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , 6} b(xi ) = 1, b(p) = b(q) = 1  xw v  pw q  p xu w  w  v  xvw  xvz  xu v  xvu  v  (b) b(u) = b(v) = b(w) = b(z) = 2, ∀k 6= l ∈ {u, v, w, z} b(xlk ) = 1, b(pu ) = b(pv ) = b(pw ) = b(pz ) = b(q) = 2  Figure 1: Gadgets for 3-kites (a) and 4-kites (b) of G1 in graph G. Half-edges corresponding to the original edges are thickened, the auxiliary edges are thin. Original vertices (thick dot) are connected with all the other original vertices of graph G. The auxiliary vertices have no connections outside of the gadget. The figures are subtitled with the specifications of b(v) values for different vertices. For a vertex t with b(t) = i, the resulting b-matching will contain exactly i edges ending in t. Next we build so-called gadgets. For each 3-kite t on vertices u, v, w we add two vertices pt , q t to V ′ . Let’s assume that u is incident to external edge of M . Vertex pt is connected to the splitting vertices of edges of t that are neighbors of u, i.e. to vertices xu{u,v} , xu{u,w} and to vertex xv{v,w} . w v Vertex q t is connected to every other splitting vertex of t, i.e. xw {u,w} , x{v,w} , x{u,v} . All edges incident to verices pt , q t have weight 0 in G′ . For each 4-kite of Cmax on vertices u, v, w, z we add five vertices psu , psv , psw , psz , q s to V ′ . Vertex s pu is connected to the splitting vertices of edges of s that are neighbors of u, i.e. to vertices xu{u,v} , xu{u,w} , xu{u,z} . Vertices psv , psw , psz are connected analogously. Vertex q is connected to vertices psu , psv , psw , psz . All edges incident to verices psu , psv , psw , psz , q s have weight 0. We will reduce the problem of computing a relaxed cycle cover improving Cmax with respect to M to the problem of computing a perfect b-matching of the graph G′ . We define the function b : V ′ → N in the following way. For each vertex v ∈ V we set b(v) = 2. For each splitting vertex v ′ of some problematic edge we set b(v ′ ) = 1. For all vertices pt and q t , where t denotes a 3-kite of Cmax we have b(pt ) = b(q t ) = 1. For all vertices psu and q s , where s denotes a 4-kite of Cmax and u 8  one of its vertices we have b(psu ) = b(q s ) = 2. Theorem 2 Any perfect b-matching of G′ yields a relaxed cycle cover C2 improving Cmax with respect to M . A maximum weight perfect b- matching of G′ yields a relaxed cycle cover C2 improving Cmax with respect to M such that w(C2 ) ≥ OP T . Proof. First we show that any perfect b-matching of G′ yields a relaxed cycle cover improving Cmax with respect to M . Let B be any perfect b-matching of G′ . B defines C2 ⊆ Ẽ as follows. A half-edge (u, x{u,v} ) is contained in C2 iff edge (u, xu{u,v} ) of G′ is contained in B. A non-problematic edge (u, v) is contained in C2 iff (u, v) is contained in B. Since b(v) = 2 for any vertex v of V , we can see that the property (i) of Definition 1 is satisfied. Consider now an arbitrary 3-kite t of Cmax . There are 3 problematic edges of t and thus six half-edges. Suppose that t is on vertices u, v, w. We can notice that a half-edge (u, x{u,v} ) is not contained in C2 iff a splitting vertex xu{u,v} is connected in B to one of the vertices pt , q t or to a splitting vertex xv{u,v} . Since pt and q t are connected to one splitting vertex each, at most 4 halfedges of the problematic edges of t are contained in B. If a splitting vertex xu{u,v} is connected in B to xv{u,v} , then both half-edges of the edge (u, v) are excluded from C2 . This shows that the number of half-edges of problematic edges of t contained in C2 is even. Consider now an arbitrary problematic square s of Cmax . There are six problematic edges of s and thus twelve half-edges of these edges. Suppose that s is on vertices u, v, w, z. We can notice that a half-edge (u, x{u,v} ) is not contained in C2 iff a splitting vertex xu{u,v} is not matched to u in B. Thus a half-edge (u, x{u,v} ) does not occur in C2 iff a splitting vertex xu{u,v} is connected in B to one of the vertices psu , psv , psw , psz or to a splitting vertex xv{u,v} . Since q is connected to two of the vertices psu , psv , psw , psz and b(psu ) = b(psv ) = b(psw ) = b(psz ) = 2, exactly six splitting vertices of the problematic edges of s are connected in B to vertices psu , psv , psw , psz . This means that at least six half-edges of the problematic edges of s are not contained in B. If a splitting vertex xu{u,v} is connected in B to xv{u,v} , then both half-edges of the edge (u, v) are excluded from C2 . This shows that the number of half-edges of problematic edges of s contained in C2 is even. In order to show that w(C2 ) ≥ OP T it suffices to prove the following lemma. Lemma 5 Every cycle cover not containing kites of G1 corresponds to some perfect b-matching of G′ . The proof is in Section 10  4  ✷  Exchange sets F1 , F2 and path-2-coloring of G′2  We construct a multigraph G2 from one copy of a relaxed cycle cover C2 and one copy of a maximum weight perfect matching M . Since C2 may contain half-edges and we want G2 to contain only edges of G, for each half-edge of edge (u, v) contained in C2 , we will either include the whole edge (u, v) in G2 or not include it at all. While doing so we have to ensure that the total weight of the constructed multigraph G2 is at least 32 opt. The main idea behind deciding which half-edges are extended to full edges and included in G2 is that we compute two sets Z1 and Z2 such that for each kite in G1 half of the edges containing half-edges belongs to Z1 and the other half to Z2 . (Note that by Lemma ?? each kite in G1 contains 9  an even number of half-edges in C2 .) Let I(C2 ) denote the set consisting of whole edges of G contained in C2 . This way w(C2 ) = w(I(C2 )) + 21 (w(Z1 ) + w(Z2 )). Next, let Z denote the one of the sets Z1 and Z2 with maximum weight. Then G2 is defined as a multiset consisting of edges of M , edges of I(C2 ) and edges of Z. We obtain Fact 1 The total weight of the constructed multigraph G2 is at least 23 opt. Proof. The weight of M is at least 21 opt. The weight of w(C2 ) = w(I(C2 )) + 12 (w(Z1 ) + w(Z2 )) is at least opt. Since w(Z) = max{w(Z1 ), w(Z2 )}, we obtain that w(I(C2 )) + w(Z) ≥ w(C2 ). ✷ Since Cmax contains at least one kite, G1 is non-path-3-colorable. We can notice, however, that if we remove one edge from each kite from the multigraph G1 , then the obtained multigraph is path-3-colorable. If we manage to construct a set F1 with one edge per each kite such that additionally the multigraph G2 ∪ F1 is path-2-colorable, then we have a 54 -approximation of Max TSP. Since computing such F1 may be difficult, we allow, in turn, certain edges of C2 to be removed from G2 and added to G1 . Thus, roughly, our goal is to compute such disjoint sets F1 , F2 that: 1. F1 ⊂ Cmax contains at least one edge of each kite; 2. for each kite c, F2 ⊂ I(C2 ) contains exactly one edge not contained in c; 3. the multigraph G′1 = G1 \ F1 ∪ F2 is path-3-colorable; 4. the multigraph G′2 = G2 \ F2 ∪ F1 is path-2-colorable. Let F1 and F2 be two sets of edges that satisfy properties 1. and 2. of the above. Then the set of edges C2′ = (I(C2 ) ∪ Z ∪ F1 ) \ F2 can be partitioned into cycles and paths of G′2 , where G′2 denotes the resulting multigraph G2 \ F2 ∪ F1 . The partition of C2′ into cycles and paths is carried out in such a way that two incident edges of C2′ belonging to a common path or cycle of C2 , belong also to a common path or cycle of C2′ (and G′2 ). Also, the partition is maximal, i.e., we cannot add any edge e of C2′ to any path p of G′2 so that p ∪ {e} is also a path or cycle of G′2 . We say that e is a double edge of G′2 , or that e is double, if the multigraph G′2 contains two copies of e. In any path-2-coloring of G′2 every double edge must have both colors of K2 assigned to it. We observe that in order for G′2 to be path-2-colorable, we have to guarantee that there does not exist a cycle c of G′2 of odd length l that has l incident double edges. Since every two consecutive edges of c are incident to some double edge, they must be assigned different colors of K2 and because the length of c is odd, this is clearly impossible. The way to avoid this is to choose one edge of each such potential cycle and add it to F2 . We say that a path p of G′2 beginning at w and ending at v is amenable if (i) neither v nor w has degree 4 in G′2 or (ii) v has degree 4, w has degree smaller than 4 and p ends with a double edge, the last-but-one edge of p is a double edge or the last-but-one and the last-but-three vertices in p are matched in M . It turns out that G′2 that does not contain odd cycles described above and whose every path is amenable is path-2-colorable - we show it in Section 8. To facilitate the construction of G′2 , whose every path is amenable and to ensure that F1 and F2 have certain other useful properties we create 10  two opposite orientations of I(C2 ): D2 and opp(D2 ). In each of these orientations I(C2 ) contains directed cycles and paths and each kite has the same number of incoming and outgoing edges. (This can be achieved by pairing the endpoints of paths ending at the same kite and combining them. For example, if C2 contains half-edges h1 = (u, xu{u,v} ) and h2 = (w, xw {u,w} ) of a certain 3-kite t ′ ′ and edges e1 = (u , u), e2 = (w , w), then in the orientation in which e1 is directed from u′ to u the edge e2 must be directed from w′ to w.) Apart from whole edges C2 contains also half-edges. Let H(C2 ) denote the set of edges of G such that C2 contains exactly one half-edge of each of these edges. We partition H(C2 ) into two sets Z1 , Z2 so that for each kite c half of the edges of H(C2 ) is contained in Z1 and the other half in Z2 . With each of the orientations D2 , opp(D2 ) we associate one of the sets Z1 , Z2 . Thus, we assume that D2 contains Z1 , with the edges of Z1 being oriented in a consistent way with the edges of I(C2 ) under orientation D2 , and opp(D2 ) contains Z2 , with its edges being oriented accordingly. The exact details of the construction of Z1 and Z2 are given in the proof of Lemma 6. Depending on which of the sets Z1 , Z2 has bigger weight, we either choose the orientation D2 or opp(D2 ). Hence, from now on, we assume that the edges of I(C2 ) ∪ Z are directed. Lemma 6 It is possible to compute sets F1 , F2 such that they and the resulting G′2 satisfy: 1. F1 ⊂ Cmax \ ((Z ∪ I(C2 )) ∩ M ); 2. F2 ⊆ I(C2 ) ∪ Z; 3. for each kite c, (i) the set F1 contains exactly one edge of c and the set F2 contains zero edges of c or (ii) (it can happen only for 4-kites) the set F1 contains exactly two edges of c and the set F2 contains one edge of c \ M ; 4. for each kite c the set F2 contains exactly one outgoing edge of c; 5. for each kite c and each vertex v of c the number of edges of F2 incident to v is at most one greater than the number of edges of F1 incident to v; 6. there exists no cycle of G′2 of odd length l that has l double edges incident to it; 7. each path of G′2 is amenable. The property 1. of this lemma guarantees that G′2 does not contain more than two copies of any edge. We show in Appendix 8 that properties 6. and 7. are essentially sufficient for the multigraph G′2 to be path-2-colorable. Properties 4. and 5. will be helpful in finding a path-3-coloring of G′1 . Property 5. ensures that no vertex v has six incident edges in G′1 . The proof of this lemma is given in Section 9. The path-2-coloring of G′2 is quite similar to the path-3-coloring of G1 . It is described in Section 8.  5  Completing the path-coloring of G  After the construction and path-2-coloring of G′2 we are presented with the task of extending the partial path-3-coloring of G1 to the complete path-3-coloring of G′1 . In particular, we have to color  11  the edges of kites, edges of F2 that have been added during the construction of G′2 and external edges of M incident to 3-kites, called tails. A tail incident to a 3-kite t is said to be a tail of t. Let us now describe the set of uncolored edges of G′1 in more detail. Each one of them is incident to some kite and has either (1) two endpoints belonging to the same kite c (an internal edge of c), or (2) one of its endpoints belongs to some kite c and the other does not belong to any kite (an external edge of c) or (3) its endpoints belong to two different kites c and c′ (an external edge both of c and c′ ). Let t denote a 3-kite. Then by Lemma 6 exactly one edge of t belongs to F1 , no edge of t belongs to F2 and there also exists exactly one edge in e ∈ F2 that is an outgoing edge of t, i.e., e is an external edge of t and is directed from an endpoint belonging to t in I(C2 ). F2 may also contain up to three incoming edges of t, each one incident to a different vertex of t. Any incoming edge of t is also an outgoing edge of some other kite. A tail of t is also uncolored in G′1 . Each uncolored edge e of G′1 has a requirement d(e) denoting the number of colors of K3 that must be assigned to it. Then for any edge e contained in some 3-kite, d(e) = 3 if e ∈ M \ F1 , d(e) = 1 if e ∈ F1 \ M and d(e) = 2 otherwise. Thus, for each 3-kite t we have to color exactly six of its edges in the multigraph G′1 . Let s denote a 4-kite. Then by Lemma 6 either (1) exactly one edge of s belongs to F1 and no edge of s belongs to F2 or (2) exactly two edges of s belong to F1 and one edge of s belongs to F2 . There also exists exactly one edge e ∈ F2 that is an outgoing edge of s. F2 may also contain up to four incoming edges of s, each one incident to a different vertex of s. For any edge e belonging to some 4-kite, d(e) = 3 if e ∈ M \ F1 or e ∈ F2 , d(e) = 1 if e ∈ F1 \ M and d(e) = 2 otherwise. Thus, for each 4-kite s we have to color exactly nine of its edges in the multigraph G′1 . Each uncolored external edge e in G′1 has requirement d(e) = 1. Let H denote the subgraph of G′1 comprising all edges with positive requirement. We need to assign colors of K3 to edges of H (or, in other words, color edges of H with colors of K3 ) in such a way that each color class in the whole graph G′1 forms a collection of disjoint paths. The coloring of edges of H is an extension of the already existing partial path-3-coloring of G1 . Therefore, for some edges there exist restrictions on colors of K3 that can be assigned to them. Consider any vertex v that does not belong to any kite and that has one or two incident edges in H. If v has an incident tail in H, then it has exactly two incident edges in G′1 \ H that are colored with two different pairs of colors of K3 (while path-3-coloring G1 we can easily guarantee that two consecutive edges of Cmax incident to v such that an edge of M incident to v is also incident to a 3-kite are colored with two different pairs of colors). Let these pairs of colors be {k1 , k2 } and {k2 , k3 }. Hence any edge of H incident to v may be colored only with k1 or k3 - we associate with v a two-element subset Z(v) = {k1 , k3 }. Moreover, if v has two incident edges in H and we color one of them with k1 , then the other one must be colored with k3 . If v does not have an incident tail in H, then it has at most one incident edge in H and exactly five edges in the multigraph G1 as well as in the multigraph G′1 \ H. In this case there exists exactly one color k of K3 that can be assigned to an edge of H incident to v and we associate a one-element subset Z(v) = {k} with v. Let t be a 3-kite. Then a vertex of t incident to its tail is called a foot vertex (of t). If e′ ∈ F1 ∩t is incident to the foot vertex of t, then t is said to be vertical; otherwise it is horizontal. Two 3-kites t1 and t2 having a common tail are called twins. Also, each one of them is called a twin and t1 is said to be a brother of t2 . A 3-kite that is not a twin is said to be non-twin. Some of the edges contained in H are directed. The directions of edges of H satisfy: 1. each internal edge is undirected (i.e., each edge contained in a kite);  12  2. the direction of each edge of F2 is the same as in I(C2 ); the properties of edges of F2 are described in Lemma 6 in properties (3), (4) and (5); 3. a tail of two twins is undirected; otherwise, a tail of a 3-kite t is an incoming edge of t. (It may happen that a tail e of some 3-kite belongs also to I(C2 ) and F2 . Then G′1 contains two copies of e, each one with the requirement d(e) = 1 and the copy corresponding to a tail is treated as a tail and the other copy is treated as an external directed edge.) From graph H we build a graph I by shrinking each kite to a single vertex. Each vertex of I that corresponds to a kite in H is called, respectively a t-vertex (if it is a 3-kite) or an s-vertex (if it is a 4-kite); each remaining vertex is called an o-vertex. In any coloring of I or H, we say that an o-vertex v is respected if any edge incident to v is assigned a color belonging to Z(v) and if there are two edges incident to v, then they have different colors assigned to them. To pre-color a directed cycle or path r of I means to color each of its edges with a color of K3 so that each o-vertex of r is respected. To color a kite c means to color each edge e of c with d(e) colors of K3 . We are going to color the edges of H in portions - by considering directed cycles and paths in I. For each such cycle or path we will color its edges as well as some of the kites corresponding to its vertices. To be able to talk more precisely about these operations we introduce below the notions of processing a directed cycle or path r in I and step-processing a vertex v on r. Processing a directed cycle or path r in I consists in step-processing each of its vertices on r. Definition 2 Let r be a directed cycle or path in I and v a vertex on r that has an outgoing edge that belongs to r. To step-process v (or in case v corresponds to a kite c, to step-process c) on r means: • if an outgoing edge of v is uncolored - to color it, • if v has an incoming edge contained in r - to color it, • if v corresponds to a kite c - to color the kite c unless c is a horizontal twin, whose brother has not been step-processed (on any directed cycle or path in I), • if v corresponds to a non-twin 3-kite t - to color the tail of t, • if v corresponds to a twin 3-kite t, whose brother t′ has already been step-processed - to color the common tail of t and t′ and in case t′ has not already been colored, to color t′ , • to carry out the above so that each color class forms a collection of vertex-disjoint paths in G′1 and so that each o-vertex in I is respected. To process a directed path r in I that goes through vertices v1 , . . . , vk and directed from vk to v1 means to step-process each of the vertices v2 , . . . , vk in turn, starting from v2 . When we process such a path, then we start the step-processing v2 by coloring an outgoing edge of v2 incident also to v1 . We then continue step-processing v2 and afterwards, proceed to ste-processing v3 , then v4 and so on. If vi and vj of r correspond to twins ti and tj such that ti is horizontal and considered before tj on r, then while step-processing ti we only color the edges incident to vi and leave ti and its tail uncolored. When we come to vj , we color the incoming edge of r incident to vj and both twins ti 13  and tj and their common tail. In an analogous way we define the processing of a directed cycle r in I - we start from step-processing any vertex on r and continue with step-processing subsequent vertices along r. Let us notice that if a vertex v corresponding to a kite c has not been step-processed, then c is uncolored and either (1) every external edge of c is also uncolored or (2) an outgoing edge of c is colored because we have just step-processed v ′ on some directed path or cycle r such that r contains an edge (v, v ′ ); apart from this every other external edge of c is uncolored. Also, a given vertex v has exactly one outgoing edge in I but may belong to more than one directed path in I or it may belong to a directed cycle and some directed path(s) in I. However, in Algorithm 2 the first time we encounter v while processing a directed cycle or path, we will step-process it, because each considered directed path is maximal under inclusion. If we encounter v again while processing a different cycle or path, we will just color some of its incoming edges (and possibly a tail and so on) but will not step-process v again. Algorithm 2 Color H while ∃ a directed cycle in I do process it and remove its edges from I end while while ∃ a directed maximal path in I do process it and remove its edges from I end while  In Section 7 we prove that every directed cycle or path can be processed.  14  6  Summary Algorithm MaxTSP 1. Compute a cycle cover Cmax of G of maximum weight and a perfect matching M of G of maximum weight. 2. Let G1 denote a multigraph obtained from two copies of Cmax and one copy of M - its weight is at least 25 opt. Path-3-color G1 with colors of K3 = {1, 2, 3} leaving kites and edges of M incident to kites uncolored. 3. Compute a maximum weight relaxed cycle cover C2 improving Cmax with respect to M . 4. Let G2 denote a multigraph obtained from one copy of C2 and one copy of M - its weight is at least 32 opt. Compute the sets of edges F1 ⊂ Cmax , F2 ⊂ C2 such that the multigraph G′1 = G1 \ F1 ∪ F2 is path-3-colorable and the multigraph G′2 = G2 \ F2 ∪ F1 is path-2-colorable (i.e. F1 , F2 are as in Lemma 6). 5. Path-2-color G′2 with colors of K2 = {4, 5}. 6. Extend the partial path-3-coloring of G1 to the complete path-3-coloring of G′1 . 7. Choose the color class of maximum weight - its weight is at least 54 opt and complete the paths of this class into a traveling salesman tour in an arbitrary way.  The presented algorithm works for graphs with an even number of vertices. If the number of vertices of a given graph is odd, then we can guess one edge, shrink it and compute the remaining part of the solution in the graph with even vertices.  7  Correctness of Algorithm 2  We are going to prove that every directed cycle or path in I can be processed. First we give several auxiliary lemmas. Lemma 7 Let c be a directed cycle in I of even length, whose every other vertex is an o-vertex. Then we are able to pre-color c in such a way that its every two consecutive edges get assigned different colors. Proof. First, let us notice that an o-vertex v may have two incident edges in I only if one of them is a tail of some 3-kite. Thus, every vertex of c that is not an o-vertex must correspond to a 3-kite and be a t-vertex.  15  If the length of c is two, then c contains exactly one o-vertex v. We then assign one color of Z(v) to one edge of c and the other color of Z(v) to the other edge of c and are done. Suppose now that c has length greater than two. Let v be any o-vertex of c and e1 , e2 the edges of I incident to v. We assign one of the colors k1 of Z(v) to e1 and the other k2 to e2 . Assume that e2 is an incoming edge of v1 , e3 is an outgoing edge of v1 and e4 , . . . , ek are the subsequent edges of c. The edges e3 and e4 are incident to another o-vertex v ′ of c. We will show now that whatever the set Z(v ′ ), we are always able to asign colors to e3 and e4 in such a way that e4 does not get assigned k1 - the color already assigned to e1 . If Z(v ′ ) contains k2 and some other color k4 , then we assign k4 to e3 and k2 to e4 . If Z(v ′ ) does not contain k2 , then it contains k1 and k3 and we assign k1 to e3 and k3 to e4 . This way (i) edges e2 and e3 get assigned different colors and (ii) e4 gets assigned a color different from k1 . If c has length 4, then we notice that the edges e1 and e4 of c get assigned different colors as well and we are done. If c has length greater than 4, then we consider the next pairs of edges and continue in the manner described above. More precisely, when we consider the pair of edges e2i+1 and e2i+2 incident to some o-vertex w, we know that the invariant that e1 and e2i have different colors assigned is satisfied. Our goal is to color e2i+1 and e2i+2 in such a way that (i) e2i+1 gets assigned a color different from the color assigned to e2i and (ii) e2i+2 gets assigned a color different from k1 . From the way we have analysed coloring e3 and e4 , we know that it can always be done. ✷  Corollary 2 Let c be a directed cycle in I of even length, whose every other vertex is an o-vertex. Then we are able to process c. Proof. First, let us notice that every t-vertex of c corresponds to a non-twin 3-kite, because the tail of each such kite is contained in c and thus is directed. While pre-coloring c whenever two edges e1 , e2 of c adjacent to the same kite c get colored, we also color c. While coloring c we only have to see to it that no vertex of c gets three incident edges of the same color in G′1 and to that c does not contain a monochromatic cycle i.e. a 3-cycle. We show how to color c in Figure 2 and in Figure ??. Let us notice that after pre-coloring c and all 3-kites corresponding to t-vertices on c, no color class contains a cycle - this is because every edge e of c is incident to a t-vertex corresponding to a 3-kite t and the only external edges incident to t in the whole graph G′1 are e and some other edge e′ of c. We know, however, that every two consecutive edges of c are colored differently. Hence e′ is colored differently from e. Thus, neither e nor e′ can belong to a monochromatic cycle, which means that in this way we process c. ✷ Suppose that the tail e of t is uncolored. Then t is said to be flexible if there exist such two colors k, k′ ∈ K3 that e can be colored both with k and k′ , by which we mean that if we color the tail of t with k (or correspondingly k′ ), then the foot of t does not have more than three incident edges colored with k (resp. k′ ). The flexibility of a 3-kite t is useful when t is a vertical twin that is step-processed before its twin t′ . Then while step-processing t we color t but leave its tail uncolored and later later while step-processing t′ we have a greater ’flexibility’ in coloring t′ and its tail. Lemma 8 Let t be any uncolored vertical 3-kite and e1 , e2 ∈ F2 \ M two external edges incident to t colored with, respectively, k1 and k2 . Let w be the foot vertex and e the tail of t. Additionally, e1 16  and e2 are not both incident to w and k1 6= k2 . Then it is possible to color the edges of t so that t becomes flexible and so that e can be colored with k3 ∈ / {k1 , k2 }. Proof. For all possible triangles we will show how to color the edges for t. These colorings are presented in Figure 2. k2 k1  k2 k2  k1 k2 k3  k1 k2 k3  k1 k2 k3  k1  k1 k3  k1 k3  k2 k1 k2  k1  k2  (a) e can be colored with all colors in K3  (b) By Lemma 6 edge in F1 ∩ t must be incident to e1 and e2 . e can be colored with all colors in K3  (c) Both edges of t incident to w can be colored with k3 , depending on which one is not in F1 . e can be colored with k1 and k3  Figure 2: Vertical triangles with k1 6= k2 and e1 not incident to w ✷ Lemma 9 The computed sets F1 , F2 satisfy: 1. No foot of a 3-kite has two incident edges of F2 . 2. If a 3-kite has four incident edges of F2 , then it is vertical. The proof follows from the proof of Lemma 6. Lemma 10 Let t be a vertical 3-kite, whose tail e is uncolored and that has been colored at some point as in Lemma 8. Then, however, we color any further external edges of H incident to t apart from its tail, t always stays flexible. Proof. The lemma follows from the fact that the foot of t has not two incident edges of F2 .  ✷  Let t be an uncolored 3-kite t, whose tail e is also uncolored. Then we say that t is weakly flexible if there exist two colors k, k′ ∈ K3 such that t can be colored in at least two ways and in one of these colorings e can be colored with k and in the other with k′ , i.e., after coloring e with k or k′ , the foot of t has at most two incident edges colored with respectively k or k′ . We say that an uncolored twin t is versatile if every two colored edges of H incident to t have different colors assigned to them. The weak flexibility of a 3-kite t is useful when t is a horizontal twin that is step-processed before its twin t′ . While step-processing t on some directed cycle or path r we do not color it or its tail but only the incident edges of r and later while step-processing t′ we color both t and t′ and their common tail. 17  Lemma 11 Every uncolored versatile horizontal 3-kite is weakly flexible. Proof. Let t be any triangle on vertices u, v, w as in Lemma 11 and let e1 , e2 , e3 three external edges incident to t colored with, respectively, k1 , k2 and k3 . Let w be the foot vertex and e the tail of t. Let us assume that e2 and e3 are not incident to w. Then we can color e with k2 and k3 . For each of these colors we have to show how to color edges of t. As these cases are symmetric, we assume that e is colored with k2 . Let us assume that e2 is incident to v. Then we color (u, v) and (u, w) with k2 . k2  e2 k2  k2  As t is horizontal, we still have to color (v, w) with 2 colors, and the other edges with one color. If there is an edge, say e1 , incident to w we color (v, w) and (v, u) with k1 . If there is an edge incident to v other than e2 , say e3 , we color (v, w) and (u, w) with k3 . If there are both of these edges, than it is correct coloring. Otherwise there is an edge incident to u, say e1 , and we can color (v, w) and either (u, v) or (u, w) with k1 , so we can always color t. ✷  Lemma 12 Every directed cycle or path can be processed in such a way that at all times every uncolored horizontal twin is versatile. Proof. Let us consider a directed path p going through vertices v1 , . . . , vk and directed from vk to v1 . We can notice that since cycles are processed before paths, each vertex of p is distinct. We observe also that v1 is either an o-vertex or corresponds to a kite that has already been step-processed otherwise we could extend p, because then the outgoing edge of v1 would be uncolored. Vertex vk , on the other hand, is either an o-vertex or corresponds to an uncolored (and not step-processed) kite. We begin by coloring the arc (v2 , v1 ) with any color of K3 that is available. Let us note that some color of K3 is always available because of the following. If v1 is an o-vertex, then it has exactly six incident edges in the multigraph G′1 - apart from five edges in the multigraph G1 , it has an additional incoming edge that is an outgoing edge of some kite. If v1 corresponds to a kite, then Lemma 6 Property 5 guarantees that any vertex in G′1 belonging to a kite has degree at most six. Also, if v1 corresponds to an uncolored 3-kite t that has already been step-processed, then we color (v2 , v1 ) with such a color k of K3 that no external edge of t is colored with k. Such a color k always exists because only horizontal 3-kites can be left uncolored and they have at most three incident edges of F2 . Thus we can guarantee that t remains versatile. We step-process subsequent vertices on p according to the rules listed below. Let e1 ∈ p be an outgoing edge of v colored with k1 and e2 an uncolored incoming edge of v. Depending on whether v is an o-, t- or s-vertex and other conditions we proceed as follows:  18  1. e2 ∈ M . Then v must be a t-vertex corresponding to a 3-kite t and e2 is an outgoing edge of an o-vertex v ′ . We color t, e2 and an incoming edge e3 of v ′ . If Z(v ′ ) = {k1 , k′ }, then we color e2 with k′ and e3 with k1 . Otherwise Z(v ′ ) = {k2 , k3 } = K3 \ k1 . Then we color e2 with k2 and e3 with k3 or the other way around. 2. v is a t-vertex corresponding to a non-twin 3-kite t and e is the tail of t incident to an overtex v ′ . We color t, e2 and e. If Z(v ′ ) = {k1 , k′ }, then we color e with k ′ and e2 with k ∈ K3 \ {k1 , k′ }. Otherwise Z(v ′ ) = {k2 , k3 } = K3 \ k1 . Then we color e2 with k2 and e with k3 or the other way around. 3. v is a t-vertex corresponding to a twin 3-kite t, whose brother t′ has already been colored and e is the tail of t. Then by Lemmas 8 and 10, there exist two colors of K3 , such that if we look only at t′ , then e can be colored with either of them. Let Z(e) denote the set consisting of these two colors. Now we proceed almost identically as in the case above. If Z(e) = {k1 , k′ }, then we color e with k′ and e2 with k ∈ K3 \ {k1 , k′ }. Otherwise Z(e) = {k2 , k3 } = K3 \ k1 . Then we color e2 with k2 and e with k3 or the other way around. We color t. Note that each colored external edge of t is colored with a different color. This cannot be said about t′ - it may happen that the tail of t′ is colored with the same color as some other external edge e′ of t′ , but we do not have to worry about edge e′ ending in a monochromatic cycle because then the tail of t and t′ would also have to belong to such cycle. 4. v is a t-vertex corresponding to a twin 3-kite t, whose brother t′ has not been step-processed. We color e2 with k2 or k3 . If t is vertical, then we color t. Otherwise we leave t uncolored. 5. v is a t-vertex corresponding to a twin 3-kite t, whose brother t′ has been step-processed but is uncolored. Since t′ has been step-processed, but is uncolored, it is horizontal. By Lemma 11 t′ is weakly flexible - therefore there exist two colors k, k′ that can be used for coloring the tail of t′ . If k1 ∈ {k, k′ }, then we color the tail of t and t′ with the color belonging to {k, k′ } \ k1 and e2 with the remaining color of K3 - note that this way each colored external edge of t is colored with a different color. If k1 ∈ / {k, k′ }, then we color the tail with k2 and ′ e2 with k3 . We also color both t and t . 6. v is an s-vertex. Then we color e2 with any color of K3 different from k1 . We also color s. We argue that by proceeding as above, we do not create a monochromatic cycle in G′1 and thus process p. This is so, because every external edge colored with k while processing p is contained in some path p′ consisting of edges colored with k that ends at a vertex of p corresponding to a kite c′ such that c′ has only one incident external edge in G′1 colored with k. Let us now turn our attention to directed cycles. Let c be a directed cycle of I. We can assume that c is not as in Lemma 7, because we have already dealt with such cycles. Thus c contains two subsequent vertices v, v ′ such that neither v nor v ′ is an o-vertex and c contains an edge (v, v ′ ) directed from v to v ′ . If possible we choose v that is an s-vertex or corresponds to a 3-kite t, whose tail also belongs to c. If such v does not exist then we choose v that corresponds to a 3-kite that is either non-twin or whose brother has already been step-processed. For now, we assume that this is the case. We start by coloring an incoming edge of v. If v corresponds to a 3-kite t, whose tail q does not belong to c, then q can be colored with some two colors k2 , k3 . In this case we color the incoming edge of v with k1 ∈ / {k2 , k3 }. 19  We continue processing c according to the rules described above until we reach the vertex v ′ . If applying the rules also to v ′ would result in the arc (v, v ′ ) being colored with a different color than an incoming edge of v, we apply the rules to v ′ and are done. Otherwise v ′ must correspond to a 3-kite t′ which is either non-twin or that is a twin whose brother has already been colored. Also, assume that the incoming edge of v is colored with k1 . It follows that the tail of t′ can be colored with k2 or k3 , both different from k1 , and that the outgoing edge of t′ is colored with k2 or k3 . Otherwise we would be able to color (v, v ′ ) with a color different from k1 . Suppose that the outgoing edge of v is colored with k2 . In this case we color the tail of t′ with k3 and color (v, v ′ ) with k3 - if it is not incident to the tail of t′ and with k2 otherwise. By Lemma 9 property 1, it cannot happen that both the outgoing and incoming edge of t′ is incident to the foot of t′ . We are left with the case when each vertex of c corresponds to a twin 3-kite whose brother also occurs on c. We leave this case to the reader. ✷  8  Path-2-coloring  The partition of G′2 into cycles and paths is carried out in such a way that two edges of C2′ belonging to a common path or cycle of C2 , belong also to a common path or cycle of G′2 . Also, the partition is maximal, i.e., we cannot add any edge e of C2′ to any path p of G′2 so that p ∪ {e} is also a path or cycle of G′2 . We may assume that each path and cycle of G′2 is directed - the orientations of edges are consistent with those in G2 . A surrounding of a cycle c of C2 , denoted as sur(c), contains every edge of c and every edge of M incident to c. Let p be a path of G′2 directed from u to v. If v has degree 4 in G′2 , then an edge e of p incident to v is said to be a border of p. The surrounding of p, denoted as sur(p), contains every edge of p and every edge of M incident to p. We construct a directed graph Gp = (Vp , Ep ) such that each path of G′2 is represented by some vertex of Vp and Ep contains an edge (p, p′ ) iff p has a border and the border of p is incident to some vertex of p′ . Thus each vertex of Vp has at most one outgoing edge. Below we describe the algorithm for path-2-coloring the graph G′2 . In it we first color the cycles of G′2 and their surroundings. The order of coloring the paths of G′2 is dictated by the structure of graph Gp : we begin by coloring the paths of G′2 that form cycles in Gp ; next at each step we color an uncolored path, whose outdegree in Gp is zero. The presence of borders complicates path-2-coloring in two aspects: 1. Suppose that edges e1 = (u, u′ ) and e2 = (u, u′′ ) belong to some path of G′2 and that u is incident to a double edge ed different from e1 and e2 . Since ed has to be colored with two colors of K2 , edges e1 and e2 must be assigned different colors of K2 . Therefore while path-2-coloring G′2 we will preserve the following invariant: Invariant 1 Every two edges e1 = (u, u′ ), e2 = (u, u′′ ) of G′2 such that their common endpoint u is incident to a double edge ed different from e1 and e2 are assigned different colors of K2 . 2. Each border b of a path p of G′2 is colored while coloring the path p and not before. In particular, if b is double and is incident to a path or cycle p′ such that p′ is colored before p, then while coloring p′ we assign only one color to b. The second one is assigned while coloring  20  p. If b is double we may also think of it as of two edges - one being a border and the other an edge of the matching M . Because of this we modify the meaning of a safe edge in this section as follows. We say that a colored edge e is safe if no matter how we color the so far uncolored edges except for any uncolored borders, e is guaranteed not to belong to any monochromatic cycle. In particular, it means that if we want to prove that a newly colored border b is safe we have to explicitly show that it does not belong to any monochromatic cycle - without taking use of the fact that previously colored edges are safe. Algorithm 3 Color G′2 During the whole execution ensure that Invariant 1 is satisfied. while ∃c – an uncolored cycle of G′2 do for e ∈ sur(c) do color e in such a way, that it is safe end for end while while ∃cp – a directed cycle of Gp do for p such that p is a vertex on cp do color each e ∈ sur(p) in such a way, that it is safe end for remove each vertex of cp together with incident edges from Gp end while while ∃p – an uncolored path of G′2 such that outdegGp (p) = 0 do for e such that e ∈ sur(p) do color e in such a way, that it is safe end for remove p together with incident edges from Gp end while  Lemma 13 Let c be an uncolored cycle c of C2 considered at some step of Algorithm Color G2 . Then it is possible to color each edge belonging to sur(c) in such a way that it is safe. Proof. The procedure of coloring the edges of sur(c) is similar to that described in the proofs of Lemmas 1 and 4. We orient the edges of c so that c becomes directed. Case 1: (i) For each color k ∈ K2 there exists an edge of M incident to one of the edges of c that is colored k or (ii) there exists an uncolored edge of M incident to one of the edges of c. First we color every uncolored non-double edge e of M incident to c so that case (i) holds. Next we color each double edge incident to c. Let e = (u, v) be a double edge such that u belongs to c. Then, necessarily v belongs to some path of C2 and since we color cycles of C2 before coloring paths of C2 , e is uncolored. We start with such a double edge e = (u, v) that the predecessor u′ of u on the cycle c has no incident double edge. The existence of such double edge is guaranteed by Lemma 6. Let e1 = (u, u′ ) and e2 = (u, u′′ ) be two edges of c incident to u and let e′ be an edge of M incident to u′ and k the color of K2 assigned to e′ . To preserve Invariant 1 we have to color the edges e1 , e2 with different colors of K2 . To make it possible we color e with a color k ′ belonging to K2 \ k, i.e., 21  for the time being we color e only with one color instead of two. We proceed with each subsequent double edge incident to c in the same way, i.e., we color such edges in order of their occurrence along c. Further we color all edges of c. Let e = (u, v) be an edge of c oriented from u to v and let e′ be an edge of M incident to u k the color of K2 assigned to e′ . Then we color e with a color k ′ belonging to K2 \ k. We can notice that each so far colored edge is safe. Suppose that e = (u, v) is colored with k. Then we additionally assign k ′ 6= k to e. Case 2: All edges of M incident to c are colored with the same color k. We color any chosen one edge of c with k and the remaining ones with k ′ 6= k. ✷  Lemma 14 Let p be an uncolored path p of C2 considered at some step of Algorithm Color G2 such that outdegGp (p) = 0. Then it is possible to color each edge belonging to sur(p) in such a way that it is safe. Proof. Generally we proceed in a very similar way as in Lemma 13. The path p is already oriented. First we color each edge of M incident to p with one color of K2 in order of their occurrence along p. If a given edge e of M incident to u is double, then we color it with one color only and with the one different from that assigned to an edge of M incident to u′ which proceeds u on p. Next we color each edge (u, v) of p directed from u to v, which is not a border of p with a color different from that assigned to an edge e′ of M incident to u. We must also color the border b of p, if p has one. If b is double, then it must have got assigned one color of K2 before we started coloring p - that is because outdegGp (p) = 0, which means that b got colored while coloring the path or cycle of G′2 incident to b. It may also happen that the border b of p is incident to some ”internal” vertex of p but then we have also already assigned one color of K2 to it. If b is already colored with k1 , then we additionally assign k2 6= k1 to it. The safety of b follows from the following. The edge e proceeding b on p is colored with one color k of K2 . From the way we color edges of p, we notice that e is contained in a monochromatic path pk colored with k, whose one endpoint lies on p. In other words we claim that pk has a ”dead end”. We can observe that a part of pk starting with e is contained in p and does not leave p. It follows from the fact that each edge (u, v) of p is colored with a color different from the one assigned to the edge of M incident to u. This means that e is safe, because we have already colored every edge of p and every edge of M incident to p (except possibly for some borders), hence b is safe. If the border b = (u, v) of p is not double, then we still have to color it. Suppose that v is the endpoint of p. Then three edges of the multigraph G′2 incident to v have already been colored. This means that there is only one color of K2 that can be used for coloring b. We must also ensure that after coloring b, it does not belong to any monochromatic cycle. Since p is amenable, b is either proceeded by a double edge on p or an edge e′ of M incident to v is also incident to a last-but-three vertex of p. In the first case, the safety of b follows from the fact that an edge of p proceeding a double edge proceeding b is safe. (The argument is the same as above.) In the second case we leave the edge e′ uncolored till this point. Once we know that we are forced to color b, with say k ∈ K2 , we color e′ with the other color of K2 and we also color accordingly the two edges proceeding b and are done. ✷  22  Lemma 15 Let cp be a directed cycle of Gp considered at some step of Algorithm Color G2 . Then it is possible to color each edge belonging to the surrounding of each path of G′2 occurring on cp in such a way that it is safe. Proof. Suppose that the cycle cp goes through vertices p1 , p2 , . . . , pk in this order. Let (ui , vi ) denote the border of path pi of G′2 for each i, 1 ≤ i ≤ k. We start by coloring the path p1 and its surrounding in the manner described in the proof of Lemma 14. If the border (u1 , v1 ) is not double, then we leave it uncolored. Next we color each of the paths p2 , . . . , pk−1 and their surroundings together with their borders, also in the way described in the proof of Lemma 14. Next we have to check two possibilities of dealing with the path pk . First we color the path pk together with its border and surrounding in the same manner as the remaining paths p1 , . . . , pk−1 and if the border (u1 , v1 ) is uncolored, because it is not double, we color it with the only possible color of K2 . It may happen, however, that by doing so we create a monochromatic cycle c′ that is formed by the part of p1 between v1 and v2 , the part of p2 between v2 and v3 and so on until the part of pk between vk and v1 . If this is the case, then we leave the part of pk between vk and v1 colored as it is and uncolor the remaining part of pk . If the border (u1 , v1 ) is not double, then we change its color to the opposite one. If the border (u1 , v1 ) is double, then we change the color of the edge proceeding it on p1 to the opposite one. Next we change the orientation of the uncolored part of pk as follows. The endpoints of pk are vk and some vertex wk and originally pk is oriented from wk to vk . Now we change the orientation of the part p′ of pk between v1 and wk so that it is directed from v1 to wk . Let e = (w, v1 ) denote the edge of p′ incident to v1 . Since v1 has degree 4 in the multigraph G′2 , there exists only one color k of K2 that can be used for coloring e. The rest of p′ is colored in the standard way. We only have to show that the edge e is safe, as every other edge considered in this lemma is safe by reasoning analogous to that used in two previous lemmas. The edge e is safe because it is colored with same color k that every edge of c′ but one is colored with. Also, e is the only edge incident to c′ but not lying on c′ that is colored with k. The example of this algorithm is presented on Figure 3. ✷  9  The proof of Lemma 6  First we want to guarantee that property 6. is satisfied. Let us say that an edge e is a d-edge if it belongs to M and some kite. Let S contain every cycle of C2 of odd length l that has l different incident d-edges. Let T denote the set of all d-edges. We build a bipartite graph Gd = (S ∪ T, Ed ) such that there exists an edge in Ed between a cycle c of S and edge e of T iff e is incident to c. Furthermore for each 4-kite s incident to at most three cycles in S we merge vertices corresponding to d-edges in s into one vertex. Let us notice that the degree of each d-edge of T in Gd is at most 3 and the degree of each cycle c of S is at least 3. We compute a matching Md of size |S| in the graph Gd . By Hall’s Theorem such a matching always exists. Then for each cycle c and matched to it d-edge e we will either (i) add an outgoing edge of c incident to e to F2 or (ii) ensure that e is not a double edge. We begin with the proof for the case when there are only 3-kites. Let t be any 3-kite on vertices u, v, w such that e = (u, v) is a d-edge of t and e2 = (u, w) and e3 = (v, w). 23  v1  w2 5  4  u2  45  u1  4  5  45  4 4  5  5  w1 5  4  5  5  v2  5  (a) Paths of cp before coloring. There are two paths: the first one from w1 to v1 and the second one from w2 to v2 .  4  (b) Preliminary coloring of paths of cp . There is a monochromatic cycle in color 5 5  5 45  4  4  5  5 45  4 5 5  4  (c) We recolor edge (u1 , v1 ) and path from v1 to w2 . All edges are now safe  Figure 3: Example of algorithm described in Lemma 15  24  We begin with the case when t has three incoming and three outgoing edges of C2 incident to it. We add e to F1 . To F2 we add any outgoing edge of t belonging to C2 (it can be an edge required by Md ). If at some later point t gets three incident incoming edges of F2 , then we remove e from F1 and replace it with that one of the edges e2 , e3 that is incident to an outgoing edge of F2 and orient it so that it is directed to w. We do it so that Lemma ?? Property (2) is satisfied. Whenever e does not belong to Z, we add it to F1 and an outgoing edge of t incident to e to F2 . We consider now the cases when t has two incoming and two outgoing edges of C2 incident to it. In Figure 4 we show how to assign edges of all possible 3-kites with two incoming and two outgoing edges to F1 and F2 . In case of triangles with one incoming and one outgoing edge there are already two edges of t in C2 ∪ Z. Therefore we add remaining edge to F1 and incident edge (we can guarantee that it is outgoing when constructing D2 ) to F2 . To finish the proof we must consider all cases for 4-kites. We say that an edge e is a side edge if it belongs to 4-kite, but not to M . Let c be any 4-kite on vertices u, v, w, z such that (u, v) and (w, z) are d-edges and (u, z) and (v, w) are side edges. Let Ic be the set of those edges in I(C2 ), whose both endpoints are in {u, v, w, z} (so I(C2 ) \ Ic contains all incoming and outgoing edges incident to c). First we consider the cases when c has one incoming and one outgoing edge of C2 incident to it (by our construction of C2 these edges must be incident to different vertices of c). If these edges are not incident to the same side edge, we add outgoing edge to F2 and the side edge incident to it to F1 . Otherwise let’s assume that they are incident to (u, z), and that edge incident to u is outgoing in D2 , whereas edge incident to z is outgoing in opp(D2 ). 1. u and z are incident to at most 2 half-edges or 1 edge of Ic and 1 half-edge - we divide halfedges into Z1 and Z2 so that degree of z in I(C2 )∪Z1 ∪M is 3 and degree of u in I(C2 )∪Z2 ∪M is 3. Then we add (u, z) to F1 and outgoing edge to F2 . 2. z is incident to 1 edge of Ic and 2 half-edges and (u, z) is not in Ic - then half-edge (u, z) is in C2 so u is not incident to any edge in Ic . We divide half-edges into Z1 and Z2 so that (u, v) is not in Z1 and degree of u in I(C2 ) ∪ Z2 ∪ M is 3. If outgoing edge is incident to u we add (u, v) to F1 , and otherwise we add (u, z) to F1 . In both cases we add outgoing edge to F2 . 3. (u, z) is in Ic - we divide half-edges so that (u, v) is not in Z1 and (w, z) is not in Z2 . We add d-edge incident to outgoing edge to F1 and outgoing edge to F2 . Now let’s consider the cases when two vertices incident to the same d-edge, say (u, v), are incident to one incoming and one outgoing edge each and the other two vertices aren’t incident to any incoming or outgoing edges. If w and z are incident to two half-edges each then two half-edges incident to w go to Z1 , and the other two half-edges go to Z2 . If w and z are incident to one half-edge each then I(C2 ) must contain (w, z) and we divide half-edges into Z1 and Z2 arbitrarily. There are three cases depending on which edges incident to z are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) (cases when in Z there are half-edges incident to w are symmetric): 1. (w, z) and (v, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u and (v, z) to F2 and add (u, z) and (v, w) to F1 . 2. (w, z) and (u, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to v to F2 and add (v, w) to F1 .  25  e  e  f  f2 e2  f1 e2  e1  e1  f3 (a) We add f to F2 and e2 to F1 . In G′2 we orient e2 so that it is directed from a common endpoint with e.  (b) We add f1 to F2 and e to F1 . If e2 is in Z we orient it from w to u and make f2 outgoing. If e3 is in Z we orient it from v to w and make f3 outgoing  e  e  f1  f1 e2  e2  e1  e1  f2  (c) If e2 is in Z we make f1 outgoing. In this case we add e to F1 and f1 to F2 and orient e2 from u to w. If e is in Z we make f2 outgoing, add e3 to F1 and f2 to F2 and we orient e3 from v to w  (d) If e is in Z we add e2 to F1 and f1 to F2 . If e2 is in Z we add e to F1 and f2 to F2  e  e  f2  f3 e2  f1 e2  e1  e1  f1 (e) If e2 is in Z we make f1 outgoing, add e to F1 and f2 to F2 . If e is in Z we make f3 outgoing, add e3 to F1 and f2 to F2  (f) We add e to F1 and f1 to F2  Figure 4: Assigning edges of 3-kites with two incoming and two outgoing edges 3. (v, z) and (u, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to v to F2 . If incoming edge incident to v is also in F2 we add (v, w) to F1 . Otherwise we add (w, z) to F1 The next cases are similar to the previous one, but now vertices incident to one incoming and one outgoing edge each are incident to the same side edge, say (u, z). We divide half-edges same as before, so two half-edges incident to v go to Z1 , and the other two go to Z2 . Now the cases are: 26  1. (v, z) and (v, w) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) and z was matched in Md with (w, z) - we add outgoing edge incident to z and (v, z) to F2 . If incoming edge incident to z is in F2 we add (w, z) and (u, z) to F1 . Otherwise we add (w, z) and (v, w) to F1 . 2. (v, z) and (v, w) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) and z wasn’t matched in Md with (w, z) - we add outgoing edge incident to u and (v, z) to F2 and we add (u, v) and (z, w) to F1 . 3. (v, z) and (u, v) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u and (v, z) to F2 . If incoming edge incident to u is in F2 we add (u, z) and (v, w) to F1 . Otherwise we add (v, w) and (w, z) to F1 . 4. (u, v) and (v, w) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) and z was matched in Md with (w, z) - we add outgoing edge incident to z to F2 and (w, z) to F1 . 5. (u, v) and (v, w) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) and z wasn’t matched in Md with (w, z) - we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 . If incoming edge incident to u is in F2 we add (u, z) to F1 . Otherwise we add (w, z) to F1 . Now there are three cases in which there is a vertex in c, say u, incident to two edges in I(C2 )\Ic , two vertices incident to one edge in I(C2 ) \ Ic each and a vertex incident to no edge in I(C2 ) \ Ic . The first case is when z isn’t incident to any edge in I(C2 ) \ Ic . Let’s assume that edge incident to v is outgoing in D2 . We divide half-edges into Z1 and Z2 so that (i) in Z1 ∪ I(C2 ) there is an edge incident to v and edge incident to z and, similarly, in Z2 ∪ I(C2 ) there is an edge incident to w and edge incident to z (ii) no two half-edges incident to u are in the same set (this condition can be satisfied because in C2 there are at most two half-edges incident to u). Now we consider all subcases of which edges are in Z ∪ I(C2 ): 1. (v, w) and (w, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 and (u, z) to F1 . 2. (v, w) and (v, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u and (v, z) to F2 and add (u, z) and (w, z) to F1 . 3. (v, w) and (u, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 . If incoming edge incident to u is also in F2 we add (u, v) to F1 . Otherwise we add (w, z) to F1 . 4. (v, z) and (w, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 and (u, v) to F1 . 5. (v, z) and (u, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - there is no edge incident to w, so edge incident to v is outgoing. We add outgoing edge incident to v to F2 and (v, w) to F1 . 6. (u, v) and (w, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 and (u, z) to F1 . 7. (u, v) and (v, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u and (v, z) to F2 and add (u, z) and (w, z) to F1 . 8. (u, w) and (w, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u and (u, w) to F2 and add (u, v) and (u, z) to F1 . 9. (u, w) and (v, w) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - (u, w) is incident to neither v nor z, so edge incident to w is outgoing. We add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 . If incoming edge incident to u is also in F2 we add (u, z) to F1 . Otherwise we add (w, z) to F1 . 27  10. (w, z) and (u, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 and (u, v) to F1 . In the second case w isn’t incident to any edge in I(C2 ) \ Ic . We divide half-edges same as in the previous case, so we guarantee that (i) in Z1 ∪ I(C2 ) there is an edge incident to v and edge incident to w and, in Z2 ∪ I(C2 ) there is an edge incident to z and edge incident to w. Condition (ii) remains the same. Now the subcases are as follows: 1. (v, w) and (w, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 and (u, v) to F1 . 2. (v, w) and (u, w) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - there is no edge incident to z, so edge incident to v is outgoing. We add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 . If incoming edge incident to u is also in F2 we add (u, z) to F1 . Otherwise we add (w, z) to F1 . 3. (v, z) and (v, w) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u and (v, z) to F2 and add (u, z) and (w, z) to F2 . 4. (v, z) and (u, w) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 . If incoming edge incident to u is also in F2 we add (u, v) to F1 , and otherwise we add (w, z) to F1 . In this case at least one of (u, v), (w, z) is not double edge, so cycle going through v and z satisfies condition 6 from lemma. 5. (v, z) and (w, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u and (v, z) to F2 and add (u, z) and (v, w) to F2 . 6. (u, v) and (v, w) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - there is no edge incident to z, so edge incident to v is outgoing. We add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 . If incoming edge incident to u is also in F2 we add (u, z) to F1 . Otherwise we add (w, z) to F1 . 7. (u, v) and (w, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 . If incoming edge incident to u is also in F2 we add (u, z) to F1 . Otherwise we add (v, w) to F1 . 8. (w, z) and (u, w) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - there is no edge incident to v, so edge incident to z is outgoing. We add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 and (u, v) to F1 . 9. (u, z) and (v, w) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - (u, z) is incident to neither v nor w, so edge incident to z is outgoing. We add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 . If incoming edge incident to u is also in F2 we add (u, v) to F1 . Otherwise we add (w, z) to F1 . 10. (u, z) and (w, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - there is no edge incident to v, so edge incident to z is outgoing. We add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 . If incoming edge incident to u is also in F2 we add (u, v) to F1 . Otherwise we add (v, w) to F1 . In the third case v isn’t incident to any edge in I(C2 )\Ic . Similarly as before we divide half-edges to guarantee that (i) in Z1 ∪ I(C2 ) there is an edge incident to w and edge incident to v and, in Z2 ∪ I(C2 ) there is an edge incident to z and edge incident to v. Once again condition (ii) remains the same. Now the subcases are as follows: 1. (v, w) and (v, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 and (u, v) to F1 . Condition 6 from lemma is satisfied, because (w, z) is not a double edge.  28  2. (v, w) and (u, v) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 . If incoming edge incident to u is also in F2 we add (u, z) to F1 . Otherwise we add (w, z) to F1 . 3. (u, w) and (v, w) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u and (v, w) to F2 . If incoming edge incident to u is also in F2 we add (u, z) and (u, v) to F1 . Otherwise we add (u, v) and (w, z) to F1 . 4. (u, w) and (v, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - (u, w) is incident to neither v nor z, so edge incident to w is outgoing. We add u to F2 and (u, v) to F1 . 5. (w, z) and either (v, w) or (v, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 and (u, v) to F1 . 6. (w, z) and (u, v) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 . If incoming edge incident to u is also in F2 we add (u, z) to F1 . Otherwise we add (v, w) to F1 . 7. (v, z) and (u, v) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u and (v, z) to F2 . If incoming edge incident to u is also in F2 we add (u, z) and (w, z) to F1 . Otherwise we add (v, w) and (w, z) to F1 . 8. (u, z) and (v, w) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - (u, z) is incident to neither v nor w, so edge incident to z is outgoing. We add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 and (u, v) to F1 . 9. (u, z) and (v, z) are in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - (u, z) is incident to neither v nor w, so edge incident to z is outgoing. We add outgoing edge incident to u and (v, z) to F2 and add (u, v) and (v, w) to F1 . The final case when c is incident to two incoming and two outgoing edges of C2 is when each vertex of c is incident to one edge of I(C2 ) Ic . First suppose that (u, z) is in I(C2 ). Then we can assume that in Z there is half-edge incident to v (or there is (v, w) in I(C2 )), because other cases are symmetric: 1. (u, v) is in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u or z to F2 and (w, z) to F1 . 2. (v, z) is in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u or z and (v, z) to F2 and (u, v) and (w, z) to F1 . 3. (v, w) is in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to u or z to F2 and d-edge adjacent to added outgoing edge to F1 . If (u, w) is in I(C2 ) we assume that in Z ∪I(C2 ) there is an edge incident to z and that edge incident to z is outgoing. If edge incident to u is outgoing we add it to F2 and add (u, v) to F1 . If edge incident to w is outgoing then there are three cases: 1. (u, z) is in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to w and (u, w) to F2 and add (v, w) and (w, z) to F1 . 2. (v, z) is in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to w to F2 and add (w, z) to F1 . 3. (w, z) is in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to w to F2 and add (u, v) to F1 .  29  Now suppose that (u, v) is in I(C2 ). We assume that in Z ∪ I(C2 ) there is an edge incident to z and that edge incident to z is outgoing: 1. (u, z) or (v, z) is in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident to z to F2 and (w, z) to F1 . 2. (w, z) is in Z ∪ I(C2 ) - we add outgoing edge incident z to F2 and (u, z) to F1 . Finally suppose that there are no whole edges inside c, so there are four half-edges. Into Z1 belong half-edges adjacent to outgoing edges in D2 and into Z2 those adjacent to outgoing edges in opp(D2 ). Now we have to consider all possible edges in Z: 1. (u, z) and one other edge is in Z - we act the same as in case with side edge. 2. (u, v) and (v, z) are in Z - if edge incident to z is outgoing we add it to F2 . Otherwise edge incident to v is outgoing and we add it to F2 . In both cases we add (w, z) to F1 . 3. (u, v) and (w, z) are in Z - we add any outgoing edge to F2 and adjacent side edge to F1 . 4. (u, w) and (v, z) are in Z - we add any outgoing edge to F2 and adjacent d-edge to F1 . Now let’s consider the case when c has three incoming and three outgoing edges of C2 incident to it and there is a vertex, say z which is not incident to any incoming or outgoing edge. Then z is incident to two half-edges, on of which is in Z. If in Z there is half-edge (w, z), we add outgoing edge incident to w to F2 and add (u, z) to F1 . If incoming edge incident to w is also in F2 we add (v, w) to F1 , so that property 5 from lemma is satisfied. If in Z there is either (v, z) or (u, z), we add outgoing edge incident to w to F2 and (w, z) to F1 . In all other cases when c has three incoming and three outgoing edges of C2 incident to it, there are at most two half-edges, each incident to different vertex. In these cases we divide half-edges into Z1 and Z2 in such way, that to Z1 belongs half-edge incident to outgoing edge in D2 . Now we have to consider all cases to which vertices incoming and outgoing vertices are incident: 1. Vertices incident to two edges of I(C2 ) \ Ic are incident to the same d-edge, say (u, v) - let’s assume that edge incident to w is outgoing (and therefore either half-edge incident to w is in Z or (w, z) is in I(C2 )). Then we add outgoing edge incident to w to F2 and either add (v, w) to F1 if (w, z) is in I(C2 ) ∪ Z or add (w, z) to F1 otherwise. 2. Vertices incident to two edges of I(C2 ) \ Ic are incident to the same side edge say (u, z) - let’s assume that edge incident to w is outgoing (and therefore either half-edge incident to w is in Z or (v, w) is in I(C2 )). Then if (v, w) is in Z ∪ I(C2 ) we add outgoing edge incident to w to F2 and (w, z) to F1 . If (u, w) is in Z we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 and (u, v) to F1 . Finally if (w, z) is in Z we add outgoing edge incident to z to F2 and (v, w) to F1 . If incoming edge incident to z is also in F2 we add (u, z) to F1 , so that property 5 from lemma is satisfied 3. None of the above cases - let’s assume that u and w are incident to two edges in I(C2 ) \ Ic and edge incident to z is outgoing (and therefore either half-edge incident to z is in Z or (v, z) is in I(C2 )). Then if (v, z) is in Z ∪ I(C2 ) we add outgoing edge incident to z to F2 and (w, z) to F1 . If (u, z) is in I(C2 ) we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 and (u, v) to F1 . Finally if (w, z) is in Z there are two subcases: 30  (a) In matching Md cycle incident to vertex u is matched to d-edge (u, v) - then we add outgoing edge incident to u to F2 and (u, v) to F1 (b) Otherwise we add outgoing edge incident to w to F2 . If also incoming edge incident to w is in F2 we add (v, w) to F1 , and if it isn’t in F2 we add (u, v) to F1 . In the case when c is incident to four incoming and four outgoing edges of C2 we add outgoing edge incident to u or v to F2 (depending on which one of cycles incident to these vertices was matched to (u, v) in Md ; if none of them we choose arbitrarily) and add (u, v) to F1 . ✷  10  Proof of Lemma 5  Let’s now see, that the cycle cover we have found using our gadgets is indeed what had been promised — the maximum weight cycle cover (in which we agree to having paths ending with half-edges) not containing kites from G1 . To prove that we will show, that no such cycle cover of G has been blocked by our gadgets and demands, so for every proper cycle cover of G, it can be translated into a b-matching in the modified graph. Let’s start off with triangles. Lemma 16 Let K ∈ C1 be a 3-kite in the graph G1 . Let C be a cycle cover of G not containing K (as one of the cycles). There exists a selection of edges in the gadget GK corresponding to K, that is compliant with the cycle cover C and every node v in GK has exactly b(v) adjacent edges in it. Its total weight will be equal to the weight of C. Proof. Since the cycle cover C doesn’t contain K as one of its cycles, it will have at least two edges connecting the nodes of this triangle with other vertices in the graph (that are external with regard to K). These edges are replicated in the gadget-modified graph, so there is no doubt, they can be selected into the b-matching. We will now present, how to handle the edges of the triangle K and the gadget GK . We will consider different interactions between C and K. • If K ∩ C = ∅ (no edge of the kite is used in the cycle cover), then the demands of vertices u, v and w are fulfilled by the external edges. Additionally, we select the edges hx1 , x2 i (middle edge on the right side of the gadget), hx5 , x6 i (middle on the left side), hx3 , pi and hx4 , qi. • If K ∩C = {hu, vi} (the cycle cover contains one side of the triangle), the b-matching obviously contains hu, x1 i and hx2 , vi — the halves of the edge hu, vi. We also select the middle edges of two other sides of the triangle, namely hx3 , x4 i and hx5 , x6 i. We satisfy the demands of p and q by connecting them with x1 and x2 respectively. • Finally, if K ∩ C = {hu, vi, hv, wi} (the cycle cover contains two sides of the triangle), we select the corresponding half-edges hu, x1 i, hx2 , vi, hv, x3 i and hx4 , wi. The nodes p and q are connected with x6 and x5 . ✷ In turn, for the 4-kite it will turn out, that our gadgets not only block selecting a length-4 cycle into the b-matching, but also prevent it from containing a length-3 cycle built on three vertices of the 4-kite. 31  Lemma 17 Let K ∈ C1 be a 4-kite in G1 . Let C be a cycle cover of G not containing any length-4 or length-3 cycle built on the vertices of K as one of its cycles. There exists a selection of edges, that is compliant with the cycle cover C, such that every vertex v ∈ GK has exactly b(v) adjacent edges in the selection (so the selection forms a b-matching). The weight of the b-matching is equal to that of C. Proof. Similarly to the proof of Lemma 16, we need to look into all the possible interactions of the cycle cover C with the edges of K (together with its diagonals). For every such option, we will show, how to expand it into a compliant b-matching. The analysis is presented in the Figure 5 ✷  References [1] A.Barvinok, E.Kh.Gimadi, A.I.Serdyukov: The maximun traveling salesman problem. In: The Traveling Salesman Problem and its variations, 585-607, G.Gutin and A.Punnen, eds., Kluwer, 2002 [2] R.Bhatia: private communication [3] Zhi-Zhong Chen, Yuusuke Okamoto, Lusheng Wang: Improved deterministic approximation algorithms for Max TSP. Information Processing Letters, 95, 2005, 333-342 [4] Yi-Jen Chiang: New Approximation Results for the Maximum Scatter TSP. Algorithmica 41(4): 309-341 (2005) [5] M.L.Fisher, G.L.Nemhauser, L.A.Wolsey: An analysis of approximation for finding a maximum weight Hamiltonian circuit. Oper.Res.27 (1979) 799-809 [6] R.Hassin, S.Rubinstein: Better Approximations for Max TSP. Information Processing Letters, 75, 2000, 181-186 [7] R. Hassin, S. Rubinstein: An Approximation Algorithm for the Maximum Traveling Salesman Problem. Inf. Process. Lett. 67(3): 125-130 (1998) [8] R.Hassin, S.Rubinstein: A 7/8-approximation algorithm for metric Max TSP, Information Processing Letters, 81(5): 247-251, 2002 [9] H.Kaplan, M. Lewenstein, N. Shafrir, M. Sviridenko: Approximation Algorithms for Asymmetric TSP by Decomposing Directed Regualar Multigraphs. J.ACM 52(4):602-626 (2005) [10] S.R.Kosaraju, J.K.Park, C.Stein: Long tours and short superstrings. In: Proc. 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),166-177 (1994) [11] A.V.Kostochka, A.I.Serdyukov: Polynomial algorithms with the estimates 43 and 56 for the traveling salesman problem of he maximum (in Russian). Upravlyaemye Sistemy, 26:55-59, 1985 [12] J. Monnot: Approximation algorithms for the maximum Hamiltonian path problem with specified endpoint(s). European Journal of Operational Research 161(3): 721-735 (2005) 32  [13] Katarzyna E. Paluch, Marcin Mucha, and Aleksander Madry. A 7/9 - approximation algorithm for the maximum traveling salesman problem. In Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop on Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization, volume 5687 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 298–311. Springer, 2009. [14] Katarzyna E. Paluch and Khaled M. Elbassioni and Anke van Zuylen. Simpler Approximation of the Maximum Asymmetric Traveling Salesman Problem. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, STACS’2012, Leibniz International Proceedings of Informatics 14, pages 501–506, 2012. [15] Katarzyna Paluch. Better Approximation Algorithms for Maximum Asymmetric Traveling Salesman and Shortest Superstring. CoRR abs/1401.3670 (2014). [16] C.H.Papadimitriou, M.Yannakakis: The traveling salesman problem with distances one and two. Mathematics of Operations Research 18 Issue 1 (1993), pp. 1-11 [17] A.Schrijver: Nonbipartite Matching and Covering. In: Combinatorial Optimization, Volume A, 520-561, Springer 2003 [18] A.I.Serdyukov: An Algorithm with an Estimate for the Traveling Salesman Problem of Maximum (in Russian). Upravlyaemye Sistemy, 25 (1984):80-86 [19] R. Hassin and S. Rubinstein: An approximation algorithm for maximum triangle packing. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 154 (2006), 971–979 [20] Z. Sichen, L. Zhao, Y. Liang, M. Zamani, R. Patro, R. Chowdhury, E. M. Arkin, J. S. B. Mitchell and Steven Skiena: Optimizing Read Reversals for Sequence Compression - (Extended Abstract). Algorithms in Bioinformatics - 15th International Workshop (WABI), 2015 [21] W. Tong, R. Goebel, T. Liu and G. Lin: Approximation Algorithms for the Maximum Multiple RNA Interaction Problem. Combinatorial Optimization and Applications - 7th International Conference, COCOA 2013, pp. 49–59 [22] Z. Chen and L. Wang: An Improved Approximation Algorithm for the Bandpass-2 Problem. Combinatorial Optimization and Applications - 6th International Conference, COCOA 2012, pp. 188–199 [23] A.I. Barvinok, D.S. Johnson, G.J. Woeginger, R. Woodroofe. Finding maximum length tours under polyhedral norms. In Proceedings of IPCO VI, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 1412, 1998, pp. 195–201. [24] Alexander I. Barvinok, Sándor P. Fekete, David S. Johnson, Arie Tamir, Gerhard J. Woeginger, Russell Woodroofe. The geometric maximum traveling salesman problem. In J. ACM 50(5): 641-664 (2003) [25] Esther M. Arkin, Yi-Jen Chiang, Joseph S. B. Mitchell, Steven Skiena, Tae-Cheon Yang. On the Maximum Scatter TSP (Extended Abstract). In SODA 1997: 211-220 [26] Prasad Chalasani, Rajeev Motwani. Approximating Capacitated Routing and Delivery Problems. SIAM J. Comput. 28(6): 2133-2149 (1999)  33  (a) No side or diagonal of the square was taken into C  (b) C contains one side of the graph.  (c) C contains two opposite sides of K  (d) C contains two adjacent sides of the cycle K  (e) Three sides of the square are taken into C.  (f) C contains one diagonal of K.  (g) A diagonal and a side edge of K are in C.  (h) C contains one diagonal and two opposite side edges of K.  (i) Two diagonals of K are taken into C.  (j) Two diagonals and a side of K are in C.  Figure 5: Proof of the Lemma 17. For every selection of the edges and diagonals of K in the cycle cover C we are showing, how to select edges of the gadget GK , to realize the cycle cover in the gadgets-modified graph.  34

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
