Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_4112

Abstract:
Making FPGAs accessible to Scientists and Engineers as Domain Expert Software Programmers with LabVIEW Hugo A. Andrade  Simon Hogg  Stephan Ahrends  National Instruments Berkeley, CA, USA hugo.andrade@ni.com  National Instruments Austin, TX, USA simon.hogg@ni.com  National Instruments Munich, Germany stephan.ahrends@ni.com  The framework presents a platform-based design methodology, which supports multiple models of computation to capture the application at the right domain level, and then helps map that application into several pre-qualified platform targets. These heterogenous targets range from personal computers running desktop operating systems, to embedded real-time processors, to micro-controllers and FPGAs.  Abstract— In this paper we present a graphical programming framework, LabVIEW, and associated language and libraries, as well as programming techniques and patterns that we have found useful in making FPGAs accessible to scientists and engineers as domain expert software programmers. Keywords— FPGA; RIO; LabVIEW; software programmers; graphical programming; domain experts  I. INTRODUCTION Many scientists and engineers do software programming as a (significant) part of their daily job. Either setting up experiments, taking measurements, developing prototypes, testing their designs, embedding software as part of larger systems, or modeling and analyzing the world around them. The type of software that they develop varies significantly with their domain or task that they are performing, and many times is categorized as scientific programming, embedded programming, test software development, and more recently cyber-physical systems programming, etc. Many of these scientist and engineers are domain experts in other fields like medicine, biology, chemistry, mechanical engineering, etc. and are not formally trained as computer scientists or electrical engineers, but have learned software programming well enough to be proficient in their own domain, and use software programming to their advantage. So having to go even further to understand how to program an FPGA is a foreign concept. For such scientists and engineers having a programming framework that makes their programming job easier is a welcome help. In this paper we present one such framework, (Laboratory Virtual Instrument Engineering LabVIEW Workbench), specifically targeted to scientist and engineers, who need to program as part of their jobs. In addition to highlighting the merits of a visual framework and graphical programming language, we will also show the importance of intuitive and precise access to I/O, and a rich set of library components so that reuse can be exploited. We will also show how such framework has evolved from a programming environment to a system-level development framework for heterogeneous targets. Software programmers will find familiar elements in this flow, and will be eased into more hardware centric elements as needed/beneficial for specific requirements, in particular interfacing to real-world I/O at several levels.  This paper is subdivided into the following sections: in Section II we describe the general LabVIEW framework in technical detail, including key language and environment features and the set of libraries supported. In section III we show how this environment can make development for software programmers trying to use FPGAs much easier. What  Is  LabVIEW? Section IV shows a supporting use case. Section V summarizes Publish  Date:  Aug  16,  2013 our conclusions and future direction. Table  of  Contents 1.   What  Makes  Up  LabVIEW?  II. THE LABVIEW SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK  2.   Benefits  of  LabVIEW  3.   LabVIEW  –  More  Than  Just  Software  LabVIEW is a graphical application programming environment originally developed in the mid 1980’s by National Instruments Corporation for the Data Acquisition LabVIEW  is  a  highly  productive  development  environment  for  creating  custom  applications  that  interact  with  real-­world  data  or (DAQ), Test and Measurement (T&M) and the Industrial signals  in  fields  such  as  science  and  engineering. Automation (IA) markets. It is composed of several well The  net  result  of  using  a  tool  such  as  LabVIEW  is  that  higher  quality  projects  can  be  completed  in  less  time  with  fewer  people  involved. So  productivity  is  the  key  benefit,  but  that  is  a  broad  and  general  statement.  To  understand  what  this  really  means,  consider  the  reasons integrated sub-tools targeted at making the development and that  have  attracted  engineers  and  scientists  to  the  product  since  1986.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  engineers  and  scientists  have  a  job  to  do  – they  have  to  get  something  done,  they  have  to  show  the  results  of  what  they  did,  and  they  need  tools  that  help  them  do  that.  Across prototyping of science and engineering applications that different  industries,  the  tools  and  components  they  need  to  succeed  vary  widely,  and  it  can  be  a  daunting  challenge  to  find  and  use  all these  disparate  items  together.  LabVIEW  is  unique  because  it  makes  this  wide  variety  of  tools  available  in  a  single  environment, require interaction with real-world data and signals very simple ensuring  that  compatibility  is  as  simple  as  drawing  wires  between  functions. and efficient. These sub-tools can be categorized as shown in 1.  What  Makes  Up  LabVIEW? LabVIEW  itself  is  a  software  development  environment  that  contains  numerous  components,  several  of  which  are  required  for  any  type  of Figure 1 [4], and are described in the following sub-sections. test,  measurement,  or  control  application. 4.   Productivity  and  Empowerment  with  LabVIEW  NI  LabVIEW  software  is  used  for  a  wide  variety  of  applications  and  industries,  which  can  make  it  challenging  to  answer  the  question: “What  is  LabVIEW?”  I  have  heard  many  conflicting  opinions  and  debates  over  the  years,  so  I  thought  it  would  be  appropriate  to  take  this opportunity  to  discuss  what  LabVIEW  is.    Figure  1.  LabVIEW  contains  several  valuable  components.  Fig. 1. LabVIEW Subtools by Category  To  quote  one  of  our  software  developers,  “We  write  low-­level  code  so  you  don’t  have  to.”  Our  global  team  of  developers  continually works  on  the  six  areas  called  out  in  Figure  1  to  free  you,  the  LabVIEW  user,  up  to  focus  on  the  bigger  problems  and  tasks  you  are  trying to  solve.      G  Programming  Language Intuitive,  flowchart-­like  dataflow  programming  model Shorter  learning  curve  than  traditional  text-­based  programming  Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 1st International Workshop on FPGAs for Software Programmers (FSP 2014), September 1, 2014, Munich, Germany.  Naturally  represents  data-­driven  applications  with  timing  and  parallelism The  G  programming  language  is  central  to  LabVIEW;;  so  much  so  that  it  is  often  called  “LabVIEW  programming.”  Using  it,  you  can  quickly tie  together  data  acquisition,  analysis,  and  logical  operations  and  understand  how  data  is  being  modified.  From  a  technical  standpoint,  G is  a  graphical  dataflow  language  in  which  nodes  (operations  or  functions)  operate  on  data  as  soon  as  it  becomes  available,  rather  than in  the  sequential  line-­by-­line  manner  that  most  programming  languages  employ.  You  lay  out  the  “flow”  of  data  through  the  application graphically  with  wires  connecting  the  output  of  one  node  to  the  input  of  another.  9  A. G Programming Language One of the key subtools is a compiler for the graphical programming language called G. G is a dataflow language that due to its intuitive graphical representation and programmatic syntax has been well accepted in the instrumentation industry, especially by scientists and engineers that are familiar with programming concepts but are not professional software developers and rather domain experts. Using it, they can quickly tie together data acquisition, analysis, and logical operations and understand how data is being modified. Though it is easy to use and flexible, it is built on an elegant and practical model of computation.  process of manually taking individual measurements and then trying to correlate, process, and tabulate data by hand. LabVIEW makes the process of integrating hardware much easier by using a consistent programming approach no matter what hardware is being used. The same initialize-configureread/write-close pattern is repeated for a wide variety of hardware devices, data is always returned in a format compatible with the analysis and reporting functions, and the user is not forced to search through instrument programming manuals to find low-level message and register-based communication protocols unless specifically needed. LabVIEW has freely available drivers for thousands of NI and third-party hardware devices (e.g. scientific instruments, data acquisition devices, sensors, cameras, motors and actuators, etc.) In the rare case that a LabVIEW driver does not already exist, the user has tools to create his own, reuse a DLL or other driver not related to LabVIEW, or use low-level communication mechanisms to operate hardware without a driver.  The idea behind G was to provide an intuitive flowchartlike block diagram view to the domain expert software programmer, since most scientists and engineers understood that concept; and it became the primary syntactical element in LabVIEW. The semantics follow homogeneous structured dynamic dataflow, which combines constructs from imperative and functional languages [1], where actor nodes (operations or functions called virtual instruments or “VI’s”) operate on data as soon as it becomes available, rather than in the sequential line-by-line manner that most programming languages employ. The VI’s are connected via unidirectional edges (called “wires”) as shown on Figure 2. VI’s are either primitives built into G or sub-VI’s written in the G language. Dataflow allows the user to not worry about memory allocation, garbage collection, and concurrency. The focus is on data, who produces and who consumes it, and what operation is performed on the data, rather than on how to pass data from one place to the other, or when the data arrive.  The cross-platform nature of LabVIEW also allows the user to deploy his code to many different computing platforms. In addition to the desktop OSs (Windows, OS X, and Linux), LabVIEW can target embedded real-time controllers, ARM microprocessors, and field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), so he can quickly prototype and deploy to the most appropriate hardware platform without having to learn new tool chains. C. Analysis and Technical Code Libraries LabVIEW tailors the G programming language to engineering and scientific use by incorporating hundreds of specialized functions and algorithms that are not typically included with general-purpose programming languages.  The user interface is presented through a “front panel” that provides “controls” and “indicators” through which the user sends and receives information. The programmatic hierarchical interface is specified through the connector pane.  In addition to the standard programming language constructs, LabVIEW contains functions for:  Figure  2.  This  block  diagram  shows  shows  self-­documenting  G  code. Fig. 2. LabVIEW Block Diagram LabVIEW  contains  a  powerful  optimizing  compiler  that  examines  your  block  diagram  and  directly  generates  efficient  machine  code, avoiding  the  performance  penalty  associated  with  interpreted  or  cross-­compiled  languages.  The  compiler  can  also  identify  segments  of code  with  no  data  dependencies  (that  is,  no  wires  connecting  them)  and  automatically  split  your  application  into  multiple  threads  that  can run  in  parallel  on  multicore  processors,  yielding  significantly  faster  analysis  and  more  responsive  control  compared  to  a  single-­threaded, sequential  application.  •  String, array, and waveform manipulation  •  Signal processing, including filters, spectral analysis, and transforms  •  Mathematical analysis, including curve fitting, statistics, differential equations, linear algebra, and interpolation  •  Communication, including high-level protocols, HTTP, SMTP, FTP, TCP, UDP, Serial, and Bluetooth  •  Report generation, file I/O, and database connectivity  •  Add-on packages for specialized disciplines, such as: o  Control design and simulation  o  Sound and vibration analysis  windowing,  o Machine vision and image processing B. Hardware Support o RF and communication Typically, integrating different hardware devices can be a With  the  debugging  tools  in  LabVIEW,  you  can  slow  down  execution  and  see  the  data  flow  through  your  diagram,  or  you  can  use common  tools  such  as  breakpoints  and  data  probes  to  step  through  your  program  node-­by-­node.  The  combination  of  working  with major pain point when automating any test, measurement, or higher-­level  building  blocks  and  improved  visibility  into  your  application’s  execution  results  in  far  less  time  spent  tracking  down  bugs  in All of the included functions in LabVIEW work seamlessly your  code. control system. Worse yet, not integrating the different with the data acquired from the supported hardware, and no Hardware  Support hardware pieces leads to the hugely inefficient and error-prone Support  for  thousands  of  hardware  devices,  including: special conversion or data movement setup is needed. Scientific  instruments  Data  acquisition  devices Sensors Cameras Motors  and  actuators Familiar  programming  model  for  all  hardware  devices Portable  code  that  supports  several  deployment  targets  10  Typically,  integrating  different  hardware  devices  can  be  a  major  pain  point  when  automating  any  test,  measurement,  or  control  system. Worse  yet,  not  integrating  the  different  hardware  pieces  leads  to  the  hugely  inefficient  and  error-­prone  process  of  manually  taking individual  measurements  and  then  trying  to  correlate,  process,  and  tabulate  data  by  hand.  These flexible models of computation allow the domain expert to pick the right tool for the particular problem being solved. In any given application the developer is likely to use more than one approach, and LabVIEW is a good tool to quickly tie everything together.  D. UI Components and Reporting Tools Every LabVIEW block diagram also has an associated front panel, which is the user interface of the application. On the front panel generic controls and indicators such as strings, numbers, and buttons or technical controls and indicators such as graphs, charts, tables, thermometers, dials, and scales can be placed. These are designed for engineering use, meaning the user can enter SI units such as 4M instead of 4,000,000, change the scale, export data to tools such as NI DIAdem and Microsoft Excel, and they can be completely customized.  G. Levels of Abstraction LabVIEW can express functionality at several levels that enable the user to trade off productivity or ease of use with performance of the resulting systems. It provides several ways to accomplish similar tasks, so the user can make balance simplicity and customization on a task-by-task basis.  In addition to displaying data as an application is running, LabVIEW also contains several options for generating reports from test or acquired data. The user can send simple reports directly to a printer or HTML file, programmatically generate Microsoft Office documents, or integrate with NI DIAdem for more advanced reporting. Remote front panels and Web service support cab be used to publish data over the Internet with the built-in Web server.  Express VIs offer quick and easy configuration of VIs, but are somewhat limited in flexibility. Many of these types of VIs generate lower level G code that can be made accessible to the user as a starting point to develop more flexible code. Third party developers can themselves offer Express VIs to endusers. Non-express VIs, where the Application Programming Interface (API) is exposed directly, are categorized as productive (high-level) or low-level. The most common way to program in LabVIEW is using high-level functions that strike a balance between abstracting the unnecessary administrative tasks such as memory management and format conversion, but keep the flexibility of being able to customize almost every aspect of whatever task you need to accomplish. In contrast, when one needs to be able to completely define every detail of a task, LabVIEW offers the same low-level access as available in traditional programming languages.  E. Technology Abstraction LabVIEW quickly adopts technology advances in personal and embedded computing in such a way that the domain expert user gets the new capabilities without having to learn significant new paradigms. Examples of this approach include how LabVIEW is able to automatically generate multithreaded code for execution on multicore processors or program FPGAs to gain the speed and reliability of custom hardware chips without the user needing to learn the underlying details of multithreading, or hardware description languages for FPGAs. The same applies to new OSs, networking protocols, etc.  VIs at all levels of abstraction are provided as part of the main libraries, examples, additional libraries, third party libraries, and, in a growing number, by an open community. To deal with the large number of options a comprehensive VI search facility and hyper-linked documentation are provided in the framework.  F. Models of Computation When LabVIEW was first released, G was the only way to define the user functionality. Much has changed since then. The user can now pick the most efficient approach to solve the problem at hand. Examine the following considerations: •  Graphical data flow is the default model of computation for LabVIEW  •  Statecharts provide a higher level of abstraction for state-based (control) applications.  •  Simulation diagrams are a familiar way of modeling and analyzing dynamic systems.  •  Formula Nodes put simple mathematical formulas in line with the G code. MathScript is math-oriented, textual programming for LabVIEW that can be used to call .m files without the need for extra software.  •  DLL calls, ActiveX/.NET communication, and the inline C node let the user reuse existing ANSI C/C++ code and code from other programming languages.  •  CLIP and IP integration nodes import FPGA intellectual property based on VHDL or other HDLs.  •  Single-cycle Timed Loops (SCTL) provide a synchronous-reactive model of computation for register-transfer level (RTL) hardware design.  III. ENABLING FPGAS FOR DOMAIN EXPERT SOFTWARE PROGRAMMERS In this section we present some framework extensions (LabVIEW FPGA [6]) as well as techniques and patterns that focus on making FPGAs more accessible to LabVIEW software programmers, in particular those that are domain experts, focusing on protocol-aware testing, software-defined instruments, and embedded and cyber-physical systems. A. Integrated Synthesis Tools The Xilinx synthesis tools are integrated with LabVIEW FPGA. They are invoked automatically on hidden generated code to create a bitfile to download and run on the FPGA. B. Reference Target Platform In order to make targeting FPGAs more consistent, we defined a canonical FPGA platform that is not limited to just a fabric, but included an instruction processor and attached I/O. It centered on the common use case of real-world I/O access, and was specialized for an FPGA-based computing platform. We call it Reconfigurable I/O (RIO) [5], as shown in Figure 3.  11  There are three main computing engines: an externally attached or internal instruction processor, typically running a real-time operating system, an (optional) remote host computer, typically running a desktop operating system, and the FPGA fabric. All of these computing engines are programmable by LabVIEW. Depending on the application and the knowledge or experience of the programmer, parts of the code may run on the host computer, the real-time computer or the FPGA. The framework attempts to show a consistent programming environment, yet has not hidden the boundaries between these components.  investment of code that has been made on the host already, which uses the standard API; matching the original validated FPGA design as well. So a set of side-band interfaces were defined that allow most of the matched FPGA-Host code to continue to operate as originally intended, but allowing for extensibility. The side-band interface includes feature or signature export from the FPGA and import on the host, as well as communication through host-FPGA boundary. E. Effective Use of Hardware-Software Communication In order to be able to start with a design that has most of the code on the instruction processor, and migrates only those part needed to the fabric, we need to minimize the development and run-time cost of doing so. This means that the inter-process communication has to be independent of target and has to be efficient. The LabVIEW RIO framework supports both queue and memory register abstractions to communicate between tasks on the same processor or FPGA, as well as across these entities. If the entities are across a bus, it automatically instantiates DMA channels and engines to support the operation.  I/O attached to the FPGA is viewed as part of a RIO target, and has first class representation within the LabVIEW FPGA environment. The nodes present an interface to the program in terms closest to the domain expert, e.g. analog input in engineering units, as opposed to digital protocols to specific analog to digital converters. Similarly control of the timing of the critical I/O operations is done in high-level terms.  F. Models of Computation Different jobs require different tools. Similarly, depending on the tasks, the user may want to code application components using different models of computation. Just like in the general framework, multiple models of computation are available for the FPGA. In particular, the general G structured homogeneous dataflow is the default model of computation. The Single Cycle Timed Loop sub-framework discussed below follows a synchronous reactive model of computation consistent with execution on clock ticks. For control applications we also offer a modal model that follows StateCharts syntax and semantics, including hierarchical and concurrent states. Some models of computation like continuous time (mainly for physical subsystem modeling) are not available for implementation on FPGA yet, but are available for co-simulation.  Fig. 3. LabVIEW RIO Architecture  C. Pre-configured FPGA bit personalities with I/O As we have mentioned, access to real-world I/O is one of most important requirements for the type of domain experts that we are targeting. Yet, many of them do not want to program an FPGA just to have synchronous deterministic access to I/O. The NI Scan Engine [3] enables efficient access to coherent sets of I/O channels attached to the FPGA, using a scan that stores data in a global memory map and updates all values at a single rate, known as the scan period. To do this a specialized IP is placed on the FPGA that interfaces to I/O modules connected to the FPGA. Yet, at the same time, it allows the rest of the fabric to be available for further FPGA computing or connecting to other types of specialized I/O that may not only interface to the Scan Engine.  G. Consistent IP and Programming Model As part of making software components portable between targets it is important to not only have a consistent programming language, but also consistent set of libraries that port across most targets. Each of these libraries is optimized and the resource utilization is made clear, either in documentation or as part of the framework information system. H. Optimization  D. FPGA Extensions Whenever possible we try to make I/O functionality directly available to the instruction processor, either by using the Scan Engine or other “relaying” techniques. This gives the programmer the most flexibility. In doing so, we make choices on levels of API supported. For example, in the case of RIOenabled RF instruments, we have pre-built bit personalities onto the FPGA that allow the board to appear as a more traditional instrument, by supporting standard APIs for that class of instrument. Yet, domain experts want to make changes and specialize such a software-defined instrument. Such a change in the FPGAs makes it difficult to preserve the  1) Algorithmic IP and High-level Synthesis Optimizing an algorithm for an FPGA can be a complex task since the concurrency and connectivity options are fairly large. As an add-on to the LabVIEW FPGA Module, LabVIEW FPGA IP Builder generates high-performance FPGA IP by leveraging high-level synthesis (HLS) technology. HLS generates efficient hardware designs from three components: 1. an algorithm implemented in a high-level language such as LabVIEW, 2. visual synthesis directives specifying the performance and resource objectives, and 3. an FPGA target with known characteristics. It can be used to  12  automatically optimize FPGA VIs and easily port desktop code to the FPGA. The user is able to quickly explore designs with rapid performance and resource estimates. He can reuse IP, unmodified, to adapt to different application requirements.  the application, and only then would they need to target the actual FPGA, so that the compilation time is minimized. L. High-level Language Features Software engineering principles like object-oriented design are very useful to domain experts as well, especially as their code base grows incrementally or when they are starting on large projects to begin with. These techniques are also available in graphical form with LabVIEW and they extend to LabVIEW FPGA as well.  2) Low-level IP and Graphical RTL Abstraction Sometimes in order to optimize an algorithm or to connect to detailed I/O protocols it is necessary to describe the operations at the cycle or register transfer level (RTL). LabVIEW provides the Single Cycle Timed Loop model of computation in which the user, when needed, can describe the operations a cycle at a time. Within this environment the compiler takes advantage of the fact that data needs to only propagate data between adjacent flip-flops and removes part of the logic that would normally ensure that the regular dataflow semantics are followed between VIs.  IV. USE CASE To demonstrate some of the framework features and recommended techniques listed in sections II and III, we describe in this section how we developed a device that connects to a regular pair of analog speakers and enables them to play music from iOS devices over the air. To this effect we used the LabVIEW framework and a RIO board to develop an AirPlay-based [7] Wireless Music System (WMS).  I. External IP Even if we provide much IP at the high-level, sometimes the end-user either has legacy IP or has available to them IP written in a different programming or hardware description languages. In such a case, it is important to be able to import that IP, and make it appear in a consistent and native form to the LabVIEW framework. CLIP (Component Level IP) and IPIN (IP Integration Nodes) are two ways to import external IP into LabVIEW FPGA. A CLIP Node executes independently and in parallel to the IP developed in LabVIEW FPGA. In addition, CLIP can interface directly with the FPGA clocks and I/O pins. In contrast, the IP Integration Node is inserted into the LabVIEW FPGA block diagram and executes as defined by the dataflow of the LabVIEW VI. As part of the LabVIEW dataflow execution, the IP integration Node provides the ability to verify the overall application behavior and timing using the cycle-accurate simulation tools.  Since we wanted for this design to be available as reference for students, we selected as a base interface board the NI myRIO [2], which is an embedded hardware device that introduces students to industry proven RIO technology and allows them to quickly design real, complex engineering systems. In our case, it provides the following platform elements needed for our implementation: 1. Wi-Fi access for over the air music delivery; 2. a Digital to Analog Converter (DAC), connected to audio quality analog output (for analog speakers); and 3. a Xilinx Zynq 7010 all-programmable SoC, implementing the basic RIO architecture elements: a dual-core ARM processor to run the basic protocols, and high-level soft real-time processing; a reconfigurable fabric to interface to the DAC, provide low-level timing, and hard real-time processing. There are a couple of free implementations of the AirPlay protocol [7] for ARM processors running Linux, which we were able to leverage. The main application is developed using LabVIEW RT (Figure 4). It spawns a process running ShairPort, which implements basic protocols and decoding for the music transmitted from iOS devices. ShairPort was compiled from C code available online [7]. To advertise AirPlay service ShairPort searches for an installed Avahi mDNS service (binary opkg) and connects to it directly.  J. Soft Computing Targets FPGAs are very flexible, including the development of instruction processors on the fabric. These processors are complete but are not the most powerful, yet the fact that the user can dedicate a processor to a specific I/O component is very useful. Using some of the IP integration mechanisms described above, we have been able to integrate popular soft processors such as MicroBlaze, by using the Xilinx tools to define the processor and its I/O. The I/O then appears as connection to the rest of the LabVIEW FPGA code for setup in accelerated computing or directly attached to I/O. The processor can be programmed today in C, and resulting compiled code can be overlaid onto an existing bit file without recompiling the rest of the fabric portion.  The ShairPort process provides the data in lossless format to the main LabVIEW RT processing loop via UNIX pipes. The main loop implements a simple equalizer using a 3channel filter bank (Figure 5), using the built-in libraries. It then passes the data to a Host-FPGA DMA FIFO queue, so that we can implement on the FPGA the only part that really requires very precise timing, namely the 44KHz interface to the analog out port (Figure 6). Notice that as domain experts we do not need to worry about the details of the interface to DAC, but just provide high-level data to the I/O interface. Similarly we described the timing as a simple loop timer that gets the specific timing requirements from the RT processor via a run-time parameter.  K. Consistent Debugging Techniques and Simulation In addition to consistent models of computation, libraries and patterns, it is important to have a consistent debugging and simulation flow in between targets as well. In the LabVIEW framework a developer can start development on the host, and can complete all the logic or algorithm development there, then they can move all to the real-time processor in case they need to directly access I/O, and eventually to the LabVIEW FPGA. Once on the FPGA they can see a cycle accurate simulation of  The prototype is shown in Figure 7, with the myRIO device attached to the speakers, streaming music from an iPhone.  13  V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS  REFERENCES  In this paper we have presented a graphical programming framework, LabVIEW, and associated language and libraries, as well as programming techniques and patterns that we have found useful in making FPGAs accessible to scientists and engineers as domain expert software programmers.  [1]  [2] [3]  We focused on a single RIO module as target, i.e. one instruction processor, attached fabric and I/O, and we only touched briefly on some of the challenges of networking RIO subsystems. In the future, we would like to focus on networks of RIO modules, and some of the challenges of programming such a system. In particular, we would like view the entire system of processors and FPGA as one large target, i.e. systemlevel synthesis.  [4] [5] [6] [7]  H. Andrade, and S. Kovner, “Software Synthesis from Dataflow Models for G and LabVIEW™,” in Thirty-second Annual Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers, Pacific Grove, California, U.S.A., November 1998 “NI myRIO, “ originally published online at http://www.ni.com/myrio/ “NI Scan Engine Adavanced I/O Access,” originally publihsed online at http://www.ni.com/white-paper/8071/en/ Hogg, Simon, “What is LabVIEW?”, originally published online at http://www.ni.com/newsletter/51141/en “LabVIEW RIO Architecture”, originally published online at http://www.ni.com/white-paper/10894/en/ “LabVIEW FPGA”, originally published online at http://www.ni.com/fpga/ “AirPlay (Wikipedia)”, originally published online at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AirPlay  Fig. 4. LabVIEW Project Explorer View (top left) and LabVIEW Linux RT Top-level App Front Panel (top right) and Block Diagram (bottom)  Fig. 5. LabVIEW Linux RT Decoding and Processing BDs  Fig. 6. LabVIEW FPGA DAC Timing FP and BD  14  Fig. 7. myRIO WMS Protoytpe

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
