Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_5120

Abstract:
Dependent landmark drift: robust point set registration with a Gaussian mixture model and a statistical shape model Osamu Hirose  arXiv:1711.06588v2 [cs.AI] 23 Jan 2018  Faculty of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Institute of Science and Engineering, Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, JAPAN. E-mail: hirose@se.kanazawa-u.ac.jp Abstract. The goal of point set registration is to find point-by-point correspondences between point sets, each of which characterizes the shape of an object. Because local preservation of object geometry is assumed, prevalent algorithms in the area can often elegantly solve the problems without using geometric information specific to the objects. This means that registration performance can be further improved by using prior knowledge of object geometry. In this paper, we propose a novel point set registration method using the Gaussian mixture model with prior shape information encoded as a statistical shape model. Our transformation model is defined as a combination of the similar transformation, motion coherence, and the statistical shape model. Therefore, the proposed method works effectively if the target point set includes outliers and missing regions, or if it is rotated. The computational cost can be reduced to linear, and therefore the method is scalable to large point sets. The effectiveness of the method will be verified through comparisons with existing algorithms using datasets concerning human body shapes, hands, and faces. Keywords: Point set registration, Gaussian mixture model, statistical shape model, EM algorithm  1  Introduction  Point matching is the problem of finding point-by-point correspondence between point sets where each set characterizes the geometry of an object. Finding such geometrical correspondences between point sets is studied in the fields of image recognition and computer vision. A major class of point matching problems is point set registration—the problem of finding a transformation between two point sets in addition to point-bypoint correspondences. Point set registration problems can be roughly classified into two classes according to the transformation models: rigid and non-rigid transformations. A rigid transformation model is defined as a linear map that preserves the relative positions of points in a point set, i.e., rotation, and translation. The rigid point set registration problem is a relatively simple problem that has been intensively studied [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Non-rigid registration is a more complex problem that involves transforming an object’s geometry. Typical transformation models used for point set registration problems are the thin-plate spline functions [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] and Gaussian functions [11, 12, 13, 14]. These methods are differently classified according to the definitions of the point set registration problem: energy minimization [6, 7, 10], and probabilistic density estimation using a Gaussian mixture model [8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14]. Crucial to the success of these registration methods is a robustness to outliers, points that are irrelevant to the true geometry of the object. Several approaches have been proposed to deal with outliers, such as statistical analysis for distances between correspondent points [15, 16, 17], soft assignments [7, 18], trimming point sets through iterative random sampling [19], kernel correlation [20], explicit probabilistic modeling of outliers [11, 12, 13, 14], and the use of robust estimators such as the L2 E estimator [8] and a scaled Geman–McClure estimator [21]. Another factor crucial to the success of registration methods is the assumption of a smooth displacement field, which forces neighboring points to move coherently. The smoothness of the displacement field, also known as the motion coherence, is imposed by a regularization technique defined as a penalty term for energy minimization [6, 7, 10] and a penalty term for log-likelihood functions [8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14]. Due to the assumption of a smooth displacement field, such non-rigid registration algorithms seek to find transformations with sufficient global flexibility while preserving the local topology of a point set. These methods are universally applicable to general point set registration problems as no prior knowledge, except for that concerning the smoothness of a displacement field, is assumed for the geometry of objects to be registered. This means that registration performance can be improved by using prior knowledge of  object geometry. One approach to incorporating such prior information is the use of a kinematic motion for articulated objects, such as the human body [22, 23, 24, 25]. These methods show promising results but cannot be applied to objects with no kinematics. Another approach is the use of partial correspondence across two point sets [26, 27]. These methods also show promising results, but better performance is not expected if partial correspondence is not available. Yet another approach is the use of supervised learning techniques. One candidate of such supervised learning techniques is a statistical shape model [28, 29] that describes the mean shape and statistical variation of geometrical objects. Shape variations represented by statistical shape models are constructed from shape statistics of landmark displacements. Therefore, movements of neighboring landmarks are not assumed to be correlated, and those of distant landmarks are allowed to be dependent on one another. The statistical shape models also do not require any physical models such as object kinematics. Statistical shape models have been widely used as prior shape information for various tasks, including image registration, image segmentation, and surface reconstruction, in the fields of computer vision and medical imaging. A broad range of these works were reviewed in several survey papers [30, 31, 32, 33], and a lecture note [34]. In the field of computer vision, statistical shape models have mainly been used for reconstruction or completion of smooth 3D surfaces [35, 36, 37, 38, 39], which can be interpreted in a wider sense as point set registration problems with extra information such as colors, surface normals, and the articulation of the human body shape. These works include applications related to the reconstruction of 3D human surfaces such as faces [35], body shapes and poses [36, 38], skins and muscles [37], and body shapes [39]. In the field of medical imaging, the point set registration problems with statistical shape models have often been developed in noisier settings, i.e. in the presence of outliers [40, 41, 42], and these methods were later extended to image registration [43] and image segmentation [44]. All these methods are designed on the basis of non-rigid registration techniques such as probabilistic density estimation with a Gaussian mixture model [40, 41], the one with a t-mixture model [42], and the minimization of an energy function [43]. Typically, these methods solve either or both of two different problems. The first problem, which is sometimes called group-wise point set registration, involves finding point-by-point correspondence among multiple unstructured point sets, aiming at learning statistical shape models [40, 41, 42, 43]. The second problem involves finding point-by-point correspondence between a point set that forms the average shape in a pre-trained statistical shape model and a new unstructured point set that forms an object shape [41, 43]. More recently, a method of 3D surface reconstruction, originating in these works, has been proposed with an efficient use of surface normals [45]. In this article, we focus on the second problem, motivated by the fact that (a) the scalability of the algorithms for the second problem is relatively limited, since their computational costs are proportional to the product of the numbers of the two point sets to be registered, and (b) their formulation did not explicitly include the rotational term and they might not be robust against a rotated target shape. As in [45], we assume that training shapes or pre-trained statistical shape models are available as prior shape information. This assumption is somewhat strong but is not unrealistic, because training shapes with point-by-point correspondence or pretrained shape models are often publicly available; for example, 2D human hands and faces [46], 3D human poses and shapes [36], and 3D human shapes [39]. In test cases, we do not assume the use of any extra information such as color, surface normals, the articulation in the body parts, or the partial correspondence between point sets, in order not to reduce the applicability of the method. Contributions of this work We propose a novel non-rigid point set registration algorithm based on a supervised learning approach that we call dependent landmark drift (DLD). In the context of statistical shape modeling, the proposed algorithm is a novel optimization algorithm for fitting a statistical shape model, where one input point set forms the mean shape and another forms a target shape. The proposed algorithm is designed as a Gaussian mixture model in which the transformation model is defined as a combination of the similar transformation and the statistical shape model. Among the related algorithms, our approach is novel in that it simultaneously provides (1) fast computation, with computational costs proportional to the sum of the numbers of two point sets to be registered, (2) simultaneous optimization of scale, translation, rotation, and shape deformation, and (3) adaptive control of the smoothness of a displacement field. In addition, our algorithm retains the merits of the registration algorithms based on the Gaussian mixture model, i.e., robustness against outliers, originating in the explicit probabilistic modeling of outliers, and a built-in annealing scheme. The effectiveness of the proposed algorithm was tested through comparisons with existing point set registration algorithms, for which high quality implementations are available.  2  Methods  In this section, we review the statistical shape model based on the principal component analysis and then introduce a point set registration technique based on the Gaussian mixture model (GMM) [11, 12]. Finally, we propose a novel registration algorithm for fitting the statistical shape model combined with GMM.  2.1  Statistical shape model  We begin with definitions of a landmark and a shape, required to define a statistical shape model. To obtain shape statistics from multiple geometric objects, it is essential to define correspondent points across them. These points of correspondence are called landmarks. A shape is typically defined as a set of landmarks for one of the geometric objects with scale, rotation, and translation effects removed [46, 47]. Note here that a point set and a shape are distinguished from each other in that (1) shapes are composed of the same number of points whereas the number of points in a point set is generally different from those in other point sets, and (2) points in shapes are correspondent across all shapes, whereas points in multiple point sets are not correspondent. Statistical shape models are constructed from training shapes, i.e., multiple point sets with point-by-point correspondence. Definition of a statistical shape model The statistical shape model (SSM) is a representation of a geometrical shape and its statistical variations in an object. Since definitions of SSM diverge according to the aim of the application or the method of construction [30], we introduce a definition based on the principal component analysis (PCA) [28, 29, 46], that can adequately describe the proposed algorithm. Suppose a shape is composed of M landmarks (v1 , · · · , vM ), each of which T T lies in a D-dimensional space. Then, the shape is represented as a vector v = (v1T , · · · , vM ) ∈ RM D . The PCA-based statistical shape model is defined as follows: v =u+  K X  zk hk + w,  (1)  k=1  where u = (uT1 , · · · , uTM )T ∈ RM D is the mean shape, hk ∈ RM D is the kth leading shape variation, zk ∈ R is the kth weight corresponding to the kth shape variation, K is the number of shape variations, and w ∈ RM D is a residual vector. To reduce information sharing in shape variations to the maximum extent, h1 , · · · , hK are usually assumed to satisfy the orthonormality condition hTi hj = δij where δij is Kronecker’s delta. Estimation of shape variations from training data Mean shape u and shape variations h1 , · · · , hK are unknown, and should be estimated from multiple shapes v1 , · · · , vB , i.e., training data. The mean shape u is simply estimated as the average of sample shapes. Suppose C ∈ RM D×M D is a shape covariance matrix defined as B  C=  1 X (vj − v̄)(vj − v̄)T , B − 1 j=1  (2)  where v̄ is the sample average of shapes v1 , · · · , vB . The shape covariance matrix C represents statistical dependencies for landmark displacements. The kth shape variation can be estimated as the kth eigenvector of C corresponding to the kth largest eigenvalue. We note that the shape covariance matrix is dependent on rotations of shapes v1 , · · · , vB . On the contrary, coherent moves of landmarks caused by the rotation of a whole shape cannot be represented as their covariance if the rotation angle is relatively large. Therefore, effects of rotations should be eliminated from the training shapes v1 · · · , vB in computing the shape covariance matrix C.  2.2  Gaussian mixture model for point set registration  We summarize the Gaussian mixture modeling approach for solving point set registration problems proposed by Myronenko et al. [12], since this approach is the basis for the proposed algorithm. They defined a registration  problem of two point sets as a problem of probabilistic density estimation, where one point set is composed of centroids for a Gaussian mixture model (GMM), and the other consists of samples generated from the GMM. We here refer to a point set to be deformed as a floating point set and the other point set that remains fixed as a target point set. We also refer to a point that is irrelevant to the true object geometry as an outlier and one that represents the true object geometry as an inlier. Suppose xn ∈ RD and ym ∈ RD are the nth point in a target point set X = {x1 , · · · , xN } and the mth point in a floating point set Y = {y1 , · · · , yM }, respectively. The probabilistic model for registering the two point sets X and Y is designed as a mixture model for generating target point xn in the four-step procedure: (1) a label is considered to be an outlier or an inlier based on the Bernoulli distribution with outlier probability ω, (2) if the label is an inlier, a point is selected from the floating point set Y = {y1 , · · · , yM } with equal probability p(m) = 1/M , (3) the selected point ym is moved by the transformation model T , and (4) target point xn is generated by the Gaussian distribution whose center is the moved point. More formally, the mixture model is defined as follows: p(xn ; Θ) = ω · poutlier (xn ) + (1 − ω) ·  M X  p(m)p(xn |m; Θ),  (3)  m=1  where Θ is a set of parameters of the mixture model, and poutlier (xn ) is a distribution of outliers. The prior distribution of inliers is defined as p(m) = 1/M . The inlier distribution p(xn |m; Θ) for m = 1, · · · , M is defined as a Gaussian distribution   ||xn − T (ym ; θ)||2 1 exp − , (4) p(xn |m; Θ) = 2σ 2 (2πσ 2 )D/2 where σ 2 is the variance of the Gaussian distribution, T (ym ; θ) is a transformation model for floating point ym with a set of parameters θ, and Θ = (θ, σ 2 ) is a set of parameters of the GMM. Based on the construction of GMM, the point set registration problem is defined as the minimization of the negative log-likelihood function with a regularization term as follows:  Θ̂ = argminΘ  −  N X   log p(xn ; Θ) + γR(T ) ,  (5)  n=1  where R(T ) is the regularizer in the motion coherence theory [48] and γ > 0 is a parameter that controls the degree of the smoothness for the displacement field. Since the analytic solution for Eq. (5) is not available, the EM algorithm is used to search for a local minimum of the function. The EM algorithm iteratively improves a solution by updating the upper bound of the negative log-likelihood function, called the Q-function. Given a current estimate Θ̄ = (σ̄ 2 , θ̄), the Q-function for the GMM is derived as M N NP D 1 XX 2 p(m|xn , Θ̄)||xn − T (ym ; θ)||2 + γR(T ) Q(Θ, Θ̄) = log σ + 2 2 2σ n=1 m=1  (6)  PN PM where NP = n=1 m=1 p(m|xn , Θ̄) ≤ N is the effective number of matching points, and p(m|xn , Θ̄) denotes the posterior probability that floating point ym is correspondent to target point xn under the current estimate Θ̄. The posterior probability p(m|xn ; Θ̄) can be calculated as p(m|xn ; Θ̄) =  p(xn |m; Θ̄) . PM 1 0 ωpoutlier (xn ) + (1 − ω) M m0 =1 p(xn |m ; Θ̄)  (7)  Based on the theory of the EM algorithm, a solution of the point set registration problem is obtained by iterating the following procedure: (i) updating the posterior probability p(m|xn ; Θ̄), (ii) finding the Θ∗ that minimizes the Q-function for Θ given the parameter set Θ̄, and (iii) replacing the given parameter set Θ̄ with the minimizer Θ∗ of the Q-function. This procedure is iterated until a suitable convergence criterion is satisfied. We note that the residual variance σ 2 corresponds to temperature T used in the annealing step for thin plate spline robust point matching (TPS-RPM) [6]. From Eq. (4) and Eq. (7), we see that matching between point sets tends to be more random if σ 2 is large and less random if it is small. To avoid local minima, TPS-RPM requires some heuristics to reduce the temperature T during optimization. On the contrary, σ 2 can be estimated during optimization, and thus no heuristics are required for decreasing σ 2 .  Algorithm 1: Dependent Landmark Drift T T · Input: X = (x1 , · · · , xN )T , u = (uT1 , · · · , uTM )T , H = (H1T , . . . , HM ) , ΛK , ω ∈ (0, 1), γ > 0.  · Output: Y = (y1 , · · · , yM )T . · Initialization: Y = U , S = volume(X), σ 2 =  N M 1 XX ||xn − ym ||2 . N M D n=1 m=1  · EM optimization: repeat until convergence. - E-step: compute pmn , pm· , p·n for each m and n. pmn  1 2σ 2 ||xn   − ym ||2 , = PM  1 2 + (2πσ 2 )D/2 ω M m=1 exp − 2σ 2 ||xn − ym || 1−ω S  pm· =  exp −  N X  pmn , p·n =  M X  pmn , NP =  pmn ,  n=1 m=1  m=1  n=1  M N X X  - M-step: update z, s, R, d, Y , u, H and σ 2 . (a) Update shape parameters z, translation vector d, and shape Y . xP =  z=  N M M 1 X 1 X 1 X p·n xn , uP = pm· um , HP = pm· Hm , NP n=1 NP m=1 NP m=1  M nX  T pm· Hm Hm − NP HPT HP + γΛ−1 K  N X M o−1 n X  o T pmn Hm (xn − um ) − NP HPT (xP − uP ) ,  n=1 m=1  m=1  d = xP − uP − HP z, ym = um + Hm z + d, for all m = 1, · · · , M , yP =  M 1 X pm· ym . NP m=1  (b) Update pose parameters (s, R, d), shape model (u, H), and shape Y . M X N X  A=  pmn (xn − xP )(ym − yP )T , compute SVD of A = ΦLΨT ,  m=1 n=1 M .X R = Φd(1, · · · , 1, det(ΦΨ ))Ψ , s = tr(A R) pm· ||ym − yP ||2 , d = xP − sRyP , T  T  T  m=1  um ← sRum + d, Hm ← sRHm , ym ← sRym + d, for all m = 1, · · · , M . (c) Update residual variance σ 2 . σ2 =  1  N X M X  NP D  n=1 m=1  pmn ||xn − ym ||2 .  Figure 1: Registration algorithm for the mean shape u and point set X. The mean shape u is also denoted by the matrix notation U = (u1 , · · · , uM )T . The notation d(·) denotes the operation for converting a vector into a diagonal matrix, det(·) denotes the determinant of a square matrix, and the symbol “←” denotes the substitution.  2.3  Dependent landmark drift  We propose a novel algorithm, which we call dependent landmark drift (DLD), for registering the mean shape and a novel point set. The algorithm uses the same GMM framework as the CPD algorithm. The merits of using a GMM, such as the explicit modeling of outliers and a built-in annealing scheme, are thereby inherited by the proposed algorithm. The main difference between the CPD and the DLD is in the definition of transformation models for a floating point set: the transformation model of the CPD is based on motion coherence, i.e., moving points under a smooth displacement field, whereas that of the DLD is a combination of a statistical shape model, a similar transformation, and motion coherence. Statistical shape model as a transformation model We first describe that statistical shape models can be utilized as a transformation model for GMM-based point set registration. Suppose hmk ∈ RD is a subvector of the kth shape variation hk , corresponding to the mth landmark um ∈ RD in the mean shape u ∈ RM D . We also denote K shape variation vectors corresponding to the mth landmark by a D-by-K matrix Hm = (hm1 , · · · , hmK ) ∈ RD×K . Then, the statistical shape model (1) is denoted by a point-by-point transformation model vm = um + Hm z + wm ,  (8)  where vm is the mth point in shape v ∈ RD , z = (z1 , · · · , zK ) ∈ RK is a weight vector for K shape variations, and wm ∈ RD is a subvector of the residual vector w corresponding to landmark um . Therefore, the statistical shape model can be used as a transformation model of a point set registration. A merit of using statistical shape models for point set registration problems is that moves of landmarks are estimated based on the statistical dependency of landmark displacements. We therefore call our algorithm dependent landmark drift. Transformation model We incorporate prior shape information into the transformation model. We suppose that the training phase has already finished, that is, the mean shape u = (uT1 , · · · , uTM )T and shape variations H = (h1 , · · · , hK ), also T T denoted by H = (H1T , · · · , HM ) , have been calculated from training shapes. We then define the transformation model TDLD as a combination of the similar transformation and the statistical shape model, encoding prior shape information as follows: TDLD (um ; θ) = sR(um + Hm z) + d,  (9)  where s ∈ R is a scale parameter, R ∈ RD×D is a rotation matrix, and d ∈ RD is a translation vector. We incorporated the similar transformation into the transformation model because the effects of scale, translation, and rotation are eliminated from the statistical shape model during training. We refer to the triplet ρ = (s, R, d) as pose parameters and z as shape parameters. We note that the transformation model is different from [41, 43] in that our model combines the similar transformation and the non-rigid transformation with a PCA model, whereas their transformation model is defined as the PCA model only. Definition of Q-function We use the Gaussian mixture model, defined as Eqs. (3) and (4), as the basis of solving the point set registration problems. We suppose λk ∈ R is the kth largest eigenvalue of the covariance matrix C computed from training data and ΛK ∈ RK×K is the diagonal matrix defined as ΛK = d(λ1 , · · · , λK ), where d(·) denotes the operation of converting a vector into a diagonal matrix. Replacing the transformation model T in Eq. (6) by TDLD , we define the Q-function of the point set registration problem as N M 1 XX NP D log σ 2 + 2 pmn ||xn − sR(um + Hm z) − d||2 + γz T Λ−1 (10) K z, 2 2σ n=1 m=1 PN PM where Θ = (z, ρ, σ 2 ), pmn = p(m|xn ; Θ̄), and NP = n=1 m=1 pmn . We used the Tikonov regularizer z T Λ−1 z as a regularization term to avoid searching for extreme shapes, where γ > 0 is a parameter that K controls the search space of z. We note that this regularization is interpreted as a smooth displacement field because the resulting transformed shape becomes increasingly similar to the mean shape as γ increases, i.e., the neighboring points move coherently. The prior shape information in our approach is therefore a combination of the statistical shape model, the similar transformation, and motion coherence.  QDLD (Θ, Θ̄) =  Outlier distribution We note that the outlier distribution poutlier (xn ) included in the mixture model defined as Eq. (3) is somewhat of an arbitrary choice according to applications. For example, poutlier (xn ) can be removed from the mixture model if no outliers exist in the target point. To register point sets with outliers, we use a D-dimensional uniform distribution defined as poutlier (xn ) = 1/S,  (11)  where S is the volume of the region in which outliers can be generated. The volume S is of course unknown and we therefore use the minimum-variance unbiased estimator of the D-dimensional uniform distribution as an estimate of the volume S that is calculated from the target point set X. Optimization Based on the theory of the EM algorithm, a solution to the point set registration problem is obtained by iterating the following procedure: (i) updating the posterior probability pmn = p(m|xn ; Θ̄), (ii) finding the Θ∗ that minimizes the Q-function for Θ given the parameter set Θ̄, and (iii) replacing the given parameter set Θ̄ with the minimizer Θ∗ of the Q-function. Since the analytic solution Θ∗ is unavailable, we divide the optimization procedure (ii) into three steps: (a)  Optimization of shape parameter z and translation vector d given (s, R, σ 2 ),  (b)  Optimization of pose parameter ρ = (s, R, d) given (z, σ 2 ),  (c)  Optimization of residual variance σ 2 given (z, ρ).  For each step, it is possible to find the exact minimizer of the Q-function given corresponding fixed parameters. For steps (a) and (c), the exact minimizers are obtained by taking partial derivatives of QDLD , and equating them to zero. For step (b), QDLD must be optimized under the orthonormality condition RT R = ID as R is a rotation matrix. This constrained optimization problem can be analytically solved by using the result reported in [53]. The mean shape u and shape variations H are updated in step (b) after updating the scale parameter s and the rotation matrix R since u and H are dependent on the coordinate system in which the statistical shape model is defined. Translation vector d is updated in both (a) and (b) of the M-step to find a better approximation of the exact minimizer Θ∗ in a heuristic manner. The residual variance σ 2 can be estimated in the same manner as in the general case of the GMM-based registration, and the built-in annealing scheme in GMM is retained. The DLD algorithm is summarized in Figure 1. Linear time algorithm The bottleneck of the algorithm is the computation of pmn for all m = 1, · · · , M and n = 1, · · · , N . The computational cost of evaluating all pmn is O(M N ) for one iteration of the EM algorithm. Fortunately, the direct evaluation of pmn can be avoided and can be efficiently computed by using the approximate techniques for the summation of Gaussian functions. Suppose P ∈ RM ×N is the matrix, the mnth element of which is pmn . By using this matrix notation, Algorithm 1 can be replaced by Algorithm 2 shown in Figure 2. All computations related to P in Algorithm 2 are expressed as any of P 1N , P T 1M , and P X. We also suppose KY X ∈ RM ×N is a Gaussian affinity matrix, the mnth element of which is defined as kmn = exp{−||xn − ym ||2 /2σ 2 }. The bottleneck matrix-vector products P 1N , P T 1M , and P X can be computed as follows: q  = 1N ./(KYT X 1M + c1N )  P T 1M = 1N − cq, P 1N = KY X q, P X = KY X d(q)X,  (12)  ω M where “./” denotes element-wise division, c = (2πσ 2 )D/2 1−ω S is a constant, and d(·) denotes the operation for converting a vector into a diagonal matrix. The bottleneck computations P 1N , P T 1M , and P X are thereby reduced to the products between the Gaussian affinity matrix KY X and vectors of size M and N , i.e., KYT X a and KY X b for arbitrary vectors a ∈ RM and b ∈ RN .  Algorithm 2: Dependent Landmark Drift (Linear time algorithm) T T · Input: X = (x1 , · · · , xN )T , u = (uT1 , · · · , uTM )T , H = (H1T , . . . , HM ) , ΛK , ω ∈ (0, 1), γ > 0.  · Output: Y = (y1 , · · · , yM )T . · Initialization: v(Y ) = u, S = volume(X), σ 2 =  1  M tr(X T X) − 2(1TM Y X T 1N ) + N tr(Y T Y ) . NMD  · EM optimization: repeat until convergence. - E-step: calculate P 1N , P T 1M , and P X using the Nyström method. (a) Approximate KY X using the random samples V ⊂ X ∪ Y without replacement. KY X ≈ KY V KV−1V KV X , (b) Calculate P 1N , P T 1M , and P X. q = 1N ./(KYT X 1M + c1N ), P T 1M = 1N − cq, P 1N = KY X q, P X = KY X d(q)X, - M-step: update z, s, R, d, u, H, Y and σ 2 . (a) Update shape parameters z, translation vector d, and shape Y . NP = 1TM P 1N , P = d((P 1N ) ⊗ 1D ), xP = v(P X), uP = Pu, HP = NP−1 (1TM ⊗ ID )PH, xP = NP−1 X T P T 1M , uP = NP−1 U T P 1N ,  −1  T z = HT PH − NP HPT HP + γΛ−1 H (xP − uP ) − NP HPT (xP − uP ) , K d = xP − uP − HP z, v(Y ) = u + Hz + 1M ⊗ d, yP = NP−1 Y T P 1N . (b) Update pose parameters (s, R, d), shape model (u, H), and shape Y . X̃ = X − 1N xTP , Ỹ = Y − 1M yPT , A = (P X̃)T Ỹ , compute SVD of A = ΦLΨT ,  R = Φd(1, · · · , 1, det(ΦΨT ))ΨT , s = tr(AT R) tr(Ỹ T d(P 1N )Ỹ ), d = xP − sRyP , u ← s(IM ⊗ R)u + 1M ⊗ d, H ← s(IM ⊗ R)H, Y ← sY RT + 1M dT . (c) Update residual variance σ 2 . o 1 n tr(X T d(P T 1M )X) − 2tr(Y T P X) + tr(Y T d(P 1N )Y ) . σ2 = NP D  Figure 2: Linear time algorithm for registering mean shape u and point set X. The notation d(·) denotes the operation for converting a vector into a diagonal matrix, det(·) denotes the determinant of a square matrix, and v(·) denotes the operation for converting a matrix into a vector in the row-major order. The mean shape u is also denoted by the matrix notation U = (u1 , · · · , uM )T , i.e., u = v(U ). Also, 1M and 1N denote column vectors of all 1s of size M and N , respectively. The identity matrices of size M and D are denoted by IM and ID . The symbols “←” and ⊗ denote the substitution and the Kronecker product, respectively.  These matrix-vector products KYT X a and KY X b can be efficiently evaluated using approximation techniques such as the improved fast Gauss transform (IFGT) [49] and the Nyström method [50]. In this work, we use the Nyström method as an approximation technique because the computational cost of the IFGT depends on the bandwidth of the Gaussian function; the modified IFGT algorithms that are practically faster than the original version requires the direct computation i.e., O(M N ) computation, in a worst-case scenario [51, 52]. If the IFGT is used in our algorithm, the direct computation cannot be avoided since the bandwidth, which corresponds to residual variance σ 2 , gradually decreases as the optimization proceeds. We therefore use the Nyström method, where its computational cost is unaffected by the bandwidth and is always O(M + N ) during the optimization. Suppose that V is the set of points that is randomly chosen L times from the combined point set Z = X ∪ Y without replacement. The Gaussian affinity matrix KY X can be approximated by the Nyström method as follows: KY X ≈ KY V KV−1V KV X ,  (13)  where KY V ∈ RM ×L , KV V ∈ RL×L , and KV X ∈ RL×N are the Gaussian affinity matrices between Y and V , for the subset V itself, and between V and X, respectively. If the number of sampled points L is much less than N and M , the approximation of the products KYT X a or KY X b can be efficiently calculated by evaluating matrix-vector products in the right-hand side of the following equations KYT X a ≈ KVT X KV−1V KYT V b, KY X b ≈ KY V KV−1V KV X a,  (14)  from right to left. The computational costs of evaluating the right-hand side equations are O(DL(M + N ) + L3 + DL2 ), i.e., O(M + N ) if we assume that L and D are constants. One issue of using the Nyström method is the trade-off between speed and accuracy; setting L to a small value leads to fast but less accurate computations. Therefore, if the residual variance σ is sufficiently small, we directly evaluate Eqs. (12), reducing the computational cost by ignoring the points that are sufficiently distant from the mean point of a Gaussian function. The points that lie within a small distance from the mean point can be efficiently found by using the KD tree search. The computations of the other terms in Algorithm 2 can be evaluated in O(M + N ) time. The product P X̃ in Algorithm 2 is computed in O(M + N ) time because P X̃ = P X − (P 1N )xTP . We note that direct evaluations of diagonal matrices such as d(q), d(P 1N ), d(P T 1M ), P and IM , which can also be a bottleneck, are avoided as the computations of off-diagonal elements can be ignored. Therefore, the computational cost of one iteration of the EM algorithm to M + N . We also note that the initialization step requires PNis proportional PM O(M + N ) computations since n=1 m=1 xTn ym = 1TN XY T 1M can be computed by evaluating matrix-vector products of the right-hand side equation from left to right. Adaptive control of the smoothness of the displacement field The choice of parameter γ is crucial to performing accurate registration since γ controls the smoothness of a displacement field. If γ is excessively large, the shape deformation is less affected by the target point set and tends to be more conservative. On the contrary, if γ is excessively small, the registration often fails since the displacement field becomes less smooth and the optimization tends to be stuck in local minima. To relax the difficulty in choosing an appropriate γ, we adopt an optional search strategy based on the adaptive control of γ. We initially set γ to a moderately large value, and, if the optimization process approaches convergence, we set it to zero or a value close to zero. The rationale of this approach is to register two point sets in a hierarchical manner; the average shape is deformed globally in the early stage of the optimization, and is deformed more locally near the convergence.  3  Experiments  In this section, we report the computational time and the registration performance of the proposed algorithm. The computational times of the two approximation methods, the Nyström method [50] and the IFGT [49, 52], for computing pairwise matching probabilities will be compared with the direct computations methods. The registration performance will be tested through experimental comparisons with existing point set registration algorithms, CPD [12] and TPS-RPM [6], for which high quality implementations are distributed by the authors of the papers.  Figure 3: Optimization process for a body shape with missing regions (top) and outliers (bottom). The points in the target shapes and deformed shapes are colored blue and red, respectively. The leftmost column shows the initial human pose, and the optimization proceeds from left to right.  Figure 4: Resulting deformed shapes for five bodies with different body postures obtained from the SCAPE dataset. The left four figures show success examples and the rightmost figure shows a failure example.  3.1  Datasets and training statistical shape models  We used the IMM hand and face datasets [17] as 2D examples and the SCAPE dataset [36] as a 3D example. Each shape in the IMM dataset was obtained from a 2D image of a human hand or a human face by manually placing 56 and 58 landmarks, respectively. That is, the points in the shapes were correspondent across all shapes for each dataset. The number of shapes in the hand dataset was 40, and the face dataset consisted of 240 shapes, i.e., six faces with different angles per person for 40 different people. The SCAPE dataset includes 71 human body shapes with different body postures, each of which is composed of 12,500 points. The ground truth data for point-by-point correspondence were provided for all 71 point sets. As mentioned in the previous section, the effects of scale, rotation, and translation needed to be removed from the training data to learn the statistical shape model. To do so, we pre-processed the shapes in the original datasets as follows: For each dataset, we first calculated the mean shape as the sample average of all shapes. We then constructed training data by computing shapes with the best rigid alignment with the mean shape. Note that, from Result 7.1 described in [47], it is possible to find the best rigid transformation to match two shapes, i.e., two point sets with point-by-point correspondence. For the SCAPE dataset, we repeated the computation of the mean shape three times in order to increase the quality of the average shape. For all experiments conducted in this paper, the statistical shape model required for the registration was trained in a leave-one-out manner, i.e., one for a validation point set and the others for training shapes.  3.2  Application to the SCAPE dataset  We applied the DLD algorithm to the human body No. 1 included in the SCAPE dataset. To demonstrate the robustness against missing regions, we generated a point set by removing 2,000 points from the legs and 2,000 points above the shoulder. Further, we generated another target point set with 3,750 outliers added to human body No. 1 in order to demonstrate robustness against outliers. Except for ω, we used common parameters: the number of points used in the Nyström method (denoted by l) was set to 500, and the number of shape variations (denoted by K) was set to 70. In addition, the adaptive control of γ was turned on, where the initial γ was set to 1.0−4 . We set ω = 1.0−4 for the point set with missing regions and ω = 0.30 for the one with outliers, since no outliers were added to the first point set. Figure 3 shows the progress of the optimization for human body No. 1 with missing regions and outliers. In these figures, each optimization proceeds from the left to the right. For both cases, the DLD algorithm succeeded in the registration, suggesting that it has robustness against missing regions and outliers. Figure 4 shows typical examples of success trials and a failure trial for different body postures. We here used the same parameter set as the one used for the point set with missing regions. These examples suggested that our algorithm worked effectively for different body postures without any extra information such as colors, surface normals, or human body articulation. However, they also suggested that the registration error could not always be removed. Computational Time We measured the CPU time of the proposed algorithm using the human body No. 1 in the SCAPE dataset and the average shape calculated for the dataset. To evaluate the scalability of the DLD algorithm, we generated ten pairs of point sets with the same numbers of points by randomly sampling 1250, 2500, · · · , 12,500 points without replacement from the target point set and the average shape. We used a MacBook Pro (Retina 15inch, Early 2013, OS X El Capitan 10.11.6) with a 2.4GHz Intel Core i7 and 16GB RAM as our computational environment. We implemented the DLD algorithm in the C language, and used GCC 6.0 as a C compiler. We compared the direct method for computing the pairwise probability with two approximation methods: the IFGT [49, 52] and the Nystöm method [50]. The IFGT was implemented according to the technical paper [52], and the IFGT error bound was set to 1.0−6 . The number of points used for the Nyström method was set to 500. We stopped the computation if the improvement of the log-likelihood during one iteration of the EM algorithm was below 1.0−4 . Figure 5 shows the resulting CPU times for the three methods. For the point sets with 1,250 points, the CPU times for the Nyström method, the IFGT, and the direct computation were 5.19, 8.56, and 5.41 seconds, respectively. For the point sets with 12,500 points, i.e., the most severe condition, the CPU time for the Nyström method was 105.4 seconds, which was 12.2 times faster than the direct computation and 5.6 times faster than the IFGT. From the figure, we observe that the direct computation was over-linear. We also observe that the IFGT was slightly over-linear, suggesting that the direct computation included in the IFGT framework was used during the optimization. The computational time of the Nyström method was linear, which is consistent with the analysis of the computational cost described in the previous section.  1400 Nystrom IFGT Direct  CPU time (sec)  1200 1000 800 600 400 200 0  0  2000  4000  6000  8000  10000 12000 14000  Number of Points (M=N)  Figure 5: Comparison of the CPU time among the direct computation (black), the IFGT (blue), and the Nyström method (red).  3.3  Illustrative results for 2D datasets  To test the robustness of our approach, we generated four types of target point data for hand No. 6 in the IMM hand data. The top row in Figure 6 shows the correct target shapes, i.e., hand No. 6 in the IMM dataset, and the second row shows target point sets, which represent hand No. 6 with four types of modifications: (a) replication of target points with dispersion, (b) deletion of target points, (c) addition of outliers, and (d) rotation of the whole shape. We here used hand No. 6 selected from the original dataset as a validation point set instead of the pre-processed one for training a statistical shape model, to prevent the test problem from becoming too easy. The red points shown in figures of the third row are the initial hand shapes to be deformed, i.e., the mean shape of the hands, before optimization. Choice of parameters For all four target point sets, we fixed K and γ, which are the parameters of the DLD, to K = 10 and γ = 10−3 . On the contrary, we used the remaining parameter ω = 0.01 for (a), (b), and (d) and ω = 0.30 for (c) since outliers were included in (c), but not included in (a), (b), and (d). For CPD and TPS-RPM, we used the software distributed by the authors of CPD and TPS-RPM with their default parameters. For the DLD, we used 39 hand shapes as training data with target hand shape No. 6 removed. Results The fourth, fifth, and sixth rows in Figure 6 show the results of registrations using the DLD, CPD, and TPSRPM algorithms, respectively. The DLD yielded the best registration for all data. For all hand shapes deformed by CPD and TPS-RPM, images of all fingers except the thumb were rendered thinner than those of the true target shape, suggesting the weakness in assuming only a smooth displacement field as prior shape information: a point was forced to be displaced coherently with its neighboring points, even for a different finger. For data (a), all methods roughly recovered the true target shape, whereas thinner fingers were observed for the CPD and TPS-RPM. For data (b), the DLD recovered the missing points correctly. On the other hand, the CPD and TPS-RPM did not recover the missing points, and the thumb and all fingers were rendered shorter in their results than in the true target shapes. This suggests a weakness in the computation of the missing regions. This weakness originates from assuming only a smooth displacement field: floating points moved much more coherently as the target points did not exist near them. For data (c), the DLD found the true target shape, whereas the deformed shapes generated by CPD and TPS-RPM were close to the mean shape rather than the true target shape. For data (d), all methods roughly recovered the true target shape, whereas thinner fingers were observed in results for the CPD and TPS-RPM. The DLD succeeded in recovering the true hand shape.  True shape  Target data  Initial Shape  DLD  CPD  TPS-RPM  Figure 6: Applications of DLD, CPD, and TPS-RPM to hand No.6 with four types of modification: (1) replication of points with dispersion, (2) deletion of points, (3) addition of outliers, and (4) rotation of the whole shape.  3.4  Comparison of registration performance in 2D cases  To evaluate the registration performance of the DLD more precisely, we compared the DLD, CPD, and TPSRPM using the same IMM hand dataset and the IMM face dataset under various conditions. As the true target shapes to be estimated, we used hand No. 6 and face 22-4f shown in the first row of Figure 7. For the IMM hand dataset, we used 39 hand shapes with hand No. 6 removed from all 40 shapes as a set of training data for the DLD, whereas 234 face shapes, with all six faces of human No. 22 removed, were used as the other set of training data for the DLD. Generating validation datasets As in the experiment in the previous subsection, we generated four types of target data for hand No. 6: (a) 20-time replication of target points with dispersion, (b) random deletion of target points, (c) addition of outliers that follow uniform distributions, and (d) rotation of the whole shape. In generating the four types of target data, we changed the following data generation parameters: (a) standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution for replicating target points, (b) missing rate, (c) signal-to-noise ratio, and (d) rotation angle. To repeat the experiments and reduce the influence of randomness on registration performance, we generated target point sets 20 times for (a), (b), and (c) in the same setting. For (d), a single set of target points was generated for each rotation angle, since there is no randomness in the case of rotation. Definition of registration accuracy The DLD, CPD, and TPS-RPM were applied to each target data item, and the registration accuracy was calculated for each. For target data (a), (b), and (c), the average and standard errors in the registration accuracy were calculated. Registration accuracy was defined as the rate of correct matching between a true target shape and a deformed mean shape following registration. More formally, it was defined as follows: Accuracy =  #points with correct matching . #points in the mean shape  Point-by-point correspondence to compute registration accuracy was estimated using the nearest-neighbor matching between the deformed mean shape and the true target shape, i.e., the shape before modifications such as deletion of points or addition of replicated points and outliers. Choice of parameters We used the default parameters for the CPD and TPS-RPM implemented in their software. For the DLD, we fixed the number of shape variations to K = 10 for the hand dataset and K = 30 for the face dataset. We set the parameter of the DLD ω to 0.01 for (a), (b), and (d), whereas it was set to 0.30 for (c) since the former datasets did not include outliers and the latter included outliers. We changed the parameter of the DLD γ to 5.0 × 10−3 , 1.0 × 10−3 , and 5.0 × 10−4 without the adaptive contol of γ to investigate the influence of γ on registration performance. Results The second row in Figure 7 shows the results of a comparison between target shapes and replicated target points. The x-axis represents the standard deviation of replicating target points while the y-axis shows registration accuracy. For the hand datasets, the registration performance of DLD was insensitive to the regularization parameter γ and the DLD outperformed the CPD and TPS-RPM in almost all cases. For face datasets, the DLD with γ = 5.0 × 10−3 achieved the best registration performance, whereas the DLD with γ = 5.0 × 10−4 was less accurate than the CPD. The results for target shapes with random missing points are shown in the third row of Figure 7. The x-axis represents the missing rate and the y-axis registration accuracy. The DLDs with γ = 1.0 × 10−3 and 5 × 10−4 were the most stable for the target shapes, and they outperformed CPD and TPS-RPM in nearly all cases. On the contrary, the DLD with γ = 5 × 10−3 was moderately less accurate than CPD for the hand dataset. This suggests that a γ that is too large may, in some cases, reduce registration accuracy because of the large bias originating in the prior shape information.  Hand No. 6  Target data  Face 22-4f  1  0.6  0.8  0.5  0.6  0.4  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2  0 0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1  1 DLD .=5e-3,!=0.01 DLD .=1e-3,!=0.01 DLD .=5e-4,!=0.01 CPD TPS-RPM  1 0.8 0.8 0.6  Replication  0.6  0.4  0.4 DLD .=5e-3, !=0.01 DLD .=1e-3, !=0.01 DLD .=5e-4, !=0.01 CPD TPS-RPM  0.2 0  0.02  0.2  0.04  0.06  0.08  0.1  0  0.02  Standard deviation 1  1  0.8  0.8  0.6  0.6  0.4  0.06  0.08  0.1  DLD .=5e-3,!=0.01 DLD .=1e-3,!=0.01 DLD .=5e-4,!=0.01 CPD TPS-RPM  0.4  Deletion  DLD .=5e-3, !=0.01 DLD .=1e-3, !=0.01 DLD .=5e-4, !=0.01 CPD TPS-RPM  0.2 0  0.04  Standard deviation  0  0.2  0.4  0.2  0.6  0.8  1  0  0  0.2  Missing rate  0.4  0.6  0.8  1  Missing rate  1 1 0.8 0.8 0.6  0.6  0.4  0.4  Outliers  DLD .=5e-3, !=0.3 DLD .=1e-3, !=0.3 DLD .=5e-4, !=0.3 CPD TPS-RPM  0.2 0  0  0.2  0.4  DLD .=5e-3,!=0.3 DLD .=1e-3,!=0.3 DLD .=5e-4,!=0.3 CPD TPS-RPM  0.2 0.6  0.8  1  0  0  0.2  Signal-to-noise ratio 1  1  0.8  0.8  0.6  0.6  0.4  0.6  0.8  1  0.4  Rotation  DLD .=5e-3, !=0.01 DLD .=1e-3, !=0.01 DLD .=5e-4, !=0.01 CPD TPS-RPM  0.2 0  0.4  Signal-to-noise ratio  -50  0  Rotation angle  50  DLD .=5e-3,!=0.01 DLD .=1e-3,!=0.01 DLD .=5e-4,!=0.01 CPD TPS-RPM  0.2 0  -50  0  50  Rotation angle  Figure 7: Comparisons of registration performance among DLD, CPD, and TPS-RPM using hand No. 6 in the IMM hand dataset (left), and face 22-4f in the IMM face dataset (right) with four types of modification: (1) replication of points with dispersion, (2) deletion of points, (3) addition of outliers, and (4) rotation of the whole shape.  The fourth row in Figure 7 shows the results for target shapes with outliers following a 2D uniform distribution with x1 ∈ [0.0, 1.2] and x2 ∈ [0.0, 1.2] for the hand dataset and that with x1 ∈ [0.2, 1.0] and x2 ∈ [0.0, 0.8] for the face dataset. The x-axis of each figure represents the signal-to-noise ratio and the y-axis represents registration accuracy. The DLD achieved the best registration performance for both datasets in nearly all cases, showing its robustness against outliers. When the signal-to-noise ratio was 0.1, the DLD was less accurate than the CPD and TPS-RPM. This suggests that an inappropriate choice of noise probability ω reduces registration accuracy. The fifth row in Figure 7 shows the results for rotated target shapes. The x-axis and the y-axis represent the rotation angle and registration accuracy, respectively. For the hand dataset, the registration accuracy of TPS-RPM was considerably stable and was unaffected by the rotation angles, at least in the range [−π/3, π/3]. For the face dataset, the DLD achieved the best performance in nearly all cases, suggesting its robustness to the rotation.  4  Conclusion  Many existing algorithms for solving point set registration problems employ the assumption of a smooth displacement field, that is, the local geometry of the point set is preserved. Because of this assumption, registration problems are elegantly solved by these algorithms in various cases. This means that the registration performance can be improved using prior shape information instead of sacrificing the applicability of the algorithms. In this paper, we proposed a novel point set registration algorithm based on a Gaussian mixture model with explicit outlier modeling. We used a PCA-based statistical shape model to encode prior shape information, which was combined with the assumption of a smooth displacement field. The proposed algorithm works effectively if the target point set is rotated as pose parameters corresponding to a similar transformation are simultaneously estimated in addition to shape deformation. Our algorithm is also scalable to large point sets because of the presence of a linear-time algorithm, which was verified through the application to the SCAPE dataset. To evaluate the registration performance of the proposed algorithm, we compared it with CPD and TPS-RPM using the IMM hand dataset and the IMM face dataset with four types of modifications: replication of target points with dispersion, random deletion of target points, addition of outliers, and rotation of the entire shape. The proposed algorithm outperformed CPD and TPS-RPM in almost all cases, showing its effectiveness for various types of point set registration problems.  Conflict of Interest None declared.  References [1] L. G. Brown, A survey of image registration techniques, ACM Comput. Surv. 24 (4) (1992) 325–376. [2] P. Besl, N. McKay, A method for registration of 3-D shapes, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 14 (2) (1992) 239–256. [3] S. Rusinkiewicz, M. Levoy, Efficient variants of the ICP algorithm, in: Proc. Third Int. Conf. 3-D Digit. Imaging Model., IEEE Comput. Soc, 2001, pp. 145–152. [4] A. W. Fitzgibbon, Robust registration of 2D and 3D point sets, Image Vis. Comput. 21 (13-14) (2003) 1145–1153. [5] A. Makadia, A. Patterson, K. Daniilidis, Fully Automatic Registration of 3D Point Clouds, in: Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., IEEE Comput. Soc, 2006, pp. 1297–1304. [6] H. Chui, A. Rangarajan, A feature registration framework using mixture models, in: Proc. IEEE Work. Math. Methods Biomed. Image Anal., IEEE Comput. Soc, 2000, pp. 190–197. [7] H. Chui, A. Rangarajan, A new point matching algorithm for non-rigid registration, Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 89 (2-3) (2003) 114–141.  [8] B. Jian, B. C. Vemuri, Robust point set registration using Gaussian mixture models, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 33 (8) (2011) 1633–1645. [9] J. Chen, J. Ma, C. Yang, L. Ma, S. Zheng, Non-rigid point set registration via coherent spatial mapping, Signal Processing 106 (2015) 62–72. [10] Y. Yang, S. H. Ong, K. W. C. Foong, A robust global and local mixture distance based non-rigid point set registration, Pattern Recognit. 48 (1) (2015) 156–173. [11] A. Myronenko, X. Song, M. Á. Carreira-Perpiñán, Non-rigid point set registration: Coherent Point Drift, in: Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 19, MIT press, 2006, pp. 1009–1016. [12] A. Myronenko, X. Song, Point set registration: Coherent point drift, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 32 (12) (2010) 2262–2275. [13] J. Ma, W. Qiu, J. Zhao, Y. Ma, A. L. Yuille, Z. Tu, Robust L2E estimation of transformation for non-rigid registration, IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 63 (5) (2015) 1115–1129. [14] J. Ma, J. Zhao, A. L. Yuille, Non-rigid point set registration by preserving global and Local Structures, IEEE Trans. Image Process. 25 (1) (2016) 53–64. [15] Z. Zhang, Iterative point matching for registration of free-form curves and surfaces, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 13 (2) (1994) 119–152. [16] S. Granger, X. Pennec, Multi-scale EM-ICP: A fast and robust approach for surface registration, in: Proc. 4th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Springer-Verlag, 2002, pp. 418–432. [17] C. Stewart, Chia-Ling Tsai, B. Roysam, The dual-bootstrap iterative closest point algorithm with application to retinal image registration, IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 22 (11) (2003) 1379–1394. [18] A. Rangarajan, H. Chui, F. L. Bookstein, The Softassign Procrustes Matching Algorithm, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 1230 (1997) 29–42. [19] D. Chetverikov, D. Stepanov, P. Krsek, Robust Euclidean alignment of 3D point sets: The trimmed iterative closest point algorithm, Image Vis. Comput. 23 (3) (2005) 299–309. [20] Y. Tsin, T. Kanade, A correlation-based approach to robust point set registration, in: Proc. 6th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., (ECCV’04) Springer-Verlag, 2004, pp. 558–569. [21] Q.-Y. Zhou, J. Park, V. Koltun, Fast global registrastion, in: Proc. 14th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., (ECCV’16) Springer-verlag, 2016. [22] D. Mateus, R. Horaud, D. Knossow, F. Cuzzolin, E. Boyer, Articulated shape matching using Laplacian eigenfunctions and unsupervised point registration, in: Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. 2008, IEEE Comput. Soc, 2008, pp. 1–8. [23] R. Horaud, F. Forbes, M. Yguel, G. Dewaele, J. Zhang, Rigid and articulated point registration with expectation conditional maximization, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 33 (3) (2011) 587–602. [24] S. Ge, G. Fan, Non-rigid articulated point set registration with local structure preservation, in: Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Work. 2015, IEEE Comput. Soc, 2015, pp. 126–133. [25] S. Ge, G. Fan, Non-rigid articulated point set registration for human pose estimation, in: 2015 IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., IEEE, 2015, pp. 94–101. [26] I. Kolesov, J. Lee, G. Sharp, P. Vela, A. Tannenbaum, A stochastic approach to diffeomorphic point set registration with landmark constraints, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 38 (2) (2016) 238–251. [27] V. Golyanik, B. Taetz, G. Reis, D. Stricker, Extended coherent point drift algorithm with correspondence priors and optimal subsampling, in: Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–9. [28] T. Cootes, C. Taylor, D. Cooper, J. Graham, Active shape models–their training and application, Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 61 (1) (1995) 38–59.  [29] T. F. Cootes, C. Taylor, Statitical models of appearance for computer vision, Tech. Rep. Univ. Manchester (2004) 1–124. [30] T. Heimann, H. P. Meinzer, Statistical shape models for 3D medical image segmentation: a review, Med. Image Anal. 13 (4) (2009) 543–563. [31] F. P. M. Oliveira, J. M. R. S. Tavares, Medical image registration: a review, Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Engin. 17 (2) (2012) 73–93. [32] A. Sotiras, C. Davatzikos, N. Paragios, Deformable medical image registration: a survey, IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 32 (7) (2013) 1153–1190. [33] M. Berger, A. Tagliasacchi, L. M. Seversky, P. Alliez, J. A. Levine, A. Sharf, C. T. Silva, State of the art in surface reconstruction from point clouds, in: Proc. of Eurographics 2014 - State of the Art Reports, The Eurographics Association, 2014. [34] S. Bouaziz, A. Tagliasacchi, H. Li, M. Pauly, Modern techniques and applications for real-time non-rigid registration, in: SIGGRAPH ASIA 2016 Courses, SA ’16, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2016, pp. 11:1– 11:25. [35] V. Blanz, T. Vetter, A morphable model for the synthesis of 3D faces, in: Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques - SIGGRAPH ’99, ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, 1999, pp. 187–194. [36] D. Anguelov, P. Srinivasan, D. Koller, S. Thrun, J. Rodgers, J. Davis, SCAPE: Shape Completion and Animation of People, ACM Transactions on Graphics 24 (3) (2005) 408–416. [37] S. I. Park, J. K. Hodgins, Data-driven modeling of skin and muscle deformation, ACM Transactions on Graphics 27 (3) (2008) 96:1–6. [38] A. Jain, T. Thormahlen, H.-P. Seidel, C. Theobalt, MovieReshape: Tracking and Reshaping of Humans in Videos, ACM Transacons on Graphics 29 (5) (2010) 148:1–10. [39] Y. Yang, Y. Yu, Y. Zhou, S. Du, J. Davis, R. Yang, Semantic parametric reshaping of human body models, in: 2nd International Conference on 3D Vision, 2, 2014, pp. 41–48. [40] H. Hufnagel, X. Pennec, J. Ehrhardt, N. Ayache, H. Handels, Generation of a statistical shape model with probabilistic point correspondences and the expectation maximization- iterative closest point algorithm, International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery 2 (5) (2008) 265–273. [41] A. Rasoulian, R. Rohling, P. Abolmaesumi, Group-wise registration of point sets for statistical shape models, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 31 (11) (2012) 2025–2034. [42] N. Ravikumar, A. Gooya, A. F. Frangi, Z. A. Taylor, Robust group-wise rigid registration of point sets using t-mixture model Proc. of SPIE 9784, 2016, pp. 1–14. [43] Y. Wang, J. Z. Cheng, D. Ni, M. Lin, J. Qin, X. Luo, M. Xu, X. Xie, P. A. Heng, Towards personalized statistical deformable model and hybrid point matching for robust MR-TRUS registration, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 35 (2) (2016) 589–604. [44] J. Kruger, J. Ehrhardt, H. Handels, Probabilistic appearance models for segmentation and classification, Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2016, pp. 1698–1706. [45] F. Bernard, L. Salamanca, J. Thunberg, A. Tack, D. Jentsch, H. Lamecker, S. Zachow, F. Hertel, J. Goncalves, P. Gemmar, Shape-aware surface reconstruction from sparse 3D point-clouds, Medical Image Analysis 38 (2017) 77–89. [46] M. B. Stegmann, D. D. Gomez, A brief introduction to statistical shape analysis (2002). [47] I. L. Dryden, K. V. Mardia, Statistical shape analysis with applications in R, Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK, 2016.  [48] A. L. Yuille, N. M. Grzywacz, A mathematical analysis of the motion coherence theory, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 3 (2) (1989) 155–175. [49] C. Yang, R. Duraiswami, N.A. Gumerov, L. Davis, Improved fast Gauss transform and efficient kernel density estimation, in: Proc. Ninth IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., IEEE, 2003, pp. 664–671. [50] C. Williams, M. W. Seeger, Using the Nyström method to speed up kernel machines, in: Proc. 13th Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2001, pp. 682–688. [51] V. I. Morariu, B. V. Srinivasan, V. C. Raykar, R. Duraiswami, L. S. Davis, Automatic online tuning for fast Gaussian summation, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 21, Curran Associates, Inc., 2009, pp. 1113–1120. [52] V. C. Raykar, C. Yang, R. Duraiswami, Fast computation of sums of Gaussians in high dimensions, Technical report in University of Maryland. [53] A. Myronenko, X. Song, On the closed-form solution of the rotation matrix arising in computer vision problems (2009).

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
