Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 9
ArXiv ID: hf_503

Abstract:
Evolving Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Image Classification Yanan Sun, Bing Xue and Mengjie Zhang  arXiv:1710.10741v2 [cs.NE] 31 Oct 2017  School of Engineering and Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington PO Box 600, Wellington 6140, New Zealand e-mail: {Yanan.Sunm, Bing.Xue, Mengjie.Zhang}@ecs.vuw.ac.nz where X and Y are the input data and corresponding label, respectively, F (·) denotes the architecture choosing function with the given data, G(·) refers to the initialization method of the connection weights Weight based on the chosen architecture, and L(·) measures the differences between the true label and the label predicted by the CNN using X and Weight . Typically, the Gradient Descend (GD)-based approaches, e.g., Stochastic GD (SGD), are utilized to minimize L(X, Weight , Y ) within the given number of epochs, where the connection weight values are iteratively updated. Although L(·) is not differentiable in all occasions, GD-based methods are preferred due to their effectiveness and good scalability as the number of connection weights increases. A CNN commonly has a huge number of connection weights. However, F (·) and G(·) are countable functions that are discrete and neither convex or concave, and they are not well addressed in practice. Furthermore, because the gradient-based optimizers are heavily dependent on the initial values of the weights (including biases), it is essential to choose a suitable G(·) that can help the consecutive GD-based approaches to escape from local minima. Furthermore, the performance of assigned architectures cannot be evaluated until the minimization of L(·) is finished, while the minimization is a progress of multiple iterations, which in turn increases the difficulty of choosing the I. I NTRODUCTION potential optimal F (·). Therefore, the architecture design and Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have demonstrated connection weight initialization strategy should be carefully their exceptional superiority in visual recognition tasks, such treated in CNNs. as traffic sign recognition [1], biological image segmentaTypically, most of the architecture design approaches were tion [2], and image classification [3]. CNNs are originally initially developed for the deep learning algorithms in the early motivated by the computational model of the cat visual cortex date (e.g., the Stacked Auto-Encoders (SAEs) [10], [11] and specializing in processing vision and signal related tasks [4]. the Deep Belief Networks (DBNs) [12]), such as Grid Search Since LetNet-5 was proposed in 1989 [5], [6], which is an (GS), Random Search (RS) [13], Bayesian-based Gaussion implementation of CNNs and whose connection weights are Process (BGP) [14], [15], Tree-structured Parzen Estimators optimized by the Back-Propagation (BP) algorithm [7], various (TPE) [16], and Sequential Model-Based Global Optimizavariants of CNNs have been developed, such as VGGNet [8] tion (SMBO) [17]. Theoretically, GS exhaustively tests all and ResNet [9]. These variants significantly improve the clascombinations of the parameters to expectedly seize the best sification accuracies of the best rivals in image classification one. However, GS cannot evaluate all combinations within an tasks. Diverse variants of CNNs differ from their architectures acceptable time in reality. Moreover, GS is difficult to optimize and weight connections. the parameters of continuous values [13]. RS could reduce the Mathematically, a CNN can be formulated by (1) in the exhaustive adverse of GS, but the absolute “random” severely context of an image classification task with the input (X, Y ), challenges the sampling behavior in the search space [18]–[20].  In addition, BGP incurs extra parameters (i.e., the kernels) that  Architecture = F (X, Y ) Weight = G(Architecture ) (1) are arduous to tune. TPE treats each parameter independently,  while the most key parameters in CNNs are dependent (e.g., minimize L(X, Weight , Y )  Abstract—Evolutionary computation methods have been successfully applied to neural networks since two decades ago, while those methods cannot scale well to the modern deep neural networks due to the complicated architectures and large quantities of connection weights. In this paper, we propose a new method using genetic algorithms for evolving the architectures and connection weight initialization values of a deep convolutional neural network to address image classification problems. In the proposed algorithm, an efficient variable-length gene encoding strategy is designed to represent the different building blocks and the unpredictable optimal depth in convolutional neural networks. In addition, a new representation scheme is developed for effectively initializing connection weights of deep convolutional neural networks, which is expected to avoid networks getting stuck into local minima which is typically a major issue in the backward gradient-based optimization. Furthermore, a novel fitness evaluation method is proposed to speed up the heuristic search with substantially less computational resource. The proposed algorithm is examined and compared with 22 existing algorithms on nine widely used image classification tasks, including the stateof-the-art methods. The experimental results demonstrate the remarkable superiority of the proposed algorithm over the stateof-the-art algorithms in terms of classification error rate and the number of parameters (weights). Index Terms—Genetic algorithms, convolutional neural network, image classification, deep learning.  the convolutional layer size and its stride, more details can be seen in Subsection II-A). The methods mentioned above have shown their good performance in most SAEs and DBNs, but are not suitable to CNNs. Their success in SAEs and DBNs is due largely to the architecture construction approaches, which are greedy layer-wised by stacking a group of building blocks with the same structures (i.e., the three-layer neural networks). In each building block, these architecture-search methods are utilized for only optimizing the parameters, such as the number of neurons in the corresponding layer. However in CNNs, the layer-wised method cannot be applied due to their architecture characteristics of non-stacking routine, and we must confirm the entire architectures at a time. Furthermore, multiple different building blocks exist in CNNs, and different orders of them would result in significantly different performance. Therefore, the architecture design in CNNs should be carefully treated. Recently, Baker et al. [21] proposed an architecture design approach for CNNs based on reinforcement learning, named MetaQNN, which employed 10 Graphic Processing Unit (GPU) cards with 8-10 days for the experiments on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Due to the drawbacks of existing methods and limited computational resources available to interested researchers, most of these works in CNNs are typically performed by experts with rich domain knowledge [13]. Genetic Algorithms (GAs), which are a paradigm of the evolutionary algorithms that do not require rich domain knowledge [22], [23], adapt the meta-heuristic pattern motivated by the process of natural selection [24] for optimization problems. GAs are preferred in various fields due to their characteristics of gradient-free and insensitivity to local minima [25]. These promising properties are collectively achieved by a repeated series of the selection, mutation, and crossover operators. Therefore, it can be naturally utilized for the optimization of architecture design and the connection weight initialization for CNNs. Indeed, GAs for evolving neural networks can be traced back to 1989 [26]. In 1999, Yao [25] presented a survey about these different approaches, which are largely for the optimization of connection weights in the fixed architecture topologies. In 2002, Stanley and Miikkulainen proposed the NeuronEvolution Augmenting Topology (NEAT) [27] algorithm to evolve the architecture and connection weights of a small scale neural network. Afterwards, the HyperNEAT [28], i.e., NEAT combined with the compositional pattern producing networks [29], was proposed to evolve a larger scale neural network with an indirect encoding strategy. Motivated by the HyperNEAT, multiple variants [30]–[32] were proposed to evolve even larger scale neural networks. However, the major deficiencies of the HyperNEAT-based approaches are: 1) they are only suitable for evolving deep neural networks with global connection and single building blocks, such as SAEs and DBNs, but not CNNs where local connection exists and multiple different building blocks need to be evolved simultaneously, and 2) hybrid weigh connections (e.g., connections between two layers that are non-adjacent) may be evolved, which are contrast to the architectures of CNNs.  Indeed, the views have been many years that evolutionary algorithms are incapable of evolving the architecture and connection weights in CNNs due to the tremendous number of related parameters [33]–[35]. Until very recently in 2017, Google showed their Large Evolution for Image Classification (LEIC) method specializing at the architecture optimization of CNNs [36]. LETC is materialized by GAs without the crossover operator, implemented on 250 high-end computers, and archives competitive performance against the state-ofthe-art on the CIFAR-10 dataset by training for about 20 days. Actually, by directly using GAs for the architecture design of CNNs, several issues would raise in nature: 1) the best architecture is unknown until the performance is received based on it. However, evaluating the performance of one individual takes a long time, and appears more severely for the entire population. This would require much more computational resources for speeding up the evolution; 2) the optimal depth of CNNs for one particular problem is unknown, therefore it is hard to constrain the search space for the architecture optimization. In this regard, a variablelength gene encoding strategy may be the best choice for both 1) and 2), but how to assign the crossover operation for different building blocks is a newly resulted problem; and 3) the weight initialization values heavily affect the performance of the confirmed architecture, but addressing this problem involves a good gene encoding strategy and the optimization of hundreds and thousands decision variables. A. Goal The aim of this paper is to design and develop an effective and efficient GA method to automatically discover good architectures and corresponding connection weight initialization values of CNNs (i.e., the first two formulae in (1)) without manual intervention. To achieve this goal, the objectives below have been specified: 1) Design a flexible gene encoding scheme of the architecture, which does not constrain the maximal length of the building blocks in CNNs. With this gene encoding scheme, the evolved architecture is expected to benefit CNNs to achieve good performance in solving different tasks at hand. 2) Investigate the connection weight encoding strategy, which is capable of representing tremendous numbers of the connection weights in an economy way. With this encoding approach, the weight connection initialization problem in CNNs is expected to be effectively optimized by the proposed GA. 3) Develop associated selection (including the environmental selection), crossover, and mutation operators that can cope with the designed gene encoding strategies of both architectures and connection weights. 4) Propose an effective fitness measure of the individuals representing different CNNs, which does not require intensive computational resources.  Input 24x24  Feature maps 4@20x20  Feature maps 4@10x10  Feature maps 8@8x8  Feature maps 8@4x4  Full connection layer 128x1 Flatten  Convolution  Pooling  Convolution  Pooling  Fig. 1. An general architecture of the Convolutional Neural Network.  5) Investigate whether the new approach significantly outperform the existing methods in both classification accuracy and number of weights. B. Organization  the feature map and the input data through padding zeros, the convolutional operations are categorized into two types: the VALID (without padding) and the SAME (with padding). Specifically, each element in the feature map is the sum of the products of each element from the filter and the corresponding elements this filter overlaps. If the input data is with multiple channels, say 3, one feature map will also require 3 different filters, and each filter convolves on each channel, then the results are summed element-wised.  1 0  0  1  1  0  1  0  1  1  1  1  0  1  0  0  1  2  2 0  0  1  1  0  1  0  1  1  1  1  0  1  2 2  The reminder of this paper is organized as follows: the Filter {width:2, height:2} 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Feature map background of the CNNs, the related works on the architecture Stride {width:1, height:1} Input 4x4 3x3 Input 4x4 design and weight initialization approaches of CNNs are reviewed in Section II. The framework and the details of each Fig. 2. An illustration of convolutional operation. step in the proposed algorithm are elaborated in Section III. The experiment design and experimental results of the proAn example of the VALID convolutional operation is illusposed algorithm are shown in Sections IV and V, respectively. trated by Fig. 2, where the filter has the same width and height Next, further discussions are made in Section VI. Finally, the equal to 2, the input data is with the size of 4 × 4, and the conclusions and future work are detailed in Section VII. stride has the same height and width equal to 1. As shown in Fig. 2, the generated feature map is with the size of 3 × 3, the II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK shadow areas in the input data with different colors refer to A. Architecture of Convolutional Neural Network the overlaps with the filter at different positions of the input 1) Bone of CNNs: Fig. 1 exhibits an extensive architecture data, the shadow areas in the feature map are the respective of one CNN, where there are two convolutional operations, resulted convolutional outcomes, and numbers in the filter are two pooling operations, the resulted four groups of feature the connection weight values. Generally, convolutional results maps, and the full connection layer in the tail. The last layer, regarding each filter are updated by adding a bias term and which is a full connection layer, receives the input data by then through a nonlinearity, such as the Rectifier Linear Unit flattening all elements of the fourth group of feature maps. (ReLU) [37], before they are stored into the feature map. ObviGenerally, the convolutional layers and the pooling layers can ously, the involved parameters in one convolutional operation be mixed to stack together in the head of the architecture, are the filter width, the filter height, the number of feature while the full connection layers are constantly stacked with maps, the stride width, the stride height, the convolutional each other in the tail of the architecture. The numbers in Fig. 1 type, and the connection weight in the filter. refer to the sizes of the corresponding layer. Particularly, the 3) Pooling: Intuitively, the pooling operation resembles the input data is with 24 × 24, the output is with 128 × 1, and convolution operation except for the element-wised product the other numbers denote the feature map configurations. For and the resulted values of the corresponding feature map. example, 4@20 × 20 implies there are 4 feature maps, each Briefly, the pooling operation employs a predefined window with the size of 4 × 4. (i.e., the kernel) to collect the average value or the maximal In the following, the details of the convolutional layer and value of the elements where it slides, and the slide size is the pooling layer, which are associated with the convolution also called “stride” as in the convolutional operation. For and the pooling operations, respectively, are documented in better understanding, an example of the pooling operation is detail, while the full connection layer is not intended to illustrated by Fig. 3, where the kernel is with the size of 2 × 2, describe here because it is well-known. and the both stride width and height are 2, the input data 2) Convolution: Given an input image with the size of is with the size of 4 × 4, the shadows with different colors n × n, in order to receive a feature map generated by the refer to the two slide positions and the resulted pooling values. convolutional operations, a filter must be defined in advance. In this example, the maximal pooling operation is employed. Actually, a filter (it can also be simply seen as a matrix) is Evidently in the pooling operation, the involved parameters randomly initialized with a predefined size (i.e., the filter width are the kernel width, the kernel height, the stride width, the and the filter height). Then, this filter travels from the leftmost stride height, and the pooling type. to the rightmost of the input data with the step size equal to a stride (i.e., the stride width), and then travels again after B. CNN Architecture Design Algorithm In this subsection, only LEIC [36] is concerned due to its moving downward with the step size equal to a stride (i.e., the stride height), until reach the right bottom of the input specific intention for the architecture design of CNNs. To this image. Depending on whether to keep the same sizes between end, we will review the algorithm and then point out the  first initialization method. In the second initialization approach, the shortage of the first one has been solved, but the major diffi0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 culty exists in choosing the parameter of the distribution, such 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 as the range of the uniform distribution, and the mean value as Kernel {width:2, height:2} 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Stride {width:2, height:2} Feature map well as the standard derivation of the Gaussian distribution. To Input 4x4 2x2 Input 4x4 solve this problem, the Xavier initializer presented a range for uniform sampling based on the neuron saturation prior using Fig. 3. An illustration of pooling operation. the sigmoid activation function [39]. Supposed the number of neurons in two adjacent layers are n1 and n2 , the values of limitations, which are used to highlight the necessity of the the weights connecting these two layers are initialized within i h p p corresponding work in the proposed algorithm. the range of − 6/(n1 + n2 ), 6/(n1 + n2 ) by uniformly LEIC employed a GA to evolve the architectures of CNNs, sampling. Although the Xavier initializer works better than the where individuals were evolved from scratch, and each individ- initialization methods from the other two categories, a couple ual was encoded with a variable-length chromosome. During of major issues exist: 1) It highly relies on the architectures of the phase of evolution, different kinds of layers can be incor- CNNs, particularity the number of neurons in each layer in the porated into the individuals by the mutation operation, with networks (e.g., n and n in its formulation). If the optimal 1 2 the expectation that individuals with promising performance architectures of the networks are not found, the resulted will be generated. Note that, the crossover operation, which initialized parameters perform badly as well, then there is no are designed for local search in GAs, were not investigated way to evaluate the desired performance of the architectures in the main part of LEIC. Without any crossover operator, and may mislead the adjustment of the architectures. 2) The GAs typically require a large population size for reducing Xavier initializer is presented on the usage of the sigmoid the adverse impact. Therefore, LETC adopted a population activation, while the widely used activation function in CNNs size of 103 , while that of a magnitude with order 102 is is the ReLU [3], [9], [40], [41]. a general setting in the GA community. In addition, 250 To the best of our knowledge, there has not been any existhigh-end computers were employed for LEIC, which was ing evolutionary algorithm for searching for the connection caused by the fitness assignment approach utilized in LEIC. weight initialization of deep learning algorithms including In LEIC, each individual was evaluated with the final image CNNs. The main reason is the tremendous numbers of weights, classification accuracy, which typically took a long time due to which are difficult to be effectively encoded into the chromothe iterative nature of GD-based optimizers. However, LEIC somes and to be efficiently optimized due to its large-scale reported an external experiment on the crossover operation, global optimization nature [42]. which was used only for exchanging the mutation probabilities III. T HE PROPOSED ALGORITHM and the connection weights trained by SGD. Although it is In this section, the proposed Evolving deep Convolutional difficult to reach the actual reason why the crossover has not been used for evolving the architectures in LETC, it is obvious Neural Networks (EvoCNN) for image classification is docuat least that the crossover operations are not easy to achieve mented in detail. for chromosomes with different lengths. This would be more A. Algorithm Overview complicated in CNNs that have multiple different building blocks. In summary, the main deficiency of LEIC is its high com- Algorithm 1: Framework of EvoCNN putational complexity mainly caused by the fitness evaluation 1 P0 ←Initialize the population with the proposed gene encoding strategy; strategy it adopts as well as without crossover operations. The 2 t ← 0; huge computational resource that LEIC requires makes it very 3 while termination criterion is not satisfied do intractable in academic environment. 4 Evaluate the fitness of individuals in Pt ; C. Connection Weight Initialization 5 S ← Select parent solutions with the developed slack binary tournament selection; Typically, the initialization methods are classified into three 6 Q t ← Generate offsprings with the designed genetic different categorises. The first employs constant numbers to operators from S; initialize all connection weights, such as the zero initializer, 7 P ←Environmental selection from Pt ∪ Qt ; t+1 one initializer, and other fixed value initializer. The second is 8 t ← t + 1; the distribution initializer, such as using the Gaussion distribution or uniform distribution to initialize the weights. The third 9 end covers the initialization approaches with some prior knowl- 10 Select the best individual from Pt and decode it to the corresponding convolutional neural network. edge, and the famous Xavier initializer [38] belongs to this category. Because of the numerous connection weights existAlgorithm 1 outlines the framework of the proposed ing in CNNs, it is not necessary that all the connection weights start with the same values, which is the major deficiency of the EvoCNN method. Firstly, the population is initialized based on max(1,0,1,1)  0  1  1  0  max(0,1,1,0)  0  1  1  0  C  P  C  C  C  P  C  P  C  Convolutional  C  C  P  F  ...  F  F  F  ...  P  ...  C Pooling  P  Full connection  F  Fig. 4. An example of three chromosomes with different lengths in EvoCNN. TABLE I T HE ENCODED INFORMATION IN E VO CNN. Unit Type convolutional layer  pooling layer  full connection layer  Encoded Information the filter width, the filter height, the number of feature maps, the stride width, the stride height, the convolutional type, the standard deviation and the mean value of filter elements the kernel width, the kernel height, the stride width, the stride height, and the pooling type (i.e., the average or the maximal) the number of neurons, the standard deviation of connection weights, and the mean value of connection weights  the proposed flexible gene encoding strategy (line 1). Then, the evolution begins to take effect until a predefined termination criterion, such as the maximum number of the generations, has been satisfied (lines 3-9). Finally, the best individual is selected and decoded to the corresponding CNN (line 10) for final training. During the evolution, all individuals are evaluated first based on the proposed efficient fitness measurement (line 4). After that, parent solutions are selected by the developed slack binary tournament selection (line 5), and new offspring are generated with the designed genetic operators (line 6). Next, representatives are selected from the existing individuals and the generated offsprings to form the population in the next generation to participate subsequent evolution (line 7). In the following subsections, the key steps in Algorithm 1 are narrated in detail. B. Gene Encoding Strategy  Table I. Commonly, hundreds of thousands connection weights may exist in one convolutional or full connection layer, which cannot be all explicitly represented by a chromosome and effectively optimized by GAs. Therefore, in EvoCNN, we use only two statistical real numbers, the standard derivation and mean value of the connection weights, to represent the numerous weight parameters, which can be easily implemented by GAs. When the optimal mean value and the standard derivation are received, the connection weights are sampled from the corresponding Gaussian distribution. The details of population initialization in EvoCNN are given in the next subsection based on the gene encoding strategy introduced above. C. Population Initialization Algorithm 2: Population Initialization Input: The population size N , the maximal number of convolutional and pooling layers Ncp , and the maximal number of full connection layers Nf . Output: Initialized population P0 . 1 P0 ← ∅; 2 while |P0 | ≤ N do 3 part1 ← ∅; 4 ncp ← Uniformaly generate an integer between [1, Ncp ]; 5 while |part1 | ≤ ncp do 6 r ← Uniformly generated a number between [0, 1]; 7 if r ≤ 0.5 then 8 l ← Initialize a convolutional layer with random settings; 9 else 10 l ← Initialize a pooling layer with random settings; 11 end 12 part1 ← part1 ∪ l; 13 end 14 part2 ← ∅; 15 nf ← Uniformaly generate an integer between [1, Nf ]; 16 while |part2 | ≤ nf do 17 l ← Initialize a full connection layer with random settings; 18 part2 ← part2 ∪ l; 19 end 20 P0 ← P0 ∪ (part1 ∪ part2 ); 21 end 22 Return P0 .  As introduced in Subsection II-A, three different building blocks, i.e., the convolutional layer, the pooling layer, and the full connection layer, exist in the architectures of CNNs. Therefore, they should be encoded in parallel into one chromosome for evolution. Because the optimal depth of a CNN in solving one particular problem is unknown prior to confirming its architecture, the variable-length gene encoding strategy, which is very suitable for this occasion, is employed in the proposed EvoCNN method. Furthermore, because the performance of CNNs is highly affected by their depths [8], [43]–[45], this For convenience of the elaboration, each chromosome is variable-length gene encoding strategy makes the proposed EvoCNN method have chances to reach the best result due separated into two parts. The first part includes the convolutional layers and the pooling layers, and the other part is the to no constrains on the architecture search space. In particular, an example of three chromosomes with dif- full connection layers. Based on the convention of the CNN ferent lengths from EvoCNN is illustrated by Fig. 4, and all architectures, the first part starts with one convolutional layer. represented information in these three layers are detailed in The second part can be added to only at the tail of the first  part. In addition, the length of each part is set by randomly evaluation in EvoCNN. Because EvoCNN concerns on solving choosing a number within a predefined range. image classification tasks, the classification error is the best Algorithm 2 shows the major steps of the population initial- strategy to assign their fitness. The number of connection ization, where |·| is a cardinality operator, lines 3-13 show the weights is also chosen as an additional indicator to measure generation of the first part of one chromosome, and lines 14- the individual’s quality based on the principle of Occam’s 19 show that of the second part. During the initialization of razor [46]. the first part, a convolutional layer is added first. Then, a With the conventions, each represented CNN is trained convolutional layer or a pooling layer is determined by the on the training set Dtrain , and the fitness is estimated on once coin tossing probability and then added to the end, which another dataset Df itness 1 . CNNs are frequently with deep is repeated until the predefined length of this part is met. For architectures, thus thoroughly training them for receiving the the second part, full connection layers are chosen and then final classification error would take considerable expenditure added. Note here that, convolutional layers, pooling layers, of computing resource and a very long time due to the and full connection layers are initialized with the random large number of training epochs required (>100 epochs are settings, i.e., the information encoded into them are randomly invariably treated in fully training CNNs). This will make it specified before they are stored into the corresponding part. much more impracticable here due to the population-based After these two parts finished, they are combined and returned GAs with multiple generations (i.e., each individual will take a as one chromosome. With the same approach, a population of full training in each generation). We have designed an efficient individuals are generated. method to address this concern. In this method, each individual is trained with only a small number of epochs, say 5 or 10 D. Fitness Evaluation epochs, based on their architectures and connection weight initialization values, and then the mean value and the standard derivation of classification error are calculated on each batch Algorithm 3: Fitness Evaluation of D f itness in the last epoch. Both the mean value and the Input: The population Pt , the training epoch number k standard derivation of classification errors, are employed as the for measuring the accuracy tendency, the training fitness of one individual. Obviously, the smaller mean value, set Dtrain , the fitness evaluation dataset Df itness , the better individual. When the compared individuals are with and the batch size num of batch. the same mean values, the less standard derivation indicates Output: The population with fitness Pt . the better one. 1 for each individual s in Pt do In summary, three indicators are used in the fitness evalu2 i ← 1; ation, which are the mean value, standard derivation, and the 3 eval steps ← |Df itness |/num of batch; number of parameters. There are several motivations behind 4 while i ≤ k do this fitness evaluation strategy: 1) It is sufficient to investigat5 Train the connection weights of the CNN ing only the tendency of the performance. If individuals are represented by individual s; with better performance in the first several training epochs of 6 if i == k then CNNs, they will probably still have the better performance in 7 accy list ← ∅; the following training epochs with greater confidence. 2) The 8 j ← 1; mean value and the standard derivation are statistical signifi9 while j ≤ eval steps do cance indicators, thus suitable for investigating this tendency, 10 accyj ← Evaluate the classification error and the final classification error can be received by optimizing on the j-th batch data from Df itness ; only the best individual evolved by the proposed EvoCNN 11 accy list ← accy list ∪ accyj ; method. 3) CNN models with less number of connection 12 j ← j + 1; weights are preferred by smart devices (more details are 13 end discussed in Section VI). 14 Calculate the number of parameters in s, the mean value and standard derivation from E. Slack Binary Tournament Selection accy list, assign them to individual s, and update s from Pt ; We develop one slack version of the standard binary tour15 end nament selection, which are documented in Algorithm 4, to 16 i ← i + 1; select parent solutions for the crossover operations in the 17 end proposed EvoCNN method. Briefly, two sets of comparisons 18 end are employed. The comparisons between the mean values of 19 Return Pt . individuals involves a threshold α, and that comparisons between the parameter numbers involves another threshold β. If Fitness evaluation aims at giving a quantitative measure determining which individuals qualify for serving as parent solutions. Algorithm 3 manifests the framework of the fitness  1 The original training set is randomly split into D train and Df itness , where Df itness is unseen to the CNN training phase, which can give a good indication of the generalization accuracy on the test set.  units, i.e., the convolutional layer, the pooling layer, and the full connection layer, are firstly collected into three different lists based on their orders in the corresponding chromosome, which refers to the Unit Collection (UC) phase. Then, these three lists are aligned at the top, and units at the same positions are performed the crossover. This phase is named the UA and crossover phase. Finally, the Unit Restore (UR) phase is employed, i.e., when the crossover operation is completed, the units in these lists are restored to their original positions of the associated chromosomes. With these three consequential phases (i.e., the UC, the UA and crossover, and the UR), two chromosomes with different lengths could easily exchange their gene information for crossover. Because the crossover operation is performed on the unit lists where only the units with the same types are loaded, this proposed UA crossover operation is natural (because they have the same origins). For the remaining units, which do not perform crossover operations due to no paired ones, are kept at the same position. Mutation operations may perform on each position of the units from one chromosome. For a selected mutation point, a unit could be added, deleted, or modified, which is determined by a probability of 1/3. In the case of unit addition, a convolutional layer, a pooling layer, or a full connection layer is added by taking a probability of 1/3. If the mutation is to modify an existing unit, the particular modification is dependent on the unit type, and all the encoded information in the unit would be changed (encoded information on each unit type can be seen in Table I). Note that all the encoded formation is denoted by real the parent solution cannot be selected with these comparisons, numbers, therefore the Simulated Crossover (SBX) [47] and the individual with smaller standard derivation is chosen. the polynomial mutation [48] are employed in the proposed In practice, tremendous number of parameters exist in deep EvoCNN method due to their notable show in real number CNNs, which would easily cause the overfitting problem. gene representations. Therefore, when the difference between the mean values of two individuals is smaller than the threshold α, we further con- G. Environmental Selection sider the number of connection weights. The slight change of the parameter numbers will not highly affect the performance Algorithm 5: Environmental Selection of CNNs. Consequently, β is also introduced. Input: The elistsm fraction γ, and the current population By iteratively performing this selection, parent solutions Pt ∪ Qt . are selected and stored into a mating pool. In the proposed Output: The selected population Pt+1 . EvoCNN method, the size of the mating pool is set to be the 1 a ← Calculate the number of elites based on γ and the same of the population size. predefined population size N from Algorithm 2; F. Offspring Generation 2 Pt+1 ← Select a individuals that have the best mean values from Pt ∪ Qt ; The steps for generating offspring are given as follows: 3 Pt ∪ Qt ← Pt ∪ Qt − Pt+1 ; step 1): randomly select two parent solutions from the mating 4 while |Pt+1 | < N do pool; 5 s1 , s2 ← Randomly select two individuals from step 2): use crossover operator on the selected solutions to Pt ∪ Qt ; generate offspring; 6 s ← Employe Algorithm 4 to select one individual step 3): use mutation operator on the generated offspring; from s1 and s2 ; step 4): store offspring, remove the parent solutions from the 7 Pt+1 ← Pt+1 ∪ s; mating pool, and perform steps 1-3 until the mating 8 end pool is empty. 9 Return Pt+1 . The proposed crossover operation can be seen in Fig. 5. To achieve crossover, we design a method called Unit Alignment (UA) for recombining two individuals with different chromoThe environmental selection is shown in Algorithm 5. Dursome lengths. During the crossover operation, three different ing the environmental selection, the elitism and the diversity  Algorithm 4: Slack Binary Tournament Selection Input: Two compared individuals, the mean value threshold α, and the paramemter number threshold β. Output: The selected individual. 1 s1 ← The individual with larger mean value; 2 s2 ← The other individual; 3 µ1 , µ2 ← The mean values of s1 , s2 ; 4 std1 , std2 ← The standard derivations of s1 , s2 ; 5 c1 , c2 ← The parameter numbers of s1 , s2 ; 6 if µ1 − µ2 > α then 7 Return s1 . 8 else 9 if c1 − c2 > β then 10 Return s2 . 11 else 12 if std1 < std2 then 13 Return s1 . 14 else if std1 > std2 then 15 Return s2 . 16 else 17 Return randon one from {s1 , s2 }. 18 end 19 end 20 end  Convolutional  Pooling  C  Full connection  P  Chromosome #1 C1  P1  C2  Convolutional unit list  C3  F  Chromosome #2 P2  Pooling unit list  F1  F2  F3  C1  Full connection unit list  P1  C2  P2  Convolutional unit list  P3  F1  Pooling unit list  F2  F3  Full connection unit list  C1  P1  F1  C1  P1  F1  C2  P2  F2  C2  P2  F2  P3  F3  C3  F3  F4  F4  (a) Unit Collection crossover  crossover C1  C1  crossover  P1  crossover  P1  F1  P2  F2  P3  F3  F1  crossover  C2  C2  crossover  P2  C3  F2 crossover F3 F4  (b) Unit Aligh and Crossover Offspring #2  Offspring #1 C1  P1  C2  C3  P2  F1  F2  F3  C1  P1  C2  P2  P3  F1  F2  F3  F4  (c) Unit Restore Fig. 5. An example to illustrate the entire crossover process. In this example, the first chromosome is with length 8 including three convolutional layers, two pooling layers, and three full connection layers; the other one is with length 9 including two convolutional layers, three pooling layers, and four full connection layers. In the first step of crossover (i.e., the unit collection), the convolutiona layers, the pooling layers, and the full connection layers are collected from each chromosome and stacked with the same orders to them in each chromosome (see Fig. 5a). In the second step, the unit lists with the same unit types are aligned at the top, i.e., the two convolutional layer lists are picked and aligned, and the same operations on the other two lists. When these unit lists finish the alignment, units at the same positions from the each two lists are paired and performed crossover operation, which can be shown in Fig. 5b. At last, units from these unit lists are restored based on the positions where they are from (see Fig. 5b). Note in Fig. 5b, the units that have experienced crossover operations are highlighted with italics and underline fonts, while the units that do not perform the crossover operations remain the same.  are explicitly and elaborately addressed. To be specific, a fraction of individuals with promising mean values are chosen first, and then the remaining individuals are selected by the modified binary tournament selection demonstrated in Subsection III-F. By these two strategies, the elitism and the diversity are considered simultaneously, which are expected to collectively improve the performance of the proposed EvoCNN method. Note here that, the selected elites are removed before the tournament selection gets start to work (line 3 of Algorithm 5), while the individuals selected for the purpose of diversity are kept in the current population for the next round of tournament selection (lines 4-8 of Algorithm 5) based on the convention in the community.  and then the decoded CNN will be deeply trained with a larger number of epochs by SGD for future usage. IV. E XPERIMENT D ESIGN In order to quantify the performance of the proposed EvoCNN, a series of experiments are designed and performed on the chosen image classification benchmark datasets, which are further compared to state-of-the-art peer competitors. In the following, these benchmark datasets are briefly introduced at first. Then, the peer competitors are given. Finally, parameter settings of the proposed EvoCNN method participating into these experiments are documented. A. Benchmark Datasets  H. Best Individual Selection and Decoding  In these experiments, nine widely used image classification At the end of evolution, multiple individuals are with benchmark datasets are used to examine the performance of promising mean values but different architectures and connec- the proposed EvoCNN method. They are the Fashion [49], the tion weight initialization values. In this regard, there will be Rectangle [50], the Rectangle Images (RI) [50], the Convex multiple choices to select the “Best Individual”. For example, Sets (CS) [50], the MNIST Basic (MB) [50], the MNIST if we are only concerned with the best performance, we with Background Images (MBI) [50], Random Background could neglect their architecture configurations and consider (MRB) [50], Rotated Digits (MRD) [50], and with RD plus only the classification accuracy. Otherwise, if we emphasis Background Images (MRDBI) [50] benchmarks. Based on the types of the classification objects, these the smaller number of parameters, corresponding decision could be made. Once the “Best Individual” is confirmed, benchmarks are classified into three different categories. The the corresponding CNN is decoded based on the encoded first category includes only Fashion, which is for recognizing architecture and connection weight initialization information, 10 fashion objects (e.g., trousers, coats, and so on) in the  50, 000 training images and 10, 000 test images. The second final classification accuracy and is invisible to public. As for one is composed of the MNIST [6] variants including the other architecture design approaches introduced in Section I, MB, MBI, MRB, MRD, and the MRDBI benchmarks for such as GS, RS, among others, they are not scalable to CNNs classifying 10 hand-written digits (i.e., 0-9). Because the and not suitable to be directly compared as well. MNIST has been easily achieved 97%, these MNIST variants In the experiments, state-of-the-art algorithms that have are arbitrarily added into different barriers (e.g., random back- reported promising classification errors on the chosen benchgrounds, rotations) from the MNIST to improve the complexity marks are collected as the peer competitors of the proof classification algorithms. Furthermore, these variants have posed EvoCNN method. To be specific, the peer com12, 000 training images and 50, 000 test images, which further petitors on the Fashion benchmark are collected from the challenges the classification algorithms due to the mush less dataset homepage2. They are 2C1P2F+Dropout, 2C1P, 3C2F, training data while more test data. The third category is for 3C1P2F+Dropout, GRU+SVM+Dropout, GoogleNet [41], recognizing the shapes of objects (i.e., the rectangle or not for AlexNet [3], SqueezeNet-200 [51], MLP 256-128-64, and the Rectangle and RI benchmarks, and the convex or not for VGG16 [52], which perform the experiments on the raw the Convex benchmark). Obviously, this category covers the dataset without any preprocessing. The peer competitors on Rectangle, the RI, and the CS benchmarks that contain 1, 200, other benchmarks are CAE-2 [53], TIRBM [54], PGBM+DN12, 000, and 8, 000 training images, respectively, and all of 1 [55], ScatNet-2 [56], RandNet-2 [57], PCANet-2 (softthem include 50, 000 test images. Compared to the Rectangle max) [57], LDANet-2 [57], SVM+RBF [50], SVM+Poly [50], benchmark, the RI is generated by adding randomly sampled NNet [50], SAA-3 [50], and DBN-3 [50], which are from backgrounds from the MNIST for increasing the difficulties the literature [57] recently published and the provider of the of classification algorithms. benchmarks3. In addition, each image in these benchmarks is with the size 28 × 28, and examples from these benchmarks are shown in C. Parameter Settings Fig. 6 for reference. Furthermore, another reason for using All the parameter settings are set based on the conventions these benchmark datasets is that different algorithms have in the communities of evolutionary algorithms [58] and deep reported their promising results, which is convenient for the learning [59], in addition to the maximal length of each basic comparisons on the performance of the proposed EvoCNN layer. Specifically, the population size and the total generation method and these host algorithms (details can be seen Subsec- number are set to be 100. The distribution index of SBX and tion IV-B). Polynomial mutation are both set to be 20, and their associated probabilities are specified as 0.9 and 0.1, respectively. The maximum lengths of the convolutional layers, the pooling layers, and the full connection layers are set to be the same (a) Examples from the first category. From left to right, they are T-shirt, trouser, as 5 (i.e., the maximal depths of CNNs in these experiments pullover, dress, coat, sandal, shirt, sneaker, bag, and ankle boot. are 15). Moreover, the proportion of the elitism is set to be 20% based on the Pareto principle. Note that the 20% data are randomly selected from the training images as the fitness evaluation dataset. For the implementation of the proposed (b) Examples from the second category. From left to right, each two images EvoCNN method, we constrain the same values of the width are from one group, and each group is from MBi, MRB, MRD, MRDBI, and MB, respectively. These images refer to the hand-written digits 0, 4, 2, 6, 0, and height for filter, stride, and kernel. The width and height 5, 7, 5, 9, and 6, respectively. for stride in the convolutional layer are set to be 1, those in the pooling layer are specified at the same value to its kernel, and the convolutional type is fixed to “SAME”. The proposed EvoCNN method is implemented by Tensor(c) Examples from the thrid category, From left to right, the first three images flow [60], and each copy of the code runs in a computer are from the Rectangle benchmark, the following four ones are from the RI benchmark, and the remaingings are from the Convex benchmark. Specifically, equipped with two GPU cards with the identical model number these examples with the index 1, 2, 6, 7, and 11 are positive samples. GTX1080. During the final training phase, each individual Fig. 6. Examples from the benchmarks chosen. is imposed by the BatchNorm [61] for speeding up and the weight decay with an unified number for preventing from B. Peer Competitors the overfitting. Due to the heuristic nature of the proposed Ideally, the algorithms for neural network architecture de- EvoCNN method, 30 independent runs are performed on each sign discussed in Section I should be collected here as the peer benchmark dataset, and the mean results are estimated for competitors. However, because MetaQNN [21] and LEIC [36] the comparisons unless otherwise specified. Furthermore, the highly rely on the computational resources, it is impossible experiments take 4 days on the Fashion benchmark for each to reproduce the experimental results in an academic envi- run, 2–3 days on other benchmarks. ronment. Furthermore, the benchmark dataset investigated in 2 https://github.com/zalandoresearch/fashion-mnist these two algorithms employed different data preprocessing 3 http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/∼ lisa/twiki/bin/view.cgi/Public/DeepVsShallowComparisonIC and augmentation techniques, which will highly enhance the  V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS  classification error rates, where the difference is only 0.2%. The proposed EvoCNN method further decreases the error rate In this section, the experimental results and analysis of the by 0.83% to 5.47%. Furthermore, the mean performance of proposed EvoCNN method against peer competitors are shown EvoCNN is even better than the best performance of eight in Subsection V-A. Then, the weight initialization method in competitors, and only a little worse than the best of GoogleNet the proposed EvoCNN method are specifically investigated in and VGG16. However, EvoCNN has a much smaller number Subsection V-B. of connection weights — EvoCNN uses 6.52 million weights A. Overall Results while GoogleNet uses 101 million and VGG uses 26 million Experimental results on the Fashion benchmark dataset are weights. EvoCNN also employs only half of the numbers of shown in Table II, and those on the MB, MRD, MRB, MBI, training epochs used in the VGG16. The results show that the MRDBI, Rectangle, RI, and Convex benchmark datasets are proposed EvoCNN method obtains much better performance in shown in Table III. In Tables II and III, the last two rows the architecture design and connection weight initialization of denote the best and mean classification errors received from CNNs on the Fashion benchmark, which significantly reduces the proposed EvoCNN method, respectively, and other rows the classification error of the evolved CNN generated by the show the best classification errors reported by peer competi- proposed EvoCNN method. According to Table III, EvoCNN is the best one among all tors4 . In order to conveniently investigate the comparisons, the terms “(+)” and “(-)” are provided to denote whether the best the 13 different methods. Specifically, EvoCNN achieves the result generated by the proposed EvoCNN method is better or best performance on five of the eight datasets, and the second worse that the best result obtained by the corresponding peer best on the other three datasets — the MB, MRD, and Convex competitor. The term “—” means there is no available result datasets, where LDANet-2, TIRBM, and PCANet-2(softmax) reported from the provider or cannot be counted. Most informa- achieve the lowest classification error rate, respectively. Furtion of the number of parameters and number of training epoch thermore, comparing the mean performance of EvoCNN with from the peer competitors on the Fashion benchmark dataset the best of the other 12 methods, EvoCNN is the best on four is available, therefore, such information from EvoCNN is also datasets (MRB, MBI, Rectangle and RI), second best on two shown in Table II for multi-view comparisons. However, for (MRD and Convex), third best and fourth best on the other two the benchmarks in Table III, such information is not presented datasets (MRDBI and MB). Particularly on MRB and MBI, because they are not available from the peer competitors. the lowest classification error rates of the others are 6.08% Note that all the results from the peer competitors and the and 11.5%, and the mean error rates of EvoCNN are 3.59% proposed EvoCNN method are without any data augmentation and 4.62%, respectively. In summary, the best classification error of the proposed EvoCNN method wins 80 out of the preprocessing on the benchmarks. 84 comparisons against the best results from the 12 peer competitors, and the mean classification error of EvoCNN is TABLE II T HE CLASSIFICATION ERRORS OF THE PROPOSED E VO CNN METHOD better than the best error of the 12 methods on 75 out of the AGAINST THE PEER COMPETITORS ON THE FASHION BENCHMARK 84 comparisons. DATASET. B. Performance Regarding Weight Initialization  It is clearly shown in Table II that by comparing the best performance, the proposed EvoCNN method outperforms all the ten peer competitors. The two state-of-the-art algorithms, GoogleNet and VGG16, achieve respectively 6.5% and 6.3% 4 It is a convention in deep learning community that only the best result is reported.  60 weight initializaed by EvoCNN weight initialized by Xavier  50 40 30  0  Fashion  MB  MRD  MRB MBI MRDBI Benchmark datasets  Rectangle  5.39 6.33  10  5.97 8.27  20  0.01 0.23  300 30 — 150 100 — — 200 25 200 100 100  37.38 41.88  3.27M 100K — 7.14M — 101M 60M 500K 41K 26M 6.68M 6.52M  4.62 5.8  8.40(+) 7.50(+) 9.30(+) 7.40(+) 10.30(+) 6.30(+) 10.10(+) 10.00(+) 10.00(+) 6.50(+) 5.47 7.28  3.59 3.93  2C1P2F+Drouout 2C1P 3C2F 3C1P2F+Dropout GRU+SVM+Dropout GoogleNet [41] AlexNet [3] SqueezeNet-200 [51] MLP 256-128-64 VGG16 [52] EvoCNN (best) EvoCNN (mean)  5.46 6.24  # epochs  1.28 2.45  # parameters  7.28 9.28  error(%)  Classification error (%)  classifier  RI  Convex  Fig. 7. Performance comparison between the proposed EvoCNN method and the CNN using the evolved architecture and the Xavier weight initializer.  Further experiments are performed to examine the effectiveness of the connection weight initialization method in the proposed EvoCNN approach. By comparing different weight initializers, we would also investigate whether the architecture or the connection weight initialization values will affect the classification performance. To achieve this, we initialize another group of CNNs with the same architectures as that of  TABLE III T HE CLASSIFICATION ERRORS OF THE PROPOSED E VO CNN METHOD AGAINST THE PEER COMPETITORS ON THE MB, MRD, MRB, MBI, MRDBI, R ECTANGLE , RI, AND C ONVEX BENCHMARK DATASETS  classifier  MB  MRD  MRB  MBI  MRDBI  Rectangle  RI  Convex  CAE-2 [53] TIRBM [54] PGBM+DN-1 [55] ScatNet-2 [56] RandNet-2 [57] PCANet-2 (softmax) [57] LDANet-2 [57] SVM+RBF [50] SVM+Poly [50] NNet [50] SAA-3 [50] DBN-3 [50] EvoCNN (best) EvoCNN (mean)  2.48(+) — — 1.27(+) 1.25(+) 1.40(+) 1.05(-) 3.03(+) 3.69(+) 4.69(+) 3.46(+) 3.11(+) 1.18 1.28  9.66(+) 4.20(-) — 7.48(+) 8.47(+) 8.52(+) 7.52(+) 11.11(+) 15.42(+) 18.11(+) 10.30(+) 10.30(+) 5.22 5.46  10.90(+) — 6.08(+) 12.30(+) 13.47(+) 6.85(+) 6.81(+) 14.58(+) 16.62(+) 20.04(+) 11.28(+) 6.73(+) 2.80 3.59  15.50(+) — 12.25(+) 18.40(+) 11.65(+) 11.55(+) 12.42(+) 22.61(+) 24.01(+) 27.41(+) 23.00(+) 16.31(+) 4.53 4.62  45.23(+) 35.50(+) 36.76(+) 50.48(+) 43.69(+) 35.86(+) 38.54(+) 55.18(+) 56.41(+) 62.16(+) 51.93(+) 47.39(+) 35.03 37.38  1.21(+) — — 0.01(=) 0.09(+) 0.49(+) 0.14(+) 2.15(+) 2.15(+) 7.16(+) 2.41(+) 2.61(+) 0.01 0.01  21.54(+) — — 8.02(+) 17.00(+) 13.39(+) 16.20(+) 24.04(+) 24.05(+) 33.20(+) 24.05(+) 22.50(+) 5.03 5.97  — — — 6.50(+) 5.45(+) 4.19(-) 7.22(+) 19.13(+) 19.82(+) 32.25(+) 18.41(+) 18.63(+) 4.82 5.39  the evolved EvoCNN, but their weights are initialized with the widely used Xavier initializer [38] (details in Subsection II-C). The comparisons are illustrated in Fig. 7, where the xaxis denotes the benchmark datasets, and y-axis denotes the classification error rates. Fig. 7 clearly shows that the proposed connection weight initialization strategy in EvoCNN improves the classification performance on all the benchmarks over the widely used Xavier initializer. To be specific, the proposed weight initialization method reaches ≈1.5% classification accuracy improvement on the Fashion, MB, MRD, MBI, RI, and Convex benchmarks, and 4.5% on the MRDBI benchmark. By comparing with the results in Tables II and III, it also can be concluded that the architectures of CNNs contribute to the classification performance more than that of the connection weight initialization. The proposed EvoCNN method gained promising performance by automatically evolving both the initial connection weights and the architectures of CNNs.  operation in this context (because crossover operations can not be easily performed between the genes from different origins). Therefore, a new crossover operation is introduced to the proposed EvoCNN method. UC, UA, as well as UR are designed to complete the crossover operation, which enhances the communications between the encoded information, and expectedly leverages the performance in pursuing the promising architectures of CNNs. The typically used approaches in optimizing the weights of CNNs are based on the gradient information. It is well known that the gradient-based optimizers are sensitive to the starting position of the parameters to be optimized. Without a better starting position, the gradient-based algorithms are easy to be trapped into local minima. Intuitively, finding a better starting position of the connection weights by GAs is intractable due to the huge numbers of parameters. As we have elaborated, a huge number of parameters can not be efficiently encoded into the chromosomes, nor effectively optimized. In the proposed VI. F URTHER D ISCUSSIONS EvoCNN method, an indirect encoding approach is employed, which only encodes the means and standard derivations of In this section, we will further discuss the encoding stratthe weights in each layer. In fact, employing the standard egy of the architectures and the weights related parameters, derivation and the mean to initialize the starting position of and the fitness evaluation in the proposed EvoCNN method. connection weights is a compromised approach and can be Extra findings from the experimental results are discussed as ubiquitously seen from deep learning libraries [60], [62], [63], well, which could provide insights on the applications of the which is the motivation of this design in the proposed EvoCNN proposed EvoCNN method. method. With this strategy, only two real numbers are used In GAs, crossover operators play the role of exploitation to denote the hundreds of thousands of parameters, which search (i.e., the local search), and mutation operators act could save much computational resource for encoding and the exploration search (i.e., the global search). Because the optimization. local search and the global search should complement to each other, only well designing both of them could remarkably Existing techniques for searching for the architectures of promote the performance. Generally, the crossover operators CNNs typically take the final classification accuracy as the operate on the chromosomes with the same lengths, while fitness of individuals. A final classification accuracy typically the proposed EvoCNN method employs the variable-length requires many more epochs of the training, which is a very ones. Furthermore, multiple different basic layers exist in time-consuming process. In order to complete the architecture CNNs, which improve the difficulties of designing crossover design with this fitness evaluation approach, it is natural  to employ a lot of computation resource to perform this task in parallel to speed up the design. However, computational resource is not necessarily available to all interested researchers. Furthermore, it also requires extra professional assistances, such as the task schedule and synchronization in the multi-thread context, which is beyond the expertise of most researchers/users. In fact, it is not necessary to check individual final classification accuracy, but a tendency that could predict their future quality would be sufficient. Therefore, we only employ a small number of epochs to train these individuals. With this kind of fitness measurement, the proposed EvoCNN method does not highly reply on the computational resource. In summary, with the well-designed yet simplicity encoding strategies and this fitness evaluation method, researchers without rich domain knowledge could also design the promising CNN models for addressing specific tasks in their (academic) environment, where is the computational resources are typically limited. TABLE IV T HE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY AND THE PARAMETER NUMBERS FROM THE INDIVIDUALS ON THE FASHION BENCHMARK DATASET. classification accuracy # parameters  99% 569,250  98% 98,588  97% 7,035  96% 3,205  95% 955  Moreover, interesting findings have also been discovered when the proposed EvoCNN method terminates, i.e., multiple individuals are with the similar performance but significant different numbers of connection weights (See Table IV), which are produced due to population-based nature of the proposed EvoCNN method. Recently, various applications have been developed, such as the auto-driving car and some interesting real-time mobile applications. Due to the limited processing capacity and battery in these devices, trained CNNs with similar performance but fewer parameters are much more preferred because they require less computational resource and the energy consumption. In addition, similar performance of the individuals are also found with different lengths of the basic layers, and there are multiple pieces of hardware that have been especially designed to speed the primitive operations in CNNs, such as the specialized hardware for convolutional operations. In this regard, the proposed EvoCNN method could give manufacturers more choices to make a decision based on their own preferences. If the traditional approaches are employed here, it is difficult to find out such models at a single run. VII. C ONCLUSIONS  AND  F UTURE W ORK  The goal of the paper was to develop a new evolutionary approach to automatically evolving the architectures and weights of CNNs for image classification problems. This goal has been successfully achieved by proposing a new representation for weight initialization strategy, a new encoding scheme of variable-length chromosomes, a new genetic operator, a slacked binary tournament selection, and an efficient fitness  evaluation method. This approach was examined and compared with 22 peer competitors including the most state-ofthe-are algorithms on nine benchmark datasets commonly used in deep learning. The experimental results show that the proposed EvoCNN method significantly outperforms all of these existing algorithms on almost all these datasets in terms of their best classification performance. Furthermore, the mean classification error rate of the proposed algorithm is even better than the best of others in many cases. In addition, the model optimized by EvoCNN is with a much smaller number of parameters yet promising best classification performance. Specifically, the model optimized by EvoCNN employs 100 epochs to reach the lowest classification error rate of 5.47% on the Fasion dataset, while the state-of-theart VGG16 employs 200 epochs but 6.50% classification error rate. Findings from the experimental results also suggest that the proposed EvoCNN method could provide more options for the manufacturers that are interested in integrating CNNs into their products with limited computational and battery resources. In this paper, we investigate the proposed EvoCNN method only on the commonly used middle-scale benchmarks. However, large-scale data are also widely exist in the current era of big data. Because evaluating only one epoch on these largescale data would require significant computational resource and take a long period, the proposed fitness evaluation method is not suitable for them unless a huge amount computational resources are available. In the future, we will put effort on efficient fitness evaluation techniques. In addition, we will also investigate evolutionary algorithms for recurrent neural networks, which are powerful tools for addressing time-dependent data, such as the voice and video data. R EFERENCES [1] D. CireşAn, U. Meier, J. Masci, and J. Schmidhuber, “Multi-column deep neural network for traffic sign classification,” Neural Networks, vol. 32, pp. 333–338, 2012. [2] F. Ning, D. Delhomme, Y. LeCun, F. Piano, L. Bottou, and P. E. Barbano, “Toward automatic phenotyping of developing embryos from videos,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 1360–1371, 2005. [3] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2012, pp. 1097–1105. [4] D. H. Hubel and T. N. Wiesel, “Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional architecture in the cat’s visual cortex,” The Journal of Physiology, vol. 160, no. 1, pp. 106–154, 1962. [5] Y. LeCun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard, W. Hubbard, and L. D. Jackel, “Backpropagation applied to handwritten zip code recognition,” Neural Computation, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 541–551, 1989. [6] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 86, no. 11, pp. 2278–2324, 1998. [7] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learning representations by back-propagating errors,” Cognitive Modeling, vol. 5, no. 3, p. 1, 1988. [8] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014. [9] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.  [10] H. Bourlard and Y. Kamp, “Auto-association by multilayer perceptrons and singular value decomposition,” Biological Cybernetics, vol. 59, no. 4-5, pp. 291–294, 1988. [11] G. E. Hinton and R. S. Zemel, “Autoencoders, minimum description length, and helmholtz free energy,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3–3, 1994. [12] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov, “Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks,” Science, vol. 313, no. 5786, pp. 504–507, 2006. [13] J. Bergstra and Y. Bengio, “Random search for hyper-parameter optimization,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 13, no. Feb, pp. 281–305, 2012. [14] C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. Williams, Gaussian processes for machine learning. MIT press Cambridge, 2006, vol. 1. [15] J. Močkus, “On bayesian methods for seeking the extremum,” in Optimization Techniques IFIP Technical Conference. Springer, 1975, pp. 400–404. [16] J. S. Bergstra, R. Bardenet, Y. Bengio, and B. Kégl, “Algorithms for hyper-parameter optimization,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2011, pp. 2546–2554. [17] F. Hutter, H. H. Hoos, and K. Leyton-Brown, “Sequential model-based optimization for general algorithm configuration.” LION, vol. 5, pp. 507– 523, 2011. [18] J. Beck and T. Fiala, “integer-making theorems,” Discrete Applied Mathematics, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 1981. [19] J. Halton and G. Smith, “Radical inverse quasi-random point sequence, algorithm 247,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 7, p. 701, 1964. [20] E. I. Atanassov, A. Karaivanova, and S. Ivanovska, “Tuning the generation of sobol sequence with owen scrambling.” in Large-Scale Scientific Computing. Springer, 2009, pp. 459–466. [21] B. Baker, O. Gupta, N. Naik, and R. Raskar, “Designing neural network architectures using reinforcement learning,” International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. [22] D. Ashlock, Evolutionary computation for modeling and optimization. Springer Science & Business Media, 2006. [23] T. Back, Evolutionary algorithms in theory and practice: evolution strategies, evolutionary programming, genetic algorithms. Oxford university press, 1996. [24] M. Mitchell, An introduction to genetic algorithms. MIT press, 1998. [25] X. Yao, “Evolving artificial neural networks,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 87, no. 9, pp. 1423–1447, 1999. [26] G. Miller, “Designing neural networks using genetic algorithms,” Proceedings of ICGA-89, 1989. [27] K. O. Stanley and R. Miikkulainen, “Evolving neural networks through augmenting topologies,” Evolutionary computation, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 99–127, 2002. [28] K. O. Stanley, D. B. D’Ambrosio, and J. Gauci, “A hypercube-based encoding for evolving large-scale neural networks,” Artificial life, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 185–212, 2009. [29] K. O. Stanley, “Compositional pattern producing networks: A novel abstraction of development,” Genetic programming and evolvable machines, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 131–162, 2007. [30] J. K. Pugh and K. O. Stanley, “Evolving multimodal controllers with hyperneat,” in Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation. ACM, 2013, pp. 735–742. [31] M. Kim and L. Rigazio, “Deep clustered convolutional kernels,” in Feature Extraction: Modern Questions and Challenges, 2015, pp. 160– 172. [32] C. Fernando, D. Banarse, M. Reynolds, F. Besse, D. Pfau, M. Jaderberg, M. Lanctot, and D. Wierstra, “Convolution by evolution: Differentiable pattern producing networks,” in Proceedings of the 2016 on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. ACM, 2016, pp. 109–116. [33] B. Zoph and Q. V. Le, “Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01578, 2016. [34] B. Baker, O. Gupta, N. Naik, and R. Raskar, “Designing neural network architectures using reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02167, 2016. [35] P. Verbancsics and J. Harguess, “Generative neuroevolution for deep learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5355, 2013. [36] E. Real, S. Moore, A. Selle, S. Saxena, Y. L. Suematsu, Q. Le, and A. Kurakin, “Large-scale evolution of image classifiers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01041, 2017.  [37] X. Glorot, A. Bordes, and Y. Bengio, “Deep sparse rectifier neural networks,” in Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2011, pp. 315–323. [38] X. Glorot and Y. Bengio, “Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural networks,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2010, pp. 249–256. [39] A. L. Hodgkin and A. F. Huxley, “A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve,” The Journal of physiology, vol. 117, no. 4, pp. 500–544, 1952. [40] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks,” in European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2014, pp. 818–833. [41] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with convolutions,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015, pp. 1–9. [42] M. N. Omidvar, X. Li, Y. Mei, and X. Yao, “Cooperative co-evolution with differential grouping for large scale optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 378–393, 2014. [43] Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent, “Representation learning: A review and new perspectives,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1798–1828, 2013. [44] Y. Bengio and O. Delalleau, “On the expressive power of deep architectures,” in International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory. Springer, 2011, pp. 18–36. [45] O. Delalleau and Y. Bengio, “Shallow vs. deep sum-product networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2011, pp. 666– 674. [46] A. Blumer, A. Ehrenfeucht, D. Haussler, and M. K. Warmuth, “Occam’s razor,” Information Processing Letters, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 377–380, 1987. [47] K. Deb and R. B. Agrawal, “Simulated binary crossover for continuous search space,” Complex Systems, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1–15, 1994. [48] K. Deb, Multi-objective optimization using evolutionary algorithms. John Wiley & Sons, 2001, vol. 16. [49] H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. Vollgraf, “Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017. [50] H. Larochelle, D. Erhan, A. Courville, J. Bergstra, and Y. Bengio, “An empirical evaluation of deep architectures on problems with many factors of variation,” in Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Machine Learning. ACM, 2007, pp. 473–480. [51] F. N. Iandola, S. Han, M. W. Moskewicz, K. Ashraf, W. J. Dally, and K. Keutzer, “Squeezenet: Alexnet-level accuracy with 50x fewer parameters and < 0.5 mb model size,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07360, 2016. [52] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014. [53] S. Rifai, P. Vincent, X. Muller, X. Glorot, and Y. Bengio, “Contractive auto-encoders: Explicit invariance during feature extraction,” in Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2011, pp. 833–840. [54] K. Sohn and H. Lee, “Learning invariant representations with local transformations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6418, 2012. [55] K. Sohn, G. Zhou, C. Lee, and H. Lee, “Learning and selecting features jointly with point-wise gated boltzmann machines,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, 2013, pp. 217–225. [56] J. Bruna and S. Mallat, “Invariant scattering convolution networks,” IEEE transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1872–1886, 2013. [57] T.-H. Chan, K. Jia, S. Gao, J. Lu, Z. Zeng, and Y. Ma, “Pcanet: A simple deep learning baseline for image classification?” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 5017–5032, 2015. [58] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182–197, 2002. [59] G. E. Hinton, “A practical guide to training restricted boltzmann machines,” in Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade. Springer, 2012, pp. 599–619. [60] M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro, G. S. Corrado, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin et al., “Tensorflow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous distributed systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.04467, 2016.  [61] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015, pp. 448–456. [62] Y. Jia, E. Shelhamer, J. Donahue, S. Karayev, J. Long, R. Girshick, S. Guadarrama, and T. Darrell, “Caffe: Convolutional architecture for fast feature embedding,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on Multimedia. ACM, 2014, pp. 675–678. [63] T. Chen, M. Li, Y. Li, M. Lin, N. Wang, M. Wang, T. Xiao, B. Xu, C. Zhang, and Z. Zhang, “Mxnet: A flexible and efficient machine learning library for heterogeneous distributed systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.01274, 2015.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 9. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
