Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_5792

Abstract:
The Dynamics of Rank-Maximal and Popular Matchings∗ Pratik Ghosal  †  Adam Kunysz‡  Katarzyna Paluch§  arXiv:1703.10594v2 [cs.DS] 20 Aug 2017  August 22, 2017  Abstract Given a bipartite graph, where the two sets of vertices are applicants and posts and ranks on the edges represent preferences of applicants over posts, a rank-maximal matching is one in which the maximum number of applicants is matched to their rank one posts and subject to this condition, the maximum number of applicants is matched √ to their rank two posts, and so on. A rank-maximal matching can be computed in O(min(c n, n)m) time, where n denotes the number of applicants, m the number of edges and c the maximum rank of an edge in an optimal solution [9]. We study the dynamic version of the problem in which a new applicant or post may be added to the graph and we would like to maintain a rank-maximal matching. We show that after the arrival of one vertex, we are always able to update the existing rank-maximal matching in O(min(cn, n2 ) + m) time; moreover, by the application of just one alternating path. The time bound can be considered optimal under the circumstances, as improving it would imply a better running time for the rank-maximal matching problem. Additionally, our solution has the property that enables to minimize the number of needed changes. As a by-product we also get an analogous O(m) result for the dynamic version of the (one-sided) popular matching problem.  1  Introduction  We consider the dynamic version of the rank-maximal matching problem. In the rank-maximal matching problem we are given a bipartite graph G = (A ∪ P, E), where A is a set of applicants, P is a set of posts and edges have ranks. An edge (a, p) has rank i if the post p is one of the applicant a’s ith choices. A matching of the graph G is said to be rank-maximal if it matches the maximum number of applicants to their rank one posts and subject to this condition, it matches the maximum number of applicants to their rank two posts, and so on. A rank-maximal matching can √ be computed in O(min(c n, n)m) time, where n denotes the number of applicants, m the number of edges and c the maximum rank of an edge in an optimal solution [9]. In the dynamic variant of the problem a new vertex may be added to the graph and we would like to maintain a rank-maximal matching. When the new vertex v is added to the graph G we assume that the graph G itself does not change. In particular, if a new post p arrives, the applicants of G cannot change their preferences over posts that are already included in G. Let us call the graph G extended by v and the edges incident to v as the graph H. In order to have a rank-maximal matching of H, we would like to be able to transform a rank-maximal matching M of G into a ∗  Partly supported by Polish National Science Center grant UMO-2013/11/B/ST6/01748 University of Wroclaw, Wroclaw, Poland. pratikghosal20082@gmail.com ‡ University of Wroclaw, Wroclaw, Poland. aku@cs.uni.wroc.pl § University of Wroclaw, Wroclaw, Poland. abraka@cs.uni.wroc.pl  †  1  rank-maximal matching N of H, making only the smallest needed number of changes. In some cases a rank-maximal matching of G is also rank-maximal in H. We design an algorithm that updates M by an application of just one alternating path P , i.e., P is such that M ⊕ P = (M \ P ) ∪ (P \ M ) is a rank-maximal matching of H. To be able to compute P efficiently, we need access to the reduced graphs G01 , G02 , . . . , G0c of G (the notion is defined in [9] and also recalled in Section 2) and their Edmonds-Gallai decompositions. We show that we can compute a required alternating path P as well as update the reduced graphs H10 , H20 , . . . , Hc0 0 of H and their Edmonds-Gallai decompositions in O(min(cn, n2 ) + m) time. The result may seem rather surprising. For comparison, let us note that it is much easier to update the matching gradually - separately in each of the graphs Hi that consists of edges of rank at most i. In such approach, however, it is required to compute and apply r alternating paths. Each such computation and update of the reduced graph Hi0 can be carried out in O(n + m) time and thus the overall running time is O(r(n + m)). This is how the problem is dealt with in a recent paper by Nimbhorkar and Rameshvar [12]. Observe that our algorithm is significantly faster than the one in [12] and the improvement may be of the order Ω(m) if r is of the order Ω(m). Additionally, our solution has the property of practical relevance that enables to minimize the number of needed changes - namely from all alternating paths such that M ⊕ P is a rank-maximal matching of the new graph, we are able to find the shortest one. The construction of our algorithm requires a good grasp of the properties of the Edmonds-Gallai decomposition and a knowledge of the structure of rank-maximal matchings. The popular matching problem in the one-sided version is defined as follows. The input is the same as in the rank-maximal matching problem - we are given a bipartite graph G, in which the vertices of one side of the graph express their preferences over the vertices of the other side. The goal is to find a popular matching in G, if it exists. A matching M is said to popular if there exists no other matching M 0 such that M 0 is more popular than M . A matching M 0 is more popular than M if the number of applicants preferring M 0 to M is greater than the number of applicants preferring M to M 0 and an applicant a prefers M 0 to M 0 if (i) he is matched in M 0 and unmatched in M or (ii) he prefers the post p assigned to him in M 0 to the one he gets in M . Not every instance of the √ problem admits a popular matching. Nevertheless, Abraham et al. [2] gave an O( nm) algorithm that computes a popular matching, if it exists. The algorithm is in a certain sense similar to the one computing a rank-maximal matching. It consists of two phases that are the same as in the algorithm for rank-maximal matchings, but the edges participating in the second phase are selected in some special way. To obtain a solution for a dynamic version of the popular matching problem, in which new vertices may be added to the graph, we can directly use the algorithm for the dynamic version of the rank-maximal matching by redefining appropriately rank two edges. Thus we are able to update a popular matching in O(m) time after the arrival of a new vertex. The algorithm for updating a rank-maximal matching can be also used for updating a bounded unpopularity matching in the same time bound of O(min(cn, n2 ) + m) [7]. There are many real world applications of this algorithm. Let us assume that there is a company that recruits new employees each year and each recruited applicant has a preference list on the posts. A central authority matches each applicant with a post. There is already a existing matching from the previous year. It is not efficient to calculate the matching from scratch every year. It is efficient if we can update the existing matching from the previous year when we calculate the new matching. This is the motivation behind the dynamic matching problem. The rank maximal matching and the popular matching are two well known optimality criterion when we have a bipartite graph with one sided preference list. We combine these two properties and give a dynamic matching algorithm that works for both rank maximal and popular matching algorithm. This is the main motivation behind our problem. Previous work A rank-maximal matching can be found via a relatively straightforward 2  reduction to a maximum weight matching. The running time of the resulting algorithm is √ O(r2 nm log n), where r denotes the maximal value of a rank, if we use the Gabow-Tarjan algorithm, or O(rn(m + n log n)) for the Fredman-Tarjan algorithm. The first algorithm for rankmaximal matchings was given by Irving in [8] for the version without ties and with running time of O(d2 n3 ), where d denotes the maximum degree of an applicant in the graph (thus d = c). The √ already mentioned [9] gives a combinatorial algorithm that runs in O(min(n, c n)m) time (and not √ O(min(n + r, c n)m)). The capacitated and weighted versions were considered, respectively, in [13] and [10]. A switching graph characterisation of the set of all rank-maximal matchings is described in [6]. Independently of our work, in a recent paper [12] Nimbhorkar and Rameshvar also study the dynamic version of the rank-maximal matching problem and develop an O(r(n + m)) algorithm for updating a rank-maximal matching after the addition or deletion of a vertex or edge. Related work Matchings under preferences in the dynamic setting have been studied under different notions of optimality. In [11] McCutchen introduced the notion of unpopularity factor and showed that it is NP-hard to compute a least unpopular matching in one-sided instances. Bhattacharya et. al. [4] gave an algorithm to maintain matchings with unpopularity factor (∆ + k) by making an amortized number of O(∆ + ∆2 /k) changes per round, for any k > 0 where ∆ denotes the maximum degree of any agent in any round. Note that this is the number of changes made to the matching and not the update time, which is much higher and requires a series of computations of a maximum weight matching. In [3] Abraham and Kavitha describe the notion of a so called voting path. A voting path is a sequence of matchings which starts from an arbitrary matching, and ends at a popular matching and each matching in the sequence is more popular than the previous one. The authors showed that in a one-sided setting with ties there always exists a voting path of length at most two. They also show how to compute such paths in linear time, given a popular matching in the graph, what allows them to maintain a popular matching under a sequence of deletions and additions of vertices √ to the graph, however, in (O( nm) time per each update. √ Another example is the notion of Pareto optimality. In [1] authors gave an O( nm) for computing Pareto optimal matchings. In [5] Fleischer and Wang studied Pareto optimal matchings in the dynamic setting. The authors gave a linear time algorithm to maintain a maximum size Pareto matching under a sequence of deletions and additions of vertices.  2  Preliminaries  Let G = (A ∪ P, E) be a bipartite graph and let M be a maximum matching of G. We say that a path S is M -alternating if its edges belong alternately to M and E \ M . We say that a vertex v is free or unmatched in M if no edge of M is incident to v. An M -alternating path is said to be M -augmenting (or augmenting if the matching is clear from the context) if it starts and ends at an unmatched vertex. Given a maximum matching M we can partition the vertex set of G into three disjoint sets E, O and U . Nodes in E, O and U are called even, odd and unreachable respectively and are defined as follows. A vertex v ∈ V (G) is even (resp. odd ) if there is an even (resp. odd) length alternating path in G with respect to M from an unmatched vertex to v. A vertex v ∈ V (G) is unreachable if there is no alternating path in G with respect to M from an unmatched vertex to v. For vertex sets A and B, we call an edge connecting a vertex in A with a vertex in B an AB edge. The following lemma is well-known in matching theory. Lemma 1. Edmonds-Gallai decomposition (EG-decomposition) [14, 9] 3  Let M be a maximum matching in G and let E, O and U be defined as above. 1. The sets E, O, U are pairwise disjoint 2. Let N be any maximum matching in G (a) N defines the same sets E, O and U (b) N contains only U U and OE edges (c) Every vertex in O and every vertex in U is matched by N (d) |N | = |O| + |U |/2 3. There is no EU and no EE edge in G Throughout the paper we consider many graphs at once, thus to avoid confusion, for a given graph G we denote the sets of even, odd and unreachable vertices as E(G), O(G) and U (G) respectively.  2.1  Rank-Maximal Matchings  In this section we briefly recall known facts about rank-maximal matchings (see [9] for more details). An instance of the rank-maximal matching problem is a bipartite graph G = (A ∪ P, E), where A is a set of applicants, P is a set of posts, and E can be partitioned as E = E1 ∪ E2 ∪ . . . ∪ Er . For each i ≤ r the set Ei consists of edges of rank i and r is a maximum rank any applicant assigns to a post. Definition 1. The signature of a matching is defined as an r-tuple ρ(M ) = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xr ), where for each 1 ≤ i ≤ r, xi is the number of applicants a ∈ A such that (a, M (a)) ∈ Ei . We define an ordering of matchings imposed by the lexicographical order of their signatures. Let M , M 0 be two matchings in G. We denote M  M 0 if and only if ρ(M ) lex ρ(M 0 ). A matching M in G is rank-maximal if M has the maximum signature under the ordering . The pseudocode of Irving et al.’s algorithm [9] is denoted as Algorithm 1. √ Theorem 1. [9] Algorithm 1 computes a rank-maximal matching in O(min{c n, n}m) time, where c ≤ r denotes a maximal-rank in the optimal solution. Algorithm 1 for computing a rank-maximal matching 1: procedure RankMaximalMatching(G) 2: G01 ← G1 3: Let M1 be any maximum matching of G01 4: for i = 1, 2, . . . , r do 5: Determine a partition of the vertices of G0i into the sets E(G0i ), O(G0i ) and U (G0i ) 6: Delete all edges in Ej (for j > i) which are incident on nodes in O(G0i ) ∪ U (G0i ). These are the nodes that are matched by every maximum matching in G0i . 7: Delete all O(G0i )O(G0i ) and O(G0i )U (G0i ) edges from G0i . These are the edges that are not used by any maximum matching in G0i . 8: Add the edges in Ei+1 and call the resulting graph G0i+1 . 9: Determine a maximum matching Mi+1 in G0i+1 by augmenting Mi . 10:  return Mr The following invariants of Algorithm 1 are proven in [9]. 4  1. For every 1 ≤ i ≤ r, every rank maximal matching in Gi is contained in G0i . 2. The matching Mi is rank-maximal of Gi , and is a maximum matching in G0i . 3. If a rank-maximal matching in G has signature (s1 , s2 , . . . , si , . . . , sr ) then Mi has signature (s1 , s2 , . . . , si ). 4. The graphs G0i (1 ≤ i ≤ r) constructed during the execution of Algorithm 1 are independent of the rank-maximal matching computed by the algorithm.  2.2  The Dynamic Rank-Maximal Matching Problem  We assume that we have already executed Algorithm 1 on G and computed a rank-maximal matching M . Additionally we store all the structures computed by the algorithm i.e. reduced graphs G0i along with their EG-decompositions and matchings Mi . At some point a new applicant a ∈ / A arrives. Let H = (A ∪ {a} ∪ P, F1 ∪ F2 ∪ . . . ∪ Fr ) be a modified graph obtained by adding an applicant a along with the information about his post preferences to G. Our goal in the dynamic version of the rank-maximal matching problem is to compute a rank-maximal matching in H along with all the auxiliary structures that Algorithm 1 normally computes when it is executed on H. We would like to refrain from executing Algorithm 1 on H and solve the problem more efficiently. Let us for each 1 ≤ i ≤ r denote: Hi = (A ∪ {a} ∪ P, F1 ∪ F2 ∪ . . . ∪ Fi ), Hi0 = (A ∪ {a} ∪ P, F10 ∪ F20 ∪ . . . ∪ Fi0 ) reduced graphs computed by Algorithm and Ni - a rank-maximal matching of Hi . Our goal is to compute graphs Hi0 along with their EG-decompositions and matchings Ni , assuming that we already have graphs G0i , their decompositions and matchings Mi . In order to simplify the notation, we are going to assume that the newly arriving applicant a is already present in V (G) but it is isolated in G.  3  Is M a Rank-Maximal Matching of H?  Before we describe our algorithm for the dynamic rank-maximal matching problem we first introduce and solve a simplified variant of this problem, in order to build some intuition. Our first assumption is that a newly arriving vertex a has only one edge incident on it. We also slightly change our goal. Instead of computing a rank-maximal matching in H we only determine if M is a rank-maximal matching of H. Our goal is to solve this problem in O(m) time. The following is the main theorem of this section: Theorem 2. Assume that we are given reduced graphs G01 , G02 , . . . , G0r+1 , their EG-decompositions and matchings M1 , M2 , . . . , Mr . There is an O(m) time algorithm to determine if Mr is a rankmaximal matching of H. In the following lemma we examine how the maximum matching M in a bipartite graph G and its EG-decomposition change if we add one edge to G. Lemma 2. Let G = (A ∪ P, E) be a bipartite graph, M a maximum matching of G and a ∈ A and p ∈ P two vertices of G such that (a, p) ∈ / E and a has type E in the EG-decomposition of G (a ∈ E(G)). Then the graph J = (A ∪ P, E ∪ (a, p)) has the following properties: 1. If p ∈ E(G), then the edge (a, p) belongs to every maximum matching of J. A maximum matching of J is of size |M | + 1.  5  2. If p ∈ O(G), then the edge (a, p) belongs to some maximum matching of J but not to every one and M remains a maximum matching of J. Additionally, the EG-decomposition of the graph J is the same as that of G. 3. If p ∈ U (G), then the edge (a, p) belongs to some maximum matching of J but not to every one and M remains a maximum matching of J. Additionally, the EG-decomposition of the graph J is different from that of G in the following way. A vertex v ∈ U (G) belongs to E(J) (respectively, O(J)) if there exists an even-length (corr., odd-length) alternating path starting with the edge (a, p) and ending at v. Apart from this every vertex has the same type in the EG-decomposition of G and J, i.e., if v ∈ X(G), then v ∈ X(J), where X ∈ {E, O, U }. We can use the property (3) of Lemma 2 in order to efficiently update the decomposition of the graph G once the edge (a, p), where a ∈ E(G) and p ∈ U (G) is added to G. Below we describe the intuitions behind Algorithm 2. We assume that the newly added edge (a, x) is of rank k.We will show that for each i it is possible to efficiently deduce the structure of Hi0 from the structure of G0i without actually executing Algorithm 1 on H. From the pseudocode of Algorithm 1 we can easily see that for each i such that 1 ≤ i < k we have G0i = Hi0 , and that Mi is a rank-maximal matching of Hi . How do graphs G0k and Hk0 differ when we enter the loop f or in the line 4 of the algorithm during phase k? One can easily see that either G0k + (a, x) = Hk0 or G0k = Hk0 holds. The latter case happens when the edge (a, x) is removed from Fk if in some iteration j < k we have x ∈ / E(G0j ). Tk−1 From now on we assume that x ∈ i=1 E(G0i ). One can easily check that when we enter the loop f or in the line 4 of Algorithm 1 we have G0k + (a, x) = Hk0 . We can use Lemma 2 to obtain the information about the EG-decomposition of Hk0 from the decomposition of G0k . There are three cases depending on the type of x in G0k : (1) If x ∈ E(G0k ), then (a, x) belongs to every maximum matching of Hk0 . From invariants (1 − 4) of the Algorithm 1, (a, x) belongs to every rank-maximal matching of H. (2) If x ∈ U (G0k ), then the EG-decomposition of Hk0 can be easily inferred from the EGdecomposition of G0k . (3) If x ∈ O(G0k ), then the EG-decomposition of Hk0 is the same as that of G0k . In case (1) we can simply halt the algorithm and claim that M is not a rank-maximal matching of H. Let us consider the case (2). From Lemma 2 we can see that some vertices may belong to U (G0k ) ∩ E(Hk0 ) or U (G0k ) ∩ O(Hk0 ). If a vertex v ∈ U (G0k ) ∩ E(Hk0 ) (resp. v ∈ U (G0k ) ∩ O(Hk0 )) then we say that v changes its type from U to E (resp. O) in the phase k. What implications does this fact have on the execution of Algorithm 1 on H? Note that in lines 6 and 7 of Algorithm 1 we remove some edges incident to vertices of types O and U . If v changes its type from U to E in phase k then some edges incident to v are deleted in the phase k during the execution of Algorithm 1 on G, but these edges are not deleted in the phase k during the execution of Algorithm 1 on H. We call such edges activated edges and in the pseudocode we denote the set of these edges as AEu . Additionally vertices which change type from either U or O to E are called activated vertices. The set of such vertices is denoted as AV . It remains to consider the case (3). We already know from Lemma 2 that the presence of (a, x) in Hk0 does not affect its EG-decomposition. It turns out however that if for some k 0 > k we have x ∈ U (G0k0 ) but x ∈ O(G0k0 −1 ) then the presence of (a, x) in H might affect the EG-decomposition 6  of Hk0 0 , but will not have any impact on the decompositions of graphs Hl0 for k < l < k 0 . Such edges are also marked as activated edges and added to AEo . The main idea behind the remaining part of the algorithm is to maintain sets of activated edges so that in any phase k 0 > k a reduced graph Hk0 0 is obtained from G0k0 by adding to this graph a certain subset of edges activated in phases preceding the phase k. The EG-decomposition of Hk0 0 is then computed with the aid of decompositions of G0k0 and Hk0 0 −1 . The main difficulty comes from the fact that in the phase k graphs G0k and Hk0 differ by exactly one edge, whereas in a phase k 0 (k 0 > k) Hk0 0 may potentially contain multiple activated edges. A suitable generalisation of Lemma 2 allows us to deal with this problem. Lemma 3. Let G = (A ∪ P, E) be a bipartite graph, M a maximum matching of G and E 0 = {(a1 , p1 ), (a2 , p2 ), . . . (as , ps )} the set of edges none of which belongs to E. Additionally each ai belongs to A ∩ E(G), each pi belongs to P . The edges in E 0 need not be vertex disjoint. Let G0 = (A ∪ P, E ∪ E 0 ). There is an algorithm which can correctly distinguish between the following two situations: (A) Maximum matching of G0 is of size at least |M | + 1. (B) M remains a maximum matching of G0 . If (A) occurs then the algorithm runs in O(m) time. If (B) occurs then the algorithm additionally determines the EG-decomposition of G0 and runs in time O(|X|), where X = {(x, y) ∈ E ∪ E 0 : x ∈ U (G), x ∈ / U (G0 )}. Note that we do not prove any theorems from this section, as the correctness of Algorithm 2 is implied by the correctness of Algorithm 3, which is proven in the paper. Alive(i) the set of vertices that are alive in G0i at the beginning of phase i, i.e., v ∈ Alive(i) Ti−1 denotes 0 iff v ∈ j=1 E(Gj ).  4  Augmentation  In this section we want to look closer at the situation when a rank-maximal matching of G is not a rank-maximal matching of H. This happens when at some point Algorithm 2 in line 9 encounters an edge (v, w) such that v belongs to U (G0i ) ∩ E(Hi0 ) and w belongs to E(G0i ) and thus it executes line 10 and outputs ”Mr is not a rank-maximal matching of H”. In other words, it occurs when the maximum matching in the reduced graph Hi0 is larger by one than the maximum matching in the reduced graph G0i . Let us examine two such examples depicted in Figure 1. Here the edge (a, x) is of rank 1 and the edge (a1 , p1 ) of rank 2. Vertex a1 belongs to U (G02 ) ∩ E(H20 ) and p1 belongs to E(G02 ) - thus Algorithm 2 outputs the answer ”Mr is not a rank-maximal matching of H”. This means that in H20 there exists an M2 -augmenting path containing the edges (a, x) and (a1 , p1 ). However, in order to obtain a rank-maximal matching N of H, we would like to carry out the augmentation as late as possible. In fact, once we know that a rank-maximal matching of G is not a rank-maximal matching of H and the augmentation in some phase i is inevitable, we want to postpone augmenting Ni and thus changing N till the last phase. In the first example of Figure 1, we can notice that the vertex p1 belongs to E(G0i ) for every i such that 2 ≤ i ≤ 4 and that the graph G04 together with the edges (a, x) and (a1 , p1 ) still contains an augmenting path containing (a, x) and (a1 , p1 ). What is more, this augmenting path  7  Algorithm 2 for checking if Mr is a rank-maximal matching of H 1: C ← {a0 } (a new vertex) 2: AV ← {a0 } activated vertices 3: AE ← ∅ activated edges 4: i ← 1 5: while i ≤ r do 6: R ← G0i \ C 7: for all a ∈ AV do 8: AE ← AE ∪ {(a, p) ∈ F̃i : a ∈ AV ∧ p ∈ Alive(i)} 9: if there exists (a, p) ∈ AE such that p ∈ E(G0i ) then 10: return Mr is not a rank-maximal matching of H 11: else 12: H̃i ← C ∪ R ∪ AE 13: AEu ← {(a, p) ∈ AE : p ∈ U (G0i )} 14: for all S : S is an even-length Mi -alt. path in H̃i between a0 and a ∈ U (G0i ) do 15: C ←C ∪S 16: AV ← AV ∪ {a} 17: AEo ← {(a, p) ∈ AE ∪ G0i : a ∈ C ∧ p ∈ O(G0i )} 18: AE ← AE ∪ AEo \ AEu 19: i←i+1 20: return Mr is a rank-maximal matching of H was already present in the graph G02 ∪ {(a, x), (a1 , p1 )}. We can check that after applying it we obtain a rank-maximal matching of H4 . In the second example of Figure 1, the vertex p1 belongs to E(G0i ) for every i such that 2 ≤ i ≤ 4 and it belongs to U (G05 ). Thus G05 ∪ {(a, x), (a1 , p1 )} does not contain any augmenting paths and we are stuck with a matching M5 which is not rank-maximal in H5 . We observe that if we had augmented M4 in the graph G04 ∪{(a, x), (a1 , p1 )} obtaining a rank-maximal matching N4 of H4 , then one of the edges of rank 5 would not be present in the maximum matching of G05 ∪ {(a, x), (a1 , p1 )} if we computed it by augmenting N4 . So, in order to get a rank-maximal matching of H5 from M5 we should ”undo” one of the augmentations that was carried out in phase 5. Using matching terminology we should apply any even length M5 -alternating path starting at a and containing (a1 , p1 ) and one of the edges of rank 5 belonging to M5 . Later on, in Theorem 3 we prove that in such two types of scenarios the described approach is correct, i.e. although we discover that M is not a rank-maximal matching of H already in some phase i, we can afford to wait till some later phase j and apply either an augmenting path or an even length alternating path in the graph G0j ∪ Fi0 . The correctness of this approach is based on the following two lemmas. Lemma 4. Let G = (A ∪ P, E) be a bipartite graph, M its maximum matching and C a connected component of G that contains exactly one free vertex of A in M . Let E1 = {(a1 , p1 ), (a2 , p2 ), . . . (ar , pr )} denote a new set of edges such that each ai belongs to C ∩ E(G) and no pi belongs to C. Let G1 denote the graph G ∪ E1 . Let n0 denote the number of edges of a maximum matching of G. Assume also that each maximum matching of G1 is computed by augmenting a maximum matching of G. Then we have: 1. If there exists i such that pi ∈ E(G), then: 8  p5 1 a5 1 1 a  1 x  p2 5 a3  2 p1 a1 2 p 2 1 p2 1  1 p4  a  1 a4  a1  x 1  1  1 2  a2 p1  1 p3 1 a4  1  a3 4  p3  Figure 1: Thick edges belong to the matching. (a) Every maximum matching of G1 contains n0 edges of E and one edge of E1 . (b) The edge (ai , pi ) ∈ E1 such that pi ∈ E(G) belongs to some maximum matching of G1 . (c) No edge (aj , pj ) ∈ E1 such that pj ∈ O(G) ∪ U (G) belongs to a maximum matching of G1 . (d) (i) Each vertex of G \ C either has the same type in G and G1 or (ii) it belongs to E(G) ∪ O(G) and U (G1 ). Each vertex of C belongs to U (G1 ) or (E(G) ∩ O(G1 )) ∪ (O(G) ∩ E(G1 )). (e) No edge (a, p) of G such that one of its endpoints belongs to O(G) and the other to O(G) ∪ U (G) belongs to any maximum matching of G1 . 2. If there exists no i such that pi ∈ E(G), then: (a) (i) Each vertex of G \ C either has the same type in G and G1 or (ii) it belongs to U (G) and E(G1 ) ∪ O(G1 ). Each vertex of U (G) that belongs also to E(G1 ) ∪ O(G1 ) is reachable in G1 from a0 by an even/odd length M -alternating path. Each vertex of C has the same type in G and G1 . (b) An edge (a, p) such that a ∈ U (G) ∩ E(G1 ) and p ∈ O(G) belongs to some maximum matching of G1 . Every other edge (a, p) of G such that one of its endpoints belongs to O(G) and the other to O(G) ∪ U (G) belongs to no maximum matching of G1 . We say that a graph G is reduced if it does not contain any edge (u, v) such that either both u and v belong to O(G) or exactly one of the vertices belongs to U (G) and the other one to O(G). Lemma 5. Let G = (A ∪ P, E) be a reduced bipartite graph and C a connected component of G that contains exactly one free vertex of A in a maximum matching of G. 9  H  E1  E2  G\C  C  G\C  G1  G2  Figure 2: The pictorial representation of G, G1 , G2 and H as described in Lemma 5 Let E1 = {(a1 , p1 ), (a2 , p2 ), . . . (ar , pr )} and E2 denote two new sets of edges such that each endpoint of a new edge belongs to E(G). Also, each edge of E1 connects a vertex of C ∩ A with a vertex not contained in C and each edge of E2 connects two vertices not belonging to C. Let G1 , G2 and H denote respectively G ∪ E1 , G ∪ E2 and G ∪ E1 ∪ E2 . We assume that we calculate maximum matchings of G1 and G2 by augmenting a maximum matching of G. A maximum matching of H is calculated by augmenting a maximum matching of G1 or G2 . M12 is defined as the set of maximum matchings of H that we get from augmenting a maximum matching of G1 . Similarly, M21 denotes the set of maximum matching of H that we get from augmenting a maximum matching of G2 . Let n0 denote the number of edges of a maximum matching of G and n2 the number of edges of E2 contained in a maximum matching of G2 after we augment the maximum matching of G to get a maximum matching of G2 . Then we have: 1. If there exists i such that pi ∈ E(G2 ), then every matching of M12 ∪ M21 contains n0 edges of E, n2 edges of E2 and one edge of E1 . 2. If there exists no i such that pi ∈ E(G2 ), then: (a) A matching of M12 contains n0 edges of E, n2 − 1 edges of E2 and one edge of E1 . On the other hand, every matching of M21 is a maximum matching of G2 . (b) A matching of M12 that contains (aj , pj ) can be obtained from any matching of M21 by applying any even length alternating path in H starting at a free vertex of C, containing (aj , pj ) and an odd number of edges from E2 . (c) Additionally, if pj ∈ O(G2 ), then the even length alternating path ends at a vertex v ∈ E(G)∩E(G2 ). Also the endpoint that alternating path belongs to E(H)∩E(G1 )∩E(G). Conversely, for every alternating path in H that starts at a free vertex of C, contains (aj , pj ) and ends at a vertex v ∈ E(G) ∩ E(G2 ), it holds that it contains an odd number of edges from E2 and has even length.  5  Algorithm for updating a rank-maximal matching  In this section we present the algorithm for computing a rank-maximal matching of H. Its pseudocode is written as Algorithm 3. In Algorithm 3 for each 1 ≤ i ≤ r, a matching Mi denotes a rank-maximal 10  matching of Gi . Also, for each r ≥ j > i a matching Mi is contained in Mj . By phase i of Algorithm 3 we mean an i-ith iteration of the loop for from line 4. By Ci and Ri we denote C or R, respectively, at the beginning of phase i. By phase 0 we denote the part of Algorithm 3 before the start of phase 1. Depending on whether during phase i lines 9-14 or 16-18 are carried out, the phase is either called augmenting or non-augmenting. We say that a vertex v is active in G0i if v ∈ O(G0i ) ∪ E(G0i ) and not active or inactive (or unreachable) otherwise. In Algorithm 3 the subgraph Ci may be viewed as the subgraph that encompasses the (”positive”) changes between graphs Hi0 and G0i . Ci always contains a new vertex a0 that belongs to H and not to G as well as vertices that are at this point unreachable in G, i.e., they belong to U (G0i ). If there exist vertices that are active in Hi0 but inactive in G0i , then they belong to Ci . Also, any vertex of Ci is active in some graph Hj0 such that j ≤ i but inactive in G0j . Any edge that belongs to Hi0 \ G0i is either contained in Ci or one of its endpoints belongs to Ci . Each such edge belongs to the set AE at some point and is called an activated edge. The subgraph Ci does not encompass all changes - in particular, it may happen that some vertex v ∈ / Ci is active in G0i but unreachable in Hi0 or that 0 0 some edge belongs to Gi \ Ci but not to Hi . During phase i, we construct a graph H̃i that contains every edge belonging to some rankmaximal matching of Hi . At the beginning of phase i, the set AV contains activated vertices, each of which is alive in Hi0 but not in G0i . We later show in Theorem 3 that a rank-maximal matching of Hi may be obtained from a rank-maximal matching Mi by the application of any alternating path si ∈ Si and that every matching obtained in this way is rank-maximal. The paths si of Si are defined as follows. Definition 2. For each i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , r} we define the set Si of Mi -alternating paths contained in H̃i , each of which starts at a0 . Let AV denote the set AV at the end of a respective phase i. If at the end of phase i of Algorithm 3 there exists an edge of AE that connects a vertex of C with a vertex of E(G0i ), then si ∈ Si iff it is an Mi -augmenting path ending at any free vertex in Mi . (Each such path contains exactly one edge of AE.) Otherwise, si ∈ Si iff (i) it is an Mi -alternating path ending at any vertex of AV (each such path contains exactly one edge of AEu or is a path of length 0) or (ii) it is an Mi -alternating path ending at any vertex of Alive(i) (each such path contains exactly one edge of AEo ). In order to obtain a rank-maximal matching Nr that differs from Mr in the smallest possible way, we choose that path sr ∈ Sr which is shortest. Theorem 3. For each i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , r} it holds: 1. H̃i contains every edge belonging to some rank-maximal matching of Hi . 2. Ci has the properties of C from Lemma 4 with respect to the matching Mi . Also, Ci contains no vertex that is active in G0i and at the beginning of phase i but after the execution of line 6 each edge of AE connects a vertex of Ci with a vertex of Ri . 3. For each si ∈ Si a matching Mi ⊕ si is a rank-maximal matching of Hi and a maximum matching of H̃i . 4. Each rank-maximal matching Ni of Hi is such that Mi ⊕ Ni contains one of the paths si ∈ Si . 5. At the end of phase i − 1 the set AV contains all vertices that are active in Hi0 and not active in G0i . 11  Algorithm 3 for computing a rank-maximal matching of H 1: C ← {a0 } (a new vertex) 2: AV ← {a0 } activated vertices 3: AE ← ∅ activated edges 4: for i = 1, 2, . . . , r do 5: R ← G0i \ C 6: AE ← AE ∪ {(a, p) ∈ F̃i : a ∈ AV ∧ p ∈ Alive(i)} 7: H̃i ← C ∪ R ∪ AE 8: if each (a, p) ∈ AE is such that p ∈ U (G0i ) ∪ O(G0i ) then 9: AEu ← {(a, p) ∈ AE : p ∈ U (G0i )} 10: for all every even-length Mi -alternating path S in H̃i between a0 and a ∈ U (G0i ) that contains an odd number of edges of (R ∩ Ei ) \ AE do 11: C ←C ∪S 12: AV ← AV ∪ {a} 13: AEo ← {(a, p) ∈ AE ∪ G0i : a ∈ C ∧ p ∈ O(G0i )} 14: AE ← AE ∪ AEo \ AEu 15: else (there exists (a, p) ∈ AE such that p ∈ E(G0i )) 16: for all (a, p) ∈ AE such that p ∈ O(G0i ) ∪ U (G0i ) do 17: AE ← AE \ {(a, p)} 18: AV ← ∅ 19: Nr ← Mr ⊕ sr , where sr - any path belonging to Sr 20: return Nr Proof. Claim 1. Suppose that i > 1 and H̃i contains every edge belonging to some rank-maximal matching of Hi . Then a maximum matching of H̃i that contains a rank-maximal matching of Hi−1 is a rank-maximal matching of Hi . At the end of phase 0, the subgraph C0 as well as the set AV contains exactly one vertex a0 . We can notice that H1 = H̃1 = H10 . Using Lemma 4 it is easy to check that the theorem holds for i = 1. 0 Suppose now that i > 1. We first argue that every edge of Hi0 \ Hi−1 is present in H̃i . Every 0 0 0 edge of Hi \ Hi−1 has both endpoints in the set of alive vertices of Hi . If both endpoints of such an edge belong to Ri , then they are also alive in G0i (a vertex that is not alive in G0i \ Ci is also not alive in Hi0 ) and thus such an edge is included in H̃i . If one of the endpoints v of such edge (v, w) belongs to Ci , then v must belong to the set AV - by the induction hypothesis point 4 and hence edge (v, w) is added to H̃i in line 6. The edges belonging to H̃i−1 \ H̃i are either those belonging to G0i−1 \ G0i or those removed in line 17 during phase i − 1. By Lemma 4 1c,e and 2e no such edge belongs to a maximum matching of H̃i−1 and therefore by the induction hypothesis point 3, no such edge belongs to a rank-maximal matching of Hi−1 . We have thus proved that H̃i contains every edge belonging to some rank-maximal matching of Hi . It is easy to see that Ci satisfies all the properties stated in point 2 of the theorem. We will show now that every matching Mi ⊕ si is a maximum matching of H̃i that contains a rank-maximal matching of Hi−1 . Suppose first that phase (i − 1) is an augmenting phase. Case 1: Phase i is also an augmenting phase. There exists then an edge (a, p) ∈ AE such that 12  p ∈ E(G0i ). We claim that p ∈ E(G0i−1 ). In phase i − 1 the edge (a, p) also belongs to AE. If it were the case that p ∈ / E(G0i−1 ), then (a, p) would have been deleted during phase i − 1 in line 17. Since (a, p) is such that p ∈ E(G0i ), there exists in H̃i an Mi -augmenting path T containing (a, p) that ends at some free vertex p0 in G0i \ Ci . The vertex p0 is also free in G0i−1 \ Ci−1 . If T is contained in H̃i−1 , then by definition of the set Si−1 the path T belongs to Si−1 and thus by induction hypothesis, Mi−1 ⊕ T is a rank maximal matching of Hi−1 . This then would mean that Mi ⊕ T is a rank-maximal matching of Hi , because Mi ⊕ T contains the same number of rank i edges as Mi . Assume then that the path T is not contained in H̃i . Let T 0 denote the maximal subpath of T that starts at a0 and is contained in H̃i−1 . It must end at a vertex p00 that is free in Mi−1 and matched in Mi . We know that Mi−1 ⊕ T 0 is a rank-maximal matching of Hi−1 . The path T 00 = T \ T 0 connects two vertices that are alive in G0i , one of which is free in Mi . Also, T 00 is contained in G0i \ Ci . Therefore, by Theorem 1 of [6], the matching Mi ⊕ T 00 is a rank-maximal matching of Gi . This means that Mi ⊕ T is a rank-maximal matching of Hi . Case 2: Phase i is non-augmenting. Let n0 denote the number of edges of Mi that have rank smaller than i and n2 the number of edges of Mi with rank i. Let us note, that since phase i − 1 is augmenting, each matching Mi−1 ⊕ si−1 contains one edge more than Mi−1 . A maximum matching of H̃i has the same cardinality as Mi . Therefore, a rank-maximal matching of Hi contains at most n2 − 1 edges of rank i. Each si from Si is an even length Mi -alternating path that contains an odd number of edges of rank i. By Lemma 5, the matching Mi ⊕ si is a maximum matching of H̃i that has one edge of AE, n0 edges not belonging to AE and of rank strictly smaller than i and n2 − 1 edges of rank i. Each of the paths si ∈ Si contains some path si−1 ∈ Si−1 . Also each edge of AE belongs to Si ∩ Si−1 . It is so because each edge (a, p) that belongs to AE at the beginning of phase i is such that p ∈ E(G0i−1 ) and thus (a, p) is contained in some si−1 as well as some si . Hence, Mi ⊕ si is a rank maximal matching of Hi . Suppose now that phase i − 1 is non-augmenting and phase i is augmenting. It means that there exists an edge e = (a, p) ∈ AE such that p ∈ E(G0i ). If the edge e did not belong to AE in phase i − 1, it means that a ∈ AV and thus there exists a path si−1 ending at a, whose application to Mi−1 yields a rank-maximal matching of Hi−1 . Also, in G0i \ Ci there exists an even length Mi -alternating path T that starts at p and ends at a free vertex p0 . By Theorem 1 of [6], the matching Mi ⊕ T is rank-maximal in Gi . The edge e clearly has rank i. Therefore Mi ⊕ ({e} ∪ T ∪ si−1 ) is a maximum matching of H̃i that contains a rank-maximal matching of Hi−1 and has one edge of rank i more than Mi - therefore it is rank-maximal in Hi . If the edge e did belong to AE in phase i − 1, then p ∈ O(G0i−1 ). In G0i \ Ci there exists an even length Mi -alternating path T that starts at p and ends at a free vertex p0 . Let T 0 denote the maximal subpath of T starting at p and contained in G0i−1 \ Ci and let T 00 denote T \ T 0 . Let also s denote an Mi -alternating path from a0 to p. We notice that T 0 ends at a vertex p00 alive in G0i−1 and thus Mi−1 ⊕ (s ∪ T 0 ) is rank-maximal in Hi−1 . Let us note that the edge e0 = (p00 , a00 ) is of rank i. Also, Mi ⊕ (T 00 \ e00 ) is rank-maximal in Gi . Therefore Mi ⊕ (s ∪ T ) is rank-maximal in Hi . The analysis of the case when both phases i − 1 and i are non-augmenting is similar and is left for the reader. If phase i is augmenting, then we set the set AV as empty. This is because any vertex a that is alive in Hi0 and thus belongs to E(Hj0 ) for every j < i will belong to O(Hi0 ) ∪ U (Hi0 ) - this follows from Lemma 4 1d. Theorem 4. Algorithm 3 runs in O(min(rn, n2 ) + m) time.  13  3 a2 1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1 a3  2 2 p0  a0 1  a0  a1 1  1  1  2  1  1 2  1  1 3  1  1  1  1 3  1 1  a4 1  1 a5  Figure 3: On the right-hand side there is the graph H obtained by adding the vertex a0 and the edge (a0 , p0 ) to G. The graph H̃2 is presented on the left-hand side. In this particular example the graph on the right-hand side is also equal to H̃3 (i.e. H = H̃3 ). The vertices inside the ellipse form the set C. Label of each edge is equal to its rank. Proof. Without any additional assumptions the running time of Algorithm 3 is O(rn + m). The executions of line 8 and 15 may require O(rn) time as every edge (a, p) may belong to AE for a number of phases and in each one of them we need to check to which of the sets E(G0i ), U (G0i ), O(G0i ) the endpoint p belongs. The rest of the time the algorithm takes is O(m). The runtime of the algorithm may be reduced if we assume that for each vertex v we maintain a list i1 < i2 < . . . < ik which denotes the changes of type among reduced graphs G0i , i.e., v belongs to O(G0i1 ), E(G0i2 ), . . . , U (G0ik ). Each such list has length at most the number of augmentations in G, which is at most n. Theorem 5. Assuming we are given the reduced graphs G01 , . . . , G0r , the reduced graphs of H can be computed O(min(rn, n2 ) + m) time.  6  Example of how Algorithm 3 works  Let us take a look at what Algorithm 3 does when executed on the graph presented on Figure 3. At the beginning of the first iteration C contains only vertex a0 , R contains the rest of the graph. The 14  4  p7  a7  1  1 p8  a6 1  1  p6 1  p1  a0 1  a4  a9 1  1  5  6  p9  1  a3  p5  1  1  p2  a1 1  3  p3  a5  a10  1 a12  1  p10 1  p12  a11  2  Figure 4: The figure presents the graph H which is obtained by adding the edge (a0 , p1 ) to G. Thick edges belong to a rank-maximal matching of G. vertex a0 is added to the set AV . The edge (a0 , p0 ) is added to the set AE of activated edges. Since p0 ∈ U (G01 ), sets C and AV are updated. The set C from now on contains the subgraph inside the ellipse on the left-hand side of Figure 3 and AV contains the vertices a0 and a1 . In order to get a rank maximal matching of H1 , we may apply one of the two alternating paths - each one starts at a0 and one of them finishes at a1 and the other at a0 (a zero-length path). In the second iteration the algorithm first updates the set of activated edges. The updated graph is presented on the left-hand side of Figure 3. At this point the set AE contains two edges incident to a1 and crossing the ellipse. Since both endpoints of edges of AE at this point belong to E(G02 ), the algorithm enters an augmenting phase. The set AV is reset to empty. In order to obtain a rank-maximal matching of H2 any augmenting path of H̃2 may be applied. Sets C and R remain the same. In the third iteration the algorithm first updates the sets AV and C. The updated graph is presented on the right-hand side of Figure 3. Since there are no edges in AE such that both endpoints belong to E(G03 ), the algorithm enters a non-augmenting phase. The set AE contains an edge of rank 2 crossing the ellipse. Vertices which are alive and reachable from a0 after this iteration are denoted as a4 and a5 . In order to obtain a rank-maximal matching of H3 we can either apply an even length alternating path starting at a0 and ending at an alive vertex or apply an even length alternating path starting at a0 and ending at a vertex of AV . Let us now take a look at the example presented on Figure 4. This example gives us an idea about changing from an augmenting phase to a non-augmenting phase and vice versa. After the first iteration, the vertex a0 is an activated vertex and (a0 , p1 ) is an activated edge and the algorithm enters a non-augmenting phase. In the second iteration the edge (a1 , p2 ) of rank 2 becomes activated. Also p2 is an even vertex in G02 , thus the algorithm enters an augmenting phase and a rank-maximum 15  matching in H2 can be obtained by applying the augmenting path containing the edge (a1 , p2 ). The vertex p2 is still reachable from p7 by an even length alternating path in the third iteration. Thus p2 remains even in G03 and in the third iteration algorithm remains in an augmenting phase. In the fourth iteration p2 becomes unreachable in the G04 , so the algorithm enters a nonaugmenting phase. Since p2 is unreachable in the G04 graph, the algorithm updates the set C. At this point the set C consists of vertices belonging to two alternating paths 1) a path from a0 to a5 and 2) a path from a0 to a9 . The edge (a9 , p9 ) becomes activated in the 5th iteration. Since p9 is an even vertex in G05 , the algorithm again enters an augmenting phase. In sixth iteration p9 becomes unreachable thus the algorithm is again in a non-augmenting phase and the set C is again updated. Updated set C at this point contains all the vertices of the graph with the exception of a12 and p12 . Finally, in order to get a rank maximal matching in H, we can apply an alternating path from a0 to a10 as this vertex is alive in the sixth iteration.  7  Updates of reduced graphs Hi0  Algorithm 3 computes graphs H̃i such that H̃i contains every edge that belongs to some rankmaximal matching of Hi . Note that it is possible that Hi0 contains an edge that does not belong to H̃i . Each such edge does not belong to any rank-maximal matching of Hi . Thus both of its endpoints belong to U (Hi0 ). We will deal with such edges at the end. Our more important goal is to determine which edges of H̃i do not belong to Hi0 . By Theorem 3 point 4 we know that any rank-maximal matching Ni of Hi is such that Mi ⊕ Ni contains some path si ∈ Si is a good path. Lemma 6. A vertex v belongs to E(Hi0 ) (resp. O(Hi0 )) iff in the graph H̃i there exists an Ni alternating path P from a free vertex u to a vertex w ∈ Alive(i) ∪ AVi such that v lies on P and its distance on P from u is even (respectively, odd). Proof. Suppose first thatTv ∈ E(Hi0 ). Then in Hi0 there exists an Ni -alternating path P from a free vertex u to a vertex w ∈ ij=1 E(Hj0 ) such that v lies on P and its distance on P from u is even. By Theorem [] Ni ⊕ P is also a rank-maximal matching of Hi . This means that every edge of P belongs to some rank-maximal matching of Hi and therefore by Theorem 3 point 1 the graph H̃i contains T each edge of P . By Theorem 3 point 5 the set of vertices ij=1 E(Hj0 ) is equal to Alive(i) ∪ AVi . The case when v ∈ O(Hi0 ) is analogous. Let us assume now that in the graph H̃i there exists an Ni -alternating path P from a free vertex u to a vertex w ∈ Alive(i) ∪ AVi such that v lies on P and its distance on P from u is even. It suffices to show that every edge of P belongs to some rank-maximal matching of Hi , because it will mean that every edge of P belongs to Hi0 . If every edge of Ni ∩ P belongs also to Mi , then the whole path P lies in G0i \ Ci and thus by Lemma 4 from [6] Ni ⊕ P is also a rank-maximal matching of Hi and we are done. In order to show this it suffices to use the fact that (Mi ⊕ si ) ⊕ P = Mi ⊕ (si ⊕ P ). Hence, the matching Ni0 = Mi0 ⊕ s0 is a rank-maximal matching of Hi and thus we have shown that every edge of P either belongs to Ni or to Ni0 . It remains to show how to efficiently compute EG-decompositions of graphs Hi0 given H̃i . Note that we cannot simply apply Lemma 6 multiple times for each of the graphs H̃i , as such an approach would lead to an algorithm of complexity O(rm). Below we describe a general idea behind Algorithm 4 for computing EG-decompositions of Hi0 , then in Lemma 7 we show that it is possible to implement this algorithm to achieve an O(m + min(rn, n2 )) runtime. 16  From Lemma 8 we know that if P is a path in H̃i from a free vertex u to a vertex w ∈ Alive(i)∪AVi , then we can determine types of all vertices of P in Hi0 . Additionally from Lemma 8 it is possible to determine types of such vertices in graphs Hj0 for each j < i. The above observations are a basis of Algorithm 4. We start with i = r and determine the set Zi of all vertices belonging to paths as described above (i.e. from a free vertex u to a vertex w ∈ Alive(i) ∪ AVi ). Then we update the type of each vertex from Zi using Lemma 8, set i ← i − 1 and repeat the process for the new graph H̃i . We continue iterating over i until we reach i = 0. Note that if for some vertex v we have v ∈ Zi and v ∈ / Zj for each j > i, then we have v ∈ U (Hj0 ) for each j > i. Thus we can correctly determine types of all the vertices using this approach. Of course a naive implementation of the above idea does not achieve an O(m + min(rn, n2 )) runtime. Additional observations are needed. Let v be any vertex. First we note that if i is maximal such that v belongs to Zi then types of v in graphs H10 , H20 , . . . , Hr0 can be correctly determined. There is no need to update the type of v anymore even if it belongs to some Zj for j < i. Thus throught the execution of the algorithm we maintain the set Z of vertices for which we have already computed types and make sure to only update the types of vertices belonging to Zi \ Z. In order to speed up the algorithm we need to show how to efficiently compute sets Zi \ Z. Let us first show how to find vertices belonging to Zi . We first build an Ni -alternating forest of vertices reachable from the set Fi of free vertices with respect to Ni . Then we determine the set X of vertices belonging to Ti and Alive(i) ∪ AV . Next we consider a graph (V (Ti ), Wi ) where Wi is the set of edges with both endpoints in Ti . It is easy to see that all vertices reachable by alternating paths from X in this graph form the set Zi . Note that from Lemma 8 it follows that V (Ti ) ⊆ V (Tj ) for j < i, hence we do not have to build the alternating forest from scratch in each iteration. Instead for each i we simply determine Ti using the forest Ti+1 . The set Zi \ Z can be determined similarly to the set Zi . Instead of considering a graph (V (Ti ), Wi ) we simply consider a graph (V (Ti ) \ Z, Wi ) and claim that Zi \ Z is equal to the set of vertices reachable from X in this graph. Computations of forests Ti take O(m + min(nc, n2 )) time in total. It is a straightforward consequence of the fact that V (Ti ) ⊆ V (Ti−1 ). Similarly we can see that the time needed to compute all vertices reachable from X in graphs (V (Ti ) \ Z, Wi ) over the duration of the algorithm is also bounded by O(m + min(nc, n2 )). It is a consequence of the fact that once a vertex v is detected to be in Zi \ Z it is added to Z and none of the edges incident to such a vertex is visited in any of the following iterations. From the above discussion we obtain the correctness of the following lemma. Lemma 7. Algorithm 4 computes EG-decompositions of graphs Hi0 in O(m + min(rn, n2 )) time. Lemma 8. Let i1 < i2 < . . . < ik denote the list of numbers of augmenting phases of Algorithm 3. Let nA denote the number of augmenting phases of Algorithm 3 and nA (i) the number of augmenting phases till phase i and including phase i. 1. Free vertices in Ni are the same in Hi0 and H̃i . 2. If a vertex v is reachable in H̃i from a free vertex in Ni via an Ni -alternating path and ending at an alive vertex, then: (a) v is reachable in H̃j from a free vertex in Nj via an Nj -alternating path ending at an alive vertex for every j < i. (b) for every j ≤ i such that v ∈ E(G0j ) ∪ O(G0j ) v has the same type in Hj0 and G0j , i.e., (v ∈ E(G0j ) ⇔ v ∈ E(Hj0 )) and (v ∈ O(G0j ) ⇔ v ∈ O(Hj0 )). 17  Algorithm 4 for computing EG-decompositions of graphs Hi0 1: Z ← ∅ 2: F ← ∅ 3: Nr+1 ← Nr 4: for i = r, r − 1, . . . , 1 do 5: Ni ← Ni+1 \ Fi+1 6: Fi ← free vertices with respect to Ni 7: Ti ← Ni -alternating forest in Ĥi starting from vertices of Fi 8: Wi ← edges of Ĥi with both endpoints in Ti 9: X ← vertices belonging to Ti and Alive(i) ∪ AV 10: Zi \ Z ← all vertices reachable in (V (Ti ) \ Z, Wi ) from X via an Ni -alternating path 11: for all v ∈ Zi \ Z do 12: for every j > i, v ∈ U (Hj0 ) 13: v ∈ E(Hi0 ) (resp. O(Hi0 )) if v is reachable via an even (resp. odd) length Ni -alternating path 14: if v ∈ E(G0i ) ∪ O(G0i ) then 15: for every j ≤ i, v’s type in Hj0 is the same type as in G0j 16: else for every j < i such that v ∈ U (G0j ), v’s type in Hj0 is determined as in Lemma 8 2c 17: 18: for every j < i such that v ∈ E(G0j ) ∪ O(G0j ), v’s type in Hj0 is the same type as in 0 Gj Z ← Z ∪ Zi 20: for all v ∈ V \ Z do 21: v ∈ U (Hi0 ) for every i  19:  18  (c) for every v ∈ U (G0j ) and every j < i, v has the same type in Hj0 as in Hi0 if nA (i) has the same parity as nA (j) and otherwise, v belongs to O(Hj0 ) iff it belongs to E(Hi0 ) and v belongs to E(Hj0 ) iff it belongs to O(Hi0 ). Proof. We first prove (1). From Theorem 3 point 3 we know that Ni is a rank maximal matching of Hi and also Ni is a maximum matching of Hi0 . Theorem 3 point 3 implies that Ni is a maximum matching of H̃i . Both Hi0 and H̃i have the same set of vertices, thus free vertices with respect to Ni are the same in Hi0 and H̃i and (1) holds. 2(a) This part directly follows from the lemma 6. 2(b) Let v ∈ E(G0j ) ∪ O(G0j ). This assumption implies that v ∈ / C. From Lemma 4 points 1d 0 and 2a we know that v has the same type in Gj and H̃j . Additionally v is reachable from a free vertex by an alternating path ending at an alive vertex in the graph H̃j . From Lemma 6 we know that v ∈ E(H̃j ) if and only if v ∈ E(Hj0 ). Similarly we have v ∈ O(H̃j ) if and only if v ∈ O(Hj0 ), hence 2(b) is proven. 2(c) Let v ∈ U (G0j ) for some j < i. We can assume that AE contains more than one edge. There is a path from the free vertex in C to v in H̃j , so v ∈ C. Without loss of generality, we assume that the alternating path from the free vertex in C and v is of even length. Therefore in each phase, v is an even vertex before we apply the alternating path starting from C. Since, the free vertex in C belongs to A, v belongs to A. Let j 0 be the next augmenting phase after j (j < j 0 < i). In phase j 0 there exists an edge in AE such that both endpoints are even vertices in H̃j 0 . Then by Lemma 4 point 1e the type of the vertex v changes, thus v ∈ O(H̃j 0 ) after the augmentation. Therefore, for each augmenting phase, the type of v changes from even to odd. Let us assume that j 00 is a non-augmenting phase such that j < j 00 < i. In the iteration j 00 there is no edge in AE such that both endpoints are even vertices. So by Lemma 4 point 2b the vertex v retains its type, so v is an even vertex in H̃j 00 . Thus, for every non-augmenting phase, v is an even vertex. Also each path containing v starts from a free vertex and ends at an alive vertex. Hence the vertex v has the same type in both H̃j and Hj0 for each j < i and from the above it easily follows that 2(c) holds.  8  Proofs of Lemmas 4 and 5  Proof of Lemma 4 Proof. We first prove 1(a) − 1(e). Let us assume that there exists i such that pi ∈ E(G). Consider a maximum matching M in the graph G. From the fact that ai , pi ∈ E(G) and Lemma 1 we can see that in G there exist an M -alternating path P1 from a free vertex f1 to ai and an M -alternating path P2 from a free vertex f2 to pi . Thus paths P1 and P2 along with the edge (ai , pi ) form an M augmenting path P 0 in G1 . From the fact that C is a connected component one can easily see that vertices of P1 are contained in C (i. e. V (P1 ) ⊆ C). Similarly we have V (P2 ) ⊆ A ∪ P \ C. Let M 0 = M ⊕ P 0 . Obviously M 0 contains n0 edges of E and one edge of E1 . We now prove that M 0 is a maximum matching of G1 . Assume by contradiction that there exists a matching M 00 such that |M 00 | = |M | + 2. The symmetric difference M 00 ⊕ M contains two M -augmenting paths in G1 . At least one of these paths has both endpoints in A ∪ P \ C. Let this path be X. The path X has to contain at least two edges of E1 as otherwise it would be contained in the graph G, contradicting the maximality of M . Let x1 and x2 be respectively first and last edge of E1 on the path X. The path X can be split into the following subpaths (X1 , x1 , Y, x2 , X2 ).  19  Note that X1 starts with an unmatched vertex and ends with a matched edge, thus the length of X1 is even. Similarly the length of X2 is even. Additionally both endpoints of Y belong to A, hence Y is also of even length. It is a contradiction as the length of X is clearly even despite the fact that we assumed that X is an augmenting path. Note that from the above discussion it already follows that 1(b) holds. Let us now prove 1(a). We are going to show that every maximum matching of G1 contains at most one edge of E1 . Assume by contradiction that there exists a maximum matching M1 of G1 containing at least two edges of E1 . Since |M1 | = |M | + 1 there is an M -augmenting path P in G1 containing at least two edges of E1 . Consider a subpath X of P between any two consecutive edges of E1 . We have E1 ∩ M = ∅ thus X must begin and end with matched edges. Also note that both endpoints of X belong to the same side of the bipartition of G1 , thus X is an alternating path of even length. It is a contradiction, hence 1(a) follows. Now we prove 1(c). Assume by contradiction that some (aj , pj ) belongs to a maximum matching M1 and that pj ∈ O(G) ∪ U (G). Consider an M -augmenting path P belonging to M ⊕ M1 . From 1(a) it follows that the path P can be split into subpaths (P1 , (aj , pj ), P2 ), where P1 is contained in C and P2 in A ∪ P \ C. The path P2 is an even length M -alternating path in G from a free vertex, ending at pj , contradicting the fact that pj ∈ O(G) ∪ U (G). Thus 1(c) holds. 1(d). Let us consider the case v ∈ C first. It suffices to show that v ∈ E(G1 ) implies v ∈ O(G) and that v ∈ O(G1 ) implies v ∈ E(G). Let us consider a maximum matching M1 in G1 and any alternating path P from a free vertex v0 ∈ A ∪ P \ C crossing the set C. Let (x, y) be the first edge of E1 on this path and x ∈ / C, y ∈ C. Our goal is to show that (x, y) ∈ / M1 . Assume by contradiction that (x, y) ∈ M1 . Let P 0 be a subpath of P from a free vertex v0 to y. Note that M1 ⊕ P 0 is a maximum matching in G of size |M | + 1 - a contradiction. Thus (x, y) ∈ / M1 and we have y ∈ O(G1 ). From the definition of E1 we also have y ∈ E(G). One can easily see that if a vertex x ∈ P ∩ C belongs to O(G1 ) then it belongs to E(G) and also that if x ∈ C ∩ E(G1 ) then x ∈ O(G). The case v ∈ C of 1(d) easily follows from the fact that the choice of P is arbitrary. Let us now consider the case v ∈ A ∪ P \ C. It suffices to show that v ∈ E(G1 ) implies v ∈ E(G) and that v ∈ O(G1 ) implies v ∈ O(G). Let v ∈ E(G1 ). From Lemma 1 there exists a maximum matching M1 in G1 such that v is unmatched. One edge of M1 belongs to E1 . If we remove this edge we obtain a matching M2 = M1 ∩ E which is maximal in G. Note that v is still unmatched in this matching, hence we have v ∈ E(G). Assume now that v ∈ O(G1 ). We also consider a maximum matching M1 in G1 . From Lemma 1 the vertex v is matched to a vertex w such that w ∈ E(G1 ). From the above discussion it follows that w ∈ E(G). If (v, w) ∈ / E1 then obviously we have v ∈ O(G). Assume that (v, w) ∈ E1 . From the assumption that v ∈ A ∪ P \ C it follows that w ∈ C. Recall that we have w ∈ E(G) ∩ E(G1 ) - a contradiction with the previously proven part of 1(d). Thus 1(d) is proven. 1(e). Assume by contradiction that there is an edge (a, p) of G such that a ∈ O(G), p ∈ O(G)∪U (G) and (a, p) belongs to a maximum matching M1 of G1 . Consider a matching M 0 = M ∩E. From 1(a) we have (a, p) ∈ M 0 , |M 0 | = |M1 | − 1 and M 0 is a maximum matching of G. However from Lemma 1 it follows that (a, p) does not belong to any maximum matching of G - a contradiction. Let us now prove that 2(a) − 2(d) hold. Assume that there is no i such that pi ∈ E(G). 2(a) We first show that M remains a maximum matching in G1 . Assume by contradiction that there is an M -augmenting path P in G1 . Let x be an endpoint of the path not belonging to C and let (aj , pj ) be the first edge of P going from x belonging to E1 . The existance of a subpath from x to pj implies that pj ∈ E(G) - a contradiction. Thus every maximum matching of G is also a maximum matching of G1 . We now show that a maximum matching of G1 can contain at most one edge of E1 . Let us assume by contradiction that there exists a matching M 0 containining at least two such edges e1 and e2 . Consider a symmetric difference M ⊕ M 0 . First note that the fact that 20  G1 is bipartite implies that neither e1 nor e2 belong to an alternating cycle of M ⊕ M 0 . Thus at least one of these two edges belongs to an alternating path starting from a free vertex x0 ∈ / C. This fact implies that the endpoint of this edge belonging to P also belongs to E(G) - contrary to our initial assumption. Thus 2(a) holds. 2(b) Let (aj , pj ) be any edge of E1 . Since aj ∈ E(G), there is a an M -alternating path P in G from a free vertex in C to aj . Note that pj ∈ / E(G) and Lemma 1 imply that pj is matched in M to some M (pj ) 6= aj . The path P together with edges (aj , pj ) and (pj , M (pj )) form an M -alternating path P 0 in G1 . Clearly M ⊕ P 0 is a maximum matching in G1 containing the edge (aj , pj ), thus 2(b) holds. 2(c) Recall that M is a maximum matching in both G and G1 . Every vertex of C is from definition reachable in G from a free vertex x belonging to C by an M alternating path. Obviously each such a path is also an M -alternating path in the graph G1 . This fact and Lemma 1 imply that types of vertices belonging to C are identical in both G and G1 . Let us assume that there is a vertex v ∈ / C such that its types in G and G1 differ. Note that if it was v ∈ E(G) ∪ O(G) then there would be an M -alternating path in G from a free vertex belonging to A ∪ P \ C to v. Such a path would also remain an M -alternating path in G1 contradicting the assumption that types of v in G and G1 differ. Thus there is v ∈ U (G) and v ∈ E(G1 ) ∪ O(G1 ). From Lemma 1 there exists an M -alternating path P from a free vertex x to v. We know that v ∈ U (G) thus at least one edge of E1 belongs to P . From the fact that G1 is bipartite it easily follows that exactly one edge of E1 belongs to P . Note that this fact also implies that P starts in the only free vertex of C, thus 2(c) holds. 2(d) Let (a, p) be an edge such that a ∈ U (G) ∪ E(G1 ) and p ∈ O(G). So a is reachable from a free vertex a0 in C by an even length M -alternating path. Therefore, p is reachable from a0 by an odd length M -alternating path in G1 . If we apply the alternating path, then p is matched in some maximum matching of G1 . Now let (a, p) be an edge such that a ∈ U (G) ∪ O(G) and p ∈ O(G). So p ∈ O(G1 ). Therefore the edge (a, p) is an OO or OU type edge in G1 . So the edge (a, p) is never matched in any maximum matching of G1 . Proof of Lemma 5 Proof. Let G be a bipartite graph and G1 , G2 and H denote respectively G ∪ E1 , G ∪ E2 and G ∪ E 1 ∪ E2 . (1) Let us assume that M2 be a maximum matching of G2 . Let both endpoints of the edge (ai , pi ) ∈ E1 belong to E(G2 ). When we add E1 to G2 , we have an M2 -augmenting path in H. First, we show that the M2 -augmenting path contains even number of edges from E2 . Every augmenting path contains odd number of edges. Here, the M2 -augmenting path contains one edge from E1 , some even length path segments consisting of the edges from E and some edges from E2 . So the number of edges from E2 is even. Also two edges from E2 are separated by an even length path segment consisting of the edges from E. So we can say that in the M2 -augmenting path, between every two matched edges from E2 , there is an unmatched edge from E2 and vice versa. So half of the edges of E2 in the M2 -augmenting path are matched. Therefore, when we apply the M2 -augmenting path, the number of matched edges of E and E2 remains the same. The number of matched edge from E1 becomes 1. Also by the construction, the matching we get belongs to M21 . So every matching of M21 contains n0 edges of E, n2 edges of E2 and one edge of E1 .  21  Next we show that M21 and M12 are the same sets. This will prove that every matching of M12 also contains n0 edges of E, n2 edges of E2 and one edge of E1 . Let us consider a matching M ∈ M21 . First we construct a maximum matching G. Let us consider the matching M of M21 induced in G. This matching contains n0 edges. We know that a maximum matching of G contains n0 edges. So this matching is a maximum matching of G and we denote is as M 0 . Next we show that M ∈ M12 . First we take the symmetric difference M ⊕ M 0 . The symmetric difference only contains one edge from E1 and some edges from E2 . These edges are vertex disjoint. First we consider the graph G and its maximum matching M 0 . Next we add E1 to G and match the edge from E1 , that is matched in M . So we get a maximum matching of G1 . Next we add E2 to G1 and apply rest of the length 1 augmenting paths. Finally we get the matching M . But we get this matching by augmenting a maximum matching of G1 . So M ∈ M12 . Therefore, M21 ⊆ M12 . Similarly, it can be shown that M12 ⊆ M21 . Thus we can conclude that M12 = M21 . 2(a) There are two ways to get a maximum matching H from a maximum matching M of G. In the first case, we add E2 to the graph G to get a maximum matching M2 of the graph G2 . There does not exist any edge (ai , pi ) ∈ E1 such that pi ∈ E(G2 ). When we add the edges from E1 to G2 , we get the graph H. Since we do not get any M2 -augmenting path in H, the maximum matching of G2 is a maximum matching of H. By the definition in the statement of the lemma, this maximum matching of H belongs to M21 . So, a matching of M21 is a maximum matching of G2 . Next we prove that the matching that is construced by the other case, is a matching from M12 . First we add E1 to G to get the graph G1 . Since both endpoints of the edges from E1 belong to E(G), we get some M -augmenting paths in G1 . If we apply any M -augmenting path we get a maximum matching M1 of G1 . M1 contains 1 edge from E1 and n0 edges from E. When we add E2 to G1 , we get the graph H. We know that none of the vertices of C is free in M1 . Therefore there does not exist any M1 -augmenting path in H finishing at a vertex from C. So we can get augmenting paths of two types. The first possibility is that the augmenting path is totally contained in G2 . The other possibility is that the augmenting path contains one matched edge and one unmatched edge from E1 . So each M1 -augmenting path of H only increases the number of the matched edges from E2 by 1. We know the size of a maximum matching of H is n0 + n2 . Also this matching is a matching from M12 . So a matching of M12 contains 1 edge from E1 , n0 edges from E and n2 − 1 edges from E2 . 2(b) Let us consider a matching M from M21 . Let us have an M -alternating path starting from a free vertex of C, containing the edge (aj , pj ) and an odd number of edges from E2 . So we can assume that M -alternating path contains 2k − 1 edges from E2 and 1 edge from E1 . In the alternating path, any two edges not belonging to G are separated by an even length path segment consisting of edges from E. Also the edge (aj , pj ) is unmatched in the alternating path. So the number of matched edges from E2 in the M -alternating path is k. When we apply the M -alternating path, the matching now contains the edge (aj , pj ). Also the number of edges of E2 in the alternating path is k − 1. So the number of edges from E and E2 are n0 and n2 − 1 respectively. So the resultant maximum matching is a valid matching of M12 . 2(c)In the next part we have pj ∈ O(G2 ). Let us consider a matching M2 ∈ M21 . We assume that the M2 -alternating path starts from a free vertex of C in the graph H, contains (aj , pj ) from E1 and odd number of edges from E2 . Since the graph is a bipartite graph, the other endpoint of the alternating path also belongs to A. Let the other endpoint of the alternating path be a0 . We have assumed that pj ∈ O(G2 ). Since M2 ∈ M21 , a maximum matching of G2 is a maximum matching of H. So when we add E1 to G2 , we get an alternating path from the free vertex of C to pj . The alternating path contains the edges from C and one edge from E1 . Also pj ∈ O(G2 ) implies that pj is reachable from a free vertex by an odd length alternating path contained in G2 . These two alternating paths are vertex disjoint except for 22  the vertex pj . So the vertices that are reachable from C via the edge (aj , pj ) in H is reachable from a free vertex via pj in G2 . So a0 is reachable from a free vertex via pj in G2 . So a0 ∈ E(G2 ). If there are two alternating components connected by an EE edge in a bipartite graph, and vertices from A are even in one component, then vertices from P would be even in other component. In our graph, there are odd number of edges from E2 between pj and a0 with pj ∈ E(G). Also both endpoints of the edges from E2 belong to E(G). So a0 ∈ E(G). Therefore, a0 ∈ E(G) ∪ E(G2 ) ∪ E(H). Next we show a0 ∈ E(G1 ). We know that a0 ∈ E(G). When we add E1 to G, we have some augmenting paths in G1 . The even vertices from A, that are part of any augmenting path in G1 , belong to C. Hence none of the even vertices of A from G \ C belong to any augmenting path. Hence the type of the vertices of A from G \ C remains the same. Therefore, a0 ∈ E(G1 ). Let M be a matching of M21 and M 0 be a matching of M12 containing the edge (aj , pj ). We prove that for any M -alternating path in H that starts from a free vertex of C1 , contains the edge (aj , pj ) and ends at a0 ∈ E(G) ∩ E(G2 ) will always have an odd number of edges from E2 and has even length. The M -alternating path starts at a free vertex, and the path is not an M -augmenting path. So the path is of even length. In the next part, we show the M -alternating path contains odd number of edges from E2 . The alternating path contains some subpaths from G, 1 edge from E1 and some edges from E2 . M contains n2 edges from E2 and no edge from E1 . M 0 contains an edge from E1 and n2 − 1 edges from E2 . If we take the symmetric difference M ⊕ M 0 , we claim that it contains odd number of edges from E2 . If total number of common edges from E2 in the matchings M and M 0 is k 0 , then the number of edges from E2 in the symmetric difference is n2 + (n2 − 1) + 2k 0 = 2(n2 + k 0 ) − 1, which is odd. So alternating path contains odd number of edges from E2 .  References [1] David J. Abraham, Katarı́na Cechlárová, David Manlove, and Kurt Mehlhorn. Pareto optimality in house allocation problems. In Xiaotie Deng and Ding-Zhu Du, editors, Algorithms and Computation, 16th International Symposium, ISAAC 2005, Sanya, Hainan, China, December 19-21, 2005, Proceedings, volume 3827 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 1163–1175. Springer, 2005. [2] David J. Abraham, Robert W. Irving, Telikepalli Kavitha, and Kurt Mehlhorn. Popular matchings. SIAM J. Comput., 37(4):1030–1045, 2007. [3] David J. Abraham and Telikepalli Kavitha. Voting paths. SIAM J. Discrete Math., 24(2):520– 537, 2010. [4] Sayan Bhattacharya, Martin Hoefer, Chien-Chung Huang, Telikepalli Kavitha, and Lisa Wagner. Maintaining near-popular matchings. In Magnús M. Halldórsson, Kazuo Iwama, Naoki Kobayashi, and Bettina Speckmann, editors, Automata, Languages, and Programming - 42nd International Colloquium, ICALP 2015, Kyoto, Japan, July 6-10, 2015, Proceedings, Part II, volume 9135 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 504–515. Springer, 2015. [5] Rudolf Fleischer and Yihui Wang. Dynamic pareto optimal matching. Fourth International Symposium on Information Science and Engineering, 02:797–802, 2008. [6] Pratik Ghosal, Meghana Nasre, and Prajakta Nimbhorkar. Rank-maximal matchings - structure and algorithms. In Hee-Kap Ahn and Chan-Su Shin, editors, Algorithms and Computation 25th International Symposium, ISAAC 2014, Jeonju, Korea, December 15-17, 2014, Proceedings, volume 8889 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 593–605. Springer, 2014. 23  [7] Chien-Chung Huang, Telikepalli Kavitha, Dimitrios Michail, and Meghana Nasre. Bounded unpopularity matchings. Algorithmica, 61(3):738–757, 2011. [8] Robert W. Irving. Greedy matchings. Technical report tr-2003-136, University of Glasgow, 2003. [9] Robert W. Irving, Telikepalli Kavitha, Kurt Mehlhorn, Dimitrios Michail, and Katarzyna E. Paluch. Rank-maximal matchings. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 2(4):602–610, 2006. [10] Telikepalli Kavitha and Chintan D. Shah. Efficient algorithms for weighted rank-maximal matchings and related problems. In Tetsuo Asano, editor, Algorithms and Computation, 17th International Symposium, ISAAC 2006, Kolkata, India, December 18-20, 2006, Proceedings, volume 4288 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 153–162. Springer, 2006. [11] Richard Matthew McCutchen. The least-unpopularity-factor and least-unpopularity-margin criteria for matching problems with one-sided preferences. In Eduardo Sany Laber, Claudson F. Bornstein, Loana Tito Nogueira, and Luérbio Faria, editors, LATIN 2008: Theoretical Informatics, 8th Latin American Symposium, Búzios, Brazil, April 7-11, 2008, Proceedings, volume 4957 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 593–604. Springer, 2008. [12] P. Nimbhorkar and A. Rameshwar V. Dynamic Rank Maximal Matchings. ArXiv e-prints, April 2017. [13] Katarzyna E. Paluch. Capacitated rank-maximal matchings. In Paul G. Spirakis and Maria J. Serna, editors, Algorithms and Complexity, 8th International Conference, CIAC 2013, Barcelona, Spain, May 22-24, 2013. Proceedings, volume 7878 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 324–335. Springer, 2013. [14] Alexander Schrijver. Combinatorial Optimization- Polyhedra and Efficiency. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2003.  24

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
