Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_5545

Abstract:
ATRank: An Attention-Based User Behavior Modeling Framework for Recommendation Chang Zhou1 , Jinze Bai2 , Junshuai Song2 , Xiaofei Liu1 , Zhengchao Zhao1 , Xiusi Chen2 , Jun Gao2 1 Alibaba Group Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies, EECS, Peking University {ericzhou.zc, hsiaofei.hfl, buqing}@alibaba-inc.com, {baijinze, songjs, xiusichen, gaojun}@pku.edu.cn  arXiv:1711.06632v2 [cs.AI] 27 Nov 2017  2  Abstract A user can be represented as what he/she does along the history. A common way to deal with the user modeling problem is to manually extract all kinds of aggregated features over the heterogeneous behaviors, which may fail to fully represent the data itself due to limited human instinct. Recent works usually use RNN-based methods to give an overall embedding of a behavior sequence, which then could be exploited by the downstream applications. However, this can only preserve very limited information, or aggregated memories of a person. When a downstream application requires to facilitate the modeled user features, it may lose the integrity of the specific highly correlated behavior of the user, and introduce noises derived from unrelated behaviors. This paper proposes an attention based user behavior modeling framework called ATRank, which we mainly use for recommendation tasks. Heterogeneous user behaviors are considered in our model that we project all types of behaviors into multiple latent semantic spaces, where influence can be made among the behaviors via self-attention. Downstream applications then can use the user behavior vectors via vanilla attention. Experiments show that ATRank can achieve better performance and faster training process. We further explore ATRank to use one unified model to predict different types of user behaviors at the same time, showing a comparable performance with the highly optimized individual models.  Introduction As a word can be represented by the surrounding context (Mikolov et al. 2013), a user can be represented by his/her behaviors along the history. For downstream tasks like ranking in recommendation system, traditional ways to represent a user are to extract all kinds of hand-crafted features aggregated over different types of user behaviors. This feature engineering procedure guided by human instinct may fail to fully represent the data itself, and it requires too much work. Besides, the aggregated features also lose information of any individual behavior that could be precisely related with the object that needs to be predicted in the downstream application. As the user behaviors naturally form a sequence over the timeline, RNN/CNN structures are usually exploited to encode the behavior sequence for downstream applications Copyright c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.  as in the encoder-decoder framework. However, for RNN based methods, long-term dependencies are still very hard to preserve even using the advanced memory cell structures like LSTM and GRU (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997; Chung et al. 2014). RNN also has a disadvantage that both the offline training and the online prediction process are time-consuming, due to its recursive natural which is hard to parallelize. Recently, it’s shown that CNN-based encoding methods can also achieve comparable performance with RNN in many sequence processing tasks (Kim 2014). Though it’s highly parallelizable, the longest length of the interaction paths between any two positions in the CNN network is logk (n), where n is the number of user behaviors and k is the kernel width. Both the basic RNN and CNN encoders suffer from the problem that the fixed-size encoding vector may not support both short and long sequences well. The attention mechanism is then introduced to provide the ability to reference specific records dynamically in the decoder, which has already achieved great successes in fields like Machine Translation, Image Caption in recent years. Downstream applications of behavior modeling like recommendation can also utilize the attention mechanism, since the item to be ranked may only be related to very small parts of the user behaviors. However, we show that the one-dimensional attention score between any two vectors may neutralize their relationships in different semantic spaces. The attention-based n P pooling can be formularized as C = ai v~i , where ai is i=1  a scalar. We can see that, each element in v~i will multiply by the same ai , such that different semantics of v~i can only compromise to use this overall multiplier, which makes it hard to preserve only the highly related semantics while discard those unrelated parts in the weighted average vector. Another important issue is that the user behaviors are naturally heterogeneous, highly flexible, and thus hard to model. For large companies today, various kinds of user behaviors could be collected, which makes it increasingly important to utilize those user behaviors to provide better personalized services. Take the e-business recommendation service as an example, a user may browse/buy/mark items, receive/use coupons, click ads, search keywords, write down reviews, or even watch videos and live shows offered by a shop, each of which reveals some aspects of the user that  would be helpful to build more comprehensive user models, providing a better understanding of the user intents. Though heterogeneous data representation can be learnt by minimizing the distances in the projected latent spaces (Bordes et al. 2013; Lin et al. 2015; Chang et al. 2015), there are no explicit supervisions like mapping or inferencing between any pair of user behaviors that could help build the individual behavior representations. In this paper, we propose an attention-based user behavior modeling framework called ATRank, which we currently use for recommendation tasks. We first project variablelength heterogenous behavior representations into multiple latent spaces, where behavior interactions can be made under common semantics. Then we exploit the power of selfattention mechanism to model each user behavior after considering the influences brought by other behaviors. We perform vanilla attention between these attention vectors and the ranking item vector, whose outputs are fed into a ranking neural network. It’s observed that self-attention with time encoding can be a replacement for complex RNN and CNN structures in the sequential behavior encoding, which is fast in both training and prediction phase. Experiments also show that ATRank achieves better performance while is faster in training. We further explore the model to predict multiple types of user behaviors at the same time using only one unified model, showing a comparable performance with the highly optimized individual models.  Related Works Context Aware Recommendation. An industrial recommendation system usually has varieties of models to extract different aspects of the user features, e.g., user gender, income, affordance, categorial preference, etc, all from the user behaviors, trying to capture both long-term and shortterm user interests. Then it builds different models for each recommendation scenario using those extracted features, either continuous or categorial (Covington, Adams, and Sargin 2016; Cheng et al. 2016). These are multi-step tasks and it’s hard to optimize jointly. RNN based methods are studied for recommendation in academic fields in recent years, which builds the recommendation context directly from the behaviors for each user (Rendle et al. 2011; Hariri, Mobasher, and Burke 2012; Wu et al. 2016). Though it’s an more elegant way to encode user context, it still suffers from several difficulties. First, RNN is hard to parallelize in prediction phase, which makes it not easy to ensure the response time to be low enough for a commercial recommendation system. Second, the RNN embedding of the user behaviors is a fix-sized, aggregated status, which is not well suited for modeling both long and short behavior sequences. It can easily fail to preserve specific behavior information when enrolled in the downstream applications. Attention and Self-Attention. Attention is introduced by (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) firstly in the encoderdecoder framework, to provide more accurate alignment for each position in the machine translation task. Instead of preserving only one single vector representation for the whole object in the encoder, it keeps the vectors for each element  as well, so that the decoder can reference these vectors at any decoding step. Recently, attention based methods are widely applied in many other tasks like reading comprehension (Cui et al. 2016; Cheng, Dong, and Lapata 2016; Lin et al. 2017), ads recommendation (Zhou et al. 2017; Zhai et al. 2016), computer vision (Xu et al. 2015), etc. Self-attentions are also studied in different mechanisms (Vaswani et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2017; Cui et al. 2016), in which inner-relations of the data at the encoder side are considered. Note that, both work of (Vaswani et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2017) show that project each word onto multiple spaces could improve the performance of their own tasks. Heterogeneous Behavior Modeling. Heterogeneous data representation is heavily studied in domains like knowledge graph completion and multimodal learning. In the domain of knowledge graph completion, lots of works have been proposed to learn heterogeneous entity and relation representations by minimizing the distances of the linear projected entities in the relation-type semantic subspace (Bordes et al. 2013; Lin et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2014). Similar idea is adopted in multimodal learning tasks like image caption (Vinyals et al. 2015) and audio-visual speech classification (Ngiam et al. 2011).  Self-Attention Based Behavior Modeling Framework This paper focuses on general user behaviors that can be interpreted using the binary relation between a user and an entity object. We formulate a user behavior as a tuple {a, o, t}, where a stands for the behavior type describing the action a user takes, o is the object that the behavior acts on, and t is the timestamp when the behavior happens. Note that, while a and t are the atomic features representing the behavior type and action time, o is represented as all its belonging features. So that, a user can be represented as all his/her behaviors U = {(aj , oj , tj )|j = 1, 2, ..., m}. We illustrate the overall attention-based heterogeneous user behavior modeling framework in Figure 1. We divide the framework into several blocks, namely raw feature spaces, behavior embedding spaces, latent semantic spaces, behavior interaction layers and downstream application network. Next, we discuss all these blocks in detail.  Raw Feature Spaces We first partition the user behavior tuples U = {(aj , oj , tj )|j = 1, 2, ..., m} into different behavior groups G = {bg1 , bg2 , ..., bgn } according to the target object types, n T S where bgi bgj = ø and U = bgi . Within each bgi , the i=1  raw feature spaces of the objects are the same, which may contain both the continuous features and the categorial features depending on how we model the target object. Then we can use group-specific neural nets to build up the behavior embeddings.  Behavior Embedding Spaces In each behavior group bgi , we embed the raw features of any behavior tuple (aj , oj , tj ) using the same embedding  Figure 1: Attention-Based Heterogeneous Behaviors Modeling Framework building block, uij = fi (aj , oj , tj ). The raw features of the target object oj are concatenated and fed into the feedforward neural network, while aj and tj are encoded separately that will be discussed below. Temporal & Behavior Type Encoding. Each behavior may have different action time, which is a very important continuous feature, providing a good opportunity to cope with sequence data without the enrollment of any CNN or RNNstructures. In order to preserve the temporal information, we use a temporal encoding methods similar as the positional embedding mentioned in (Gehring et al. 2017), with the embedding content to be the concatenation of both time and action type. However, we found it very difficult in learning a good embedding directly on this continuous time feature using embedding concatenation or addition. The better way we found is to bucketize the time feature into multiple granularities and perform categorial feature lookups. For example, in the recommend task over the amazon dataset, we slice the elasped time w.r.t the ranking time into intervals whose gap length grow exponentially, e.g., we map the time in range [0, 1), [1, 2), [2, 4), ..., [2k , 2k+1 ), ... to categorial feature of 0, 1, 2, ..., k+1, .... Different behavior groups may have different granularities of time slicing. Similar as the temporal encoding, we perform a direct lookup on the behavior type, trying to capture the impacts of different behavior types. Then we can encode any user behavior uij ∈ bgi as uij = embi (oj ) + lookupti (bucketizei (tj )) + lookupai (aj ) where embi is the embedding concatenation for any object o ∈ bgi . The outputs of the behavior embedding space are the list of vectors in all behavior groups, B = {ubg1 , ubg2 , ..., ubgn } where ubgi is the set of all behavior embeddings belonging to behavior group i, ubgi = concatj (uij ). Note that, the shape of the embeddings for each group may be different,  since 1) the numbers of behaviors in each group vary from user to user, 2) the information carried for each type of behavior could be in different volume. E.g., an item behavior may contain much more information than a keyword search behavior, since the item may reveal user preference towards brand, price, style, tastes, etc, while one short query keyword can only show limited intents of a user. Embedding Sharing. We enable the embedding sharing when multiple groups of objects have features in common, e.g, shop id, category id that can be both shared by objects like items and coupons in an e-business recommendation system, referring to the same entities. Note that we don’t share the temporal encoding lookups across behavior groups, since the time impact for each type of behavior may vary a lot. For example, the time impact is dominating on the coupon receiving behavior, since it’s a strong short-term intention, while buying shoes of a certain brand may be of long-term interest, where the temporal information could be less important.  Latent Semantic Spaces Lots of works have shown that linear projections over multisubspaces could improve the performance in various tasks. We argue that heterogeneous behaviors could have very different expressive power, thus their embedding spaces could be in both different sizes and meanings. Linear projection here plays a role to put them into the same semantic space, where connections or comparisons can be made. So we map each behavior into K latent semantic spaces. We explain this idea in Figure 1 that, each behavior group is represented as a composite color bar, which is then factorized into RGB colors where further operations can be taken within the comparable atomic color spaces. Given the user behaviors’ representation B, we first project the variable-length behaviors in different groups into  fix-length encoding vectors S = concat(0) (FM1 (ubg1 ), FM2 (ubg2 ), ..., FMn (ubgn )) (1) where the symbol FMi represents the projection function which is parameterized by Mi . FMi maps a behavior in group i onto the overall space of dimension size sall . Then the projected behavior embeddings in each spaces are Sk = FPk (S)  (2)  where FPk is a projection function for the k-th semantic space. In this paper, all the projection function Fθ is set to be a single layer perceptron parametrized by θ with relu as the activation function. Let the number of all behaviors of a user be nall , the number of behaviors in group i be ni , the dimension of the feature embedding space for that group be bi , the dimension of the k-th semantic space be sk . Then ubgi is in shape of ni -by-bi , Sk is in shape of nall -by-sk . The superscript on concat function indicates which dimension the concatenation is performed on.  where F is a feedforward network with one hidden layer, aiming to provide non-linear transformation over each behavior vector after attention-based pooling. The output of F keeps the same shape as the input, and we successively perform drop out, residual connections and layer normalization on the outputs.  Downstream Application Network With the generated user behavior models, we can ensemble various kinds of neural networks according to the downstream task requirement. In this paper, we focus on evaluating the recommendation tasks, and we set the downstream application network to be a point-wise or a pair-wise fully connected neural network. Vanilla Attention. For both the point-wise and the pairwise model, a vanilla attention is performed to produce the final context vector etu for user u w.r.t. the embedding vector qt to be predicted. This follows the similar procedure in the self-attention phase, h~t = FMg(t) (~ qt ),  c~k = sof tmax(a(s~k , C; θk ))FQk (C) e~tu = Fvanilla (concat(1) ((c~1 , c~2 , ..., c~K )))  Self-Attention Layer This layer tries to capture the inner-relationships among each semantic space. The intense of each behavior could be affected by others, such that attentions for some behaviors could be distracted and the others could be strengthened. This is done by the self-attention mechanism. The outputs of this layer could be regarded as the behavior representation sequence taking considerations of the impacts of the others in each latent space. We exploit similar self-attention structure mentioned in (Vaswani et al. 2017) for Machine Translation task, with some customized settings. We calculate each attention score matrix Ak in the k-th semantic space as Ak = sof tmax(a(Sk , S; θk ))  (3)  where each row of Ak is the score vector w.r.t all the attention vectors in that subspace, the softmax function guarantees that all scores for a behavior sums to one. The score function a(Sk , S; θk ) measures the impacts among all behaviors in the k-th semantic space, and in this paper we choose the bilinear scoring function as in (Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015) a(Sk , S; θk ) = Sk Wk S  T  (4)  Then the attention vectors of space k are Ck = Ak FQk (S)  (5)  where FQk is another projection function that maps S onto the k-th semantic space, which in this paper is a single layer perceptron with relu activation fucntion. Then Ck is in shape of nall -by-sk . These vectors from different subspaces are concatenated together and then reorganized by C = Fself (concat(1) (C1 , C2 , ..., CK ))  (6)  s~k = FPk (h~t ) (7)  where g(t) maps behavior t to its behavior group number, and Fvanilla has different parameters with Fself . For a point-wise prediction model, the probability of each behavior t that will be taken is predicted. We extract the raw feature of t, map these features into the behavior embedding space according to the building block of its behavior group qt . Then we perform a vanilla attention as shown above. The final loss function is the sigmoid cross entropy loss X − yt log σ(f (ht , etu )) + (1 − yt ) log (1 − σ(f (ht , etu ))) t,u  (8) where f is a ranking function whose input is the ranking behavior embedding qt and the user encoding etu w.r.t behavior t computed by vanilla-attention. f can be either a dotproduct function or a more complexed deep neural network. It is easy to rewrite the downstream network to support pair-wise training and evaluation, and we omit here due to limited space.  Experiment In this section, we first evaluate our method in context-aware recommendation tasks with only one type of behavior, trying to show the benefits of using self-attention to encode user behaviors. Then we collect a multi-behavior dataset from an online recommendation service, and evaluate how the heterogeneous behavior model performs in recommendation tasks. We further explore the model to support multitask using one unified model, which can predict all kinds of behaviors at the same time.  Dataset Amazon Dataset. We collect several subsets of amazon product data as in (McAuley et al. 2015), which have already  been reduced to satisfy the 5-core property, such that each of the remaining users and items have 5 reviews each 1 . The feature we use contains user id, item id, cate id and timestamps. The statistics of the dataset is show in table 1. Let all the user behaviors for u be (b1 , b2 , ..., bk , ..., bn ), we make the first k behaviors of u to predict the k+1-th behavior in the train set, where k = 1, 2, ..., n-2, and we use the first n-1 behaviors to predict the last one in the test set. Dataset Electro. Clothing.  # Users 192,403 39,387  # Items 63,001 23,033  # Cates 801 484  # Samples 1,689,188 278,677  Table 1: Statistics of Amazon DataSets Taobao Dataset. We collect various kinds of user behaviors in a commercial e-business website 2 . We extract three groups of behaviors, namely item behavior group, search behavior group and coupon receiving behavior group. Item behaviors list all the user action types on items, such as browse, mark, buy, etc. The feature set of an item contains item id, shop id, brand id, category id. Search behavior is expressed as the search tokens, and has only one type of action. In coupon receiving behavior group, coupon features are consist of coupon id, shop id and coupon type. This group also has only one action type. All above behaviors have a time feature that represent the timestamp when that behavior happens. The statics of each categorial is shown in table 2. This dataset is guaranteed that each user has at least 3 behaviors in each behavior group.  Competitors • BPR-MF: Bayesian Personalized Ranking (Rendle et al. 2009) is a pairwise ranking framework. It trains on pairs of a user’s positive and negative examples, maximizing the posterior probability of the difference given the same user. The item vector is a concatenation of item embedding and category embedding, each of which has a dimension of 64, the user vector has a dimension of 128. • Bi-LSTM: We implement a Bi-LSTM method to encode the user behavior history, whose difference with (Zhang et al. 2014) is that we use a bidirectional LSTM as the encoder because of better performance in our experiments. Then we concatenate the two final hidden states to the user embedding. The stacked LSTM depth is set to be 1. • Bi-LSTM+Attention: We add a vanilla attention on top of the Bi-LSTM method mentioned above. • CNN+Pooling: We use a CNN structure with max pooling to encode the user history as in (Zheng, Noroozi, and Yu 2017; Kim 2014). We use ten kinds of window sizes from one to ten for extracting different features, and all of the feature map have the same kernel size with 32. Then we apply a max-over-time pooling operation over the feature map, and pass all pooled features from different maps to a fully connected layer to produce final user embedding. 1 2  http://jmcauley.ucsd.edu/data/amazon/ http://www.taobao.com  Figure 2: AUC Progress in Amazon Electro Test Set  Hyperparameters Our method and all competitors use the common hyperparameters as follows. • Network Shape. We set the dimension size of each categorial feature embedding to be 64, and we concat these embeddings as the behavior representation in the behavior embedding space. The hidden size of all layers is set to be 128. The ranking function f is simply set to be the dot product in these tasks. As we observe better performance with point-wise ranking model, we omit the results of pair-wise models here for simplicity. For ATRank, we set the number of the latent semantic spaces to be 8, whose dimension sizes sum to be the same as the size of the hidden layer. • Batch Size. The batch size is set to be 32 for all methods. • Regularization. The l2-loss weight is set to be 5e-5. • Optimizer. We use SGD as the optimizer and apply exponential decay which learning rate starts at 1.0 and decay rate is set to 0.1.  Evaluation Metrics We evaluate the average user AUC as following: X X X 1 1 AU C = T est δ(pu,i ˆ > pu,j ˆ ) |U | |Iu+ ||Iu− | + − T est u∈U  i∈Iu j∈Iu  where pu,i ˆ is the predicted probability that a user u ∈ U T est may act on i in the test set and δ(·) is the indicator function.  Results on Single-type Behavior Dataset We first illustrate the average user AUC of all the methods for the amazon dataset in table 3. We can see that ATRank performs better than the competitors especially when the user behavior is dense, which reveals the benefits of the selfattention based user behavior modeling. Table 4 illustrates the average vanilla-attention score for different time buckets over the whole amaon dataset, which can be inferred that time encoding via self-attention can  Dataset MultiBehavior.  #Users  #Items  #Cates  #Shops  #Brands  #Queries  #Coupons  #Records  Avg Length  30,358  447,878  4,704  109,665  49,859  111,646  64,388  247,313  19.8  Table 2: Statistics of Multi-Behavior DataSets  also incorporate the time information as a replacement of RNN/CNN. Then we show how the average user AUC for the test set evolves along with the training procedure in Figure 2. We can see that ATRank converges much faster than RNN or CNN-based methods in training, since ATRank does not incur less-parallelizable operations as in RNN, and any behavior could be affected by the other in just one layer of self attention. Though BPR is faster in training, it has a very pool performance.  Results on Multi-type Behavior Dataset We train the general model to evaluate the probability of the next user action, including all types of behaviors. We evaluate 7 tasks regarding different parts of the dataset as the train set and the test set. One2one model. First we train three models using only one type of the behaviors and predict on the same type of behavior, namely item2item, coupon2coupon, query2query as baseline, we refer these type of model as one2one model. All2one model. Then we train another three models using all types of the behaviors as user history and predict each type of behavior separately, namely all2item, all2coupon, all2query, we refer these models as all2one model. All2all model. Finally we train a unified model for multitask evaluation, using all types of user behaviors to predict any type of behavior at the same time, and we refer this model as all2all model. Sample generation. In the multi-type behavior dataset we build, the item samples are the click actions in one of the inner-shop recommendation scenarios, which are collected from the online click log of that scenario containing both positive and negative samples. The user behaviors, however, are not limited to that scenario. We build the coupon samples by using the behaviors before the coupon receiving action, and the negative sample is randomly sampled in the rest of the coupons. The query samples are made similar with the coupon samples. Then we show the average user AUC of all three models in table 5 respecitvely. We can see that, all2one model utilizes all types of user behaviors so that it performs better than the one2one models which only use the same type of behavior. The all2all model actually performs three different tasks using only one model, which shows that it can benefit from these mix-typed training process and achieve comparable performance with the highly optimized individual models.  Case Study We try to explain the effects of self-attention and vanillaattention in our model separately by case study. We visualize  Dataset BPR Bi-LSTM Bi-LSTM + Attention CNN + Max Pooling ATRank  Electro. 0.7982 0.8757 0.8769 0.8804 0.8921  Clothe. 0.7061 0.7869 0.7835 0.7786 0.7905  Table 3: AUC on Amazon Dataset  a user buying sequence from amazon dataset in Figure 4(a), which are one bag for woman, one ring, one hat for men, five jewelry of all kinds, one women’s legging and women’s shows respectively, the ranking item is a women’s hoodie. We first illustrate how the self-attention scores look like among those behaviors in different semantic spaces in Figure 3. Here the items that a user has bought form a timeline placed repeatedly as coordinate, and the heat map matrix represent the self-attention scores between any two behaviors in several different semantic space. Note that, the score matrix is normalized through row-oriented softmax so that it is asymmetric. Then we have several observations from the Figure 3. First, different semantic space may focus on different behaviors, since the heat distributions vary a lot in all the 8 latent spaces. Second, in some spaces, e.g., space I, II, III and VIII, the relative trends of the attention score vectors keep the same for each row’s behavior, while the strength is varied. The higher scores tend to gather around some specific columns. These spaces may consider more about the overall importance of a behavior among them. Third, in some other spaces, the higher scores tend to form a dense square. Take the space VI as an example, behavior 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 may form a group of jewelries, among which user behaviors have very high inner attention scores. Those spaces probably consider more about relationships of category similarities. It then can be concluded that self-attention models the impacts among the user behaviors in different semantic spaces. Then we study the effects of vanilla-attention in ATRank in Figure 4. We can see that the attention score for each latent space also varies a lot in Figure 4(b). Some latent spaces, e.g., space I, VII, VIII, highlight only the most correlated behaviors, while others like II, III show the average aggregation of all the behaviors. Note that, the space number of vanilla attention does not have a necessarily correspondence with that of self-attention, because there is a feedforward neural network that performs another non-linear projections on the concatenated self-attention vectors.  Time Range(#Day) Avg Att-Score  [0, 2) 0.2494  [2, 4) 0.1655  [4, 8) 0.1737  [8, 16) 0.1770  [16, 32) 0.1584  [32, 64) 0.1259  [64, 128) 0.1188  Table 4: Average Attention Score for Different Time Bucket over Amazon Dataset  Figure 3: Case Study: Heatmap of Self-Attention in ATRank Predict Target Bi-LSTM Bi-LSTM + Attention CNN + Max Pooling ATRank-one2one ATRank-all2one ATRank-all2all  Item 0.6779 0.6754 0.6762 0.6785 0.6825 0.6759  Query 0.6019 0.5999 0.6100 0.6132 0.6297 0.6199  Coupon 0.8500 0.8413 0.8611 0.8601 0.8725 0.8587  Table 5: AUC on Ali Multi Behavior Dataset (a) Average Vanilla-Attention Score over All Latent Space  Conclusion This paper proposes an attention-based behavior modeling framework called ATRank, which is evaluated on recommendation tasks. ATRank can model with heterogeneous user behaviors using only the attention model. Behaviors interactions are captured using self-attention in multiple semantic spaces. The model can also perform multi-task that predict all types of user actions using one unified model, which shows comparable performance with the highly optimized individual models. In the experiment, we show that our method achieves faster convergence while obtains better performance. We also give a case study that shows the insight of the how attention works in ATRank.  (b) Vanilla-Attention Score in Different Latent Spaces  Figure 4: Case Study on Vanilla-Attention in ATRank  Acknowledgments This work was partially supported by National Key Research and Development Program No. 2016YFB1000700, NSFC under Grant No. 61572040, and Alibaba-PKU joint Program.  References [Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014] Bahdanau, D.; Cho, K.; and Bengio, Y. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473. [Bordes et al. 2013] Bordes, A.; Usunier, N.; Weston, J.; and Yakhnenko, O. 2013. Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. In International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2787–2795. [Chang et al. 2015] Chang, S.; Han, W.; Tang, J.; Qi, G.-J.; Aggarwal, C. C.; and Huang, T. S. 2015. Heterogeneous network embedding via deep architectures. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 119–128. ACM. [Cheng et al. 2016] Cheng, H.-T.; Koc, L.; Harmsen, J.; Shaked, T.; Chandra, T.; Aradhye, H.; Anderson, G.; Corrado, G.; Chai, W.; Ispir, M.; Anil, R.; Haque, Z.; Hong, L.; Jain, V.; Liu, X.; and Shah, H. 2016. Wide & deep learning for recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Deep Learning for Recommender Systems, DLRS 2016, 7–10. [Cheng, Dong, and Lapata 2016] Cheng, J.; Dong, L.; and Lapata, M. 2016. Long short-term memory-networks for machine reading. arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.06733. [Chung et al. 2014] Chung, J.; Gulcehre, C.; Cho, K.; and Bengio, Y. 2014. Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555. [Covington, Adams, and Sargin 2016] Covington, P.; Adams, J.; and Sargin, E. 2016. Deep neural networks for youtube recommendations. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, 191–198. ACM. [Cui et al. 2016] Cui, Y.; Chen, Z.; Wei, S.; Wang, S.; Liu, T.; and Hu, G. 2016. Attention-over-attention neural networks for reading comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.04423. [Gehring et al. 2017] Gehring, J.; Auli, M.; Grangier, D.; Yarats, D.; and Dauphin, Y. N. 2017. Convolutional sequence to sequence learning. ArXiv e-prints. [Hariri, Mobasher, and Burke 2012] Hariri, N.; Mobasher, B.; and Burke, R. 2012. Context-aware music recommendation based on latenttopic sequential patterns. In Proceedings of the sixth ACM conference on Recommender systems, 131–138. ACM. [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997] Hochreiter, S., and Schmidhuber, J. 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural computation 9(8):1735–1780. [Kim 2014] Kim, Y. 2014. Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.5882. [Lin et al. 2015] Lin, Y.; Liu, Z.; Zhu, X.; Zhu, X.; and Zhu, X. 2015. Learning entity and relation embeddings for knowledge graph completion. In Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2181–2187. [Lin et al. 2017] Lin, Z.; Feng, M.; Santos, C. N. d.; Yu, M.; Xiang, B.; Zhou, B.; and Bengio, Y. 2017. A struc-  tured self-attentive sentence embedding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03130. [Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015] Luong, M.-T.; Pham, H.; and Manning, C. D. 2015. Effective approaches to attention-based neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.04025. [McAuley et al. 2015] McAuley, J.; Targett, C.; Shi, Q.; and Van Den Hengel, A. 2015. Image-based recommendations on styles and substitutes. In Proceedings of the 38th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 43–52. ACM. [Mikolov et al. 2013] Mikolov, T.; Sutskever, I.; Chen, K.; Corrado, G. S.; and Dean, J. 2013. Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 3111– 3119. [Ngiam et al. 2011] Ngiam, J.; Khosla, A.; Kim, M.; Nam, J.; Lee, H.; and Ng, A. Y. 2011. Multimodal deep learning. In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on machine learning (ICML-11), 689–696. [Rendle et al. 2009] Rendle, S.; Freudenthaler, C.; Gantner, Z.; and Schmidt-Thieme, L. 2009. Bpr: Bayesian personalized ranking from implicit feedback. In Proceedings of the twenty-fifth conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, 452–461. AUAI Press. [Rendle et al. 2011] Rendle, S.; Gantner, Z.; Freudenthaler, C.; and Schmidt-Thieme, L. 2011. Fast context-aware recommendations with factorization machines. In Proceedings of the 34th international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in Information Retrieval, 635–644. ACM. [Vaswani et al. 2017] Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L.; Gomez, A. N.; Kaiser, L.; and Polosukhin, I. 2017. Attention is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03762. [Vinyals et al. 2015] Vinyals, O.; Toshev, A.; Bengio, S.; and Erhan, D. 2015. Show and tell: A neural image caption generator. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 3156–3164. [Wang et al. 2014] Wang, Z.; Zhang, J.; Feng, J.; and Chen, Z. 2014. Knowledge graph embedding by translating on hyperplanes. AAAI - Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. [Wu et al. 2016] Wu, S.; Ren, W.; Yu, C.; Chen, G.; Zhang, D.; and Zhu, J. 2016. Personal recommendation using deep recurrent neural networks in netease. In IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering, 1218–1229. [Xu et al. 2015] Xu, K.; Ba, J.; Kiros, R.; Cho, K.; Courville, A.; Salakhudinov, R.; Zemel, R.; and Bengio, Y. 2015. Show, attend and tell: Neural image caption generation with visual attention. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2048–2057. [Zhai et al. 2016] Zhai, S.; Chang, K.-h.; Zhang, R.; and Zhang, Z. M. 2016. Deepintent: Learning attentions for online advertising with recurrent neural networks. In Proceed-  ings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 1295–1304. ACM. [Zhang et al. 2014] Zhang, Y.; Dai, H.; Xu, C.; Feng, J.; Wang, T.; Bian, J.; Wang, B.; and Liu, T.-Y. 2014. Sequential click prediction for sponsored search with recurrent neural networks. In AAAI, 1369–1375. [Zheng, Noroozi, and Yu 2017] Zheng, L.; Noroozi, V.; and Yu, P. S. 2017. Joint deep modeling of users and items using reviews for recommendation. In Proceedings of the Tenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 425–434. ACM. [Zhou et al. 2017] Zhou, G.; Song, C.; Zhu, X.; Ma, X.; Yan, Y.; Dai, X.; Zhu, H.; Jin, J.; Li, H.; and Gai, K. 2017. Deep interest network for click-through rate prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06978.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
