Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_5190

Abstract:
Cakewalk Sampling  Uri Patish 1 Shimon Ullman 1  arXiv:1802.09030v1 [stat.ML] 25 Feb 2018  Abstract Combinatorial optimization is a common theme in computer science which underlies a considerable variety of problems. In contrast to the continuous setting, combinatorial problems require special solution strategies, and it’s hard to come by generic schemes like gradient methods for continuous domains. We follow a standard construction of a parametric sampling distribution that transforms the problem to the continuous domain, allowing us to optimize the expectation of a given objective using estimates of the gradient. In spite of the apparent generality, such constructions are known to suffer from highly variable gradient estimates, and thus require careful tuning that is done in a problem specific manner. We show that a simple trick of converting the objective values to their cumulative probabilities fixes the distribution of the objective, allowing us to derive an online optimization algorithm that can be applied in a generic fashion. As an experimental benchmark we use the task of finding cliques in undirected graphs, and we show that our method, even when blindly applied, consistently outperforms related methods. Notably, on the DIMACS clique benchmark, our method approaches the performance of the best clique finding algorithms without access to the graph structure, and only through objective function evaluations, thus providing significant evidence to the generality and effectivity of our method.  1. Introduction Combinatorial optimization is one of the foundational problems of computer science, and many theoretical and real world problems can be described using such formulation. Though in general such problems are NP-hard (Papadimitriou, 2003), for many real world applications lo1 Department of Computer Science and Applied Math, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. Correspondence to: Uri Patish <uri.patish@gmail.com>.  cally optimal solutions can be of great use. In machine learning for example, a classical task is to divide a given set of examples into a fixed number of groups in a manner that would minimize exemplar distances within each group, and algorithms such as k-means (MacQueen et al., 1967) are frequently used to approach such problems. The continuous and persistent use of k-means in a wide variety of applications till this day proves that from a practical point of view, algorithms that return locally optimal solutions can be quite useful. In spite of the aforementioned understanding being shared among many practitioners, it seems that to date no single method has emerged as a canonical method for approaching combinatorial problems. This stands in stark contrast when compared with continuous optimization. In the former setting, gradient based algorithms can be applied to a variety of problems in a generic fashion, and these seem to provide useful solutions both in the convex as well as in the non-convex settings, a property that underlies much of the success of deep learning methods (LeCun et al., 2015). Thus, while for the continuous settings gradient based methods can be regarded the canonical optimization method, in the combinatorial case it seems that each problem needs special consideration. Sometimes problem specific greedy algorithms are the method of choice. In other times, algorithms that iteratively transform one solution to another in some non-deterministic fashion such as MCMC or genetic algorithm methods will be useful, and in others cases, gradient free methods will dominate (Avriel, 2003). Nonetheless, it seems one that overarching property is that whenever a combinatorial problem could be parameterized in some manner that allows access to a gradient, greater efficiency could be achieved. One standard way to achieve this is to construct a parametric distribution over the space of solutions, and to search for the parameters which optimize the expected value of some given objective function. Once a problem is transformed in such a manner, the gradient can be estimated through sampling, and gradient based updates can be used to find optimal parameters of the distribution. At this point, sampling from the former returns locally optimal solutions with high probability. In spite of the apparent generality of such optimization algorithms, the aforementioned gradient estimates require special attention. In particular, these are composed of the  Cakewalk Sampling  log-likelihood-gradient of each example, multiplied by the objective value of that example. On the one hand, such dependence on the objective values is what allows such algorithms to give higher likelihood for examples that achieve better objective values. On the other, such direct dependence on the objective values effects the distribution of the gradient estimates, a property that makes it particularly hard to find the right step size when performing the gradient update. This phenomenon is pronounced both when optimizing general objective functions whose scale is unknown in advance, and certainly during the course of the optimization when some optimum is approached. While there are methods for rescaling the estimated gradient such as actorcritic methods in reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 2017), or methods for reducing the variance of various estimators (Ross, 2013), these are typically constructed in a problem specific manner. Following this understanding, we set on constructing a generic surrogate objective function whose set of locally optimal solutions includes those of the original problem, and which has the same distribution for every possible objective function. On the outset, seems that finding such general purpose surrogate objective function could be hard. Nonetheless, we show that a simple trick of transforming the actual objective values with their cumulative probabilities solves most of the problem. By transforming the objective in such a manner, we fix the distribution of the objective values throughout the optimization, a feat which allows us to derive an online stochastic optimization algorithm that can be applied in a generic fashion. Since the crux of our method is based on capitalizing on the cumulative distribution function (CDF henceforth) of the original objective, we refer to our method as CAkEWaLK which stands for CumulAtivEly Weighted LiKelihood. We start by describing a standard stochastic optimization algorithm for combinatorial problems in section 2, and then proceed to present the Cakewalk method in section 3. In section 4 we discuss how Cakewalk is related to multi-arm bandits algorithms, to policy-gradient methods in reinforcement learning, and to the cross-entropy method (De Boer et al., 2005). In particular, we show that for some choice of a surrogate objective, our stochastic optimization framework produces an online version of the cross entropy method (CE henceforth). Furthermore, we show how this surrogate objective can be adapted in a few ways, and through experimentation, we demonstrate the effectivity of a new surrogate objective. To guarantee that our method is effective even for hard combinatorial problems, we focus on problems that in general are NP-Hard. For that matter, in section 5 we demonstrate how Cakewalk could be used to find inclusion-maximal cliques in undirected graphs, and in section 6 we report its performance on a dataset of graphs on which results are regularly published. On this dataset, we show how Cakewalk significantly outperforms similar  online optimizers both in term of the quality of the solutions it finds, and in terms of its sampling efficiency.  2. Background We set out on constructing a stochastic optimization algorithm for combinatorial optimization problems, and start by stating the problem. Let f be an objective function which we need to maximize, and let x ∈ [M ] N be a string that describes N items such that each xj is one of a discrete set of M items. In this text we denote discrete sets {1, . . . , K} using [K] . Our goal is to search the space X = [M ] N for some x⋆ that achieves an optimal f (x⋆ ) = y ⋆ . Since X is discrete, in general this problem is NP-Hard (maximum clique can be reduced to this description), hence we focus only on finding locally optimal solutions rather than the global optimum x⋆ . Thus, we suppose that along with f we’re also given a neighbourhood function N that maps each x to its neighboring set, and that our goal is to return some locally optimal solution x∗ ∈ Xf∗ where the set of locally optimal solutions Xf∗ is defined as follows, Xf∗ = {x ∈ X |∀x′ ∈ N (x) .f (x) ≥ f (x′ )}  (1)  Preferably, we would like to find some x∗ whose objective value y ∗ = f (x∗ ) is as large as possible, though in general, this cannot be guaranteed. In section 5 we exemplify this form of optimization using the problem of finding inclusion maximal cliques. We describe a stochastic optimization algorithm for tackling optimization problems of this form. Let X be a random variable that is defined over X , and which is distributed according to some parametric distribution Pθ that the algorithm maintains. In addition, let Y be a random variable that is defined over the values of the objective function f , i.e. Y = f (X). We emphasize that in this text we refer to random variables using capital English letters in bold such as X or Y , and we use x and y to refer to elements in their appropriate sample spaces (deterministic quantities). During the optimization, the algorithm iteratively samples solutions x according to Pθ , and it updates the parameters θ ∈ Rd which govern Pθ in a manner that reflects how good is the objective value y = f (x) with which x is associated. Thus, by ’pushing’ Pθ towards xs that are associated with high y values, the algorithm increases its probability of sampling solutions that are closer in some sense to good xs. Initially Pθ (X = x) is multivariate uniform (fully specified in section 3.2), but as the optimization continues, the algorithm decreases the entropy in the distribution until eventually only few solutions become likely, and sampling some x from Pθ , with high probability, returns one of several locally optimal solutions. As we discuss an iterative algorithm that at each iteration t up-  Cakewalk Sampling  dates the parameters θt , we refer to the random variables that correspond to Pθt by X t and Y t . Lastly, as a short hand notation, we refer to Pθ (X = x) simply by Pθ (x).  minder of the text we drop the superscript k when referring to xkt and ytk .  Since we learn a distribution function, we say that our learning objective J(θ) is to maximize the expectation over x ∼ Pθ of the original objective which we denote as Eθ [Y ]. To find the parameters θ which maximize Eθ [Y ], we derive a gradient ascent algorithm which relies on gradient estimate of ∇θ Eθ [Y ]. To estimate the gradient, we use the log-derivative trick, X ∇θ Eθ [Y ] = ∇θ [yPθ (x)]  3. Cakewalk Method  x∈X  =  X  [y∇θ Pθ (x)]  X  [y∇θ log Pθ (x) Pθ (x)]  x∈X  =  x∈X  = Eθ [Y ∇θ log Pθ (X)]  (2)  and we can use Monte Carlo estimation (Wasserman, 2013) to estimate Eθ [Y ∇θ log Pθ (X)]. Traditionally, at each  K iteration t, a large sample St = xkt , ytk k=1 of some fixed size K is sampled using Pθ t . Denoting this estimate by ∆t , then the update at iteration t that has the following form, θ t = θt−1 + ηt ∆t ∆t =  1 K  K X  k=1    ytk ∇θ log Pθ xkt  (3)   (4)  where ηt is a learning rate parameter (step size) that is predetermined. We describe the update step using a vanilla gradient update mostly for illustratory purposes, though in practice any gradient based update such as AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011) or Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) can be used instead. Turns out that for positive learning rates this stochastic optimization scheme converges to a local maximum of J, and when using the optimal parameters θ∗ , sampling from Pθ∗ returns locally optimal solutions x∗ ∈ Xf∗ with high probability (Williams, 1992). Nonetheless, such gradient estimates are known to be highly variable (Paisley et al., 2012), which requires drawing large samples at each iteration which is costly. Though there are techniques for reducing the variance of such estimates (Ross, 2013), these are mostly useful when tied to the specifics of some given objective. We approach this problem differently, and consider instead how can we adapt the optimization objective in a manner that allows us to rely on highly noisy gradient estimates that only involve a single example (i.e., setting K = 1), while ensuring we converge to a distribution that still allows us to sample some x∗ ∈ Xf∗ . Since we focus on online updates, for the re-  At this point, we’ve set the stage for discussing the main innovation we introduce in this work, a surrogate objective function that preserves the original set of optimal solutions, and which can be optimized using generic online updates. To achieve this, we start by examining equations 3 and 4 and observing that if we update θ in the direction of ∇θ log Pθ (x), ηy can be considered as the step we’re taking in that direction. Thus, the sign and magnitude of ηy essentially determine whether we increase or decrease the likelihood of x, and to what extent we do so. The implication this has over the optimization is that the distribuT tions of {ηt Y t }t=1 determine the course of the optimization. If for example |ηt Y t | is unbounded from above for all t, we might take steps that are too large, which might cause us to diverge. Another scenario that involves large steps is that we do converge, though we’ll decrease the entropy in Pθ too fast, and we won’t have the chance to sample enough solutions from X before converging to some bad local optimum. Steps that are too small are unfavorable as well, as these will keep the sampling distribution too close to uniform, and due to the combinatorial nature of X , finding good xs can take exponentially many examples. This extends to scenarios that involve functions that have a different scale. For example, suppose that we have two functions such that f2 (x) = cf1 (x) for every x, with c being some fixed positive constant. Clearly, Xf∗1 = Xf∗2 , nonetheless, sampling and updating the parameters using equations 3 and 4 would change the speed of the optimization by a factor c. Though one can adjust the learning rates to the particularities of some given objective, such an approach would require that we tune the optimization on a case by case basis. Lastly, since in general we don’t know ahead of time the distribution of each Y t , it seems that if we follow the construction presented in section 2, we won’t be able to determine the series {ηt }Tt=1 in a manner that would fit all objective functions. This reasoning leads us to conclude that if we wish to obtain generic updates that fit the aforementioned optimization scheme, we must come up with some fixed surrogate objective function which would preserve the set of optimal solutions of the original objective. To achieve this, we suggest a weight function w that when composed over f (i.e. w ◦ f ) produces a surrogate objective that meets these criteria. Preserving the original set of optimal solution is the easy part, as all we need to do is to require that w will be mono∗ tonic increasing, and that would imply that Xf∗ ⊆ Xw◦f ∗ (and strict monotonicity would ensure that Xf = Xw∗ though we don’t insist on that). The harder part is to con-  Cakewalk Sampling  struct w in a manner that would fix the distribution of w(Y t ) for all t. Nonetheless, basic probability tells us that if Ft is the CDF of Yt , then Ft (Y t ) is uniformly distributed on [0, 1] (Wasserman, 2013). Since every CDF is monotonic increasing, if we construct w using Ft , we can preserve the original set of optimal solutions, and make significant progress towards our goal. Next, since insisting that w (yt ) ∈ [0, 1] might not be ideal, we take this idea one step further, and rescale Ft (y) using another bounded monotonic increasing function g : [0, 1] → [a, b] where a, b ∈ R will be our desired bounds. To summarize, the core element that makes our online optimization as effective is a surrogate objective function that has the following form, w (y) = g (F (y)) (5) Next, since we don’t have access to F in general, as was the case with the gradient, we need to estimate it from data. Fortunately enough, since the image of f is one dimensional (an optimization objective), order statistics can supply us with highly reliable non-parametric estimates for the CDF of each Y t . The only question that comes up is how can we perform the aforementioned estimation without drawing a large sample at each iteration. Due to equation 6, if we use a sampling distribution for which k∇θ log Pθ (x)k is bounded, then since w is bounded as well, k∆k will be bounded for every x and y. The main implication of this property is that we can control how different the parameters will be between any two iterations, i.e., that for any two iterations t and t− k where k ∈ [t − 1] we can make kθt − θt−k k as small as we want simply by changing ηt . Thus, instead of drawing a sample of size k on each iteration t, we can say the last objective values yt−1 , . . . , yt−k are approximately i.i.d according Pθt−1 . Therefore, if we use small enough learning rates, we can estimate Ft−1 as follows, F̂t−1 (y) =  k 1X I [yt−i < y] k i=1  In our experiments, using some fixed learning rate η ∈ (0, 1) along with k = η1 seem to work quite well. Overall, the Cakewalk parameters’ update has the following form,   ∆t = g F̂t−1 (yt ) ∇θ log Pθ (xt )  (6)  We note that whenever this assumption doesn’t hold, one can draw a large sample for estimating both the CDF and the gradient, and still enjoy the benefits of our ’varianceinvariant’ surrogate objective. By fixing the distribution of the former, for bounded k∇θ log Pθ (x)k, this also fixes the variance of the gradient estimates, which is likely to improve the reliability of these estimates. Nonetheless, in  this text, we prefer to focus on the online version which we deem as reasonable, and which offers considerable runtime savings. 3.1. Weight Functions In this section, we focus on a single iteration t, and thus, drop the subscript t in all cases. The purpose of the first option we present is to illustrate the connection between our algorithm, and the CE method. For that reason, we denote this weight function as ŵCE and its associated transformation by gCE . Given some small ρ ∈ [0, 1] which is decided by the user a-priori (typically, 0.1 or 0.01), the weight function is defined as follows,   ŵCE (y) = gCE F̂ (y) i h = I F̂ (y) ≥ 1 − ρ Clearly, for any fixed ρ, gCE is monotonic increasing and bounded, and ŵCE (Y ) is a Bernoulli random variable with probability ρ, and thus, |ŵCE (Y )| is bounded. Notably, using gCE in equation 6 leads to an update which can be considered as an online version of the CE method. There are two main disadvantages to gCE . First of all, it relies on another parameter ρ that requires manual tuning. More importantly, gCE uses only the highest ρ percentile of the examples to update Pθ (x) while in fact the worst xs supply valuable information - they have low objective values, and thus, their likelihood should be decreased rather than simply ignored. Thus, we suggest two weight functions which fix this issue. Probably the simplest option is to use the empirical CDF directly, i.e. w = F̂ , which would make w (Y ) uniform discrete on [0, 1]. While this weighting doesn’t involve any extra parameters, nor does it ignore the information supplied by every x, it still has one major drawback, it leads to an increase in the likelihood of every example it sees. This create a bias towards xs that have already been sampled, compared with xs that weren’t, even though their associated objective value might be better. Since X grows exponentially fast with N , as N grows, examples that are drawn early in the process can influence the course of the optimization dramatically. Following this reasoning, we adjust F̂ so that it would only increase the likelihood of only half of the examples, and decrease the likelihood of the other half. To do so, we define ŵ as follows, ŵ (y) = 2F̂ (y) − 1 By construction, it follows that ŵ (Y ) is uniform discrete on [−1, 1]. In this fashion, when applied with some fixed learning rate, ŵ determines whether the likelihood of some  Cakewalk Sampling  Algorithm 1 Cakewalk input f , Pθ , k, U {objective function f , sampling distribution Pθ , integer k, gradient addition rule Add} initialize θ 0 repeat {for every t in 1, 2, . . . } xt ∼ Pθt−1 {sampling an example} yt = f (xt ) {objective value evaluation} if t > k then   P wt = 2 k1 ki=1 I [yt−i < yt ] − 1 ∆t = wt ∇θ log Pθ (xt ) θt = Add (θt−1 , ∆t ) end if until convergence return x∗ which had the highest y ∗  Then, Pθ (x)  =  Y  j∈[N ]  P  eθxj ,j θk,j k∈[M] e  Next, we proceed to calculate ∇θ log Pθ (x) to complete the update rule that is used by our algorithm. Stated in terms of partial derivatives, ∂ log Pθ (x) = I [xj = i] − Pθ (xj = i) ∂θi,j and therefore k∇θ log Pθ (x)k is bounded, making it a valid sampling distribution for our method.  4. Related Work example will be increased or decreased, and to what extent. Notably, this is achieved along with full specification of the distribution of ŵ (Y ). This is a major advantage compared with, for example, transforming Y with its estimated z-score, as in this case we can’t determine how w (Y ) is distributed, which might trip the optimization whenever Y isn’t a normal random variable. Furthermore, for the ztransform, we can’t guarantee that|w (Y )| is bounded, and without such boundedness, the optimization might both diverge, and the online estimation of w will suffer. We summarize Cakewalk with ŵ, and any gradient addition rule Add (this includes learning rates) in algorithm 1. 3.2. Sampling Distribution Before presenting some specific distribution, we note that one can construct problem specific distributions which capture prior knowledge about a given problem. Having said that, in this section we describe a simple distribution that could be used in a variety of problems, and which is designed in a manner that would reduce its number of parameters. To do so, we factorize Pθ (x) into a sequence of independent distributions each defined over a different dimension, and therefore, the number of parameters required to represent Pθ grows only linearly with M N , instead of the exponential number of parameters that is required to represent the full joint distribution. In this way, we search for elements xj that are on average useful to many possible solutions in terms of their associated objective value. By combining such elements in different positions, we can iteratively progress towards solutions that overall perform well. In this formulation, each xj is drawn independently according to a softmax distribution,  ∀i ∈ [M ] , j ∈ [N ] .Pθ (xj = i) = P  eθi.j  k∈[M]  eθk,j  As noted before, our method, in spite of being derived from a different perspective, is closely related to the CE method. The CE method was initially introduced by Rubinstein as a method for estimating low probability events (Rubinstein, 1997) by iteratively adapting an importance sampler towards some event of interest. Later, Rubinstein adapted CE to combinatorial optimization problems (Rubinstein, 2001) by using a sampling distribution which is similar to the one we presented in section 3.2 in which case the likelihood ratio is 1. Turns out that Rubinstein’s construction in this case is in fact equivalent to constructing a weighted likelihood estimator (De Boer et al., 2005), which is similar to the stochastic optimization perspective we’ve used to derive our method. The major benefit of this perspective is that it allows to generalize the type of weights which are used, and in particular, we show how using the empirical CDF without thresholding can be used to construct weighting schemes that are superior to Rubinstein’s. Furthermore, relying on gradient updates provides Cakewalk with a few more benefits when compared with the closed form updates of CE. First of all, using gradient updates allows us to smoothly update the parameters without any of the smoothing tricks used by Rubinstein (De Boer et al., 2005). Secondly, it paves the way for using sampling distributions which cannot be updated in closed form. Lastly, by relying on bounded gradient updates, we are able to estimate the CDF in an online manner, and thus avoid the computational costs of drawing a large sample on each iteration. This in turn, reduces the runtime costs of Cakewalk in few orders of magnitude. The next family of methods which our algorithm is related to are policy gradient methods in reinforcement learning. Reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 1998) is concerned with sequential decision problems whose purpose is to maximize some long term goal. In this setting, a learner sequentially takes actions, and through trail-and-error, a function that maps states to actions is learned. Like we  Cakewalk Sampling  do, policy gradient methods construct a parametric probability distribution which is updated in a manner that give higher likelihood for sequences of actions which resulted in higher long term rewards. The research on such methods was initiated by Williams with his REINFORCE algorithm (Williams, 1988), an algorithm which is closely related to Cakewalk. Notably, the REINFORCE parameter update, when written using our notation, takes the following form ∆ = E [α (Y − β) ∇θ log Pθ (X)], which clarifies the connection between the two. Most of the work on policy gradient methods essentially discusses how to rescale Y using different α and β which reflect estimates of how Y would behave in various scenarios. For example, actor critic methods (Sutton & Barto, 2017) try to set β according to estimates of E (Y ) when Y is distributed as a Markov decision process (Sutton & Barto, 2017). Clearly, this requires modeling Y in a particular manner, and thus, must be applied on a problem by problem basis. Of these methods, probably the natural actor-critic algorithm (Peters & Schaal, 2008) better fits Cakewalk’s general purpose nature. The former rescales the estimated gradient by multiplying it by the inverse of the Fisher information matrix, which in turn, requires accurate estimates of both the gradient, and of the Fisher information matrix. This makes the natural actor-critic considerably more computationally expensive than online algorithms such as Cakewalk or REINFORCE, as it requires large samples for estimating the two accurately, and due to the inversion operation. Lastly, we note that while policy gradient methods can be effective after careful tuning to a particular problem, they are notorious for being highly sensitive to the choice of learning rates. This stands in stark contrast to Cakewalk which can be used with the same fixed learning rate since the distribution of ŵ (Y ) is fixed for any Y , therefore this is the key that makes Cakewalk such a general purpose optimizer. The third family of algorithms to which our method is related are multi-arm bandits algorithms. In the bandits setting, a learner is faced with a sequential decision problem, where in each round the learner has to choose an arm, and each arm is associated with some non-deterministic loss. After an arm is chosen, the loss associated with that arm is revealed, and the learner can update the rule by which the next action will be chosen. The goal of the learner is to minimize the cumulative loss suffered during this process, compared with the best single arm in hindsight, and algorithms for this setting are judged by asymptotical comparison of the two. Initially suggested by Thompson (Thompson, 1933), this setting has been explored extensively with the notable successes of the UCB algorithm (Auer, 2002; Auer et al., 2002a) for cases where the losses are stochastic, and the Exp3 (Auer et al., 1995; 2002b) for when they can even be determined by an adversary, and over the years these have become a basis for a  wide variety of algorithms (Bubeck et al., 2012). Of particular interest to our setting is the case where the arms are high dimensional and are a compact subset of Rd as in online linear optimization algorithms pioneered by (Awerbuch & Kleinberg, 2004; McMahan & Blum, 2004), d or a subset of {0, 1} as is in combinatorial bandits algorithms pioneered by (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2012). In both cases, to achieve useful performance bounds when faced with infinitely many arms, the losses are assumed to be a linear function of the arms. Closer to the optimization setting are pure exploration bandits algorithms (Audibert & Bubeck, 2010) which are only judged by the optimal solution which they return, an idea that was even adapted to the combinatorial setting (Chen et al., 2014). The key difference between bandits algorithms and our method is that the losses associated with each of the arms are non-deterministic, and thus in the bandits setting the main challenge is to balance estimating the statistics associated with each of the arms, with exploiting the information gathered thus far. In the optimization setting on the other hand, the goal is simply to find the best deterministic solution using the least number of steps. Thus, in spite of the apparent similarity, it is this fundamental difference that separates the optimization from bandits settings, and which accordingly, leads to different algorithms.  5. Application to Clique Finding In this section, we investigate the problem of finding cliques in a graph, and start by stating the problem. Suppose we’re given a graph G = (V, E) where V = [N ] is a set of vertices, and E ⊆ V × V is a set of edges. We say that G is undirected if for every (i, j) ∈ E it follows that (j, i) ∈ E, and if this is not so, we say G is directed. Given some undirected graph G, we say that G is complete if for every i, j ∈ V it follows that (i, j) ∈ E. Let U ⊆ V , we call GU = (U, EU ) a subgraph of G if for every i, j ∈ U , (i, j) ∈ EU if and only if (i, j) ∈ E. A clique is a subset of vertices U ⊆ V such that GU is complete, and accordingly, an inclusion maximal clique is a subset U such that GU is complete, and that there is no other v ∈ V \ U such that GU∪{v} is also a complete graph. The clique number ω (G) of a graph G is the size of the largest inclusion maximal clique. Given some graph G, and an integer k ∈ N, the decision problem of maximum clique is to determine whether ω (G) is larger than k. Following the seminal work of Karp in 1972 (Karp, 1972), it follows that the maximum-clique problem is NP-complete (Papadimitriou, 2003), and thus, unless P=NP, no polynomial time can decide this problem. We find the notion of inclusion-maximality as a natural definition of local optimality, and therefore use it to study algorithms for combinatorial optimization. Thus, we proceed to describe clique finding as a combinatorial optimization problem.  Cakewalk Sampling  Table 1. Local Optimality, Soft-Clique-Size. Higher is better. * outperformed by Cakewalk ŵ in a statistical significant manner. This applies to all tables.  SGA A DAG RAD A DAM  REINFORCE  E XP 3  OCE0.01  OCE0.1  C AKEWALK F̂  0.001* 0.000* 0.000*  0.000* 0.000* 0.000*  0.001* 0.077* 0.106*  0.000* 0.691* 0.353*  0.002* 0.164* 0.184*  C AKEWALK ŵ 0.042 0.835 0.753  Table 2. Local Optimality, Inclusion-Maximality. Higher is better.  SGA A DAG RAD A DAM  REINFORCE  E XP 3  OCE0.01  OCE0.1  C AKEWALK F̂  0.000 0.000* 0.000*  0.000 0.000* 0.000*  0.000 0.063* 0.100*  0.000 0.875 0.412*  0.000 0.175* 0.212*  Given some graph G = (V, E) with N vertices, let the N space X = {0, 1} correspond to strings which determine membership in some subgraph GU . Let x ∈ X , then for each variable j ∈ V , we say that j ∈ U if and only if xj = 1. Since, x describes membership in U , we refer to such subsets as Ux . With these elements in place, we can now describe a function that maps X to [N ], and which returns a positive value if and only if Ux is a clique, Y fCS (x, G) = |Ux | I [(i, j) ∈ E] i,j∈Ux ,i6=j  Observe that  Q  I [(i, j) ∈ E] is 1 if and only if GUx  i,j∈Ux ,i6=j  is complete and 0 otherwise, thus, by multiplying it by the size of Ux , fCS returns the clique size (hence the CS) if Ux is a clique, and it return 0 if it is not. At this point, fCS and X define a combinatorial optimization problem. Nonetheless, optimizing fCS directly can be hard as it is an all-or-none kind of function, i.e., it returns a positive value only if we’ve found a clique, but it doesn’t say how close is some Ux to a clique. In this manner, an algorithm that relies on function evaluation as its only source of information will have a hard time inferring how well it progresses. For that matter, we design another objective that could inform such algorithms how densely connected is some subgraph. Thus, we replace fCS with an objective that indicates how densely connected is some Ux , and accordingly refer to it as the soft-clique-size function. Denoting it by fSCS , its definition is as follows, P I [(i, j) ∈ E] fSCS (x, G, κ) =  i,j∈Ux ,i6=j  max (|Ux | (|Ux | − 1 + κ) , 1)  with κ being some parameter in [0, 1] that rewards larger cliques. First, observe that fSCS (x, G, κ) = 0 for every Ux such that |Ux | < 2 regardless of κ. If some Ux is a  C AKEWALK ŵ 0.037 0.912 0.887  clique, for every P i, j ∈ Ux , i 6= j it follows that (i, j) ∈ E, I [(i, j) ∈ E] = |Ux | (|Ux | − 1). As and thus, i,j∈Ux ,i6=j  a result, for κ = 0, fSCS (x, G, 0) = 1 if and only if Ux is clique. Nonetheless, with κ = 0, there is no indication to the algorithm that it should prefer larger cliques over smaller ones. Thus, increasing κ gives larger cliques a ’boost’ compared with smaller cliques, though it could be that some Ux which isn’t a clique will receive a higher value than some smaller Ux′ which is a clique. Nonetheless, x |−1 , for a clique Ux , when κ = 1, fSCS (x, G, 1) = |U|U x| and thus, the larger Ux is, the closer this ratio is to 1. In this manner, fSCS rewards larger cliques. Empirically, we see that the algorithms we’ve tested aren’t very sensitive to κ, and various values of κ allows the algorithms we’ve tested to find inclusion maximal cliques. Note that sampling a clique is non-trivial since sampling algorithms do not have access to the graph itself, and cannot perform any graph related search operations.  6. Experimental Results We compare stochastic online optimizers on the clique finding problem, and focus on the latter as it has a natural definition of local optimality. Our goal is not to provide the best clique finding algorithm, but to use the problem as a benchmark for such methods. These differ from clique finding algorithms like Bron-Kerbosch(Bron & Kerbosch, 1973) as they do not have access to the graph itself, and only receive information through function evaluations. As a benchmark, we used 80 undirected graphs that were published as part of the second DIMACS challenge (Johnson & Trick, 1996) which specifically focused on combinatorial optimization, and included instances of the clique problem. Each graph in the dataset was generated using a random generator that specializes in a particular graph type that conceals cliques in a different manner. The graphs contain up to 4000 nodes,  Cakewalk Sampling  Table 3. Best-Sample to Total-Samples Ratio. Lower is better.  SGA A DAG RAD A DAM  REINFORCE  E XP 3  OCE0.01  OCE0.1  C AKEWALK F̂  0.557 0.458 0.564  0.515 0.501 0.495  0.874 0.966* 0.835*  0.945 0.820* 0.697*  0.939 0.926* 0.741*  C AKEWALK ŵ 0.927 0.657 0.619  Table 4. Largest-Returned-Clique To Largest-Known-Clique Ratio. Higher is better.  SGA A DAG RAD A DAM  REINFORCE  E XP 3  OCE0.01  OCE0.1  C AKEWALK F̂  0.000 0.000* 0.000*  0.000 0.000* 0.000*  0.000 0.077* 0.051*  0.000 0.700 0.248*  0.000 0.118* 0.139*  and are varied both in their number of nodes and in their edge density. Over the years, this dataset has become a standard benchmark for clique finding algorithms, and results on it are regularly published. We compared methods both in term of the solutions’ quality, and in terms of their sampling efficiency as some optimizers find the best solutions earlier than others. In terms of solutions’ quality, we focused on local optimality using inclusion maximality and another criterion which we specify later. We tested each method on all 80 graphs, letting it maximize the soft-clique-size function using various values of κ. To determine inclusion maximality, since a-priori we don’t know which κ will lead to an inclusion maximal clique, we’ve executed each method using each of the values 0.0, 0.1, . . . , 1.0 as κ. In each execution, we’ve executed a method for 100 |V | samples, and at the execution’s end, recorded both the soft-clique-size, and the clique-size of the best solution, as well as the sample number in which the best solution was found. In term of the methods tested, following the discussion on related work, we experimented with the CE method, a policy gradient algorithm, and a bandits algorithm. For the CE method, we only used the online version we derive in this work as only the online version can be compared directly with other online methods in terms of their sampling efficiency. We use two threshold values suggested by Rubinstein, ρ = 0.1 and ρ = 0.01, and refer to these as OCE0.1 and OCE0.01 accordingly, with the O standing for online. From the policy gradient methods, REINFORCE is probably the most related to Cakewalk in the generic and online fashion in which it can be applied, and thus we focus on it. Of the bandits family of algorithms, we considered Exp3 as the most suitable candidate due to the multi-dimensionality of the problem. For example, adding an isolated vertex v to a set of vertices U who is a clique will damage the objective. Due to such cases, we’ve used Exp3 instead of UCB. We didn’t use combinatorial bandits algorithms as  C AKEWALK ŵ 0.000 0.805 0.704  these are computationally infeasible (Bubeck et al., 2012), and are mostly useful for theoretical purposes. We applied Exp3 to each of the N elements independently. Note that the assumption of bounded losses/gains that the Exp3 algorithm is dependent upon is met by the soft-clique-size function. For the Cakewalk method, we used both the unscaled empirical CDF F̂ , and its scaled counterpart ŵ, denoting these as Cakewalk F̂ and Cakewalk ŵ. For the latter two, and for OCE0.1 and OCE0.01 we used the last 100 objective values to estimate the empirical CDF. Altogether, we experimented with 6 stochastic online optimizers. In addition, we experimented with 3 types of gradient updates. First, we used the vanilla gradient update to which we refer to as stochastic gradient ascent (SGA henceforth). In addition, we experimented with the AdaGrad and the Adam updates. Both methods are considered scale invariant, and thus, when applied in conjunction with REINFORCE make for an important comparison to Cakewalk. AdaGrad is particularly suited to our setting as applying it on indicator data is one of its classical use cases (I [xj = i] can be considered as our data). Adam on the other hand has proven as effective for training neural networks in a wide variety of problems, and nowadays is probably the mostly commonly used optimizer. We decided to experiment with Exp3 in conjunction with AdaGrad and Adam even though this revokes the theoretical guarantees of Exp3 for completeness purposes. We applied AdaGrad with δ = 10−6 , and Adam with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, ǫ = 10−6 . We used a learning rate η = 0.01 in all the executions. All the algorithms were implemented in Julia (Bezanson et al., 2017) by the authors. Altogether, we’ve tested 6 optimization methods, 3 update steps, on 80 graphs, and 11 values of κ, leading to a total of 15840 separate executions. We analyzed 4 performance measures for each of the 6 optimizers, and the 3 gradient update types, and accordingly report results in four 3 × 6 tables. In the following, we refer to each combination of an optimizer and gradient update as  Cakewalk Sampling  a method. First, we examined whether a locally optimal solution was found. To test for local optimality for the softclique-size, given a result x in some graph, we compared it to every other x′ for that graph whose Hamming distance from x is 1, and checked that no x′ s achieved higher soft-clique-size. We report average local optimality for the soft clique size in table 1. Then, to test inclusion maximality of the returned solutions, since the soft-clique-size doesn’t guarantee convergence to cliques, for every graph, we tested whether a method returned at least one inclusion maximal clique when applied with some κ.We report average inclusion maximality in table 2. Next, to analyze the sampling efficiency of each method, we calculated the ratio of the best sample number and the total number of samples used in that execution. We report average best-sample to total-samples ratio in table 3. To ensure returned solutions aren’t trivial (say cliques of size 2), for each graph, we compared the largest inclusion maximal clique found by that method, and compared it to the best known solution for that graph. We did this comparison using 37 graphs for which results are regularly published and collected (Mascia, 2015) (we did not find such results for the other 43 graphs). We report average largest-found-clique to largest-known-clique ratios in table 4. Lastly, we compared every optimizer to Cakewalk ŵ in all the experimental conditions. Comparisons were done using one sided sign test (Gibbons & Chakraborti, 2011), and to control the false discovery rate (Wasserman, 2013), the Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to calculate the significance threshold at a level of 10−6 . In each table we mark the best performing method using bold fonts. In table 3 we excluded REINFORCE and Exp3 from this comparison as they didn’t return locally optimal solutions (nearly zero in tables 1 and 2).  7. Conclusions and Discussion The results in tables 1 and 2 clearly indicate that our key innovation, the reliance on the empirical CDF to produce a surrogate objective, is the key for making effective stochastic optimizers, as both REINFORCE and Exp3 didn’t rely on the latter, and both completely failed even when aided with updates that supposedly render them as scale invariant. Notably, the OCE method, in spite of its under performance, did return useful solutions as indicated by tables 1,2 and 4. This further emphasizes our claim that the objective values should not be used directly. Nonetheless, an all-ornone kind of approach reduces the sampling efficiency as indicated by the superiority of Cakewalk over OCE in table 3. When comparing Cakewalk F̂ and Cakewalk ŵ, the superiority of the latter in all measures indicates that the cumulative probabilities need further rescaling to [−1, 1] as it is in this form which indicates to the optimizer which solutions are good, and which are not. Furthermore, it seems  that Cakewalk ŵ with AdaGrad under-the-hood results in a surprisingly effective optimizer, and the quality of the returned solutions exceeds that of any other method we’ve tested. Notably, in this regime, Cakewalk approaches the performance of the best clique finding algorithms that directly search a graph, and which are tailored to this specific task. Note that none of the tested methods had enough samples to recover the graph itself, as most graphs have more than 100 nodes, and we’ve allowed only for 100 |V | samples in each execution. Thus, it could be that without such limitations, and with proper tuning of κ (say using golden section search), Cakewalk will prove as a competitive clique finding algorithm, though we leave this to future research. Overall, we find these results as a strong indication that Cakewalk sampling is a highly effective stochastic optimization method, and we believe that future research will prove its effectiveness in other domains such as continuous non-convex optimization, and in reinforcement learning problems.  8. Acknowledgment Supported by Israeli Science Foundation grant 320/16.  References Audibert, Jean-Yves and Bubeck, Sébastien. Best arm identification in multi-armed bandits. In COLT-23th Conference on Learning Theory-2010, pp. 13–p, 2010. Auer, Peter. Using confidence bounds for exploitationexploration trade-offs. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3(Nov):397–422, 2002. Auer, Peter, Cesa-Bianchi, Nicolo, Freund, Yoav, and Schapire, Robert E. Gambling in a rigged casino: The adversarial multi-armed bandit problem. In Foundations of Computer Science, 1995. Proceedings., 36th Annual Symposium on, pp. 322–331. IEEE, 1995. Auer, Peter, Cesa-Bianchi, Nicolo, and Fischer, Paul. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit problem. Machine learning, 47(2-3):235–256, 2002a. Auer, Peter, Cesa-Bianchi, Nicolo, Freund, Yoav, and Schapire, Robert E. The nonstochastic multiarmed bandit problem. SIAM journal on computing, 32(1):48–77, 2002b. Avriel, Mordecai. Nonlinear programming: analysis and methods. Courier Corporation, 2003. Awerbuch, Baruch and Kleinberg, Robert D. Adaptive routing with end-to-end feedback: Distributed learning and geometric approaches. In Proceedings of the thirty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 45–53. ACM, 2004.  Cakewalk Sampling  Bezanson, Jeff, Edelman, Alan, Karpinski, Stefan, and Shah, Viral B. Julia: A fresh approach to numerical computing. SIAM review, 59(1):65–98, 2017. Bron, Coen and Kerbosch, Joep. Algorithm 457: finding all cliques of an undirected graph. Communications of the ACM, 16(9):575–577, 1973.  Mascia, Franco. DIMACS Clique Benchmark Set, 2015. Last update: 2015-10-26, Accessed: 2018-02-06. McMahan, H Brendan and Blum, Avrim. Online geometric optimization in the bandit setting against an adaptive adversary. In International Conference on Computational Learning Theory, pp. 109–123. Springer, 2004.  Bubeck, Sébastien, Cesa-Bianchi, Nicolo, et al. Regret analysis of stochastic and nonstochastic multi-armed bandit problems. Foundations and Trends R in Machine Learning, 5(1):1–122, 2012.  Paisley, John William, Blei, David M., and Jordan, Michael I. Variational bayesian inference with stochastic search. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2012, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, June 26 - July 1, 2012, 2012.  Cesa-Bianchi, Nicolo and Lugosi, Gábor. Combinatorial bandits. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 78 (5):1404–1422, 2012.  Papadimitriou, Christos H. Computational complexity. John Wiley and Sons Ltd., 2003.  Chen, Shouyuan, Lin, Tian, King, Irwin, Lyu, Michael R, and Chen, Wei. Combinatorial pure exploration of multiarmed bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 379–387, 2014. De Boer, Pieter-Tjerk, Kroese, Dirk P, Mannor, Shie, and Rubinstein, Reuven Y. A tutorial on the cross-entropy method. Annals of operations research, 134(1):19–67, 2005. Duchi, John C., Hazan, Elad, and Singer, Yoram. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and stochastic optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2121–2159, 2011. Gibbons, Jean Dickinson and Chakraborti, Subhabrata. Nonparametric statistical inference. In International encyclopedia of statistical science, pp. 977–979. Springer, 2011. Johnson, David S and Trick, Michael A. Cliques, coloring, and satisfiability: second DIMACS implementation challenge, October 11-13, 1993, volume 26. American Mathematical Soc., 1996. Karp, Richard M. Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In Complexity of computer computations, pp. 85– 103. Springer, 1972. Kingma, Diederik P. and Ba, Jimmy. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR, abs/1412.6980, 2014. LeCun, Yann, Bengio, Yoshua, and Hinton, Geoffrey. Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436–444, 2015. MacQueen, James et al. Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate observations. In Proceedings of the fifth Berkeley symposium on mathematical statistics and probability, volume 1, pp. 281–297. Oakland, CA, USA, 1967.  Peters, Jan and Schaal, Stefan. Natural actor-critic. Neurocomputing, 71(7-9):1180–1190, 2008. Ross, S.M. Simulation. Academic Press, 2013. ISBN 9780124158252. Rubinstein, Reuven Y. Optimization of computer simulation models with rare events. European Journal of Operational Research, 99(1):89–112, 1997. Rubinstein, Reuven Y. Combinatorial optimization, crossentropy, ants and rare events. Stochastic optimization: algorithms and applications, 54:303–363, 2001. Sutton, Richard S and Barto, Andrew G. Reinforcement learning: An introduction, volume 1. MIT press Cambridge, 1998. Sutton, Richard S and Barto, Andrew G. Reinforcement learning an introduction–second edition, in progress (draft), 2017. Thompson, William R. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of the evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 25(3/4):285–294, 1933. Wasserman, Larry. All of statistics: a concise course in statistical inference. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013. Williams, Ronald J. On the use of backpropagation in associative reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Neural Networks, volume 1, pp. 263–270. San Diego, CA., 1988. Williams, Ronald J. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine learning, 8(3-4):229–256, 1992.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
