Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_5844

Abstract:
Noname manuscript No. (will be inserted by the editor)  Modelling serendipity in a computational context  arXiv:1411.0440v5 [cs.AI] 16 May 2017  Joseph Corneli · Anna Jordanous · Christian Guckelsberger · Alison Pease · Simon Colton Abstract Building on a survey of previous theories of serendipity and creativity, we advance a sequential model of serendipitous occurrences. We distinguish between serendipity as a service and serendipity in the system itself, clarify the role of invention and discovery, and provide a measure for the serendipity potential of a system. While a system can arguably not be guaranteed to be serendipitous, it can have a high potential for serendipity. Practitioners can use these theoretical tools to evaluate a computational system’s potential for unexpected behaviour that may have a beneficial outcome. In addition to a qualitative features of serendipity potential, the model also includes quantitative ratings that can guide development work. We show how the model is used in three case studies of existing and hypothetical systems, in the context of evolutionary computing, automated programming, and (next-generation) recommender systems. From this analysis, we extract recommendations for practitioners working with computational serendipity, and outline future directions for research. Keywords serendipity, computational creativity, autonomous systems, evolutionary computing, automated programming, recommender systems  This research was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council through grants EP/L00206X, EP/J004049 as well as EP/L015846/1 and the Future and Emerging Technologies (FET) programme within the Seventh Framework Programme for Research of the European Commission, under FET-Open Grant numbers: 611553 (COINVENT) and 611560 (WHIM). J. Corneli · C. Guckelsberger · S. Colton Department of Computing, Goldsmiths, University of London Email: {firstInitial.lastName}@gold.ac.uk A. Jordanous School of Computing, University of Kent Email: a.k.jordanous@kent.ac.uk A. Pease School of Science and Engineering, University of Dundee Email: a.pease@dundee.ac.uk  2  1 Introduction The operationalisation of serendipity in computational systems presents a tantalising possibility: for example, by deploying machine learning techniques for pattern recognition, “Instead of waiting for the happy accidents in the lab, you might be able to find them in the data” (Kennedy 2016, p. 70). However – the important advances in data science that lie behind that quote notwithstanding – the idea of computational serendipity remains contentious. The most straightforward view on the matter is what Turing (1950) called “Lovelace’s Objection”: namely, that a computer “can do whatever we know how to order it to perform” (Lovelace 1842, p. 722) – and no more. Lovelace’s Objection has more recently been echoed by one of the foremost scholars of serendipity, Pek van Andel: “Like all intuitive operating, pure serendipity is not amenable to generation by a computer. The very moment I can plan or programme ‘serendipity’ it cannot be called serendipity anymore.” (van Andel 1994, p. 646) On the other side of the argument, Minsky (1967) suggested that any sufficiently complex computational system is bound to make decisions that its creators could not foresee, and may not fully understand. In this paper, we aim to theorise serendipity in computational systems, and show that computational systems can have greater or lesser potential for serendipity. Notions of serendipity are increasingly relevant in the arts, in technology, and elsewhere (McKay 2012; Rao 2015; Kennedy 2016). Serendipity may be encouraged with methods drawn from various domains, including architecture, data science, and cultural engineering. However, these applied approaches tend to be ad hoc, foregoing systematic investigation into the best ways to encourage serendipity. Indeed, in line with the objections sketched above, the question remains as to whether a systematic approach to serendipity is even possible. Computational thinking around this question promises further illumination. Most previous research on serendipity in a computing context focuses on stimulating serendipitous discovery on the user side. Paul André et al (2009) previously proposed a two-part model of serendipity encompassing “the chance encountering of information, and the sagacity to derive insight from the encounter.” The first phase is the one that is automated most frequently. The SerenA project for instance, developed by Deborah Maxwell et al (2012), aimed to support users in forming bridging connections from an unexpected encounter to a previously unanticipated but valuable outcome, by drawing on linked data from the web. Together with many other projects, e.g. from the domain of recommender systems (Zhang et al 2011), the SerenA system realises what we call serendipity as a service. In this paper, by contrast, rather than revisiting the topic of serendipitous discoveries on the user side which are triggered by a computational system, we focus on on modelling serendipity on the system side. We develop a model, associate evaluation criteria, and offer guidance for system designers seeking to maximise the potential for serendipity in their systems.  Modelling serendipity in a computational context  3  Prior explorations have typically focused on engineering – and in some cases aesthetics (Reichardt 1968) – rather than on theory. Attempts to develop a more systematic treatment of serendipity include the work of Figueiredo and Campos (2001), who describe several types of serendipitous “moves” that effect the transformation of a problem that cannot be solved into one that can. André et al (2009) suggest that sagacity and insight in computational systems can be improved with added domain expertise and a common language model. While these suggestions are independently valuable, they miss a degree of theoretical unity. For example, recognising new patterns and defining new problems seems to be an important part of many classic examples of serendipity, but this is considerably more ambitious than problem solving. Here, one can compare von Foerster’s ([1979] 2003) notion of a second-order cybernetics, which theorises system participants who specify their own purpose. Similarly, many historical examples of serendipity are centred on learning, rather than simply reasoning from something that is already known. Louis Pasteur, who is known for several lucky experiments (Roberts 1989; Gaughan 2010), famously remarked: “Dans les champs de l’observation le hasard ne favorise que les esprits préparés” (“In the fields of observation chance favors only the prepared mind”) (Pasteur [1854] 1939, p. 131). Even so, it is not clear from existing model that the presence or absence of talents like domain expertise and linguistic ability allow us to draw a distinction between serendipitous and non-serendipitous discovery. Lawley and Tompkins (2008) develop a well articulated process model of serendipity as a sequence of events, and Makri and Blandford (2012a) adapt this to focus on connections amongst data. Our model takes inspiration from an earlier engagement with these approaches (Pease et al 2013) and makes the application to computational systems more systematic. When we consider classic examples of serendipity, such as the practical uses for weak glue, the possibility that a life-saving antibiotic could be found growing on contaminated petri dishes, or the idea that burdock burrs could be anything but annoying, we notice radical changes in evaluation. Our approach to serendipity centres on a previously unanticipated “focus shift.” We consequently share van Andel’s view that serendipity cannot be planned or programmed: being unanticipated, this shift in focus cannot be predetermined; furthermore, results following a focus shift cannot be guaranteed. However, we suggest that a computational system can be designed to have greater or lesser potential for serendipity. Evaluation and re-evaluation are key aspects of our approach. For example, asking what weak glue could possibly be useful for might kick off an exploratory process of invention. A system that can detect previously missed opportunities and false realisations – what van Andel (1994, p. 639) terms negative serendipity – may be able to learn from them. In this paper, we propose a qualitative process model of serendipity, and a definition of the serendipity potential of a system in terms of the components the model is made of, their parameters and their interplay. We distinguish between the serendipity potential of an individual system, in contrast to the potential of a family of systems in a given domain. We apply our model in the analysis of several existing and hypothetical systems, in which we (heuristically) map  4  system features to the model’s components and component parameters. The primary limitation of our model is that it produces contextual or subjective judgements of serendipity potential, which depend on assumptions of the evaluator, and their knowledge of similar systems. Making these assumptions and knowledge explicit is one of the ways in which the model can be useful as a design and evaluation tool, as our case studies show. Although technical realisations already exist for most of the proposed components, more work is needed to realise systems that fully integrate them and thus meet the model’s criteria. We include pointers in this direction in the final sections.  Summary of contributions We distinguish “serendipity as a service” from “serendipity in the system”. In 2, drawing on a brief review of prior literature on the concept of “serendipity,” we juxtapose existing theories and models conveniently, and summarise the logical structure of serendipitous occurrences. We suggest to understand serendipity in terms of discovery, invention and creativity, and thus augment the existing literature with references from creativity research. In Section 3, we synthesise the understanding gained in the previous section in a process-oriented model and in a definition of the serendipity potential of a system. We provide a demonstration of our model and evaluation procedure in Section 4, by applying it to three case studies in evolutionary jazz improvisation, automated programming, and next-generation recommender systems. Section 5 concludes the paper with recommendations for researchers working on computational serendipity.  2 The structure of serendipitous occurrences: a literature review 2.1 Etymology and selected definitions The English term “serendipity” derives from Horace Walpole’s interpretation of the first chapter of the 1302 poem Eight Paradises, in an Italian translation from the Persian of the Sufi poet Amı̄r Khusrow. Related stories are recounted in other folktales (Mazur 2016, p. 225). The term “serendipity” is however related quite specifically to this version of the tale, and is first found in a 1757 letter from Walpole to Horace Mann: “This discovery is almost of that kind which I call serendipity, a very expressive word . . . You will understand it better by the derivation than by the definition. I once read a silly fairy tale, called The Three Princes of Serendip: as their Highness travelled, they were always making discoveries, by accidents & sagacity, of things which they were not in quest of [.]” (van Andel (1994, p. 633); cf. Remer (1965)) Following Walpole’s coinage, “serendipity” was mentioned in print only 135 times over the next 200 years, according to a survey carried out by Robert  Modelling serendipity in a computational context  5  Merton and Elinor Barber, collected in The Travels and Adventures of Serendipity (Merton and Barber 2004). Merton describes his own understanding of a generalised “serendipity pattern” and its constituent parts as follows: “The serendipity pattern refers to the fairly common experience of observing an unanticipated, anomalous and strategic datum which becomes the occasion for developing a new theory or for extending an existing theory.” (Merton 1948, p. 506) [emphasis in original] In 1986, Philippe Quéau described serendipity as “the art of finding what we are not looking for by looking for what we are not finding” (Quéau (1986), in the translation of Campos and Figueiredo (2002, p. 121)). Campbell (2005) defines it as “the rational exploitation of chance observation, especially in the discovery of something useful or beneficial.” Van Andel (1994, p. 631) describes it simply as “the art of making an unsought finding.” Roberts (1989, pp. 246–249) records 30 entries for the term “serendipity” from English language dictionaries dating from 1909 to 1989. While classic definitions required an accidental discovery, this criterion was modified or omitted later on. Roberts gives the name pseudoserendipity to “sought findings” in which a desired discovery nevertheless follows from an accident. Makri and Blandford (2012a,b) point to a continuum between sought and unsought findings, and highlight the role of subjectivity both in bringing about a serendipitous outcome, and in describing a given sequence of events as “serendipitous.” Many of Roberts’s collected definitions treat serendipity as a psychological attribute: a “gift” or “faculty.” Along these lines, Jonathan Zilberg asserts: “Chance is an event while serendipity is a capability dependent on bringing separate events, causal and non-causal together through an interpretive experience put to strategic use.” (Zilberg 2015, p. 79) Numerous historical examples exhibit features of serendipity and involve interpretive frameworks that are deployed on a social rather than on an individual scale. For instance, between Spencer Silver’s creation of high-tack, low-adhesion glue in 1968, Arthur Fry’s invention of a sticky bookmark in 1973, and the eventual launch of the distinctive canary yellow re-stickable notes in 1980, there were many opportunities for Post-it™ Notes not to have come to be (Flavell-While 2012). Merton and Barber argue that a psychological perspective needs to be integrated with a sociological perspective. “For if chance favours prepared minds, it particularly favours those at work in microenvironments that make for unanticipated sociocognitive interactions between those prepared minds. These may be described as serendipitous sociocognitive microenvironments.” (Merton and Barber 2004, p. 259–260) Large-scale scientific and technical projects generally rely on the convergence of interests of key actors and various other cultural factors. For example, Umberto Eco (2013) describes the historical role of serendipitous mistakes, falsehoods, and rumours in the production of knowledge.  6  2.2 Theories of serendipity and creativity Serendipity is typically discussed in the context of discovery. In everyday parlance, this concept is often linked with invention or creativity (Jordanous and Keller 2012). However, Henri Bergson drew the following distinction: “Discovery, or uncovering, has to do with what already exists, actually or virtually; it was therefore certain to happen sooner or later. Invention gives being to what did not exist; it might never have happened.” (Bergson [1941] 1946, p. 58) We suggest that serendipity should be understood in terms of both discovery and invention: that is, the discovery of something unexpected in the world and the invention of an application for the same. Indeed, these terms provide convenient labels for the two-part model describing the “chance encountering of information” followed by “the sagacity to derive insight from the encounter” suggested by André et al (2009), or the transformation of unexpected data into a new theory from Merton. McKay (2012) draws on the same Bergsonian distinction to frame her argument about the role of serendipity in artistic practice, where discovery and invention can be seen as ongoing and diverse. This draws our attention to the relationship between serendipity and creativity. While there are many different definitions of creativity, novelty and utility are often understood to be essential criteria (for instance, see Newell et al (1963) or Boden (1990)). Rothenberg reviewed a collection of international perspectives on creativity and found “creativity involves thinking that is aimed at producing ideas or products that are relatively novel” (Rothenberg 1990, p. 2). And relatedly, Cropley (2006), following Austin ([1978] 2003), understands a creative individual as someone who “stumbles upon something novel and effective when not looking for it.” However, Cropley questions “whether it is a matter of luck,” because of the work and knowledge involved in the process forming an assessment of the finding. This again supports the notion of an inventive, creative aspect to serendipity. We can also point to process-level parallels between definitions of serendipity and previous theories of creativity. Csíkszentmihályi’s perspective is particularly suggestive regarding the way in which an unanticipated, anomalous, and strategic datum, à la Merton, might arise and develop in social interactions: “[C]reativity results from the interaction of a system composed of three elements: a culture that contains symbolic rules, a person who brings novelty into the symbolic domain, and a field of experts who recognize and validate the innovation.” (Csíkszentmihályi 1997, p. 6) [emphasis added] In this case, novelty is attributed to “a person”: even so, it seems reasonable to assume that this person’s novel insights rely at least in part on the observation of data. This model can be compared with Csíkszentmihályi’s (1997, pp. 79–80, after Wallas (1926)) five-stage model of the creative process, comprised of the steps preparation, incubation, insight, evaluation, and elaboration. This more elaborate model is a near match to the process-based model of serendipity from  Modelling serendipity in a computational context Serendipity is. . . chance encountering of information sagacity to derive insight discovery invention unanticipated, anomalous, strategic datum symbolic rules (that do not directly novelty validation account for the data) preparation (including incubation insight evaluation elaboration observations) prepared amplify unexpected recognise evaluate seize the moment effects event mind potential effects project exploit reflect on valuable new connection outcome value connection value perception bridge interest achieves a explanation attention valuation to a of a focus shift problem chance event  7  (1) (2) (3) (4)  (5) (6) (7) (8)  Table 1: Aligning ideas from several theories of serendipity and creativity. Lines 1-6 show increasing detail, moving from two to six phases; lines 7 and 8 bundle some of the steps together. Sources: (1) André et al; (2) Bergson; (3) Merton; (4) Csíkszentmihályi; (5) Wallas (as adapted by Csíkszentmihályi); (6) Lawley and Tompkins; (7) Makri and Blandford; (8) Section 3 of the current paper. Lawley and Tompkins (2008), which takes the outward form of a sequence: prepared mind, unexpected event, recognise potential, seize the moment, amplify effects, and evaluate effects. However, Lawley and Tompkins’s model includes a feedback loop between “recognising potential” and “evaluating effects” that is not present in the Wallas/Csíkszentmihályi model. Moreover: “[S]ometimes the process involves further potentially serendipitous events [a]nd sometimes it further prepares the mind (at which time learning can [be] said to have taken place)” (Lawley and Tompkins 2008) Makri and Blandford (2012a) propose a model that adapts Lawley and Tompkins, notably by combining the “prepared mind” and “unexpected event” into one first step, a new connection, which involves a “mix of unexpected circumstances and insight.” They also suggest that a parallel process of reflection into the “unexpectedness of circumstances that led to the connection and/or the role of insight in making the connection” is important for the subjective identification of serendipity. These authors also differ somewhat from Lawley and Tompkins in their interpretation of the nonlinear nature of the process. For Makri and Blandford, what is most important is that projections of value can be updated as the connection is exploited – for example, when it is discussed with others. 2.3 Summary We distil our findings from the literature and draw parallels between them in Table 1 above. While the details differ, we can see clear agreement from  8  prior theorists suggesting that serendipitous discoveries can be dissected into different aspects of varying granularity. We can also see a good indication of the sorts of aspects that these might be. At a high level we can see serendipity as lying in a space that is described by chance (a property of the environment), sagacity (a property of the discoverer) and value (a property of the discovery). This parallels Csíkszentmihályi’s characterisation of creativity, but now highlights the role of unexpected observations. Indeed we could describe serendipity as a form of creativity that happens in context, on the fly, with the active participation of a creative agent, but not entirely within that agent’s control. While the various theories we have examined differ from one another about just where “insight” takes place in the process – and some do not mention this term explicitly – none of them suggests anything to support a theory of “uninsightful” serendipity. Our interpretation – summarised in row 8 in Table 1 above – aims to make only low-level assumptions about the cognitive abilities of the agent. We explore the multi-faceted nature of serendipity in detail below.  3 A computational model and evaluation framework for assessing the potential for serendipity in computational systems We propose a model for serendipity in a computational context, which informs a working definition of the serendipity potential of a system. We follow this with a discussion of heuristics for applying the definition, and some examples. Figure 1 lays out the main ideas in our model, and Definitions 1–7 explain the components of this diagram. In overview, the diagram illustrates serendipity as a vertical process chain, with events travelling through – and being transformed as they are processed by – an array of cognitive components. Each component is represented by a solid bar with an opening, characterised by an orientation (x) and a width (w) parameter. These parameters serve as the geometric counterparts and as placeholders for the general properties underlying any cognitive process. Orientation describes the general direction from which the component can receive inputs, while the width describes the openness of that input stream. The serendipity potential of the overall system depends on the properties of the individual components which determine their alignment. We elaborate a few properties in the following definitions of the components, but we do not intend to provide an exhaustive description. Our goal is instead to provide a description which abstracts from the actual physical, physiological, or programmatic implementation. To provide some minimal grounding, we occasionally refer to existing theories in cognitive science. Jakob von Uexküll ([1940] 1982) argued that each individual, based on their embodiment and requirements, constructs a “world of meaning” which is separate from the actual world. We assume that this basic pattern repeats again at each level of increasing abstraction: that is, not only are perceptions of data in the world constrained to be meaningful, but re-interpretation of that  Modelling serendipity in a computational context  Event  9  |  Chance  |  w:possibility x:domain  Perception w:sensory field x:sensory orientation  Attention w:processing resources x:focus  Interest w:experience x:curiosity  Explanation w:effort x:skills  Bridge w:laterality x:domain knowledge  Valuation w:taste x:judgement  v(  )  Fig. 1: A schematic diagram that shows an event that is processed by a system with a result that can be called serendipitous. The event is perceived by the system, gains attention and interest, and subsequently elicits an explanation which the system then bridges to a problem, . The composite is given an ), on the basis of which the system changes its mode of evaluation v( behaviour – e.g., because the explanation is seen as a solution to the problem. Each of the processing steps is seen as a threshold, determined by parameters, such as the position x and width w that are put forward here. After the event has gained the system’s attention, it is assumed that the subsequent steps are subject to a degree of conscious control (grey dots and curly lines at a given juncture depict sensors and controllers that can influence the width and position of the corresponding threshold). The valuation step drives another round of adjustments – including behaviour in the world (solid lines on right-hand side). This can now include conscious choices to alter the agent’s sensory apparatus or change its allocation of attention. data through attention, interest, explanation, and so on, moves the data into new worlds of meaning. These remarks could describe perception and action in general. We need a somewhat detailed model which is sensitive to an agent’s embodiment, in order to describe what happens in the course of perceiving and processing chance events – however, we do not aim to theorise each step in detail. The main thrust of this section is that “serendipity” is only present if the process successfully progresses through all the steps in our diagram. Definition 1 (Foundational terms). The world is the backdrop against which the system operates. The system comprises a set of transformational mechanisms. Some aspects of the world will change over the course of the system’s  10  operation and some will remain fixed. An event is a change that takes place in the world. It may be invoked independently or by the system. Chance can be involved in both cases. We will henceforth assume that the event does, indeed, involve a chance component. The world is always, ultimately, the same shared real world that we are living in. The typical examples of systems that we will consider are those that can be implemented on a computer. These systems are constrained to perceive events that can be represented as input data. Accordingly, when analysing a given system we can constrain ourselves to consider the part of the world that it is able to observe (e.g., the wavelengths that can be perceived visually or as sounds). Although our primary applications are in computational settings, the definitions in this section are also intended to be general enough to apply to biological and non-biological systems, consisting of one or several agents. A “system” could either correspond to a single agent (like Georges de Mestral) or comprise an assemblage of people, tools, and processes (like those found in the labs and workrooms of the 3M Corporation). Typically, an event will inferentially describe, and circumstantially form part of, a broader chain or pattern of events that is perceived over time. Chance denotes a subjective degree of uncertainty about these perceptions. This usage is compatible with Hume’s ([1748] 1904, p. 99) opinion that chance is “a merely negative word.” In more computationally explicit terms: the system does not have access to a deterministic simulation that would reliably predict the event. Definition 2 (Perception). Perception represents the interface between our system and the world. It allows evidence of the event to enter the system, if its occurence in the world aligns with the system’s perceptual component. On a standard hand calculator, if a user presses the button labelled “2” on the keypad, that is an event. If the button is pressed with the right amount of force, this event will be perceived by the calculator, as we can infer from the numeral “2” appearing on the screen. As we will see below, the calculator will not go much further than this, i.e. detecting events. For an example that holds more interest from the point of view of our model, NumbersWithNames is a program designed to help with “the discovery part” of mathematics (Colton and Dennis 2002, p. 7), by forming conjectures about a given integer sequence. In this case, the system’s perceptual field is comprised by the limits of the formalism used to describe the sequences, and its sensory orientation is pointed towards whatever sequence it is presented with. Arbitrary text (for instance, a Shakespeare sonnet) would in general fail to parse, and would thus not be passed along to the next step. Definition 3 (Attention). Attention directs a system’s processing to a perceived event. It lifts an event into consciousness, so questions about the event can be raised, and components handling the event can be modified. Attention is based on – and restricted by – a system’s information processing bandwidth. Receiving attention means to bring the event into focus. In the  Modelling serendipity in a computational context  11  theory of mind as a prediction machine (Clark 2013), a stimulus is only given attention when the event crosses a prediction error boundary. In a simple system like a hand calculator, every stimulus is automatically submitted to a degree of further processing after “enter” is pressed. Some inputs require more processing and some require less. However, the processing resource allocation does not vary, and all events are given similar “attention” in a predefined fashion. If NumbersWithNames runs with a single-threaded interface, its attentional focus is only available when it is not busy processing prior input. It only does further processing for input data that matches the input syntax. A Shakespeare sonnet would thus be excluded. Such a filter only forwards data can be considered meaningful for the system itself or its designer, but does not encompass a measure for interestingness yet. We suggest that everything that takes up to this point is “unconscious,” whereas everything that follows can be “consciously” perceived by the system. We understand “conscious” perception not in the hard way, but as being able to measure and identify an event at a given stage. This allows for the manipulation of component parameters while and after an event has been processed. Thus, the x and w parameters describing the following dimensions have both current and potential values. In Figure 1, the force exerted by conscious control is schematically represented with internal sensors and spring-like, curly arrows. Definition 4 (Interest). Having received attention, an event is given a preliminary evaluation with respect to the system’s pre-existing knowledge and interests. When a given event is deemed to be of interest, we synonymously say that a focus shift has occurred that moves the spotlight of consciousness to the new event in the context that has been established. This process qualifies the event for further examination. The w parameter associated with this dimension can be considered as experience, required by the system to identify an event as interesting. Only with such an identification of interest can the event be explained, and tied to a problem in the later processing steps. We use the term curiosity to describe the x parameter, characterising which range of data that the system would be prepared to consider further. Due to the role of conscious effort at this stage, if a given piece of data looks like a potential match for whatever the system is curious about, it may carry out further investigation (i.e., supplementary preparations) to decide whether the event really is interesting. Not every system will have this sort of sophisticated ability to adjust its internal behaviour at this stage. It might not account for the notion of interest at all, by constraining potential events strictly by means of a perceptual mask (e.g. the input interface of the calculator), and only considering the remaining narrow stream of events without additional filtering. It might also simply apply a rigid set of predefined algorithms. NumbersWithNames for instance processes each entered sequence further via a range of transformation rules, as part of a process of conjecture generation. This can be thought of as part of its initial phase of attention. However, only some of the generated data will be  12  identified as interesting, following a “pruning” step, which delineates the scope of the system’s curiosity. For some input sequences, NumbersWithNames fails to identify any interesting and plausible conjectures whatsoever. In either case, NumbersWithNames does not progress to the next step: apart from its initial battery transformations and the pruning step, it makes no further effort to explain why a particular conjecture is interesting. In contrast, the Curious Design Agents developed by Saunders (2007) evolve artworks in respect to a more sophisticated mesure of interestingness: they cluster artworks in a model and assess the novelty of new inputs by means of classification error. They then determine a new artwork’s interestingness by mapping its novelty to an inverse-U-shaped curve of interestingness. Definition 5 (Explanation). By means of closer analysis, experimentation, discussion, or some other concerted means of examination devoted to the newlycontextualised event, the event may be explained. The scope of analysis and experimentation is determined by the system’s efforts. Explanatory success depends on the system’s skills. We noted above that NumbersWithNames did not make any significant effort to explain why a given “interesting” conjecture was interesting. In particular, it did not attempt to prove the conjectures that it generated. Here, it is worth noting that some of these conjectures were indeed proved by its users. One can remark that even a failed proof attempt would begin to explain what makes a given conjecture interesting. Some of NumbersWithNames’s successors did indeed use off-the-shelf proof-generation software to attempt to prove generated conjectures (Colton 2007), thereby embarking on the explanation phase. In general, whereas the system had previously regarded the event as interesting, and, in some weak sense, contextually meaningful, at this stage the event starts to become comprehensible. However, we cannot talk about serendipity, since the usefulness of this explication has not been determined yet in respect to an existing or yet unknown problem. We could potentially explain an event without determining its interestingess, but establishing the context of interest, i.e. why the event is actually looked at by the system, is important for building a bridge in the next stage. Definition 6 (Bridge). The system may now potentially find a bridge between the event, the explanation that it generated in Definition 5, and an existing problem within the domain – or it may generalise the explained event as a potential solution to some previously unknown problem. The two cases in Definition 6 correspond to the results found through ‘pseudo-serendipity’ and ‘serendipity’. In a classic example from the history of science, Alexander Fleming (1964) was able to form a bridge between his observation of clear spots in his dirty petri dishes caused by penicillium notatum spores to the invention of penicillin in large part because for much of his life he had been concerned with the question “Is there a substance which is harmful to harmful bacteria but harmless to human tissue?” (Roberts 1989, p. 161). In contrast, nearly 60 years earlier, Eugene Semmer also discovered and cursorily  Modelling serendipity in a computational context  13  explained the curious effects of penicillium notatum – but he did not find a bridge to the important problem his discovery could have solved (Cropley and Cropley 2013, p. 75). At this point, one final step remains: the connection between the event, its explanation, and the newly-retrieved problem must be deemed valuable. Definition 7 (Valuation). The explained event is positively or negatively evaluated with respect to the bridged problem. A positively-valued result that has been arrived at through the process described in Definitions 2–6 is called serendipitous. A result is considered to be ‘positively-valued’ if it leads to a change in the system’s behaviour, via adjustments to some of the above-described methods. The assigned value depends on the system’s taste, notably present in the case of the artworks evolved by the Curious Design Agents in (Saunders 2007), and its judgement, as in the judgements of value made by NumbersWithNames’s users about certain (true) conjectures. Again, the latter system did not possess sufficient background knowledge to operate at this level itself; but its conjecture generation efforts did contribute to the development of new published results. In this regard, NumbersWithNames can be considered a good example of serendipity as a service. We note that interest, explanation, bridging and valuation are conscious and thereby coupled to internal evaluations, whereas perception and attention are unconscious as the event is processed, and in this model their parameters can only change following conscious valuation of a serendipitous outcome. For example, one may consider what happens when a person first gets glasses: this changes their sensory field. Such an event might come about serendipitously: for instance, the individual might never have known they needed glasses until they tried on their friend’s glasses for fun. There are certainly other nonserendipitous ways that system parameters can be changed (e.g., through classical conditioning or direct intervention by a programmer) – but it is not our concern to theorise these. Note that we can schematize the diagram in Figure 1 further, in iconic form, using the hexagram “䷁”. This denotes a system for which w > 0 at each step. Thinking this way, we can elaborate several cases of serendipity as a service. For example a division of labour via “䷊ + ䷋” suggests a system taking care of the first three processing steps, with the user building a subsequent interpretation of the results, starting with the Explanation stage. A several-part process like “䷋+䷙+䷋” could describe a situation in which a user carries out an initial data gathering step, hands a query off to the system for processing, and takes over again after that to interpret the results. This is the way NumbersWithNames was used. Again, whether the processing steps are fully automated or instead arise in a “cyborg” system that combines both human and machine contributions, all of the features outlined above are required in order for there to be potential for serendipity. We further claim that it is possible to compare two or more  14  systems, and describe their relative serendipity potential. Definition 8 (Serendipity potential of a system). We define the serendipity potential of a system S to be the size of the overlap of all of the contributing components: Z SP(S) = ιperception × ιattention × ιinterest × ιexplanation × ιbridge × ιvaluation , where each “ι· ” is an indicator function for the corresponding dimension, defined in terms of its w and x parameters. To facilitate comparisons between systems, we normalise each dimension, so that the support of “ι· ” lies within the unit interval. For example, in a simple continuous one-dimensional model, ιperception = 1 over the interval [x − w/2, x + w/2], and 0 elsewhere. It is an immediate corollary of the definition that if any of the “ι· ” functions is 0 everywhere for a given system, then SP(S) = 0. Notice that the serendipity potential of the system does not directly take into account environmental factors, schematised in Figure 1 as possibility and domain. This is not because we view the relationship between the system and its environment as unimportant. Rather, following the predictive mind hypothesis, we assume that the system has been sufficiently tuned to its environment so that ιperception and ιevent overlap to some degree. Perceiving more events, or a broader range of events, can contribute to the development of a “prepared mind.” Under certain circumstances this will enhance the system’s serendipity potential. Nevertheless, we emphasise that in most of the noted examples from history, only one observation among many is deemed serendipitous. Pease et al (2013) describe several environmental factors that could contribute to serendipitous outcomes: action within a dynamic world, interaction with multiple contexts, involvement with multiple tasks, and connection with multiple influences. More broadly, the coupling between a systems’ perception and the likely and unlikely events in the domain will influence its potential for serendipitous outcomes. For the purposes of the current paper, further theorising the nature of perception and validating these proposed environmental factors of serendipity would take us on an unnecessary excursion. We believe such inter-systemic comparisons will be most relevant when the two systems are quite similar – for example, as a way to characterise the evolution from one version of a system to the next. Accordingly, the metric of serendipity potential is complementary to the graphical formalism and heuristic methods for assessing progress towards a creative system described by Colton et al (2014). For purposes of illustrating this definition, we put forward a simple estimates in Section 4.3. 3.1 On the role of chance and the prepared mind Our multi-component model allows us to shed more light on the role of chance in serendipity, and its relationship to the prepared mind highlighted by Pasteur  Modelling serendipity in a computational context  15  ([1854] 1939, p. 131). In keeping with the emphasis on the unsought finding, unanticipated data, and the role of chance that we described in Section 2, we now suggest that chance not only has an explicit role in what can be perceived at any given moment, but also that it implicitly affects the preparation of the ‘prepared mind’. This is because chance events that have taken place at an earlier time will have contributed to the system’s embodiment and, partly as a consequence, to its behaviour in the present. Chance events will have shaped what the system expects and can explain. In line with recent developments in the theory of the predictive mind, attention will be paid to what deviates from the expected (Clark 2013). Our model is grounded in the assumption that a prepared mind plays an important role in assigning interest, explaining an event, and bridging its explanation to an existing or yet unknown problem. If we consider that each system and sub-system establishes a “world of meaning” that largely depends on its embodiment but also on the chance involved in its emergence, it becomes clear that each system has a different perspective on the world. Combining a number of differently prepared minds in one system can thus increase the overall serendipity potential. This reiterates the importance of a social view on serendipity, as was remarked by some of the theorists quoted in Section 2.  3.2 An example system architecture  reflection module  Discovery:  generation module  feedback  [Focus shift]  Invention:  validation  evaluation module  ...  experimentation module Fig. 2: A boxes-and-arrows diagram, showing one possible implementation architecture. The internal icons match the steps described in Figure 1.  16  Figure 2 expands the schematic from Figure 1 into a sketch of the components of one possible idealised implementation of a (potentially) serendipitous system. It is inspired by certain well-known practices of collaborative peer review used by professional and novice writers (Gabriel 2002). The first module in the architecture is a generative process. In an implementation, this may be based on observations of the outside world, or it may be purely computational. In any case, its products are passed on to the next stage, and this corresponds to the Event in Figure 1. After running the generated data through a feedback loop, certain aspects of it are perceived, attended to, and – in this implementation – marked up as “interesting.” Note that the designation of interest does not necessarily arise all at once: in general it the outcome of a reflective process. In the architecture envisioned here, this process makes use of two primary functions: one that notices particular aspects of the data, and another which applies processing power to add further reflections about those aspects. Together, these functions build up a “feedback object,” which consists of the original data and together with a range of newly-added metadata and markup. This is passed on to an experimentation module, which has the task of validating the purported interest of the feedback object, and determining what it may be useful for. The first step attempts to explain the reason for the feedback relative to the initial event, and the second step bridges that to a new or existing problem. This is again an iterative process, which may consider alternative explanations and problems. The eventual result is passed to an evaluation module, and, from there, to further applications – which could include changes to any of the modules described above. 3.3 Summary We proposed a sequential model of serendipity, consisting of several cognitive components that were characterised by a set of exemplary parameters. We illustrated each component with reference to existing software systems, and defined the serendipity potential of a system as as the overlap of all of these components, accounting for their alignment and interplay. We commented on connections with the theory of the predictive mind, and on the relevance of social interactions to increasing potential for serendipity. We developed an example architecture of a system that has the potential for serendipitous outcomes, and related it back to our initial model. In the following section we turn to more detailed case studies in which we apply and thus demonstrate our model. 4 Serendipity in computational systems: case studies The three case studies considered here, respectively, apply the foregoing model and the definition of the serendipity potential of a system to evaluate an existing system, to design a new experiment, and to frame a grand challenge. The analysis is accompanied, where relevant, by an adjusted version of the  Modelling serendipity in a computational context  17  model illustration from Figure 1. These diagrams can quickly show that the first two systems we examine do not have serendipity potential, although they both match some of our heuristic criteria. This helps to show that the definition above is not overly inclusive. As Campbell (2005) writes, “serendipity presupposes a smart mind”, and our analysis suggests several directions for further work in computational intelligence.  4.1 Case study: GAmprovising – An evolutionary jazz improvisation system 4.1.1 System description Jordanous (2010) reported on a system using genetic algorithms for computational jazz improvisation, which was later given the name GAmprovising (Jordanous 2012). Reevaluating GAmprovising can shed light on the manner in which evolutionary methods might be deployed to expand a computational system’s serendipity potential. GAmprovising uses genetic algorithms to evolve a population of Improvisors. Each Improvisor is able to randomly generate music based on various parameters such as the range of notes to be used, preferred notes, rhythmic implications around note lengths and other musical parameters (Jordanous 2010). After a cycle of evolution, each Improvisor is evaluated using a fitness function based on Ritchie’s (2007) formal criteria for creativity. This model relies on user-supplied ratings of the novelty and appropriateness of the music produced by the Improvisor to calculate 18 metrics that are applied to judge the Improvisor’s creativity. The fittest Improvisors are used to seed a new generation of Improvisors through crossover and mutation operations. 4.1.2 Application of our evaluation framework The initial event processed by the GAmprovising system is the its initial “population of ‘Improvisors’ in the form of a set of values for musical parameters” (Jordanous 2010, p. 224). The range of possible settings for these musical parameters – including the musical key, tempo markings, and the amount of variability that is allowed – define the domain that GAmprovising perceives. Here, the system has full access to the available events, as they are internal; its access is only limited in respect to the possible artefacts, given parameter constraints on the artefact space. No events take place outside of this pre-defined scope, although the exact seed population is randomly generated. Nevertheless, this starting event is always perceived by the system, and draws its attention in the form of further processing, namely through random generation of musical pieces within the constraints of the musical parameters. This is where the automated processing stops. A human evaluator is then responsible for rating the typicality and value of the compositions. Note that value here must be understood as a compositions interestingness for the user, and not in respect to a different problem, e.g. a missing improvisation in an existing score. Further  18  Event Perception Attention Interest Explanation Bridging Valuation Fig. 3: Schematic analysis of the GAmprovising system. The light-grey bar at the Interest step represents user intervention. derived metrics are used to give each composition a score. Jordanous (2010) notes that this process “introduces a fitness bottleneck.” For the purpose of the current evaluation, we will consider the user as an “oracle” that assigns interest to some of the compositions (this is depicted by the light grey portion of the “Interest” bar in Figure 3). Once the process of rating is complete, the top-rated Improviser parameters are mutated and seed a new generation of Improvisers, thus producing another event similar to the initial one. In our compressed iconic representation, the combined system takes the form “䷡+䷈”. However, at no stage is there an explanation of the interesting example: all that we know is that the user liked a certain composition better and/or found it more jazz-like than the other candidates. Accordingly, our analysis stops here, without a through-line to the later processing steps. The fact that the system is able to generate results in the form of musical improvisations produced by the fittest Improvisors – along with the parameters that have been considered fittest – should not be deemed serendipitous. And, indeed, successful behaviour proved to be the norm: “Over several runs, it was able to produce jazz improvisations which slowly evolved from what was essentially random noise, to become more pleasing and sound more like jazz to the human evaluator’s ears” (Jordanous 2010).  Modelling serendipity in a computational context  19  4.2 Case study: Iterative design in automated programming 4.2.1 System description Here we consider the design of a contemporary experiment with the FloWr flowcharting framework (Colton and Charnley 2014). FloWr is a tool for creating and running computational flowcharts, built of small modules called ProcessNodes. For the day-to-day user, FloWr offers a visual programming environment. However, it can also be invoked programmatically, on the Java Virtual Machine and via a new web API (Charnley et al 2016). The goals of the FloWr project are to create both a user-friendly tool for co-creativity and an autonomous Flowchart Writer. Our experiment targets the latter scenario, assembling available ProcessNodes into flowcharts automatically. This can be viewed as a simple example of automated programming. In the backend, FloWr’s flowcharts are stored as scripts. These scripts list the involved nodes, together with their (input) parameters and (output) variable settings. Connections between nodes are established when one node’s input parameter references the output variable of another node. Inputs and outputs have type constraints. For instance, the WordSenseCategoriser node has a stringsToCategorise parameter, which needs to be seeded with an ArrayList of strings. However, the constraints also go beyond Java types: the output of WordSenseCategoriser is only useful when each of the entries in the input ArrayList can be parsed into a space-separated list of words. Another parameter, the node’s requiredSense, needs to be seeded with a string that represents one of the 57 British National Corpus Part of Speech tags. Given constraints of this nature, the first challenge in automated flowchart assembly is to match inputs to outputs correctly, and to make sure that all required inputs are satisfied. A second more substantial challenge is to decide why one flowchart architecture should be preferred to another; in other words, to induce a fitness function over the space of possible solutions. One factor that adds complexity to any strategy for evaluation is that some nodes, like the Twitter node, deliver results that change each time the service is queried, so that a given flowchart may produce different results for the same input settings – or even intermittently fail to produce results at all. Pease et al (2013) envision the system being deployed in an autonomous, online setting with “a version of the software on a server, constantly generating, testing and evaluating the flowcharts it produces.” 4.2.2 Application of our evaluation framework In the initial experimental design from Pease et al (2013), a range of events are described that could potentially spur discovery. All of these events have an aleatoric aspect. System users will upload new nodes and assemble novel flowcharts. An existing flowchart might run and produce unexpected results, if some of the nodes it uses have changed the way they work in the meantime. The system itself might produce a working flowchart through the generate-and-  20  Event Perception Attention Interest Explanation Bridging Valuation Fig. 4: Schematic analysis of the FloWr system. Light grey areas represent work in progress: specifically, represents constraints that will be removed and represents constraints that will be added. test method described above. Here, a “working flowchart” is simply a valid combination of nodes that generates non-empty output. If we consider an experiment based on randomly combining sets of nodes and periodically producing a working flowchart, the analysis would be very similar to what we saw in the previous case study. Randomly selected sets of nodes would be perceived, attended to, and some of them made interesting through a combinatorial process. Notice that FloWr’s ability to test for nonempty output means that it can progress one step further down the stack than GAmprovising, without any user intervention: schematically, “䷊” as opposed to “䷡”. In Figure 4, the light grey bar at the “Explanation” layer indicates work in progress. Note that this effort will also involve revisions at the “Interest” layer, which will create more restrictive criteria for interest – illustrated by light grey extensions of the bars at that layer, and a correspondingly narrower gap. There will be push-back to the “Perception” layer as well, since the revised system will need to be able to process a wider range of events. This will be described below. The basic intuition is that syntactically correct flowcharts that satisfy local node-to-node input/output constraints are in no way guaranteed to produce results that are interesting or useful in a meaningful sense. Corneli et al (2015) advance a more stringent criterion for interest: rather than merely seeking to generate non-empty output, FloWr could be tuned to search for flowcharts that generate poetry. Corneli and Corneli (2016) further elaborate the range of challenges associated with building a computer system that can understand text and its context within discourse. A system that could perceive its dialogical  Modelling serendipity in a computational context  21  context and ascribe context-specific meaning and interest to its constructions should also be able to explain its choices. For example, a simple explanatory routine would just present “framing data” that shows the choices that were made as the flowchart was generated. A more sophisticated explanation might contrast the selected output with competitors that do not perform as well relative to a fitness function that is abstracted from the operating context. The challenge of the development task just outlined should not be underestimated. Nevertheless, for completeness, we will say a few words about the further reflection layers. In addition to explaining why the generated text is contextually meaningful, a future system might also be able to invent heuristics that would allow it to reliably generate similarly-meaningful texts in related contexts, thereby realising a bridge. Alternatively or additionally the system might draw on different expressive modalities and invent a new way to present the generated text, e.g., by playing on double meanings that it contains. In this way the system might achieve what Barth (1991, p. 311) calls “logistically assisted serendipity.” Either a useful new heuristic or a particularly expressive composition would receive a positive valuation. We should also remark that even in a case where the system is not able to carry out the bridging and valuation steps, the user may on occasion do so – providing us with yet another example of “serendipity as a service.” For example, an earlier poetry-generating system by Colton et al (2012) used: “. . . a template-guided version of the cut-up method to mash together semantically-coherent text fragments in a way that . . . obeys certain over-arching constraints on metre and rhyme.” (Veale 2015) As Veale observes, these re-hashed associations may appear fresh, interesting, and meaningful to the reader. The poems in question were semantically more robust than those produced in earlier work in computational poetry that was limited to reading and mimicking surface style (Carslisle 2000) – perhaps making them more prone to this poetic “placebo effect.” Understanding the aesthetic judgements that make a given poem work especially well remains a significant challenge, both from a computational and literary point of view. Corneli et al (2015) outline some of the questions that a poetry critic would ask when reading a poem.  4.3 Case study: A next-generation recommender system Having examined two empirical cases in which some but not all of the features of our model are present, we now turn to a hypothetical system where we are free to imagine all of the relevant components from Figure 1 falling into place. Here we present a system description with no further analysis, since the system design is entirely guided by the evaluation framework.  22  4.3.1 System description Recommender systems are one of the primary contexts in computing where ‘serendipity’ is currently discussed. For instance, an Amazon spokesperson told Fortune: “Our mission is to delight our customers by allowing them to serendipitously discover great products. We believe this happens every single day and that’s our biggest metric of success.” (Mangalindan 2012) In the context of the current recommender system literature, a system is considered serendipitous if it recommends items to a user which they are likely to find novel and unexpected, but yet useful. These systems mostly focus on supporting discovery for the user. A few architectures also seem to take invention on the system side into account, e.g., by using Bayesian methods to invent new ways of making recommendations (Guo 2011). But even in this case, the system has limited autonomy. In complex and rapidly evolving domains where hand-tuning is cost-intensive or infeasible, it may make sense to build recommender systems that can more flexibly invent new recommendation strategies. In other words, we suggest to move from “serendipity as a service,” in which a serendipitous user experience is induced by the recommender system, to “serendipity on the system side.” Accordingly, we take inspiration from current recommendation techniques that aim to stimulate serendipitous discovery for the user. These methods associate less-popular items with high unexpectedness (Herlocker et al 2004; Lu et al 2012), and use clustering to discover latent structures in the search space, e.g., partitioning users into clusters of common interests, or clustering users and domain objects (Kamahara and Asakawa 2005; Onuma et al 2009; Zhang et al 2011). To design for “serendipity on the system side” we can turn these formulations around. User behaviour (e.g., following certain recommendations) or changes to the domain (e.g., adding a new product) present a sequence of events that, in aggregate, might lead the system to discover a new way to make recommendations in the future. This already happens in a limited sense with current systems: e.g., changes to average purchasing behaviour will change the specific recommendations that are made. Essentially, what would be new in the system we are proposing is a staged series of higher-order reflections that is capable of learning from this kind of adjustment. Again, an unexpected pattern of behaviour in aggregate is the “event” of interest. In order to perceive this event, the system needs certain patternmatching criteria, as well as the ability to detect exceptions to those patterns. To progress to the attention stage, it might pull in or simulate and augment additional data that could help to explain the deviations. Some patterns may prove uninteresting: for example, if the system can show directly that the pattern is highly localised and unlikely to repeat or to generalise for whatever reason. However, for patterns that do appear to generalise, an explanation can be offered. For instance, new elements may have been introduced into the domain that do not cluster well, or a group of users may suddenly indicate a strong preference towards an item that does not fit their preference history. In  Modelling serendipity in a computational context  23  response, the system might attempt to apply a new machine learning paradigm to make sense of the data, or generate hypotheses and initiate an A/B test with the users in question. This experimental phase could generate a useful result that generalises further via some set of analogies. For example, if the system determines that recommendations for cat food perform well in connection with searches for certain alcoholic beverages, it might bridge to the notion that it could just as well recommend other household products instead. In a subsequent evaluation step, it might draw on a background knowledge base and realise that recommendations for cough syrup or mouthwash could be seen as rather tactless by a user who is searching for a bottle of artisinal gin. On the basis of this valuation, the system could (serendipitously) invent the strategy of using multi-way analogies when bridging to new recommendations. It could back this up by testing various beverage and pet-related combinations. Here it is appropriate to remark that Definition 8 will yield a non-zero SP score for such a system. We will not attempt to give a numerical estimate of this score, however we will remark that the support of ιperception is presumably very small relative to the vast range of patterns that could be discovered. Accordingly, the overall SP score will be “small.” Since perception of patterns is a de facto limiting factor, we suggest that, at least initially, any strategy that can increase the system’s ability to spot new patterns is likely to increase its SP score.  4.4 Summary While two of the three systems we examined failed to meet all of our criteria, all three show potential for serendipity pending further development. Here, we summarise these directions for future work. 1. A future version of the evolutionary music system would be more convincingly if it could evaluate musical works without user intervention. It might also be able to tailor its fitness function to the individual user. Interaction between the system’s tasks and more dynamism in its influences would help differentiate individual threads or system runs, providing a route to more sophisticated internal evaluation. In a future version of the system, perhaps only some Improvisers would recognise and take interest in a given event (e.g., they might be tuned to notice specific musical patterns). Consequently, individual Improvisers would be more selective, but the population as a whole would be more musically sophisticated. We would expect evolved results of more variable quality, as judged by the system – opening the exciting potential for it to learn identifiable musical skills, and to innovate relative to this skill set. 2. The flowchart assembly process would need relatively stringent, criteria for meaning, and ultimately, for value, before third-party observers are likely to attribute serendipity to the system. This shifts the emphasis from a mostly local analysis that asks which nodes can be fit together, to a more global  24  analysis that seeks to qualitatively characterise generated outputs. This raises a range of challenges related to autonomous evaluation, like in the evolutionary music system case, above. We also saw how more sophisticated processing at later stages may impose additional constraints on previous process steps. Embedding the system in a real-world context (e.g., in which it is tasked with responding meaningfully to user-submitted texts; cf. Corneli and Corneli (2016)) could provide a useful training ground. 3. The next-generation recommender systems we have envisioned needs to be able to make inferences from aggregate user behaviour. This points to long-term considerations that go beyond the unique serendipitous event. The short-term value of recommendations should potentially be allowed to suffer as long as the expected value of future more intelligently informed recommendations remains higher. To bootstrap such a system, the symmetry between serendipity on the user side and serendipity on the system side might be exploited: as a preliminary step towards building an artificiallyintelligent recommender system, users might be assigned tasks that are designed to trigger serendipity on the system-side. Referring to Definition 8, serendipity potential can be increased whenever we (or the system itself) can increase the breadth and alignment of its several components.  5 Discussion, future work, and conclusions In the foregoing sections, we’ve characterised the serendipity potential of individual systems, and indicated how the model can be used to compare two systems. We applied our model to characterise the potential of serendipity on the system side. Nevertheless, we believe that our model could likewise be used to characterise its potential for serendipity as a service, if some components are considered to be realised by users. Serendipity potential could also be defined straightforwardly for a family of systems, again using the concept of a layered architecture and indicator functions, now defining ιperception and the other ι· ’s in Definition 8 as sums of the corresponding functions over the population. In this way, a wider range of perceptions and other abilities can be brought online. In such a setting, “alignment” between the several components variously takes on a message passing, format-shifting, or broader social interpretation. Historical examples like the development of Post-it™ notes show how multiple perspectives can contribute to serendipitous outcomes. Indeed, our Definition 4 suggests that this phenomenon lies at the heart of serendipity – although like each of the steps in our model, it is necessary but not sufficient. Populations are important in another respect: even if there is only a small chance that some particular event will happen, with sufficient trials, it will likely happen. This corresponds to Bergson’s ([1941] 1946) comment that every discovery will happen “sooner or later.” By contrast, as we discussed in Section 2, the Bergsonian theory of invention states some in-principle possibilities may fail to come into existence.  Modelling serendipity in a computational context  25  So, is “pure serendipity”, amenable to generation by a computer? The answer is, as in van Andel’s introductory quote, “no”. Though, we have shown in our analysis that we can describe computational systems that are, at least in principle, as capable of realising serendipitous outcomes as human beings, if not more so. Although, no one – human or machine – can guarantee that any specific effort will lead to an unexpectedly beneficial outcome (by definition, this outcome may fail to materialise), we suggest that we can build systems with greater potential for serendipity. Our contribution can therefore be seen as an necessary extension to van Andel’s denial. One broad class of examples, computer-supported serendipity, which we have herein referred to as “serendipity as a service,” is already well-studied. That work has been accompanied by collections of heuristics for system users who may want to increase their own potential for serendipity (Makri et al 2014). However, previous scholarly and empirical attention to the potential for serendipity in computational systems themselves has been much more constrained. Our case studies suggest that serendipity on the system side is within the reach, if not yet the grasp, of contemporary computing practice. For philosopher and media theorist Vilém Flusser, automation in a universe otherwise ruled by entropy is defined as follows: “a self-governing computation of accidental events, excluding human intervention and stopping at a situation that human beings have determined to be informative.” (Flusser [1985] 2011, p. 19) The reason these events are informative is that they are improbable “from the standpoint of the universe.” However, Flusser observes that “from the receiver’s standpoint, they are still probable.” The default operation of most modern technologies is to be thoroughly predictable. In our definition of serendipity potential, we consider a localised context of evaluation in where the agent’s subjective understanding of an event matters. Thus, for example, a Coca Cola bottle is commonplace item in modern society, but its appearance in the film The Gods Must Be Crazy prompts the character Xi to go an long journey. Our model considers not only discoveries but also the unexpected invention of new and unanticipated patterns of discovery. This framework is consistent with the theory of the predictive mind, which suggests that ‘enminded’ beings (Ingold 2000, pp. 170–171; Brandt 2011) are conscious and act precisely on the basis of surprising, unexpected data. Our layered model is also reminiscent of earlier models in AI: we point to Singh and Minsky (2005) and Sloman and Logan (1998) as relevant prior art. Sloman and Logan’s division into reactive, deliberative, and reflective layers map coherently onto the six-layer division we’ve presented. Moreover, Singh and Minsky’s six layers – instinctive reactions, learned reactions, deliberative thinking, reflective thinking, self-reflective thinking and self-conscious thinking – could be seen as nearly analogous to the framework we presented above. The schematic similarities notwithstanding, we believe that an analysis of serendipity gives a new way to think about these established problems in AI and other sciences of the mind. For example, we can consider the psychologist  26  Carl Jung’s ([1950] 2014, p. 5486) remark that “Unexpected cures may arise from questionable therapies and unexpected failures from allegedly reliable methods.” In Section 2, we described serendipity as a form of creativity that happens in context, on the fly, with the active participation of a creative agent, but not entirely within that agent’s control. We would hazard that a capacity for serendipity, understood along these lines, could be a reasonable therapeutic goal. What is interesting to remark here is that the higher-level reflective capacities requisite for serendipity may themselves develop serendipitously. According to Simon and Newell (1958, p. 6), “[i]ntuition, insight, and learning” have been close at hand in the computing field for some time. And yet, computer scientists working in the field of computational creativity – like media artists working in the field of creative computing – often focus on product evaluations rather than on developing systems with these capabilities. As alluded to in our case study on GAmprovising, Ritchie (2007) proposed metrics that depend on properties that a reasonably sophisticated judge can ascribe to generated artefacts: “typicality”, i.e., the extent to which an artefact belongs to a certain genre, and “quality.” These are used as atomic measures from which more complex metrics, including “novelty,” can be derived. In recent years, artefact-centred evaluations are increasingly complemented by methods that consider process (Colton 2008) or a combination of product and process (Jordanous 2012; Colton et al 2014). Systems increasingly evaluate their own work in light of an audience model or through other means, and may adapt their goals and behaviour accordingly (e.g., Gervás and León 2016). However, “accidents” arising outside of the control of the system (and ultimately, outside of the control of the researcher) might be deemed out of scope for computational creativity. Unexpected external effects could even be seen to invalidate research in this area. We claim that the concept of serendipity brings autonomous creative systems into clearer focus: not via an abstract notion of creativity ex nilio or ex se, but as creativity in interaction with the world. This requires a different mindset, and a different approach to system building and evaluation. Our model provides basic outlines that system designers and developers can use to guide their efforts to develop the potential for serendipity in their systems. Although this was not the main focus of our research, this model may also prove relevant to understanding and averting “unexpected failures.” Russell et al (2015) advise AI researchers to build features of verification, validity, security and control into their systems. An uncertain world requires autonomy to be added to the list, which means giving up some control, and accepting that there will be missed opportunities on the one hand, and that computers will devote resources to problems we would not have thought of on the other. As we considered ways to enhance the measure of serendipity potential in our case studies, we were led to consider computational agents that increasingly participate in “our world” rather than in a circumscribed and highly controlled microdomain. AI researchers need to think about how to design systems that can not only face “more complex challenges” (Knight 2016) – but that can also gracefully learn how to tackle new challenges as they arise.  Modelling serendipity in a computational context  27  6 Bibliography van Andel P (1994) Anatomy of the Unsought Finding. Serendipity: Orgin, History, Domains, Traditions, Appearances, Patterns and Programmability. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 45(2):631–648 André P, Schraefel MC, Teevan J, Dumais ST (2009) Discovery is never by chance: designing for (un) serendipity. In: Bryan-Kinns N, Gross MD, Johnson H, Ox J, Wakkary R (eds) Proceedings of the seventh ACM conference on Creativity and Cognition, ACM, pp 305–314 Austin JH ([1978] 2003) Chase, chance, and creativity: The lucky art of novelty. MIT Press Barth J (1991) The last voyage of somebody the sailor. Hodder & Stoughton Bergson H ([1941] 1946) The Creative Mind. Greenwood Press Boden MA (1990) The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms. Weidenfield and Nicholson, London Brandt PA (2011) The Enminded Body. Spinoza, Descartes, and the Philosophy of Cognition– A Critical Note. Chinese Semiotic Studies 5(1):26–41 Campbell WC (2005) Serendipity in research involving laboratory animals. ILAR journal 46(4):329–331 Campos J, Figueiredo AD (2002) Programming for Serendipity. In: McBurney P, Ohsawa Y, Parsons S (eds) Proc. of the AAAI Fall Symposium on Chance Discovery – The Discovery and Management of Chance Events Carslisle JP (2000) Comments on Kurzweil’s Cybernetic Poet. AMCIS 2000 Proceedings p 123 Charnley J, Colton S, Llano MT, Corneli J (2016) The FloWr Online Platform: Automated Programming and Computational Creativity as a Service. In: Cardoso A, Pachet F, Corruble V, Ghedini F (eds) Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Computational Creativity, ICCC 2016, ACC Clark A (2013) Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 36(03):181–204 Colton S (2007) Computational discovery in pure mathematics. In: Džeroski S, Todorovski L (eds) Computational Discovery of Scientific Knowledge: Introduction, Techniques, and Applications in Environmental and Life Sciences, Springer, pp 175–201 Colton S (2008) Creativity Versus the Perception of Creativity in Computational systems. In: Ventura D, Maher ML, Colton S (eds) AAAI Spring Symposium: Creative Intelligent Systems, March 26–28, 2008 at Palo Alto, California, pp 14–20 Colton S, Charnley J (2014) Towards a Flowcharting System for Automated Process Invention. In: Ventura D, Colton S, Lavrač N, Cook M (eds) Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Computational Creativity, ICCC 2014, ACC Colton S, Dennis LA (2002) The NumbersWithNames Program. In: Golumbic M, Hoffman F, Faltings B, Dix J (eds) Seventh International Sumposium on Artificial Intelligence and Mathematics, January 2-4, 2002, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, USA Colton S, Goodwin J, Veale T (2012) Full FACE poetry generation. In: Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Computational Creativity, ICCC 2012, ACC, pp 95–102 Colton S, Pease A, Corneli J, Cook M, Llano T (2014) Assessing Progress in Building Autonomously Creative Systems. In: Ventura D, Colton S, Lavrač N, Cook M (eds) Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Computational Creativity, ICCC 2014, ACC Corneli J, Corneli M (2016) Teaching natural language to computers. In: Abe A, Rzepka R (eds) Proceedings of the International Workshop on Language Sense on Computers Corneli J, Jordanous A, Shepperd R, Llano MT, Misztal J, Colton S, Guckelsberger C (2015) Computational poetry workshop: Making sense of work in progress. In: Colton S, Toivonen H, Cook M, Ventura D (eds) Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Computational Creativity, ICCC 2015, ACC Cropley A (2006) In praise of convergent thinking. Creativity Research Journal 18(3):391–404 Cropley DH, Cropley AJ (2013) Creativity and crime: A psychological analysis. Cambridge University Press  28 Csíkszentmihályi M (1997) Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention, vol 39. Harper Perennial Eco U (2013) Serendipities: Language and lunacy. Columbia University Press Figueiredo AD, Campos J (2001) The Serendipity Equations. In: Weber R, von Wangenheim CG (eds) Proc. of International Conference On Case-Based Reasoning-4 Flavell-While C (2012) Spencer Silver and Arthur Fry: the chemist and the tinkerer who created the Post-it Note. The Chemical Engineer pp 53–55 Fleming A (1964) Penicillin. In: Nobel Lectures, Physiology or Medicine, 1942-1962, Elsevier Flusser V ([1985] 2011) Into the Universe of Technical Images. University of Minnesota Press von Foerster H ([1979] 2003) Cybernetics of cybernetics. In: Understanding Understanding, Springer, pp 283–286 Gabriel RP (2002) Writer’s Workshops and the Work of Making Things: Patterns, Poetry... Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc. Gaughan R (2010) Accidental Genius: The World’s Greatest By-Chance Discoveries. Metro Books Gervás P, León C (2016) Integrating Purpose and Revision into a Computational Model of Literary Generation. In: Creativity and Universality in Language, Springer, pp 105–121 Guo S (2011) Bayesian Recommender Systems: Models and Algorithms. PhD thesis, The Australian National University Herlocker JL, Konstan Ja, Terveen LG, Riedl JT (2004) Evaluating collaborative filtering recommender systems. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 22(1):5–53 Hume D ([1748] 1904) An enquiry concerning human understanding. Open Court Publishing Ingold T (2000) The perception of the environment: essays on livelihood, dwelling and skill. Psychology Press Jordanous A (2010) A Fitness Function for Creativity in Jazz Improvisation and Beyond. In: Ventura D, Pease A, Pérez y Pérez R, Ritchie G, Veale T (eds) Proceedings of the First International Conference on Computational Creativity, ICCC 2010, ACC, pp 223–227 Jordanous A (2012) A Standardised Procedure for Evaluating Creative Systems: Computational Creativity Evaluation Based on What it is to be Creative. Cognitive Computation 4(3):246–279 Jordanous A, Keller B (2012) What makes musical improvisation creative? Journal of Interdisciplinary Music Studies 6(2):151–175 Jung CG ([1950] 2014) Psychology and Religion: West and East, Collected Works of CG Jung, vol 11. Princeton University Press Kamahara J, Asakawa T (2005) A community-based recommendation system to reveal unexpected interests. In: Chen YPP (ed) Proceedings of the 11th International Multimedia Modelling Conference, IEEE Computer Society, pp 433–438 Kennedy P (2016) Inventology: How We Dream Up Things That Change the World. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Knight W (2016) Don’t Despair if Google’s AI Beats the World’s Best Go Player. MIT Technology Review Lawley J, Tompkins P (2008) Maximising Serendipity: The art of recognising and fostering unexpected potential – A Systemic Approach to Change. URL http://www.cleanlanguage. co.uk/articles/articles/224/1/Maximising-Serendipity/Page1.html, lecture presented to The Developing Group, 7 June, 2008. Lovelace AA (1842) Translator’s notes to M. Menabrea’s memoir on Babbage’s Analytical Engine. In: Taylor R (ed) Scientific Memoirs, vol 3, Richard and John E. Taylor, pp 691–731 Lu Q, Chen T, Zhang W, Yang D, Yu Y (2012) Serendipitous Personalized Ranking for Top-N recommendation. 2012 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conferences on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology pp 258–265, DOI 10.1109/WI-IAT.2012.135 Makri S, Blandford A (2012a) Coming across information serendipitously - Part 1: A process model. Journal of Documentation 68:684–705 Makri S, Blandford A (2012b) Coming across information serendipitously - Part 2: A classification framework. Journal of Documentation 68:706–724 Makri S, Blandford A, Woods M, Sharples S, Maxwell D (2014) “Making my own luck”: Serendipity strategies and how to support them in digital information environments. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 65(11):2179–2194  Modelling serendipity in a computational context  29  Mangalindan JP (2012) Amazon’s recommendation secret. Fortune URL http://fortune. com/2012/07/30/amazons-recommendation-secret/ Maxwell D, Woods M, Makri S, Bental D, Kefalidou G, Sharples S (2012) Designing a semantic sketchbook to create opportunities for serendipity. In: Cowan BR, Bowers CP, Beale R, Baber C (eds) Proceedings of the 26th Annual BCS Interaction Specialist Group Conference on People and Computers, British Computer Society, pp 357–362 Mazur J (2016) Fluke: The Math and Myth of Coincidence. Basic Books McKay E (2012) How does the philosophy of Bergson give us insight into the notion of serendipity and how does this provide a framework for artistic practice? Undergraduate honors thesis, Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design Merton RK (1948) The Bearing of Empirical Research upon the Development of Social Theory. American Sociological Review pp 505–515 Merton RK, Barber E (2004) The Travels and Adventures of Serendipity: A study in Sociological Semantics and the Sociology of Science. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, USA Minsky M (1967) Why programming is a good medium for expressing poorly understood and sloppily formulated ideas. In: Krampen M, Seitz P (eds) Design and Planning II-Computers in Design and Communication, Hastings House, pp 120–125 Newell A, Shaw JG, Simon HA (1963) The process of creative thinking. In: Gruber HE, Terrell G, Wertheimer M (eds) Contemporary Approaches to Creative Thinking, Atherton, New York, pp 63–119 Onuma K, Tong H, Faloutsos C (2009) TANGENT: A Novel ‘Surprise-me’ Recommendation Algorithm. In: Elder J, Fogelman FS, Flach P, Zaki M (eds) Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining Pasteur L ([1854] 1939) Discours, Prononcé a Doui, le 7 décembre 1854, a l’occasion de l’installation solennelle de la Faculté des lettres de Douai et de la Faculté des sciences de Lille. In: Vallery-Radot LP (ed) Oeuvres de Pasteur, Vol. 7, Masson and Co., Paris, France, pp 129–132 Pease A, Colton S, Ramezani R, Charnley J, Reed K (2013) A Discussion on Serendipity in Creative Systems. In: Maher ML, Veale T, Saunders R, Bown O (eds) Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Computational Creativity, ICCC 2013, ACC Quéau P (1986) Éloge de la simulation: de la vie des langages à la synthèse des images. Champ Vallon/INA Rao V (2015) Breaking Smart: Seeking serendipity through technology. Ribbonfarm, Inc., URL http://breakingsmart.com Reichardt J (ed) (1968) Cybernetic Serendipity: the computer and the arts. Studio International Remer TG (1965) Serendipity and the Three Princes: From the peregrinaggio of 1557. University of Oklahoma Press Ritchie GD (2007) Some Empirical Criteria for Attributing Creativity to a Computer Program. Minds and Machines 17:67–99 Roberts RM (1989) Serendipity: Accidental Discoveries in Science. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Hoboken Rothenberg A (1990) Creativity and Madness. John Hopkins University Press Russell SJ, Dewey D, Tegmark M (2015) Research Priorities for Robust and Beneficial Artificial Intelligence. AI Magazine 36(4) Saunders R (2007) Towards a computational model of creative societies using curious design agents. Engineering Societies in the Agents World VII 4457:340–353 Simon HA, Newell A (1958) Heuristic problem solving: The next advance in operations research. Operations Research 6(1):1–10 Singh P, Minsky M (2005) An architecture for cognitive diversity. In: Davis DN (ed) Visions of Mind: Architectures for Cognition and Affect, IGI Global, pp 312–331 Sloman A, Logan B (1998) Architectures and tools for human-like agents. In: Proceedings of the 2nd European conference on cognitive modelling, vol 58, p 65 Turing AM (1950) Computing machinery and intelligence. Mind 59(236):433–460 von Uexküll J ([1940] 1982) The theory of meaning. Semiotica 42(1):25–79 Veale T (2015) Game of Tropes: Exploring the Placebo Effect in Computational Creativity. In: Colton S, Toivonen H, Cook M, Ventura D (eds) Proceedings of the Sixth International  30 Conference on Computational Creativity, ACC, p 78 Wallas G (1926) The art of thought. Jonathan Cape Zhang YC, Ó Séaghdha D, Quercia D, Jambor T (2011) Auralist: Introducing Serendipity into Music Recommendation. In: Adar E, Teevan J, Agichtein E, Maarek Y (eds) Proc. of the fifth ACM international conference on Web search and data mining, pp 13–22 Zilberg JL (2015) On embedded action anthropology and how one thing leads to another by chance. In: Nahm S, Rinker CH (eds) Applied Anthropology: Unexpected Spaces, Topics and Methods, Routledge, pp 79–92

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
