Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_5386

Abstract:
JSJ decompositions: definitions, existence, uniqueness. II: Compatibility and acylindricity. Vincent Guirardel, Gilbert Levitt  arXiv:1002.4564v3 [math.GR] 25 Mar 2016  Abstract We define the compatibility JSJ tree of a group G over a class of subgroups. It exists whenever G is finitely presented and leads to a canonical tree (not just a deformation space) which is invariant under automorphisms. Under acylindricity hypotheses, we prove that the (usual) JSJ deformation space and the compatibility JSJ tree both exist when G is finitely generated, and we describe their flexible subgroups. We apply these results to CSA groups, Γ-limit groups (allowing torsion), and relatively hyperbolic groups. This paper and its companion arXiv:0911.3173 have been replaced by arXiv:1602.05139.  1  Introduction  Though self-contained, this paper is a sequel to [GL09]. In that first paper we gave a general definition of the JSJ deformation space DJSJ of a finitely generated group G over a class of subgroups A, by means of a universal maximality property; this definition agrees with the constructions given by Rips-Sela, Dunwoody-Sageev, Fujiwara-Papasoglu [RS97, DS99, FP06] in various contexts. We showed that the JSJ deformation space always exists when G is finitely presented (without any assumption on A). We also explained that in general the JSJ decomposition is not a single tree (or graph of groups) but a deformation space, i.e. a collection of trees all having the same elliptic subgroups. A trivial example: if G is free, its JSJ deformation space over any A is CullerVogtmann’s (unprojectivized) outer space. The first main goal of this paper is to introduce another type of JSJ decomposition, which also exists whenever G is finitely presented, and does lead to a well-defined tree Tco ; being canonical, this tree is in particular invariant under any automorphism of G (provided that A is). This construction is based on compatibility, and we call Tco the compatibility JSJ tree. It is similar to the canonical tree constructed by Scott and Swarup [SS03], it dominates it and it may be non-trivial when Scott and Swarup’s decomposition is trivial. The second main goal is to use acylindricity to construct and describe the JSJ deformation space and the JSJ compatibility tree in various situations, for instance when G is a CSA group, or a Γ-limit group with Γ a hyperbolic group (possibly with torsion), or a relatively hyperbolic group. Being based on acylindrical accessibility, these constructions only require that G be finitely generated.  Compatibility Given two trees T1 , T2 (always with an action of G and edge stabilizers in a given class A), there does not always exist a map f : T1 → T2 (maps are always assumed to be G-equivariant). A necessary and sufficient condition is that every subgroup of G which is elliptic in T1 (i.e. fixes a point in T1 ) also fixes a point in T2 . We then say that T1 dominates T2 . They belong to the same deformation space if T1 dominates T2 and T2 1  dominates T1 (i.e. they have the same elliptic subgroups). Domination is a partial order on the set of deformation spaces. A tree T1 is elliptic with respect to T2 if all edge stabilizers of T1 are elliptic in T2 . As in [GL09], we say that T1 is universally elliptic if it is elliptic with respect to every tree. The JSJ deformation space DJSJ is defined as the maximal deformation space (for domination) containing a universally elliptic tree. Its elements are JSJ trees, i.e. universally elliptic trees which dominate all universally elliptic trees. To define compatibility, we impose restrictions on maps between trees. A collapse map f : T1 → T2 is a map consisting in collapsing edges in certain orbits to points (in terms of graphs of groups, collapsing certain edges of the graph). We then say that T2 is a collapse of T1 , and T1 is a refinement of T2 . Two trees T1 , T2 are compatible if they have a common refinement: a tree T̂ such that there exist collapse maps T̂ → Ti . The standard example is the following: splittings of a hyperbolic surface group associated to two simple closed geodesics C1 , C2 are compatible if and only if C1 and C2 are disjoint or equal. Compatibility implies ellipticity, as T1 is elliptic with respect to T2 if and only if there exists T̂ with maps fi : T̂ → Ti , where f1 is a collapse map but f2 is arbitrary. We now mimic the definition of the JSJ deformation space given in [GL09], using compatibility instead of ellipticity. Definition 1.1. A tree is universally compatible if it is compatible with every tree. The compatibility JSJ deformation space Dco is the maximal deformation space (for domination) containing a universally compatible tree, if it exists. Theorem 1.2. Let G be finitely presented, and let A be any conjugacy-invariant class of subgroups of G, stable under taking subgroups. Then the compatibility JSJ deformation space Dco of G over A exists. As mentioned above, the deformation space Dco contains a preferred element Tco (except in degenerate cases). Theorem 1.3. Assume that Dco exists and is irreducible. If A is invariant under automorphisms of G, then Dco contains a tree Tco which is invariant under automorphisms. This is because a deformation space D containing an irreducible universally compatible tree has a preferred element. We develop an analogy with arithmetic, viewing a refinement of T as a multiple of T . We define the least common multiple (lcm) of a family of pairwise compatible trees, and Tco is the lcm of the reduced universally compatible trees contained in Dco . Being invariant under automorphisms sometimes forces Tco to be trivial (a point). This happens for instance when G is free. On the other hand, we give simple examples of virtually free groups, generalized Baumslag-Solitar groups, Poincaré duality groups, with Tco non-trivial. For splittings over virtually cyclic groups (or more generally V P Cn groups), Tco dominates (sometimes strictly) the tree constructed by Scott and Swarup as a regular neighbourhood. When G is a one-ended hyperbolic group, Tco is very close to the tree constructed by Bowditch [Bow98] from the topology of ∂G. More involved examples are given at the end of the paper, using acylindricity. Before moving on to this topic, let us say a few words about the proof of Theorem 1.2. Existence of the usual JSJ deformation space is a fairly direct consequence of accessibility [GL09], but proving existence of the compatibility JSJ deformation space is more delicate. Among other things, we use a limiting argument, and we need to know that a limit of universally compatible trees is universally compatible. At this point we move into the world of R-trees (simplicial or not), where collapse maps have a natural generalisation as maps preserving alignment: the image of any arc 2  is an arc (possibly a point). Compatibility of R-trees thus makes sense. Recall that the length function of an R-tree T with an isometric action of G is the map l : G → R defined by l(g) = minx∈T d(x, gx). Theorem 1.4. Two irreducible R-trees T1 , T2 with length functions l1 , l2 are compatible if and only if l1 + l2 is the length function of an R-tree. As a warm-up, we give a proof of the following classical facts: a minimal irreducible R-tree is determined by its length function; the equivariant Gromov topology and the axes topology (determined by length functions) agree on the space of irreducible R-trees (following a suggestion by M. Feighn, we extend this to the space of semi-simple trees). Our proof does not use based length functions and extends to a proof of Theorem 1.4. A useful corollary of Theorem 1.4 is that compatibility is a closed equivalence relation on the space of R-trees. In particular, the space of R-trees compatible with a given tree is closed.  Acylindricity In the second part of this paper, we prove the existence of the usual JSJ deformation space DJSJ , and the JSJ compatibility tree Tco , under some acylindricity conditions. Since these conditions are rather technical, we first describe some of the applications given in the third part. Recall that a group G is CSA if centralizers of non-trivial elements are abelian and malnormal. In order to deal with groups having torsion, we introduce K-CSA groups (for K a fixed integer), and we show that, for every hyperbolic group Γ (possibly with torsion), there exists K such that Γ-limit groups are K-CSA. Also recall that a subgroup of a relatively hyperbolic group is elementary if it is parabolic or virtually cyclic. A group is small if it has no non-abelian free subgroup (see Subsection 2.3 for a better definition). Theorem 1.5. Let G be a finitely generated group, and H an arbitrary family of subgroups, with G one-ended relative to H. In the following situations, the JSJ deformation space DJSJ of G over A relative to H, and the compatibility JSJ tree Tco , exist. Moreover, non-small flexible vertex stabilizers are the same for Tco as for trees in DJSJ ; they are QH with finite fiber. • G is a torsion-free CSA group, A is the class of abelian (resp. cyclic) subgroups. • G is a Γ-limit group (with Γ a hyperbolic group), A is the class of virtually abelian (resp. virtually cyclic) subgroups. • G is a relatively hyperbolic group whith small parabolic groups, A is the class of elementary (resp. virtually cyclic) subgroups. Some explanations are in order. We work in a relative setting. This is important for applications (see e.g. [Pau04, Per09]), and also needed in our proofs. We therefore fix a (possibly empty) family H of subgroups of G, and we only consider trees relative to H, i.e. trees in which every H ∈ H fixes a point. The family H is completely arbitrary (in [GL09] we needed H to consist of finitely many finitely generated subgroups). We say that G is one-ended relative to H if it does not split over a finite group relative to H. A vertex stabilizer of a JSJ decomposition is flexible if it is not universally elliptic: there is a tree in which it fixes no point. A key fact of JSJ theory is that flexible vertex stabilizers often are quadratically hanging (QH): assuming G to be torsion-free for simplicity, this means in the context of Theorem 1.5 that flexible vertex stabilizers Gv which contain a free group F2 are fundamental groups of compact surfaces, with incident edge 3  groups contained in boundary subgroups; moreover, the intersection of Gv with a group conjugate to a group of H must also be contained in a boundary subgroup. Let us now explain how acylindricity is used to prove Theorem 1.5. Recall [Sel97] that a tree is k-acylindrical if segments of length ≥ k + 1 have trivial stabilizers (when G has torsion, it is convenient to weaken this definition by allowing long segments to have finite stabilizers; we neglect this issue in this introduction). Acylindrical accessibility [Sel97] gives a bound on the number of orbits of edges and vertices of k-acylindrical trees. However, one cannot use such a bound directly to prove the existence of JSJ decompositions. It may happen that all trees under consideration are acylindrical (for instance, cyclic splittings of hyperbolic groups have this property). In this case we prove that JSJ decompositions exist by analyzing a limiting R-tree using Sela’s structure theorem [Sel97]. But in general we have to deal with non-acylindrical trees. To prove Theorem 1.5, we have to be able to associate an acylindrical tree T ∗ to a given tree T ; in applications T ∗ is the (collapsed) tree of cylinders of T introduced in [GL08] (see Subsection 9.1). The tree T ∗ must be dominated by T , and not too different from T : groups which are elliptic in T ∗ but not in T should be small (they do not contain F2 ). We say that T ∗ is smally dominated by T . Z b  Z  b  Z  b  Z Z  Z  b  Z Z2  Z  Figure 1: a JSJ splitting of a toral relatively hyperbolic group and its tree of cylinders Here is an example (which already appears in [GL08]). Let T be the Bass-Serre tree of the graph of groups Γ pictured on the left of Figure 1 (all punctured tori have the same boundary subgroup, equal to the edge groups of Γ). It is not acylindrical, so we consider its tree of cylinders T ∗ (whose quotient graph of groups Γ∗ is pictured on the right of Figure 1). The tree T ∗ is acylindrical, but Γ∗ has a new (small) vertex stabilizer isomorphic to Z2 . The tree T is a cyclic JSJ tree. The tree T ∗ is the cyclic compatibility JSJ tree of G, it is also a cyclic JSJ tree relative to non-cyclic abelian subgroups. The proof of Theorem 1.5 first consists in constructing a JSJ tree Tr relative to H and to small subgroups which are not virtually cyclic. We then construct a JSJ tree Ta (only relative to H) by refining Tr at vertices with small stabilizer. The tree Tr is the collapsed tree of cylinders of Ta . We show that it is (very closely related to) the compatibility JSJ tree. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 3 we prove Theorem 1.4 and we define lcm’s of compatible simplicial trees. Theorems 1.2 and 1.3 are proved in Section 4, and simple examples of compatibility JSJ trees are given in Section 5. In Sections 7 and 8 we construct JSJ trees and we describe their flexible subgroups, first under the asumption that trees are acylindrical, and then under the assumption that every tree smally dominates an acylindrical tree. We then recall the definition of the tree of cylinders and explain how this leads to small domination (Section 9). The compatibility properties of the tree of cylinders are used in Subsection 9.3 to construct the JSJ compatibility tree. In Sections 11 through 13 we apply the results of Part II to CSA (and K-CSA) groups and to relatively hyperbolic groups. In Section 14 we consider (virtually cyclic) splittings. In this case one may have to slightly refine Tr in order to get the compatibility JSJ tree. The last section explains how one can use JSJ trees to describe small actions on R-trees. This gives another, more 4  general, approach to the main result of [Gui00b].  Contents 1 Introduction  1  2 Preliminaries 2.1 Simplicial trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2 Metric trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.3 Smallness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.4 Maps between trees, compatibility, deformation spaces 2.5 Universal ellipticity and JSJ decompositions [GL09] .  I  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  Compatibility  3 Length functions and compatibility 3.1 From length functions to trees . . . 3.2 Compatibility and length functions 3.3 Common refinements . . . . . . . . 3.4 Arithmetic of trees . . . . . . . . . 4 The 4.1 4.2 4.3  6 6 6 7 8 8  9 . . . .  9 9 11 13 14  compatibility JSJ tree Existence of the compatibility JSJ space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . The compatibility JSJ tree Tco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Relative splittings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16 16 19 19  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  5 Examples 5.1 Free groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.2 Algebraic rigidity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.3 Free products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.4 Hyperbolic groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.5 (Generalized) Baumslag-Solitar groups . . . . . . . 5.6 The canonical decomposition of Scott and Swarup 5.7 Poincaré Duality groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.8 Trees of cylinders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  II  . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . .  Acylindrical JSJ deformation spaces  20 20 20 20 20 21 21 21 22  22  6 Introduction  22  7 Uniform acylindricity 7.1 Existence of the JSJ deformation space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7.2 Description of flexible vertices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22 24 26  8 Acylindricity up to small groups  27  9 The 9.1 9.2 9.3  30 30 31 32  III  tree of cylinders Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Trees of cylinders and acylindricity up to small groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Trees of cylinders and compatibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Applications  34  10 Introduction  34  11 CSA groups  34  12 Γ-limit groups and K-CSA groups  35  5  13 Relatively hyperbolic groups  38  14 Virtually cyclic splittings  39  15 Reading actions on R-trees 15.1 Reading R-trees from the JSJ deformation space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15.2 Reading R-trees from the compatibility JSJ tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  40 41 41  2 2.1  Preliminaries Simplicial trees  Let G be a finitely generated group. We consider actions of G on simplicial trees T . We usually assume that G acts without inversion, and T has no redundant vertex : if a vertex has valence 2, it is the unique fixed point of some element of G. We denote by V (T ) the set of vertices of T . By Bass-Serre theory, the action of G on T can be viewed as a splitting of G as a marked graph of groups Γ, i.e. an isomorphism between G and the fundamental group of a graph of groups. A one-edge splitting (when Γ has one edge) is an amalgam or an HNN-extension. In order to do JSJ theory, we will fix a family A of subgroups of G, which is stable under conjugation and under taking subgroups, and we only consider trees with edge stabilizers in A (splittings over groups in A). We say that such a tree is an A-tree, or a tree over A. We will also work in a relative situation. We consider an arbitrary family H of subgroups of G, and we restrict to A-trees in which every subgroup occuring in H fixes a point. We say that these trees are relative to H, and we call them (A, H)-trees. If H is empty, one recovers the non-relative situation. We say that G splits relative to H if it acts non-trivially on a tree relative to H. It is freely indecomposable (resp. one-ended) relative to H if it does not split over the trivial group (resp. over a finite group) relative to H .  2.2  Metric trees  When endowed with a path metric making each edge isometric to a closed interval, a simplicial tree becomes an R-tree (we usually declare each edge to have length 1). An Rtree is a geodesic metric space T in which any two distinct points are connected by a unique topological arc. We denote by d, or dT , the distance in a tree T . All R-trees are equipped with an isometric action of G, and considered equivalent if they are equivariantly isometric. The considerations below apply to actions on trees, simplicial or not. Non-simplicial trees will be needed in Subsection 7.1. A branch point is a point x ∈ T such that T \ {x} has at least three components. A non-empty subtree is degenerate if it is a single point, non-degenerate otherwise. If A, B are disjoint closed subtrees, the bridge between them is the unique arc I = [a, b] such that A ∩ I = {a} and B ∩ I = {b}. We denote by Gv , Ge the stabilizer of a point v or an arc e. If T is simplicial and v is a vertex, the incident edge groups of Gv are the subgroups Ge ⊂ Gv , where e is an edge incident on v. A subgroup H < G, or an element g ∈ G, is called elliptic if it fixes a point in T . We then denote by Fix H or Fix g its fixed point set. An element g which is not elliptic is hyperbolic. It has an axis, a line on which it acts as a translation. If g ∈ G, we denote by ℓ(g) its translation length ℓ(g) = minx∈T d(x, gx). The subset of T where this minimum is achieved is the characteristic set A(g): the fixed point set if g is elliptic, the axis if g is hyperbolic. The map ℓ : G → R is the length function of T ; we  6  denote it by ℓT if there is a risk of confusion. We say that a map ℓ : G → R is a length function if there is a tree T such that ℓ = ℓT . If ℓ takes values in Z, the R-tree T is a simplicial tree. The action of G on T (or T itself) is trivial if there is a global fixed point (i.e. G itself is elliptic). If the action is non-trivial, there is a hyperbolic element (so ℓ 6= 0). This is a consequence of the following basic fact (recall that G is assumed to be finitely generated). Lemma 2.1 (Serre’s Lemma [Ser77]). If two elliptic elements s1 , s2 satisfy Fix s1 ∩Fix s2 = ∅, then s1 s2 is hyperbolic. Let s1 , . . . , sn be elliptic elements (or subgroups) such that Fix si ∩ Fix sj 6= ∅ for all i, j. Then hs1 , . . . , sn i fixes a point. If the action is non-trivial, there is a smallest invariant subtree Tmin , the union of all axes of hyperbolic elements. We always assume that the action is minimal, i.e. Tmin = T . The action of G on T (or T itself) is irreducible if there exist hyperbolic elements g, h such that A(g) ∩ A(h) is compact. This is equivalent to the existence of hyperbolic elements g, h with [g, h] hyperbolic. It implies that G contains a non-abelian free group. If a minimal action is neither trivial nor irreducible, there is a fixed end or an invariant line. More precisely, there are three possibilities: • T is a line, and G acts by translations. • T is a line, and some g ∈ G reverses orientation. The action is dihedral. In the simplicial case, the action factors through an action of the infinite dihedral group D∞ = Z/2 ∗ Z/2. • There is a unique invariant end (this happens in particular if T is the Bass-Serre tree of a strictly ascending HNN extension). In this case the length function ℓ is abelian: it is the absolute value of a non-trivial homomorphism ϕ : G → R (whose image is infinite cyclic if T is simplicial); in other words, ℓ is the length function of a non-trivial action on a line by translations. These considerations apply to the action of a subgroup H ⊂ G. If H is infinitely generated, its action may be non-trivial although every h ∈ H is elliptic. In this case Tmin is not defined. There is a unique invariant end as in the third assertion of the trichotomy stated above, but ϕ = 0.  2.3  Smallness  We will consider various classes of “small” subgroups of G. Each class contains the previous one. • A group H is VPCn (resp. VPC≤n ) if it is virtually polycyclic of Hirsch length n (resp. at most n). VPC≤1 is the same as virtually cyclic. • A group H is slender if H and all its subgroups are finitely generated. If a slender group acts non-trivially on a tree, there is an invariant line. • Given a tree T , we say (following [BF91] and [GL07]) that a subgroup H < G is small in T if its action on T is not irreducible. As mentioned above, H then fixes a point, or an end, or leaves a line invariant. We say that H is small (in G) if it is small in every simplicial tree on which G acts. Every group not containing F2 (the free group of rank 2) is small. • If we fix A, and possibly H, as above, we say that H is small in A-trees (resp. small in (A, H)-trees) if it is small in every A-tree (resp. every (A, H)-tree) on which G acts. These smallness properties are invariant under commensurability and under taking subgroups. Also note that a group contained in a group of H is small in (A, H)-trees. 7  2.4  Maps between trees, compatibility, deformation spaces  All maps between trees will be assumed to be G-equivariant. A map f : T → T ′ preserves alignment, or is a collapse map, if the image of any arc [x, y] is a point or the arc [f (x), f (y)]. Equivalently, the preimage of every subtree is a subtree. When T and T ′ are simplicial, we only consider maps obtained by collapsing edges to points. By equivariance, the set of collapsed edges is a union of G-orbits. In terms of graphs of groups, one obtains T ′ /G by collapsing edges of T /G. If there is a collapse map f : T → T ′ , we say that T ′ is a collapse of T , and T is a refinement of T ′ . In the simplicial context, we say that T is obtained by refining T ′ at those vertices v for which f −1 (v) is not a single point. Two trees T1 , T2 are compatible if they have a common refinement: there exists a tree T̂ with collapse maps gi : T̂ → Ti . In the remainder of these preliminaries, we only consider simplicial trees (with an action of G) and we fix A as above. A tree T1 dominates T2 if there is an equivariant map from T1 to T2 . Equivalently, T1 dominates T2 if every vertex stabilizer of T1 fixes a point in T2 . Two A-trees belong to the same deformation space D over A if they have the same elliptic subgroups (i.e. each one dominates the other). If a tree in D is irreducible, so are all others, and we say that D is irreducible. We say that D dominates D ′ if trees in D dominate those in D ′ . This induces a partial order on the set of deformation spaces of G over A. A tree T is reduced [For02] if no proper collapse of T lies in the same deformation space as T . Equivalently, T is reduced if, for any edge uv such that hGu , Gv i is elliptic, there exists a hyperbolic element g ∈ G sending u to v (in particular the edge maps to a loop in T /G). This may also be read at the level of the graph of groups: T is not reduced if and only if Γ = T /G contains an edge e with distinct endpoints ū, v̄ such that ie (Ge ) = Gū . If T is not reduced, one obtains a reduced tree T ′ in the same deformation space by collapsing certain orbits of edges (but T ′ is not uniquely defined in general).  2.5  Universal ellipticity and JSJ decompositions [GL09]  We fix A and H as above (with H empty in the non-relative case). For instance, A may be the family of subgroups which are finite, (virtually) cyclic, abelian, VPC≤n for some fixed n, slender. We refer to (virtually) cyclic, abelian, slender... splittings (or trees, or JSJ decompositions) when A is the corresponding family of subgroups (we consider the trivial group as cyclic, so that A is subgroup closed). A tree T is elliptic with respect to a tree T ′ if edge stabilizers of T are elliptic in T ′ . In this case there is a tree T̂ (an (A, H)-tree if T and T ′ are (A, H)-trees) which refines T and dominates T ′ [GL09, Lemma 3.2]. A subgroup H ⊂ G is universally elliptic (or (A, H)-universally elliptic if there is a risk of confusion) if H is elliptic in every (A, H)-tree. A tree is universally elliptic if its edge stabilizers are universally elliptic. A JSJ tree of G over A relative to H is a universally elliptic (A, H)-tree TJ which is maximal for domination: every universally elliptic (A, H)-tree is dominated by TJ . The set of all JSJ trees is a deformation space called the JSJ deformation space. JSJ trees always exist when G is finitely presented and H consists of finitely many finitely generated subgroups [GL09]. If TJ is a JSJ tree, a vertex stabilizer Gv of TJ is rigid if it is universally elliptic. Otherwise, Gv (or v) is flexible. In many situations, flexible vertex stabilizers are quadratically hanging (QH) subgroups: there is a normal subgroup F ⊳ Gv (called the fiber of Gv ) such that Gv /F is isomorphic to the fundamental group π1 (Σ) of a hyperbolic 2-orbifold Σ (usually with boundary), and images of incident edge groups in π1 (Σ) are either finite or contained 8  in a boundary subgroup (a subgroup conjugate to the fundamental group of a boundary component). When F is trivial and Σ is a surface, we say that Gv is a QH surface group. An extended boundary subgroup of Gv is a group whose image in π1 (Σ) is finite or contained in a boundary subgroup. In a relative situation, with T relative to H, we define Gv to be a relative QH-subgroup if, additionally, every conjugate of a group in H intersects Gv in an extended boundary subgroup. Since incident edge groups are extended boundary subgroups, it is enough to check this for conjugates of H that are contained in Gv . If Gv is a relative QH-subgroup, we say that a boundary component C of Σ is used if there exists an incident edge group, or a subgroup of Gv conjugate to a group of H, whose image in π1 (Σ) is contained with finite index in π1 (C).  Part I  Compatibility 3  Length functions and compatibility  The main result of this section is Theorem 3.7, saying that two R-trees are compatible if and only if the sum of their length functions is again a length function. This has a nice consequence: the set of R-trees compatible with a given tree is closed. As a warm-up we give a proof of the following known facts: the length function of an irreducible R-tree determines the tree up to equivariant isometry, and the Gromov topology agrees with the axes topology (determined by translation lengths). After proving Theorem 3.7, we show that pairwise compatibility for a finite set of Rtrees implies the existence of a common refinement. We conclude by defining least common multiple (lcm’s) and prime factors for irreducible simplicial trees. In Subsections 3.1 to 3.3, the countable group G does not have to be finitely generated (hypotheses such as irreducibility ensure that G contains enough hyperbolic elements). We leave details to the reader. We will use the following facts: Lemma 3.1 ([Pau89]). Let T be an R-tree with a minimal action of G. Let g, h be hyperbolic elements. 1. If their axes A(g), A(h) are disjoint, then ℓ(gh) = ℓ(g −1 h) = ℓ(g) + ℓ(h) + 2d(A(g), A(h)) > ℓ(g) + ℓ(h). The intersection between A(gh) and A(hg) is the bridge between A(g) and A(h). 2. If their axes meet, then min(ℓ(gh), ℓ(g−1 h)) ≤ max(ℓ(gh), ℓ(g −1 h)) = ℓ(g) + ℓ(h). The inequality is an equality if and only if the axes meet in a single point. Lemma 3.2 ([Pau89, Lemma 4.3]). If T is irreducible, any arc [a, b] is contained in the axis of some g ∈ G.  3.1  From length functions to trees  Let T be the set of minimal isometric actions of G on R-trees modulo equivariant isometry. Let Tirr ⊂ T be the set of irreducible R-trees. The following are classical results: 9  Theorem 3.3 ([AB87, CM87]). Two minimal irreducible R-trees T, T ′ with the same length function are equivariantly isometric. Theorem 3.4 ([Pau89]). The equivariant Gromov topology and the axes topology agree on Tirr. By Theorem 3.3, the assignment T 7→ ℓT defines an embedding Tirr → RG . The axes topology is the topology induced by this embedding. The equivariant Gromov topology on T is defined by the following neighbourhood basis. Given T ∈ T , a number ε > 0, a finite subset A ⊂ G, and x1 , . . . , xn ∈ T , define Nε,A,{x1 ,...xn } (T ) as the set of trees T ′ ∈ T such that there exist x′1 , . . . , x′n ∈ T ′ with |dT ′ (x′i , ax′j ) − dT (xi , axj )| ≤ ε for all a ∈ A and i, j ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Theorem 3.4 should be viewed as a version with parameters of Theorem 3.3: the length function determines the tree, in a continuous way. As a preparation for the next subsection, we now give quick proofs of these theorems. Unlike previous proofs, ours does not use based length functions. Proof of Theorem 3.3. Let T, T ′ be minimal irreducible R-trees with the same length function ℓ. We denote by A(g) the axis of a hyperbolic element g in T , by A′ (g) its axis in T ′ . By Lemma 3.1, A(g) ∩ A(h) is empty if and only if A′ (g) ∩ A′ (h) is empty. We define an isometric equivariant map f from the set of branch points of T to T ′ , as follows. Let x be a branch point of T , and y 6= x an auxiliary branch point. By Lemmas 3.1 and 3.2, there exist hyperbolic elements g, h whose axes in T do not intersect, such that [x, y] is the bridge between A(g) and A(h), with x ∈ A(g) and y ∈ A(h). Then {x} = A(g) ∩ A(gh) ∩ A(hg). The axes of g and h in T ′ do not intersect, so A′ (g) ∩ A′ (gh) ∩ A′ (hg) is a single point which we call f (x). Note that f (x) = ∩k A′ (k), the intersection being over all hyperbolic elements k whose axis in T contains x: if k is such an element, its axis in T ′ meets all three sets A′ (g), A′ (gh), A′ (hg), so contains f (x). This gives an intrinsic definition of f (x), independent of the choice of y, g, and h. In particular, f is G-equivariant. It is isometric because dT ′ (f (x), f (y)) and dT (x, y) are both equal to 1/2(ℓ(gh) − ℓ(g) − ℓ(h)). We then extend f equivariantly and isometrically first to the closure of the set of branch points of T , and then to each complementary interval. The resulting map from T to T ′ is onto because T ′ is minimal. Proof of Theorem 3.4. Given g ∈ G, the map T 7→ ℓT (g), from Tirr to R, is continuous in the Gromov topology: this follows from the formula ℓ(g) = max(d(x, g2 x) − d(x, gx), 0). This shows that the Gromov topology is finer than the axes topology. For the converse, we fix ε > 0, a finite set of points xi ∈ T , and a finite set of elements ak ∈ G. We have to show that, if the length function ℓ′ of T ′ is close enough to ℓ on a suitable finite subset of G, there exist points x′i ∈ T ′ such that |dT ′ (x′i , ak x′j ) − dT (xi , ak xj )| < ε for all i, j, k. First assume that each xi is a branch point. For each i, choose elements gi , hi as in the previous proof, with xi an endpoint of the bridge between A(gi ) and A(hi ). If ℓ′ is close to ℓ, the axes of gi and hi in T ′ are disjoint and we can define x′i as A′ (gi ) ∩ A′ (gi hi ) ∩ A′ (hi gi ). A different choice g̃i , h̃i may lead to a different point x̃′i . But the distance between x′i and x̃′i goes to 0 as ℓ′ tends to ℓ because all pairwise distances between A′ (gi ), A′ (gi hi ), A′ (hi gi ), A′ (g̃i ), A′ (g̃i h̃i ), A′ (h̃i g̃i ) go to 0. It is then easy to complete the proof. If some of the xi ’s are not branch points, one can add new points so that each such xi is contained in a segment bounded by branch points xbi , xci . One then defines x′i as the point dividing [x′bi , x′ci ] in the same way as xi divides [xbi , xci ].  10  As suggested by M. Feighn, one may extend the previous results to reducible trees. Let Tss consist of all minimal trees which are either irreducible or isometric to R (we only rule out trivial trees and trees with exactly one fixed end, see Subsection 2.2); these trees are called semi-simple in [CM87]. Every non-zero length function is the length function of a tree in Tss , and the set of length functions is projectively compact in RG [CM87, Theorem 4.5]. Theorem 3.5. Two minimal trees T, T ′ ∈ Tss with the same length function are equivariantly isometric. The equivariant Gromov topology and the axes topology agree on Tss . In other words, the assignment T 7→ ℓT induces a homeomorphism between Tss , equipped with the equivariant Gromov topology, and the space of non-zero length functions. We note that the results of [CM87] are stated for all trees in Tss , those of [Pau89] for trees which are irreducible or dihedral. Proof. We refer to [CM87, page 586] for a proof of the first assertion in the reducible case. Since the set of irreducible length functions is open, it suffices to show the following fact: Claim 3.6. If Tn is a sequence of trees in Tss whose length functions ℓn converge to the length function ℓ of an action of G on T = R, then Tn converges to T in the Gromov topology. To prove the claim, we denote by An (g) the characteristic set of g ∈ G in Tn , and we fix h ∈ G hyperbolic in T (hence in Tn for n large). We denote by In (g) the (possibly empty or degenerate) segment An (g) ∩ An (h). The first case is when G acts on T by translations. To show that T Tn converges to T , it suffices to show that, given elements g1 , . . . , gk in G, the length of i In (gi ) goes to infinity with n. By a standard argument using Helly’s theorem, we may assume k = 2. We first show that, for any g, the length |In (g)| goes to infinity. Let N ∈ N be arbitrary. Since g−1 hN gh−N is elliptic in T , the distance between In (hN gh−N ) and In (g) goes to 0 as n → ∞. But In (hN gh−N ) is the image of In (g) by hN , so lim inf n→∞ |In (g)| ≥ N ℓ(h). To show that the overlap between In (g1 ) and In (g2 ) goes to infinity, we can assume that the relative position of In (g1 ) and In (g2 ) is the same for all n’s. If they are disjoint, In (g1 g2 g1−1 ) or In (g2 g1 g2−1 ) is empty, a contradiction. Since every |In (g)| goes to infinity, the result is clear if In (g1 ) and In (g2 ) are nested. In the remaining case, up to changing gi to its inverse, we can assume that g1 , g2 translate in the same direction along An (h) if they are both hyperbolic. Then In (g1 ) ∩ In (g2 ) equals In (g1 g2 ) or In (g2 g1 ), so its length goes to infinity. Now suppose that the action of G on T is dihedral. Suppose that g ∈ G reverses orientation on T . For n large, the axes of h, g −1 hg, ghg −1 in Tn have a long overlap by the previous argument. On this overlap h translates in one direction, g −1 hg and ghg −1 in the other (because ℓn (hg−1 hg) is close to 0 and ℓn (h−1 g−1 hg) is not). It follows that g acts as a central symmetry on a long subsegment of An (h). Moreover, if g, g ′ both reverse orientation, the distance between their fixed points on An (h) is close to 2ℓ(gg ′ ). The convergence of Tn to T easily follows from these observations. This proves the claim, hence the theorem.  3.2  Compatibility and length functions  Recall that two R-trees T1 , T2 are compatible if they have a common refinement: there exists an R-tree T̂ with (equivariant) collapse maps gi : T̂ → Ti (see Subsection 2.4). If T1 and T2 are compatible, they have a standard common refinement Ts constructed as follows.  11  We denote by di the distance in Ti , and by ℓi the length function. Let T̂ be any common refinement. Given x, y ∈ T̂ , define δ(x, y) = d1 (g1 (x), g1 (y)) + d2 (g2 (x), g2 (y)). This is a pseudo-distance satisfying δ(x, y) = δ(x, z) + δ(z, y) if z ∈ [x, y] (this is also a length measure, as defined in [Gui00a]). The associated metric space (Ts , d) is an R-tree which refines T1 and T2 , with maps fi : Ts → Ti satisfying d(x, y) = d1 (f1 (x), f1 (y)) + d2 (f2 (x), f2 (y)). The length function of Ts is ℓ = ℓ1 + ℓ2 (this follows from the formula ℓ(g) = limn→∞ n1 d(x, g n x)). In particular, ℓ1 +ℓ2 is a length function. We now prove the converse. Theorem 3.7. Two minimal irreducible R-trees T1 , T2 with an action of G are compatible if and only if the sum ℓ = ℓ1 + ℓ2 of their length functions is a length function. Remark 3.8. If T1 and T2 are compatible, then λ1 l1 + λ2 l2 is a length function for all λ1 , λ2 ≥ 0. Corollary 3.9. Compatibility is a closed relation on Tirr × Tirr. In particular, the set of irreducible R-trees compatible with a given T0 is closed in Tirr. Proof. This follows from the fact that the set of length functions is a closed subset of RG [CM87]. Proof of Theorem 3.7. We have to prove the “if” direction. Let T1 , T2 be irreducible minimal R-trees with length functions ℓ1 , ℓ2 , such that ℓ = ℓ1 + ℓ2 is the length function of a minimal R-tree T . We denote by A(g), A1 (g), A2 (g) axes in T , T1 , T2 respectively. First note that T is irreducible: hyperbolic elements g, h with [g, h] hyperbolic exist in T since they exist in T1 . We want to prove that T is a common refinement of T1 and T2 . In fact, we show that T is the standard refinement Ts mentioned earlier (which is unique by Theorem 3.3). The proof is similar to that of Theorem 3.3, but we first need a few lemmas. Lemma 3.10. [[Gui05, lemme 1.3]] Let S ⊂ G be a finitely generated semigroup such that no point or line in T is invariant under the subgroup hSi generated by S. Let I be an arc contained in the axis of a hyperbolic element h ∈ S. Then there exists a finitely generated semigroup S ′ ⊂ S with hS ′ i = hSi such that every element g ∈ S ′ \ {1} is hyperbolic in T , its axis contains I, and g translates in the same direction as h on I. Lemma 3.11. Let T1 , T2 , T be arbitrary irreducible minimal trees. Given an arc I ⊂ T , there exists g ∈ G which is hyperbolic in T1 , T2 and T , and whose axis in T contains I. Proof. Apply Lemma 3.10 with S = G and any h whose axis in T contains I. Since S ′ generates G, it must contain an element h′ which is hyperbolic in T1 : otherwise G would have a global fixed point in T1 by Serre’s lemma (Lemma 2.1). Applying Lemma 3.10 to the action of S ′ on T1 , we get a semigroup S ′′ ⊂ S ′ whose non-trivial elements are hyperbolic in T1 . Similarly, S ′′ contains an element g which is hyperbolic in T2 . This element g satisfies the conclusions of the lemma. Remark 3.12. More generally, one may require that g be hyperbolic in finitely many trees T1 , . . . , Tn . Lemma 3.13. Let g, h be hyperbolic in T1 and T2 (and therefore in T ). • If their axes in T meet, so do their axes in Ti .  12  • If their axes in T do not meet, their axes in Ti meet in at most one point. In particular, the elements gh and hg are hyperbolic in Ti . Proof. Assume that A(g) and A(h) meet, but A1 (g) and A1 (h) do not. Then ℓ1 (gh) > ℓ1 (g)+ℓ1 (h). Since ℓ(gh) ≤ ℓ(g)+ℓ(h), we get ℓ2 (gh) < ℓ2 (g)+ℓ2 (h). Similarly, ℓ2 (g −1 h) < ℓ2 (g) + ℓ2 (h). But these inequalities are incompatible by Lemma 3.1. Now assume that A(g) and A(h) do not meet, and A1 (g), A1 (h) meet in a nondegenerate segment. We may assume ℓ1 (gh) < ℓ1 (g−1 h) = ℓ1 (g) + ℓ1 (h). Since ℓ(gh) = ℓ(g−1 h) > ℓ(g) + ℓ(h), we have ℓ2 (gh) > ℓ2 (g −1 h) > ℓ2 (g) + ℓ2 (h), contradicting Lemma 3.1. We can now complete the proof of Theorem 3.7. It suffices to define maps fi : T → Ti such that d(x, y) = d1 (f1 (x), f1 (y)) + d2 (f2 (x), f2 (y)). Such maps are collapse maps (if three points satisfy a triangular equality in T , then their images under fi cannot satisfy a strict triangular inequality), so T is the standard common refinement Ts . The construction of fi is the same as that of f in the proof of Theorem 3.3. Given branch points x and y, we use Lemma 3.11 to get elements g and h hyperbolic in all three trees, and such that the bridge between A(g) and A(h) is [x, y]. Then Lemma 3.13 guarantees that Ai (g) ∩ Ai (gh) ∩ Ai (hg) is a single point of Ti , which we define as fi (x); the only new phenomenon is that Ai (g) and Ai (h) may now intersect in a single point. The relation between d, d1 , d2 comes from the equality ℓ = ℓ1 + ℓ2 , using the formula di (fi (x), fi (y)) = 1/2(ℓi (gh)−ℓi (g)−ℓi (h)). Having defined fi on branch points, we extend it by continuity to the closure of the set of branch points of T (it is 1-Lipschitz) and then linearly to each complementary interval. The relation between d, d1 , d2 still holds.  3.3  Common refinements  The following result is proved for almost-invariant sets in [SS03, Theorem 5.16]. Proposition 3.14. Let G be a finitely generated group, and let T1 , . . . , Tn be irreducible minimal R-trees such that Ti is compatible with Tj for i 6= j. Then there exists a common refinement T of all Ti ’s. Remark 3.15. This statement may be interpreted as the fact that the set of projectivized trees satisfies the flag condition for a simplicial complex: whenever one sees the 1-skeleton of an n-simplex, there is indeed an n-simplex. Two compatible trees Ti , Tj define a 1simplex tℓi + (1 − t)ℓj of length functions. If there are segments joining any P pair of length functions ℓi , ℓj , the proposition says that there is an (n − 1)-simplex ti ℓi of length functions. To prove Proposition 3.14, we need some terminology from [Gui05]. A direction in an R-tree T is a connected component δ of T \ {x} for some x ∈ T . A quadrant in T1 × T2 is a product Q = δ1 × δ2 of a direction of T1 by a direction of T2 . A quadrant Q = δ1 × δ2 is heavy if there exists h ∈ G hyperbolic in T1 and T2 such that δi contains a positive semi-axis of h (equivalently, for all x ∈ Ti one has hn (x) ∈ δi for n large). We say that h makes Q heavy. The core C(T1 ×T2 ) ⊂ T1 ×T2 is the complement of the union of quadrants which are not heavy. By [Gui05, Théorème 6.1], T1 and T2 are compatible if and only if C(T1 × T2 ) contains no non-degenerate rectangle (a product I1 × I2 where each Ii is a segment not reduced to a point). We first prove a technical lemma. Lemma 3.16. Let T1 , T2 be irreducible and minimal. Let f : T1 → T1′ be a collapse map, with T1′ irreducible. Let δ1′ × δ2 be a quadrant in T1′ × T2 , and δ1 = f −1 (δ1′ ). If the quadrant δ1 × δ2 ⊂ T1 × T2 is heavy, then so is δ1′ × δ2 . 13  Note that δ1 is a direction because f preserves alignment. Proof. Consider an element h making δ1 × δ2 heavy. If h is hyperbolic in T1′ , then h makes δ1′ × δ2 heavy and we are done. If not, assume that we can find some g ∈ G, hyperbolic in T1′ and T2 (hence in T1 ), such that for i = 1, 2 the axis Ai (g) of g in Ti intersects Ai (h) in a compact set. Then for n > 0 large enough the element hn gh−n makes δ1 × δ2 heavy. Since this element is hyperbolic in T1′ and T2 , it makes δ1′ × δ2 heavy. We now prove the existence of g. Consider a line l in T2 , disjoint from A2 (h), and the bridge [x, y] between l and A2 (h). Let I ⊂ l be a segment containing x in its interior. By Lemma 3.11, there exists g hyperbolic in T1′ and T2 whose axis in T2 contains I, hence is disjoint from A2 (h). Being hyperbolic in T1′ , the element g is hyperbolic in T1 . Its axis intersects A1 (h) in a compact set because A1 (h) is mapped to a single point in T1′ (otherwise, h would be hyperbolic in T1′ ). Proof of Proposition 3.14. First assume n = 3. Let T12 be the standard common refinement of T1 , T2 (see Subsection 3.2). Let C be the core of T12 × T3 . By [Gui05, Théorème 6.1], it is enough to prove that C does not contain a product of non-degenerate segments [a12 , b12 ] × [a3 , b3 ]. Assume otherwise. Denote by a1 , b1 , a2 , b2 the images of a12 , b12 in T1 , T2 . Since a12 6= b12 , at least one inequality a1 6= b1 or a2 6= b2 holds. Assume for instance a1 6= b1 . We claim that [a1 , b1 ]×[a3 , b3 ] is contained in the core of T1 ×T3 , giving a contradiction. We have to show that any quadrant Q = δ1 × δ3 of T1 × T3 intersecting [a1 , b1 ] × [a3 , b3 ] is heavy. Denote by f : T12 → T1 the collapse map. The preimage Q̃ = f −1 (δ1 ) × δ3 of Q in T12 × T3 is a quadrant intersecting [a12 , b12 ] × [a3 , b3 ]. Since this rectangle in contained in C(T12 × T3 ), the quadrant Q̃ is heavy, and so is Q by Lemma 3.16. This concludes the case n = 3. The general case follows by a straightforward induction.  3.4  Arithmetic of trees  In this subsection, we work with simplicial trees. We let Sirr be the set of simplicial trees T which are minimal, irreducible, with no redundant vertices and no inversion. We also view such a T as a metric tree, by declaring each edge to be of length 1. This makes Sirr a subset of Tirr . By Theorem 3.3, a tree T ∈ Sirr is determined by its length function ℓ. Definition 3.17. The prime factors of T are the one-edge splittings Ti obtained from T P by collapsing edges in all orbits but one. Clearly ℓ = i ℓi , where ℓi is the length function of Ti . We may view a prime factor of T as an orbit of edges of T , or as an edge of the quotient graph of groups Γ = T /G. Since G is assumed to be finitely generated, there are finitely many prime factors (this remains true if G is only finitely generated relative to a finite collection of elliptic subgroups). Lemma 3.18. Let T ∈ Sirr . 1. Any non-trivial tree T ′ obtained from T by collapses (in particular, its prime factors) belongs to Sirr . 2. The prime factors of T are distinct (T is “squarefree”). Proof. Let e be any edge of T which is not collapsed in T ′ . Since T has no redundant vertex and is not a line, either the endpoints of e are branch points u, v, or there are branch points u, v such that [u, v] = e ∪ e′ with e′ in the same orbit as e. Using Lemma 3.2, we can find elements g, h hyperbolic in T , whose axes are not collapsed to points in T ′ , and such that [u, v] is the bridge between their axes. Since g, h are hyperbolic with 14  disjoint axes in T ′ , the tree T ′ is irreducible. It is easy to check that collapsing cannot create redundant vertices, so T ′ ∈ Sirr. Now suppose that e, hence [u, v], gets collapsed in some prime factor T ′′ . Then ℓ′ (gh) > ℓ′ (g) + ℓ′ (h) holds in T ′ but not in T ′′ , so T ′ 6= T ′′ . Remark 3.19. This lemma shows that collapsing an irreducible simplicial tree yields an irreducible tree (or a point). Collapsing a non-irreducible tree clearly yields a minimal non-irreducible tree belonging to the same deformation space (or a point). Because of this lemma, a tree of Sirr is determined by its prime factors. In particular, T refines T ′ if and only if every prime factor of T ′ is also a prime factor of T . If T1 and T2 are compatible, the standard refinement Ts constructed in Subsection 3.2 is a metric tree which should be viewed as the “product” of T1 and T2 . We shall now define the lcm T1 ∨ T2 of simplicial trees T1 and T2 . To understand the difference between the two, suppose T1 = T2 . Then Ts is obtained from T1 by subdividing each edge, its length function is 2ℓ1 . On the other hand, T1 ∨ T1 = T1 . Definition 3.20. Consider two trees T1 , T2 ∈ Sirr , with length functions ℓ1 , ℓ2 . We define ℓ1 ∧ ℓ2 as the sum of all length functions which appear as prime factors in both T1 and T2 . It is the length function of a tree T1 ∧ T2 (possibly a point) which is a collapse of both T1 and T2 . We call T1 ∧ T2 the gcd of T1 and T2 . We define ℓ1 ∨ ℓ2 = ℓ1 + ℓ2 − ℓ1 ∧ ℓ2 as the sum of all length functions which appear as prime factors in T1 or T2 (or both). Lemma 3.21. Let T1 and T2 be compatible trees in Sirr . There is a tree T1 ∨ T2 ∈ Sirr whose length function is ℓ1 ∨ ℓ2 . It is a common refinement of T1 and T2 , and no edge of T1 ∨ T2 is collapsed in both T1 and T2 . We call T1 ∨ T2 the lcm of T1 and T2 . Proof. Let T be any common refinement. We modify it as follows. We collapse any edge which is collapsed in both T1 and T2 . We then remove redundant vertices and restrict to the minimal subtree. The resulting tree T1 ∨ T2 belongs to Sirr (it is irreducible because it refines T1 ). It is a common refinement of T1 and T2 , and no edge is collapsed in both T1 and T2 . We check that T1 ∨ T2 has the correct length function by finding its prime factors. Since no edge is collapsed in both T1 and T2 , a prime factor of T1 ∨ T2 is a prime factor of T1 or T2 . Conversely, a prime factor of Ti is associated to an orbit of edges of Ti , and this orbit lifts to T1 ∨ T2 . Proposition 3.22. Let T1 , . . . , Tn be pairwise compatible trees of Sirr. There exists a tree T1 ∨ · · · ∨ Tn in Sirr whose length function is the sum of all length functions which appear as a prime factor in some Ti . Moreover: 1. A tree T ∈ Sirr refines T1 ∨ · · · ∨ Tn if and only if it refines each Ti . 2. A tree T ∈ Sirr is compatible with T1 ∨ · · · ∨ Tn if and only if it is compatible with each Ti . 3. A subgroup H is elliptic in T1 ∨ · · · ∨ Tn if and only if it is elliptic in each Ti . If T1 dominates each Ti , then T1 ∨ · · · ∨ Tn belongs to the deformation space of T1 . Definition 3.23. T1 ∨ · · · ∨ Tn is the lcm of the compatible trees Ti .  15  Proof. First suppose n = 2. We show that T1 ∨ T2 satisfies the additional conditions. If T refines T1 and T2 , it refines T1 ∨ T2 because every prime factor of T1 ∨ T2 is a prime factor of T . This proves Assertion 1. If T1 , T2 , T are pairwise compatible, they have a common refinement T̂ by Proposition 3.14 or [SS03, Theorem 5.16] (where one should exclude ascending HNN extensions). This T̂ refines T1 ∨ T2 by Assertion 1, so T and T1 ∨ T2 are compatible. Assertion 3 follows from the fact that no edge of T1 ∨ T2 is collapsed in both T1 and T2 , as in the proof of [GL09, Lemma 3.2]: if H fixes a point v1 ∈ T1 and is elliptic in T2 , it fixes a point in the preimage of v1 in T1 ∨ T2 . The case n > 2 now follows easily by induction. By Assertion 2, the tree T1 ∨ · · · ∨ Tn−1 is compatible with Tn , so we can define T1 ∨ · · · ∨ Tn = (T1 ∨ · · · ∨ Tn−1 ) ∨ Tn .  4  The compatibility JSJ tree  We fix a family A of subgroups which is stable under conjugation and under taking subgroups. We work with simplicial trees, which we often view as metric trees in order to apply the results from the previous section. We only consider A-trees (trees with edge stabilizers in A). Note that the lcm of a finite family of pairwise compatible A-trees is an A-tree. In [GL09] we have defined a JSJ tree (of G over A) as an A-tree which is universally elliptic (over A) and dominates every universally elliptic A-tree. Its deformation space is the JSJ deformation space DJSJ . In this section we define the compatibility JSJ deformation space and the compatibility JSJ tree. For simplicity we work in the non-relative case (see Subsection 4.3 for the relative case). Definition 4.1. An A-tree T is universally compatible (over A) if it is compatible with every A-tree. If, among deformation spaces containing a universally compatible tree, there is one which is maximal for domination, it is unique. It is denoted by Dco and it is called the compatibility JSJ deformation space of G over A. Clearly, a universally compatible tree is universally elliptic. This implies that Dco is dominated by DJSJ . In Subsection 4.2 we shall deduce from [GL07] that Dco , if irreducible, contains a preferred tree Tco , which we call the compatibility JSJ tree. It is fixed under any automorphism of G that leaves Dco invariant. In particular, if A is Aut(G)-invariant, then Tco is Out(G)-invariant. Also note that Tco may be refined to a JSJ tree (Lemma 4.8 of [GL09]).  4.1  Existence of the compatibility JSJ space  Theorem 4.2. If G is finitely presented, the compatibility JSJ space Dco of G (over A) exists. The heart of the proof of Theorem 4.2 is the following proposition. Proposition 4.3. Let G be finitely presented. Let T0 ← T1 · · · ← Tk ← · · · be a sequence of refinements of irreducible universally compatible A-trees. There exist collapses T k of Tk , in the same deformation space as Tk , such that the sequence T k converges to a universally compatible simplicial A-tree T which dominates every Tk . Proof of Theorem 4.2 from the proposition. We may assume that there is a non-trivial universally compatible A-tree. We may also assume that all such trees are irreducible: otherwise it follows from Remark 3.19 that there is only one deformation space of A-trees, and the theorem is trivially true. 16  Let (Sα )α∈A be the set of universally compatible A-trees, up to equivariant isomorphism. We have to find a universally compatible A-tree T which dominates every Sα . By Lemma 3.9 of [GL09], we only need T to dominate all trees in a countable set Sk , k ∈ N. We obtain such a T by applying Proposition 4.3 with Tk = S0 ∨ · · · ∨ Sk ; the trees Tk are universally compatible by Assertion 2 of Proposition 3.22. Proof of Proposition 4.3. By accessibility (see Proposition 4.4 of [GL09]), there exists an A-tree S which dominates every Tk (this is where we use finite presentability of G). But of course we cannot claim that it is universally compatible. We may assume that Tk and S are minimal, that Tk+1 is different from Tk , and that S ∧ Tk is independent of k. We define Sk = S ∨ Tk . We denote by ∆k , Γ, Γk the quotient graphs of groups of Tk , S, Sk , and we let πk : Γk → Γ be the collapse map (see Figure 2). We denote by ρk the collapse map Γk+1 → Γk . Sk /G = Γk  A  A  Bk C1  C2  ...  Tk /G = ∆k  Ck  C1  C2  A  Bk Ck  T k /G = ∆k  ...  B  Ck  C  A  πk B  Ck  C  Sk′ /G  A  B C  S/G = Γ  Figure 2: The trees Tk , S, Sk , T k , Sk′ , with C1 ⊃ C2 ⊃ · · · ⊃ Ck ⊃ C, and Bk = B ∗C Ck . The trees Sk all belong to the deformation space of S, and Sk+1 strictly refines Sk . In particular, the number of edges of Γk grows. Since accessibility holds within a given deformation space (see [GL07] page 147), this growth occurs through the creation of a bounded number of long segments whose interior vertices have valence 2, with one of the incident edge groups equal to the vertex group. We now make this precise. Fix k. For each vertex v ∈ Γ, define Yv = πk−1 ({v}) ⊂ Γk . The Yv ’s are disjoint, and edges of Γk not contained in ∪v Yv correspond to edges of Γ. Since Sk and S are in the same deformation space, Yv is a tree of groups, and it contains a vertex cv whose vertex group equals the fundamental group of Yv (which is the vertex group of v in Γ). This cv may fail to be unique, but we can choose one for every k in a way which is compatible with the maps ρk . We orient edges of Yv towards cv . The group carried by such an edge is then equal to the group carried by its initial vertex. Say that a vertex u ∈ Yv is peripheral if u = cv or u is adjacent to an edge of Γk which is not in Yv (i.e. is mapped onto an edge of Γ by πk ). By minimality of Sk , each terminal vertex u0 of Yv is peripheral (because it carries the same group as the initial edge of the segment u0 cv ). In each Γk , the total number of peripheral vertices is bounded by 2|E(Γ)| + |V (Γ)|. It follows that the number of points of valence 6= 2 in ∪v Yv is bounded. Cutting each Yv at its peripheral vertices and its points of valence ≥ 3 produces the segments of Γk mentioned earlier. On the example of Figure 2, there is one segment in Γk , corresponding to the edges labelled C1 , . . . , Ck . The point cv ∈ Γk is the vertex labelled by A. The vertex v of Γ to which the segment corresponds is the vertex of Γ labelled A. Having defined segments for each k, we now let k vary. The preimage of a segment of Γk under the map ρk is a union of segments of Γk+1 . Since the number of segments is bounded independently of k, we may assume that ρk maps every segment of Γk+1 onto a segment of Γk . In particular, the number of segments is independent of k. 17  Recall that we have oriented the edges of Yv towards cv . Each edge contained in ∪v Yv carries the same group as its initial vertex, and edges in a given segment are coherently oriented. Segments are therefore oriented. There are various ways of performing collapses on Γk . Collapsing all edges contained in segments yields Γ (this does not change the deformation space). On the other hand, one obtains ∆k = Tk /G from Γk by collapsing some of the edges which are not contained in any segment (all of them if S ∧ Tk is trivial). The segments of Γk may be viewed as segments in ∆k , but collapsing the initial edge of a segment of ∆k may now change the deformation space (if the group carried by the initial point of the segment has increased when Γk is collapsed to ∆k ). We define a graph of groups ∆k by collapsing, in each segment of ∆k , all edges but the initial one. The corresponding tree T k is a collapse of Tk which belongs to the same deformation space as Tk . Moreover, the number of edges of ∆k (prime factors of T k ) is constant: there is one per segment, and one for each common prime factor of Tk and S. Let ℓk : G → Z be the length function of T k . Lemma 4.4. The sequence ℓk is non-decreasing (i.e. every sequence ℓk (g) is non-decreasing) and converges. Proof. The difference between ℓk and ℓk−1 comes from the fact that initial edges of segments of ∆k may be collapsed in ∆k−1 . Fix a segment L of ∆k . Let ek be its initial edge. We assume that ek is distinct from the edge fk mapping onto the initial edge of the image of L in ∆k−1 . Assume for simplicity that ek and fk are adjacent (the general case is similar). The group carried by fk is equal to the group carried by its initial vertex vk . A given lift ṽk of vk to Tk is therefore adjacent to only one lift of fk (but to several lifts of ek ). On any translation axis in Tk , every occurence of a lift of fk is immediately preceded by an occurence of a lift of ek . The length function of the prime factor of Tk and T k−1 corresponding to fk is therefore bounded from above by that of the prime factor of Tk and T k corresponding to ek . Since this is true for every segment, we get ℓk−1 ≤ ℓk as required. Let Sk′ = S ∨T k . It collapses to S, belongs to the same deformation space as S (because it is a collapse of Sk ), and the number of edges of Sk′ /G is bounded. By an observation due to Forester (see [GL07, p. 169]), this implies an inequality ℓ(Sk′ ) ≤ Cℓ(S), with C independent of k. Since ℓk ≤ ℓ(Sk′ ), we get convergence. We call ℓ the limit of ℓk . It is the length function of a tree T because the set of length functions of trees is closed [CM87]. This tree is simplicial because ℓ takes values in Z, and irreducible because ℓk is non-decreasing. It is universally compatible as a limit of universally compatible trees, by Corollary 3.9. Since ℓ ≥ ℓk , every g ∈ G elliptic in T is elliptic in Tk , and T dominates Tk by Lemma 3.6 of [GL09]. There remains to prove that every edge stabilizer Ge of T belongs to A. If Ge is finitely generated, there is a simple argument using the Gromov topology. In general, we argue as follows. We may find hyperbolic elements g, h such that Ge is the stabilizer of the bridge between A(g) and A(h) (the bridge might be e ∪ e′ as in the proof of Lemma 3.18 if an endpoint of e is a valence 2 vertex). Choose k so that the values of ℓk and ℓ coincide on g, h, gh. In particular, the axes of g and h in T k are disjoint. Any s ∈ Ge is elliptic in T k since lk ≤ l. Moreover, ℓk (gs) ≤ ℓ(gs) ≤ ℓ(g) = ℓk (g). The fixed point set of s in T k must intersect the axis of g, since otherwise ℓk (gs) > ℓk (g), a contradiction. Similarly, it intersects the axis of h. It follows that Ge fixes the bridge between the axes of g and h in T k , so Ge ∈ A. This concludes the proof of Proposition 4.3.  18  4.2  The compatibility JSJ tree Tco  When Dco is irreducible, we show that it contains a preferred tree Tco . Given a deformation space D, we say that a tree T is D-compatible if T is compatible with every tree in D. Lemma 4.5. An irreducible deformation space D can only contain finitely many reduced D-compatible trees. Recall (see Subsection 2.4) that T is reduced if no proper collapse of T lies in the same deformation space as T . If T is not reduced, one may perform collapses so as to obtain a reduced tree T ′ in the same deformation space (note that T ′ is D-compatible if T is). Proof. This follows from results in [GL07]. We refer to [GL07] for definitions not given here. Suppose there are infinitely many reduced D-compatible trees T1 , T2 , . . . . Let Sk = T1 ∨ T2 ∨ · · · ∨ Tk . It belongs to D by Assertion 3 of Proposition 3.22 . As pointed out on page 172 of [GL07], the tree Sk is BF-reduced, i.e. reduced in the sense of [BF91], because all its edges are surviving edges (they survive in one of the Ti ’s), and the space D is non-ascending by Assertion 4 of Proposition 7.1 of [GL07]. Now there is a bound CD for the number of orbits of edges of a BF-reduced tree in D ([GL07, Proposition 4.2]; this is an easy form of accessibility, which requires no smallness or finite presentability hypothesis). It follows that the sequence Sk is eventually constant. Corollary 4.6. If D is irreducible and contains a D-compatible tree, it has a preferred element: the lcm of its reduced D-compatible trees. Definition 4.7. If the compatibility JSJ deformation space Dco exists and is irreducible, its preferred element is called the compatibility JSJ tree Tco of G (over A). If Dco is trivial, we define Tco as the trivial tree (a point). It may happen that Dco is neither trivial nor irreducible. It then follows from Remark 3.19 that it is the only deformation space of A-trees. If there is a unique reduced tree T in Dco (in particular, if Dco consists of actions on a line), we define Tco = T . Otherwise we do not define Tco . See Subsection 5.5 for an example where Dco consists of trees with exactly one fixed end.  4.3  Relative splittings  Besides A, the set of allowed edge stabilizers, we now fix an arbitrary set H of subgroups of G and we only consider (A, H)-trees, i.e. A-trees in which every element of H is elliptic. We then define the compatibility deformation space Dco as in the non-relative case (with universal compatibility defined with respect to (A, H)-trees). Theorem 4.8. If G is finitely presented, and H is a finite family of finitely generated subgroups, the compatibility JSJ space Dco of G (over A relative to H) exists. If Dco is irreducible, it has a preferred element Tco . Existence is proved as in the non-relative case, using relative accessibility [GL09, Section 5.1]. The trees S, Sk , Tk , T̄k are relative to H (note that an lcm of (A, H)-trees is an (A, H)-tree). Since the groups in H are finitely generated, they are elliptic in T because all their elements are elliptic, so T is an (A, H)-tree. Remark 4.9. The theorem remains true if G is only finitely presented relative to H.  19  5 5.1  Examples Free groups  When A is Aut(G)-invariant, the compatibility JSJ tree Tco is Out(G)-invariant. This sometimes forces it to be trivial. Suppose for instance that G has a finite generating set ai such that all elements ai and ai a±1 j (i 6= j) belong to the same Aut(G)-orbit. Then the only Out(G)-invariant length function ℓ is the trivial one. This follows from Serre’s lemma (Lemma 2.1) if the generators are elliptic, from the inequality max(ℓ(ai aj ), ℓ(ai a−1 j )) ≥ ℓ(ai ) + ℓ(aj ) (see Lemma 3.1) if they are hyperbolic. In particular: Proposition 5.1. If G is a free group and A is Aut(G)-invariant, then Tco is trivial.  5.2  Algebraic rigidity  The following result provides simple examples with Tco non-trivial. Proposition 5.2. Assume that there is only one reduced JSJ tree TJ ∈ DJSJ , and that G does not split over a subgroup contained with infinite index in a group of A. Then Tco exists and equals TJ . Proof. Let T be any A-tree. The second assumption implies that T is elliptic with respect to TJ by Remark 2.3 of [FP06] or Corollary 7.11 of [GL09], so there is a tree T̂ refining T and dominating TJ as in Lemma 3.2 of [GL09]. Collapse all edges of T̂ whose stabilizer is not universally elliptic. Arguing as in the proof of [GL09, Proposition 8.1], one sees that the collapsed tree T ′ also dominates TJ , hence is a JSJ tree because it is universally elliptic. Since TJ is the unique reduced JSJ tree, T ′ is a refinement of TJ , so TJ is compatible with T . This shows that TJ is universally compatible. Thus Tco = TJ . A necessary and sufficient condition for a tree to be the unique reduced tree in its deformation space is given in [Lev05] (see also [CF09]). The proposition applies for instance to free splittings and splittings over finite groups, whenever there is a JSJ tree with only one orbit of edges. This provides examples of virtually free groups with Tco non-trivial: any amalgam F1 ∗F F2 with F1 , F2 finite and F 6= F1 , F2 has this property (with A the set of finite subgroups).  5.3  Free products  Let A consist only of the trivial group. Let G = G1 ∗· · ·∗Gp ∗Fq be a Grushko decomposition (Gi is non-trivial, not Z, and freely indecomposable, Fq is free of rank q). If p = 2 and q = 0, or p = q = 1, there is a JSJ tree with one orbit of edges and Tco is a one-edge splitting as explained above. We now show that Tco is trivial if p + q ≥ 3 (of course it is trivial also if G is freely indecomposable or free of rank ≥ 2). Assuming p + q ≥ 3, we actually show that there is no non-trivial tree T with trivial edge stabilizers which is invariant under a finite index subgroup of Out(G). By collapsing edges, we may assume that T only has one orbit of edges. Since p + q ≥ 3, we can write G = A ∗ B ∗ C where A, B, C are non-trivial and A ∗ B is a vertex stabilizer of T . Given a non-trivial c ∈ C and n 6= 0, the subgroup cn Ac−n ∗ B is the image of A ∗ B by an automorphism but is not conjugate to A ∗ B. This contradicts the invariance of T .  5.4  Hyperbolic groups  Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group, and let A consist of all virtually cyclic subgroups. It follows from [Gui00b] that the tree TBow constructed by Bowditch [Bow98] using the topology of ∂G is universally compatible, and refines any reduced tree in Dco . In particular, 20  TBow ∈ Dco . One can easily check that Tco is obtained from TBow by collapsing every edge e such that Ge is a maximal virtually cyclic subgroup fixing no other edge, and by removing redundant vertices.  5.5  (Generalized) Baumslag-Solitar groups  We consider cyclic splittings of generalized Baumslag-Solitar groups. These are groups which act on a tree with all edge and vertex stabilizers infinite cyclic. Unless G is isomorphic to Z, Z2 , or the Klein bottle group, all such trees belong to the cyclic JSJ deformation space (see [For03] or Subsection 6.6 of [GL09]). First consider a solvable Baumslag-Solitar group BS(1, s), with |s| ≥ 2. In this case Dco is trivial if s is not a prime power. If s is a prime power, Dco is the JSJ deformation space (it is reducible). When G = BS(r, s) with none of r, s dividing the other, Proposition 5.2 applies by [Lev05]. In particular, Dco is non-trivial. This holds, more generally, when G is a generalized Baumslag-Solitar group defined by a labelled graph with no label dividing another label at the same vertex. See [Bee] for a study of Dco for generalized Baumslag-Solitar groups.  5.6  The canonical decomposition of Scott and Swarup  Recall that a group is VPCn (resp. VPC≤n ) if it is virtually polycyclic of Hirsch length n (resp. ≤ n). Let G be a finitely presented group, and n ≥ 1. Assume that G does not split over a VPCn−1 subgroup, and that G is not VPCn+1 . Let A consist of all subgroups of VPCn subgroups. Then Dco dominates the Bass-Serre tree TSS of the regular neighbourhood Γn = Γ(Fn : G) constructed by Scott-Swarup in Theorem 12.3 of [SS03]. This follows directly from the fact that TSS is universally compatible ([SS03, Definition 6.1(1)], or [GL08, Corollary 8.4] and [GL10, Theorem 4.1]). The domination may be strict: if G = BS(r, s), the tree TSS is always trivial but, as pointed out above, Dco is non-trivial when none of r, s divides the other.  5.7  Poincaré Duality groups  Let G be a Poincaré duality group of dimension n (see also work by Kropholler on this subject [Kro90]). Although such a group is not necessarily finitely presented, it is almost finitely presented [Wal04, Proposition 1.1], which is sufficient for Dunwoody’s accessiblity, so the JSJ deformation space and the compatibility JSJ deformation space exist. By [KR89b, Theorem A], if G splits over a virtually solvable subgroup H, then H is VPCn−1 . We therefore consider the family A consisting of VPC≤n−1 -subgroups. By [KR89a, Corollary 4.3], for all VPCn−1 subgroups H, the number of coends ẽ(G, H) is 2 (see [SS03, p. 33] for a discussion of the relation between ẽ(G, H) and the number of coends, [Geo08, Section 14.5]). By [KR89a, Theorem 1.3], if G is not virtually polycyclic, then H has finite index in its commensurizer. By Corollary 8.4(2) of [GL08], this implies that the JSJ deformation space contains a universally compatible tree (namely its tree of cylinders, see Subsection 9.1 or [GL08]), so equals Dco . But one has more in this context: any universally elliptic tree is universally compatible. Indeed, since VPCn−1 -subgroups of G have precisely 2 coends, Proposition 7.4 of [SS03] implies that any two one-edge splittings T1 , T2 of G over A with edge stabilizers of T1 elliptic in T2 are compatible. Indeed, strong crossing of almost invariant subsets corresponding to T1 and T2 occurs if and only edge stabilizers of T1 are not elliptic in T2 ([Gui05, Lemme 11.3]), and the absence of (weak or strong) crossing is equivalent to compatibility of T1 and T2 [SS00]. To sum up, we have:  21  Corollary 5.3. Let G be a Poincaré duality group of dimension n, with G not virtually polycyclic. Let A the family of VPC≤n−1 -subgroups. Then Tco exists and lies in the JSJ deformation space of G over A. In particular, G has a canonical JSJ tree over A.  5.8  Trees of cylinders  We will see additional examples based on the tree of cylinders in Part III.  Part II  Acylindrical JSJ deformation spaces 6  Introduction  In this part of the paper, we prove existence of the usual JSJ deformation space DJSJ , under some acylindricity assumptions. We will return to the compatibility JSJ in Subsection 9.3. As above, we fix a finitely generated group G and a class A of subgroups of G which is stable under conjugating and passing to subgroups. We will work in a relative situation, both for applications and because the proof uses relative trees (see Section 8). We therefore fix an arbitrary set H of subgroups of G (possibly empty), and we consider (A, H)-trees, i.e. minimal actions of G on simplicial trees with edge stabilizers in A, in which every subgroup occuring in H is elliptic. Using acylindrical accessibility, we first show (Sections 7 and 8) that one may construct the JSJ deformation space of G over A relative to H, and describe its flexible subgroups, provided that every tree T may be mapped to an acylindrical tree T ∗ whose deformation space is not too different from that of T . We then explain (Section 9) how the tree of cylinders introduced in [GL08] yields such acylindrical trees T ∗ . But the tree of cylinders also has strong compatibility properties, which are used in Subsection 9.3 to construct and describe the JSJ compatibility tree. Applications of these constructions will be given in Part III. For concreteness, we describe the example studied in Section 11 right away. See also the example given in the introduction. Example 6.1. G is a torsion-free CSA group (for instance a limit group, or a torsion-free hyperbolic group), A is the family of its abelian subgroups, H is arbitrary. Later we will introduce C, k, S, Snvc , T ∗ , E, ∼; they should be thought of as follows. E is the family of non-trivial abelian subgroups, ∼ is the commutation relation on E, and T ∗ = Tc will be the tree of cylinders of T for ∼. The tree T ∗ is (k, C)-acylindrical with k = 2 and C = 1: stabilizers of arcs of length > 2 have cardinality ≤ 1. Finally, S will be the family of abelian subgroups, Snvc the family of non-cyclic abelian subgroups. Subgroups becoming elliptic when passing from T to T ∗ belong to S. All trees considered in Sections 7 through 14 are simplicial, except for the limit tree T∞ introduced in Subsection 7.1.  7  Uniform acylindricity  In this section, we assume that for each (A, H)-tree T there is an acylindrical tree T ∗ (with uniform constants) in the same deformation space, and we deduce the existence of the JSJ deformation space. In the setting of Example 6.1, this applies if all abelian subgroups of 22  G are cyclic (for instance if G is a torsion-free hyperbolic group), and more generally if H contains all non-cyclic abelian groups. This is a first step towards the proof of Theorem 8.3, where we allow T ∗ not to lie in the same deformation space as T . An infinite group H is virtually cyclic if some finite index subgroup is infinite cyclic. Such a group maps onto Z or D∞ (the infinite dihedral group Z/2 ∗ Z/2) with finite kernel. Definition 7.1. Given C ≥ 1, we say that H is C-virtually cyclic if it maps onto Z or D∞ with kernel of order at most C. Equivalently, H acts non-trivially on a line with edge stabilizers of order ≤ C. An infinite virtually cyclic group is C-virtually cyclic if the order of its maximal finite normal subgroup is ≤ C. Note that finite subgroups of a C-virtually cyclic group have cardinality bounded by 2C. Definition 7.2. A tree T is (k, C)-acylindrical if all arcs of length ≥ k + 1 have stabilizer of cardinality ≤ C. If T ′ belongs to the same deformation space as T , it is (k′ , C)-acylindrical (see [GL07]), but in general there is no control on k′ . Theorem 7.3. Given A and H, suppose that there exist numbers C and k such that: • A contains all C-virtually cyclic subgroups of G, and all subgroups of order ≤ 2C; • for any (A, H)-tree T , there is an (A, H)-tree T ∗ in the same deformation space which is (k, C)-acylindrical. Then the JSJ deformation space of G over A relative to H exists. Moreover, if all groups in A are small in (A, H)-trees, then the flexible vertices are relative QH vertices with fiber of cardinality at most C, and all boundary components are used. Recall (Subsection 2.3) that H is small in T (resp. in (A, H)-trees) if it fixes a point, or an end, or leaves a line invariant in T (resp. in all (A, H)-trees on which G acts). See Subsection 2.5 for the definitions of flexible, QH, and used boundary components. Remark 7.4. Theorem 7.3 holds, with the same proof, if G is only finitely generated relative to a finite collection of subgroups, and these subgroups are in H. Theorem 7.3 will be proved in Subsections 7.1 and 7.2. We start with two general lemmas. Lemma 7.5. If a group H acts non-trivially on a (k, C)-acylindrical tree T , and H is small in T , then H is C-virtually cyclic. Proof. By smallness, H preserves a line or fixes an end. If it acts on a line, it is C-virtually cyclic. If it fixes an end, the set of its elliptic elements is the kernel of a homomorphism to Z. Every finitely generated subgroup of this kernel is elliptic. It fixes a ray, so has order ≤ C by acylindricity. It follows that H is C-virtually cyclic. Lemma 7.6. If a finitely generated group G does not split over subgroups of order ≤ C relative to a family H, there exists a finite family H′ = (H1 , . . . , Hp ), with Hi a finitely generated group contained in a group of H, such that G does not split over subgroups of order ≤ C relative to H′ . A special case of this lemma is proved in [Per09].  23  Proof. All trees in this proof will have stabilizers in the family A(C) consisting of all subgroups of order ≤ C. Note that over A(C) all trees are universally elliptic, so having no splitting is equivalent to the JSJ deformation space being trivial. Let H1 , . . . , Hn , . . . be an enumeration of all finitely generated subgroups of G contained in a group of H. We have pointed out ([GL09, Remark 4.6]) that G admits JSJ decompositions over A(C) (this follows from Linnell’s accessibility [Lin83]). This is also true in the relative setting, so let Tn be a JSJ tree relative to Hn = (H1 , . . . , Hn ). We show the lemma by proving that Tn is trivial for n large. By Lemma 4.8 of [GL09], the tree Tn , which is relative to Hn−1 , may be refined to a JSJ tree relative to Hn−1 . If we fix n, we may therefore find trees S1 (n), . . . , Sn (n) such that Si (n) is a JSJ tree relative to Hi and Si (n) refines Si+1 (n). By Linnell’s accessibility theorem, there is a uniform bound for the number of orbits of edges of S1 (n) (assumed to have no redundant vertices). This number is an upper bound for the number of n′ s such that Tn and Tn+1 belong to different deformation spaces, so for n large the trees Tn all belong to the same deformation space D (they have the same elliptic subgroups). Since every Hn is elliptic in D, so is every H ∈ H (otherwise H would fix a unique end, and edge stabilizers would increase infinitely many times along a ray going to that end). The non-splitting hypothesis made on G then implies that D is trivial. We also note: Lemma 7.7. It suffices to prove Theorem 7.3 under the additional hypothesis that G does not split over subgroups of order ≤ 2C relative to H (“one-endedness condition”). Proof. Let A(2C) ⊂ A denote the family of subgroups of order ≤ 2C. As mentioned in the previous proof, Linnell’s accessibility implies the existence of a JSJ tree over A(2C) relative to H. We can now apply Subsection 8.1 of [GL09].  7.1  Existence of the JSJ deformation space  Because of Lemma 7.7, we assume from now on that G does not split over subgroups of order ≤ 2C relative to H. In this subsection, we prove the first assertion of Theorem 7.3. We have to construct a universally elliptic tree TJ which dominates every universally elliptic tree (of course, all trees are (A, H)-trees and universal ellipticity is defined with respect to (A, H)-trees). Countability of G allows us to choose a sequence of universally elliptic trees Ui such that, if g ∈ G is elliptic in every Ui , then it is elliptic in every universally elliptic tree. By Corollary 3.6 of [GL09], it suffices that TJ dominates every Ui . Refining Ui if necessary, as in the proof of [GL09, Theorem 4.3], we may assume that Ui+1 dominates Ui . In particular, we are free to replace Ui by a subsequence when needed. Let Ti be a (k, C)-acylindrical tree in the same deformation space as Ui . Let ℓi be the length function of Ti . The proof has two main steps. First we assume that, for all g, the sequence ℓi (g) is bounded, and we construct a universally elliptic (A, H)-tree TJ which dominates every Ui . Such a tree is a JSJ tree. In the second step, we deduce a contradiction from the assumption that the sequence ℓi is unbounded. • If ℓi (g) is bounded for all g, we pass to a subsequence so that ℓi has a limit ℓ (possibly 0). Since the set of length functions of trees is closed [CM87, Theorem 4.5], ℓ is the length function associated to the action of G on an R-tree T . Since ℓ takes values in Z, the tree T is simplicial (but in general it is not an A-tree). We can assume that all trees Ti are non-trivial. By Lemma 7.5, Ti is irreducible except if G is virtually cyclic, in which case the theorem is clear. If g ∈ G is hyperbolic in some Ti0 , then ℓi (g) ≥ 1 for all i ≥ i0 (because Ti dominates Ti0 ), so g is hyperbolic in T . Since every Ti is irreducible, there exist g, h ∈ G such that g, h, and [g, h] are hyperbolic in Ti  24  (for some i), hence in T , so T is also irreducible. By [Pau89], Ti converges to T in the Gromov topology (see Subsection 3.1). We will not claim anything about the edge stabilizers of T , but we study its vertex stabilizers. We claim that a subgroup H ⊂ G is elliptic in T if and only if it is elliptic in every Ti ; in particular, every H ∈ H is elliptic in T , and T dominates every Ti . Note that the claim is true if H is finitely generated, since g ∈ G is elliptic in T if and only if it is elliptic in every Ti . If H is infinitely generated, let H ′ be a finitely generated subgroup of cardinality > C. If H is elliptic in T , it is elliptic in Ti because otherwise it fixes a unique end and H ′ fixes an infinite ray of Ti , contradicting acylindricity of Ti . Conversely, if H is elliptic in every Ti but not in T , the group H ′ fixes an infinite ray in T . By Gromov convergence, H ′ fixes a segment of length k + 1 in Ti for i large. This contradicts acylindricity of Ti , thus proving the claim. We now return to the trees Ui . They are dominated by T since the trees Ti are. Their edge stabilizers are in Aell , the family of groups in A which are universally elliptic. Since Aell is stable under taking subgroups, any equivariant map f : T → Ui factors through the tree TJ obtained from T by collapsing all edges with stabilizer not in Aell . The tree TJ is a universally elliptic (A, H)-tree dominating every Ui , hence every universally elliptic tree. It is a JSJ tree. • We now suppose that ℓi (g) is unbounded for some g ∈ G, and we work towards a contradiction. Since the set of projectivized non-zero length functions is compact [CM87, Theorem 4.5], we may assume that ℓi /λi converges to the length function ℓ of a non-trivial R-tree T∞ , for some sequence λi → +∞. By Theorem 3.5, convergence also takes place in the Gromov topology (all Ti ’s are irreducible, and we take T∞ to be a line if it is not irreducible). Lemma 7.8. 1. Any subgroup H < G of order > C which is elliptic in every Ti fixes a unique point in T∞ . In particular, elements of H are elliptic in T∞ . 2. Tripod stabilizers of T∞ have cardinality ≤ C. 3. If I ⊂ T∞ is a non-degenerate arc, then its stabilizer GI has order ≤ C or is Cvirtually cyclic. 4. Let J ⊂ I ⊂ T∞ be two non-degenerate arcs. If GI is C-virtually cyclic, then GI = GJ . Proof. Recall that Ti+1 dominates Ti , so a subgroup acting non-trivially on Ti also acts non-trivially on Tj for j > i. To prove 1, we may assume that H is finitely generated. It is elliptic in T∞ because all of its elements are. But it cannot fix an arc in T∞ : otherwise, since Ti /λi converges to T∞ in the Gromov topology, H would fix a long segment in Ti for i large, contradicting acylindricity. Using the Gromov topology, one sees that a finitely generated subgroup fixing a tripod of T∞ fixes a long tripod of Ti for i large, so has cardinality at most C by acylindricity. This proves 2. To prove 3, consider a group H fixing a non-degenerate arc I = [a, b] in T∞ . It suffices to show that H does not contain F2 : depending on whether H is elliptic in every Ti or not, Assertion 1 or Lemma 7.5 then gives the required conclusion. If H contains a non-abelian free group, choose elements {h1 , . . . , hn } generating a free subgroup Fn ⊂ H of rank n ≫ C, and choose ε > 0 with ε ≪ |I|. For i large, there exist two points ai , bi ∈ Ti at distance at least (|I| − ε)λi from each other, and contained in the characteristic set (axis or fixed point set) of each hj . Additionally, the translation length of every hj in Ti is at most ελi if i is large enough. Then all commutators [hj1 , hj2 ] fix most of the segment [ai , bi ], contradicting acylindricity of Ti if n(n − 1)/2 > C. 25  We now prove 4. By Assertion 1, we know that GI acts non-trivially on Ti for i large, so we can choose a hyperbolic element h ∈ GI . We suppose that g ∈ GJ does not fix an endpoint, say a, of I = [a, b], and we argue towards a contradiction. Let ai , bi ∈ Ti be in the axis of h as above, with d(ai , gai ) ≥ δλi for some δ > 0. For i large the translation lengths i 2 C+1 ] all of g and h in Ti are small compared to |J|λ C , and the elements [g, h], [g, h ], . . . , [g, h j 1 fix a common long arc in Ti . By acylindricity, there exist j1 6= j2 such that [g, h ] = [g, hj2 ], so g commutes with hj1 −j2 . It follows that g preserves the axis of h, and therefore moves ai by ℓi (g), a contradiction since ℓi (g) = o(λi ) as i → ∞.    Sela’s proof of acylindrical accessibility now comes into play to describe the structure of T∞ . We use the generalization given by Theorem 5.1 of [Gui08], which allows nontrivial tripod stabilizers. Lemma 7.8 shows that stabilizers of unstable arcs and tripods have cardinality at most C, and we have assumed that G does not split over a subgroup of cardinality at most C relative to H, hence also relative to a finite H′ by Lemma 7.6. It follows that T∞ is a graph of actions as in Theorem 5.1 of [Gui08]. In order to reach the desired contradiction, we have to rule out several possibilities. First consider a vertex action Gv Yv of the decomposition of T∞ given by [Gui08]. If Yv is a line on which Gv acts with dense orbits through a finitely generated group, then, by Assertion 3 of Lemma 7.8, Gv contains a finitely generated subgroup H mapping onto Z2 with finite or virtually cyclic kernel, and acting non-trivially. The group H acts non-trivially on Ti for i large, contradicting Lemma 7.5. Now suppose that Gv Yv has kernel Nv , and the action of Gv /Nv is dual to a measured foliation on a 2-orbifold Σ (with conical singularities). Then Nv has order ≤ C since it fixes a tripod. Consider a one-edge splitting S of G (relative to H) dual to a simple closed curve on Σ. This splitting is over a C-virtually cyclic group Ge . In particular, S is an (A, H)-tree. Since Ge is hyperbolic in T∞ , it is also hyperbolic in Ti , hence in Ui , for i large enough. On the other hand, being universally elliptic, Ui is elliptic with respect to S. By Remark 2.3 of [FP06] (see [GL09, Lemma 7.10]), G splits relative to H over an infinite index subgroup of Ge , i.e. over a group of order ≤ 2C, contradicting our assumptions. By Theorem 5.1 of [Gui08], the only remaining possibility is that T∞ itself is a simplicial tree, and all edge stabilizers are C-virtually cyclic. Then T∞ is an (A, H)-tree, and its edge stabilizers are hyperbolic in Ti for i large. This leads to a contradiction as in the previous case.   7.2  Description of flexible vertices  We now prove the second assertion of Theorem 7.3: if all groups in A are small in (A, H)trees, then the flexible vertices are relatively QH with fiber of cardinality at most C. Let Gv be a flexible vertex group of a JSJ tree TJ . We consider splittings of Gv (over groups in A) relative to the incident edge groups and the subgroups of Gv conjugate to some H ∈ H, as studied in Subsection 5.2 of [GL09]. These splittings extend to splittings of G relative to H. We claim that every edge stabilizer A ⊂ Gv of such a splitting is C-virtually cyclic. The group A cannot be (A, H)-universally elliptic, since otherwise the splitting could be used to refine TJ , contradicting maximality of the JSJ tree TJ . Being small in (A, H)trees, A is C-virtually cyclic: apply Lemma 7.5 to the action of A on T ∗ , where T is some (A, H)-tree in which A is not elliptic. This proves the claim. We assume that G does not split (relative to H) over a subgroup of order ≤ 2C, so it does not split over a subgroup of infinite index of A. It follows that all splittings of Gv are minimal in the sense of Fujiwara-Papasoglu, by Remark 3.2 of [FP06]. Moreover, any pair of splittings is either hyperbolic-hyperbolic or elliptic-elliptic [FP06, Proposition 2.2]. Since Gv is flexible, there are hyperbolic-hyperbolic splittings, and we consider a maximal set I of hyperbolic-hyperbolic splittings, in the sense of Definition 4.4 of [FP06]. 26  We now construct an enclosing graph of groups decomposition for I, as in the proof of Proposition 5.4 in [FP06]. Associated to a finite set of splittings Ii ⊂ I (consisting of splittings T1 , . . . , Ti where each Tk is hyperbolic-hyperbolic with respect to some Tj , j < k, if k > 1) is a splitting of Gv with a QH vertex stabilizer Si fitting in an exact sequence 1 → Fi → Si → π1 (Σi ) → 1. One can check from the construction in [FP06] that this decomposition is relative to H, and that any non-peripheral element in Si is hyperbolic in some splitting Tj . In particular, any conjugate of a group in H intersects Si in an extended boundary subgroup, so Si is a relative QH group. As in [FP06], the point is to show that the complexity of the 2-orbifold Σi is bounded. If not, one uses non-peripheral simple closed 1-suborbifolds on Σi to construct splittings ∆i of Gv with arbitrarily many orbits of edges. In [FP06] this is ruled out by BestvinaFeighn’s accessibility theorem, but we have to use a different argument because we do not assume that G is finitely presented. Since Si was constructed using splittings over C-virtually cyclic groups, the fibers Fi have order bounded by C, so ∆i is (2, C)-acylindrical. Refining TJ at the vertices in the orbit of v using ∆i , and collapsing the original edges, we obtain splittings of G with arbitrarily many orbits of edges. These splittings are (2, C)-acylindrical since the ∆i ’s are over non-peripheral 1-suborbifolds. This contradicts the main result of [Wei07], which generalizes Sela’s acylindrical accessibility [Sel97] by allowing groups of order ≤ C to have arbitrary fixed point sets. We now have an enclosing graph of groups decomposition of Gv for I, that is relative to H, and with a relative QH vertex stabilizer S. Its edge stabilizers are C-virtually cyclic, hence in A. We complete the proof by showing S = Gv . Assume otherwise. Then some boundary component of the underlying orbifold yields a non-trivial splitting ∆ of Gv . Maximality of the JSJ tree TJ therefore implies that ∆ is hyperbolic-hyperbolic with respect to some other splitting. As in Lemma 5.5 of [FP06], the “rigidity” property of enclosing groups contradicts the maximality of I. This proves that flexible vertices of TJ are relative QH with fiber of cardinality at most C. By Proposition 7.5 and Remark 8.19 of [GL09], all boundary components of the underlying orbifold are used. This completes the proof of the second assertion of Theorem 7.3.  8  Acylindricity up to small groups  In this section, we generalize Theorem 7.3. Instead of requiring that every deformation space contains a (k, C)-acylindrical tree, we require that one can make every tree acylindrical without changing its deformation space too much: the new elliptic subgroups should be small in (A, H)-trees. Definition 8.1. Besides A and H, we fix a family S of subgroups of G. It should be closed under conjugation and under taking subgroups, and every group in S should be small in (A, H)-trees. If C ≥ 1 is fixed, we denote by Snvc the family of groups in S which are not C-virtually cyclic. In applications S will contain A, sometimes strictly. Definition 8.2. Let T, T ∗ be (A, H)-trees. Given S, we say that T smally dominates T ∗ (with respect to S) if: • T dominates T ∗ ; • any group which is elliptic in T ∗ but not in T belongs to S (in particular, it is small in (A, H)-trees); 27  • edge stabilizers of T ∗ are elliptic in T . Theorem 8.3. Given A, H, and S as in Definition 8.1, suppose that there exist numbers C and k such that: • A contains all C-virtually cyclic subgroups, and all subgroups of cardinal ≤ 2C; • every (A, H)-tree T smally dominates some (k, C)-acylindrical (A, H)-tree T ∗ . Then the JSJ deformation space of G over A relative to H exists. Moreover, if all groups in A are small in (A, H)-trees, then the flexible vertex groups that do not belong to S are relatively QH with fiber of cardinality at most C. All the boundary components of the underlying orbifold are used. The rest of this section is devoted to the proof. As above, Lemma 7.7 lets us assume that G does not split over groups of order ≤ 2C relative to H (“one-endedness” assumption). Lemma 8.4. Assume that G does not split over groups of order ≤ 2C relative to H. Suppose that T smally dominates a (k, C)-acylindrical tree T ∗ . 1. If a vertex stabilizer Gv of T ∗ is not elliptic in T , it belongs to Snvc (in particular, it is not C-virtually cyclic). 2. Let H be a subgroup. It is elliptic in T ∗ if and only if it is elliptic in T or contained in a group K ∈ Snvc . In particular, all (k, C)-acylindrical trees smally dominated by T belong to the same deformation space. 3. Assume that T ∗ is reduced. Then every edge stabilizer Ge of T ∗ has a subgroup of index at most 2 fixing an edge in T . In particular, if T is universally elliptic, so is T ∗. Proof. Clearly Gv ∈ S because T smally dominates T ∗ . Assume that it is C-virtually cyclic. Stabilizers of edges incident on v have infinite index in Gv since they are elliptic in T and Gv is not, so they have order ≤ 2C. This contradicts the “one-endedness” assumption (note that T ∗ is not trivial because then G = Gv would be C-virtually cyclic, also contradicting one-endedness). The “if” direction of Assertion 2 follows from Lemma 7.5. Conversely, assume that H is elliptic in T ∗ but not in T . If v is a vertex of T ∗ fixed by H, we have H ⊂ Gv and Gv ∈ Snvc by Assertion 1. For Assertion 3, let u and v be the endpoints of an edge e of T ∗ . First suppose that Gu is not elliptic in T . It is small in T , so it preserves a line or fixes an end. Since Ge is elliptic in T , some subgroup of index at most 2 fixes an edge. If Gu fixes two distinct points of T , then Ge fixes an edge. We may therefore assume that Gu and Gv each fix a unique point in T . If these fixed points are different, Ge = Gu ∩ Gv fixes an edge of T . Otherwise, hGu , Gv i fixes a point x in T , and is therefore elliptic in T ∗ . Since T ∗ is reduced, some g ∈ G acting hyperbolically on T ∗ maps u to v and conjugates Gu to Gv (unless there is such a g, collapsing the edge uv yields a tree in the same deformation space as T ∗ ). This element g fixes x, a contradiction. Corollary 8.5.  1. T ∗ is an (A, H ∪ Snvc )-tree.  2. If T1 dominates T2 , then T1∗ dominates T2∗ . 3. If T is an (A, H ∪ Snvc )-tree, then T ∗ lies in the same deformation space as T . In particular, Theorem 7.3 applies to (A, H ∪ Snvc )-trees.  28  Applying Theorem 7.3, we get the existence of a JSJ tree Tr of G over A relative to H ∪ Snvc . We can assume that Tr is reduced. We think of Tr as relative, as it is relative to Snvc (not just to H). In the setting of Example 6.1, Snvc is the class of all non-cyclic abelian subgroups and Tr is a JSJ tree over abelian groups relative to all non-cyclic abelian subgroups. Lemma 8.6. If Tr is reduced, then it is (A, H)-universally elliptic. Proof. We let e be an edge of Tr such that Ge is not elliptic in some (A, H)-tree T , and we argue towards a contradiction. We may assume that T only has one orbit of edges. The first step is to show that Tr dominates T ∗ . Since T ∗ is relative to H ∪ Snvc , the group Ge fixes a vertex u ∈ T ∗ by (A, H ∪ Snvc )universal ellipticity of Tr . This u is unique because edge stabilizers of T ∗ are elliptic in T . Also note that Gu ∈ Snvc by Assertion 1 of Lemma 8.4. There is an equivariant map T → T ∗ , so Gu contains the stabilizer of some edge f ⊂ T , and Gf ⊂ Gu ∈ Snvc is (trivially) (A, H ∪ Snvc )-universally elliptic. Since T has a single orbit of edges, it is (A, H ∪ Snvc )-universally elliptic (but it is not relative to H ∪ Snvc ). On the other hand, T ∗ is an (A, H ∪ Snvc )-tree, and it is (A, H ∪ Snvc )-universally elliptic by Assertion 3 of Lemma 8.4 (replace T ∗ by a reduced tree in the same deformation space if needed). By maximality of the JSJ, Tr dominates T ∗ . Recall that u is the unique fixed point of Ge in T ∗ . Denote by a, b the endpoints of e in Tr . Since Tr dominates T ∗ , the groups Ga and Gb fix u, so hGa , Gb i ⊂ Gu ∈ Snvc is elliptic in Tr . As in the previous proof, some g ∈ G acting hyperbolically on Tr maps a to b (because Tr is reduced). This g fixes u, so belongs to Gu ∈ Snvc , a contradiction since Tr is relative to H ∪ Snvc . We shall now construct a JSJ tree Ta relative to H by refining Tr at vertices with small stabilizer. This JSJ tree Ta is thought of as absolute as it is not relative to Snvc . Lemma 8.7. There exists a JSJ tree Ta over A relative to H. It may be obtained by refining Tr at vertices with stabilizer in S (in particular, the set of vertex stabilizers not belonging to S is the same for Ta as for Tr ). Moreover, Ta∗ lies in the same deformation space as Tr . Proof. Let v be a vertex of Tr . We shall prove the existence of a JSJ tree Tv for Gv relative to the family Pv consisting of incident edge groups and subgroups conjugate to a group of H (see Subsection 5.2 of [GL09]). By Lemma 5.3 of [GL09], which applies because Tr is (A, H)-universally elliptic (Lemma 8.6), one then obtains a JSJ tree Ta for G relative to H by refining Tr using the trees Tv . If Gv is elliptic in every (A, H)-universally elliptic tree T , its JSJ is trivial and no refinement is needed at v. Assume therefore that Gv is not elliptic in such a T . Consider the (A, H ∪ Snvc )-tree T ∗ . It is (A, H)-universally elliptic by Assertion 3 of Lemma 8.4, hence (A, H ∪ Snvc )-universally elliptic, so it is dominated by Tr . In particular, Gv is elliptic in T ∗ , so belongs to S. Being small in (A, H)-trees, Gv has at most one non-trivial deformation space containing a universally elliptic tree [GL09, Proposition 6.1]. Applying this to splittings of Gv relative to Pv , we deduce that T is a (non-minimal) JSJ tree of Gv relative to Pv . This shows the first two assertions of the lemma. We now show the “moreover”. Since Ta∗ is an (A, H ∪ Snvc )-universally elliptic (A, H ∪ Snvc )-tree, it is dominated by Tr . Conversely, Ta dominates Tr and therefore Ta∗ dominates Tr∗ by Corollary 8.5(2), so Ta∗ dominates Tr since Tr and Tr∗ lie in the same deformation space by Corollary 8.5(3).  29  We have just proved that the JSJ deformation space relative to H exists. To complete the proof of Theorem 8.3, there remains to describe flexible vertex groups under the assumption that all groups in A are small in (A, H)-trees. Let Gv be a flexible vertex stabilizer of Ta which does not belong to S. Because of the way Ta was constructed by refining Tr at vertices with stabilizer in S, the group Gv is also a vertex stabilizer of Tr , with the same incident edge groups. Being flexible in Ta , the group Gv is non-elliptic in some (A, H)-tree T . By Lemma 8.4, Gv is non-elliptic in the (A, H ∪ Snvc )-tree T ∗ . This means that Gv is not (A, H ∪ Snvc )-universally elliptic, so it is a flexible vertex stabilizer of Tr . Since groups of A are small in (A, H ∪ Snvc )-trees, Theorem 7.3 implies that Gv is relatively QH with fiber of order ≤ C, and all boundary components are used.  9  The tree of cylinders  In order to apply Theorem 8.3, one has to be able to construct an acylindrical tree T ∗ smally dominated by a given tree T . We show how the (collapsed) tree of cylinders Tc∗ may be used for that purpose.  9.1  Definitions  We first recall the definition and some basic properties of the tree of cylinders (see [GL08] for details). Besides A and H, we have to fix a conjugacy-invariant subfamily E ⊂ A. For the purposes of this paper, we always let E be the family of infinite groups in A. We assume that G is one-ended relative to H, so that all (A, H)-trees have edge stabilizers in E. As in [GL08], an equivalence relation ∼ on E is admissible (relative to H) if the following axioms hold for any A, B ∈ E: 1. If A ∼ B, and g ∈ G, then gAg −1 ∼ gBg−1 . 2. If A ⊂ B, then A ∼ B. 3. Let T be an (A, H)-tree. If A ∼ B, and A, B fix a, b ∈ T respectively, then for each edge e ⊂ [a, b] one has Ge ∼ A ∼ B. Fix an admissible equivalence relation ∼. Let T be an (A, H)-tree. We declare two edges e, f to be equivalent if Ge ∼ Gf . The union of all edges in an equivalence class is a subtree Y , called a cylinder of T . Two distinct cylinders meet in at most one point. The tree of cylinders Tc of T is the bipartite tree such that V0 (Tc ) is the set of vertices v of T which belong to at least two cylinders, V1 (Tc ) is the set of cylinders Y of T , and there is an edge ε = (v, Y ) between v and Y in Tc if and only if v ∈ Y . The tree Tc is dominated by T (in particular, it is relative to H). It only depends on the deformation space D containing T (we sometimes say that it is the tree of cylinders of D). The stabilizer of a vertex v ∈ V0 (Tc ) is the stabilizer of v, viewed as a vertex of T . The stabilizer GY of a vertex Y ∈ V1 (Tc ) is the stabilizer GC (for the action of G on E by conjugation) of the equivalence class C ∈ E/ ∼ containing stabilizers of edges in Y . If A ∈ E, then A ⊂ GC where C is the equivalence class of A. The stabilizer of an edge ε = (v, Y ) of Tc is Gε = Gv ∩ GY ; it is elliptic in T . It often happens that edge stabilizers of Tc belong to A. But this is not always the case, so we have to consider the collapsed tree of cylinders Tc∗ obtained from Tc by collapsing all edges whose stabilizer does not belong to A (see Section 5.2 of [GL08]). It is an (A, H)-tree and is equal to its collapsed tree of cylinders.  30  9.2  Trees of cylinders and acylindricity up to small groups  We assume that G is one-ended relative to H and we fix an admissible equivalence relation ∼ on E. The following lemma gives conditions ensuring that the collapsed tree of cylinders Tc∗ of T is smally dominated by T , and (2, C)-acylindrical. Lemma 9.1. Let S be a class of subgroups which are small in (A, H)-trees, as in Definition 8.1. Suppose that, for every equivalence class C ∈ E/ ∼, the stabilizer GC belongs to S. Also assume that one of the following holds: 1. For all C ∈ E/ ∼, the group GC belongs to A. 2. A is stable by extension of index 2: if A has index 2 in A′ , and A ∈ A, then A′ ∈ A. If T is any (A, H)-tree, then Tc∗ is an (A, H)-tree smally dominated by T . Any vertex stabilizer of Tc∗ which is not elliptic in T is a GC . Assume furthermore that there exists C with the following property: if two groups of E are inequivalent, their intersection has order ≤ C. Then Tc∗ is (2, C)-acylindrical. Proof. It is a general fact that edge stabilizers of Tc are elliptic in T , and that T dominates Tc . A vertex stabilizer of Tc which is not elliptic in T is a GC , so belongs to S by assumption. This proves that T smally dominates Tc (but in general Tc may have edge stabilizers not in A). Under the first hypothesis (GC ∈ A), the stabilizer of an edge ε = (v, Y ) of Tc belongs to A because GY does, so Tc = Tc∗ is an (A, H)-tree. Under the second hypothesis, Remark 5.11 of [GL08] guarantees that Tc∗ belongs to the same deformation space as Tc , so Tc∗ also is smally dominated by T . Its vertex stabilizers are vertex stabilizers of Tc . Acylindricity of Tc∗ follows from the fact that any segment of length 3 in Tc∗ contains edges with inequivalent stabilizers (see [GL08]). Corollary 9.2. Let G be one-ended relative to H, and let S be as in Definition 8.1. Suppose that: • A contains all finite and virtually cyclic subgroups, and is stable by extension of index 2. • ∼ is an admissible equivalence relation on the set E of infinite groups in A, with all groups GC belonging to S. • There exists C such that, if two groups in E are inequivalent, their intersection has order ≤ C. Then the JSJ deformation space DJSJ over A relative to H exists. Its flexible subgroups belong to S or are relatively QH with finite fiber. The collapsed tree of cylinders (Ta )∗c of DJSJ is a JSJ tree relative to H ∪ Snvc . It has the same vertex stabilizers not contained in S as trees in DJSJ . Proof. Lemma 9.1 allows us to apply Theorem 8.3 (with T ∗ = Tc∗ and k = 2). Every A ∈ A is finite or contained in a GC , hence is small in (A, H)-trees because GC ∈ S, so we can apply the “moreover” of the theorem. Thus DJSJ exists, and flexible groups are as described. We consider the JSJ tree Ta relative to H and the JSJ tree Tr relative to H ∪ Snvc as in Subsection 8. By Lemma 8.7, the collapsed tree of cylinders (Ta )∗c of Ta lies in the same deformation space as Tr . If (Ta )∗c is reduced, its edge stabilizers fix an edge in Tr (see Section 4 of [GL07]), so (Ta )∗c is (A, H ∪ Snvc )-universally elliptic and therefore a JSJ tree relative to H ∪ Snvc .  31  In general, we have to prove that (Ta )∗c is (A, H∪Snvc )-universally elliptic: if ε = (x, Y ) is an edge of (Ta )c with Gε ∈ A, then Gε is (A, H ∪ Snvc )-universally elliptic. Let T be an (A, H ∪ Snvc )-tree. If GY is not C-virtually cyclic, then GY ∈ Snvc , and therefore Gε ⊂ GY is elliptic in T . If GY is C-virtually cyclic, consider an edge e of Ta with Ge ⊂ Gε ⊂ GY . By one-endedness of G, the group Ge is infinite, so has finite index in Gε . Since Ge is (A, H)-universally elliptic, hence (A, H ∪ Snvc )-universally elliptic, so is Gε . The last assertion of the theorem follows from Lemma 8.7 (recall that two trees belonging to the same deformation space have the same vertex stabilizers not in A [GL07, Corollary 4.4]).  9.3  Trees of cylinders and compatibility  The tree of cylinders may also be used to construct and describe the compatibility JSJ deformation space Dco (see Section 4). This is based on the following observation. Lemma 9.3. Let Ta be a universally elliptic (A, H)-tree. Assume that, to each (A, H)-tree T , one can associate an (A, H)-tree T ∗ in such a way that: 1. T ∗ is compatible with any (A, H)-tree dominated by T ; 2. If an (A, H)-tree T is a refinement of Ta , then T ∗ is a refinement of Ta∗ . Then Ta∗ is universally compatible (i.e. compatible with every (A, H)-tree). Proof. Let T be any (A, H)-tree. Since Ta is universally elliptic, there exists a refinement S of Ta dominating T [GL09, Lemma 3.2]. By the first assumption, S ∗ and T have a common refinement R. Since S ∗ is a refinement of Ta∗ , the tree R is a common refinement of T and Ta∗ . In applications, Ta is a JSJ tree and T ∗ is the collapsed tree of cylinders Tc∗ , so the lemma says that (Ta )∗c is universally compatible. The compatibility JSJ deformation space, if it exists, is dominated by Ta and dominates (Ta )∗c . The first assumption of Lemma 9.3 is a general property of trees of cylinders (Proposition 8.1 of [GL08]). For the second one, we invoke the following lemma. Lemma 9.4. Let G be one-ended relative to H. Let ∼ be an admissible equivalence relation. Suppose that each group GC which contains F2 is (A, H)-universally elliptic, and that one of the two assumptions of Lemma 9.1 holds. Let S, T be (A, H)-trees, with S refining T . Assume that each vertex stabilizer Gv of T is small in S or relatively QH with finite fiber. Then Sc∗ refines Tc∗ . Since S dominates T , there is a cellular map from Sc∗ to T c∗ (it maps a vertex to a vertex, an edge to a vertex or an edge) [GL08, Lemma 5.6]. The point of the lemma is that this is a collapse map. Proof. It suffices to show that Sc refines Tc . First suppose that T is obtained from S by collapsing the orbit of a single edge e (this is the key step). We consider two cases, depending on the image v of e in T . We assume that Gv is not elliptic in S, since otherwise S and T belong to the same deformation space and therefore Sc = Tc . First suppose that Gv is small in S. In this case, we claim that v belongs to only one cylinder of T . Indeed, the preimage Sv of v in S is a line or a subtree with a Gv -fixed end. All edges in Sv belong to the same cylinder Y of S. Edges f of S with one endpoint x in Sv also belong to Y . This is clear under the first assumption of Lemma 9.1 (GC ∈ A) since Gf ⊂ Gv ⊂ GY ∈ A, so Gf ∼ GY ; under the second assumption, we note that Gx contains the stabilizer of an edge in Y with index at most 2, so belongs to A, and Gf ∼ Gx ∼ Ge . Thus v belongs to only one cylinder of T . This implies Sc = Tc . 32  Now suppose that v is relatively QH with finite fiber F . We claim that a cylinder of S containing an edge of the preimage Sv of v is entirely contained in Sv . This implies that Sc refines Tc by Remark 4.13 of [GL08]. The action of Gv on Sv is minimal because it has only one orbit of edges. Standard arguments (see [MS84, III.2.6]) show that this action is dominated by an action dual to a non-peripheral simple closed 1-suborbifold of the underlying orbifold of Gv . In particular, its edge stabilizers are not universally elliptic (this is clear if the orbifold is a surface, see [Gui00b, Lemma 5.3] for the general case). Now consider an edge f of S with one endpoint in Sv . Since G is one-ended relative to H, and F is finite, the image of Gf in the orbifold group Gv /F is infinite so contains a finite index subgroup of a boundary subgroup. If f ′ is an edge of Sv , then Gf and Gf ′ generate a group which contains F2 and is not universally elliptic. Our assumption on the groups GC implies that Gf and Gf ′ cannot be equivalent. The claim follows since f and f ′ cannot be in the same cylinder. If several orbits of edges of S are collapsed in T , one iterates the previous argument, noting that all vertex stabilizers of intermediate trees are relatively QH with finite fiber or small in S. Corollary 9.5. Let G be one-ended relative to H. Suppose that: 1. A contains all finite and virtually cyclic subgroups, and is stable by extension of index 2; 2. ∼ is an admissible equivalence relation on the set E of infinite groups in A; if GC contains F2 , it is (A, H)-universally elliptic. 3. There exists C such that, if two groups in E are inequivalent, their intersection has order ≤ C. Then the collapsed tree of cylinders (Ta )∗c of the JSJ deformation space (over A relative to H) is universally compatible. Proof. Assumption 2 implies that the groups GC and the elements of A are small in (A, H)trees. We can apply Corollary 9.2 with S consisting of all groups GC and their subgroups. It follows that a JSJ tree Ta exists, and its flexible subgroups belong to S or are relatively QH with finite fiber. By Lemmas 9.3 and 9.4 (applied with T ∗ = Tc∗ ), its collapsed tree of cylinders (Ta )∗c is universally compatible. Proposition 9.6. Further assume that each group GC belongs to A, and G ∈ / A. Then the compatibility JSJ deformation space Dco exists and contains (Ta )c . It is trivial or irreducible, so the JSJ compatibility tree Tco is defined. The assumption GC ∈ A guarantees that (Ta )c is an (A, H)-tree, so no collapsing is necessary. Also note that S (as defined in the previous proof) and A contain the same infinite groups, so Corollary 9.2 implies that the flexible subgroups of (Ta )c belong to A or are relative QH subgroups with finite fiber. Proof. The point is to show that (Ta )c is maximal (for domination) among universally compatible trees. This will prove that Dco exists and contains (Ta )c . It is irreducible or trivial because Tc is equal to its tree of cylinders [GL08, Corollary 5.8], and the tree of cylinders of a reducible tree is trivial. Consider a universally compatible tree T . We have to show that each vertex stabilizer Gv of (Ta )c is elliptic in T . If Gv is not contained in any GC , then it is elliptic in Ta , hence in T because T , being universally elliptic, is dominated by Ta . We can therefore assume that Gv ∈ A, and also that Gv does not contain F2 . 33  Since G ∈ / A, the quotient graph (Ta )c /G is not a point. There are two cases. If the image of v in (Ta )c /G has valence at least 2, we can refine (Ta )c to a minimal tree T ′ (in the same deformation space) having Gv as an edge stabilizer. Since Gv ∈ A, this is an (A, H)-tree. Its edge group Gv is elliptic in T because T is universally compatible. The remaining case is when the image of v in (Ta )c /G has valence 1. In this case we assume that Gv is not elliptic in T , and we argue towards a contradiction. Let e be an edge of (Ta )c containing v. We are going to prove that Gv contains a subgroup G0 of index 2 with Ge ⊂ G0 . Assuming this fact, we can refine (Ta )c to a minimal (A, H)-tree T ′ in which G0 is an edge stabilizer. As above, G0 is elliptic in T , and so is Gv . This is the required contradiction. We now construct G0 . Replacing T by T ∨ (Ta )c (which is universally compatible by Assertion 2 of Proposition 3.22), and then collapsing, we can assume that (Ta )c is obtained from T by collapsing the orbit of an edge. We consider the action of Gv on T . By Lemma 3.6 of [GL09], Gv contains a hyperbolic element. Since Gv does not contain F2 , it is small in T , and the action defines a non-trivial morphism ϕ : Gv → Z (if there is a fixed end) or ϕ : Gv → Z/2 ∗ Z/2 (if the action is dihedral). Since Ge is elliptic in T , its image under ϕ is trivial, or contained in a conjugate of a Z/2 factor. It is now easy to construct G0 , as the preimage of a suitable index 2 subgroup of the image of ϕ.  Part III  Applications 10  Introduction  In Part I, we gave a general definition and proved the existence of the compatibility JSJ tree Tco for G finitely presented. In Part II, we gave a general existence theorem for the JSJ decomposition of a finitely generated group under acylindricity hypotheses. In the following sections, we are going to describe examples where these results apply. They will mostly be based on the tree of cylinders construction. As we saw in Subsection 9.3, the tree of cylinders enjoys strong compatibility properties. Because of this, we will see that in many examples, the (collapsed) tree of cylinders Tc∗ of the JSJ deformation space satisfies the same compatibility properties, and lives in the same deformation space, as the compatibility JSJ tree Tco . Although defined in less generality, Tc∗ is usually easier to describe than Tco and, for this reason, is more useful than Tco in concrete situations (see Corollary 13.2). Note that any automorphism of G leaving A and H invariant leaves DJSJ and Dco invariant, hence fixes both Tc∗ and Tco . We first treat the case of abelian splittings of CSA groups. To allow torsion, we introduce K-CSA groups in Section 12.2, and describe their JSJ decomposition over virtually abelian groups. We then consider elementary splittings of relatively hyperbolic groups. Finally, we consider splittings of a finitely generated group over virtually cyclic groups under the assumption that their commensurizers are small. Then we relate these JSJ decompositions to actions on R-trees.  11  CSA groups  In our first application, G is a torsion-free CSA group, and we consider splittings over abelian, or cyclic, groups. Recall that G is CSA if the commutation relation is transitive on G \ {1}, and maximal abelian subgroups are malnormal. Toral relatively hyperbolic groups, in particular limit groups and torsion-free hyperbolic groups, are CSA. 34  If G is freely indecomposable relative to H, commutation is an admissible equivalence relation on the set of infinite abelian (resp. infinite cyclic) subgroups (see [GL08]). The groups GC are maximal abelian subgroups, so are small in all trees. Over abelian groups, all edge stabilizers of Tc are abelian since GC ∈ A, so Tc∗ = Tc . Over cyclic groups, Tc may have non-cyclic edge stabilizers, so we have to use Tc∗ . Theorem 11.1. Let G be a finitely generated torsion-free CSA group, and H any family of subgroups. Assume that G is freely indecomposable relative to H. 1. The abelian (resp. cyclic) JSJ deformation space DJSJ of G relative to H exists. Its non-abelian flexible subgroups are relative QH surface groups, with every boundary component used. 2. The collapsed tree of cylinders Tc∗ of DJSJ is an abelian (resp. cyclic) JSJ tree relative to H and all non-cyclic abelian subgroups. It is universally compatible. 3. If G is not abelian, the abelian compatibility JSJ tree Tco (relative to H) exists and belongs to the same deformation space as Tc∗ . Trees in DJSJ and Dco have the same non-abelian vertex stabilizers (they are universally elliptic or surface groups). See Subsection 2.5 for the definitions of flexible, QH, and used boundary components. Remark 11.2. By Corollary 8.4 of [GL09], the first assertion holds even if G is not freely indecomposable. Proof. We apply Corollaries 9.2 and 9.5 with A the family of abelian (resp. cyclic) subgroups, C = 1, and S the family of abelian subgroups. The CSA property guarantees that A is stable by extension of index 2. As mentioned above, ∼ is commutation. Non-abelian flexible subgroups are relatively QH with finite fiber, hence surface groups because G is torsion-free. Assertion 3 follows from Proposition 9.6 since the condition GC ∈ A holds over abelian groups. The last assertion of the theorem does not apply to cyclic splittings, because the condition GC ∈ A does not hold. In this setting Tc∗ is universally compatible by Corollary 9.5, but as the following example shows it may happen that Dco strictly dominates Tc∗ . As illustrated by this example, we will show in Subsection 14 that one obtains Dco by possibly refining Tc∗ at vertices with group Z2 . Example. Let H be a torsion-free hyperbolic group with property FA, and hai a maximal cyclic subgroup. Consider the HNN extension G = hH, t | tat−1 = ai, a one-ended torsion-free CSA group. The Bass-Serre tree T0 is a JSJ tree over abelian groups. Its tree of cylinders T1 is the Bass-Serre tree of the amalgam G = H ∗hai ha, ti, it is also the compatibility JSJ tree over abelian groups by Assertion 3 of Theorem 11.1. Over cyclic groups, T0 is a JSJ tree, its tree of cylinders is T1 , but the compatibility JSJ tree is T0 (this follows from Proposition 5.2 and [Lev05]; the non-splitting assumption of Proposition 5.2 holds over cyclic groups, but not over abelian groups).  12  Γ-limit groups and K-CSA groups  The notion of CSA groups is not well-adapted to groups with torsion. This is why we introduce K-CSA groups, where K is an integer. Every hyperbolic group Γ is K-CSA for some K. Being K-CSA is a universal property; in particular, all Γ-limit groups are K-CSA. We say that a group is K-virtually abelian if it contains an abelian subgroup of index ≤ K (note that the infinite dihedral group is 1-virtually cyclic, in the sense of Definition 7.1, but only 2-virtually abelian). 35  Lemma 12.1. If a countable group G is locally K-virtually abelian, then G is K-virtually abelian. Proof. Let g1 , . . . , gn , . . . be a numbering of the elements of G. Let An ⊂ hg1 , . . . , gn i be an abelian subgroup of index ≤ K. For a given k, there are only finitely many subgroups of index ≤ K in hg1 , . . . , gk i, so there is a subsequence Ani such that Ani ∩ hg1 , . . . gk i is independent of i. By a diagonal argument, one produces an abelian subgroup A of G whose intersection with each hg1 , . . . , gn i has index ≤ K, so A has index ≤ K in G. Definition 12.2. Say that G is K-CSA for some K > 0 if: 1. Any finite subgroup has cardinality at most K (in particular, any element of order > K has infinite order). 2. Any element g ∈ G of infinite order is contained in a unique maximal virtually abelian group M (g), and M (g) is K-virtually abelian. 3. M (g) is its own normalizer. A 1-CSA group is just a torsion-free CSA group. The Klein bottle group is 2-CSA but not 1-CSA. Any hyperbolic group Γ is K-CSA for some K since finite subgroups of Γ have bounded order, and there are only finitely many isomorphism classes of virtually cyclic groups whose finite subgroups have bounded order. Corollary 12.5 will say that Γ-limit groups also are K-CSA. Lemma 12.3. Let G be a K-CSA group. 1. If g and h have infinite order, the following conditions are equivalent: (a) g and h have non-trivial commuting powers; (b) gK! and hK! commute; (c) M (g) = M (h); (d) hg, hi is virtually abelian. 2. Any infinite virtually abelian subgroup H is contained in a unique maximal virtually abelian group M (H). The group M (H) is K-virtually abelian and almost malnormal: if M (H) ∩ M (H)g is infinite, then g ∈ M (H). Proof. (c) ⇒ (b) ⇒ (a) in Assertion 1 is clear since gK! ∈ A if A ⊂ M (g) has index ≤ K. We prove (a) ⇒ (c). If gm commutes with hn , then gm normalizes M (hn ), so M (gm ) = M (hn ) and M (g) = M (gm ) = M (hn ) = M (h). Clearly (c) ⇒ (d) ⇒ (a). This proves Assertion 1. Being virtually abelian, H contains an element g of infinite order, and we define M (H) = M (g). We have to show h ∈ M (H) for every h ∈ H. This follows from Assertion 1 if h has infinite order since M (h) = M (g). If h has finite order, we write M (g) = M (hgh−1 ) = hM (g)h−1 , so h ∈ M (g) because M (g) equals its normalizer. A similar argument shows almost malnormality. We now prove that, for fixed K, the class of K-CSA groups is closed in the space of marked groups (K-CSA is a universal property). We refer to [CG05] for the topological space of marked groups, and the relation with universal theory. Proposition 12.4. For any fixed K > 0, the class of K-CSA groups is defined by a set of universal sentences. In particular, the class of K-CSA groups is stable under taking subgroups, and closed in the space of marked groups.  36  Proof. For any finite group F = {a1 , . . . , an }, the fact that G does not contain a subgroup isomorphic to F is equivalent to a universal sentence saying that for any n-uple (x1 , . . . , xn ) satisfying the multiplication table of F , not all xi ’s are distinct. Thus, the first property of K-CSA groups is defined by (infinitely many) universal sentences. Now consider the second property. We claim that, given ℓ and n, the fact that hg1 , . . . , gn i is ℓ-virtually abelian may be expressed by the disjunction VAl,n of finitely many finite systems of equations in the elements g1 , . . . , gn . To see this, let π : Fn → G be the homomorphism sending the i-th generator xi of Fn to gi . If A ⊂ hg1 , . . . , gn i has index ≤ ℓ, so does π −1 (A) in Fn . Conversely, if B ⊂ Fn has index ≤ ℓ, so does π(B) in hg1 , . . . , gn i. To define VAl,n , we then enumerate the subgroups of index ≤ ℓ of Fn . For each subgroup, we choose a finite set of generators wi (x1 , . . . , xn ) and we write the system of equations [wi (g1 , . . . , gn ), wj (g1 , . . . , gn )] = 1. This proves the claim. By Lemma 12.1 (and Zorn’s lemma), any g is contained in a maximal K-virtually abelian subgroup. The second property of Definition 12.2 is equivalent to the fact that, if hg, hi is virtually abelian, hg, g1 , . . . , gn i is K-virtually abelian, and g has order > K, then hg, h, g1 , . . . , gn i is K-virtually abelian. This is defined by a set of universal sentences constructed using the VAl,n ’s. If the first two properties of the definition hold, the third one is expressed by saying that, if g has order > K and hg, hgh−1 i is K-virtually abelian, so is hg, hi. This is a set of universal sentences as well. Corollary 12.5. Let Γ be a hyperbolic group. There exists K such that any Γ-limit group is K-CSA. Moreover, any subgroup of a Γ-limit group G contains a non-abelian free subgroup or is K-virtually abelian. Remark 12.6. We will not use the “moreover”. There are additional restrictions on the virtually abelian subgroups. For instance, there exists N ≥ 1 such that, if hgh−1 = g−1 for some g of infinite order, then hg ′N h−1 = g′−N for all g′ of infinite order in M (g). Proof. The first assertion is immediate from Proposition 12.4. Now let H be an infinite subgroup of G not containing F2 . By [Kou98, Proposition 3.2], there exists a number M such that, if x1 , . . . , xM are distinct elements of Γ, some element of the form xi or xi xj has infinite order (i.e. order > K). This universal statement also holds in G, so H contains an element g of infinite order. Recall that there exists a number N such that, if x, y ∈ Γ, then xN and y N commute or generate F2 (see [Del96]). The same statement holds in G since, for each non-trivial word w, the universal statement [xN , y N ] 6= 1 ⇒ w(xN , y N ) 6= 1 holds in Γ hence in G. Thus, for all h ∈ H, the elements gN and hgN h−1 commute. By Lemma 12.3 H normalizes M (g), so H ⊂ M (g) and H is K-virtually abelian. Let G be a K-CSA group. We now show how to define a tree of cylinders for virtually abelian splittings of G (hence also for virtually cyclic splittings). Let A be the family of all virtually abelian subgroups of G, and E the family of infinite subgroups in A. Given H, H ′ ∈ E, define H ∼ H ′ if M (H) = M (H ′ ). Equivalently, H ∼ H ′ if and only if hH, H ′ i is virtually abelian. The stabilizer of the equivalence class C of any H ∈ E is M (H). Lemma 12.7. If G is one-ended relative to H, the equivalence relation ∼ is admissible (see Subsection 9.1). Proof. By one-endedness, all (A, H)-trees have edge stabilizers in E. The first two properties of admissibility are obvious. Consider H, H ′ ∈ E with H ∼ H ′ , and an (A, H)-tree T in which H fixes some a and H ′ fixes some b. Since the group generated by two commuting elliptic groups is elliptic, there are finite index subgroups H0 ⊂ H and H0′ ⊂ H ′ 37  such that hH0 , H0′ i fixes a point c ∈ T . Any edge e ⊂ [a, b] is contained in, say, [a, c], so Ge ∼ H0 ∼ H as required. Theorem 12.8. Let G be a K-CSA group, and H any family of subgroups. Assume that G is one-ended relative to H. Then: 1. The virtually abelian (resp. virtually cyclic) JSJ deformation space DJSJ of G relative to H exists. Its flexible subgroups are virtually abelian, or relatively QH with finite fiber and every boundary component used. 2. The collapsed tree of cylinders Tc∗ of DJSJ is a virtually abelian (resp. virtually cyclic) JSJ tree relative to H and to all virtually abelian subgroups which are not virtually cyclic. It is universally compatible. 3. If G is not virtually abelian, the virtually abelian compatibility JSJ tree Tco (relative to H) exists and Tc∗ ∈ Dco . Trees in DJSJ and Dco have the same non virtually abelian vertex stabilizers. The proof is similar to that of Theorem 11.1, with C = K. The first assertion still holds if G is not one-ended relative to H, using Linnell’s accessibility as in Lemma 7.7.  13  Relatively hyperbolic groups  Theorem 13.1. Let G be hyperbolic relative to finitely generated subgroups H1 , . . . , Hp . Let H be any family of subgroups. If G is one-ended relative to H, and every Hi which contains F2 is contained in a group of H, then: 1. The elementary (resp. virtually cyclic) JSJ deformation space DJSJ of G relative to H exists. Its non-elementary flexible subgroups are relatively QH with finite fiber, and every boundary component is used. 2. The collapsed tree of cylinders Tc∗ of DJSJ for co-elementarity is an elementary (resp. virtually cyclic) JSJ tree relative to H and to all elementary subgroups which are not virtually cyclic. It is universally compatible. 3. If G is neither parabolic nor virtually cyclic, the elementary compatibility JSJ tree Tco (relative to H) exists and Tc∗ ∈ Dco . Trees in DJSJ and Dco have the same non-elementary vertex stabilizers (they are universally elliptic or QH). We make a few comments before giving the proof. Recall that a subgroup is parabolic if it is conjugate to a subgroup of some Hi , elementary if it is virtually cyclic (possibly finite) or parabolic. Co-elementarity, defined by A ∼ B if hA, Bi is elementary, is an admissible equivalence relation on the set of infinite elementary subgroups (see [GL08], Examples 3.3 and 3.4; if Hi is not contained in a group of H, it has finitely many ends, so Lemma 3.5 of [GL08] applies). The stabilizer GC of an equivalence class is a maximal elementary subgroup, so over elementary groups no collapsing is necessary (i.e. Tc = Tc∗ ). If H = {H1 , . . . , Hp }, then G is finitely presented relative to H, and existence of the JSJ deformation space follows from [GL09, Section 5.1]. The first assertion of the theorem remains true if G is not one-ended relative to H, provided that G is accessible relative to H. As before, the last assertion may fail over virtually cyclic groups. Proof. We apply Corollary 9.2 and Proposition 9.6, with A consisting of all elementary (resp. virtually cyclic) subgroups, and S consisting of all elementary subgroups. Elementary subgroups are small in (A, H)-trees by our assumption on the Hi ’s, and every GC 38  is elementary. We choose C bigger than the order of any finite subgroup which is nonparabolic or contained in a virtually cyclic Hi , to ensure that Snvc contains no virtually cyclic subgroup. Remark. For the first two assertions of the theorem, the hypothesis that every Hi which contains F2 is contained in a group of H may be weakened to: every Hi is small in (A, H)trees. This requires a slight generalization of Lemma 3.5 of [GL08]. Corollary 13.2. Let G be hyperbolic relative to a finite family of finitely generated subgroups H = {H1 , . . . , Hp }. Let A be the family of elementary subgroups of G. If G is one-ended relative to H, there is a JSJ tree T over A relative to H which is equal to its tree of cylinders, invariant under automorphisms of G preserving H, and compatible with every (A, H)-tree. The vertex stabilizers of T are elementary, universally elliptic, or relatively QH with finite fiber. If G is one-ended, and no Hi is 2-ended or contains F2 , then T is also the tree of cylinders of the non-relative JSJ deformation space over A. It is compatible with every tree with elementary edge stabilizers. Proof. We define T as the tree of cylinders of the JSJ deformation space over A relative to H. It is equal to its tree of cylinders by Corollary 5.8 of [GL08]. Applying Theorem 13.1 with H empty, we see that the tree of cylinders of the non-relative JSJ deformation space is a JSJ tree relative to all elementary subgroups which are not virtually cyclic, hence relative to H because no Hi is 2-ended.  14  Virtually cyclic splittings  In this subsection we consider splittings of G over virtually cyclic groups, assuming smallness of their commensurizers. Let A be the family of virtually cyclic (possibly finite) subgroups of G, and E the family of all infinite virtually cyclic subgroups of G. Recall that two subgroups A and B of G are commensurable if A ∩ B has finite index in A and B. The commensurability relation ∼ is an admissible relation on E (see [GL08]), so one can define a tree of cylinders. The stabilizer GC of the commensurability class C of a group A ∈ E is its commensurizer Comm(A), consisting of elements g such that gAg −1 is commensurable with A. The condition GC ∈ A does not hold, so Proposition 9.6 does not apply. Theorem 14.1. Let A be the family of virtually cyclic (possibly finite) subgroups, and let H be any set of subgroups of G, with G one-ended relative to H. Let S be the set of subgroups of commensurizers of infinite virtually cyclic subgroups. Assume that there is a bound C for the order of finite subgroups of G, and that all groups of S which contain F2 are contained in a group of H. Then: 1. The virtually cyclic JSJ deformation space DJSJ relative to H exists. Its flexible subgroups either commensurize some infinite virtually cyclic subgroup, or are relative QH-subgroups with finite fiber and every boundary component used. 2. The collapsed tree of cylinders Tc∗ of DJSJ (for commensurability) is a virtually cyclic JSJ tree relative to H and the groups of S which are not virtually cyclic. It is universally compatible. 3. If G contains F2 , then the virtually cyclic JSJ tree Tco relative to H exists, and Dco can be obtained from Tc∗ by (possibly) refining at vertices v with Gv virtually Z2 . Trees in DJSJ and Dco have the same vertex stabilizers Gv ∈ / S.  39  Remark 14.2. The assumptions are satisfied if G is a torsion-free CSA group, or a K-CSA group, or any relatively hyperbolic group whose finite subgroups have bounded order as long as all parabolic subgroups containing F2 are contained in a group of H. If G is KCSA, the trees of cylinders of a given T for commutation and for commensurability belong to the same deformation space (this follows from Lemma 12.3). See Subsection 11 for an example with Tc∗ ∈ / Dco . Proof. The first two assertions follow from Corollary 9.2 as in the previous examples. For the third assertion, let T be a JSJ tree (relative to H). We know that Tc∗ is universally compatible by Corollary 9.5. By [GL08, Remark 5.11], Tc and Tc∗ are in the same deformation space. This implies that any group elliptic in Tc∗ but not in T belongs to S, hence does not contain F2 . Existence of Dco follows as there are only finitely many deformation spaces between T and Tc∗ by Proposition 6.1 of [GL09]. The assumption F2 ⊂ G guarantees that Dco is trivial or irreducible, so Tco is defined. One may obtain a tree T ′ ∈ Dco by refining Tc∗ at vertices v with Gv not elliptic in T . Such a Gv does not contain F2 , so is small in T ′ . If it fixes exactly one end, then Dco is an ascending deformation space, contradicting [GL07, Prop.7.1(4)]. Thus Gv acts on a line, hence is virtually Z2 because edge stabilizers are virtually cyclic. We also have: Theorem 14.3. Let G be torsion-free and commutative transitive. Let H be any family of subgroups. If G is freely indecomposable relative to H, then: 1. The cyclic JSJ deformation space DJSJ of G relative to H exists. Its flexible subgroups are QH surface groups, with every boundary component used. 2. Its collapsed tree of cylinders Tc∗ (for commensurability) is a JSJ tree relative to H and all subgroups isomorphic to a solvable Baumslag-Solitar group BS(1, s). It has the same non-solvable vertex stabilizers as trees in DJSJ . It is universally compatible. 3. If G is not a solvable Baumslag-Solitar group, the cyclic compatibility JSJ deformation space Dco relative to H exists and may be obtained by (possibly) refining Tc∗ at vertices with stabilizer isomorphic to Z2 . Recall that G is commutative transitive if commutation is a transitive relation on G \ {1}. Proof. Here we do not apply Corollary 9.2 directly, because we do not have enough control on the groups GC (though they may be shown to be metabelian). By Proposition 6.5 of [GL08], if T is any tree with cyclic edge stabilizers, a vertex stabilizer of its collapsed tree of cylinders which is not elliptic in T is a solvable BaumslagSolitar group BS(1, s) (with s 6= −1 because of commutative transitivity). Arguing as in the proof of Lemma 9.1, we deduce that Theorem 8.3 applies, with T ∗ the collapsed tree of cylinders and S consisting of all solvable Baumslag-Solitar subgroups and their subgroups. No subgroup of BS(1, s) can be flexible, except if Gv = G ≃ Z2 , so all flexible groups are surface groups. Assertion (2) of the theorem follows from Lemma 8.7. For Assertion (3), one argues as in the proof of Theorem 14.1.  15  Reading actions on R-trees  Rips theory gives a way to understand stable actions on R-trees, by relating them to actions on simplicial trees. Therefore, they are closely related to JSJ decompositions. We consider first the JSJ deformation space, then the compatibility JSJ tree. 40  15.1  Reading R-trees from the JSJ deformation space  Proposition 15.1. Let G be finitely presented. Let TJ be a JSJ tree over the family of slender subgroups. If T is an R-tree with a stable action of G whose arc stabilizers are slender, then edge stabilizers of TJ are elliptic in T . Proof. By [Gui98], T is a limit of simplicial trees Tk with slender edge stabilizers. Since TJ is universally elliptic, edge stabilizers of TJ are elliptic in Tk . They are elliptic in T because they are finitely generated and all their elements are elliptic. Remark 15.2. More generally, suppose that G is finitely presented and A is stable under extension by finitely generated free abelian groups: if H < G is such that 1 → A → H → Zk → 1, with A ∈ A, then H ∈ A. Let TJ be a JSJ tree over A with finitely generated edge stabilizers (this exists by Theorem 4.3 of [GL09]). If T is a stable R-tree with arc stabilizers in A, then edge stabilizers of TJ are elliptic in T . Recall [FP06] that, when G is finitely presented, flexible vertices of the slender JSJ deformation space are either slender or QH (with slender fiber). Proposition 15.3. Let G, TJ , T be as in the previous proposition. There exists an R-tree T̂ obtained by blowing up each flexible vertex v of TJ into 1. an action by isometries on a line if Gv is slender, 2. an action dual to a measured foliation on the underlying 2-orbifold of Gv if v is QH, which resolves (or dominates) T in the following sense: there exists a G-equivariant map f : T̂ → T which is piecewise linear. Proof. Using ellipticity of TJ with respect to T , we argue as in the proof of [GL09, Lemma 3.2], with T1 = TJ and T2 = T . If v ∈ V (TJ ) and Gv is elliptic in T , we let Yv ⊂ T be a fixed point. If Gv is not elliptic in T , we let Yv be its minimal subtree. It is a line if Gv is slender. If v is a QH vertex, then Yv is dual to a measured foliation of the underlying orbifold by Skora’s theorem [Sko96] (applied to a covering surface Σ0 ). Remark 15.4. The arguments given above may be applied in more general situations. For instance, assume that G is finitely generated, that all subgroups of G not containing F2 are slender, and that G has a JSJ tree TJ over slender subgroups whose flexible subgroups are QH. Let T be an R-tree with slender arc stabilizers such that G does not split over a subgroup of the stabilizer of an unstable arc or of a tripod in T . Then, applying [Gui08] and the techniques of [Gui98], we see that T is a limit of slender trees, so Propositions 15.1 and 15.3 apply.  15.2  Reading R-trees from the compatibility JSJ tree    In [Gui00b], the first author explained how to obtain all small actions of a one-ended hyperbolic group G on R-trees from a JSJ tree. The proof was based on Bowditch’s construction of a JSJ tree from the topology of ∂G. Here we give a different, more general, approach, based on Corollary 3.9 (saying that compatibility is a closed condition) and results of Part III (describing the compatibility JSJ space). Being universally compatible, Tco is compatible with any R-tree which is a limit of simplicial A-trees. We illustrate this idea in a simple case. Let G be a one-ended finitely presented torsion-free CSA group. Assume that G is not abelian, and let Tco be its compatibility JSJ tree over the class A of abelian groups (see Definition 4.7 and Theorem 11.1). Let G T be an action on an R-tree with trivial tripod stabilizers, and abelian arc stabilizers. By [Gui98], T is a limit of simplicial A-trees. Since Tco is compatible with all A-trees, it is compatible with T by Corollary 3.9. Let 41  T̂ be the standard common refinement of T and Tco with length function ℓT + ℓTco (see Subsection 3.2). Let fco : T̂ → Tco and f : T̂ → T be maps preserving alignment such that dT̂ (x, y) = dTco (fco (x), fco (y)) + dT (f (x), f (y)). −1 (v) To each vertex v and each edge e of Tco there correspond closed subtrees T̂v = fco and T̂e = f −1 (e̊) of T̂ . By minimality, T̂e is a segment of T̂ containing no branch point except maybe at its endpoints. The relation between dT̂ , dTco , and dT shows that the restriction of f to T̂v is an isometric embedding. In particular, T can be obtained from T̂ by changing the length of the segments T̂e (possibly making the length 0). We shall now describe the action of Gv on T̂v . Note that Gv is infinite. Its action on T̂v need not be minimal, but it is finitely supported, see [Gui08]. Given an edge e of Tco containing v, we denote by xe the endpoint of T̂e belonging to T̂v . The tree T̂v is the convex hull of the points xe . First suppose that Gv fixes some x ∈ T̂v . Note that, if xe 6= x, the stabilizer of the arc [x, xe ] contains Ge , so is infinite. We claim that, if e and f are edges of Tco containing v with xe 6= xf , then [x, xe ] ∪ [x, xf ] contains no tripod. Assume otherwise. Then the intersection [x, xe ] ∩ [x, xf ] is an arc [x, y]. The stabilizer of [x, y] is abelian and must also fix xe and xf by triviality of tripod stabilizers. This proves that Stab[x, y] fixes [x, xe ] ∪ [x, xf ], contradicting triviality of tripod stabilizers. We have thus proved that T̂v is a cone on a finite number of orbits of points. If Gv does not fix a point in T̂v , then it is flexible. If it is abelian, triviality of tripod stabilizers implies that T̂v is a line. If Gv is not abelian, it is a surface group by Theorem 11.1. Skora’s theorem [Sko96] asserts that the minimal subtree (Tv )min of Gv is dual to a measured lamination on a compact surface. By triviality of tripod stabilizers, Tv \ (Tv )min is a disjoint union of segments, and the pointwise stabilizer of each such segment has index at most 2 in a boundary subgroup of Gv . It follows in particular from this analysis that T̂ and T are geometric (see [LP97]).  References [AB87]  Roger Alperin and Hyman Bass. Length functions of group actions on Λ-trees. In Combinatorial group theory and topology (Alta, Utah, 1984), pages 265–378. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, 1987.  [Bee]  Benjamin Beeker. In preparation.  [BF91]  Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn. Bounding the complexity of simplicial group actions on trees. Invent. Math., 103(3):449–469, 1991.  [Bow98] Brian H. Bowditch. Cut points and canonical splittings of hyperbolic groups. Acta Math., 180(2):145–186, 1998. [CG05]  Christophe Champetier and Vincent Guirardel. Limit groups as limits of free groups. Israel J. Math., 146:1–75, 2005.  [CF09]  Matt Clay and Max Forester. Whitehead moves for G-trees. Bull. Lond. Math. Soc., 41(2):205–212, 2009.  [CM87]  Marc Culler and John W. Morgan. Group actions on R-trees. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 55(3):571–604, 1987.  [Del96]  Thomas Delzant. Sous-groupes distingués et quotients des groupes hyperboliques. Duke Math. J., 83(3):661–682, 1996.  [DS99]  M. J. Dunwoody and M. E. Sageev. JSJ-splittings for finitely presented groups over slender groups. Invent. Math., 135(1):25–44, 1999.  [For02]  Max Forester. Deformation and rigidity of simplicial group actions on trees. Geom. Topol., 6:219–267 (electronic), 2002.  42  [For03]  Max Forester. On uniqueness of JSJ decompositions of finitely generated groups. Comment. Math. Helv., 78:740–751, 2003.  [FP06]  K. Fujiwara and P. Papasoglu. JSJ-decompositions of finitely presented groups and complexes of groups. Geom. Funct. Anal., 16(1):70–125, 2006.  [Geo08] Ross Geoghegan. Topological methods in group theory, volume 243 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, New York, 2008. [Gui98]  Vincent Guirardel. Approximations of stable actions on R-trees. Comment. Math. Helv., 73(1):89–121, 1998.  [Gui00a] Vincent Guirardel. Dynamics of Out(Fn ) on the boundary of outer space. Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4), 33(4):433–465, 2000. [Gui00b] Vincent Guirardel. Reading small actions of a one-ended hyperbolic group on R-trees from its JSJ splitting. Amer. J. Math., 122(4):667–688, 2000. [Gui05]  Vincent Guirardel. Cœur et nombre d’intersection pour les actions de groupes sur les arbres. Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4), 38(6):847–888, 2005.  [Gui08]  Vincent Guirardel. Actions of finitely generated groups on R-trees. Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble), 58(1):159–211, 2008.  [GL07]  Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt. Deformation spaces of trees. Groups Geom. Dyn., 1(2):135–181, 2007.  [GL08]  Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt. arXiv:0811.2383 [math.GR], 2008.  [GL09]  Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt. JSJ decompositions: definitions, existence and uniqueness. I: The JSJ deformation space. arXiv:0911.3173 [math.GR], 2009.  [GL10]  Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt. Scott and Swarup’s regular neighbourhood as a tree of cylinders. Pacific J. Math., 245(1):79–98, 2010.  Trees of cylinders and canonical splittings.  [Kou98] Malik Koubi. Croissance uniforme dans les groupes hyperboliques. Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble), 48(5):1441–1453, 1998. [Kro90]  P. H. Kropholler. An analogue of the torus decomposition theorem for certain Poincaré duality groups. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 60(3):503–529, 1990.  [KR89a] P. H. Kropholler and M. A. Roller. Relative ends and duality groups. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 61(2):197–210, 1989. [KR89b] P. H. Kropholler and M. A. Roller. Splittings of Poincaré duality groups. III. J. London Math. Soc. (2), 39(2):271–284, 1989. [Lev05]  Gilbert Levitt. Characterizing rigid simplicial actions on trees. In Geometric methods in group theory, volume 372 of Contemp. Math., pages 27–33. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2005.  [LP97]  Gilbert Levitt and Frédéric Paulin. Geometric group actions on trees. Amer. J. Math., 119(1):83–102, 1997.  [Lin83]  P. A. Linnell. On accessibility of groups. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 30(1):39–46, 1983.  [MS84]  John W. Morgan and Peter B. Shalen. Valuations, trees, and degenerations of hyperbolic structures. I. Ann. of Math. (2), 120(3):401–476, 1984.  [Pau89] Frédéric Paulin. The Gromov topology on R-trees. Topology Appl., 32(3):197–221, 1989. [Pau04] Frédéric Paulin. Sur la théorie élémentaire des groupes libres (d’après Sela). Astérisque, (294):ix, 363–402, 2004. [Per09]  Chloé Perin. Elementary embeddings in torsion-free hyperbolic groups, 2009. arXiv:0903.0945v1 [math.GR].  [RS97]  E. Rips and Z. Sela. Cyclic splittings of finitely presented groups and the canonical JSJ decomposition. Ann. of Math. (2), 146(1):53–109, 1997.  43  [SS00]  Peter Scott and Gadde A. Swarup. Splittings of groups and intersection numbers. Geom. Topol., 4:179–218 (electronic), 2000.  [SS03]  Peter Scott and Gadde A. Swarup. Regular neighbourhoods and canonical decompositions for groups. Astérisque, 289:vi+233, 2003. Corrections available at http: //www.math.lsa.umich.edu/~pscott/.  [Sel97]  Z. Sela. Acylindrical accessibility for groups. Invent. Math., 129(3):527–565, 1997.  [Ser77]  Jean-Pierre Serre. Arbres, amalgames, SL2 . Société Mathématique de France, Paris, 1977. Rédigé avec la collaboration de Hyman Bass, Astérisque, No. 46.  [Sko96]  Richard K. Skora. Splittings of surfaces. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 9(2):605–616, 1996.  [Wal04] C. T. C. Wall. Poincaré duality in dimension 3. In Proceedings of the Casson Fest, volume 7 of Geom. Topol. Monogr., pages 1–26 (electronic). Geom. Topol. Publ., Coventry, 2004. [Wei07]  Richard Weidmann. On accessibility arXiv:math/0702185v1 [math.GR].  Vincent Guirardel Institut de Recherche Mathématique de Rennes Université de Rennes 1 et CNRS (UMR 6625) 263 avenue du Général Leclerc, CS 74205 F-35042 RENNES Cedex e-mail:vincent.guirardel@univ-rennes1.fr Gilbert Levitt Laboratoire de Mathématiques Nicolas Oresme Université de Caen et CNRS (UMR 6139) BP 5186 F-14032 Caen Cedex France e-mail:levitt@math.unicaen.fr  44  of  finitely  generated  groups,  2007.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
