Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_5877

Abstract:
arXiv:1610.06696v4 [math.GR] 3 Oct 2017  Distal actions on coset spaces in totally disconnected, locally compact groups Colin D. Reid∗ University of Newcastle, School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia colin@reidit.net March 27, 2018  Abstract Let G be a totally disconnected, locally compact (t.d.l.c.) group and let H be an equicontinuously (for example, compactly) generated group of automorphisms of G. We show that every distal action of H on a coset space of G is a SIN action, with the small invariant neighbourhoods arising from open H-invariant subgroups. We obtain a number of consequences for the structure of the collection of open subgroups of a t.d.l.c. group. For example, it follows that for every compactly generated subgroup K of G, there is a compactly generated open subgroup E of G such that K ≤ E and such that every open subgroup of G containing a finite index subgroup of K contains a finite index subgroup of E. We also show that for a large class of closed subgroups L of G (including for instance all closed subgroups L such that L is an intersection of subnormal subgroups of open subgroups), every compactly generated open subgroup of L can be realized as L∩O for an open subgroup of G.  Contents 1 Introduction  2  2 Structure of coset actions 2.1 Preliminaries on equicontinuity . . . . . . . . . 2.2 Equicontinuity for group automorphisms . . . . 2.3 Distality for group automorphisms . . . . . . . 2.4 The stable residual property . . . . . . . . . . . 2.5 A dynamical characterization of a class of coset ∗  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . spaces  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  6 6 7 11 14 15  The author is an ARC DECRA fellow. Research supported in part by ARC Discovery Project DP120100996.  1  3 Reduced envelopes 3.1 First results . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.2 Envelope equivalence . . . . . . . . 3.3 Background on elementary groups 3.4 Discrete regional quotient groups .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  17 17 21 23 24  4 Some special classes of closed subgroups 4.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.2 Codistal subgroups . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.3 RIO subgroups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.4 Regional relative separability . . . . . . . 4.5 Decomposition rank of open subgroups . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  27 27 27 32 35 38  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  5 The discrete residual 40 5.1 Action of the discrete residual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 5.2 Decomposition of the discrete residual . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 A Metrizable approximation of group actions  43  References  48  1  Introduction  An important aspect of the theory of totally disconnected, locally compact (t.d.l.c.) groups G is the study of dynamics of (semi-)groups of automorphisms (or more generally, endomorphisms) of the group, including inner automorphisms. The theory is most well-developed in the case of a Z-action by automorphisms, or iterates of a single endomorphism; see for example [2], [20] and [4]. More generally, the methods for actions of Z generalize in a well-behaved way to actions of compactly generated groups with an additional condition, called flatness, that is automatically satisfied, for example, by any action of a finitely generated nilpotent group (see [19], [16] and [13]). We regard a t.d.l.c. group G as a uniform space by equipping it with the right uniformity. The result we obtain will apply to all subgroups H of Aut(G) that are equicontinuously generated, meaning that meaning that H has a symmetric generating set that is equicontinuous on G. The main theorem of this article, which is an application of the main theorem of [14], gives characterizations of the closed H-invariant subgroups K of G that contain the discrete residual in terms of the dynamics of the action of H on G/K. Definition 1.1. Given a topological group G and a group of automorphisms H of G, the discrete residual ResG (H) is the intersection of all H-invariant open subgroups of G; if H = Inn(G) we define Res(G) = ResG (H).  2  Given a closed H-invariant subgroup K of G, then H acts by homeomorphisms on the quotient space G/K. We say H acts N-distally on G/K if there is a neighbourhood of the trivial coset consisting of distal points for the action and N-equicontinuously on G/K if there is a neighbourhood of the trivial coset consisting of equicontinuous points for the action. Theorem A (See §2.5). Let G be a t.d.l.c. group, let H ≤ Aut(G) be equicontinuously generated and let K be a closed H-invariant subgroup of G. Let V be the set of open H-invariant subgroups of G. Then the following are equivalent: (i) H acts N-equicontinuously on G/K; (ii) H acts N-distally on G/K; (iii) there is a neighbourhood N/K of the trivial coset in G/K such that given x, y ∈ N/K, if Hx is compact and x ∈ Hy, then y ∈ Hx; (iv) {V K/K | V ∈ V} is a base of neighbourhoods of the trivial coset in G/K; (v) K ≥ ResG (H). Since a compact set of automorphisms is always equicontinuous, Theorem A applies to all compactly generated automorphism groups of t.d.l.c. groups, for example the group of inner automorphisms induced by a compactly generated subgroup of G. Note also that Inn(G) is equicontinuous if and only if G is a SIN group, meaning it has a base of conjugation-invariant identity neighbourhoods, and indeed a base of identity neighbourhoods consisting of open normal subgroups. It is already known from examples that no analogue of Theorem A holds when H is an arbitrary group of automorphisms of a t.d.l.c. group; for instance, every nilpotent t.d.l.c. group has distal action on itself, but there are nilpotent t.d.l.c. groups that are not SIN groups. Hence some sort of assumption that H is generated by a ‘small’ subset of Aut(G) is necessary. There are consequences for the manner in which compactly generated groups can be embedded into general t.d.l.c. groups. In particular, every compactly generated subgroup has a reduced envelope in the sense of [13]. Definition 1.2. Let G be a topological group and let H be a subgroup of G. A reduced envelope for H in G is an open subgroup E of G such that H ≤ E, and such that given any open subgroup E2 of G such that |H : H ∩ E2 | is finite, then |E : E ∩ E2 | is finite. Theorem B (See Theorem 3.5). Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H be a subgroup of G with equicontinuously generated action on G. Then there is an open subgroup E of G with the following properties: 3  (i) E is a reduced envelope for H in G; (ii) E = HResG (H)U , where U is a compact open subgroup of G; (iii) E is equicontinuously generated, and if H is compactly generated then so is E; (iv) ResG (H) is the intersection of all open normal subgroups of E, so in particular, ResG (H) is normal in E; (v) E/ResG (H) is a SIN group. When they exist, reduced envelopes are unique up to finite index. We can thus define the envelope class EG (H) of H to be the set of open subgroups of G commensurate to a reduced envelope for H, and say subgroups H1 and H2 are envelope equivalent, and write H1 ≈G H2 , if both H1 and H2 have reduced envelopes and EG (H1 ) = EG (H2 ). Envelope equivalence classes have representatives in any cocompact subgroup and in any subgroup of finite covolume, so are potentially a tool to understand lattices in t.d.l.c. groups, especially cocompact lattices. Theorem C (See §3.2). Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let A be a subgroup (not necessarily closed). Suppose that A is either cocompact or of finite covolume in G. Then for every compactly generated subgroup H1 of G, there is a subgroup H2 of A such that H1 ≈G H2 . If A is cocompact in G, then H2 can be chosen to be finitely generated. Envelope equivalence classes are also well-behaved under continuous homomorphisms. Given a t.d.l.c. group G, write EG for the set of commensurability classes of compactly generated open subgroups of G. Theorem D (See §3.2). Let G and H be t.d.l.c. groups and let φ : G → H be a continuous homomorphism. Let K1 and K2 be compactly generated subgroups of G such that K1 ≈G K2 . Then φ(K1 ) ≈H φ(K2 ). In particular, there is a well-defined map θ : EG → EH ; EG (O) 7→ EH (φ(O)). If H = φ(G)X for a compact set X, then θ is surjective. We also consider how open subgroups of a t.d.l.c. group G are related to open subgroups of closed subgroups of G. Fix a t.d.l.c. group G and a closed subgroup H of G. An open subgroup K of H is relatively separable in (G, H) if K = H ∩ O for an open subgroup O of G; we say H is regionally relatively separable (RRS) in G if every compactly generated open subgroup of H is relatively separable in (G, H). Not all closed subgroups are RRS subgroups (see Example 4.19). However, we can prove that many subgroups are RRS by introducing a smaller class, the RIO subgroups of G, and showing that this class has a number of closure properties. 4  Definition 1.3. A closed subgroup H is a RIO subgroup of G if every compactly generated open subgroup of H is an intersection of open subgroups of G. (The definition can be stated in several equivalent ways; see Definition 4.1, Proposition 4.9 and Corollary 4.12.) Theorem E (See Theorem 4.11). Let G be a t.d.l.c. group. All of the following are RIO subgroups of G: (i) any closed subgroup H that acts distally on G/H by translation (for example, any closed subnormal subgroup of G); (ii) any RIO subgroup of a RIO subgroup of G; (iii) any intersection of RIO subgroups of G; (iv) the closure of any pointwise limit inferior of RIO subgroups of G. Theorem F (See §4.4). Let G be a t.d.l.c. group. Then every RIO subgroup of G is an RRS subgroup of G. We also give an application of RIO subgroups to the theory of elementary t.d.l.c. second-countable groups in the sense of Wesolek (see [17]): given a group G of decomposition rank α, we show that, subject to some obvious restrictions, every possible decomposition rank of a compactly generated closed subgroup of G occurs as the rank of a compactly generated open subgroup of G. (See §4.5.) Finally, in the case that H is a compactly generated group of automorphisms, we use the results of the present paper together with the main theorem of [15] to analyse the structure of ResG (H). Theorem G (See §5.2). Let G be a t.d.l.c. group, let H ≤ Aut(G) be compactly generated and let R = ResG (H). Then H does not act N-distally on R/S for any proper closed subgroup S of R. In particular, ResR (H) = R. Moreover, there is a finite normal H-invariant series {1} = R0 < R1 < · · · < Rn = R, such that given 1 ≤ i ≤ n, the factor Ri /Ri−1 satisfies at least one of the following: (i) Ri /Ri−1 is infinitely generated and discrete, and i < n; (ii) [R, Ri ] ≤ Ri−1 and i < n; (iii) Ri /Ri−1 is the largest compact normal H-invariant subgroup of R/Ri−1 on which H acts ergodically; (iv) Ri /Ri−1 is a nondiscrete chief factor of R ⋊ H, that is, there does not exist a closed normal H-invariant subgroup S of R such that Ri−1 < S < Ri , and moreover H does not leave invariant any proper compactly generated open subgroup of Ri /Ri−1 . 5  Acknowledgement I thank Eli Glasner for bringing the article [1] to my attention, which inspired a major revision of the present article. I also thank Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace, Riddhi Shah and Phillip Wesolek for their very helpful comments and suggestions in the preparation of this article. Notation. In this article, we require all topological groups to be Hausdorff. Given a group G, a subset X of G and a set of automorphisms Y , we say that X is Y -invariant if y(X) = X for all y ∈ Y . Given a group G and subgroups H, K and L such that L ≤ K and K and L are H-invariant (that is, hKh−1 = K for all h ∈ H, and similarly for L), we understand the action of H on K/L to be given by conjugation unless otherwise specified. Given subsets X and Y of a group G, we define X −1 := {x−1 | x ∈ X}, XY := {xy | x ∈ X, y ∈ Y }, and X n = {x1 x2 . . . xn | x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ∈ X}. All group actions are left actions unless otherwise stated.  2 2.1  Structure of coset actions Preliminaries on equicontinuity  Definition 2.1. Let X be a locally compact Hausdorff space with a compatible uniformity U , let x ∈ X and let S ⊆ Homeo(X). The set S is equicontinuous at x if for every entourage E ∈ U , there is a neighbourhood U of x such that ∀s ∈ S ∀y ∈ U : (s.x, s.y) ∈ E. We say S is equicontinuous if S is equicontinuous at every x ∈ X. In the definition of equicontinuity for actions on locally compact Hausdorff spaces (or more general uniformizable spaces), the choice of uniformity is significant, but on a compact Hausdorff space there is only one compatible uniformity. Thus in the case that X is locally compact Hausdorff and Sx is compact, as soon as S is equicontinuous at x with respect to some compatible uniformity, it is equicontinuous at x with respect to every compatible uniformity. Compact sets of homeomorphisms are equicontinuous. Lemma 2.2. Let X be a locally compact Hausdorff space, let S ⊆ Homeo(X) and suppose that S has compact closure in the compact-open topology of Homeo(X). Then S is equicontinuous with respect to every compatible uniformity. Proof. Since equicontinuity is inherited by subsets, we may assume S = S, so S is compact in the compact-open topology. Let E be a neighbourhood of 6  the diagonal in X × X. Then for each s ∈ S, we see that E contains Us × Us for some open neighbourhood Us of s.x. Let Ks be a compact neighbourhood of x contained in s−1 (Us ). Then there is a basic neighbourhood Ns of s in Homeo(X) consisting of all homeomorphisms h such that hKs ⊆ Us . Given h ∈ Ns and y ∈ Ks , we see that h.x and h.y are both contained in Us , so (h.x, h.y) ∈ E. S Since S is compact, there T is a finite subset {s1 , . . . , sn } of S such that S ⊆ ni=1 Nsi . Now let U = ni=1 Ksi : we observe that whenever y ∈ U and s ∈ S, we have (s.x, s.y) ∈ E. Equicontinuity is preserved by finite unions, and finite products of pointwise bounded equicontinuous families are pointwise bounded equicontinuous. Lemma 2.3 ([14, Lemma 2.2]). Let X be a locally compact Hausdorff space equipped with some uniformity U , let S, T ⊆ Homeo(G) and let x ∈ X. (i) If S and T are equicontinuous at x, then so is S ∪ T . (ii) Suppose that T x is compact, T is equicontinuous at x, and T x consists of equicontinuous points for S on X. Then ST is equicontinuous at x ∈ X. If in addition, Sy is compact for every y ∈ T x, then ST x is compact.  2.2  Equicontinuity for group automorphisms  If G is a locally compact group and K is a closed subgroup of G, we have a canonical choice of compatible uniformity on the coset space G/K. Definition 2.4. Let G be a locally compact group and let K be a closed subgroup of G. The right uniformity on G/K is the uniformity with basic entourages of the form EU = {(xK, yK) ∈ G/K × G/K | xK ⊆ U yK}, where U is an identity neighbourhood in G. In particular if K = {1}, we have the right uniformity on G, with basic entourages of the form EU = {(x, y) ∈ G × G | x ∈ U y}. Let S ⊆ Aut(G) such that s(K) = K for all s ∈ S. The action of S on G/K is 1-equicontinuous if the trivial coset is an equicontinuous point for the action, N-equicontinuous if there is a neighbourhood of the trivial coset consisting of equicontinuous points, and equicontinuous if every coset is an equicontinuous point of the action, in all cases with respect to the right uniformity. A group H of automorphisms is equicontinuously generated if H = hSi where S is equicontinuous on G and S = S −1 .  7  In the case that S is a group, the 1-equicontinuity condition is equivalent to S having small invariant neighbourhoods (SIN) on G/K, that is, every neighbourhood of K in G/K contains a neighbourhood O/K such that s(O) = O for all s ∈ S. However, a group can be equicontinuously generated without having a SIN action; consider for instance a compactly generated non-SIN group G acting on itself by conjugation. For a set of automorphisms acting on G itself, equicontinuity at some point is equivalent to equicontinuity everywhere. Lemma 2.5. Let G be a locally compact group and let S ⊆ Aut(G). Then S is equicontinuous at some x ∈ G if and only if S is equicontinuous at every x ∈ G. Proof. Suppose that S is equicontinuous at some x ∈ G. Let U be an identity neighbourhood and let y ∈ G. Then there is a neighbourhood V of x such that for all z ∈ V and all s ∈ S, we have (s(x), s(z)) ∈ EU , that is, s(x) ∈ U s(z). We see that V = V ′ x where V ′ is an identity neighbourhood, so for all v ∈ V ′ and s ∈ S we have s(x) ∈ U s(vx). Using the fact that s is an automorphism, we see that s(x) ∈ U s(v)s(x), so 1 ∈ U s(v), and hence s(y) ∈ U s(v)s(y) = U s(vy). Thus W = V ′ y is a neighbourhood of y such that for all z ∈ W , we have (s(y), s(z)) ∈ EU . We conclude that S is equicontinuous at every y ∈ G. Corollary 2.6. Let G be a locally compact group and let S, T ⊆ Aut(G). If S and T are equicontinuous on G, then so is ST . Proof. Let x be the identity in G. The set T x = {x} is compact, so ST is equicontinuous at x by Lemma 2.3, and hence by Lemma 2.5, S is equicontinuous on G. We thus have natural generalizations of ‘compactly generated’ and ‘σcompact’. In particular, if one defines a σ-equicontinuous group of automorphisms to be a group of automorphisms arising as an ascending union of a sequence (Sn )n∈N of equicontinuous sets, then every equicontinuously generated group is σ-equicontinuous, as is every σ-compact group. It is also useful to note that the equicontinuity property is inherited by the actions on all coset spaces where the action is well-defined. Lemma 2.7. Let G be a topological group, let S ⊆ Aut(G), let H ≤ L ≤ K ≤ G be S-invariant closed subgroups and let x ∈ K. Suppose xH is an equicontinuous point of the action of S on G/H. Then xL is an equicontinuous point of the action of S on K/L. Proof. Let U be an identity neighbourhood in K. Then there is an identity neighbourhood U2 in G such that U2 ∩K ⊆ U . Since xH is an equicontinuous point for S on G/H, there is an identity neighbourhood V in G such that 8  for all y ∈ V xH and all s ∈ S, we have s(x) ∈ U2 s(y)H. Consider now the set W = (V ∩ K)xL = (V x ∩ K)L. Certainly W/L is a neighbourhood of xL in K/L. Given y ∈ V x ∩ K, we have s(x) ∈ U2 s(y)H ∩ K; since s(y) ∈ K and H ≤ K, we have U2 s(y)H ∩ K = (U2 s(y) ∩ K)H = (U2 ∩ K)s(y)H. In particular, s(x) ∈ U s(y)L. Since U was an arbitrary identity neighbourhood in K, we conclude that xL is an equicontinuous point for the action of S on K/L. A useful tool for understanding groups of automorphisms of a nonArchimedean group is the discrete residual, defined as follows. Definition 2.8. Let G be a topological group and let H ≤ Aut(G). The discrete residual ResG (H) of H acting on G is the intersection of all open H-invariant subgroups of G. If K = HS is a group of automorphisms of G such that H is a subgroup and S = S −1 is an equicontinuous set, then every open H-invariant subgroup of G contains a K-invariant one. In particular, the discrete residuals of the actions are the same. Moreover H is equicontinuously generated if and only if K is, generalizing the well-known fact that a cocompact subgroup of a compactly generated locally compact group is compactly generated. Lemma 2.9. Let G be a topological group and let K be a group of automorphisms of G. Suppose that S = S −1 , K = HS where H ≤ K and S is equicontinuous on G. (i) Every open H-invariant subgroup of G contains a K-invariant one. In particular, ResG (H) = ResG (K). (ii) The action of H on G is equicontinuously generated if and only if the action of K is. Proof. Without loss of generality we can assume 1 ∈ S. (i) Let O be an open H-invariant subgroup of G. Then we have a Kinvariant subgroup of the form \ \ O∗ = k−1 (O) = s−1 (O). s∈S  k∈K  Since S is equicontinuous, we see that O∗ is an open subgroup of G. In particular, O ≥ ResG (K); given the choice of O, we conclude that ResG (H) ≥ ResG (K). On the other hand, since every K-invariant open subgroup is in particular H-invariant, we must have ResG (H) ≤ ResG (K), so in fact ResG (H) = ResG (K). 9  (ii) We adapt the proof of the analogous result for compact generation from [10, Proposition 2.C.8]. Suppose T is an equicontinuous generating set for H on G. Then S ∪ T is a generating set for K that is equicontinuous by Lemma 2.3. Conversely, suppose now that T is an equicontinuous generating set for K on G. Without loss of generality, 1 ∈ T and T = T −1 . Let P = ST S∩H. We see that P is equicontinuous on G by Corollary 2.6. Clearly also P = P −1 . It remains to show that P generates H. Let h ∈ H; then h = t1 t2 . . . tn for some t1 , . . . , tn ∈ T . Let s0 = 1; since K = HS, for each i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, we −1 can choose si ∈ S such that si−1 ti s−1 i ∈ H and hence si−1 ti si ∈ P . Then n Y i=1  Qn  (si−1 ti s−1 i )  n Y −1 −1 = ( ti )s−1 n = hsn ∈ Hsn . i=1  −1 The product i=1 (si−1 ti s−1 i ) is in H, so sn is also in H, hence in P . Thus we obtain an expression for h as a product of elements of P , completing the proof that H is equicontinuously generated on G.  We can prove some additional properties of the action of H on G/K in the case that both H and K have 1-equicontinuous action. Lemma 2.10. Let G be a topological group, let K be a closed subgroup of G and let O be a nonempty open subset of G such that O = KOK and O = O −1 . Suppose that O ⊆ U K for some open subgroup U of G. Then there is an open subgroup V of U such that V K = hOi. Proof. Given o ∈ O, then o = uk for some u ∈ U and k ∈ K; it then follows u = (uk)k−1 is an element of Y := O ∩ U , so O = Y K. Indeed, KY K = KO = O = Y K, so any product of sets of the form A1 A2 . . . An K where Ai ∈ {Y, K} can be reduced to the form Y m K. In particular, any such set is a subset of U K, so the semigroup W generated by Y ∪K is contained in U K. Given k ∈ K, then ko ∈ O for any o ∈ O, so k = koo−1 ∈ OO −1 = O2 . Since Y ⊆ O, K ⊆ O 2 , O = Y K, and O = O−1 , we see that in fact W is the group hOi generated by O. In particular, W has nonempty interior and is thus an open subgroup. Since K ≤ W ⊆ U K, we have W = V K where V = U ∩ W . Since W is an open subgroup, so is V . Definition 2.11. Let G be a group acting on a topological space X. The orbit closure relation R for the action is given by (x, y) ∈ R if y ∈ Gx. An action of a group G on a topological space X is minimal if every orbit is dense. More generally, the action has minimal orbit closures if G acts minimally on Gx for every x ∈ X; equivalently, the orbit closure relation R is symmetric. Proposition 2.12. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group, let H ≤ Aut(G) and let K be a closed H-invariant subgroup of G. Suppose H and K are both 1equicontinuous on G/K. 10  (i) Let W be the set of H-invariant open subgroups W of G of the form W = U K, where U is a compact open subgroup of G. Then {W/K | W ∈ W} is a base of neighbourhoods of the trivial coset in G/K. In particular, K ≥ ResG (H). (ii) H has minimal orbit closures on G/K. Proof. (i) Let U be the set of compact open subgroups of G and let U ∈ U . Since K is 1-equicontinuous on G/K, by applying Lemma 2.10, we obtain an open subgroup V of G containing K such that V ⊆ UTK. Since H is 1equicontinuous on G/K, the H-invariant subgroup W = h∈H h(V ) is also open. We have K ≤ W ⊆ U K, so that W = (U ∩ W )K as in the proof of Lemma 2.10; in particular, W ∈ W. By Van Dantzig’s theorem, {U K/K | U ∈ U } is a base of neighbourhoods of the trivialTcoset, so the same is true of the set {W/K | W ∈ W}. In particular, K = W ∈W W ≥ ResG (H). (ii) Let x, y ∈ G and suppose yK ⊆ H(x)K. In other words, for every identity neighbourhood U in G, there is h ∈ H such that h(x) ∈ yU K. Fix such an identity neighbourhood U . By part (i) there is W ∈ W such that W ⊆ U K. Now let h ∈ H be such that h(x) ∈ yW ; then h−1 (y) ∈ xW ⊆ xU K. Since U can be made arbitrarily small, we conclude that xK ⊆ H(y)K. Thus the condition yK ⊆ H(x)K defines a symmetric relation on pairs (xK, yK) in G/K; in other words, H has minimal orbit closures on G/K. Corollary 2.13. Let G be a SIN t.d.l.c. group and let K be a closed subgroup of G. Then K is the intersection of the open subgroups of G that contain K as a cocompact subgroup. Proof. Let K act on G by conjugation. Then the action of K on G/K is equicontinuous by Lemmas 2.5 and 2.7. Thus by Proposition 2.12(i), we can express K is an intersection of open subgroups of the form U K where U is a compact open subgroup of G; in particular, these contain K as a cocompact subgroup.  2.3  Distality for group automorphisms  Let G be a topological group, let H ≤ Aut(G) and let K be an H-invariant closed subgroup of G. Definition 2.14. The action of H on G/K is 1-distal if the trivial coset K is a distal point of the action, and N-distal if the trivial coset is an N-distal point. We now have an array of possible properties of the action of H on G/K to consider:  11  equicontinuous  +3 N-equicontinuous  +3 1-equicontinuous (SIN)     +3 N-distal   +3 1-distal  distal  The implications shown are clear, but we do not know if any other implications hold in general; certainly distal does not imply equicontinuous. The properties in each row are equivalent if K is trivial, but possibly distinguished in general by complications arising from the action of K on G/K. We recall that by Lemma 2.7, equicontinuous points are preserved on passing to quotient coset spaces. In contrast there is no reason to expect distal points to pass to quotient coset spaces in general. Distality implies a certain orbit closure property. Lemma 2.15 ([14, Lemma 2.7]). Let H be a group acting by homeomorphisms on a Hausdorff topological space X. Let x, y ∈ X be such that Hx is compact and consists of distal points for the action. Then H acts minimally on Hx. Indeed, we have Hy = Hx whenever y ∈ X is such that Hx ∩ Hy 6= ∅. It is useful to have some equivalent versions of the condition “x is a distal fixed point” (for example, when we have a 1-distal action of automorphisms on a coset space G/K, and x is the trivial coset). Lemma 2.16. Let G be a group acting by homeomorphisms on a Hausdorff topological space X and let x ∈ X. Then the following are equivalent: (i) x is a distal fixed point of the G-action; (ii) For all nets (gi )i∈I in G, and all points y ∈ X r {x}, then (gi (y)) does not converge to x; (iii) The intersection of the set {O ⊆ X open | x ∈ O; ∀g ∈ G : gO = O} is {x}. Proof. Suppose x is a distal fixed point of the G-action and let (gi )i∈I be a net in G. Suppose gi (y) converges to x for some y ∈ X. Then (gi (x), gi (y)) converges to (x, x); since x is a distal point we must have y = x. Thus (i) implies (ii). Suppose (ii) holds, let y ∈ X r {x} and let Y = {g(y) | g ∈ G}. Then every point in Y is the limit of some net (gi (y)), where (gi ) is a net in G. Thus x 6∈ Y . We see that O = X r Y is an open G-invariant subset of X such that x ∈ O, but y 6∈ O. Since y ∈ X r {x} was arbitrary, we conclude that (iii) holds. Finally suppose that (iii) holds and let y ∈ X r {x}. Then there exists an open G-invariant set O that contains x but not y. In particular, no point y ∈ X r {x} can be in the same G-orbit as x, so Gx = {x}, that is, x is fixed 12  by G. Suppose (gi ) is a net in G such that (gi (y)) converges to some limit z. Then (gi (x)) converges to x (since x is fixed), but z lies in the closed G-invariant set X r O, which does not contain x. Thus (x, y) cannot be a proximal pair, showing that x is a distal point for the action. With a sufficiently restricted action of K, we can ensure that a 1-distal action of H is in fact distal. Lemma 2.17. Let G be a locally compact group, let H ≤ Aut(G) and let K be a closed H-invariant subgroup of G. Suppose that there is a collection H of H-invariant neighbourhoods of K in G/K, each of which contains a K-invariant neighbourhood, and such that H has trivial intersection. Then H acts distally on G/K. Proof. Let (hi ) be a net in H and suppose x, y, z ∈ G are such that (hi (x)K) and (hi (y)K) converge to zK. Then there is a net (ki ) in K such that (hi (x)ki ) converges to z. Consequently, the cosets ki−1 (hi (x)−1 hi (y))K = ki−1 hi (x−1 y)K form a net that converges to the trivial coset in G/K. In particular, hi (x−1 y)K is eventually contained in any given K-invariant neighbourhood of the trivial coset in G/K. Since every element of H is H-invariant and contains a K-invariant neighbourhood of K, in fact x−1 yK is contained in every element of H. By Lemma 2.16, H has trivial intersection; thus x−1 yK = K, that is, xK = yK. Thus the action of H on G/K is distal. We highlight the following special cases. Corollary 2.18. Let G be a locally compact group and let H ≤ Aut(G). (i) The action of H on G/ResG (H) is distal. (ii) Let K be a closed H-invariant subgroup of G such that H acts 1-distally on G/K and K is 1-equicontinuous on G/K. Then H has distal action on G/K. Proof. (i) Let R = ResG (H) and let H = {O/R | O is an open subgroup of G, ∀h ∈ H : h(O) = O}. By the definition of R, H has trivial intersection; moreover, every element of H is R-invariant. Thus H acts distally on G/R by Lemma 2.17. (ii) Let H = {O/K | O is an open subset of G, OK = O, ∀h ∈ H : h(O) = O}. Since H acts 1-distally on G/K, the intersection of H is trivial. Since K is 1equicontinuous on G/K, any identity neighbourhood O in G that is invariant 13  under right translation by K (in other words, such that O = OK) also contains an identity neighbourhood that is invariant under left translation by K. In particular, every element of H contains a K-invariant neighbourhood of the trivial coset. Thus H acts distally on G/K by Lemma 2.17.  2.4  The stable residual property  Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H ≤ Aut(G). In general ResG (H) is not open, and so the set of open H-invariant subgroups has no minimal element. However, there is often an open H-invariant subgroup U such that U/ResG (H) is compact; U is then the smallest open H-invariant subgroup up to finite index. In this section we define this property and then explore some consequences. Definition 2.19. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H ≤ Aut(G). Say that H has stable residual (SR) on G if there exists an open H-invariant subgroup U such that ResG (H) is cocompact in U . If H is equicontinuous on G, it is clear that H has (SR) on G. Later (Corollary 2.23), we will see that in fact every equicontinuously generated group of automorphisms has (SR). The property (SR) has consequences for the normalizer of the discrete residual, as can be seen from the following lemma. Lemma 2.20. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group, let H ≤ Aut(G), let R = ResG (H) and let x ∈ G. Suppose that {h(x)R | h ∈ H} has compact closure in G/R. Then xRx−1 ≤ R. Proof. Let O be an open H-invariant subgroup of G. Then R ≤ O, and since {h(x)R | h ∈ H} has compact closure in G/R, the orbit {h(x) | h ∈ H} is contained in the union of finitely many right cosets of O. Consequently T O ∗ = h∈H h(x)−1 Oh(x) is an open subgroup of G; clearly O ∗ is also Hinvariant. In particular, R ≤ O ∗ , so R ≤ x−1 Ox, that is, xRx−1 ≤ O. Since O was an arbitrary open H-invariant subgroup, in fact xRx−1 ≤ R. We now obtain a number of equivalent versions of (SR). Proposition 2.21. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group, let H ≤ Aut(G), let R = ResG (H) and let W be the set of H-invariant open subgroups W of G of the form W = V R, where V is a compact open subgroup of G. Then the following are equivalent: (i) H has (SR) on G. (ii) W is nonempty. (iii) {W/R | W ∈ W} is a base of neighbourhoods of the trivial coset in G/R, and NG (R) ≥ hWi. 14  (iv) The action of H on G/R is 1-equicontinuous. (v) NG (R) is open and H has equicontinuous action on NG (R)/R. Proof. The implications (v) ⇒ (iv), (iii) ⇒ (ii) and (ii) ⇒ (i) are all immediate. It now suffices to show (iv) ⇒ (iii) and (i) ⇒ (v). Suppose (iv) holds. Since the trivial coset is an equicontinuous fixed point for H on G/R, it has a compact H-invariant neighbourhood O/R. By Lemma 2.20, O ∩ O−1 ⊆ NG (R), so NG (R) is open. Now consider the action of H and R on NG (R)/R. Since R acts trivially on NG (R)/R, we can apply Proposition 2.12(i) to conclude that {W/R | W ∈ W} is a base of neighbourhoods of the trivial coset in G/R. Lemma 2.20 ensures that NG (R) ≥ hWi; thus (iii) follows. Suppose (i) holds: say U is an open H-invariant subgroup of G such that U/R is compact. Then U ≤ NG (R) by Lemma 2.20, so U/R is a compact group. By the definition of R, the open H-invariant subgroups of U/R have trivial intersection; by compactness, they therefore form a base of neighbourhoods of the identity. Thus H has 1-equicontinuous action on U/R and hence on NG (R)/R; since NG (R)/R is a group, it follows by Lemma 2.5 that H acts equicontinuously on NG (R)/R. Thus (v) holds and the cycle of implications is complete.  2.5  A dynamical characterization of a class of coset spaces  We recall part of the main theorem of [14]; together with the results we have accumulated so far on coset space actions, this will lead to a proof of Theorem A. Theorem 2.22 (See [14, Theorem 1.2]). Let X be a locally compact zerodimensional space, let S be a family of homeomorphisms of X with 1 ∈ S and S = S −1 , such that S is equicontinuous with respect to some compatible uniformity, and let G = hSi. Let U be an open subset of X, and write U0 for the union of all compact G-invariant subsets of U . Then the following are equivalent: (i) For every T compact openTsubset V of U , there is a finite subset F of G such that g∈G g(V ) = g∈F g(V ). (ii) Given x ∈ U and y ∈ U0 such that y ∈ Gx is a compact subset of U , then x ∈ Gy. Proof of Theorem A. It is clear that (i) implies (ii). By Lemma 2.15 we see that (ii) implies (iii). Now assume (iii) holds. Fix an equicontinuous generating set S for H such that 1 ∈ S and S = S −1 . Then S is equicontinuous on G/K by Lemma 2.7. Considering the action of H on X = G/K and the neighbourhood N/K of the trivial coset, we are in the situation of Theorem 2.22(ii). 15  Thus using Theorem 2.22(i), given any compact open subgroupTU of G such that U ⊆ N , there is a finite subset F of H such that O := h∈H h(U K) is H-invariant; T note in particular that O is an identity neighbourhood in G. Let W = h∈F h(U ); then W is an open subgroup of G, such that wO = O for all w ∈ W . In particular, the group V := {g ∈ G | gO = O} is open. Since O is H-invariant, the group V is also H-invariant, that is, V ∈ V. Since O is an identity neighbourhood such that V OK = O, we have V K ⊆ O. Since the initially chosen compact open subgroup U of G can be made arbitrarily small, by letting U range over a base of identity neighbourhoods in G, we see that {V K/K | V ∈ V} is a base of neighbourhoods of the trivial coset in G/K. Hence (iv) holds. Now suppose that (iv) holds, that is, {V K/K | V ∈ V} is a base of neighbourhoods T of the trivial coset in G/K. Then in particular, the intersection W = V ∈V V is contained in K. By the definition of V, we see that W ≥ ResG (H), so K ≥ ResG (H). Thus (iv) implies (v). Finally, suppose that (v) holds. Consider first the action of H on G/ResG (H): this action is distal, in particular N-distal, by Corollary 2.18(i). From the implication (ii) ⇒ (iv) in the present theorem, indeed the action of H on G/ResG (H) is 1-equicontinuous. Proposition 2.21 then ensures that H has (SR) on G, and hence has N-equicontinuous action on G/ResG (H). By Lemma 2.7, the action of H on G/K is also N-equicontinuous, in particular N-distal. Thus (v) implies (i) and the cycle of implications is complete. In the course of the above proof, we proved the following: Corollary 2.23. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H ≤ Aut(G) be equicontinuously generated. Then H has (SR) on G. Let us note the special case of Theorem A when K is 1-equicontinuous on G/K (for instance, if K is a compact subgroup or if K has open normalizer in G). In this case we have more equivalent statements; the next theorem together with Corollary 3.7 will generalize [13, Theorem 5.13]. Theorem 2.24. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group, let H ≤ Aut(G) be equicontinuously generated and let K be an H-invariant subgroup of G. Suppose that K is 1-equicontinuous on G/K. Let V be the set of open H-invariant subgroups of G and let W be the set of open H-invariant subgroups of G containing K as a cocompact subgroup. Then the action of H on G/K is one of: N-equicontinuous, 1-equicontinuous, distal, N-distal, 1-distal, if and only if it has all of these properties. Moreover, the following are equivalent: (i) H acts distally on G/K; (ii) H has minimal orbit closures on G/K;  16  (iii) {V K/K | V ∈ V} is a base of neighbourhoods of the trivial coset in G/K; (iv) {W/K | W ∈ W} is a base of neighbourhoods of the trivial coset in G/K; (v) K is an intersection of open H-invariant subgroups; (vi) K ≥ ResG (H). Proof. By Corollary 2.18 it is equivalent for the action of H on G/K to be distal, N-distal or 1-distal. Moreover, N-distal is equivalent to N-equicontinuous by Theorem A, N-equicontinuous implies 1-equicontinuous, and 1-equicontinuous implies 1-distal. The properties listed for the action of H on G/K are therefore all equivalent. By Theorem A, (iii) and (vi) are each equivalent to H having N-distal action. By Proposition 2.12(ii), (i) implies (ii); on the other hand it is clear that (ii) implies that the action is 1-distal. Thus (i), (ii), (iii) and (vi) are equivalent. Assuming (iii), then (iv) follows by Proposition 2.12(i). The implications (iv) ⇒ (v) ⇒ (vi) are clear. This completes proof that all the conditions are equivalent. Given a t.d.l.c. group G and a group H acting distally on G, we observe an interesting closure property of equicontinuous subsets of H. This generalizes [13, Corollary 1.9], which in turn generalized several previously known sufficient conditions for a t.d.l.c. group G to be a SIN group (in other words, for Inn(G) to be equicontinuous on G). Corollary 2.25. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H ≤ Aut(G). Suppose that H acts distally on G. Then for every equicontinuous symmetric subset S of H, the subgroup hSi generated by S is itself equicontinuous. Proof. Given an equicontinuous subset S of H, then L = hSi is equicontinuously generated and acts distally on G. Hence by Theorem A, L is N-equicontinuous on G; indeed, L is equicontinuous by Lemma 2.5.  3 3.1  Reduced envelopes First results  Suppose that H is a subgroup of G, acting by conjugation. There is a close relationship between the set of open subgroups normalized by H, and the set of open subgroups containing H. In particular, if H has (SR) on G, then there is also an open subgroup containing H that is the smallest such up to finite index. 17  Definition 3.1. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H ≤ G. An envelope for H in G is an open subgroup E of G such that H ≤ E. The envelope is reduced if, given any open subgroup such that |H : H ∩ E2 | < ∞, then |E : E ∩ E2 | < ∞. The following is a sufficient condition for a group to be a reduced envelope. Lemma 3.2. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H ≤ G. Suppose that there is an open subgroup of G of the form E = HResG (H)X, where X is compact. Then E is a reduced envelope for H in G. Proof. Let E2 be an open subgroup of G, let H2 = H ∩ E2 and suppose that |H : H2 | < ∞. Then H = H2 Y where Y is finite, so ResG (H) = ResG (H2 ) by Lemma 2.9. In particular, ResG (H) ≤ E2 . Thus E2 contains the finite index subgroup H2 ResG (H) of HResG (H); the latter is cocompact in E by hypothesis. Since E2 is also open, it follows that |E : E ∩ E2 | < ∞. Thus E is a reduced envelope. If H has a reduced envelope, recall that the envelope class EG (H) is the set of open subgroups of G commensurate to a reduced envelope for H. The discrete residual of H on G can be reinterpreted as the discrete residual of E ∈ EG (H). The size of generating set needed for E ∈ EG (H) is controlled by a generating set for H. Lemma 3.3. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H ≤ G. Suppose H has a reduced envelope and let E ∈ EG (H). (i) Let O be an open H-invariant subgroup of G. Then there exists an open normal subgroup O∗ of E such that O∗ ≤ O. Thus Res(E) = ResG (H); in particular, Res(E) does not depend on the choice of E, and the normalizer of ResG (H) is open in G. (ii) If H is equicontinuously generated as a group of automorphisms of G, then so is E, and if H is compactly generated, then so is E. Proof. (i) Let N = NG (O) and let E2 be a reduced envelope for H. We see that N is an open subgroup of G containing H; by the reduced envelope property, T |E2 : E2 ∩ N | is finite, so |E : E ∩ N | is finite. It follows that O2 := e∈E eOe−1 is a finite intersection of conjugates of O, so O2 is open, and hence O∗ = O2 ∩ E is open; by construction, O∗ is a normal subgroup of E. We have shown that every H-invariant subgroup contains an open normal subgroup of E. Conversely, since E contains a finite index subgroup of H, the same argument shows that every open normal subgroup of E contains an H-invariant open subgroup. Thus Res(E) = ResG (H). The remaining conclusions are clear.  18  (ii) Let U be a compact open subgroup of E. Then E2 = hH, U i is an open subgroup of G containing H, so E2 has finite index in E. Thus E = hH ∪ U ∪ Xi where X is finite. It follows that if H is compactly generated, so is E. Similarly, since the compact set U ∪ X is necessarily equicontinuous on G, if H is equicontinuously generated on G then so is E. We can now characterize the subgroups with (SR) on G in terms of reduced envelopes. Lemma 3.4. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H ≤ G. Then the following are equivalent: (i) H has (SR) on G; (ii) H has a reduced envelope E such that E/Res(E) is a SIN group. Moreover, if (ii) holds, we can take E to be of the form E = HResG (H)U for a compact open subgroup U of G. Proof. Let R = ResG (H). Suppose H has (SR) on G. Let W be the set of H-invariant open subgroups W of G of the form W = U R, where U is a compact open subgroup of G. Then by Proposition 2.21, {W/R | W ∈ W} is a base of neighbourhoods of the trivial coset in G/R. In particular, H has an envelope of the form E = HW for W ∈ W; we can write E as E = HRU for U a compact open subgroup of G, so E is a reduced envelope by Lemma 3.2. By Lemma 3.3, we have R = Res(E) and every open H-invariant subgroup of E contains an open E-invariant subgroup; in particular, every W ∈ W contains an open normal subgroup of E. We conclude that E/Res(E) is a SIN group, so (i) implies (ii). Conversely, suppose H has a reduced envelope E such that E/Res(E) is a SIN group. Then R = Res(E) by Lemma 3.3, so NG (R) is open in G, and E/R is a SIN group. In particular, H is equicontinuous on E/R, since H ≤ E, and hence H has (SR) on G. Thus (ii) implies (i). We summarize the properties we have obtained for reduced envelopes of subgroups H of a t.d.l.c. group G, such that H has (SR) on G. This will immediately imply Theorem B. Theorem 3.5. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H ≤ G. If H is compactly generated, or more generally, if H has equicontinuously generated action on G, then H has (SR) on G. Now suppose that H has (SR) on G and let K = HResG (H). Then there is a reduced envelope E for H in G of the form E = KU , where U is a compact open subgroup of G. Moreover the following holds for every closed subgroup L of G such that K ≤ L and |L : L ∩ E| < ∞: 19  (i) L is compactly or equicontinuously generated on G respectively if and only if H is; (ii) We have ResG (H) = Res(E) = ResG (L); (iii) L/ResG (H) is a SIN group; (iv) Letting W be the set of open subgroups of G containing H, then W has intersection K, and {W/K | W ∈ W} is a base of neighbourhoods for the trivial coset in G/K. Proof. If H has equicontinuously generated action on G, then H has (SR) on G by Corollary 2.23. From now on we assume H has (SR) on G. Let R = ResG (H). By Lemma 3.3, any reduced envelope E of H must satisfy R = Res(E), and hence K ≤ E. Lemma 3.4 shows that there is a reduced envelope E for H of the form E = KU , where U is a compact open subgroup of G, and moreover that E/R is a SIN group. Part (i) is satisfied in the case L ∈ EG (H) by Lemma 3.3, and then follows in the generality stated from Lemma 2.9 and the fact that K is cocompact in a reduced envelope. We see that L is contained in a reduced envelope E2 for H, so ResG (L) ≤ Res(E2 ) = R; on the other hand, since H ≤ L, we have R ≤ ResG (L). Thus (ii) holds. Part (iii) follows the fact that E/R is a SIN group. Given an open subgroup U of G that contains H, then U is also Hinvariant, so R ≤ U , and hence HR ≤ U . Recall that R = Res(E) by Lemma 3.3 and E/R is a SIN group by Lemma 3.4. By Corollary 2.13, HR/R is an intersection of open subgroups of E/R, and hence HR is an intersection of open subgroups of G. Indeed, Proposition 2.12(i) ensures that {W/HR | W ∈ W} is a base of neighbourhoods for the trivial coset in G/HR. Thus (iv) holds. Now let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H ≤ Aut(G) be equicontinuously generated. Using Theorem A, we see that given any K < ResG (H), then the action of H on ResG (H)/K is not N-distal. Proposition 3.6. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group, let H ≤ Aut(G) be equicontinuously generated and let R = ResG (H). Then H does not act N-distally on R/S for any proper closed subgroup S of R. In particular, ResR (H) = R. Proof. By Theorem A, to show that H cannot act N-distally on R/S for any proper closed subgroup S of R, it is sufficient (and clearly also necessary) to show that H does not preserve any proper open subgroup of R. Let S be a proper open subgroup of R and suppose S is H-invariant. Consider the action of H on G/S. Suppose that (xS, yS) is a proximal pair for the action of H on G/S. By Corollary 2.18, H acts distally on G/R, so xR = yR, in other words y = xr for some r ∈ R. Let (hi ) be a net in H 20  and let t ∈ G be such that hi (x)S and hi (y)S converge to tS. In particular, hi (y)si converges to t for a net (si ) in S. Now −1 −1 −1 −1 (hi (y)si )−1 hi (x)S = s−1 i hi (r x )hi (x)S = si hi (r )S  is a net that converges to the trivial coset in G/S. This net, however, is confined to the discrete space R/S, so in order to converge it must be −1 eventually constant. Thus s−1 i hi (r ) ∈ S for sufficiently large i and hence r −1 ∈ S, so that in fact xS = yS. Thus the action of H on G/S is in fact distal. Theorem A now implies that S ≥ R, a contradiction. We see then that there are no proper open H-invariant subgroups of R, as required. Corollary 3.7. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H ≤ Aut(G) be equicontinuously generated. If ResG (H) is compact, then H acts ergodically on ResG (H). Proof. Follows from Proposition 3.6 and [11, Proposition 2.1].  3.2  Envelope equivalence  Definition 3.8. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group. Say H1 , H2 ≤ G are envelope equivalent in G, and write H1 ≈G H2 , if H1 and H2 both have reduced envelopes and EG (H1 ) = EG (H2 ). Let us now note some sufficient conditions for two compactly generated subgroups H1 and H2 of a group G to be envelope equivalent. Lemma 3.9. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H be a compactly generated subgroup of G. (i) Let H2 be a subgroup of G commensurate with H. Then H2 ≈G H. (ii) Let E be an open subgroup of G. Then E ≈G H if and only if E ∈ EG (H). (iii) Let K be a subgroup of H, such that K is either cocompact or of finite covolume in H. Then K ≈G H. Proof. (i) Let E be a reduced envelope for H and let E2 be a reduced envelope for H2 . Then |H : H ∩ E2 | < ∞, so |E : E ∩ E2 | < ∞; similarly, |H2 : H2 ∩ E| < ∞, so |E2 : E ∩ E2 | < ∞. (ii) Every open subgroup E of G is clearly its own reduced envelope in G, so EG (E) is just the commensurability class of E amongst open subgroups of G. Thus EG (E) = EG (H) if and only if E ∈ EG (H). (iii) Since open subgroups are closed, it is easily seen that EG (H) = EG (H) and similarly for K. So we may assume H and K are closed subgroups of G. Let E be a reduced envelope for H. 21  Consider an open subgroup O of G such that O∩K has finite index in K; we claim that O ∩ E has finite index in E. Let L = O ∩ H. We see that if K is cocompact or of finite covolume in H, then so is its finite index subgroup O ∩ K, and hence the overgroup L of O ∩ K is respectively cocompact or of finite covolume in H. Moreover, L is open in H. In a locally compact group, the only open subgroups that are cocompact or of finite covolume are the finite index ones, so L has finite index in H. But then since E is a reduced envelope for H, it follows that O ∩ E has finite index in E as claimed. Thus E is also a reduced envelope for K; in particular, K ≈G H. We recall the following general feature of compactly generated t.d.l.c. groups. Lemma 3.10 (See for instance [7, Proposition 4.1]). Let G be a compactly generated t.d.l.c. group, let U be a compact open subgroup of G and let D be a dense subgroup of G. Then there exists a finite subset F of D such that G = hF iU . We can now prove Theorems C and D. Proof of Theorem C. Recall that G is a t.d.l.c. group, A is a subgroup of G such that A is cocompact or of finite covolume, and H1 is a compactly generated subgroup of G. Our aim is to find H2 ≤ A such that H1 ≈G H2 , and such that H2 is finitely generated in the case that A is cocompact. By Lemma 3.9(ii), H1 ≈G E where E is a reduced envelope for H1 . So we may assume that H1 is open in G. Let B = A ∩ H1 . Since H1 is open in G, we see that B = A ∩ H1 . Moreover, B is cocompact or of finite covolume in H1 . Thus B ≈G H1 by Lemma 3.9(iii). Let us now suppose A is cocompact in G. In this case B is cocompact in H1 ; in particular, B is compactly generated. Then by Lemma 3.10, there is a compact open subgroup V of B and a finite subset F of B such that B = H2 V , where H2 = hF i. In particular, H2 has cocompact closure in B, so H2 ≈G B and hence H2 ≈G H1 . Proof of Theorem D. Recall that G and H are t.d.l.c. groups and φ : G → H is a continuous homomorphism, and EG and EH are the sets of commensurability classes of compactly generated open subgroups of G and H respectively. Let K1 and K2 be compactly generated subgroups of G such that K1 ≈G K2 . Let Ei be a reduced envelope in G for Ki for i = 1, 2. Then both φ(K1 ) and φ(K2 ) are compactly generated, so each has a reduced envelope in H, and hence φ(K1 ) and φ(K2 ) have reduced envelopes. Given an open subgroup U1 of H containing a finite index subgroup of φ(K1 ), then φ−1 (U1 ) is an open subgroup of G containing a finite index subgroup of K1 . Hence φ−1 (U1 ) contains a finite index subgroup of E1 , and then by commensurability, φ−1 (U1 ) contains a finite index subgroup of E2 , and in particular of 22  K2 . Thus U1 contains a finite index subgroup of φ(K2 ). Similarly, any open subgroup of H containing a finite index subgroup of φ(K2 ) also contains a finite index subgroup of φ(K1 ). We conclude that the reduced envelopes for φ(K1 ) and φ(K2 ) are commensurate, so φ(K1 ) ≈H φ(K2 ). Define θ : EG → EH by θ(EG (O)) = EH (φ(O)). To see that θ is welldefined, let O2 be an element of EG (O) for some compactly generated open subgroup O of G. Then O and O2 are commensurate, so O ≈G O2 by Lemma 3.9(i). Moreover, since O is compactly generated, so is O2 . Thus EH (φ(O)) = EH (φ(O2 )) by the previous paragraph. Now suppose that H = φ(G)X for a compact set X and let U be a compactly generated open subgroup of H. Then by Theorem C, there is a finitely generated subgroup V of φ(G) such that V ≈H U . Let F be a finite generating set for V and let F ′ be a finite subset of G such that φ(F ′ ) = F . Then K = hF ′ i is a finitely generated subgroup of G, so has a reduced envelope E in G. We have K ≈G E, and hence φ(K) ≈H φ(E); moreover, φ(K) = V ≈H U , so in fact φ(E) ≈H U . This demonstrates that θ is surjective.  3.3  Background on elementary groups  For some context for later results in this article, we briefly recall the class E of elementary groups defined by P. Wesolek in [17] and their canonical rank function, the decomposition rank. See [17] for more details. From now on we write ‘t.d.l.c.s.c.’ to mean ‘t.d.l.c. second-countable’. Definition 3.11. The class of elementary t.d.l.c.s.c. groups is the smallest class of t.d.l.c.s.c. groups such that (i) E contains all second countable profinite groups and countable discrete groups. (ii) E is closed under taking closed subgroups. (iii) E is closed under taking Hausdorff quotients. (iv) E is closed under forming extensions that result in a t.d.l.c.s.c. group. S (v) If G is a t.d.l.c.s.c. group and G = i∈N Oi where (Oi )i∈N is an ⊆increasing sequence of open subgroups of G with Oi ∈ E for each i, then G ∈ E . Definition 3.12. Let T be the class of t.d.l.c.s.c. groups and let ω1 be the first uncountable ordinal. The decomposition rank ξ is a partial ordinalvalued function from T to [1, ω1 ) satisfying the following properties: (a) ξ(G) = 1 if and only if G = {1};  23  S (b) If G ∈ T is non-trivial and G = i∈N Oi with (Oi )i∈N some increasing sequence of compactly generated open subgroups of G, then ξ(G) is defined if and only if ξ(Ri ) is defined for Ri := Res(Oi ) for all i ∈ N. If ξ(G) is defined, then ξ(G) = sup ξ(Ri ) + 1. i∈N  By [17, Theorem 4.7] and [17, Lemma 4.12], such a function ξ exists, is unique, has domain of definition exactly E , and is equivalent to the decomposition rank as defined in [17].  3.4  Discrete regional quotient groups  We now give an example of how reduced envelopes can be used to reduce questions about arbitrary compactly generated closed subgroups K of a t.d.l.c. group G to the case when K is open. Proposition 3.13. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group. The following are equivalent: (i) For every nontrivial compactly generated closed subgroup H of G, then ResG (H)  H; (ii) For every nontrivial compactly generated closed subgroup H of G, then Res(H) 6= H; (iii) For every noncompact compactly generated closed subgroup H of G, then H has an infinite discrete quotient; (iv) For every noncompact compactly generated open subgroup H of G, then H has an infinite discrete quotient. Proof. Let us note that for any closed subgroup H of G, then O ∩ H is an open normal subgroup of H whenever O is an open H-invariant subgroup of G. In particular, Res(H) ≤ ResG (H), so (i) implies (ii). We now claim that (ii) implies (iii), by showing the contrapositive. Let H be a noncompact compactly generated closed subgroup of G, let R = ResG (H) and let K = HR. Suppose that H has no infinite discrete quotient. Then certainly K/R has no infinite discrete quotient. Let E = KU be a compactly generated reduced envelope for H in G, as given by Theorem 3.5, where U is a compact open subgroup of G. Then R = Res(E), so R is in the kernel of any map from E to a discrete group. Moreover, K is cocompact in E, so given any continuous homomorphism φ : E → D where D is discrete, then φ(K) has finite index in E. In particular, since K/R has no infinite discrete quotient, we see that E has no infinite discrete quotient, so E/R is a t.d.l.c. group with no infinite discrete quotient. By Theorem 3.5(iii), E/R is also a SIN group; the only way this is possible is if E/R is compact. 24  Thus R is cocompact in E, so R is compactly generated. Since E contains H, E is not compact and hence R is nontrivial. We now observe that Res(R) = ResR (E) by Lemma 2.9, whilst ResR (E) = R by Proposition 3.6. Thus Res(R) = R, a contradiction to (ii). It is clear that (iii) implies (iv). We prove the remaining implication (iv) ⇒ (i) in contrapositive form. Suppose there is a nontrivial compactly generated closed subgroup H of G such that ResG (H) ≥ H. Certainly H is not compact. As in the previous paragraph, we can take a compactly generated reduced envelope E = HResG (H)U for H in G. This time, in fact E = ResG (H)U and Res(E) = ResG (H). We see that E/Res(E) is compact, ensuring that E has no infinite discrete quotient, but E is not compact, a contradiction to (iv). Say a t.d.l.c. group G is a discrete regional quotient group if it satisfies any of the four equivalent conditions of Proposition 3.13. Let D be the class of discrete regional quotient groups. We also recall the class S of nondiscrete compactly generated topologically simple t.d.l.c. groups. Clearly the classes D and S are disjoint. We see that D contains the class E of elementary groups; indeed this containment is strict (see Remark 3.16 below). On the other hand, every second-countable group in D is isomorphic to a group in the set E ∗ introduced in [13, Theorem 3.12]. It is not clear if there are groups in E ∗ that are not in D; one possibility is that there exists G ∈ S such that every element of G has trivial contraction group. By appealing to results of P.-E. Caprace and N. Monod ([8]), we obtain the following statement on the role of D and S in the structure of general t.d.l.c. groups. Corollary 3.14. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group. Then exactly one of the following holds: (i) G ∈ D, that is, every noncompact compactly generated closed subgroup of G has an infinite discrete quotient; (ii) There is a compactly generated open subgroup K of G such that Res(K) is cocompact in K, and such that there is a K-invariant closed subgroup L of Res(K) with Res(K)/L ∈ S . Proof. If (i) holds, then the only compactly generated open subgroups K of G such that Res(K) is cocompact in K are the compact open subgroups of G; in this case Res(K) = {1}, so Res(K) has no quotient in S . Thus (i) and (ii) are mutually exclusive. We may therefore suppose (i) fails, that is, not every noncompact compactly generated closed subgroup of G has an infinite discrete quotient. Then by Proposition 3.13, there is a compactly generated open subgroup K of G such that K has no infinite discrete quotient. It then follows by [8, Theorem F] and [8, Proposition 5.4] that Res(K) is cocompact in K and that Res(K) has 0 < n < ∞ quotients in S . By replacing K with 25  a finite index open subgroup of K, we can ensure that each of the quotients of Res(K) in S has K-invariant kernel. (Note that if K2 is a finite index open subgroup of K, then Res(K) = Res(K2 ).) Instead of considering all infinite discrete quotients, we can consider infinite quotients in a commensurability class of discrete groups. Here again, the situation for compactly generated closed subgroups in general reduces to considering compactly generated open subgroups. Proposition 3.15. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group. Let C be a class of infinite discrete groups, such that if H ∈ C and K is a group isomorphic to a finite index subgroup of H, then K ∈ C. The following are equivalent: (i) For every noncompact compactly generated closed subgroup H of G, then H has a quotient in C; (ii) For every noncompact compactly generated open subgroup H of G, then H has a quotient in C. Proof. Clearly (i) implies (ii). For the converse, suppose that (i) does not hold, that is, there is a noncompact compactly generated closed subgroup H of G with no quotient in C. Let R = ResG (H) and let K = HR. Then certainly K/R has no quotient in C. Let E = KU be a compactly generated reduced envelope for H in G, as given by Theorem 3.5, where U is a compact open subgroup of G. Then R = Res(E), so R is in the kernel of any map from E to a discrete group. Moreover, K is cocompact in E, so given any continuous homomorphism φ : E → D where D is discrete, then φ(K) has finite index in E. In particular, since K/R has no quotient in C, we see that E has no quotient in C. This contradicts (ii) and completes the proof. Remark 3.16. This subsection (§3.4) is inspired by the recent preprint [9]; I thank Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace and Phillip Wesolek for sharing with me preliminary versions of their results. Caprace and Wesolek show the following: Given a Burger–Mozes universal group U (F ) with prescribed local action on a locally finite tree (see [3]), such that the local action F is not free, then U (F ) is nonelementary and indeed involves groups in S as subquotients ([9, Corollary 4.17]). However, if F is nilpotent, then given a compactly generated closed subgroup H of U (F ) that is not compact, then H has an infinite discrete quotient (see [9, Corollary 1.2]). These examples U (F ), where F is nilpotent and does not act freely, have the following consequences for the present discussion: (1) The group U (F ) is in D rE , so E is a proper subclass of D. In particular, this shows that not every group in the set E ∗ is elementary; as noted in [9], this provides a negative answer to [13, Question 2].  26  (2) There are closed subgroups KEH ≤ U (F ) such that H is compactly generated and H/K ∈ S . Note that in this case we still have H ∈ D. Thus the class D is not closed under quotients, and the condition that Res(K) be cocompact in K is essential for the dichotomy of Corollary 3.14.  4 4.1  Some special classes of closed subgroups Introduction  In this section we consider the problem of describing closed subgroups of a t.d.l.c. group in terms of open subgroups. We focus on two elementary operations for extending a family of closed subgroups. Definition 4.1. Let G be a topological group and let C(G) be a class of closed subgroups of G. Define IC(G) (the class of intersection-C subgroups) to be the class of subgroups that are intersections of groups in C(G). Define RC(G) (the class of regionally-C subgroups) as follows: we have H ∈ RC(G) if there is a compactly generated open subgroup U of H such that, for every compactly generated group K such that U ≤ K ≤ H, then K ∈ C(G). Let O(G) denote the class of open subgroups of G. If H ∈ IO(G), say H is an IO subgroup of G, and if H ∈ RIO(G), say H is a RIO subgroup. It is clear that RO(G) = O(G). If G is a t.d.l.c. SIN group, then IO(G) is the class of all closed subgroups, by Corollary 2.13; however, for more general t.d.l.c. groups it is easy to find examples of closed subgroups that are not IO subgroups, for example lattices in a nondiscrete simple t.d.l.c. group. Given an arbitrary subgroup H of the t.d.l.c. group G, it is clear that there is a unique smallest IO subgroup of G that contains H, the IO-closure in G, namely the intersection of all open subgroups that contain H; if H has (SR) on G, then by Theorem 3.5(iv), the IO-closure of H is exactly HResG (H). Note also that if K is a closed locally normal subgroup of G, that is, such that NG (K) is open, then we have K ∈ IO(G) by considering the open subgroups of NG (K)/K; so if H has (SR) on G, then ResG (H) ∈ IO(G).  4.2  Codistal subgroups  To understand the closed subgroup structure of a t.d.l.c. group G, it is useful to consider distal coset spaces of G, where now G itself acts by left translation. Definition 4.2. Let G be a topological group and let H be a closed subgroup of G. Say H is codistal in G, and write H ∈ D(G), if the action of G on G/H by left translation is distal.  27  We remark at this point that orbits of more general distal actions of G can be converted into distal coset spaces, at the cost of passing to a possibly finer topology: if G acts continuously and distally on a topological space X, then each point stabilizer of the action is codistal in G. The following characterization of codistal subgroups is essentially due to H. Keynes [12, see Theorem 2.3]. Lemma 4.3. Let G be a topological group, let H be a closed subgroup of G and let G act on G/H by left translation. Then the following are equivalent: (i) G acts distally on G/H; (ii) H is a distal point for the action of H on G/H; T (iii) We have H = U ∈U HU H, where U is a base of identity neighbourhoods in G. Proof. Clearly (i) implies (ii), and (ii) implies (iii) by Lemma 2.16. Suppose (iii) holds. We note that G acts transitively by homeomorphisms on G/H, so either all diagonal points (zH, zH) are accumulation points of nondiagonal orbits or none of them are. Thus to show G acts distally on G/H, it suffices to consider whether there exists a proximal pair (xH, yH) such that xH 6= yH and (H, H) ∈ {(gxH, gyH) | g ∈ G}. Given such a pair, we see that for all U ∈ U , there exists g ∈ G such that gx, gy ∈ U H. It thenTfollows that x−1 y ∈ HU −1 U H. Since U ∈ U was arbitrary, we have x−1 y ∈ U ∈U HU H. By (iii), we therefore have x−1 y ∈ H, that is, xH = yH, a contradiction. Thus G acts distally on G/H, so (iii) implies (i). A special case are closed commensurated subgroups. Recall that for a subgroup H of a group G, the commensurator of H in G is the group CommG (H) := {g ∈ G | |H : H ∩ gHg−1 ||gHg−1 : H ∩ gHg−1 | < ∞}; we say H is commensurated in G if CommG (H) = G. An easy observation is that H is commensurated in G if and only if H has finite orbits on the coset space G/H. For closed subgroups, this is clearly a special case of the situation where H has distal action on G/H. Given Lemma 4.3, we observe some more closure properties of the set of codistal subgroups of G. In particular, every IO-subgroup is codistal. Proposition 4.4. Let G be a topological group. (i) Every closed commensurated subgroup of G is codistal. (ii) Let H ∈ D(G) and K ∈ D(H). Then K ∈ D(G). (iii) Let H, K ≤ G be closed subgroups such that K ∈ D(G). Then H ∩ K is codistal in H. 28  (iv) Let H ⊆ D(G). Then  T  K∈H K  ∈ D(G).  (v) Let K ≤ H ≤ G be closed subgroups such that K is cocompact in H and codistal in G. Then H is codistal in G. (vi) Every IO-subgroup of G is codistal. Proof. All actions in this proof are by left translation. By Lemma 4.3, to show a subgroup B of A is codistal, it suffices to show that B is a distal point for the action of B on A/B. (i) If K is closed and commensurated in G, then G/K is Hausdorff and the action of K on G/K has finite orbits: indeed, we see that for each g ∈ G, the right coset Kg of K is a left coset of g −1 Kg, hence a union of finitely many left cosets of K ∩ g −1 Kg, and so the double coset KgK is a union of finitely many left cosets of K. Thus the orbits of K on G/K have no accumulation points; in particular, K is a distal point for the action of K on G/K. (ii) Suppose x ∈ G is such that the K-orbit of xK accumulates at the trivial coset in G/K. Then the K-orbit of xH accumulates at the trivial coset in G/H. Since K acts distally on G/H, it follows that x ∈ H. It then follows that in fact x ∈ K, since K acts distally on H/K. Thus K is codistal in G. (iii) Let L = H ∩ K. There is then an H-equivariant continuous injective map from H/L to G/K, where H acts on both coset spaces by translation. Since H acts distally on G/K, it also acts distally on H/L. Thus L is codistal in G. T (iv) Let H = K∈H K and suppose x ∈ G is such that the H-orbit of xH accumulates at the trivial coset in G/H. Then for each K ∈ H, the Horbit of xK accumulates at the trivial coset in G/K. Since H acts distally on G/K, it follows that x ∈ K. Since K ∈ H was arbitrary, we must have x ∈ H. Thus H is codistal in G. (v) Suppose x ∈ G is such that the H-orbit of xH accumulates at the trivial coset in G/H. Then there is a net (hi )i∈I in H such that hi xH converges to H. Let U be a compact open subgroup of G. Then the net (hi xK)i∈I is eventually confined to a compact subset U H/K of G/K; by passing to a subnet we may assume hi xK → yK for some y ∈ G. Indeed, since H is closed and hi xH → H, we must have y ∈ H. Since K ∈ D(G), we see that H acts distally on G/K; the H-orbit of yK is the compact set H/K. We now apply Lemma 2.15 to conclude that HxK = H; in particular, x ∈ H. Thus the trivial coset is a distal point for the action of H on G/H, and hence H is codistal in G. (vi) Open subgroups are clearly codistal, so (vi) follows from (iv). In general there are codistal subgroups of t.d.l.c. groups, even codistal cocompact subgroups, that are not IO-subgroups; see Example 4.19(ii). 29  However, if we focus on the case of subgroups with equicontinuously generated action, the possibilities are more restricted. In particular, the next two lemmas will show that an IO-subgroup with equicontinuously generated action is very closely approximated by an equicontinuously generated open subgroup. Definition 4.5. Given a topological group G and H ≤ Aut(G), write ResG,f (H) for the intersection of all open H-invariant subgroups of finite index in G. In the case that H = Inn(G) we define ResG,f (H) =: Resf (G). Lemma 4.6. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H ∈ IO(G). Suppose that H is cocompact in G. Then H is an intersection of open subgroups of finite index in G. As a consequence, we have Res(G) ≤ Resf (G) ≤ H. Proof. Let H ≤ O ≤ G such that O is open. Then the coset space G/O is both compact and discrete, hence it is finite. Since H ∈ IO(G), it follows that H is an intersection of open subgroups O of finite index in G. For each T such O, the group g∈G gOg −1 is itself open, since it is a finite intersection of conjugates of O. Thus Resf (G) ≤ H. In turn, it is clear that Res(G) ≤ Resf (G). Lemma 4.7. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H be a closed subgroup of G that has equicontinuously generated action on G (for example, any closed compactly generated subgroup of G). Then the following are equivalent: (i) ResG (H) = Res(H); (ii) ResG (H) ≤ H; (iii) H ∈ IO(G); (iv) H ∈ D(G); (v) There is an open subgroup E of G such that Res(E) ≤ H ≤ E. Moreover, if (i)–(v) hold, then in fact there is an equicontinuously generated open subgroup E of G such that Res(E) = Res(H), H is cocompact in E and H is an intersection of finite index open subgroups of E. Proof. Let R = ResG (H). It is clear that (i) implies (ii). By Theorem 3.5(iv), the IO-closure of H in G is exactly HR, so (ii) and (iii) are equivalent. We see by Proposition 4.4(vi) that (iii) implies (iv). Suppose (iv) holds. Then H acts distally on G/H by conjugation, so (ii) holds by Theorem A, or in other words, H = HR. It then follows by Theorem 3.5 that H has a reduced envelope of the form E = HU where U is a compact open subgroup of G. In particular, H is cocompact in E. Since (ii) implies (iii), we see that H is a cocompact intersection of open subgroups of E; hence Res(E) ≤ H by Lemma 4.6, proving (v). 30  Suppose (v) holds. We have R = ResE (H), and clearly ResE (H) ≤ Res(E), so R ≤ H. If O is an open H-invariant subgroup of G, then H ∩ O is an open normal subgroup of H; thus Res(H) ≤ R. On the other hand, if L is an open normal subgroup of H, then L ∩ R is an open H-invariant subgroup of R, so by Proposition 3.6, L ≥ R; hence R = Res(H). We have now shown that (v) implies (i), which completes the cycle of implications to show that (i)–(v) are equivalent. Now suppose (i)–(v) holds. By Theorem 3.5, H has a reduced envelope E = HRU where U is a compact open subgroup; in fact E = HU in this case, since R ≤ H, so H is cocompact in E. By Theorem 3.5(i), E is equicontinuously generated on G, and hence on itself. We have R = Res(E) by Theorem 3.5(ii), so R = Res(H) by condition (ii) of the present lemma. By (iii), H is an intersection of open subgroups of E; since H is cocompact in E, it follows by Lemma 4.6 that H is an intersection of finite index open subgroups of E. We have thus proved that E has all the required properties. It was noted in [6, Lemma 7.4] that if G is a first-countable profinite group and H is a commensurated compact subgroup of G, then G normalizes a finite index subgroup of H. We now prove a similar result in the more general context of compactly generated closed subgroups of t.d.l.c. groups. Proposition 4.8. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H be a compactly generated closed subgroup of G. Suppose that H has at most countably many open subgroups of finite index (for example, H is second-countable). Then the following are equivalent: (i) CommG (H) is open in G; (ii) there is an open normal subgroup of H of finite index such that NG (K) is open in G. Proof. Suppose CommG (H) is open in G. By Proposition 4.4(i), we see that H is codistal in CommG (H); hence by Lemma 4.7, there is an open subgroup E of CommG (H) such that H is cocompact in E and H is an intersection of finite index open subgroups of E. By [5, Main Theorem], it follows that given a finite subset X of E, there is a finite index subgroup KX of H that is normal in hH, Xi. We can clearly replace KX with its closure S in H, and so ensure that KX is closed, hence open in H. Thus E = K∈K NE (K) where K is the set of open normal subgroups of H of finite index. Each of the subgroups NE (K) is closed, and by hypothesis, K is countable. Hence by the Baire Category Theorem, there is some K ∈ K such that NE (K) has nonempty interior in E, and hence is an open subgroup of E, which in turn means that NG (K) is open in G. Thus (i) implies (ii).  31  Conversely, suppose K is an open normal subgroup of H of finite index such that NG (K) is open in G. Then CommG (K) ≥ NG (K), so CommG (K) is open, and in fact CommG (K) = CommG (H), since K is commensurate with H. Thus CommG (H) is open, showing that (ii) implies (i).  4.3  RIO subgroups  We now consider the class RIO(G) of RIO-subgroups of a t.d.l.c. group G. This class has a number of closure properties that can be derived from Theorem A and Proposition 4.4, as will be shown in Theorem 4.11 below. Here are some characterizations of RIO subgroups. Say that a net of subgroups (Hi )i∈I is ascending if i ≤ j implies Hi ≤ Hj , and descending if i ≤ j implies Hi ≥ Hj . Proposition 4.9. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H be a closed subgroup of G. Then the following are equivalent: (i) H ∈ RIO(G); (ii) H ∈ RD(G); (iii) there is an ascending net (Hi )i∈I of subgroups such that H = and Hi ∈ D(G) ∩ O(H) for all i ∈ I;  S  i∈I  Hi  (iv) every compactly generated open subgroup of H is in IO(G); (v) every compactly generated open subgroup of H is in D(G). Proof. By Lemma 4.7, we see that (i) and (ii) are equivalent and (iv) and (v) are equivalent. The implications (ii) ⇒ (iii) and (iv) ⇒ (i) are clear. It now suffices to show (iii) ⇒ (v). Suppose (iii) holds for the ascending net (Hi )i∈I and let K be a compactly generated open subgroup of H. Then for i ∈ I sufficiently large, we have K ≤ Hi . Now K is open in Hi , so certainly K ∈ D(Hi ), whilst Hi ∈ D(G). Thus K ∈ D(G) by Proposition 4.4(ii). Thus (iii) implies (v) as required. As a generalization of directed unions and intersections of subgroups, one can define the limit inferior of a net of subgroups. Definition 4.10. Let G be a group and let (Hi )i∈I be a net of subgroups of G. Define lim inf(Hi )i∈I to be the set of elements g of G such that there exists i ∈ I for which g ∈ Hj for all j ≥ i. Note that the limit inferior of a net of closed subgroups is itself a subgroup, but not necessarily closed. (The limit superior is less useful in this context, as it is not even a subgroup in general.) In the special case that  32  the net is ascending or descending, the limit inferior is just the union or intersection respectively of the net. We now establish several closure properties of the class RIO(G), including properties analogous to those established for the smaller class D(G). This will in particular prove Theorem E. Theorem 4.11. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group. (i) Every codistal subgroup of G is a RIO subgroup. (ii) Let K ≤ H ≤ G be closed subgroups. If K ∈ RIO(H) and H ∈ RIO(G), then K ∈ RIO(G). (iii) Let H, K ≤ G be closed subgroups. If K ∈ RIO(G), then H ∩ K ∈ RIO(H). T (iv) Let H ⊆ RIO(G) and let H = K∈H K. Then H ∈ RIO(G). (v) Let K ≤ H ≤ G be closed subgroups such that K is cocompact in H. If K ∈ RIO(G), then H ∈ RIO(G). (vi) Let (Hi )i∈I be a net of RIO subgroups of G. Then H = lim inf(Hi )i∈I is a RIO subgroup of G. (vii) Let ψ : H → G be a continuous homomorphism, where H is a t.d.l.c. group, and let K be a RIO subgroup of G. Then ψ −1 (K) is a RIO subgroup of H. Proof. In this proof we will use repeatedly without further comment the following special case of Proposition 4.9: given H ≤ G closed, then H ∈ RIO(G) if and only if every compactly generated open subgroup of H is in D(G). (i) Let H be a codistal subgroup of G and let L be a compactly generated open subgroup of H. Then L ∈ D(H), so L ∈ D(G) by Proposition 4.4(ii). Thus H ∈ RIO(G). (ii) Let L be a compactly generated open subgroup of K and let M be a compactly generated open subgroup of H containing L. Then L ∈ D(H), so L ∈ D(M ). In turn, since H ∈ RIO(G), we have M ∈ D(G). Thus L ∈ D(G) by Proposition 4.4(ii). We conclude that K ∈ RIO(G) as required. (iii) Let L be a compactly generated open subgroup of H ∩ K and let M be a compactly generated open subgroup of K containing L. Then M ∈ D(G); hence H ∩ M ∈ D(H) by Proposition 4.4(iii). Since L is open in H ∩ M , it follows by Proposition 4.4(ii) that L ∈ D(H). We conclude that H ∩ K ∈ RIO(H). (iv) Let L be a compactly generated open subgroup of H, let K ∈ H and let W be a compact open subgroup of K. The group L′ = hL, W i is then a compactly generated open subgroup of K, so L′ ∈ IO(G) by part 33  (ii). Consequently, ResG (L′ ) ≤ L′ ≤ K and in particular ResG (L) ≤ K. Since K ∈ H was arbitrary, in fact ResG (L) ≤ H. Now L has (SR) on G by Corollary 2.23, so L′′ := LResG (L) ∈ IO(G) by Theorem 3.5(iv). We conclude that H is an ascending open union of codistal subgroups of G, so H ∈ RIO(G) by Proposition 4.9. (v) Let L be a compactly generated open subgroup of H. Then L ∩ K is open in K and cocompact in L; in particular, L ∩ K is compactly generated. Since K ∈ RIO(G) we therefore have L∩K ∈ D(G); we then have L ∈ D(G) by Proposition 4.4(v). Thus H ∈ RIO(G). (vi) Let D = lim inf(Hi )i∈I . Then we can S write D as an ascending T union of intersections of subgroups, namely D = i∈I H≥i , where H≥i = j≥i Hj . By part (iv), we have H≥i ∈ RIO(G) for all i ∈ I. Let L be a compactly generated open subgroup of H. Since D is dense in H, we see that D ∩ L is dense in L, and consequently there is a finite subset S of D and a compact open subgroup W of L such that L = hSiW . Since S is finite we have S ⊆ H≥i for some i ∈ I. Let M = L ∩ H≥i ; note that M is open in H≥i , since L is open in H, so M ∈ RIO(G) by part (ii). Moreover, since hSi ≤ M and L = hSiW , we see that M is cocompact in L and thus compactly generated; hence in fact M ∈ D(G). Since M is cocompact in L, it follows by Proposition 4.4(v) S that L ∈ D(G). Thus H ∈ RIO(G). (vii) We can write K = i∈I Ki where S each Ki is an intersection of −1 (K) = −1 −1 open subgroups (O ) of G. Then ψ ij i∈I ψ (Ki ) and ψ (Ki ) = T −1 −1 j ψ (Oij ); by continuity, each of the groups ψ (Oij ) is open in H, so each of the groups ψ −1 (Ki ) is an IO subgroup of H. Thus ψ −1 (K) is a RIO subgroup of H by Proposition 4.9. As a corollary of Theorem 4.11(vi), we have yet another characterization of RIO subgroups. Corollary 4.12. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H be a closed subgroup of G. Then H ∈ RIO(G) if and only if H is the limit inferior of a net of open subgroups of G. Proof. If H is the limit inferior of a net of open subgroups of G, then H ∈ RIO(G) by Theorem 4.11(vi). Conversely, if H ∈ RIO(G), then H is the union of an ascending net (Ki )i∈I of subgroups such that Ki ∈ IO(G). In turn, each Ki is the intersection of a collection Oi of open subgroups of G; we may ensure Oi is closed under taking finite intersections, and thus organize Oi as a descending net (Oj )j∈Ji , so that in fact Ki = lim inf(Oj )j∈Ji . F Now equip J := i∈I Ji with the ordering so that j < j ′ exactly if either j ∈ Ji and j ′ ∈ Ji′ for i <I i′ , or j, j ′ ∈ Ji with j <Ji j ′ . Then H = lim inf(Oj )j∈J . We finish this subsection by considering how the class RIO(G) relates to the class of all closed subgroups. At this point it is instructive to consider the class of t.d.l.c. groups of rank 2. 34  Definition 4.13. Let G be a nontrivial t.d.l.c. group. Then G is regionally SIN, or has rank 2, if every compactly generated subgroup of G is a SIN group. The term ‘rank 2’ is motivated by elementary t.d.l.c.s.c. groups (recall §3.3): if G is a nontrivial second-countable t.d.l.c. group, then G is regionally SIN if and only if G is elementary and ξ(G) = 2. If G is regionally SIN, then every compactly generated subgroup is an IO subgroup, so every closed subgroup is a RIO subgroup. On the other hand, if G is a t.d.l.c. group such that every closed subgroup is a RIO subgroup, then certainly every compactly generated discrete subgroup has SIN action (equivalently, equicontinuous action) on G. The author is not aware of examples of t.d.l.c. groups that are not regionally SIN, but such that every finitely generated discrete subgroup acts equicontinuously. We can give a constructive description of the RIO-closure of an arbitrary subgroup, generalizing the IO-closure of a compactly generated subgroup. Given S a t.d.l.c. group G, the rank 2 residual Res2 (G) is given by Res2 (G) := K∈K Res(K), where K is the set of compactly generated open subgroups of G; equivalently, G/Res2 (G) is the largest rank 2 quotient of G. Similarly the relative rank 2 residual ResG,2 (K) of a closed subgroup K S of G is L∈K ResG (L), where now K is the set of compactly generated open subgroups of K. Proposition 4.14. K is a RIO subgroup of G if and only if ResG,2 (K) ≤ K. Given any subgroup K of G, then L = ResG,2 (K)K is the smallest RIO subgroup of G that contains K. Proof. If K is a RIO subgroup of G, then every compactly generated open subgroup M of G satisfies ResG (M ) ≤ M , so certainly ResG,2 (K) ≤ K. Now let K be any closed subgroup of G. Given L ≥ K, every compactly generated open subgroup of K is contained in such a subgroup of L, so that ResG,2 (L) ≥ ResG,2 (K). Thus any RIO subgroup of G containing K must contain ResG,2 (K)K. It remains to show that L = ResG,2 (K)K is a RIO subgroup of G. We observe that L is generated topologically by subgroups of the form M ′ = M ResG (M ), where M is a compactly generated open subgroup of K; moreover, such subgroups M ′ form an ascending net. Each group of this form is an IO subgroup of G by Theorem 3.5(iv). Thus by Theorem 4.11(vi), L is a RIO subgroup of G as required.  4.4  Regional relative separability  For some closed subgroups H of a t.d.l.c. group G, there is a clear relationship between compactly generated open subgroups of H and those of G, defined as follows.  35  Definition 4.15. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H be a closed subgroup of G. Then H is regionally relatively separable (RRS) in G if for every compactly generated open subgroup K of H, there is an open subgroup O of G such that K = H ∩ O. Write RRS(G) for the class of RRS subgroups of G. Note that the open subgroup O in the above definition can always be taken to be compactly generated: one can replace O with O ′ = hK, U i where U is a compact open subgroup of O. We can now show that all RIO subgroups are RRS. Proof of Theorem F. Let H ∈ RIO(G) and let K be a compactly generated open subgroup of H. By Proposition 4.9, K ∈ IO(G); in particular, ResG (K) ≤ K. It follows by Theorem 3.5(iv) that {W/K | W ∈ W} forms a base of neighbourhoods of the trivial coset in G/K, where W is the set of open subgroups containing K. Since K is open in H, the subspace H/K of G/K is discrete, so there is O ∈ W such that H/K ∩ O/K = K/K, that is, H ∩ O = K. As corollaries, we note that the locally normal property is inherited by compactly generated open subgroups, and also obtain another property of compactly generated IO-subgroups. Corollary 4.16. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group, let H be a closed locally normal subgroup of G, and let K be a compactly generated open subgroup of H. Then K is locally normal in G. Proof. Without loss of generality we can replace G with any open subgroup that contains H; thus we may assume H is normal in G. We then have H ∈ RIO(G) (indeed, H ∈ IO(G)), so H ∈ RRS(G) by Theorem F. In particular, there is an open subgroup O of G such that K = H ∩ O. Now O clearly normalizes its intersection with the normal subgroup H, so we see that K is normal in O. In particular, K is locally normal in G. Corollary 4.17. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let H be a closed compactly generated subgroup of G such that H ∈ IO(G). Let E be a reduced envelope for H. Then Resf (E) = Resf (H); in particular, Resf (H) is locally normal in G. Proof. By Theorem 3.5, H is cocompact in E, so by Lemma 4.6 we have Resf (E) ≤ H; it is clear that Resf (H) ≤ Resf (E). Now let K be an open subgroup of H of finite index. Then K is compactly generated, so by Theorem F there is an open subgroup O of E such that K = H ∩ O. We see that K is cocompact T in E, so O is also cocompact and hence of finite index. The group O ∗ = g∈E gOg −1 is then an open normal subgroup of E of finite index such that O ∗ ≤ O, so Resf (E) ≤ O. Thus Resf (E) ≤ H ∩ O = K. 36  Since K was an arbitrary open subgroup of H of finite index, it follows that Resf (E) ≤ Resf (H) and hence Resf (E) = Resf (H). It is not clear which of the closure properties of the class of RIO subgroups also apply to RRS subgroups. For instance, if H is an ascending union of open subgroups, each RRS in G, is H necessarily RRS in G? We do at least observe that RRS is a transitive property. Proposition 4.18. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group and let K ≤ H be closed subgroups of G. (i) If K is RRS in G, then K is also RRS in H. (ii) If K is RRS in H and H is RRS in G, then K is RRS in G. Proof. (i) Let L be a compactly generated open subgroup of K. By the RRS property, L = K ∩ O where O is an open subgroup of G. Since K ≤ H, in fact L = K ∩ (O ∩ H), where now O ∩ H is an open subgroup of H. (ii) Let L be a compactly generated open subgroup of K. Then L = K ∩ M where M is an open subgroup of H; as observed, we can take M to be compactly generated. In turn M = H ∩ O where O is an open subgroup of G. Thus L = K ∩ (H ∩ O) = K ∩ O, showing that K is RRS in G. To summarize, we have the following nested sequence of classes of closed subgroups of a t.d.l.c. group G, where LN(G) is the class of closed locally normal subgroups and C(G) is the class of all closed subgroups: O(G) ⊆ LN(G) ⊆ IO(G) ⊆ D(G) ⊆ RIO(G) ⊆ RRS(G) ⊆ C(G).  (1)  Any of the inclusions in (1) can be proper. The class of closed subnormal subgroups is contained in D(G) by Proposition 4.4(ii), but is incomparable in general with the classes below D(G) in (1). We justify these claims with the examples below. Example 4.19. (i) Let A = Sym(3), let S be the symmetric group acting on N, andQ form the unrestricted wreath product G = A≀N S. Here we embed P = N A as a compact open subgroup and equip S with the discrete topology. (a) The trivial subgroup is closed and locally normal, but not open in G. (b) The subgroup {f : N → A | ∀i : f (i) ∈ h(12)i} of P is an IO subgroup of G that is not locally normal. (c) The subgroup {f ∈ S | ∃j ∈ N ∀i > j : f (i) = i} of S is a closed RIO subgroup of G that is not codistal.  37  (d) The subgroup H = {f ∈ S | ∃n ∀i : f (i) = i + n} of S is a closed RRS subgroup of G that is not a RIO subgroup. (e) The subgroup P ⋊ H of G is an open subgroup that is not subnormal. (ii) Let V ∼ = W ∼ = Fp [[t]], regarded as profinite vector spaces over Fp . Let H be the group of continuous Fp -linear maps from V to W under pointwise addition, and define an action ρ of H on K = V ⊕ W by setting ρ(h)(v, w) = (v, w + h(v)). Let G = K ⋊ρ H where K is embedded as a compact open subgroup of G and H carries the discrete topology. Then H is subnormal in G (since G is nilpotent), and in addition H is cocompact in G, but H is not an IO subgroup, since every open subgroup containing H also contains W . (iii) Let T be the regular locally finite tree of degree 3, let G be the group of type-preserving automorphisms of T , let g be a hyperbolic element of G and let H = hgi. Then H is a closed (indeed discrete) subgroup of G, but not an RRS subgroup: indeed, H has trivial intersection with every proper open subgroup of G.  4.5  Decomposition rank of open subgroups  As in §3.4, we give another example of how the structure of compactly generated closed subgroups of a t.d.l.c. group G is controlled by the structure of compactly generated open subgroups of G. Recall the class E of elementary groups and the decomposition rank ξ defined in §3.3. Fix a group G ∈ E and let K be a nontrivial closed compactly generated subgroup of G. We have the following restrictions on ξ(K): (A) By [17, Corollary 4.10], we have ξ(K) ≤ ξ(G). (B) From the definition, we see that every value taken by ξ is a successor ordinal. We must also have ξ(K) = ξ(Res(K)) + 1. Thus ξ(Res(K)) = α + 1 for some ordinal α, and then ξ(K) = α + 2. We now show that in a very strong sense, the restrictions (A) and (B) are the only possible restrictions on ξ(K), and there are no further restrictions on the ranks of compactly generated open subgroups of G. Theorem 4.20. Let G be an elementary t.d.l.c.s.c. group and let α be an ordinal such that α + 2 ≤ ξ(G). Then there is a compactly generated open subgroup O of G such that ξ(O) = α + 2. S Proof. Write ξ(G) = π + 1. We have G = i∈N Oi with (Oi )i∈N some (possibly terminating) increasing sequence of compactly generated open subgroups. In this case π = sup ξ(Res(Oi )). i∈N  38  In particular, since α < π, there is some i such that ξ(Res(Oi )) > α; it then follows that ξ(Oi ) = ξ(Res(Oi )) + 1 ≥ α + 2. So certainly there is a compactly generated open subgroup of at least the desired rank. Now let β be the least ordinal such that β ≥ α and G has a compactly generated open subgroup of rank β + 2, say ξ(O) = β + 2. We may suppose for a contradiction that β > α. Then ξ(Res(O)) = β + 1 and α + 2 ≤ β + 1. Using the rank formula for Res(O), we see that Res(O) has a compactly generated open subgroup K such that α+2 ≤ ξ(K) < β +2; since restriction (B) above still applies, we have ξ(K) = γ + 2 for some ordinal γ such that α ≤ γ < β. Now in the chain K ≤ Res(O) ≤ O ≤ G, each group is open or normal in the next. By Theorem 4.11(ii), it follows that K ∈ RIO(G); indeed, since K is compactly generated, K ∈ IO(G). Applying Lemma 4.7, there is a compactly generated open subgroup E of G such that Res(E) = Res(K). In particular, ξ(E) = ξ(Res(E)) + 1 = ξ(Res(K)) + 1 = ξ(K) = γ + 2. This contradicts the minimality of β, proving that in fact β = α, so G has a compactly generated open subgroup O of exactly the desired rank. Remark 4.21. The value of the ordinal α = sup{ξ(G) | G ∈ E } is not known at the time of writing: it could be ω1 , or it could be some countable ordinal. (In the latter case, it would be easy to show that there is actually an elementary group that achieves the largest possible rank.) Theorem 4.20 at least shows (given that decomposition rank for infinite t.d.l.c.s.c. groups is a commensurability invariant) that an elementary group of ‘large’ rank necessarily has a ‘large’ poset of commensurability classes of open subgroups. Contrast with the group G = Aut(Td ) of automorphisms of a d-regular tree. The closed subgroup structure of Aut(Td ) is extremely rich: for example, given a compactly generated group H without arbitrarily small nontrivial compact normal subgroups, then by taking a Cayley–Abels graph for H and lifting to its covering tree, one can realize H as a quotient of a closed subgroup of Aut(Td ) for all but finitely many d. However, Aut(Td ) has only two commensurability classes of open subgroups, namely the class of compact open subgroups, and the class that consists of Aut(Td ) and its unique open subgroup of index 2.  39  5  The discrete residual  5.1  Action of the discrete residual  Given an equicontinuously generated group H of automorphisms of a t.d.l.c. group G, the absence of H-invariant open subgroups restricts the way in which ResG (H) can act on closed H-invariant subgroups of G. Proposition 5.1. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group, let H ≤ Aut(G) and let R be an H-invariant closed subgroup of G such that ResR (H) = R. Let K be a closed subgroup of G that is both R-invariant and H-invariant. (i) Let L be a compactly generated open subgroup of K. invariant, then L is also R-invariant, and in fact  If L is H-  [L, R] ≤ ResL (R ⋊ H) ≤ ResL,f (R ⋊ H) = ResL,f (H). (ii) If K is compact, then [K, R] ≤ ResK (R ⋊ H) = ResK (H). (iii) If K is discrete, then CK (R) contains every finitely generated Hinvariant subgroup of K. Proof. Without loss of generality, we may replace G with RK and assume that K is normal in G. Thus K is a RIO subgroup of G; in particular, by Theorem F, K is a RRS subgroup of G. Let L be a compactly generated H-invariant open subgroup of K. Then by the RRS property, L = K ∩ O for some open subgroup O of G. In particular, NG (L) ≥ O, so NG (L) is open, and hence NR (L) is an open subgroup of R. We see that NR (L) is also H-invariant. Thus NR (L) = R. Now let M be an open H-invariant subgroup of L of finite index. Then M is R-invariant by the same argument. Thus R acts on the finite discrete factor L/M by conjugation; the kernel of this action, namely the set CR (L/M ) := {r ∈ R | ∀l ∈ L : [l, r] ∈ M }, is then an open subgroup of R. Since L and M are H-invariant, CR (L/M ) is also H-invariant, so R = CR (L/M ). In other words, [L, R] ≤ M . As M was an arbitrary open H-invariant subgroup of L of finite index, we conclude that [L, R] ≤ ResL,f (H). In particular, every open H-invariant subgroup of L of finite index is in fact R ⋊ H-invariant, so ResL,f (H) = ResL,f (R ⋊ H). Now let N be an open subgroup of L that is R ⋊ H-invariant, but not necessarily of finite index. Then P = NG (L) ∩ NG (N ) acts continuously on the discrete finitely generated group L/N ; since R ≤ P , the action of R on L/N is also continuous. In particular, every element of L/N has open centralizer in R, and there is thus an open subgroup of R that centralizes a generating set of L/N . Then CR (L/N ) is an open H-invariant subgroup of R, so R = CR (L/N ); from the choice of N we conclude that [L, R] ≤ ResL (R ⋊ H). Clearly ResL (R ⋊ H) ≤ ResL,f (R ⋊ H). We have now proved all the assertions in (i). 40  Part (ii) is the special case of part (i) where K = L and K is compact, using the fact that every open subgroup of a compact group has finite index. Part (iii) follows from the special case of part (i) where K is discrete and L is finitely generated, as in this case ResL (R ⋊ H) is trivial, so [L, R] = {1} and hence L ≤ CK (R). Consider now a compactly generated t.d.l.c. group of the form G = ResG (H) ⋊ H. We note that there is a certain compact normal subgroup of G determined by the action of H that naturally divides the action on compact normal subgroups into two parts. Proposition 5.2. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group, let H ≤ Aut(G) be compactly generated and let R = ResG (H). (i) There is a unique largest compact H-invariant subgroup N of G such that H acts ergodically on N and R ≤ NG (N ); moreover, N ≤ R and NG (N ) is open. (ii) Let T /N be the elliptic part of the centre of R/N . Then T contains every compact normal H-invariant subgroup of R. Proof. We see that L = R ⋊ H is compactly generated by Theorem 3.5(i). Let A be a compact L-invariant subgroup of R. Then there is a compact open subgroup U of G such that A ≤ U . By Proposition 2.21, there is an open H-invariant subgroup V of G such that V ⊆ U R. Let LV := V ⋊ H; we see that every LV -conjugate of A is contained in U , so A is contained in a compact LV -invariant subgroup A2 of R. Now let W be any open Hinvariant subgroup of G such that W/R is compact and let LW := W ⋊ H; then A2 has only finitely many LW -conjugates, each of which is normal in R, so A2 is contained in a compact LW -invariant subgroup A3 of R. From the preceding argument, we see that the union C of all compact L-invariant subgroups of R is in fact the union of all compact LW -invariant subgroups of R, where W is any open H-invariant subgroup of G such that W/R is compact. By [15, Theorem 3.3], there is a compact L-invariant subgroup K of R such that C/K is discrete; in particular, C is closed. Set N = ResC (L); then certainly N ≤ K, so N is compact. We see that in fact N = ResC (LW ) by Lemma 2.9. In particular, W ≤ NG (N ), so NG (N ) is open. We see that L acts ergodically on N by Corollary 3.7; it then follows by Proposition 5.1(ii) that in fact ResN (H) = N , so H acts ergodically on N. Now suppose M is a compact H-invariant subgroup of G on which H acts ergodically, such that R ≤ NG (M ). In other words, M is a compact L-invariant subgroup of G on which H acts ergodically. Then H does not preserve any open subgroup of M , so M ≤ U for every open H-invariant subgroup of NG (M ); thus M ≤ R. It follows that M ≤ C, and hence M = ResM (L) ≤ ResC (L) = N, 41  proving (i). From the construction of N , we see that for every compact normal Hinvariant subgroup S of R, the action of H on SN/N is residually discrete. Applying Proposition 5.1, C/N is a central factor of R. Since C/N is generated topologically by compact subgroups, we see that it is contained in the elliptic part of the centre of R/N , proving (ii).  5.2  Decomposition of the discrete residual  We can now prove Theorem G. Proof of Theorem G. By hypothesis, we have a t.d.l.c. group G ⋊ H such that H is compactly generated. Let R = ResG (H). We have already seen (Proposition 3.6) that ResR (H) = R. The group L := R ⋊ H is compactly generated by Theorem 3.5(i). By [15, Theorem 1.3], there is a finite normal H-invariant series {1} = R0 < R1 < · · · < Rn = R, such that given 1 ≤ i ≤ n, the factor Ri /Ri−1 is compact, discrete or a chief factor of L. Suppose Ri /Ri−1 is a chief factor of L; that is, there does not exist a closed subgroup S of R such that Ri−1 < S < Ri and such that S is both Hinvariant and R-invariant. Then it follows from Proposition 5.1(i) that H does not leave invariant any proper compactly generated open subgroup of Ri /Ri−1 ; in particular, either Ri /Ri−1 is discrete or case (iv) in the statement of the theorem is satisfied. Let us now consider the uppermost factor R/Rn−1 . Since H does not leave invariant any proper open subgroup of R, we see that R/Rn−1 is not discrete. If R/Rn−1 is compact then H acts ergodically by Corollary 3.7. Otherwise, R/Rn−1 is a nondiscrete chief factor of L. Thus R/Rn−1 satisfies at least one of cases (iii) and (iv) in the statement of the theorem. It is natural to obtain the series in ascending order, in other words, Ri+1 is obtained by setting Ri+1 = N where N/Ri is either a minimal L-invariant subgroup of R/Ri , or a sufficiently large compact or discrete subgroup of R/Ri . The flexibility of the construction is such that whenever Ri+1 /Ri is compact, we can ensure Ri+1 /Ri is the largest compact L-invariant subgroup of R/Ri up to finite index (such a subgroup exists by [15, Theorem 3.3]). Then Ri ≤ N ≤ Ri+1 where N/Ri is the unique largest compact L-invariant subgroup of R/Ri on which H acts ergodically, as provided by Proposition 5.2(i). By Proposition 5.2(ii), Ri+1 /N is a central factor of R. We can thus ensure, possibly at the cost of increasing the length of the series, that every compact factor in the series satisfies (iii) or is a central factor of R (or both). Thus every compact factor Ri /Ri−1 satisfies at least one of cases (ii) and (iii) in the statement of the theorem. 42  Now let 1 ≤ i < n and consider the factor M = Ri /Ri−1 . We have already dealt with the cases when M is compact or a nondiscrete chief factor, so we may assume M is discrete. If M is finitely generated, then M is a central factor of R by Proposition 5.1(iii), so case (ii) of the theorem is satisfied. Otherwise M is infinitely generated and case (i) of the theorem is satisfied. This exhausts the possibilities for M ; thus we have obtained a finite normal H-invariant series for R of the required form. In the statement of Theorem G, the uppermost factor R/Rn−1 of R = ResG (H) cannot be discrete, and all of the finitely generated discrete factors occurring must be central in R. The following example indicates why we cannot hope to restrict the discrete factors much further than this: for instance, we cannot require all discrete abelian factors to be central in R, nor can we avoid a discrete factor appearing as a quotient of a cocompact subgroup of R. Example 5.3. In Sym(Z), let ai = (3i 3i + 1 3i + 2), let bi = (3i 3i + 1) and let c be the shift n 7→ n + 3. Let D be the group abstractly generated by {ai | i ∈ Z}, let U be the closure of the group generated by {bi | bi ∈ Z} and let S = hci. Then the group G = DU S carries a unique t.d.l.c. topology extending the permutation topology of U . Let H = Inn(G). Both G and H are compactly generated, and R := ResG (H) = DU . One sees that in any finite series for R ⋊ H of the form specified by Theorem G, there will be an infinitely generated discrete abelian factor Ri+1 /Ri appearing in the series such that Ri+1 is cocompact in R and Ri+1 /Ri is not a central factor of R.  A  Metrizable approximation of group actions  In an earlier version of this article, the main theorem was proved by first reducing to actions on metrizable spaces. This reduction turned out to be unnecessary, but is perhaps of independent interest; we preserve the arguments in this appendix. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group, let H ≤ Aut(G) and let K be a closed Hinvariant subgroup. As long as H is not too large (σ-equicontinuous is a sufficient constraint), then X = G/K can be approximated as a topological H-space by completely metrizable H-spaces. Definition A.1. A function f : X → Y between topological spaces is proper if it is continuous and the preimage of any compact set is compact. Given equivalence relations R1 , R2 on a set X, say R1 ≤ R2 if R1 ⊆ R2 , regarded as subsets of X × X. Let H be a group acting by homeomorphisms on a locally compact Hausdorff space X. The H-space X is pro-metrizable (with filtration (∼i )i∈I ) if there is a descending net (∼i )i∈I of equivalence relations, each preserved by H, such that: 43  (a) If x ∼i y for all i ∈ I, then x = y. (b) For each i ∈ I, the quotient space X/ ∼i is locally compact and completely metrizable and the quotient map pi : X → X/ ∼i is proper. The following lemma shows that the structure of X is approximated well by that of the quotients X/ ∼i . Lemma A.2. Q Let X be a pro-metrizable space with filtration (∼i )i∈I , and let p : X → i∈I X/ ∼i be the product of the maps pi . Then p is a proper topological embedding. Proof. By the standard characterization of the product topology, p is continuous. In particular, the image of every compact subset of X Q is compact, and hence closed. Conversely, given a compact subset K of i∈I X/ ∼i , then the projection πi (K) of K onto each of the coordinates is compact, so −1 p−1 (K) ⊆ p−1 (πi (K)) = p−1 i (K) for each i. Since pi is proper, pi (K) is compact, so p−1 (K) is relatively compact; by continuity p−1 (K) is closed, hence compact. Thus p is proper. We see from condition (a) of the definition of a pro-metrizable space that p is injective. Thus p induces a one-to-one correspondence between compact subsets of X and those of p(X). The topology of X is generated by relatively compact open sets; in turn, every relatively compact open set O is the difference of two compact sets (namely, O = O r (O r O)). Thus every open set in X has open image in p(X), in other words, p is a topological embedding. Under some fairly general circumstances, coset spaces give pro-metrizable actions in this sense. Proposition A.3. Let G be a t.d.l.c. group, let H be a σ-equicontinuous group of automorphisms of G and let K be a closed H-invariant subgroup. Then G/K is pro-metrizable as an H-space, with completely metrizable quotients of the form Zi = Ni \G/K where (Ni )i∈I is a descending net of compact H-invariant subgroups with trivial intersection. Proof. Let us note first that it follows from Urysohn’s metrization theorem (see for instance [18, Corollary 23.2]) that every Hausdorff quotient space of a compact metrizable space is completely metrizable. Let H be the union of an ascending sequence (Sn ) of equicontinuous sets such that 1 ∈ Sn = Sn−1 for all n ∈ N. Fix a descending net (Ui )i∈I of compact T open subgroups of G with trivial intersection. Given i ∈TI, let Ui (n) = s∈Sn s(UT i ), let Vi (n) be the core of ∞ Ui (n) in Ui , let Mi = ∞ V (n) and let N = i n=1 i n=1 Ui (n). Then Mi is a compact normal subgroup of Ui ; by construction, we see that Ui /Mi is a firstcountable, hence completely metrizable, profinite group. Since Mi ≤ Ni , it follows that the right coset space Ni \Ui is completely metrizable. 44  Now define Zi = Ni \G/K; the corresponding equivalence relation ∼i on G/K is then given by xK ∼i yK if Ni xK = Ni yK. Since both Ni and K are H-invariant subgroups of G, we see that ∼i is an H-invariant equivalence relation, so H acts on Zi . We see that {Ui xK/K | i ∈ I} is a base of neighbourhoods of xK for any given x ∈ G. In particular, it is now clear that given x, y ∈ G, if xK ∼i yK for all i ∈ I then xK = yK. The relation ∼i is the orbit relation of the compact group Ni acting on G/K, so the quotient map from G/K to Zi is proper. It remains to show that Zi is completely metrizable. Fix i ∈ I and write N = Ni and U = Ui . We can partition Zi into clopen sets Ox , where Ox = {N yK | y ∈ G, N yK ⊆ U xK}. Now fix x ∈ G; it suffices to show Ox is completely metrizable. We see that N yK ∈ Ox if and only if yK = zxK for some z ∈ U . There is therefore a surjective map θ from U to Ox given by z 7→ N zxK. This map is easily seen to be continuous; since U is compact, in fact θ is closed, so θ is a quotient map. We have θ(a) = θ(b) if and only if b ∈ N a(xKx−1 ∩ U ), so Ox is homeomorphic to the double coset space N \U/R where R = xKx−1 ∩ U . Since N and R are closed subgroups of the compact group U , the double coset space is Hausdorff; hence N \U/R is completely metrizable. Thus Ox is completely metrizable, and hence Zi is completely metrizable. Here is a condition under which a distal fixed point remains distal in a quotient space. Lemma A.4. Let H be a group acting by homeomorphisms on a topological space X. Let ∼ be an H-invariant equivalence relation, such that the quotient map p : X → X/ ∼ is proper and X/ ∼ is a locally compact Hausdorff space. Suppose that z ∈ X is fixed by H and that [z] consists of distal points for the action of H on X. Then [z] is a distal point of the action of H on X/ ∼. Proof. Given x ∈ X, write [x] for the ∼-class of x. Suppose that ([x], [z]) is a proximal pair for the action of H on X/ ∼: that is, there exists a net (hi ) in H such that hi ([x]) → [z]. Eventually hi ([x]) will be confined to a compact neighbourhood K of [z]; since p is proper, it follows that hi (x) is confined to a compact neighbourhood p−1 (K) of z. Thus by passing to a subnet, we may assume hi (x) converges, say hi (x) → w ∈ [z]. Consider [z] as a subspace of X; then [z] is compact, since p is proper. Moreover, H[z] = [z], since Hz = z and ∼ is H-invariant, and by hypothesis [z] consists of distal points for the action of H on X. Thus x ∈ [z] by Lemma 2.15. In particular, [x] = [z], proving that [z] is a distal point of the action of H on X/ ∼. We conclude this section with a decomposition for actions with an Ndistal fixed point on pro-metrizable spaces. As noted in Lemma 2.16, the 45  singleton of a distal fixed point is always an intersection of open invariant neighbourhoods; what is significant here is that we obtain a supply of proper closed invariant neighbourhoods. Definition A.5. Let G be a group acting on a topological space X. The action has generic neighbourhoods at x ∈ X if every G-invariant neighbourhood of x is dense; in other words, for all y ∈ X, there are nets (xi ) in X and gi in G such that xi → x and gi xi → y. Note that the action is topologically transitive, that is, every nonempty open G-invariant set is dense, if and only if the action has generic neighbourhoods at every point. An action can have a generic neighbourhood point without being topologically transitive: for example, the action of the multiplicative group R>0 of positive reals on C via r(z) = rz is not topologically transitive, but z = 0 is a generic neighbourhood point. However, for distal actions on compact metrizable spaces, the existence of a generic neighbourhood point is equivalent to minimality of the action. Lemma A.6. Let H be a group acting by homeomorphisms on a completely metrizable space X. Then x ∈ X has generic neighbourhoods if and only if there is a dense Gδ set of points D such that x ∈ Hy for all y ∈ D. Proof. Suppose x has generic neighbourhoods under the action and fix a complete metric d on X compatible with the topology. Let O be the set of open S H-invariant neighbourhoods of x. For each positive integer n, let On = g∈G g(Bn ), where Bn is the open ball of radius 1/n around x. Then On is an H-invariant neighbourhood of x. By hypothesis, it follows that On is dense in X. Moreover, we see that for T all O ∈ O, there T∞ exists n such that O = Bn ⊆ O, so that in fact On ⊆ O. Thus O∈O n=1 On . By the Baire T Category Theorem, we conclude that D = O∈O O is a dense Gδ set. Let y ∈ D. Then the set V = X r Hy is an open H-invariant set that does not contain y. Since y ∈ O for all O ∈ O, it follows that x 6∈ V , in other words x ∈ Hy. Conversely, suppose there is a dense set of points D such that x ∈ Hy for all y ∈ D. Let O be an open H-invariant neighbourhood of x and suppose z ∈ X r O. Then Hz is contained in X r O, so x 6∈ Hz and hence z 6∈ D. Thus X r O is an open set disjoint from D. Since D is dense, we conclude that X r O = ∅, in other words O is dense. Corollary A.7. Let H be a group acting by homeomorphisms on a completely metrizable space X. Suppose x has generic neighbourhoods and that Hx is compact and consists of distal points for the action. Then X = Hx and the action of H on X is minimal. Proof. By Lemma A.6, there is a dense Gδ set of points D such that x ∈ Hy for all y ∈ D. By Lemma 2.15, H acts minimally on Hx and we have 46  Hy = Hx for all y ∈ D. In particular, Hx is dense, and hence equal to X. Proposition A.8. Let H be a group and let X be an H-space that is either pro-metrizable or completely metrizable and let x ∈ X be a fixed point of H. For each closed subset Y of X, let KY be the set of closed H-invariant neighbourhoods of x in Y . Let X 0 = X, for each ordinal α let X α+1 = T T λ α ∞ be the K∈KX α K and for each limit ordinal λ let X = α<λ X . Let X α intersection of the spaces X as α ranges over the ordinals. Then the following hold: (i) We have X ∞ = X α , where α is minimal such that X α = X α+1 . The sets (Xβ )β≤α then form a strictly descending sequence of closed Hinvariant subspaces of X. (ii) The subspace X ∞ is the unique largest subspace of X such that x has generic neighbourhoods under the action of H on X ∞ . (iii) Suppose that there is an open neighbourhood O of x such that every compact H-invariant subset of O consists of distal points for the action of H on X. Then X ∞ = {x}. (iv) If X T is completely T metrizable, there is a countable subset L of KX such that K∈L K = K∈KX K. Proof. It is clear that we produce a (weakly) descending sequence of closed H-invariant subspaces of X, so X α = X α+1 for some α; let α be the first ordinal for which this occurs. Then we see that every closed H-invariant neighbourhood of x in X α is dense. It follows by induction that X α = X β for all β > α, so X α = X ∞ . By the choice of α, the sets (Xβ )β≤α then form a strictly descending sequence, proving (i). Suppose Y is an H-invariant subspace of X in which x has generic neighbourhoods. Then Y ⊆ X 0 , and whenever Y ⊆ X α we see that Y is contained in every closed H-invariant neighbourhood of x in X α , so Y ⊆ X α+1 . By induction, Y ⊆ X ∞ . Conversely, since X ∞ = X α = X α+1 for some α, we see that there are no proper closed H-invariant neighbourhoods of x in X ∞ , so x is a generic neighbourhood point for the action on X ∞ . This proves (ii). Now suppose that there is an open neighbourhood O of x such that every compact H-invariant subset of O consists of distal points for the action of H on X. Suppose X is pro-metrizable with filtration (∼i )i∈I . Letting i range over I, the sets ([x]i r O) form a descending net of compact sets with empty intersection: thus there exists i ∈ I such that [x]i ⊆ O. So without loss of generality, we may assume [x]i ⊆ O for all i ∈ I. In particular, [x]i is a compact H-invariant set contained in O, so [x]i consists of distal points for the action. Fix i ∈ I, let Y = X ∞ / ∼i and let p : X → Y be the quotient 47  map. By Lemma A.4, y := [x]i is a distal fixed point of H, but at the same time y is a generic neighbourhood point of H on Y . Since Y is a completely metrizable space, we conclude that Y = {y} by Corollary A.7. Letting i range over I, we see that each of the spaces X ∞ / ∼i has a single point, so in fact X ∞ only has a single point. Similarly, if X itself is completely metrizable, then X ∞ is completely metrizable and we again have X ∞ = {x} by Corollary A.7. This completes the proof of (iii). If X is completely metrizable, then we see that every K ∈ KX contains On for some n, where On is as in the proof of Lemma A.6, and hence it suffices to take L = {On | n ∈ N}, proving (iv).  References [1] J. Auslander, E. Glasner and B. Weiss, On recurrence in zero dimensional flows, Forum Math. 19 (2007), 107–114. [2] U. Baumgartner and G. A. Willis, Contraction groups and scales of automorphisms of totally disconnected locally compact groups, Israel J. Math. 142 (2004), 221–248. [3] M. Burger and Sh. Mozes, Groups acting on trees: from local to global structure, Publ. Math. IHÉS 92 (2000), 113–150. [4] T. P. Bywaters, H. Glöckner and S. Tornier, Endomorphisms of totally disconnected locally compact groups, preprint (2017), arXiv:1612.06958v2. [5] P.-E. Caprace, P. H. Kropholler, C. D. Reid and P. Wesolek, On the residual and profinite closures of commensurated subgroups, arXiv:1706.06853v2. [6] P.-E. Caprace, C. D. Reid and G. A. Willis, Locally normal subgroups of totally disconnected groups. Part I: General theory, Forum Math. Sigma 5 (2017), e11, 76pp. [7] P.-E. Caprace, C. D. Reid and G. A. Willis, Locally normal subgroups of totally disconnected groups. Part II: Compactly generated simple groups, Forum Math. Sigma 5 (2017), e12, 89pp. [8] P.-E. Caprace and N. Monod, Decomposing locally compact groups into simple pieces, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 150 (2011), no. 1, 97–128. [9] P.-E. Caprace and P. Wesolek, Indicability, residual finiteness and simple subquotients of groups acting on trees, preprint (2017), arXiv:1708.04590v1. 48  [10] Y. Cornulier and P. de la Harpe, Metric geometry of locally compact groups, EMS Tracts in Mathematics vol. 25, European Math. Society, Zürich, 2016. [11] W. Jaworski, Contraction groups, ergodicity, and distal properties of automorphisms of compact groups, Illinois J. Math. 56 (2012), no. 4, 1023–1084. [12] H. B. Keynes, A study of the proximal relation in coset transformation groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 128 (1967), 389–402. [13] C. D. Reid, Dynamics of flat actions on totally disconnected, locally compact groups, New York J. Math. 22 (2016), 115–190. [14] C. D. Reid, Equicontinuity, orbit closures and invariant compact open sets for group actions on zero-dimensional spaces, preprint (2017), arXiv:1710.00627v1. [15] C. D. Reid and P. R. Wesolek, The essentially chief series of a compactly generated locally compact group, Math. Ann. (2017), https://doi.org/10.1007/s00208-017-1597-0 [16] Y. Shalom and G. A. Willis, Commensurated subgroups of arithmetic groups, totally disconnected groups and adelic rigidity, Geom. Funct. Anal. 23 (2013), no. 5, 1631–1683. [17] P. R. Wesolek, Elementary totally disconnected locally compact groups, Proc. London Math. Soc. 110 (2015), no. 6, 1387–1434. [18] S. Willard, General topology, Addison–Wesley, 1970. [19] G. A. Willis, Tidy subgroups for commuting automorphisms of totally disconnected groups: an analogue of simultaneous triangularisation of matrices, New York J. Math. 10 (2004), 1–35. [20] G. A. Willis, The scale and tidy subgroups for endomorphisms of totally disconnected locally compact groups, Math. Ann. 361 (2015), no. 1, 403–442.  49

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
