Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 10
ArXiv ID: hf_5426

Abstract:
arXiv:1606.01200v3 [stat.AP] 19 Mar 2018  Simple and Honest Confidence Intervals in Nonparametric Regression∗ Timothy B. Armstrong†  Michal Kolesár‡  Yale University  Princeton University  March 20, 2018  Abstract We consider the problem of constructing honest confidence intervals (CIs) for a scalar parameter of interest, such as the regression discontinuity parameter, in nonparametric regression based on kernel or local polynomial estimators. To ensure that our CIs are honest, we derive and tabulate novel critical values that take into account the possible bias of the estimator upon which the CIs are based. We show that this approach leads to CIs that are more efficient than conventional CIs that achieve coverage by undersmoothing or subtracting an estimate of the bias. We give sharp efficiency bounds of using different kernels, and derive the optimal bandwidth for constructing honest CIs. We show that using the bandwidth that minimizes the maximum mean-squared error results in CIs that are nearly efficient and that in this case, the critical value depends only on the rate of convergence. For the common case in which the rate of convergence is n−2/5 , the appropriate critical value for 95% CIs is 2.18, rather than the usual 1.96 critical value. We illustrate our results in a Monte Carlo analysis and an empirical application.  ∗  We thank Don Andrews, Sebiastian Calonico, Matias Cattaneo, Max Farrell and numerous seminar and conference participants for helpful comments and suggestions. All remaining errors are our own. The research of the first author was supported by National Science Foundation Grant SES-1628939. The research of the second author was supported by National Science Foundation Grant SES-1628878. † email: timothy.armstrong@yale.edu ‡ email: mkolesar@princeton.edu  1  1  Introduction  This paper considers the problem of constructing confidence intervals (CIs) for a scalar parameter T (f ) of a function f , which can be a conditional mean or a density. The scalar parameter may correspond, for example, to a conditional mean, or its derivatives at a point, the regression discontinuity parameter, or the value of a density or its derivatives at a point. When the goal is to estimate T (f ), a popular approach is to use kernel or local polynomial estimators. These estimators are both simple to implement, and highly efficient in terms of their mean squared error (MSE) properties (Fan, 1993; Cheng et al., 1997). In this paper, we show that one can also use these estimators to construct simple, and highly efficient confidence intervals (CIs): simply add and subtract its standard error times a critical value that is larger than the usual normal quantile z1−α/2 , and takes into account the possible bias of the estimator.1 We tabulate these critical values, and show that they depend only on (1) the optimal rate of convergence (equivalently, the order of the derivative that one bounds to obtain the asymptotic MSE); and (2) the criterion used to choose the bandwidth. In particular, if the MSE optimal bandwidth is used with a local linear estimator, computing our CI at the 95% coverage level amounts to replacing the usual critical value z0.975 = 1.96 with 2.18. Asymptotically, our CIs correspond to fixed-length CIs as defined in Donoho (1994), and so we refer to them as fixed-length CIs. We show that these CIs are near optimal in terms of their length in the class of honest CIs. As in Li (1989), we formalize the notion of honesty by requiring that the CI cover the true parameter asymptotically at the nominal level uniformly over a parameter space F for f (which typically places bounds on derivatives of  f ). Furthermore, we allow this parameter space to grow with the sample size. The notion of honesty is closely related to the use of the minimax criterion used to derive the MSE efficiency results: in both cases, one requires good performance uniformly over the parameter space F .  In deriving these results, we answer three main questions. First, how to optimally form a CI based on a given class of kernel-based estimators? Popular approaches include undersmoothing  (choosing the bandwidth to shrink more quickly than the MSE optimal bandwidth) and biascorrection (subtracting an estimate of the bias). We show that widening the CI to take into account bias is more efficient (in the sense of leading to a smaller CI while maintaining coverage) than both of these approaches. In particular, we show that, in contrast to the practice of undersmoothing, the optimal bandwidth for CI construction is larger than the MSE optimal bandwidth. This contrasts with the work of Hall (1992) and Calonico et al. (2017) on optimality of undersmoothing. Importantly, these papers restrict attention to CIs that use the usual critical value z1−α/2 . It then becomes necessary to choose a small enough bandwidth so that the bias 1  An R package implementing our CIs in regression discontinuity designs is available at https://github. com/kolesarm/RDHonest.  2  is asymptotically negligible relative to the standard error, since this is the only way to achieve correct coverage. Our results imply that rather than choosing a smaller bandwidth, it is better to use a larger critical value that takes into account the potential bias; this also ensures correct coverage regardless of the bandwidth sequence. While the fixed-length CIs shrink at the optimal rate, undersmoothed CIs shrink more slowly. We also show that fixed-length CIs are about 30% shorter than the bias-corrected CIs, once the standard error is adjusted to take into account the variability of the bias estimate (Calonico et al. (2014) show that doing so is important in order to maintain coverage). Second, since the MSE criterion is typically used for estimation, one may prefer to report a CI that is centered around the MSE optimal estimator, rather than reoptimizing the bandwidth for length and coverage of the CI. How much is lost by using the MSE optimal bandwidth to construct the CI? We show that, under a range of conditions most commonly used in practice, the loss in efficiency is very small: a fixed-length CI centered at the MSE optimal bandwidth is 99% efficient in these settings. Therefore, there is little efficiency loss from not re-optimizing the bandwidth for inference. Third, how much is lost by using a kernel that is not fully optimal? We show that the relative kernel efficiency for the CIs that we propose, in terms of their length, is the same as the relative efficiency of the estimates in terms of MSE. Thus, relative efficiency calculations for MSE, such as the ones in Fan (1993), Cheng et al. (1997), and Fan et al. (1997) for estimation of a nonparametric mean at a point (estimation of f (x0 ) for some x0 ) that motivate much of empirical practice in the applied regression discontinuity literature, translate directly to CI construction. Moreover, it follows from calculations in Donoho (1994) and Armstrong and Kolesár (2017) that our CIs, when constructed using a length-optimal or MSE-optimal bandwidth, are highly efficient among all honest CIs: no other approach to inference can substantively improve on their length. The requirement of honesty, or uniformity the parameter space F , that underlies our anal-  ysis, is important for two reasons. First, it leads to a well-defined and consistent concept of optimality. For example, it allows us to formally show that using local polynomial regression of  an order that’s too high given the amount of smoothness imposed is suboptimal. In contrast, under pointwise-in-f asymptotics (which do not require such uniformity), high-order local polynomial estimates are superefficient at every point in the parameter space (see Chapter 1.2.4 in Tsybakov, 2009, and Brown et al., 1997). Second, it is necessary for good finite-sample performance. For example, as we show in Section 4.1, bandwidths that optimize the asymptotic MSE derived under pointwise-in-f asymptotics can lead to arbitrarily poor finite-sample behavior. This point is borne out in our Monte Carlo study, in which we show that commonly used plug-in bandwidths that attempt to estimate this pointwise-in-f optimal bandwidth can lead to severe undercoverage, even when combined 3  with undersmoothing or bias-correction. In contrast, fixed-length CIs perform as predicted by our theory. Our approach requires an explicit definition of the parameter space F . When the parameter  space bounds derivatives of f , the parameter space will depend on this particular bound M. Unfortunately, the results of Low (1997), Cai and Low (2004), and Armstrong and Kolesár (2017) show that it is impossible to avoid choosing M a priori without additional assumptions on the parameter space: one cannot use a data-driven method to estimate M and maintain coverage over the whole parameter space. We therefore recommend that, whenever possible, problemspecific knowledge be used to decide what choice of M is reasonable a priori. We also propose a data-driven rule of thumb for choosing M, although, by the above impossibility results, one needs to impose additional assumptions on f in order to guarantee honesty. Regardless of how one chooses M, the fixed-length CIs we propose are more efficient than undersmoothed or bias-corrected CIs that use the same (implicit or explicit) choice of M. While our results show that undersmoothing is inefficient, an apparent advantage of undersmoothing is that it leads to correct coverage for any fixed smoothness constant M. However, as we discuss in detail in Section 4.2, a more accurate description of undersmoothing is that it implicitly chooses a sequence Mn → ∞ under which coverage is controlled. Given a sequence of undersmoothed bandwidths, we show how this sequence Mn can be calculated explicitly. One can then obtain a shorter CI with the same coverage properties by computing a fixed-length CI for the corresponding Mn . To illustrate the implementation of the honest CIs, we reanalyze the data from Ludwig and Miller (2007), who, using a regression discontinuity design, find a large and significant effect of receiving technical assistance to apply for Head Start funding on child mortality at a county level. However, this result is based on CIs that ignore the possible bias of the local linear estimator around which they are built, and an ad hoc bandwidth choice. We find that, if one bounds the second derivative globally by a constant M using a Hölder class, the effect is not significant at the 5% level unless one is very optimistic about the constant M, allowing f to only be linear or nearly-linear. Our results build on the literature on estimation of linear functionals in normal models with convex parameter spaces, as developed by Donoho (1994), Ibragimov and Khas’minskii (1985) and many others. As with the results in that literature, our setup gives asymptotic results for problems that are asymptotically equivalent to the Gaussian white noise model, including nonparametric regression (Brown and Low, 1996) and density estimation (Nussbaum, 1996). Our main results build on the “renormalization heuristics” of Donoho and Low (1992), who show that many nonparametric estimation problems have renormalization properties that allow easy computation of minimax mean squared error optimal kernels and rates of convergence. As we show in Appendix C, our results hold under essentially the same conditions, which apply in 4  many classical nonparametric settings. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives the main results. Section 3 applies our results to inference at a point, Section 4 gives a theoretical comparison of our fixedlength CIs to other approaches, and Section 5 compares them in a Monte Carlo study. Finally, Section 6 applies the results to RD, and presents an empirical application based on Ludwig and Miller (2007). Appendix A discusses implementation details and includes a proposal for a rule of thumb for choosing M. Appendix B gives proofs of the results in Section 2. The supplemental materials contain further appendices and additional tables and figures. Appendix C verifies our regularity conditions for some examples, and includes proofs of the results in Section 3. Appendix D calculates the efficiency gain from using different bandwidths on either side of a cutoff in RD that is used in Section 6. Appendix E contains details on optimal kernel calculations discussed in Section 3.  2  General results  We are interested in a scalar parameter T (f ) of a function f , which is typically a conditional mean or density. The function f is assumed to lie in a function class F = F (M), which places “smoothness” conditions on f , where M indexes the level of smoothness. We focus on classical nonparametric function classes, in which M corresponds to bound on a derivative of f of a given order. We allow M = Mn to grow with the sample size n. We have available a class of estimators T̂ (h; k) based on a sample of size n, which depend on a bandwidth h = hn > 0 and a kernel k. Let bias(T̂ ) = sup|Ef T̂ − T (f )| f ∈F  denote the worst-case bias of an estimator T̂ , and let sdf (T̂ ) = varf (T̂ )1/2 denote its standard deviation. We assume that the estimator T̂ (h; k) is centered so that its maximum and minimum bias over F sum to zero, supf ∈F Ef (T̂ (h; k) − T (f )) = − inf f ∈F Ef (T̂ (h; k) − T (f )).  Our main assumption is that the variance and worst-case bias scale as powers of h. In particular, we assume that, for some γb > 0, γs < 0, B(k) > 0 and S(k) > 0, bias(T̂ (h; k)) = hγb MB(k)(1 + o(1)),  sdf (T̂ (h; k)) = hγs n−1/2 S(k)(1 + o(1)),  (1)  where the o(1) term in the second equality is uniform over f ∈ F . Note that the second  condition implies that the standard deviation does not depend on the underlying function f asymptotically. As we show in Appendix C in the supplemental materials, this condition (as well as the other conditions used in this section) holds whenever the renormalization heuristics 5  of Donoho and Low (1992) can be formalized. This includes most classical nonparametric problems, such as estimation of a density or conditional mean, or its derivative, evaluated at a point (which may be a boundary point). In Section 3, we show that (1) holds with γb = p, and γs = −1/2 under mild regularity conditions when T̂ (h; k) is a local polynomial estimator of a conditional mean at a point, and F (M) consists of functions with pth derivative bounded by M.  Let t = hγb −γs MB(k)/(n−1/2 S(k)) denote the ratio of the leading worst-case bias and stan1/(γb −γs ) dard deviation terms. Substituting h = tn−1/2 S(k)/(MB(k)) into (1), the approxi-  mate bias and standard deviation can be written as hγb MB(k) = tr n−r/2 M 1−r S(k)r B(k)1−r ,  hγs n−1/2 S(k) = tr−1 n−r/2 M 1−r S(k)r B(k)1−r  (2)  where r = γb /(γb − γs ). Since the bias and the standard deviation both converge at rate nr/2 when M is fixed, we refer to r as the rate exponent (this matches the definition in, e.g., Donoho and Low 1992; see Appendix C in the supplemental materials). Computing the wost-case bias-standard deviation ratio (bias-sd ratio) t associated with a given bandwidth allows easy computation of honest CIs. Let se(h; b k) denote the standard error,  an estimate of sdf (T̂ (h; k)). Assuming a central limit theorem applies to T̂ (h; k), [T̂ (h; k) − T (f )]/se(h; b k) will be approximately distributed as a normal random variable with variance 1 and bias bounded by t. Thus, an approximate 1 − α CI is given by T̂ (h; k) ± cv1−α (t) · se(h; b k),  (3)  where cv1−α (t) is the 1 − α quantile of the |N(t, 1)| distribution (see Table 1). This is an approximate version of a fixed-length confidence interval (FLCI) studied in Donoho (1994), who replaces se(h; b k) with sdf (T̂ (h; k)) in the definition of this CI, and assumes sdf (T̂ (h; k)) is constant over f , in which case its length will be fixed. We thus refer to CIs of this form as “fixed-length”, even though se(h; b k) is random. One could also form honest CIs by simply  adding and subtracting the worst case bias, in addition to adding and subtracting the standard error times z1−α/2 = cv1−α (0), the 1 − α/2 quantile of a standard normal distribution, forming b k)). However, since the estimator T̂ (h; k) cannot the CI as T̂ (h; k)±(bias(T̂ (h; k))+z1−α/2 · se(h;  simultaneously have a large positive and a large negative bias, such CI will be conservative, and longer than the CI given in Equation (3).  Honest one-sided 1 − α CIs based on T̂ (h; k), can be constructed by simply subtracting the maximum bias, in addition to subtracting z1−α times the standard deviation, from T̂ (h; k): [T̂ (h; k) − hγb MB(k) − z1−α hγs n−1/2 S(k) , ∞).  6  (4)  To discuss the optimal choice of bandwidth h and compare efficiency of different kernels k in forming one- and two-sided CIs, and compare the results to the bandwidth and kernel efficiency results for estimation, it will be useful to introduce notation for a generic performance criterion. Let R(T̂ ) denote the worst-case (over F ) performance of T̂ according to a given criterion, and let R̃(b, s) denote the value of this criterion when T̂ − T (f ) ∼ N(b, s2 ). For FLCIs, we can take their half-length as the criterion, which leads to  n   o RFLCI,α (T̂ (h; k)) = inf χ : Pf |T̂ (h; k) − T (f )| ≤ χ ≥ 1 − α all f ∈ F ,  R̃FLCI,α (b, s) = inf χ : PZ∼N (0,1) (|sZ + b| ≤ χ) ≥ 1 − α = s · cv1−α (b/s).  To evaluate one-sided CIs, one needs a criterion other than length, which is infinite. A natural criterion is expected excess length, or quantiles of excess length. We focus here on the quantiles of excess length. For CI of the form (4), its worst-case β quantile of excess length is given by ROCI,α,β (T̂ (h; k)) = supf ∈F qf,β (T f − T̂ (h; k) + hγb MB(k) + z1−α hγs n−1/2 S(k)), where qf,β (Z)  is the β quantile of a random variable Z. The worst-case β quantile of excess length based on an estimator T̂ when T̂ − T (f ) is normal with variance s2 and bias ranging between −b and b  is R̃OCI,α,β (b, s) ≡ 2b + (z1−α + zβ )s. Finally, to evaluate T̂ (h; k) as an estimator we use root mean squared error (RMSE) as the performance criterion: RRM SE (T̂ ) = sup f ∈F  q  Ef [T̂ − T (f )]2 ,  R̃(b, s) =  √  b2 + s2 .  When (1) holds and the estimator T̂ (h; k) satisfies an appropriate central limit theorem, these performance criteria will satisfy R(T̂ (h; k)) = R̃(hγb MB(k), hγs n−1/2 S(k))(1 + o(1)).  (5)  To keep the statement of our main results simple, we make this assumption directly. As is the case for condition (1), we show in Appendix C in the supplemental materials that this condition will typically hold in most classical nonparametric problems. In Section 3, we verify it for the problem of estimation of a conditional mean at a point. We will also assume that R̃ scales linearly in its arguments (i.e. it is homogeneous of degree one): R̃(tb, ts) = tR̃(b, s). This holds for all three criteria considered above. Plugging in (2) and using scale invariance of R̃ gives R(T̂ (h; k)) = n−r/2 M 1−r S(k)r B(k)1−r tr−1 R̃(t, 1)(1 + o(1))  (6)  where t = hγb −γs MB(k)/(n−1/2 S(k)) is the bias-sd ratio and r = γb /(γb − γs ) is the rate exponent, as defined above. Under (6), the asymptotically optimal bandwidth for a given  7  performance criterion R is h∗R = (n−1/2 S(k)t∗R /(MB(k)))1/(γb −γs ) , with t∗R = argmint tr−1 R̃(t, 1). Assuming t∗R is finite and strictly greater than zero, the optimal bandwidth decreases at the rate (nM 2 )−1/[2(γb −γs )] regardless of the performance criterion—the performance criterion only determines the optimal bandwidth constant. Since the approximation (5) may not hold when h is too small or large relative to the sample size, we will only assume this condition for bandwidth sequences of order (nM 2 )−1/[2(γb −γs )] . For our main results, we assume directly that optimal bandwidth sequences decrease at this rate: M r−1 nr/2 R(T̂ (hn ; k)) → ∞ for any hn with  hn (nM 2 )1/[2(γb −γs )] → ∞ or hn (nM 2 )1/[2(γb −γs )] → 0. (7)  Condition (7) will hold so long as it is suboptimal to choose a bandwidth such that the bias or the variance dominates asymptotically, which is the case in the settings considered here.2 We collect some implications of these derivations in a theorem. Theorem 2.1. Let R be a performance criterion with R̃(b, s) > 0 for all (b, s) 6= 0 and  R̃(tb, ts) = tR̃(b, s) for all (b, s). Suppose that Equation (5) holds for any bandwidth sequence hn with lim inf n→∞ hn (nM 2 )1/[2(γb −γs )] > 0 and lim supn→∞ hn (nM 2 )1/[2(γb −γs )] < ∞, and suppose that Equation (7) holds. Let h∗R and t∗R be as defined above, and assume that t∗R > 0 is unique and well-defined. Then: (i) The asymptotic minimax performance of the kernel k is given by M r−1 nr/2 inf R(T̂ (h; k)) = M r−1 nr/2 R(T̂ (h∗R ; k)) + o(1) h>0  = S(k)r B(k)1−r inf tr−1 R̃(t, 1) + o(1), t  where h∗R = (n−1/2 S(k)t∗R /(MB(k)))1/(γb −γs ) , and t∗R = argmint tr−1 R̃(t, 1). (ii) The asymptotic relative efficiency of two kernels k1 and k2 is given by lim  n→∞  inf h>0 R(T̂ (h; k1 )) inf h>0 R(T̂ (h; k2 ))  =  S(k1 )r B(k1 )1−r . S(k2 )r B(k2 )1−r  It depends on the rate r but not on the performance criterion R. In typical settings, we will need the optimal bandwidth h∗R to shrink at a rate such that (h∗R )−2γs n → ∞ and → 0. If M is fixed, this simply requires that γb − γs > 1/2, which basically amounts to a requirement that F (M ) imposes enough smoothness so that the problem is not degenerate in large samples. If M = Mn → ∞, then the condition also requires nr/2 M r−1 → ∞, so that M does not increase too quickly. 2  h∗R  8  (iii) If (1) holds, the asymptotically optimal bias-sd ratio is given by lim  n→∞  bias(T̂ (h∗R ; k)) sdf (T̂ (h∗R ; k))  = argmin tr−1 R̃(t, 1) = t∗R . t  It depends only on the performance criterion R and rate exponent r. If we consider two performance criteria R1 and R2 satisfying the conditions above, then the limit of the ratio of optimal bandwidths for these criteria is h∗ lim ∗R1 = n→∞ h R2    t∗R1 t∗R2  1/(γb −γs )  .  It depends only on γb and γs and the performance criteria. Part (i) gives the optimal bandwidth formula for a given performance criterion. The performance criterion only determines the optimal bandwidth constant (the optimal bias-sd ratio) t∗R . Part (ii) shows that relative kernel efficiency results do not depend on the performance criterion. In particular, known kernel efficiency results under the RMSE criterion such as those in Fan (1993), Cheng et al. (1997), and Fan et al. (1997) apply unchanged to other performance criteria such as length of FLCIs, excess length of one-sided CIs, or expected absolute error. Part (iii) shows that the optimal bias-sd ratio for a given performance criterion depends on F only through the rate exponent r, and does not depend on the kernel. The optimal bias-sd ratio for RMSE, FLCI and OCI, respectively, are p √ t∗RM SE = argmin tr−1 R̃RM SE (t, 1) = argmin tr−1 t2 + 1 = 1/r − 1, t>0  t>0  t∗F LCI = argmin tr−1 R̃F LCI,α (t, 1) = argmin tr−1 cv1−α (t), t>0  and  t>0  t∗OCI = argmin tr−1 R̃OCI,α (t, 1) = argmin tr−1 [2t + (z1−α + zβ )] = (1/r − 1) t>0  t>0  z1−α + zβ . 2  Figures 1 and 2 plot these quantities as a function of r. Note that the optimal bias-sd ratio is larger for FLCIs (at levels α = .05 and α = .01) than for RMSE. Since h is increasing in t, it follows that, for FLCI, the optimal bandwidth oversmooths relative to the RMSE optimal bandwidth. One can also form FLCIs centered at the estimator that is optimal for different performance criterion R as T̂ (h∗R ; k) ± se(h b ∗R ; k) · cv1−α (t∗R ). The critical value cv1−α (t∗R ) depends only on the  rate exponent r and the performance criterion R. In particular, the CI centered at the RMSE p optimal estimator takes this form with t∗RM SE = 1/r − 1. Table 1 reports this critical value p cv1−α ( 1/r − 1) for some rate exponents r commonly encountered in practice. By (6), the 9  resulting CI is wider than the one computed using the FLCI optimal bandwidth by a factor of (t∗F LCI )r−1 · cv1−α (t∗F LCI ) . (t∗RM SE )r−1 · cv1−α (t∗RM SE )  (8)  Figure 3 plots this quantity as a function of r. It can be seen from the figure that if r ≥ 4/5, CIs  constructed around the RMSE optimal bandwidth are highly efficient. For example, if r = 4/5, to construct an honest 95% FLCI based on an estimator with bandwidth chosen to optimize RMSE, one simply adds and subtracts the standard error multiplied by 2.18 (rather than the usual 1.96 critical value), and the corresponding CI is only about 3% longer than the one with bandwidth chosen to optimize CI length. The next theorem gives a formal statement. Theorem 2.2. Suppose that the conditions of Theorem 2.1 hold for RRMSE and for RFLCI,α̃ for all α̃ in a neighborhood of α. Let se(h b ∗rmse ; k) be such that se(h b ∗rmse ; k)/ sdf (h∗rmse ; k) converges in probability to 1 uniformly over f ∈ F . Then o  n p = 1 − α. lim inf Pf T (f ) ∈ T̂ (h∗rmse ; k) ± se(h b ∗rmse ; k) · cv1−α ( 1/r − 1)  n→∞ f ∈F  The asymptotic efficiency of this CI relative to the one centered at the FLCI optimal bandwidth, defined as limn→∞  3  inf h>0 RFLCI,α (T̂ (h;k)) , RFLCI,α (T̂ (h∗rmse ;k))  is given by (8). It depends only on r.  Inference at a point  In this section, we apply the general results from Section 2 to the problem of inference about a nonparametric regression function at a point, which we normalize to be zero, so that T (f ) = f (0). We allow the point of interest to be on the boundary on the parameter space. Because in sharp regression discontinuity (RD) designs, discussed in detail in Section 6, the parameter of interest can be written as the difference between two regression functions evaluated at boundary points, the results in this section generalize naturally to sharp RD. We write the nonparametric regression model as yi = f (xi ) + ui ,  i = 1, . . . , n,  (9)  where the design points xi are non-random, and the regression errors ui are by definition mean-zero, with variance var(ui ) = σ 2 (xi ). We consider inference about f (0) based on local polynomial estimators of order q, T̂q (h; k) =  n X  wqn (xi ; h, k)yi ,  i=1  10  where the weights wqn (xi ; h, k) are given by wqn (x; h, k)  =  e′1 Q−1 n mq (x)k(x/h),  Qn =  n X  k(xi /h)mq (xi )mq (xi )′ .  i=1  Here mq (t) = (1, t, . . . , tq )′ , k(·) is a kernel with bounded support, and e1 is a vector of zeros with 1 in the first position. In particular, T̂q (h; k) corresponds to the intercept in a weighted least squares regression of yi on (1, xi , . . . , xqi ) with weights k(xi /h). Local linear estimators correspond to q = 1, and Nadaraya-Watson (local constant) estimators to q = 0. It will be convenient to define the equivalent kernel kq∗ (u)  =  e′1  Z  X  −1 mq (t)mq (t) k(t) dt mq (u)k(u), ′  (10)  where the integral is over X = R if 0 is an interior point, and over X = [0, ∞) if 0 is a (left)  boundary point. We assume the following conditions on the design points and regression errors ui : R P Assumption 3.1. The sequence {xi }ni=1 satisfies nh1 n ni=1 g(xi /hn ) → d X g(u) du for some d > 0, and for any bounded function g with finite support and any sequence hn with 0 <  lim inf n hn (nM 2 )1/(2p+1) < lim supn hn (nM 2 )1/(2p+1) < ∞.  Assumption 3.2. The random variables {ui }ni=1 are independent and normally distributed with Eui = 0 and var(ui ) = σ 2 (xi ), and the variance function σ 2 (x) is continuous at x = 0. Assumption 3.1 requires that the empirical distribution of the design points is smooth around 0. When the support points are treated as random, the constant d typically corresponds to their density at 0. The assumption of normal errors in Assumption 3.2 is made for simplicity and could be replaced with the assumption that for some η > 0, E[u2+η ] < ∞. i Because the estimator is linear in yi , its variance doesn’t depend on f , 2  sd(T̂q (h; k)) =  n X  wqn (xi )2 σ 2 (xi )  =  i=1    σ 2 (0) dnh  Z  X  kq∗ (u)2    du (1 + o(1)),  (11)  where the second equality holds under Assumptions 3.1 and 3.2, as we show in Appendix C.2 in the supplemental materials. The condition on the standard deviation in Equation (1) thus holds with sZ γs = −1/2 and S(k) = d−1/2 σ(0) kq∗ (u)2 du. (12) X  Tables S1 and S2 in the supplemental materials give the constant kernels. 11  R  X  kq∗ (u)2 du for some common  On the other hand, the worst-case bias will be driven primarily by the function class F . We consider inference under two popular function classes. First, the Taylor class of order p, o n P p (j) j f (0)x /j! ≤ M|x| /p! x ∈ X . FT,p (M) = f : f (x) − p−1 j=0  This class consists of all functions for which the approximation error from a (p − 1)-th order Taylor approximation around 0 can be bounded by p!1 M|x|p . It formalizes the idea that the pth derivative of f at zero should be bounded by some constant M. Using this class of functions to derive optimal estimators goes back at least to Legostaeva and Shiryaev (1971), and it underlies much of existing minimax theory concerning local polynomial estimators (see Fan and Gijbels, 1996, Chapter 3.4–3.5). While analytically convenient, the Taylor class may not be attractive in some empirical settings because it allows f to be non-smooth and discontinuous away from 0. We therefore also consider inference under Hölder class3 ,  FHöl,p (M) = f : |f (p−1) (x) − f (p−1) (x′ )| ≤ M|x − x′ |, x, x′ ∈ X .  This class is the closure of the family of p times differentiable functions with the pth derivative bounded by M, uniformly over X , not just at 0. It thus formalizes the intuitive notion that f should be p-times differentiable with a bound on the pth derivative. The case p = 1 corresponds to the Lipschitz class of functions. Theorem 3.1. Suppose that Assumption 3.1 holds. Then, for a bandwidth sequence hn with 0 < lim inf n hn (nM 2 )1/(2p+1) < lim supn hn (nM 2 )1/(2p+1) < ∞, Mhpn T biasFT,p (M ) (T̂q (hn ; k)) = B (k)(1 + o(1)), p! p,q  T Bp,q (k)  =  Z  X  |up kq∗ (u)| du  and biasFHöl,p (M ) (T̂q (hn ; k)) =  Mhpn Höl B (k)(1 + o(1)), p! p,q Höl Bp,q (k)  =p  Z  ∞  t=0  Z  u∈X ,|u|≥t  kq∗ (u)(|u| − t)p−1 du dt.  Höl Thus, the first part of (1) holds with γb = p and B(k) = Bp,q (k)/p! where Bp,q (k) = Bp,q (k) for T FHöl,p (M), and Bp,q (k) = Bp,q (k) for FT,p (M).  If, in addition, Assumption 3.2 holds, then Equation (5) holds for the RMSE, FLCI and OCI performance criteria, with γb and B(k) given above and γs and S(k) given in Equation (12). 3  For simplicity, we focus on Hölder classes of integer order.  12  The theorem verifies the regularity conditions needed for the results in Section 2, and implies that r = 2p/(2p + 1) for FT,p (M) and FHöl,p (M). If p = 2, then we obtain r = 4/5. By Theorem 2.1 (i), the optimal rate of convergence of a criterion R is R(T̂ (h∗R ; k)) = O((n/M 1/p )−p/(2p+1) ). As we will see from the relative efficiency calculation below, the optimal order of the local polynomial regression is q = p−1 for the kernels considered here. The theorem allows q ≥ p−1, so that we can examine the efficiency of local polynomial regressions that are of order that’s too high relative to the smoothness class (when q < p − 1, the maximum bias is infinite). Under the Taylor class FT,p (M), the least favorable (bias-maximizing) function is given by f (x) = M/p! · sign(wqn (x))|x|p . In particular, if the weights are not all positive, the least  favorable function will be discontinuous away from the boundary. The first part of Theorem 3.1 then follows by taking the limit of the bias under this function. Assumption 3.1 ensures that this limit is well-defined. Under the Hölder class FHöl,p (M), it follows from an integration by parts identity that the bias under f can be written as a sample average of f (p) (xi ) times a weight function that depends on the kernel and the design points. The function that maximizes the bias is then obtained by setting the pth derivative to be M or −M depending on whether this weight function is positive or negative. This leads to a pth order spline function maximizing the bias. See Appendix C.2 in the supplemental materials for details. For kernels given by polynomial functions over their support, kq∗ also has the form of a T Höl polynomial, and therefore Bp,q and Bp,q can be computed analytically. Tables S1 and S2 in the  supplemental materials give these constants for selected kernels.  3.1  Kernel efficiency  It follows from Theorem 2.1 (ii) that the optimal equivalent kernel minimizes S(k)r B(k)1−r . Under the Taylor class FT,p (M), this minimization problem is equivalent to minimizing Z  X  ∗  2  k (u) du  p Z  p ∗  X    |u k (u)| du ,  (13)  The solution to this problem follows from Sacks and Ylvisaker (1978, Theorem 1) (see also Cheng et al. (1997)). We give details of the solution as well as plots of the optimal kernels in Appendix E in the supplemental materials. In Table 2, we compare the asymptotic relative efficiency of local polynomial estimators based on the uniform, triangular, and Epanechnikov kernels to the optimal Sacks-Ylvisaker kernels. Fan et al. (1997) and Cheng et al. (1997), conjecture that minimizing (13) yields a sharp bound on kernel efficiency. It follows from Theorem 2.1 (ii) that this conjecture is correct, and 13  Table 2 match the kernel efficiency bounds in these papers. One can see from the tables that the choice of the kernel doesn’t matter very much, so long as the local polynomial is of the right order. However, if the order is too high, q > p − 1, the efficiency can be quite low, even if the bandwidth used was optimal for the function class or the right order, FT,p (M), especially on the boundary. However, if the bandwidth picked is optimal for FT,q−1 (M), the bandwidth will shrink at a lower rate than optimal under FT,p (M), and the resulting rate of convergence will be lower than r. Consequently, the relative asymptotic efficiency will be zero. A similar point in the context of pointwise asymptotics was made in Sun (2005, Remark 5, page 8).  The solution to minimizing S(k)r B(k)1−r under FHöl,p (M) is only known in special cases. When p = 1, the optimal estimator is a local constant estimator based on the triangular kernel. When p = 2, the solution is given in Fuller (1961) and Zhao (1997) for the interior point problem, and in Gao (2018) for the boundary point problem. See Appendix E in the supplemental materials for details, including plots of these kernels. When p ≥ 3, the solution is unknown.  Therefore, for p = 3, we compute efficiencies relative to a local quadratic estimator with a triangular kernel. Table 3 calculates the resulting efficiencies for local polynomial estimators based on the uniform, triangular, and Epanechnikov kernels. Relative to the class FT,p (M), the bias constants are smaller: imposing smoothness away from the point of interest helps to reduce the worst-case bias. Furthermore, the loss of efficiency from using a local polynomial estimator of order that’s too high is smaller. Finally, one can see that local linear regression with a triangular kernel achieves high asymptotic efficiency under both FT,2 (M) and FHöl,2 (M), both at the interior and at a boundary, with efficiency at least 97%, which shows that its popularity in empirical work can be justified on theoretical grounds. Under FHöl,2 (M) on the boundary, the triangular kernel is nearly efficient.  3.2  Gains from imposing smoothness globally  The Taylor class FT,p (M), formalizes the notion that the pth derivative at 0, the point of interest, should be bounded by M, but doesn’t impose smoothness away from 0. In contrast, the Hölder class FHöl,p (M) restricts the pth derivative to be at most M globally. How much can one tighten a confidence interval or reduce the RMSE due to this additional smoothness? It follows from Theorem 3.1 and from arguments underlying Theorem 2.1 that the risk of using a local polynomial estimator of order p − 1 with kernel kH and optimal bandwidth under FHöl,p (M) relative to using a local polynomial estimator of order p − 1 with kernel kT and optimal bandwidth under FT,p (M) is given by inf h>0 RFHöl,p (M ) (T̂ (h; kH )) inf h>0 RFT,p (M ) (T̂ (h; kT ))  =  p ! 2p+1 R ∗ 2 k (u) du RX H,p−1 ∗ k (u)2 du X T,p−1  14  Höl Bp,p−1 (kH ) T Bp,p−1(kT )  1 ! 2p+1  (1 + o(1)),  where RF (T̂ ) denotes the worst-case performance of T̂ over F . If the same kernel is used, the first term equals 1, and the efficiency ratio is determined by the ratio of the bias constants Bp,p−1(k). Table 4 computes the resulting reduction in risk/CI length for common kernels. One  can see that in general, the gains are greater for larger p, and greater at the boundary. In the case of estimation at a boundary point with p = 2, for example, imposing global smoothness of  f results in reduction in length of about 13–15%, depending on the kernel, and a reduction of about 10% if the optimal kernel is used.  3.3  Practical implementation  Given a smoothness class FT,p (M) or FHöl,p (M), Theorems 2.1, 2.2, and 3.1 imply that one p b ∗rmse , k). can construct nearly efficient CIs for f (0) as T̂p−1 (h∗rmse ; k) ± cv1−α ( 1/r − 1) · se(h Alternatively, one could use the critical value cv1−α (bias(T̂p−1 (h∗rmse ; k))/se(h b ∗rmse , k)) based on the finite-sample bias-sd ratio (see Theorem C.1 in the supplemental materials for the finitesample bias expression). To implement this CI, one needs to (i) choose p, M, and k; (ii) form an estimate se(h b ∗rmse , k) of the standard deviation of T̂p−1 (h∗rmse ; k); and (iii) form an estimate of h∗rmse (which depends on the unknown quantities σ 2 (0) and d). We now discuss these issues in turn, with reference to Appendix A for additional details. The choice of p depends on the order of the derivative the researcher wishes to bound and it determines the order of local polynomial. Since local linear estimators are the most popular in practice, we recommend p = 2 as a default choice. In this case, both the Epanechnikov and the triangular kernel are nearly optimal. For M, the results of Low (1997), Cai and Low (2004) and Armstrong and Kolesár (2017) imply that to maintain honesty over the whole function class, a researcher must choose the constant a priori, rather than attempting to use a data-driven method. We therefore recommend that, whenever possible, problem-specific knowledge be used to decide what choice of M is reasonable a priori, and that one considers a range of plausible values by way of sensitivity analysis.4 If additional restrictions on f are imposed, a data-driven method for choosing M may be feasible. In Appendix A.1, we describe a rule-of-thumb method based on the suggestion in Fan and Gijbels (1996, Chapter 4.2). For the standard error se(h b ∗rmse , k), many choices are available in the literature. In our Monte Carlo and application, we use a nearest-neighbor estimator discussed in Appendix A.2.  To compute h∗rmse , one can plug in the constant M (discussed above) along with estimates of d, and σ 2 (0). Alternatively, one can plug in M and an estimate of the function σ 2 (·) to the formula for the finite-sample RMSE. See Appendix A.3 for details. 4  These negative results contrast with more positive results for estimation. See Lepski (1990), who proposes a data-driven method that automates the choice of both p and M .  15  4  Comparison with other approaches  In this section, we compare our approach to inference about the parameter T (f ) to three other approaches to inference. To make the comparison concrete, we focus on the problem of inference about a nonparametric regression function at a point, as in Section 3. The first approach, that we term “conventional”, ignores the potential bias of the estimator and constructs the CI as T̂q (h, k) ± z1−α/2 se(h; b k). The bandwidth h is typically chosen to minimize the asymptotic mean squared error of T̂q (h; k) under pointwise-in-f (or “pointwise”, for short) asymptotics, as opposed to the uniform-in-f asymptotics that we consider. We refer to this bandwidth as h∗pt . In undersmoothing, one chooses a sequence of smaller bandwidths, so that in large samples, the bias of the estimator is dominated by its standard error. Finally, in bias correction, one re-centers the conventional CI by subtracting an estimate of the leading bias term from T̂q (h; k). In Section 4.1, we discuss the distinction between h∗pt and h∗rmse . In Section 4.2, we compare the coverage and length properties of these CIs to the fixed-length CI (FLCI) based on T̂q (h∗rmse ; k).  4.1  RMSE and pointwise optimal bandwidth  The general results from Section 2 imply that given a kernel k and order of a local polynomial q, the RMSE-optimal bandwidth for FT,p (M) and FHöl,p (M) in the conditional mean estimation problem in Section 3 is given by h∗rmse =    S(k)2 1 2pn M 2 B(k)2  1  2p+1  =    σ 2 (0)p!2 2pndM 2  R  k ∗ (u)2 du X q Bp,q (k)2  1  2p+1  ,  (14)  Höl T where Bp,q (k) = Bp,q (k) for FHöl,p (M), and Bp,q (k) = Bp,q (k) for FT,p (M). In contrast, the optimal bandwidth based on pointwise asymptotics is obtained by minimizing the sum of the  leading squared bias and variance terms under pointwise asymptotics for the case q = p − 1. This bandwidth is given by (see, for example, Fan and Gijbels, 1996, Eq. (3.20)) h∗pt =    1 R ∗ 2  2p+1 k (u) du σ 2 (0)p!2 q RX . 2pdnf (p) (0)2 ( X tp kq∗ (t) dt)2  (15)  Thus, the pointwise optimal bandwidth replaces M with the pth derivative at zero, f (p) (0), and R it replaces Bp,q (k) with X tp kq∗ (t) dt. R Note that Bp,q (k) ≥ | X tp kq∗ (t) dt| (this can be seen by noting that the right-hand side corresponds to the bias at the function f (x) = ±xp /p!, while the left-hand side is the supremum of the bias over functions with pth derivative bounded by 1). Thus, assuming that f (p) (0) ≤ M (this holds by definition for any f ∈ F when F = FHöl,p (M)), we will have h∗pt /h∗rmse ≥ 1. The ratio h∗pt /h∗rmse can be arbitrarily large if M exceeds f (p) (0) by a large amount. It then 16  follows from Theorem 2.1, that the RMSE efficiency of the estimator T̂p−1 (h∗pt ; k) relative to T̂p−1 (h∗rmse ; k) may be arbitrarily low. The bandwidth h∗pt is intended to optimize RMSE at the function f itself, so one may argue that evaluating the resulting minimax RMSE is an unfair comparison. However, the mean squared error performance of T̂p−1 (h∗pt ; k) at a given function f can be bad even if the same function f is used to calculate h∗pt . For example, suppose that the support of xi is finite and contains the point of interest x = 0. Consider the function f (x) = xp+1 if p is odd, or f (x) = xp+2 if p is even. This is a smooth function with all derivatives bounded on the support of xi . Since f (p) (0) = 0, h∗pt is infinite, and the resulting estimator is a global pth order polynomial least squares estimator. Its RMSE will be poor, since the estimator is not even consistent. To address this problem, plug-in bandwidths that estimate h∗pt include tuning parameters to prevent them from approaching infinity. The RMSE of the resulting estimator at such functions is then determined almost entirely by these tuning parameters. Furthermore, if one uses such a bandwidth as an input to an undersmoothed or bias-corrected CI, the coverage will be determined by these tuning parameters, and can be arbitrarily bad if the tuning parameters allow the bandwidth to be large. Indeed, we find in our Monte Carlo analysis in Section 5 that plug-in estimates of h∗pt used in practice can lead to very poor coverage even when used as a starting point for a bias-corrected or undersmoothed estimator.  4.2  Efficiency and coverage comparison  Let us now consider the efficiency and coverage properties of conventional, undersmoothed, and bias-corrected CIs relative to the FLCI based on T̂p−1 (h∗rmse , k). To keep the comparison meaningful, and avoid the issues discussed in the previous subsection, we assume these CIs are also based on h∗rmse , rather than h∗pt (in case of undersmoothing, we assume that the bandwidth is undersmoothed relative to h∗rmse ). Suppose that the smoothness class is either FT,p (M) and FHöl,p (M) and denote it by F (M). For concreteness, let p = 2, and q = 1. Consider first conventional CIs, given by T̂1 (h; k) ±z1−α/2 se(h; b k). If the bandwidth h equals h∗rmse , then this CIs are shorter than the 95% FLCIs by a factor of z0.975 / cv0.95 (1/2) = 0.90. Consequently, their coverage is 92.1% rather than the nominal 95% coverage. At the RMSE-  optimal bandwidth, the bias-sd ratio equals 1/2, so disregarding the bias doesn’t result in severe undercoverage. If one uses a larger bandwidth, however, the bias-sd ratio will be larger, and the undercoverage problem more severe: for example, if the bandwidth is 50% larger than h∗rmse , so that the bias-sd ratio equals 1/2 · (1.5)(5/2) the coverage is only 71.9%. Second, consider undersmoothing. This amounts to choosing a bandwidth sequence hn such that hn /h∗rmse → 0, so that for any fixed M, the bias-sd ratio tn = hnγb −γs MB(k)/(n−1/2 S(k)) 17  approaches zero, and the CI T̂ (hn ; k) ± cv1−α (0)se(h b n ; k) = T̂ (hn ; k) ± z1−α/2 se(h b n ; k) will consequently have proper coverage in large samples. However, the CIs shrink at a slower rate than nr/2 = n4/5 , and thus the asymptotic efficiency of the undersmoothed CI relative to the optimal FLCI is zero. On the other hand, an apparent advantage of the undersmoothed CI is that it appears to avoid specifying the smoothness constant M. However, a more accurate description of undersmoothing is that the bandwidth sequence hn implicitly chooses a sequence of smoothness constants Mn → ∞ such that coverage is controlled under the sequence of parameter spaces F (Mn ). We can improve on the coverage and length of the resulting CI by making this sequence explicit and computing an optimal (or near-optimal) FLCI for F (Mn ).  To this end, given a sequence hn , a better approximation to the finite-sample coverage of the CI T̂ (hn ; k) ± z1−α/2 se(h b n ; k) over the parameter space F (M) is PZ∼N (0,1) (|Z + tn (M)| ≥ z1−α/2 ) γb −γs where tn (M) = hn MB(k)/(n−1/2 S(k)) is the bias-sd ratio for the given choice of M. This approximation is exact in idealized settings, such as the white noise model in Appendix C. For a given level of undercoverage η = ηn , one can then compute Mn as the greatest value of  M such that this approximation to the coverage is at least 1 − α − η. In order to trust the undersmoothed CI, one must be convinced of the plausibility of the assumption f ∈ F (Mn ): otherwise the coverage will be worse than 1 − α − η. This suggests that, in the interest of  transparency, one should make this smoothness constant explicit by reporting Mn along with the undersmoothed CI. However, once the sequence Mn is made explicit, a more efficient approach is to simply report an optimal or near-optimal CI for this sequence, either at the coverage level 1 − α − η (in which case the CI will be strictly smaller than the undersmoothed CI while maintaining the same coverage) or at level 1 − α (in which case the CI will have better  finite-sample coverage and may also be shorter than the undersmoothed CI). Finally, let us consider bias correction. It is known that re-centering conventional CIs by an estimate of the leading bias term often leads to poor coverage (Hall, 1992). In an important  paper, Calonico et al. (2014, CCT hereafter) show that the coverage properties of this biascorrected CI are much better if one adjusts the standard error estimate to account for the variability of the bias estimate, which they call robust bias correction (RBC). For simplicity, consider the case in which the main bandwidth and the pilot bandwidth (used to estimate the bias) are the same, and that the main bandwidth is chosen optimally in that it equals h∗rmse . In this case, their procedure amounts to using a local quadratic estimator, but with a bandwidth h∗rmse , optimal for a local linear estimator. The resulting CI obtains by adding and subtracting z1−α/2 times the standard deviation of the estimator. The bias-sd ratio of the estimator is given by  R ∗ 2 1/2 k (u) du 1 B2,2 (k) MB2,2 (k)/2 ∗ 5/2 R ∗ RX 1∗ = . (16) tRBC = (hrmse ) 2 1/2 2 B2,1 (k) σ(0)( k2 (u) du/dn) k (u)2 du X 2 18  The resulting coverage is given by Φ(tRBC +z1−α/2 )−Φ(tRBC −z1−α/2 ). The RBC interval length relative to the 1 − α FLCI around a local linear estimator with the same kernel and minimax MSE bandwidth is the same under both FT,p (M), and FHöl,p (M), and given by 1/2 ∗ 2 k (u) du 2 X R 1/2 (1 + o(1)). cv1−α (1/2) X k1∗ (u)2 du z1−α/2  R  (17)  The resulting coverage and relative length is given in Table 5. One can see that although the coverage properties are excellent (since tRBC is quite low in all cases), the intervals are about 30% longer than the FLCIs around the RMSE bandwidth. Under the class FHöl,2 (M), the RBC intervals are also reasonably robust to using a larger bandwidth: if the bandwidth used is 50% larger than h∗rmse , so that the bias-sd ratio in Equation (16) is larger by a factor of (1.5)5/2 , the resulting coverage is still at least 93.0% for the kernels considered in Table 5. Under FT,2 (M), using a bandwidth 50% larger than h∗rmse yields coverage of about 80% on the boundary and 87% in the interior. If one instead considers the classes FT,3 (M) and FHöl,3 (M) (but with h∗rmse still chosen to be MSE optimal for FT,2 (M) or FHöl,2 (M)), then the RBC interval can be considered an undersmoothed CI based on a second order local polynomial estimator. Following the discussion of undersmoothed CIs above, the limiting coverage is 1 − α when M is fixed (this matches the pointwise-in-f coverage statements in CCT, which assume the existence of a continuous third derivative in the present context). Due to this undersmoothing, however, the RBC CI shrinks at a slower rate than the optimal CI. Thus, depending on the smoothness class, the 95% RBC CI has close to 95% coverage and efficiency loss of about 30%, or exactly 95% coverage at the cost of shrinking at a slower than optimal rate.  5  Monte Carlo  To study the performance of the FLCI that we propose, and compare its performance to other approaches, we conduct a Monte Carlo analysis of the conditional mean estimation problem considered in Section 3. We consider Monte Carlo designs with conditional mean functions M 2 (x − 2(|x| − 0.25)2+ ) 2 M 2 (x − 2(|x| − 0.2)2+ + 2(|x| − 0.5)2+ − 2(|x| − 0.65)2+ ) f2 (x) = 2 M f3 (x) = ((x + 1)2 − 2(x + 0.2)2+ + 2(x − 0.2)2+ − 2(x − 0.4)2+ + 2(x − 0.7)2+ − 0.92) 2 f1 (x) =  19  where M ∈ {2, 6}, giving a total of 6 designs. In all cases, xi is uniform on [−1, 1], ui ∼ N(0, 1/4), and the sample size is n = 500. Figure 5 plots these designs. The regression function for each design lies in FHöl,2 (M) for the corresponding M.  For each design, we implement the optimal FLCI centered at the MSE optimal estimate, as described in Section 3.3, for each choice of M ∈ {2, 6}, and with M calibrated using the rule-  of-thumb (ROT) described Appendix A.1. The implementations with M ∈ {2, 6} allow us to gauge the effect of using an appropriately calibrated M, compared to a choice of M that is either too conservative or too liberal by a factor of 3. The ROT calibration chooses M automatically, but requires additional conditions in order to have correct coverage (see Section 3.3). In addition to these FLCIs, we consider five other methods of CI construction. The first four are different implementations of the robust bias-corrected (RBC) CIs proposed by CCT (discussed in Section 4). Implementing these CIs requires two bandwidth choices: a bandwidth for the local linear estimator, and a pilot bandwidth that is used to construct an estimate of its  bias. The first CI uses a plug-in estimate of h∗pt defined in (15), as implemented by Calonico et al. (2017), and an analogous estimate for the pilot bandwidth (this method is the default in their accompanying software package). The second CI, also implemented by Calonico et al. (2017), uses bandwidth estimates for both bandwidths that optimize the pointwise asymptotic coverage error (CE) among CIs that use usual z1−α/2 critical value. This CI can be considered a particular form of undersmoothing. For the third and fourth CIs, we set both the main and the pilot bandwidth to h∗rmse with M = 2, and M = 6, respectively. Finally, we consider a conventional CI centered at a plug-in bandwidth estimate of h∗pt , using the rule-of-thumb estimator of Fan and Gijbels (1996, Chapter 4.2). All CIs are computed at the nominal 95% coverage level. Table 6 reports the results. The FLCIs perform well when the correct M is used. As expected, they suffer from undercoverage if M is chosen too small, or suboptimal length when M is chosen too large. The ROT choice of M appears to do a reasonable job of having good coverage and length in these designs without requiring knowledge of the true smoothness constant. However, as discussed in Section 3.3, it is impossible for the ROT choice of M (or any other data-driven choice) to do this uniformly over the whole function class, so one must take care in extrapolating these results to other designs. As predicted by the theory in Section 4, the RBC CI has good coverage when implemented using h∗rmse , although it is on average about 25% longer than the corresponding FLCI. The other CIs all have very poor coverage for at least one of the designs. Our analysis in Sections 4 suggests that this is due to the use of plug-in bandwidths that estimate the pointwise MSE optimal bandwidth h∗pt . Indeed, looking at the average of the bandwidth over the Monte Carlo draws (also reported in Table 6), it can be seen that the plug-in bandwidths used for these bandwidths tend to be much larger than those that estimate h∗rmse . This is even the case 20  for the CE bandwidth, which is intended to minimize coverage errors. Overall, the Monte Carlo analysis suggests that default approaches to nonparametric CI construction (bias-correction or undersmoothing relative to plug-in bandwidths) can lead to severe undercoverage, and that plug-in bandwidths justified by pointwise-in-f asymptotics are the main culprit. Bias-corrected CIs such as the one proposed by CCT can have good coverage if one starts from the minimax RMSE bandwidth, although they will be wider than FLCIs proposed in this paper.  6  Application to sharp regression discontinuity  In this section, we apply the results for estimation at a boundary point from Section 3 to sharp regression discontinuity (RD), and illustrate them with an empirical application. Using data from the nonparametric regression model (9), the goal in sharp RD is to estimate the jump in the regression function f at a known threshold, which we normalize to 0, so that T (f ) = limx↓0 f (x)−limx↑0 f (x). The threshold determines participation in a binary treatment: units with xi ≥ 0 are treated; units with xi < 0 are controls. If the regression functions of potential outcomes are continuous at zero, then T (f ) measures the average effect of the treatment for units with xi = 0 (Hahn et al., 2001). For brevity, we focus on the most empirically relevant case in which the regression function f is assumed to lie in the class FHöl,2 (M) on either side of the cutoff: f ∈ FRD (M) = {f+ (x)1(x ≥ 0) − f− (x)1(x < 0) : f+ , f− ∈ FHöl,2 (M)}. We consider estimating T (f ) based on running a local linear regression on either side of the boundary. Given a bandwidth h and a second-order kernel k, the resulting estimator can be written as T̂ (h; k) =  n X  w n (xi ; h, k)yi ,  i=1  n n w n (x; h, k) = w+ (x; h, k) − w− (x; h, k),  n with the weight w+ given by  w+ (x; h, k) = e′1 Q−1 n,+ m1 (x)k+ (x/h),  k+ (u) = k(u)1(u ≥ 0),  P n and Qn,+ = ni=1 k+ (xi /h)m1 (xi )m1 (xi )′ . The weights w− , Gram matrix Q̂n,− and kernel k− are defined similarly. That is, T̂ (h; k) is given by a difference between estimates from two local linear regressions at a boundary point, one for units with non-negative values running variable 2 xi , and one for units with negative values of the running variable. Let σ+ (x) = σ 2 (x)1(x ≥ 0),  21  2 and let σ− (x) = σ 2 (x)1(x < 0). In principle, one could allow the bandwidths for the two local linear regressions to be different. We show in Appendix D in the supplemental materials, however, that the loss in  efficiency resulting from constraining the bandwidths to be the same is quite small unless the 2 2 ratio of variances on either side of the cutoff, σ+ (0)/σ− (0), is quite large. 2 It follows from the results in Section 3 that if Assumption 3.1 holds and the functions σ+ (x) 2 and σ− (x) are right- and left-continuous, respectively, the variance of the estimator doesn’t depend on f and satisfies  2  sd(T̂ (h; k)) =  n X  n  2 2  w (xi ) σ (xi ) =  i=1  R∞ 0   k1∗ (u)2 du 2 2 σ+ (0) + σ− (0) (1 + o(1)), dnh  with d defined in Assumption 3.1. Because T̂ (h; k) is given by the difference between two local linear regression estimators, it follows from Theorem 3.1 and arguments in Appendix C.2 in the supplemental materials that the bias of T̂ (h; k) is maximized at the function f (x) = −Mx2 /2 · (1(x ≥ 0) − 1(x < 0)). The worst-case bias therefore satisfies Z ∞ n  2 MX n n 2 w (xi ) + w− (xi ) xi = −Mh · u2 k1∗ (u) du · (1 + o(1)). bias(T̂ (h; k)) = − 2 i=1 + 0 The RMSE-optimal bandwidth is given by h∗rmse   R∞ ∗ 2 1/5 2 2 k1 (u) du σ+ (0) + σ− (0) 0 = R∞ 2 ∗ · . dn4M 2 ( 0 u k1 (u) du)2  (18)  Similar to the discussion in Section 4.1, this expression is similar to the optimal bandwidth definition derived under pointwise asymptotics (Imbens and Kalyanaraman, 2012), except that ′′  ′′  4M 2 is replaced with (f+ (0) − f− (0))2 , which gives infinite bandwidth if the second derivatives at zero are equal in magnitude and of opposite sign. Consequently, the critique in Section 4.1 applies to this bandwidth as well. The bias-sd ratio at h∗rmse equals 1/2 in large samples; a two-sided CI around T̂ (h∗rmse ; k) for a given kernel k can therefore be constructed as T̂ (h∗rmse ; k) ± cv1−α (1/2) · sd(T̂ (h∗rmse ; k)).  (19)  One can use the critical value cv1−α (bias(T̂ (h∗rmse ; k))/ sd(T̂ (h∗rmse ; k))) based on the finitesample bias-sd ratio. The choice of M, and computation of the standard error and h∗rmse are similar to the conditional mean case, and are discussed in Appendix A.  22  6.1  Empirical illustration  To illustrate the implementation of feasible versions of the CIs (19), we use a subset of the dataset from Ludwig and Miller (2007). In 1965, when the Head Start federal program launched, the Office of Economic Opportunity provided technical assistance to the 300 poorest counties in the United States to develop Head Start funding proposals. Ludwig and Miller (2007) use this cutoff in technical assistance to look at intent-to-treat effects of the Head Start program on a variety of outcomes using as a running variable the county’s poverty rate relative to the poverty rate of the 300th poorest county (which had poverty rate equal to approximately 59.2%). We focus here on their main finding, the effect on child mortality due to causes addressed as part of Head Start’s health services. See Ludwig and Miller (2007) for a detailed description of this variable. Relative to the dataset used in Ludwig and Miller (2007), we remove one duplicate entry and one outlier, which after discarding counties with partially missing data leaves us with 3,103 observations, with 294 of them above the poverty cutoff. Figure 4 plots the data. To estimate the discontinuity in mortality rates, Ludwig and Miller (2007) use a uniform kernel5 and consider bandwidths equal to 9, 18, and 36. This yields point estimates equal to −1.90, −1.20 and −1.11 respectively, which are large effects given that  the average mortality rate for counties not receiving technical assistance was 2.15 per 100,000. The p-values reported in the paper, based on bootstrapping the t-statistic (which ignores any potential bias in the estimates), are 0.036, 0.081, and 0.027. The standard errors for these estimates, obtained using the nearest neighbor method (with J = 3) are 1.04, 0.70, and 0.52. These bandwidth choices are optimal in the sense that they minimize the RMSE expression (22) if M = 0.040, 0.0074, and 0.0014, respectively. Thus, for these bandwidths to be optimal, one has to be very optimistic about the smoothness of the regression function. In comparison, the rule of thumb method for estimating M discussed in Appendix A.1 yields M̂rot = 0.299, implying h∗rmse estimate 4.0, and the point estimate −3.17. For these smoothness parameters, the critical values based on the finite-sample bias-sd ratio are given by 2.165, 2.187,  2.107 and 2.202 respectively, which is very close to the asymptotic value cv.95 (1/2) = 2.181. The resulting 95% confidence intervals are given by (−4.143, 0.353),  (−2.720, 0.323),  (−2.215, −0.013),  and  (−6.352, 0.010),  respectively. The p-values based on these estimates are given by 0.100, 0.125, 0.047, and 0.051. These values are higher than those reported in the paper, as they take into account the potential bias of the estimates. Thus, unless one is confident that the smoothness parameter M is very 5  The paper states that the estimates were obtained using a triangular kernel. However, due to a bug in the code, the results reported in the paper were actually obtained using a uniform kernel.  23  small, the results are not significant at 5% level. Using a triangular kernel helps to tighten the confidence intervals by about 2–4% in length, as predicted by the relative asymptotic efficiency results from Table 3, yielding (−4.138, 0.187),  (−2.927, 0.052),  (−2.268, −0.095),  and  (−5.980, −0.322)  The underlying optimal bandwidths are given by 11.6, 23.1, 45.8, and 4.9 respectively. The pvalues associated with these estimates are 0.074, 0.059, 0.033, and 0.028, tightening the p-values based on the uniform kernel.  24  Appendix A  Implementation details  This section discusses implementation details. We focus on the nonparametric regression setting of Section 3, with additional details for the RD setting of Section 6 where relevant.  A.1  Rule of thumb for M  Fan and Gijbels (1996) suggest using a global polynomial estimate of order p+2 to estimate the pointwise-in-f optimal bandwidth. We apply this approach to estimate M, thereby giving an analogous rule-of-thumb estimate of the minimax optimal bandwidth. To calibrate M, let f˘(x) be the global polynomial estimate of order p + 2, and let [xmin , xmax ] denote the support of xi . We define the rule-of-thumb choice of M to be the supremum of |f˘(p) (x)| over x ∈ [xmin , xmax ].  The resulting minimax RMSE optimal bandwidth is given by (14) with the rule-of-thumb M plugged in. In contrast, the rule-of-thumb bandwidth proposed by Fan and Gijbels (1996, Chapter 4.2) plugs in f˘(p) (0) to the pointwise-in-f optimal bandwidth formula (15). We conjecture that, for any M, the resulting CI will be asymptotically honest over the intersection of F (M) and an appropriately defined set of regression functions that formalizes the notion that the pth derivative in a neighborhood of zero is bounded by the maximum pth derivative of the global p + 2 polynomial approximation to the regression function. We leave this question, as well as optimality of the resulting CI for this class, for future research. In the RD setting in Section 6, the regression function has a discontinuity at a point on the support of xi , which is normalized to zero. In this case, we define f˘(p) (x) to be the global polynomial estimate of order p + 2 in which the intercept and all coefficients are allowed to be different on either side of the discontinuity (that is, we add the indicator I(xi > 0) for observation i being above the discontinuity, as well as interactions of this indicator with each order of the polynomial). We then take the supremum of |f˘(p) (x)| over x ∈ [xmin , xmax ] as our  rule-of-thumb choice of M, as before.  A.2  Standard errors  Because the local linear estimator T̂1 (h∗rmse ; k) is a weighted least squares estimator, one can consistently estimate its finite-sample conditional variance by the nearest neighbor variance estimator considered in Abadie and Imbens (2006) and Abadie et al. (2014). Given a bandwidth h, the estimator takes the form se(h, b k)2 =  n X  J σ̂ 2 (xi ) = J +1  w1n (xi ; h, k)2 σ̂ 2 (xi ),  i=1  25  J 1X yi − yj(i) J j=1  !2  ,  (20)  for some fixed (small) J ≥ 1, where j(i) denotes the jth closest observation to i. In contrast, the usual Eicker-Huber-White estimator sets σ̂ 2 (xi ) = û2i , where ûi is the regression residual, and it can be shown that this estimator will generally overestimate the conditional variance. In the RD setting, the standard error can be estimated using the same formula with the corresponding weight function w (n) (xi ; h, k) for the local linear RD estimator, except that the jth closest observation to i, j(i), is only taken among units with the same sign of the running variable.  A.3  Computation of h∗rmse  For h∗rmse , there are two feasible choices. The first is to use a plug-in estimator that replaces the unknown quantities d, and σ 2 (0), by some consistent estimates. Alternatively, one can directly minimize the finite-sample RMSE over the bandwidth h, which for FHöl,2 (M) takes the form M2 RMSE(h) = 4 2  n X  w1n (xi ; h, k)x2i  i=1  !2  +  n X  w1n (xi ; h, k)2 σ 2 (xi ).  (21)  i=1  Pn Pn n 2 n 2 2 For FT,2 (M), the sum i=1 w1 (xi ; h, k)xi is replaced by i=1 |w1 (xi ; h)xi |. Since σ (xi ) is typically unknown, one can replace it by an estimate σ̂ 2 (xi ) = σ̂ 2 that assumes homoscedasticity of the variance function. For the RD setting with the class FRD (M), the finite-sample RMSE takes the form M2 RMSE(h)2 = 4  n X i=1  n w+ (xi ; h)  +  n w− (xi ; h)    x2i  !2  +  n X i=1   n n w+ (xi )2 + w− (xi )2 σ 2 (xi ), (22)  and h∗rmse can be chosen to minimize this expression with σ 2 (x) replaced with the estimate 2 2 2 2 σ̂ 2 (xi ) = σ̂+ (0)1(x ≥ 0) + σ̂− (0)1(x < 0), where σ̂+ (0) and σ̂− (0) are some preliminary variance  estimates for observations above and below the cutoff. This method was considered previously in Armstrong and Kolesár (2017), who show that  the resulting confidence intervals will be asymptotically valid and equivalent to the infeasible CI based on minimizing the infeasible RMSE (21). This method has the advantage that it avoids having to estimate d, and it can also be shown to work when the covariates are discrete.  26  Appendix B B.1  Proofs of theorems in Section 2  Proof of Theorem 2.1  Parts (ii) and (iii) follow from part (i) and simple calculations. To prove part (i), note that, if it did not hold, there would be a bandwidth sequence hn such that lim inf M r−1 nr/2 R(T̂ (hn ; k)) < S(k)r B(k)1−r inf tr−1 R̃(t, 1). n→∞  t  By Equation (7), the bandwidth sequence hn must satisfy lim inf n→∞ hn (nM 2 )1/[2(γb −γs )] > 0 and lim supn→∞ hn (nM 2 )1/[2(γb −γs )] < ∞. Thus, M r−1 nr/2 R(T̂ (hn ; k)) = S(k)r B(k)1−r tnr−1 R̃(tn , 1) + o(1) where tn = hnγb −γs B(k)/(n−1/2 S(k)). This contradicts the display above.  B.2  Proof of Theorem 2.2  The second statement (relative efficiency) is immediate from (6). For the first statement (coverage), fix ε > 0 and let sdn = n−1/2 (h∗rmse )γs S(k) so that, uniformly over f ∈ F , p sdn / sdf (T̂ (h∗rmse ; k)) → 1 and sdn /se(h b ∗rmse ; k) → 1. Note that, by Theorem 2.1 and the calculations above,  p ˆ ; k)) = sdn · cv1−α−ε ( 1/r − 1)(1 + o(1)) R̃FLCI,α+ε (T̂ (h∗rmse  p and similarly for R̃FLCI,α−ε (T̂ (h∗rmse ; k)). Since cv1−α ( 1/r − 1) is strictly decreasing in α, it follows that there exists η > 0 such that, with probability approaching 1 uniformly over f ∈ F , ˆ ; k)) < se( ˆ ; k)) · cv1−α ( RFLCI,α+ε (T̂ (h∗rmse b T̂ (h∗rmse  p  1/r − 1)  < (1 − η)RFLCI,α−ε (T̂ (h∗rmse ; k)).  Thus, o n p ∗ ∗ lim inf inf P T f ∈ T̂ (hrmse ; k) ± se( b T̂ (hrmse ; k)) · cv1−α ( 1/r − 1) n f ∈F  n o ∗ ∗ ≥ lim inf inf P T f ∈ T̂ (hrmse ; k) ± RFLCI,α+ε (T̂ (hrmse ; k)) ≥1−α−ε   n  f ∈F  27  and o n p ∗ ∗ lim sup inf P T f ∈ T̂ (hrmse ; k) ± se( b T̂ (hrmse ; k)) · cv1−α ( 1/r − 1) f ∈F n  n o ∗ ∗ ˆ ≤ lim sup inf P T f ∈ T̂ (hrmse ; k) ± RFLCI,α−ε (T̂ (hrmse ; k))(1 − η) ≤ 1 − α + ε,   n  f ∈F  ˆ ; k)). Taking ε → 0 gives where the last inequality follows by definition of RFLCI,α−ε (T̂ (h∗rmse the result.  References Abadie, A. and Imbens, G. W. (2006). Large sample properties of matching estimators for average treatment effects. Econometrica, 74(1):235–267. Abadie, A., Imbens, G. W., and Zheng, F. (2014). Inference for misspecified models with fixed regressors. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 109(508):1601–1614. Armstrong, T. B. and Kolesár, M. (2017). Optimal inference in a class of regression models. Econometrica, forthcoming. Brown, L. D. and Low, M. G. (1996). Asymptotic equivalence of nonparametric regression and white noise. The Annals of Statistics, 24(6):2384–2398. Brown, L. D., Low, M. G., and Zhao, L. H. (1997). Superefficiency in nonparametric function estimation. The Annals of Statistics, 25(6):2607–2625. Cai, T. T. and Low, M. G. (2004). An adaptation theory for nonparametric confidence intervals. The Annals of Statistics, 32(5):1805–1840. Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., and Farrell, M. H. (2017). On the effect of bias estimation on coverage accuracy in nonparametric inference. Journal of the American Statistical Association, forthcoming. Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., and Titiunik, R. (2014). Robust nonparametric confidence intervals for regression-discontinuity designs. Econometrica, 82(6):2295–2326. Cheng, M.-Y., Fan, J., and Marron, J. S. (1997). On automatic boundary corrections. The Annals of Statistics, 25(4):1691–1708. Donoho, D. L. (1994). Statistical estimation and optimal recovery. The Annals of Statistics, 22(1):238–270. 28  Donoho, D. L. and Low, M. G. (1992). Renormalization exponents and optimal pointwise rates of convergence. The Annals of Statistics, 20(2):944–970. Fan, J. (1993). Local linear regression smoothers and their minimax efficiencies. The Annals of Statistics, 21(1):196–216. Fan, J., Gasser, T., Gijbels, I., Brockmann, M., and Engel, J. (1997). Local polynomial regression: optimal kernels and asymptotic minimax efficiency. Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 49(1):79–99. Fan, J. and Gijbels, I. (1996). Local Polynomial Modelling and Its Applications. Monographs on Statistics and Applied Probability. Chapman & Hall/CRC, New York, NY. Fuller, A. T. (1961). Relay control systems optimized for various performance criteria. In Coales, J. F., Ragazzini, J. R., and Fuller, A. T., editors, Automatic and Remote Control: Proceedings of the First International Congress of the International Federation of Automatic Control, volume 1, pages 510–519. Butterworths, London. Gao, W. Y. (2018). Minimax linear estimation at a boundary point. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 165:262–269. Hahn, J., Todd, P. E., and van der Klaauw, W. (2001). Identification and estimation of treatment effects with a regression-discontinuity design. Econometrica, 69(1):201–209. Hall, P. (1992). Effect of bias estimation on coverage accuracy of bootstrap confidence intervals for a probability density. The Annals of Statistics, 20(2):675–694. Ibragimov, I. A. and Khas’minskii, R. Z. (1985). On nonparametric estimation of the value of a linear functional in gaussian white noise. Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 29(1):18–32. Imbens, G. W. and Kalyanaraman, K. (2012). Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression discontinuity estimator. The Review of Economic Studies, 79(3):933–959. Legostaeva, I. L. and Shiryaev, A. N. (1971). Minimax weights in a trend detection problem of a random process. Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 16(2):344–349. Lepski, O. V. (1990). On a problem of adaptive estimation in gaussian white noise. Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 35(3):454–466. Li, K.-C. (1989). Honest confidence regions for nonparametric regression. The Annals of Statistics, 17(3):1001–1008. 29  Low, M. G. (1997). 25(6):2547–2554.  On nonparametric confidence intervals.  The Annals of Statistics,  Ludwig, J. and Miller, D. L. (2007). Does head start improve children’s life chances? evidence from a regression discontinuity design. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1):159–208. Nussbaum, M. (1996). Asymptotic equivalence of density estimation and Gaussian white noise. The Annals of Statistics, 24(6):2399–2430. Sacks, J. and Ylvisaker, D. (1978). Linear estimation for approximately linear models. The Annals of Statistics, 6(5):1122–1137. Sun, Y. (2005). Adaptive estimation of the regression discontinuity model. Technical report. Uinivesity of California, San Diego. Tsybakov, A. B. (2009). Introduction to nonparametric estimation. Springer. Zhao, L. H. (1997). Minimax linear estimation in a white noise problem. The Annals of Statistics, 25(2):745–755.  30  Table 1: Critical values cv1−α (·) 1−α r  b 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.408 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.707 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.5 2.0  6/7 4/5  2/3  1/2  0.01  0.05  0.1  2.576 2.589 2.626 2.683 2.757 2.764 2.842 2.934 3.030 3.037 3.128 3.227 3.327 3.826 4.326  1.960 1.970 1.999 2.045 2.107 2.113 2.181 2.265 2.356 2.362 2.450 2.548 2.646 3.145 3.645  1.645 1.653 1.677 1.717 1.772 1.777 1.839 1.916 2.001 2.008 2.093 2.187 2.284 2.782 3.282  p Notes: Critical values cv (t) and cv ( 1/r − 1), correspond to the 1−α quantiles of the |N (t, 1)| 1−α 1−α p and |N ( 1/r − 1, 1)| distribution, where b is the worst-case bias-standard deviation ratio, and r is the exponent r. For b ≥ 2, cv1−α (b) ≈ b + z1−α/2 up to 3 decimal places for these values of 1 − α.  Table 2: Relative efficiency of local polynomial estimators for the function class FT,p (M). Boundary Point Interior point Kernel  Order  p=1  p=2  p=3  p=1  p=2  p=3  Uniform 1(|u| ≤ 1)  0 1 2  0.9615 0.9615 0.5724 0.9163 0.9615 0.9712 0.4121 0.6387 0.8671 0.7400 0.7277 0.9267  Triangular (1 − |u|)+  0 1 2  1 1 0.6274 0.9728 1 0.9943 0.4652 0.6981 0.9254 0.8126 0.7814 0.9741  Epanechnikov 3 (1 − u2 )+ 4  0 1 2  0.9959 0.9959 0.6087 0.9593 0.9959 1 0.4467 0.6813 0.9124 0.7902 0.7686 0.9672  ∗ . The functional T f corresponds to Notes: Efficiency is relative to the optimal equivalent kernel kSY the value of f at a point.  31  Table 3: Relative efficiency of local polynomial estimators for the function class FHöl,p (M). Boundary Point Interior point Kernel  Order  p=1  p=2  p=3  p=1  p=2  p=3  Uniform 1(|u| ≤ 1)  0 1 2  0.9615 0.9615 0.7211 0.9711 0.9615 0.9662 0.5944 0.8372 0.9775 0.8800 0.9162 0.9790  Triangular (1 − |u|)+  0 1 2  1 0.7600 0.9999 0.6336 0.8691 1  Epanechnikov 3 (1 − u2 )+ 4  0 1 2  0.9959 0.9959 0.7471 0.9966 0.9959 0.9949 0.6186 0.8602 0.9974 0.9116 0.9425 1  1 1 0.9892 0.9263 0.9487 1  Notes: For p = 1, 2, efficiency is relative to the optimal kernel, for p = 3, efficiency is relative to the local quadratic estimator with triangular kernel. The functional T f corresponds to the value of f at a point.  Table 4: Gains from imposing global smoothness Boundary Point Interior point Kernel  p=1 p=2  p=3 p=1  p=2 p=3  Uniform Triangular Epanechnikov Optimal  1 1 1 1  0.764 0.797 0.788  1 1 1 0.995  0.855 0.882 0.872 0.906  1 1 1 1  0.848 0.873 0.866  Notes: Table gives the relative asymptotic risk of local polynomial estimators of order p − 1 and a given kernel under the class FHöl,p (M ) relative to the risk under FT,p (M ). “Optimal” refers to using the optimal kernel under a given smoothness class.  32  Table 5: Performance of RBC CIs based on h∗rmse bandwidth for local linear regression under FT,2 and FHöl,2 . FT,2 FHöl,2 Kernel  Length  Coverage  tRBC  Length  Coverage  tRBC  1.35 1.32 1.33  0.931 0.932 0.932  0.400 0.391 0.393  1.35 1.32 1.33  0.948 0.947 0.947  0.138 0.150 0.148  1.35 1.27 1.30  0.941 0.940 0.940  0.279 0.297 0.298  1.35 1.27 1.30  0.949 0.949 0.949  0.086 0.110 0.105  Boundary Uniform Triangular Epanechnikov Interior Uniform Triangular Epanechnikov  Legend: Length—CI length relative to 95% FLCI based on a local linear estimator and the same kernel and bandwidth h∗rmse ; tRBC —worst-case bias-standard deviation ratio;  33  Table 6: Monte Carlo simulation: Inference at a point. M =2 Method  Bandwidth  Bias  M =6  SE  E[h]  Cov  RL  Bias  SE  Em [h]  Cov  RL  Design 1 RBC RBC RBC RBC Conventional FLCI, M = 2 FLCI, M = 6 FLCI, M = M̂rot  h = ĥ∗pt , b = b̂∗pt h = ĥce , b = b̂ce h = b = ĥ∗rmse,M=2 h = b = ĥ∗rmse,M=6 ĥ∗pt,rot ĥ∗rmse,M=2 ĥ∗rmse,M=6 ĥ∗rmse,M=M̂  0.063 0.030 0.001 0.000 0.032 0.021 0.009 0.008  0.035 0.041 0.061 0.076 0.036 0.043 0.054 0.056  0.75 0.45 0.36 0.23 0.56 0.36 0.23 0.22  55.6 85.9 94.5 94.2 76.6 94.9 96.6 95.6  0.73 0.85 1.27 1.58 0.76 1.00 1.25 1.29  0.157 0.059 0.002 0.000 0.049 0.065 0.028 0.010  0.036 0.045 0.061 0.075 0.046 0.043 0.053 0.069  0.62 0.34 0.36 0.23 0.31 0.36 0.23 0.14  0.1 72.5 94.5 94.2 77.4 75.2 94.7 96.3  0.60 0.75 1.00 1.24 0.76 0.79 0.99 1.28  h = ĥ∗pt , b = b̂∗pt h = ĥce , b = b̂ce h = b = ĥ∗rmse,M=2 h = b = ĥ∗rmse,M=6 ĥ∗pt,rot ĥ∗rmse,M=2 ĥ∗rmse,M=6 ĥ∗rmse,M=M̂  0.043 0.028 0.002 0.000 0.032 0.020 0.009 0.013  0.035 0.040 0.061 0.076 0.032 0.043 0.054 0.048  0.77 0.49 0.36 0.23 0.78 0.36 0.23 0.30  75.9 87.5 94.5 94.2 74.4 95.1 96.6 94.3  0.72 0.83 1.27 1.58 0.67 1.00 1.25 1.13  0.129 0.074 0.006 0.000 0.073 0.061 0.028 0.020  0.035 0.041 0.061 0.075 0.040 0.043 0.053 0.059  0.77 0.44 0.36 0.23 0.44 0.36 0.23 0.20  4.6 54.3 94.4 94.2 53.0 78.1 94.7 94.3  0.57 0.68 1.00 1.24 0.66 0.79 0.99 1.08  h = ĥ∗pt , b = b̂∗pt h = ĥce , b = b̂ce h = b = ĥ∗rmse,M=2 h = b = ĥ∗rmse,M=6 ĥ∗pt,rot ĥ∗rmse,M=2 ĥ∗rmse,M=6 ĥ∗rmse,M=M̂  -0.043 -0.026 -0.002 0.000 -0.032 -0.020 -0.009 -0.010  0.035 0.040 0.061 0.076 0.033 0.043 0.054 0.052  0.77 0.49 0.36 0.23 0.72 0.36 0.23 0.25  75.7 88.2 94.5 94.2 74.7 95.0 96.5 95.6  0.72 0.83 1.27 1.58 0.69 1.00 1.25 1.22  -0.122 -0.063 -0.007 0.000 -0.065 -0.060 -0.027 -0.013  0.035 0.043 0.061 0.075 0.042 0.043 0.053 0.065  0.74 0.43 0.36 0.23 0.39 0.36 0.23 0.16  10.2 64.6 94.4 94.2 62.0 78.1 94.7 96.1  0.58 0.71 1.00 1.24 0.69 0.79 0.99 1.21  rot  Design 2  34  RBC RBC RBC RBC Conventional FLCI, M = 2 FLCI, M = 6 FLCI, M = M̂rot  rot  Design 3 RBC RBC RBC RBC Conventional FLCI, M = 2 FLCI, M = 6 FLCI, M = M̂rot  rot  Legend: E[h]—average (over Monte Carlo draws) bandwidth; SE—average standard error, Cov—coverage of CIs (in %); RL—relative (to optimal FLCI) length. Bandwidth (bw) descriptions: ĥ∗pt —plugin estimate of pointwise MSE optimal bw; b̂∗pt —analog for estimate of the bias; ĥce —plugin estimate of coverage error optimal bw; b̂ce —analog for estimate of the bias; The implementation of Calonico et al. (2017) is used for all four bws. ĥ∗rmse,M =2 , ĥ∗rmse,M =6 —RMSE optimal bw, assuming M = 2, and M = 6, respectively. ĥ∗pt,rot —Fan and Gijbels (1996) rule of thumb; ĥ∗  rmse,M =M̂rot  ĥ∗rmse,M =2 , ĥ∗rmse,M =6 , ĥ∗  rmse,M =M̂rot  , and ĥ∗pt,rot . 50,000 Monte Carlo draws.  —RMSE optimal bw, using ROT for M . See Appendix A for detailed description of  FLCI, α = 0.01  2.0 1.5  FLCI, α = 0.05 FLCI, α = 0.1  1.0  MSE  0.5 0.0  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  r  0.9  1  Figure 1: Optimal worst-case bias-standard deviation ratio for fixed length CIs (FLCI), and maximum MSE (MSE) performance criteria.  1.5  OCI, α = 0.01, β = 0.8 OCI, α = 0.05, β = 0.8 OCI, α = 0.01, β = 0.5  1.0  MSE OCI, α = 0.05, β = 0.5  0.5  0.0 0.5  0.6  r  0.7  0.8  0.9  1  Figure 2: Optimal worst-case bias-standard deviation ratio for one-sided CIs (OCI), and maximum MSE (MSE) performance criteria.  35  1.00  Relative efficiency  FLCI, α = 0.1  0.98 FLCI, α = 0.05  0.96 0.94 0.92  FLCI, α = 0.01  0.5  0.6  r  0.7  0.8  0.9  1  Mortality rate  Figure 3: Efficiency of fixed-length CIs based on minimax MSE bandwidth relative to fixedlength CIs based on optimal bandwidth.  6  4  2  -40  -20  0  Poverty rate minus 59.1984  20  Figure 4: Average county mortality rate per 100,000 for children aged 5–9 over 1973–83 due to causes addressed as part of Head Start’s health services (labeled “Mortality rate”) plotted against poverty rate in 1960 relative to 300th poorest county. Each point corresponds to an average for 25 counties. Data are from Ludwig and Miller (2007).  36  1.5  f (x)  1.0  0.5  0.0  Design 2 Design 1  -0.5  -1.0  Design 3 -1.0  -0.5  0.0  0.5  x Figure 5: Monte Carlo simulation Designs 1–3, and M = 2.  37  1.0  arXiv:1606.01200v3 [stat.AP] 19 Mar 2018  Supplemental Materials for “Simple and Honest Confidence Intervals in Nonparametric Regression” Timothy B. Armstrong∗  Michal Kolesár†  Yale University  Princeton University  March 20, 2018  Appendix C  Verification of regularity conditions in examples  We verify the conditions (1), (5) and (7) in some applications. Section C.1 shows that these conditions hold in the Gaussian white noise model under a mild extension of conditions in Donoho and Low (1992). Thus, the results apply to estimating, among other things, a function or one of its derivatives evaluated at a given point, when the function is observed in the white noise model. By equivalence results in Brown and Low (1996) and density estimation Nussbaum (1996), our results also apply when the function of interest is a density or conditional mean. Section C.2 verifies these conditions directly for local polynomial estimators in the nonparametric regression setting.  C.1  Gaussian white noise model  The approximation (5) holds as an exact equality (i.e. with the o(1) term equal to zero) in the Gaussian white noise model whenever the problem renormalizes in the sense of Donoho and Low (1992). We show this below, using notation taken mostly from that paper. Consider a Gaussian white noise model √ Y (dt) = (Kf )(t) dt + (σ/ n)W (dt), ∗ †  email: timothy.armstrong@yale.edu email: mkolesar@princeton.edu  1  t ∈ Rd .  We are interested in estimating the linear functional T (f ) where f is known to be in the class F = {f : J2 (f ) ≤ C} where J2 (f ) : F → R and C ∈ R are given. Let Ua,b denote the renormalization operator Ua,b f (t) = af (bt). Suppose that T , J2 , and the inner product are homogeneous: T (Ua,b f ) = abs0 T (f ), J2 (Ua,b f ) = abs2 J2 (f ) and hKUa1 ,b f, KUa2 ,b gi = a1 a2 b2s1 hKf, Kgi. These are the same conditions as in Donoho and Low (1992) except for the last one, which is slightly stronger since it must hold for the inner product rather than just the norm. Consider the class of linear estimators based on a given kernel k: sh  T̂ (h; k) = h  Z  sh  (Kk(·/h))(t) dY (t) = h  Z  [KU1,h−1 k](t) dY (t)  for some exponent sh to be determined below. The worst-case bias of this estimator is bias(T̂ (h; k)) = sup |T (f ) − hsh hKk(·/h), Kf i| . J2 (f )≤C  Note that J2 (f ) ≤ C iff. f = Uhs2 ,h−1 f˜ for some f˜ with J2 (f˜) = J2 (Uh−s2 ,h f ) = J2 (f ) ≤ C. This gives bias(T̂ (h; k)) = sup |T (Uhs2 ,h−1 f ) − hsh hKk(·/h), KUhs2 ,h−1 f i| J2 (f )≤C  = sup J2 (f )≤C  hs2 −s0 T (f ) − hsh +s2 −2s1 hKk(·), Kf i .  If we set sh = −s0 + 2s1 so that s2 − s0 = sh + s2 − 2s1 , the problem will renormalize, giving bias(T̂ (h; k)) = hs2 −s0 bias(T̂ (1; k)). The variance does not depend on f and is given by varf (T̂ (h; k)) = h2sh (σ 2 /n)hKU1,h−1 k, KU1,h−1 ki = h2sh −2s1 (σ 2 /n)hKk, Kki = h−2s0 +2s1 (σ 2 /n)hKk, Kki. Thus, Equation (1) holds with γb = s2 − s0 , γs = s1 − s0 , B(k) = bias(T̂ (1; k)) = sup |T (f ) − hKk, Kf i| , J2 (f )≤C  and S(k) = σkKkk and with both o(1) terms equal to zero. This implies that (5) holds with the o(1) term equal to zero, since the estimator is normally distributed.  2  C.2  Local polynomial estimators in fixed design regression  This section proves Theorem 3.1 and Equation (11) in Section 3. We begin by deriving the worst-case bias of a general linear estimator T̂ =  n X  w(xi )yi  i=1  under Hölder and Taylor classes. For both FT,p (M) and FHöl,p (M) the worst-case bias is infinite P P unless ni=1 w(xi ) = 1 and ni=1 w(xi )xj = 0 for j = 1, . . . , p − 1, so let us assume that w(·) Pp−1 j (j) satisfies these conditions. For f ∈ FT,p (M), we can write f (x) = (0)/j! + r(x) j=0 x f p with |r(x)| ≤ M|x| /p!. As noted by Sacks and Ylvisaker (1978), this gives the bias under f P as ni=1 w(xi )r(xi ), which is maximized at r(x) = M sign(w(x))|x|p /p!, giving biasFT,p (T̂ ) = Pn p i=1 M|w(xi )x| /p!. For f ∈ FHöl,p (M), the (p − 1)th derivative is Lipschitz and hence absolutely continuous. P P Furthermore, since ni=1 w(xi ) = 1 and ni=1 w(xi )xj = 0, the bias at f is the same as the P j (j) (0)/j!, so we can assume without loss of generality that f (0) = bias at x 7→ f (x) − p−1 j=0 x f f ′ (0) = · · · = f (p−1) (0). This allows us to apply the following lemma.  Lemma C.1. Let ν be a finite measure on R (with the Lebesgue σ-algebra) with finite support and and let w : R → R be a bounded measurable function with finite support. Let f be p − 1 times differentiable with bounded pth derivative on a set of Lebesgue measure 1 and with f (0) = f ′ (0) = f ′′ (0) = · · · = f (p−1) (0) = 0. Then Z  ∞  w(x)f (x) dν(x) =  0  and  Z  ∞  w̄p,ν (s)f (p) (s) ds  s=0  0  w(x)f (x) dν(x) =  −∞  where  Z  Z  R  ∞ w̄p,ν (s) = Rx=s  s  0  w̄p,ν (s)f (p) (s) ds s=−∞  w(x)(x−s)p−1 dν(x) (p−1)! w(x)(x−s)p−1 (−1)p (p−1)! x=−∞  s≥0 dν(x)  s < 0.  Proof. By the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus and the fact that the first p − 1 derivatives  at 0 are 0, we have, for x > 0, f (x) =  Z  x t1 =0  Z  t1  t2 =0  ···  Z  tp−1  tp =0  f  (p)  (tp ) dtp · · · dt2 dt1 =  3  Z  x  s=0  f (p) (s)(x − s)p−1 ds. (p − 1)!  Thus, by Fubini’s Theorem, Z  ∞  Z  ∞  Z  x  f (p) (s)(x − s)p−1 dsdν(x) (p − 1)! x=0 s=0 Z ∞ Z ∞ w(x)(x − s)p−1 (p) = f (s) dν(x)ds (p − 1)! s=0 x=s  w(x)f (x) dν(x) =  x=0  w(x)  which gives the first display in the lemma. The second display in the lemma follows from applying the first display with f (−x), w(−x) and ν(−x) playing the roles of f (x), w(x) and ν(x). Applying Lemma C.1 with ν given by the counting measure that places mass 1 on each of R the xi ’s (ν(A) = #{i : xi ∈ A}), it follows that the bias under f is given by w(x)f (x) dν = R w̄p,ν (s)f (p) (s) ds. This is maximized over f ∈ FHöl,p (M) by taking f (p) (s) = M sign(w̄p,ν (s)), R which gives biasFHöl,p (M ) (T̂ ) = |w̄p,ν (s)| ds.  We collect these results in the following theorem. Pn Pn Theorem C.1. For a linear estimator T̂ = i=1 w(xi )yi such that i=1 w(xi ) = 1 and Pn j i=1 w(xi )x = 0 for j = 1, . . . , p − 1, biasFT,p (M ) (T̂ ) =  n X  p  M|w(xi )x| /p!  and  biasFHöl,p (M ) (T̂ ) =  i=1  Z  |w̄p,ν (s)| ds  where w̄p,ν (s) is as defined in Lemma C.1 with ν given by the counting measure that places mass 1 on each of the xi ’s. Note that, for t > 0 and any q, Z  Z ∞Z x w(x)(x − s)q−1 w(x)(x − s)q−1 dν(x)ds = dsdν(x) wq,ν (s) ds = (q − 1)! (q − 1)! s=t x=t s=t s=t x=s x  Z ∞ Z ∞ w(x)(x − t)q −(x − s)q dν(x) = dν(x) = w̄q+1,ν (t). (S1) = w(x) q! q! x=t x=t s=t Z  ∞  ∞  Z  ∞  Let us define w̄0,ν (x) = w(x), so that this holds for q = 0 as well. For the boundary case with p = 2, the bias is given by (using the fact that the support of ν is contained in [0, ∞)) Z  ∞  w(x)f (x) dν(x) = 0  Z  ∞  w̄2,ν (x)f  (2)  (x) dx where w̄2,ν (s) =  0  Z  ∞  x=s  w(x)(x − s) dν(x).  For a local linear estimator based on a kernel with nonnegative weights and support [−A, A], the equivalent kernel w(x) is positive at x = 0 and negative at x = A and changes signs once. From (S1), it follows that, for some 0 ≤ b ≤ A, w̄1,ν (x) is negative for x > b and 4  nonnegative for x < b. Applying (S1) again, this also holds for w̄2,ν (x). Thus, if w̄2,ν (s̃) were strictly positive for any s̃ > 0, we would have to have w̄2,ν (s) nonnegative for s ∈ [0, s̃]. Since P w̄2,ν (0) = ni=1 w(xi )xi = 0, we have 0 < w̄2,ν (0) − w̄2,ν (s̃) = −  Z  s̃  x=0  w(x)(x − s̃) dν(x)  Rs which implies that x=s w(x)dν(x) < 0 for some 0 ≤ s < s < s̃. Since w(x) is positive for small enough x and changes signs only once, this means that, for some s∗ ≤ s̃, we have w(x) ≥ 0 R s∗ for 0 ≤ x ≤ s∗ and x=0 w(x)dν(x) > 0. But this is a contradiction, since it means that R s∗ w̄2,ν (s∗ ) = − 0 w(x)(x − s∗ ) dν(x) < 0. Thus, w̄2,ν (s) is weakly negative for all s, which implies that the bias is maximized at f (x) = −(M/2)x2 . We now provide a proof for Theorem 3.1 by proving the result for a more general sequence of estimators of the form n 1 X T̂ = k̃n (xi /h)yi , nh i=1  where k̃n satisfies  1 nh  further assume  Pn  i=1  k̃n (xi /h) = 1 and  1 nh  Pn  i=1  k̃n (xi /h)xji = 0 for j = 1, . . . , p − 1. We  Assumption C.1. The support and magnitude of k̃n are bounded uniformly over n, and, for some k̃, supu∈R |k̃n (u) − k̃(u)| → 0. Theorem C.2. Suppose Assumptions 3.1 and C.1 hold. Then for any bandwidth sequence hn such that lim inf n hn (nM 2 )1/(2p+1) > 0, and lim supn hn (nM 2 )1/(2p+1) < ∞. Mhpn T biasFT,p (M ) (T̂ ) = B̃ (k̃)(1 + o(1)), p! p  B̃pT (k̃)  =d  Z  X  |upk̃(u)| du  and biasFHöl,p (M ) (T̂ ) =  Mhpn Höl B̃ (k̃)(1 + o(1)), p! p B̃pHöl (k̃)  = dp  Z  ∞  t=0  Z  u∈X ,|u|≥t  k̃(u)(|u| − t)p−1 du dt.  If Assumption 3.2 holds as well, then sd(T̂ ) = h−1/2 n−1/2 S(k̃)(1 + o(1)), n qR where S(k̃) = d1/2 σ(0) X k̃(u)2 du, and (5) holds for the RMSE, FLCI and OCI performance criteria with γb = p and γs = −1/2. 5  Proof. Let Ks denote the bound on the support of k̃n , and Km denote the bound on the magnitude of k̃n . The first result for Taylor classes follows immediately since n  M p 1 X biasFT,p (M ) (T̂ ) = |k̃n (xi /h)||xi /h|p = h p! nh i=1    M p h d p!  Z  X  p    |k̃(u)||u| du (1 + o(1))  where the first equality follows from Theorem C.1 and the second equality follows from the fact that for any function g(u) that is bounded over u in compact sets, n  1 X k̃n (xi /h)g(xi /h) − d nh i=1 n  Z  1 X k̃(xi /h)g(xi /h) − d ≤ nh i=1 n  k(u)g(u) du  X  Z  n  1 X k̃n (xi /h)g(xi /h) − k̃(xi /h)g(xi /h) k(u)g(u) du + nh i=1 X  1 X ≤ o(1) + I(|xi /h| ≤ Ks ) sup |g(u)| · sup |k̃n (u) − k̃(u)| = o(1), (S2) nh i=1 u∈[−Ks,Ks ] u∈[−Ks ,Ks ]  where the second line follows by triangle inequality, the third line by Assumption 3.1 applied to the first summand, and the last equality follows by Assumption 3.1 applied to the first term, and Assumption C.1 applied to the last term. For Hölder classes, biasFHöl,p (M ) (T̂ (h; k̃n )) = M  Z  |w̄p,ν (s)| ds  by Theorem C.1 where w̄p,ν is as defined in that theorem with w(x) = s > 0, w̄p,ν (s) =  Z  = hp−1  n  n  We have, for  − s)p−1 1 X k̃n (xi /h)(xi − s)p−1 dν(x) = I(xi ≥ s) (p − 1)! nh i=1 (p − 1)!  1 k̃ (x/h)(x nh n  x≥s  1 k̃ (x/h). nh n  1 X k̃n (xi /h)(xi /h − s/h)p−1 I(xi /h ≥ s/h). nh i=1 (p − 1)!  Thus, by Equation (S2), for t ≥ 0, h−(p−1) w̄p,ν (t · h) → d · w̄p (t), where w̄p (t) =  Z  u≥t  k̃(u)(u − t)p−1 du (p − 1)!  6  (i.e. w̄p (t) denotes w̄p,ν (t) when w = k̃ and ν is the Lebesgue measure). Furthermore, −(p−1)  |h  "  # n Km X I(0 ≤ xi /h ≤ Ks )(xi /h)p−1 w̄p,ν (t · h)| ≤ · I(t ≤ Ks ) ≤ K1 · I(t ≤ Ks ), nh i=1 (p − 1)!  where the last inequality holds for some K1 by Assumption 3.1. Thus, M  Z  p  s≥0  |w̄p,ν (s)| ds = h M  Z  −(p−1)  t≥0  |h   Z w̄p,ν (t · h)| dt = h M d p  t≥0   |w̄p (t)| dt (1 + o(1))  by the Dominated Convergence Theorem. Combining this with a symmetric argument for t ≤ 0 gives the result. For the second part of the theorem, the variance of T̂ doesn’t depend on f , and equals n  n 1 2 1 X S̃ , k̃n (xi /h)2 σ 2 (xi ) = var(T̂ ) = 2 2 n h i=1 nh n  where  S̃n2  1 X = k̃n (xi /h)2 σ 2 (xi ). nh i=1  By the triangle inequality, S̃n2  2  − dσ (0)  Z  k̃(u)2 du  X n  ≤ sup  |x|≤hKs  1 X k̃n (x/h) σ (x) − k̃(x/h) σ (0) · I(|xi /h| ≤ Ks ) nh i=1 Z n 1 X 2 2 + σ (0) k̃(xi /h) − d k̃(u)2 du = o(1), nh i=1 X 2 2  2 2  where the equality follows by Assumption 3.1 applied to the second summand and the second term of the first summand, and Assumptions 3.2 and C.1 applied to the first term of the first summand. This gives the second display in the theorem. The last statement (verification of Equation (5)) follows immediately from continuity of R̃ for these performance criteria, since T̂ is distributed normal with constant variance. The local polynomial estimator takes the form given above with n  k̃n (u) =  e′1  1 X k(xi /h)mq (xi /h)mq (xi /h)′ nh i=1  !−1  mq (u)k(u).  If k is bounded with bounded support, then, under Assumption 3.1 this sequence satisfies  7  Assumption C.1 with k̃(u) =  e′1   Z −1 ′ d k(u)mq (u)mq (u) du mq (u)k(u) = d−1 kq∗ (u), X  where kq∗ is the equivalent kernel defined in Equation (10). Theorem 3.1 and Equation (11) then follow immediately by applying Theorem C.2 with this choice of k̃n and k̃.  Appendix D  Regression discontinuity with different bandwidths on either side of the cutoff  This appendix calculates the efficiency gain from using different bandwidths on either side of the cutoff. We state a result in a more general setup than that considered in Section 6. Consider estimating a parameter T (f ), f ∈ F , using a class of estimators T̂ (h+ , h− ; k) indexed by two bandwidths h− and h+ . Suppose that the worst-case (over F ) performance of  T̂ (h+ , h− ; k) according to a given criterion satisfies  2 2γs 1/2 s )(1 + o(1)), (S3) R(T̂ (h+ , h− ; k)) = R̃(MB(k)(hγ−b + hγ+b ), n−1/2 (S+ (k)2 h2γ + + S− (k) h− )  where R̃(b, s) denotes the value of the criterion when T̂ (h+ , h− ; k) − T (f ) ∼ N(b, s2 ), and S(k) > 0 and B(k) > 0. Assume that R̃ scales linearly with its arguments. In the RD application considered in Section D, if Assumptions 3.1 holds, ui is normally 2 2 distributed, and σ+ (x) and σ− (0) are right- and left-continuous at 0, then Condition (S3) holds R∞ R∞ 2 2 with γs = −1/2, γb = 2, S+ (k) = σ+ (0) 0 k1∗ (u)2 du/d, S− (k) = σ− (0) 0 k1∗ (u)2 du/d, and R∞ B(k) = − 0 u2 k1∗ (u)du/2. Let ρ = h+ /h− denote the ratio of the bandwidths, and let t denote the ratio of the leading worst-case bias and standard deviation terms, MB(k)(1 + ργb ) MB(k)(hγ−b + hγ+b ) γb −γs . = h t= − s 2 2γs 1/2 n−1/2 (S+ (k)2 ρ2γs + S− (k)2 )1/2 n−1/2 (S+ (k)2 h2γ + + S− (k) h− ) Substituting h+ = ρh− and h− = (tn−1/2 (S+ (k)2 ρ2γs +S− (k)2 )1/2 M −1 B(k)−1 (1+ργb )−1 )1/(γb −γs ) into (S3) and using linearity of R̃ gives R(T̂ (h+ , h− ; k)) = R̃(MB(k)hγ−b (1 + ργb ), hγ−s n−1/2 (S+ (k)2 ρ2γs + S− (k)2 )1/2 )(1 + o(1)) = M 1−r n−r/2 (1 + ς(k)2 ρ2γs )r/2 (1 + ργb )1−r S− (k)r B(k)1−r R̃(t, 1)(1 + o(1)), where r = γb /(γb − γs ) is the rate exponent, and ς(k) = S+ (k)/S− (k) is the ratio of the variance constants. Therefore, the optimal bias-sd ratio is given by t∗R = argmint>0 R̃(t, 1), and depends 8  only on the performance criterion. The optimal bandwidth ratio ρ is given by 2  ρ∗ = argmin(1 + ς(k)2 ρ2γs )r/2 (1 + ργb )1−r = ς(k) γb −2γs , ρ  and doesn’t depend on the performance criterion. Consequently, inference that restricts the two bandwidths to be the same (i.e. restricting ρ = 1) has asymptotic efficiency given by lim  minh+ ,h− R(T̂ (h+ , h− ; k))  n→∞  minh R(T̂ (h; k))    s γb /2 (1 + ργ∗b )−γs (1 + ς(k)2 ρ2γ ∗ ) = (1 + ς(k)2 )γb /2 2−γs 1−r/2  2r 2−r 1 + ς(k) . = 2r−1 (1 + ς(k)2 )r/2  γ  1 b −γs  In the RD application in Section 6, ς(k) = σ+ (0)/σ− (0), and r = 4/5. The display above implies that the efficiency of restricting the bandwidths to be the same on either side of the cutoff is at least 99.0% if 2/3 ≤ σ+ /σ− ≤ 3/2, and the efficiency is still 94.5% when the ratio of standard deviations equals 3. There is therefore little gain from allowing the bandwidths to be different.  Appendix E  Optimal kernels for inference at a point  Here we give details of optimal kernel calculations discussed in Section 3.1 in the main text. The optimal equivalent kernel under the Taylor class FT,p (M) solves Equation 13 in the main text. The solution is given by      Pp−1 Pp−1 p p j j − b + j=1 αj u + |u| , kSY,p(u) = b + j=1 αj u − |u| +  −  the coefficients b and α solving Z  uj kSY,p(u) du = 0, XZ kSY,p(u) du = 1.  j = 1, . . . , p − 1,  X  For p = 1, the triangular kernel kTri (u) = (1 − |u|)+ is optimal both in the interior and on the boundary. In the interior for p = 2, α1 = 0 solves the problem, yielding the Epanechnikov kernel kEpa (u) = 43 (1 − u2)+ after rescaling. For other cases, the solution can be easily found numerically. Figure S1 plots the optimal equivalent kernels for p = 2, 3, and 4, rescaled to be supported on [0, 1] and [−1, 1] in the boundary and interior case, respectively. 9  The optimal equivalent kernel under the Hölder class FHöl,2 (M) has the form of a quadratic spline with infinite number of knots on a compact interval. In particular, in the interior, the R ∞ Int Int optimal kernel is given by fHöl,2 (u)/ −∞ fHöl,2 (u) du, where ∞  Int fHöl,2 (u)  X 1 (−1)j (|x| − kj )2+ , = 1 − x2 + 2 j=0  and the knots kj are given by kj = p √ √ (3 + 33 − 26 + 6 33)2 /16.  (1+q)1/2 (2 1−q 1/2  − q j/2 − q (j+1)/2 ), where q is a constant q =  Bd At the boundary, the optimal kernel is given by fHöl,2 (u)/  R∞  −∞  Bd fHöl,2 (u) du, where  Bd Int fHöl,2 (u) = (1 − x0 x + x2 /2)1(0 ≤ x ≤ x0 ) + (1 − x20 )fHöl,2 ((x − x0 )/(x20 − 1))1(x > x0 ),  with x0 ≈ 1.49969, so that for x > x0 , the optimal boundary kernel is given by a rescaled version of the optimal interior kernel. The optimal kernels are plotted in Figure S2.  References Brown, L. D. and Low, M. G. (1996). Asymptotic equivalence of nonparametric regression and white noise. The Annals of Statistics, 24(6):2384–2398. Donoho, D. L. and Low, M. G. (1992). Renormalization exponents and optimal pointwise rates of convergence. The Annals of Statistics, 20(2):944–970. Nussbaum, M. (1996). Asymptotic equivalence of density estimation and Gaussian white noise. The Annals of Statistics, 24(6):2399–2430. Sacks, J. and Ylvisaker, D. (1978). Linear estimation for approximately linear models. The Annals of Statistics, 6(5):1122–1137.  10  Kernel (k(u))  q  R1 0  T Bp,q (k) =  kq∗ (u)2 du p = 1 1 2 16 27  R1 0  |up kq∗ (u)| du  p=2  p=3  Höl Bp,q (k)  p=1 1 2 8 27  p=2  p=3  1 6 216 3125  1 20  1 10 32 729  1 35  Uniform 1(|u| ≤ 1)  0 1 2  1 4 9  Triangular (1 − |u|)+  0 1 2  4 3 24 5 72 7  0.4293 0.2147 0.1400  0.1699  Epanechnikov 3 (1 − u2 )+ 4  0 1 2  6 5  3 8  3 8  4.498 9.816  0.4382 0.2290 0.5079 0.2662 0.1777  0.2369 11 95 0.1913 0.0508  59 162  0.7055 0.4374 0.3294  0.2352  1 3 3 8  1 3 27 128  3 16  15 448  Table S1: Kernel constants for standard deviation and maximum bias of local polynomial regression estimators of order q for selected kernels. Functional of interest is value of f at a boundary point.  Kernel  q  R1  −1  1 2 1 2 9 8  Uniform 1(|u| ≤ 1)  0 1 2  Triangular (1 − |u|)+  0 1 2  2 3 2 3 456 343  Epanechnikov 3 (1 − u2)+ 4  0 1 2  3 5 3 5 5 4  T Bp,q (k) =  kq∗ (u)2 du p = 1 1 2 1 2  R1  −1  |up kq∗ (u)| du  p=2  p=3  1 3  Höl Bp,q (k)  p=1  p=2  1 2 1 2  1 3  0.4875 0.2789 0.1975  0.2898 0.0859  1 3 1 3  1 3 1 3  1 6  0.2103 0.0517  3 8 3 8  3 8 3 8  0.3603 0.1718 0.1067  1 16  1 6  0.3116 0.1399 0.0844 1 5  p=3  8 245  1 5  0.2347 0.0604  5 128  Table S2: Kernel constants for standard deviation and maximum bias of local polynomial regression estimators of order q for selected kernels. Functional of interest is value of f at an interior point.  11  6  0.6 p=2  p=2  4  0.4  2  0.2  0  0.0  20 1.5  k ∗ (u)  1.0  p=3  10 5  p=3  k ∗ (u)  15  0.5  0  0.0 1.5  40 1.0  30  p=4  p=4  20  0.5  10 0  0.0 0.00  0.25  0.50  u  0.75  1.00  -1.0  -0.5  0.0  u  0.5  1.0  Figure S1: Optimal equivalent kernels for Taylor class FT,p (M) on the boundary (left), and in the interior (right), rescaled to be supported on [0, 1] on the boundary and [−1, 1] in the interior.  12  6  4  k ∗ (u)  k ∗ (u)  1.0  0.5  2  0  0.0 0.00  0.25  0.50  u  0.75  1.00  -1.0  -0.5  0.0  u  0.5  1.0  Figure S2: Optimal equivalent kernels for Hölder class FHöl,2 (M) on the boundary (left), and in the interior (right), rescaled to be supported on [0, 1] on the boundary and [−1, 1] in the interior.  13

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 10. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
