Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 7
ArXiv ID: hf_5646

Abstract:
1  Performance Analysis of Dynamic Channel Bonding in Spatially Distributed High Density WLANs  arXiv:1801.00594v1 [cs.NI] 2 Jan 2018  Sergio Barrachina-Muñoz, Francesc Wilhelmi, Boris Bellalta Abstract—In this paper we discuss the effects on throughput and fairness of dynamic channel bonding (DCB) in spatially distributed high density (HD) wireless local area networks (WLANs). First, we present an analytical framework based on continuous time Markov networks (CTMNs) for depicting the phenomena given when applying different DCB policies in spatially distributed scenarios, where nodes are not required to be within the carrier sense of each other. Then, we assess the performance of DCB in HD IEEE 802.11ax WLANs by means of simulations. Regarding spatial distribution, we show that there may be critical interrelations among nodes – even if they are located outside the carrier sense range of each other – in a chain reaction manner. Results also show that, while always selecting the widest available channel normally maximizes the individual long-term throughput, it often generates unfair scenarios where other WLANs starve. Moreover, we show that there are scenarios where DCB with stochastic channel width selection improves the latter approach both in terms of individual throughput and fairness. It follows that there is not a unique DCB policy that is optimal for every case. Instead, smarter bandwidth adaptation is required in the challenging scenarios of next-generation WLANs. Index Terms—Dynamic channel bonding, spatial distribution, policy, CTMN, WLAN, throughput, IEEE 802.11ax  F  1  I NTRODUCTION  W  IRELESS local area networks (WLANs), with IEEE 802.11 as the most widely used standard, are a costefficient solution for wireless Internet access that can satisfy most of the current communication requirements in domestic, public, and business scenarios. However, the scarcity of the frequency spectrum, the increasing throughput demands given by new hungry-bandwidth applications, and the heterogeneity of current wireless network deployments give rise to substantial complexity. Such issues gain importance in dense WLAN deployments, leading to multiple partially overlapping scenarios and coexistence problems. In this regard, two main approaches for optimizing the scarce resources of the frequency spectrum are being deeply studied in the context of WLANs: channel allocation (CA) and channel bonding (CB). While CA refers to the action of allocating the potential transmission channels for a WLAN or a group of WLANs (i.e., allocating both the primary and secondary basic channels), CB is a technique whereby nodes are allowed to use a contiguous set of idle channels for transmitting in larger bandwidths, and thus potentially achieving higher throughputs. This paper focuses on CB, which was firstly introduced in the IEEE 802.11n amendment [1], where two 20 MHz basic channels can be aggregated to transmit in a 40 MHz channel. Newer amendments like IEEE 802.11ac (11ac) [2] extend the number of basic channels that can be aggregated up to 160 MHz channel widths. It is expected that IEEE 802.11ax (11ax) will boost the use of wider channels [3]. Nonetheless, due to the fact that using wider channels increases the contention and interference among nodes, undesirable lower performances may be experienced when  •  All the authors are with Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF). E-mails: {sergio.barrachina, boris.bellalta, francesc.wilhelmi}@upf.edu  applying static channel bonding (SCB), specially in high density (HD) WLAN scenarios. To mitigate such a negative effect, dynamic channel bonding (DCB) policies are used to select the bandwidth in a more flexible way based on the instantaneous spectrum occupancy. A well-known example of DCB policy is always-max (AM)1 [4], [5], where transmitters select the widest channel found idle when the backoff counter terminates. To the best of our knowledge, the works in the literature assessing the performance of DCB study only the SCB and AM policies, while they also assume fully overlapping scenarios where all the WLANs are within the carrier sense range of the others [4], [6], [7], [8]. Therefore, there is an important lack of insights on the performance of CB in more realistic WLAN scenarios, where such a condition usually does not hold. With this work we aim to extend the state of the art by providing new insights on the performance of DCB in WLAN scenarios that are not required to be fully overlapping; where the effect of hidden and exposed nodes plays a crucial role due to the spatial distribution interdependencies. Namely, a node’s operation has a direct impact on the nodes inside its carrier sense range, which in turn may affect nodes located outside such range in a complex and hard to prevent way. Besides, we assess different DCB policies, including an stochastic approach that selects the channel width randomly. To do so, we first introduce the Spatial-Flexible Con-  1. Some papers in the literature use the terms DCB and AM indistinctly. In this paper we notate AM as an special case of DCB.  2  tinuous Time Markov Network (SFCTMN),2 an analytical framework based on Continuous Time Markov Networks (CTMNs). This framework is useful for describing the different phenomena that occur in WLAN networks when considering DCB in spatially distributed scenarios, i.e., where nodes are not required to be within the carrier sense range of each other. In this regard, we depict such complex phenomena by means of illustration through several toy scenarios. We then evaluate the performance of the proposed policies in HD 11ax WLAN scenarios by means of simulations using the 11axHDWLANsSim [9] wireless network simulator.3 We find that, while AM is normally the best DCB policy for maximizing the individual long-term throughput of a WLAN, it may generate unfair scenarios where some other WLANs starve. In fact, there are cases where less aggressive policies like stochastic channel width selection improves AM both in terms of individual throughput and fairness. The contributions of this paper are as follows: 1) Novel insights on the effects of DCB in HD WLANs. We depict the complex interactions that are given in spatially distributed scenarios – i.e., considering path loss, signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) and clear channel assessment (CCA) thresholds, co-channel and adjacent channel interference, etc. – and discuss the influence that nodes operation may have among them. In this regard, we show that AM is not always the optimal policy and that different networks may require different DCB policies. This leads to the need of local policy adaptation. 2) Generalization of DCB policies including only-primary (i.e., selecting just the primary channel for transmitting), SCB, AM, and probabilistic uniform (PU) (i.e., selecting the channel width stochastically). We show that WLAN scenarios implementing any combination of DCB policies can be characterized by a CTMN with specific transition probabilities. This allows us to analytically compare the behavior of these policies. 3) Algorithm for modeling WLAN scenarios with CTMNs that extends the one presented in [8]. This extension allows us capturing non-fully overlapping scenarios, taking into consideration spatial distribution implications. 4) Performance evaluation of the presented DCB policies in HD WLAN scenarios by means of simulations. The physical (PHY) and medium access control (MAC) layers are set in a representative way for single user (SU) 11ax WLANs. We show that AM does not always maximize the individual throughput, but more flexible policies like PU are required. Besides, we show that policy learning and/or adaptation is required on a perWLAN basis in order to maximize both the individual throughput and system fairness. The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide related work on DCB. Then, in Section 2. All of the source code of SFCTMN is open, encouraging sharing of algorithms between contributors and providing the ability for people to improve on the work of others under the GNU General Public License v3.0. The code used in this work can be found at https://github.com/ sergiobarra/SFCTMN. 3. An overview of the simulator, as well as the parameters used in the simulations are shown in the Appendix  3 we describe the system model considered throughout the article. The SFCTMN framework for modeling WLAN scenarios with CTMNs is detailed in Section 4. We depict the interactions in frequency and space in Section 5 by means of several toy scenarios. The performance of the different DCB policies in HD WLANs is assessed in Section 6. We conclude with some final remarks and future work at Section 7.  2  R ELATED WORK  Several works in the literature assess the performance of CB by means of analytical models, simulations or real testbeds. Authors in [10], [11] experimentally analyze SCB in IEEE 802.11n WLANs and show that the reduction of Watt/Hertz when transmitting in larger channel widths causes lower SINR at the receivers. This lessens the coverage area consequently and increases the probability of packets losses due to the accentuated vulnerability to interference. Nonetheless, they also show that DCB can provide significant throughput gains when such issues are palliated by properly adjusting the transmission power and data rates. With the 11ac and 11ax amendments larger channel widths are allowed (up to 160 MHz) and the pros and cons of CB are also accentuated. Nevertheless, it is important to emphasize that in the dense and short-range WLAN scenarios expected in the coming years [3], the issues concerning low SINR values may be palliated due to the shorter distances between transceiver and receiver, and to techniques like spatial diversity multiple-input multipleoutput (MIMO) [12]. In this regard, authors in [5], [13] assess the performance of DCB in 11ac WLANs by means of simulations and show that it can provide significant throughput gains. Still, they also corroborate the fact that these gains are severely compromised by the activity of overlapping wireless networks. There are also works in the literature that use an analytical approach for assessing the performance of CB. For instance, authors in [6] analytically model and evaluate the performance of CB in short-range 11ac WLANs, proving significant performance boost when the presence of external interference is low to moderate. In [4], authors show that the use of CB can provide significant performance gains even in scenarios with a high density of WLANs, though it may also cause unfair situations. Likewise, authors in [8] use a CTMN-based model to explain key properties of DCB such as the sensitivity to the backoff and transmission time distributions, or the high switching times between different dominant states. Non-saturation regimes are considered in [14], where authors propose an analytical model for the throughput performance of channel bonding in 11ac WLANs in presence of collisions under both saturated and non-saturated traffic loads. Authors in [15] develop an analytical framework to study the performance of opportunistic channel bonding in WLANs where 11ac users coexist with legacy users. Similarly, authors in [16] assess the performance of CB in the context of opportunistic spectrum access via an analytical model and conclude that CB is generally beneficial where there is low primary users activity. Some solutions involving CB are also available in the literature. For instance, an intelligent scheme for jointly  3  Fig. 1: Simplified set of allowed channels for transmitting in the 11ac and 11ax amendments. This particular channelization scheme is defined by C = {{1}, {2}, ..., {1, 2}, {3, 4}, ..., {1, 2, 3, 4}, ..., {1, 2, ..., 8}}. adapting the rate and bandwidth in MIMO IEEE 802.11n WLANs is presented in [12]. Real experiments show that such scheme (ARAMIS) accurately adapts to a wide variety of channel conditions with negligible overhead and achieving important performance gains. In [17], authors propose an spectrum-distribution algorithm where access points (APs) adjust both the primary channel and width to match their traffic loads. They show that the spectrum utilization can be substantially improved when allocating more bandwidth to APs with high traffic load. An stochastic spectrum distribution framework accounting for WLANs demand uncertainty is presented in [18], showing better performance compared to the naive allocation approach. Authors in [19] show that the maximal throughput performance can be achieved with DCB under the CA scheme with the least overlapped channels among WLANs. We believe that this is the first work that provides insights on the performance of DCB in spatially distributed scenarios, where the effect of hidden and exposed nodes plays a crucial role due to the spatial interdependencies among nodes. In this regard, we also provide an algorithm for generating the CTMNs to model such kind of scenarios. Besides, we assess the performance of different DCB policies, including a novel stochastic approach. and show that always selecting the widest available channel is sub-optimal in some of the studied scenarios.  3  •  •  •  •  must share the same primary channel pw . Essentially, the primary channel is used to i) sense the medium for decrementing the backoff when the primary channel’s frequency band is found free, and ii) listening to decodable packets for performing the request to send (RTS) and clear to send (CTS) handshake – or entering in network allocation vector (NAV) state – and receiving data or ACK packets. Hence, the primary channel is always used when transmitting and receiving packets. Channel C : a channel C = {c1 , c2 , ..., cN } consists of a contiguous set of N basic channels. The width (or bandwidth) of a channel is N |c|. Channelization scheme C : the set of channels that can be used for transmitting is determined by the channel access specification and the system channel (Csys ), whose bandwidth is given by Nsys |c|. Namely, all the nodes in the system must transmit in some channel included in C . A simplified version of the channelization considered in the 11ac and 11ax standards is shown in Figure 1. WLAN’s allocated channel Cw : nodes in a WLAN w must transmit in a channel contained in Cw ∈ C . Different WLANs may be allocated with different primary channels and different available channel widths. We use Nw to denote the number of basic channels allocated for WLAN w. tx Transmission channel Cn : a node n belonging to a WLAN w has to transmit in a channel Cntx ⊆ Cw ∈ C , which will be given by i) the set of basic channels in Cw found idle by node n at the end of the backoff (Cnfree ),4 and ii) on the implemented DCB policy.  In the example shown in Figure 2, the system channel Csys counts with Nsys = 8 basic channels and WLAN X is allocated with the channel CX = {1, 2, 3, 4} and primary channel pX = 3. Note that in this example the AP of WLAN X does not select the entire channel allocated, but a smaller one, i.e., CXtx = {3, 4} ⊆ CX . Two reasons may be the cause: i) basic channels 1 and 2 are detected busy at the end of the backoff, or ii) the DCB policy determines not to pick them.  S YSTEM MODEL UNDER CONSIDERATION  In this Section we first depict the notation regarding channelization that is used throughout this article. We also define the DCB policies that are studied and provide a general description of the carrier sense multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) operation in IEEE 802.11 WLANs. Finally, we expose the main assumptions considered in the presented scenarios. 3.1  Channelization  Let us define some terms regarding channel access for the sake of facilitating further explanation: • Basic channel c: the frequency spectrum is split into basic channels of width |c| = 20 MHz. • Primary channel pw : basic channel with different roles depending on the node state. All the nodes belonging to the same WLAN w – i.e., AP and stations (STAs) –  Fig. 2: Channel access notation. WLAN X is allocated with 4 basic channels but only 2 are used for the transmission.  4. Note that, in order to include secondary basic channels for transmitting, a WLAN must listen them free during at least a PIFS period before the backoff counter terminates as shown in Figure 3. While such PIFS condition is not considered in the SFCTMN framework for the sake of analysis simplicity, the 11axHDWLANSim simulator does.  4  3.2  CSMA/CA operation in IEEE 802.11 WLANs  According to the CSMA/CA operation, when a node n belonging to a WLAN w has a packet ready for transmission, it measures the power sensed in the frequency band of pw . Once the primary channel has been detected free, i.e., the power sensed by n at pw is smaller than its CCA threshold, the node starts the backoff procedure by selecting a random initial value of BO ∈ [0, CW − 1] time slots. The contention window is defined as CW = 2b CWmin , where b ∈ {0, 1, 2, ..., m} is the backoff stage with maximum value m, and CWmin is the minimum contention window. When a packet transmission fails, b is increased by one unit, and reset to 0 when the packet is acknowledged. After computing BO, the node starts decreasing the backoff counter while sensing the primary channel. Whenever the power sensed by n at pw is higher than its CCA, the backoff is paused and set to the nearest higher time slot until pw is detected free again, at which point the countdown is resumed. When the backoff timer reaches zero, the node selects the transmission channel Cntx based on the set of idle basic channels Cnfree and on the DCB policy. The selected transmission channel is then used throughout the whole packet exchanges involved in a data packet transmission between the transceiver and receiver. Namely, RTS (used for notifying the selected transmission channel), CTS, and ACK packets are also transmitted in Cntx . Likewise, any other node that receives an RTS in its primary channel with enough power to be decoded will enter in NAV state, which is used for deferring channel access and avoiding packet collisions (especially those caused by hidden node situations). In Figure 3, the temporal evolution of a node operating under AM is shown. In this example, the WLAN to which the node belongs is allocated with the channel Cw = {1, 2, ..., 8} and primary channel pw = 2 . While at the end of the first backoff the node is able to select the full allocated channel to transmit in, i.e., Cntx = Cw , at the end of the second one, because of the interference sensed at channel 3 during the PIFS period, a narrower channel Cntx = {1, 2} is selected. 3.3  DCB policies  The DCB policy determines which transmission channel a node must pick from the set of available ones. When the backoff terminates, any node belonging to a WLAN w operates according to the DCB policy as follows: • Only-primary (OP): picks just the primary channel for transmitting if it is found idle. This policy is also known as single-channel. • Static channel bonding (SCB): exclusively picks the full channel allocated in its WLAN when found free. Namely, nodes operating under SCB cannot transmit in channels different than Cw . • Always-max (AM): picks the widest possible channel found free in Cw for transmitting. • Probabilistic uniform (PU): picks with same probability any of the possible channels found free inside the allocated channel Cw . For the sake of illustration, let us consider the example shown in Figure 3, where the evolution of a node imple-  menting AM is presented. Regarding the rest of DCB policies, OP would just pick the basic channel 2 after both backoff terminations. Instead, while SCB would transmit in the entire channel after the first backoff, it would not transmit at the end of second one because part of Cw is busy. Finally, PU would transmit on channels {2}, {1, 2}, {1, 2, 3, 4} or {1, 2, ..., 8} with same probability 1/4 at the first backoff termination, and on channels {2} or {1, 2} with probability 1/2 at the end of the second one. An schematic flowchart of the DCB policy operation is shown in Figure 4. 3.4  Main assumptions  In this paper we present results gathered via the SFCTMN framework based on CTMNs, and also via simulations through the 11axHDWLANsSim wireless network simulator. While in the latter case we are able to introduce more realistic implementations of the 11ax amendment, in the analytical model we use relaxed assumptions for facilitating posterior analysis. This subsection depicts the general assumptions considered in both cases. 1) Channel model: signal propagation is isotropic regardless of the selected path loss model L. Also, the propagation delay between any pair of nodes is considered negligible due to the small carrier sense areas given in the 5 GHz band. Besides, the transmission power is divided uniformly among the basic channels in the selected transmission channel. Specifically, we apply a loss of 3 dB per basic channel each time the bandwidth is doubled. We also consider an adjacent channel interference model that replicates the half of the power transmitted per Hertz into the two basic channels that are contiguous to the actual transmission channel Cntx . 2) Packet errors: we consider that a packet is lost if i) the power of interest received at the receiver is less than its CCA, ii) the SINR (γ ) perceived at the receiver does not accomplish the capture effect (CE), i.e., γ < CE, or iii) the receiver was already receiving a packet. In the latter case, the decoding of the first packet is ruptured only if the CE is no longer accomplished because of a the interfering transmission. We assume an infinite maximum number of retransmissions per packet, whose effect is almost negligible in most of the cases because of the small probability of retransmitting a data packet more than few times [20]. 3) Modulation coding scheme (MCS): the MCS index used by each WLAN is the highest possible, and it is kept constant throughout all the simulation. We assume that the MCS selection is designed to keep the packet error rate constant and equal to η , given that static deployments are considered. 4) Traffic: downlink traffic is considered. In addition, we assume a full-buffer model, i.e., APs always have packets pending for transmission as they operate in saturated regime.  4  T HE CTMN MODEL FOR HD WLAN S  The analysis of CSMA/CA networks through CTMN models was firstly introduced in [21]. Such models were later applied to IEEE 802.11 networks in [4], [6], [8], [14], [19],  5  Fig. 3: CSMA/CA temporal evolution of a node operating under AM and the 11ax channelization scheme.  Fig. 4: Flowchart of the transmission channel selection. In this example channel 5 is the primary channel and a DCB policy D = AM is applied.  [22], [23], among others. Experimental results in [24], [25] demonstrate that CTMN models, while idealized, provide remarkably accurate throughput estimates for actual IEEE 802.11 systems. A comprehensible example-based tutorial of CTMN models applied to different wireless networking scenarios can be found in [26]. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, works that model CSMA/CA WLANs using CB study just the SCB and AM policies, while assuming fully overlapping scenarios where all the WLANs are inside the carrier sense range of each other. Therefore, there is an important lack of insights on more general WLAN scenarios, where such condition usually does not hold and interdependencies among nodes may have a critical impact on their performance. In this section we depict our extended version of the algorithm introduced in [8] for generating the CTMNs corresponding to spatially distributed WLAN scenarios, which is implemented in the SFCTMN framework. With this extension, as the condition of having fully overlapping networks is no longer required for constructing the corresponding CTMNs, more factual observations can be made. In this paper, since we consider that there is only one transmitter-receiver pair per WLAN (i.e., the AP and one STA), we will simply refer to the WLAN activity as a unit. 4.1  Implications  Modeling WLAN scenarios with CTMNs requires the backoff and transmission times to be exponentially distributed. This has a main implication: because of the negligible propagation delay, the probability of packet collisions between two or more nodes within the carrier sense range of the other nodes is zero. The reason is that two WLANs will never end their backoff at the same time, and therefore they will never start a transmission at the same time either.  In overlapping single-channel CSMA/CA networks, it is shown that the state probabilities are insensitive to the backoff and transmission time distributions [25], [27]. However, even though authors in [8] prove that the insensitivity property does not hold for DCB networks, the sensitivity to the backoff and transmission time distributions is very small. Therefore, the analytical results obtained using the exponential assumption offer a good approximation for deterministic distributions of the backoff, data rate and packet length as well.  4.2  Constructing the SFCTMN  In order to depict how CTMNs are generated, let us consider the toy scenario (Scenario I) shown in Figure 5, which is composed of two fully overlapping WLANs implementing AM.5 The channel allocation of such scenario can be defined as CA = {1, 2, 3, 4} with pA = 2, and CB = {3, 4} with pB = 3. That is, there are four basic channels in the system, and the set of valid transmission channels according to the 11ax channel access scheme is CI = {{1}, {2}, {3}, {4}, {1, 2}, {3, 4}, {1, 2, 3, 4}} (see Figure 1).  Fig. 5: Scenario I. WLANs A and B are inside the carrier sense range of each other with potentially overlapping basic channels 3 and 4. Due to the fact that both WLANs are inside the carrier sense range of each other, their APs could be transmitting simultaneously at any time t only if their transmission channels do not overlap, i.e., CAtx (t) ∩ CBtx (t) = ∅. Notice that slotted backoff collisions cannot occur because their counters decrease continuously in time, and therefore two transmissions cannot be neither started nor finished at the very same time. 5. We have selected Scenario I for depicting the algorithm in a simple way. CTMNs corresponding to non-fully overlapping scenarios (e.g., Scenario III in Section 5) can be also generated with the very same algorithm.  6  4.2.1  States  4.2.2  CTMN algorithm: finding states and transitions  The first step for constructing the CTMN is to identify the global state space Ψ, which is simply composed by all the possible combinations given by the system channelization scheme and the channel allocations of the WLANs. The  A22 B33  −  ∅ s1  ) (s 5 A µ , 8 −,  λA , µA (s2 ) 1, 3  A22  ψ8  ψ6  A22 B34  A21  ψ9  λ  s5  B,  9, 7  A41  B(  s4  B34 s3  )  ψ10 A21 B34  ) (s 4  B33 ψ7  A21 B33  µ  s2  ) (s 3 B ,µ λ B 2, 5  A state in the CTMN is defined by the set of WLANs active and the basic channels on which they are transmitting. Essentially, we say that a WLAN is active if it is transmitting in some channel, and inactive otherwise. We define two types of state spaces: the global state space (Ψ) and the feasible state space (S ). • Global state space: a global state ψ ∈ Ψ is a state that accomplishes two conditions: i) the channels in which the active WLANs are transmitting comply with the channelization scheme C , and ii) all active WLANs transmit inside their allocated channels. That is, Ψ only depends on the particular channelization scheme C in use and on the channel allocation of the WLANs in the system. In this paper, we assume that every transmission should be made in channels inside Csys that are composed of a = 2k contiguous basic channels, for some integer k ≤ log2 Nsys , and that their rightmost basic channels fall on multiples of a, as stated in the 11ac and 11ax amendments. • Feasible state space: a feasible state s ∈ S ⊆ Ψ exists only if each of the active WLANs in such state started their transmissions by accomplishing the CCA requirement derived from the assigned DCB policy. Namely, given a global state space, S depends only on the spatial distribution and on the DCB policies assigned to each WLAN. The CTMN corresponding to the toy scenario being discussed is shown in Figure 6. Regarding the notation, we represent the states by the most left and most right basic channels used in the transmission channels of each of their active WLANs. For instance, state s4 = A21 B43 refers to the state where A and B are transmitting in channels CAtx = {1, 2} and CBtx = {3, 4}, respectively. Concerning the state spaces, states ψ6 , ψ7 , ψ8 , ψ9 , ψ10 , ψ11 , ψ12 ∈ / S are not reachable (i.e., they are global but not feasible) for two different reasons. First, states ψ11 and ψ12 are not feasible because of the overlapping channels involved. Secondly, the rest of unfeasible states are so due to the fact that AM is applied, thus at any time t that WLAN A(B) finishes its backoff and B(A) is not active, A(B) picks the widest available channel, i.e., CAtx (t) = {1, 2, 3, 4} or CBtx (t) = {3, 4}, respectively. Likewise, any time A(B) finishes its backoff and B(A) is active, A(B) picks again the widest available channel, which in this case would be CAtx (t) = {1, 2} for A and CBtx (t) = {3, 4} for B if A is not transmitting in its full allocated channel, respectively. Some states such as s5 = A21 are reachable only via backward transitions. In this case, when A finishes its backoff and B is transmitting in CBtx (t) = {3, 4} (i.e., s3 ), A picks just CAtx (t) = {1, 2} because the power sensed in channels 3 and 4 exceeds the CCA as a consequence of B’s transmission. That is, s5 is only reachable through a backward transition from s4 , given when B finishes its transmission in state s4 .  λ  A ,µ ,6 A  4  s4 A41 B33 ψ11 A41 B34 ψ12  Fig. 6: CTMN of Scenario I when applying AM. Circles represent states. All the states are global. Specifically, feasible states are displayed in white, while non-feasible states are gray colored. Two-way transitions are noted with forward and backward rates λ, µ, respectively, to avoid cluttering in the figure. The only backward transition is colored in red. The blue pair of numbers beside the transition edges represent the algorithm’s discovery order of the forward and backward transitions, respectively. feasible states in S are later identified by exploring the states in Ψ. Algorithm 1 shows the pseudocode for identifying both S and the transitions among such states, which are represented by the transition rate matrix Q. Essentially, while there are discovered states in S that have not been explored yet, for any state sk ∈ S not explored, and for each WLAN X in the system, we determine if X is active or not. If X is active, we then set possible backward transitions to already known and not known states. To do so, it is required to fully explore Ψ looking for states where: i) other active WLANs in the state remain transmitting in the same transmission channel,6 and ii) WLAN X is not active. On the other hand, if WLAN X is inactive in state sk , we try to find forward transitions to other states. To that aim, the algorithm fully explores Ψ looking for states where i) other active WLANs in the state remain transmitting in the 6. Notice that we use Xab ∈ s to say that a WLAN X transmits in a range of contiguous basic channels [a, b] when the CTMN is in state s. With slight abuse of notation, s − Xab represents the state where all WLANs that were active in s remain active except for X, which becomes inactive after finishing its packet transmission. Similarly, s + Xab , represents the state were all the active WLANs in s remain active and X is transmitting in the range of basic channels [a, b].  7  Algorithm 1: CTMN generation of spatially distributed DCB WLAN scenarios. 1 i = 1; .........# Index of the last state found 2 k = 1; ....... # Index of the state currently being explored 3 sk = ∅; ......# State currently being explored 4 S = {sk }; # Set of feasible states Q = [ ]; ....... # Transition rate matrix # Generate the global state space Ψ 7 Ψ = generate_psi_space() ; 5  6  8 9 10  11 12  while sk ∈ S do foreach WLAN X do # If WLAN is active in sk  if ∃a, b s.t. Xba ∈ sk then foreach ψ ∈ Ψ do # If there exists a backward transition  13  if sk − Xba == ψ then if ψ 6∈ S then i = i + 1; k 0 = i; S = S ∪ ψ;  14 15 16 17 18 19  else  20  22  # Get index of state ψ in S k 0 = get_index(ϕ∗ ); # New backward transition sk → sk0  23  Qk,k0 = µX (sk )  21  24  # If WLAN is NOT active in sk  25  else Φ = ∅; . # Set of global states reachable from sk Φ∗ = ∅; . # Set of feasible states reachable from sk  26 27 28  29 30 31 32  33 34 35 36 37 38 39  # Find possible forward states  foreach ψ ∈ Ψ do if ∃a, b s.t. sk + Xba == ψ then Φ = Φ ∪ ψ; # Function f finds feasible states and corresponding transition probabilities according to the DCB policy D and the basic channels found free  CXfree (sk ) = {PXrx (sk , CX ) < CCAX : 0, 1}; ~ } = f (D, CXfree , Φ); {Φ∗ , α foreach ϕ∗ ∈ Φ∗ do if ϕ 6∈ S then i = i + 1; k 0 = i; S = S ∪ ϕ∗ ; else # Get index of state ϕ∗ in S k 0 = get_index(ϕ∗ ); # New forward transition sk → sk0  40  41 42  Qk,k0 = α ~ (ϕ∗ )λX ;  43 44  k = k + 1;  same transmission channel, and ii) X is active in the new state as a result of applying the implemented DCB policy (D) as shown in line 33. It is important to remark that in order to apply such policy, the set of idle basic channels in state sk , i.e., CXfree (sk ), must be identified according to the power sensed in each of the basic channels allocated to X, i.e., PXrx (sk , CX ), and on its CCA level. Afterwards, the transmission channel is selected through the f function, which applies D. In Figure 4, a simple flowchart of the transmission channel selection is shown. Each transition between two states si and sj has a corresponding transition rate Qi,j . For forward transitions, the packet transmission attempt rate (or simply backoff rate) has an average duration λ = 1/(E[B] · Tslot ), where E[B] is the expected backoff duration in time slots, determined −1 by the minimum contention window, i.e., E[B] = CWmin . 2 Furthermore, for backward transitions, the departure rate (µ) depends on the duration of a successful transmission (i.e., µ = 1/tsuc ), which in turn depends on both the data rate (r) given by the selected MCS and transmission channel width, and on the packet length E[Ldata ]. In the algorithm we simply say that the data rate of a WLAN X depends on the state of the system, which collects such information, i.e., µX (s). Depending on the DCB policy, different feasible forward transitions may exist from the very same state, which are represented by the set Φ∗ . As shown in line 43, every feasible forward transition rate is weighted by a transition probability vector (α ~ ) whose elements determine the probability of transiting to each of the possible global states in Φ. Namely, with an slight abuse of mathematical notation, the probability to transit to any given feasible state ϕ∗ ∈ Φ is α ~ (ϕ∗ ). As aPconsequence, α ~ must follow the normalization condition α ~ (ϕ∗ ) = 1. For the sake of illustration, in the CTMNs of Figures 6, 8 and 10, states are numbered according to the order in which they are discovered. Transitions between states are also shown below the edges. Note that with SFCTMN, as non-fully overlapping networks are allowed, transitions to states where one or more WLANs may suffer from packet loses due to interference are also reachable as shown in Section 5. 4.3  Performance metrics  Since there are a limited number of possible channels to transmit in, the constructed CTMN will always be finite. Furthermore, it will be irreducible due to the fact that backward transitions between neighboring states are always feasible. Therefore, a steady-state solution to the CTMN always exists. However, due to the possible existence of one-way transitions between states, the CTMN is not always time-reversible and the local balance may not hold [28], and hence, it prevents to find simple product-from solutions to compute the equilibrium distribution of the CTMNs. The equilibrium distribution vector ~π represents the fraction of time the system spends in each feasible state. Hence, we define πs as the probability of finding the system at state s. In order to obtain ~π we can use the transition rate matrix Q given the system of equations ~π Q = 0. As an example, for scenario I, considering that its elements are sorted by the discovery order of the states,  8  ~π = (π∅ , πA41 , πB43 , πA21 B43 , πA21 ). Besides, the corresponding transition rate matrix is   ∗ λA λB 0 0  µA (s2 ) ∗  0 0 0    , ∗ λA 0 Q =  µB (s3 ) 0   0 0 µA (s4 ) ∗ µB (s4 )  µA (s5 ) 0 0 λB ∗ where λA , λB and µA (s), µB (s) are the packet generation and departure rates in state s of WLANs A and B, respectively. The diagonal elements represented by ‘*’ in the matrix should be replaced by the negative sum of the rest of items of their row, e.g., Q4,4 = − µA (s4 ) + µB (s4 ) , but for the sake of format issues we do not include them in the matrix. Once ~π is computed, estimating the average throughput experienced by each WLAN is straightforward. Specifically, the average throughput of an WLAN w is X   Γw := E[L] {γw (s) > CE : 0, 1}µw (s)πs 1 − η , s∈S  where E[L] is the expected data packet length, γw (s) is the SINR perceived by the STA in WLAN w in state s, CE is the capture effect, and η is the constant packet error probability. The system aggregate throughput is then the sum of the PM throughputs of all the WLANs, i.e., Γ := w=1 Γw . Besides, in order to evaluate the fairness of a given scenario, we can use the proportional fairness metric,  P :=  M X  log10 Γw ,  w=1  and the Jain’s Fairness Index (F ) [29], 2 PM w Γw F := PM 2  . M w Γw  5  I NTERACTIONS IN FREQUENCY AND SPACE  In this section we draw some relevant conclusions about applying different DCB policies in CSMA/CA WLANs by analyzing four representative toy scenarios with different channel allocations and spatial distributions. To that aim we use the SFCTMN analytical framework. We also validate the gathered results by means of the 11axHDWLANsSim wireless network simulator (refer to the Appendix for details on the parameters considered). 5.1  Feasible states dependence on the DCB policy  In Table 1 we show the effect of applying different DCB policies on the average throughput experienced by WLANs A and B (ΓA and ΓB , respectively), and by the whole network (Γ), in scenarios I and II (presented in Figures 5 and 7, respectively). Let us first consider Scenario I. As explained in Section 4 and shown in Figure 6, the CTMN reaches 5 feasible states when WLANs implement AM. Instead, due to the fact that both WLANs overlap in channels 3 and 4 when transmitting in their whole allocated channels – i.e., CAtx = CA = {1, 2, 3, 4} and CBtx = CB = {3, 4}, respectively – the SCB policy reaches just three feasible states. Such states correspond to those with a single WLAN transmitting, i.e.,  TABLE 1: DCB policy effect on the average throughput [Mbps] in Scenario I and Scenario II. The values obtained through 11axHDWLANsSim are displayed in red, while the other correspond to the SFCTMN framework. Policy D  |S|  OP  4  SCB  3  AM  5  PU  10  Scenario I ΓA ΓB  Γ  113.23 113.23 226.47 113.23 113.23 226.46  143.46 143.46 286.92 131.98 148.85 280.83  220.12 212.21 432.34 217.60 214.81 432.41  149.14 148.38 297.52 149.20 148.42 297.63  |S|  4 3 3 6  Scenario II ΓA ΓB  Γ  113.23 113.23 226.47 113.23 113.23 226.46  109.19 109.19 218.38 108.72 108.84 217.56  109.19 109.19 218.38 108.72 108.84 217.56  113.19 113.19 226.38 113.20 113.18 226.38  S = {∅, A41 , B43 }. In the case of OP, both WLANs are forced to pick just their primary channel for transmitting and, therefore, S = {∅, A22 , B33 , A22 B33 }. Notice that state A22 B33 is feasible because A and B have different primary channels and do not overlap when transmitting in them. The last policy studied is PU, which is characterized by providing further exploration on the global state space Ψ. It usually allows expanding the feasible state space S accordingly because more transitions are permitted. In scenario I, whenever the CTMN is in state ∅ and the backoff of A or B expires, the WLANs pick each of the possible available channels with same probability. Namely, the CTMN will transit to A22 , A21 or A41 with probability 1/3 when A’s backoff counter terminates, and to B33 or B43 with probability 1/2 whenever B’s backoff counter terminates. Likewise, if the system is in state B33 , and A terminates its backoff counter, the CTMN will transit to the feasible states A22 B33 or A21 B33 with probability 1/2. Similarly, whenever the system is in state A22 or A21 , and B finishes its backoff, B will pick the transmission channels {3} or {3, 4} with same probability 1/2 making the CTMN to transit to the corresponding state where both WLANs transmit concurrently. These probabilities are called transition probabilities and are represented by the vector α ~ X,s (s0 ). For instance, in the latter case, the probability to transit from s = A22 to s0 = A22 B33 when B terminates its backoff is α ~ B,A22 (A22 B33 ) = 1/2. 5.2  The short vs. long-term throughput dilemma  Intuitively, one could think that, as it occurs in Scenario I, always picking the widest channel found free by means of AM, i.e., maximizing the throughput of the immediate packet transmission (or short-term throughput), may be the best strategy for maximizing the long-term throughput as well. However, the Scenario II depicted in Figure 7, is a counterexample that illustrates such lack of applicable intuition. It consists of two overlapping WLANs as Scenario I, but with different channel allocation. Specifically, CA = CB = {1, 2} with pA = 1 and pB = 2, respectively. The CTMNs that are generated according to the different DCB policies – generalized to any value the corresponding transition probabilities α ~ A,∅ , α ~ B,∅ may have – are shown in Figure 8. Regarding the transition probabilities, Table 2 shows the vectors α ~ A,∅ , α ~ B,∅ that are given for each of the studied DCB policies in Scenario II. Firstly, with OP, due to the fact  9  A11 B22 ,  Fig. 7: Scenario II. WLANs A and B are inside the carrier sense range of each other with potentially overlapping basic channels 1 and 2.  ,µ  ) s2 ( A  A11 s2  )λ A s 2 1, 5 ( ∅  , α~ A  )λ A,  ∅ s1  3) µ A(s  (s 3 ~ A,∅ α 2, 7 α ~ B, ∅ (s 4 )λ B, µ B, ∅(  s5  4, 1  B,  A21  λ A, B22  )λ B  0  6,  µ  B(  12  s5  )  s3  B (s 4)  3, 9  α~  λ  s 5) µ A( 1 8, 1  A11 B22 s6  s4  ,µ  B(  s5  ) B12 s5  Fig. 8: CTMN corresponding to Scenario II. Transitions edges are dashed for referring to those that may be given or not depending on the DCB policy. For instance, state s6 is only reachable for the OP and PU policies. The discovery order of the states and transitions (displayed in blue) corresponds to the PU policy.  that WLANs are only allowed to transmit in their primary channel, the CTMN can only transit from state ∅ to states A11 or B22 , i.e., α ~ A,∅ (s2 ) = α ~ B,∅ (s4 ) = 1. Similarly, with SCB, WLANs can only transmit in their complete allocated channel, thus, when being in state ∅ the CTMN transits only to A21 or B21 , i.e., α ~ A,∅ (s3 ) = α ~ B,∅ (s5 ) = 1. Notice that AM generates the same transition probabilities (and respective average throughput) than SCB because whenever the WLANs have the possibility to transmit – which only happens when the CTMN is in state ∅ – both A and B pick the widest channel available, i.e., CAtx = CBtx = {1, 2}. Finally, PU picks uniformly at random any of the possible transitions that A and B provoke when terminating their backoff in state ∅, i.e., α ~ A,∅ (s2 ) = α ~ A,∅ (s3 ) = 1/2 and α ~ B,∅ (s4 ) = α ~ B,∅ (s5 ) = 1/2, respectively. TABLE 2: Transition probabilities from state ∅ of WLANs A and B in Scenario II for different DCB policies. D  |S|  OP SCB AM PU  4 3 3 6  α ~ A,∅ (s2 ) α ~ A,∅ (s3 ) α ~ B,∅ (s4 ) α ~ B,∅ (s5 )  1.0 0.0 0.0 0.5  0.0 1.0 1.0 0.5  1.0 0.0 0.0 0.5  0.0 1.0 1.0 0.5  Notice that state when both WLANs are transmitting at the same time, is reachable from states A11 and B22 for both OP and PU. In such states, when either A or B terminates its backoff and the other is still transmitting in its primary channel, only a transition to state A11 B22 is possible, i.e., α ~ A,s2 (s6 ) = α ~ B,s4 (s6 ) = 1. Interestingly, as shown in Table 1, applying OP in Scenario II, i.e., being conservative and unselfish, is the best policy to increase both the individual average throughput of A and B (ΓA , ΓB , respectively) and the system’s aggregated one (Γ). Instead, being aggressive and selfish, i.e., applying SCB or AM, provides the worst results both in terms of individual and system’s aggregate throughput. In addition, PU provides similar results than OP in average because most of the times that A and B terminate their backoff counter, they can only transmit in their primary channel, as the secondary channel is most likely occupied by the other WLAN. In fact, state A11 B22 is the dominant state for both OP and PU. Specifically, the probability of finding the CTMN in state A11 B22 , i.e., ~πs6 , is 0.9802 for OP and 0.9702 for PU, respectively. Therefore, the slight differences on throughput experienced with OP and PU are given because of the possible transition from ∅ to the states A21 and B12 in PU, where WLANs occupy entirely the allocated channel preventing the other for decreasing its backoff. Despite being a very simple scenario, we have shown that it is not straightforward to determine the optimal DCB policy that the AP in each WLAN must follow. Evidently, in a non-overlapping scenario, AM would be the optimal policy for both WLANs because of the non-existence of inter-WLAN contention. However, this is not a typical case in dense scenarios and, consequently, AM should not be adopted as de facto DCB policy, even though it provides more flexibility than SCB. This simple toy scenario also serves to prove that some intelligence should be implemented in the APs in order to harness the information gathered from the environment. Concerning the throughput differences in the values obtained by SFCTMN and 11axHDWLANsSim,7 we note that the main disparities correspond to the AM and SCB policies. It is important to remark that while SFCTMN does not consider neither backoff collisions nor NAV periods, 11axHDWLANsSim actually does so in a more realistic way. Therefore, in 11axHDWLANsSim, whenever there is an slotted backoff collision, the RTS packets can be decoded by the STAs in both WLANs if the CE is accomplished. That is why the average throughputs are increased consequently. Regarding the NAV periods, an interesting phenomena occurs in Scenario I when implementing SCB, AM or PU. While the RTS packets sent by B cannot be decoded by A because its primary channel is always outside the possible transmission channels of B (i.e., pA = 2 ∈ / CBtx = {3, 3} or {3, 4}), the opposite occurs when A transmits them. Due to the fact that the RTS is duplicated in each of the basic channels used for transmitting, whenever A transmits in its whole allocated channel, B is able to decode the RTS (i.e., pB = 3 ∈ CAtx = {1, 2, 3, 4}) and enters in NAV consequently. 7. In 11axHDWLANsSim the throughput is simply computed as the number of useful bits (corresponding to data packets) that are successfully transmitted divided by the observation time of the simulation.  10  5.3  Cumulative interference and hidden nodes  When considering non-fully overlapping scenarios, i.e., where some of the WLANs are not inside the carrier sense range of the others, complex and hard to prevent phenomena may occur. As an illustrative example, let us consider the case shown in Figure 9a, where 3 WLANs sharing a single channel (i.e., CA = CB = CC = {1}) are deployed composing a line network. As the carrier sense range is fixed and is the same for each AP, by locating the APs at different distances we obtain different topologies that are worth to be analyzed. We name these topologies from T1 to T4 depending on the distance between consecutive APs, which increases according to the topology index. Notice that all the DCB policies discussed in this work behave exactly the same way in single-channel scenarios. Therefore, in this subsection we do not make distinctions among them. The average throughput experienced by each WLAN in each of the regions is shown in Figure 9b. Regarding topology T1, when APs are close enough to be inside the carrier sense range of each other in a fully overlapping manner, the medium access is shared fairly because of the CSMA/CA mechanism. For that reason, the throughput is decreased to approximately 1/3 with respect to topology T4. Specifically, the system spends almost the same amount of time in the states where just one WLAN is transmitting, i.e., π(A11 ) = π( B11 ) = π(C11 ) ≈ 1/3. The neighbor overlapping case in topology T2, where A and C can transmit at the same time whenever B is not active, but B can only do so when neither A nor C are active, is a clear case of exposed-node starvation. Namely, B has very few transmission opportunities as A and C are transmitting almost permanently and B must continuously pause its backoff consequently. An interesting and hard to prevent phenomena occurs in the potential central node overlapping case at topology T3. Figure 10 shows the corresponding CTMN. In this case, the cumulated interference that B perceives when A and C transmit at the same time prevents it to decrease the backoff. However, B is able to decrement the backoff any time A or C are not transmitting. This leads to two possible outcomes regarding packet collisions. On the one hand, if the capture effect condition is accomplished by B (i.e., γB > CE) no matter whether A and C are transmitting, B will be able to successfully exchange packets and the throughput will increase accordingly. On the other hand, if the capture effect condition is not accomplished, B will suffer a huge packet error rate because most of the initiated transmissions will be lost due to the concurrent transmissions of A and C (i.e., γB < CE when A and C transmit). This phenomena may be recurrent and have considerable impact in high density networks where multiples WLANs interact with each other. Therefore, it should be foreseen in order to design efficient DCB policies. Finally, as expected, in topology T4, due to the fact that WLANs are isolated, i.e., outside the carrier sense range of each other, they achieve the maximum throughput because all their transmission are successful and they are never required to pause their backoff. Concerning the differences on the average throughput values estimated by SFCTMN and 11axHDWLANsSim, we  observe two phenomena regarding backoff collisions in topologies T1 and T3. In T1, due to the fact that simultaneous transmissions (or backoff collisions) are permitted and captured in 11axHDWLANsSim – and such transmissions do not cause any packet losses as the capture effect is accomplished – the throughput is slightly higher accordingly. The most notable difference is given in T3. In this topology SFCTMN estimates that B is transmitting just the 50.1% of the time because, as A and C operate like in isolation, most of the time they transmit concurrently, causing backoff freezing at B. However, 11axHDWLANsSim estimates that B transmits about the 75% of the time, capturing a more realistic behavior. Such difference is caused by the insensitivity property of the CTMN. For instance, whenever the system is in state s6 = A11 C11 and A finishes its transmission (transiting to s4 = C11 ), B decreases its backoff accordingly while C is still active. In this case it is more probable to transit from s4 to s7 = B11 C11 than to s6 = A11 C11 again because, in average, the remaining backoff counter of B will be smaller than the generated by A when finishing its transmission. This is in fact not considered by the CTMN, which assumes the same probability to transit from s4 to s6 than to s7 because of the exponential distribution and the memoryless property. 5.4  Variability of optimal policies  Most often, the best DCB policy for increasing the own throughput, no matter what policies the rest of WLANs may implement, is AM. Nonetheless, there are exceptions like the one presented in Scenario II. Besides, if achieving throughput fairness between all WLANs is the objective, other policies may be required. Therefore, there is not always an optimal common policy to be implemented by all the WLANs. In fact, there are cases where different policies must be assigned to different WLANs in order to increase both the fairness and individual WLAN throughputs. For instance, let us consider another toy scenario (Scenario IV) using the topology T2 of Scenario III, where three WLANs are located in a line in such a way that they are in the carrier sense range of the immediate neighbor. In this case, however, let us assume a different channel allocation: CA = CB = CC = {1, 2} and pA = pC = 1, pB = 2. Table 3 shows the individual and aggregated throughputs, the proportional throughput fairness, and the Jain’s fairness index for different combinations of DCB policies. We note that, while implementing AM in all the WLANs the system’s aggregated throughput is the highest (i.e., Γ = 428.73 Mbps), the throughput experienced by B is the lowest (i.e., ΓB = 4.04 Mbps), leading to a very unfair situation as indicated by J = 0.67928. We also find another case where implementing AM does not maximize the individual throughput. Namely, when A and C implement AM (i.e., DA = DC = AM), it is preferable for B to implement PU and force states in which A and C transmit only in their primary channels. This increases considerably both the throughput of B (i.e., ΓB = 66.46 Mbps) and the fairness (i.e., P = 6.206 and J = 0.89988). Looking at the most fair combinations, we notice that A, C or both must implement PU in order to let B transmit with similar amount of opportunities. Specifically, when both A  11  (b) Average throughput.  (a) Topologies.  Fig. 9: Scenario III. Yellow and blue arrows indicate the carrier sense range of WLANs A and C, respectively. The carrier sense range of WLAN B is not displayed. T3-noCE refers to topology T3 when B does not accomplish the capture effect condition whenever A, B and C are active. MC and Sim refer to the values obtained through SFCTMN and 11axHDWLANsSim.  A  s2 em  4 1,  ∅  2  C  −, 22  s6  6  1 ty 10, 9t,y p 2 em 0 11, 19  15 ,2  3  AC  s3 em p 3, 1  s5  13  B  2, 8  s1  5, 14  pt y y 7, p6,t 1 em 7  6  AB  1 ,2 18  ABC  s8  BC  s4  s7  Fig. 10: CTMN corresponding to Scenario III-T3. For the sake of visualization, neither the transition rates nor the transmission channels are included in the figure. The discovery order of the transitions is represented by the pairs in blue.  TABLE 3: Policy combinations effect on throughput and fairness in the WLANs of Scenario IV. Policy  Throughput [Mbps]  DA DB DC  AM AM PU PU AM AM  AM PU AM PU AM PU  AM AM PU PU PU PU  Fairness  ΓA  ΓB  ΓC  Γ  P  212.35 155.48 113.76 113.77 115.36 115.33  04.04 66.46 112.27 112.27 110.70 110.73  113.77 113.77 113.76 113.77 114.28 114.28  428.73 377.42 339.79 339.81 340.34 340.34  5.260 6.206 6.162 6.162 6.164 6.164  J  0.67928 0.89988 0.99996 0.99996 0.99969 0.99970  and C implement PU, B experiences the highest throughput and the system achieves the highest fairness (i.e., J ≈ 1) accordingly. Nonetheless, the price to pay is to heavily decrease the throughput of A and C. Therefore, as most of the times it does not exist a global policy that satisfies all the WLANs in the system, different policies should be adopted depending on the parameter to be optimized.  E VALUATION OF DCB IN HD WLAN S  In this Section we study the effects of the presented DCB policies on dense WLAN scenarios. We first draw some general conclusions from analyzing the throughput and fairness obtained through the different policies when increasing the number of WLANs per area unit. Then, we discuss what is the optimal policy that a particular WLAN should locally pick in order to maximize its own throughput. The results gathered in this section have been obtained using 11axHDWLANSim, an event-based wireless network simulator that aims to capture the effects of the newest technologies included in the IEEE 802.11 amendments. The values of the considered parameters are shown in the Appendix. 6.1  Network density vs. throughput  Figure 11 shows the general scenario considered for conducting the experiments presented in this Section. For the sake of speeding up 11axHDWLANSim simulations, we assume that each WLAN is composed just of 1 AP and 1 STA. Due to the fact that APs and STAs are located randomly in the map, the number of STAs should not have a significant impact on the results because only downlink traffic is assumed. Essentially, we consider a rectangular area Amap = 100 × 100 m2 , where M WLANs are placed uniformly at random with the single condition that any pair of APs must be separated at least dmin AP-AP = 10 m. The STA of each WLAN is located also uniformly at random at a distance max dAP-STA ∈ [dmin AP-STA , dAP-STA ] = [1, 5] m from the AP. The channelization C counts with Nsys = 8 basic channels and follows the 11ax proposal (see Figure 1). The channel allocation is also set uniformly at random, i.e., every WLAN w is assigned a primary channel pw ∼ U [1, 8] and allocated channel CX containing Nw ∼ U {1, 2, 4, 8} basic channels. For each number of WLANs studied (i.e., M = 2, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50), we generate ND = 50 deployments with different random node locations and channel allocations. Then, for each of the deployments, we assign to all the WLANs the same DCB policy. Namely, we simulate  12  Fig. 11: Example scenario where M = 11 WLANs are spread uniformly at random in a map of size mw × mh .  NM × ND × NP = 7 × 50 × 4 = 1400 scenarios, where NM is the number of different M values studied and NP is the number of DCB policies considered in this paper. Besides, all the simulations have a duration of Tobs = 20 seconds. In Figure 12, it is shown by means of boxplots8 the average throughput per WLAN for each of the presented DCB policies. As expected, when there are few WLANs in the area, the most aggressive policies (i.e., SCB and AM) provide the higher throughputs. Instead, PU, and especially OP, perform the worst, as they do not extensively exploit the free bandwidth. However, when M increases and the scenario gets denser, the average throughput obtained by all the policies except SCB tends to be similar. This occurs due to the fact that WLANs implementing AM and PU will likely perform single-channel transmissions (as OP does) because the PIFS condition for multiple channels will most likely not be accomplished. In the case of SCB, some of the basic channels inside the WLAN’s allocated channel will most likely be occupied by other WLANs, and therefore its backoff counter will get repeatedly paused. Thus, its average throughput in dense scenarios is considerably low with respect to the other policies. In order to asses the use of the spectrum, we first define the average bandwidth usage of a WLAN w as BWw =  Nsys 1 X tx t (c) · |c|, Tobs c=1 w  where ttx w (c) is the time that WLAN w is transmitting in a channel containing at least the basic channel c, and |c| is the bandwidth of a basic channel (i.e., 20 MHz). We can then define the spectrum utilization of a given scenario as the ratio P ACS M w=1 BWw ρ= , Amap · Nsys · |c| where ACS is the circular carrier sense area of each WLAN when transmitting in a single-channel. The average of such ratio in the considered scenarios is shown in Figure 13. Similarly to the throughput, while OP and PU do not leverage the free spectrum in low density scenarios, SCB 8. Matlab’s bloxplot definition: https://www.mathworks.com/help/ stats/boxplot.html  Fig. 12: Node density effect on the average WLAN throughput. On each box, the central mark indicates the median, and the bottom and top edges of the box indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively. The whiskers extend to the most extreme data points not considered outliers, and the outliers are plotted individually using the ‘+’ symbol.  Fig. 13: Node density effect on spectrum utilization. and AM do so by exploiting the most bandwidth. Instead, when the number of nodes per area increases, SCB suffers from heavy contention periods, which reiterates the need of flexibility to adapt to the channel state. In this regard, we note that AM is clearly the policy exploiting the most bandwidth in average for any number of WLANs. Nonetheless, neither the average throughput per WLAN nor the spectrum utilization may be a proper metric when assessing the performance of the whole system. Namely, having some WLANs experiencing high throughputs when some others starve is often a situation preferable to be avoided. In that sense, we focus on the fairness, which is both indicated by the boxes and outliers in Figure 12, and  13  more clearly by the expected Jain’s fairness index shown in Figure 14.  WLANs operating with the same primary channel due to heavy interference, specially when OP is being used. 6.2  Fig. 14: Node density effect on Jain’s Fairness Index. As expected, the policy providing the highest fairness is OP. In fact, no matter the channel allocation, WLANs only pick their primary channel for transmitting when implementing OP; hence the fairness is always maximized at the cost of probably wasting part of the frequency spectrum, specially when the node density is low. In this regard, PU also provides high fairness while exploiting the spectrum more, which increases the average throughput per WLAN accordingly. Regarding the aggressive policies, as expected, SCB is clearly the most unfair policy due to its ‘all or nothing’ strategy. Therefore, it seems preferable to prevent WLANs from applying SCB in dense scenarios because of the number of WLANs that may starve or experience really low throughput. However, even though being aggressive, AM is able to adapt its transmission channel to the state of the medium, thus providing both higher throughput and fairness. Still, as indicated by the boxes and outliers of Figure 12, AM is not per se the optimal policy. In fact, there are scenarios where PU performs better in terms of both fairness and throughput. Consequently, there is room to improve the presented policies with some smarter adaptation or learning approaches (e.g., tunning properly the transition probabilities α ~ when implementing stochastic DCB). There are also some phenomena that we have observed during the simulations that are worth to be mentioned. Regarding backoff decreasing slowness, in some scenarios, it can be the case that a WLAN w is forced to decrease its backoff counter very slowly due to the fact that neighboring WLANs operate in a channel including the primary channel of w. That is why more fairness is achieved with PU in dense networks as such neighboring WLANs do not always pick the whole allocated channel. Thus, they let w to decrease their backoff more often, and to proceed to transmit accordingly. Finally, concerning the transmission power and channel width, we have observed that transmitting just in the primary channel can also be harmful to other WLANs because of the higher transmission power used per 20 MHz channel. While this may allow to use higher MCS and respective data rates, it may also cause packet losses in neighboring  Local optimal policy  With the following experiment we aim to identify what would be the optimal policy that a particular WLAN should adopt in order to increase its own throughput. In this case, we consider an area Amap = 50 × 50 m2 with one WLAN (A) located at the center, and M − 1 = 19 WLANs spread uniformly at random in the area. Regarding the channel allocation, all the WLANs are again set with primary channel and allocated channel selected uniformly at random, with the exception of A, which is allocated the widest channel (i.e., CA = {1, ..., 8}) in order to provide more flexibility and capture complex effects. The primary channel of A is also selected uniformly at random (i.e., pA ∼ U [1, 8]). While the DCB policies of the M − 1 WLANs are also set uniformly at random (i.e., they will implement OP, SCB, AM or PU with same probability 1/4), A’s policy is set in a deterministic way. Specifically, we generate ND = 400 deployments following the aforementioned conditions for each of the DCB policies that A can implement. That is, we simulate ND × NP = 1600 scenarios. The simulation time of each scenario is Tobs = 25 seconds. The first noticeable result is that, in dense scenarios, SCB is non-viable for WLANs with wide allocated channels because they are most likely prevented to initiate transmissions. In fact, A is not able to successfully transmit data packets in any of the 400 scenarios simulated for SCB (i.e., E[ΓSCB A ] = 0). Regarding the rest of policies, on average, A’s throughput is 3.2 % higher when implementing AM (E[ΓAM A ] = 41.07 Mbps) with respect to PU (E[ΓPU A ] = 39.74 Mbps). Besides, for dense scenarios like this one, there is a clear trend to pick just one channel when implementing AM and PU. That is why OP provides an average throughput (E[ΓOP A ] = 39.04 Mbps) close to the ones achieved by AM and PU. Nonetheless, as the high standard deviation of the throughput indicates (e.g., σAM (ΓA ) = 38.25 Mbps when implementing AM), there are important differences regarding ΓA depending on the scenario. Table 4 compares the share of scenarios where AM or PU provide the highest individual throughput for A. Three types of outcomes are categorized accordingly a defined margin δΓ : AM (a) PU performs better than AM: E[ΓPU A ] − E[ΓA ] > δΓ AM (b) PU performs similarly to AM: |E[ΓPU ] − E [Γ A A ]| < δΓ PU (c) PU performs worse than AM: E[ΓAM ] − E [Γ A A ] > δΓ We use the margin δΓ = 0.5 Mbps for capturing the cases where AM and PU perform similarly. TABLE 4: Share of scenarios where AM or PU provide the highest individual throughput for WLAN A. AM E[ΓPU A ] > E[ΓA ]  AM E[ΓPU A ] ≈ E[ΓA ]  PU E[ΓAM A ] > E[ΓA ]  97/400 (24.25 %)  135/400 (33.75 %)  168/400 (42.00 %)  We see that in most of the cases AM performs better than PU. However, in about 1/4 of the scenarios PU improves AM and this share is even higher when considering  14  smaller values of δΓ . Also, there are a few scenarios where the throughput experienced by PU with respect to AM is considerable (more than 30 %). This mainly occurs when the neighboring nodes frequently occupy A’s primary channel through complex interactions that keep frozen its backoff accordingly for long periods of time. Therefore, as a rule of thumb for dense networks, we can state that, while AM reaches higher throughputs on average, stochastic DCB is less risky and performs similarly well. Nonetheless, even though PU is more fair than AM on average, it does not guarantee the absence of starving WLANs either. It follows that WLANs must be provided with some kind of adaptability to improve both the individual throughput and fairness with acceptable certainty.  7  C ONCLUSIONS  In this work we show the effect of DCB in spatially distributed scenarios, where WLANs are not required to be within the carrier sense range of each other. We study different types of DCB policies including a new approach that selects the transmission channel width probabilistically. We also present the SFCTMN analytical framework for modeling WLAN scenarios through CTMNs, and use it to depict the phenomena that occur in several toy scenarios. In this regard, we prove that i) the feasible states in the CTMNs highly depend on the DCB policy, ii) always selecting the widest available channel found free does not always maximize the own throughput (short vs. long-term throughput dilemma), iii) cumulative interference from hidden nodes may cause important throughput losses in spatially distributed scenarios due to packet losses or inadmissible large contention periods, and iv) often, there is not an optimal global policy to be applied to each WLAN, but different policies are required, specially in non-fully overlapping scenarios where chain reaction actions are complex to foresee in advance. Besides, we analyze via simulations the impact of the node density on the individual throughput and system’s fairness in 11ax WLANs. Results corroborate that, while DCB is normally the best policy to maximize the individual short and long-term throughput, there are cases, specially in high density scenarios, where other policies like stochastic PU perform better both in terms of individual throughput and throughput fairness among WLANs. Therefore, we conclude that the performance of DCB can be importantly improved by implementing adaptive policies capable of harnessing the knowledge gathered from the medium and/or via information distribution. In this regard, our next work will focus on studying machine learning based policies to enhance WLANs performance in high density scenarios. We also aim to capture non-saturation regimes in the SFCTMN framework, as the reduction of overlapping situations may have an important impact on the performance of the policies.  A PPENDIX A 11 A X HDWLAN S S I M & 11 AX PARAMETERS For the high-density results presented in Section 6, we have simulated multiple 11ax scenarios9 in 11axHDWLANsSim. This simulator is a particular release of Komondor,10 a wireless networks simulator built on top of COST library [30]. COST facilitates the development of discrete event simulation using CompC++, a component-oriented extension to C++. COST provides a collection of components that interact with each other by exchanging messages through communication, and a simulation engine that is responsible for synchronizing components. The value of the parameters considered in the simulations are shown in Table 5. Regarding the path loss, we use the simple but accurate partition loss model for 5 GHz indoor environments with corridors proposed in [31]. Specifically, the path loss in dB experienced at a distance d is defined by PL(d) = PLFree (d) + αd, where PLFree (d) is the well-known free space path loss at distance d and α = 0.44 dB/m is the constant attenuation per unit of path length that fits the best to the measurements collected in an office. TABLE 5: Parameters considered in the presented scenarios. Parameter  Description  Value  CWmin m CCA Ptx Gtx Grx Ldata LBACK LRTS LCTS nagg CE N Tslot SIFS DIFS PIFS η fc Tofdm Tphy nss HE Tphy Lsf Ldel Lmac Ltail ACS  Min. contention window Backoff stage CCA threshold Transmission power Transmitting gain Reception gain Length of a data packet Length of a block ACK Length of an RTS packet Length of a CTS packet Num. data packets aggregated Capture effect threshold Background noise level Slot duration SIFS duration DIFS duration PIFS duration Packet error rate Central frequency OFDM symbol duration Legacy PHY header duration SU spatial streams HE header duration Length of MAC’s service field Length of MAC’s MPDU delimiter Length of MAC header Length of MAC’s tail Single-channel carrier sense area  16 5 -82 dBm 15 dBm 0 dB 0 dB 12000 bits 240 bits 160 bits 112 bits 64 20 dB -95 dBm 9 µs 16 µs 34 µs 25 µs 0.1 5 GHz 16 µs 20 µs 1 32 µs 16 bits 32 bits 272 bits 6 bits 5384.6 m2  The data rate (r) used in the data packet transmissions among all the nodes has always been the highest allowed by the MCS in the 11ax depending on the distance between AP and STA. Specifically, r = Nsc Ym Yc nss , where Nsc is 9. It is important to note that the 11ax amendment is still in an early development stage and newer version may include changes with respect the parameters considered in this work. 10. All of the source code of Komondor is open, encouraging sharing of algorithms between contributors and providing the ability for people to improve on the work of others under the GNU General Public License v3.0. The release used in this work and all the output files of the performed simulations can be found at https://github.com/wn-upf/ Komondor.  15  the number of subcarriers (dependent on the transmission channel width), Ym is the number of modulation bits and Yc is the coding rate. The latter two parameters depend on the MCS. Nsc can be 234, 468, 980 or 1960 for 20, 40, 80, and 160 MHz channel widths, respectively. For instance, for the MCS providing highest data rate, Ym = 10 bits and Yc = 5/6. Accordingly, the data rate for 20 MHz channel transmissions is defined by r20MHz = 52Ym Yc . With such parameters we can define the duration of the different packets transmissions, and the duration of a successful transmission accordingly:  [9]  [10]  [11]  [12]     Lsf + LRTS + Ltail Tofdm , r20MHz   Lsf + LCTS + Ltail Tofdm , tCTS = Tphy + r20MHz HE tdata = Tphy + Tphy +   Lsf + nagg (Ldel + Lmac + Ldata ) + Ltail + Tofdm , r   Lsf + LBACK + Ltail tBACK = Tphy + Tofdm , r20MHz tsuc = tRTS + SIFS + tCTS + SIFS+ + tdata + SIFS + tBACK + DIFS + Tslot .  tRTS = Tphy +  ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work has been partially supported by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness under the Maria de Maeztu Units of Excellence Programme (MDM-20150502), and by a Gift from the Cisco University Research Program (CG#890107, Towards Deterministic Channel Access in High-Density WLANs) Fund, a corporate advised fund of Silicon Valley Community Foundation. The work done by S. Barrachina-Muñoz is supported by a FI grant from the Generalitat de Catalunya.  R EFERENCES [1] [2]  [3] [4] [5] [6]  [7]  [8]  IEEE 802.11n. Standard for Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY): Enhancements for High Throughput. IEEE, 2009. I. P802.11ac. Standard for Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications: Enhancements for Very High Throughput for Operation in Bands below 6 GHz. IEEE, 2014. B. Bellalta. IEEE 802.11ax: High-efficiency WLANs. IEEE Wireless Communications, 23(1):38–46, 2016. B. Bellalta, A. Checco, A. Zocca, and J. Barcelo. On the interactions between multiple overlapping WLANs using channel bonding. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 65(2):796–812, 2016. M. Park. IEEE 802.11ac: Dynamic bandwidth channel access. In Communications (ICC), 2011 IEEE International Conference on, pages 1–5. IEEE, 2011. B. Bellalta, A. Faridi, J. Barcelo, A. Checco, and P. Chatzimisios. Channel bonding in short-range wlans. In European Wireless 2014; 20th European Wireless Conference; Proceedings of, pages 1–7. VDE, 2014. S. Vasthav, S. Srikanth, and V. Ramaiyan. Performance analysis of an IEEE 802.11ac WLAN with dynamic bandwidth channel access. In Communication (NCC), 2016 Twenty Second National Conference on, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2016. A. Faridi, B. Bellalta, and A. Checco. Analysis of Dynamic Channel Bonding in Dense Networks of WLANs. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2016.  [13]  [14] [15]  [16]  [17]  [18]  [19] [20]  [21] [22] [23] [24] [25]  [26]  [27] [28] [29]  S. Barrachina-Muñoz and F. Wilhelmi. Komondor v1.0 - 11axHDWLANsSim: first stable release implementing basic IEEE 802.11ax features. GitHub release, 2017. [Online] GitHub release: https: //github.com/wn-upf/Komondor/releases/tag/v1.0. L. Deek, E. Garcia-Villegas, E. Belding, S. Lee, and K. Almeroth. The impact of channel bonding on 802.11n network management. In Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies, page 11. ACM, 2011. M. Y. Arslan, K. Pelechrinis, I. Broustis, S. V. Krishnamurthy, S. Addepalli, and K. Papagiannaki. Auto-configuration of 802.11n WLANs. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference, page 27. ACM, 2010. L. Deek, E. Garcia-Villegas, E. Belding, S. Lee, and K. Almeroth. Joint rate and channel width adaptation for 802.11 MIMO wireless networks. In Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc Communications and Networks (SECON), 2013 10th Annual IEEE Communications Society Conference on, pages 167–175. IEEE, 2013. M. X. Gong, B. Hart, L. Xia, and R. Want. Channel bounding and MAC protection mechanisms for 802.11ac. In Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM 2011), 2011 IEEE, pages 1–5. IEEE, 2011. M. Kim, T. Ropitault, S. Lee, and N. Golmie. A Throughput Study for Channel Bonding in IEEE 802.11ac Networks. IEEE Communications Letters, 2017. M. Han, Sami K., L. X. Cai, and Y. Cheng. Performance Analysis of Opportunistic Channel Bonding in Multi-Channel WLANs. In Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2016 IEEE, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2016. S. Joshi, P. Pawelczak, D. Cabric, and J. Villasenor. When channel bonding is beneficial for opportunistic spectrum access networks. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 11(11):3942–3956, 2012. T. Moscibroda, R. Chandra, Y. Wu, S. Sengupta, P. Bahl, and Y. Yuan. Load-aware spectrum distribution in wireless LANs. In Network Protocols, 2008. ICNP 2008. IEEE International Conference on, pages 137–146. IEEE, 2008. A. Nabil, M. J. Abdel-Rahman, and A. B. MacKenzie. Adaptive Channel Bonding in Wireless LANs Under Demand Uncertainty. To appear in the Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), Montreal, QC, Canada, October 2017. C. Kai, Y. Liang, T. Huang, and X. Chen. A Channel Allocation Algorithm to Maximize Aggregate Throughputs in DCB WLANs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03909, 2017. P. Chatzimisios, A. Boucouvalas, and V. Vitsas. Performance analysis of IEEE 802.11 DCF in presence of transmission errors. In Communications, 2004 IEEE International Conference on, volume 7, pages 3854–3858. IEEE, 2004. R. Boorstyn, A. Kershenbaum, B. Maglaris, and V. Sahin. Throughput analysis in multihop CSMA packet radio networks. IEEE Transactions on Communications, 35(3):267–274, 1987. G. Bianchi. Performance analysis of the IEEE 802.11 distributed coordination function. IEEE Journal on selected areas in communications, 18(3):535–547, 2000. B. Bellalta. Throughput Analysis in High Density WLANs. IEEE Communications Letters, 21(3):592–595, 2017. B. Nardelli and E. Knightly. Closed-form throughput expressions for CSMA networks with collisions and hidden terminals. In INFOCOM, 2012 Proceedings IEEE, pages 2309–2317. IEEE, 2012. S. C. Liew, C. H. Kai, H. C. Leung, and P. Wong. Back-of-theenvelope computation of throughput distributions in CSMA wireless networks. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 9(9):1319– 1331, 2010. B. Bellalta, A. Zocca, C. Cano, A. Checco, J. Barcelo, and A. Vinel. Throughput analysis in CSMA/CA networks using continuous time Markov networks: a tutorial. In Wireless Networking for Moving Objects, pages 115–133. Springer, 2014. H. Salameh, M. Krunz, and D. Manzi. Spectrum bonding and aggregation with guard-band awareness in cognitive radio networks. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 13(3):569–581, 2014. F. P. Kelly. Reversibility and stochastic networks. Cambridge University Press, 2011. R. Jain, D. Chiu, and W. Hawe. A quantitative measure of fairness and discrimination for resource allocation in shared computer system, volume 38. Eastern Research Laboratory, Digital Equipment Corporation Hudson, MA, 1984.  16  [30] G. Chen and B. K. Szymanski. Reusing simulation components: cost: a component-oriented discrete event simulator. In Proceedings of the 34th conference on Winter simulation: exploring new frontiers, pages 776–782. Winter Simulation Conference, 2002. [31] J. Medbo and J-E. Berg. Simple and accurate path loss modeling at 5 GHz in indoor environments with corridors. In Vehicular Technology Conference, 2000. IEEE-VTS Fall VTC 2000. 52nd, volume 1, pages 30–36. IEEE, 2000.  Sergio Barrachina-Muñoz obtained his B.Sc. degree in Telematics Engineering and his M.Sc. in Intelligent Interactive Systems in 2015 and 2016, respectively, both from Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona. Currently, he is a PhD student and teacher assistant in the Department of Information and Communication Technologies (DTIC) at Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF). His main research interests are focused on developing autonomous learning methods and techniques for improving the performance of next-generation wireless networks.  Francesc Wilhelmi holds a BSc degree in Telematics Engineering from the Universitat Pompeu Fabra (2015) with a focus on Broadband and Wireless Communications. With the aim of applying new techniques for solving many well-known problems in communications, Francesc obtained his MSc degree in Intelligent and Interactive Systems also from the UPF in 2016. He is now a PhD Student in the Wireless Networking Group (WN) of the Department of Information and Communication Technologies (DTIC) at the UPF. The main topics of his PhD Thesis are related to spatial reuse in high-density wireless networks through power and sensitivity adjustment by taking advantage of Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques.  Boris Bellalta is an Associate Professor in the Department of Information and Communication Technologies (DTIC) at Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF). He obtained his degree in Telecommunications Engineering from Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC) in 2002 and the Ph.D. in Information and Communication Technologies from UPF in 2007. His research interests are in the area of wireless networks, with emphasis on the design and performance evaluation of new architectures and protocols. The results from his research have been published in more than 100 international journal and conference papers. He is currently involved in several international and national research projects, including the coordination of the ENTOMATIC FP7 collaborative project. At UPF he is giving several courses on networking, queuing theory and wireless networks. He is co-designer and coordinator of the interuniversity (UPF and UPC) masters degree in Wireless Communications.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 7. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
