Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_5435

Abstract:
1  Predicting the Driver’s Focus of Attention: the DR(eye)VE Project  arXiv:1705.03854v2 [cs.CV] 17 Nov 2017  Andrea Palazzi, Davide Abati, Simone Calderara, Francesco Solera, and Rita Cucchiara Abstract—In this work we aim to predict the driver’s focus of attention. The goal is to estimate what a person would pay attention to while driving, and which part of the scene around the vehicle is more critical for the task. To this end we propose a new computer vision model based on a multi-branch deep architecture that integrates three sources of information: raw video, motion and scene semantics. We also introduce DR(eye)VE, the largest dataset of driving scenes for which eye-tracking annotations are available. This dataset features more than 500,000 registered frames, matching ego-centric views (from glasses worn by drivers) and car-centric views (from roof-mounted camera), further enriched by other sensors measurements. Results highlight that several attention patterns are shared across drivers and can be reproduced to some extent. The indication of which elements in the scene are likely to capture the driver’s attention may benefit several applications in the context of human-vehicle interaction and driver attention analysis. Index Terms—focus of attention, driver’s attention, gaze prediction  F  1  I NTRODUCTION  According to the J3016 SAE international Standard, which defined the five levels of autonomous driving [23], cars will provide a fully autonomous journey only at the fifth level. At lower levels of autonomy, computer vision and other sensing systems will still support humans in the driving task. Human-centric Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) have significantly improved safety and comfort in driving (e.g. collision avoidance systems, blind spot control, lane change assistance etc.). Among ADAS solutions, the most ambitious examples are related to monitoring systems [18], [26], [30], [40]: they parse the attention behavior of the driver together with the road scene to predict potentially unsafe manoeuvres and act on the car in order to avoid them – either by signaling the driver or braking. However, all these approaches suffer from the complexity of capturing the true driver’s attention and rely on a limited set of fixed safety-inspired rules. Here, we shift the problem from a personal level (what the driver is looking at) to a task-driven level (what most drivers would look at) introducing a computer vision model able to to replicate the human attentional behavior during the driving task. We achieve this result in two stages: First, we conduct a data-driven study on drivers’ gaze fixations under different circumstances and scenarios. The study concludes that the semantic of the scene, the speed and bottom-up features all influence the driver’s gaze. Second, we advocate for the existence of common gaze patterns that are shared among different drivers. We empirically demonstrate the existence of such patterns by developing a deep learning model that can profitably learn to predict where a driver would be looking at in a specific situation. To this aim we recorded and annotated 555,000 frames (approx. 6 hours) of driving sequences in different traffic and weather conditions: the DR(eye)VE dataset. For every frame we acquired the driver’s gaze through an accurate eye tracking device and •  All authors are with the Department of Engineering “Enzo Ferrari”, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy. E-mail: name.surname@unimore.it  (a) RGB frame  (b) optical flow  (c) semantic segmentation  (d) predicted map  Fig. 1. An example of visual attention while driving (d), estimated from our deep model using (a) raw video, (b) optical flow and (c) semantic segmentation.  registered such data to the external view recorded from a roof-mounted camera. The DR(eye)VE data richness enables us to train an end-to-end deep network that predicts salient regions in car-centric driving videos. The network we propose is based on three branches which estimate attentional maps from a) visual information of the scene, b) motion cues (in terms of optical flow) and c) semantic segmentation (Fig. 1). In contrast to the majority of experiments, which are conducted in controlled laboratory settings or employ sequences of unrelated images [9], [27], [62], we train our model on data acquired on the field. Final results demonstrate the ability of the network to generalize across different day times, different weather conditions, different landscapes and different drivers. Eventually, we believe our work can be complementary to the current semantic segmentation and object detection literature [11], [41], [42], [64], [69] by providing a diverse set of information. According to [58], the act of driving combines complex attention mechanisms guided by the driver’s past experience, short  2  reactive times and strong contextual constraints. Thus, very little information is needed to drive if guided by a strong focus of attention (FoA) on a limited set of targets: our model aims at predicting them. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, related works about computer vision and gaze prediction are provided to frame our work in the current state-of-the-art scenario. Sec. 3 describes the DR(eye)VE dataset and some insights about several attention patterns that human drivers exhibit. Sec. 4 illustrates the proposed deep network to replicate such human behavior, and Sec. 5 reports the performed experiments.  2  R ELATED W ORK  Predicting human attention is often formalized as a dense prediction task estimating the probability of each point in a given scene to attract the observer’s gaze. Attention in images and videos. Literature concerning human attention prediction on images branches in two families: top-down and bottom-up strategies. Former approaches aim at highlighting objects and cues that could be meaningful in the context of a given task. For this reason, such methods are also known as task-driven. Usually, top-down computer vision models are built to integrate semantic contextual information in the attention prediction process [60]. This can be achieved by either merging estimated maps at different levels of scale and abstraction [21], or including a-priori cues about relevant objects for the task at hand [15], [19], [68]. Human focus in complex interactive environments (e.g. while playing videogames) [7], [46], [47] follows task-driven behaviors as well. Conversely, bottom-up models capture salient objects or events naturally popping out in the image, independently of the observer, the undergoing task and other external factors. This task is widely known in literature as visual saliency prediction. In this context, computational models focus on spotting visual discontinuities, either by clustering features or considering the rarity of image regions, locally [36], [54] or globally [1], [12], [70]. Recently, the success of deep networks involved both taskdriven attention and saliency prediction, as models have become more powerful in both paradigms, achieving state-of-the-art results on public benchmarks [13], [14], [25], [31], [34]. In video, attention prediction and saliency estimation are more complex with respect to still images since motion heavily affects human gaze. Some models merge bottom-up saliency with motion maps, either by means of optical flow [72] or feature tracking [71]. Other methods enforce temporal dependencies between bottom-up features in successive frames. Both supervised [56], [72] and unsupervised [39], [66], [67] feature extraction can be employed, and temporal coherence can be achieved either by conditioning the current prediction on information from previous frames [51] or by capturing motion smoothness with optical flow [56], [72]. While deep video saliency models still lack, an interesting work is [4], which relies on a recurrent architecture fed with clip encodings to predict the fixation map by means of a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). Nevertheless, most methods limit to bottom-up features accounting for just visual discontinuities in terms of textures or contours. Our proposal, instead, is specifically tailored to the driving task and fuses the bottom-up information with semantics and motion elements that have emerged as attention factors from  the analysis of the DR(eye)VE dataset. Attention and driving. Prior works addressed the task of detecting saliency and attention in the specific context of assisted driving. In such cases, however, gaze and attentive mechanisms have been mainly studied for some driving sub-tasks only, often acquiring gaze maps from on-screen images. Bremond et al. [55] presented a model that exploits visual saliency with a non-linear SVM classifier for the detection of traffic signs. The validation of this study was performed in a laboratory non-realistic setting, emulating an in-car driving session. A more realistic experiment [8] was then conducted with a larger set of targets, e.g. including pedestrians and bicycles. Driver’s gaze has also been studied in a pre-attention context, by means of intention prediction relying only on fixation maps [49]. The study in [62] inspects the driver’s attention at T junctions, in particular towards pedestrians and motorbikes, and exploits object saliency to avoid the looked-but-failed-to-see effect. In absence of eye tracking systems and reliable gaze data, [5], [17], [59], [63] focus on drivers’ head, detecting facial landmarks to predict head orientation. Such mechanisms are more robust to varying lighting conditions and occlusions, but there is no certainty about the adherence of predictions to the true gaze during the driving task. Datasets. Many image saliency datasets have been released in the past few years, improving the understanding of the human visual attention and pushing computational models forward. Most of these datasets include no motion information, as saliency ground truth maps are built by aggregating fixations of several users within the same still image. Usually, a gaussian filtering post-processing step is employed on recorded data, in order to smooth such fixations and integrate their spatial locations. Some datasets, such as the MIT saliency benchmark [9], were labeled through an eye tracking system, while others, like the SALICON dataset [27] relied on users clicking on salient image locations. We refer the reader to [6] for a comprehensive list of available datasets. On the contrary, datasets addressing human attention prediction in video still lack. Up to now, Action in the Eye [38] represents the most important contribution, since it consists in the largest video dataset accompanied by gaze and fixation annotations. That information, however, is collected in the context of action recognition, so it is heavily task-driven. A few datasets address directly the study of attention mechanisms while driving, as summarized in Tab. 1. However, these are mostly restricted to limited settings and are not publicly available. In some of them [55], [62] fixation and saliency maps are acquired during an in-lab simulated driving experience. In-lab experiments enable several attention drifts that are influenced by external factors (e.g. monitor distance and others) rather than the primary task of driving [58]. A few in-car datasets exist [8], [49], but were precisely tailored to force the driver to fulfill some tasks, such as looking at people or traffic signs. Coarse gaze information is also available in [17], while the external road scene images are not acquired. We believe that the dataset presented in [49] is, among the others, the closer to our proposal. Yet, video sequences are collected from one driver only it is not publicly available. Conversely, our DR(eye)VE dataset is the first dataset addressing driver’s focus of attention prediction that is made publicly available. Furthermore, it includes sequences from several different drivers and presents a high variety of landscapes (i.e. highway, downtown and countryside), lighting and weather conditions.  3  Fig. 2. Examples taken from a random sequence of DR(eye)VE. From left to right: frames from the eye tracking glasses with gaze data, from the roof-mounted camera, temporal aggregated fixation maps (as defined in Sec. 3) and overlays between frames and fixation maps.  3  T HE DR( E Y E )VE PROJECT  In this section we present the DR(eye)VE dataset, the protocol adopted for video registration and annotation, the automatic processing of eye-tracker data and the analysis of the driver’s behavior in different conditions. The dataset. The DR(eye)VE dataset consists of 555,000 frames divided in 74 sequences, each of which is 5 minutes long. Eight different drivers of varying age from 20 to 40, including in 7 men and a woman, took part to the driving experiment, that lasted more than two months. Videos were recorded in different contexts, both in terms of landscape (downtown, countryside, highway) and traffic condition, ranging from traffic-free to highly cluttered scenarios. They were recorded in diverse weather conditions (sunny, rainy, cloudy) and at different hours of the day (both daytime and night). Tab. 1 recaps the dataset features and Tab. 2 compares it with other related proposals. DR(eye)VE is currently the largest publicly available dataset including gaze and driving behavior in automotive. The Acquisition System. The driver’s gaze information was captured using the commercial SMI ETG 2w Eye Tracking Glasses (ETG). ETG capture attention dynamics also in presence of head pose changes, which occur very often during the task of driving. While a frontal camera acquires the scene at 720p/30fps, users pupils are tracked at 60Hz. Gaze information are provided in terms of eye fixations and saccade movements. ETG was manually calibrated before each sequence for every driver. Simultaneously, videos from the car perspective were acquired using the GARMIN VirbX camera mounted on the car roof (RMC, Roof-Mounted Camera). Such sensor captures frames at 1080p/25fps, and includes further information such as GPS data, accelerometer and gyroscope measurements. Video-gaze registration. The dataset has been processed to move the acquired gaze from the egocentric (ETG) view to the car (RMC) view. The latter features a much wider field of view (FoV), and can contain fixations that are out of the egocentric view. For instance, this can occur whenever the driver takes a  peek at something at the border of this FoV, but doesn’t move his head. For every sequence, the two videos were manually aligned to cope with the difference in sensors framerate. Videos were then registered frame-by-frame through a homographic transformation that projects fixation points across views. More formally, at each t t timestep t the RMC frame IRM C and the ETG frame IET G are registered by means of a homography matrix HET G→RM C , computed by matching SIFT descriptors [35] from one view to the other (see Fig. 3). A further RANSAC [16] procedure ensures robustness to outliers. Fixation map computation. The pipeline discussed above provides a frame-level annotation of the driver’s fixations. In contrast to image saliency experiments [9], there is no clear and indisputable protocol for obtaining continuous maps from raw fixations when acquired in task-driven real-life scenarios. This is even more evident when fixations are collected in task-driven real-life scenarios. The main motivation resides in the fact that observer’s subjectivity cannot be removed by averaging different observers’ fixations. Indeed two different observers cannot experience the same scene at the same time (e.g. two drivers cannot be at the same time in the same point of the street). The only chance to average among different observers would be the adoption of a simulation environment, but it has been proved that the cognitive load in controlled experiments is lower than in real test scenarios and it effects the true attention mechanism of the observer [52]. In our preliminary DR(eye)VE release [2], fixation points were aggregated and smoothed by means of a temporal sliding window. In such a way, temporal filtering  Fig. 3. Registration between the egocentric and roof-mounted camera views by means of SIFT descriptor matching.  4  TABLE 1 Summary of the DR(eye)VE dataset characteristics. The dataset was designed to embody the most possible diversity in the combination of different features. The reader is referred to either the additional material or to the dataset presentation [2] for details on each sequence. # Videos  # Frames  Drivers  74  555,000  8  Weather conditions sunny cloudy rainy  Lighting day evening night  Gaze Info raw fixations gaze map pupil dilation  Metadata GPS car speed car course  Camera Viewpoint driver (720p) car (1080p)  TABLE 2 A comparison between DR(eye)VE and other datasets. Dataset  Frames  Drivers  Pugeault et al. [49]  158,668  –  40 120 1,860,761  30 77 50  555,000  8  Simon et al. [55] Underwood et al. [62] Fridman et al. [17] DR(eye)VE [2]  Scenarios Countryside, Highway Downtown Downtown Urban Motorway Highway Countryside, Highway Downtown  discarded momentary glimpses that contain precious information about the driver’s attention. Following the psychological protocol in [37] and [22], this limitation was overcome in the current release where the new fixation maps were computed without temporal smoothing. Both [37] and [22] highlight the high degree of subjectivity of scene scanpaths in short temporal windows (< 1 sec) and suggest to neglect the fixations pop-out order within such windows. This mechanism accounts also for the inhibition of return phenomenon that may prevent interesting objects to be observed twice in short temporal intervals [24], [48]. More formally, the fixation map Ft for a frame at time t is built by accumulating projected gaze points in a temporal sliding window of k = 25 frames, centered in t. For each time step t + i in the window, where i ∈ {− k2 , − k2 + 1, . . . , k2 − 1, k2 }, gaze points projections on Ft are estimated through the homography t transformation Ht+i that projects points from the image plane at frame t + i, namely pt+i , to the image plane in Ft . A continuous fixation map is obtained from the projected fixations by centering on each of them a multivariate Gaussian having a diagonal covariance matrix Σ (the spatial variance of each variable is set to σs2 = 200 pixels) and taking the max value along the time axis:  Ft (x, y) =  max  k i∈(− k 2 ,..., 2 )  t N ((x, y) | Ht+i · pt+i , Σ)  Annotations Gaze Maps Driver’s Actions Gaze Maps – 6 Gaze Location Classes Gaze Maps GPS, Speed, Course  Real-world  Public  Yes  No  No No Yes  No No No  Yes  Yes  Fig. 4. Resulting fixation map from a 1 second integration (25 frames). The adoption of the max aggregation of equation 1 allows to account in the final map two brief glances towards traffic lights.  (1)  The Gaussian variance has been computed by averaging the ETG spatial acquisition errors on 20 observers looking at calibration patterns at different distances from 5 to 15 meters. Visual examples of fixation maps can be appreciated in Fig. 2-4. Eventually, each map Ft is normalized to sum to 1, so that it can be considered a probability distribution of fixation points.  (a) Acting - 69 719  (b) Inattentive - 12 282  Labeling attention drifts. Fixation maps exhibit a very strong central bias. This is common in saliency annotations [57] and even more in the context of driving. For these reasons, there is a strong unbalance between lots of easy-to-predict scenarios and unfrequent but interesting hard-to-predict events. To enable the evaluation of computational models under such circumstances, the DR(eye)VE dataset has been extended with a set of further annotations. For each video, subsequences whose ground truth poorly correlates with the average ground truth of that sequence are selected. We employ Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient (CC ) and select subsequences with CC < 0.3. This  (c) Error - 22 893  (d) Subjective - 3 166  Fig. 5. Examples of the categorization of frames where gaze is far from the mean. Overall, 108 060 frames (∼20% of DR(eye)VE) were extended with this type of information.  happens when the attention of the driver focuses far from the vanishing point of the road. Examples of such subsequences are depicted in Fig. 5. Several human annotators inspected the selected frames and manually split them into (a) acting, (b) inattentive, (c) errors and (d) subjective events:  5  |Σ| = 2.49 × 109  |Σ| = 2.03 × 109  |Σ| = 8.61 × 108  |Σ| = 1.02 × 109  |Σ| = 9.28 × 108  (a) 0 ≤ km/h ≤ 10  (b) 10 ≤ km/h ≤ 30  (c) 30 ≤ km/h ≤ 50  (d) 50 ≤ km/h ≤ 70  (e) 70 ≤ km/h  Probability of fixation  Fig. 6. As speed gradually increases, driver’s attention converges towards the vanishing point of the road. (a) When the car is approximately stationary, the driver is distracted by many objects in the scene. (b-e) As the speed increases, the driver’s gaze deviates less and less from the vanishing point of the road. To measure this effect quantitatively, a two-dimensional Gaussian is fitted to approximate the mean map for each speed range, and the determinant of the covariance matrix Σ is reported as an indication of its spread (the determinant equals the product of eigenvalues, each of which measures the spread along a different data dimension). The bar plots illustrate the amount of downtown (red), countryside (green) and highway (blue) frames that concurred to generate the average gaze position for a specific speed range. Best viewed on screen. 0.01  0.4 0.3  0.005  0.2 0.1  0  0  road  sidewalk  buildings traffic signs  trees  flowerbed  sky  vehicles  people  cycles  Fig. 7. Proportion of semantic categories that fall within the driver’s fixation map when thresholded at increasing values (from left to right). Categories exhibiting a positive trend (e.g. road and vehicles) suggest a real attention focus, while a negative trend advocates for an awareness of the object which is only circumstantial. See Sec. 3.1 for details.  errors can happen either due to failures in the measuring tool (e.g. in extreme lighting conditions) or in the successive data processing phase (e.g. SIFT matching); • inattentive subsequences occur when the driver focuses his gaze on objects unrelated to the driving task (e.g. looking at an advertisement); • subjective subsequences describe situations in which the attention is closely related to the individual experience of the driver, e.g. a road sign on the side might be an interesting element to focus for someone that has never been on that road before but might be safely ignored by someone who drives that road every day. • acting subsequences include all the remaining ones. Acting subsequences are particularly interesting as the deviation of driver’s attention from the common central pattern denotes an intention linked to task-specific actions (e.g. turning, changing lanes, overtaking . . . ). •  3.1  Dataset analysis  By analyzing the dataset frames, the very first insight is the presence of a strong attraction of driver’s focus towards the  (a)  (b)  Fig. 8. Mean frame (a) and fixation map (b) averaged across the whole sequence 02, highlighting the link between driver’s focus and the vanishing point of the road.  vanishing point of the road, that can be appreciated in Fig. 8. We observed indeed that drivers often tend to disregard road signals, cars coming from the opposite direction and pedestrians on sidewalks. This is an effect of human peripheral vision [53], that allows observers to still perceive and interpret stimuli out of - but sufficiently close to - their focus of attention (FoA). A driver can therefore achieve a larger area of attention by focusing on the road’s vanishing point: due to the geometry of the road environment, many of the objects worth of attention are coming from there and have already been perceived when distant. Moreover, the gaze location tends to drift from this central attractor when the context changes in terms of car speed and landscape. Indeed [50] suggests that our brain is able to compensate spatially or temporally dense information by reducing the visual field size. In particular, as the car travels at higher speed the temporal density of information (i.e. the amount of information that the driver needs to elaborate per unit of time) increases: this causes the useful visual field of the driver to shrink [50]. We also observe this phenomenon in our experiments, as shown in Fig. 6. DR(eye)VE data also highlight that the driver’s gaze is attracted towards specific semantic categories. To reach the above conclusion, the dataset is analysed by means of the semantic segmentation model in [69] and the distribution of semantic classes within the fixation map evaluated. More precisely, given a segmented frame and the relative fixation map, the probability for each semantic class to fall within the area of attention is computed as follows: First, the fixation map (which is continuous in [0, 1]) is normalized such that the maximum value equals 1. Then, nine binary maps are constructed by thresholding such continuous values linearly in the interval [0, 1]. As the threshold moves towards 1 (the maximum value), the area of interest shrinks around the real fixation points (since the continuous map is modeled by  6  conv3D  pool3D  64  conv3D 128  pool3D  conv3D  conv3D  256  256  pool3D  up2D  conv2D 1  Fig. 9. The COARSE module is made of an encoder based on C3D network [61] followed by a bilinear upsampling (bringing representations back to the resolution of the input image) and a final 2D convolution. During feature extraction, the temporal axis is lost due to 3D pooling. All convolutional layers are preceded by zero paddings in order keep borders, and all kernels have size 3 along all dimensions. Pooling layers have size and stride of (1, 2, 2, 4) and (2, 2, 2, 1) along temporal and spatial dimensions respectively. All activations are ReLUs.  COARSE  input  REFINE  output  cropped videoclip  Videoclip  112  CROP  112 448  shared weights  resized videoclip RESIZE  112  112  448  last frame  Fig. 10. A single FoA branch of our prediction architecture. The COARSE module (see Fig. 9) is applied to both a cropped and a resized version of the input tensor, which is a videoclip of 16 consecutive frames. The cropped input is used during training to augment the data and the variety of ground truth fixation maps. The prediction of the resized input is stacked with the last frame of the videoclip and fed to a stack of convolutional layers (refinement module) with the aim of refining the prediction. Training is performed end-to-end and weights between COARSE modules are shared. At test time, only the refined predictions are used. Note that the complete model is composed of three of these branches (see Fig. 11), each of which predicting visual attention for different inputs (namely image, optical flow and semantic segmentation). All activations in the refinement module are LeakyReLU with α = 10−3 , except for the last single channel convolution that features ReLUs. Crop and resize streams are highlighted by light blue and orange arrows respectively.  means of several gaussians centered in fixation points, see previous section). For every threshold, a histogram over semantic labels within the area of interest is built, by summing up occurrences collected from all DR(eye)VE frames. Fig. 7 displays the result: for each class, the probability of a pixel to fall within the region of interest is reported for each threshold value. The figure provides insight about which categories represent the real focus of attention and which ones tend to fall inside the attention region just by proximity with the formers. Object classes that exhibit a positive trend, such as road, vehicles and people, are the real focus of the gaze, since the ratio of pixels classified accordingly increases when the observed area shrinkes around the fixation point. In a broader sense, the figure suggests that despite while driving our focus is dominated by road and vehicles, we often observe specific objects categories even if they contain little information useful to drive.  4  M ULTI -B RANCH DEEP ARCHITECTURE FOR  FOCUS OF ATTENTION PREDICTION  The DR(eye)VE dataset is sufficiently large to allow the construction of a deep architecture to model common attentional patterns. Here, we describe our neural network model to predict human FoA while driving. Architecture design. In the context of high level video  analysis (e.g. action recognition and video classification), it has been shown that a method leveraging on single frames can be outclassed if a sequence of frames is used as input instead [28], [61]. Temporal dependencies are usually modeled either by 3D convolutional layers [61], tailored to capture short range correlations, or by recurrent architectures (e.g. LSTM, GRU), that can model longer term dependencies [3], [44]. Our model follows the former approach, relying on the assumption that a small time window (e.g. half a second) holds sufficient contextual information for predicting where the driver would focus in that moment. Indeed, human drivers can take even less time to react to an unexpected stimulus. Our architecture takes a sequence of 16 consecutive frames as input (called clips from now on) and predicts the fixation map for the last frame of such clip. Many of the architectural choices made to design the network come from insights from the dataset analysis presented in Sec.3.1. In particular, we rely on the following results: • the drivers’ FoA exhibits recurrent patterns, suggesting that it can be reproduced by a computational model; • the drivers’ gaze is affected by a strong prior on objects semantics, e.g. drivers tend to focus on items lying on the road; • motion cues, like vehicle speed, are also key factors that influence gaze. Accordingly, the model output merges three branches with identical architecture, unshared parameters and different input  7  domains: the RGB image, the semantic segmentation and the optical flow field. The whole architecture is called multi-branch model from now on and it is illustrated in Fig. 11. Following a bottomup approach, in Sec. 4.1 the building blocks of each branch are motivated and described. Later, in Sec. 4.2 it will be shown how the branches merge into the final model. 4.1  Single FoA branch  Each branch of the multi-branch model is a two-input twooutput architecture composed of two intertwined streams, as shown in Fig. 10. The aim of this peculiar setup is to prevent the network from learning a central bias, that would otherwise stall the learning in early training stages. To this end, one of the streams is given as input (output) a severely cropped portion of the original image (ground truth), ensuring a more uniform distribution of the true gaze, and runs through the COARSE module, described below. Similarly, the other stream uses the COARSE module to obtain a rough prediction over the full resized image and then refines it through a stack of additional convolutions called REFINE model. At test time, only the output of the REFINE stream is considered. Both streams rely on the COARSE module, the convolutional backbone (with shared weights) which provides the rough estimate of the attentional map corresponding to a given clip. This component is detailed in Fig. 9. The COARSE module is based on the C3D architecture [61] that encodes video dynamics by applying a 3D convolutional kernel on the 4D input tensor. As opposed to 2D convolutions that stride along the width and height dimension of the input tensor, a 3D convolution also strides along time. Formally, the j -th feature map in the i-th layer at position (x, y) at time t is computed as: x,y,t vi,j  = bi,j +  i−1 Qi−1 Ri−1 X PX X X  p,q,r x+p,y+q,t+r wi,j,m vi−1,m  (2)  m p=0 q=0 r=0 p,q,r  where m indexes different input feature maps, wi,j,m is the value at the position (p, q) at time r of the kernel connected to the m-th feature map, and Pi , Qi and Ri are the dimensions of the kernel along width, height and temporal axis respectively; bi,j is the bias from layer i to layer j . From C3D, only the most general-purpose features are retained by removing the last convolutional layer and the fully connected layers which are strongly linked to the original action recognition task. The size of the last pooling layer is also modified in order to cover the remaining temporal dimension entirely. This collapses the tensor from 4D to 3D, making the output independent of time. Eventually, a bilinear upsampling brings the tensor back to the input spatial resolution and a 2D convolution merges all features into one channel. See Fig. 9 for additional details on the COARSE module. Training the two streams together During training, the first stream feeds the COARSE network with random crops, forcing the model to learn the current focus of attention given visual cues rather than prior spatial location. The C3D training process described in [61], employs a 128 × 128 image resize, and then a 112 × 112 random crop. However, the small difference in the two resolutions limits the variance of gaze position in ground truth fixation maps and is not sufficient to avoid the attraction towards the center of the image. For this reason, training images  are resized to 256 × 256 before being cropped to 112 × 112. This crop policy generates samples that cover less than a quarter of the original image thus ensuring a sufficient variety in prediction targets. This comes at the cost of a coarser prediction: as crops get smaller, the ratio of pixels in the ground truth covered by gaze increases, leading the model to learn larger maps. In contrast, the second stream feeds the same COARSE model with the same images, this time resized to 112 × 112 – and not cropped. The coarse prediction obtained from the COARSE model is then concatenated with the final frame of the input clip, i.e. the frame corresponding to the final prediction. Eventually, the concatenated tensor goes through the REFINE module to obtain a higher resolution prediction of the FoA. The overall two-stream training procedure for a single branch is summarized in Algorithm 1. Training objective Prediction cost can be minimized in terms of Kullback-Leibler divergence: ! X Y (i) DKL (Y kŶ ) = Y (i) log  + (3)  + Ŷ (i) i where Y is the ground truth distribution, Ŷ is the prediction, the summation index i spans across image pixels and  is a small constant that ensures numerical stability1 . Since each single FoA branch computes an error on both the cropped image stream and the resized image stream, the branch loss can be defined as: X Lb (Xb , Y) = DKL (φ(Y m )kC(φ(Xbm ))) + m  DKL (Y  m  kR(C(ψ(Xbm )), Xbm )))    (4)  where C and R denote COARSE and REFINE modules, (Xbm , Y m ) ∈ Xb × Y is the m-th training example in the b-th domain (namely RGB, optical flow, semantic segmentation), and φ and ψ indicate the crop and the resize functions respectively. Inference step While the presence of the C(φ(Xbm )) stream is beneficial in training to reduce the spatial bias, at test time only the R(C(ψ(Xbm )), Xbm )) stream producing higher quality prediction is used. The outputs of such stream from each branch b are then summed together, as explained in the following section. 4.2  Multi-Branch model  As described at the beginning of this section and depicted in Fig. 11, the multi-branch model is composed of three identical branches. The architecture of each branch has already been described in Sec. 4.1 above. Each branch exploits complementary information from a different domain and contributes to the final prediction accordingly. In detail, the first branch works in the RGB domain and processes raw visual data about the scene XRGB . The second branch focuses on motion through the optical flow representation Xflow described in [20]. Eventually, the last branch takes as input semantic segmentation probability maps Xseg . For this last branch, the number of input channels depends on the specific algorithm used to extract the results, 19 in our setup (Yu and Koltun [69]). The three 1. Please note that DKL inputs are always normalized to be a valid probability distribution despite this may be omitted in notation to improve equations readability.  8  Algorithm 1 TRAINING. The model is trained in two steps: first each branch is trained separately through iterations detailed in procedure SINGLE BRANCH TRAINING ITERATION, then the three branches are fine-tuned altogether as shown by procedure MULTI BRANCH FINE - TUNING ITERATION . For clarity, we omit from notation: i) the pedix b denoting the current domain in all X , x and ŷ variables in the single branch iteration and ii) the normalization of the sum of the outputs from each branch in line 13. 1: procedure A: SINGLE BRANCH TRAINING ITERATION  2: 3: 4: 5: 6:  input: domain data X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , x16 }, true attentional map y of last frame x16 of videoclip X output: branch loss Lb computed on input sample (X, y) Xres ← resize(X , (112, 112)) Xcrop , ycrop ← get_crop((X , y ), (112, 112)) ŷcrop ← COARSE(Xcrop ) # get coarse prediction on uncentered crop ŷ ← REFINE(stack(x16 , upsample(COARSE(Xres )))) # get refined prediction over whole image Lb (X, Y ) ← DKL (ycrop kŷcrop ) + DKL (ykŷ) # compute branch loss as in Eq. 4  7: procedure B: MULTI BRANCH FINE - TUNING ITERATION  8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13:  input: data X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , x16 } for all domains, true attentional map y of last frame x16 of videoclip X output: overall loss L computed on input sample (X, y) Xres ← resize(X, (112, 112)) Xcrop , ycrop ← get_crop((X, y), (112, 112)) for branch b ∈ {RGB, flow, seg} do ŷbcrop ← COARSE(Xbcrop ) # as in line 4 of the above procedure ŷb ← REFINE(stack(xb16 , upsample(COARSE(Xbres )))) # as in line 5 of the above procedure P P L(X, Y ) ← DKL (ycrop k b ŷbcrop ) + DKL (yk b ŷb ) # compute overall loss as in Eq. 5  independent predicted FoA maps are summed and normalized to result in a distribution. To allow for larger batch size, we choose to bootstrap each branch independently by training it according to Eq. 4. Then, the complete multi-branch model which merges the three branches is finetuned with the following loss: X X C(φ(Xbm ))) + L(X , Y) = DKL (φ(Y m )k m  b m  DKL (Y k  X  R(C(ψ(Xbm )), Xbm )))    .  b  (5) The algorithm describing the complete inference over the multi-branch model in detailed in Alg. 2. Algorithm 2 INFERENCE. At test time, the data extracted from the resized videoclip is input to the three branches and their output is summed and normalized to obtain the final FoA prediction. input: data X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , x16 } for all domains output: predicted FoA map ŷ 1: Xres ← resize(X, (112, 112)) 2: for branch b ∈ {RGB, flow, seg} do 3: ŷb ← REFINE(stack(xb16 , upsample(COARSE(Xbres )))) P P P 4: ŷ ← b ŷb / i b ŷb (i)  5  E XPERIMENTS  In this section we evaluate the performance of the proposed multi-branch model. First, we start by comparing our model against some baselines and other methods in literature. Following the guidelines in [10], for the evaluation phase we rely on Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient (CC ) and Kullback–Leibler Divergence (DKL ) measures. Moreover, we evaluate the Information Gain (IG) [32] measure to assess the quality of a predicted map  P with respect to a ground truth map Y in presence of a strong bias, as: 1 X IG(P, Y, B) = Yi [(log2 ( + Pi ) − log2 ( + Bi )] (6) N i being i an index spanning all the N pixels in the image, B the bias computed as the average training fixation map and  ensures numerical stability. Furthermore, we conduct an ablation study to investigate how different branches affect the final prediction and how their mutual influence changes in different scenarios. We then study whether our model captures the attention dynamics observed in Sec. 3.1. Eventually, we assess our model from a human perception perspective. Implementation details. The three different pathways of the multi-branch model (namely FoA from color, from motion and from semantics) have been pre-trained independently using the same cropping policy of Sec. 4.2 and minimizing the objective function in Eq. 4. Each branch has been respectively fed with: • 16 frames clips in raw RGB color space; • 16 frames clips with optical flow maps, encoded as color images through the flow field encoding [20]; • 16 frames clips holding semantic segmentation from [69] encoded as 19 scalar activation maps, one per segmentation class. During individual branch pre-training clips were randomly mirrored for data augmentation. We employ Adam optimizer with parameters as suggested in the original paper [29], with the exception of the learning rate that we set to 10−4 . Eventually, batch size was fixed to 32 and each branch was trained until convergence. The DR(eye)VE dataset is split into train, validation and test set as follows: sequences 1-38 are used for training, sequences 39-74 for testing. The 500 frames in the middle of each training sequence constitute the validation set.  9  F oA f r om c ol or  RGB c l i p  na l pr edi c t i on  F oA f r om mot i on  ow c l i p  + F oA f r om s ema nt i c s  s eg c l i p  Fig. 11. The multi-branch model is composed of three different branches, each of which has its own set of parameters, and their predictions are summed to obtain the final map. Note that in this figure cropped streams are dropped to ease representation, but are employed during training (as discussed in Sec. 4.2 and depicted in Fig. 10.  Input frame  GT  multi-branch  [43]  [4]  [13]  Fig. 12. Qualitative assessment of the predicted fixation maps. From left to right: input clip, ground truth map, our prediction, prediction of the previous version of the model [43], prediction of RMDN [4] and prediction of MLNet [13].  Moreover, the complete multi-branch architecture was finetuned using the same cropping and data augmentation strategies minimizing cost function in Eq. 5. In this phase batch size was set to 4 due to GPU memory constraints and learning rate value was lowered to 10−5 . Inference time of each branch of our architecture is ≈ 30 milliseconds per videoclip on an NVIDIA Titan X. 5.1  Model evalutation  In Tab. 3 we report results of our proposal against other state-ofthe-art models [4], [13], [43], [56], [66], [67] evaluated both on the complete test set and on acting subsequences only. All the competitors, with the exception of [43] are bottom-up approaches and mainly rely on appearance and motion discontinuities. To test the effectiveness of deep architectures for saliency prediction we compare against the Multi-Level Network (MLNet) [13], which scored favourably in the MIT300 saliency benchmark [9], and the Recurrent Mixture Density Network (RMDN) [4], which represents the only deep model addressing video saliency. While  MLNet works on images discarding the temporal information, RMDN encodes short sequences in a similar way to our COARSE module, and then relies on a LSTM architecture to model long term dependencies and estimates the fixation map in terms of a GMM. To favor the comparison, both models were re-trained on the DR(eye)VE dataset. Results highlight the superiority of our multi-branch architecture on all test sequences. The gap in performance with respect to bottom-up unsupervised approaches [66], [67] is higher, and is motivated by the peculiarity of the attention behavior within the driving context, which calls for a task-oriented training procedure. Moreover, MLNet low performance testifies for the need of accounting the temporal correlation between consecutive frames that distinguishes the tasks of attention prediction in images and videos. Indeed, RMDN processes video inputs and outperforms MLNet on both DKL and IG metrics, performing comparably on CC . Nonetheless, its performance are still limited: this indicates that long term dependencies which RMDN is designed to capture  10  TABLE 3 Experiments illustrating the superior performance of the multi-branch model over several baselines and competitors. We report both the average across the complete test sequences and only the acting frames.  Baseline Gaussian Baseline Mean Mathe et al. [56] Wang et al. [66] Wang et al. [67] MLNet [13] RMDN [4] Palazzi et al. [43] multi-branch  Test sequences CC DKL IG ↑ ↓ ↑ 0.40 2.16 -0.49 0.51 1.60 0.00 0.04 3.30 -2.08 0.04 3.40 -2.21 0.11 3.06 -1.72 0.44 2.00 -0.88 0.41 1.77 -0.06 0.55 1.48 -0.21 0.56 1.40 0.04  Acting subsequences CC DKL IG ↑ ↓ ↑ 0.26 2.41 0.03 0.22 2.35 0.00 0.32 2.35 -0.36 0.31 2.13 0.31 0.37 2.00 0.20 0.41 1.80 0.51  TABLE 4 The ablation study performed on our multi-branch model. I, F and S represent image, optical flow and semantic segmentation branches respectively.  I F S I+F I+S F+S I+F+S  Test sequences CC DKL IG ↑ ↓ ↑ 0.554 1.415 -0.008 0.516 1.616 -0.137 0.479 1.699 -0.119 0.558 1.399 0.033 0.554 1.413 -0.001 0.528 1.571 -0.055 0.559 1.398 0.038  Acting subsequences CC DKL IG ↑ ↓ ↑ 0.403 1.826 0.458 0.368 2.010 0.349 0.344 2.082 0.288 0.410 1.799 0.510 0.404 1.823 0.466 0.380 1.956 0.427 0.410 1.797 0.515  are hardly beneficial for this task. Eventually, we also observe improvement with respect to our previous model [43]. Notably this latter boost is particularly evident in acting sub-sequences. The gap in performance resides in the greater awareness of our multi-branch architecture of the aspects that characterize the driving task as emerged from the analysis in Sec. 3.1. The positive performance of our model are also confirmed when evaluated on the acting partition of the dataset. We recall that acting indicates sub-sequences exhibiting a significant task-driven shift of attention from the center of the image (Fig. 5). Being able to predict the FoA also on acting sub-sequences means that the model captures the strong centered attention bias but is capable of generalizing when required by the context. Some successful prediction cases are illustrated in Fig. 12. This is further shown by the comparison against a centered gaussian baseline (BG) and against the average of all training set fixation maps (BM). The former baseline has proven effective on many image saliency detection tasks [9] while the latter represents a more task-driven version of it. The superior performance of the multi-branch model w.r.t. baselines highlights that despite the attention is often strongly biased towards the vanishing point of the road, the network is able to deal with sudden task-driven changes in gaze direction. 5.2  Model analysis  In this section we investigate the behavior of our proposed model under different landscapes, time of day and weather (Sec. 5.2.1); we study the contribution of each branch to the FoA prediction task (Sec. 5.2.2); and we compare the learnt attention dynamics against the one observed in the human data (Sec. 5.2.3).  5.2.1  Dependency on driving environment  The DR(eye)VE data has been recorded under varying landscapes, time of day and weather conditions. We tested our model in all such different driving conditions. As would be expected, Fig. 14 shows that the human attention is easier to predict in highways rather than downtown, where the focus can shift towards more distractors. The model seems more reliable in evening scenarios, rather than morning or night, where we observed better lightning conditions and lack of shadows, over-exposure and so on. Lastly, in rainy conditions we notice that human gaze is easier to model, possibly due to the higher level of awareness demanded to the driver. To support the latter intuition, we measured the performance of BM baseline (i.e. the average training fixation map), grouped for weather condition. As expected, the DKL value in rainy weather (1.53) is significantly lower than the ones for cloudy (1.61) and sunny weather (1.75), highlighting that when rainy the driver is more focused on the road and less attracted by distractors. 5.2.2  Ablation study  In order to validate the design of the multi-branch model (see Sec. 4.2), here we study the individual contributions of the different branches by disabling one or more of them. Results in Tab. 4 show that the RGB branch plays a major role in FoA prediction. The motion stream is also beneficial and provides a slight improvement, that becomes clearer in the acting subsequences. Indeed, optical flow intrinsically captures a variety of peculiar scenarios that are non-trivial to classify when only color information is provided, e.g. when the car is still at a traffic light or is turning. The semantic stream, on the other hand, provides very little improvement. In particular, from Tab. 4 and by specifically comparing I+F and I+F+S, a slight increase in the IG measure can be appreciated. Nevertheless, such improvement has to be considered negligible when compared to color and motion. We expect the benefit from this branch to increase as more accurate segmentation models will be released. 5.2.3  Do we capture the attention dynamics?  The previous sections validate quantitatively the proposed model. Now, we assess its capability to attend like a human driver by comparing its predictions against the analysis performed in Sec. 3.1. First, we report the average predicted fixation map in several speed ranges in Fig. 13. The conclusions we draw are twofold: i) generally, the model succeeds in modeling the behavior of the driver at different speeds, and ii) as the speed increases fixation maps exhibit lower variance, easing the modeling task, and prediction errors decrease. We also study how often our model focuses on different semantic categories, in a fashion that recalls the analysis of Sec. 3.1, but employing our predictions rather than ground truth maps as focus of attention. More precisely, we normalize each map so that the maximum value equals 1, and apply the same thresholding strategy described in Sec. 3.1. Likewise, for each threshold value a histogram over class labels is built, by accounting all pixels falling within the binary map for all test frames. This results in nine histograms over semantic labels, that we merge together by averaging probabilities belonging to different threshold. Fig. 15 shows the comparison. Color bars represent how often the predicted map focuses on a certain category, while gray bars depict  11  |Σ| = 2.50 × 109  |Σ| = 1.57 × 109  |Σ| = 3.49 × 108  |Σ| = 1.20 × 108  |Σ| = 5.38 × 107  (a) 0 ≤ km/h ≤ 10  (b) 10 ≤ km/h ≤ 30  (c) 30 ≤ km/h ≤ 50  (d) 50 ≤ km/h ≤ 70  (e) 70 ≤ km/h  Fig. 13. Model prediction averaged across all test sequences and grouped by driving speed. As the speed increases, the area of the predicted map shrinks, recalling the trend observed in ground truth maps. As in Fig. 6, for each map a two dimensional Gaussian is fitted and the determinant of its covariance matrix Σ is reported as a measure of the spread. 1.9  1.7 DKL  Kendall rank coefficient, which scored 0.51 when computed on the two bar series.  Multi-branch Image Flow Segm  1.8  1.6  5.3  1.5  To further validate the predictions of our model from the human perception perspective, 50 people with at least 3 years of driving experience were asked to participate to a visual assessment2 . First, a pool of 400 videoclips (40 seconds long) is sampled from the DR(eye)VE dataset. Sampling is weighted such that resulting videoclips are evenly distributed among different scenarios, weathers, drivers and daylight conditions. Also, half of these videoclips contain sub-sequences that were previously annotated as acting. To approximate as realistically as possible the visual field of attention of the driver, sampled videoclips are pre-processed following the procedure in [65]. As in [65] we leverage the Space Variant Imaging Toolbox [45] to implement this phase, setting the parameter that halves the spatial resolution every 2.3◦ to mirror human vision [33], [65]. The resulting videoclip preserves details near to the fixation points in each frame, whereas the rest of the scene gets more and more blurred getting farther from fixations until only low-frequency contextual information survive. Coherently with [65] we refer to this process as foveation (in analogy with human foveal vision). Thus, pre-processed videoclips will be called foveated videoclips from now on. To appreciate the effect of this step the reader is referred to Fig. 16. Foveated videoclips were created by randomly selecting one of the following three fixation maps: the ground truth fixation map (G videoclips), the fixation map predicted by our model (P videoclips) or the average fixation map in the DR(eye)VE training set (C videoclips). The latter central baseline allows to take into account the potential preference for a ”stable” attentional map (i.e. lack of switching of focus).  1.4 1.3  Ra in y  Cl  ou dy  Weather ________________________ Su nn y  Ni gh t  Ev en in g  ay  Time of day ________________________ M or ni ng  Hi gh w  Do w  nt ow  n  Landscape ________________________ Co un try si d e  1.2  Fig. 14. DKL of the different branches in several conditions (from left to right: downtown, countryside, highway, morning, evening, night, sunny, cloudy, rainy). Underlining highlights difference of aggregation in terms of landscape, time of day and weather. Please note that lower DKL indicates better predictions.  probability of fixations (log scale)  10 0  10 -1  10 -2  10 -3  10 -4  road  sidewalk  buildings traffic signs  trees  flowerbed  sky  vehicles  people  cycles  Fig. 15. Comparison between ground truth (gray bars) and predicted fixation maps (colored bars) when used to mask semantic segmentation of the scene. The probability of fixation (in log-scale) for both ground truth and model prediction is reported for each semantic class. Despite absolute errors exist, the two bar series agree on the relative importance of different categories.  ground truth behavior and are obtained by averaging histograms in Fig. 7 across different thresholds. Please note that, to highlight differences for low populated categories, values are reported on a logarithmic scale. The plot shows a certain degree of absolute error is present for all categories. However, in a broader sense, our model replicates the relative weight of different semantic classes while driving, as testified by the importance of roads and vehicles, that still dominate, against other categories such as people and cycles that are mostly neglected. This correlation is confirmed by  Visual assessment of predicted fixation maps  Once created the set of foveated videoclips as above, the visual assessment could start. Each participant was then asked to see five randomly sampled foveated videoclips. After each videoclip, he answered two questions: • If you were sitting in the same car of the driver whose attention behavior you just observed, how safe would you feel? (rate from 1 to 5) • Would you say the observed attention behavior comes from a human driver? (yes/no) 2. These were students (11 females, 39 males) of age between 21 and 26 (µ = 23.4, σ = 1.6) recruited at our University on a voluntary basis through an online form.  12  6  Fig. 16. The figure depicts a videoclip frame that underwent the foveation process. The attentional map (above) is employed to blur the frame in a way that approximates the foveal vision of the driver [45]. In the foveated frame (below), it can be appreciated how the ratio of high-level information smoothly degrades getting farther from fixation points.  This paper presents a study of human attention dynamics underpinning the driving experience. Our main contribution is a multi-branch deep network capable of capturing such factors and replicating the driver’s focus of attention from raw video sequences. The design of our model has been guided by a prior analysis highlighting i) the existence of common gaze patterns across drivers and different scenarios; and ii) a consistent relation between changes in speed, lightning conditions, weather and landscape, and changes in the driver’s focus of attention. Experiments with the proposed architecture and related training strategies yielded state-of-the-art results. To our knowledge, our model is the first able to predict human attention in real-world driving sequences. As the model only input are car-centric videos, it might be integrated with already adopted ADAS technologies. A user study revealed that the attentional patterns predicted by our network made users feel safer than human behavior.  R EFERENCES [1] [2]  The aim of the first question is to measure the comfort level of the observer during a driving experience when suggested to focus at specific locations in the scene. The underlying assumption is that the observer is more likely to feel safe if he agrees that the suggested focus is lighting up the right portion of the scene, that is what he thinks it is worth looking in the current driving scene. Conversely, if the observer wishes to focus at some specific location but he cannot retrieve details there, he is going to feel uncomfortable. The second question measures participants’ bias towards human driving ability. Each of the 50 participant evaluates five foveated videoclips, for a total of 250 examples. Assessment results, summarized in Fig. 17, indicate that perceived safety for videoclips foveated using the attentional maps predicted by the model is generally higher than for the ones foveated using either human or central baseline maps. Nonetheless the central bias baseline proves to be extremely competitive, in particular in non-acting videoclips in which it scores similarly to the model prediction. It is worth noticing that in this case both kind of automatic predictions outperform human ground truth by a significant margin (Fig. 17 b). Conversely, when we consider only the foveated videoclips containing acting subsequences, the human ground truth is perceived as much safer than the baseline, despite still scores worse than our model prediction (Fig. 17 c). These results hold despite due to the localization of the fixations the average resolution of the predicted maps is only the 38% of the resolution of ground truth maps (i.e. videos foveated using prediction map feature much less information). We did not measure significant difference in perceived safety across the different drivers in the dataset (σ 2 = 0.09). Eventually, the confusion matrix for the second question asked is reported in Fig. 18. Participants were not particularly good at discriminating between human’s gaze and model generated maps, scoring about the 55% of accuracy which is comparable to random guessing. Also, the increasing trend of false positives towards higher scores suggests that participants were tricked into believing that ”safer” clips came from humans. The reader is referred to Fig. 18 for further details.  C ONCLUSIONS  [3] [4] [5] [6] [7]  [8]  [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18]  R. Achanta, S. Hemami, F. Estrada, and S. Susstrunk. Frequency-tuned salient region detection. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009. IEEE Conference on, pages 1597–1604, June 2009. 2 S. Alletto, A. Palazzi, F. Solera, S. Calderara, and R. Cucchiara. Dr(Eye)Ve: A dataset for attention-based tasks with applications to autonomous and assisted driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pages 54–60, 2016. 3, 4 L. Baraldi, C. Grana, and R. Cucchiara. Hierarchical boundary-aware neural encoder for video captioning. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2017. 6 L. Bazzani, H. Larochelle, and L. Torresani. Recurrent mixture density network for spatiotemporal visual attention. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017. 2, 9, 10 G. Borghi, M. Venturelli, R. Vezzani, and R. Cucchiara. Poseidon: Facefrom-depth for driver pose estimation. In CVPR, 2017. 2 A. Borji and L. Itti. Cat2000: A large scale fixation dataset for boosting saliency research. CVPR 2015 workshop on ”Future of Datasets”, 2015. 2 A. Borji, D. N. Sihite, and L. Itti. What/where to look next? modeling top-down visual attention in complex interactive environments. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 44(5):523– 538, 2014. 2 R. Brémond, J.-M. Auberlet, V. Cavallo, L. Désiré, V. Faure, S. Lemonnier, R. Lobjois, and J.-P. Tarel. Where we look when we drive: A multidisciplinary approach. In Proceedings of Transport Research Arena (TRA’14), Paris, France, 2014. 2 Z. Bylinskii, T. Judd, A. Borji, L. Itti, F. Durand, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba. Mit saliency benchmark, 2015. 1, 2, 3, 9, 10 Z. Bylinskii, T. Judd, A. Oliva, A. Torralba, and F. Durand. What do different evaluation metrics tell us about saliency models? arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.03605, 2016. 8 X. Chen, K. Kundu, Y. Zhu, A. Berneshawi, H. Ma, S. Fidler, and R. Urtasun. 3d object proposals for accurate object class detection. In NIPS, 2015. 1 M. M. Cheng, N. J. Mitra, X. Huang, P. H. S. Torr, and S. M. Hu. Global contrast based salient region detection. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 37(3):569–582, March 2015. 2 M. Cornia, L. Baraldi, G. Serra, and R. Cucchiara. A Deep Multi-Level Network for Saliency Prediction. In International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), 2016. 2, 9, 10 M. Cornia, L. Baraldi, G. Serra, and R. Cucchiara. Predicting human eye fixations via an lstm-based saliency attentive model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09571, 2016. 2 L. Elazary and L. Itti. A bayesian model for efficient visual search and recognition. Vision Research, 50(14):1338 – 1352, 2010. 2 M. A. Fischler and R. C. Bolles. Random sample consensus: a paradigm for model fitting with applications to image analysis and automated cartography. Communications of the ACM, 24(6):381–395, 1981. 3 L. Fridman, P. Langhans, J. Lee, and B. Reimer. Driver gaze region estimation without use of eye movement. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 31(3):49–56, 2016. 2, 4 B. Fröhlich, M. Enzweiler, and U. Franke. Will this car change the lane?turn signal recognition in the frequency domain. In 2014 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium Proceedings, pages 37–42. IEEE, 2014. 1  13  (a)  (b)  (c)  Fig. 17. Distributions of safeness scores for different map sources, namely Model Prediction, Center Baseline and Human Groundtruth. Considering the score distribution over all foveated videoclips (a) the three distributions may look similar, even though the model prediction still scores slightly better. However, when considering only the foveated videos contaning acting subsequences (b) the model prediction significantly outperforms both center baseline and human groundtruth. Conversely, when the videoclips did not contain acting subsequences (i.e. the car was mostly going straight) the fixation map from human driver is the one perceived as less safe, while both model prediction and center baseline perform similarly.  Fig. 18. On the left, the confusion matrix reports the results of participants’ guesses on the source of fixation maps. Overall accuracy is about 55% which is fairly close to random chance. The stacked bar graph on the right represents the ratio of TP, TN, FP and FN composing each score. The increasing score of FP – participants falsely thought the attentional map came from a human driver – highlights that participants were tricked into believing that ”safer” clips came from humans.  [19] D. Gao, V. Mahadevan, and N. Vasconcelos. On the plausibility of the discriminant centersurround hypothesis for visual saliency. Journal of Vision, pages 1–18, 2008. 2 [20] T. Gkamas and C. Nikou. Guiding optical flow estimation using superpixels. In Digital Signal Processing (DSP), 2011 17th International Conference on, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2011. 7, 8 [21] S. Goferman, L. Zelnik-Manor, and A. Tal. Context-aware saliency detection. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 34(10):1915–1926, Oct. 2012. 2 [22] R. Groner, F. Walder, and M. Groner. Looking at faces: Local and global aspects of scanpaths. Advances in Psychology, 22:523–533, 1984. 4 [23] S. Grubmüller, J. Plihal, and P. Nedoma. Automated Driving from the View of Technical Standards, pages 29–40. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2017. 1 [24] J. M. Henderson. Human gaze control during real-world scene perception. Trends in cognitive sciences, 7(11):498–504, 2003. 4 [25] X. Huang, C. Shen, X. Boix, and Q. Zhao. Salicon: Reducing the semantic gap in saliency prediction by adapting deep neural networks. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 262–270, Dec 2015. 2 [26] A. Jain, H. S. Koppula, B. Raghavan, S. Soh, and A. Saxena. Car that knows before you do: Anticipating maneuvers via learning temporal driving models. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 3182–3190, 2015. 1 [27] M. Jiang, S. Huang, J. Duan, and Q. Zhao. Salicon: Saliency in context. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2015. 1, 2 [28] A. Karpathy, G. Toderici, S. Shetty, T. Leung, R. Sukthankar, and L. FeiFei. Large-scale video classification with convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1725–1732, 2014. 6 [29] D. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015. 8 [30] P. Kumar, M. Perrollaz, S. Lefevre, and C. Laugier. Learning-based approach for online lane change intention prediction. In Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2013 IEEE, pages 797–802. IEEE, 2013. 1 [31] M. Kümmerer, L. Theis, and M. Bethge. Deep gaze I: boosting saliency prediction with feature maps trained on imagenet. In International  Conference on Learning Representations Workshops (ICLRW), 2015. 2 [32] M. Kümmerer, T. S. Wallis, and M. Bethge. Information-theoretic model comparison unifies saliency metrics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(52):16054–16059, 2015. 8 [33] A. M. Larson and L. C. Loschky. The contributions of central versus peripheral vision to scene gist recognition. Journal of Vision, 9(10):6–6, 2009. 11 [34] N. Liu, J. Han, D. Zhang, S. Wen, and T. Liu. Predicting eye fixations using convolutional neural networks. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2015 IEEE Conference on, pages 362–370, June 2015. 2 [35] D. G. Lowe. Object recognition from local scale-invariant features. In Computer vision, 1999. The proceedings of the seventh IEEE international conference on, volume 2, pages 1150–1157. Ieee, 1999. 3 [36] Y.-F. Ma and H.-J. Zhang. Contrast-based image attention analysis by using fuzzy growing. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Multimedia, MULTIMEDIA ’03, pages 374–381, New York, NY, USA, 2003. ACM. 2 [37] S. Mannan, K. Ruddock, and D. Wooding. Fixation sequences made during visual examination of briefly presented 2d images. Spatial vision, 11(2):157–178, 1997. 4 [38] S. Mathe and C. Sminchisescu. Actions in the eye: Dynamic gaze datasets and learnt saliency models for visual recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 37(7):1408–1424, July 2015. 2 [39] T. Mauthner, H. Possegger, G. Waltner, and H. Bischof. Encoding based saliency detection for videos and images. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2494– 2502, 2015. 2 [40] B. Morris, A. Doshi, and M. Trivedi. Lane change intent prediction for driver assistance: On-road design and evaluation. In Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2011 IEEE, pages 895–901. IEEE, 2011. 1 [41] A. Mousavian, D. Anguelov, J. Flynn, and J. Kosecka. 3d bounding box estimation using deep learning and geometry. In CVPR, 2017. 1 [42] D. Nilsson and C. Sminchisescu. Semantic video segmentation by gated recurrent flow propagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.08871, 2016. 1 [43] A. Palazzi, F. Solera, S. Calderara, S. Alletto, and R. Cucchiara. Where should you attend while driving? In IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium Proceedings, 2017. 9, 10 [44] P. Pan, Z. Xu, Y. Yang, F. Wu, and Y. Zhuang. Hierarchical recurrent neural encoder for video representation with application to captioning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1029–1038, 2016. 6 [45] J. S. Perry and W. S. Geisler. Gaze-contingent real-time simulation of arbitrary visual fields. In Human vision and electronic imaging, volume 57, 2002. 11, 12, 15 [46] R. J. Peters and L. Itti. Beyond bottom-up: Incorporating task-dependent influences into a computational model of spatial attention. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2007. CVPR’07. IEEE Conference on, pages 1–8. IEEE, 2007. 2 [47] R. J. Peters and L. Itti. Applying computational tools to predict gaze direction in interactive visual environments. ACM Transactions on Applied Perception (TAP), 5(2):9, 2008. 2 [48] M. I. Posner, R. D. Rafal, L. S. Choate, and J. Vaughan. Inhibition of return: Neural basis and function. Cognitive neuropsychology, 2(3):211– 228, 1985. 4 [49] N. Pugeault and R. Bowden. How much of driving is preattentive? IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 64(12):5424–5438, Dec 2015. 2, 4 [50] J. Rogé, T. Pébayle, E. Lambilliotte, F. Spitzenstetter, D. Giselbrecht,  14  [51]  [52] [53] [54] [55] [56] [57] [58] [59]  [60]  [61]  [62] [63]  [64] [65] [66] [67] [68]  [69] [70]  [71]  [72]  and A. Muzet. Influence of age, speed and duration of monotonous driving task in traffic on the drivers useful visual field. Vision research, 44(23):2737–2744, 2004. 5 D. Rudoy, D. B. Goldman, E. Shechtman, and L. Zelnik-Manor. Learning video saliency from human gaze using candidate selection. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1147–1154, 2013. 2 R. Ruknas, J. Back, P. Curzon, and A. Blandford. Formal modelling of salience and cognitive load. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, 208:57 – 75, 2008. 3 J. Sardegna, S. Shelly, and S. Steidl. The encyclopedia of blindness and vision impairment. Infobase Publishing, 2002. 5 B. Schlkopf, J. Platt, and T. Hofmann. Graph-Based Visual Saliency, pages 545–552. MIT Press, 2007. 2 L. Simon, J. P. Tarel, and R. Bremond. Alerting the drivers about road signs with poor visual saliency. In Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 2009 IEEE, pages 48–53, June 2009. 2, 4 C. S. Stefan Mathe. Actions in the eye: Dynamic gaze datasets and learnt saliency models for visual recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 37, 2015. 2, 9, 10 B. W. Tatler. The central fixation bias in scene viewing: Selecting an optimal viewing position independently of motor biases and image feature distributions. Journal of vision, 7(14):4–4, 2007. 4 B. W. Tatler, M. M. Hayhoe, M. F. Land, and D. H. Ballard. Eye guidance in natural vision: Reinterpreting salience. Journal of Vision, 11(5), May 2011. 1, 2 A. Tawari and M. M. Trivedi. Robust and continuous estimation of driver gaze zone by dynamic analysis of multiple face videos. In Intelligent Vehicles Symposium Proceedings, 2014 IEEE, pages 344–349, June 2014. 2 A. Torralba, A. Oliva, M. S. Castelhano, and J. M. Henderson. Contextual guidance of eye movements and attention in real-world scenes: the role of global features in object search. Psychological review, 113(4):766, 2006. 2 D. Tran, L. Bourdev, R. Fergus, L. Torresani, and M. Paluri. Learning spatiotemporal features with 3d convolutional networks. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 4489–4497, Dec 2015. 6, 7 G. Underwood, K. Humphrey, and E. van Loon. Decisions about objects in real-world scenes are influenced by visual saliency before and during their inspection. Vision Research, 51(18):2031 – 2038, 2011. 1, 2, 4 F. Vicente, Z. Huang, X. Xiong, F. D. la Torre, W. Zhang, and D. Levi. Driver gaze tracking and eyes off the road detection system. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 16(4):2014–2027, Aug 2015. 2 P. Wang, P. Chen, Y. Yuan, D. Liu, Z. Huang, X. Hou, and G. Cottrell. Understanding convolution for semantic segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08502, 2017. 1 P. Wang and G. W. Cottrell. Central and peripheral vision for scene recognition: A neurocomputational modeling explorationwang & cottrell. Journal of Vision, 17(4):9–9, 2017. 11 W. Wang, J. Shen, and F. Porikli. Saliency-aware geodesic video object segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3395–3402, 2015. 2, 9, 10 W. Wang, J. Shen, and L. Shao. Consistent video saliency using local gradient flow optimization and global refinement. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 24(11):4185–4196, 2015. 2, 9, 10 J. M. Wolfe, K. R. Cave, and S. L. Franzel. Guided search: an alternative to the feature integration model for visual search. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 1989. 2 F. Yu and V. Koltun. Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convolutions. In ICLR, 2016. 1, 5, 7, 8 Y. Zhai and M. Shah. Visual attention detection in video sequences using spatiotemporal cues. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, MM ’06, pages 815–824, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM. 2 Y. Zhai and M. Shah. Visual attention detection in video sequences using spatiotemporal cues. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, MM ’06, pages 815–824, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM. 2 S.-h. Zhong, Y. Liu, F. Ren, J. Zhang, and T. Ren. Video saliency detection via dynamic consistent spatio-temporal attention modelling. In AAAI, 2013. 2  Andrea Palazzi received the masters degree in computer engineering from the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia in 2015. He is currently PhD candidate within the ImageLab group in Modena, researching on computer vision and deep learning for automotive applications.  Davide Abati received the masters degree in computer engineering from the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia in 2015. He is currently working toward the PhD degree within the ImageLab group in Modena, researching on computer vision and deep learning for image and video segmentation.  Simone Calderara received a computer engineering masters degree in 2005 and the PhD degree in 2009 from the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, where he is currently an assistant professor within the Imagelab group. His current research interests include computer vision and machine learning applied to human behavior analysis, visual tracking in crowded scenarios, and time series analysis for forensic applications. He is a member of the IEEE.  Francesco Solera obtained a master degree in computer engineering from the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia in 2013 and a PhD degree in 2017. His research mainly addresses applied machine learning and social computer vision.  Rita Cucchiara received the masters degree in Electronic Engineering and the PhD degree in Computer Engineering from the University of Bologna, Italy, in 1989 and 1992, respectively. Since 2005, she is a full professor at the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy, where she heads the ImageLab group and is Director of the SOFTECH-ICT research center. She is currently President of the Italian Association of Pattern Recognition, (GIRPR), affilaited with IAPR. She published more than 300 papers on pattern recognition computer vision and multimedia, and in particular in human analysis, HBU and egocentric-vision. The research carried out spans on different application fields, such as video-surveillance, automotive and multimedia big data annotation. Corrently she is AE of IEEE Transactions on Multimedia and serves in the Governing Board of IAPR and in the Advisory Board of the CVF.  15  7  S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL  Here we provide additional material useful to the understanding of the paper. Additional multimedia are available at: https://ndrplz. github.io/dreyeve/. 7.1  DR(eye)VE dataset design  The following table reports the design the DR(eye)VE dataset. The dataset is composed of 74 sequences of 5 minutes each, recorded under a variety of driving conditions. Experimental design played a crucial role in preparing the dataset to rule out spurious correlation between driver, weather, traffic, daytime and scenario. In Tab. 5 and Tab. 6 we report the details for each sequence in train and test set respectively. 7.2  Visual Assessment Details  The aim of this section is to provide additional details on the implementation of visual assessment presented in Sec. 5.3 of the paper. Please note that additional videos regarding this section can be found together with other supplementary multimedia at https://ndrplz.github.io/dreyeve/. Eventually, the reader is referred to https://github.com/ndrplz/dreyeve for the code used to create foveated videos for visual assessment.  Space Variant Imaging System Space Variant Imaging System (SVIS) is a MATLAB toolbox that allows to foveate images in real-time [45], which has been used in a large number of scientific works to approximate human foveal vision since its introduction in 2002. In this frame, the term foveated imaging refers to the creation and display of static or video imagery where the resolution varies across the image. In analogy to human foveal vision, the highest resolution region is called the foveation region. In a video, the location of the foveation region can obviously change dynamically. It is also possible to have more than one foveation region in each image. The foveation process is implemented in the SVIS toolbox as follows: first the the input image is repeatedly low-passed filtered and down-sampled to half of the current resolution by a Foveation Encoder. In this way a low-pass pyramid of images is obtained. Then a foveation pyramid is created selecting regions from different resolutions proportionally to the distance from the foveation point. Concretely, the foveation region will be at the highest resolution; first ring around the foveation region will be taken from half-resolution image; and so on. Eventually, a Foveation Decoder up-sample, interpolate and blend each layer in the foveation pyramid to create the output foveated image. The software is open-source and publicly available here: http://svi. cps.utexas.edu/software.shtml. The interested reader is referred to the SVIS website for further details. Videoclip Foveation From fixation maps back to fixations. The SVIS toolbox allows to foveate images starting from a list of (x, y) coordinates which represent the foveation points in the given image (please see Fig. 19 for details). However, we do not have this information as in our work we deal with continuous attentional maps rather than discrete points of fixations. To be able to use the same software  TABLE 5 DR(eye)VE train set: details for each sequence. Sequence 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37  Daytime Evening Morning Evening Night Morning Morning Evening Evening Night Evening Evening Evening Night Morning Evening Night Evening Night Night Evening Night Morning Morning Night Morning Morning Evening Night Night Evening Morning Morning Evening Morning Morning Evening Morning  Weather Sunny Cloudy Sunny Sunny Cloudy Sunny Rainy Sunny Sunny Rainy Cloudy Rainy Rainy Rainy Sunny Cloudy Rainy Sunny Sunny Sunny Cloudy Rainy Sunny Rainy Sunny Rainy Rainy Cloudy Cloudy Cloudy Rainy Rainy Cloudy Sunny Cloudy Cloudy Rainy  Landscape Countryside Highway Highway Downtown Countryside Downtown Downtown Countryside Highway Downtown Downtown Downtown Downtown Highway Countryside Downtown Countryside Downtown Downtown Countryside Countryside Countryside Countryside Countryside Highway Downtown Downtown Highway Countryside Highway Highway Highway Highway Countryside Downtown Countryside Highway  Driver D8 D2 D3 D2 D7 D7 D3 D1 D1 D2 D5 D1 D4 D6 D5 D7 D4 D1 D6 D2 D3 D7 D5 D6 D4 D5 D6 D5 D8 D7 D8 D1 D4 D3 D3 D1 D8  Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set Train Set  API we need to regress from the attentional map (either true or predicted) a list of approximated yet plausible fixation locations. To this aim we simply extract the 25 points with highest value in the attentional map. This is justified by the fact that in the phase of dataset creation the ground truth fixation map Ft for a frame at time t is built by accumulating projected gaze points in a temporal sliding window of k = 25 frames, centered in t (see Sec.3 of the paper). The output of this phase is thus a fixation map we can use as input for the SVIS toolbox. Taking the blurred-deblurred ratio into account. To the visual assessment purposes, keeping track the amount of blur that a videoclip has undergone is also relevant. Indeed, a certain video may give rise to higher perceived safety only because a more delicate blur allows the subject to see a clearer picture of the driving scene. In order to consider this phenomenon we do the following. Given an input image I ∈ Rh,w,c the output of the Foveation Encoder is a resolution map Rmap ∈ Rh,w,1 , taking value in range [0, 255], as depicted in Fig. 19 (b). Each value indicates the resolution that a certain pixel will have in the foveated image after decoding, where 0 and 255 indicates minimum and maximum resolution respectively. For each video v, we measure video average resolution after  16  (a)  (b)  (c)  Fig. 19. Foveation process using SVIS software is depicted here. Starting from one or more fixation points in a given frame (a), a smooth resolution map is built (b). Image locations with higher values in the resolution map will undergo less blur in the output image (c).  TABLE 6 DR(eye)VE test set: details for each sequence. Sequence 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74  Daytime Night Night Morning Night Evening Night Morning Evening Evening Morning Morning Morning Morning Night Evening Evening Night Morning Night Evening Night Morning Morning Night Night Morning Evening Morning Evening Evening Morning Evening Morning Night Evening Night Morning  Weather Sunny Rainy Sunny Sunny Cloudy Cloudy Rainy Sunny Rainy Rainy Cloudy Cloudy Rainy Sunny Sunny Cloudy Cloudy Sunny Rainy Sunny Cloudy Cloudy Cloudy Sunny Cloudy Rainy Cloudy Sunny Sunny Cloudy Cloudy Rainy Rainy Cloudy Cloudy Sunny Rainy  Landscape Downtown Downtown Downtown Highway Highway Countryside Countryside Countryside Countryside Downtown Countryside Highway Highway Downtown Highway Downtown Highway Countryside Countryside Highway Downtown Highway Downtown Downtown Countryside Countryside Downtown Downtown Highway Countryside Countryside Highway Downtown Highway Downtown Countryside Downtown  Driver D8 D4 D1 D1 D1 D2 D1 D4 D5 D7 D8 D3 D2 D3 D7 D7 D8 D6 D6 D5 D4 D7 D5 D5 D6 D8 D8 D2 D6 D3 D4 D2 D3 D6 D2 D7 D4  Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set Test Set  foveation as follows:  vres =  N 1 XX Rmap (i, f ) N f =1 i  where N is the number of frames in the video (1000 in our setting) and Rmap (i, f ) denotes the ith pixel of the resolution map corresponding to the f th frame of the input video. The higher the value of vres the more information is preserved in the foveation process. Due to the sparser location of fixations in ground truth attentional maps, these result in much less blurred videoclips.  Indeed videos foveated with model predicted attentional maps have in average only the 38% of the resolution w.r.t. videos foveated starting from ground truth attentional maps. Despite this bias, model predicted foveated videos still gave rise to higher perceived safety to assessment participants. 7.3  Segmentation  In this section we report exemplar cases that particularly benefit from the segmentation branch. In Fig. 20 we can appreciate that, among the three branches, only the semantic one captures the real gaze, that is focused on traffic lights and street signs.  8  A BLATION S TUDY  In Fig.21 we showcase several examples depicting the contribution of each branch of the multi-branch model in predicting the visual focus of attention of the driver. As expected, the RGB branch is the one that more heavily influences the overall network output.  9  D O SUBTASKS HELP IN F OA PREDICTION ?  The driving task is inherently composed of many subtasks, such as turning or merging in traffic, looking for parking and so on. While such fine-grained subtasks are hard to discover (and probably to emerge during learning) due to scarcity, here we show how the proposed model has been able to leverage on more common subtask to get to the final prediction. These subtasks are: turning left/right, going straight, being still. We gathered automatic annotation through GPS information released with the dataset. We then train a linear SVM classifier to distinguish the above 4 different actions starting from the activations of the last layer of multi-path model, unrolled in a feature vector. The SVM classifier scores a 90% of accuracy on the test set (5000 uniformely sampled videoclips), supporting the fact that network activations are highly discriminative for distinguishing the different driving subtasks. Please refer to Fig. 22 for further details. Code to replicate this result is available at https://github.com/ndrplz/dreyeve along with the code of all other experiments in the paper.  10  O N F IG .7  We represent in Fig. 23 the process employed for building the histogram in Fig.7 (in the paper). Given a segmentation map of a frame and the corresponding ground-truth fixation map, we collect  17  RGB  flow  segmentation  gt  Fig. 20. Some examples of the beneficial effect of the semantic segmentation branch. In the two cases depicted here, the car is stopped at a crossroad. While the RGB branch remains biased towards the road vanishing point and the optical flow branch focuses on moving objects, the semantic branch tends to highlight traffic lights and signals, coherently with the human behavior.  Input frame  GT  multi-branch  RGB  FLOW  SEG  Fig. 21. Example cases that qualitatively show how each branch contribute to the final prediction. Best viewed on screen.  pixel classes within the area of fixation thresholded at different levels: as the threshold increases, the area shrinks to the real fixation point. A better visualization of the process can be found at https://ndrplz.github.io/dreyeve/.  Fig. 22. Confusion matrix for SVM classifier trained to distinguish driving actions from network activations. The accuracy is generally high, which corroborates the assumption that the model benefits from learning an internal representation of the different driving sub-tasks.  18  image  segmentation  different fixation map thresholds  Fig. 23. Representation of the process employed to count class occurrences to build Fig.7. See text and paper for more details.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
