Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 7
ArXiv ID: hf_5214

Abstract:
Fast Real-Time DC State Estimation in Electric Power Systems Using Belief Propagation  arXiv:1705.01376v2 [cs.IT] 11 Aug 2017  Mirsad Cosovic, Student Member, IEEE, Dejan Vukobratovic, Member, IEEE  Abstract—We propose a fast real-time state estimator based on the belief propagation algorithm for the power system state estimation. The proposed estimator is easy to distribute and parallelize, thus alleviating computational limitations and allowing for processing measurements in real time. The presented algorithm may run as a continuous process, with each new measurement being seamlessly processed by the distributed state estimator. In contrast to the matrix-based state estimation methods, the belief propagation approach is robust to ill-conditioned scenarios caused by significant differences between measurement variances, thus resulting in a solution that eliminates observability analysis. Using the DC model, we numerically demonstrate the performance of the state estimator in a realistic real-time system model with asynchronous measurements. We note that the extension to the AC state estimation is possible within the same framework. Index Terms—Real-Time State Estimation, Electric Power System, Factor Graphs, Gaussian Belief Propagation  scanning rate (seconds), but due to the computational limitations, practical SE algorithms run every few minutes or when a significant change occurs [3]. In this work, we propose a fast real-time state estimator based on the belief propagation (BP) algorithm. Using the BP, it is possible to estimate state variables in a distributed fashion. In other words, unlike the usual scenario where measurements are transmitted directly to the control center, in the BP framework, measurements are locally collected and processed by local modules (at substations, generators or load units) that exchange BP messages with neighboring local modules. Furthermore, even in the scenario where measurements are transmitted to the centralized control entity, the BP solution is advantageous over the classical centralized solutions in that it can be easily distributed and parallelized for high performance.  The state estimation (SE) function is a part of the energy management system that allows for monitoring of electric power systems. Input data for the SE arrive from supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) technology. SCADA provides communication infrastructure to collect legacy measurements (voltage and line current magnitude, power flow and injection measurements) from measurement devices and transfer them to a central computational unit for processing and storage. In the last decades, phasor measurement units (PMUs) were developed that measure voltage and line current phasors and provide highly accurate measurements with high sampling rates. PMUs were instrumental to the development of the wide area measurement systems (WAMSs) that should provide real-time monitoring and control of electric power systems [1], [2]. The WAMS requires significant investments in deployment of a large number of PMUs across the system, which is why SCADA systems will remain important technology, particularly at medium and low voltage levels. Monitoring and control capability of the system strongly depends on the SE accuracy as well as the periodicity of evaluation of state estimates. Ideally, in the presence of both legacy and PMU measurements, SE should run at the  Compared to our recent work on BP-based SE [4], [5] that addresses classical (static) SE problem, this paper is an extension to the real-time model that operates continuously and accepts asynchronous measurements from different measurement subsystems. More precisely, we assume presence of both SCADA and WAMS infrastructure, and without loss of generality, we observe active power flow and injection measurements (from SCADA), and voltage phase angle measurements (from WAMS). We present appropriate models for measurement arrival processes and for the process of measurement deterioration (or “aging”) over time. Such measurements are continuously integrated into the running instances of distributed BP-based modules. For simplicity, we present the real-time BP-based SE applied on the DC SE model, while extension to the AC SE model follows similar lines as in the static SE scenario [4]. Our extensive numerical experiments on the example IEEE 14 system show that the BP algorithm is able to provide real-time SE performance. Furthermore, the BP-based SE is robust to ill-conditioned systems in which significant difference arise between measurement variances, thus allowing state estimator that runs without observability analysis. Note that in this paper, we do not address the convergence guarantees for the BP-based solution [6], and we leave the detailed treatment of convergence for our future work.  M. Cosovic is with Schneider Electric DMS NS, Novi Sad, Serbia (e-mail: mirsad.cosovic@schneider-electric-dms.com). D. Vukobratovic is with Department of Power, Electronic and Communications Engineering, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia (e-mail: dejanv@uns.ac.rs). Demo source code available online at https://github.com/mcosovic. This paper has received funding from the EU 7th Framework Programme for research, technological development and demonstration under grant agreement no. 607774.  The structure of this paper is as follows: In Section II, we provide background on conventional and BP-based SE. Section III described the proposed fast real-time BP-based SE, while Section IV considers the performance and numerical results for the IEEE 14 bus test case. Concluding remarks are provided in Section V.  I. I NTRODUCTION  One can find the state estimate x̂ via maximization of the likelihood function L(z|x), which is defined via likelihoods of k independent measurements:  II. BACKGROUND A. State Estimation in Electric Power Systems The main SE routines comprise the SE algorithm, network topology processor, observability analysis and bad data analysis. The core of the SE is the SE algorithm which provides a state estimate of the system, i.e., the set of all complex bus voltages, based on the network topology and set of measurements M. Using information about switch and circuit breaker positions the network topology processor generates a bus/branch model of the power network and assigns real-time measurement devices (legacy and/or PMU devices) across the bus/branch model [7, Sec. 1.3]. As a result, the graph G = (V, E) representing the power network is defined, where the set of nodes V = {1, . . . , n} represents the set of buses, while the set of edges E ⊆ V × V represents the set of branches. In addition, the set of real-time measurements Mrt ⊆ M is connected to the graph G. According to the location and the type of real-time measurements the observability analysis determines observable and unobservable islands. Within the observable islands, it is possible to obtain unique state estimates from the available set of real-time measurements Mrt , which is not the case within unobservable parts of the system. Once observability analysis is done, pseudo-measurements can be added, in order for the entire system to be observable [7, Sec. 4.6], [3]. The set of pseudo-measurements Mps ⊂ M represents certain prior knowledge (e.g., historical data) of different electrical quantities and they are usually assigned high values of variances [7, Sec. 1.3]. As detailed later, we assume that, at a given time, the system measurements are either real-time or pseudo-measurements, i.e., the sets Mrt and Mps are disjoint Mrt ∩ Mps = ∅ and their union is the set M = Mrt ∪ Mps . The observability analysis provides the measurement model which can be described as the system of equations: z = h(x) + u,  (1)  where x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) is the vector of state variables, h(x) = (h1 (x), . . . , hk (x)) is the vector of measurement functions, z = (z1 , . . . , zk ) is the vector of independent measurement values, and u = (u1 , . . . , uk ) is the vector of uncorrelated measurement errors. The SE problem is commonly an overdetermined system of equations (k > n) usually defined by both real-time measurements and pseudo-measurements [8, Sec. 2.1]. Each measurement Mi ∈ M is associated with measured value zi , measurement error ui and measurement function hi (x). Under the assumption that measurement errors ui follow a zero-mean Gaussian distribution, the probability density function associated with the measurement Mi equals: ( ) [zi − hi (x)]2 1 2 exp , (2) N (zi |x, σi ) = p 2σi2 2πσi2  where σi2 is the variance of the measurement error ui , and the measurement function hi (x) connects the vector of state variables x to the value of the measurement Mi .  x̂ = arg max L(z|x) = arg max x  x  k Y  N (zi |x, σi2 ).  (3)  i=1  It can be shown that the solution of (3) can be obtained by solving the following optimization problem, known as the weighted least squares (WLS) problem [9, Sec. 9.3]: x̂ = arg min x  k X [zi − hi (x)]2 i=1  σi2  .  (4)  The state estimate x̂ that represents the solution of the optimization problem (4) is known as the WLS estimator and it is identical to the maximum likelihood solution. B. DC State Estimation The DC model is dealing with linear measurement functions h(x) and it is obtained by linearisation of the AC model [4]. Therefore, the DC SE takes only bus voltage angles x ≡ θ as state variables and the set of measurements M involves the active power flow at the branch (i, j) ∈ E, the active power injection into the bus i ∈ V and the bus voltage angle at the bus i ∈ V, with measurement functions defined as follows: hPij (·) = −bij (θi − θj ) X hPij (·) hPi (·) =  (5a) (5b)  j∈Hi \i  hθi (·) = θi ,  (5c)  where θi and θj are bus voltage angles at buses i and j, bij is susceptance of the branch and Hi \ i is the set of buses incident to the bus i. ˆ which is a solution to the The DC state estimate x̂ ≡ θ, WLS problem (4), is obtained through non-iterative procedure by solving the system of linear equations:  (6) HT WH x̂ = HT Wz, where H ∈ Rk×n is the Jacobian matrix of measurement functions (5), and W ∈ Rk×k is a diagonal matrix containing inverses of measurement variances. C. Factor Graphs and Belief Propagation Algorithm Factor graph construction: The factor graph describes a factorization of the likelihood function L(z|x). It comprises the set of factor nodes F and the set of variable nodes X . In the DC scenario, the vector of state variables θ determines the set of variable nodes X = {θ1 , . . . , θn }, while the set of measurements M defines the set of factor nodes F = {f1 , . . . , fk }. Each measurements defines a corresponding factor N (zi |x, σi2 ) of the likelihood function which is represented by a factor node. A factor node fi connects to a variable node xs ∈ X if and only if the state variable xs is an argument of the corresponding measurement function hi (x) [4].  Belief propagation algorithm: The BP algorithm efficiently calculates marginal distributions of state variables by passing two types of messages along the edges of the factor graph: i) a variable node to a factor node, and ii) a factor node to a variable node messages. Both variable and factor nodes in a factor graph process the incoming messages and calculate outgoing messages. The marginal inference provides marginal probability distributions that is used to estimate values x̂ of state variables x. Next, we describe a version of BP algorithm called Gaussian BP, where all the messages represent Gaussian distributions. Message from a variable node to a factor node: Consider a part of a factor graph shown in Fig. 1a with a group of factor nodes Fs = {fi , fw , ..., fW } ⊆ F that are neighbours of the variable node xs ∈ X . Let us assume, for the time being, that the incoming messages µfw →xs (xs ), . . . , µfW →xs (xs ) into the variable node xs are Gaussian and represented by their mean-variance pairs (zfw →xs , σf2w →xs ), . . . , (zfW →xs , σf2W →xs ). µ f w → xs ( x s )  fw  . . . fW  µ xl → f i ( x l )  xl  . . .  fi  xL  µ f W → xs ( x s )  f i µ f i → xs ( x s )  (b)  fW  µ f w → xs ( x s ) x s µ f i → xs ( x s ) fi  µ f W → xs ( x s )  Fig. 1. Message µxs →fi (xs ) from variable node xs to factor node fi (subfigure a), message µfi →xs (xs ) from factor node fi to variable node xs and marginal inference of the variable node xs (subfigure c).  It can be shown that the message µxs →fi (xs ) from the variable node xs to the factor node fi is proportional (i.e. ∝) to the Gaussian function: µxs →fi (xs ) ∝ N (zxs →fi |xs , σx2s →fi ), with mean zxs →fi and variance σx2s →fi obtained as: ! X zfa →xs zxs →fi = σ2 σf2a →xs xs →fi  (7)  (8a)  fa ∈Fs \fi  σx2s →fi  =  The Gaussian function associated with the factor node fi is given by: N (zi |xs , xl , . . . , xL , σi2 ) ) ( [zi − hi (xs , xl , . . . , xL )]2 . (10) ∝ exp 2σi2 The linear function hi (xs , xl , . . . , xL ) can be represented in a general form as: X Cxb xb , hi (xs , xl , . . . , xL ) = Cxs xs + (11)  µfi →xs (xs ) ∝ N (zfi →xs |xs , σf2i →xs ),  (c)  1  µxL →fi (xL ) ∝  (9)  N (zxL →fi |xL , σx2L →fi ).  where Xi \ xs is the set of variable nodes incident to the factor node fi , excluding the variable node xs . It can be shown that the message µfi →xs (xs ) from the factor node fi to the variable node xs is represented by the Gaussian function:  xs  µ xL → f i ( x L )  (a)  . . .  µxl →fi (xl ) ∝ N (zxl →fi |xl , σx2l →fi ) ...  xb ∈Xi \xs  x s µ xs → f i ( x s )  fw  group of variable nodes Xi = {xs , xl , ..., xL } ⊆ X that are neighbours of the factor node fi ∈ F . The message µfi →xs (xs ) can be computed only when all other incoming messages (variable to factor node messages) are known. Let us assume that the messages into factor nodes are Gaussian, denoted by:  X  fa ∈Fs \fi  1  σf2a →xs  .  (8b)  After the variable node xs receives the messages from all of the neighbouring factor nodes from the set Fs \ fi , it evaluates the message µxs →fi (xs ) according to (8) and sends it to the factor node fi . Message from a factor node to a variable node: Consider a part of a factor graph shown in Fig. 1b that consists of a  with mean zfi →xs and variance σf2i →xs obtained as: ! X 1 zfi →xs = Cxb zxb →fi zi − Cxs xb ∈Xi \xs ! X 1 2 2 2 2 σfi →xs = 2 σi + Cxb σxb →fi . Cxs  (12)  (13a)  (13b)  xb ∈Xi \xs  After the factor node fi receives the messages from all of the neighbouring variable nodes from the set Xi \ xs , it evaluates the message µfi →xs (xs ) according to (13a) and (13b), and sends it to the variable node xs . Marginal inference: It can be show that the marginal of the variable node xs , illustrated in Fig. 1c, is represented by the Gaussian function: p(xs ) ∝ N (x̂s |xs , σx2s ), with the mean value x̂s and variance σx2s : ! X zfc →xs σ2 x̂s = σf2c →xs xs  (14)  (15a)  fc ∈Fs  X 1 1 = . σx2s σf2c →xs  (15b)  fc ∈Fs  Finally, the mean-value x̂s is adopted as the estimated value of the state variable xs .  Message scheduling: The SE scenario is in general an instance of Loopy BP since the corresponding factor graph usually contains cycles. Loopy BP is an iterative algorithm and requires a message-passing schedule which, in this work, is selected as the usual synchronous schedule [4].  Mθ 1  Mθ 2 1  MP12  fθ1  In this section, we propose a fast and robust BP-based SE algorithm that can update the state estimate vector x̂ in a time-continuous process. Hence, the algorithm can handle each new measurement Mi ∈ Mrt as soon as it is delivered from telemetry to the computational unit. Further, using the BP SE algorithm, it is possible to compute the state estimate vector x̂ without resorting to observability analysis. The proposed SE solution is based on the fact that the BP-based algorithm is robust in terms of handling the ill-conditioned scenarios caused by significant differences between values of variances (e.g., PMU measurements and pseudo-measurements). Ideally, pseudo-measurements should not affect the solution within observable islands (i.e., determined with real-time measurements), therefore the variance of pseudo-measurements Mi ∈ Mps should be set to σi2 → ∞. In the conventional SE this concept is a source of ill-conditioned system. Hence, the values of pseudo-measurement variances should be defined to prevent ill-conditioned situations and ensure numerical stability of the SE algorithm (e.g., 1010 − 1015 ). On the other hand, inability to define σi2 → ∞ causes that pseudo-measurements have more or less impact on the state estimate x̂, and thus the number of pseudo-measurements should be minimized to produce an observable system. The BP SE algorithm allows the inclusion of an arbitrary number of pseudo-measurements with an extremely large values of variances (e.g., 1060 ), hence the impact on the observable island is negligible. Consequently, observable islands will have unique solution according to the real-time measurements, while unobservable islands will be determined according to both real-time and pseudo-measurements. Therefore, we propose a model where the network topology processor generates bus/branch model and assigns all possible measurements that exist in the power system, setting their variances to suitable values. Without loss of generality, we demonstrate this procedure by a toy-example, using a simple bus/branch model shown in Fig. 2a where all the possible measurements are assigned. The first step is converting the bus/branch model and its measurements configuration into the corresponding factor graph illustrated in Fig. 2b. We assume, for the time being, that all the measurements are pseudo-measurements M ≡ Mps = {Mθ1 , Mθ2 , MP1 , MP2 , MP12 } and Mrt = {∅}, noting that the system is unobservable. Using equations (8), (13) and (15) the BP algorithm will compute the state estimate vector x̂ according to the set of factor nodes F defined by the set of pseudo-measurements M ≡ Mps . Hence, the system is defined according to the prior knowledge in lack of real-time measurements.  θ1  θ2  fP12  f θ2  fP2 MP 2  MP 1  III. R EAL - TIME S TATE E STIMATION U SING B ELIEF P ROPAGATION  fP1  2  (b)  (a)  Fig. 2. Transformation of the bus/branch model and measurement configuration (subfigure a) into the corresponding factor graph for the DC model (subfigure b).  Subsequently, in an arbitrary moment, we assume that the computational unit received a real-time measurement Mrt = {Mθ1 }, which determines an observable island that contains bus 1, while bus 2 remains within unobservable island. The BP algorithm in continuous process will compute the new value of state estimate θ̂1 according to Mθ1 , with insignificant impact of (high-variance) pseudo-measurements Mps \ {Mθ1 }, while the value of the state estimate θ̂2 will be defined according to both Mθ1 and Mps \ {Mθ1 }. Assuming that subsequently, the computational unit receives an additional real-time measurement MP12 , the system will be observable. The state estimate x̂ at that moment will be computed according to the real-time measurements Mrt = {Mθ1 , MP12 }, with negligible influence of pseudo-measurements Mps \ {Mθ1 , MP12 }. Based on our extensive numerical analysis on large IEEE test cases, the proposed algorithm is able to track the state of the system in the continuous process without need for observability analysis. Note that, due the fact that the values of state variables usually fluctuate in narrow boundaries, in normal conditions, the continuous algorithm allows for fast response to new each measurement. IV. N UMERICAL R ESULTS We evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm using the IEEE 14 bus test case with the measurement configuration shown in Fig. 3.  13  14 12 11 10 6 9 1 7  5 4  8  2 3 Active Power Flow Measurement Active Power Injection Measurement Voltage Angle Measurement  Fig. 3. The IEEE 14 bus test case with measurement configuration.  A. Simulation Setup  σ2 2 σps  2 σrt  trt  tps  t  Fig. 4. The time-dependent function of variances for real-time measurements.  B. Test Case 1 In the following, we analyze performance of the proposed algorithm in the scenario characterized by significant differences between variances and observe influence of the pseudo-measurements on the state estimate x̂ ≡ θ̂. In Table I, we define the (fixed) schedule and type of real-time measurements, where each real-time measurement 2 is set to σrt = 10−12 MW at trt and we assume tps → ∞ 2 (i.e., σrt remains at 10−12 MW for t > trt ). The example is designed in such a way that, upon reception of each real-time measurement, due to its very low variance one of the states from the estimated state vector θ̂ becomes approximately equal to the power flow solution. Fig. 5 shows estimated values of voltage angles θ3 , θ8 and θ14 for the scenario defined in Table I. One can note the robustness of the proposed BP SE solution in a sense that, at  TABLE I S CHEDULE AND TYPE OF REAL - TIME MEASUREMENTS Active power flow MPij  Time  Active power flow MPij  trt (s)  from bus i  to bus j  trt (s)  from bus i  to bus j  1 2 3 4 5 6 7  1 2 3 4 5 4 7  2 3 4 5 6 7 8  8 9 10 11 12 13  7 9 10 6 12 13  9 10 11 12 13 14  θ3 (deg)  Time  −6.0  Power Flow Solution BP SE Solution  −9.5 −13.0  θ8 (deg)  −14.0 −18.0 −22.0 θ14 (deg)  We start by a given IEEE 14 bus test case and apply the DC power flow analysis to generate the exact solution for voltage angles and active powers across the network. Further, we corrupt the exact solution by the additive white Gaussian noise of variance σ 2 to generate set of measurements M. The slack bus is bus 1 where the voltage angle has a given value θ1 = 0, therefore, the variance is σ12 → 0 (e.g. we use σ12 = 10−60 deg). Throughout this section, the variance of active power flow and injection pseudo-measurements are 2 σps = 1060 MW, while voltage angle pseudo-measurements 2 have σps = 1060 deg. Note that the base power for the IEEE 14 bus test case is 100 MVA. In each test case (described below), the algorithm starts at the time instant t = 0 initialized using the full set of pseudo-measurements M ≡ Mps generated according to historical data. Consider an arbitrary measurement Mi ∈ M. This measurement is initialized as pseudo-measurement, i.e., at t = 0, Mi ∈ Mps . Let trt denotes the time instant when the computational unit has received the real-time measured 2 value of Mi with the predefined value of variance σrt . We model the “aging” of the information provided by this measurement by the linear variance increase over time up to 2 the time instant tps where it becomes equal to σps (Fig 4). In other words, we assume Mi ∈ Mps during 0 ≤ t < trt and t ≥ tps , while Mi ∈ Mrt during trt ≤ t < tps . After the transition period t ≥ tps , Mi is observed as pseudo-measurement until the next real-time measurement is received.  −16.0 −19.5 −23.0 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10 11 12 13 14  Time (s)  Fig. 5. Real-Time estimates of voltage angles θ3 , θ8 and θ14 where the computational unit received active power flow real-time measurements every 2 = 10−12 MW. t = 1 s with variance σrt  any time instant, the extreme difference in variances between already received real-time measurements and remaining set of pseudo-measurements (that typically lead to ill-conditioned scenarios), are accurately solved by the BP estimator. As expected, in our pre-designed example, we clearly note a sequential refinement of the state estimate, where each new received real-time measurement MPij accurately defines the corresponding state variable θj . More precisely, starting from the slack bus that has a known state value, the real-time measurement MP12 specifies the state value of θ2 at time t = 1 s. The chain of refinements repeats successively until t = 13 s when the final state variable θ14 is accurately estimated. Although somewhat trivial, the above example demonstrates that the BP-based SE algorithm provides a solution according to the real-time measurements, irrespective of the presence of (all) pseudo-measurements. In addition, Fig. 5 shows how BP influence propagates through the network (e.g., upon reception, measurement MP12 affects the distant state variable θ14 ). C. Test Case 2 In order to investigate how fast BP influence propagates through the network, we use the same setup given in Section IV-B, and analyse the response of the system to the received 2 = {202 , 102 , real-time measurement of different variance σrt −2 10 } MW. In particular, we track the convergence of the  θ2 (deg)  −2.0  2 = 202 MW σrt 2 = 102 MW σrt  −5.5  2 = 10−2 MW σrt  −9.0  θ3 (deg)  −7.0  Power Flow BP SE  −12.0 −17.0  θ8 (deg)  −2.0 −12.0 −22.0 θ14 (deg)  (iterative message passing) BP algorithm over time, from the moment the real-time measurement is received, to the moment when the state estimate reaches a steady state. Fig. 6 illustrates the influence of the real-time measurement MP12 received at trs = 1 s, on the state variables θ2 , θ3 and θ14 . As expected, the received real-time measurement has almost immediate impact on the state variable θ2 , where steady state occurs within t < 1 ms, even 2 for the high value of measurement variance σrt = 202 MW. Further, this real-time measurement will influence the entire system through iterative BP message exchanges. As expected, increasing the distance between the measurement location and the bus location, more time is need for the corresponding state variable to reach the steady state. For example, steady state of the state variable θ14 occurs within t < 25 ms. To summarize, the algorithm is able to provide fast response on the received real-time measurements and, for the DC SE framework, it is able to support both WAMS and SCADA technology in terms of the required computational delays1 .  −2.0 −15.0 −28.0 50  100  150  200  250  300  Time (s)  Fig. 7. Real-time estimates of voltage angles θ3 , θ8 and θ14 where real-time measurements arrived at the computational unit according to Poisson process.  During the first 250 s, the BP SE provides state estimates according to incoming noisy real-time measurements and, as apparent from the figure, each new real-time measurement will affect the current state of the system. After t = 250 s, the voltage angle real-time measurements arrived with constant and very low variance, thus providing state estimates which are considerably more accurate.  θ3 (deg)  −6.0  V. C ONCLUSIONS  −12.5  θ14 (deg)  −19.0 −11.0 −16.0 −21.0 1000  1010  1020  1030  Time (ms)  Fig. 6. Real-Time estimates of voltage angles θ2 , θ3 and θ14 where the computational unit received active power flow real-time measurement MP12 2 = {202 , 102 , 10−2 } MW. at the time t = 1 s with variances σrt  We presented the fast real-time DC SE model based on the powerful BP algorithm, which is able to provide state estimates without resorting to observability analysis. The proposed BP estimator can be distributed and parallelized which allows for flexible and low-delay centralized or distributed implementation suitable for integration in emerging WAMS. For the future work, we plan to provide extensive numerical analysis of the proposed algorithm, including the AC SE model implemented within the same framework, and extended to the generalized SE model. R EFERENCES  D. Test Case 3 In the final scenario, we consider the dynamic scenario in which the power system changes values of both generations and loads every 100 s. In the interval between t = 0 and t = 250 s, only active power flow and injection real-time 2 measurements are available with variances σrt = 102 MW 3 2 and tps − trt = 10 s. After 250 s, the voltage angle real-time measurements become available with parameters 2 σrt = 10−6 deg and tps → ∞. For every measurement, arrival process in each interval is modeled using Poisson process with average inter-arrival time 1/λ, where for active power flow and injection real-time measurements we set λ = 0.05 and for angle real-time measurements λ = 0.5. Fig. 7 shows state estimates of state variables θ3 , θ8 and θ14 over the time interval of 300 s for the described scenario. 1 Our ongoing work aims to extend these results to the more complex BPbased AC SE model [4]. 2 Although the period of 103 s may appear large, note that this is 2 = 1060 MW at t . compensated by very high variance σps ps  [1] N. Kayastha, D. Niyato, E. Hossain, and Z. Han, “Smart grid sensor data collection, communication, and networking: a tutorial,” Wireless communications and mobile computing, vol. 14, pp. 1055–1087, 2014. [2] X. Li and A. Scaglione, “Robust decentralized state estimation and tracking for power systems via network gossiping,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 1184–1194, 2013. [3] A. Monticelli, “Electric power system state estimation,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 262–282, 2000. [4] M. Cosovic and D. Vukobratovic, “Distributed State Estimation in Power System Using Belief Propagation: Algorithms and Performance,” ArXiv e-prints, Feb. 2017. [5] M. Cosovic and D. Vukobratovic, “Distributed Gauss-Newton method for AC state estimation: A belief propagation approach,” in 2016 IEEE Conference on Smart Grid Communications, Nov 2016, pp. 643–649. [6] T. Sui, D. E. Marelli, and M. Fu, “Convergence analysis of Gaussian belief propagation for distributed state estimation,” in 2015 54th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), Dec 2015, pp. 1106–1111. [7] A. Abur and A. Expósito, Power System State Estimation: Theory and Implementation, ser. Power Engineering. Taylor & Francis, 2004. [8] A. Monticelli, State Estimation in Electric Power Systems: A Generalized Approach, ser. Kluwer international series in engineering and computer science. Springer US, 1999. [9] A. Wood and B. Wollenberg, Power Generation, Operation, and Control, ser. A Wiley-Interscience publication. Wiley, 1996.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 7. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
