Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 7
ArXiv ID: hf_5572

Abstract:
Hierarchical restricted isometry property for Kronecker product measurements Ingo Roth∗ , Axel Flinth† , Richard Kueng‡, Jens Eisert∗ , and Gerhard Wunder∗ ∗ Freie  Universität Berlin, {i.roth, jense, g.wunder}@fu-berlin.de Universität Berlin, flinth@math.tu-berlin.de ‡ California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, rkueng@caltech.edu  arXiv:1801.10433v1 [cs.IT] 31 Jan 2018  † Technische  Abstract—Hierarchically sparse signals and Kronecker product structured measurements arise naturally in a variety of applications. The simplest example of a hierarchical sparsity structure is two-level (s, σ)-hierarchical sparsity which features s-block-sparse signals with σ-sparse blocks. For a large class of algorithms recovery guarantees can be derived based on the restricted isometry property (RIP) of the measurement matrix and model-based variants thereof. We show that given two matrices A and B having the standard s-sparse and σsparse RIP their Kronecker product A ⊗ B has two-level (s, σ)hierarchically sparse RIP (HiRIP). This result can be recursively generalized to signals with multiple hierarchical sparsity levels and measurements with multiple Kronecker product factors. As a corollary we establish the efficient reconstruction of hierarchical sparse signals from Kronecker product measurements using the HiHTP algorithm. We argue that Kronecker product measurement matrices allow to design large practical compressed sensing systems that are deterministically certified to reliably recover signals in a stable fashion. We elaborate on their motivation from the perspective of applications.  I. I NTRODUCTION The field of compressed sensing studies the solution of the underdetermined inverse problem of reconstructing a suitably structured signal x ∈ Kd from linear noisy samples y = Ax + e ∈ Km , where A ∈ Km×d , m < d, is a measurement matrix and e accounts for additive noise. The most prominent structure assumption on x is thereby sparsity. By K we denote a field that is either that of real numbers R or of complex numbers C. The recovery of x from y and A is guaranteed with high probability for a variety of algorithms when the measurement matrix A is drawn from a suitable random ensemble. A working-horse in proving such recovery guarantees is that a random measurement matrix A often fulfills the so-called restricted isometry property (RIP) with high probability. This means that there exist δ ∈ [0, 1) such that  (1 − δ) kxk2 ≤ kAxk2 ≤ (1 + δ) kxk2 (1) P d 2 2 for all s-sparse x ∈ Kd . Here kxk = i=1 |xi | denotes the ℓ2 -norm. Typical examples of such measurement ensemble fulfilling a RIP ensuring reconstruction from m ≥ m0 samples with m0 ∈ Õ(s) are sub-Gaussian matrices or subsampled Fourier matrices. In practice, however, matrices are most often ‘less random’. In fact, in many applications it is highly desirable to make use of as little randomness as possible. This work will focus on measurement matrices that can be  written as the Kronecker product of smaller matrices. In this sense, this work contributes to the broader scheme of partially derandomising recovery schemes. A. Kronecker product measurements Measurement matrices that are the Kronecker product of a number of smaller matrices naturally appear in various practical applications. As an illustrative example let us consider the following simple multi-user communication model: A potentially very large number N of users simultaneously send messages xi of length n to a central base station. They thereby encode their messages with a common compressed sensing matrixPA. At the base station m different superpositions yj = i bj,i Axi of the individual encoded messages Axi are measured. One can, for instance, think of a massive MIMO system, where the different weights bj,i arise from the fact that the encoded messages Axi scatter along different paths to arrive at the base station. Hence, at the base station we want to recover the entire signal x = [xT1 , . . . , xN T ]T from the linear measurements of the form y = (B ⊗ A)x where B is the m × N matrix with entries bj,i . We conclude that Kronecker product measurements are typically encountered when the superposition of multiple parties that share a common sensing/coding matrix are observed. Another important class of examples is constituted by unit rank measurements on matrices as they can be cast as Kronecker product measurements. Consider measurements on X ∈ KN,n of the form Yi,j = Tr(ai bTj X), where ai and bj denote the columns of a matrix A ∈ KM×N and B ∈ Km×n , respectively. Then using column-wise vectorisation it holds that vec(Y) = A ⊗ BT vec(X). Such unit rank measurements often arise in bilinear compressed sensing problems that are lifted [11] to linear matrix problems. The results of this work are for example applied in angle-delay pair estimation in massive MIMO in Ref. [14] along those lines. From the computational perspective, Kronecker products have a number of highly desirable properties. For instance, they can to some extent be applied in parallel computations or stored more efficiently. A Kronecker product A ⊗ B ∈ KM×N ⊗ Km×n is described by M N + mn parameters, whereas a general matrix C ∈ KMm×N n needs M N mn parameters. At the same time, this significantly reduces the amount of randomness that is required to generate such  matrices. This is, in fact, an obstacle for proving that such matrices obey the standard RIP property. The relation between the RIP-constants of a group of matrices A1 , . . . , AL and the corresponding constant for the Kronecker product A1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ AL have been investigated in Refs. [1], [2]. Therein, the authors use a slightly different convention for the RIP constants, namely (1 − δ) kxk ≤ kAxk ≤ (1 + δ) kxk .  (2)  Algorithm 1 (HiHTP) Input: measurement matrix A, measurement vector y, block column sparsity (s, σ) 1: x0 = 0 2: repeat 3: Ωk+1 = Ls,σ (xk + A∗ (y − Axk )) 4: xk+1 = arg minz∈CN n {ky − Azk, supp(z) ⊂ Ωk+1 } 5: until stopping criterion is met at k̃ = k Output: (s, σ)-sparse vector xk̃  In short, a Kronecker product has the k-RIP if and only if each of its blocks has the k-RIP. More concretely, max δ k (Aℓ ) ≤ δk (A1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ AL ) ≤  1≤l≤L  L Y  (1 + δ k (Aℓ )) − 1.  ℓ=1  For us, in particular the lower bound is interesting. It tells us that if we intend to build a matrix A1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ AL with the s-RIP, we need each Aℓ to exhibit the s-RIP! We can in particular not ensure to be able to reconstruct arbitrary signals of higher sparsity than s if one of the matrices Aℓ fails to reconstruct s-sparse signals. B. Hierarchically sparse vectors Motivated by a variety of applications, more restricted sparsity structures have intensively been studied over the last decade. Classic examples of structured sparse signals are signals that have only a small number of non-vanishing but possibly dense blocks, block-sparsity, [4], [5] or signals that feature sparse blocks (see, e.g., Ref. [15]). The combination and generalisation of these structure leads to the concept of hierarchically sparse signals. The simplest example are twolevel (s, σ)-hierarchically sparse signals (see, e.g., Refs. [3], [16], [17]). More precisely, let x ∈ KN n . We can partition x into N blocks xi , each of size n. Definition 1 (Hierarchical sparsity). A vector x ∈ KnN is (s, σ)-hierarchically sparse if at most s blocks have nonvanishing entries and each of these blocks is σ-sparse. For convenience, we will call a hierarchically (s, σ)-sparse vector simply (s, σ)-sparse in this work. In the applications discussed above, hierarchically sparse signals are a reasonable restriction. In our simple communication model for example, an (s, σ)-sparse signal x arises if we demand that at a given time only a maximum of s users are active and the messages xi itself are each σ-sparse. The exploitation of such finer structure assumptions has been identified as crucial in the development of future scalable mobile communication systems [18], [19] and they have been studied in the task of channel estimation and user activity detection, e.g., in Ref. [20]. Similarly, in bilinear compressed sensing problems where both arguments are sparse, the resulting vectorisation of the lifted matrix is hierarchically sparse [14], [21]. Note that in lifted problems the signals will also have a low-rank structure and thus be more structured than being merely hierarchically sparse. For this reason, hierarchically sparse recovery methods are not expected to achieve an information theoretically  optimal sampling complexity in these settings. But they are still of interest because of their low computational demands. These are important examples; it goes without saying that hierarchically sparse signals are ubiquitous in signal processing, in physics and in the life sciences. By adopting the notion of model-based sparse recovery [6], three of the five authors of this paper designed an iterative thresholding algorithm, HiHTP, for recovering (s, σ)-sparse and more general hierarchically sparse vectors, see Ref. [3]. The algorithm follows the same strategy as the original hardthresholding pursuit (HTP) algorithm of [10]. In every iteration it estimates the support using a thresholding operation on a gradient step and subsequently solves the least-squares fitting problem restricted to the estimated support. The main modification for the recovery of (s, σ)-sparse vectors is to employ the projection onto vectors with (s, σ)-sparse support Ls,σ (x) := supp arg min kx − zk .  (3)  (s, σ)-sparse z  As argued in Ref. [3] this projection can be efficiently calculated. Algorithm 1 shows the resulting HiHTP algorithm. The algorithm was proven to converge to the correct signal under an HiRIP-assumption on the measurement matrix. A matrix is thereby said to have the HiRIP property if an inequality like (4) is satisfied for all (s, σ)-sparse x. Since the set of (s, σ)sparse vectors is contained in the set of s · σ-sparse vectors, the HiRIP is a weaker condition compared to standard RIP. This work is dedicated to deriving statements about the HiRIP-properties of Kronecker products A⊗B. We will prove that the (s, σ)-HiRIP constant of A ⊗ B is bounded by the s-RIP constant of A and σ-RIP constant of B as follows: A⊗B δ(s,σ) ≤ δsA + δσB + δsA δσB .  Hence, the Kronecker product of matrices with good RIPconstants has a non-trivial HiRIP constant. This is in sharp contrast to the properties of the RIP discussed above. This discrepancy indicates that one can derive much stronger recovery results when dealing with hierarchical sparsity patterns, rather than unstructured ones. We will argue that a similar statement holds for multilevel hierarchical structures and Kronecker products of the form A1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ AL . So we find that that tensor products in general inherit multilevel HiRIP from the RIP of the constituents. From a more information theoretic perspective, the result opens up a new possibility to actually certify HiRIP for a given  matrix. In principle, given a matrix A, a sparsity level s and a constant δ > 0, it is an NP-hard problem to decide whether the RIP constant δs of A is smaller than δ [8], [9]. However, our result indicates that certifying that a HiRIP constant of the matrix A is smaller than δ can be done by checking that all Ai have (sufficiently) smaller RIP-constants. If the dimension of the matrices Ai are small enough it is even practical to certify their RIP by brute-force calculations of a spectral norm for all possible sparse supports. In fact, we find that in certain parameter regimes the complexity of certification of HiRIP of a matrix A = A⊗l 1 with the brute-force algorithm scales polynomial in the size of the large matrix A. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present the technical statement of our main results and some fundamental consequences of them. In Section III, we discuss on how our main result can be used to design matrices that are known to have HiRIP. II. M AIN R ESULTS  Definition 2 (HiRIP). Given a matrix A ∈ Km×nN , we denote by δs,σ the smallest δ ≥ 0 such that (4)  for all (s, σ)-hierarchically sparse vectors x ∈ KnN . As has been advertised in the introduction, we can prove the following result Theorem 1 (Main result). Given A ∈ KM×N having s-sparse RIP with constant δsA and B ∈ Km×n with σ-sparse RIP with constant δσB , then A ⊗ B : KN n → KMm  (5)  has (s, σ)-sparse HiRIP with constant δ(s,σ) ≤ δsA + δσB + δsA δσB .  (6)  Before presenting the proof of Theorem 1, we need to introduce some notation. First, we let vec : KN ×n → KN n denote the canonical isomorphism of column-wise vectorisation. In other words, vec is defined by linear extension of the requirement vec(Ei,j ) = ei ⊗ ej , where Ei,j = ei eTj ∈ KN ×n denotes the matrix with only one non-vanishing unit entry in the i-th row and j-th column. The Kronecker product is always understood as   a1,1 B . . . a1,N B  ..  . .. (7) A ⊗ B =  ... . .  am,1 B  Lemma 2. For A ∈ KM×N and B ∈ Km×n and X ∈ KN ×n it holds that (A ⊗ B) vec(X) = Fm,M (B ⊗ A)FN,n vec(X) and FN,n vec(X) = vec(XT ). We now have all the tools we need to prove Theorem 1. Proof of Theorem 1. Let x ∈ KN n be hierarchically (s, σ)sparse. With the help of Lemma 2 we find 2  In the following, let [d] be the subset {1, . . . , d} ⊂ N of integers smaller or equal than d ∈ N. Furthemore, for x ∈ Kd and Ω ∈ [d] we define the vector x|Ω that coincides with x on the indices in Ω and vanishes otherwise. Let us begin by formally defining the HiRIP for (s, σ)-hierarchical sparsity.  (1 − δ)kxk2 ≤ kAxk2 ≤ (1 + δ)kxk2  Passing from one vector representation to the other amounts to applying the flip operator FN,n : KN n → KN n , that linearly extends the mapping ei ⊗ ej 7→ ej ⊗ ei . The action induced by switching between the column-wise to row-wise vectorisation in the space of operators acting on the vector space is the swap of the tensor product components. To be precise:  . . . am,N B  This convention justifies the term column-wise vectorisation. It will be convenient to also implicitly make use of rowwise vectorisation, which can be defined as X 7→ vec(XT ).  k(A ⊗ B)xk = k(A ⊗ Idn )(IdN ⊗B)xk  2  = kFm,M (Idn ⊗A)FN,n (IdN ⊗B)xk  2  2  = k(Idn ⊗A)FN,n (IdN ⊗B)xk ,  where the last line follows from the fact that Fm,M is unitary. The vector (IdN ⊗B)x has only non-vanishing entries in s of its N blocks. Therefore, the flipped vector h := FN,n (IdN ⊗B)x consists of blocks hi ∈ KN with i ∈ [n] that are at most s-sparse each. This allows us to apply the s-sparse RIP property of A for each of the blocks X 2 2 2 kAhi k ≤ (1 + δs ) khk . k(Idn ⊗A)hk = i∈[n]  Making use of the unitarity of the flip once again, the ℓ2 -norm of h is identical to X kBxi k , (8) khk2 = k(IdN ⊗B)xk = i∈[N ]  where xi ∈ Kn i ∈ [N ] are the σ-sparse blocks of x. Every term of the sum is bounded by the σ-sparse RIP of B yielding 2  2  khk ≤ (1 + δσ ) kxk . In summary, we have established 2  k(A ⊗ B)xk ≤ (1 + δs )(1 + δσ ) kxk . The lower RIP bound can be derived in the same way, completing the proof. The main consequence of Theorem 1 is that it allows to construct a new class of measurement matrices for which the HiHTP algorithm is guaranteed succeed. More precisely, we get the following corollary. Corollary 3. Let A ∈ KM×N and B ∈ Km×n , and suppose that the following RIP-conditions hold s√ 3+1 A B √ − 1. δ3s , δ2σ ≤ 3  Then, for x ∈ KnN , e ∈ KMm and Ω ⊆ [N ] × [n] and (s, σ)sparse support set, the sequence xk defined by the HiHTP Algorithm 1 with y = (A ⊗ B)x|Ω + e satisfies, for any k ≥ 0 k  x − x|Ω ≤ ρ  k  0  x − x|Ω + τ kek ,  where ρ=    A B A B 2(δ3s + δ2σ + δ3s δ2σ ) A B A δ B )2 1 − (δ3s + δ2σ + δ3s 2σ    < 1.  Proof. We simply need to note that Theorem 1 implies that 1 A⊗B A B A B δ3s,2σ ≤ (δ3s + δ2σ + δ3s δ2σ ) < √ . 3 The rest follows from Theorem 1 of [3]. In Ref. [3] one example has been given of a class of matrices guaranteed to possess the HiRIP with high probability. Concretely, it was shown that a random dense Gaussian matrix G ∈ Km×N n has the (s, σ)-HiRIP with high probability under the assumption m & sσ log(N ) + σ log(N n). These are slightly less measurements than the sσ log(N n) measurements needed to secure the (unstructured) sσ-RIP with high probability [7]. We can now describe a new class: Taking any pair of random matrices A ∈ KM×N and B ∈ Km×n both guaranteed to possess the s- and σ-RIP with high probability, A ⊗ B will have the (s, σ)-HiRIP. As an example, we can use random Gaussian matrices with M & s log(N ) and m & σ log(n), resulting in a measurement matrices A ⊗ B ∈ Kµ×nN with µ & sσ log(N ) log(n). Hence, a measurement scheme using Kronecker matrices will need slightly more measurements than the fully Gaussian matrices to have the HiRIP. This price could, however, sometimes be worth paying. First, we get a vast reduction in space needed to store the matrix ((M N + mn) instead of M N · mn). Also, as has been discussed in the introduction, there are applications where the Kronecker structure of a measurement process is inherent. Moreover, the results and notions of this section can readily be generalized to hierarchical sparsity with more than two levels. Definition 3 (Multilevel hierarchical sparsity, HiRIP). Let L ≥ 3, n1 , . . . , nL and s1 , . . . , sL be natural numbers. 1) A vector x ∈ Kn1 ···nL is called (s1 , . . . , sL )(hierarchically) sparse if it consists of n1 blocks xi ∈ Kn2 ···nL such that only s1 blocks are non-zero, and each xi is (s2 , . . . , sL )-sparse. 2) For Am×n1 ···nL , we define δs1 ,...,sL as the smallest δ ≥ 0 for which Inequality (4) holds for all (s1 , . . . , sL )sparse vectors x. The following result is a generalization of Theorem 1. m×n1  be a matrix with RIP-constant Theorem 4. Let A ∈ K δsA1 and B ∈ KM×N one with HiRIP constant δsB2 ,...,sL . Then  the hierarchical RIP-constant δs1 ,...,sn of A ⊗ B ∈ KmM×nN satisfies δs1 ,...,sL ≤ δsA1 + δsB2 ,...,sL + δsA1 · δsB2 ,...,sL . In particular, through induction, we obtain for matrices Ai ∈ Kmi ×ni , i = 1, . . . , L, with si -th RIP constants δsAi i : δs1 ,...,sL (A1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ AL ) ≤  L Y  (1 + δsAi i ) − 1.  i=1  The techniques of the proof of Theorem 1 can readily be adapted to prove also Theorem 4. Proof of Theorem 4. The proofs reads exactly as the proof of Theorem 1 up to equation (8), with an adapted version of the flipping operator. Here, we use that the blocks xi are not σsparse, but (s2 , . . . , sL )-sparse, and apply the corresponding RIP of B. The statement now follows in exactly the same manner as above. Analogously, to Corollary 3 we can derive a recovery guarantee for a generalisation of HiHTP to more general hierarchically sparse vectors including multiple layers using the results of Ref. [3]. III. E FFICIENTLY  CHECKABLE  H I RIP  Theorem 4 has a consequence that may be surprising. Given a matrix A ∈ KM×N and some δ > 0, to certify whether the standard RIP constant δs is smaller than δ is in general an NP-hard problem [8], [9]. To this date, no deterministic constructions of measurement matrices are known that achieve an optimal scaling in sampling complexity. For a variety of ensembles of matrices there exist guarantees that with high probability a random instance with optimal scaling complexity fulfils the RIP. However, checking whether one was lucky or not is not feasible already for intermediate sized systems. The brute-force approach for certifying the normal S-sparse RIP of a matrix A ∈ KM×N is to calculate kA†Ω AΩ − IdS k  N for all S S-sized supports Ω and taking the maximum. The computational effort of this approach scales at least as (N/S)S S 3 , which grows exponentially in N for fixed ratios (N/S). Note that the number of hierarchically sparse supports also scales exponentially in the overall system size. Hence, a brute force calculation to certify the HiRIP of an arbitrary matrix is also exponentially expensive. If we, however, let A = B⊗L , where B ∈ Km×n . We can certify the s = (s, . . . , s) =: (s,L )-HiRIP of A by simply brute-force checking the s-RIP of the matrix B, and subsequently invoking Theorem 4, which in this case reads: Corollary 5. Given a matrix B with s-sparse RIP with constant δs , the matrix B⊗L has (s,L )-HiRIP with δ(s,L ) ≤ (1 + δs )l − 1.  (9)  The brute-force calculation of the s-sparse RIP of B thereby S 1/L only takes an order of (n/s)s s3 = (N/S) L S 3/L computations, where N = nL and S = sL denotes the total  system size and total sparsity, respectively. In the regime where S ≤ cLL for some constant c ∈ R, we arrive at a polynomial scaling in the overall system size N . Hence, we can certify that A = B⊗L ∈ KM×N has (s,L )-HiRIP in an efficient way. More generally, our approach applies to all measurement matricesPA with a known tensor decomposition of the form r M = i=1 Mi1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ MiL . Checking RIP individually for all compound matrices Mij induces an additional factor of rL in the computational costs of certifying HiRIP for M compared to a matrix of the form B⊗L . Let us verify that this efficient scheme is actually practical for real applications by evaluating the computational costs for reasonable parameter values. Let us assume L = 3 levels with block size n = 102 and sparsity s = 10 on each level.This amounts to N = 106 and S = 103 . Hence, the bruteforce approach for checking RIP or HiRIP for an arbitrary 3 measurement matrix requires order of 1010 computations. In comparison, if we let as many of today’s fastest computing devices (with around 100 Peta FLOPS) as there are atoms in the universe run for the entire estimated age of the universe, we would be able perform around 10115 computations. On the contrary, we can check δ10 for B with n = 102 with order of 1010 computations, which is practically feasible on current desktop hardware. This scheme, however, has a catch in the form of a suboptimal sampling complexity M . To ensure that δ(s,L ) is smaller than a constant δ̃ using Corollary 5 one has to have δs ≤ (δ̃ + 1)1/L − 1. Typically, for a matrix B ∈ Km×n to have RIP with δs ≤ δ requires m ≥ m0 with m0 scaling at least as m0 ∼ 1/δ ∼ L/ log(1 + δ̃) − 1/2 + O(1/L) for large L. Therefore, in the regime of efficiently checkable HiRIP S ≤ cLL , we get an overall sampling complexity M = mL & (Ls)L & S 2 scaling quadratically in S. This is reminiscent of the quadratic bottleneck that also plagues most deterministic constructions of RIP matrices. IV. C ONCLUSIONS The recovery of hierarchically sparse vectors from linear measurements of Kronecker type naturally appears in a plethora of practical applications. The HiHTP algorithm, an efficient algorithm for achieving such a recovery, is guaranteed to work under a HiRIP condition. In this work, we have shown that a Kronecker product A ⊗ B has the (s, σ)-HiRIP property as soon as its components exhibit the RIP. The analogous result holds for Kronnecker products with multiple factors and multi-level hierarchically sparse vectors. This is in contrast to the standard s-RIP, where each component needs to have the s-RIP. As a further application of our result, we described measurement schemes in which it can be efficiently checked to have the HiRIP, in sharp contrast to the general computational hardness of deciding whether a RIP constant is smaller than a given constant. These schemes, however, exhibit a suboptimal sample complexity. On a higher level, the present work contributes to the program of identifying ways of achieving recovery of structured vectors with as little randomness as possible.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT AF acknowledges support from the DFG (Grant KU 1446/18-1), IR and JE by the DFG (EI 519/9-1), the Templeton Foundation and the ERC (TAQ), and GW by DFG SPP 1914 COSIP and EU H2020 5GPP project ONE5G. R EFERENCES [1] M. F. Duarte and R. G. Baraniuk, Kronecker product matrices for compressive sensing, Technical Report TREE-1105. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University (2011). [2] S. Jokar and V. Mehrmann, Sparse solutions to underdetermined Kronecker product systems. Lin. Alg. Appl. 431(12):2437-2447 (2009) [3] I. Roth, M. Kliesch, G. Wunder, and J. Eisert, Reliable recovery of hierarchically sparse signals and application in machine-type communications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.07806 (2016). [4] Y. Eldar and M. Mishali, Robust recovery of signals from a structured union of subspaces., IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 55(11):5302-5316 ( 2009) [5] M. Stojnic, F. Parvaresh, and B. Hassibi, On the reconstruction of block-sparse signals with an optimal number of measurements. IEEE Trans. Signal Process., 57(8):3075–3085(2009). [6] R. G. Baraniuk, V. Cevher, M. F. Duarte, and C. Hegde, Model-based compressive sensing, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory. 56(4):1982– 2001(2010). [7] R. G. Baraniuk and M. Davenport, R. DeVore, and M. Wakin, A simple proof of the restricted isometry property for random matrices., Constr. Appr. 28(3):253:263 (2008). [8] A. M. Tillmann and M. E. Pfetsch, The computational complexity of the restricted isometry property, the nullspace property, and related concepts in compressed sensing, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory. 60(2):1248–1259(2014). [9] A. S. Bandeira, E. Dobriban, D. G. Mixon, and W. F. Sawin, Certifying the restricted isometry property is hard, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory. 59(6):3448– 3450(2013). [10] S. Foucart, Hard thresholding pursuit: An algorithm for compressive sensing, SIAM J. Num. An., vol. 49, pp. 2543–2563, 2011. [11] E. Candès, T. Strohmer and V. Voroninski, Phaselift: Exact and stable signal recovery from magnitude measurements via convex programming, Found. Comp. Math., 12(6):805-849,2012 [12] A. Ahmed, B. Recht and J. Romberg, Blind deconvolution using convex programming, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 60(3):1711-1732, 2014. [13] S. Ling and T. Strohmer, Blind deconvolution meets blind demixing: Algorithms and performance bounds. Inverse Problems, 31:115002, 2015. [14] G. Wunder, I. Roth, A. Flinth, M. Barzegar, S. Haghighatshoar, G. Caire and G. Kutyniok, Hierarchical sparse channel estimation for massive MIMO, Proc. IEEE/ITG Workshop on Smart Antennas (WSA’18), 2018. [15] B. Adcock, A. C. Hansen, C. Poon, and B. Roman, Breaking the coherence barrier: A new theory for compressed sensing, arXiv preprint arXiv:1302.0561, 2013. [16] P. Sprechmann, I. Ramirez, G. Sapiro, and Y. Eldar, Collaborative hierarchical sparse modeling, in 2010 44th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS), 2010, pp. 1–6. [17] J. Friedman, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani, A note on the group lasso and a sparse group lasso, arXiv:1001.0736 [math, stat], 2010. [18] G. Wunder, H. Boche, T. Strohmer, and P. Jung, Sparse signal processing concepts for efficient 5G system design, IEEE ACCESS, Dec. 2015. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.0435. [19] G. Wunder, P. Jung, and M. Ramadan, Compressive random access using a common overloaded control channel, Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conference (Globecom’14), 2015. [20] G. Wunder, I. Roth, R. Fritschek, and J. Eisert, HiHTP: A Customtailored hierarchical sparse detector for massive MTC, in Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, to appear, 2017. [21] G. Wunder, I. Roth, R. Fritschek, B. Gross, and J. Eisert, Secure massive IoT using hierarchical fast blind deconvolution, to appear in Proc. IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC’18), 2018.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 7. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
