Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_5304

Abstract:
Collaborative Object Transportation Using MAVs via Passive Force Control  arXiv:1612.04915v1 [cs.RO] 15 Dec 2016  Andrea Tagliabue1 , Mina Kamel1 , Sebastian Verling1 , Roland Siegwart1 , Juan Nieto1 Abstract— This paper shows a strategy based on passive force control for collaborative object transportation using Micro Aerial Vehicles (MAVs), focusing on the transportation of a bulky object by two hexacopters. The goal is to develop a robust approach which does not rely on: (a) communication links between the MAVs, (b) the knowledge of the payload shape and (c) the position of grasping point. The proposed approach is based on the master-slave paradigm, in which the slave agent guarantees compliance to the external force applied by the master to the payload via an admittance controller. The external force acting on the slave is estimated using a non-linear estimator based on the Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF) from the information provided by a visual inertial navigation system. Experimental results demonstrate the performance of the force estimator and show the collaborative transportation of a 1.2 m long object.  I. INTRODUCTION MAVs have recently stimulated the fantasy of researchers and entrepreneurs [1][2] as a new tool for good delivery. Quadcopters and hexacopters have shown to be especially suited for this task, thanks to their ability to navigate in cluttered environments [3] and being able to deliver a payload with extreme accuracy [4]. However, their inherent limited size constrain the range of applications to the transportation of small and light-weight objects. Collaborative strategies can significantly enhance MAV transportation capabilities and can provide a cost effective solution with respect to the deployment of a single, more capable MAV [5]. A common approach for collaborative transportation is based on centralized solutions, where a coordinator computes a control action for each of the agents and it shares the command with them [6]. A second possible approach is based on distributed control algorithm. In this case, the agents only share a common goal and the individual control laws are obtained with respect to the grasping point on the payload [7]. Both of the described collaborative approaches, however, present some limitations. Centralized approaches rely on the ability of the coordinator to effectively communicate with the agents and this can often be an issue due to the limited robustness of wireless communication networks. Distributed approach, instead, relies on the knowledge of the relative position between each agent and the payload. In this paper we overcame these issues by showing a bio-inspired [8] collaborative approach based on the masterslave(s) paradigm. We chose one of the available MAVs to be the leader - the master - while the remaining agents 1 Autonomous Systems Lab., Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.  Fig. 1: Experimental setup for collaborative object transportation. The master vehicle is controlled remotely, while the slave provides compliance to the movement of the master using an admittance controller.  act as slaves. The task of the master is simply to lift the payload and pull it in the desired direction. The slaves which are also attached to the payload - actively guarantee compliance to the master’s actions by sensing the force that master applies on the payload and changing their position accordingly. Slave’s active compliance is guaranteed through an admittance controller, while external forces are estimated via position, velocity, attitude and angular velocity information using an estimator based on the UKF. To obtain the pose of the MAV, as well as its velocity and angular velocity, we use a visual-inertial navigation system mounted on the slave agent. In our setup we assume the following: (a) the payload is big enough to guarantee that at least two MAVs can autonomously grasp it, (b) all the agents are already attached to the payload and (c) the attitude of the vehicle is decoupled from the rotational dynamic of the payload - this is achieved, for example, by connecting vehicle and payload via a rope or a spherical joint [9]. A. Contributions The main contribution of this work is the novel approach for collaborative object transportation using MAVs. The approach that we propose has the advantage of not relying on: (a) communication links between the MAVs, (b) the knowledge of the payload shape, (c) the position of grasping point, and is potentially scalable to multiple agents. To effectively demonstrate our approach, we describe the implementation of a force estimator based on the UKF which handles quaternions, is computationally light, and fast. It is  able to detect a collision with a wall in less than 20 ms and provides an accurate enough force estimate for humanvehicle interaction without relying on an external motion capture system, but using a VI (Visual Inertial) navigation system. B. Structure of this work We start by presenting existing approaches and technologies for cooperative transportation via MAV in Section II. We then proceed by providing an overview of the control strategy and architecture in Section III and we detail the implementation of the force estimator and admittance controller in Sections IV and V, respectively. We conclude by showing experimental results in Section VI and conclusion in Section VII. II. RELATED WORK Literature for collaborative transportation via aerial vehicle is rich of examples. Earliest publications are related to collaborative transportation of a single payload using two helicopters [10] [11], but do not provide experimental results. Collaborative transportation using UAVs are extensively discussed by [5] and [12]. [6] makes use of a centralized cooperative strategy which relies on communication between MAVs while an example of distributed strategy based on information about the payload shape and grasping points is provided by [7]. In terms of passive force control and admittance control, a comprehensive description is provided in [13]. [14] describes an example of admittance control for quadcopters and human-machine interaction, but heavily relies on motion capture systems for the force estimation. An external forces and torque estimator for multirotor vehicles based on the UKF and similar to the one we propose is adressed on [15], which relies on the work of [16] for attitude quaternion estimation. III. SYSTEM DESIGN A. The Master-Slave Paradigm The master-slave paradigm is a common communication approach for cooperative tasks and is used in many different fields, from industries, informatics to the railway sector. In our context, we defined it as follows. We divide the agents (the MAVs) which take part in the collaborative transportation maneuver in two categories, (a) master and (b) slave. The master, which is unique, follows a reference trajectory given by an external operator or a path planning algorithm while grasping, lifting and pulling the payload. It executes its standard on-board reference tracking and state estimation algorithms and it behaves as if it was carrying the payload alone. The slave agent - which can be one or more - instead grasps the payload, detects the magnitude and direction of the force that the master is applying on it and generates a trajectory compliant with the force applied by the master. Master and slave do not share information via a conventional communication link, but rather via the force applied  Fig. 3: Reference frames defined for this work. I represents the inertial reference frame, while B the MAV reference frame.  to the payload, which is sensed by the slave through a force estimator. B. Slave Control Architecture From now on we will focus our attention on the control architecture of the slave agent, since the master runs a standard pose tracking feedback loop. Slave’s control architecture is composed by four main building blocks. • State estimator: estimates the slave’s (a) position, (b) velocity, (c) attitude, and (d) angular velocity w.r.t the I frame. It can either be an external motion capture system such as [17] or a VI navigation system. The attitude is expressed as a quaternion. • Force and torque estimator: estimates the external force acting on the slave expressed in I frame and external torque around zB axis in B frame. Additionally to the full output of the state estimator - which is used in the update step - the force and torque estimator needs the measurement of the speed of the rotors to propagate the model dynamics in the state prediction step. • Admittance controller: provides a reference pose (position and attitude) for the MAV position and attitude controller, given the estimate of the external force and torque and a desired trajectory. According to the choice of its parameters, it can better track the desired trajectory or give full compliance to the estimated external disturbances. For example, during the cooperative transportation, it complies fully to the force components on xI and yI axis while tracking an altitude reference on zi . More details can be found in Section V. • Position and attitude controller: MPC based controller, that tracks the trajectory generated by the admittance controller by providing a rotor speed command. C. Coordinate System The relevant coordinate frames for this work are two: an inertial reference frame attached to the ground I and a noninertial reference frame attached to the Center of Gravity (CoG)of the vehicle B. They are represented in Figure 3. D. Hardware and Software a) Hardware: The MAV used for our experiments is the AscTec Firefly hexacopter equipped with an on board computer based on a quad-core 2.1 GHz Intel i7 processor  Fig. 2: Active interaction control scheme for the slave agent. The user-provided desired trajectory is modified by the admittance controller according to the external force and torque estimated by the UKF filter based estimator. The state estimator can be either based on a visual-inertial navigation system or an external motion capture system.  and 8 GB of RAM. The hexacopter is additionally equipped with a Visual-Inertial navigation system, developed by the Autonomous Systems Lab at ETHZ and Skybotix AG [18]. This sensor measurement, fused with vehicle’s IMU provide a 100 Hz estimate of: (a) position, (b) velocity, (c) attitude, (d) angular velocity of the MAV. b) Software: We implemented the force estimator and the admittance controller algorithm using C++ and ROS. All the algorithms run on board the hexacopter to avoid issues related to wireless communication. Both the force estimator and the admittance controller run at 100 Hz using about 10% of the available computational power together. The position and attitude controller is based on the model predictive controller developed in [19], [20]. IV. EXTERNAL FORCE AND TORQUE ESTIMATOR In this section, we present the UKF that was implemented to estimate the external force and torque acting on the MAV. First, we derive a nonlinear, discrete time model of the rotational and translational dynamics of a hexacopter, to be used in the derivation of the process model of the filter. Second, we derive the measurement model to be used in the update step. Third, we describe the prediction and update step for the whole state of the filter with the exception of the attitude quaternion. In the end, we describe the singularity free prediction and update steps which take into account the attitude quaternion. A. Hexacopter Model with External Force and Torque c) Model Assumptions: In order to simplify the model derivation, we assume that: • The MAV structure is rigid, symmetric on the xB yB and yB zB planes, and the CoG (Center of Gravity) and body frame origin B coincide; • Aerodynamic interaction with the ground or other surfaces can be neglected and we only consider aerodynamic effects dominant at low speed;  •  No external torque acts around xB and yB axis.  In addition, we define the rotation matrix from frame B I to frame I as R(q)B , where q is the normalized quaternion representing the attitude of the vehicle. Finally, we simplify the equations by introducing U1 , U2 and U3 as the total torque produced by the propellers around, respectively, xb , yb and zb , and U4 as the total thrust produced by the propellers expressed in B frame. We compute Ui , i = 1 . . . 4 from the rotor speed ni , i = 1 . . . 6, using the allocation matrix, as defined in [21] for the AscTec Firefly hexacopter [22]:    U1 s U2   −c   = K U3  −1 1 U4 K = diag  1 s 0 c 1 −1 1 1  lkn  −s −1 c 0 1 −1 1 1 lkn  kn km    s n1 2  −c  .  . 1  .  n6 2 1  kn )  (1)  (2)  where l is the boom length, kn and km are rotor constants and c = cos(30 deg) and s = sin(30 deg). d) Translational Dynamics: We derive the linear acceleration with respect to I reference frame by taking into account the following forces: (a) gravity, (b) thrust, (c) aerodynamic effects, (d) external forces due to interaction with the vehicle. We obtain:     ! 0 0 ẍ 1 I  0  + F aero − 0 + 1 F ext (3) ÿ  = R(q) B m m U4 g z̈ where F ext are the external forces that act on the vehicle expressed in I reference frame, m is the mass of the vehicle, and F aero is defined as:   6 ẋ X aero F = kdrag |ni | ẏ  (4) i=1 0  e) Rotational Dynamics: We derive the angular acceleration ω̇ in B frame by taking into account the following torques: (a) total torque produced by propellers, (b) external torque around z axis, (c) inertial effects, (d) propeller’s gyroscopic effects. We obtain:     ! U1 0 −1  rotor U2  +  0  − ω × Jω − τ ω̇ = J (5) U3 τ ext  We assume that the change of external force and torque is purely driven by zero mean additive process noise, whose covariance is a tuning parameter of the filter. The external force and torque are updated according to  where τext is the external torque around the zB axis. J is the inertia tensor of the MAV with respect to B frame, defined as   Jxx 0 0 Jyy 0  J= 0 (6) 0 0 Jzz  ext F ext k+1 = F k (1 − Ts /τ̄ )  and τrotor is the torque caused by propeller’s gyroscopic effects defined according to [23] as   6 ωy X τrotor = Jr Ωr ωx  with Ωr = ni − 6ωz (7) i=1 0 where Jr is the propeller’s moment of inertia around its axis of rotation. f) Discretized Model: Given the sampling time Ts = 0.01s, we discretize the analytic models (3) and (5) using the forward Euler method, while the normalized attitude quaternion q k is integrated using the approach proposed in [16]: q k+1 = Ω(ω k )q k (8)  ext F ext k+1 = F k  (16)  ext τk+1 = τkext  or by assuming an exponential force decaying model ext τk+1 = τkext (1 − Ts /τ̄ )  (17)  where τ̄ is a constant set by the user and defines the convergence speed of the estimates. In order to define the state covariance and the process noise covariance, we introduce a new representation s̄k of the state sk , where we substitute the attitude quaternion q k with a 3 × 1 attitude error vector ek . More details about this substitution are explained in IV-D.   s̄k = pk v k ek ω k F ext (18) τkext k We can now introduce P k , the 16 × 16 covariance matrix associated to the state s̄k , and Q, the 16 × 16 time invariant process noise diagonal covariance matrix. h) Measurement Model: We define the measurement vector z k , the associated 12 × 12 measurement noise covariance matrix R and the linear measurement function z k = Hs̄k +v k , under the assumption that the measurements are subject to zero-mean additive noise.   em ωm vm z k = pm (19) k k k k  with  cos( 12 ||ω k ||Ts )I3×3 Ω(ω k ) = −ΨTk  Ψk cos( 12 ||ω k ||Ts )   (9)  and  1 (10) Ψk = sin ( ||ωk ||Ts )ωk /||ωk || 2 The discretized dynamic equations can then be written in compact form as: ext sk+1 = f (sk , F ext k , τk , nk )  (11)  with  sk = pk  vk  qk  ωk    (12)  As the last step we introduce the notation: ext sk+1 = fk (sk , F ext k , τk )  (13)  where the dependency of f (·) from nk is taken into account by making f (·) time-variant. B. Process and Measurement models g) Process Model: First, we augment the state vector of the hexacopter model (12) and the system dynamic equation (13) so that they take into account the external force and torque. We obtain: sk+1 = fk (sk ) + w̄k  sk = pk  vk  qk  ωk  F ext k  (14) τkext    (15)  z k = Hs̄k + v k   H = I12×12 012×4  (20)  2 1T3 σm,e   2 1T3 σm,ω ) (21)   2 R = diag( 1T3 σm,p  2 1T3 σm,v  As a remark, we observe that the measured attitude quaternion is converted in a three states parametrization ek for the measurement vector. In addition, the measurement update step of the filter is performed using the state vector s̄k . (IV-C.0.j). C. Position, Velocity, Angular Velocity, External Force and Torque Estimation Notation Declaration: From now on, we will use the following notation: + • ŝk−1 denotes the estimated state before the prediction step − • ŝk denotes the estimated state after the prediction step and before the update step + • ŝk denotes the estimated state after the update step The same applies for the state covariance matrix P . i) Prediction Step: The predicted state for all the states with the exception of the attitude is computed using the standard UKF prediction step, as explained in [24] and [25]. The matrix square root is computed using the Cholesy decomposition [24].  j) Kalman Filter Based Update Step: Because the measurement model corresponds to a linear function, we can use the standard KF update step for all the states in the vector state s̄k . First, compute the Kalman gain matrix as T − T −1 Kk = P − k H (HP k H + R)  t Reference Trajectory:  Desired trajectory  output of the Admittance Controller  Estimated External Forces Torques  (22)  Then, the updated state covariance is obtained from − T T P+ k = (I16×16 − K k H)P k (I16×16 − K k H) + K k RK k (23) Finally, the updated state is obtained from − − s̄+ k = s̄k + K k (z k − Hs̄k )  D. Quaternion Based Attitude Estimation Quaternions do not naturally fit in the Unscented Transformation (UT) since they are defined on a non linear manifold, while the UT is performed on a vector space. Interpreting a quaternion as a member of R4 produces a singular 4 × 4 covariance matrix and does not guarantee the unitary norm constraint, while considering quaternions as members of R3 - by exploiting the unitary norm constraint - always produces a singularity. For these reasons we estimate the MAV attitude by following the approach called USQUE - Unscented Quaternion Estimation - proposed by [16]. In this approach, the attitude estimate is based on the estimation of the error attitude quaternion - which is always assumed to be smaller than 180 degrees - through a three states parametrization obtained using the Modified Rodriguez Parameters (MRP). Modified Rodriguez Parameters Let q = [q Tv , qs ] be a quaternion, where q v is the vector part and qs is the scalar part. A corresponding (but singular) attitude representation p, with p ∈ R3 , can be obtained as p=f  qv a + qs  x(t)  (24)  (25)  where a is a parameter from 0 to 1 and f is a scale factor. We will choose f = 2(a + 1) and a to be a tunable parameter of the filter. The inverse representation is obtained as p −a ||p||2 + f f 2 + (1 − a2 )||p||2 qs = (26) f 2 + ||p||2 −1 q v =f (a + qs )p The implemented algorithm for attitude estimation is discussed in the following steps. Its prediction step follows the USQUE approach explained in [16]. The update step - where we fuse the attitude measurement at time k into the attitude error vector - assumes that the measurement for the filter corresponds to the difference between the measured attitude quaternion and the estimate of the attitude at time step k − 1. Because the initialization and prediction step are extensively covered in [16] and [26], we only report the implemented measurement update step.  Fig. 4: Schematic explanation of admittance control. Given a desired trajectory, the admittance controller generates a new reference trajectory according to the estimated external forces by simulating a second order spring-mass-damper dynamic system.  k) Update Step: •  Given an attitude measurement q m k , compute the rotam (27). tion error between q̂ + and q k−1 k −1  + m δq m k = q̂ k−1 ⊗ (q k ) • • • •  (27)  Transform the measured rotation error quaternion δq m k in the vector em k using MRP (25). ¯− Store em k in ŝk and compute the updated attitude error mean and covariance as in IV-C.0.j. ¯+ Retrieve ê+ k from ŝk and compute the updated error + attitude quaternion δq + k from êk using MRP (26). + Rotate the predicted attitude quaternion q̂ − k of δq k to obtain the current quaternion estimate of the attitude − + q̂ + k = q̂ k ⊗ δq k  (28)  V. ADMITTANCE CONTROLLER A. An Intuitive Explanation Admittance control is based on the idea that the trajectory which guarantees compliance with external force/torque is generated by simulating a spring-mass-damper dynamic system. As represented in Figure 4, the new trajectory is generated as if the MAV, with virtual mass mv , was connected to the desired trajectory via a spring with elastic constant K and via a damper with damping coefficient c. The deviation from the desired trajectory is caused by the estimated external force/torque, which excites the virtual mass. Compliance with external force/torque can be tuned by changing K. Increasing values of K simulate a stiffer spring, which in turn yields to better desired trajectory tracking. Conversely, K = 0 guarantees full compliance with the estimated external force.  mv (Λ̈d,i − Λ̈r,i ) + c(Λ̇d,i − Λ̇r,i ) + K(Λd,i − Λr,i ) = Fiext (29)  Jv (Λ̈d − Λ̈r ) + c(Λ̇d − Λ̇r ) + K(Λd − Λr ) = τzext  (30)  The index i denotes one of the axes xI , yI , zI , while Λd,i represents the desired trajectory on the selected axis and Λr,i the generated reference trajectory on the selected axis. The parameters mv , c and K can be set independently for every axis and represent, respectively, the virtual spring, the virtual damping and the virtual mass of the controller. Jv represents virtual inertia around the body z axis. In addition, the controller only takes into account the desired pose by setting Λ̈d = Λ̇d = 0, which is equivalent to assuming that the reference is only given in discrete steps. Additionally, in the output trajectory, we set Λ̈r = Λ̇r = 0 so that the controller only generates a reference for the pose of the MAV. C. Robustness to Noise and Offsets If no force acts on the vehicle and the desired trajectory is constant, noise and other factors not included in the model (such as propeller efficiency) may result in a non-zero force estimate, which in turn causes a drift in the reference pose Λr .Similarly, external factors such as constant wind or model-mismatches in the force and torque estimator may cause a constant offset in the estimated external disturbances. In order to avoid undesired drifts in the reference trajectory, the admittance controller has been integrated into a finite state machine (FSM), which monitors the magnitude of the force on each axis and decides whether to reject or take into account the estimated external force to compute a new trajectory reference [14]. Model mismatches and offset in the force/torque estimation can be taken into account by averaging the estimated external forces for a given time Tavg while the helicopter is hovering. The computed offset is subtracted from each force/torque estimate produced by the force/torque estimator. D. Landing Detection and Auto-Disengagement The controller must be engaged only once the vehicle is hovering, so that it does not take into account the ground reaction force as an external force resulting in an undesired reference trajectory as the output. The controller is also able to auto-disengage by detecting landing. Landing detection is achieved by checking the magnitude of the estimated external force and its angle θL with respect to the normal of the plane xI ,yI ; landing is detected when the magnitude of F ext is ext bigger than a tunable threshold F̄ and if θL is smaller than a tunable threshold θ̄L for a given time TLanding .  External Force [N] x axis  2 1 0 Estimate Measurement  -1 -2 0  5  10  15  20  Time - t [s] External Force [N] y axis  The Admittance Controller generates a new reference trajectory independently for every axis. The trajectory generation law has been derived by the discretization of the differential equation 29 for the generation of the trajectory on xI , yI , zI and 30 for the reference value of ψ.  2 0 Estimate Measurement  -2 -4 0  5  10  15  20  15  20  Time - t [s] External Force [N] z axis  B. Trajectory Generation Law  0 Estimate Measurement  -2 -4 -6 0  5  10  Time - t [s]  Fig. 5: Measured forces and estimated forces on xI , yI and zI axis. We performed the experiment with the hexacopter on hover and using the visual inertial navigation system as state estimator. TABLE I: RMS estimation error for force/torque estimator validation Disturbance Fxext Fyext Fzext  RMS error 0.4298 0.4941 0.5729  Unit N N N  VI. EVALUATION We now present four main experimental results. In the first two, we benchmark the performances of the force/torque estimator by comparing its estimates with the measurements of a force sensor and by showing its reaction speed in detecting a collision with a wall, respectively. In the third experiment, we test the admittance controller by interacting with the vehicle through a rope and finally, in the fourth experiment, we show the result of a payload carrying maneuver using two hexacopters. A. Force and torque estimator accuracy The first experiment was performed by connecting a Optoforce OMD-20-FE-200N force sensor at the bottom of the structure of the AscTech Firefly. An in-extensible nylon wire was attached to the sensor and interaction was performed by pulling the wire, while the MAV was maintained steady at about 1.6 m from the ground by the VI-odometry state estimator and MPC pose and attitude controller. The external forces due to the interaction measured and estimated on the xI and yI axis are represented in Figure 5. The RMS error between the measurements and the estimate is reported in Table I. B. Detecting Collision with a Wall In this experiment we use the force estimator to detect a collision with a wall and to send a ”safe” new reference to the position and attitude controller. We use this experiment to  MAV Position and Traj. Ref. [m]  0 -1 -2 Position of MAV Safety Controller Reference Desired Trajectory  -3 -4  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  Time - t [s] External Force [N] y axis  40 30  10 0 -10  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  Time - t [s]  35  1.2 0.8 0.4 0 -0.4 -0.8 -1.2 -1.6 -2  20 5 -10 -25 -40 -55 3.8  3.85  3.9  3.95  4  External Force [N] - y axis  MAV Position [m] - y axis  Fig. 6: Wall collision detection experimental results. The wall is placed at yI = −1.95 m. The impact generates an external force of 34.5 N and a safe trajectory reference is generated 0.84 m further than the impact point. The impact happens at about 1.2 m/s.  Fig. 8: Illustration of the human-hexacopter interaction. The interaction is performed through a string attached at the bottom of the MAV. It is possible to experiment with different values of virtual spring, mass and damping to understand how they affect the behavior of the slave agent in a collaborative transportation task. 0.5 Position of MAV Force  0 -0.5  Position y - [m]  20  -1 -1.5 -2  4.05  Time - t[s]  Fig. 7: Detail of the impact detection time computation. The vertical line on the left represents the impact instant t = 3.870 s , while the vertical line on the right the detection instant t = 3.887 s.  highlight the reaction speed of the force estimator, showing that it is able to react in less than 20 ms. The logic for the trajectory modification is simply based on checking if the estimated external force exceeds a given threshold. If yes, than a safe reference is generated, which is computed by translating the impact point by a vector proportional to the impact force magnitude - computed at the step after the impact - and direction. In Figure 6 we represent how the filter and the ”safety” controller react in case of impact with a wall. Since the wall corresponds to the plane yI = −1.95 m expressed in I reference frame, we only show the y component of (a) desired trajectory, (b) trajectory generated by safety controller, (c) pose of the MAV, estimated using a motion capture system [17], and (d) estimated external force.  C. Drone on a Leash To test the capability of admittance controller we present a real-time interaction. A human operator can interact with the MAV via a string attached at the bottom of the hexacopter. The results are represented in Figure 8.  -2.5 -3 -1.5  -1  -0.5  0  0.5  1  1.5  Position x - [m]  Fig. 9: Executed trajectory by the slave agent. The estimated external forces acting on the slave agent is depicted by the black arrows.  D. Cooperative payload transportation Finally we present the cooperative transportation of a bulky object. The payload is a 1.2 m carton tube weighing 0, 37 kg. The helicopters are two identical AscTec Firefly systems and the state estimator used is the visual-intertial navigation system (VI sensor). The master helicopter is controlled by a human operator, while the trajectory for the slave vehicle is generated by the admittance controller. Both the helicopters are attached at the extremities of the payload via a nylon wire, which cancels any torque. The admittance controller is used to generate a compliant trajectory on the xI and yI axis, while tracking a given altitude reference on zI . We achieved this by setting the virtual spring value on x and y axis to be K = 0 N/m, while on the z a stiff virtual spring of value K = 10 N/m has been used. The setup of the experiment is represented in Figure 1. The reference trajectory for the slave and its position are represented in Figure 9, while the reference trajectory and the estimated external forces for every axis are shown in Figure 10. Finally, the estimated external torque as well as  x-force [N] x-position [m]  2 0 -2 x-force x-reference x-position  -4 -6 0  5  10  15  20  25  15  20  25  time [s]  y-force [N] y-position [m]  6 y-force y-reference y-position  4 2 0 -2 -4 0  5  10  time [s]  z-force [N] z-position [m]  1 0 -1  z-force z-reference z-position  -2 -3 0  5  10  15  20  25  time [s]  Fig. 10: Estimated external force, admittance controller reference trajectory and estimated position of the slave agent during the collaborative transportation. External Torque Around z Axis - [Nm] Yaw Angle - [rad]  0.3 Reference Trajectory for Yaw angle External Torque Estimated Yaw Angle  0.2 0.1 0 -0.1 -0.2 -0.3 -0.4 -0.5 -0.6 -0.7 0  5  10  15  20  Time - t [s]  Fig. 11: Estimated external torque around z axis, reference trajectory for yaw attitude angle, and estimated yaw attitude angle (VI-sensor). The peak in torque estimation at t = 22 s corresponds to the accidental collision of one of the propellers of the MAV with the payload.  the yaw angle are displayed in Figure 11. VII. CONCLUSION In this work we showed that collaborative transportation of bulky payload can be achieved without relying on a communication network between the involved agents. We achieved this by making use of an admittance controller in conjunction with a force estimator based on the Unscented Kalman Filter. The force estimates are obtained using the state information provided by a visual inertial navigation system. We include demonstration of the filter performance by detecting wall collision and real time interaction with a human. R EFERENCES [1] 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.io.tudelft.nl/onderzoek/ delft-design-labs/applied-labs/ambulance-drone/ [2] “Zipline, the future of healthcare is out for delivery, website,” http: //flyzipline.com, 2016.  [3] M. Nieuwenhuisen, D. Droeschel, M. Beul, and S. Behnke, “Autonomous MAV Navigation in Complex GNSS-denied 3D Environments,” IEEE International Symposium on Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics (SSRR), no. October, pp. 1241–1250, 2015. [4] F. A. Architecture, “Architecture Installation,” no. August, 2014. [5] I. Maza, K. Kondak, M. Bernard, and A. Ollero, “Multi-UAV cooperation and control for load transportation and deployment,” Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems: Theory and Applications, vol. 57, no. 1-4, pp. 417–449, 2010. [6] N. Michael, J. Fink, and V. Kumar, “Cooperative manipulation and transportation with aerial robots,” Autonomous Robots, no. September 2010, pp. 1–14, 2010. [7] D. Mellinger, M. Shomin, N. Michael, and V. Kumar, “Cooperative Grasping and Transport using Multiple QuadrotorsmellingerDARS10.pdf,” pp. 1–14, 2015. [8] H. F. McCreery and M. D. Breed, “Cooperative transport in ants: A review of proximate mechanisms,” Insectes Sociaux, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 99–110, 2014. [9] H. N. Nguyen, S. Park, and D. Lee, “Aerial tool operation system using quadrotors as Rotating Thrust Generators,” IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, vol. 2015-Decem, pp. 1285–1291, 2015. [10] P. J. S. D. Mittal, M., “Nonlinear adaptive control of a twin lift helicopter system,” IEEE Control Systems Magazine 11(3), pp. 39– 45, 1991. [11] R. A. Reynolds, H.K., “H control of a twin lift helicopter system,” Proceedings of the 31st IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pp. 2442–2447, 1992. [12] V. Parra-Vega, A. Sanchez, C. Izaguirre, O. Garcia, and F. RuizSanchez, “Toward aerial grasping and manipulation with multiple UAVs,” Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems: Theory and Applications, vol. 70, no. 1-4, pp. 575–593, 2013. [13] L. Villani and J. D. Schutter, Springer Handbook of Robotics, B. Siciliano and O. Khatib, E. B. H. Springer-Verlag, Ed., 2008. [14] F. Augugliaro and R. D’Andrea, “Admittance control for physical human-quadrocopter interaction,” Control Conference (ECC), 2013 . . . , pp. 1805–1810, 2013. [15] C. D. Mckinnon and A. P. Schoellig, “Unscented External Force Estimation for Quadrotors and Experiments,” arXiv, 2016. [16] J. Crassidis and F. L. Markley, “Unscented Filtering for Spacecraft Attitude Estimation,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 536–542, 2003. [17] “Vicon website,” http://www.vicon.com, 2016. [18] J. Nikolic, J., R. M. Burri, P. Gohl, S. Leutenegger, P. Furgale, and R. Siegwart, “A Synchronized Visual-Inertial Sensor System with {FPGA} Pre-Processing for Accurate Real-Time {SLAM},” {IEEE} Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2014. [19] M. Kamel, T. Stastny, K. Alexis, and R. Siegwart, “Model predictive control for trajectory tracking of unmanned aerial vehicles using robot operating system,” in Robot Operating System (ROS) The Complete Reference, A. Koubaa, Ed. Springer, (to appear). [20] M. Kamel, M. Burri, and R. Siegwart, “Linear vs Nonlinear MPC for Trajectory Tracking Applied to Rotary Wing Micro Aerial Vehicles,” ArXiv e-prints, Nov. 2016. [21] M. W. Achtelik, S. Lynen, M. Chli, and R. Siegwart, “Inversion based direct position control and trajectory following for micro aerial vehicles,” IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 2933–2939, 2013. [22] “Ascending technologies website,” http://www.asctec.de, 2016. [23] S. Bouabdallah, “Design and Control of Quadrotors With Application To Autonomous Flying,” École Polytechnique Fédérale De Lausanne, À La Faculté Des Sciences Et Techniques De L’Ingénieur, vol. 3727, no. 3727, p. 61, 2007. [24] D. Simon, Optimal State Estimation, 2006, vol. 2. [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19274326 [25] S. J. Julier and J. K. Uhlmann, “A General Method for Approximating Nonlinear Transformations of Probability Distributions,” pp. 1–27, 1996. [26] F. L. Markley, Y. Cheng, J. L. Crassidis, and Y. Oshman, “Quaternion Averaging,” NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, pp. 1–10, 2007.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
