Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_5923

Abstract:
Linearizable Iterators for Concurrent Sets Archita Agarwal  Zhiyu Liu  Eli Rosenthal  Vikram Saraph  March 2, 2018  arXiv:1705.08885v3 [cs.DS] 1 Mar 2018  Abstract This paper proposes a general framework for adding linearizable iterators to a class of data structures that implement set operations. We introduce a condition on set operations, called local consistency, which informally states that set operations never make elements unreachable to a sequential iterator’s traversal. We show that sets with locally consistent operations can be augmented with a linearizable iterator via the framework. Our technique is broadly applicable to a variety of data structures, including hash tables and binary search trees. We apply the technique to sets taken from existing literature, prove their operations are locally consistent, and demonstrate that iterators do not significantly affect the performance of concurrent set operations.  1  Introduction  The increasing prevalence of distributed and parallel computer architectures has motivated the development of a large selection of concurrent data structures. It is desirable for these data structures to come equipped with lock-free operations, in order to guarantee system-wide progress and a certain amount of resilience to failure. Furthermore, linearizability [7] is often required to ensure consistency among the data structure’s operations, so that any execution appears to take place one operation at a time. However, designing efficient data structures that are lock-free and linearizable can be challenging, requiring techniques highly specific to the data structures in question. In many application domains, one desires functionality that can retrieve information dependent on the global view of a data structure. For example, one may wish to calculate the size of a data structure at a moment in time, or to apply a filter to all its elements. In a single-threaded setting, one can easily accomplish these tasks through iteration: a common API that provides sequential access to collect all elements of a data structure. An Iterate operation returns this sequence of elements, called a snapshot. In a multithreaded setting, an iterator is linearizable if the operation appears to other threads to occur instantaneously. In other words, a linearizable iterator is required to return a snapshot containing elements that could have all been simultaneously in the set. Harris’s lock-free linked list [4] is a widely used set implementation supporting linearizable Insert, Delete, and Contains operations (collectively called set operations). Petrank and Timnat [13] designed a linearizable iteration scheme for Harris’s list, capable of supporting multiple concurrent lock-free iterators. In their implementation, iterators work together to build a snapshot via a shared snap-collector object, with concurrent set operations reporting their modifications. However, their work relies on specific aspects of the linked list, and applies only to other data structures sharing those particular aspects. We propose a more general solution that applies to a broad class of data structures.  1.1  Contributions  In order for an iterator to be linearizable, its snapshot must satisfy two properties: it should (1) be consistent with concurrent updates to the set and (2) contain all elements not modified by concurrent updates. We call property (2) global consistency. Intuitively, property (1) ensures that modified nodes are accounted for correctly, while property (2) ensures that unmodified nodes are accounted for correctly. Petrank and Timnat’s snap-collector provides an iterator for a linked list implementation, whose snapshot is consistent  1  with concurrent updates (Property 1). Furthermore, their linked list trivially satisfies global consistency due to its linear structure. Hence their approach produces a linearizable iterator for the linked list. Petrank and Timnat were the first to develop a lock-free linearizable iterator for the linked list, though their approach cannot be naively applied to other concurrent sets. We will see that their snap-collector framework needs substantial technical changes to apply generically to sets not implemented by linked lists, so that the framework yields an iterator satisfying property (1). However, global consistency is generally not satisfied by arbitrary set implementations; for example, in a search tree, rotations may suddenly make existing elements unreachable to an active iterator. So addressing global consistency requires a completely novel approach. The main contribution of this paper is a condition called local consistency, which a condition on set’s operations that ensures global consistency. Specifically, local consistency states that an operation may never make unmodified elements unreachable to an in-progress iterator. We prove that local consistency of each set operation’s atomic steps implies global consistency of any iterator’s snapshot. Therefore a set implementation with locally consistent set operations can be augmented with a linearizable iterator. We demonstrate the simplicity of our approach by verifying local consistency for a lock-free relaxedbalance binary search by Brown et al. [3]. We also apply the iterator framework to two state-of-the-art set implementations: a lock-free resizable hash table by Liu et al. [9], and a lock-free unbalanced search tree by Natarajan and Mittal [11]. We evaluate the framework performance, noting an overhead of only 20 − 30%, which is comparable to the linked list iterator.  1.2  Related work  Designing efficient iterators for non-blocking, linearizable concurrent data structures is a challenging research problem with sparse treatment in the literature. Petrank and Timnat [13] proposed a wait-free iterator for non-blocking linked lists [4, 14] and lock-free skip lists [6]. Nikolakopoulos et al. [12] considered different consistency specifications of iterators for concurrent data structures. In particular, they presented both obstruction-free [5] and wait-free implementations of iterators for the classic lock-free concurrent queue by Michael and Scott [10]. Range queries and partial traversals are generalizations of iterations that retrieve a consistent view of one part of a data structure. Brown and Avni [2] presented a non-blocking k-ary search tree with range queries. The range queries are only obstruction-free, as they only guarantee termination in the absence of concurrent updates. Avni et al. [1] introduced Leap-List, a concurrent data structure designed to provide range queries. Since the operations are STM-based, only obstruction freedom is guaranteed. Kallimanis and Kanellou [8] proposed Dense, a wait-free concurrent graph with partial traversals. Dense provides a wait-free dynamic traversal operation that can traverse over nodes of the graph and return a consistent view of visited edges.  2  Iterator framework  We first describe the snap-collector object to establish common terminology. We then give a template defining how the set’s operations are modified to support iteration. Then we outline how each operation is linearized. Snap-collector. Due to space limitations, we discuss only the more salient aspects of Petrank and Timnat’s snap-collector object [13]. The snap-collector allows iterators to collectively build a shared snapshot of the set, and enables each set operation to notify iterators about concurrent changes that were missed. The snap-collector is set to active when at least one iteration is taking place, otherwise it is deactivated. The snap-collector maintains two linked lists: a shared snapshot-list for iterators and individual reportlists for set operations1 . Iterators traverse the data structure according to some ordering provided by the user (depth first traversal of binary trees), and build a temporary snapshot by appending collected nodes to the snapshot-list via compare-and-swap (CAS) operations. Set operations add reports to their respective report-lists via CAS, where a report contains the modified node’s address and a flag indicating whether it was inserted or deleted. Before reporting, a set operation re-reads the snap-collector’s address to check if it is active. If it is, the operation reports; otherwise it moves on without reporting anything. Reported nodes are 1 We  assume a bounded number of updaters in order to provide each its report-list.  2  merged with those in the snapshot-list to produce a final snapshot: a node is in the snapshot exactly when (1) it is in the snapshot-list and an insert report, and (2) it is not in a delete report. Multiple concurrent iterators synchronize by using the same snap-collector and thus building the same snapshot. Data structure assumptions. Before applying the snap-collector to create a linearizable set iterator, we must state some basic assumptions to make the original construction generic. First, we distinguish between nodes and keys: we assume that the elements in the set, called keys, are each contained in a level of indirection called a node. If keys are not contained in nodes (as in a hash set), we wrap them in nodes. It is also assumed that memory allocated to nodes is not reclaimed, so that nodes are unique. These two assumption are to avoid ABA issues for keys that are inserted and deleted several times. Nodes are then endowed with a boolean mark field that indicates logical deletion. We assume there is predefined single-threaded procedure, called a sequential iterator, for traversing nodes in the set. The user must provide the sequential iterator since it may be highly specific to the underlying data structure, though there is typically a natural one. For example, a binary search tree may use depth-first traversal, or a linked list may use a linear traversal. Iterators follow this procedure to traverse the set. New set operations. Here we give our template for creating new set operations that report their updates to a snap-collector. It generalizes that of [13], though we make non-trivial modifications to make it general. The set’s original insert and delete operations are referred to as DS-Insert and DS-Delete. The original DS-Insert is used as is, but DS-Delete operation is altered: instead of deleting a specified key, DSDelete deletes a specified node. The Seek(k) operation is defined as the subroutine of the original set operations that searches for and returns the node containing key k, if one exists. Together, DS-Insert, DS-Delete, and Seek are used to implement new set operations compatible with a snap-collector iterator.  3  Algorithm 1 Framework operations 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13: 14: 15: 16: 17: 18: 19: 20: 21: 22:  procedure Insert(k) n ← Seek(k); if n exists, i.e., (k is found) then if n is marked then Read snap-collector sc; Report deletion of n; DS-Delete(n); Insert(k); else Try-Report(n); return False; end if else b ← DS-Insert(k); if b = 1 then Try-Report(n); return True; else Insert(k); end if end if end procedure  31: 32: 33: 34: 35: 36: 37: 38: 39: 40: 41: 42: 43: 44: 45: 46: 47: 48: 49: 50: 51: 52: 53: 54: 55: 56: 57:  procedure Try-Report(n) Read snap-collector sc; if n is marked then Report deletion of n; else Report insertion of n; 29: end if 30: end procedure 23: 24: 25: 26: 27: 28:  58: 59: 60: 61: 62: 63: 64:  procedure Delete(k) n ← Seek(k); if n exists then b ← Mark(n); if b = 0 then Read snap-collector sc; Report deletion of n; DS-Delete(n); Delete(k); else Read snap-collector sc; Report deletion of n; DS-Delete(n); return True; end if else return False; end if end procedure procedure Contains(k) n ← Seek(k); if n exists then if n is marked then Read snap-collector sc; Report deletion of n; return False else Try-Report(n); return True; end if else return False; end if end procedure  Insert: Start with Seek(k). If k not found, call DS-Insert(k). If unsuccessful, restart. Otherwise report an insert and return True. If node with k exists, check its mark. If unmarked, report an insert return False. Otherwise report a delete, remove node via DS-Delete, and restart. Delete: Start with Seek(k). If no node N containing k found, return False. Otherwise try marking N with a CAS. If CAS succeeds, report a delete, remove N via DS-Delete, and return True. If CAS fails, report a delete, call DS-Delete(N ), and restart. Contains: Start with Seek(k). If no node N contains k found, return False. Otherwise if N is marked, report a delete and return False. Otherwise report an insert and return True. Iterate: Read the snap-collector pointer. If not yet created, or deactivated, create/activate a new snapcollector. Traverse nodes according to sequential iteration order. Upon traversing each unmarked node, check if snap-collector is still active. If active, append node to snapshot-list via CAS. If CAS fails, retry until success or until snap-collector deactivation. After traversal finishes, deactivate snap-collector, and block snapshot-list and report-lists by appending sentinels to them. Sort and de-duplicate nodes in snapshot-list, and merge with reports to produce final snapshot.  4  2.1  Linearizability  We present a summary of each operation’s possible linearization points (LPs). The arguments are similar in spirit to Petrank and Timnat’s approach [13], though they require substantial changes to be made generic. Set operations below are either successful (returns True) or unsuccessful (returns False). Iterate. Linearized at its snap-collector’s deactivation. Recall that an iterator deactivates its snapcollector after it finishes iteration over the set. Successful insert. Typically linearizes at the time it reports its inserted node. However, dependencies between Insert and other operations can force Insert to linearize at its reports. For example, if a concurrent successful Contains(k) finishes before Insert(k) reports, then Insert must linearize before Contains returns. Since Contains reports an insert, we linearize Insert at the first insert report of k. There are two cases in which Insert(k) linearizes before any reporting, due to k becoming visible to other operations. In the first case, a concurrent Iterate collects k before reporting happens. So we consider the first collect of k as another possible LP. In the second case, a successful Delete(k) may occur between physical insertion of k and its reporting. Then Insert linearizes immediately before the LP of Delete. So a successful Insert(k) linearizes at either (i) the first insert report of k, (ii) the first collect of k, or (iii) the LP of a (concurrent) successful delete of k (whichever of (i), (ii), (iii) occurs first). Unsuccessful insert. It reports insertion of k for the same reason Contains(k) reports k, i.e., to avoid an unsuccessful insert linearizing before a successful insert. There are two possible LPs. If there is a concurrent successful Insert(k), the unsuccessful Insert(k) linearizes immediately after the LP of successful Insert(k). Otherwise, k exists, and there is no concurrent successful Insert(k), but a Delete(k) trying to delete it. We linearize insert when it is sure that Delete(k) has not already removed the node N containing k, which is when Insert sees that N is unmarked. Successful delete. Typically linearizes at the first delete report of k. However, this may not always suffice: a concurrent iterator can see the node marked, ignore it, and finish before any delete report is generated. Therefore, if all concurrent iterators see N with key k has been marked, then delete is linearized at the time it marks N . Otherwise, it is linearized at the first delete report. Unsuccessful delete. Typically linearizes when its Seek(k) indicates that k was not found. However, a concurrent successful Insert(k) might return before Seek returns, forcing Delete(k) to linearize before Insert returns. So the LP of unsuccessful Delete(k) is (i) immediately before the LP of concurrent successful Insert(k), or (ii) when k is not found (whichever occurs first). Successful contains. A successful Contains(k) behaves similarly to unsuccessful Insert(k), so the possible LPs of Contains(k) are the same as those of an unsuccessful Insert(k). Unsuccessful contains. There are two cases. Either the operations is unable to find k, or it sees that node N containing k is marked, or logically absent. In the first case, the LPs are the same as an unsuccessful Delete(k). In the second case, if Contains(k) overlaps with the LP of a successful Delete(k), then Contains(k) linearizes immediately after. Otherwise, Contains(k) is linearized at the start of its execution. The LP of Delete(k) must be before the Contains operation, because Contains(k) sees that N is marked. The argument above is enough to ensure that iteration is consistent with concurrent set operations. However in general, this approach overlooks the possibility of an iterator failing to collect nodes not modified during its execution. That is, a linearizable iterator must also be globally consistent. The linked list iterator trivially satisfies global consistency, though this property does not necessarily hold for more complex data structures. Moreover, global consistency may be difficult to verify, so in the next section we introduce a property that is easier to work with, called local consistency.  3  Local and global consistency  We describe local consistency and its role in supporting linearizable set iterators. As before, we are given a sequential iterator for a set. One would hope that the sequential iterator functions correctly in multithreaded settings, though this often fails to be true. For instance, the sequential iterator that traverses the internal self-balancing tree in Figure 1a may see an inconsistent snapshot. In particular, suppose it runs a depth-first traversal of the tree, starting at the root node (node 6 in Figure 1a). The iterator then pauses, and another thread performs a rotation. If the iterator then continues in isolation, it fails to collect nodes L = {1, 2, 3, 4}  5  50  6 1  In view  1  Collected  1  Last collected  1  Removed  1  Internal  1  4 2 1  7 5  4  rotate  3  3  iterator  20  6  2 1  50  5  10  30  20  28  50  10  40  40 35  (a) Example rotation that is not locally consistent.  20  30  40  7  Marked New link  10  28  35  48  48  (b) A rotation in a chromatic tree.  50 iterator 30  28  20 10  40 35  50 iterator 30  48  20  30  28  (c) V (N0 , T ), the view of an iterator beginning its traversal.  iterator  20  30  RB2  (subgraph replaced)  20  30  40  40 35  iterator  40 10  48  (d) V (28, T ), the iterator’s view after collecting nodes 10 and 28.  28  35  48  (e) A rotation happens, resulting in tree T 0 . The iterator’s view V (28, T 0 ) remains unchanged.  Figure 1: Examples of views. in the left half of the tree, since it believes 6 is still the root. There is no way to linearize this iterator’s execution since L must be included in its snapshot. It is therefore essential for a linearizable iterator to collect unmodified nodes in the set, where modified nodes are those that are either inserted or deleted during the iterator’s execution. We state this property as a definition. Definition 3.1 (global consistency). Consider an iterator over a set. Then the iterator’s snapshot is globally consistent if it contains all nodes in the set not modified by concurrent operations. Global consistency is easy to verify for the linked list iterator, though it is a more difficult property to analyze for more complex data structures. So we also introduce a property called local consistency, a constraint on the atomic steps of set operations, which informally states that atomic steps never make unvisited nodes unreachable to an iterator. Local consistency does not restrict basic data structure geometry, though it does constrain how set operations can move nodes around within the data structure. Verifying local consistency is more straightforward since it only requires one to work with the set operation’s atomic steps. But more importantly, we show that local consistency of each atomic step implies global consistency of the iterator’s snapshot.  3.1  Views and local consistency  Consider a fixed set implementation (binary search tree, hash table, linked list), and let O denote the collection of all such data structures. Each data structure T ∈ O is comprised of nodes storing keys. When speaking in general terms, “node” refers to only those that contain actual keys, as opposed to e.g. internal nodes that are only used for traversal. Let <T denote the order on the node set of T in which nodes are visited by a sequential iterator. This does not necessarily coincide with the set’s ordering; e.g. a hash set may not even have an ordering. As a running example for this section, we use the chromatic tree of Brown et al. [3], which is a relaxedbalance variant of a red-black tree that implements non-blocking linearizable set operations. At a high level, each update to the chromatic tree is made in a copy-on-write manner: a connected subgraph is atomically replaced with a newly-created connected subgraph reflecting the update to the tree. Keys are only stored in the leaf nodes; data contained in internal nodes are for traversal. Note it is assumed that internal nodes in a removed subgraph persist in memory long enough for concurrent iterators located in the subgraph to finish their traversal.2 Figure 1b illustrates a rebalancing step (which Brown et al. call RB2), after which a concurrent iterator may finish its traversal. Consider an iterator traversing through data structure T . Then its view is defined as follows. 2 This  holds true in garbage collected languages.  6  Definition 3.2 (view). Let N be a node in T . Then the view of T relative to N is defined to be the set of nodes V (N, T ) = {M : M >T N, M not marked}. That is, if node N is most recently visited by the iterator, then V (N, T ) is the remaining set of nodes that the iterator would traverse were it to run solo. We take V (N0 , T ) as notation for the set of all nodes in T . See Figure 1 for examples of an iterator’s view in a chromatic tree. We reason about set operations by decomposing them into their atomic steps which we also call mutators; these terms are used interchangeably. Definition 3.3 (mutator). A mutator is an atomic step, modeled as a function m : O → O that maps each data structure T to a modified data structure m(T ). Marking, physical insertion, and physical removal of a node via CAS are examples of mutators. The RB2 operation in Figure 1b is an atomic step which we denote by mutator mRB2 . We now define local consistency, which restricts how mutators can change an iterator’s view. Definition 3.4 (local consistency). Let m model an atomic step in a set operation op, and suppose op modifies set of nodes R. Then m is called locally consistent if for any iterator, any data structure T ∈ O and any N ∈ T , the following holds (where 4 is the symmetric set difference): V (N, T ) 4 V (N, m(T )) ⊆ R An operation composed from locally consistent atomic steps is also called locally consistent. In the above definition, R is called the change set of m, and may be written as Rm to denote its association with m. If m is an atomic step of inserting node N , then Rm = {N }, or if it is a step in deleting M , then Rm = {M }. The mRB2 mutator never changes an iterator’s view, as in Figure 1b, so V (N, T ) 4 V (N, mRB2 (T )) is always empty. So mRB2 is locally consistent. Figure 2 illustrates the atomic steps of insert and delete operations that modify the chromatic tree. Let mi denote the mutator representing Insert’s atomic step. In Figure 2a, an Insert(38) runs concurrently with an iterator. The iterator will either collect or miss node 38, depending on whether the node is added before the iterator reaches it. Local consistency allows for the uncertainty of 38 being in the iterator’s view, but requires nodes 10 and 40 to remain in the view if they were not previously collected. This is true for each interleaving of an iterator with Insert, so V (N, T )4V (N, mi (T )) ⊆ {38}. So mi is local. In Figure 2b, Delete(10) runs concurrently with an iterator. There are two atomic steps, marking and physical removal of 10, which both have a change set of {10}. The marking mutator mµ removes 10 from the iterator’s view, since marked nodes are skipped by iterators. The iterator will either collect or miss 10, depending on whether it is marked before being collected. As with insertion, local consistency permits this uncertainty, so mµ is locally consistent. The removal mutator md does not logically delete any nodes since 10 is already marked, so similar reasoning to RB2 shows that md never changes an iterator’s view. So md is also locally consistent. For each mutator m, the change set Rm is added to an aggregate set R over the span of an iterator’s execution. As R grows with more concurrent mutators, the iterator may miss more nodes. However, local consistency of each m implies global consistency, or that iterators never miss unmodified nodes in the set. This is stated as a theorem. Theorem 1. Let T be a set data structure with a given sequential iterator, and locally consistent set operations. Then any iteration over T , possibly concurrent with other operations, produces a globally consistent snapshot. We first provide some intuition, followed by a proof. Consider a data structure T whose set operations’ atomic steps are locally consistent. Take any execution of an iterator over T , possibly concurrent with other operations, and decompose the entire execution into atomic steps. Then at each step, local consistency guarantees that no unmodified node ever leaves the iterator’s view, unless it has already been collected by the iterator. Inducting over the execution’s atomic steps shows that the same holds true at the end of the iterator’s execution, which implies that the iterator must have collected every unmodified node, or global consistency.  7  iterator 50  iterator  50  iterator 50  38  38  40  10 40  (i)  40 30  insert 38  delete 10  50 40  39  iterator  40  39  50  (i)  30 10  10  30  30  30  10  (ii)  30  30 10  50  (ii)  iterator 38  40  30  39  40  39 38  39  38  10  iterator 40  40  40  (a) Executions (i) and (ii) of Insert(38).  (b) Executions (i) and (ii) of Delete(10).  Figure 2: Insert and Delete operations, each in the presence of an iterator. To prove the converse, suppose one of the set operation’s atomic steps m is not local. Then there is an execution where m shifts an unmodified node N outside of a concurrent iterator’s view. Extending this execution by letting the iterator run solo, the iterator returns a snapshot that is globally inconsistent since it does not contain N . Proof. Let mi be locally consistent mutators with induced change sets Ri , running concurrently with an iterator. The iterator’s execution occurs over a sequence of time steps t1 , . . . tn , as specified by the mutators m1 , . . . mn . Let t0 denote the starting time of the iterator’s execution, and define T0 = T . Then we inductively define Ti+1 = mi+1 (Ti ), so that Ti is the data structure after the first i mutators are applied to T . Let U = V (N0 , T ), the set of all nodes initially contained in the data structure. Since each mutator represents an atomic operation, the iterator runs in isolation between each ti and ti+1 . Let Ni denote the node most recently visited in Ti up to time ti , and let Si be the set of all nodes collected by the iterator up to time ti . Then the following holds: Si+1 = Si ∪ (V (Ni , Ti ) \ V (Ni+1 , Ti )) This is because the set of nodes that the iterator collects between times ti and ti+1 is precisely V (Ni , Ti ) \ V (Ni+1 , Ti ). Let Xi denote the set of unmodified nodes up to time ti . As time progresses, an increasing S number of nodes in the data structure are modified by mutators, so Xi shrinks over time. Defining Ri = j≤i Rj to be the aggregate of all modified nodes up to time ti , we see that Xi = U \ Ri . The theorem we wish to prove may be stated as follows: Xn ⊆ Sn Since Xn is the set of nodes not modified by a mutator at the end of the iterator’s execution, each node in Xn should also be in Sn , which is the set of all nodes the iterator collects over its execution. We prove this by inducting on ti . For any ti , we want to prove the following: Xi ⊆ Si ∪ V (Ni , Ti ) That is, at any given time, any unmodified node has already been collected by the iterator, or will be collected at a future time. To begin the proof, we start with the base case i = 0, which states that X0 ⊆ S0 ∪V (N0 , T0 ). But S0 = ∅ since no nodes have been collected at the start of the execution, and V (N0 , T0 ) = U . Also, by definition, X0 = U \ R0 . The containment U \ R0 ⊆ U clearly holds, so the base case X0 ⊆ S0 ∪ V (N0 , T0 ) is true. Next, inductively assuming that Xi ⊆ Si ∪ V (Ni , Ti ) holds, we want to show that the same is true for i + 1. For brevity, we write Yi = Si ∪ V (Ni , Ti ), so that Xi ⊆ Yi . The set Yi contains nodes the iterator collects if it runs concurrent with mutators up to time ti , then runs in isolation from ti onwards. We know that Xi \ Xi+1 = Ri+1 , so if we show that Yi \ Yi+1 ⊆ Ri+1 , then we can conclude that Xi+1 ⊆ Yi+1 .  8  Intuitively, we want to show that more nodes are removed from Xi (to obtain Xi+1 ) than are removed from Yi (to obtain Yi+1 ). Calculating Yi \ Yi+1 , we have: Yi \ Yi+1 = (Si ∪ V (Ni , Ti )) \ (Si+1 ∪ V (Ni+1 , Ti+1 )) ⊆ (Si ∪ V (Ni , Ti )) \ (Si ∪ V (Ni , Ti ) \ V (Ni+1 , Ti ) ∪ V (Ni+1 , Ti+1 )) ⊆ V (Ni+1 , Ti ) \ V (Ni+1 , Ti+1 ) ⊆ V (Ni+1 , Ti )4V (Ni+1 , mi+1 (Ti )) We get Yi \ Yi+1 ⊆ V (Ni+1 , Ti )4V (Ni+1 , mi (Ti )). Finally, invoking local consistency of mi+1 , we arrive at Yi \ Yi+1 ⊆ Ri+1 . Therefore Xi+1 ⊆ Yi+1 = V (Ni+1 , Ti+1 ). So by induction, we have Xn ⊆ Sn ∪ V (Nn , Tn ), and since V (Nn , Tn ) = ∅, we have Xn ⊆ Sn . This completes the proof of the theorem. It follows that local consistency at each atomic step implies global consistency of the entire iteration. Here we have proved locally consistency of a few atomic steps of the chromatic tree; the remaining steps are shown to be locally consistent using similar arguments. The other atomic steps, along with local consistency proofs for the two other sets (unbalanced binary search trees and hash sets) can be found in the next section. Then we evaluate the framework applied to the unbalanced binary search tree and the hash set.  4  Applying the Framework  We apply our framework to data structures taken from the literature, and prove their set operations to be locally consistent  4.1  Lock-Free Binary Search Tree  We consider the lock-free binary search tree of Natarajan and Mittal [11]. In this tree, keys are stored in leaf nodes, and each internal node maintains left and right fields of an internal node, which are edges pointing to the respective child nodes. Each edge can be marked as flagged or tagged. A flagged edge signifies that both the nodes incident to the edge are to be removed from the tree, and a tagged edge indicates that only the parent node will be removed. Such nodes are considered logically deleted. Once an edge is flagged or tagged, it is made immutable, so it cannot point to another node. 4.1.1  Operations  Each set operation starts with a read-only DS-Seek(key) subroutine 3 that uses a binary search to attempt findind a leaf with key (see Algorithm 1 in [11]). The search terminates at a leaf node, regardless of whether that leaf contains the correct key. DS-Seek returns a seekRecord which consists of this leaf node, the parent of the leaf, the parent’s nearest ancestor that is not tagged, called the ancestor, and the ancestor’s child in the path, called the successor. See Figure 3 for an example of nodes in a seekRecord. Set operations sometimes call a Cleanup subroutine to help physically remove nodes that have been logically but not physically deleted (see Algorithm 4 in [11]). The Cleanup function takes as arguments a key and the seekRecord returned by DS-Seek(key) called by operation earlier. As shown in Figure 3, Cleanup attempts to physically remove the leaf node in seekRecord (or the sibling of leaf, depending on which of them is marked) and all nodes in the path between successor and parent. This is accomplished by applying a CAS to swing an edge (left or right) of ancestor to point from successor to leaf ’s sibling (or leaf ), since each nodes along the path are tagged and hence logically deleted. Cleanup returns true if the CAS succeeds and false otherwise. The Contains(key) operation calls DS-Seek(key), retrieves leaf from the returned seekRecord, and compares the key in leaf to key.If they match, the operation returns true, otherwise it returns false. The Insert(key) operation begins with DS-Seek(key), and returns false immediately if key matches the key of leaf returned by the DS-Seek, as a node of the same key is already present in the tree. Otherwise, as shown in Figure 3, it makes a single CAS to attempt to insert a new internal node as a child of parent, with 3 To  resolve terminology conflicts, we use DS-Seek to refer to the Seek function in the original algorithm.  9  Figure 3: A single CAS that physically removes all shaded nodes. a new leaf node of key and leaf as its two children (by linking them before the CAS). If the CAS fails, there must be a conflicting Delete operation there, and therefore the Insert operation will call the Cleanup function if necessary to help physically remove nodes and then retry from the beginning. The Delete(key) operation begins with DS-Seek(key), (Algorithm 3 in [11]) and returns false if its key does not match the key of leaf returned by its DS-Seek(key) subroutine. This is because a node of the same key is not present in the tree. Otherwise, Delete tries to logically delete leaf by making a CAS to flag the edge between parent and leaf. If the CAS succeeds, the Delete operation will call Cleanup repeatedly until leaf has been physically removed (lines 83-87 of Algorithm 3 in [11]). (Before each Cleanup call, a DS-Seek(key) is also called to get an updated seekRecord ). If the CAS fails to flag the edge because of a conflicting update, Delete will first call Cleanup if necessary to help physically remove other marked nodes, and then restart its own Delete operation from the beginning. 4.1.2  Local consistency  We prove local consistency of each operation’s atomic steps. Recall that leaf nodes are the only ones that store keys, so iterators’ views are only taken with respect to leaf nodes. There are only two operations that may change the view of an iterator. One is the CAS operation in Insert(u) that swings a child pointer of a parent to a new internal node v, where v has as children u and parent’s original child leaf. The change set of this CAS is Rm = {u}, since {u} is the node being inserted. Leaves in the tree other than leaf and u are not affected by the CAS, so we only have to ensure that leaf remains in an iterator’s view, given that u ∈ Rm . If an iterator has not visited parent yet, it will be able to reach leaf either following the old path parent → leaf before the CAS, or the new path parent → v → u after the CAS. If the iterator is currently at parent, it will be able to reach leaf via the path parent → leaf both before and after the CAS, as it has already read parent with the old edge (parent, leaf ). In either case, leaf remains in the iterator’s view. Therefore, we have that for each (leaf) node N , and any iterator, V (N, T )∆V (N, m(T )) ⊆ {u} = Rm . So insert’s CAS is locally consistent. The other atomic step is the CAS in Cleanup that swings a child pointer of a node ancestor to a leaf v in order to remove a connected group of nodes between them, as in Figure 3. As stated earlier, all nodes removed by the CAS were already marked as logically deleted by previous Delete operations, so those nodes do not affect the view of an iterator. Now we consider node v, the only unmarked leaf whose reachability might be affected by the CAS. If an iterator is at any node in the subtree rooted at successor, v is reachable following the path from ancestor to parent in the old tree, both before and after the CAS. If an iterator has not visited successor yet, it can reach v following either the same path before the CAS, or the path ancestor → v directly after the CAS. In either case, v remains in the iterator’s view. Therefore V (N, T )∆V (N, m(T )) = ∅ and hence this CAS is also locally consistent.  4.2  Lock-Free hash set  Liu et al. [9] designed a lock-free, dynamically resizable hash set. The hash set is implemented as a linked list of HNode objects, each representing a version of the hash set. Each HNode contains an array of buckets 10  Figure 4: The high-level design of the lock-free hash set. implemented from FSets, which are sets that can be frozen, or made permanently immutable. Each HNode also has a pred pointer to the previous HNode. The head HNode is the current version. Set containment is performed by checking the appropriate bucket for the queried key. A thread inserts or deletes a key in a bucket by creating a copy of the bucket, updating the copy with the new key, and replacing the original bucket with a CAS. The hash set’s operations periodically trigger a resize, in which an HNode is created with new array of buckets, and buckets are initialized and copied over lazily. The head pointer is swung to the new HNode, and old buckets are frozen when copies are created for the new HNode. In applying our framework, keys in each bucket are placed in new node objects, so that buckets contain nodes containing keys. This is to introduce a level of indirection needed for the snap-collector algorithm to work. An iterator traverses the bucket array of the head HNode, one bucket at a time. It linearly scans the nodes in each bucket. If the iterator finds an uninitialized bucket, it follows pred to retrieve the bucket(s) in the previous version. 4.2.1  Local consistency  We prove that each atomic step of the hash set’s operations is locally consistent. There are four atomic steps that can affect an iterator’s view. The first one is the CAS in DS-Insert(u) that replaces a bucket F with an updated copy F 0 containing u. The change set Rm of this atomic step is {u}. If an iterator has already read F , or is in the process of reading F , then the iterator will not notice the change this CAS makes, so its view will not change. If the iterator has not reached bucket F , it will eventually read the new FSet F 0 containing u. All other buckets are unaffected, so in both cases, V (N, T )∆V (N, m(T )) ⊆ {u} for any iterator and node N . Hence insert’s atomic step is locally consistent. The second atomic step is the CAS in DS-Delete(v ) that replaces a bucket F with an updated copy F 0 omitting u. V (N, T )∆V (N, m(T )) = ∅ in this case, as u has already been marked as logically deleted. Therefore it is trivial to prove Delete’s atomic step is also locally consistent. The third atomic step is the CAS that a thread makes to initialize a bucket F . Recall that nodes in F are retrieved from the previous HNode. If an iterator reaches F before it is initialized, it will traverse the corresponding buckets in the previous version. The iterator will encounter the same nodes if it reaches F after it has been initialized. Hence this CAS is locally consistent, as it will not change an iterator’s view (V (N, T )∆V (N, m(T )) = ∅). The last step is the CAS in a resize that swings head to the newly created HNode. An iterator accessing the buckets of new HNode will find them all uninitialized, so the iterator will read the same nodes regardless of how it is interleaved with the resize CAS. Therefore the iterator’s view is unchanged, meaning this step is locally consistent.  11  4.3  Chromatic Tree  Brown et al. [3] proposed a general technique to implement non-blocking trees using the LLX, SCX and VLX primitives, which are multi-word generalizations of the load-link (LL), store-conditional (SC) and validate (VL) operations, respectively. They implement the chromatic tree (described in the previous section) using their technique. Recall that updates to the chromatic tree are made in a copy-on-write manner: a connected subgraph is atomically replaced with a new connected subgraph reflecting the update to the tree. These update operations consist of insertion, deletion, and 22 different rotations for rebalancing. 4.3.1  Local consistency  The RB2 operation and its local consistency proof were discussed in the previous section. Here, we describe two additional operations, BLK and W1, and prove local consistency. Furthermore, we argue that local consistency proofs of the remaining operations are largely the same. We only consider how these operations change the structure of the tree, and not auxiliary information stored in nodes, since iterators are not concerned with the latter. See the full paper by Brown et al. [3] for detailed descriptions and figures of all 22 rotations. Since the purpose of each rotation is to help rebalance the tree, and not to insert or delete keys, the change set of each rotation is empty. So in order for a rotation to be locally consistent, it must never change the view of an iterator running concurrently with it. We first consider BLK, illustrated in Figure 5. iterator 50  50  iterator 30  40  BLK 40  28  20  30  20 10  30  20  35  48  10  40  28  35  48  Figure 5: The BLK operation. As seen in the figure above, BLK replaces a subgraph with an exact copy of it. This is because BLK only updates node weights used for rebalancing; since the chromatic trees nodes are immutable, new copies of the original internal nodes must be made to do this. However, an iterator does not need to know any weight information used by the chromatic tree’s set operations, so to an iterator, the tree is essentially unchanged. In particular, the iterator’s view will not change after an application of BLK, so BLK is locally consistent. PUSH and W7 also only update node weights while preserving the original structure of the tree, so they are locally consistent as well. 50  iterator  50 iterator  30  30 20  40 20  W1  40  30  40  48 37  10  28  37 35  20  48 39  10  28  37  35  39  Figure 6: The W1 operation. We now consider W1, illustrated in Figure 6 above. Unlike BLK, W1 performs non-trivial structural rebalancing of the tree. It is also a more complex rebalance than RB2 (in Figure 1b). However, like RB2, 12  dis = (25,25,50) dis = (25,25,50), # iterators = 3 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0  1  3  5  7  dis = (50,50,0), # iterators = 3 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0  9  dis = (25,25,50), # iterators = 5 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0  1  3  5  7  1  3  5  7  1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0  9 HS  1  3  5  3  5  7  9  dis = (25,25,50)  dis = (50,50,0), # iterators = 5 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0  1  9  7  1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 9  1  3  HS 1 UBST 1  UBST  (a) Scalability of the updaters for the key range [0, 214 ].  HS 3 UBST 3  5  7  9  HS 5 UBST 5  (b) Scalability of the updaters for [0, 212 ] key range.  Figure 7: Updater performance: x-axis represents the number of updaters and y-axis the slowdown in updater throughput. In Figure(b), HSi and UBSTi are the slowdowns of the hash set and UBST updaters in presence of i iterators. dis = (25,25,50), range = [0,4096]  dis = (50,50,0), range = [0,4096] 8000  8000  6000  6000  4000  4000  2000  2000 1  2  3  4  5  UBST1 UUBST1  6 UBST3 UUBST3  7  1  UBST5 UUBST5  2  3  4  5  6  7  UBST7 UUBST7  Figure 8: Iterator throughput for range [0, 212 ]: x-axis is iterator count and y-axis the number of operations by updaters. UBSTi and UUBSTi are iterator throughput in optimized and unoptimized UBST in presence of i updaters. the outgoing links of the removed subgraph are not deleted, so an iterator in the middle of traversing a removed portion of the tree will still be able to finish its traversal. So, for example, an iterator at the deleted internal node 30 can reach leaf nodes 35, 39, and 48 via the deleted internal nodes 40 and 37. Since the iterator can still reach all unmodified nodes after W1 is applied, its view is unchanged, so it is locally consistent. This is the same reasoning we used to prove local consistency of RB2. The same reasoning also applies to the remaining rotation operations (RB1, W2, W3, W4, W5, W6). Note that every rotation operation stated in this paper also has an inverse, bringing the count to 22 rotations.  5  Performance evaluation  We evaluate the performance of the iterator framework applied to an unbalanced binary search tree (UBST) [11] and a hash set [9]. For the hash set, we used the Java code given by the authors, and we implemented UBST in Java according to the pseudocode of the original work. We extended both data structures with an iterator. We ran experiments on Java SE Runtime, version 1.7.0, on a system with 2 Intel(R) Xeon(R) 2.60GHz processors, each processor having 8 cores. We execute several runs of the following multithreaded benchmark. Some threads are designated as iterators which repeatedly call Iterate. Other threads are designated as updaters which call Contains, Insert or Delete. We consider two distributions of operations: one with 25% insertions, 25% deletions and 13  50% searches, and the other with 50% insertions and 50% deletions. Keys are chosen uniformly at random from each of three ranges: [0, 212 ], [0, 214 ], [0, 216 ]. For each distribution and range, we vary the number of updaters between 1 and 9. To maintain a stable performance estimate as the updater count varies, the updaters’ operations and the data structure’s initial state are predetermined for each distribution and range. The throughput of a run is the total number of update operations completed across a fixed duration. With each run, we measure the slowdown in performance of updaters due to iterators as the ratio of the throughput of updaters with no concurrent iterators (called WOI) to the throughput of updaters with iterators (WI). Each experiment consists of phases WOI and WI. Before each phase, the main thread initializes the set (as explained above), then creates iterators and updaters. Threads run for half a second to allow the JVM to warm up, after which each runs 2 seconds. Slowdown is computed after both phases complete. Results of the experiments are shown in Figure 7a, where each plot shows the average slowdown of updaters over 10 runs for [0, 214 ] key range with 3 and 5 concurrent iterators. Overall, we notice that iterators impose an overhead of approximately 20% and 30% on updater throughput of UBST and hash set, respectively, without significantly affecting the underlying set’s scalability. The result for UBST is comparable to the results for the linked list [13]. Since updates to hash sets are amortized constant time, a small overhead imposed by iterators can account for a large fraction of the total time spent by the updaters. Similar results are obtained as the number of iterators is increased. Figure 7b summarizes experiments for range [0, 212 ]. Observe that almost all the slowdown factors are approximately 0.8 and 0.7 for UBST and hash set, respectively. We conclude that (i) updaters scale with the number of iterators, and (ii) iterators impose a small overhead on the throughput of the updaters. For the largest range [0, 216 ], as the number of iterators increases, scalability is preserved but throughput declines to about 60%. Since we start with a large initial number (215 ) of keys, we hypothesize that slowdown is due to the poor cache locality of the huge data structure, and not due to iterators. Figure 8 shows throughput and scalability of iterators with respect to updaters (bottom three lines), with throughput decreasing with more updaters. This is due to iterators merging more reports generated by updaters. There is a decline in iterations completed per iterator as the number of iterators is increased. This is due to iterators competing to add nodes to the snapshot-list. To reduce contention, iterators are optimized for UBST in the same way Petrank and Timnat [13] optimize linked lists: before adding a node, the iterator compares the new node’s key with the last key in the snapshot-list, only adding the new key to the snapshotlist if it is greater. This optimization is only possible when keys are traversed in sorted order, e.g. in the tree.  References [1] Hillel Avni, Nir Shavit, and Adi Suissa. Leaplist: Lessons learned in designing tm-supported range queries. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC ’13, pages 299–308, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM. [2] Trevor Brown and Hillel Avni. Range queries in non-blocking k -ary search trees. In Principles of Distributed Systems, 16th International Conference, OPODIS 2012, Rome, Italy, December 18-20, 2012. Proceedings, pages 31–45, 2012. [3] Trevor Brown, Faith Ellen, and Eric Ruppert. A general technique for non-blocking trees. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming, PPoPP ’14, pages 329–342, New York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM. [4] Timothy L. Harris. A pragmatic implementation of non-blocking linked-lists. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Distributed Computing, DISC ’01, pages 300–314, London, UK, UK, 2001. Springer-Verlag. [5] Maurice Herlihy, Victor Luchangco, and Mark Moir. Obstruction-free synchronization: Double-ended queues as an example. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, ICDCS ’03, pages 522–, Washington, DC, USA, 2003. IEEE Computer Society.  14  [6] Maurice Herlihy and Nir Shavit. The Art of Multiprocessor Programming. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 2008. [7] Maurice P. Herlihy and Jeannette M. Wing. Linearizability: A correctness condition for concurrent objects. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 12(3):463–492, July 1990. [8] Nikolaos D. Kallimanis and Eleni Kanellou. Wait-free concurrent graph objects with dynamic traversals. In 19th International Conference on Principles of Distributed Systems, OPODIS 2015, December 14-17, 2015, Rennes, France, pages 27:1–27:17, 2015. [9] Yujie Liu, Kunlong Zhang, and Michael Spear. Dynamic-sized nonblocking hash tables. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM symposium on Principles of distributed computing, pages 242–251. ACM, 2014. [10] Maged M. Michael and Michael L. Scott. Simple, fast, and practical non-blocking and blocking concurrent queue algorithms. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC ’96, pages 267–275, New York, NY, USA, 1996. ACM. [11] Aravind Natarajan and Neeraj Mittal. Fast concurrent lock-free binary search trees. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming, PPoPP ’14, pages 317–328, New York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM. [12] Yiannis Nikolakopoulos, Anders Gidenstam, Marina Papatriantafilou, and Philippas Tsigas. A consistency framework for iteration operations in concurrent data structures. In 2015 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, IPDPS 2015, Hyderabad, India, May 25-29, 2015, pages 239–248, 2015. [13] Erez Petrank and Shahar Timnat. Distributed Computing: 27th International Symposium, DISC 2013, Jerusalem, Israel, October 14-18, 2013. Proceedings, chapter Lock-Free Data-Structure Iterators, pages 224–238. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. [14] Shahar Timnat, Anastasia Braginsky, Alex Kogan, and Erez Petrank. Wait-free linked-lists. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming, PPoPP ’12, pages 309–310, New York, NY, USA, 2012. ACM.  15

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
