Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_5780

Abstract:
Parallel Range and Segment Queries with Augmented Maps  arXiv:1803.08621v1 [cs.CG] 23 Mar 2018  Yihan Sun Carnegie Mellon University yihans@cs.cmu.edu  Guy E. Blelloch Carnegie Mellon University guyb@cs.cmu.edu Abstract  The range and segment query problems are fundamental problems in computational geometry, and have extensive applications in many domains. Despite the large body of theoretical work on parallel geometry algorithms, efficient implementations can be complicated. We know of very few practical implementations of the algorithms, and most implementations do not have tight theoretical bounds. In this paper we focus on simple and efficient parallel algorithms and implementations for range and segment queries. We propose using a simple framework (the augmented map) to model the problem. Based on the augmented map interface, we develop both multi-level tree structures and sweepline algorithms supporting range and segment queries in two dimensions. For the sweepline algorithms, we also propose a parallel paradigm and show corresponding cost bounds. All of our data structures are work-efficient to build in theory (all need O(n log n) work) and achieve a low parallel depth (poly-logarithmic for the multi-level tree structures, and O(n ) for sweepline algorithms). We have implemented all the data structures described in the paper using a parallel augmented map library. Based on the library each data structure only requires about 100 lines of C++ code. We test their performance on large data sets (up to 108 elements) and a machine with 72-cores (144 hyperthreads). The parallel construction times are all less than 8 seconds in parallel, achieving 33-to-63-fold speedup. Speedups on queries are up to 108-fold. Our sequential range query implementations outperforms the CGAL implementation by more than a factor of 2, and gets an additional 63-fold speedup on all cores.  1  Introduction  The range query problem and segment query problem are fundamental problems in computational geometry, and also have extensive applications in many domains [52, 17, 25, 46, 50, 23, 25]. In this paper, we focus on the 2D setting. The range query takes a set of points in the 2-dimension Euclidean space as input, and asks for the subset of points that are in some query window, or the corresponding count or weighted sum. The segment query problem takes the input of a set of horizontal segments1 , and reports all segments (or counts, or weighted sums) that cross some vertical segment. The solution to these problems is usually a data structure based on some variant of a range-tree [14], segment-tree [12], the sweep-line algorithms [45], or combinations of them. In addition to the large body of work on sequential data structures, there has also been research on parallel structures for such queries [2, 9, 30, 10]. However, efficient implementations of these structures can be complicated, and we know of few theoretically efficient parallel implementations for range and segment query structures. This challenge is not only because of the delicate design of many algorithmic details, but also because very different data structures and optimizations are required due to the different combinations of input settings and queries. Most implementations [32, 11, 23] do not have useful theoretical bounds. Our goal is to develop theoretically efficient algorithms which can be implemented with ease and also run fast in practice, both sequentially and in parallel. To do this, we present a simple framework for developing parallel data structures for a variety of low-dimensional geometric queries. The framework is built on an interface, and the corresponding library for implementations, that supports augmented maps [48]. The augmented map is an abstract data type based on ordered maps of key-value pairs augmented with an abstract “sum” called the augmented value. They are supported by associating two functions with a map: one converts a key-value pair into an augmented value, and one combines augmented values. Previous work [48] shows that using augmented trees as the underlying structure, a wide variety of functions on (augmented) maps can be implemented efficiently, including 1 More  generally arbitrary non-intersecting segments. In our experiments we use axis aligned segments, but some of our algorithms are easily applied to the general case as described in Section 6  1  Range Query Segment Query SegCount Query  Sweep Tree Sweep Tree Sweep Tree  Build Query Work Depth Query-all Query-sum n log n n k log(n/k + 1)) log n n log n log3 n log2 n + k log2 n n log n n log n + k log n n log n log3 n log2 n + k log2 n n log n n log n n log n log3 n log2 n  Table 1: Theoretical (asymptotical) costs of all data structures in this paper. n is the input size. k is the output size.  < 1 can be any given constant. All bounds are in big-O (O(·)) notation. “Sweep” means the sweepline algorithm, and “Tree” means the corresponding multi-level tree. union, intersection, insertion, deletion, range extraction and sums, and so on. All the bulk operations such as union and construction can run in parallel with asymptotically optimal work and polylogarithmic depth. The augmented map framework provides concise and elegant abstraction for many geometry queries. In particular, we study how it can model the range query problem and segment query problem, which both are two-level map structures: an outer level map augmented with an inner map structure. In this paper we always use the augmented tree to implement the inner map. Using different representations as the outer tree, we develop data structures both directly based on multi-level augmented trees, and based on the prefix structure, which is proposed in this paper. The prefix structure, as an alternative to the augmented trees, provides another implementation for augmented maps. This data structure stores the augmented value of all the prefixes of the original map. When using the prefix structures to represent the outer maps for the geometry queries, the whole algorithm is similar to the standard sweepline algorithm. When the augmenting functions satisfy certain conditions, we propose a parallel paradigm to construct the prefix structures and show the corresponding bounds (see Table 1). In this paper we present six data structures for range and segment query. Three of them are multi-level trees including the range tree (noted as RangeTree), the segment tree (noted as SegTree) and a tree structure to answer segment counting query (SegCntTree). The other three are sweepline style algorithms (noted as RangeSweep, SegSweep and SegCntSweep). They are efficient both in theory and in practice. A list of all data structures and their corresponding costs are summarized in Table 1. We do not use techniques such as fractional cascading [36, 49] so some of our bounds are not optimal, but we note that all of them are off optimal by at most a log n factor in work. Our algorithms are motivated by previous theoretically efficient parallel algorithms [2, 10]. We implemented all data structures described in this paper using a parallel augmented map library PAM [48]. With a well-defined interface and abstractions of the underlying structures, each application only requires about 100 lines of C++ code for the parallel version. We present experimental results comparing our algorithms and also comparing to CGAL range trees [41], which is over 600 lines of C++ code for a sequential range tree. Our implementation can construct structures of size 108 within 8 seconds. We get a 33-to-63-fold speedup in construction on a machine with 72 cores (144 hyperthreads), and 60-to-100-fold speedup in queries. Even our sequential version outperforms CGAL by more than a factor of 2.  2  Related Work  There has been significant work on solving computational geometry problems using augmented tree structures. Range trees [13] and segment trees [15] have been extensively studied in research papers [14, 42, 18] and introduced in textbooks [16, 43]. In distributed systems, there has also been work studying range trees [1] and segment trees [52]. In parallel settings, Atallah et al. [9] propose cascading divide-and-conquer scheme for solving many computational geometry problems in parallel. We know of no implementation of it. There also have been papers on computational geometry problems focusing on external memory (EM) models [47, 3, 7, 6] or considering read-write asymmetry [33]. Many previous results focus on developing fast sweepline algorithms on specific problems such as range queries [5, 8], segment intersecting [38, 26], Voronoi diagrams [29, 35], Delaunay triangulation [51, 27], and some other problems [39]. All of the mentioned work is are in the sequential setting. There are also papers making efforts to parallelize the sweepline algorithms. Goodrich et al. [30] propose a framework to parallelize several sweepline-based algorithms. Instead of using a vertical line sweeping over the plane, they use a moving point around a planar subdivision. There is no experimental evaluation of these algorithms. McKenney and McGuire [37]  2  propose parallel sweepline algorithms by segmenting the input into stripes. No theoretical bound is provided in this paper. Besides, the optimizations are specific for their tested problem, and do not scale on large number of threads.  3  Preliminaries  Parallel Cost Model. To analyze asymptotic theoretical costs of a parallel algorithm we use work W and depth D (or span S), where work is the total number of operations and depth is the length of the critical path. We can bound the total runtime in terms of work and depth since any computation with W work and D depth will run in time T <W P + D assuming a PRAM [34] with P processors and a greedy scheduler [31, 22, 21]. We assume concurrent reads and exclusive writes (CREW). Persistence. A persistent data structure [28] is a data structure that preserves the previous version of itself when it is modified and always yields a new updated structure. For tree structures persistence can be achieved by path copying, in which only the affected path related to the update is copied, such that the asymptotical cost remains unchanged. Nodes are shared across different versions of trees, making implementations space-efficient. In this paper we assume underlying persistent tree structures, which is essential in guaranteeing the efficiency both in space and time. In experiments we also use a library (PAM) supporting persistence [48]. Sweepline Algorithms. A sweepline algorithm (or plane sweep algorithm) is an algorithmic paradigm that uses a conceptual sweep line to process elements in order in Euclidean space. It uses a virtual line sweeping across the plane, which stops at some points to make updates. Often the positions that the sweep line stops at are determined by the input data, e.g., the endpoints of segments. We call them the event points, and note them as pi ∈ P . They are processed in a certain order defined by some comparison function ≺. Here we limit ourselves to cases where the events are known ahead of time. As the algorithm processing the points, a data structure T is maintained and updated at each event point to track the status at that point. Sarnak and Tarjan [44] first noticed that by being persistent, one can keep the intermediate structures ti ∈ T at all event points, such that they can be used for further queries. Indeed in the two sweepline algorithms in this paper, we adopt the same methodology, but parallelize it. We call them the prefix structure at each point. Typically in such sweepline algorithms, on meeting an event point pi we compute ti based on the previous structure ti−1 and the new point pi using an update function h : P × T 7→ T , i.e., ti = h(pi , ti−1 ), from an initial structure t0 . We define it in an abstraction as follows: S = SW(P, ≺, T, t0 , h)  (1)  Then the input of this sweepline paradigm would be a sequence of pi ∈ P . The predicate ≺: P × P 7→ B OOL defines a total order on P in which the set of points will be processed. T is the type of the prefix structure, and h : T × P 7→ T defines the update function. t0 ∈ T is the initial prefix structure. The Sweep paradigm then gives a map from P to T which represents the prefix structure at each event point. The Augmented Map. The augmented map [48] is an abstract data type (ADT) that associates an ordered map (a set of key-value pairs) structure with a “map-reduce” operation for keeping track of the abstract sum over entries in the map (referred to as the augmented value of the map). More formally, an augmented map is an ordered map M where keys belong to some ordered set K (with total ordering defined by relation <K ) and values to a set V , that is associated with two functions: the base function g : K × V 7→ A that maps a key-value pair to an augmented value (∈ a set A) and the combine function f : A × A 7→ A that combines (reduces) two augmented values. We require f to be associative and have an identity I (i.e., set A with f and I forms a monoid). We notationally extend the binary operation as follows: f (a1 ) = a1 , f (a1 , a2 , . . . , an )  = f (f (a1 , a2 , . . . an−1 ), an )  An augmented map is parameterized as: a = AM(K, <K , V, A, g, f, I)  (2)  Here K, V and A represent the types of keys, values, and augmented values. <K defines the total order on K. g, f and I are defined as above. In this paper, we refer to each key-value pair in a map as an entry and denote it as e = (k, v). We use k(e) and v(e) to extract the key and the value from an entry. Then the augmented value of a map M = 3  Function D ELETE(m, k) I NSERT(m, e, σ) I NTERSECT(m1 , m2 ) D IFFERENCE(m1 , m2 ) U NION(m1 , m2 , σ) B UILD(s, σ) U P T O(m, k) R ANGE(m, k1 , k2 ) AL EFT(m, k) AR ANGE(m, k1 , k2 )  Work log n log n   n1 n1 log n + 1 2  Depth log n log n log n1 log n2  n log n log n log n log n log n  log n log n log n log n log n  Table 2: The core functions on augmented maps. We assume k, k1 , k2 ∈ K, m, m1 , m2 are maps, n = |m|, ni = |mi |. s is a sequence. All bounds are in big-O (O(·)) notation. The bounds assume the augmenting functions f , g and argument function σ all have constant cost. (e1 , e2 , . . . , en ), denoted as A(M ), can be calculated using the based function g and combine function f as A(M ) = f (g(k(e1 ), v(e1 )), g(k(e2 ), v(e2 ), . . . , g(k(en ), v(en )). A list of common functions in the augmented map interface used in this paper and their parameters are shown in Table 2 (the first column). Some of the functions are the standard functions (e.g., U NION, I NSERT) augmented with an operation σ to combine values of entries with the same key (details can be found in Table 7 and Appendix D). They are useful for the query algorithms on the counting or weighted sum in this paper. There are also some functions designed specific for augmented maps. For example, the AR ANGE function returns the augmented value of all entries within a key range, and AL EFT(k) returns the augmented value of all entries up to a key k. They are useful in answering related range queries. Many computational geometry problems can be modeled concisely using the augmented map interface, so that solving them is as simple as properly defining the seven parameters. The augmented map was first proposed and supported using augmented trees (as we briefly review below). In this paper, we propose a new sweepline-like structure (see Section 4) to support augmented maps, which provides efficient implementation especially for some geometry problems. The abstraction we propose in this paper does not rely on the underlying implementation of augmented maps, nor any specific balancing schemes. However some bounds and proofs may be only applicable on specific data structures (e.g., the insertion on range trees requires weight-balanced tree to guarantee the theoretical bound, and an efficient query on the segment tree especially makes use of the tree structure). In the experiments we use a library PAM [48] using weight-balanced trees implementing augmented maps (See details in the appendix). Augmented Maps Using Augmented Trees. An efficient implementation of augmented maps is to use augmented balanced binary search trees [48]. Entries are stored in tree nodes and sorted by keys. Each node also keeps another attribute that is the augmented value of the sub-map in the subtree rooted at u, which can be computed by the augmented values in its two children and the entry in u. We denote l(u) and r(u) as the left and right child of a node u. In this paper we also use the node u to represent the entry stored in it if it is not ambiguous. The augmented map interface can be supported in an efficient and highly-parallelized manner using appropriate algorithms on the balanced binary search tree (e.g., the join-based algorithms [19, 48]). When implemented using the join-based algorithms on augmented trees, the costs are listed in the last two columns in Table 2. When related functions (e.g., f, g, σ) all have constant work and depth, all functions listed in Table 2 have optimal work and polylog depth. In particular, some functions related to augmented values can be supported more efficiently making use of the tree structure. More details can be found in [48].  4  Augmented Maps Using Prefix Structures for Sweepline Algorithms  In this paper, we use the sweepline-like structure as an alternative to the tree structure to represent the augmented map. For an ordered map m, we store the augmented value of the prefix at each entry ei , i.e., AL EFT(m, ei ). For example, if the augmented value just keeps the sum of values, we store at each entry the prefix sum up to this point. In this paper we use this data structure for representing the outer-level map structure in the range query and the segment query, which makes the whole algorithm equivalent to a sweepline algorithm. In particular, we store the sequence of event points in order in the map m, and at each point pi we use the augmented value of the prefix in m up to pi as the prefix structure. This is equivalent to use the combine function f as the update function. That is to  4  Algorithm 1: The construction of the prefix-combine trees. The for-loops noted with ∗ can run in parallel. Input: A list p of length n storing all the points to be processed in order, the update function h, the fold function ρ, the combine function f , the empty prefix structure t0 and the number of blocks b. We assume n is an integral multiple of b. Output: A series of prefix-combine trees ti . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  r = n/b; for i ← 0 to b do [in parallel] t0i = ρ(pi×r , . . . , p(i+1)×r−1 ) for i ← 1 to b − 1 do ti×r = f (t(i−1)×m , t0i−1 ) for i ← 0 to b − 1 do [in parallel] s = i × r; e = s + r for j ← s to e − 1 do tj = h(tj−1 , pj ) return {pi 7→ ti }  ⋯⋯ Step1: Batching  Step2: Sweeping  𝑡1′  = 𝜌(𝑝1 , … , 𝑝𝑟 )  𝑡2′  = 𝜌(𝑝𝑟+1 , … , 𝑝2𝑟 )  = 𝜌(𝑝  ′ 𝑡𝑚  𝑏−1 𝑟+1 , … , 𝑝𝑛 )  ⋯⋯ 𝑡0 = 𝐼  𝑡2𝑟 = 𝑓(𝑡𝑟 , 𝑡2′ )  𝑡𝑟 = 𝑡1′  Step3: Refining  ⋯⋯ 𝑡𝑖 = ℎ(𝑡𝑖−1 , 𝑝𝑖−1 )  Figure 1: An illustration for the parallel sweepline paradigm. The blue boxes denotes the event points. The orange boxes are the prefix structures. say, an augmented map m = AM(K, ≺, V, A, f, g, I)  (3)  is equivalent to (or, can be represented by) a sweepline scheme s as: s = SW(K × V, ≺, A, I, h(t, p) ≡ f (t, g(p)))  (4)  In many cases a much simpler update function h(t, p) can be provided as an equivalence of f (t, g(p))). A parallel sweepline paradigm. Here we present an algorithm to build the prefix structures in parallel. Because of the associativity of the combine function, to repeatedly update a sequence of points {pi } onto prefix structure t using h is equivalent to combining the augmented value on all points {pi } to t by the combine function f . Thus our approach is to evenly split the original sequence of points into b blocks, calculate the augmented value of each corresponding block, and then refine the prefix structures in each block using the update function h (see details below). For simplicity we assume n = b × r, r ∈ Z+ . We define a fold function ρ : {P } 7→ T ({P } denotes a sequence of elements in P ) that converts a sequence of points into the augmented value. We note that the fold function can be directly computed by g and f (e.g., using a parallel map-reduce scheme), but in many applications a much simpler (or more efficient) algorithm can be used. More precisely, the parallel paradigm to build the prefix structures has three steps (also see Algorithm 1 and Figure 1):  5  Function Work Depth Output Size  h(t, p) O(log |t|) O(log |t|) O(|t|)  ρ(s) O(|s| log |s|) O(log |s|) O(|s|)  f (t, t0 ) O(|t0 | log(|t|/|t0 | + 1)) O(log |t| log |t0 |) O(|t0 | + |t|)  Table 3: A typical setting of the function costs in a sweepline paradigm. 1. Batching (Line 2). After sorting all input points by ≺, we evenly split them into b blocks. Define r = n/b. Then in parallel we build b units of t0i ∈ T using ρ corresponds to the b blocks, which are the augmented values (partial sums) of each block. 2. Sweeping (Line 4) We combine these t0i in turn sequentially by the combine function f to get the first prefix structure t0 , tr , t2r . . . in each block by ti×r = f (t(i−1)×r , t0i ). 3. Refining. (Line 5 to 7) We build all the other prefix structures based on the above-built t0 , tr , t2r . . . in the corresponding blocks. All the b blocks can be done in parallel. In each block, the points pi are processed in turn to update its previous prefix structure ti−1 sequentially using h. We define a parallel scheme of this problem to be: s0 = PS(P ; ≺; T ; t0 ; h; ρ; f )  (5)  Here ≺: P × P 7→ B OOL, t0 ∈ T , h : T × P 7→ T , ρ : {P } 7→ T and f : T × T 7→ T are defined as introduced above. In many non-trivial instantiations of this framework (especially the two in this paper), the prefix structure keeps an ordered structure tracking some elements related to a subset of the event points, having size O(i) at point i. The combine function is some set function (e.g., the U NION function), which typically costs O(n2 log(n1 /n2 + 1)) on combining a block of size n2 with the current prefix structure of size n1 ≥ n2 [19, 4, 20]. Accordingly, the function h simply updates one element (e.g., an insertion corresponds to the U NION function on a set and one single element) to the structure, costing O(log n) on a structure of size n. Creating the augmented value of each block of r points (using ρ) costs O(r log r) work and O(log r) depth. It will build a prefix structure of size at most r. A common setting of the related functions is summarized in Table 3, and the corresponding bounds of the sweepline algorithm is given in Theorem 1. Theorem 1. A sweepline paradigm S as defined in Equation 4 representing an augmented map M , can be built in parallel using its corresponding parallel paradigm S 0 (Equation 5). If the bounds √ as shown in Table 3 hold, then Algorithm 1 can construct all prefix structures in work O(n log n) and depth O( n log1.5 n). Proof. The algorithm and its cost is analyzed as follows: 1. Batching. Build b units of augmented values t0i ∈ T using function ρ in each block in parallel. There are k such structures, each of size at most r = n/b, so it takes work O(b · nb log nb ) = O(n log nb ) and depth O(log nb ). 2. Sweeping. Compute tr , t2r . . . by combining the augmented values t0i of each block with the previous prefix structure using the combine function f , sequentially. The calculation of each prefix structures are sequential, but the combine function works in parallel. The size of t0i is no more than O(n/b). Considering the given work and depth bound of the combine function, the total work of this step is bounded by: P P  b b ir n O i=1 r log( r + 1) = O(n log b). The depth is: O i=1 log r log ir = O(k log r log n). Pn 3. Refining. For each block, build all the other prefix structures using h. The total work is: O( i=1 log i) = O(n log n). The depth is the cost to finish all work in one block, which is O( nb log n). p   In total, it costs work O(n log n) and depth O b log nb + nb log n . When b = Θ( n/ log n), the depth is √ O( n log1.5 n). We show the implementation of this paradigm in Appendix E. Actually, by repeatedly applying this process to each block in the refining step, we can further reduce the depth.  6  Range Query: Inner Map: RI = AM ( K: X × Y ; ≺: <Y ; Outer Map: RO = AM ( K: X × Y ; ≺: <X ; Outer Map in Sweepline Paradigm: RS = PS ( P : X × Y ; ≺: <X ;  V : W;  A: W ;  g: (k, v) 7→ v;  f : +W ;  I: 0  )  V : W;  A: RI ;  g: RI .singleton;  f : RI .union;  I: ∅  )  T : RI ;  t0 : ∅  h: RI .insert  ρ: RI .build;  f : RI .union  )  Segment Query: Inner map: SI = AM ( K: X × X × Y ; ≺: <Y ; V : Z; A: Z; g: (k, v) 7→ 1; f : +Z ; I: 0 ) Outer Map: SO = AM ( K: X; ( ≺: <X ; V : X × Y ; A: SI × SI ; g: gseg f : fseg I: (∅, ∅) ) (∅, SI .singleton((xk , xv ), y)), when xk < xv ; fseg : See Equation 8; gseg (xk , (xv , y)): (SI .singleton((xv , xk ), y), ∅), when xk > xv Outer Map in Sweepline Paradigm: SS = PS ( P( : X × X × Y ; ≺: <X ; T : SI ; t0 : ∅; h: ( hseg ; ρ: ρseg ; f : fseg ) SI .insert(t, p), p is a left endpoint OL ∈ SI : segments with right endpoint in {pi } hseg (t, p): , ρseg ({pi }) = hOL , OR i SI .delete(t, p), p is a right endpoint OR ∈ SI : segments with left endpoint in {pi } Segment Count Query: Inner map: CI = AM ( K: X; ≺: <Z ; V : Z; A: Z; g: (k, v) 7→ 1; f : +Z ; Outer Map: CO = AM ( K: Y ; ≺: <Y ; V : X × X; A: CI ; g: gcnt f : CI .union gcnt (y, (l, r)) = CI .build({(l, 1), (r, −1)}) Outer Map in Sweepline Paradigm: CS = PS ( P : Y × X × X; ≺: <Y ; T : CI ; t0 : ∅; h: hcnt ; ρ: ρcnt ; hcnt (t, (y, l, r)) = CI .union(t, {(l, 1), (r, −1)})∗ ρcnt ({(yi , li , ri )}) = CI .build({(li , 1), (ri , −1)})  I: 0  )  I: ∅  )  Table 4: All structures used in this paper. ∗: this U NION can be done simply by two insertions. Corollary 1. A sweepline paradigm S as defined in Equation 4 representing an augmented map M , can be parallelized using its corresponding parallel paradigm S 0 (Equation 5). If the bounds as shown in Table 3 hold, then we can construct all prefix structure in work O( 1 n log n) and depth Õ(n ) for arbitrary small  > 0. We give the proof in Appendix B. Note that the prefix structure, as a representation for augmented maps, is not efficient for many basic map functions such as U NION, F ILTER, etc. It is especially useful in U P T O and AL EFT (O(log n) which is just a binary search in the prefix structures). It is also useful in computing AR ANGE when an efficient invert f −1 of the combine function exists. In this paper we use the prefix structure to represent the outer map for the range query and segment query problems. They both fit the proposed parallel paradigm in Algorithm 1, and accord with the assumption on the function cost in Theorem 1.  5  2D Range Query  Given a set of points P = {pi = (xi , yi ) | 0 ≤ i < n} in the plane, each with weight wi , a range query looks up some information (e.g., count, sum of weights, or the full list) of points within a rectangle defined by a horizontal range (xL , xR ) and vertical range (yL , yR ). We assume xi ∈ X, yi ∈ Y where X and Y are two sets with total order defined by <X and <Y respectively. The weights wi are from set W , which with an operation +W forms a semigroup. Note that +W is not necessarily addition, but any associated functions such as max, min would work. The 2D range query can be answered using a two-level map structure, each level corresponding to one dimension of the coordinates. It can answer many sorts of queries including reporting the count, weighted sums or all points  7  )  in the query window. In this section we assume the query is on the weighted sum and the other queries can be answered by variants of the presented structure. The definition (the outer map RO with inner map RI ) and the illustration are shown in Table 4 and Figure 2 (a). In particular, the key of the outer map is the coordinate of each point (sorted by x-coordinate) and the value is the weight. The augmented value of such an outer map, which is the inner map, contains the same set of points in its subtree in the outer map sorted by the y-coordinates. Thus the base function of the outer map is just a singleton on the point and the combine function is the U NION. The augmented value of the inner map accumulates weights over y-ranges using +W . Then the construction of a sequence s of points along with their weights can be done with the augmented map interface as: rO = RO .B UILD(s)  (6)  To answer the query, we conduct two nested range searches (xL , xR ) on the outer map and (yL , yR ) on the corresponding inner maps. It can be represented using the augmented map functions as: RQ(rO , xL , xR , yL , yR ) = RI .AR ANGE( RO .AR ANGE(rO , xL , xR ), yL , yR )  (7)  In this paper we always use augmented trees to implement the inner map. We discuss two implementations of the outer map: the augmented tree (which makes the whole data structure a 2D range tree [16, 43]) and the prefix structures (which makes the whole algorithm a sweepline algorithm).  5.1  2D Range Tree  If the outer map is also supported using the augmented tree structure, the whole range map becomes a range tree. In this case we do not need to explicitly build RO .AR ANGE(rO , xL , xR ) in queries. Instead, as the standard range tree query algorithm, we search the x-range on the outer tree, and directly conduct the range query on y-coordinates on the related inner trees. This operation is directly supported by the function AP ROJECT in the augmented map interface and the PAM library, making use of the tree structure [48]. This costs O(log2 n) per query. Such a tree structure can be constructed within work O(n log n) and depth O(log3 n). It answers the weighted sum query in O(log2 n) time, and report all queried points in O(k + log2 n) time (k is the output size). Similar discussion of range trees is shown in [48]. In this paper, we discuss how to implement efficient updates (insertions or deletions) on the range tree with reasonable (amortized logarithmic) cost using the augmented map interface. Dynamic Update on Range Tree. Our range tree allows rotations so dynamic updates are supported. Here we take the insertion as an example, but similar methodology can be applied to any mix of insertion and deletion sequences2 . Generally, if the augmented tree is used to support augmented maps, the insertion function will re-compute the augmented values of all the nodes on the insertion path. In the range tree, the cost is O(n) per update because the combine function (U NION) has about linear cost. Actually, the standard range tree insertion can be asymptotically more efficient [36]. At each node on the insertion path, the new entry will be first inserted into the inner tree. When imbalance occurs, we re-construct the inner trees of the nodes involved in rotations. If the outer tree is weight-balanced, the amortized cost per update is O(log2 n) [36]3 . This is actually directly supported by the augmented map interface and the PAM library. When the augmented map is supported by the augmented tree, and when the combine function is commutative, a “lazy” insertion function can be applied. First, at each node on the insertion path, we call f on the original augmented value and the new element to be inserted. The correctness is guaranteed by the commutativity of f . When imbalance occurs, we re-compute the augmented values of the related nodes. Since the U NION function is also accumulative, we can use this lazy insert function to conduct updates on the range tree, and get the same asymptotical bound as the standard range tree update algorithm.  5.2  The Sweepline Algorithm  In this section we present a parallel sweepline algorithm for the 2D range query problem using the parallel sweepline paradigm. It can answer queries such as the count or the weighted sum of all points in the query window. To make deletions work, one may need to define the inverse function f −1 of the combine function. for a subtree of size n, imbalance occur at least every Θ(n) updates, each cost O(n). Hence the amortized cost of rotations per update is O(log n). Directly inserting the entry into all inner trees on the insertion path takes O(log2 n). In all the amortized cost is O(log2 n) per update. 2 To  3 Intuitively,  8  guarantee efficiency, this algorithm requires the +W function to have an inverse −W . We use the prefix structure to represent the outer map RO in Table 4. In this case, each prefix structure is an inner map tracking all points up to the current point. The combine function of the outer map is U NION, hence the update function h can be an insertion. The corresponding fold function builds an inner map from a list of points. The definition of such a sweepline paradigm RS is shown in Table 4. The theoretical bound of the functions (I NSERT, B UILD, and U NION) on the inner map, when supported by the augmented trees, are consistent with the assumptions in Theorem 1. Thus the theoretical cost of this algorithm directly follows from Theorem 1. Also, if persistence is supported by path-copying, this data structure takes O(n log n) space instead of trivially O(n2 )4 . Answering Queries. Explicitly computing AR ANGE(rO , xL , xR ) in Equation 7 can be costly. We note that it can be computed by take a D IFFERENCE on the prefix structure tR at xR and the prefix structure tL at xL (each can be found by a simple binary search). However when |tL | is large but |tR − tL | is small this can be inefficient. If only the weighted sum is required, a more efficient query algorithm can be applied as long as +W has an inversion. We can compute the weighted sum of all points within the range (yL , yR ) in tL and tR respectively, using AR ANGE, and the difference (applying −W ) on them is the answer. Two independent binary searches cost O(log n) respectively, and the range search on y-coordinate costs work O(log n). Thus total cost of a single query is O(log n). Extension to Report All Points. The above sweepline algorithm can be inefficient in reporting all the points in the query window. Here we propose a variant to report all query point in Appendix A. The cost of one query is O(k log( nk + 1)), where k is the output size. Comparing with a range tree, which costs O(k + log2 n) per query, this algorithm is asymptotically more efficient when k < log n.  6  2D Segment Query  Given a set of segments parallel with x-axis on 2D planar, and a segment Sq parallel with y-axis, segment query requires some information related to all the segments that cross Sq to be reported (e.g., count, full list, etc.). For a segment with left endpoint li and right endpoint ri we say it starts from li and ends in ri . We assume li , ri ∈ X and yi ∈ Y . We assume all the x-coordinates are distinct. Note that although we describe this problem in the setting that all segments are parallel with the x-axis, a variant of this data structure can deal with general non-intersecting segments by giving a total order to all segments based on their y-coordinates, as has been discussed in the previous work [16, 40]. In this paper we introduce a two-level map structure addressing this problem (shown in Table 4 and Figure 2 (b)). We assume that the queries ask the count or the full list (the weighted sum and be answered by a simple variant). We define the key of the outer map to be the the x-coordinates of all endpoints of the input segments. The value is the other x-coordinate of the segment and its y-coordinate. Each (sub-)outer map corresponds to an interval on x-axis (from the leftmost to the rightmost key in the sub-map), noted as the x-range of this map. The augmented value of an outer map is a pair of inner maps: L(·) (the left open set) which stores all input segments starting from outside of its x-range and ending inside (i.e., only the right endpoint is in its x-range), and asymmetrically R(u) (the right open set) with all segments starting inside but ending outside. We call them the open sets of the corresponding interval. To combine the open sets of two contiguous intervals ul and ur , we use an associative operation fseg : hL(u), R(u)i = fseg (hL(ul ), R(ul )i, hL(ur ), R(ur )i) =hL(ul ) ∪ (L(ur )\R(ul )), R(ur ) ∪ (R(ul )\L(ur ))i  (8)  , where u is the interval of concatenating ul and ur . Intuitively, taking the left open set as an example, they are all segments starting in ur and going beyond, or those stretching out from ul but not ending in ur . We use fseg as the combine function of the outer map. This function is associative. We store the x-coordinate of the other endpoint in the value, which helps to tell if the key is the left or the right endpoint. This is useful in the base function (gseg in Table 4) of the outer map, which computes the augmented value of a single entry. For an entry (xk , (xv , y)), the interval it represents is the solid point at xk . WLOG we assume xk < xv so that the key is the left endpoint. Then the only element in its open sets is the segment itself in its right open set. If xk > xv it is symmetric. 4 Note that in [28] a more space-efficient version (linear space) is shown, but our point here is to show that our paradigm is generic and simple for many different problems without much extra cost  9  We organize all segments in the inner maps sorted by their y-coordinate and augmented by the count or weightsum, such that in queries, the y-range search can be done in the related inner maps. The definition of such the multi-level map for segment queries is in Table 4. The construction of such a two-level map (SO ) from a list of segments B = {(li , ri , yi )} can be done as follows: B 0 = {(xk , (xv , y)) : (xk , xv , y) ∈ B || (xv , xk , y) ∈ B} sO = SO .B UILD(B 0 )  (9)  Assume the query segment is (xq , tq , bq ), where xq defines its x-coordinate and tq and bq defines the query range on the y-coordinate. The query will first find all segments that crosses xq , and then conduct a range query on (tq , bq ) on the y-coordinate among those segments. To find all segments that crosses xq , note that they are the segments starting before xq but ending after xq , which are exactly in the right open set of the interval (−∞, xq ). This can be computed by the function AL EFT. The query can be done using the augmented map interface as: SQ(sO , tq , bq , xq ) = SI .R ANGE(RO PEN(SO .AL EFT(sO , xq )), bq , tq )  (10)  , where RO PEN extracts the right open set from an open set pair. We always use augmented trees to implement the inner map. We discuss two implementations of the outer map: the augmented tree (which makes the whole data structure a segment-tree-like structure [15]) and the prefix structures (which makes the whole algorithm a sweepline algorithm). At the end of this section we also present a simple augmented map structure to answer the counting or weightedsum queries in Section 6.3. Similarly it can be implemented by both multi-level trees or the sweepline algorithm.  6.1  The segment tree  If the outer map is implemented by the augmented tree, then the whole segment map structure becomes very similar to the segment tree data structure [15]. Previous work has also studied a similar data structure [24, 10]. We note that their version can deal with more types of queries and problems, but we know of no implementation work of a similar data structure. Our goal is to show how to apply the simple augmented map framework to model the segment query problem, and show an efficient and concise implementation of it. In segment trees [15], each subtree represents an open interval, and all nodes in the same layer span the whole interval (see Figure 2 as an example). The intervals are separated by the endpoints of input segments, and the two children partition the interval of the parent. Our version is slightly different from the classic segment trees in that we also use internal nodes to represent a point on the axis. For example, a tree node u denoting an interval (l, r) have its left child ul representing (l, k(u)), right child ur representing (k(u), r), and the single node u itself, is the solid point at it key k(u). For each subtree u, we track the open sets of its corresponding interval, which is exactly the augmented value of the sub-map rooted at u. Like the augmented value, the open sets of a node can be generated by combining the open sets of its two children (and the entry in itself) using Equation 8. Answering Queries more efficiently. The AL EFT on the augmented tree structure SO is costly (O(n log n) in the worst case), as it would require O(log n) U NION and D IFFERENT on the way. Here we present a more efficient query algorithm making use of the tree structure. Besides the open sets, in each node we store two helper sets (called the symetric difference sets): the segments starting in its left half and going beyond the whole interval (R(ul )\L(ur ) as in Equation 8), and vice versa (L(ur )\R(ul )). These symetric difference sets are the side-effect of computing the open sets. Hence in implementations we just keep them with no extra work. We start with the 1D version of the query algorithm, which only queries all segments across some x-coordinate xq . We make an assumption that xq is unique to all the input endpoints. We search xq in the tree and add related segments into the return list on the way. Denote the current tree node being visited as u. Then xq falls in either the left or the right side of k(u). WLOG, we assume xq goes right. Then all segments starting in the left half and going beyond the range of u should be reported because they must cover xq . All such segments are in R(l(u))\L(r(u)), which is in u’s symetric difference sets. We then go down to the right to continue the search recursively. Taking y-coordinates into consideration, we just search the corresponding y-range in the symetric difference sets related to the x-search. The cost of returning all related segments is O(k + log2 n), and the cost of returning the count is O(log2 n).  10  (a) Range Query  The Range Tree:  F  C  A  D  H Aug value here: {𝑮, 𝑯, 𝑰}  y B  G  C D  F  L  J  H  E  J  I  L  K  A  The Sweepline Prefix structure here: Algorithm: {𝑨, 𝑫, 𝑪, 𝑩}  x  (b) Segment Query The Segment Tree: F  A  C  J H Aug value here: ⟨ 𝑪𝑮 , 𝑯𝑰 ⟩  D  y C  G E D  A  H  L  I K  F  B  J  L  The Sweepline Prefix structure here: Algorithm: {𝑫𝑭, 𝑪𝑮}  x  (c) Segment Counting Query The SegCount Tree: FK AB  CG  DE  HI  MJ Aug value here:  NL  { 𝑱, 𝟏 , 𝑰, 𝟏 , 𝑳, 𝟏 , 𝑯, −𝟏 , 𝑵, −𝟏 , (𝑴, −𝟏)}  x B  K  C  M N  H G A  D  F  E  I  The Sweepline Prefix structure here: Algorithm: { 𝑨, 𝟏 , 𝑬, 𝟏 , 𝑫, −𝟏 , 𝑮, 𝟏  L J  y , 𝑩, −𝟏 , (𝑪, −𝟏)}  Figure 2: An illustration of all data structures introduced in this paper. The input data are shown in the middle rectangle. We show the corresponding tree structures on the top, and the sweepline algorithm on the bottom. We use caption letters (e.g., A) to denote points, and a pair of endpoints (e.g., AB) to denote a segment. All the inner trees (the augmented values or the prefix structures) are shown as sets (for the segment tree, it is a pair of sets) with elements listed in sorted order.  11  6.2  The Sweepline Algorithm  If we use the prefix structure to represent the outer map, then the algorithm becomes a sweepline algorithm (shown as SS in Table 4). We store at each endpoint p the augmented value of the prefix of all points up to p. Because the corresponding interval is a prefix, the left open set is always an empty set. For simplicity we only keep the right open set as the prefix structure, which is all “alive” segments up to the current event point (a segment (l, r, y) is alive at some point x ∈ X iff l ≤ x ≤ r). There are two kinds of events: reaching a left endpoint or a right endpoint. Accordingly, each left endpoint triggers an insertion of its corresponding segment into the prefix structure while the right ones cause deletions. This is also what happens when a single point is plugged in as ur in Equation 8. In the batching step, we compute the augmented value of each block, which is the open sets of the corresponding interval. Basically, the left open set of an interval are segments with their right endpoints inside the interval, noted as OL , and the right open set is those with left endpoints inside, noted as OR . Note that the actual open sets should be hOR \OL , OL \OR i, but the intersection of the two sets will cancel out in the further computation (when calling the combine function f ), so we just keep them here as is5 . In the sweeping step, the prefix structure is updated by the combine function fseg , but only on the right open set, which is equivalent to first taking a UNION with OR and then a DIFFERENCE with OL . Finally in the refining step, likewise, we insert at each left endpoint and delete at the right ones. This algorithm fits the sweepline abstraction in Theorem 1, so the corresponding bound holds. Answering Queries. The AL EFT on the prefix structure is straightforward which is just a binary search xq in the sorted list of x-coordinates. In that prefix structure all segments are sorted by the y-coordinates, and we search the y-range on that using a 1D range search. Since all alive segments can be easily tracked in the corresponding prefix structure, many different kinds of queries can be conducted by different augmentations on the inner tree. In all, a query on reporting all intersecting segments costs O(log n + k) (k is the output size), and a query on counting related segments costs O(log n).  6.3  A Tree Structure to Answer the Total Count of Intersected Segments  We also present a simple two-level augmented map structure to answer segment count queries (see the Segment Count Query in Table 4). We organize the y-coordinates in the outer map, and deal with x-coordinates in the inner tree (Figure 2 (c)). We first look at the inner map. For a set of 1D segments, a feasible solution is to count the segments across some xq is to organize all end points in sorted order, and assign signed flags to them as values: left endpoints with 1, and right endpoints with −1 (w and −w for the weighted version). Then the prefix sum of the values up to xq is the number of alive segments. To efficiently query the prefix sum we can organize all endpoints as keys in an augmented map, with values being the signed flags, and augmented values adding values. We call this map the count map of the segments. To extend it to 2D scenario, we use a similar outer map as range query problem. On this level y-coordinates are keys, the x-coordinates are values, and the augmented value is the count map on x-coordinates of all segments in the outer map. The combine function is U NION on the count maps. However, different from range maps, here each tree node represents two endpoints of that segment, with signed flags 1 (left) and −1 (right) respectively, leading to a different base function (gcnt ). We present corresponding definition and illustration on both multi-level tree structures and the sweepline paradigm in Table 4 and Figure 2 (c).  7  Experiments  We implement our algorithms for range queries and segment queries using a parallel augmented map library (PAM) [48], which provides simple and efficient interface for augmented maps using augmented trees. We also implement the abstract parallel sweepline paradigm as described in Section 4. On top of the PAM library all of our data structures only need about 100 lines of code. Some examples are given in Appendix F and we plan to make all our code available on GitHub. All the algorithms in this library match the versions described in this paper. More details about PAM and the implementation of the sweepline paradigm are in Appendix D and E. The PAM library supports persistence by path-copying. 5 Even  computing the actual open sets will not affect the asymptotical bound.  12  For 2D range queries, we test the range tree in Section 5.1 (RangeTree) and the sweepline algorithm in Section 5.2 (RangeSweep). For 2D segment queries, we test the segment tree in Section 6.1 (SegTree), the sweepline algorithm in Section 6.2 (SegSweep). We also test the tree version for answering counting queries in Section 6.3 (SegCntTree). We compare our sequential range tree with a sequential library CGAL [41] 6 . We test both queries on reporting weighted sums (query-sum) and all queried elements (query-all). On reporting all queried elements, since the cost is largely affected by the output size, we test a small and a large query window with average output size less than 10 and about 106 respectively. We accumulate query time of 103 large-window queries and 106 small window queries. For query-sum we accumulate 106 queries picked uniformly randomly in the whole range. For parallel queries we run all queries in parallel. Each Query-all functions also can run in parallel. The sequential algorithms tested in this paper are directly running the parallel algorithms on one core. We use n for the input size, p for the number of threads. All coordinate ranges are set to be 0 to 109 . For the sweepline algorithms we set k = p, and do not repeat applying the parallel paradigm to blocks. The theoretical bounds for all the tested functions are given in Table 1. We run experiments on a 72-core Dell R930 with 4 x Intel(R) Xeon(R) E7-8867 v4 (18 cores, 2.4GHz and 45MB L3 cache) with 1GB memory. Each core is 2-way hyperthreaded giving 144 hyperthreads. Our code was compiled using the g++ 5.4.1 compiler which supports the Cilk Plus extensions. We compile with -O2. In the rest of this section we first show results on range queries and segment queries, and then give comparisons across all tested structures, as well as some conclusions in the summary part. We also give the result on our lazy-insert function for range trees and discuss in Appendix C. 2D Range Queries. We test our implementation on RangeTree and RangeSweep addressing 2D range queries, querying both the sum of weights and the full list, sequentially and in parallel. We show the running time on n = 108 in Table 5. We also give the the speedup on n = 108 points in Figure 3 (a). We compare our sequential version with the CGAL [41] library, which is sequential and only supports query-all. For parallel performance, we cannot find a comparable parallel C++ implementation of range query problems, so we just compare the two versions (RangeSweep vs. RangeTree) of our implementations. We first look at the sequential performance. RangeTree and RangeSweep demonstrate similar performance and significantly outperform CGAL (about 50% of the running time). Among all, RangeTree is the fastest in construction (see Table 5), which is about 20% faster than RangeSweep and 50% faster than CGAL. Some other discussions about comparing our sequential RangeTree with CGAL are given in [48]. We then discuss the parallel performance. As shown in Figure 3(a), on n = 108 , the speedup of both RangeTree and RangeSweep scale up to 144 threads. On 108 points and all 144 threads, RangeTree can finish the construction in 3.1s, achieving a 63-fold speedup (see Table 5). RangeSweep has relatively worse parallel performance. It achieves a 33-fold √ speedup and spends 7.3s on construction in parallel. This is mainly because of its bad theoretical parallel depth (Õ( n) vs. logarithmic). As for RangeTree not only the construction is highly-parallelized, but the combine function (union) is also parallelizable. For queries, if only the weighted sum is required, the RangeSweep algorithm shows the best performance in both theory and practice. It only requires two plain binary searches on the top level and then two range queries, while the RangeTree requires at most O(log n) of such range queries. On query-all, RangeSweep is much slower than the other two when query window is large, but shows better performance for small windows (see Table 5). This is consistent with their theoretical bounds. In the query-all case on large window, our RangeTree largely outperforms the other two algorithms. As for speedup of parallel queries, the speedup numbers are above 65 because they are embarrassingly parallelized. We show the number of experiments on dynamic update of range trees in Table 6 and discuss the results in Appendix C. 2D Segment Query. In this section we show the running times on segment queries using SegSweep, SegTree and SegCntTree. We give all running times on n = 5 × 107 in Table 5. We also show the parallel speedup in Figure 3(b). Note that for these structures on input size n (number of segments), actually 2n points are in the tree7 . Thus we set input size to be n = 5 × 107 for comparison with the trees for range queries. We do not find comparable C++ implementations on exactly the same problem so we just compare our three implementations with each other. We first look at the sequential performance. SegCntTree is the fastest in construction, while SegTree runs 6 similar comparison is also shown in [48], but in this paper we also compare it with RangeSweep and consider different size of query windows. 7 This is not exactly true for CountTree. With n input segments the size of the outer tree is n, but the number of elements we are dealing with is still 2n (all the endpoints). For example the size of the inner tree at the root is 2n.  13  Construction Speedup  60  RangeSweep RangeTree  32 16 8  (a). Range Query, n = 108 , varying p  4 2 1  1  2  4  8  16  32  72  144  Number of Threads  Construction Speedup  64  SegSweep SegTree SegCntTree  32 16 8  (b). Segment Query, n = 108 , varying p  4 2 1  1  2  4  8  16  32  72  144  Number of Threads Figure 3: The sequential time and speedup of building various data structures for range queries and segment queries. significantly slower than the other two. This is fairly reasonable because SegTree stores four sets (the open sets and the symetric difference sets) in each node, and calls two DIFFERENCE functions and two UNION functions in each combine function. Similarly, the SegCntTree is faster than the other two in construction probably because it only reports the weighted sum, indicating less information stored in the tree. In addition, SegCntTree has a smaller outer tree size (5 × 107 vs. 108 ), requiring fewer invocations of combine functions on the top level. For parallel performance, all three data structures scale up to 144 threads (see Figure 3(b)). For n = 5 × 107 input segments, SegCntTree has the least construction time of 3.205s. Both SegTree and SegCntTree get more than 60-fold speedup. The lack of parallelism of SegSweep is because of the same reason as RangeSweep. We then discuss the performance on answering queries. On reporting the weighted sum, SegSweep shows significant efficiency compared to the other two because of its better theoretical bound. SegCntTree shows better performance than SegTree probably because of its simpler structure and more intuitive searching process. As for querying all segments, SegTree is faster than SegSweep on large query window, but is slower when the query window is small. This may be of the reason that the secondary range query on y-coordinate, for SegSweep, is just a range searching on a large tree containing all segments across the queried x-coordinate. For SegTree, however, the y-range-query is conducted on many smaller trees (the symetric difference sets), and in all would save time when output size is large. The query speedup for all queries is over 58. Summary. Since all results in Table 5 are on 108 elements, we briefly compare all the data structures. There are two  14  Algorithm  Seq. RangeSweep 243.889 RangeTree 200.590 CGAL 525.940 SegSweep 243.514 SegTree 340.752 SegCntTree 202.006  Build, s Par. 7.304 3.161 6.811 5.513 3.205  Spd. 33.39 63.46 35.75 61.81 63.03  Query-sum, µs Seq. Par. Spd. 12.744 0.147 86.69 61.012 0.752 81.13 6.917 0.081 85.39 46.599 0.561 83.06 33.582 0.401 83.75  Query-all (small), µs Seq. Par. Spd. 11.441 0.134 85.38 17.069 0.212 80.51 153.542 5.908 0.074 79.83 31.340 0.379 82.69 -  Query-all (large), ms Seq. Par. Spd. 213.273 1.968 108.37 44.717 0.686 65.19 110.941 155.717 1.594 97.69 76.211 1.298 58.71 -  Table 5: The running time of different data structures on range queries (n = 108 ) and segment queries (n = 5 × 107 ). “Seq.”, “Par.” and “Spd.” refer to the sequential, parallel running time and the speedup respectively. types of algorithms: sweepline algorithms SegSweep and RangeSweep, and multi-level trees RangeTree, SegTree and SegCntTree. For the construction of multi-level trees, with properly defined augmentation, the construction is automatically done by the augmented map constructor in PAM, which is highly-parallelized (logarithmic depth). For √ the sweepline algorithms, the parallelism comes from the blocking-and-batching process, with a Õ( n) depth. Thus the speedup of the sweepline algorithms is slightly worse than the multi-level trees. The two sweepline algorithms have close construction time. For the multi-level trees, SegTree is much slower than the other two. This is because it stores more information in each node (four maps) and has more complicated combine function. For range queries, RangeTree spends less time in construction, and is more efficient in reporting the full list of queried points for large output size. The RangeSweep algorithm is especially good in just reporting the sum of weights or the full list with small size. For the segment queries, although SegCntTree is fastest in construction, it only answers weight queries. SegSweep reports the weighted sum rather fast and requires reasonable constructing time. For query-all, SegTree answers queries the most efficiently on large output size, but requires longer construction time.  8  Conclusion  This paper we develop fast and concise implementations of a broad set of parallel algorithms for range and segment queries that are very much faster and simpler than the previous implementations as well as theoretically efficient. We did this by using a simple framework on the abstraction of augmented maps. Based on different representations (augmented trees and prefix structures), we design both multi-level trees and sweepline algorithms addressing range and segment queries. We implement all algorithms in these paper and test the performance both sequentially and in parallel. Experiments show that our algorithm achieve good speedup, and have good performance even running sequentially, and outperforms existing sequential implementations such as CGAL.  15  References [1] Pankaj K. Agarwal, Kyle Fox, Kamesh Munagala, and Abhinandan Nath. Parallel algorithms for constructing range and nearest-neighbor searching data structures. In Proc. ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGAI Symp. on Principles of Database Systems (PODS), pages 429–440, 2016. [2] Alok Aggarwal, Bernard Chazelle, Leo Guibas, Colm Ó’Dúnlaing, and Chee Yap. Parallel computational geometry. Algorithmica, 3(1-4):293–327, 1988. [3] Deepak Ajwani, Nodari Sitchinava, and Norbert Zeh. Geometric algorithms for private-cache chip multiprocessors. In European Symposium on Algorithms, pages 75–86. Springer, 2010. [4] Yaroslav Akhremtsev and Peter Sanders. Fast parallel operations on search trees. In 23rd IEEE International Conference on High Performance Computing, HiPC 2016, Hyderabad, India, December 19-22, 2016, pages 291–300, 2016. [5] Lars Arge, Gerth Stølting Brodal, Rolf Fagerberg, and Morten Laustsen. Cache-oblivious planar orthogonal range searching and counting. In Proceedings of the twenty-first annual symposium on Computational geometry, pages 160–169. ACM, 2005. [6] Lars Arge, Vasilis Samoladas, and Jeffrey Scott Vitter. On two-dimensional indexability and optimal range search indexing. In Proceedings of the eighteenth ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGART symposium on Principles of database systems, pages 346–357. ACM, 1999. [7] Lars Arge and Jeffrey Scott Vitter. Optimal external memory interval management. SIAM Journal on Computing, 32(6):1488–1508, 2003. [8] Lars Arge and Norbert Zeh. Simple and semi-dynamic structures for cache-oblivious planar orthogonal range searching. In Proceedings of the twenty-second annual symposium on Computational geometry, pages 158–166. ACM, 2006. [9] M. J. Atallah, R. Cole, and M. T. Goodrich. Cascading divide-and-conquer: A technique for designing parallel algorithms. SIAM J. Comput., 18(3):499–532, June 1989. [10] Mikhail J. Atallah and Michael T. Goodrich. Efficient plane sweeping in parallel. In Proceedings of the Second Annual ACM SIGACT/SIGGRAPH Symposium on Computational Geometry, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA, June 2-4, 1986, pages 216–225, 1986. [11] Dmitry Basin, Edward Bortnikov, Anastasia Braginsky, Guy Golan-Gueta, Eshcar Hillel, Idit Keidar, and Moshe Sulamy. Kiwi: A key-value map for scalable real-time analytics. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming, pages 357–369. ACM, 2017. [12] J. L. Bentley and D. Wood. An optimal worst case algorithm for reporting intersections of rectangles. IEEE Trans. Comput., 29(7):571–577, July 1980. [13] Jon Louis Bentley. Decomposable searching problems. Information processing letters, 8(5):244–251, 1979. [14] Jon Louis Bentley and Jerome H Friedman. Data structures for range searching. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 11(4):397–409, 1979. [15] Jon Louis Bentley and Derick Wood. An optimal worst case algorithm for reporting intersections of rectangles. IEEE Transactions on Computers, (7):571–577, 1980. [16] Mark De Berg, Marc Van Kreveld, Mark Overmars, and Otfried Cheong Schwarzkopf. Computational Geometry. Springer, 2000. [17] Ashwin R Bharambe, Mukesh Agrawal, and Srinivasan Seshan. Mercury: supporting scalable multi-attribute range queries. In ACM SIGCOMM computer communication review, volume 34, pages 353–366. ACM, 2004. [18] Gabriele Blankenagel and Ralf Hartmut Güting. External segment trees. Algorithmica, 12(6):498–532, 1994. 16  [19] Guy E Blelloch, Daniel Ferizovic, and Yihan Sun. Just join for parallel ordered sets. In Proc. of the ACM Symp. on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA), pages 253–264, 2016. [20] Guy E. Blelloch and Margaret Reid-Miller. Fast set operations using treaps. In Proc. ACM Symp. on Parallel Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA), pages 16–26, 1998. [21] Robert D. Blumofe and Charles E. Leiserson. Space-efficient scheduling of multithreaded computations. SIAM J. on Computing, 27(1):202–229, 1998. [22] Richard P. Brent. The parallel evaluation of general arithmetic expressions. Journal of the ACM, 21(2):201–206, April 1974. [23] Chee Yong Chan and Yannis E Ioannidis. Hierarchical cubes for range-sum queries. In Proceedings of the 25th VLDB Conference, pages 675–686, 1999. [24] Bernard Chaselle. Intersecting is easier than sorting. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’84, pages 125–134, New York, NY, USA, 1984. ACM. [25] Yatin Chawathe, Sriram Ramabhadran, Sylvia Ratnasamy, Anthony LaMarca, Scott Shenker, and Joseph Hellerstein. A case study in building layered dht applications. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 35(4):97–108, 2005. [26] Bernard Chazelle and Herbert Edelsbrunner. An optimal algorithm for intersecting line segments in the plane. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 39(1):1–54, 1992. [27] Vid Domiter and Borut Žalik. Sweep-line algorithm for constrained delaunay triangulation. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 22(4):449–462, 2008. [28] James R. Driscoll, Neil Sarnak, Daniel D. Sleator, and Robert E. Tarjan. Making data structures persistent. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 38(1):86 – 124, 1989. [29] Steven Fortune. A sweepline algorithm for voronoi diagrams. Algorithmica, 2(1-4):153, 1987. [30] Michael T. Goodrich, Mujtaba R. Ghouse, and J Bright. Sweep methods for parallel computational geometry. Algorithmica, 15(2):126–153, 1996. [31] R. L. Graham. Bounds on multiprocessing timing anomalies. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 17(2):416–429, 1969. [32] Ching-Tien Ho, Rakesh Agrawal, Nimrod Megiddo, and Ramakrishnan Srikant. Range queries in olap data cubes. In Proc. ACM International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), pages 73–88, New York, NY, USA, 1997. ACM. [33] Rico Jacob and Nodari Sitchinava. Lower bounds in the asymmetric external memory model. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures, SPAA ’17, 2017. [34] Joseph JáJá. An introduction to parallel algorithms, volume 17. Addison-Wesley Reading, 1992. [35] Li Jin, Donguk Kim, Lisen Mu, Deok-Soo Kim, and Shi-Min Hu. A sweepline algorithm for euclidean voronoi diagram of circles. Computer-Aided Design, 38(3):260–272, 2006. [36] George S Lueker. A data structure for orthogonal range queries. In Foundations of Computer Science, 1978., 19th Annual Symposium on, pages 28–34. IEEE, 1978. [37] Mark McKenney and Tynan McGuire. A parallel plane sweep algorithm for multi-core systems. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGSPATIAL international conference on advances in geographic information systems, pages 392–395. ACM, 2009. [38] Kurt Mehlhorn and Stefan Näher. Implementation of a sweep line algorithm for the straight line segment intersection problem. 1994.  17  [39] Otto Nurmi. A fast line-sweep algorithm for hidden line elimination. BIT Numerical Mathematics, 25(3):466– 472, 1985. [40] Mark H Overmars. Geometric data structures for computer graphics: an overview. In Theoretical foundations of computer graphics and CAD, pages 21–49. Springer, 1988. [41] Mark H Overmars. Designing the computational geometry algorithms library cgal. In Applied computational geometry towards geometric engineering, pages 53–58. Springer, 1996. [42] Bernd-Uwe Pagel, Hans-Werner Six, Heinrich Toben, and Peter Widmayer. Towards an analysis of range query performance in spatial data structures. In Proceedings of the twelfth ACM SIGACT-SIGMOD-SIGART symposium on Principles of database systems, pages 214–221. ACM, 1993. [43] Hanan Samet. The design and analysis of spatial data structures, volume 199. Addison-Wesley Reading, MA, 1990. [44] Neil Sarnak and Robert E. Tarjan. Planar point location using persistent search trees. Commun. ACM, 29(7):669–679, July 1986. [45] M. I. Shamos and D. Hoey. Geometric intersection problems. In 17th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (sfcs 1976), pages 208–215, Oct 1976. [46] Elaine Shi, John Bethencourt, TH Hubert Chan, Dawn Song, and Adrian Perrig. Multi-dimensional range query over encrypted data. In Security and Privacy, 2007. SP’07. IEEE Symposium on, pages 350–364. IEEE, 2007. [47] Nodari Sitchinava. Computational geometry in the parallel external memory model. SIGSPATIAL Special, 4(2):18–23, 2012. [48] Yihan Sun, Daniel Ferizovic, and Guy E. Blelloch. PAM: parallel augmented maps. In Proc. ACM SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming (PPoPP), 2018. [49] Dan E Willard. Predicate-oriented database search algorithms. Technical report, HARVARD UNIV CAMBRIDGE MA AIKEN COMPUTATION LAB, 1978. [50] Kjell Winblad. Faster concurrent range queries with contention adapting search trees using immutable data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.00722, 2017. [51] Borut Žalik. An efficient sweep-line delaunay triangulation algorithm. Computer-Aided Design, 37(10):1027– 1038, 2005. [52] Changxi Zheng, Guobin Shen, Shipeng Li, and Scott Shenker. Distributed segment tree: Support of range query and cover query over dht. In IPTPS, 2006.  A  Extend the Sweepline Algorithm to Report All Points in Range Queries  In the main body we have mentioned that by using a different augmentation, we can adjust the sweepline algorithm for range query to report all queried points. It is similar to the RangeSweep, but instead of weight, we store the x-coordinates as values, and set the augmented value to be the maximum x-coordinate among all points in the subtree. To answer queries we first narrow the range to the points in tree tR by just searching xR . Then all queried points are those in tR with x-coordinates larger than xL and y-coordinate in [yL , yR ]. We still conduct a range query in [yL , yR ] on tR , but adapt an optimization that if the augmented value of a tree node is less than xL , the whole subtree is discarded. Otherwise, at least part of the points in the tree would be relevant and we recursively deal with its two subtrees. We give the algorithm in Algorithm 2. Here A is a list, and the addition (+) on A means to append a new entry to A. Now we analyze the cost of the query algorithm. Assume that the output size is k. The total cost is asymptotically the number of tree nodes the algorithm visits. All reported points, obviously, will be visited. All the points that are visited but not reported, are visited either by the top-level range query, or those visited by in filter x but not 18  Algorithm 2: R EPORTA LL (t,xL , yL , yR ) Input: Current tree node t, the lower bound of the x-coordinate of the query window xL , the y-range [yL , yR ] Output: Return all points in the subtree rooted at r that have x-coordinate no less than xL and y-coordinate in range [yL , yR ] 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23  while r is not empty do if y(t) < yL then t ← r(t); continue if y(t) > yL then t ← l(t); continue A←∅ if (x(t) ≥ xL ) then A ← A + e(t); p ← l(t) while p do if y(p) < yL then p ← r(p); continue; if x(p) > xL then A ← A + e(p); F ILTER X(r(p), xL , A); p ← l(p) p ← r(t) while p do if y(p) > yR then p ← l(p); continue; if x(p) > xL then A ← A + e(p); F ILTER X(l(p), xL , A); p ← l(p) return A Function F ILTER X(t, x, A) if A(t) < x then return; if x(r) > x then A ← A + e(t); F ILTER X(l(t), x, A); F ILTER X(r(t), x, A);  added to the return list in Line 21. The top level search will visit at most O(log n) nodes. For Line 21, if a node is visited, that means at least one node in its subtree will be reported. Hence, k reported node will result in at most k log n nodes to be visited on the path. We call the path to find a node the “finding path” of a node. However, on the top levels, the finding paths are shared. For example, the first node of all k finding paths is the root, which will only be visited once instead of k times. Obviously the worst case occurs in when all the output nodes are leaves. In this case if we reconstruct all nodes being visited by filter x we will find them to be a consecutive component from the root to some leaves, which are those to be reported. Then all visited nodes, actually, is the nodes visited by the union function based on split-join (this union algorithm is also the exact algorithm used in PAM library) model [19] when merge this tree with a set of all output points. This costs O(k log(n/k + 1)). Detailed proof for the complexity of the union function can be found in [19].  B  Proof for Corollary 1  Proof. To reduce the depth of the ParaParadigm mentioned in Section 4, we adopt the same algorithm as introduced in Theorem 1, but in the last refining step, repeatedly applying the same algorithm on each block. If we repeat for a c of times, for the i-th time the work would be the same as splitting the total list into k i blocks. Hence the work is still O(n log n) every round. After c rounds the total work is O(cn log n). For depth, notice that the first step costs logarithmic depth, and the second step, after c iterations, in total, requires depth Õ(cb) depth. The final refining step, as the size of each block is getting smaller and  smaller, the cost of each block is at most O( bni log n) in the i-th iteration. In total, the depth is Õ cb + bnc , which, when c 1 b = c c+1 n c+1 , is Õ(n1/(c+1) ). Let  = 1/(c + 1), which can be arbitrary small by adjusting the value of c, we can get the bound in Corollary 1.  19  Algorithm AUG I NSERT L AZY I NSERT  m 10 105  Seq. (s) 406.079 12.506  Par. (s) 5.366 -  Spd. 75.670 -  Table 6: The performance of insertions on range trees using lazy-insert in PAM. Specially, when c = log n, the depth will be reduced to poly-logarithmic, and the total work is accordingly O(n log2 n). This is equivalent to applying a recursive algorithm (very similar to the divide-and-conquer algorithm of the prefix-sum problem). Although the depth can be poly-logarithmic, it is not work-efficient any more. If we set c to some given constant, the work and depth of this algorithm are O(n log n) and O(n ) respectively.  C  Experimental Result on Dynamic Range Trees  We use the lazy-insert function (assuming a commutativity combine function) in PAM to support the insertion on range trees and test the performance. We first build an initial tree of size using our construction algorithm, and then conduct a sequence of insertions on this tree. We compare it with the plain insertion function (denoted as AUG I NSERT) in PAM which is general for the augmented tree (re-call the combine function on every node on the insertion path). We show the results in Table 6. Because the combine function takes linear time, each AUG I NSERT function costs about 40s, meaning that even 5 insertions may cost as expensive as re-build the whole tree. This function can be parallelized, with speedup about 70+. The parallelism comes from the parallel combine function U NION. The L AZY I NSERT function is much more efficient and can finish 105 insertions in 12s sequentially. Running in parallel does not really help in this case because the the combine function (U NION) is very rarely called, and even when it is called, it would be on very small tree size. When the size increases to 106 , the cost is also greater than rebuilding the whole tree. This means that in practice, if the insertions come in big bulks, rebuilding the tree (even sequentially) is often more efficient than inserting each point one by one into the tree. When there are only a small number of insertions coming in streams, L AZY I NSERT is reasonable efficient.  D  The PAM library  The PAM library [48] uses the augmented tree structure to implement the interface of the augmented maps. We give a list of the functions as well as their mathematical definitions in Table 7. Besides the standard functions defined on maps, there are some functions designed specific for augmented maps. Some of the functions are the standard functions (e.g., union, insert) augmented with an operation σ to combine values of entries with the same key. In the reasonable scenarios when two entries with the same key should appear simultaneously in the map, their values would be combined by the function σ. For example, when the same key appears in both maps involved in a union or intersection, the key will be kept as is, but their values will be combined by σ to be the new value in the result. Same case happens when an entry is inserted into a map that already has the same key in it, or when we build a map from a sequence that has multiple entries with the same key. A common scenario where this is useful for example, is to keep a count for each key, and have union and intersection sum the counts, insert add the counts, and build keep the total counts of the same key in the sequence. There are also some functions designed specific for augmented maps. For example, the aug range function returns the augmented value of all entries within a key range,which is especially useful in answering related range queries. The functions implemented in PAM are work-optimal and have low depth. The sequential and parallel cost of some functions are list in Table 2. In the PAM library, an augmented map aug map<entry> is defined using C++ templates specifying the key type, value type and the necessary information about the augmented values. The entry structure should contain the follows: • typename K: the key type (K), • function comp: K × K 7→ bool: the comparison function on K (<K ) • typename V: the value type (V ),  20  Function dom(m) find(m, k) (or m[k]) delete(m, k) insert(m, e, σ) intersect (m1 , m2 , σ) diff(m1 , m2 ) union(m1 , m2 , σ) build(s, σ) upTo(m, k) range(m, k1 , k2 ) aVal(m) aLeft(m, k) aRange(m, k1 , k2 )  Description {k(e) : e ∈ m} v if (k, v) ∈ m else  {(k0 , v) ∈ m | k0 6= k} Argument σ : V × V → V delete(m, k(e)) ∪ {(k(e), σ(v(e), m[k(e)]))} Argument σ : V × V → V {(k, σ(m1 [k], m2 [k]))| k ∈ dom(m1 ) ∩ dom(m2 )} {e ∈ m1 | k(e) 6∈ dom(m2 )} Argument σ : V × V → V diff(m1 , m2 ) ∪ diff(m2 , m1 )∪ intersect(m1 , m2 , σ) Arguments σ : V × V → V, s = he1 , e2 , . . . , en i {(k0 , σ(vi01 , vi02 , . . . )) | ∃e = (k0 , vi0j ) ∈ s, i1 < i2 < . . . } {e ∈ m | k(e) ≤ k} {e ∈ m | k1 ≤ k(e) ≤ k2 } A(m) A(m0 ) : M 0 = {e0 | e0 ∈ M, k(e0 ) < k} A(M 0 ) : M 0 = {e0 | e0 ∈ M, k1 < k(e0 ) < k2 }  Work n log n log n  Depth log n log n log n  log n  log n  n1 log    n1 n2  +1    log n1 log n2  n(log n)  log n  log n  log n  1  1  log n  log n  Table 7: The core functions on ordered maps. We assume k, k1 , k2 , k 0 ∈ K, v, v1 , v2 ∈ V and e ∈ K × V , m, m1 , m2 are ordered maps, n = |m|, ni = |mi |, n0 is the output size. s is a sequence.  represents an empty element. All bounds are in big-O (O(·)) notation. The bounds assume all the other functions (augmenting functions f , g and arguments σ, φ) have constant cost. • typename A: the augmented value type (A), • function base: K × V 7→ A: the base function (g) • function combine: A × A 7→ A: the combine function (f ) • function I: ∅ 7→ A: the identity of f (I)  E  The Implementation of Sweepline Paradigm  We implemented the sweepline paradigm introduced in Section 4. It only requires setting the list of points (in processing order) p, the number of points n, the initial prefix structure Init, the combine function (f ) f, the fold function (φ) phi and the update function (h) h. cilk for is the parallel-for supported by cilk. template<class Tp, class P, class T, class F, class Phi, class H> T* sweep(P* p, size_t n, T Init, Phi phi, F f, H h, size_t num_blocks) { size_t block_size = ((n-1)/num_blocks); Tp* Sums = new Tp[num_blocks]; T* R = new T[n+1]; // generate partial sums for each block cilk_for (size_t i = 0; i < num_blocks-1; ++i) { size_t l = i * block_size, r = l + block_size; Sums[i] = phi(p + l, p + r);} // Compute the prefix sums across blocks R[0] = Init; for (size_t i = 1; i < num_blocks; ++i) { R[i*block_size] = f(R[(i-1)*block_size], std::move(Sums[i-1])); } delete[] Sums; // Fill in final results within each block  21  cilk_for (size_t i = 0; i < num_blocks; ++i) { size_t l = i * block_size; size_t r = (i == num_blocks - 1) ? (n+1) : l + block_size; for (size_t j = l+1; j < r; ++j) R[j] = h(R[j-1], p[j-1]); } return R; }  F  Using PAM for Computational Geometry Algorithms  We give some examples of our implementations using PAM library and sweepline paradigm. We give construction code for RangeTree and RangeSweep, as well as the query code for RangeSweep. Note that the code shown here is almost all code we need to implement these data structures. Comparing with all existing libraries our implementations are much simpler and as shown in the paper, are very efficient. Range Tree. In the code w type should support operation “+”. x type and y type should support comparison functions. template<typename X,typename Y,typename W> struct Point { X x; Y y; W w; }; template<typename X,typename Y,typename W> struct RangeQuery { using P = Point<X,Y,W>; using PX = pair<X,Y>; using PY = pair<X,Y>; struct inner_map_t { using K = PY; using V = W; static bool comp(K a, K b) { return a < b;} using A = W; static A base(key_t k, val_t v) { return v; } static A combine(A a, A b) { return a+b; } static A I() { return 0;} }; using inner_map = aug_map<inner_map_t>; struct outer_map_t { using K = PX; using V = W; static bool comp(K a, K b) { return a < b;} using A = inner_map; static A base(K k, V v) { return A(make_pair(PY(k.second, k.first), v)); } static A combine(A a, A b) { return A::union(a, b, [](W x, W y) {return x+y;}); } static A I() { return A();} }; using outer_map = aug_map<outer_map_t>; void construct(vector<P>& p) { const size_t n = p.size(); pair<PX, W> *a = new pair<PX, W>[n]; cilk_for (size_t i = 0; i < n; ++i) { a[i] = make_pair(  22  make_pair(p[i].x, p[i].y), p[i].w); } range_tree = outer_map(a, a+n); } outer_map range_tree; };  RangeSweep. In the code w type should support operation “+”, as well as its inverse “-”. x type and y type should support comparison functions. Here the augmented versions of insert, union and build are used. The augmented operation is necessary to deal with duplicates in y-coordinate. template<typename X,typename Y,typename W> struct RangeQuery { using entry_t = pair<Y, W>; struct map_t { using K = Y; using V = W; static bool comp(K a, K b) { return a < b;} using A = W; static A I() {return 0;} static A base(K k, V v) {return v;} static A combine(aug_t a, aug_t b) {return a + b;} }; using c_map = aug_map<map_t>; c_map* ts; X* xs; size_t n; RangeQuery(vector<Point>& p) { n = p.size(); Point* A = p.data(); auto less = [] (Point a, Point b) {return a.x < b.x;}; parallel_sort(A,n,less); xs = new X[n]; entry_t *ys = new entry_t[n]; cilk_for (size_t i = 0; i < n; ++i) { xs[i] = A[i].x; ys[i] = entry_t(A[i].y, A[i].w); } auto plus = [] (W a, W b) {return a + b;}; auto insert = [&] (c_map m, entry_t a) { return c_map::insert(m, a, plus); }; auto fold = [&] (entry_t* s, entry_t* e) { return c_map(s,e,plus); }; auto combine = [&] (c_map m1, c_map m2) { return c_map::map_union(m1, std::move(m2), plus);}; ts = sweep<c_map>(ys, n, c_map(), insert, fold, combine); } weight query(coord x1, coord y1, coord x2, coord y2) { int l = binary_search(xs, x1); int r = binary_search(xs, x2); W left = (l<0) ? 0.0 : ts[l].aug_range(y1,y2); W right = (r<0) ? 0.0 : ts[r].aug_range(y1,y2); return right-left; }  23

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
