Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 9
ArXiv ID: hf_5612

Abstract:
arXiv:1601.01607v1 [cs.DC] 7 Jan 2016  NodIO, a JavaScript framework for volunteer-based evolutionary algorithms : first results Juan-J. Merelo*1 , Mario Garcı́a-Valdez2 , Pedro A. Castillo1 , Pablo Garcı́a-Sánchez1 , P. de las Cuevas*1 , Nuria Rico3 ‡§¶∗k† January 8, 2016  Abstract JavaScript is an interpreted language mainly known for its inclusion in web browsers, making them a container for rich Internet based applications. This has inspired its use, for a long time, as a tool for evolutionary algorithms, mainly so in browser-based volunteer computing environments. Several libraries have also been published so far and are in use. However, the last years have seen a resurgence of interest in the language, becoming one of the most popular and thus spawning the improvement of its implementations, which are now the foundation of many new client-server applications. We present such an application for running distributed volunteer-based evolutionary algorithm experiments, and we make a series of measurements to establish the speed of JavaScript in evolutionary algorithms that can serve as a baseline for comparison with other distributed computing experiments. These experiments use different integer and floating point problems, and prove that the speed of JavaScript is actually competitive with other languages commonly used by the evolutionary algorithm practitioner.  Keywords Evolutionary algorithms, evolutionary computation, distributed computing, internet computing, social networks, volunteer computing, metacomputing, performance evaluation. ∗ Manuscript  submitted for review on January 8, 2016. of Computer Architecture and Technology and CITIC University of Granada ‡2 Dept. of Graduate Studies at Instituto Tecnológico de Tijuana §3 Dept. of Statistics and Operational Research University of Granada ¶ E-mail addresses: jmerelo@ugr.es, mario@tectijuana.edu.mx, pacv@ugr.es, pablogarcia@ugr.es,nrico@ugr.es k *Corresponding author. †1 Dept.  1  1  Introduction  The need to use non-permanent and potentially massive computing infrastructure for distributed scientific experiments has lead to the rising of volunteer computing defined as a set of tools that allow citizens to donate cycles to scientific experiments by running an application [1]; this application can be embedded in a web page. And since browsers are ubiquitous, we are more interested in these kind of systems, this has led us to create a framework for evolutionary algorithm experiments that is able to work in that mode [2]. NodIO is a cloud or bare metal based volunteer evolutionary computing system derived from the NodEO library, whose architecture has been developed using JavaScript on the client as well as the server. All parts of the framework are free and available with a free license from https://github.com/JJ/splash-volunteer. As a volunteer based system, there are some issues that have to be addressed [3, 4] : 1. Volunteers are anonymous, only the Internet Protocol addresses (IP) sent in each request is known. 2. As anonymous entities, volunteers are not accountable. If a volunteer misbehaves in some way the provider cannot prosecute or discipline the volunteer. In the case of JavaScript, this issue is aggravated because even if it is obfuscated, source code and data is sent to clients. 3. Participants must also trust the application provider, regarding invasion of privacy, the integrity of their devices, and intended application. Several kind of threats are possible in this environment; first, since its programming interface is open and its code is open source, it is relatively easy to find vulnerabilities and sabotage the system, as indicated in [5], by crafting a fake request which, for instance, assigns a fake fitness to a particular chromosome. Other two different kinds of attacks are also possible: a denial of service attack as well as penetration testing. We have approached this threat in a pragmatic way: all sources, client and server, for the application, are openly released as free software. We also released as an open access paper the result of the experiments performed [2] and all data, once anonymized, as open data. This builds trust between the user and the scientist, which indeed has an impact on the performance of the system, since there is no need to include cheating checks or other functions that would degrade it. This socio-technical approach is, indeed, coherent with our whole approach to the study of a distributed volunteer system which can only be tackled by approaching it from the technical as well as the social, as in social media, angle. In general, a distributed volunteer-based evolutionary computation framework based on the browser such as NodIO is simply a client-server system whose client is, or can be, embedded in the browser via JavaScript. Since JavaScript is the only language that is present across all browsers, the choice was quite clear. Even so, there might be some issues with the performance of the language itself, which is why we have made a comparison between JavaScript and other 2  Other clients  Best individual  PUT  GET  CLIENT  Random individual  SERVER  Figure 1: Description of the proposed framework. Clients execute a JavaScript EA in the browser, which, every 100 generations, sends the best individual and receives a random one from the server. languages [6]. In that paper we prove that JavaScript can be faster than compiled languages such as Scala and, in any case, it provides a performance that is comparable to other languages usually employed in evolutionary computation and numerical optimization such as Python. Compiled languages such as Java or C might be faster when considering the performance of a single-user, but this is more than offset by the computational power of the spontaneous volunteers we can gather at whim, including people using their mobile phones or tablets. Together, the performance is several orders of magnitude higher, which is the objective in this kind of systems. Since JavaScript is quite a popular language nowadays, it also provides compilers from a number of languages, many of them in their family (like CoffeeScript), but many other outside, so researchers can, in fact, write their fitness function in Python, Erlang, Scala, or even Java, and then compile it to JavaScript. For completeness, an experiment comparing the performance of a JavaScript implementation versus Java and Matlab is included in section 3. We will first describe the NodIO architecture in the next Section.  2  NodIO architecture  The NodIO architecture has two tiers. The figure 1 describes the general system architecture and algorithm behavior. Different web technologies, such as JQuery or Chart.js have been used to build the user interface elements of the framework. 1. A REST server, that is, a server that includes several routes that can be 3  called for storing and retrieving information (the “CRUD” cycle: create, request, update, and delete) from the server. A JSON data format is used for the communication between clients and the server. There are two kinds of information: problem based, that is, related to the evolutionary algorithm such as PUTing a chromosome in or GETing a random chromosome from it, and information related to the performance and state of the experiments. It also performs logging duties, but they are basically a very lightweight and high performance data storage [7]. The server has the capability to run a single experiment, storing the chromosomes in a data structure that is reset when the solution is found. 2. A client that includes the evolutionary algorithm as JavaScript code embedded in a web page that displays graphs, some additional links, and information on the experiment. This code runs an evolutionary algorithm island starting with a random population, then it sends, every 100 generations, the best individual back to the server (via a PUT request), and requests a random individual from the server (via a GET request). This is the invariant part of the framework, but other than that, the algorithm can be run in many different ways: stopping when a solution is found or using Web Workers. In fact, since it is a pool-based system such as the one described in [8], any kind of client that calls the application programming interface (API) can be used, written in any kind of language. However, in this paper we are going to focus on the dynamics and measurements of the volunteer part of the framework. The researcher only has to change a function, which can be written in JavaScript or in any other language with cross-compilation to JavaScript [9] to solve different optimization problems. Let us see how this system addresses the different challenges outlined above: • Scalability is provided via the use of a lightweight and high-performance, single-threaded, server based in Node.js and Express.js. Although this single server is a bottleneck since it will eventually saturate, the fact that it runs as a non-blocking single thread allows the service of many requests. In fact, a limit in the number of simultaneous requests will be reached, but so far it has not been found, unlike what we found in our previous systems, DCoR, [10], which had a low scalability. • The framework is heterogeneous since it does not need any performance, operating system, or even browser requirement as long as JavaScript is enabled: anyone visiting the page, even from mobile devices, can load the algorithm. In case the browser does not support HTML5 Web workers (e.g., Windows Phone or some version of Android) or their use has been disabled, a basic version of NodIO can also be used. • Fault tolerance is always an issue, and in this case, the single point of failure would be the server: the system, as such, would break down if the server fails. However, the individual islands in every browser would 4  continue running, and having access to just one of them would allow the local algorithm to proceed. In fact, the island does not need the server to run: it runs locally if needed, with the only exception that it is obviously unable to communicate with the rest of the islands. • Adaptiveness is achieved simply through the autonomous operation of every individual island without any synchronization mechanism. The islands in the system are, in fact, unaware of each other, communicating only through the server. This architecture has been tested in other high demand systems with success, but in the case of NodIO, additional experiments are needed to asses the scalability of the communication system. • Since the algorithm runs in the browser, user’s safety is achieved through its sandbox mechanisms. The user is thus assured that there is no unsafe access either to their local files or even to more resources than the browser should be allotted. • Running the algorithm is just a matter of loading the page, which makes the operation totally anonymous. For the same reason, ease of use is optimal, being as easy as simply clicking on an URL, available to anyone with access to a browser. • Reasonable performance is not ensured. In fact, we should make sure that there is a reasonable amount of clients over which the performance achieved is better than what you would obtain in your own desktop system. If this is not the case, it is a pointless academic exercise. There are many different ways to validate a framework that intends to address these challenges. Some of them are included by design: it is anonymous, since no accounts are needed to participate in the experiment, it is safe for the user, since we are using the browser black box, and it is also heterogeneous. We have designed the experiments so that they show adaptability to different types of experiments and clients, scalability with the number of clients and the problem size, and measured performance by comparing it with a baseline configuration, with which, as indicated above, is compatible and can be used in a complementary way. Fault tolerance will be experimented by dropping the server and checking the continuity of the experiments. After the initial experiments [2], we realized that we needed to make some improvements. So, in order to improve the number of cycles per user, we enhanced the basic architecture in several different aspects. One proposed improvement involved restarting the client once the solution was found, so that as long as the user was visiting the page it was running an evolutionary algorithm. Another was a small algorithmic enhancement: instead of having a fixed population, population size was randomly distributed between 128 and 256 and different for each client. We called this instance of the architecture NodIO-W2 . The other improvement was to use the Web Worker API as described next. The rationale for this change comes from the realization that JavaScript has been commonly used to develop client-side scripts that handle the user 5  interface, communicating asynchronously with servers and updating the content that is displayed [11]. Long-running scripts like those proposed in this work can interfere with the responsiveness of the web application, because everything is handled by a single thread. The Web Workers specification [12] defines an API that allows Web developers to execute long-running scripts in parallel with the scripts of the main page. Worker scripts are spawned in the background allowing a thread-like operation using message-passing as the communication mechanism between the worker’s execution environment and the main thread. According to the Web Workers W3C Candidate Recommendation [12] workers are expected to be long-lived, they have a high start-up performance cost, and a high per-instance memory cost. The Web Worker API is implemented in current versions of both desktop and mobile web browsers. For volunteer computing using the Web Worker API brings several advantages over a single threaded implementation: • If the browser uses a tabbed document interface, the worker script keeps running in the background even in case the user brings forward another tabbed window. • Several evolutionary algorithms can be executed in parallel in a single web page. • Many implementations of the Web Worker API can use multiple-core CPUs for the execution of worker scripts, in particular the execution in multiple-core CPUs was tested in desktop versions of Chrome, FireFox and Safari. • Each NodEO instance can be restarted independently. A sequence diagram of NodIO-W2 , is presented in Figure 2. In this version, clients use the Web Workers API to run two NodEO instances per browser. The sequence diagram shows the interaction between processes in a time sequence. In this version there are two kinds of asynchronous messages: HTTP Requests shown as bold arrows between the client and the server where PUT and GET HTTP methods are represented by red and blue arrows respectively. There are also messages between workers and the main thread locally in the client, which are shown as thin solid arrows. There are three processes involved: • Node.js This is the server side process which is basically the same as used previously, except for some minor log-related changes. • Client main thread The main script creates worker instances and handles the user interface. • Worker global scope The worker execution space does not have access to the Document Object Model (DOM) or JQuery objects in the main thread. Asynchronous HTTP requests to the server are implemented using the XMLHttpRequest object.  6  CLIENT Worker Global Scope  SERVER Web Page Scope  Express.js  JQuery Chart.js DOM  XHR NodIO  2  3  Loads Worker Script Creates Worker Instance Assigns new UUID  winston  NodIO  Sequence Initialised 1 Experiment Chromosome Array Reset  User Visits Site Experiment  GET index.html  GET worker.js  Message: Start  Worker.js  4  Node.js Process  Creates Population Runs n generations PUT: Best individual  IF NOT GLOBAL BEST: GET Random Message: IterationData  REPEAT  5  Updates DOM With new data Experiment  1.2.3  ELSE: PUT: Best individual Message: Finished  Worker Instance 7 Reset Assign new UUID  6  Starts Again in m seconds  Worker.js  Experiment Sequence Incremented Chromosome Array Reset Start New Experiment  Message: Start  Figure 2: Description of the W2 version of NodIO. In this version, clients use Web Workers to run the evolutionary algorithm, with two of them per browser. The sequence of events happens as follows: 1. First the NodIO process is started in Node.js. As part of the initialization procedure, the sequential number of experiments is initialized and a log file is created. The shared pool implemented as an array is reset. 2. A volunteer follows the link of the experiment triggering a GET HTTP request, then the page is loaded. 3. The main script renders the page and creates the worker instance. In order to create a dedicated worker instance, another GET request is sent to the server, then the client receives the second worker implementation script. Each worker instance executes over time one or more evolutionary  7  algorithms islands. Each island starts with a random population and it is assigned a universally unique identifier (UUID). The UUID is included in each of the HTTP requests sent to the server. The initial parameters for each island can be distinct. Once the worker is created and the parameters have been set, a message is sent to the worker to start the algorithm. 4. The worker first creates the population following the previously specified parameters. Once the population has been initialized, the EA generation loop is started. After n generations the state of the population is evaluated. The chromosome with the best fitness is sent to the shared population with a PUT HTTP request. If the best fitness is not the global best, the EA loop must continue, but first a chromosome is randomly selected from the shared population. The current generation number and the best chromosome are also sent to the client’s main thread in order to update the DOM to display the current state of the island (described next). These messages are all asynchronous, so the EA loop of the worker continues even before a message is received by the target. If the best fitness is a global best, the best chromosome is sent to the server and the loop ends. A message is sent to the main thread indicating that the best individual has been found. 5. The main thread receives messages from workers as events handled by a callback function. When an iteration message is received, the page is updated by displaying a dynamic plot of the generation number and best fitness, and a representation of the chromosome is also generated. 6. When a global best is received from an island, the current experiment ends, the experiment number is incremented, and the population array is reset. 7. When the main thread receives a message indicating that a worker has ended the EA loop, that worker is reinitialized. The worker process is not ended, to avoid the start-up cost, only the parameters and population are reset and a new UUID assigned. These two versions of the framework will have to be tested in the wild to measure its performance. However, before testing this framework in a real experiment, we have to establish a baseline for comparison.  3  Baseline Experiments  We have used the classical Trap function [13] used as well as the Rastrigin’s floating-point optimization problem. Since JavaScript is a functional language and declaring a different function and handing at the creation of the algorithm object, called Classic, is the only change needed to work with a different problem.  8  Figure 3: Comparison of times to solution (labeled as times) for the baseline system, using a Node.js client, for different population sizes. Only runs in which solution has been found are used for this graph. First, we establish the baseline performance by running fifty runs of the evolutionary algorithm in a desktop client written using NodEO [14], the basic JavaScript library we have used as base to build NodIO, the framework. This experiment tries to find the solution to the 40-trap function with parameters l = 4, a = 1, b = 2, z = 3 and a population size equal to 512. The algorithm in a single island was run until the solution (a string with all ones) was found or five million evaluations had been performed. It took around a minute, on average, that is 68.9694 seconds, to perform these runs. In this experiment only 33, that is, 66% were successful. The experiments were repeated for population p = 1024, with a success rate upgraded to 100% and an average duration of 3.46 seconds. Results for these two experiments are shown in Figure 3. The baseline hardware system has these characteristics: Linux penny 3.13.0-34-generic #60-Ubuntu SMP Wed Aug 13 15:45:27 UTC 2014 x86_64 x86_64 x86_64 GNU/Linux with a 4-core Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-4770 CPU @ 3.40GHz. These two experiments establish a baseline result and show that the time to success depends on the population size, with a bigger population contributing to have more diversity and thus speeding up the solution [15]. The volunteer computing experiments that we will describe next do not and can not have the same conditions, but the baseline is that if they eventually take longer than a basic desktop, their interest will be purely academic. 9  3.1  Tests with a floating-point hard optimization problem  JavaScript has been traditionally implemented as an interpreted language not designed for the development of high performance systems. On the other hand, current JavaScript virtual machines (VMs from now on) are closing the gap, for instance the Google V8 is an engine specifically designed for the fast execution of large JavaScript applications. In order to increase performance V8 compiles JavaScript source code directly into machine code when it is first executed. There are no intermediate byte codes or an interpreter [16]. JavaScript has gained popularity in server-side development using runtime environments such as Node.js and is also used in desktop and mobile applications. To further evaluate how a current JavaScript implementation could be used by a computer scientist to develop complex optimization problems, a benchmark function, which was provided by the CEC2010 Special Session on Large-Scale Global Optimization [17] is used in this section. The function is described next. The basic Rastrigin’s function is separable, and is defined as follows; Frastrigin (x) =  D X  [x2i − 10 cos(2πxi ) + 10]  (1)  i=1  where D is the dimension and x = (x1, x2, , xD ) is a D-dimensional row vector (i.e., a 1D matrix). Rastrigins function is a classical multimodal problem. Such problem is difficult since the number of local optima grows exponentially with the increase of dimensionality. To make it non-separable, an orthogonal matrix is also used for coordinate rotation. The rotated Rastrigin’s function is defined as follows: (2) Frot rastrigin (x) = Frastrigin (z), z = x ∗ M Where M is a D × D orthogonal matrix. The benchmark emulates real-world optimization problems that most likely will consist of different groups of parameters with strong dependencies within but little interaction between the groups. This issue is reflected in the benchmark by randomly dividing the objective variables into several groups, each of which contains a number of variables. The parameter m is used to control the number of variables in each group and hence, defining the degree of separability: D  F15 (x) =  m X  Frot  rastrigin [z(P(k−1)∗m+1  : Pk∗m )]  (3)  k=1  For the benchmark D = 1000, Group size m = 50, x = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xD ) is the candidate solution, o = (o1 , o2 , . . . , oD ) is the shifted global optimum, z = x − o is the shifted candidate solution and finally P is a random permutation of {1, 2, . . . , D}. This optimization problem was selected because it is representative of the kind of algorithms, data types, and structures employed in large scale optimization problems. The function was implemented in both Matlab and Java 10  languages as part of the Test Suite of the companion competition of the Special Session and to give competitors an idea of the computational cost of the challenge, the runtime required for 10,000 function evaluations for a particular configuration was published by organizers. The Java implementation took 7596ms and the Matlab version 1115ms. The whole experiment had the value of 3,000,000 function evaluations as termination condition. Using the Java implementation as a guide, the function described above was implemented to compare the performance of JavaScript against both implementations, again using the time required for 10,000 function evaluations. Before discussing the setup and performance results, certain details of the implementation in JavaScript are presented to give readers an idea of how practical and mature this language is for developing complex mathematical functions.  Figure 4: Runtime of 10,000 function evaluations for F15 • Randomize Both Matlab and Java programs rely on a Java Randomizer library for the randomization of the shift vectors and matrices used by the function. The library includes the generation of pseudorandom Gaussians of type double and uniformly distributed integers. Generators use a single long seed. In order to implement the same functionality in JavaScript, the library random-js was used, as there are inconsistencies in the implementation of the standard Math.random() between engines and also their results are non-deterministic. The library random-js, implements a Mersenne Twister algorithm producing consistent results across all JavaScript VMs. 11  • Timing functions In order to compare the performance of each implementation, an accurate and consistent way of measuring the runtime of functions is needed. In JavaScript the Date class is often used to measure execution time, but has the limitation of having a maximum resolution given in milliseconds. In order to measure the runtime intervals with a higher precision two functions where used: for Node.js we used the native process.hrtime() function which returns a high-resolution measure in a [seconds, nanoseconds] array, and for measuring in the browser the Performance.now() function was called, which uses floating-point numbers with up to microsecond precision. A drawback found is that the Performance.now() function is only implemented in Firefox and Chrome browsers. Both functions are independent of the system clock. • Tools An important consideration when choosing certain language to write non-trivial programs is the availability of development tools. While developing the experiments, we used a comprehensive set of developer tools available for both browsers and desktop [18]. These tools included package managers, in this case npm, debuggers, logging libraries such as winston, network monitors, editors, and even debugging of the multi-threaded execution of Web Workers. Although the fact that developer tools vary from browser to browser supposed a drawback, they all have the same functionality. The JavaScript debugger can be accessed directly from the user menu in most browsers. • Data Types JavaScript uses floating point numbers with a limited precision of 64 bits that partially implement the functionality of the StrictMath library used by the Java implementation. If more precision is needed, developers could use math.js, an extensive math library with support for matrices and big numbers. We found that the JavaScript ecosystem is mature enough for developing non-trivial code, but developers have to consider the differences between VMs implementations and therefore use certain libraries in order to increase the precision and repeatability of algorithms. As for the performance of JavaScript against Java and Matlab we conducted first the basic test described earlier in a 3.7 GHz Quad-Core Intel Xeon E5 processor running OS X 10.10.5, using Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 1.8.0 25-b17), MatLab version R2015a for Mac OSX, Node FrameWork version 0.12.2, Google Chrome Version 46.0.2490.86 (64-bit) and Firefox version 41.0.2. The performance of the time required for 10,000 function evaluations is presented in Figure 4. In our test the Matlab implementation had the best performance with an average of 935ms, followed by Java with 991ms. On the other hand, JavaScript took 32% more time than Java with 1238ms in Chrome using a single Web Worker and 1,234ms using Node.js. The results also show that there is not much difference between the Node.js implementation and that of a browser. There is also not much difference between running the code in the main thread or in Web Workers. When running the experiment in Firefox a dialog alerted that the script was taking 12  too much time, showing that this kind of processing is not intended for the main thread. Additionally, there is not much overhead when running two Web Workers in parallel as they took 1279ms each. This experiment shows that JavaScript is viable as a language language for developing complex mathematical functions an these can run in a browser with acceptable performance.  4  Conclusion  This paper has been intended mainly as a description of the NodIO architecture as well as two different implementations, with or without web workers, as well as a collection of measurements of the performance of the JavaScript language in different implementations, and compared with other languages. The first conclusion we can draw is that, even if JavaScript is not the fastest language around, its performance is competitive and can be used profitably for medium size problems, with its speed in floating point problems being around 30% less than Matlab or Java. A framework created around this language, like the NodIO we systematize and introduce in this paper, can more than compensate this difference with the recourse of the users that can be spontaneously gathered in a volunteer computing experiment. The fact that it is so simple to participate in it, without needing to download anything, implies that it can be used for peak or nonpermanent workloads. However, it remains to be seen how many users and the real performance that NodIO, in any of its implementations, would achieve. This is left for future work.  Acknowledgment This work has been supported in part by TIN2011-28627-C04-02 and TIN201456494-C4-3-P (Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitivity), SPIP201401437 (Dirección General de Tráfico) and PYR-2014-17 GENIL project (CEIBIOTIC Granada). Additional support was recieved by Projects 5622.15-P (ITM) and PROINNOVA 2015: 220590 (CONACYT). We would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers of previous versions of this paper who have really helped us to improve this paper (and our work) with their suggestions. We are also grateful to Anna Sáez de Tejada for her help with the data processing scripts.  References [1] D. P. Anderson and G. Fedak, “The computational and storage potential of volunteer computing,” in in 6th IEEE International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid (CCGrid), 2006.  13  [2] J.-J. Merelo-Guervós and P. Garcı́a-Sánchez, “Modeling browserbased distributed evolutionary computation systems,” CoRR, vol. abs/1503.06424, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1503. 06424 [3] L. F. Sarmenta, “Volunteer computing,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2001. [4] “What is volunteer computing?” BOINC Wiki, 2012, [Internet; download 25-octubre-2013]. [Online]. Available: http://boinc.berkeley.edu/trac/ wiki/VolunteerComputing [5] P. Domingues, B. Sousa, and L. M. Silva, “Sabotage-tolerance and trust management in desktop grid computing,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 904–912, 2007. [6] J.-J. Merelo, P. Garcı́a-Sánchez, M. Garcı́a-Valdez, and I. Blancas, “There is no fast lunch: an examination of the running speed of evolutionary algorithms in several languages,” ArXiv e-prints, Nov. 2015. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.01088 [7] J. J. Merelo, “Low or no cost distributed evolutionary computation,” in Intelligent Distributed Computing VIII, ser. Studies in Computational Intelligence, D. Camacho, L. Braubach, S. Venticinque, and C. Badica, Eds. Springer International Publishing, 2015, vol. 570, pp. 3–4. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10422-5 1 [8] M. Garcı́a-Valdez, L. Trujillo, J. J. Merelo-Guervós, and F. F. de Vega, “Randomized parameter settings for heterogeneous workers in a poolbased evolutionary algorithm,” in Parallel Problem Solving from Nature – PPSN XIII, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, T. Bartz-Beielstein, J. Branke, B. Filipič, and J. Smith, Eds., vol. 8672. Springer, 2014, pp. 702–710. [9] J. Ashkenas, “List of languages that compile to JS,” November 2015. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/jashkenas/coffeescript/ wiki/list-of-languages-that-compile-to-js [10] J. J. Merelo, A. M. Garcı́a, J. L. J. Laredo, J. Lupión, and F. Tricas, “Browser-based distributed evolutionary computation: performance and scaling behavior,” in GECCO ’07: Proceedings of the 2007 GECCO conference companion on Genetic and evolutionary computation. New York, NY, USA: ACM Press, 2007, pp. 2851–2858. [11] D. Flanagan, JavaScript: the definitive guide. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2006. [12] I. Hickson, “Web Workers, W3C Candidate Recommendation,” W3C. W3C, vol. 1, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://http://www.w3.org/TR/ workers  14  [13] D. H. Ackley, A connectionist machine for genetic hillclimbing. Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, USA, 1987.  Kluwer  [14] J. J. Merelo Guervós, “NodEO, a evolutionary algorithm library in Node,” GeNeura group, Tech. Rep., Mar. 2014, available at http://figshare.com/articles/nodeo/972892. [Online]. Available: http: //figshare.com/articles/nodeo/972892 [15] J. L. J. Laredo, B. Dorronsoro-Dı́az, C. Fernandes, J.-J. Merelo-Guervós, and P. Bouvry, “Oversized populations and cooperative selection: Dealing with massive resources in parallel infrastructures,” in LION, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, G. Nicosia and P. M. Pardalos, Eds., vol. 7997. Springer, 2013, pp. 444–449. [16] J. Gray, “Google chrome: The making of a cross-platform browser,” Linux Journal, vol. 2009, no. 185, Sep. 2009. [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1610564.1610565 [17] K. Tang, X. Yao, P. N. Suganthan, C. MacNish, Y.-P. Chen, C.-M. Chen, and Z. Yang, “Benchmark functions for the cec2008 special session and competition on large scale global optimization,” Nature Inspired Computation and Applications Laboratory, USTC, China, pp. 153–177, 2007. [18] S. Tilkov and S. Vinoski, “Node. js: Using javascript to build highperformance network programs,” IEEE Internet Computing, no. 6, pp. 80– 83, 2010.  15

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 9. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
