Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_5161

Abstract:
Multidimensional Dynamic Pricing for Welfare Maximization Aaron Roth*  Aleksandrs Slivkins†  Jonathan Ullman‡  Zhiwei Steven Wu§  arXiv:1607.05397v3 [cs.DS] 10 Jun 2017  June 13, 2017  Abstract We study the problem of a seller dynamically pricing d distinct types of indivisible goods, when faced with the online arrival of unit-demand buyers drawn independently from an unknown distribution. The goods are not in limited supply, but can only be produced at a limited rate and are costly to produce. The seller observes only the bundle of goods purchased at each day, but nothing else about the buyer’s valuation function. Our main result is a dynamic pricing algorithm for optimizing welfare (including the seller’s cost of production) that runs in time and a number of rounds that are polynomial in d and the approximation parameter. We are able to do this despite the fact that (i) the price-response function is not continuous, and even its fractional relaxation is a non-concave function of the prices, and (ii) the welfare is not observable to the seller. We derive this result as an application of a general technique for optimizing welfare over divisible goods, which is of independent interest. When buyers have strongly concave, Hölder continuous valuation functions over d divisible goods, we give a general polynomial time dynamic pricing technique. We are able to apply this technique to the setting of unit demand buyers despite the fact that in that setting the goods are not divisible, and the natural fractional relaxation of a unit demand valuation is not strongly concave. In order to apply our general technique, we introduce a novel price randomization procedure which has the effect of implicitly inducing buyers to “regularize” their valuations with a strongly concave function. Finally, we also extend our results to a limited-supply setting in which the number of copies of each good cannot be replenished.  * University of Pennsylvania. Email: aaroth@cis.upenn.edu. † Microsoft Research. Email: slivkins@microsoft.com. ‡ Northeastern University. Email: jullman@ccs.neu.edu. § University of Pennsylvania. Email: wuzhiwei@cis.upenn.edu.  1  Introduction  Consider the problem of an online retailer who sells a large variety of goods. The seller can in principle produce or procure more copies of each good as needed, but only at a limited rate, and at some per-unit production /procurement cost that varies by good. In each round, the seller can dynamically set the price for each type of good. Each buyer has an unknown valuation function defined (in general) over bundles of goods, and quasi-linear utility for money. Each buyer chooses which item to buy to optimize his utility function given the prices. The seller observes the purchased bundle—i.e. the revealed preferences of the buyer—but not the buyer’s valuation of the purchased bundle (or of any other bundle). The buyer’s valuation function is drawn independently from a fixed but unknown distribution, called the buyer distribution. The seller’s objective is to optimize social welfare: the expected buyer valuation of the purchased good minus its production cost. Social welfare, like profit, is a natural objective for the seller: in particular, sellers attempting to grow their market (rather than exploit an existing monopoly position) might prefer to optimize social welfare rather than profit in the short term. A tempting first attempt at solving this problem would be to simply set the price for each good to be equal to its cost of production, which would indeed maximize social welfare if there were no other constraints on the bundles of items purchased by buyers. However, this solution is unsatisfactory when additional supply can only be generated at a bounded rate, because the cost of production bears no relationship to the buyers’ values for a good. Because of this, setting prices equal to costs can result, for example, in every buyer demanding the largest possible quantity of the same good, which the seller may not be able to accommodate. In a more realistic setting, there will be constraints on the rate of production and resupply for each good. Hence, we study the welfare maximization problem in which we impose the additional constraint that the expected bundle purchased (in expectation over the draw of the buyer) lies in a bounded set. Because constraints of this sort bind across buyers, setting prices equal to costs fails, and the problem requires a nontrivial solution. Since the buyer distribution is unknown, the seller cannot directly compute the prices that optimize social welfare. Instead, she faces a learning problem: she can try different prices over time and observe the responses from random buyers drawn from the distribution, and try to learn the optimal price vector. More formally, the goal is to use a small number of rounds to learn a price vector that nearly optimizes expected social welfare. We want the algorithm’s guarantees hold in the worst case over the choice of distributions over buyer valuation functions. Essentially, we are studying a welfare-optimization version of the well-known dynamic pricing problem, also known as learn-and-earn, with d > 1 goods for sale. (Prior work on dynamic pricing focused on profit maximization.) At a very high level, the main challenge presented is to learn the price response function—i.e. the function mapping prices to expected bundles purchased—and then optimize it with respect to welfare. Moreover, this is a high dimensional function (for large d), and so one must overcome the curse of dimensionality. Prior work on non-Bayesian dynamic pricing (e.g., Babaioff et al. (2015); Besbes and Zeevi (2009, 2012); Broder and Rusmevichientong (2012); den Boer and Zwart (2014); Keskin and Zeevi (2014); Wang et al. (2014)) dealt with this challenge by making strong assumptions on the price response function itself. Typical assumptions include Lipschitzness (Besbes and Zeevi, 2009, 2012; Wang et al., 2014) (which allows for discretization in low-dimensional problems), and particularly for high dimensional problems, linearity (den Boer and Zwart, 2014; Keskin and Zeevi, 2014) or concavity (Babaioff et al., 2015;  1  Besbes and Zeevi, 2009; Wang et al., 2014).1 However, assumptions of this sort are not well supported by a micro-economic foundation. In fact, natural assumptions on the buyer valuations do not necessarily result in price-response function with these properties. In this paper, we pursue a different approach which stands on stronger microeconomic foundations: we make assumptions on the form of the valuation functions directly (and no assumptions on the distribution over valuation functions), and show that we can work with the price response function that results. This is the case despite the fact that our problem is high dimensional, and the price response function that results from our assumptions is not concave. We also face an additional challenge: unlike profit, welfare is not observable, and we can observe the purchased bundle but not the buyer’s valuation for that bundle. Nevertheless, we design algorithms that find a near-optimal price vector with respect to welfare, in a number of rounds that is polynomial in d and the accuracy parameter. (Whereas, for example, a naive solution based on discretization and Lipschitzness of the price-response function requires a number of rounds that is exponential in d.) Our results also extend to the limited-supply setting.  1.1  Our Contributions  Our main result solves the problem in the setting of indivisible goods when buyers are unit-demand or, alternatively, when the seller only allows each customer to buy a single item. Surprisingly, no other assumptions are needed! Further, we give a general result for the setting of divisible goods under certain assumptions on the valuation functions. In fact, we show how this general result can be leveraged to yield the result for unit demands. Both settings work as follows. There are d goods. In each round, prices are set and one buyer arrives and purchases her most preferred bundle from the set of feasible bundles. The seller incurs production/procurement costs for each sale, which are linear in the sold bundle. We give a computationally efficient and round efficient algorithm for finding a nearly welfaremaximizing price vector subject to a constraint on the expected consumption. Let SW(p) be the expected social welfare that results from setting prices p. The seller would like to set prices to ensure that the expected per-round purchase of each good j, denoted xj (p), is bounded above by some supply sj . This models a realistic scenario in which the seller’s inventory can be replenished, but only at a limited rate. For example, perhaps at most one truckload of goods can be stocked per day. Approximating a restocking period constraint with a constraint on the expected percustomer purchase is reasonable if the restocking period corresponds to a large number of rounds, because then the realized consumption over these rounds concentrates around is expectation. In the following, we will write x(p) = (x1 (p), . . . , xd (p)) to denote the bundle induced by prices p. Divisible goods. Departing from previous work, instead of making assumptions about the functional form of the price-response function, which depends on the buyers’ valuations in aggregate, we make assumptions on the individual buyers’ valuations themselves. Specifically, we assume the buyers’ valuations are strongly concave and Hölder continuous. (These assumptions are satisfied by a large class of well-studied valuation, including CES and Cobb-Douglas as shown 1 Prior work that does not make assumptions on the shape of valuations or demand curves is either restricted to sell-  ing a single good (d = 1) (Babaioff et al., 2015; Kleinberg and Leighton, 2003), or suffers from the curse of dimensionality and comes with performance guarantees relative to the discretized prices rather than all prices (Badanidiyuru et al., 2013).  2  in Roth et al. (2016)). The sold bundles are constrained to lie in the bounded set F ⊂ Rd+ (e.g. F = [0, 1]d means at most one unit of each good can be purchased). Theorem 1.1 (Divisible Goods). Assume divisible goods, and buyers with strongly concave and and Hölder-continuous valuations. There is an algorithm that takes as input parameters d, α, δ > 0 and a supply vector s ∈ Rd>0 , such that with probability at least 1 − δ, the algorithm outputs a price vector p ∈ Rd+ such that x(p) ≤ s  and SW(p) ≥  max  p∈Rd+ : x(p)≤s  SW(p) − α.  The number of rounds and the total computation time are polynomial in d,  (1) 1 α  and log δ1 .  Unit-demand buyers and indivisible goods. We use our result for divisible goods to give a polynomial time dynamic pricing algorithm for welfare maximization in the indivisible goods setting when buyers have unit demand valuations. Here we consider distributions D over price vectors p ∈ Rd+ , rather than fixed price vectors p. To extend our notation, let x(D) = Ep∼D [x(p)] and SW(D) = Ep∼D [SW(p)]. We prove: Theorem 1.2 (Indivisible Goods). Assume indivisible goods, and buyers with unit-demand valuations. There is an algorithm that takes as input parameters d, α, δ > 0 and a supply vector s ∈ Rd+ , such that with probability at least 1 − δ the algorithm outputs a distribution D over price vectors p ∈ Rd+ such that x(D) ≤ s  and  SW(D) ≥  max  distributions D ′ : x(D ′ )≤s  SW(D ′ ) − α.  The number of rounds and the total computation time are polynomial in d,  1 α  (2)  and log δ1 .  In the generality that we state our theorem, using a distribution over prices rather than a fixed price vector is unavoidable. The reason has to do with how the buyers break ties when they are indifferent between goods. As shown in Hsu et al. (2016), without further genericity assumptions, it can be that no fixed pricing can induce optimal (or even feasible) allocations if buyers use uncoordinated tie breaking rules. Instead, tie-breaking needs to be coordinated amongst the buyers: the tie-breaking rule needs to be different for different buyers, and essentially needs to be specified by the mechanism. The randomness in our pricing scheme serves as a coordination mechanism amongst buyers (since each buyer faces a different realization of prices). Remark. In both settings, we prove more general theorems in which we express our results in terms of a stronger benchmark—the welfare of the optimal lottery over allocations, without restriction to those that can be induced by posted pricing.2 The above theorems can be reformulated in terms of cumulative regret for a given time horizon T . Then the execution of the algorithm in the respective theorem corresponds to an exploration phase of bounded length. The price vector p computed by the algorithm is used in an exploitation phase consisting of all subsequent rounds. Theorem 1.1 guarantees that OWel completes in poly(d, log δ1 ) · α −m rounds, for some constant m. Expected regret relative to the best fixed price 2 A posted price vector (resp., distribution over them) computed by an algorithm can only hope to compete with  the best posted price vector (resp., distribution). Thus, the mathematical statement behind (ii) is that the posted price benchmarks used in the theorems are in fact equivalent to the stronger benchmark.  3  vector can be upper-bounded by 1 for every round of exploration, and α + δ per round of exploitation. Optimizing the choice of α and δ, we obtain regret poly(d, log T ) · T m/(m+1) . Theorem 1.2 implies a similar corollary for the unit-demands setting. Extension to limited supply. We extend our results to a limited-supply setting. In our model, there is a fixed horizon of T rounds and the seller has a non-replenishable supply of T sj units of each good j. T and s ∈ [0, 1]d are known in advance. Each day, the seller will set prices and a random buyer will purchase their preferred bundle until either the time horizon or the sellers’ supply is exhausted, whichever comes first. For a pricing policy π, we use SWtot (π) to denote its expected total welfare.3 A “fixed-vector” pricing policy uses the same price vector p in all rounds. Likewise, “fixed-distribution” pricing policy always draws the price vector independently from the same fixed distribution D. The expected total welfare of these policies is denoted, resp., SWtot (p) and SWtot (D). In the setting of divisible goods, we simply use the algorithm from Theorem 1.1 with the same constraint vector s. The price vector p computed by this algorithm achieves high expected total welfare for a given problem instance: we prove that it is nearly optimal compared to the best fixed-vector pricing policy. Further, it is nearly optimal compared to any pricing policy. Likewise, in the setting of unit demands, we use the algorithm from Theorem 1.2 with the same constraint vector s. The distribution D computed by this algorithm is nearly optimal compared to the best fixed-distribution pricing policy with x(D) ≤ s. Theorem 1.3. Consider dynamic pricing with limited supply. Fix constraint vector s ∈ Rd+ and time horizon T > 32 log(T )/s ∗ , where s ∗ = minj sj . (a) Consider the setting of divisible goods. When the algorithm from Theorem 1.1 is given as input d, s, α, δ, with probability 1 − δ it outputs a price vector p ∈ Rd+ such that  p SWtot (p) ≥ sup SWtot (π) − αT − O T log(T )/s ∗ . pricing policies π  (b) Assume indivisible goods and unit demands. When the algorithm from Theorem 1.2 is given as input d, s, α, δ, with probability 1 − δ it outputs distribution D over price vectors such that  p SWtot (D) ≥ sup SWtot (D ′ ) − αT − O T log(T )/s ∗ . distributions D ′ with x(D ′ ) ≤ s  The number of rounds and the total computation time are polynomial in d,  1.2  1 α  and log δ1 .  Our Techniques  Our general results for divisible goods build on a crucial structural property: even though the expected welfare of the induced bundle x(p) is not concave in the price vector p, it becomes concave if we treat the bundle itself as the decision variable. We illustrate this via a simple 1-dimensional example, adapted from Roth et al. (2016): 3 Considering expected welfare per round is not enough, as one pricing policy may halt sooner than another.  4  √ Example 1.4. There is a single good (d = 1), and a single buyer with valuation v(x) = x. he seller’s √ cost function is c(x) = x. If price p is posted, the buyer’s utility for x units is x − p · x, so she would purchase x∗ (p) = 4p1 2 units of the good. Consequently, the welfare is SW(p) = v(x∗ (p)) − c(x∗ (p)) =  1 1 − 2. 2p 4p  Note that welfare is not a concave function of the price. However, if we write the welfare as a function of x = x∗ (p), the purchased amount of good, this function is concave: √ SW(x) = v(x) − c(x) = x − x. Thus, we would like to optimize expected welfare as a function of the induced bundle. However, we only control prices and not induced bundles. To address this, our algorithm has two “layers,” where the outer layer optimizes over induced bundles, and the inner layer finds a price vector which approximately induces a given bundle. Another challenge is that welfare is not observed, since we do not observe buyer valuations. Instead, we find a way to approximate the subgradients of welfare, and use noise-tolerant subgradient descent to optimize over the bundles. We build on and extend the result of Roth et al. (2016) for the special case of a single buyer and unlimited supply (which focuses on profit rather than welfare). The main distinction is single buyer vs. distributions over buyers; in other words, Roth et al. (2016) assume that for a given price vector the outcome is deterministic, whereas in our paper it is drawn from a fixed but unknown distribution over the possible outcomes. The “inner layer” of our algorithm extends the algorithm in Roth et al. (2016) from a single buyer to distributions over buyers. This extension presents several technical challenges, and answers one of their main open questions. In particular, we analyze a generalization of the convex programming technique used in Roth et al. (2016) to accommodate a distribution over (arbitrarily many) buyers. We cannot use the “outer layer” from Roth et al. (2016) because it requires direct observations of the objective function to feed into a procedure for zeroth-order optimization, and our seller cannot directly observe the buyers’ welfare (unlike profit, which is observable). Instead, we develop a new technique to obtain the subgradient for the welfare function so as to enable first-order optimization. Also, we remove a major assumption of homogenous buyer valuations. As stated, our general result does not apply to unit demand buyers over indivisible goods. In order to cast this problem as a divisible goods problem, we view buyers as having linear valuations over divisible goods, optimizing over the set of bundles that have at most unit ℓ1 norm. The bundle that maximizes a linear function is always at a vertex of the feasible region, and hence is integral. That is, it is the bundle purchased by a unit-demand buyer in the indivisible goods setting. However, there is a substantial difficulty: our general technique relies on buyer valuation functions being strongly concave, a condition not satisfied by linear functions. A standard way to obtain strong convexity in the convex optimization literature is to add a strongly convex regularizer to the objective function. However, we do not get to modify the buyer’s objective function in this way. Instead, we perturb the price vectors proposed by our general dynamic pricing algorithm with Gumbel noise. Doing so has the property that the expected bundle purchased by each buyer (where expectation is taken over the price perturbation) is the bundle that maximizes the buyer’s linear valuation function, plus an entropy regularization term (Warmuth, 2009). Thus, in expectation over our perturbations, we can view buyers as optimizing valuation functions which 5  are strongly concave over the ℓ1 norm—even though for every fixed perturbation, buyers are maximizing some linear function and thus buy a unit bundle of indivisible goods. By perturbing the price vectors used over the run of our algorithm for divisible goods, therefore, we can optimize welfare over these “regularized” buyers. By reducing the noise rate (and hence the implicit regularization parameter), we approach the optimal welfare of the actual, unit-demand buyers. The extension to limited supply (Theorem 1.3(a)) relies on a structural result about bandits with knapsacks (Badanidiyuru et al., 2013), a general framework of which dynamic pricing with limited supply is a special case. We use a non-standard “embedding” of dynamic pricing into this framework, and a concentration inequality for total welfare that requires a somewhat delicate proof.  1.3  Related Work  Our setting is related to several lines of work. First, dynamic pricing, a.k.a. learn-and-earn, focuses on a seller with a large inventory of each good, facing a stream of buyers with unknown valuations. This is a large line of work, mainly in operations research — see Boer (2015) for a review. Most related are non-Bayesian approaches. As mentioned above, the main distinction is that we make assumptions on the buyer valuations rather than on the price response function. Also, the learnand-earn literature does not consider welfare-optimization, to the best of our knowledge. Second, our problem can be viewed as an instance of the multi-armed bandits problem (Bubeck and Cesa-Bianch 2012; Gittins, 1989), a well-studied abstract framework in which an algorithm repeatedly chooses actions (e.g., price vectors) and receives rewards (e.g., revenue from a sale). The main issue is the tension between acquisition and usage of information, a.k.a. the exploration-exploitation tradeoff. Bandit algorithms are directly applicable to dynamic pricing either via discretization (Babaioff et al., 2015; Badanidiyuru et al., 2013; Kleinberg and Leighton, 2003) or via assumptions on expected revenue.4 The main distinction is (again) that solutions to bandit problems tend to make assumptions directly on the rewards, in part because they do not model the finer structure behind the rewards (such as valuation functions). Third, there are several papers on welfare-optimizing posted pricing in combinatorial auctions (Balcan et al., 2008; Blum et al., 2011; Chakraborty et al., 2013; Feldman et al., 2015). These papers tackle more difficult scenarios with non-divisible goods and non-IID valuations, and accordingly obtain weaker, multiplicative guarantees. Also, the pricing is either static (Balcan et al., 2008; Feldman et al., 2015) (not changing over time), or changing over time but not adapting to the observed purchases (Blum et al., 2011; Chakraborty et al., 2013). This research is mainly motivated by connections to mechanism design for combinatorial auctions. Fourth, there is a large literature on revealed preferences, starting from Samuelson (Samuelson, 1938), see Mas-Colell et al. (1995); Rubinstein (2012); Varian (2006) for background. Most work in economics has focused on the construction of utility functions that explain or rationalize a given sequence of price/bundle observations, e.g. Afriat (1967). A recent literature studies the problem of predicting purchase decisions given past observations at different price points (Balcan et al., 2014; Beigman and Vohra, 2006; Zadimoghaddam and Roth, 2012). More related to our paper is Amin et al. (2015) who study the problem of iteratively setting prices to maximize the profit obtained from a single budgeted buyer (who repeatedly makes purchase decisions) with a linear 4 E.g., if expected revenue is concave in prices, one can apply bandit algorithms for concave rewards (Agarwal et al.,  2013; Bubeck et al., 2015; Flaxman et al., 2005; Hazan and Levy, 2014).  6  utility function. The most related paper in this line is Roth et al. (2016), as discussed in the previous subsection. Ours is the first paper in this line of work able to handle indivisible goods. A related, but distinct literature focuses on learning valuation functions from example evaluations of those functions (Balcan et al., 2012), rather than from example maximizations of those functions (as in the revealed preference literature).  1.4  Map of the Paper  Section 3 contains the our general result for divisible goods (a generalization of Theorem 1.1). Our application to unit demand valuations over indivisible goods, and the perturbation techniques that go into deriving this result are presented in Section 4. The limited supply setting is treated in Section 5. We conclude in Section 6. To improve the flow of the paper, some details are deferred to the appendix.  2  Model and Preliminaries  There is a seller selling d different types of goods to a sequence of buyers arriving one after another in rounds. Each buyer’s valuation v is drawn independently from an unknown distribution ψ over a finite class V of valuation functions over the goods, where |V | = n.5 6 Both ψ and V are unknown to the seller. Throughout, we will use i to index the buyer’s types in V , and write vi for the valuation function for a buyer of type i, and ψ(vi ) for the probability mass on buyers of type i. At each round t, the seller posts a price vector p = p t ∈ Rd+ , and the t-th buyer with valuation v ∼ ψ makes a purchase to maximize his utility under these prices. In particular, we consider two different settings: one with divisible goods and the other with indivisible goods. Divisible goods Each valuation v : Rd+ → R+ is a function from (fractional) bundles of goods to values. Under prices p, the buyer with valuation v will purchase the utility-maximizing bundle xv∗ (p) ≡ argmax[v(x) − hx, pi] x∈F  where F ⊂ Rd+ denotes the set of feasible bundles available for purchase. Indivisible goods We consider unit-demand buyers, who will either purchase exactly 1 unit of some good or nothing. Each buyer’s valuation is defined by a value vector v ∈ Rd>0 such that vj denotes her value for 1 unit of the j-th good. At round t, a buyer with valuation v purchases i h xv∗ (p) ≡ argmax vj − pj . j∈[d]∪{⊥}  where ⊥ denotes the choice of buying nothing (we define v⊥ = p⊥ = 0), and we allow arbitrary tie-breaking rules. The seller has a (known) cost vector c ∈ Rd+ such that the cost of producing a unit of good j is cj . The seller wishes to set prices so as to optimize the expected social welfare — the expected 5 We take V to be finite only for convenience. Our results do not depend on n = |V |, so it can be arbitrarily large. 6 Throughout, R = {x ∈ R | x ≥ 0} and R = {x ∈ R | x > 0} denote non-negative reals and positive reals, resp. + >0  7  valuation of the buyer’s purchased bundle or item minus its production cost. In particular, if the seller posts a price vector p over the goods, the expected social welfare is SW(p) = E [v(xv∗ (p)) − c(xv∗ (p))] . v∼ψ  (3)  where we write c(xv∗ (p)) to denote the production cost for the purchase xv∗ (p). For any distribution D over prices, the expected welfare is defined as SW(D) = Ep∼D [SW(p)]. Computational model We will think of the algorithm as having access to a revealed preference oracle ReP(ψ): given any input price vector p ∈ Rd+ , it will draw a random valuation v from ψ, and return the purchase decision xv∗ (p). Our goal is to design computationally efficient algorithms to compute optimal prices using only polynomially many queries to ReP. Notably, the expected or realized social welfare is not observable to the algorithm, since it cannot observe v(xv∗ (p)).  2.1  Noisy Subgradient Descent  A key ingredient in our algorithms is the ability to minimize a convex function (or maximize a concave function), given access only to noisy sub-gradients of the function. We accomplish this using the gradient descent algorithm. Below we recap some necessary background. Let C ⊆ Rd be a compact and convex set of diameter at most D (w.r.t. ℓ2 norm). A subgradient of a function f : C → R at point x ∈ C is any vector g ∈ C that satisfies the inequality f (y) ≥ f (x) + hg, y − xi for any point y ∈ C. The set of all subgradients at x is denoted ∂f (x). If f is differentiable, the only subgradient g is the gradient ∇f (x). The basic subgradient descent method is an iterative algorithm that starts at some point x1 ∈ C and iterates the following equations yt+1 = xt − η gt ,  and  xt+1 = Π C (yt+1 )  where η is the learning rate and gt ∈ ∂f (xt ) is a subgradient of the function f at point xt , and Π C (x) = argminy∈C kx − yk denote the projection operator onto C. Now, we will assume that gt and/or xt are subject to noise. We will use two variants of the algorithm, which operate under two different models of noise. In the first model, the algorithm only has access to unbiased estimates of the subgradient. Theorem 2.1 (Zinkevich (2003)). Suppose that f is convex, and for some constant D, G, the estimates of the subgradients satisfy E [gt ] ∈ ∂f (xt ) and kgt k ≤ G for all steps t, and the diameter √ of the set satisfies kCk ≤ D. Then if we run the subgradient descent method with step size η = D/(G T ), then for any T P and any initial point x1 ∈ C, the point z = T1 Tt=1 xt satisfies √ E [f (z)] ≤ min f (x) + 2DG/ T . x∈C  In the second model, the algorithm has access to the noiseless subgradients, but the points xt are adversarially perturbed after the projection. Theorem 2.2. Suppose that f is convex, fix constants D, E, and G. Suppose that the gradient descent algorithm performs the following update in each iteration yt+1 = xt − η gt  xt+1 = Π C (yt+1 ) + ξt  and 8  such that gt ∈ ∂f (xt ) and ξt ∈ Rd is a noise vector. Suppose that kgt k ≤ G and kξt k ≤ E, xt ∈ C for all steps t, and the diameter descent method √ of the set satisfies kCk ≤ D. Then if we run the subgradient P with step size η = D/(G T ), for any T and any initial point x1 ∈ C, the point z = T1 Tt=1 xt satisfies √ √ f (z) ≤ min f (x) + DG/ T + GE T . x∈C  The proof is similar to the standard analysis of gradient descent (e.g., see Theorem 3.1 in Bubeck (2015)). For the sake of completeness, we provide a self-contained proof of this result in Appendix B.  3  A General Algorithm in the Divisible Goods Setting  This section is dedicated to the divisible good setting: we give a computationally efficient algorithm for finding a price vector that approximately optimizes social welfare subject to the constraint that the expected per-round demand of each good j is no more than sj . Specifically, let xψ∗ (p) denote the expected bundle purchased by a random buyer under the prices p (or the induced bundle by p), that is xψ∗ (p) = E [xv∗ (p)] . v∼ψ  Given access to the revealed preference oracle ReP, the algorithm finds an approximately optimal price vector p using polynomially queries to ReP and guarantees that xψ∗ (p) ≤ s. Our algorithm consists of two layers, and we present it in three main steps. 1. First, we analyze a pertinent convex program and derive several structural results. In particular, we show that the expected social welfare can be expressed as a concave function of the induced bundle. 2. Next, we present the inner layer of the algorithm: given any target bundle x̂, we can iteratively find price vectors p t such that the induced bundle xψ∗ (p t ) converges to x̂ over time. 3. Finally, we show how to derive subgradients of the expected social welfare function from information available. The outer layer of the algorithm will then use (noisy) subgradient descent to optimize the welfare function over the bundle space. We make the following assumptions on the feasible set F and each valuation function v ∈ V .  Assumption 3.1 (Feasible set). We assume that F is convex, closed, has a non-empty interior7 and bounded norm: kF k2 ≤ R for some parameter R.8 A canonical example is F = [0, 1]d : each buyer can simultaneously buy up to one unit of each good. Assumption 3.2 (Valuations). Each valuation function v in V satisfies: 1. v is monotonically increasing in each coordinate. (This can be relaxed to Assumption 3.4.) 2. v is (λ, β)-Hölder continuous with respect to the ℓ1 norm over F , for some λ ≥ 1 and some absolute β constant β ∈ (0, 1]. Namely: |v(x) − v(x′ )| ≤ λ · kx − x′ k1 for all x, x′ ∈ F . 7 See Definition A.1 for a formal definition. 8 For a set C ⊂ Rd and a norm k · k, we write kCk = sup x∈C kxk. When the norm is unspecified, it is assumed to be ℓ2 .  9  3. v is σ-strongly concave over F — for all x, x′ ∈ F , v(x′ ) ≤ v(x) + h∇v(x), x′ − xi − (σ/2) · kx − x′ k22 . These assumptions on the valuations are satisfied by a large class of well-studied valuation functions, including Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) and Cobb-Douglas (See Roth et al. (2016) for a proof). We crucially rely on a use property of strongly concave functions: any point in the domain that is close to the minimum in objective value is also close to the minimum in Euclidean distance(see Lemma A.2).  3.1  A Stochastic Convex Program  Let us say that a bundle x̂ ∈ Rd+ is inducible if there exists a price vector p ∈ Rd+ such that xψ∗ (p) = x̂. Note that each inducible bundle x̂ is a convex combination of n bundles (purchased by all the buyers) in F , so it must lie in the set F . A centerpiece in our analysis is the following welfare maximization convex program that characterizes the relation between the posted prices and inducible bundles. Definition 3.3. For any bundle x̂ ∈ F , let convex program SCP(x̂) be the following X ψ(vi ) vi (xi ) maxn x∈F  such that  (4)  vi ∈V  X  vi ∈V  ψ(vi ) xij ≤ x̂j  xi ∈ F  for every j ∈ [d]  for every vi ∈ V  (5) (6)  Let VAL(x̂) be the optimal value of the convex program SCP(x̂). We also say that SCP(x̂) is supplysaturating if its optimal solution x• saturates all of the supply constraints defined by eq. (5), that is P • i ψ(vi ) xij = x̂j for all j.  To interpret the above as a stochastic welfare maximization program, consider a market in which there are d types of goods and each good j has supply x̂j . For each valuation function vi ∈ V , we introduce a buyer i with this valuation, who shows up to the market with probability ψ(vi ). We use a vector xi = (xi1 , . . . , xid ) ∈ F to represent the bundle of goods allocated to a buyer i if he shows up. Then the program is precisely computing an allocation over all buyers to maximize the expected welfare subject to the constraint that the expected demand is no more than the supply given by x̂.9  Assumption 3.4 (Relaxing monotonicity in valuations). In fact, the assumption that each valuation in the class V is increasing can be relaxed. Our algorithm works as long as the class V and the feasible set F guarantees that SCP(x̂) is supply-saturating for any x̂ ∈ F . For the sake of generality, our analysis will rely on the supply saturation condition instead of the monotonicity of the valuations. This will be useful for applying the algorithm to the indivisible goods setting. If the valuations in the class V are increasing functions, the optimal solution of SCP(x̂) will saturate all of the supply constraints in eq. (5). Claim 3.5. Suppose that each valuation v ∈ V is monotonically increasing in each coordinate. Then for any x̂ ∈ F , the convex program SCP(x̂) is supply-saturating. 9 Similar construction of such stochastic convex programs also appeared in Devanur et al. (2012).  10  For each of the supply constraints in eq. (5), we can introduce a dual (price) variable pj and write down the following partial Lagrangian   d   X X X   ψ(vi ) xij − x̂j  (7) pj  Lx̂ (x, p) = ψ(vi ) vi (xi ) −   vi ∈V  j=1  vi ∈V  We can also consider the Lagrange dual function of the convex program gx̂ : Rd → R: gx̂ (p) = maxn Lx̂ (x, p). x∈F  (8)    We will mostly focus on the case where x̂ ∈ F ∩ Rd>0 , which we can show is a sufficient condition for inducibility.10   Lemma 3.6. Let x̂ ∈ F ∩ Rd>0 be a bundle, then x̂ is inducible. Proof. Consider the convex program SCP(x̂). Since the convex program satisfies the Slater’s condition, strong duality gives maxn min Lx̂ (x, p) = min maxn Lx̂ (x, p) = VAL(x̂) x∈F p∈Rd+  p∈Rd+ x∈F  h i Furthermore, since SCP(x̂) is supply-saturating, the optimal solution satisfies Evi ∼ψ xi• = x̂. Let p • be the optimal dual solution. It follows that   d  X  X X   pj•  ψ(vi ) vi (xi ) − ψ(vi ) xij − x̂j  x• = argmax L(x, p • ) = argmax   x∈F n x∈F n vi ∈V j=1 i X   ψ(vi ) vi (xi ) − hpj• , xi i + hp • , x̂i = argmax x∈F n  i  Note that the expression inside the argmax is linearly separable across i. Therefore, xi• = argmax [vi (xi ) − hp • , xi i + hp • , x̂i] = argmax [vi (xi ) − hp • , xi i] xi ∈F  (9)  xi ∈F  It follows that xi• = xv∗ i (p • ) for each i, and hence the price vector p • induces the bundle x̂. Next, we show that the prices that induce the bundle x̂ are an optimal solution of the Lagrangian dual, and the bundles purchased by each buyer in response to these prices form the unique primal optimal solution.   Lemma 3.7. Let x̂ ∈ F ∩ Rd>0 be a bundle, and let p̂ ∈ Rd+ be a price vector such that xψ∗ (p̂) = x̂. Then • the price vector p̂ is an optimal dual solution for SCP(x̂), and  10 The restriction that the bundle be positive in each coordinate is necessary — a bundle with zero in some coordinate may not be inducible. Consider the same simple setting in Example 1.4 where d = 1 and there is a single buyer with √ valuation v(x) = x. Because the marginal valuation at 0 is infinity, there is no bounded price to induce the buyer to purchase 0 units of the good.  11  • the vector x• ∈ F n such that xi• = xv∗ i (p̂) for each i is the unique optimal primal solution. A very nice consequence of Lemma 3.7 is that whenever the induced bundle x̂ is fixed, the realized bundles purchased by buyers of each type are also fixed. This allows us to express the expected social welfare as a function only of the induced bundle. In particular, the expected valuation for inducing x̂ in expectation is exactly VAL(x̂). This suggests a different way to express the welfare: as a function of the induced bundle (as opposed to a function of the price vector defined in eq. (3)). For each x̂ ∈ F , we can define SW(x̂) = VAL(x̂) − hc, x̂i.  (10)  We can show that the expected social welfare for inducing x̂ in expectation is exactly SW(x̂)(see Claim C.1). More importantly, by rewriting the welfare as a function of the bundle, we obtain a concave objective function. This is crucial for us to obtain an efficient algorithm later. Lemma 3.8. The expected social welfare function SW : F → R as defined in eq. (10) is concave. With all of structural results above, we are ready to give our two-layered algorithm for finding the welfare-maximizing prices.  3.2  Inner Layer: Converting Target Bundles to Prices  Even though we can express the expected welfare as a concave function of the induced bundle, we still cannot directly optimize the function because the seller only controls the prices of the goods instead of the expected induced bundle itself. To optimize over the bundle space, we give an algorithm that finds a price vector that approximately induces any target expected bundle x̂. Specifically, suppose that the seller has some target bundle x̂ in mind, we can learn a price vector p̂ such that the expected induced bundle is close to the target bundle: x̂ − xψ∗ (p̂) ≤ ε. In Lemma 3.7, we show that the prices that exactly induce the target bundle x̂ are the optimal dual solution for the convex program SCP(x̂), which is the price vector p that minimizes the Lagrangian dual function gx̂ . We will show that if we can find an approximate minimizer for gx̂ , we can then approximately induce the target expected bundle x̂. In particular, we will apply the noisy gradient descent method (Theorem 2.1) to minimize the function gx̂ , and for the sake of convergence of the algorithm, we will restrict the search space for the price vector to be  !(1−β)/β    √   4d   (1/β) d (11) dλ P (ε) =  p ∈ R | kpk ≤  2 +   2   ε σ  where ε is the target accuracy parameter. First, we will show that the minimax value of the Lagrangian remains close to VAL(x̂) even when we restrict the dual variables/prices to be in P (ε).   Lemma 3.9. Let x̂ ∈ F ∩ Rd>0 . There exists a value R-OPT such that maxn min Lx̂ (x, p) = min maxn Lx̂ (x, p) = R-OPT p∈P (ε) x∈F  x∈F p∈P (ε)  2  Moreover, VAL(x̂) ≤ R-OPT ≤ VAL(x̂) + ε 4σ . 12  The next result translates the approximation error in minimizing the function gx̂ to the error in inducing the target bundle x̂ by making use of the strong concavity of the valuations in V .   Lemma 3.10. Let x̂ ∈ F ∩ Rd>0 and p ′ be a price vector in P (ε) such that gx̂ (p ′ ) ≤ minp∈P (ε) gx̂ (p) + α √ for some α > 0. Let x′ = xψ∗ (p ′ ) be the expected bundle induced by prices p ′ . Then kx′ − x̂k2 ≤ 2 α/σ. Therefore, in order to (approximately) induce a target bundle in expectation, we just need to compute an (approximate) minimizer for the Lagrangian dual function gx̂ . We first show that we can compute an unbiased estimate of the gradient of gx̂ by using the observed bundle purchased by a random buyer. Lemma 3.11. Let p ∈ Rd+ be any price vector, and xv∗ (p) be bundle purchased by a buyer with valuation function v under prices p. Then E [x̂ − xv∗ (p)] = x̂ − xψ∗ (p) = ∇gx̂ (p).  v∼ψ  The result of Lemma 3.11 shows that we can obtain unbiased estimates of the gradients of the function gx̂ at different prices, as long as we can obtain unbiased estimates for the expected demand xψ∗ (p). In the next section, we will give another technique to obtain unbiased estimates for the gradients. Given access to unbiased estimate of the gradients of gx̂ , we can rely on the noisy subgradient descent method (and its guarantee in Theorem 2.1) to minimize the function gx̂ . Note that the algorithm will only find a point that approximately minimizes the function in expectation, but we can get an approximate minimizer with high probability using a standard amplification technique — running the subgradient descent method for logarithmically many times, so that one of the output price vectors is guaranteed to be accurate with high probability. More formally:   Lemma 3.12. Let x̂ ∈ F ∩ Rd>0 be any target bundle. There exists an algorithm that given any target accuracy ε and confidence parameter δ as input, outputs a list P of log(1/δ) price vectors such that with probability at least 1 − δ, there exists a price vector p̂ ∈ P that satisfies xψ∗ (p̂) − x̂ ≤ ε. Furthermore, the running time, the length of the list and the number of queries to ReP is bounded by poly(d, 1/ε, log(1/δ)). Lastly, we have one remaining technical problem to solve: given a set of price vectors P in which at least one price vector can approximately induce the target expected bundle x̂, we need to identify one such price vector. To accomplish this, we will simply post each price vector p ∈ P repeatedly, to obtain polynomially many observations from the buyers and compute the empirical average bundles over these polynomially many rounds. We select the price vector whose empirical average purchased bundle is closest to the target bundle x̂. Putting all the pieces together, we obtain our full algorithm BunToPrice (formal description in Algorithm 2 in the appendix).   Theorem 3.13. Let x̂ ∈ F ∩ Rd>0 be any target bundle. For any target accuracy parameter ε and confidence parameter δ, the instantiation BunToPrice(x̂, ε, δ) outputs a price vector p̂ that with probability at least 1 − δ satisfies kx̂ − xψ∗ (p̂)k ≤ ε. Furthermore, the number of queries to ReP is bounded by poly (d, 1/ε, log(1/δ)).  13  3.3  Outer Layer: Welfare Maximization  Finally, we combine the subroutine BunToPrice with subgradient descent to find the welfare maximizing prices. At a high level, we will use subgradient descent to optimize the function SW over the bundle space, and along the way use the algorithm BunToPrice to obtain prices which induce each target bundle that arises along subgradient descent’s optimization path. To ensure that the per-round expected demand for each good j is bounded by some supply sj , the algorithm will optimize over bundles in the set S = {x ∈ F | xj ≤ sj for each j ∈ [d]}. There are several technical challenges remaining. First, in order to optimize the concave function SW using subgradient descent, we need to compute a subgradient for each bundle the subgradient descent method chooses at intermediate steps. The following result establishes a very nice property that the price vector that induces each target bundle x̂ gives us a simple way to compute a subgradient in ∂SW(x̂). In particular, this means we can obtain a subgradient of the function SW using our subroutine BunToPrice.   Lemma 3.14. Let x̂ ∈ Rd>0 ∩ F , and p̂ be the price vector that induces x̂. Then (p̂ − c) ∈ ∂SW(x̂). Remark. Lemma 3.14 also shows that the welfare-optimal solution always prices every good at cost or higher, and hence welfare-optimal solutions are always no-deficit. To see this, note that if the prices p induce expected bundle x, then (p − c) is a subgradient of the welfare function at x, where c denotes the production cost vector. Hence, if for any good j, we had pj < ci , the gradient would be negative in that coordinate, and we could increase welfare by reducing the demand of good j, contradicting optimality. Second, at each iteration t, subgradient descent may require a subgradient at some bundle t x , but because of the error in BunToPrice, we only find prices to approximately induce the target bundle. To overcome this issue, we will rely on the analysis of subgradient descent under adversarial noise (given in Theorem 2.2). Lastly, instead of optimizing over the entire set S, we will optimize over a slightly smaller set Sξ = {x ∈ F | ξ ≤ xj ≤ sj − ξ}. This allows us to settle two issues: (1) we can guarantee that all of the induced bundles lie in the set S despite the error of BunToPrice and (2) each bundle in Sξ is guaranteed to be inducible since it is strictly positive in every coordinate (as required by Theorem 3.13). √ Lemma 3.15. For any ξ ∈ (0, 1), maxx∈S SW(x) − maxx′ ∈Sξ SW(x′ ) ≤ λ(dξ)β + dξkck.  Putting all the pieces together, we obtain our main algorithm OWel (full description presented in Algorithm 3). To establish the welfare guarantee of D̂, we will compare to an even stronger benchmark—the welfare of the optimal lottery over allocations. In particular, given any constraint vector s ∈ Rd+1 + , a feasible lottery over allocations is a randomized mapping π : [n] → F that assigns each buyer to a randomized bundle such that Evi ∼ψ [π(i)] ≤ s. Let OPTlot be the optimal social welfare achieved by a lottery over allocations. The following is the formal guarantee of OWel (corresponding to Theorem 1.1). Theorem 3.16. For any accuracy parameter α > 0, confidence parameter δ > 0, and subset S = {x ∈ F | xj ≤ sj for each j ∈ [d]} given by a supply vector s. Given query access to ReP, the instantiation OWel(α, δ, s) outputs a price vector p ′ that with probability at least 1 − δ satisfies xψ∗ (p ′ ) ≤ s and SW(p ′ ) ≥ OPTlot − α. 14  Furthermore, both the run-time of the algorithm and the number of queries to ReP is bounded by poly(d, 1/α, 1/σ, 1/λ, log(1/δ)). Remark. The only part of the algorithm that interacts with the oracle ReP (or the buyers) is BunToPrice of the inner layer. Since the BunToPrice only requires a bounded and unbiased estimate of xψ∗ (p) for each price vector p it queries, we can replace ReP by any procedure that can compute such unbiased estimate. This is crucial for solving the unit-demand problem.  4  Unit-Demand Buyers with Indivisible Goods  We now switch to the setting of indivisible goods and unit-demand buyers. Our goal is to develop a computationally and query efficient algorithm to find an approximately optimal distribution over prices subject to the constraint that the per-round expected demand of each good j is bounded by sj . In particular, we will use the algorithm OWel in Section 3 as a main tool for our solution. Throughout, we impose the following mild boundedness assumption on the values. Assumption on valuations There exists a constant upper bound Vmax such that for any buyer i ∈ [n] and item j ∈ [d], 0 < vij ≤ Vmax . Overview: relax and regularize A natural starting point for solving our problem with OWel is to consider the linear relaxation of unit demand valuations: that is we can view the buyers as having linear valuation functions over divisible goods, and optimizing over a feasible set of bundles that is the non-negative orthant of the ℓ1 ball. This relaxation maintains the property that buyers buy integral quantities of each good. However, this approach runs into a substantial difficulty, because linear valuation functions are not strongly concave, and strong concavity was an important ingredient in our analysis of OWel. Instead, we will imagine that we have access to a regularized version of the linear relaxation of our original problem: that is, we imagine that each buyer has a regularized valuation function of the form hv, xi + ηH(x), where H is the entropy function (of course, in reality, we cannot modify the valuations of the buyers). We show that we can solve the (imagined) regularized version of the problem, and also that we can induce buyers to behave (in expectation) as if their valuation functions were regularized by appropriately perturbing the price vectors we present to them. Our solution then consists of the following three steps: 1. We show that the algorithm OWel can compute an approximately optimal price vector for the regularized version of problem, as long as the algorithm has access to an unbiased estimate of the expected demand of a random regularized buyer. 2. Next, we show that we can obtain such unbiased estimates given access to the revealed preference oracle ReP(ψ) in the original un-regularized instance. The key ingredient is a novel price perturbation technique. 3. Finally, we show how to construct an approximately optimal price distribution based on the price vector output by OWel.  15  To facilitate the discussion, we will introduce a dummy good (indexed as (d + 1)) to represent the buyer’s option of buying nothing. The seller’s price and each buyer’s value for this item is always 0, and the per-round demand upper bound is simply sd+1 = 1. Moreover, we will write ∆d+1 to denote the set of all probability distributions over the (d + 1) items (or simply the simplex P over the items). For any x ∈ ∆d+1 , the entropy of x is defined as H(x) = j∈[d+1] xj log x1j . The function H is strongly concave with respect to the ℓ1 norm over the simplex.  4.1  Solving the regularized problem  Given a probability distribution ψ over value vectors and a parameter η, we imagine a corresponding η-regularized problem with a distribution ψ̃ over valuation functions: for each valuation vector vi in the support of ψ, create a regularized valuation function ṽi : ∆d+1 → R>0 with the same probability mass ψ̃vi = ψvi such that ṽi (x) = hvi , xi + ηH(x). The regularized problem is an instance of the divisible good setting, with feasible set F = ∆d+1 . Suppose that we have access to an unbiased estimate for xψ̃∗ (p) for any price vector p: then we can apply OWel from Section 3 to compute approximately optimal prices. There is a small obstacle in the analysis—the regularized valuations defined above are not monotonically increasing in each coordinate (because of the entropy term). However, recall that we were able to substitute monotonicity for Assumption 3.4— that the convex program SCP(x̂) is supply-saturating for each x̂ in our feasible region F = ∆d+1 . This is indeed satisfied in our setting: Lemma 4.1. Let F = ∆d+1 and ψ̃ be a distribution over the regularized valuation functions of the form [hv, xi + ηH(x)]. Then the convex program SCP(x̂) defined as X X ψ̃(v ) [hv , x i + ηH(x )] such that max ψ̃(vi ) xij ≤ x̂j for every j ∈ [d + 1] i i i i n x∈∆d+1  vi ∈V  vi ∈V  is supply-saturating for any x̂ ∈ ∆d+1 . h i Proof. Let x• be an optimal solution to SCP(x̂). The convex combination Eψ̃ xi• ∈ ∆d+1 , so we must h i P • = 1. Note that x̂ also lies in ∆d+1 (these are the only inducible average bundles have j∈[d+1] Eψ̃ xij h i P • ≤ x̂j are for unit demand buyers), so j∈[d+1] x̂j = 1. It follows that all of the constraints Eψ̃ xij saturated. Moreover, the feasible set ∆d+1 is convex, closed, has a non-empty interior, and √ each of the reg11 ularized valuations is η-strongly concave with respect to the ℓ2 norm, and (( d + 1 + Vmax , 1/2)Hölder continuous (see Corollary D.2for a proof). Thus we satisfy all conditions needed to apply OWel, so long as we have access to unbiased estimates of xψ̃∗ (p) for any price vector p ∈ Rd+1 + .  4.2  From price perturbation to value regularization  Solving the regularized problem using OWel requires an unbiased estimate for xψ̃ (p) for any price vector p that the algorithm queries, but in our problem instance the valuations are actually drawn from ψ (without the entropy term). To obtain such an estimate, we give a price perturbation technique that allows us to simulate the response for the regularized buyers: given any price 11 This follows from the fact that the ℓ norm of any vector is bigger than its ℓ norm. 1 2  16  vector p, we will perturb each coordinate to obtain a noisy price vector p ′ , with the effect that the random item purchased by the unit-demand buyer in expectation over the perturbation equals the bundle purchased by her regularized counterpart.12 Lemma 4.2 (Warmuth (2009)). Fix any η > 0 and any vector u ∈ Rd+1 >0 . For each j ∈ [d + 1], let Gj be a random number drawn independently and uniformly at random from [0, 1], then      X       x∗ = argmax[hu, xi + ηH(x)] = E argmax hu, xi + η xj ln ln(1/Gj )  .    x∈∆ x∈∆ d+1  d+1  j∈[d+1]  The random variable ln ln(Gj ) is distributed according to the Gumbel distribution. One immediate technical issue we have is that the Gumbel distribution is unbounded, so the perturbed prices might be negative. We also need to guarantee that the price on the dummy good ⊥ is 0. To overcome this issue, we will translate the perturbed price vector p into a non-negative price vector ′ p ′ with the following procedure: set pd+1 = 0 and pj′ = (pj − pd+1 ) − min{0, minj ′ ∈[d] (pj ′ − pd+1 )}. We will refer to this procedure as Convert, and show that the choice made by any unit-demand buyer remains the same under the new price vector p ′ . Lemma 4.3. Let p ∈ Rd+1 any real-valued vector and let p ′ = Convert(p). Then for any vector v ∈ Rd+1 >0 such that vd+1 = 0, argmax[vj − pj ] = argmax[vj − pj′ ] j∈[d+1]  j∈[d+1]  Furthermore, pj′ ≥ 0 for all j ∈ [d]. Combining the Gumbel noise addition and the procedure Convert, we can now obtain unbiased estimates for xψ̃∗ (p) using feedback from ReP(ψ), the revealed preference oracle for the original problem instance. More formally, for any fixed price vector p, consider the following distribution D(p) of random prices: 1. For each j ∈ [d + 1], let Gj be a random number drawn independently and uniformly at random from [0, 1], and let p̃j = pj + ln ln(Gj ) for each j ∈ [d + 1]. 2. Output p ′ = Convert(p̃). Given this subroutine for generating random prices, we have a procedure Sim (presented in Algorithm 1) for obtaining an unbiased estimate of xψ̃∗ (p) for any price vector p. We will establish the correctness of Sim in Lemma 4.4. Lemma 4.4. Fix any price vector p ∈ Rd+1 + , parameter η > 0, and any distribution ψ over value vectors ∗ ′ be the estimate output by Sim(p, η), then E ′ in Rd+1 . Let x ψ,Sim [x ] = xṽ (p). >0 Using the subroutine Sim to obtain unbiased estimate of xψ̃∗ (p) for different price vectors p, we can now instantiate OWel to solve the η-regularized problem. 12 The technique of simulating regularization through perturbation was also used to establish the equivalence be-  tween “Follow the Regularized Leader” and “Follow the Perturbed Leader” (Warmuth, 2009). In our setting, it is important that we can obtain this effect by perturbing the price vector, rather than the valuation vector, because we do not have control over buyer valuations.  17  Algorithm 1 Simulate the response of a regularized buyer Sim(p, η) Input: A price vector p and regularization parameter η Let p ′ a price vector drawn from D(p) Query the oracle ReP(ψ) with p ′ (i.e. post p ′ to a random consumer) and obtain feedback x′ Output: x′ as an unbiased estimate for xψ̃∗ (p)  4.3  Wrap-up: An approximately optimal distribution over prices  Let p̂ be the price vector output by OWel when solving the η-regularized problem, and consider the distribution over prices D̂ = D(p̂). Similar to the divisible goods setting, we will again compare to the optimal lottery over allocations. In particular, the optimal lottery is given by X X ψ(v )[hv − c, x i] such that ψ(vi )xij ≤ sj for each j ∈ [d + 1] max i i i n x∈∆d+1  i∈[n]  i∈[n]  Let x⋆ and OPTlot be the optimal solution and value for the program defined above. Since any distribution of prices is just inducing a lottery over allocations, we know that max SW(D) ≤ OPTlot ∗ D s.t. xψ (D)≤s where we write xψ∗ (D) = Ep∼D,v∼ψ [xv∗ (p)] to denote expected demand over the goods. The following lemma bounds the sub-optimality of D̂ compared to OPTlot in terms of the regularization parameter η and accuracy guarantee of the price vector p̂. Lemma 4.5. Fix any regularization parameter η. Suppose that p̂ is an ε-approximately optimal price vector for the η-regularized problem. Then the distribution of prices D̂ = D(p̂) satisfies SW(D̂) ≥ OPTlot − ε − η log(d + 1). Therefore, to achieve a target accuracy of α, it suffices to instantiate OWel with accuracy parameter ε = α/2 to solve the η-regularized problem with η = α/(2 log(d + 1)). Putting all the pieces together, we have our algorithm OWel-UD (formally presented in Algorithm 4) that achieves the following main result, which recovers Theorem 1.2. Theorem 4.6. For any accuracy parameter α > 0, confidence parameter δ > 0, and subset S = {x ∈ F | xj ≤ sj for each j ∈ [d]} given by a supply vector s. Given query access to ReP, the instantiation OWel-UD(α, δ, s) outputs a distribution D̂ over prices such that with probability at least 1 − δ satisfies xψ∗ (D̂) ≤ s and SW(D̂) ≥ OPTlot − α.  Furthermore, both the run-time of the algorithm and the number of queries to ReP is bounded by poly(d, 1/α, Vmax , log(1/δ)).  18  5  Limited Supply: Proof of Theorem 1.3  We turn our attention to dynamic pricing with limited supply, so as to prove Theorem 1.3. Setting and notation. Compared to the main model described in Section 2, the limited supply setting differs in the following ways. A problem instance is characterized by a pair (s, T ), where s ∈ Rd+ is the supply vector and T is the time horizon (the maximal number of rounds). Initially the seller has T · sj units of each good j. For ease of exposition, assume that at most one unit of each good can be sold in each round. Execution halts when the time horizon is exceeded, or when the remaining supply of any one good falls below 0. Performance of a given pricing policy π is characterized by its expected total welfare (over the entire execution), denoted SWtot (π). We are particularly interested in “fixed-vector” pricing policies: ones that always uses the same fixed price vector p. The expected total welfare of such policy is denoted SWtot (p). Likewise, “fixed-distribution” pricing policies always draw the price vector independently from the same fixed distribution D; the expected total welfare of such policy is denoted SWtot (D). The induced bundle for a given price vector p is a vector x = x(p) ∈ Rd+ such that xj is the perround expected consumption of each product j if price p is chosen. A bundle x ∈ Rd+ is inducible if x = x(p) for some price vector p. Connection to “Bandits with Knapsacks”. We represent our problem as a special case of “Bandits with Knapsacks” (Badanidiyuru et al., 2013), a general setting for multi-armed bandit problems with resource consumption (henceforth denoted BwK). In BwK, there are several resources consumed by an algorithm, with a limited supply of each. In each round an algorithm chooses from a fixed set of ‘arms’, receives a reward and consumes some resources. Thus, the outcome from choosing an arm is a vector (outcome vector) which consists of the reward and the consumption of all resources. The outcome vector is assumed to be an independent draw of some fixed but unknown distribution that depends only on the chosen arm. Dynamic pricing with limited supply is a canonical special case of BwK: arms correspond to price vectors, resources correspond to the goods (one resource for each good), and rewards is the seller’s utility from a given customer (typically revenue or profit, in our case — welfare). The outcome in a given round is determined by the purchased bundle.  5.1  Divisible goods: proof of Theorem 1.3(a)  We use a different, non-standard connection to BwK: arms correspond to inducible bundles, rather than price vectors. More precisely, for each inducible bundle x we have an arm in BwK such that choosing this arm means choosing a particular price vector px that induces bundle x. Henceforth, such an arm is termed arm-bundle x. The reward and resource consumption from choosing this arm-bundle are defined as those from choosing px . Note that the expected consumption of each good j is simply xj . An algorithm π for such an instance of BwK, i.e., an algorithm that in each round selects an inducible bundle and observes the purchased bundle, will be called a bundling policy. Its expected total welfare is denoted SWtot (π). A “fixed-bundle” bundling policy chooses some arm-bundle x in each round. Its expected total welfare is denoted as SWtot (x). Recall that choosing an arm-bundle x determines the realized bundles purchased by each type of buyers. (It is a consequence of Lemma 3.7.) In other words, the realized bundles do not depend on the choice of px . Therefore:  19  Claim 5.1. Fix a problem instance. For any pricing policy π ′ , there exists a bundling policy π with the same expected total welfare. Proof. The bundling policy π is constructed as follows: whenever π ′ chooses a price vector p that induces bundle x, π chooses arm-bundle x. Then π and π ′ have the same distribution over the outcome vectors in each round t (this is proved by induction on t). The analysis in Badanidiyuru et al. (2013) emphasizes “fixed-distribution” bundling policies: where in each round the arm-bundle is sampled independently from a fixed distribution D over arm-bundles. Let SWtot (D) and SW(D) denote, resp., the expected total welfare and the expected per-round welfare from this bundling policy. A structural result from Badanidiyuru et al. (2013), as specialized to our setting, essentially reduces optimization over arbitrary bundling policies to that over fixed-distribution bundling policies: Lemma 5.2 (specialized from Badanidiyuru et al. (2013)). Fix a finite set B of arm-bundles. Let supSWtot (B) be the supremum of expected total welfare achieved by bundling policies that can only use arm-bundles from B. There exists a distribution D over B such that T · SW(D) ≥ supSWtot (B) and xj (D) ≤ sj for each good j. Here T · SW(D) is seen as an approximation for SWtot (D), given that xj (D) ≤ sj for each j.  Reduction to best fixed bundle. A distribution D over arm-bundles can be replaced by armbundle x = Ex∼D [x], in the sense that SW(x) ≥ SW(D) (because is concave in the expected bundle, see Lemma 3.8), and xj (D) = xj for each good j. 13 Let supSWtot be the supremum of expected total welfare over all bundling policies π. By Claim 5.1, it is also the supremum of expected total welfare over all pricing policies. We claim that for any given ε > 0 there exists a finite set B of arm-bundles such that supSWtot (B) ≥ supSWtot − ε. This holds because SW(x) is a Hölder-continuous function of bundle x (see Lemma C.2), and so for any ε, there is a fine enough discretization of bundles that yields an ε-net for social welfare. Putting this together, we reduce arbitrary bundling policies to fixed-bundle policies: Corollary 5.3. For each ε > 0 there exists is an arm-bundle x such that T · SW(x) ≥ supSWtot − ε  and xj ≤ sj for each good j.  Again, T · SW(x) is seen as an approximation for SWtot (x), given that xj ≤ sj for each j.  Completing the proof. Fix parameter α > 0. Applying Corollary 5.3 with ε = αT /2 and letting p be a price vector that induces bundle x, we obtain a price vector p such that T · SW(p) ≥ supSWtot − αT /2 and xj (p) ≤ sj for each good j. The algorithm from Theorem 1.1 can compute a price vector p ∗ such that SW(p ∗ ) ≥ SW(p) − α/2 and xj (p ∗ ) ≤ sj for each good j. In particular, T · SW(p ∗ ) ≥ supSWtot − αT . It remains to bound the difference between the expected total welfare SWtot (p ∗ ) and the estimate T · SW(p ∗ ): 13 A similar statement — that any distribution over arms is “dominated” by some arm — is false for many other  special cases of BwK, including another version of dynamic pricing with limited supply (Badanidiyuru et al., 2013).  20  Lemma 5.4. Let smin = minj sj and assume that T smin > 32 log T . Then p SWtot (p ∗ ) ≥ T · SW(p ∗ ) − O( T log(T )/smin ).  (The lemma applies to all price vectors p ∗ such that xj (p ∗ ) ≤ sj for each good j. Its proof is deferred to Section 5.3.) Putting this all together, we see that p SWtot (p ∗ ) ≥ supSWtot − αT − O( T log(T )/smin ).  This completes the proof of Theorem 1.3.  5.2  Indivisible goods and unit demands: proof sketch of of Theorem 1.3(b)  Recall that we compete against a weaker benchmark: the best fixed distribution D over the price vectors; more precisely, against supSWtot := supD: x(D)≤s SWtot (D). We can bound the deviation between SWtot (D) and T · SW(D) via the following lemma (which is stated and proved similarly to Lemma 5.4). Lemma 5.5. Let smin = minj sj and assume that T smin > 32 log T . Let D be a distribution over price vectors such that x(D) ≤ s. Then: p |SWtot (D) − T · SW(D)| ≤ O( T log(T )/smin ).  Fix ε > 0 and choose some distribution D such that x(D) ≤ s and SWtot (D) ≥ supSWtot − ε. Apply Theorem 1.3 to construct a distribution D ∗ such that x(D ∗ ) ≤ s and SW(D ∗ ) ≥ SW(D) − α. By Lemma 5.5, it follows that p SWtot (D) − SWtot (D ∗ ) ≤ T (SW(D) − SW(D ∗ )) + O( T log(T )/smin ) p ≤ αT + O( T log(T )/smin ).  5.3  Proof of Lemma 5.4  Let π denote the the fixed-price policy with price vector p ∗ . For the sake of the argument, let us consider the execution of π in the problem instance I with time horizon T , but without the supply constraint. Let Zt be the realized total welfare of this execution by time t. Without loss of generality, we view an execution of π in the original problem instance as an execution in the unlimited-supply instance, truncated at round τ when the original problem instance would halt. Thus, the total realized welfare of π in the original problem instance is Zτ , where τ is a stopping time. Let xj = xj (p ∗ ) be the expected consumption of a given good j. Let yj,t be the realized total consumption of this good byptime t. Let w = SW(p ∗ ) be the expected per-round welfare for p ∗ . By Chernoff Bound, letting c0 = 8 log T , with probability at least 1 − T −2 we have √ p |yj,t − txj | ≤ c0 txj and Zt ≥ wt − c0 t for each good j and all rounds t ≤ T . (12) An execution of π on unlimited-supply problem instance I is called clean if the event in eq. (12) holds. To prove the lemma, it suffices to show in clean execution, p Zτ ≥ T · SW(p ∗ ) − O( T log(T )/smin ). (13) 21  So we will assume a clean execution from now on. Let Bj = sj T be the supply for good j. The stopping time τ can be expressed as o n τ = min min(T , τj ), where τj = min rounds t : yj,t > Bj . goods j  (14)  Informally, we can think of each τj as the stopping time for good j. Let us analyze τj . √ B−c0 Bj , for each good j. Claim 5.6. τj ≥ xj p Proof. Let ε = c0 Bj /xj . It suffices to prove that for each round t ≤ Bj /xj − ε we have yj,t ≤ Bj . This p p is so because by eq. (12) we have yj,t ≤ txj + c0 txj ≤ Bj − εxj + c0 Bj ≤ Bj . p Claim 5.7. min(T , τj ) ≥ T − 2c0 T /sj , for each good j. √ B−c0 Bj , then the claim follows trivially by Claim 5.6. Else, we have Proof. If T ≤ xj p q q B − c0 Bj Bj c0 Bj ≥ , so τj ≥ T − ≥ T − 2c0 T / Bj = T − 2c0 T /sj . T≥ xj 2xj xj √ √ Plugging this into eq. (14), it follows that τ ≥ T − 2c0 T /smin . Since Zτ ≥ wτ − c0 τ by eq. (12), the lower bound on τ implies eq. (13). This completes the proof of Lemma 5.4.  6  Conclusions and open questions  We provide a polynomial time dynamic pricing algorithm for maximizing welfare over the allocation of d goods, for buyers satisfying reasonable assumptions on their valuation functions. Prior work either required explicit assumptions on the aggregate price response function unsupported by micro-economic foundations, or had running time exponential in d. Let us highlight two interesting directions. First: give an algorithm with a more reasonable polynomial run time. While we achieve polynomial dependence on d and α, this is mainly a proof of concept result: the degree of the polynomial run-time of our algorithm is quite high. A (much) smaller degree is desirable, but appears beyond the reach of our current techniques. Are there practical algorithms that achieve the same guarantees? Second: extend our results to revenue optimization, a more traditional objective in the dynamic pricing literature. With our current techniques, this extension requires a major assumption on valuations, namely that buyers’ valuations are uniformly homogeneous with degree m < 1: that there exists a constant m < 1 such that for every buyer i, bundle x, and scalar λ, vi (λ x) = λm vi (x) (the extension to revenue maximization subject to this assumption follows from the techniques of Roth et al. (2016)). Can revenue maximization be handled subject to weaker assumptions?  Acknowledgements. We are grateful to Moshe Babaioff for valuable feedback on an early draft of this paper. This work was partially supported by NSF grant CNS-1253345, a Sloan Foundation Fellowship, and a DARPA grant. Parts of this work have been done while Zhiwei Steven Wu was visiting Microsoft Research. 22  References Afriat, S. 1967. The construction of utility functions from expenditure data. International Economic Review 8, 1, 67–77. Agarwal, A., Foster, D. P., Hsu, D. J., Kakade, S. M., and Rakhlin, A. 2013. Stochastic convex optimization with bandit feedback. SIAM Journal on Optimization 23, 1, 213–240. Amin, K., Cummings, R., Dworkin, L., Kearns, M., and Roth, A. 2015. Online learning and profit maximization from revealed preferences. In Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-15). Babaioff, M., Dughmi, S., Kleinberg, R. D., and Slivkins, A. 2015. Dynamic pricing with limited supply. ACM Trans. on Economics and Computation 3, 1, 4. Special issue for 13th ACM EC, 2012. Badanidiyuru, A., Kleinberg, R., and Slivkins, A. 2013. Bandits with knapsacks. In 54th IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS). Balcan, M., Blum, A., and Mansour, Y. 2008. Item pricing for revenue maximization. In 9th ACM Conf. on Electronic Commerce (EC). 50–59. Balcan, M.-F., Constantin, F., Iwata, S., and Wang, L. 2012. Learning valuation functions. In 23rd. Balcan, M.-F., Daniely, A., Mehta, R., Urner, R., and Vazirani, V. V. 2014. Learning economic parameters from revealed preferences. In Web and Internet Economics. Springer, 338–353. Beigman, E. and Vohra, R. 2006. Learning from revealed preference. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce. ACM, 36–42. Besbes, O. and Zeevi, A. 2009. Dynamic pricing without knowing the demand function: Risk bounds and near-optimal algorithms. Operations Research 57, 1407–1420. Besbes, O. and Zeevi, A. J. 2012. Blind network revenue management. Operations Research 60, 6, 1537–1550. Blum, A., Gupta, A., Mansour, Y., and Sharma, A. 2011. Welfare and profit maximization with production costs. In 52nd IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS). 77–86. Boer, A. V. D. 2015. Dynamic pricing and learning: Historical origins, current research, and new directions. Surveys in Operations Research and Management Science 20, 1 (June). Broder, J. and Rusmevichientong, P. 2012. Dynamic pricing under a general parametric choice model. Operations Research 60, 4, 965–980. Bubeck, S. 2015. Convex optimization: Algorithms and complexity. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning 8, 3-4, 231–357. Bubeck, S. and Cesa-Bianchi, N. 2012. Regret Analysis of Stochastic and Nonstochastic Multiarmed Bandit Problems. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning 5, 1.  23  Bubeck, S., Dekel, O., Koren, T., and Peres, Y. 2015. Bandit convex optimization: \(\sqrt{T}\) regret in one dimension. In 28th Conf. on Learning Theory (COLT). 266–278. Chakraborty, T., Huang, Z., and Khanna, S. 2013. Dynamic and nonuniform pricing strategies for revenue maximization. SIAM J. on Computing (SICOMP) 42, 6, 2424–2451. Preliminary version in IEEE FOCS 2009. den Boer, A. V. and Zwart, B. 2014. Simultaneously learning and optimizing using controlled variance pricing. Management Science 60, 3, 770–783. Devanur, N. R., Sivan, B., and Azar, Y. 2012. Asymptotically optimal algorithm for stochastic adwords. In ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, EC ’12, Valencia, Spain, June 4-8, 2012. 388–404. Feldman, M., Gravin, N., and Lucier, B. 2015. Combinatorial auctions via posted prices. In 26th ACM-SIAM Symp. on Discrete Algorithms (SODA). 123–135. Flaxman, A., Kalai, A., and McMahan, H. B. 2005. Online Convex Optimization in the Bandit Setting: Gradient Descent without a Gradient. In 16th ACM-SIAM Symp. on Discrete Algorithms (SODA). 385–394. Gittins, J. C. 1989. Multi-Armed Bandit Allocation Indices. John Wiley & Sons. Hazan, E. and Levy, K. Y. 2014. Bandit convex optimization: Towards tight bounds. In 27th Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS). 784–792. Hsu, J., Morgenstern, J., Rogers, R., Roth, A., and Vohra, R. 2016. Do prices coordinate markets? In Proceedings of the 48th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing. ACM, 440– 453. Keskin, N. B. and Zeevi, A. J. 2014. Dynamic pricing with an unknown demand model: Asymptotically optimal semi-myopic policies. Operations Research 62, 5, 1142–1167. Kleinberg, R. and Leighton, T. 2003. The value of knowing a demand curve: Bounds on regret for online posted-price auctions. In 44th IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS). 594–605. Mas-Colell, A., Whinston, M. D., and Green, J. R. 1995. Microeconomic Theory. Oxford University Press. Roth, A., Ullman, J., and Wu, Z. S. 2016. Watch and learn: optimizing from revealed preferences feedback. In Proc. of the 48th Annual ACM SIGACT Symp. on Theory of Computing, STOC 2016. Rubinstein, A. 2012. Lecture notes in microeconomic theory: the economic agent. Princeton University Press. Samuelson, P. A. 1938. A note on the pure theory of consumers’ behavior. Economica 5, 17, 61–71. Sion, M. 1958. On general minimax theorems. Pacific J. Math. 8, 1, 171–176. Varian, H. R. 2006. Revealed preference. In Samuelsonian economics and the twenty-first century, M. Szenberg, L. Ramrattan, and A. A. Gottesman, Eds. Oxford University Press, 99–115. 24  Wang, Z., Deng, S., and Ye, Y. 2014. Close the gaps: A learning-while-doing algorithm for singleproduct revenue management problems. Operations Research 62, 2, 318–331. Warmuth, M. 2009. A perturbation that makes ”follow the leader” equivalent to ”randomized weighted majority”. Zadimoghaddam, M. and Roth, A. 2012. Efficiently learning from revealed preference. In Internet and Network Economics - 8th International Workshop, WINE 2012. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 7695. Springer, 114–127. Zinkevich, M. 2003. Online convex programming and generalized infinitesimal gradient ascent. In Machine Learning, Proceedings of the Twentieth International Conference (ICML 2003), August 21-24, 2003, Washington, DC, USA. 928–936.  A  Basic Definitions and Tools  The following condition is useful for obtaining the Slater’s condition and strong duality in convex program. Definition A.1 (Non-empty interior). Let C ∈ Rd be a convex set defined by the following set of constraints: f i (x) ≤ 0,  i = 1, . . . , k  gj (x) ≤ 0,  j = 1, . . . , m  where each f i is a convex function and each gj is an affine function. We say that the set C has a nonempty interior if there exists a point x∗ ∈ C such that f i (x) < 0 for each i. Lemma A.2. Let φ : C → R be a σ-strongly convex function, and let x∗ = argminx∈C φ(x) be the minimizer of φ. Then, for any x ∈ C, kx − x∗ k22 ≤  2 · (φ(x) − φ(x∗ )). σ  Similarly, if φ is σ-strongly concave, and x∗ = argmaxx∈C φ(x), then for any x ∈ C, kx − x∗ k22 ≤  2 · (φ(x∗ ) − φ(x)). σ  Theorem A.3 (Real-valued Additive Chernoff-Hoeffding Bound). Let X1 , . . . , Xm be i.i.d. random variables with E [Xi ] = µ and a ≤ Xi ≤ b for all i. Then for every α > 0, ! # "P −2α 2 m i Xi . − µ ≥ α ≤ 2 exp Pr m (b − a)2  25  B  Proof for Noisy Gradient Descent  Theorem 2.2. Suppose that f is convex, fix constants D, E, and G. Suppose that the gradient descent algorithm performs the following update in each iteration yt+1 = xt − η gt  and  xt+1 = Π C (yt+1 ) + ξt  such that gt ∈ ∂f (xt ) and ξt ∈ Rd is a noise vector. Suppose that kgt k ≤ G and kξt k ≤ E, xt ∈ C for all steps t, and the diameter descent method √ of the set satisfies kCk ≤ D. Then if we run the subgradient 1 PT with step size η = D/(G T ), for any T and any initial point x1 ∈ C, the point z = T t=1 xt satisfies √ √ f (z) ≤ min f (x) + DG/ T + GE T . x∈C  Proof. Let x∗ ∈ argminx∈C c(x). For each time step t, we will write x̂t+1 = Π C (yt+1 ). Using the basic property of convexity and the elementary identity 2ha, bi = kak2 + kbk2 − ka − bk2 , we can derive the following c(xt ) − c(x∗ ) ≤ hgt , xt − x∗ i 1 (xt − yt+1 ), (xt − x∗ ) = η  1  = kxt − yt+1 k2 + kxt − x∗ k2 − kyt+1 − x∗ k2 2η  η 1  kxt − x∗ k2 − kyt+1 − x∗ k2 + kgt k2 = 2η 2 Since x∗ ∈ C, by the property of the projection mapping Π, we know that kyt+1 − x∗ k2 ≥ kΠ C (yt+1 ) − x∗ k2 = kxt+1 − x∗ + x̂t+1 − xt+1 k2 ≥ kxt+1 − x∗ k2 − 2Ekxt+1 − x∗ k Since the set C has diameter bounded by D, it follows that  η 1  kxt − x∗ k2 − kxt+1 − x∗ k2 + 2Ekxt+1 − x∗ k + kgt k2 2η 2 2   ηG DE 1 kxt − x∗ k2 − kxt+1 − x∗ k2 + + ≤ 2η 2 η  c(xt ) − c(x∗ ) ≤  Also note that kgt k ≤ G, then summing over the resulting inequality over all time steps s yields T X D 2 ηG 2 DE + + (c(xt ) − c(x∗ )) ≤ 2η 2 η t=1  √ Therefore, if we set the step size η = D/(G T ), we get the following guarantee using convexity T √ √ 1X c(z) ≤ c(xt ) ≤ DG/ T + GE T , T t=1  which recovers our claim. 26  C  Missing Details and Proofs of Section 3    Lemma 3.7. Let x̂ ∈ F ∩ Rd>0 be a bundle, and let p̂ ∈ Rd+ be a price vector such that xψ∗ (p̂) = x̂. Then • the price vector p̂ is an optimal dual solution for SCP(x̂), and  • the vector x• ∈ F n such that xi• = xv∗ i (p̂) for each i is the unique optimal primal solution. Proof. First, we will show that gx̂ (p̂) = minp∈Rd+ gx̂ (p) = VAL(x̂). Note that     X   ψ(vi ) xij − x̂j  p̂j  ψ(vi ) vi (xi ) − gx̂ (p̂) = maxn Lx̂ (x, p̂) = maxn   x∈F x∈F vi ∈V j=1 i X   ψ(vi ) vi (xi ) − hp̂j , xi i + hp̂, x̂i = maxn d X  X  x∈F  i  By eq. (9), we have xi• = argmaxxi ∈F [vi (xi ) − hp̂, xi i + hp̂, x̂i]. This means gx̂ (p̂) = Lx̂ (x• , p̂). Since for P • each j ∈ [d], we have i ψ(vi )xij = x̂j , we get gx̂ (p̂) = Lx̂ (x• , p̂) =  X i  ψ(vi ) vi (xi• ) ≤ VAL(x̂)  where the last inequality follows from the fact that x• is a feasible solution to the program SCP(x̂). Therefore, we must have g(p̂) = VAL(x̂), and so p̂ is an optimal dual solution to the convex program. Since p̂ is the optimal dual solution, it follows from eq. (9) that x• is the optimal primal solution. Finally, the uniqueness of the primal solution follows from the fact that the objective in eq. (4) is strongly concave.   Claim C.1. Let x̂ ∈ F ∩ Rd>0 be an inducible bundle, induced by price vector p̂. Then SW(p̂) = SW(x̂).  Proof. For each i, let xi• (x̂) be the allocation to buyer ih in the convex program SCP(x̂). By Lemma 3.7, i • • ∗ we know that xi (x̂) = xvi (p̂), and also VAL(x̂) = Evi ∼ψ v(xi (x̂)) . By linearity of expectation, h i SW(p̂) = E v(xi• (x̂)) − hc, xi• i = VAL(x̂) − hc, x̂i, vi ∼ψ  which recovers our claim. Lemma 3.8. The expected social welfare function SW : F → R as defined in eq. (10) is concave. Proof. Let x̂, ŷ ∈ F , and let ẑ = (x̂ + ŷ)/2. It suffices to show that SW (ẑ) ≥  SW(x̂) + SW(ŷ) . 2  Now for each vi ∈ V , let xi• , yi• , zi• be the bundles assigned to buyer i in the optimal solutions of the convex programs SCP(x̂), SCP(ŷ) and SCP(ẑ). Furthermore, let ri• = (xi• + yi• )/2. Observe that the assignment r • is also a feasible solution for the convex program SCP(ẑ), so by the optimality of z • , we have h i h i E vi (zi• ) ≥ E vi (ri• ) vi ∼ψ  vi ∼ψ  27  By the definition of SW and VAL, we have h i SW(x̂) = E vi (xi• ) − hc, x̂i,  h i SW(ŷ) = E vi (yi• ) − hc, ŷi.  and  vi ∼ψ  vi ∼ψ  It follows that i h i h SW(x̂) + SW(ŷ) = E vi (xi• ) − hc, x̂i + E vi (yi• ) − hc, ŷi vi ∼ψ vi ∼ψ i h i h = E vi (xi• ) + E vi (yi• ) − 2hc, ẑi vi ∼ψ vi ∼ψ h i • (by concavity of vi ) ≤ 2 E vi (ri ) − 2hc, ẑi = 2SW(ẑ) vi ∼ψ  which completes our proof. We can translate the Hölder continuity condition on the valuation functions in class V to a Hölder continuity condition of the function VAL and SW, which will be useful for our analysis later. Lemma C.2. VAL : F → R as defined in eq. (10) is (d 1−β λ, β)-Hölder continuous w.r.t. the ℓ1 norm. Proof. Let two bundles x̂, ŷ ∈ F be such that x̂j = ŷj + ∆ and x̂j ′ = ŷj ′ . We will first show that β  VAL(x̂) − VAL(ŷ) ≤ λkx̂ − ŷk2 = ∆β . For each i, let xi• and yi• be the assigned bundles to buyer i in SCP(x̂) and SCP(ŷ) respecP tively. By our assumption, we know i ψ(vi )xi• = ŷj + ∆. Then there exists δ1 , . . . , δn ∈ R+ such P • ≥ δi . Now consider a vector x′ ∈ F nd such that for each i, that ni=1 ψ(vi )δi = ∆ and xij • ′ − δi ≥ 0 = xij xij  • ′ xij ′ = xij ′  and  for each j ′ , j.  P Note that x′ is a feasible solution to the convex program SCP(ŷ), so we have i ψ(vi )vi (xi′ ) ≤ VAL(ŷ). Furthermore, X X ψ(vi )vi (xi′ ) − (VAL(x̂) − VAL(x̂)) ψ(vi )vi (xi′ ) = i  i  ≥ VAL(x̂) − VAL(x̂) − = VAL(x̂) − (Hölder continuity of vi )  (Jensen’s inequality)  X  ≥ VAL(x̂) − λ  i  X  ψ(vi )vi (xi′ )  i  ψ(vi )(vi (xi• ) − vi (xi′ ))  X  β  ψ(vi ) δi  i  β   X ψ(vi )δi  = VAL(x̂) − λ∆β ≥ VAL(x̂) − λ  i  28  Therefore, we have shown that the values of VAL on any two bundles x̂ and ŷ that differ by one  satisfy Hölder continuity condition. To show this condition for any two bundles x, y ∈ coordinate T F Rd>0 , we can apply the same argument iteratively. First, we can form a set of (d + 1) bundles b0 = x, b1 , . . . , b d = y such that bundles bj and b j+1 differ by at most one coordinate, and d X r=1  kbr − b r−1 k1 = kx − yk1  Let ∆r = kbr − b r+1 k1 for each r, we can then write |VAL(x) − VAL(y)| ≤  d−1 X r=0  ≤λ  |VAL(br ) − VAL(b r+1 )|  d−1 X r=0   d−1 β  1 X  β β ∆r ≤ λ d  ∆r  = d 1−β λkx − yk1 d r=0  where the last inequality follows from applying Jensen’s inequality.  C.1  Section 3.2    Lemma 3.9. Let x̂ ∈ F ∩ Rd>0 . There exists a value R-OPT such that  maxn min Lx̂ (x, p) = min maxn Lx̂ (x, p) = R-OPT x∈F p∈P (ε)  p∈P (ε) x∈F  2  Moreover, VAL(x̂) ≤ R-OPT ≤ VAL(x̂) + ε 4σ .  Proof. Since both F n and P (ε) are convex and P (ε) is compact, by Sion’s minimax theorem Sion (1958), there is a value R-OPT such that maxn min Lx̂ (x, p) = min maxn Lx̂ (x, p) = R-OPT p∈P (ε) x∈F  x∈F p∈P (ε)  (15)  Since P (ε) ⊆ Rd+ , we must have R-OPT ≥ VAL(x̂). Now we only need to show that R-OPT ≤ VAL(x̂)+α with α = ε 2 σ/4. Let (x⋆ , p ⋆ ) be a pair of minimax strategies of eq. (15). That is x⋆ ∈ argmax min L(x, p) x∈F n  p∈P (ε)  and  p ⋆ ∈ argmin maxn L(x, p) p∈P (ε) x∈F  It suffices to show that L(x⋆ , p ⋆ ) ≤ VAL(x̂) + α. Suppose not, then we have VAL(x̂) + α < min L(x⋆ , p) p∈P (ε)  =  X  ≤  X  i    X X  ⋆  − x̂ pj ψ(vi ) xij ψ(vi ) vi (xi⋆ ) − max  p∈P (ε) j∈[d]  ψ(vi ) vi (xi⋆ )  i  29  i  P ⋆ Now consider the bundle y such that yj = max{ i ψ(vi )xij , x̂j }. For each i, let yi• = xv∗ i (p ∗ (y)) P and xi• = xv∗ i (p ∗ (x̂)). By definition, VAL(y) = i ψ(vi )vi (yi• ). It is clear that X VAL(y) ≥ ψ(vi )vi (xi⋆ ) > VAL(x̂). i   (1−β)/β , then we can construct the following price vector p ′ ∈ P (ε) such that pj′ = L Let L = λ1/β ε4d 2σ P ⋆ for each good j with i ψ(vi ) xij > x̂j , and pj′ = 0 for all other goods. By Lemma C.2, we can derive the following VAL(y) − VAL(x̂) ≤ d 1−β λky − x̂k1 (16) It follows that VAL(x̂) + α < L(x⋆ , p ⋆ ) ≤ L(x⋆ , p ′ ) + * X X ′ ⋆ ⋆ ψ(vi )xi − x̂ = ψ(vi )vi (xi ) − p , X i  (18)  i  i  =  (17)  ψ(vi )vi (xi⋆ ) −  X  j:yj >x̂j  L (yj − x̂j )  ≤ VAL(y) − Lky − x̂k1  (19) (20)  By combining eqs. (16) and (20), we obtain α<d  1−β  β λky − x̂k1  β − Lky − x̂k1 = λky − x̂k1  Since α > 0, we know that ky − x̂k1 < d   1/(1−β) λ L    L (1−β) 1−β d − ky − x̂k1 λ  . By our setting of L,   β/(1−β) λ ε2σ α < dλ =α = L 4 which is a contradiction. Therefore, the minimax value R-OPT is no more than VAL(x̂) + α.   Lemma 3.10. Let x̂ ∈ F ∩ Rd>0 and p ′ be a price vector in P (ε) such that gx̂ (p ′ ) ≤ minp∈P (ε) gx̂ (p) + α √ for some α > 0. Let x′ = xψ∗ (p ′ ) be the expected bundle induced by prices p ′ . Then kx′ − x̂k2 ≤ 2 α/σ. Proof. By Lemma 3.7, we know that VAL(x̂) = minp∈Rd+ gx̂ (p). We will abuse notation to write xi′ = xv∗ i (p ′ ) for each buyer of type i. By the result of Lemma 3.9, we also have gx̂ (p ′ ) = L(x′ , p ′ ) ≤ R-OPT + α ≤ VAL(x̂) + 2α. For each i, let xi• = xv•i (x̂). Then note that L(x• , p ′ ) = VAL(x̂) − hp ′ , x̂ − x̂i = VAL(x̂). Moreover, x′ is the maximizer for L(·, p ′ ), so it follows that 0 ≤ L(x′ , p ′ ) − L(x• , p ′ ) ≤ 2α.  (21)  For each buyer of type i, any bundle and price vector p, we will write ui (x, p) = vi (x) − hp, xi to denote the quasilinear utility function of buyer i. By our assumption on the valuation functions 30  in V , we know that ui (·, p) is a σ-strongly concave function over the space W for any price vector p. We know from eq. (21) that X L(x′ , p ′ ) − L(x• , p ′ ) = ψ(vi )[ui (xi′ , p ′ ) − ui (xi• , p ′ )] ≤ 2α. i  Since for each type i, the bundles xi′ and xi• lie in the set W , we have the following based on Lemma A.2 σ • kx − xi′ k22 ≤ ui (xi′ , p ′ ) − ui (xi• , p ′ ) 2 i Also, by Jensen’s inequality, we have 2  kx̂ − x′ k22  X  =  i  It follows that  ψi (xi• − xi′ )  2  ≤  X i  ψi kxi• − xi′ k22  σ kx̂ − x′ k22 ≤ 2α 2  √ and so kx̂ − x′ k2 ≤ 2 α/σ.  Lemma 3.11. Let p ∈ Rd+ be any price vector, and xv∗ (p) be bundle purchased by a buyer with valuation function v under prices p. Then E [x̂ − xv∗ (p)] = x̂ − xψ∗ (p) = ∇gx̂ (p).  v∼ψ  Proof. Given x• = argmaxx∈F n L(x, p), we know by the Envelope theorem that the gradient of g can be obtained as X ∂gx̂ (p) • , for each j ∈ [d]. (22) = x̂j − ψ(vi ) xij ∂pj i  By the definition of x• we have,    X X X   ψ(vi )vi (xi ) − x• = argmax  pj  ψ(vi )xij − x̂j   x∈F n  i i j∈[d]     X X X    ψ(vi )vi (xi ) − = argmax  pj  ψ(vi )xij   x∈F n  i i j∈[d]    X ψ(vi ) (vi (xi ) − hp, xi i) = argmax  x∈F n i  Observe that the decision variables xi for each buyer i is independent of all other buyers’ decision in the argmax expression above. This means xi• = argmax [vi (xi ) − hp, xi i] xi ∈Rd+  31  It follows that for each buyer of type i, the bundle xi• corresponds to her purchased bundle under prices p, that is xv∗ i (p). By combining with eq. (22), we now have that ∇gx̂ (p) = E [x̂ − xv∗ (p)] = x̂ − xψ∗ (p), v∼ψ  which completes our proof.   Lemma 3.12. Let x̂ ∈ F ∩ Rd>0 be any target bundle. There exists an algorithm that given any target accuracy ε and confidence parameter δ as input, outputs a list P of log(1/δ) price vectors such that with probability at least 1 − δ, there exists a price vector p̂ ∈ P that satisfies xψ∗ (p̂) − x̂ ≤ ε. Furthermore, the running time, the length of the list and the number of queries to ReP is bounded by poly(d, 1/ε, log(1/δ)). Proof. The algorithm will start by running log(1/δ) independent instantiations (indexed by l) of noisy gradient descent method (Theorem 2.1) to optimize the function gx̂ . We will set number of iterations T1 and learning rate η to be T1 =  4096dL2R2 ε4 σ 2  and  R η= √ L dT   (1−β)/β . At each iteration point p by the gradient descent method, we will obtain with L = λ1/β ε4d 2σ an unbiased estimate of the gradient by first posting the prices p, observe the bundle x∗ (p) purchased by a random buyer, and then compute the vector (x̂ − x∗ (p)) as the estimate. Since both x̂ and x∗ (p) satisfy kx̂k, kx∗ (p)k ≤ R and x̂, x∗ (p) ∈ Rd+ , we have kx̂ − x∗ (p)k ≤ R  √ Furthermore, by our choice of search space P (ε), each iteration point p satisfies kpk ≤ L d. By the guarantee of Theorem 2.1, each instantiation of the noisy gradient descent method will output a price vector p(l) such that ε2 σ . E [gx̂ (p(l))] ≤ min gx̂ (p) + 64 p∈P ′ (ε) By Markov inequality, for each instantiation l, " # ε2σ Pr gx̂ (p(l)) − min gx̂ (p) ≥ ≤ 1/2. 32 p∈P ′ (ε) Since we have log(1/δ) independent instantiations of the noisy gradient descent method, with probability at least 1 − δ, there exists an instantiation l ∗ that outputs a price vector p̂ such that gx̂ (p̂) − min gx̂ (p) ≤ p∈P ′ (ε)  ε2 σ . 32  By Lemma 3.10, we have that kxψ∗ (p̂) − x̂k ≤ ε.  The number of rounds of interactions with the buyers is bounded by ! dL2 R2 log(1/δ) , O ε4 σ 2 which recovers our claim. 32  Algorithm 2 Learning the price vector to induce a target bundle: BunToPrice(x̂, ε, δ) Input: A target bundle x̂ ∈ C, target accuracy ε, and confidence n √ o parameter δ d Initialize: restricted price space P (ε) = p ∈ R+ | kpk ≤ dL where L = (λ)  1/β  4d ε2 σ  !(1−β)/β  ,  T0 = log(2/δ),  T1 =  16384 d L2 R2 , ε4σ 2  T2 =  4R2 log(16dR2 /δ) , ε2  R η= √ L dT1  For l = 1, . . . , T1 : Set pj1 = 1 for all good j ∈ [d] For t = 1, . . . , T0 : Query ReP with p t and observe an unbiased estimate for xψ∗ (p t ) Update price vector with gradient descent: i h   p t+1 = Π P (ε) p̂ t+1 p̂jt+1 = pjt − η x̂j − x∗ (p t )j for each j ∈ [d], P Let p(l) = 1/T Tt=1 p t . For s = 1, . . . , T2 : Query ReP and observe an unbiased estimate x(s)for xψ∗ (p t ) PT2 x(s) Let x(l) = T12 s=1 Let l ∗ = argminl∈[T1 ] kx(l) − x̂k Output: p̂ = p(l ∗ )   Theorem 3.13. Let x̂ ∈ F ∩ Rd>0 be any target bundle. For any target accuracy parameter ε and confidence parameter δ, the instantiation BunToPrice(x̂, ε, δ) outputs a price vector p̂ that with probability at least 1 − δ satisfies kx̂ − xψ∗ (p̂)k ≤ ε. Furthermore, the number of queries to ReP is bounded by poly (d, 1/ε, log(1/δ)). Proof. We will first run the subroutine in Lemma 3.12 with accuracy parameter ε/4 and confidence parameter δ/2. This will output a list of log(2/δ) prices P such that with probability at least 1−δ/2, there exists p ∗ ∈ P such that kx̂ − xψ∗ (p ∗ )k ≤ ε/4. (23) For the remainder of the proof, we will condition on this accuracy guarantee, which is the case except with probability δ/2. Next, for each of the price vector p ∈ P, we will post the price p and observe purchased bundles 16dR2 log(4d/δ)  . For each good by random buyers under prices p for T2 number of rounds where T2 = ε2 j, the amount of good j purchased by a random buyer is a random variable with in the range of [0, R] by our assumption on the class of valuations V . Let xj be the average amount of j-th good h i purchased by these T2 number of buyers. Note that Eψ xj = (xψ∗ (p))j for all good j. By applying Chernoff bound (Theorem A.3), we have with probability 1 − δ/(2d log(2/δ)) that ε kxj − (xψ∗ (p))j k ≤ √ 4 d 33  By applying a union bound over all price vectors in the set P and all goods j ∈ [d], we have with probability at least 1 − δ/2 that ε (24) kx − xψ∗ (p)k ≤ 4 We will condition on this event for the rest of the proof, which is the case except with probability δ/2. Let x′ be the average bundle for posting the price vector p ∗ . Applying triangle inequality on eqs. (23) and (24), we get kx′ − x̂k ≤ ε/2. (25) Finally, we will select the price vector p̂ ∈ P with its average bundle x closest to target bundle x̂ w.r.t. ℓ2 distance. Based on eq. (25), we must have kx − x̂k ≤ ε/2. By applying triangle inequality on eq. (24), the output price vector must satisfy kx̂ − xψ∗ (p̂)k ≤ ε, which recovers our claim.  C.2  Section 3.3    Lemma 3.14. Let x̂ ∈ Rd>0 ∩ F , and p̂ be the price vector that induces x̂. Then (p̂ − c) ∈ ∂SW(x̂). Proof. First, recall that in eq. (10), SW is defined as  SW(x̂) = VAL(x̂) − hc, x̂i.  It follows that to prove our claim, we just need to show that p̂ ∈ ∂VAL(x̂). Let ŷ ∈ Rd>0 ∩ F . By the definition of subgradient, it suffices to show that VAL(x̂) + hp̂, (ŷ − x̂)i ≥ VAL(ŷ).  Let x• and y • be the optimal solutions for SCP(x̂) and SCP(ŷ) respectively. This allows us to derive X VAL(x̂) + hp̂, (ŷ − x̂)i = ψ(vi )vi (xi• ) + hp̂, (ŷj − x̂j ) i     X •  = ψ(vi )vi (xi• ) + p̂j  ) ψ(vi )(yij• − xij j i i   X  X X   = ψ(vi ) vi (xi• ) − hp̂, x• i + p̂j  ψ(vi )yij•  X  X  j  i  Note that for each i,  xi•  = xv∗ i (p̂)  i  by Lemma 3.7, so we must have for each i vi (xi• ) − hp̂, xi• i ≥ vi (yi• ) − hp̂, yi• i.  It follows that VAL(x̂) + hp̂, (ŷ − x̂)i ≥  X i        X X X  X   ψ(vi ) vi (yi• ) − p̂j yij•  + p̂j  ψ(vi )yij•  = ψ(vi )vi (yi• ) = VAL(ŷ),   j  j  which recovers our claim.  34  i  i  Theorem 3.16. For any accuracy parameter α > 0, confidence parameter δ > 0, and subset S = {x ∈ F | xj ≤ sj for each j ∈ [d]} given by a supply vector s. Given query access to ReP, the instantiation OWel(α, δ, s) outputs a price vector p ′ that with probability at least 1 − δ satisfies xψ∗ (p ′ ) ≤ s and SW(p ′ ) ≥ OPTlot − α. Furthermore, both the run-time of the algorithm and the number of queries to ReP is bounded by poly(d, 1/α, 1/σ, 1/λ, log(1/δ)). Proof. Let π be an lottery allocation. Let x̃ ∈ F n be an allocation such that each buyer is allocated the average bundle x̃i = Evi ∼ψ [π(i)] in π ⋆ . Since each buyer’s valuation is concave, by Jensen’s inequality, we have X ψ(vi ) [vi (x̃i ) − hc, x̃i i] ≥ E [v(π(i)) − c(π(i))]. vi ∼ψ,π  i  In other words, the optimal welfare OPTlot can also be achieved by a deterministic allocation. Moreover, the optimal welfare by a deterministic allocation is maxx∈S SW(x). Therefore, we only need to bound the difference between the welfare of the resulting price vector and maxx∈S SW(x). To do that, we will need to bound three different types of error, and show that they add up to at most α with probability at least 1 − β. Before we proceed into analyzing each type of error, we condition on the event that all (T + 1) instantiations of BunToPrice achieve their target accuracy guarantees. Since each of them has confidence parameter δ, by union bound, we know this is the case except with probability (T + 1)δ ′ = δ. First, we will show that the bundle x computed by the noisy subgradient descent method satisfies (26) SW(x) ≥ max SW(x) − α/2. x∈Sξ  Observe that the perturbation error in our subgradient descent is precisely the inducing error of BunToPrice, which is bounded by ε. By Theorem 2.2 and our settings of T , η and ε (in Algorithm 3), we recover the bound in eq. (26). Next, since are not optimizing over the entire set S, we need to bound the loss in welfare for only optimizing over Sξ . The result of Lemma 3.15 can be applied, and by our choice of ξ we get max SW(x) − max SW(x′ ) ≤ α/4. ′ x∈S  x ∈Sξ  It follows that SW(x) ≥ max SW(x) − α/2 ≥ max SW(x′ ) − 3α/4. ′ x∈Sξ  x ∈S  (27)  Finally, in our last instantiation of BunToPrice, we will learn a price vector p̂ induce a bundle x̂ that is close to x, that is kx̂ − xk ≤ ε. Given our choice of ε, we can bound the difference in welfare as in the analysis of Lemma 3.15 to get SW(p̂) = SW(x̂) ≥ SW(x̂) − α/4.  (28)  By combining eqs. (26) to (28), we have obtained SW(p̂) ≥ max SW(x) − α. x∈S  Note that OWel only interacts with the buyers through BunToPrice, and each instantiation requires no more than poly(d, 1/α, log(1/δ)) rounds of interactions with the buyers.  35  Algorithm 3 Learning the price vector to optimize social welfare: OWel(α, δ, s) Input: Target accuracy α, confidence parameter δ, and per-round expected demand bound s Initialize: !β/(5β−4) √ α2 d(λ)1/β (4d/σ)(1−β)/β , M = ε= 2 16RS !1/β 16R2 M 2 α R ′ T= , δ = δ/(T + 1), ξ= , η=√ √ α 2 ε (2−2β)/β T M(1/ε)(2−2β)/β 4λd β + dkck Restricted bundle space Sξ , initial bundle x1 ∈ Sξ and prices p 1 = BunToPrice(x1 , ε, δ ′ ) For t = 1, . . . , T : Let y (t+1) = Π Sξ [xt + η(p t − c)] Let p t+1 = BunToPrice(xt+1 , ε) P Let x = 1/T Tt=1 xt Output: the last price vector p̂ = BunToPrice(x, γ , δ ′ )  D Missing Details in Section 4 Lemma D.1. The entropy function H(x) = norm over the simplex.  PN  j=1 xi log(1/xi )  √ is ( N , 1/2)-Hölder continuous w.r.t. ℓ1 -  Proof. We will first show that the function f (t) = t log(1/t) is Hölder continuous. The first-order derivative of the function is f ′ (t) = log(1/t) − 1. For any pair a, b ∈ [0, 1], we can write |f (a) − f (b)| ≤  Z  b a  ′  |f (t)| dt ≤  Z  b a  2  ′  |f (t)| dt  !1/2  ·  Z  b  2  1 dt a  !1/2  where the last inequality follows from Hölder inequality. Moreover, Z It follows that  b a  |f ′ (t)|2 dt ≤  Z  1 0  |f ′ (t)|2 dt = 1  and  |f (a) − f (b)| ≤ |a − b|1/2  Therefore, the function f is (1, 1/2)-Hölder continuous.  36  Z  b a  12 dt = |a − b|  Now we will use this to show the Hölder continuity of the entropy function. Let x, y be two probability vectors in N -dimensional space, and δj = |xi − yi |, then |H(x) − H(y)| ≤  N X  |f (xj ) − f (yj )|  ≤  N X  |xj − yj |1/2  j=1  j=1    1/2  N N     X X     |xj − yj | |xj − yj |1/2  ≤ N 1/N = N 1/N     j=1 j=1 √ = N (kx − yk1 )1/2 where the last inequality follows from Jensen inequality. Then the Hölder continuity condition immediately follows from above. Corollary D.2. Let function ṽ : ∆d+1 → R+ be defined as ṽ(x) = hv, xi + ηH(x) for some η > 0. √Suppose that each coordinate of v is non-negative and upper bounded by Vmax . Then the function is ( d + 1 + Vmax , 1/2)-Hölder continuous w.r.t. ℓ1 -norm. Lemma 4.3. Let p ∈ Rd+1 any real-valued vector and let p ′ = Convert(p). Then for any vector v ∈ Rd+1 >0 such that vd+1 = 0, argmax[vj − pj ] = argmax[vj − pj′ ] j∈[d+1]  Furthermore,  pj′  j∈[d+1]  ≥ 0 for all j ∈ [d].  ′ Proof. To show that each coordinate of p ′ is non-negative, note that pd+1 = 0 and  pj′ = (pj − pd+1 ) − min{0, min (pj ′ − pd+1 )} ≥ (pj − pd+1 ) − min (pj ′ − pd+1 ) ≥ 0. j ′ ∈[d]  j ′ ∈[d]  To show that the preference of the buyer remains the same under the two price vectors, we consider two cases: buyer will either choose the last item, or select one of the first d items. Suppose that we are in the first case. Then we know that vd+1 − pd+1 ≥ maxj ′ ∈[d] (vj ′ − pj ′ ), and it ′ follows that vd+1 −pd+1 = vd+1 −(pd+1 −pd+1 ) ≥ maxj ′ ∈[d] (vj ′ −(pj ′ −pd+1 )). Note that for each j ′ ∈ [d], ′ we also have pj ′ ≥ (pj ′ − pd+1 ), and this means ′ vd+1 − pd+1 ≥ max(vj ′ − pj′ ′ ). j ′ ∈[d]  Therefore, the buyer will continue to choose item (d + 1). Next consider the second case in which the buyer chooses an item j ∗ ∈ [d] under the price vector p. Note when we construct p ′ , the prices for the first d items are translated by the same amount, so we have j ∗ = argmax[vj − pj ] = argmax[vj − pj′ ] j∈[d]  j∈[d]  37  Now it suffices to show that the buyer will not select the last item under p ′ . To show that, we will further consider two sub-cases: either minj ′ ∈[d] (pj ′ − pd+1 ) < 0 or minj ′ ∈[d] (pj ′ − pd+1 ) ≥ 0. Suppose that minj ′ ∈[d] (pj ′ − pd+1 ) < 0. Let j △ = argminj ′ ∈[d] (pj ′ − pd+1 ), then ′ vj ∗ − pj′ ∗ = vj ∗ − pj ∗ + pj △ ≥ vj △ − pj △ + pj △ = vj △ > 0 = vd+1 − pd+1 ,  this means the buyer will strictly prefer j ∗ . Suppose that minj ′ ∈[d] (pj ′ − pd+1 ) ≥ 0. Let ′ vj ∗ − pj′ ∗ = vj ∗ − pj ∗ + pd+1 ≥ vd+1 − pd+1 + pd+1 = vd+1 − pd+1  which also implies that the buyer will still prefer j ∗ to the empty item. Lemma 4.4. Fix any price vector p ∈ Rd+1 + , parameter η > 0, and any distribution ψ over value vectors ∗ ′ be the estimate output by Sim(p, η), then E ′ in Rd+1 . Let x ψ,Sim [x ] = xṽ (p). >0 Proof. Note that the distribution of prices D(p) satisfies          ∗ ′    xψ̃ (p) = E argmax[hv − p, xi + ηH(x)] = E argmax hv − p , xi  , ψ ψ,p′ ∼D(p) x∈∆d+1  x∈∆d+1  which recovers our lemma.  Algorithm 4 Learning the price vector to optimize social welfare for unit-demand buyers and indivisible goods: OWel-UD(α, δ, s) Input: Target accuracy α, confidence parameter δ, and per-round expected demand bound s Initialize: ε = α/2, η = α/(2 log(d + 1)) Run OWel(ε, δ, s); For each price vector p queried by OWel, obtain an unbiased estimate for xψ̃∗ (p) by calling Sim(p, η) Let p̂ be the price vector output by OWel Output: the distribution over prices D̂ = D(p) Lemma 4.5. Fix any regularization parameter η. Suppose that p̂ is an ε-approximately optimal price vector for the η-regularized problem. Then the distribution of prices D̂ = D(p̂) satisfies SW(D̂) ≥ OPTlot − ε − η log(d + 1). Proof. Let OPTη be the welfare achieved by the optimal fixed price vector p η in the η-regularized problem. Then by definition of OPTη h i E hv − c, xi⋆ i + ηH(xi⋆ ) ≤ OPTη vi ∼ψ  h i Since the entropy function is non-negative, it follows that Evi ∼ψ hv − c, xi⋆ i = OPTlot ≤ OPTη . Next, we will show that there exists a price vector p η induces the optimal fractional allocation in the regularized problem. Let xη be optimal fractional allocation for the η-regularized problem  38  h ηi η such that xψ̃ = Ev∼ψ̃ xv . By Lemma 3.7, we know that there exists a price vector that induces the η  expected xψ̃ and the associated randomized allocation. By the accuracy guarantee of p̂, we have E [ṽ(xṽ∗ (p̂)) − hc, xṽ∗ (p̂)i] ≥ OPTη − ε ≥ OPTlot − ε.  ṽ∼ψ̃  Furthermore, by Lemmas 4.2 and 4.3, we can rewrite h i E [hv − c, xṽ∗ (p̂)i] = E [hv − c, xṽ∗ (p̂)i + ηH(xṽ∗ (p̂))] = E hv − c, xv∗ (D̂)i + η E [H(xṽ∗ (p̂))]  ṽ∼ψ̃  v∼ψ  v∼ψ  v∼ψ  where xv∗ (D) = Ep∼D [xv∗ (p)] is the randomized allocation D induces for each valuation v. Following from the fact the entropy term in regularized valuation is bounded by η log(d + 1), we have h i SW(D̂) = E hv − c, xv∗ (D̂)i ≥ OPTlot − ε − η log(d + 1). v∼ψ  which recovers our bound.  39

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
