Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 0
ArXiv ID: hf_5362

Abstract:
arXiv:1509.03008v1 [math.CO] 10 Sep 2015  Volume polynomials and duality algebras of multi-fans Anton Ayzenberg and Mikiya Masuda Abstract. We introduce a theory of volume polynomials and corresponding duality algebras of multi-fans. Any complete simplicial multi-fan ∆ determines a volume polynomial V∆ whose values are the volumes of multi-polytopes based on ∆. This homogeneous polynomial is further used to construct a Poincare duality algebra A˚ p∆q. We study the structure and properties of V∆ and A˚ p∆q and give applications and connections to other subjects, such as Macaulay duality, Novik–Swartz theory of face rings of simplicial manifolds, generalizations of Minkowski’s theorem on convex polytopes, cohomology of torus manifolds, computations of volumes, and linear relations on the powers of linear forms. In particular, we prove that the analogue of the g-theorem does not hold for multi-polytopes.  Contents 1. Introduction 2. Definitions: multi-fans 3. Definitions: multi-polytopes 4. Volume polynomial from the index map 5. Basic properties of volume polynomials 6. A formula for the volume polynomial 7. Poincare duality algebra of a multi-fan 8. Structure of multi-fan algebra in particular cases 9. Geometry of multi-polytopes and Minkowski relations 10. Recognizing volume polynomials and multi-fan algebras 11. Surgery of multi-fans and algebras 12. Cohomology of torus manifolds References  2 4 8 11 15 20 23 25 29 34 39 42 44  2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 52A39, 52B11, 05E45, 52C35; Secondary 05E40, 13H10, 52B05, 52B40, 52B70, 57N65, 55N91, 28A75, 51M25, 13A02 . Key words and phrases. multi-fan, multi-polytope, volume polynomial, Poincare duality algebra, Macaulay duality, Stanley–Reisner ring, Minkowski theorem, Minkowski relations, cohomology of torus manifolds. 1  2  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  1. Introduction There is a fundamental correspondence in algebraic geometry [6]: " * Toric varieties ú tRational fans in Rn u . of complex dimension n One can read the information about toric variety from its fan. Complete toric varieties correspond to complete fans, non-singular varieties correspond to nonsingular fans, and projective toric varieties correspond to normal fans of convex polytopes. Combinatorics of a fan and geometry of a toric variety are closely connected. In particular, the rays of a fan correspond to the divisors on toric variety and higher dimensional cones correspond to the intersections of divisors. In the work [7] Hattori and the second named author expanded this setting to topological category and generalized the above-mentioned correspondence in the following way: " * Torus manifolds (1.1) ù tNonsingular multi-fans in Rn u , of real dimension 2n which will be explained in a minute. Let X be a smooth closed oriented 2n-manifold with an effective action of an n-dimensional compact torus T and at least one fixed point. A closed, connected, codimension two submanifold of X will be called characteristic if it is a connected component of the fixed point set of a certain circle subgroup S of T , and if it contains at least one T -fixed point. The manifold X together with a preferred orientation of each characteristic submanifold is called a torus manifold. Characteristic submanifolds are the analogues of divisors on a toric variety. Note, that there is no one-to-one correspondence in (1.1): there may be different (in any sense) torus manifolds producing the same multi-fan. Nevertheless, multifans provide a convenient tool to study such manifolds. A multi-fan is the central object of this paper. We recall the precise definition later. Informally, a multi-fan is a collection of cones in V – Rn with apex at the origin, coming with multiplicities and satisfying certain geometrical restrictions. Sometimes it is convenient to assume that there is a fixed lattice N Ă V , and the rays of ∆ are rational with respect to N . The cones of a multi-fan may overlap nontrivially, which makes a multi-fan more general and flexible object than an ordinary fan, and provides many nontrivial examples. A multi-polytope is defined as follows. Let ∆ be a simplicial multi-fan in V – Rn . For each ray li P ∆, we specify an affine hyperplane Hi Ă V ˚ orthogonal to the linear span of li . A tuple P “ p∆, H1 , . . . , Hm q is called a simple multipolytope based on ∆. The relation of the multi-polytope to the multi-fan on which it is based, is exactly the same as the relation of a polytope to its normal fan. Ť For any multi-polytope P Ă V ˚ there is a function DHP : V ˚ z Hi Ñ Z (the notation stands for Duistermaat–Heckman, see [7]). Informally, for a generic point x P V ˚ the value DHP pxq indicates how many times the “boundary” of P wraps around x. The precise definition is given in Section 3. For an ordinary simple convex polytope this function takes value 1 inside the polytope, and 0 outside. A multi-fan ∆ is called complete if it satisfies certain mild conditions (see [7] or Definition 2.5 below). For multi-polytopes based on complete simplicial multifans, the function DHP is compactly supported. We can define the volume of a  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  multi-polytope P as an integral VolpP q :“  ż  3  DHP dµ  V˚  (the measure µ is chosen such that the volume of a fundamental domain of the dual lattice N ˚ is 1). For a given simplicial multi-fan ∆ consider the space Polyp∆q of all multipolytopes based on ∆. Following [20] we call it the space of analogous multipolytopes. To specify an affine hyperplane orthogonal to a line xli y Ă V one needs a single real number ci , the normalized distance from Hi to the origin taken with sign. This number is called the support parameter. Thus the space Polyp∆q is isomorphic to Rm , where m is the number of rays of ∆. Support parameters pc1 , . . . , cm q provide the canonical coordinates on Polyp∆q. If ∆ is complete, the volume gives a function on the space of analogous polytopes: Polyp∆q Ñ R, P ÞÑ VolpP q. Similarly to the case of actual convex polytopes, studied by Pukhlikov–Khovanskii [14] and Timorin [20], this function is a homogeneous polynomial in the support parameters. Theorem 1.1 ([7]). Let ∆ be a complete simplicial multi-fan in Rn with m rays. There exists a homogeneous polynomial V∆ P Rrc1 , . . . , cm s of degree n such that V∆ pc1 , . . . , cm q “ VolpP q for a multi-polytope P P Polyp∆q with support parameters pc1 , . . . , cm q. Following Timorin’s approach [20], we proceed as follows. Consider the ring D of differential operators with constant coefficients, acting on Rrc1 , . . . , cm s. We have D “ RrB1 , . . . , Bm s, where Bi “ BcB i . It is convenient to double the degree, so we assume that deg Bi “ 2. Given any nonzero homogeneous polynomial Ψ P Rrc1 , . . . , cm s of degree n, consider the subspace AnnpΨq Ă D, AnnpΨq “ tD P D | DΨ “ 0u. It is easily seen, that AnnpΨq is a graded ideal, and the quotient algebra D{ AnnpΨq is finite-dimensional and vanishes in degrees ą 2n. Moreover, D{ AnnpΨq is a commutative Poincare duality algebra of formal dimension 2n [20, Prop.2.5.1]. Now consider a complete simplicial multi-fan ∆ and apply this construction to the volume polynomial V∆ . In result we obtain a Poincare duality algebra A˚ p∆q :“ D{ AnnpV∆ q associated with a multi-fan ∆. The main goal of this work is to study the volume polynomials and investigate the structure of the corresponding algebras and to show their relation to other topics in combinatorics, convex geometry, commutative algebra, and topology. The work has the following structure. In Sections 2 and 3 we review the basic notions of the theory of multi-fans and in Section 4 we review the notion of the index map which is the key ingredient in the construction of the volume polynomial. In the work [7], introducing multi-fans, the existence of a lattice N – Zn Ă V was assumed, so that multi-fans are non-singular (or at least rational) with respect to this lattice. In our paper we consider general multi-fans, probably non-rational. Instead of a lattice we assume that the ambient space V has a fixed inner product. This allows, in particular, to define and compute volumes of multi-polytopes in V ˚ “ V of dimensions smaller than n (dealing with lattices, only unimodular volumes make sense). The exposition of the multi-fan theory is built to comply with this continuous setting. Nevertheless, all statements in the introductory sections follow from their lattice analogues discussed in [7].  4  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  In Section 5 we prove the basic enumerative properties of the volume polynomial. While the values of V∆ are the volumes of multi-polytopes, the values of its partial derivatives are the volumes of proper faces of these multi-polytopes up to certain constants. These relations will be used further in Section 9. In Section 6 we prove a general formula (actually, a family of formulas) for the volume polynomial, and indicate a geometrical procedure which allows to find nontrivial linear identities on the powers of linear forms. For actual convex polytopes our formula coincides with the Lawrence’s formula [8], which is well known in computational geometry. In Section 7 we review the general correspondence between homogeneous polynomials and Poincare duality algebras, known as the Macaulay duality. Using this correspondence we obtain an algebra A˚ p∆q as a Poincare duality algebra corresponding to the volume polynomial V∆ . One way to obtain this algebra is via differential operators as in Timorin’s approach. Another way involves the index map of a multi-fan. The structure of multi-fan algebras in some particular cases is described in Section 8. Every (complete simplicial) multi-fan has an underlying simplicial cycle. If this cycle is a homology sphere K, then A˚ p∆q is the quotient of Stanley–Reisner algebra of K by a linear system of parameters, and the dimensions of its graded components are the h-numbers of K. This is similar to ordinary fans. If the underlying simplicial cycle is a homology manifold, the algebra A˚ p∆q is the quotient of the Stanley–Reisner algebra by the linear system of parameters and by the certain ideal introduced and studied by Novik–Swartz [12, 13]. In this case the dimensions of the graded components of A˚ p∆q are the h2 -numbers of K. A short exposition of the Novik–Swartz theory is provided. Section 9 aims to generalize a classical Minkowski theorem on convex polytopes to multi-polytopes. The direct Minkowski theorem has a straightforward generalization which can be used to obtain linear relations in the algebra A˚ p∆q. On the other hand, the inverse Minkowski theorem, properly formulated, is controlled by the power map A2 p∆q Ñ A2n´2 p∆q, a ÞÑ an´1 . In Section 10 we answer the question which polynomials are volume polynomials of multi-fans, and which Poincare duality algebras are algebras of multi-fans. We prove that every Poincare duality algebra generated in degree 2 is isomorphic to A˚ p∆q for some complete simplicial multi-fan ∆. The basic operations on multi-fans, such as flips and connected sums, and their effects to multi-fan algebras are described in Section 11. In particular, we prove that, under flips, the dimensions of graded components of A˚ p∆q change similarly to h-numbers of simplicial complexes. Finally, in Section 12 we discuss the relation of A˚ p∆q to the cohomology of torus manifolds. It is known that, for complete smooth toric variety X, the cohomology ring H ˚ pX; Rq coincides with the algebra A˚ p∆X q of the corresponding fan. Situation with general torus manifolds and their multi-fans is more complicated. Nevertheless, in a certain sense, the multi-fan algebra A˚ p∆X q gives a “lower bound” for the cohomology of a torus manifold. 2. Definitions: multi-fans 2.1. Multi-fans as parametrized collections of cones. Let us recall the definition and basic properties of multi-fans. This exposition follows the lines of [7].  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  5  Consider an oriented vector space V – Rn with a lattice N Ă V , N – Zn . A subset of the form κ “ tr1 v1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` rk vk | ri ě 0u for given v1 , . . . , vk P V is called a cone in V . Dimension of κ is the dimension of the linear hull of κ. A cone is called strongly convex if it contains no line through the origin. In the following all cones are assumed strongly convex. Using classical construction of supporting hyperplane one can define the faces of κ, which are also the cones of smaller dimensions. If the generating set v1 , . . . , vk may be chosen linearly independent (resp. rational, the part of basis of the lattice N ), κ is called simplicial (resp. rational, unimodular). Let ConepV q denote the set of all cones in V . This set obtains a partial order: κ1 ă κ2 whenever κ1 is a face of κ2 . Let Σ be a finite partially ordered set with the minimal element ˚. Suppose there is a map C : Σ Ñ ConepV q such that (1) Cp˚q “ t0u; (2) If I ă J for I, J P S, then CpIq ă CpJq; (3) For any J P Σ the map C restricted on tI P S | I ď Ju is an isomorphism of ordered sets onto tκ P ConepV q | κ ĺ CpJqu. The image CpΣq is a finite set of cones in V . We may think of a pair pΣ, Cq as a set of cones in V labeled by the ordered set Σ. The poset Σ obtains a rank function: rkpIq :“ dim CpIq. The set of elements in Σ having maximal rank n is denoted Σxny . Consider an arbitrary function σ : Σxny Ñ t´1, `1u called a sign function. Definition 2.1 (Old definition). The triple ∆ :“ pΣ, C, σq is called a multi-fan in V . The number n “ dim V is called the dimension of ∆. Multi-fan ∆ is called simplicial (resp. rational, non-singular) if the values of C are simplicial (resp. rational, unimodular) cones. In the following we will always assume that ∆ is simplicial. Then every cone of ∆ is simplicial and property (3) of the map C implies that Σ is a simplicial poset. Recall that a poset Σ is called simplicial if any lower order ideal SďJ :“ tI P S | I ď Ju is isomorphic to the poset of faces of a simplex (i.e. a boolean lattice). 2.2. Multi-fans as pairs of weight and characteristic functions. Note that definition 2.1 of a multi-fan slightly differs from the definition of multi-fan given in [7]. To establish the correspondence consider the following construction. Let rms “ t1, . . . , mu denote the set of vertices of Σ. ` ˘ The signs of maximal simplices in Σ determine two functions on rms n , the set of all n-subsets of rms: ˆ ˙ rms w˘ : Ñ Zě0 , n where w` pti1 , . . . , in uq (resp. w´ pti1 , . . . , in uq) equals the number of simplices I P Σxny on the vertices ti1 , . . . , in u having sign `1 (resp. ´1). Although both functions w` , w´ are important by topological reasons (see [7]), only their difference w :“ w` ´ w´ is relevant to our work. So far w is a function which assigns an integral number to each n-subset of rms. Let us consider a pure simplicial complex K on the set rms whose maximal simplices K xny are the subsets I Ă rms satisfying wpIq ‰ 0.  6  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  To reach greater generality we allow w to take real values, thus ˆ ˙ rms w: Ñ R. n Each vertex i P rms corresponds to a ray (i.e. 1-dimensional cone) of ∆. We choose a generator in each ray. This gives a so called characteristic map λ : rms Ñ V , such that the ray Cpiq is generated by λpiq for every i P rms. It satisfies the following property: if ti1 , . . . , ik u P K, then λpi1 q, . . . , λpik q P V are linearly independent. This condition is called ˚-condition. Note that in [7] all multi-fans were assumed rational. In this case the generator λpiq can be chosen canonically as a unique primitive integral vector contained in Cpiq. Since we want to include non-rational simplicial multi-fans in our consideration, we should specify the generators somehow in order for the subsequent calculations to make sense. Finally we get to the following definition Definition 2.2 (New definition). A triple pK, w, λq is called a simplicial multi` ˘ fan in V . Here w : rms Ñ R is a weight function, K is a simplicial complex which n is the support of w, and λ : rms Ñ V is a characteristic function. Characteristic function satisfies ˚-condition with respect to K: if I “ ti1 , . . . , ik u P K, then the vectors λpi1 q, . . . , λpik q are linearly independent in V . Here K may have ghost vertices, i.e. i P rms such that tiu R K. The value of characteristic function in such vertices may be arbitrary (even zero). In the following we will not pay too much attention to ghost vertices since their presence does not affect the calculations. Strictly speaking, the new definition is not equivalent to the old one, since we cannot restore the poset Σ and the sign function σ : Σxny Ñ t˘1u when w takes non-integral values. Even in the integral case we cannot restore Σ uniquely. On the other hand, as was shown above, every multi-fan in the sense of old definition determines a multi-fan in the sense of new definition. We will work with the new definition most of the time. Remark 2.3. When passing from the old definition to the new one, we may lose an important information. For example consider the multi-fan in R2 “ xe1 , e2 y whose maximal cones are two copies of the non-negative cone (i.e. the cone generated by basis vectors e1 , e2 ), and two rays are generated by e1 and e2 . One of the maximal cones is taken with the sign `1 and the other with the sign ´1. We remark that such multi-fan corresponds to the torus manifold S 4 [7]. We have w` pt1, 2uq “ w´ pt1, 2uq “ 1, therefore wpt1, 2uq “ 0. Thus K is empty (equiva` ˘ lently, w : rms Ñ R vanishes). n One way to avoid such situations is to assume in the beginning that Σ itself is a simplicial complex rather than a general simplicial poset. In this case K coincides with Σ and the weight function w on K coincides with the sign function σ. In particular, w takes the value ˘1 on each maximal simplex of K (see Example 2.9). 2.3. Underlying simplicial chain. Let △rms denote an abstract simplex on pn´1q  the vertex set rms, and let △rms  be its pn ´ 1q-skeleton. Every subset I Ă rms,  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  7  pn´1q  |I| “ n may be considered as a maximal simplex of △rms . If I P K xny , then we can orient I as follows: we say that the order of vertices pi1 , . . . , in q of I is positive if and only if the basis pλpi1 q, . . . , λpin qq determines the positive orientation of V . Definition 2.4. The element ÿ pn´1q wpIqI P Cn´1 pK; Rq Ď Cn´1 p△rms ; Rq wch “ IĂK xny  is called the underlying chain of a multi-fan ∆. Here Cn´1 pK; Rq denotes the group of simplicial chains of K. 2.4. Complete multi-fans. Let us briefly recall the notion of projected multifan. We give the construction in terms of new definition of multi-fan although the similar construction may be given in terms of simplicial posets and sign functions. Let ∆ “ pK, w, λq be a simplicial multi-fan in the space V , and let I “ ti1 , . . . , ik u P K be a simplex. Let VI denote the quotient vector space V {xλpi1 q, . . . , λpik qy. Consider the multi-fan ∆I “ plkK I, wI , λI q in VI defined as follows: ‚ lkK I :“ tJ Ă rmszI | I Y J P Ku is the link of the simplex I in K. ‚ wI pJq :“ wpI Y Jq for every J P lkK I, |J| “ n ´ |I|. ‚ λI pjq is the image of λpjq P V under the natural projection V Ñ VI “ V {xλpi1 q, . . . , λpik qy. It is easily seen that λI satisfies ˚-condition. If we choose some orientation of a simplex I P K, the space VI obtains an orientation induced from V . To be precise, let us say that the basis prv1 s, . . . , rvn´k sq determines a positive orientation of VI if the basis pv1 , . . . , vn´k , λpi1 q, . . . , λpik qq is a positive basis of V for a chosen positive order pi1 , . . . , ik q of vertices of I. We call ∆I the projected multi-fan of ∆. The construction satisfies the hereditary relation p∆I1 qI2 “ ∆I1 \I2 whenever it makes sense, and there holds ∆∅ “ ∆. Let us call a vector v P V generic with respect to ∆ if it is not contained in the vector subspaces spanned ř by the cones of ∆ of dimensions ă n. For any such v define the number dv “ wpIq P R, where the sum is taken over all subsets I “ ti1 , . . . , in u Ă rms such that the cone generated by λpi1 q, . . . , λpin q contains v. Definition 2.5. The multi-fan ∆ is called pre-complete if dv does not depend on a generic vector v P V . In this case dv is called the degree of ∆. The multi-fan ∆ is called complete if the projected multi-fan ∆I is pre-complete for any simplex I P K. Remark 2.6. Note that this definition allows w to be constantly zero. We call a multi-fan zero if its weight function constantly zero. A zero multi-fan is pre-complete and therefore complete. Proposition 2.7. A multi-fan ∆ is complete if and only if its underlying simpn´1q plicial chain wch P Cn´1 p△rms ; Rq is a cycle, that is dwch “ 0 for the standard pn´1q  pn´1q  simplicial differential d : Cn´1 p△rms ; Rq Ñ Cn´2 p△rms ; Rq (if n “ 1, we assume pn´1q  that d : C0 p△rms ; Rq Ñ R is the augmentation map). Proof. In the case when w takes only integral values, the statement is proved in [7, Sec.6]. If w takes only rational values, scaling the values of w by a common denominator reduces the task to the integral case. It remains to prove the statement for real-valued w. Both conditions “∆ is complete” and “dwch “ 0” determine rational vector subspaces in the space of all possible weight functions (it is not  8  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  difficult to define the pre-completeness condition in terms of the “wall-crossing relations”, which are linear relations on wpIq with integral coefficients). Thus the rational case implies the real case.  For convenience we summarize the discussion by the following definition. Definition 2.8 (Complete simplicial multi-fan). A complete simplicial multiř pn´1q fan is a pair pwch , λq, where wch “ IĂrms,|I|“n wpIqI P Zn´1 p△rms q is a simplicial cycle on m vertices, and λ : rms Ñ V is any function satisfying the condition: tλpiquiPI is a basis of V if |I| “ n and wpIq ‰ 0. r n´1 pK; Rq Ă For a complete multi-fan ∆ the corresponding homology class rwch s P H pn´1q r n´1 p△ H rms ; Rq will be denoted r∆s and called the underlying homology class pn´1q pn´1q r n´1 p△pn´1q q may q and H ; Rq “ 0, the groups Zn´1 p△ of ∆. Since Cn p△ rms  rms  rms  be identified. Thus wch and r∆s are just two different notations for the same object.  Example 2.9. One obvious way to obtain a complete multi-fan is to start with any oriented pseudomanifold K of dimension n ´ 1 on the set of vertices rms, and take any characteristic function λ : rms Ñ V . Since K is oriented, every maximal simplex I of K becomes oriented, but this orientation may be different from the one determined by characteristic function (see subsection 2.3). Let wpIq be `1 or ´1 depending on whether these two orientations agree or not. Let us extend the weight function by zeroes to non-simplices of K. The corresponding simplicial chain ř pn´1q wch “ I wpIqI P Cn´1 p△rms ; Rq is closed, since it is exactly the fundamental pn´1q  chain of K in △rms . Therefore, pwch , λq is a complete simplicial fan.  Example 2.10. The previous example may be restricted to the case when K is a homology sphere or homology manifold. We will study these two cases in more detail in Section 8. We say that ∆ is based on an orientable simplicial pseudomanifold K if the corresponding simplicial cycle is given by K. There is one interesting feature of (complete) multi-fans revealed by Definitions 2.2 and 2.8. The multi-fans with the given set of vertices rms and the given characteristic function λ form a vector space: we may add them by adding their weights and multiply by real numbers by scaling their weights. Let MultiFansλ denote the vector space of complete multi-fans with the given characteristic function λ. pn´1q This space may be identified with certain vector subspace of Zn´1 p△rms ; Rq. We will discuss this subspace in detail in subsection 10.3. The set of multi-fans with integral weights forms a lattice inside MultiFansλ which is a certain sublattice of pn´1q Zn´1 p△rms ; Zq. 3. Definitions: multi-polytopes 3.1. Multi-polytopes. Let ∆ be a simplicial multi-fan with characteristic function λ : rms Ñ V . Let HP pV ˚ q denote the set of all affine hyperplanes in the dual vector space V ˚ . For each i P rms choose an affine hyperplane Hpiq Ă V ˚ in the dual space which is orthogonal to the linear hull of the i-th cone. In other words, Hpiq is defined by equation Hpiq “ tu P V ˚ | xu, λpiqy “ ci u for some constant ci P R called the support parameter of Hpiq.  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  9  Definition 3.1. A multi-polytope P is a pair p∆, Hq, where ∆ is a multi-fan, and H : rms Ñ HP pV ˚ q is a function such that Hpiq is orthogonal to λpiq for any i P rms. We say that P is based on the multi-fan ∆. Although the definition may be stated in general, we restrict to simplicial multifans ∆, in which case P is called a simple multi-polytope. Let us denote the set of all multi-polytopes based on ∆ by Polyp∆q. Every such multi-polytope is completely determined by its support parameters c1 , . . . , cm . Thus Polyp∆q has natural coordinates pc1 , . . . , cm q and may be identified with Rm . This space is called the space of analogous polytopes based on ∆. To simplify notation, we denote Hpiq by Hi and set č HI :“ Hi for I P K. iPI  HI is a codimension |I| affine subspace in V ˚ , since the normals of the hyperplanes Hi , i P I are linearly independent by ˚-condition. In particular, when I is a maximal simplex, I P K xny , HI is a point in V ˚ which is called the vertex of P .  Definition 3.2. Let ∆ be a simplicial multi-fan in V with the underlying simplicial complex K and let P be a simple multi-polytope based on ∆. Let I P K. Consider a simple multi-polytope FI “ p∆I , HI q in the space HI Ă V ˚ . Note that the projected multi-fan ∆I is defined in the space VI (see subsection 2.4), so the multi-polytope based on ∆I should formally lie in VI˚ . Nevertheless, we may identify HI with VI˚ . The supporting hyperplanes of FI are defined as follows: HI pjq “ HI X Hj for any vertex j of lkK I. The multi-polytope FI is called the face of P dual to I. 3.2. Duistermaat–Heckman function of a multi-polytope. Suppose I P K xny . Then the set tλpiq | i P Iu is a basis of V . Denote its dual basis of V ˚ by tuIi | i P Iu, i.e. xuIi , λpjqy “ δij where δij denotes the Kronecker delta. Take a generic vector v P V . Then xuIi , vy ‰ 0 for all I P K xny and i P I. Set # uIi if xuIi , vy ą 0, I 7tiPI|xuIi ,vyą0u I ` p´1q :“ p´1q and pui q :“ ´uIi if xuIi , vy ă 0. We denote by C ˚ pIq` the cone in V ˚ spanned by puIi q` ’s (i P I) with apex at a vertex HI of a multi-polytope P , and by φI the function on V ˚ which takes value 1 inside C ˚ pIq` and 0 outside (this is just a characteristic function of a subset but we want to avoid this term since it is already reserved for the function λ). Ťm Definition 3.3. A function DHP on V ˚ z i“1 Hi defined by ÿ p´1qI wpIqφI IPK xny  is called a Duistermaat–Heckman function associated with P .  The summands in the definition depend on the choice of a generic vector v P V . Nevertheless, the function itself is independent of v when ∆ is complete (we refer to [7] when w is integral-valued and note that the same argument works for real weights). The function DHP for a simple multi-polytope P based on a complete multifan has the following geometrical interpretation. Let S be the realization of first barycentric subdivision of K and let GI Ă S be the dual face of I P K, I ‰ ∅, i.e.  10  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  a realization of the set ttI ă I1 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă Ik u P K 1 u. If I P K xny , then GI is a point. For a given multi-polytope P based on ∆ there exists a continuous map ψ : S Ñ V ˚ such that ψpGI q Ă HI for any I P K, I ‰ ∅ (in particular, when I P K xny , this map sends the point GI P S to the vertex HI of a multi-polytope P ). This map is unique up to homotopy preservingŤthe stratifications. m Let us take any point u P V ˚ z i“1 Hi . Then u is not contained in the image of ψ by the construction of ψ. Thus we may consider the induced map in homology: r n´1 pS; Rq Ñ H r n´1 pV ˚ ztuu; Rq. ψ˚ : H  The underlying simplicial cycle r∆s may be considered as an element of the group r n´1 pS; Rq. Since V ˚ is oriented, we have the fundamental class rV ˚ ztuus P H r n´1 pV ˚ ztuu; Rq. Thus H ψ˚ pr∆sq “ WNP puq ¨ rV ˚ ztuus,  for some number WNP puq P R. This number has a natural meaning of winding number of cycle r∆s around u. It happens that this number is exactly the value of DHP at the point u P V ˚ (see details in [7, Sec.6]). It is easily seen from the above consideration that DHP has a compact support when ∆ is complete. Thus in the case of complete multi-fan we may define the volume of a multi-polytope P as ż (3.1) VolpP q “ DHP puqdµ V˚  with respect to some euclidean measure on V ˚ (in a presence of a lattice N Ă V the measure is normalized so that the fundamental domain of N ˚ Ă V ˚ has volume 1). Finally, we may consider the volume as a function on the space Polyp∆q – Rm of analogous multi-polytopes. We have a function V∆ : Rm Ñ R whose value at pc1 , . . . , cm q equals VolpP q for the multi-polytope P with the support parameters c1 , . . . , cm . The goal of the next section is to study this function using equivariant localization ideas and prove Theorem 1.1. Remark 3.4. Needless to say that in case of actual simple convex polytopes the notions introduced above coincide with the classical ones. If P is a simple convex polytope and ∆ is its normal fan, then DHP takes the value 1 inside P and 0 outside. The volume of P is just the usual volume. Note that even if ∆ is an actual fan, not all multi-polytopes based on ∆ are actual convex polytopes. Nevertheless, the notion of volume and Duistermaat–Heckman function have transparent geometrical meanings for all of them. Example 3.5. Consider the two-dimensional multi-fan ∆ with m “ 5 and V “ R2 depicted on Fig.1, left. Its characteristic function is the following: λp1q “ p1, 0q, λp2q “ p´2, 1q, λp3q “ p1, ´2q, λp4q “ p0, 1q, λp5q “ p´1, ´1q. The weight function takes the value 1 on the subsets t1, 2u, t2, 3u, t3, 4u, t4, 5u, t1, 5u and the value 0 on all other subsets. Geometrically this indicates the fact that in the multi-fan we have the cones generated by tλp1q, λp2qu, tλp2q, λp3qu, etc. with multiplicity one, and do not have the cones generated by tλp1q, λp3qu, tλp1q, λp4qu, and so on. It can be seen that every generic point of V “ R2 is covered by exactly two cones, therefore ∆ is pre-complete of degree 2. Moreover, a simple check shows that all its projected multi-fans are complete. Hence ∆ is complete. The underlying chain of p1q ∆ has the form p1, 2q` p2, 3q` p3, 4q` p4, 5q` p5, 1q P C1 p△r5s ; Rq which is obviously  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  11  a simplicial cycle. The underlying complex K of ∆ is a circle made of 5 segments, and r∆s is its fundamental class.  ∆  P λp2q  λp4q  H1  H2  H4  λp1q λp5q  H3  H5  λp3q  Figure 1. Example of a multi-fan ∆ and a multi-polytope P based on it. An example of a multi-polytope P based on ∆ is shown at Fig.1, right. Each hyperplane Hi is orthogonal to the linear span of the corresponding ray λpiq of ∆, i P r5s. The Duistermaat–Heckman function of P is shown on Fig.2. The function is constant on the chambers: it takes value 2 in the middle pentagon since the multi-polytope “winds” around the points of this region twice, and takes value 1 on triangles adjacent to the central pentagon. The value of DHP in all other chambers is 0. The volume of a multi-polytope is therefore not just the volume of the five-point star: the points in the central region contribute to the volume twice.  4. Volume polynomial from the index map 4.1. Index map. Let ∆ “ pwch , λq be a simplicial multi-fan in V – Rn with m rays. The characteristic function λ : rms Ñ V may be considered as a linear map λ : Rm Ñ V which sends the basis vector ei P Rm , i P rms to λpiq. Let txi uiPrms be the basis of pRm q˚ dual to tei uiPrms , so that pRm q˚ “ xx1 , . . . , xm y. Let us also consider the adjoint map λJ : V ˚ Ñ pRm q˚ . By definition it sends the vector u P V ˚ to m ÿ xu, λpiqyxi . i“1  For any maximal simplex I “ ti1 , . . . , in u P K xny the vectors tλpiquiPI form a basis of V according to ˚-condition, defined in subsection 2.2. Let tuIi uiPI be the dual basis of V ˚ . Let ιI : pRm q˚ Ñ V ˚ be the linear map defined by # uIi if i P I, (4.1) ιI pxi q “ 0, if i R K.  12  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  H1  H2 1  1  1 H3  1  2  H4  1 H5  Figure 2. Duistermaat–Heckman function of the multi-polytope P . Consider Rrx1 , . . . , xm s, the algebra of polynomials on pRm q˚ . Also let RrV ˚ s denote the algebra of polynomials on V ˚ . Both polynomial algebras are graded, where we set the degrees of the generating spaces pRm q˚ and V ˚ to 2. The linear map ιI induces the graded algebra homomorphism ιI : Rrx1 , . . . , xm s Ñ RrV ˚ s, denoted by the same letter. In the following, if A is a graded algebra, we denote by Aj its homogeneous part of degree j. Let S ´1 RrV ˚ s denote the ring of rational functions over RrV ˚ s graded in a natural way. Given a weight function w : K xny Ñ R we can define the linear map π!∆ : Rrx1 , . . . , xm s Ñ S ´1 RrV ˚ s as the following weighted sum: ÿ wpIqιI pxq ś (4.2) π!∆ pxq “ | det λ I| iPI ιI pxi q xny IPK  for x P Rrx1 , . . . , xm s. We assume that an inner product is fixed on V , so that | det λI | “ | detpλpiqiPI q| is well-defined even if there is no lattice in V . The inner product on V induces a euclidean measure on V ˚ and | det λI | is the volume of the parallelepiped spanned by tλpiquiPI . The translation invariant measure on V ˚ is assumed the same as in (3.1). The map π!∆ is well-defined since λI are isomorphisms. It can be seen that π!∆ is homogeneous of degree ´2n. It is called the index map of multi-fan ∆ “ pK, w, λq. Theorem 4.1. The following properties of ∆ are equivalent: ˚ (1) The image of π!∆ lies in RrV ř s Ă S ´1 RrV ˚ s; (2) The underlying chain wch “ IPK xny wpIqI is closed; (3) The multi-fan ∆ “ pwch , λq is complete. Proof. Equivalence of (2) and (3) was already shown in Proposition 2.7. The implication (2) ñ (1), in case when λ takes values in the lattice and w is integervalued, is proved in [7, Lm.8.4]. It should be noted that in this case | det λI | appearing in the denominator is nothing but the order of the finite group GI “  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  13  N {NI , where N Ă V is the lattice and NI is a sublattice generated by tλpiquiPI . The situation when λ and w are rational is reduced to the integral case by multiplying all values of λ and w by a common denominator (both conditions (1) and (2) are invariant under rescaling). The real case follows by continuity. Indeed, the subset of simplicial cycles with rational coefficients, Zn´1 pK; Qq, is dense in Zn´1 pK; Rq; the right hand side of (4.2) is continuous with respect to λ and w; and the subset RrV ˚ s is closed in S ´1 RrV ˚ s. Therefore, arbitrary complete multi-fan pw, λq can be approximated by a sequence of rational complete multi-fans ∆α “ pwα , λα q which implies that the values of π!∆ are approximated by the values of π!∆α . Since the values of π!∆α are polynomials, so are the values of π!∆ . Let us prove that (1) implies (2). ś Take any simplex J P K such that |J| “ n ´ 1 and consider the monomial xJ “ iPJ xj of degree 2pn ´ 1q lying in Rrx1 , . . . , xm s. The map π!∆ lowers the degree by 2n thus we have deg π!∆ pxJ q “ ´2. Condition (1) implies that π!∆ pxJ q is a polynomial, thus π!∆ pxJ q “ 0. By definition, we have π!∆ pxJ q “  ÿ  IPK xny  wpIqιI pxJ q ś | det λI | iPI ιI pxi q  Note that ιI is a ring homomorphism and ιI pxi q “ 0 if i R I by (4.1). Therefore, ś ÿ ÿ wpIq iPJ ιI pxi q wpIq ∆ ś “ π! pxJ q “ | det λI | iPI ιI pxi q | det λI |ιI pxj q xny xny IPK  jPrmszJ,I:“JYtjuPK  ,JĂI  Recall that ιI pxi q “ uIi , where tuIi uiPI is the basis of V ˚ dual to the basis tλpiquiPI of V . Consider the linear functional ̺ P V ˚ taking the value ̺pvq “ detppλpiqqiPJ , vq for any v P V . It can be seen that | det λI |ιI pxj q P V ˚ , where I “ J Y tju, coincides with ̺ up to sign. More precisely | det λI |ιI pxj q “ rI : Js̺, where rI : Js is the incidence sign of two simplices of K (it appears because we need to permute the vectors ppλpiqqiPJ , λpjqq in order to get the positive determinant). Therefore, ÿ 1 0 “ π!∆ pxJ q “ rI : JswpIq ̺ xny IPK  ,JĂI  It remains to notice that the sum in this expression is exactly the coefficient of J in the simplicial chain dwch P Cn´2 pK; Rq. This calculation applies to any J P K, |J| “ n ´ 2, therefore dwch “ 0.  The map λJ : V ˚ Ñ pRm q˚ , the adjoint of λ, induces the ring homomorphism RrV ˚ s Ñ Rrx1 , . . . , xm s. Hence Rrx1 , . . . , xm s obtains the structure of RrV ˚ smodule. It can be checked that λJ is the right inverse of each ιI : pRm q˚ Ñ V ˚ , therefore all ring homomorphisms ιI : Rrx1 , . . . , xm s Ñ RrV ˚ s are the RrV ˚ smodule homomorphisms. Thus π!∆ is also a homomorphism of RrV ˚ s-modules (even in the case wch is not closed). Remark 4.2. Note that conditions (1) and (2) in Theorem 4.1 make sense over an arbitrary field k. We may start with a k-valued chain wch P Cn´1 pK; kq and a characteristic function valued in kn . These data allow to define the maps ιI and π!∆ absolutely similar to the real case. Problem 4.3. Does equivalence of (1) and (2) in Theorem 4.1 hold for arbitrary fields?  14  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  For general fields we cannot reduce the task to the integral case but it is likely that there exists a straightforward algebraical proof. 4.2. Stanley–Reisner rings. Let us recall the definition of the Stanley– Reisner ring. Definition 4.4. Let K be a simplicial complex on the vertex set rms and k be a ground ring (either Z or a field). The Stanley–Reisner ring is the quotient of a polynomial ring by the Stanley–Reisner ideal: krKs :“ krx1 , . . . , xm s{ISR , where ISR “ pxi1 ¨ . . . ¨ xik | ti1 , . . . , ik u R Kq, endowed with the grading deg xi “ 2 and the natural structure of graded krx1 , . . . , xm smodule. For now let us concentrate on the case k “ R. Given a characteristic function λ on K we may define a certain ideal in RrKs generated by linear forms. As before, let λJ : V ˚ Ñ pRm q˚ “ xx1 , . . . , xm y denote the adjoint map of λ : Rm Ñ V . Let Θ denote the ideal of Rrx1 , . . . , xm s generated by the image of λJ . By abuse of notation we denote the corresponding ideal in RrKs with the same letter Θ. Let us state things in the coordinate form. Fix a basis f1 , . . . , fn of V . Then every characteristic value λpiq, i P rms is written as a row-vector pλi,1 , . . . , λi,n q, where λi,j P R. The ˚-condition for λ (see subsection 2.2) states that the square matrix formed by row-vectors pλi,1 , . . . , λi,n qiPI is non-degenerate for any I P K xny . If we consider the dual basis f¯1 , . . . , f¯n in the dual space V ˚ , then its image under λJ : V ˚ Ñ pRm q˚ “ xx1 , . . . , xm y has the form θj :“ λJ pf¯j q “ λ1,j x1 ` λ2,j x2 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` λm,j xm for j “ 1, . . . , n. Thus Θ (as an ideal either in Rrx1 , . . . , xm s or RrKs) is generated by the elements θ1 , . . . , θn . In particular, if λ is integer-valued, then Θ “ pθ1 , . . . , θn q may be considered as a well-defined ideal in ZrKs or Zrx1 , . . . , xm s. It is known that the Krull dimension of RrKs equals dim K ` 1 “ n (see e.g. [16]), and θ1 , . . . , θn is a linear system of parameters in RrKs for any characteristic function λ and every choice of a basis in V (e.g. [4, Lm.3.3.2]). Thus RrKs{Θ has Krull dimension 0, which in our case is equivalent to saying that RrKs{Θ is a finite-dimensional vector space. Moreover, it is known (see e.g. [7, Lm.8.1] or [1, Lm.3.5]) that the classes of monomials xI “ xi1 ¨ . . . ¨ xik taken for each simplex I “ ti1 , . . . , ik u P K linearly span RrKs{Θ (however there exist relations on these classes!). We introduce the following notation to make the exposition consistent with that of [7]: (4.3)  HT˚ p∆; kq :“ krKs,  H ˚ p∆; kq :“ krKs{Θ,  and, for short, HT˚ p∆q :“ HT˚ p∆; Rq and H ˚ p∆q :“ H ˚ p∆; Rq. 4.3. Evaluation on fundamental class. Let x “ xji11 ¨. . .¨xjikk be a monomial whose index set ti1 , . . . , ik u is not a simplex of K. Then ιI pxq “ 0 for any I P K xny , according to (4.1). Therefore π!∆ pxq “ 0. Hence π!∆ vanishes on the Stanley–Reisner ideal ISR and descends to the map π!∆ : RrKs Ñ RrV ˚ s.  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  15  Since π!∆ is a map of RrV ˚ s-modules, we may apply bRrV ˚ s R to π!∆ . This gives a linear map ż : H 2n p∆q Ñ R – RrV ˚ s{RrV ˚ s` ∆  Definition 4.5. Let ∆ “ pK, w, λq be a complete simplicial multi-fan. The ş map ∆ : H 2n p∆q Ñ R is called “the evaluation on the fundamental class of ∆”. ş We denote the composite map Rrx1 , . . . , xm s ։ H 2n p∆q Ñ R by ∆,Rrms .  4.4. Chern class of a multi-polytope. Let P be a multi-polytope based on a complete simplicial multi-fan ∆ “ pK, w, λq of dimension n, and let c1 , . . . , cm P R be the support parameters of P . The element c1 pP q :“ c1 x1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` cm xm P H 2 p∆q is called the first Chern class of P . Proposition 4.6. (4.4)  1 VolpP q “ n!  ż  c1 pP qn .  ∆  Proof. If λ and w are integral, the statement is proved in [7, Lm.8.6]. The rational case follows from the integral case by the following arguments. (1) In the rational case we may choose a refined lattice such that λ becomes integral with respect to this lattice (this would change the euclidean measure on V ˚ , but this change affects both sides of (4.4) in the same way). (2) A rational weight w may be turned into an integral weight by rescaling (both sides of (4.4) depend linearly on w, thus rescaling of w preserves (4.4)). Real case follows by continuity, since both sides of (4.4) depend continuously on λ and w.  It is easily seen that, for a given ∆, the expression on the right hand side of (4.4) is a homogeneous polynomial of degree n in the variables c1 , . . . , cm : ż 1 pc1 x1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` cm xm qn . V∆ pc1 , . . . , cm q “ n! ∆ Thus Proposition 4.6 implies Theorem 1.1. 5. Basic properties of volume polynomials 5.1. Partial derivatives of volume polynomial. We continue to assume that there is a fixed inner product in V which makes the integral lattice in V unnecessary. The inner product allows to identify V and V ˚ and to introduce a measure on each affine subspace of V or V ˚ . Consider the space Λk V of exterior forms on V . Given an inner product in V we obtain an inner product on Λk V . Suppose that every simplex I P K is oriented somehow. For a characteristic function λ : rms Ñ V on K and I “ ti1 , . . . , ik u P K let λpIq denote the skew form λpi1 q ^ ¨ ¨ ¨ ^ λpik q P Λk V , where pi1 , . . . , ik q is the positive order of vertices of I. Denote the norm of λpIq by covolpIq: covolpIq :“ }λpIq} “ }λpi1 q ^ ¨ ¨ ¨ ^ λpik q}. Recall from Section 3 the notion of a face of a multi-polytope. If P is a multipolytope of dimension n and I P K then FI is a multi-polytope of dimension n ´ |I| sitting in the affine subspace HI Ă V ˚ . There is a measure on HI determined by  16  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  the inner product, hence we may define the volume of FI . The following lemma shows that we can compute the volumes of faces from the volume polynomial. Lemma 5.1 (cf.[20, Thm.2.4.3]). Let J Ă rms. Consider the homogeneous polynomial BJ V∆ of degree n ´ |J|. Then řm (1) Let θu denote the linear differential operator i“1 xu, λpiqyBi for u P V ˚ . Then θu V∆ “ 0. (2) If J R K, then BJ V∆ “ 0; (3) If J P K, then the value of the polynomial BJ V∆ at a point pc̃1 , . . . , c̃m q P Rm is equal to Vol FJ covolpJq  (5.1) when |J| ă n and (5.2)  wpJq wpJq “ covolpJq | det λJ | when |J| “ n. Here c̃i are the support parameters of a multi-polytope P and FJ are its faces.  Proof. (1) We have ż m B ¯ 1 ´ÿ xu, λpiqy θu V∆ “ pc1 x1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` cm xm qn n! Bc i i“1 ż ´ÿ m ¯ 1 xu, λpiqyxi ¨ pc1 x1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` cm xm qn´1 “ 0, “ pn ´ 1q! i“1 řm since i“1 xu, λpiqyxi “ 0 in H ˚ p∆q. (2) The proof of second statement is completely similar to (1). We have ż 1 ´ź B ¯ BJ V∆ “ pc1 x1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` cm xm qn n! Bc i iPJ ż ź 1 p xi q ¨ pc1 x1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` cm xm qn´|J| “ 0, “ pn ´ |J|q! iPJ ś since xJ “ iPJ xi “ 0 in H ˚ p∆q for J R K. (3) The second claim requires some technical work. At first, let |J| “ n, i.e. J P K xny . We have ż ż 1 n xJ “ π!∆ pxJ q, pc1 x1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` cm xm q “ BJ V∆ “ BJ n! ∆ ∆ ś where xJ “ iPJ xi . By the definition of the index map (4.2) we have π!∆ pxJ q “  ÿ  IPK xny  wpIqιI pxJ q ś . | det λI | iPI ιI pxi q  If I ‰ J, the corresponding summand vanishes, since ιI pxj q “ 0 for j R I by (4.1). wpJq The summand corresponding to I “ J contributes | det λJ | which proves the statement.  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  17  Let us prove the case |J| ă n. Recall that the projected multi-fan ∆J “ plkK J, wJ , λJ q is the multi-fan in the vector space VJ “ V {xλpjq | j P Jy. There exists a “restriction” map ϕJ : H ˚ p∆q Ñ H ˚ p∆J q, defined as follows:  $ ’ , if j P lkK J; &xj ř ϕJ pxj q “ ´ iPlkK J pJi,j xi , if j P J; ’ % 0, otherwise  Here the constants pJi,j for j P J and i P lkK J are defined by ÿ (5.3) projJ λpiq “ pJi,j λpjq, jPJ  where projJ λpiq is the orthogonal projection of the vector λpiq to the linear subspace spanned by λpjq pj P Jq. The homomorphism ϕJ is now defined on the level of polynomial algebras. Claim 5.2. ϕJ is a well-defined ring homomorphism from H ˚ p∆q “ RrKs{Θ to H ˚ p∆J q “ RrlkK Js{ΘJ . Proof. The proof is a routine check. First let us prove that Stanley–Reisner relations in ∆ are mapped to the Stanley–Reisner ideal of ∆J . Let I be a nonsimplex of K. The definition of ϕJ implies that ϕJ pxI q “ 0 unless I Ă J Y VertplkK Jq. If I Ă J Y VertplkK Jq, we have that I X VertplkK Jq is a non-simplex of lkK J (otherwise we` would have I P K ˘contradicting the˘assumption). Then the `ś ś ś “ x ¨ ϕ x element ϕJ pxI q “ ϕJ J iPIXVertplkK Jq xi ¨ iPIXJ i iPIXVertplkK Jq i `ś ˘ ϕJ iPIXJ xi lies in the Stanley–Reisner ideal of lkK J. Let us check that linear relations in H ˚ p∆q are mapped ř into linear relations of H ˚ p∆J q. A general linear relation in H ˚ p∆q has the form iPrms xu, λpiqyxi for some u P V ˚ . The map ϕJ sends it to the element ´ ¯ ÿ ÿ xu, λpiqy ´ pJi,j xu, λpjqy xi jPJ  iPVertplkK Jq  “  ÿ  iPVertplkK Jq  A E ÿ u, λpiq ´ pJi,j λpjq xi “ jPJ  ÿ  xu, λJ piqyxi .  iPVertplkK Jq  ř (note that λpiq ´ jPJ pJi,j λpjq “ λpiq ´ projJ λpiq “ λJ piq is the projection of λpiq to the plane orthogonal to xλpjqyjPJ ). The last expression is zero in H ˚ p∆J q.  Next we show that restriction homomorphism is compatible with the first Chern classes of the multi-polytopes. Claim 5.3. ϕJ sends c1 pP q to c1 pFJ q. Proof. Recall that HJ denotes the ambient space of the face FJ of the multipolytope P . The supporting hyperplanes of FJ are given by intersections HJ X Hi , where Hi is the supporting hyperplane of P for i P lkK J. Let us denote by UJ the subspace spanned by λpjq’s pj P Jq so that VJ “ V {UJ . By the definition (see subsection 2.4), λJ piq is the projection image of λpiq on VJ if i is the vertex of lkK J. As in the proof of previous claim we identify the quotient  18  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  space VJ “ V {UJ with the orthogonal complement UJK of UJ . The projected vector λJ piq can be considered as the element in V and we have λpiq “ λJ piq ` projJ λpiq  (5.4)  with respect to the orthogonal decomposition V “ UJK ‘ UJ . The affine hyperplane Hi is given by tu P V ˚ | xu, λpiqy “ ci u. The affine plane HJ is given by tu P V ˚ | xu, λpjqy “ cj , for all j P Ju. By using (5.3) and (5.4) we may write the intersection Hi X HJ as ! A E ) ÿ tu P HJ | xu, λJ piq ` projJ λpiqy “ ci u “ u P HJ | u, λJ piq ` pJi,j λpjq “ ci jPJ  !  “ u P HJ | xu, λJ piqy “ ci ´ ř  ÿ  jPJ J jPJ pi,j cj  ) pJi,j cj .  for i P lkK J. Therefore the i-th support parameter of FJ is ci ´ Now it remainsřto note that the coefficient of xi in the projected class ϕJ pc1 pP qq  is exactly ci ´ jPJ pJi,j cj . Thus ϕJ pc1 pP qq “ c1 pFJ q. Now we prove the following Claim 5.4. ż  ∆  y  ź  jPJ  xj “  1 covolpJq  ż  ϕJ pyq  for any y P H ˚ p∆q.  ∆J  Proof. Let us denote by Vol S the volume of the parallelepiped formed by a set of vectors S. Then covolpJq “ VoltλpiquiPJ and the index map can be written as ÿ wpIqιI pxq ś (5.5) π!∆ pxq “ . VoltλpiquiPI iPI ιI pxi q xny IPK  Let I˜ P lkK J and, therefore, I˜ \ J P K. Then  VoltλpiquiPI\J “ VoltλpiquiPJ ¨ VoltλJ piquiPI˜ “ covolpJq ¨ VoltλJ piquiPI˜. ˜ This together with (5.5) implies the lemma.    Applying claim 5.4 to y “ c1 pP qn´|J| and using claim 5.3, we obtain ż ż ź 1 1 1 n´|J| BJ V∆ “ c1 pFJ qn´|J| . c1 pP q xj “ pn ´ |J|q! ∆ covolpJq pn ´ |J|q! ∆ J jPJ Expression at the right evaluates to  VolpFJ q covolpJq  which finishes the proof of Lemma 5.1.   Corollary 5.5. Let ∆ “ pwch , λq be a complete multi-fan. Then V∆ “ 0 implies wch “ 0. Proof. If V∆ “ 0, then BJ V∆ “ 0 for any J P K xny . This implies wch “ 0.  Remark 5.6. Of course, according to Proposition 7.2 the şpolynomial V∆ is ş non-zero if and only if the map ∆ is non-zero. The fact that ∆ is non-zero for every non-zero wch is proved by applying this map to all monomials xI , I P K xny (recall that these monomials span H 2n p∆q). This procedure is essentially the same as applying differential operators BI to V∆ .  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  Corollary 5.7. Let BP denote the linear differential operator c̃i are the support parameters of a multi-polytope P . Then 1 n B V∆ “ VolpP q, n! P VolpFI q 1 n´|I| BP BI V∆ “ . pn ´ |I|q! covolpIq  ř  iPrms c̃i Bi  19  where  Proof. Both formulas follow from Lemma 5.1 and a simple observation: if Ψ P Rrc1 , . . . , cm sk is a homogeneous polynomial of degree k, then ´ÿ ¯k c̃i Bi Ψ “ k!Ψpc̃1 , . . . , c̃m q. iPrms  (evaluation at a point coincides with the result of differentiation up to k!).    5.2. Recovering multi-fans from volume polynomials. When we associate a volume polynomial to a complete simplicial multi-fan, the numbering of the one-dimensional cones by rms is incorporated in the data of the multi-fan. We call a multi-fan with the numbering a based multi-fan. Two based multi-fans ∆ and ∆1 are said to be equivalent if there is an automorphism of V which induces an isomorphism between ∆ and ∆1 preserving the numbering. In the presence of a lattice N Ă V there should be an automorphism of the lattice with this property. Equivalent complete simplicial based multi-fans have the same volume polynomial. We will see that the converse holds for complete simplicial based multi-fans ∆ whose underlying simplicial complexes are oriented strongly connected pseudo-manifolds. Strong connectedness of K means that for any two maximal simplices I, I 1 P K xny there exists a sequence of maximal simplices I “ I0 , I1 , . . . , Ik “ I 1 such that |Is X Is`1 | “ n ´ 1 for 0 ď s ď k ´ 1. We assume that the volume polynomial V∆ associated to ∆ is non-zero. Then the class r∆s is non-zero. Since K is assumed to be a pseudo-manifold, wpIq ‰ 0 for any I P K xny . Then Lemma 5.1 shows that V∆ recovers K. Remember that m ÿ (5.6) xu, λpiqyxi “ 0 in H ˚ p∆q for any u P V ˚ . i“1  Let J P K, |J| “ n ´ 1. Since K is assumed to be a pseudo-manifold, there are xny exactly two elements ś i1 and i2 in rms such that J Y ti1 u and J Y ti2 u are in K . Multiplying xJ “ iPJ xi to the both sides in (5.6), we obtain ÿ xu, λpjqyxj xJ ` xu, λpi1 qyxi1 xJ ` xu, λpi2 qyxi2 xJ “ 0 for all u P V ˚ . jPJ  Applying A  ş  to the above identity, we have ż ż E ÿ `ż ˘ ` ˘ ` ˘ u, xj xJ λpjq ` xi1 xJ λpi1 q ` xi2 xJ λpi2 q “ 0. ∆  jPJ  ∆  ∆  ∆  Since this holds for all u P V ˚ , one can conclude ż ż ÿ `ż ˘ ` ˘ ` ˘ (5.7) xj xJ λpjq ` xi1 xJ λpi1 q ` xi2 xJ λpi2 q “ 0. jPJ  ∆  ∆  ş  ∆  ş  Note that the numbers ∆ xi1 xJ and ∆ xi2 xJ are non-zero. Identity (5.7) shows that once basis vectors tλpiquiPI for some I P K xny are determined, then the other  20  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  ş vectors λpkq’s will be determined by the intersection numbers ∆ xI where I consists of elements in rms with |I| “ n (an element in I may appear more than once). On the other hand, since ż 1 V∆ “ pc1 x1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` cm xm qn , n! ∆ ş the coefficient of cI agrees with ∆ xI up to some non-zero constant independent of ∆. These show that V∆ determines ∆ up to equivalence. Proposition 5.8. Two complete simplicial toric varieties are isomorphic if and only if their volume polynomials agree up to permutations of variables. Here it is assumed that all λpiq’s are the primitive generators of the rays. Proof. This follows from the above observation and the fact that two toric varieties are isomorphic if and only if their fans are isomorphic [3] 1.  6. A formula for the volume polynomial We say that the set S of n ` 1 vectors in V – Rn is in general position, if any n of them are linearly independent. Any such set determines a multi-fan whose underlying simplicial complex is a boundary of a simplex K “ B△rn`1s . The weights of all maximal simplices are the same up to sign due to closedness condition dwch “ 0. Thus without loss of generality we may assume that all weights are ˘1 depending on the orientations. We call such multi-fan an elementary multi-fan and denote it ∆el pSq. Lemma 6.1. Let ∆ be an elementary multi-fan determined by the vectors λp1q, . . . , λpn` 1q P V . Let 0 ‰ pα1 , . . . , αn`1 q P Rn`1 be a nonzero linear relation on these vectors, řn`1 i.e. i“1 αi λpiq “ 0. Then (6.1)  V∆ pc1 , . . . , cn`1 q “ const ¨pα1 c1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` αn`1 cn`1 qn .  for some constant const. We postpone the proof to subsection 8.3. Remark 6.2. It is not difficult to compute the constant: just apply the differential operator BJ for J Ă rn` 1s, |J| “ n to both sides of (6.1) and use Lemma 5.1. However, we do not need this constant at the moment and ignore it to simplify the exposition. Theorem 6.3. Let ∆ “ pwch , λq be a complete multi-fan. Let v P V be a generic vector. Then (6.2) ÿ wpIq 1 ś pαI,1 ci1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` αI,n cin qn , V∆ pc1 , . . . , cm q “ n! | det λI | nj“1 αI,j I“ti1 ,...,in uPK  where αI,1 , . . . , αI,n are the coordinates of v in the basis pλpi1 q, . . . , λpin qq, and wpIq is the weight. 1We are grateful to Ivan Arzhantsev from whom we learned this fact  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  21  Proof. We derive a more general family of formulas, and (6.2) will be a particular case. Let rm1 s be a set containing rms and let ÿ zpJqJ P Cn p△rm1 s ; Rq zch “ 1  s JPprm n`1q  be a simplicial chain such that dzch “ wch (it exists since wch , considered as an element in Cn p△rm1 s ; Rq, is closed hence exact). Consider any function η : rm1 s Ñ V which extends λ : rms Ñ V and satisfies the condition: for any J “ tj1 , . . . , jn`1 u with zpJq ‰ 0 the vectors ηpj1 q, . . . , ηpjn`1 q are in general position. Thus for any such J we can construct an elementary multi-fan ∆el pηpJqq. ř In the group of multi-fans we have a relation ∆ “ JPprm1 sq zpJq∆el pηpJqq, if n`1  ∆ is considered as a multi-fan on rm1 s. Volume polynomial is additive, thus we get V∆ “  (6.3)  ÿ  zpJqV∆el pηpJqq .  rm1 s n`1  JPp  q  Therefore, any simplicial chain whose boundary is wch gives a formula for the volume polynomial. Now let us consider the particular case, namely, the cone over wch . Let rm1 s “ rms \ tru and set ηprq “ v, for a generic vector v P V . So the phrase “v is a generic vector” means that the set λpIq \ tvu is in general position for any I Ă rms such that |I| “ n and wpIq ‰ 0. The function z on the cone is defined in an obvious way: zpI \ truq :“ wpIq. Relation (6.3) and Lemma 6.1 imply ÿ (6.4) V∆ “ const ¨wpIq ¨ pαI,1 ci1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` αI,n cin ` βI cr qn . I“ti1 ,...,in uĂrms  The tuple pαI,1 , . . . , αI,n , βI q is a linear relation on the vectors λpi1 q, . . . , λpin q, v. Therefore we may assume that βI “ ´1 and pαI,1 , . . . , αI,n q are the coordinates of v in the basis λpi1 q, . . . , λpin q. Left hand side of (6.4) does not depend on cr (it is a redundant support parameter), therefore we may put cr “ 0: ÿ (6.5) V∆ “ AI ¨ wpIq ¨ pαI,1 ci1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` αI,n cin qn . I“ti1 ,...,in uĂrms  To compute the constants AI take any J “ tj1 , . . . , jn u P K and apply the differential operator BJ “ BcBj ¨ . . . ¨ BcBj to the identity (6.5). On the left we have 1  n  wpJq BJ V∆ “ | det with λJ | , according to Lemma 5.1. On the right side all summands ś I ‰ J vanish, and the one with I “ J contributes n! ¨ AJ ¨ wpJq i αJ,i . Thus 1ś 1  AJ “ n! αJ,i and the statement follows. | det λJ |¨ i  Remark 6.4. Note that the formula (6.2) can be applied to compute the volume of a simple convex polytope in the case when the polytope is described as the intersection of half-spaces with the given equations. In this case the formula is known as Lawrence’s formula [8]. It has found applications in explicit volumes’ calculations. Example 6.5. Consider the standard fan ∆ of CP 2 , generated by the vectors λp1q “ p1, 0q, λp2q “ p0, 1q, λp3q “ p´1, ´1q. Take the generic vector v “ p1, 2q.  22  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  We have v “ λp1q ` 2λp2q “ λp2q ´ λp3q “ ´2λp3q ´ λp1q. Theorem 6.3 implies ˆ ˙ 1 1 1 pc1 ` 2c2 q2 ´ pc2 ´ c3 q2 ` p´c1 ´ 2c3 q2 . V∆ “ 2 2 2  This expression equals 21 pc1 `c2 `c3 q2 . The same expression is given by Lemma 6.1.  Example 6.6. Consider the normal fan of the standard n-cube. The underlying simplicial complex is isomorphic to the boundary of cross-polytope. Let t1, . . . , n, ´1, . . . , ´nu be its set of vertices, so the maximal simplices have the form t˘1, . . . , ˘nu. We have λp˘iq “ ˘ei . Take the generic vector v “ e1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` en . Then Theorem 6.3 implies ÿ 1 1 śn V∆ “ pǫ1 cǫ1 1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` ǫn cǫn n qn . n! ǫ i“1 i pǫ1 ,...,ǫn qPt`,´un ś On the other hand, we have V∆ “ i pci ` c´i q by geometrical reasons. Indeed, the polytope dual to ∆ is the brick with sides tci ` c´i uiPrns . By setting c´i “ 0 for each i we get the identity n ź 1 ÿ p´1qn´|I| cnI , (6.6) ci “ n! i“1 IĎrns ř where cI “ iPI ci . This identity is well known as discrete polarization identity.  Remark 6.7. The proof of Theorem 6.3 implies the following consideration. Take two simplicial n-chains zch,1 , zch,2 P Cn p△rms ; Rq endowed with functions η1 , η2 : rms Ñ Rn such that ηǫ pJq is in general position for any simplex J of the chain zch,ǫ , ǫ “ 1, 2. Assume that dzch,1 “ dzch,2 and the functions η1 , η2 agree on the vertices of the boundary. Then the volume polynomial of the multi-fan ∆ “ pdzch,1 , η1 q “ pdzch,2 , η2 q can be expressed by two formulas: ÿ const ¨z1 pJqpαJ,1 cj1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` αJ,n`1 cjn`1 qn “ V∆ J“pj1 ,...,jn`1 qĂrm1 s  “  ÿ  const ¨z2 pJqpαJ,1 cj1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` αJ,n`1 cjn`1 qn .  J“pj1 ,...,jn`1 qĂrm1 s  We may take a difference of the left and right parts and summarize as follows. Let us take any closed simplicial n-chain zch , dzch “ 0, on the vertex set rm1 s, and endow it with a function η : rm1 s Ñ Rn which is in general position on any simplex J of the chain. Then we get an identity ÿ const ¨zpJqpαJ,1 cj1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` αJ,n`1 cjn`1 qn “ 0 J“pj1 ,...,jn`1 qĂrm1 s  (the constants may be computed by the same method as we used previously). This seems to be a quite general way to construct algebraical identities from geometrical data. This idea can be illustrated by a simple identity obtained in Example 6.5: 1 1 pc1 ` 2c2 ´ c4 q2 ´ pc2 ´ c3 ´ c4 q2 ` p´c1 ´ 2c3 ´ c4 q2 “ pc1 ` c2 ` c3 q2 . 2 2 This identity is induced by the schematic picture shown on Fig.3. Note that the  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  ¨  ˚ ˚ ˚ ˚ ˚ B˚ ˚ ˚ ˚ ˚ ˝  ˛  2 p0, 1q  p1, 2q 4  3 p´1, ´1q  1 p1, 0q  ¨  ‹ ˚ ‹ ˚ ‹ ˚ ‹ ˚ ‹ ˚ ‹ “B˚ ‹ ˚ ‹ ˚ ‹ ˚ ‹ ˚ ‚ ˝  23  ˛  2 p0, 1q  3  1  p´1, ´1q  p1, 0q  ‹ ‹ ‹ ‹ ‹ ‹ ‹ ‹ ‹ ‹ ‚  Figure 3. Two simplicial chains with vector functions having the same boundary last step in the proof of Theorem 6.3 was to specialize c4 “ 0, but even without this specialization the identity holds true. 7. Poincare duality algebra of a multi-fan 7.1. Poincare duality algebras. À Definition 7.1. Let k be a field. Let A˚ “ nj“0 A2j be a finite-dimensional graded commutative k-algebra such that ş ‚ there exists an isomorphism A : A2n Ñ şk; ‚ the pairing A2p b A2n´2p Ñ k, a b b ÞÑ A pa ¨ bq is non-degenerate. Then A is called a Poincare duality algebra of formal dimension 2n. Let Bi “ BcB i , i P rms be the differential operator acting on the ring of polynomials Rrc ś 1 , . . . , cm s in a standard way. For a subset I Ă rms let BI denote the product iPI Bi . Consider the algebra of differential operators with constant coefficients D :“ RrB1 , . . . , Bm s. It will be convenient to double the degree, so we assume deg Bi “ 2, i P rms (while still assuming that deg ci “ 1). For any non-zero homogeneous polynomial Ψ P Rrc1 , . . . , cm s of degree n we may consider the following ideal in D: Ann Ψ :“ tD P D | DΨ “ 0u. It is not difficult to check that the quotient D{ Ann Ψ is a Poincare duality algebra of formal dimension 2n (see [20, Prop.2.5.1]), where the “integration map” assigns the number DΨ P R to any differential operator of rank n (i.e. of formal degree 2n in our setting). It happens that every Poincare duality algebra generated by degree two can be obtained by this construction as the following proposition shows. Proposition 7.2. Suppose char k “ 0 and let krms “ krx1 , . . . , xm s be a polynomial ring, where deg xi “ 2. Then the following three sets of objects are naturally equivalent: (1) Poincare duality algebras A˚ of formal dimension 2n which are the quotients of the polynomial ring krms; (2) Non-zero homogeneous polynomials Ψ P krc1 , . . . , cm s of degree n (where deg ci “ 1) up to multiplication by a non-zero constant; ş (3) Non-zero linear maps : krms2n Ñ k up to multiplication by a non-zero constant.  24  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  Proof. We give a very brief sketch of the proof. For details the reader is referred to the monograph [11] which, among other things, describes the case char k ‰ 0 (for general fields instead of a polynomial Ψ one should take an element of divided power algebra). Also we would like to mention that an equivalence of (1) and (2) is a manifestation of the well-known phenomenon called Macaulay duality (or its extended version, Matlis duality). (1)ñ(3). Let A˚ – krms{I be a Poincare şduality quotient of the ring of polynomials. Then we have a linear isomorphism A : A2n Ñ k. The composite krms2n ։ A2n Ñ k  is the required linear map. ş (3)ñ(1). Given a linear map : krms2n Ñ k we may define a pairing krms2p b ş krms2n´2p Ñ k by a b b ÞÑ a ¨ b. This pairing is degenerate and we define its kernel: ż à 2p 2p W˚ “ W , W “ tx P krms | x ¨ krms2n´2p “ 0u. 2p p  It is easy to check that W ˚ Ă krms is an ideal and krms{W ˚ is a Poincare duality algebra. (3)ñ(2). We construct a polynomial Ψ in c1 , . . . , cm by ż 1 Ψ :“ pc1 x1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` cm xm qn . n! This polynomial is non-zero. Indeed, krms2n is additively generated by the monomials of degree n in the variables xi . Each monomial can be expressed as a linear combination of expressions of the form pc1 x1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` cm xm qn for some constants ci as follows from the polarization identity (see (6.6) in Example 6.6 below). Thus expressions of the form pc1 x1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` cm xm qn linearly span krms2n and therefore, ş since is non-zero, the polynomial Ψ is not a constant zero as well. (2)ñ(1). Given a homogeneous polynomial Ψ in the variables c1 , . . . , cm , we may construct a Poincare duality quotient krB1 , . . . , Bm s{ Ann Ψ, where the action of Bi “ BcB i on polynomials is defined formally in the usual way. The consistency of all these constructions is a routine check.  The same arguments can be used to prove that there is a one-to-one correspondence between Poincare duality quotients of formal dimension 2n of an algebra B ˚ and the non-zero linear functionals on the linear space B 2n . For this correspondence we do not need the assumptions that B is generated by degree 2 and char k “ 0. This motivates the following definition. À 2j be a graded commutative k-algebra and Definition 7.3. Let B ˚ “ jB ş suppose that for some n ą 0 a non-zero linear map : B 2n Ñ k is given. The corresponding Poincare duality quotient of B ˚ , i.e. the algebra ż B ˚ {W ˚ , W 2p “ tb P B 2p | b ¨ B 2n´2p “ 0u. ş ş is denoted by PDpB ˚ , q and called Poincare dualization of B ˚ (w.r.t. ). Lemma 7.4. two algebras B1˚ , B2˚ with the given non-zero linear maps ş Consider 2n 2n : B Ñ k. Let ϕş: B1˚ ։ B2˚ şbe an epimorphism of algebras con: B Ñ k, 2 1 2 1 sistent with the integration maps: 2 ˝ϕ|B12n “ 1 . Then ϕ induces an isomorphism ş ş PDpB1˚ , 1 q – PDpB2˚ , 2 q.  ş  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  25  Proof. From the surjectivity of ϕ it easily follows that the kernel W1˚ of the intersection pairing in the first algebra şmaps to the kernel W2˚ of the second algebra. ş ˚ ˚ Thus the homomorphism ϕ r : PDpB1 , 1 q Ñ PDpB2 , 2 q is well defined. Obviously it is surjective. Let us prove that ϕ r is injective. The map ϕ şr is an isomorphism in ˚ degree 2n. Suppose that ϕpaq r “ 0 for some 0 ‰ a P PDpB , 1 1 q2p . By the definition ş of Poincare duality algebra, there exists b P PDpB1˚ , 1 q2n´2p such that ab ‰ 0. But then we have ϕpabq r “ ϕpaq r ϕpbq r “ 0 which gives a contradiction.   In the following let A˚ pΨq “ D{ Ann Ψ denote the Poincare duality algebra corresponding to the homogeneous polynomial Ψ of degree n. ş 7.2.ş Algebras associated with multi-fans. The linear maps ∆ : H 2n p∆q Ñ R and ∆,Rrms : Rrx1 , . . . , xm s2n Ñ R are consistent with the natural projection Rrx1 , . . . , xm s Ñ H ˚ p∆q. Thus Lemma 7.4 implies an isomorphism ż ż q. PDpH ˚ p∆q, q – PDpRrms, ∆,Rrms  ∆  According to the constructions mentioned in the proof of Proposition 7.2, this Poincare duality algebra is also isomorphic to A˚ pV∆ q “ D{ Ann V∆ , where V∆ is the volume polynomial. Definition 7.5. Let ∆ be a complete simplicial multi-fan of dimension n with m rays. Then the algebra ż ż ˚ ˚ q A p∆q :“ D{ Ann V∆ – PDpH p∆q, q – PDpRrms, ∆  ∆,Rrms  is called a multi-fan algebra of ∆. Remark 7.6. The constructions above show that ş there is a ring epimorphism from H ˚ p∆q – RrKs{Θ to A˚ p∆q – PDpH ˚ p∆q, ∆ q, sending xi to Bi for each i P rms. Therefore A˚ p∆q can be considered as a quotient of H ˚ p∆q, and all the relations in RrKs{Θ are inherited by A˚ p∆q. We have BJ V∆ “ 0 for J R K (Stanley–Reisner relations), ÿ p λi,j Bi qV∆ “ 0 for j “ 1, . . . , n (Linear relations). iPrms  This proves points 1 and 2 of Lemma 5.1 in a more conceptual way.  8. Structure of multi-fan algebra in particular cases 8.1. Ordinary fans. As was mentioned in the introduction, when ∆ is a normal fan of a simple convex polytope P , the construction of the algebra A˚ p∆q “ D{ Ann V∆ was introduced by Timorin in [20]. In this case the underlying simplicial complex of ∆ is a sphere and the weight function takes value `1 on all maximal simplices of K. Using purely combinatorial and geometrical considerations Timorin proved that A˚ p∆q – RrKs{Θ. This means, in particular, that the dimension di “ dim A2i p∆q is equal to hi , the h-number of K (see the definition below). The developed technique is applied to prove that A˚ p∆q is a Lefschetz algebra, meaning that there exists an element ω P A2 p∆q such that ˆω n´2k : A2k Ñ A2n´2k  26  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  is an isomorphism for each k “ 0, . . . , rn{2s. In particular this implies that the distribution of h-numbers of convex simplicial spheres is unimodal, i.e. h0 ď h1 ď ¨ ¨ ¨ ď hrn{2s “ hn´rn{2s ě ¨ ¨ ¨ ě hn´1 ě hn . According to Timorin’s result, Lefschetz element ω may be chosen in the form c1 pP q “ c1 B1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` cm Bm P A2 p∆q where P is any convex simple polytope with the normal fan ∆ and c1 , . . . , cm are its support parameters. For complete non-singular fans the algebra A˚ r∆s – RrKs{Θ coincides with the cohomology algebra H ˚ pX∆ ; Rq of the corresponding toric variety. It was the original observation of Stanley [18], that in the case when a fan ∆ is polytopal, the corresponding complete toric variety X∆ is projective, therefore there exists a Lefschetz element in its cohomology ring according to hard Lefschetz theorem. After Stanley’s work, several approaches were developed to prove the existence of Lefschetz elements in elementary terms, i.e. without referring to hard Lefschetz theorem. These approaches include in particular McMullen’s construction of the polytope algebra [9], the approach based on continuous piece-wise polynomial functions [2], and Timorin’s construction based on the volume polynomial and differential operators [20]. We will see that ordinary fans are not the only examples of multi-fans for which the structure of A˚ p∆q can be explicitly described. On the other hand, A˚ p∆q is always a Poincare duality algebra, so it is natural to ask if it is Lefschetz (or at least if the dimension vector pd0 , d1 , . . . , dn q is unimodal). Later we will show that this is not true in general, see Theorem 10.1. 8.2. Combinatorial preliminaries. For now we concentrate on multi-fans based on oriented pseudomanifolds as described in Example 2.9. Let K be a pure simplicial complex of dimension n ´ 1 on the vertex set rms. Let fj denote the number of j-dimensional simplices of K for j “ ´1, 0, . . . , n´ 1, in particular we assume that f´1 “ 1 (this reflects the fact that the empty simplex formally has dimension ´1). The h-numbers of K are defined by the formula: n ÿ  (8.1)  hj tn´j “  j“0  n ÿ  fj´1 pt ´ 1qn´j ,  j“0  r j pKq where t is a formal variable. Let βrj pKq denote the reduced Betti number dim H 1 2 of K. The h - and h -numbers of K are defined by the formulas ¸ ˆ ˙ ˜j´1 ÿ n j´s´1 r 1 βs´1 pKq for 0 ď j ď n; p´1q (8.2) hj “ hj ` j s“1 (8.3)  h2j  “  h1j  ¸ ˆ ˙˜ÿ ˆ ˙ j n n r j´s´1 r βj´1 pKq “ hj ` p´1q βs´1 pKq ´ j j s“1  for 0 ď j ď n ´ 1, and h2n “ h1n . The sum over an empty set is assumed zero. 8.3. Homology spheres. r j plkK I; kq “ 0 for Definition 8.1. K is called Cohen–Macaulay (over k), if H r any I P K and j ă dim lkK I “ n ´ 1 ´ |I|. If, moreover, Hn´1´|I| plkK I; kq – k for any I P K, then K is called Gorenstein* or (generalized) homology sphere.  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  27  The famous theorems of Reisner and Stanley (the reader is referred to the monograph [16]) tell that whenever K is Cohen–Macaulay (resp. Gorenstein*), its Stanley–Reisner algebra krKs is Cohen–Macaulay (resp. Gorenstein). Given a characteristic function λ : rms Ñ V – Rn we obtain a linear system of parameters θ1 , . . . , θn P RrKs. It generates an ideal which we denoted by Θ Ă RrKs in subsection 4.2. In Cohen–Macaulay case every linear system of parameters is a regular sequence. This implies [16]: dimpRrKs{Θq2j “ hj . If K is a homology sphere, then RrKs is Gorenstein. Thus its quotient by a linear system of parameters RrKs{Θ is a Gorenstein algebra of Krull dimension zero. This implies that RrKs{Θ is a Poincare duality algebra [11, Part 1]. Now let ∆ be a complete multi-fan based on a homology sphere K. We have the ring epimorphism RrKs{Θ Ñ A˚ p∆q (see Remark 7.6). Since both algebras have Poincare duality, it is an isomorphism (see Lemma 7.4). This proves the following Theorem 8.2. Let ∆ be a complete multi-fan based on a homology sphere K. Then A˚ p∆q – RrKs{Θ. It follows that dim A2j p∆q “ hj , the h-number of K. Note that Poincare duality implies the well-known Dehn–Sommerville relations for homology spheres: hj “ hn´j . We are in position to prove Lemma 6.1 which states that the volume polynomial of an elementary multi-fan ∆ on the vectors λpiq P V pi “ 1, . . . , n ` 1q, is equal, up řn`1 to multiplicative constant, to p i“1 αi ci qn , where pα1 , . . . , αn`1 q is a linear relation on λpiq’s. Proof of Lemma 6.1. The underlying simplicial complex of ∆ is the boundary of a simplex, which is a sphere. Therefore, by Theorem 8.2 we have A˚ p∆q – ś RrB△rn`1s s{Θ. Hence the ideal Ann V∆ Ă RrB1 , . . . , Bn`1 s is generated by n`1 i“1 Bi řn`1 (Stanley–Reisner relation) and linear differential operators θj “ i“1 λi,j Bi for j “ 1, . . . , n. Here pλi,j qnj“1 are the coordinates of the vector λpiq for each i “ řn`1 řn`1 1, . . . , n ` 1. Since i“1 αi λpiq “ 0 we have a linear relation i“1 αi λi,j “ 0 for śn`1 each j “ 1, . . . , n. Now it is easy to check that the differential operators i“1 Bi and řn`1 θj “ i“1 λi,j Bi , j “ 1, . . . , n annihilate the polynomial pα1 c1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` αn`1 cn`1 qn . Thus, according to Proposition 7.2, V∆ coincides with pα1 c1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` αn`1 cn`1 qn up to constant.  8.4. Homology manifolds. r j plkK I; kq “ 0 for any Definition 8.3. K is called Buchsbaum (over k), if H r n´1´|I| plkK I; kq – k I P K, I ‰ ∅ and j ă dim lkK I “ n ´ 1 ´ |I|. If, moreover, H for any I P K, I ‰ ∅, then K is called a homology manifold. K is called an r n´1 pK; Zq – Z. orientable homology manifold if H  The difference from the Cohen–Macaulay case is that there are no restrictions on the topology of K “ lkK ∅ itself. Similar to Cohen–Macaulay property, the term “Buchsbaum” indicates that the corresponding algebra krKs is Buchsbaum (the result of Schenzel [15]). In Buchsbaum case linear system of parameters is no longer a regular sequence. Nevertheless, Buchsbaum complexes are extensively  28  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  studied. First, Schenzel’s theorem [15] tells that if K is a Buchsbaum complex, then dimpkrKs{Θq2j “ h1j for j “ 0, . . . , n and the h1 -numbers determined by (8.2). Second, there is a theory of socles of Buchsbaum complexes introduced by Novik and Swartz [12] which we briefly review next. Let M be a module over the graded polynomial ring krms :“ krx1 , . . . , xm s. The socle of M is the following subspace Soc M :“ ta P M | a ¨ krms` “ 0u. which is obviously a krms-submodule of M. If K is Buchsbaum, then there exists a submodule IN S Ă SocpkrKs{Θq such that ˆ ˙ n r j´1 pIN S q2j – H pK; kq, j ` ˘ r j´1 pK; kq. Morewhere the right hand side means the direct sum of nj copies of H over, the result of [13] tells that whenever K is an orientable connected homology manifold, then IN S coincides with SocpkrKs{Θq and the quotient ă2n pkrKs{Θq{IN S ă2n is a Gorenstein algebra (thus Poincare duality algebra). Here IN S is the part of IN S taken in all degrees except the top one, 2n. The definition of h2 -numbers (8.3) implies that ă2n 2 dimppkrKs{Θq{IN S q2j “ hj for 0 ď j ď n.  Now let ∆ be a complete multi-fan based on an orientable connected homology manifold K. Recall from Definition 7.3 that W ˚ denotes the subspace of H ˚ p∆q “ RrKs{Θ whose graded components are ż 2j (8.4) W “ ta P pRrKs{Θq2j | a ¨ pRrKs{Θq2n´2j “ 0u ż “ ta P pRrKs{Θq2j | a ¨ Rrms2n´2j “ 0u.  By definition, A˚ p∆q “ PDpRrKs{Θq “ pRrKs{Θq{W ˚. The socle SocpRrKs{Θq lies in W ˚ in all degrees except the top one since it is killed by Rrms` . Therefore we have a well-defined ring epimorphism ă2n ˚ pRrKs{Θq{IN S ։ A p∆q.  Again, since both algebras have Poincare duality, there holds Theorem 8.4. Let ∆ be a complete multi-fan based on oriented connected ho2j ă2n mology manifold K. Then A˚ p∆q – pRrKs{Θq{IN S . It follows that dim A p∆q “ 2 2 hj , the h -number of K. In this case Poincare duality implies the well-known generalized Dehn–Sommerville relations for oriented homology manifolds: h2j “ h2n´j (see [12] and references therein).  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  29  8.5. General situation. Let ∆ be an arbitrary complete multi-fan. In the largest generality we do not have a combinatorial description for the dimensions of graded components of the multi-fan algebra. Conjecture 8.5. Let wch be a simplicial cycle, λ : rms Ñ V a characteristic map, and ∆ “ pwch , λq the corresponding complete multi-fan. The numbers dj “ dim A2j p∆q do not depend on λ. 9. Geometry of multi-polytopes and Minkowski relations Here we give another proof of Theorem 8.4 which shows the geometrical nature of the elements lying in the socle of RrKs{Θ when K is an oriented homology manifold. It relates on explicit computations in coordinates but reveals an interesting connection with the Minkowski type relations, appearing in convex geometry. Recall the basic Minkowski theorem on convex polytopes. Theorem (Minkowski). (1) (Direct) Let P be a convex full-dimensional polytope in euclidian space Rn . Let V1 , . . . , Vm be the pn ´ 1q-volumes ofřfacets of P and n1 , . . . , nm be the outward unit normal vectors to facets. Then i Vi ni “ 0 (the Minkowski relation). (2) (Inverse). Let n1 , . . . , nm be the vectors of unit lengths, spanning Rn , and let V1 , . . . , Vm be positive numbers satisfying the Minkowski relation. Then there exists a convex polytope P whose facets have outward normal vectors ni and volumes Vi . Such polytope is unique up to parallel shifts. Usually only part (2) is called Minkowski theorem, since part (1) is fairly simple. The direct Minkowski theorem has a straightforward generalization. ř Theorem 9.1. Let s as Qs be a collection of k-dimensional multi-polytopes in euclidian space Rn , forming a closed orientable cycle. Let VolpQs q be the k-volume, and νs P Λn´k Rn be ř the unit normal skew form of the multi-polytope Qs . Then there holds a relation s as VolpQs qνs “ 0 in Λn´k Rn . In the next subsection we explain the precise meaning of the terms used in the statement and give the proof.  9.1. Cycles of multi-polytopes. As before, V ˚ – Rn denotes the ambient affine space of n-dimensional polytopes, coming with fixed orientation. Let k ď n and let Π be an oriented k-dimensional affine subspace of V ˚ . Let Q be a kdimensional multi-polytope in Π. Then Q will be called a k-dimensional multipolytope in V ˚ . First let k ą 0. Denote by GMP k the group (or a vector space over R) freely generated by all k-dimensional multi-polytopes in V ˚ , where we identify the element Q (i.e. Q with reversed orientation of the underlying subspace) and ´Q. If k “ 0, the multi-polytope is just a point with weight. In this case let GMP 0 denote the group of formal sums of points whose weights sum to zero. Formally set GMP ´1 “ 0. Define the differential d : GMP k Ñ GMP k´1 by setting ÿ Fi , dQ :“ Fi : facet of Q and extending by linearity. Note that each facet comes with the canonical orientation: we say that the hyperplane Hi containing Fi is positively oriented if pa positive basis of Hi , λpiqq  30  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  is a positive basis of V . Thus the expression above is well defined. ř Definition 9.2. An element A “ s as Qs P GMP k which satisfies dA “ 0 is called a cycle of k-dimensional multi-polytopes. As in Section 5, assume that there is a fixed inner product in V . This allows to define the inner product on the skew forms. In particular, if Π is an oriented affine k-subspace in V ˚ – V , we may define its unit normal skew form νΠ P Λn´k V as the unique element of Λn´k ΠK – R which corresponds to the positive orientation of ΠK and satisfies }νΠ } “ 1. It is easy to see that if dim Π “ n ´ 1, the form νΠ is just the positive unit normal vector to Π. Let us prove Theorem 9.1. Proof. The idea of proof is straightforward and quite similar to the proof of classical Minkowski theorem: at first we proveřthe case k “ n, then reduce the general case to the case k “ n by projecting s as VolpQs qνs to all possible ksubspaces. Note that the case n “ 0 should be treated separately, but in this case the statement is trivial. (1) Suppose k “ n. Then all multi-polytopes Qs are full-dimensional. Their underlying subspaces Πs coincide with V up to orientation. Without loss of generality assume that all orientations coincide with that of V . Normal skew forms lie ř in Λ0 V – R and are equal to 1. Hence we need to prove that as VolpQs q “ 0 for any cycle of n-multi-polytopes. Recall the wall-crossing formula [7, Lemma 5.3]: Lemma 9.3. Let P be a multi-polytope and H “ Hi be Ť one of the supporting m hyperplanes: H “ Hi . Let uα and uβ be elements in V ˚ z i“1 Hi such that the segment from uα to uβ intersects the wall H transversely at µ, and does not intersect any other Hj ‰ H. Then ÿ DHP puα q ´ DHP puβ q “ sgnxuβ ´ uα , λpiqy DHFi pµq, i:Hi “H  where Fi is the facet of P , and DHFi : Hi Ñ R is its Duistermaat–Heckman function. řl Consider a cycle of multi-polytopes A “ s“1 as Qs . Let H denote the set of all supporting hyperplanes of all polytopes Qs , s “ 1, . . . , l. We have a function DHA : V ˚ z  ď  H Ñ R,  DHA :“  l ÿ  s“1  HPH  as DHQs .  Ť Let us choose a hyperplane H P H and two points uα and uβ in V ˚ z HPH H such that the segment from uα to uβ intersects the wall H transversely at µ and does not intersect any other wall from H. Let us sum the differences DHP puα q ´ DHP puβ q taken with coefficients as over all multi-polytopes Qs for which H is a supporting hyperplane. Since dA “ 0, Lemma 9.3 implies that this sum is zero. Obviously, this sum equals DHA puα q ´ DHA puβ q. This argument shows that crossing of any wall does not change the value of DHA . Therefore, DHA is constant (where it is defined). Since DHA has compact support, it must be constantly zero. Thus ż ÿ DHA “ 0. as VolpQs q “ V˚  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  31  (2) Let us prove the theorem for general k. Consider a generic oriented ksubspace Π Ă V ˚ and let ν P Λn´k V ˚ be its normal skew form. Let Γ : V ˚ Ñ Π be the orthogonal projection. Then the image of Qs under Γ is a full-dimensional řl multi-polytope in Π, which we denote by ΓpQs q. The sum s“1 as ΓpQs q is a cycle of k-dimensional multi-polytopes in Π. Therefore, step (1) implies l ÿ  as VolpΓpQs qq “ 0.  s“1  By the standard property of orthogonal projections we have VolpΓpQs qq “ VolpQs q ¨ xνs , νy. Hence  l Aÿ  as VolpQs qνs , ν  s“1  E  and this holds for any generic skew form ν. Thus to be proved.  “ 0,  řl  s“1  as VolpQs qνs “ 0 which was   9.2. Relations in A˚ p∆q as Minkowski relations. Let K be an oriented homology pn ´ 1q-manifold and ∆ be a multi-fan based on K. Suppose that every simplex Ş I P K is oriented somehow. This defines an orientation of each subspace HI “ iPI Hi (for example, by the rule “positive orientation of Hi ”‘λpi1 q ‘ ¨ ¨ ¨ ‘ λpik q is a positive orientation of V if pi1 , . . . , ik q is a positive Ź order of vertices of I). Recall from Section 5 that λpIq denotes the skew form iPI λpiq and covolpIq “ }λpIq}. Consider an arbitrary skew form µ P Λk V ˚ and let λpIqµ :“ xλpIq, µy.  k  Let C pK; Rq, 0 ď k ď n´1 denote the group of cochains on K and δ : C k pK; Rq Ñ C pK; Rq be the standard cochain differential. We also need to augment the cochain complex in the top degree, so we formally set C n pK; Rq :“ R and let δ : C n´1 pK; Rq Ñ C n pK; Rq be the evaluation of a cochain on the fundamental chain of K. An element a P C k´1 pK; Rq, k ď n will be called a (coaugmented) cocycle if ř δa “ 0. Then, since K is an oriented manifold, the Poincare dual I:|I|“k apIqFI of a is a cycle of pn ´ kq-dimensional multi-polytopes in V ˚ . (Notice that in the case k “ n we get a formal sum of points whose weights sum is zero. If we do not require that a is coaugmented, then we do not get a cycle of 0-dimensional multi-polytopes). k`1  Proposition 9.4. For any coaugmented cocycle a P C k´1 pK; Rq and any µ P Λ V there exists a relation ÿ apIqλpIqµ BI “ 0 k  I:|I|“k  ˚  in A p∆q –  ă2n pRrKs{Θq{IN S .  ř Proof. Let us apply I:|I|“k apIqλpIqµ BI to the volume polynomial V∆ and evaluate the result at a point c̄ “ pc1 , . . . , cm q: ÿ ÿ VolpFI q apIqλpIqµ BI V∆ |c̄ “ apIqλpIqµ . covolpIq I:|I|“k  I:|I|“k  32  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  Here we used Lemma 5.1. Note that the skew form λpIq{ covolpIq is by definition a řunit normal skew form to the ambient subspace of a multi-polytope FI . Since I:|I|“k apIqFI is a cycle of multi-polytopes, Theorem 9.1 implies ÿ  I:|I|“k  apIq VolpFI q  λpIq “ 0. covolpIq  Taking inner product with µ implies ÿ VolpFI q “ 0. apIqλpIqµ covolpIq I:|I|“k ř Hence the polynomial I:|I|“k apIqλpIqµ BI V∆ evaluates to zero at any point c̄. ř Therefore it vanishes as a polynomial. Thus I:|I|“k apIqλpIqµ BI P Ann V∆ which proves the statement.  We see that Minkowski theorem allows to construct linear relations in A˚ p∆q. Actually these relations exhaust all relations in A˚ p∆q. Let us state the result of [1] in terms of Minkowski relations: Proposition 9.5 ([1]). Let K be an oriented homology manifold. (1) There is an isomorphism of vector spaces A ÿ E apIqλpIqµ xI pRrKs{Θq2k – xxI | I P K, |I| “ ky{ I:|I|“k  where a runs over all exact pk ´ 1q-cochains on K and µ runs over Λk V . (2) There is an isomorphism of vector spaces A ÿ E ă2n apIqλpIq x ppRrKs{Θq{IN q – xx | I P K, |I| “ ky{ µ I 2k I S I:|I|“k  where a runs over all coaugmented closed pk ´ 1q-cochains on K and µ runs over Λk V . ` ˘ Recall that pIN S q2k – nk H k´1 pK; Rq. From Proposition 9.5 it can be seen ă2n that the difference between the vector spaces RrKs{Θ and pRrKs{Θq{IN S arises from the difference between closed cochains on K and exact cochains. This explains ` ˘ how the cohomology H k´1 pKq appears in the description of IN S . The multiple nk comes from the choice of the skew form µ P Λk V on which we project the Minkowski relation. Problem 9.6. Let ∆ be a general complete simplicial multi-fan. Is it true that A˚ p∆q is isomorphic, as a vector space, to the quotient of xxI | I P Ky by linear relations arising from Minkowski relations? What are these Minkowski relations? 9.3. Inverse Minkowski theorem. It is tempting to formulate and prove the inverse Minkowski theorem for multi-polytopes. First, we need to modify the statement. The original formulation tells that there exists a convex polytope with the given normal vectors and the volumes of facets, but it tells nothing about the combinatorics of the polytope. We may ask a more specific question, namely Question 9.7. For a given complete simplicial multi-fan ∆ with the rays generated by unit vectors n1 , . . . , nm , and a given m-tuple of real numbers V1 , . . . , Vm  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  33  ř satisfying Vi ni “ 0, does there exist a multi-polytope based on ∆ whose facets have pn ´ 1q-volumes V1 , . . . , Vm ? If yes, is it unique? A simple example shows that the answer, even for the question of existence, may be negative. Example 9.8. Let ∆ be the normal fan of a 3-dimensional cube. ∆ is an ordinary fan supported by a simplicial complex K, which is the boundary of an octahedron. Let t1, 2, 3, ´1, ´2, ´3u be the set of vertices of K and λp˘1q “ p˘1, 0, 0q, λp˘2q “ p0, ˘1, 0q, λp˘3q “ p0, 0, ˘1q be the generators of the corresponding rays of ∆ (see Example 6.6). The multi-polytopes based on ∆ are the bricks with sides parallel to coordinate axes. Minkowski relations can be written as VolpFi q “ VolpF´i q for i “ 1, 2, 3. Let us take the numbers V˘1 “ 0, V˘2 “ V˘3 “ 1. These numbers satisfy Minkowski relations, but we cannot find a brick whose facets have volumes V˘1 , V˘2 , V˘3 . Indeed, V˘1 “ 0 implies that one of the sides of a brick has length 0, but this would imply that either V˘2 “ 0 or V˘3 “ 0. Nevertheless, the answer to Question 9.7 is completely controlled by the multifan algebra. Recall that A˚ p∆q may be interpreted as the algebra of differential operators D up to AnnpV∆ q. Therefore, for every a P A2j p∆q, there is a well-defined homogeneous polynomial aV∆ of degree n ´ j. In particular, each element a P A2n´2 p∆q determines a linear homogeneous polynomial aV∆ “ V1 c1ř ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` Vm cm P Rrc1 , . . . , cm s1 . This linear polynomial is annihilated by θj “ iPrms λi,j Bj P Ann V∆ , j “ 1, . . . , n, see Lemma 5.1 or Remark 7.6. This means ÿ (9.1) Vi λpiq “ 0, iPrms  which can be considered as a Minkowski relation. Let Mink denote the vector space of all m-tuples pV1 , . . . , Vm q satisfying (9.1). Thus we obtain a natural monomorphism η : A2n´2 p∆q Ñ Mink, a ÞÑ pV1 , . . . , Vm q, where aV∆ “ V1 c1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` Vm cm . Theorem 9.9. Let ∆ be a complete simplicial multi-fan with characteristic function λ and assume that |λpiq| “ 1 for each i P rms. Let V “ pV1 , . . . , Vm q P Mink. Let P P Polyp∆q be a multi-polytope and BP “ c1 B1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` cm Bm P A2 p∆q be its first Chern class. Then the polytope P has facet volumes V1 , . . . , Vm if and only if ηpBPn´1 q “ pn ´ 1q!V . Proof. Assume that ηpBPn´1 q “ pn´1q!V . Then BPn´1 V∆ “ pn´1q!pV1 c1 `¨ ¨ ¨` Vm cm q. Hence Bi BPn´1 V∆ “ pn ´ 1q!Vi for i P rms. On the other hand, Corollary 5.7 implies Bi BPn´1 V∆ “ pn ´ 1q! VolpFi q{ covolpiq “ pn ´ 1q! VolpFi q{|λpiq| “ pn ´ 1q! VolpFi q. Thus Vi “ VolpFi q. The other direction is proved similarly.    Note that dim Mink “ m ´ n. Corollary 9.10. Existence in Question 9.7 holds for a given multi-fan ∆ and all m-tuples pV1 , . . . , Vm q P Mink if and only if the following two conditions hold: (1) dim A2 p∆q “ dim A2n´2 p∆q “ m ´ n; (2) the power map A2 p∆q Ñ A2n´2 p∆q, B ÞÑ B n´1 is surjective. Uniqueness holds if the power map is bijective.  34  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  Remark 9.11. Note that even the condition dim A2 p∆q “ m ´ n may fail to hold. As an example, consider a multi-fan having a ghost vertex, say 1. As in general, we have n relations θ1 , . . . , θn , lying in the kernel of the linear map xB1 , . . . , Bm y ։ A2 p∆q. But the element B1 , corresponding to the ghost vertex, also vanishes in A2 p∆q. Thus dim A2 p∆q ă m ´ n. There exist more nontrivial examples. For example, if the underlying simplicial complex K is disconnected, with connected components K1 , . . . , Kr on disjoint vertex sets rm1 s, . . . , rmr s, r ą 1, then each connected component contributes at most m1 ´ n in the total dimension of A2 p∆q (see the operation of connected sum of Poincare duality algebras introduced in subsection 11.1). Thus in the disconnected case dim A2 p∆q ď m ´ rn. Nevertheless, the inverse Minkowski theorem can be refined in an obvious way: we should consider Minkowski relations on each connected component. Remark 9.12. The power map A2 p∆q Ñ A2n´2 p∆q is a polynomial map of degree n ´ 1 between real vector spaces of equal dimensions. It is a complicated object which may be interesting on its own. One of the consequences from Corollary 9.10 is that the existence in the inverse Minkowski theorem holds for a multi-fan ∆ whenever dim A2 p∆q “ m ´ n and n is even. 10. Recognizing volume polynomials and multi-fan algebras A natural question is: which homogeneous polynomials are the volume polynomials, and which Poincare duality algebras appear as A˚ p∆q? The answer to the second question seems quite unexpected. Theorem 10.1. For every Poincare duality algebra A˚ generated in degree 2 there exists a complete simplicial multi-fan ∆ such that A˚ – A˚ p∆q. Recall that the symmetric array of nonnegative integers pd0 , d1 , . . . , dn q, dj “ dn´j , is called unimodal, if d0 ď d1 ď ¨ ¨ ¨ ď dtn{2u . Corollary 10.2. There exist multi-fans ∆, for which the array pdim A0 p∆q, dim A2 p∆q, . . . , dim A2n p∆qq is not unimodal. Proof. An example of Poincare duality algebra generated in degree 2, for which dimensions of graded components are not unimodal was given by Stanley in [19]. Theorem 10.1 implies that there exists a multi-fan, which produces this algebra.  The construction of the volume polynomial is additive with respect to weights. Let MultiFansλ denote the vector space of all multi-fans with the given characteristic function λ : rms Ñ V . Then we obtain a linear map (10.1)  Ωλ : MultiFansλ Ñ Rrc1 , . . . , cm sn ,  which maps ∆ to its volume polynomial V∆ . Before giving the proof of Theorem 10.1 we characterize volume polynomials of general position, in the sense explained below. For this goal we study the properties of the map Ωλ .  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  35  10.1. Characterization of volume polynomials in general position. There is a necessary condition on V∆ . If λ is a characteristic function and θj “ ř iPrms λi,j Bi P xB1 , . . . , Bm y, j “ 1, . . . , n are the corresponding linear forms, then θj V∆ “ 0, see Remark 7.6. Thus the subspace Ann2 V∆ “ tD P xB1 , . . . , Bm y | DV∆ “ 0u  has dimension at least n. It happens that in most situations this is also a sufficient condition for a polynomial to be a volume polynomial. At first let us consider the situation of general position to demonstrate the argument. Assume that all characteristic vectors λp1q, . . . , λpmq P Rn are in general position, which means that every n of them are linearly independent. Given a fixed characteristic function λ : rms Ñ V in general position, we may pick up any pn´1q simplicial cycle wch P Zp△rms ; Rq, consider a complete multi-fan ∆ “ pw, λq and take its volume polynomial. This defines a map which we previously denoted by Ωλ : pn´1q  Ωλ : Zp△rms ; Rq Ñ Rrc1 , . . . , cm sn , from the pn ´ 1q-simplicial cycles on m vertices to homogeneous polynomials of degree n. This map is linear and injective by Corollary 5.5. As before, let θj , j “ 1, . . . , n be the linear differential operators associated with λ (i.e. a basis of the image of the map λJ : V ˚ Ñ pRm q˚ ). Let Annn Θ “ tΨ P Rrc1 , . . . , cm sn | θj Ψ “ 0 for each j “ 1, . . . , nu be the vector subspace of polynomials annihilated by differential operators Θ “ pθ1 , . . . , θn q. As we have seen, if ∆ has a characteristic function λ, then V∆ P Annn Θ. Thus the image of Ωλ lies in Annn Θ. pn´1q  Lemma 10.3. If λ is in general position, then Ωλ : Zn´1 p△rms ; Rq Ñ Annn Θ is an isomorphism. Proof. Let us compute the dimensions of domain and target. There are no pn´1q pn´1q pn´1q n-simplices in △rms , thus Zn´1 p△rms q “ Hn´1 p△rms q. All Betti numbers of pn´1q  △rms get  (10.2)  between the top and the bottom vanish, thus via Euler characteristic we pn´1q  dim Hn´1 p△rms q “  ˆ ˙ ˆ ˙ ˆ ˙ ˆ ˙ m m m m ´ ` ´ ¨ ¨ ¨ ` p´1qn . n n´1 n´2 0  Now let us compute dim Annn Θ. Take a linear change of variables c1 , . . . , cm ù such that θj becomes the partial derivative BcB1 for j “ 1, . . . , n. Thus,  c11 , . . . , c1m  j  after the change of variables, Annn Θ becomes the set tΨ P Rrc11 , . . . , c1m sn | Rrc1n`1 , . . . , c1m sn .  j “ 1, .˘. . , nu which is the same as `0,m´n`n´1 `m´1 ˘ “ . This number coincides with (10.2). n n  B Bc1j Ψ n  “  Thus dim Ann Θ “   Let Gm,n denote the Grassmann manifold of all (unoriented) n-planes in pRm q˚ . We can introduce the standard Plücker coordinates on Gm,n . If m ! ) ÿ (10.3) θj “ λi,j xi i“1  j“1,...,n  is a basis in L P Gm,n , then the Plücker coordinates of L are all maximal minors of the m ˆ n matrix pλi,j q.  36  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  Any n-plane L P Gm,n determines an m-tuple of vectors in V – Rn as follows: the basis (10.3) determines the tuple tλpiq “ pλi,1 , . . . , λi,n quiPrms . The base change in L induces the natural action of GLpn, Rq on the m-tuples. By abuse of terminology we call λ : rms Ñ V the characteristic function corresponding to L P Gm,n although this characteristic function is determined only up to automorphism of V . Proposition 10.4. Let Ψ P Rrc1 , . . . , cm sn be a homogeneous polynomial. Suppose that the vector subspace Ann2 Ψ “ tD P xB1 , . . . , Bm y | DΨ “ 0u contains an n-dimensional subspace L P Gm,n with all Plücker coordinates non-zero. Then Ψ is a volume polynomial of some multi-fan. ř Proof. Let us pick a basis tθj “ i λi,j xi uj“1,...,n in L arbitrarily. Nonvanishing of all Plücker coordinates means that the corresponding characteristic function λ is in general position. By assumption, Ψ P Annn Θ. Thus Ψ is a volume polynomial of some multi-fan based on λ according to Lemma 10.3.  10.2. Proof of Theorem 10.1. Let A˚ be an arbitrary Poincare duality algebra over R generated by A2 . Let 2n be the formal dimension of A and p “ dim A2 . Take any p ` n elements x1 , . . . , xp`n P A2 in general position (i.e. every p of them are linearly independent). There are n linear relations on x1 , . . . , xp`n in ř A2 of the form i λi,j xi “ 0, j “ 1, . . . , n. Since xi are in general position, every maximal minor of the pp ` nq ˆ n-matrix |λi,j | is non-zero. As in the proof of Proposition 7.2, consider the polynomial ż 1 ΨA pc1 , . . . , cm q “ pc1 x1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` cm xm qn , n! ş – where : A2n Ñ R is any isomorphism. The linear differential operator θj “ ř i λi,j Bi annihilates ΨA for j “ 1, . . . , n. Indeed: ż ´ÿ ż m m ¯ ´ÿ 1 B ¯1 λi,j xi pc1 x1 `¨ ¨ ¨`cm xm qn´1 “ 0. pc1 x1 `¨ ¨ ¨`cm xm qn “ ¨n λi,j Bci n! n! i“1 i“1 Since θj are in general position, Proposition 10.4 implies that ΨA “ V∆ for some multi-fan ∆. Therefore the corresponding Poincare duality algebras A˚ and A˚ p∆q are isomorphic by Proposition 7.2.  10.3. Non-general position. Now we want to study which polynomials are volume polynomials without the assumption of general position. Let I Ă rms and let αI : RI Ñ Rm be the inclusion of the coordinate subspace. Then α˚I : pRm q˚ “ xB1 , . . . , Bm y Ñ pRI q˚ is a projection map. For a linear subspace Π Ă pRm q˚ of dimension at least n consider the following collection of subsets of rms: deppΠq :“ tI Ă rms | |I| ď n and α˚I |Π : Π Ñ pRI q˚ is not surjectiveu. Lemma 10.5. Let Π Ă pRm q˚ and dim Π ě n. Then there exists a subspace L Ă Π such that dim L “ n and deppLq “ deppΠq. Proof. When dim Π “ n the statement is trivial so we assume dim Π ą n. The proof follows from the general position argument. If ϕ : Π Ñ U is an epimorphism, and dim Π ą n ě dim U , then the set of all n-planes in Π which map surjectively to U is a complement to a subvariety of positive codimension inside the set of all n-subspaces of Π. This argument applied to all maps α˚I |Π : Π Ñ pRI q˚ proves that any generic n-plane L in Π satisfies deppLq “ deppΠq.   VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  37  Let Ψ be a homogeneous polynomial of degree n and Ann2 Ψ Ă xB1 , . . . , Bm y “ pR q be its annihilator subspace. m ˚  Theorem 10.6. A homogeneous polynomial Ψ P Rrc1 , . . . , cm sn is a volume polynomial of some complete simplicial multi-fan if and only if the following conditions hold: (1) dim Ann2 Ψ ě n, (2) BI Ψ “ 0 whenever I P deppAnn2 Ψq. Proof. The necessity of these conditions is already proved. Indeed, the first condition follows from the fact that Ann2 V∆ contains the image of λJ : V ˚ Ñ pRm q˚ “ xB1 , . . . , Bm y which has dimension n, see Remark 7.6. If I P deppAnn2 V∆ q, then ˚-condition (see subsection 2.2) implies I R K, and therefore BI V∆ “ 0 by Lemma 5.1. Let us prove sufficiency. By Lemma 10.5 we may choose an n-dimensional plane L Ă Ann2 Ψ such that deppLq “ deppAnn2 Ψq. Therefore, by assumption, I P deppLq implies BI Ψ “ 0. Let λ : rms Ñ V be the characteristic function corresponding to L P Gm,n . The condition I P deppLq is equivalent to the condition that vectors tλpiquiPI are linearly dependent. Consider a simplicial complex M atrλ determined by the condition: ti1 , . . . , ik u P M atrλ if and only if λpi1 q, . . . , λpik q are linearly independent. Thus M atrλ “ 2rms z deppLq. In a sense, the complex M atrλ can be considered as a maximal simplicial complex on rms for which λ is a characteristic function (this construction is similar to the universal complexes introduced in [5]). We have I R M atrλ if and only if Θ Ñ xBi yiPI is not surjective. It is easily seen that multi-fans having characteristic function λ are encoded by the simplicial pn´1qcycles on M atrλ . As before, we have a map Ωλ : Zn´1 pM atrλ ; Rq Ñ Rrc1 , . . . , cm sn which associates a volume polynomial V∆ with a multi-fan ∆ “ pwch , λq for wch P Zn´1 pM atrλ ; Rq. Let Annn pL, tBI uIPdeppLq q denote the subspace of all homogeneous polynomials of degree n which are annihilated by linear differential operators from L and by the products BI , I P deppLq (ô I R M atrλ ). We already proved that the image of Ωλ lies in Annn pL, tBI uIPdeppLq q. We need to prove that the map Ωλ : Zn´1 pM atrλ ; Rq Ñ Annn pL, tBI uIPdeppLq q is surjective. Since Ωλ is injective, it is enough to show that dimensions of the two spaces are equal. First of all notice that M atrλ is by construction the underlying simplicial complex of a linear matroid. Hence M atrλ is a Cohen–Macaulay complex of dimension r n´1 pM atrλ ; Rq is n ´ 1 (see e.g. [17]). The number dim Zn´1 pM atrλ ; Rq “ dim H called the type of the Cohen–Macaulay complex M atrλ . Consider the Stanley–Reisner ring RrM atrλ s “ RrB1 , . . . , Bm s{pBI | I R M atrλ q, and its quotient by a linear system of parameters L Ă xB1 , . . . , Bm y: RrM atrλ s{pLq “ RrB1 , . . . , Bm s{pL, tBI uIPdeppLq q Claim 10.7. dimpRrM atrλ s{pLqq2n “ dim Annn pL, tBI uIPdeppLq q. This follows from basic linear algebra. There is a non-degenerate pairing RrB1 , . . . , Bm s2n b Rrc1 , . . . , cm sn Ñ R.  38  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  For any subspace U Ă RrB1 , . . . , Bm s2n we have dim RrB1 , . . . , Bm s2n {U “ dim U K . Taking the degree 2n part of the ideal pL, tBI uIPdeppLq q as U proves the claim. Now, since M atrλ is Cohen–Macaulay, the socle of RrM atrλ s{pLq coincides with pRrM atrλ s{pLqq2n . On the other hand, the dimension of the socle coincides with the type of Cohen–Macaulay complex [16]. We have dim Annn pL, tBI uIPdeppLq q “ dim Soc RrM atrλ s{pLq r n´1 pM atrλ ; Rq “ type of M atrλ “ dim H  which finishes the proof of the theorem.    Remark 10.8. Lemma 10.3 describing the general position is a particular case of Theorem 10.6. In the case of general position the matroid complex M atrλ is just the pn ´ 1q-skeleton of a simplex on m vertices. 10.4. Global structure of the set of multi-fans. Let Gnm denote the Grassmaniann of all codimension n planes in Rm – Rrc1 , . . . , cm s1 . Obviously, Gm,n can be identified with Gnm by assigning LK Ă Rm to L Ă pRm q˚ . We have already seen, that characteristic function λ : Rm Ñ V determines the element L P Gm,n defined as the image of λJ : V ˚ Ñ pRm q˚ . The corresponding element of Gnm is the subspace Y “ LK “ Ker λ Ă Rm . Let S k Y denote the k-th symmetric power of Y P Gnm , so we have S k Y Ă k m S R “ Rrc1 , . . . , cm sk . We have S k Y Ă Annk Y K “ tΨ P Rrc1 , . . . , cm sk | DΨ “ 0 for any D P Y K u, ` ˘ and both spaces have dimension m´n`k´1 . This implies that the vector bundle k tpY, Ψq P Gnm ˆ Rrc1 , . . . , cm sk | Ψ P Annk Y K u Ñ Gnm  is S k γ, the k-th symmetric power of the canonical bundle γ over Gnm . We denote its total space by EpS k γq. Consider the set of all characteristic functions in V up to linear automorphism of V : CharFunc :“ tλ : Rm Ñ V | Im λ “ V u{ GLpV q. Let MultiFans denote the set of all complete simplicial multi-fans on the set rms (considered up to automorphisms of V again). We have a map MultiFans Ñ CharFunc which maps a multi-fan to its characteristic function. The fiber of this map over λ is the vector space MultiFansλ – Zn´1 pM atrλ ; Rq introduced earlier. We have a commutative square / EpS n γq  MultiFans  Sn γ   CharFunc  –   / Gn m  The lower map associates a codimension n subspace Y “ Ker λ to a characteristic function λ. The upper map associates a volume polynomial to a multi-fan. The upper map is linear on each fiber. The subset of characteristic functions in general position maps isomorphically to the subset of Gnm with non-zero Plücker coordinates; the fiber over a generic point maps isomorphically according to Lemma 10.3. Exceptional fibers map injectively and their images are described by Theorem 10.6.  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  39  11. Surgery of multi-fans and algebras In this section we study the behavior of the dimensions dj “ dim A2j p∆q under connected sums and flips of multi-fans. 11.1. Connected sums. Recall that A˚ pΨq “ RrB1 , . . . , Bm s{ AnnpΨq denotes the Poincare duality algebra associated with the homogeneous polynomial À Ψ. For a graded algebra (or a graded vector space) A˚ “ j A2j let HilbpA˚ ; tq “ ř j j j pdim A qt denote its Hilbert function. Sometimes it will be convenient to use the notation dmpA˚ q :“ pd0 , d1 , . . . , dn q, where dj “ dim A2j , and dmp∆q :“ dmpA˚ p∆qq. Let A1 #A2 denote a connected sum of two Poincare duality algebras of the same formal dimension 2n. By definition, A1 #A2 “ A1 ‘ A2 { „ where „ identifies 2n A01 with A02 and A2n 1 with A2 . Actually, there is an ambiguity in the choice of the latter identification, so in fact there exists a 1-dimensional family of connected sums of the given two algebras. We prefer to ignore this ambiguity in the following (the statements hold for any representative in the family). We have dmpA1 #A2 q “ dmpA1 q ` dmpA2 q ´ p1, 0, . . . , 0, 1q. Lemma 11.1. Let Ψ1 P Rrc1 , . . . , cm sn , Ψ2 P Rrc11 , . . . , c1m1 sn be the polynomials in distinct variables. Then A˚ pΨ1 ` Ψ2 q – A˚ pΨ1 q#A˚ pΨ2 q. Proof. The mixed differential operators Bi Bi11 vanish on Ψ1 `Ψ2 , while BI pΨ1 ` Ψ2 q equals BI pΨ1 q (resp. BI pΨ2 q) if I Ă rms (resp. I Ă rm1 s).  Let ∆1 , ∆2 be two multi-fans, whose vertex sets are rms “ t1, . . . , n, n ` 1, . . . , mu and rms r “ t1, . . . , n, nĆ ` 1, . . . , mu r respectively, and let I denote the set of common vertices: I “ t1, . . . , nu. Assume that the weight of I is non-zero in both multi-fans and assume that characteristic functions of ∆1 and ∆2 coincide on I. Then we may consider ∆1 and ∆2 as multi-fans with vertices rms YI rms r “ Ć t1, . . . , n, n ` 1, . . . , m, n ` 1, . . . , mu r and a common characteristic function. In this case we call the cone-wise sum ∆1 ` ∆2 a connected sum and denote it by ∆1 #I ∆2 or simply ∆1 #∆2 . Remark 11.2. It would be natural to assume that w1 pIq “ ´w2 pIq, so that the cone spanned by I contracts in the connected sum. This is consistent with the geometrical understanding how “the connected sum” should look like. However, we do not need this assumption in the following proposition. Proposition 11.3. For a connected sum ∆1 #∆2 there holds A˚ p∆1 #∆2 q – A˚ p∆1 q#A˚ p∆2 q, so that dmp∆1 #∆2 q “ dmp∆1 q ` dmp∆2 q ´ p1, 0, . . . , 0, 1q. Proof. We need a technical lemma Lemma 11.4. Let ∆ be a multi-fan and I Ă rms be a vertex set such that the corresponding characteristic vectors tλpiquiPI are linearly independent. Let V∆ be the volume polynomial and V∆zI P Rrci | i P rmszIsn be the homogeneous polynomial obtained by specializing ci “ 0 in V∆ for each i P I. Then A˚ pV∆zI q – A˚ pV∆ qp“ A˚ p∆qq as Poincare duality algebras.  40  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  řm Proof. Using linear relations θj “ i“1 λi,j Bi “ 0 in A2 p∆q we can exclude the variables Bi for i P I. This proves that the set tBi uiPrmszI spans A2 p∆q. Therefore the polynomial ż ´ÿ ¯n 1 ci xi V∆zI “ iPrmszI n! ∆ determines the same Poincare duality algebra as V∆ .  By the lemma we have A˚ p∆1 q – A˚ pV∆1 zI q and A˚ p∆2 q – A˚ pV∆2 zI q. Polynomials V∆1 zI and V∆2 zI have distinct variables, thus A˚ pV∆1 zI ` V∆2 zI q – A˚ pV∆1 zI q#A˚ pV∆2 zI q according to Lemma 11.1. It remains to note that V∆1 zI ` V∆2 zI is the result of specializing ci “ 0 for i P I in the polynomial V∆1 ` V∆2 . Finally, we have A˚ p∆1 #∆2 q “ A˚ pV∆1 #∆2 q – A˚ pV∆1 #∆2 zI q – A˚ pV∆1 zI ` V∆2 zI q – A˚ p∆1 q#A˚ p∆2 q.  11.2. Flips. In this section we assume that ∆ is based on an oriented pseudomanifold K. Our goal is to define a flip in a multi-fan. Consider separately two situations. (1) Flips changing the number of vertices. Let us take a maximal simplex I P K, |I| “ n. Let Flip1I pKq be a simplicial complex whose maximal simplices are the same as in K except that we substitute I by Cone BI. This operation adds the new vertex i, the apex of the cone. If λ : rms Ñ Rn is a characteristic function on K, we extend it to the set rms \ tiu by adding new value λpiq such that the result is a characteristic function on Flip1I pKq. This defines an operation on multi-fans which we call the flip of type p1, nq. The inverse operation will be denoted Flipni . It is applicable to ∆ if lkK i is isomorphic to the boundary of a simplex and λpVertplkK iqq is a linearly independent set. The inverse operation will be called the flip of type pn, 1q. (2) Flips preserving the set of vertices. Let S be a subset of VertpKq of cardinality n ` 1 such that the induced subcomplex KS on the set S is isomorphic to B∆p´1 ˚ ∆q´1 with p ` q “ n ` 1, p, q ě 2. Let FlippS pKq be the simplicial complex whose maximal simplices are the same as in K away from S, and B∆p´1 ˚ ∆q´1 is replaced by ∆p´1 ˚ B∆q´1 . If the set of vectors λpSq is in general position, then this operation is defined on multi-fans. We call it the flip of type pp, qq. It is easily seen that flips of types pp, qq and pq, pq are inverse to each other. Of course p1, nq- and pn, 1q-flips can be viewed as particular cases of this construction if we allow ghost vertices and formally set B∆0 to be such a ghost vertex. The following proposition tells that dimension vectors of multi-fan algebras change under the flips in the same way as h-vectors of simplicial complexes. Theorem 11.5. Let ∆1 be a multi-fan obtained from ∆ by a pp, qq-flip, p, q ě 1. Then . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0q. dmp∆1 q ´ dmp∆q “ p1, . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0q ´ p1, loomoon loomoon q  p  Proof. For p1, nq- and pn, 1q-flips this follows from Proposition 11.3 and Lemma 6.1, since p1, nq-flip is just the connected sum with an elementary multi-fan, and pn, 1q-flip is its inverse.  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  41  Now we consider the remaining cases. pp, qq-flips with p ‰ 1 and q ‰ 1 do not change the vertex set. Let rms denote the vertex set of K and K 1 , and S Ă rms denote the set of vertices at which the flip is performed. We have |S| “ n ` 1 and K|S – B∆p´1 ˚ ∆q´1 and K 1 |S – ∆p´1 ˚ B∆q´1 . Let rps be the set of vertices of ∆p´1 . Let IrmszS denote the ideal in RrB1 , . . . , Bm s generated by Bi , pi P rmszSq. Claim 11.6. IrmszS X Ann V∆ “ IrmszS X Ann V∆1 . Proof. In the group of multi-fans with a given characteristic function we have a relation ∆1 “ ∆ ` T , where T is an elementary multi-fan based on the vertex set S. Informally, to perform a flip on a multi-fan is the same as “to add a boundary of a simplex”, which cancels the cones from B∆p´1 ˚ ∆q´1 and adds the cones from ∆p´1 ˚ B∆q´1 . Therefore V∆1 “ V∆ ` VT , where VT is the polynomial which essentially depends only on the variables ci , i P S. If D P Ann V∆ X IrmszS then D annihilates both V∆ and VT . Thus it annihilates V∆1 “ V∆ ` VT and the claim follows.  We have a diagram of inclusions of graded ideals in RrB1 , . . . , Bm s: Ann  V_ ∆ o  ? _ IrmszS X Ann V∆ “ IrmszS X Ann V∆1   _  / Ann V∆1 _   IrmszS ` Ann V∆ o   ? _ IrmszS     / IrmszS ` Ann V∆1  It follows that the quotients of the vertical inclusions are isomorphic as graded vector spaces. Therefore (11.1) dmp∆1 q ´ dmp∆q “ dmpRrms{ Ann V∆1 q ´ dmpRrms{ Ann V∆ q “ dmpRrms{pIrmszS ` Ann V∆1 qq ´ dmpRrms{pIrmszS ` Ann V∆ qq. Since IrmszS is the ideal generated by Bi , pi R Sq, the ring Rrms{pIrmszS ` Ann V∆ q coincides with some quotient ring B of the polynomials in variables Bi , pi P Sq, that ř is B “ RrSs{Rels. The linear relations θj “ iPrms λi,j Bi in Ann V∆ induce the ř relations iPS λi,j Bi in Rels. Since the values of λ on S are in general position, these induced relations are linearly independent. We have n linear relations on n ` 1 variables, thus all variables are expressed through a single variable t, and we have B – Rrts{J . Since we are in a graded situation, and B is a finite dimensional algebra, J is a principal ideal generated by tp̃ for some p̃ ě 0. Hence dmpRrms{pIrmszS ` Ann V∆ qq “ dmB “ p1, . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0q. loomoon p̃  ś  Now notice that there is a Stanley–Reisner relation iPrps Bi “ 0 corresponding to non-simplex rps in K (recall that rps is the set of vertices of B∆p´1 inside B∆p´1 ˚ ∆q´1 Ă K). Therefore we have a relation tp “ 0 in B. This implies p̃ ď p. Applying the same arguments to ∆1 , we get . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0q, dmpRrms{pIrmszS ` Ann V∆1 qq “ p1, loomoon q̃  42  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  where q̃ ď q. Hence we have dmp∆1 q ´ dmp∆q “ p1, . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0q ´ p1, . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0q. loomoon loomoon q̃  p̃  Note that the vector on the left hand side is symmetric. Hence the vector on the right hand side is symmetric. If at least one inequality p̃ ď p or q̃ ď q is strict, the vector at the right is not symmetric. Thus p̃ “ p, q̃ “ q, and the statement follows.  12. Cohomology of torus manifolds 12.1. Multi-fans of torus manifolds. Recall that a torus manifold X is an oriented closed manifold of dimension 2n with an effective action of n-dimensional compact torus T having at least one fixed point, and prescribed orientations of characteristic submanifolds. Any torus manifold determines a non-singular multifan in the lie algebra LpT q – Rn of the torus as follows (see details in [7]). Let Xi , i P rms be the characteristic submanifolds. Let M be a connected component of a non-empty intersection Xi1 X ¨ ¨ ¨ X Xik for some k ą 0 and ti1 , . . . , ik u Ă rms, and assume that M has at least one fixed point. Such submanifold will be called a face submanifold. We also assume that the manifold X itself is a face submanifold corresponding to k “ 0. It easily follows from the transversality of characteristic submanifolds that M has codimension 2|k|. Let ΣX be a poset of all face submanifolds of X ordered by reversed inclusion. The basic representation theory of a torus implies that ΣX is a pure simplicial poset of dimension n ´ 1 on the vertex set rms. The maximal simplices of ΣX correspond to the fixed points of X. Given orientations of X and Xi , i P rms, each fixed point obtains a sign. This xny determines a sign function σX : ΣX Ñ t´1, `1u. Finally, let Ti denote a circle subgroup fixing Xi , for i P rms. The orientation of Xi determines the orientation of the 2-dimensional normal bundle of Xi , which in turn determines an orientation of Ti . Therefore we have a well-defined primitive element λX piq P HompS 1 , T n q – Zn Ă Rn – LpT n q. This gives a characteristic function λX : rms Ñ Rn . These constructions determine a multi-fan ∆X :“ pΣX , σX , λX q associated with a torus manifold X. This multifan is non-singular and complete [7]. As described in subsection 2.2, we may turn the data “simplicial poset + sign function” into the data “simplicial complex + weight function”. Let KX and wX denote the simplicial complex and the weight function corresponding to ∆X . In the following we assume that each non-empty intersection of characteristic submanifolds is connected and contains at least one fixed point. The assumption implies, in particular, that ΣX is a simplicial complex, and therefore KX “ ΣX and the weight function wX coincides with σX . 12.2. Face subalgebra in cohomology. Let X be a torus manifold and ∆X be the corresponding multi-fan. Let F ˚ pXq Ă H ˚ pX; Rq be the vector subspace spanned by the cohomology classes Poincare dual to face submanifolds. Since the intersection of two face submanifolds is either a face submanifold or empty, F ˚ pXq  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  43  is a subalgebra. This subalgebra is multiplicatively generated by the classes of characteristic submanifolds. The simplices of KX “ ΣX correspond to face submanifolds, and there exists aśring homomorphism RrKX s Ñ HT˚ pXq defined as follows: the element xI “ iPI xi P RrKX s2|I| corresponding to the simplex I P K ŞX maps to the equivariant cohomology class dual to the face submanifold XI “ iPI Xi . There is a natural homomorphism HT˚ pXq Ñ H ˚ pXq induced by the inclusion of a fiber in the Borel π fibration X ãÑ X ˆT ET Ñ BT . We have a commutative square of algebra homomorphisms HT˚ p∆X q ÝÝÝÝÑ H ˚ p∆X q § § § § (12.1) đ đ HT˚ pXq ÝÝÝÝÑ H ˚ pXq.  Recall from the end of subsection 4.2 that HT˚ p∆X q denotes the Stanley–Reisner ring of the underlying simplicial complex KX , H ˚ p∆X q is its quotient by the linear system of parameters, so the upper horizontal arrow in the diagram (12.1) is the natural quotient homomorphism. By definition, F ˚ pXq is the image of the right vertical map. Hence we have an epimorphism of algebras H ˚ p∆X q ։ F ˚ pXq.  Theorem 12.1. There exists a well-defined epimorphism of algebras F ˚ pXq ։ A p∆X q. ˚  Proof.ş The epimorphism H ˚ p∆X q Ñ F ˚ pXq is compatibleşwith the integration maps ∆X : H 2n p∆X q Ñ R (the multi-fan integration) and X : F 2n pXq Ñ R (integration over ş [7]. Lemma 7.4 implies that the induced map ş the manifold X), see PDpH ˚ p∆X q, ∆X q Ñ PDpF ˚ pXq, X q is an isomorphism. Thus we have a natural ş ş  epimorphism F ˚ pXq ։ PDpF ˚ pXq, X q – PDpH ˚ p∆X q, ∆X q “ A˚ p∆X q. Therefore the part of the cohomology ring generated by characteristic submanifolds is clamped between two algebras defined combinatorially: (12.2)  H ˚ p∆X q  / / F ˚ pXq _  / / A˚ p∆X q   H ˚ pXq Corollary 12.2. Betti numbers of a torus manifold X are bounded below by the dimensions of graded components of A˚ p∆X q. Remark 12.3. For complete smooth toric varieties and for quasitoric manifolds all arrows in the diagram above are isomorphisms as follows from Danilov– Jurkiewicz and Davis–Januszkiewicz [5] theorems respectively. If KX is a sphere, both horizontal maps are isomorphisms, so the face part of cohomology is completely determined by a multi-fan, while the vertical map may be non-trivial. As an example in which such phenomena occur, take an equivariant connected sum of a (quasi)toric manifold with a manifold on which the torus acts freely and whose orbit space has nontrivial homology. Finally, there exist many examples of torus manifolds for which all arrows in (12.2) are nontrivial [1]. Recall that H ˚ p∆X q is linearly generated by the square-free monomials xI corresponding to simplices I P K. There may exist certain linear relations on these  44  A. AYZENBERG AND M. MASUDA  ř elements coming from Minkowski relations: I:|I|“k apIqλpIqµ xI , where µ P Λk V and a is a function on pk ´ 1q-simplices of K. Conjecture 12.4. As a vector space,řF 2k pXq is generated by the elements txI uIPK subject to the Minkowski relations I:|I|“k apIqλpIqµ xI “ 0, where µ runs over Λk V and a runs over all functions such that the element ÿ apIqrXI {T s I:|I|“k  bounds in Cn´k pX{T ; Rq. This ř seen that whenř question is closely related to Problem 9.6. It can be ever I:|I|“k apIqrXI {T s bounds in Cn´k pX{T ; Rq, the element I:|I|“k apIqFI is a ř cycle of multi-polytopes, therefore I:|I|“k apIqλpIqµ xI vanishes in A˚ p∆X q. However, ř there may be cycles of multi-polytopes such that the corresponding elements I:|I|“k apIqrXI {T s do not bound in the orbit space. This observation represents the fact that the right arrow in (12.2) can be nontrivial. If X is an oriented manifold with locally standard torus action, having trivial free part and acyclic proper faces of the orbit space, the conjecture is proved in [1]. Informally, this situation corresponds to the case when the underlying simplicial complex of ∆X is an oriented homology manifold. References [1] A. Ayzenberg, Homology cycles in manifolds with locally standard torus actions, preprint arXiv:1502.01130v2. [2] M. Brion, Piecewise polynomial functions, convex polytopes and enumerative geometry, Banach Center Publications 36:1 (1996) 25–44. [3] F. Berchtold, Lifting of morphisms to quotient presentations, Manuscripta Math. 110 (2003), 33–44 [4] V. Buchstaber, T. Panov, Toric Topology, Math. Surveys Monogr., 204, AMS, Providence, RI, 2015. [5] M. Davis, T. Januszkiewicz, Convex polytopes, Coxeter orbifolds and torus actions, Duke Math. J., 62:2 (1991), 417–451. [6] W. Fulton, Introduction to toric varieties, Princeton University Press, 1993. [7] A. Hattori, M. Masuda, Theory of multi-fans, Osaka J. Math. 40 (2003), 1–68. [8] J. Lawrence, Polytope volume computation, Math. Comp. 57 (1991), 259–271. [9] P. McMullen, On simple polytopes, Invent. Math. 113 (1993), 419–444. [10] M. Masuda, T. Panov, On the cohomology of torus manifolds, Osaka J. Math. 43 (2006), 711–746. [11] D. M. Meyer, L. Smith, Poincaré Duality Algebras, Macaulay’s Dual Systems, and Steenrod Operations, Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics, 2005. [12] I. Novik, Ed Swartz, Socles of Buchsbaum modules, complexes and posets, Adv. Math., 222 (2009), 2059–2084. [13] I. Novik, E. Swartz, Gorenstein rings through face rings of manifolds, Composit. Math. 145 (2009), 993–1000. [14] A. V. Pukhlikov, A. G. Khovanskii, Finitely additive measures of virtual polyhedra, Algebra i Analiz 4:2 (1992), 161–185; English transl., St. Petersburg Math. J. 4 (1992), 337–356. [15] P. Schenzel, On the Number of Faces of Simplicial Complexes and the Purity of Frobenius, Math. Zeitschrift 178, 125–142 (1981). [16] R. Stanley, Combinatorics and Commutative Algebra, Boston, MA: Birkhäuser Boston Inc., 1996. (Progress in Mathematics V. 41). [17] R. Stanley, Cohen-Macaulay complexes, in Higher Combinatorics (M. Aigner, ed.), NATO Advanced Study Institute Series, Reidel, Dordrecht/Boston, (1977), 51–62.  VOLUME POLYNOMIALS AND DUALITY ALGEBRAS OF MULTI-FANS  45  [18] R. Stanley, The number of faces of a simplicial convex polytope, Adv. Math. 35 (1980), 236– 238. [19] R. Stanley, Hilbert Functions of Graded Algebras, Adv. Math. 28, 57–83 (1978). [20] V. A. Timorin, An analogue of the Hodge–Riemann relations for simple convex polytopes, Russian Math. Surveys 54:2 381–426 (1999). Department of Mathematics, Osaka City University, Sumiyoshi-ku, Osaka 558-8585, Japan. E-mail address: ayzenberga@gmail.com Department of Mathematics, Osaka City University, Sumiyoshi-ku, Osaka 558-8585, Japan. E-mail address: masuda@sci.osaka-cu.ac.jp

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 0. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
