Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_5641

Abstract:
arXiv:1304.3804v1 [cs.PF] 13 Apr 2013  Multithreaded Input-Sensitive Profiling Emilio Coppa  Camil Demetrescu  Irene Finocchi  Dept. of Computer Science Sapienza University of Rome  Dept. of Computer and System Sciences Sapienza University of Rome  Dept. of Computer Science Sapienza University of Rome  coppa@di.uniroma1.it  demetres@dis.uniroma1.it  finocchi@di.uniroma1.it  Romolo Marotta Dept. of Computer and System Sciences Sapienza University of Rome  romolo.marotta@gmail.com  Abstract  Categories and Subject Descriptors C.4 [Performance of Systems]: Measurement Techniques; D.2.8 [Software Engineering]: Metrics—performance measures  Input-sensitive profiling is a recent performance analysis technique that makes it possible to estimate the empirical cost function of individual routines of a program, helping developers understand how performance scales to larger inputs and pinpoint asymptotic bottlenecks in the code. A current limitation of input-sensitive profilers is that they specifically target sequential computations, ignoring any communication between threads. In this paper we show how to overcome this limitation, extending the range of applicability of the original approach to multithreaded applications and to applications that operate on I/O streams. We develop new metrics for automatically estimating the size of the input given to each routine activation, addressing input produced by nondeterministic memory stores performed by other threads as well as by the OS kernel (e.g., in response to I/O or network operations). We provide real case studies, showing that our extension allows it to characterize the behavior of complex applications more precisely than previous approaches. An extensive experimental investigation on a variety of benchmark suites (including the SPEC OMP2012 and the PARSEC benchmarks) shows that our Valgrind-based input-sensitive profiler incurs an overhead comparable to other prominent heavyweight analysis tools, while collecting significantly more performance points from each profiling session and correctly characterizing both thread-induced and external input.  General Terms Algorithms, Measurement, Performance. Keywords Asymptotic analysis, dynamic program analysis, instrumentation, I/O streams, multithreading, performance profiling, Valgrind, workload characterization.  1. Introduction Performance profilers collect information on running applications and associate performance metrics to software locations such as routines, basic blocks, or calling contexts [1, 9, 26]. They play a crucial role towards software comprehension and tuning, letting developers identify hot spots and guide optimizations to portions of code that are responsible of excessive resource consumption. Unfortunately, by reporting only the overall cost of portions of code, traditional profilers do not help programmers to predict how the performance of a program scales to larger inputs. To overcome this limitation, some recent works have addressed the problem of designing and implementing performance profilers that return, instead of a single number representing the cost of a portion of code, a cost function that relates the cost to the input size (see, e.g., [5, 8, 31]). This approach is inspired by traditional asymptotic analysis of algorithms, and makes it possible to analyze – and sometimes predict – the behavior of actual software implementations run on deployed systems and realistic workloads. Some of the proposed methods, such as [8], perform multiple runs with different and determinable input parameters, measure their cost, and fit the empirical observations to a model that predicts performance as a function of workload size. More recent approaches make a step further, tackling the problem of automatically measuring the size of the input 1  2013/4/16  given to generic routines [5, 31], collecting data from multiple or even single program runs. As observed in [5] and [31], a current limitation of inputsensitive profilers is that they specifically target sequential computations, ignoring any communication between threads. Multithreaded applications based on concurrent programming are traditionally difficult to analyze, since threads can interleave in a nondeterministic fashion and affect the behavior of other threads. Nevertheless, they are widespread in modern multicore architectures, making the quest for dynamic analysis tools for concurrent computations extremely critical.  call f read x  read x return  T1 T2  (a)  call g write x call f read x  (b)  return  call h read x return read x return  T1 T2 call g write x  return  Figure 1. Threaded read memory size examples.  Our contribution. In this paper we show how to extend the input-sensitive profiling methodology to the full range of concurrent applications, hinging upon the approach described in [5]. The ability to automatically infer the size of the input data on which each routine activation operates is a crucial issue in input-sensitive profiling, but current techniques may fail to properly characterize the input size in a multi-threaded environment. As shown in this paper, if the input size is not estimated correctly, the analysis of profiling data can lead to uninformative cost plots or even to misleading results. As a first contribution we therefore propose a novel metric, called threaded read memory size, that overcomes this limitation, addressing input produced by non-deterministic memory stores performed by other threads and by the OS kernel (e.g., in response to I/O or network operations). We provide real case studies, based on the MySQL database management system and on the vips image processing tool, showing that our extension allows it to characterize the behavior of complex applications more precisely than previous approaches. We then demonstrate that the input size of a routine can be automatically and efficiently computed in a multithreaded setting, and discuss the implementation of a Valgrind-based input-sensitive profiler for concurrent applications (the tool is available at http://code.google.com/p/aprof/). An extensive experimental investigation on a variety of benchmark suites (including the SPEC OMP2012 and the PARSEC benchmarks) shows that our profiler incurs an overhead comparable to other prominent Valgrind tools, while collecting significantly more performance points from each profiling session and correctly characterizing both thread-induced and external input.  2. Multithreaded Input Size Estimation A crucial issue in input-sensitive profiling is the ability to automatically infer the size of the input data on which each routine activation operates. This can be done in a singlethreaded scenario using the read memory size metric introduced in [5]: Definition 1 ([5]). The read memory size (RMS) of the execution of a routine r is the number of distinct memory cells first accessed by r, or by a descendant of r in the call tree, with a read operation. The intuition behind this metric is the following. Consider the first time a memory location ℓ is accessed by a routine activation r: if this first access is a read operation, then ℓ contains an input value for r. Conversely, if ℓ is first written by r, then later read operations will not contribute to increase the RMS since the value stored in ℓ was produced by r itself. The RMS, although very effective in single-threaded executions, may fail to properly characterize the input size of routine activations in a multi-threaded environment. Consider, as an example, the execution described in Figure 1a: routine f in thread T1 reads location x twice, but only the first read operation is a first access. Hence, RMSf = 1. Notice however that routine g in thread T2 overwrites the value stored in x before the second read by f : this read operation gets a value that is not produced by routine f itself and that should be therefore regarded as new input to f . The same drawbacks discussed in the above example arise when one or more memory locations are repeatedly loaded by a routine with values read from an external source, e.g., network or secondary storage. To overcome these issues, we propose a novel metric for estimating the input size, which we call threaded read memory size.  Paper organization. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we introduce the threaded read memory size metric, showing its usefulness through synthetic examples. Case studies drawn from real applications are discussed in Section 3. Section 4 proposes an efficient algorithm for computing the threaded read memory size of a routine activation. Section 5 describes the most relevant implementation aspects and Section 6 presents the results of our experimental evaluation. Related work is discussed in Section 7 and concluding remarks are given in Section 8.  Definition 2. Let r be a routine activation by thread t and let ℓ be a memory location. An operation on ℓ is: • a first-access, if ℓ has never been accessed before by r or  by any of its descendants in the call tree; • an induced first-access, if the latest write(ℓ) performed  by any thread t′ 6= t, if any, has not been followed by an 2  2013/4/16  procedure producer() 1: while (1) do 2: wait(empty) 3: wait(mutex) 4: produceData(x) 5: signal(mutex) 6: signal(f ull)  procedure consumer() 1: while (1) do 2: wait(f ull) 3: wait(mutex) 4: consumeData(x) 5: signal(mutex) 6: signal(empty)  procedure externalRead() 1: let b a buffer of size 2 2: for i = 1 to n do 3: load b with external data // does not imply read of b 4: consumeData(b[0]) // read and process b[0] Figure 3. Buffered read from an external device: after n iterations, RMSexternalRead = 1 and TRMSexternalRead = n.  Figure 2. Producer-consumer pattern: when n values have been produced, RMSconsumer = 1 while TRMSconsumer = n.  accesses due to semaphore operations. With this assumption, RMSconsumer = 1, since the consumer repeatedly reads the same memory location x. Conversely, the threaded read memory size gives a correct estimate of the consumer’s input size: whenever producer has generated n values written to location x at different times, we have TRMSconsumer = n. Indeed, all read operations on x are induced first-accesses: thanks to the interleaving guaranteed by semaphores, each read(x) in consumeData is always preceded by a write(x) in produceData.  access to ℓ by routine r or by any of its descendants in the call tree. Definition 3. Let r be a routine activation by thread t. The threaded read memory size TRMSr,t of r with respect to t is the number of read operations performed by r that are firstaccesses or induced first-accesses. We notice that the RMS coincides with the number of read operations that are first-accesses and therefore TRMS r,t  ≥  RMS r  Example 4. The example in Figure 3 describes the case of buffered read operations. Procedure externalRead loads 2n values from an external device (line 3): this is done by the operating system that fills in buffer b with new data at each iteration. These load operations, however, should not be implicitly regarded as read operations performed by the running thread: as shown in line 4, only one of the two values loaded at each iteration is actually read and processed by procedure externalRead. Hence, at the end of the execution TRMSexternalRead = n, due to the n induced firstaccesses at line 4. Notice that RMSexternalRead = 1 since data items are loaded across iterations on the same two memory locations b[0] and b[1] but only b[0] is repeatedly read. We will further discuss the interaction between kernel system calls and threads in Section 4.3.  (1)  for each routine activation r and thread t. Example 1. Consider again the example in Figure 1a: we have TRMSf,T1 = 2. The first read operation on x is indeed a first-access, while the second one is an induced first-access: between the latest write operation on x performed by thread T2 6= T1 and the second read(x) by routine f there are no other accesses to x by f . Example 2. Consider Figure 1b. In this case RMSh = 1 and RMSf = 1: function f performs three read operations on x (one of which through its subroutine h), but only the first one is a first-access and contributes to its RMS. With respect to the TRMSf,T1 , the read operation by h is an induced firstaccess for f (similarly to the previous example), while the third read is not: between the latest write operation on x performed by thread T2 6= T1 and the third read(x), f has already accessed x through its descendant h. We also have TRMSh,T1 = 1. Notice that the read operation in h could be regarded both as a first-access and as an induced first-access with respect to h: since we are interested in characterizing communication between threads via shared memory, we will classify accesses of this kind as induced first-accesses.  3. Case Studies In this section we discuss the utility of the TRMS metric in real applications. We show a variety of cases where TRMS correctly characterizes the input size where RMS either fails or does not collect sufficient profiling data. Our examples are based on the aprof-trms tool described in Section 5 and use basic block (BB) counts as performance metric. Input sensitive profiles can be naturally used to produce performance charts where some cost measure is plotted against the TRMS or the RMS. For instance, for each distinct input size n of a routine r, we can plot the maximum time spent by an activation of r on input size n (worst-case running time plot) or the number of times r was activated on an input of size n (workload plot). Similar charts could be produced for different cost measures (e.g., average running time), though we will not use them throughout this section. Our discussion is based on two different applications: MySQL, a relational database management system [21], and vips, an image processing software package included in  Example 3. Producer-consumer is a classical pattern in concurrent applications. The standard implementation based on semaphores (see, e.g. [27]) is shown in Figure 2, where producer and consumer run as different threads and routines produceData and consumeData write to and read from memory location x, respectively (the implementation can be easily extended to buffered read and write operations). For simplicity of exposition, we will not consider memory 3  2013/4/16  14 14.5 15 15.5 16 16.5 17 6  read memory size × 10  20 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 6  threaded read memory size × 10  (a)  (b)  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  read memory size × 1000  (a)  7  cost × 10000 (executed BB)  cost × 10000 (executed BB)  Cost plot (im_generate)  1  2  3  4  5  6 3  read memory size × 10  Cost plot (buf_flush_buffered_writes) 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0  cost T(n)=0.5 n log(n) + 2  0  5  10  15  20  25 5  threaded read memory size × 10  (b)  Figure 6. Function buf flush buffered writes of MySQL: worst-case running time plots with curve fitting. As shown by figures 4, 5, and 6, similar phenomena can arise in practice in I/O bounded or multithreaded applications. The running time of routine mysql select in Figure 4 appears to grow (at least) quadratically when we measure the input size by means of the RMS, and linearly using the TRMS. In this experiment, the query operation simply selects all tuples in the table and is applied to tables of increasing sizes: at each query, tuples are partitioned into groups, each group is loaded into a buffer through a kernel system call and is then read by routine mysql select. The RMS does not count repeated buffer read operations: hence, the input size on larger tables is exactly the same as in smaller ones (it roughly coincides with the buffer size), while the running time grows due to the larger number of buffer loads. Routine im generate in benchmark vips shows an analogous effect (see Figure 5). In this case the induced firstaccesses not counted in the RMS are due to the interaction between threads via shared memory. In both examples, the RMS plot appears to reveal an asymptotic bottleneck, which instead does not actually exist. In other cases, the scenario might be the opposite: the RMS may not reveal the existence of a possible performance bottleneck, which can be instead characterized using the TRMS. For instance, the TRMS plot of routine buf flush buffered writes of MySQL in Figure 6 shows a superlinear running time, while the RMS plot only suggests a linear growth, as highlighted by standard curve fitting techniques.  Cost plot (im_generate) 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 0  0  (a)  Figure 4. Function mysql select of MySQL: worst-case running time plots respectively obtained using RMS or TRMS as an estimate for the input size.  40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0  cost T(n) = 6.1 * n - 0.6  3  30  Cost plot (buf_flush_buffered_writes) 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0  cost × 10 (executed BB)  10  Cost plot (mysql_select) 40  3  7  20  cost × 10 (executed BB)  30  cost × 10 (executed BB)  7  cost × 10 (executed BB)  Cost plot (mysql_select) 40  5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40  threaded read memory size × 1000  (b)  Figure 5. Function im generate of vips (PARSEC 2.1): worst-case running time plots respectively obtained using RMS or TRMS as an estimate for the input size. the PARSEC 2.1 benchmark suite [3]. MySQL manages every new connection to the database by means of a separate thread, which contends for access to different shared data structures, and uses both I/O and network intensively. We also remark that vips is a data-parallel application, which constructs multi-threaded image processing pipelines in order to apply fundamental image operations such as affine transformations and convolutions. Impact of input size estimation on asymptotic trends. If the input size is not estimated correctly, the analysis of profiling data can lead to misleading results. Consider for instance the following scenario: we have n activations r1 ... rn of a routine r, activation ri has cost i and performs i read operations, out of which ⌈i/2⌉ are first-accesses and ⌊i/2⌋ are induced first-accesses. Hence, TRMSri = ⌈i/2⌉ + ⌊i/2⌋ = i while RMS ri = ⌈i/2⌉. Notice that TRMS ri ≥ RMSri , in accordance with Inequality 1. In the worst-case running time plot obtained using the TRMS we have n distinct points and the running time grows as the function f (x) = x. Conversely, in the worst-case running time plot obtained using the RMS we have only n/2 points: any two consecutive activations ri and ri+1 (with i odd) have the same RMS value ⌈i/2⌉ and the worst-case cost is i + 1 (i.e., the maximum between costs i and i + 1 of the two activations). Hence, the running time appears to grow as the function f (x) = 2x. The problem would be even more critical if, e.g., RMS ri = ⌊log i⌋: in this case, in the worst-case plot obtained using the RMS, the running time would appear to grow exponentially as f (x) = 2x .  Profile richness. The usefulness of input-sensitive profile data crucially depends on the number of distinct input size values collected for each routine: each value corresponds to a point in the cost plots associated to a routine, and plots with a small number of points do not clearly expose the behavior of the routine. In our experiments, we observed that the use of TRMS instead of RMS can often yield a larger number of distinct input size values and thus more informative plots. An example is provided by Figure 7: while routine wbuffer write thread was called 110 times during the execution of application vips, according to the RMS metric all its input sizes collapsed onto two distinct values (67 and 69, as shown in Figure 7a). However, this routine performs many load operations from secondary memory: hence, if we also take into account external input (Figure 7b), or external input combined with thread-input (Figure 7c), the number 4  2013/4/16  (b) 66  67 68 69 read memory size  70  Cost plot (wbuffer_write_thread) 50 40 30 20 10 0  (c) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50  threaded read memory size × 104  cost (executed BB) × 100  cost (executed BB) × 100  cost (executed BB) × 10  (a)  Cost plot (wbuffer_write_thread) 480 475 470 465 460 455 450 445  Cost plot (wbuffer_write_thread) 50 40 30 20 10 0 0  2  4  6  8  10  12  threaded read memory size × 106  Figure 7. Function wbuffer write thread of vips (PARSEC 2.1): (a) RMS cost plot; (b) TRMS cost plot with external input only; (c) TRMS cost plot with both external and thread input.  5  10  4  10  3  10  2  10  1  28 28.5 29 29.5 30 30.5 31 read memory size  (a)  4. Computing the Multithreaded Input Size  Workload plot (Protocol::send_eof) frequency × 10  frequency  Workload plot (Protocol::send_eof) 10  6 5 4 3 2 1 0 0  5  10  15  In this section we describe an efficient algorithm for computing the threaded read memory size of a routine activation and the input-sensitive profile of a routine. Routine profiles are thread-sensitive, i.e., profiles generated by routine activations made by different threads are kept distinct (if necessary, they can be combined in a subsequent step). The profiler is given as input multiple traces of program operations associated with timing information. Each trace is generated by a different thread and includes: routine activations (call), routine completions (return), read/write memory accesses, and read/write operations performed through kernel system calls (kernelRead and kernelWrite, necessary to characterize external input). As a first step, thread-specific traces are logically merged, interleaving operations performed by different threads according to their timestamps, in order to produce a unique execution trace. If two or more operations issued by different threads have the same timestamp, ties are broken arbitrarily: no assumption can be therefore done about which operation will be processed first. We remark that after merge and tie breaking, trace events are totally ordered. For simplicity of exposition, we also assume that switchThread events are inserted in the merged trace between any two operations performed by different threads. For each operation issued by a routine r in a thread t, the profiler must update TRMS and cost information of r with respect to t. Some operations might also require to update profiling data structures related to threads other than t. To clarify the relationships between different threads, we first discuss a naive approach as a warm-up for the reader.  20  threaded read memory size × 100  (b)  Figure 8. Function Protocal::send eof of MySQL: workload plots respectively obtained using RMS or TRMS as an estimate for the input size. of distinct TRMS values grows considerably and the trend in the cost plots becomes more meaningful. Workload and input characterization. An additional benefit of input-sensitive profiling is the capability of characterizing the typical workloads on which a routine is called in the context of deployed systems. Richer profile data collected using the TRMS metric yield more accurate workload characterization, as shown, e.g., by the workload plots of Figure 8. Moreover, our multithreaded inputsensitive profiling methodology can also provide insights on the amount of interaction of each routine with external devices (external input) and cooperating threads (threadinduced input): for instance, 99.9% of the input of routine wbuffer write thread (Figure 7) is due to loads from secondary memory and thread interaction. For each routine, we can automatically distinguish between external and thread-induced input. If we sort in decreasing order all routines in accordance with their percentage of induced first-accesses, we obtain an interesting characterization of the interplay between workload, computation, and concurrency, as shown in Figure 9. This figure plots, for each routine of benchmarks MySQL and vips, the percentage of induced first-accesses partitioned between external input and thread-induced input: a first look reveals that induced first-accesses of the majority of MySQL routines are due to external input, differently from vips routines where thread input is predominant. We remark that charts of this kind can be automatically produced by our profiler. In Section 6 we will provide a quantitative evaluation of profile richness and input characterization in a variety of applications on typical workloads.  4.1 Naive Approach Let t be a thread and let r be a routine activated by t. With a slight abuse of notation, we will denote with TRMSr,t the threaded memory size of a specific activation of r in t. According to the definition of multithreaded input size (see Section 2), computing TRMSr,t requires to count read operations issued by routine r that are either first accesses or induced first-accesses. In turn, identifying induced firstaccesses requires to monitor write operations performed by all threads, i.e., performed also by threads different from t. A simple-minded approach, which is sketched in Figure 10, is to maintain a set Lr,t of memory locations ac5  2013/4/16  % induced first-accesses  % induced first-accesses  100  Thread input External input  80 60 40 20 0 0  10  20 30 percentage of routines  40  50  100  Thread input External input  80 60 40 20 0 0  10  (a)  20 30 percentage of routines  40  50  (b)  Figure 9. Thread-induced vs. external input on benchmarks (a) MySQL and (b) vips. readt (ℓ) writet (ℓ) readt′ (ℓ), t′ 6= t writet′ (ℓ), t′ 6= t  TRMS r,t and the sets Lr,t of accessed memory locations. Instead, we maintain partial information that can be updated quickly during the computation and from which the TRMS can be easily derived upon the termination of a routine. In more details, we adapt the latest-access approach [5] as follows: for each thread t and memory location ℓ, we store ℓ in only one set Pr,t such that r is the latest routine activation in t that accessed ℓ (either directly or by its completed subroutines). At any time during the execution of thread t and for each pending routine activation r, it holds:  if ℓ 6∈ Lr,t then TRMS r,t ++ Lr,t ← Lr,t ∪ {ℓ} Lr,t ← Lr,t ∪ {ℓ} – Lr,t ← Lr,t \ {ℓ}  Figure 10. Computation of TRMSr,t with a naive approach. The notation readt /writet (ℓ)indicates that location ℓ is read/written by thread t. cessed during the activation of r. Immediately after entering r, this set is empty and TRMSr,t = 0. Memory locations can be both added to and removed from Lr,t during the execution of r, as follows:  Lr,t = Pr,t ∪ {Pr′ ,t : r′ descendant of r} where r′ is any pending routine activation that is above r in the call stack at that time. Sets Pr,t will be stored implicitly by associating timestamps to routines and memory locations. Similarly to the naive approach of Figure 10, locations will be both added to and removed from Pr,t to characterize induced first-accesses. However, this turns out to be inefficient in a multithreaded scenario: differently from read operations that change only thread-specific sets, write accesses require to change the sets Pr,t of each activation r pending in the call stack of each running thread t. By implicitly updating only one set Pr,t per thread, the latest-access algorithm avoids stack walking, but the update time for write accesses is still linear in the number of threads, which can be prohibitive in practice. To overcome this problem, we combine the latest access approach with global timestamps that are appropriately updated upon write accesses to memory locations: in this way, we will recognize induced first-accesses by comparing thread-specific timestamps with global ones. The entire algorithm is sketched in Figure 11.  • when r reads or writes a location ℓ, then ℓ is added to Lr,t  (if not already present); • when a thread t′ 6= t writes a location ℓ, then ℓ is removed  from Lr,t (if present): this allows it to recognize induced first-accesses. With this approach, at any time during the execution of r, a read operation on a location ℓ is a first access (possibly induced by other threads) if and only if ℓ 6∈ Lr,t . Hence, TRMSr,t is increased only if this test succeeds. Notice that read operations performed by threads different from t change neither set Lr,t nor TRMSr,t . We remark that in the description above r can be any routine in the call stack of thread t (not necessarily the topmost). Hence, the same checks and updates must be performed for all pending routine activations in the call stack of t. Due to stack-walking and to the fact that write operations require to update sets Lr,t of all threads, this simple-minded approach is extremely time-consuming. It is also very space demanding: in the worst case, each distinct memory location could be stored in all sets Lr,t for each thread t and each routine activation r pending in the call stack of t. In that case, the space would be proportional to the memory size times the maximum stack depth times the number of threads.  Data structures. data structures:  The algorithm uses the following global  • a counter count that maintains the total number of thread  switches and routine activations across all threads; • a shadow memory wts such that, for each memory lo-  4.2 The Read/Write Timestamping Algorithm  cation ℓ, wts[ℓ] is the timestamp of the latest write operation on ℓ performed by any thread. The timestamp of a memory access is defined as the value of count at the time in which the access took place.  To obtain a more space- and time-efficient algorithm, we exploit the latest-access approach described in [5]. Namely, we avoid to store explicitly the threaded read memory size 6  2013/4/16  procedure call(r, t) 1: count ++ 2: topt ++ 3: St [topt ].rtn ← r 4: St [topt ].ts ← count 5: St [topt ].trms ← 0 6: St [topt ].cost ← getCost() procedure return(t) 1: collect(St[topt ].rtn, St [topt ].trms, getCost()St [topt ].cost) 2: St [topt -1].trms += St [topt ].trms 3: topt --  procedure read(ℓ, t) 1: if tst [ℓ] < wts[ℓ] then 2: St [topt ].trms ++ 3: else 4: if tst [ℓ] < St [topt ].ts then 5: St [topt ].trms ++ 6: if tst [ℓ] 6= 0 then 7: i = max idx s.t. St [i].ts ≤ tst [ℓ] 8: St [i].trms -9: end if 10: end if 11: end if 12: tst [ℓ] ← count  for each i ∈ [1, topt −1]. Hence, if we can correctly maintain the partial threaded read memory size during the execution, upon completion of a routine we will also get the correct TRMS value. Algorithm and analysis. The partial threaded read memory size can be maintained as shown in Figure 11. We first notice that the global timestamp counter count is increased at each thread switch and routine call, and its value is used to update routine timestamps (line 4 of procedure call), global memory timestamps (line 2 of procedure write), and local memory timestamps (lines 1 and 12 of procedures write and read, respectively). Upon activation of a routine, procedure call(r, t) creates and initializes a new shadow stack entry for routine r in St . When the routine activation terminates, its cost is collected and its partial TRMS (which at this point coincides with the true TRMS value according to equation TRMStopt ,t = St [topt ].trms discussed above) is added to the partial TRMS of its parent, preserving Invariant 2. Local timestamps of memory locations are updated both by read and write accesses, while global timestamps are not updated upon read operations (they are thus associated to write operations only). This update scheme makes it possible to recognize induced first-accesses to any location ℓ, which is done by lines 1-2 of procedure read. If the read/write timestamp tst [ℓ] local to thread t is smaller than the global write timestamp wts[ℓ], then location ℓ must have been written more recently than the last read/write access to ℓ by thread t. Note that, if the latest access to ℓ was a write operation by thread t, then it would be tst [ℓ] = wts[ℓ] (see procedure write), letting the test tst [ℓ] < wts[ℓ] fail. Hence, if the test succeeds, the last write on ℓ must have been done by some thread t′ 6= t, the read access by t is an induced access, and the partial TRMS of the topmost routine is correctly increased by line 2 of procedure read. Invariant 2 is fully preserved by this assignment: the accessed value is new not only for the topmost routine in the call stack St , but also for all its ancestors, whose TRMS is implicitly updated according to Equation 2. On the other side, if the test of line 1 of procedure read fails, the read access to ℓ might still be a first access: this happens if the last access to location ℓ by thread t took place before entering the current (topmost) routine. Lines 4–10 address this case, updating the partial TRMS as described in [5]: the partial TRMS of the topmost routine is increased, while the partial TRMS of an appropariately chosen ancestor is decreased (it is proved in [5] that Invariant 2 is preserved). The running time of all operations is constant, except for line 7 of procedure read that requires O(log dt ) worst case time, where dt is the depth of the call stack St .  procedure write(ℓ, t) 1: tst [ℓ] ← count procedure switchThread() 2: wts[ℓ] ← count 1: count ++ Figure 11.  TRMS  algorithm: multi-threaded input.  Similarly to [5], the algorithm also uses the following threadspecific data structures for each thread t: • a shadow memory tst such that, for each memory loca-  tion ℓ, tst [ℓ] is the timestamp of the latest access (read or write) to ℓ made by thread t; • a shadow run-time stack St , whose top is indexed by  variable topt . For each i ∈ [1, topt ], the i-th stack entry St [i] stores: The id St [i].rtn, the timestamp St [i].ts, and the cumulative cost St [i].cost of the i-th pending routine activation. The partial threaded read memory size St [i].trms of the activation, defined so that the following invariant property holds throughout the execution for each i such that 1 ≤ i ≤ topt : top Xt St [j].trms (2) ∀i, 1 ≤ i ≤ topt : TRMS i,t = j=i  where TRMSi,t is a shortcut for TRMS St [i].rtn,t . At any time, TRMSi,t equals the current TRMS value of the ith pending activation on the portion of the execution trace generated by thread t seen so far. As shown in [5], Invariant 2 implies the following interesting property: for each pending routine activation, its TRMS value can be obtained by summing up its partial threaded read memory size with the TRMS value of its (unique) pending child, if any. More formally: TRMS topt ,t TRMS i,t  4.3 External Input In Section 4.2 we have focused on induced first-accesses generated by multi-threaded executions. In this section we show that the read/write timestamping algorithm can be nat-  = St [topt ].trms  = St [i].trms + TRMSi+1,t 7  2013/4/16  procedure counterOverflow() 1: for each running thread t do 2: for i = 1 to topt do 3: add St [i].ts to set A of active timestamps 4: sort(A) 5: for each running thread t do 6: for i = 1 to topt do 7: p = position of timestamp St [i].ts in A 8: St [i].ts = 3 · p 9: for each memory location ℓ do 10: q = max idx in A s.t. wts[ℓ] ≤ A[q] 11: for each running thread t do 12: if tst [ℓ] < A[q] ∨ tst [ℓ] ≥ A[q + 1] then 13: j = max idx in A s.t. tst [ℓ] ≥ A[j] 14: tst [ℓ] = 3 · j 15: elif wts[ℓ] = tst [ℓ] then tst [ℓ] = 3 · q + 1 16: elif wts[ℓ] > tst [ℓ] then tst [ℓ] = 3 · q 17: else tst [ℓ] = 3 · q + 2 18: wts[ℓ] = 3 · q + 1 19: count = 3 · |A| + 3  procedure kernelWrite(ℓ) procedure kernelRead(ℓ, t) 1: read(ℓ, t) 1: count ++ 2: wts[ℓ] ← count Figure 12.  TRMS  algorithm: external input.  urally extended to take into account also induced accesses due to external input. Procedures kernelRead and kernelWrite shown in Figure 12 update the profiler’s data structures when memory accesses are mediated by kernel system calls. Threads invoke system calls to get data from external devices (e.g., a disk or the network) or to send data to external devices. We remark that the operating system kernel must be treated differently from normal threads in our algorithm, since there are no kernel-specific shadow memory and shadow stack. When a thread sends data to an external device, it must delegate the operating system to read the memory locations containing those data and write their content to the device. Hence, a thread external write operation corresponds to a kernelRead event in the execution trace. As shown in Figure 12, read memory accesses by the operating system are regarded as read operations implicitly performed by the thread, as if the system call were a normal subroutine. Upon a kernelRead event, it is therefore sufficient to invoke procedure read that, if necessary, will update the threaded TRMS of pending routine activations. The case of kernelWrite operations is slightly more subtle. When a thread needs data from a external device, it delegates the operating system to write the device data to some memory buffer (if the buffer consists of n memory locations, the execution trace will contain n distinct kernelWrite events). This buffer load, however, should not be regarded as a thread external read operation: indeed, it may happen that only a subset of the loaded memory locations will be actually processed (and thus read) by the thread, and only those subset should be counted as external input. For this reason procedure kernelWrite does not directly change the partial TRMS of the topmost routine. Instead, it first increases count and then associates buffer memory locations with a global write timestamp that is larger than any thread-specific timestamp. This forces the test tst [ℓ] < wts[ℓ] to succeed if a buffer location ℓ will be subsequently read by the thread, properly increasing the partial TRMS only for actual read operations.  Figure 13. Counter overflow procedure.  form a periodical global renumbering of timestamps in the profiler’s data structures, taking care not to alter the partial order between tst [ℓ], wts[ℓ], and St [i].ts for each memory location ℓ, running thread t, and 1 ≤ i ≤ topt . Instead, we exploit the following observation: in Figure 11 there is no comparison between wts[ℓ] and wts[ℓ′ ] or between tst [ℓ] and tst [ℓ′ ], for ℓ 6= ℓ′ . Hence, the order between timestamps of different memory locations is irrelevant and can be arbitrarily changed. Our renumbering algorithm is sketched in Figure 13. For the sake of efficiency, the algorithm checks and renumbers each timestamp only once. Lines 1-4 collect all timestamps in the call stacks of running threads and sort them in increasing order. Notice that these timestamps are distinct: count is increased by procedure call (see Figure 11) so that a new activation is always assigned an unused value, and the renumbering algorithm keeps the property true. Routine timestamps are re-assigned in lines 5-8: the new timestamps are multiples of 3 (this choice will be justified below) and are chosen according to the rank of the original routine timestamp in the sorted set A. This guarantees that the original ordering between any two routine timestamps is preserved, and that the maximum value of a timestamp will be proportional to the total number of pending routine activations (i.e., |A|). Thread-specific and global timestamps of memory locations are re-assigned in lines 9-18. According to line 10, let A[q] be the latest pending routine activation (in any thread) started before the latest write to memory location ℓ. A thread t could have accessed ℓ before this activation (i.e., tst [ℓ] < A[q]), between pending routine activations A[q] and A[q +1]  4.4 Counter Overflows The global counter used by the read/write timestamping algorithm is common to all running threads and in our initial experiments was affected by frequent overflows, especially for long-running applications. Unfortunately, overflows are a serious concern in the computation of the TRMS, since they alter the partial ordering between memory timestamps yielding wrong input size values. To overcome this issue, we per8  2013/4/16  (i.e., A[q] ≤ tst [ℓ] < A[q + 1]), or after pending routine activation A[q + 1] (i.e., tst [ℓ] ≥ A[q + 1]). If q + 1 is not a valid index for A and tst [ℓ] ≥ A[q] we can assume to be in the second case. The first and the third cases can be treated by assigning tst [ℓ] with the same value used for the most recent activation j such that tst [ℓ] ≥ A[j] (lines 12-14): this guarantees that comparisons between tst [ℓ] and any routine timestamp at lines 4 and 7 of procedure read will succeed if and only if they succeeded before renumbering. The second case (A[q] ≤ tst [ℓ] < A[q + 1]) requires to distinguish between three different situations, which explains why new routine timestamps are chosen in line 8 as multiples of 3:  wrapped and properly mapped to one or more kernelRead or kernelWrite events: among the main system calls on a Linux x86 64 machine, write, sendto, pwrite64, writev, msgsnd, and pwritev correspond to kernelRead events, while read, recvfrom, pread64, readv, msgrcv, and preadv correspond to kernelWrite events. Thread interleaving. Under Valgrind, threads of a traced application are serialized. This makes the development and debugging of a dynamic analysis framework and of its derived tools easier. Serialization should not be seen as a crucial limitation of our implementation: for instance Helgrind [19, 28] and DRD [28], two popular tools for detecting synchronization errors in programs that use the POSIX pthreads primitives, are both based on Valgrind. Serialization implies that our profiler does not need to perform tie breaking of events (see Section 4). However, in a serialized scenario the scheduling of threads becomes a critical concern: thread interleaving may be altered and the execution may deviate from non-serialized executions. In order to avoid unrealistic executions, our tool takes benefit of the fair thread scheduler introduced in the latest release of Valgrind.  1. wts[ℓ] = tst [ℓ]: t was the last thread to write location ℓ. After renumbering (lines 15 and 18), tst [ℓ] = wts[ℓ] = 3q + 1. This guarantees that both A[q] = 3q ≤ tst [ℓ] = wts[ℓ] = 3q + 1 < A[q + 1] = 3(q + 1); 2. wts[ℓ] > tst [ℓ]: thread t has accessed location ℓ before its last write. In this case the new timestamp of tst [ℓ] is 3q (line 16). This preserves both the relations tst [ℓ] = 3q < wts[ℓ] = 3q + 1 and tst [ℓ] = 3q < A[q + 1] = 3(q + 1); 3. tst [ℓ] > wts[ℓ]: thread t has read location ℓ after its last write. In this case tst [ℓ] gets the new value 3q + 2 (line 17). The order relation wts[ℓ] = 3q + 1 < tst [ℓ] = 3q + 2 < A[q + 1] = 3(q + 1) remains valid.  Shadow memories. To reduce space overhead in practice, we maintain global and thread-specific shadow memories using three-levels lookup tables. A similar approach is also adopted by other prominent tools, such as memcheck [25]. A primary table indexes 2048 secondary tables, each covering 1GB of address space by indexing 16K chunks. Each chunk, in turn, contains the set of 32-bit timestamps for 64KB address space. In this way only chunks related to memory cells actually accessed by a thread need to be shadowed in its thread-specific shadow memory. Hence, on average (e.g., with embarrassingly parallel applications), the accessed primary memory is roughly partitioned among all running threads: the overhead for maintaining global and thread-specific shadow memories is therefore considerably smaller than in the worst-case scenario (where it would be proportional to number of running threads × number of distinct memory cells). Experiments in Section 6 will largely confirm this hypothesis.  Notice that the global timestamp count is assigned with a value larger than all the other timestamps (line 19). Using binary search to implement lines 7, 10, and 13, the running time of the global renumbering algorithm is O(ρ log ρ + µ τ log ρ) where τ , µ, and ρ are the numbers of running threads, distinct memory cells, and pending routine activations, respectively. This can be amortized against Ω(2w ) thread switch and routine call operations, where w is the word memory size.  5. Implementation To prove the feasibility of our approach, we implemented a threaded input-sensitive profiler by developing a Valgrind [23] tool called aprof-trms. Valgrind provides a dynamic instrumentation infrastructure that translates the binary code into an architecture-neutral intermediate representation (VEX). Analysis tools provide callbacks for events generated by the stream of VEX executed instructions.  6. Experimental Evaluation In this section we discuss the results of an extensive experimental evaluation of aprof-trms on a variety of benchmarks, including the SPEC OMP2012 [20] and the Princeton Application Repository for Shared-Memory Computers (PARSEC 2.1) [3]. The goals of our experiments are threefold: studying the slowdown and space overhead of aprof-trms compared to other heavyweight dynamic analysis tools, evaluating the benefits of the TRMS with respect to the RMS, and characterizing the amount of thread-induced and external input on the considered benchmarks.  Instrumentation. Similarly to the input-sensitive profiler described in [5], our tool traces all memory accesses and function calls and returns. We count basic blocks as a performance measure: tracing function calls and returns requires to instrument each basic block, thus counting basic blocks adds a light burden to the analysis time overhead, and improves accuracy in characterizing asymptotic behavior even on small workloads. Measuring basic blocks rather than time has several other advantages, very well motivated in [8]. In order to take into account external input, system calls are 9  2013/4/16  secs native 350.md 351.bwaves 352.nab 358.botsalgn 359.botsspar 360.ilbdc 362.fma3d 367.imagick 370.mgrid331 371.applu331 372.smithwa 376.kdtree geometric mean  3184.5 192.0 185.0 8.0 1.0 1936.8 46.6 170.0 5.2 26.6 14.4 33.9  nul grind 6.0 22.1 21.1 42.8 204.0 2.2 22.7 24.1 39.7 45.0 28.8 19.5 23.6  mem check 43.5 – 111.4 85.6 353.9 18.5 113.4 91.0 101.7 230.2 78.4 99.4 94.1  T IME slowdown call hel grind grind 34.7 125.4 68.4 92.0 80.4 127.2 132.9 114.2 523.1 368.3 4.7 64.9 45.2 393.4 50.5 141.6 50.9 194.6 103.7 472.8 57.0 148.1 127.3 366.6 64.8 179.4  MB aprof rms 39.6 78.0 107.5 146.3 301.4 17.3 99.0 52.3 95.7 228.9 167.8 247.4 101.5  aprof trms 41.2 91.2 186.7 179.3 457.6 26.2 118.0 60.6 130.2 367.6 213.9 551.0 140.8  native 50.8 1582.1 57.0 57.7 62.9 1415.2 155.8 77.9 395.1 88.2 49.4 98.6  nul grind 1.9 1.1 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.0 1.3 1.6 1.1 1.5 1.8 1.4 1.4  mem check 2.0 – 2.4 1.7 2.1 1.1 2.5 2.0 1.2 1.8 1.9 2.8 2.0  SPACE overhead call hel grind grind 2.0 6.7 1.1 4.0 1.8 5.8 1.7 3.4 1.7 4.8 1.0 1.8 1.3 10.6 1.7 5.4 1.1 1.8 1.6 5.6 2.0 3.3 1.5 8.4 1.5 4.5  aprof rms 2.2 3.0 2.5 1.8 2.4 4.1 3.0 3.1 2.1 3.2 2.4 4.4 2.8  aprof trms 2.3 4.0 2.8 2.3 2.6 5.1 3.8 3.9 3.0 3.7 2.6 5.6 3.3  Table 1. Performance comparison of aprof-trms with aprof and some prominent Valgrind tools on the SPEC OMP2012 benchmarks. of a routine) correspond to the same TRMS value z, with z ≥ max{x, y}. Hence, the profile richness may be either positive, if more points are collected using the TRMS, or negative, if more points are collected using the RMS. We will see that in practice the latter case is seldom true.  6.1 Experimental Setup Benchmarks. The OMP2012 benchmark suite of the Standard Performance Evaluation Corporation [20] is a collection of fourteen OpenMP-based applications from different science domains. All of them were run on the SPEC input train workloads in 64-bit mode. We could successfully test all the components except for bt331 and swim, whose execution failed due to a Valgrind memory issue. The Princeton Application Repository for Shared-Memory Computers (PARSEC 2.1) is a benchmark suite for studies of Chip-Multiprocessors [3]. It includes different workloads chosen from a variety of areas such as computer vision, media processing, computational finance, enterprise servers, and animation physics. PARSEC defines six input sets for each benchmark: experimental results reported in this section are all based on the simlarge sets [3]. For the sake of completeness, we also included in our tests the MySQL application (version 5.5.30) discussed in Section 3: we used the mysqlslap load emulation client [22], simulating 50 concurrent clients that submit approximately 1000 auto-generated queries.  2. Input volume: according to Inequality 1, the TRMS of a routine activation is always larger than or equal to the RMS of the same activation. The input volume metric characterizes the increase of the input size values due to multi-threading and to external input for an entire execution: P routine activations r RMS r P 1− routine activations r TRMS r  Values of this metric range in [0, 1). If TRMSr = RMS r for all routine activations r, then the input volume is 0. Conversely, if TRMSr ≫ RMS r for all routine activations r, then the input volume gets close to 1. 3. Thread-induced input: this metric measures the percentage of induced first-accesses (line 2 of procedure read in Figure 11) due to multi-threading.  Metrics. Besides slowdown and space overhead, we use the following metrics:  4. External input: similarly to the previous case, this metric measures the percentage of induced first-accesses due to external input.  1. Routine profile richness: for each routine r, let |RMS r | be the number of distinct RMS values collected for routine r (each value corresponds to a point in the graphs associated with r). Similarly, let |TRMS r | be the number of distinct TRMS values collected for routine r for all threads. The profile richness of routine r is defined as:  Evaluated tools. We compared the performance of aproftrms to four reference Valgrind tools: nulgrind, which does not collect any useful information and is used only for testing purposes, memcheck [25], a tool for detecting memory-related errors, callgrind [30], a call-graph generating profiler, and helgrind [19], a data race detector. Although the considered tools solve different analysis problems, all of them share the same instrumentation infrastructure provided by Valgrind, which accounts for a significant fraction of the execution times: memcheck does not trace function calls/returns and mainly relies on memory read/write events; callgrind instruments function calls/returns, but not memory accesses, and helgrind analyzes concur-  |TRMSr | − |RMS r | |RMS r | Intuitively, this metric compares the number of distinct input values obtained using the TRMS and the RMS, respectively. We notice that |TRMSr | ≥ |RMSr | does not necessarily hold: it may happen that two distinct RMS values x and y (obtained from two different activations 10  2013/4/16  10  helgrind aprof-trms aprof-rms memcheck callgrind  15 10 5  ficient than aprof-trms thanks to the adoption of memory compression schemes and to its independence from the number of threads. Similarly, aprof-rms is slightly more efficient than our tool due to the lack of a global shadow memory. On the other hand we remark that helgrind, which is akin to our tool with respect to the analysis of concurrency issues, uses 36% more space than aprof-trms. Figure 14 shows the average slowdown and space overhead, with respect to the reference Valgrind tool nulgrind, as a function of the number of spawned OpenMP threads. All the evaluated tools appear to scale properly. The average slowdown slightly decreases as the number of threads increases: this is because Valgrind serializes the execution of threads, and the time spent for instrumentation can be better amortized over the serialized executions of a larger number of threads. Overall, this experiment confirms the results detailed in Table 1 in the case of four threads. The mean space overhead of callgrind and memcheck is roughly constant: their analyses are indeed independent from concurrency issues. On the other hand, aprof-trms and helgrind show a modest increase of the space overhead when the number of threads increases: our profiling of the memory usage of aprof-trms revealed that the space overhead mostly depends on shadow memories, whose total space usage, however, grows sublinearly with the number of threads. This confirms the effectiveness of our implementation based on three-level lookup tables. The comparison with aprof-rms also suggests that the space overhead due to the global shadow memory used by aprof-trms is better amortized as the number of threads increases.  helgrind aprof-trms aprof-rms memcheck callgrind  8 overhead  slowdown  20  6 4 2  0  0 1  2  4  8  1  2  4  number of threads  number of threads  (a)  (b)  8  Figure 14. (a) Time and (b) space overhead, with respect to nulgrind, as a function of the number of threads. rent applications. We also compared aprof-trms against a previous version of aprof based on the RMS metric (see Section 2): we remark that aprof-rms targets sequential computations only, without taking into account induced firstaccesses. Platform. Experiments were performed on a cluster machine with four nodes, each equipped with two 64-bit AMD Opteron Processors 6272 @ 2.10 GHz (32 cores), with 64 GB of RAM running Linux kernel 2.6.32 with gcc 4.4.7 and Valgrind 3.8.1 – SVN rev. 13126. 6.2 Experimental Results Slowdown and space overhead. Performance figures of our evaluated tools on the SPEC OMP2012 benchmarks, obtained spawning four OpenMP threads per benchmark, are summarized in Table 1. We do not report results for the PARSEC benchmarks because some tools revealed invalid memory accesses and other memory issues that prevented a reliable comparison of executions under different tools. Compared to native execution, all the evaluated tools exhibit a large slowdown: even nulgrind, which is reported to be roughly 5 times slower than native [28], in our experiments turned out to have a mean slowdown factor of 23.6×. aprof-trms is on average 6 times slower than nulgrind: this is worse than memcheck, which is 1.5 times faster than our tool but does not trace function calls and returns, and better than helgrind, which is 1.3 times slower than aprof-trms and is the only tool designed for the analysis of concurrent computations. Recognizing induced first-accesses causes a 38% overhead on the running time, as demonstrated by the comparison of aprof-trms with aprof-rms. The mean memory requirements of aprof-trms are within a factor of 3.3 of native execution. This confirms our expectation: if memory is roughly partitioned among the four threads, the three-level lookup tables guarantee that the overall size of thread-specific shadow memories is proportional to the size of accessed memory locations. This should be added to the size of the global shadow memory, thus obtaining the total 3.3× space overhead. Even tools that do not use shadowing, such as nulgrind and callgrind, require at least 1.4× more space than native execution. memcheck hinges upon memory shadowing, but turns out to be more ef-  TRMS versus RMS. Our second set of experiments aims at evaluating the benefits of the TRMS metric with respect to the RMS. As shown in [5], an RMS-based input-sensitive profiler can collect a significant number of distinct input values for most algorithmic-intensive functions, thus producing informative cost plots. A first natural question is whether using TRMS instead of RMS has any positive or negative impact on the profile richness. Charts in Figure 15 contribute to answer this question. Each curve is related to a specific benchmark. A point (x, y) on a curve means that x% of routines have profile richness at least y: e.g., in benchmark dedup, the number of points collected using the TRMS metric is more than 100 times larger than using the RMS for roughly 4% of the routines. As expected, only for a small percentage of routines |TRMS r | is much larger than |RMS r |: this is due to the fact that I/O and thread communication are typically encapsulated in a small number of software components. However, for these routines |TRMSr | can be substantially larger than |RMSr |, e.g., up to a factor of roughly 106 for benchmark dedup. We also notice that profile richness is negative only for a statistically intangible number of routines: this means that TRMS-based profiles are (almost) always at least as informative as those obtained using the RMS. 11  2013/4/16  (b) 0.5 1 2 4 8 16 32 64  6  10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0  dedup facesim fluidanimate  (c) 0.5 1  Percentage of routines  2  4  8 16 32 64  Routine profile richness  kdtree mysqlslap nab smithwa  Routine profile richness  Routine profile richness  (a)  14  2 12 2 10 2 8 2 6 2 4 2 2 2 0  10  2  swaptions vips x264  8  2  6  2  4  2  2  2  0 0.5 1  Percentage of routines  2 4  8 16 32 64  Percentage of routines  kdtree mysqlslap nab smithwa  80 60  (b)  40 20 0 0.5 1  2  4  8 16 32 64  100  fluidanim. facesim dedup ferret  80 60  (c)  40 20 0 0.5 1  Percentage of routines  2  4  8 16 32 64  Percentage of routines  Input volume × 100  100  Input volume × 100  (a)  Input volume × 100  Figure 15. Routine profile richness of TRMS w.r.t. RMS for a representative set of benchmarks.  100  bodytrack swaptions vips x264  80 60 40 20 0 0.5 1  2  4  8 16 32 64  Percentage of routines  Figure 16. Input volume of TRMS w.r.t. RMS for a representative set of benchmarks. Due to Inequality 1, TRMS values are always larger that values for the same routine activations. Figure 16 characterizes the increase of the input size values due to induced first-accesses on a representative set of benchmarks. The interpretation of these graphs is similar to Figure 15: a point (x, y) on each benchmark-specific curve means that x% of routines have input volume ≥ y. E.g., in benchmark fluidanimate roughly 3% of the routines take almost all their input from external devices or from other threads. The trend of curves in Figure 16 decreases steeply from 100 to 0, reaching its minimum at x ≃ 8% for most benchmarks: this means that 8% of the routines are responsible of thread intercommunication and streamed I/O, and the input size of these routines cannot be appropriately predicted by the RMS metric alone.  specific routine also includes the external input of all its descendants in the call tree, which is instead neglected in the global benchmark measure (where each induced first-access is counted only once in the percentage computation). Similar considerations apply to mysqlslap. For the sake of completeness, Figure 18 and Figure 19 provide a quantitative evaluation of thread-induced and external input on a routine-per-routine basis: a point (x, y) on each benchmark-specific curve means that x% of routines have external / thread-induced input ≥ y%. For instance, in benchmark dedup, 16% of the routines are such that at least 20% of their induced first-accesses are due to thread intercommunication. These charts are in the spirit of Figure 9, but exploit a more compact representation.  RMS  7. Related Work  Analysis of induced first-accesses. In the previous experiments we observed that a non-negligible number of routines communicate with other threads or with the kernel via system calls. A natural question is how many induced first-accesses are due to external input or are thread-induced. Figure 17 answers this question, plotting the percentage of thread-induced and external input on a representative set of benchmarks: percentages are computed over the total number of induced first-accesses, and therefore sum up to 100%. Benchmarks are sorted by decreasing percentage of threadinduced input (and thus by increasing external input). An interesting observation is that the SPEC OMP2012 benchmarks get naturally clustered in the leftmost part of the histogram (from nab to botsalgn), and all of them have thread-induced input larger than 69%. We notice that external input is predominant in vips, which seems in contrast with Figure 9. This contradiction, however, is only apparent and has a clear explanation. Figure 9 plots external input on a routine-per-routine basis, while the global percentage in Figure 17 is routine-independent: the external input of a  There is a vast literature on performance profiling, both at the inter- and intra-procedural level: see, e.g., [1, 2, 4, 9–11, 29, 33] and the references therein. All these works aim at associating performance metrics to distinct paths traversed in the call graph or in the control flow graph during a program’s execution. Input-sensitivity issues are instead explored in [5, 8, 15, 31]. Marin and Mellor-Crummey [15] consider the problem of understanding how an application’s performance scales given different problem sizes, using data collected from multiple runs with determinable input parameters. Goldsmith, Aiken, and Wilkerson [8] also propose to run a program on workloads of different sizes, to measure the performance of its routines, and eventually to fit these observations to a model that predicts how the performance scales. The workload size of the program’s routines, however, is not computed automatically. Algorithmic profiling by Zaparanuks and Hauswirth [31], besides identifying boundaries between different algorithms in a program, infers their computational cost, which is related to the in12  2013/4/16  60 40 20  100  fluidanimate facesim dedup ferret nab  80 60 40 20 0 0.5 1  0  2  4  Thread input × 100  Thread input × 100  External input Thread input  100  swaptions bodytrack smithwa kdtree x264 vips  80 60 40 20 0  8 16 32 64  0.5 1  4  s  ch ks ac  bl  p vi  6 x2  p  2  es  Figure 17. External vs. thread-induced input.  4  8 16 32 64  Percentage of routines  (a)  ol  e at  t rre fe ck tra dy ap sl  du  ql ys  bo  m  de  im  al  an  ne  id  ns  gn  tio  r  a w  al ts  n ca  flu  bo  ith  ap sw  k ic  a sp ts  ag  sm  im  bo  b  e tre kd  Percentage of routines  (b)  Figure 18. Thread-induced input on a routine basis.  External input × 100  put size. The notion of input size is defined at a high level of abstraction, using different definitions for different data structures (e.g., the size of an array or the number of nodes in a tree). Instead, the input-sensitive profiling methodology described in [5], which provides the basis for our approach, automatically infers the input size by tracing low-level memory accesses performed by different routines. None of these approaches addresses concurrency issues, being thus limited to sequential computations. The problem of empirically studying the asymptotic behavior of a program has been the target of extensive research in experimental algorithmics [6, 17, 18], where individual portions of algorithmic code are extracted from applications and separately analyzed on ad-hoc test harnesses. This approach has some drawbacks as a performance evaluation method in actual software development, most prominently the fact that, by studying performance-critical routines out of their context, possible performance effects due to the interaction with the overall application might be missed. A variety of parallelism-related profilers have been proposed to help programmers parallelize complex codes by uncovering the dependencies between different regions of the program: examples include pp [14], Alchemist [32], and Kremlin [7]. Other profilers for multicore machines, such as [13, 16, 24], focus on NUMA-related performance issues and exploit detailed temporal information about memory accesses in order to build temporal flows of interactions between threads and objects. This is similar to our problem of relating memory accesses with thread intercommunication, although the final goal is orthogonal to ours, since these works aim at understanding the speed improvements that can result from parallelizing different portions of code, from executing a program on a parallel platform, or from diagnosing and reducing distant memory accesses.  100 80 60  nab ferret dedup facesim fluidanimate  40 20 0 0.5 1  2  4  8 16 32 64  Percentage of routines  (a)  External input × 100  80  na  % induced first-accesses  100  100 80 60  x264 kdtree smithwa bodytrack swaptions  40 20 0 0.5 1  2  4  8 16 32 64  Percentage of routines  (b)  Figure 19. External input on a routine basis. vation by taking into account first-accesses, possibly induced by other threads or by kernel system calls. We have shown that our approach is both methodologically sound and practical. Namely, our Valgrind-based implementation achieves performances comparable to other prominent heavyweight analysis tools. As a future direction, it would be interesting to adapt our methodology to a fully scalable and concurrent dynamic instrumentation framework, in order to exploit parallelism to leverage the slowdown of our profiler. Our methodology raises many interesting open issues regarding input characterization and thread intercommunication in concurrent applications. Measures derived from TRMS might allow it to evaluate concurrency-related aspects and to discover how multithreaded applications scale their work and how they communicate via shared memory. E.g., in a recent experimental study [12], it has been observed that even widespread multithreaded benchmarks do not interact much or interact only in limited ways, and that communication does not change predictably as a function of the number of cores. This study exploits a characterization of read/write memory accesses, and we believe that the TRMS might shed new light towards this direction.  References  8. Conclusions  [1] G. Ammons, T. Ball, and J. R. Larus. Exploiting hardware performance counters with flow and context sensitive profiling. SIGPLAN Not., 32(5):85–96, 1997. ISSN 0362-1340.  In this paper we have extended the input-sensitive profiling methodology to concurrent computations. Input-sensitive profiling requires to measure automatically the size of the input given to a generic code fragment: in a multithreaded scenario, this raises a variety of interesting issues mainly due to thread intercommunication via shared memory. At this aim, we have proposed a novel metric, called TRMS, that gives an estimate of the size of the input of each routine acti-  [2] M. Arnold and B. Ryder. A framework for reducing the cost of instrumented code. In PLDI, pages 168–179. ACM, 2001. [3] C. Bienia, S. Kumar, J. P. Singh, and K. Li. The PARSEC benchmark suite: characterization and architectural implications. In 17th Int. Conference on Parallel Architecture and Compilation Techniques (PACT’08), pages 72–81, 2008.  13  2013/4/16  performance. In Experimental Algorithmics, LNCS 2547, pages 93–126, 2002.  [4] M. D. Bond and K. S. McKinley. Practical path profiling for dynamic optimizers. In CGO, pages 205–216. IEEE Computer Society, 2005.  [19] A. Mühlenfeld and F. Wotawa. Fault detection in multithreaded c++ server applications. Electron. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci., 174(9):5–22, 2007. ISSN 1571-0661.  [5] E. Coppa, C. Demetrescu, and I. Finocchi. Input-sensitive profiling. In Proc. ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI 2012), pages 89–98, 2012.  [20] M. S. Müller, J. Baron, W. C. Brantley, H. Feng, D. Hackenberg, R. Henschel, G. Jost, D. Molka, C. Parrott, J. Robichaux, P. Shelepugin, M. van Waveren, B. Whitney, and K. Kumaran. Spec omp2012 – an application benchmark suite for parallel systems using openmp. In Proc. 8th Int. Conf. on OpenMP in a Heterogeneous World (IWOMP’12), pages 223–236, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. Springer-Verlag.  [6] C. Demetrescu, I. Finocchi, and G. F. Italiano. Algorithm engineering. Bulletin of the EATCS (algorithmics column), 79:48–63, 2003. [7] S. Garcia, D. Jeon, C. M. Louie, and M. B. Taylor. Kremlin: rethinking and rebooting gprof for the multicore age. In Proc. 32nd ACM SIGPLAN conference on Programming language design and implementation (PLDI’11), pages 458–469, 2011.  [21] MySQL Web site. http://www.mysql.com/.  [8] S. Goldsmith, A. Aiken, and D. S. Wilkerson. Measuring empirical computational complexity. In Proc. 6th joint meeting of the European Software Engineering Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT Int. Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/SIGSOFT FSE), pages 395–404, 2007.  [23] N. Nethercote and J. Seward. Valgrind: a framework for heavyweight dynamic binary instrumentation. In PLDI, pages 89–100, 2007.  [22] mysqlslap load emulation client. http://dev.mysql.com/ doc/refman/5.5/en/mysqlslap.html.  [9] S. L. Graham, P. B. Kessler, and M. K. McKusick. gprof: a call graph execution profiler (with retrospective). In K. S. McKinley, editor, Best of PLDI, pages 49–57. ACM, 1982.  [24] A. Pesterev, N. Zeldovich, and R. T. Morris. Locating cache performance bottlenecks using data profiling. In Proc. 5th European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys’10), pages 335–348, 2010.  [10] R. J. Hall and A. J. Goldberg. Call path profiling of monotonic program resources in UNIX. In Proc. Summer 1993 USENIX Technical Conference, pages 1–19. USENIX Association, 1993.  [25] J. Seward and N. Nethercote. Using Valgrind to detect undefined value errors with bit-precision. In USENIX Annual Technical Conference, General Track, pages 17–30, 2005. [26] J. M. Spivey. Fast, accurate call graph profiling. Softw., Pract. Exper., 34(3):249–264, 2004.  [11] M. Hirzel and T. Chilimbi. Bursty tracing: A framework for low-overhead temporal profiling. In Proc. 4th ACM Workshop on Feedback-Directed and Dynamic Optimization, 2001.  [27] A. S. Tanenbaum and A. S. Woodhull. Operating Systems: Design and Implementation. Prentice Hall, 2006.  [12] T. Kalibera, M. Mole, R. Jones, and J. Vitek. A black-box approach to understanding concurrency in DaCapo. In Proc. ACM int. conf. on Object oriented programming systems languages and applications (OOPSLA’12), pages 335–354, 2012.  [28] Valgrind tool suite. tools.html.  http://www.valgrind.org/info/  [29] K. Vaswani, A. V. Nori, and T. M. Chilimbi. Preferential path profiling: compactly numbering interesting paths. In POPL, pages 351–362. ACM, 2007.  [13] R. Lachaize, B. Lepers, and V. Quema. MemProf: a memory profiler for NUMA multicore systems. In Proc. USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC’12), pages 53–64, 2012. [14] J. R. Larus. Loop-level parallelism in numeric and symbolic programs. IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., 4(7):812–826, 1993.  [30] J. Weidendorfer, M. Kowarschik, and C. Trinitis. A tool suite for simulation based analysis of memory access behavior. In International Conference on Computational Science, volume 3038 of LNCS, pages 440–447, 2004.  [15] G. Marin and J. M. Mellor-Crummey. Cross-architecture performance predictions for scientific applications using parameterized models. In Proc. SIGMETRICS 2004, pages 2–13, 2004.  [31] D. Zaparanuks and M. Hauswirth. Algorithmic profiling. In Proc. 33rd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI’12), pages 67– 76. ACM, 2012.  [16] C. McCurdy and J. S. Vetter. Memphis: Finding and fixing numa-related performance problems on multi-core platforms. In Proc. International Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS’10), pages 87–96, 2010.  [32] X. Zhang, A. Navabi, and S. Jagannathan. Alchemist: A transparent dependence distance profiling infrastructure. In Proc. 7th annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (CGO’09), pages 47–58, 2009.  [17] C. C. McGeoch. Experimental algorithmics. Communications of the ACM, 50(11):27–31, 2007.  [33] X. Zhuang, M. J. Serrano, H. W. Cain, and J.-D. Choi. Accurate, efficient, and adaptive calling context profiling. In PLDI, pages 263–271, 2006.  [18] C. C. McGeoch, P. Sanders, R. Fleischer, P. R. Cohen, and D. Precup. Using finite experiments to study asymptotic  14  2013/4/16

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
