Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_5228

Abstract:
1  Time-Varying Sensor and Actuator Selection for Uncertain Cyber-Physical Systems  arXiv:1708.07912v2 [math.OC] 9 Oct 2017  Ahmad F. Taha, Member, IEEE, Nikolaos Gatsis Member, IEEE, Tyler Summers Member, IEEE, Sebastian Nugroho, Student Member, IEEE. Abstract—We propose methods to solve time-varying, sensor and actuator (SaA) selection problems for uncertain cyberphysical systems. We show that many SaA selection problems for optimizing a variety of control and estimation metrics can be posed as semidefinite optimization problems with mixed-integer bilinear matrix inequalities (MIBMIs). Although this class of optimization problems is computationally challenging, we present tractable approaches that directly tackle MIBMIs while providing both upper and lower bounds and lead to effective heuristics for SaA selection. The upper and lower bounds are obtained via successive convex approximations and semidefinite programming relaxations, respectively, and selections are obtained with a novel slicing algorithm from the solutions of the bounding problems. Custom branch-and-bound and combinatorial greedy approaches are also developed for a broad class of systems for comparison. Finally, comprehensive numerical experiments are performed to compare the different methods and illustrate their effectiveness. Index Terms—Sensor and actuator selection, cyber-physical systems, linear matrix inequalities, controller design, observer design, greedy algorithms.  I. I NTRODUCTION & B RIEF L ITERATURE R EVIEW  M  ANY emerging complex dynamical networks, from critical infrastructure to industrial cyber-physical systems (CPS) to various biological networks, are increasingly able to be instrumented with new sensing and actuation capabilities. These networks comprise growing webs of interconnected feedback loops and must operate efficiently and resiliently in dynamic and uncertain environments. The prospect of incorporating large numbers of additional sensors and actuators (SaAs) raises fundamental and important problems of jointly and dynamically selecting the most effective SaAs, in addition to simultaneously designing corresponding estimation and control laws associated with the selected SaAs. There are many different quantitative notions of network controllability and observability that can be used as a basis for selecting effective SaAs in uncertain and dynamic cyber-physical networks. Notions based on classical Kalman rank conditions for linear systems focus on binary structural properties [1]–[5]. More elaborate quantitative notions based on Gramians [6]–[13] and classical optimal and robust control and estimation problems [14]–[21] for linear systems have also been studied. For selecting SaAs based on these metrics, several optimization methods are proposed in this Ahmad F. Taha, Nikolaos Gatsis, and Sebastian Nugroho are affiliated with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Texas San Antonio. Tyler Summers is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Texas at Dallas. Emails: {ahmad.taha, nikolaos.gatsis,sebastian.nugroho}@utsa.edu, tyler.summers@utdallas.edu. This material is based upon work supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grants No. ECCS-1462404, CMMI 1728629, and CMMI 1728605. The work of T. Summers was partially sponsored by the Army Research Office and was partially accomplished under Grant Number: W911NF-17-1-0058.  literature, including combinatorial greedy algorithms [8], [9], [18], [20], convex relaxation heuristics using sparsity-inducing ℓ1 penalty functions [14]–[17] and reformulations to mixedinteger semidefinite programming via the big-M method or McCormick’s relaxation [13], [21], [22]. Despite the recent surge of interest in quantifying network controllability and observability and in associated SaA selection problems, a much wider set of metrics are relevant for uncertain cyber-physical systems. The existing literature tends to focus mainly on classical metrics (e.g., involving Kalman rank, Gramians, Linear Quadratic Regulators, and Kalman Filters) and deterministic linear time invariant systems. Methods for time varying systems with various uncertainties, constraints, and nonlinearities are also important to broaden applicability. It is well known that a broad variety of systems and control problems can be cast in the form of semidefinite programs (SDP) and linear matrix inequalities (LMI) [23], but many of these more recent formulations have not been considered in the context of SaA selection. In general, the joint selection of SaAs and design of associated estimation and control laws for many metrics can be posed as semidefinite optimization problems with mixed-integer bilinear matrix inequalities (MIBMIs). Here we propose methods to solve time-varying, sensor and actuator (SaA) selection problems for uncertain cyber-physical systems. Our methods can be applied to any of the broad range of problems formulated as MIBMIs. Although this class of optimization problems is computationally challenging, we present tractable approaches based directly on the MIBMIs that provide both upper and lower bounds and lead to effective heuristics for SaA selection. The upper and lower bounds are obtained via successive convex approximations and SDP relaxations, respectively, and selections are obtained with a novel slicing algorithm from the solutions of the bounding problems. The direct derivation of approximations and relaxations from the MIBMIs contrasts our approach with other existing optimization-based approaches. The time-varying aspect allows SaA selections to change dynamically based on time varying conditions in the network. Mixed-integer SDPs and combinatorial greedy approaches are also developed for a broad class of systems for comparison. Finally, comprehensive numerical experiments are performed to compare the different methods and illustrate their effectiveness. A preliminary version of this work appeared in [24] where we developed customized algorithms for actuator selection. Here we significantly extended the methodology with the successive convex approximation and convex relaxation approaches and provide comprehensive numerical experiments. The next section presents the framework and problem formulation, and details the paper contributions and organization.  2  II. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION AND PAPER C ONTRIBUTIONS A. Nonlinear and Uncertain CPS Model The notation used in the paper is included in Appendix A. We consider a general class of dynamic CPSs modeled as ẋ(t) = Ax(t) + Bu u(t) + Bw w(t) + Bf f (x) y(t) = Cx(t) + Du u(t) + Dv v(t), x(t0 ) = x0 .  (1a) (1b)  The network state x(t) ∈ Rnx consists of each of N nodal agent states xi ∈ Rnxi , i = 1, . . . , N . The dynamics of the CPS nodes are coupled through the state-vector evolution (1). Likewise, each nodal agent has a set of available inputs ui ∈ Rnui and measurements yi (t) = Ci x(t) ∈ Rnyi . The mapping from the input to state vector can thus be written in the form Bu = blkdiag(Bu1 , . . . , BuN ). The system nonlinearity can be expressed as f (x) ∈ Rnx and Bf represents the distribution of the nonlinearities. In summary, the system has nx states, nu control inputs, ny output measurements, nw unknown inputs (UIs), and nv data perturbations. Remark 1. The UIs account for a wide range of perturbations such as modeling errors, unknown parameters, noise, unmeasurable inputs, and actuator faults. The data perturbations incorporate measurement noise, bad data, and cyber-attacks (e.g., denial of service, replay, and data integrity attacks).  system which is determined via optimal power flow routines. The time-horizon of this change is around 5 minutes. In water distribution networks, this change is often in hours as the water demand patterns and water flows evolve at a slower time-scale than electric power demand [25]. The high-level problem for time-varying SaA selection can be formulated as follows: min  Tf X   cπ,j (π j ) + cγ,j (γ j ) + CtrlObj + EstObj  (3a)  j=1  T  T  f f ∈ P, {γ j }j=1 ∈G subject to (2), {π j }j=1  j  (3b) j  CtrlConstraints(π ), EstConstraints(γ ).  (3c)  In (3), the objective is to minimize the sum of the cost as a function of the selected SaAs and certain control and estimation metrics, which are described in the next section. The constraints include the dynamical system evolution for all time-periods j ∈ {1, . . . , Tf }, and operational set constrains (P and G) on γ and π that include the binary nature of these variables and possibly ramp constraints as a function of previous SaA selection. The control and estimation constraints depend on the considered estimation and control metrics which can be written as SDPs in many cases as discussed in the next section.  B. Problem Formulation The objective of the methods presented in this paper is twofold, namely, to model the time-varying SaA selection problem and to propose scalable methods to address this problem for uncertain CPSs following general dynamical models. To formally state the SaA selection problem, we define binary variables πi , i = 1, . . . , N , where πi = 1 if the actuator of the i-th nodal agent is selected, and 0 otherwise. Similarly, we define binary variables γi , i = 1, . . . , N , where γi = 1 if the sensor of the i-th nodal agent is selected, and 0 otherwise. Variables πi and γi are organized in vectors π and γ. Given the definitions, the uncertain dynamics can be written as j ẋ(t) = Aj x(t) + Buj Πj u(t) + Bw w(t) + Bfj f j (x), (2a)  y(t) = Γj C j x(t) + Duj u(t) + Dvj v(t), xj (t0 ) = xj0 (2b) where j denotes the time-period (see Remark 2); Π = blkdiag(π1 Inu1 , . . . , πN InuN ) places vector π in a block diagonal matrix of appropriate dimensions (variables Π and π are thus used interchangeably), and likewise Γ = blkdiag(γ1 Iny1 , . . . , γN InyN ). Without loss of generality, we assume that the SaA selection problem entails activating sensors and actuators from individual subsystems, rather than picking what measurements or actuators that are selected from each system. Remark 2 (Topological Evolution). In (2), the optimal SaA selection and the control/estimation laws change from one time-period to another. The time-frame depends on the application under study, and the state-space matrices are obtained through an apriori analysis of the system dynamics. For example, in power networks the state-space matrices (Aj , Buj , . . .) change according to the operating point of the  C. Paper Organization and Contributions The common instrument we use in this paper is SDPs. The formulations in this paper are building on semidefinite programming approaches for robust control and estimation routines, since SDP-based methods and solvers have become common and efficient over the past 20 years. The reader is referred to [23] and [26] for many SDP formulations for optimal control and estimation methods. Disclaimer: Although there are many polynomial-time algorithms to solve SDPs, many existing implementations do not scale graciously with the number of states and control inputs. Improving the computational complexity of semidefinite programming is an active area of research [27]. Recent advancements in quantum semidefinite programming solvers promise significant improvements in terms of the worst case complexity [28]. In addition, recent techniques that solve an iterative sequence of linear programs or second order cone programs are capable of providing good approximations of SDP solutions [29] and are hence more tractable that generalpurpose SDP solvers. Most importantly, given state-space parameters ahead of time, SDPs as the ones presented in this paper can be solved offline. To set the stage, we first succinctly list control and estimation formulations as SDPs in Tables VII and VIII in Appendix E, where the system dynamics, controller/observer form, optimization variables, and the optimization problem are stated. The listed formulations are instrumental in formalizing the SaA selection problem since the LMIs share a similar structure. Many other control and estimation laws can fit directly into the proposed methodologies. The main contributions of this paper are detailed next.  3  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  First, we show that a large array of optimal control and estimation problems with SaA selection share a similar level of computational complexity of solving optimization problems with MIBMIs (Section III). Second, we develop one-shot convex relaxation that produces a lower bound to the original problem with MIBMIs. Two successive convex approximations that yield upper bounds are also developed. (Sections IV–VI). Third, theoretical guarantees on the convergence of the convex relaxations and approximations are provided, with the necessary background and assumptions. Fourth, we develop simple algorithms to recover the binary selection of SaAs, in addition to the state-feedback gains and performance indices (Appendix D). Fifth, we include a general formulation that utilizes the BigM method, thereby transforming the optimization problem from MIBMIs to a mixed-integer semidefinite program (MISDP); see Section VII. Sixth, we present as an alternative a suboptimal, greedy algorithm to solve the combinatorial SaA selection problem in Section VIII. Finally, comprehensive numerical examples are provided in Section IX. The results show the performance of the developed methods and that the optimal solution to the relaxed MIBMIs is nearly obtained in mostly all instances of our study. The numerical results also corroborate the theoretical results, and the necessary assumptions needed to obtain convergence are satisfied.  The next section presents the developed framework of timevarying SaA selection for uncertain dynamic systems.  III. T IME -VARYING S A A S ELECTION WITH VARIOUS M ETRICS : A U NIFYING MIBMI F RAMEWORK In this section, we show that a plethora of control or estimation problems with time-varying SaA can be written as nonconvex optimization problems with MIBMIs. This observation considers different formulations pertaining to various observability and controllability metrics. In particular, replacing Bu with Bu Π and C with ΓC in the SDPs in Tables VII and VIII significantly increases the complexity of the optimization problem. This transforms the SDPs into nonconvex problems with MIBMIs, thereby necessitating the development of advanced optimization algorithms— the major contribution of this paper. For compactness, we only consider the actuator selection problem for robust L∞ control of uncertain linear systems (see the second row of Table VII or [30]), and leave the other problems as simple extensions. Under this simplifying setup, the system dynamics can be written as: j ẋ(t) = Aj x(t) + Buj Πj u(t) + Bw w(t)  (4a)  j z(t) = Czj x(t) + Dwz w(t),  (4b)  where Πj is binary matrix variable (cf. Section II) and z(t) is the control performance index. The time varying sequence of  selected actuators and stabilizing controllers is obtained as the solution of the following multi-period optimization problem: minimize  {S,Z,ζ,π}j  Tf X  j (η + 1)ζ j + α⊤ ππ  (5a)  j=1  j   A S j + S j Aj⊤ + αS j j  Bw subject to −Buj Πj Z j − Z j⊤ Πj Buj⊤  O (5b) j⊤ Bw −αηI  j  −S j O S j Cz ⊤ ⊤   O  O (5c) −I Dwz j Czj S j Dwz −ζ j I Hπ ≤ h, π ∈ {0, 1}N .  (5d)  In (5), the optimization variables are matrices (S, Z, Y )j , the actuator selection π j (collected in vector π for all j), and the robust control index ζ j for all j ∈ {1, . . . , Tf }, where α and η are predefined positive constants [30]. Given the solution to (5), the stabilizing control law for the L∞ problem can be −1 written as u∗ (t) = −Z ∗j (S ∗j p) x(t) for all t ∈ [tj , tj+1 ). This guarantees that kzk2 ≤ (η + 1)ζ ∗ kwk∞ . The logistic constraint Hπ ≤ h couples the selected actuators across time periods, and is discussed in Appendix B. The optimization problem (5) includes MIBMIs due to the term Buj Πj Z j . The bilinearity together with the integrality constraints bring about the need for specialized optimization methods. It should be emphasized that (5) is not a mixed-integer convex program. Therefore, general-purpose mixed-integer convex programming solvers are not applicable. Interestingly, the design of the remaining controllers and observers in Tables VII and VIII largely share the optimization complexity of problem (5). It can be easily observed that all design problems in the two tables feature MIBMIs with the form Bu ΠZ + Z ⊤ ΠBu⊤ or a similar one. This simple idea signifies the impact of finding a solution to optimization problems with MIBMIs. In fact, the LMI formulations for control problems in [23] and other studies become MIBMIs when SaA selection is included. Using (5) as an exemplification for other problems with similar non-convexities, custom optimization algorithms to deal with such MIBMIs are proposed in the ensuing sections. Remark 3 (Common or Piecewise Quadratic Lyapunov Functions). The proposed formulation does not take into account obtaining a common Lyapunov function between all timeperiods for two reasons: (1) By construction, we assume that the topological evolution or the change in the state-space matrices is not faster than the time it takes the system to reach steady-state. Hence, the final state value for time-period j is assumed to be the initial value for time-period j + 1. (2) The existence of common quadratic Lyapunov function is often a very conservative sufficiency condition [31], especially in large-scale systems. As an alternative to obtaining a common Lyapunov function, LMIs for piecewise quadratic Lyapunov functions can be formulated [31]. In particular, instead of finding a common S for LMIs SAj⊤ + Aj S ≺ O, j = 1, . . . , Tf , this stringent condition can be relaxed by obtaining different Sj ’s, while adding other LMIs that make the Lyapunov function piecewise  4  quadratic. This less conservative formulation is also convex. Hence, if the existence of a piecewise quadratic Lyapunov function is required in applications where SaA selection happens with a faster pace, additional LMIs derived in [31] can be seamlessly added to (5) without changing its complexity. IV. F ROM MIBMI S  TO  BMI S  This section along with Sections V, VI, and Appendix D develops a series of methods to deal with MIBMIs that all have the same starting point: Relaxing the integer constraints to continuous intervals. The resulting problem is still hard to solve, as it includes bilinear matrix inequalities (BMIs). For clarity, we consider a single-period version of the L∞ problem with actuator selection. This section presents some preparatory material that will be useful in the next sections. We start by considering the actuator selection problem with optimal value denoted by f ∗ . f ∗ = minimize  (η + 1)ζ + α⊤ ππ  S,Z,ζ,π    (6a)  ⊤  AS + SA + αS subject to −Bu ΠZ − Z ⊤ ΠBu⊤ ⊤ Bw   −S O  O −I Cz S Dwz Hπ ≤ h  Bw   O −αηI (6b)   SCz⊤ ⊤  Dwz O −ζI  N  π ∈ {0, 1} .    (6c) (6d) (6e)  The following standing assumption regarding the feasibility of (6) is made throughout the paper. Assumption 1. Problem (6) is feasible for πi = 1, i = 1, . . . , N with constraints (6b), (6c), and (6d) holding as strict inequalities. The previous assumption essentially postulates that when all actuators are selected, then S, Z, ζ can be found so that matrix inequalities (6b) and (6c) hold with O on the left-hand side replaced by −ǫI, and (6d) with h replaced by h − ǫ′ 1, for sufficiently small ǫ > 0 and ǫ′ > 0. Such a point does not need to be the optimal solution (6); Assumption 1 only requires the existence of such a point in the feasible set. It follows from the previous discussion that finding such a point is a convex optimization problem. The methods developed in Sections V, VI, and Appendix D rely on substituting the integer constraint (6e) with the box constraint 0 ≤ π ≤ 1. (7) Problem (6) with (6e) substituted by (7) can be written as L = minimize p  subject to  f (p)  (8a)  G(p)  O  (8b)  where the shorthand notation p = [vec(S)⊤ ζ vec(Z)⊤ π)⊤ ]⊤ is used to denote the optimization variables.The objective is f (p) = ζ + α⊤ π π, and G(p) is a matrix-valued function that includes the left-hand  sides of (6b), (6c), (6d), and the two sides of (7), in a block diagonal form. Problem (8) has the general form of a nonlinear SDP [32]. The dimensions of p and G(p) are respectively given by p ∈ Rd and G(p) ∈ Sκ , where d and κ can be inferred from (6). The notation DG(p) is used for the differential of G(p) at p, i.e., DG(p) maps a vector q ∈ Rd to Sκ as follows [DG(p)]q =  d X i=1  qi  ∂G(p) . ∂pi  (9)  The optimal value serves as an index to formally compare the various formulations to be developed in the sequel. But comparison with respect to control metrics is also important, therefore, the resulting controllers are also evaluated in terms of the system closed-loop eigenvalues in the numerical tests of Section IX. The relationship between the optimal value of (6) and (8) is formalized in the following proposition. Proposition 1. With L denoting the optimal value of problem (8), it holds that L ≤ f ∗ . Proof of Proposition 1: The proposition holds because (7) represents a relaxation of (6e). Problem (8) is still hard to solve, because it contains the BMI (6b). Since the problem is nonconvex, several algorithms seek to find a stationary point of (8), instead of a globally optimal one. Before formally stating the definition of stationary point, the Lagrangian function of (8) is given next: L(p, Λ) = f (p) + trace[ΛG(p)],  (10)  where Λ is a Lagrange multiplier matrix. Stationary points of (8) abide by the following definition. Definition 1. A pair (p∗ , Λ∗ ) is a KKT point of (8), and p∗ is a stationary point of (8), if the following hold: 1) Lagrangian optimality: ∇p L(p∗ , Λ) = 0; 2) primal feasibility: G(p∗ )  O; 3) dual feasibility: Λ∗  O; and 4) complementary slackness: Λ∗ G(p∗ ) = O. Conditions 1)–4) in the above definition are the KKT conditions for (8). These become necessary conditions that locally optimal solutions of (8) must satisfy, when appropriate constraint qualifications hold. To make this concept concrete, we present two typical constraint qualifications next [32]. Definition 2. Problem (8) satisfies Slater’s constraint qualification if there is a point p0 ∈ Rd satisfying G(p0 ) ≺ O. Slater’s constraint qualification guarantees zero duality gap for problems of the form (8) when f (p) and G(p) are convex. Though G(p) is not convex for the problem at hand, we will use Slater’s constraint qualification for convex approximations of (8) in the sequel. A constraint qualification useful for nonconvex nonlinear SDPs is given next. Definition 3. The Mangasarian-Fromovitz constraint qualification (MFCQ) holds at feasible point p0 if there exists a vector q ∈ Rd such that G(p0 ) + [DG(p0 )]q ≺ O.  (11)  5  Under MFCQ, the KKT conditions become necessary for local optima of (8). Lemma 1. Let p∗ be a locally optimal solution of (8). Then under MFCQ, there exists a Lagrange multiplier matrix Λ∗ that together with p∗ satisfies the KKT conditions of Definition 1. Proof of Lemma 1: This result is typical in the literature of nonlinear SDPs; see [33, Sec. 4.1.3]. The significance of Lemma 1 is that it characterizes the points which are local minima of (8). For future use, we mention next two refinements of the KKT conditions of Definition 1. Specifically, the complementary slackness condition implies that rank[G(p∗ )] + rank(Λ∗ ) ≤ κ [32, p. 307]. A stricter condition is defined as follows. Definition 4. A KKT point of (8) satisfies the strict complementarity if rank[G(p∗ )] + rank(Λ∗ ) = κ. To state the second condition, the definition of a feasible direction for problem (8) is provided next. Definition 5. Let p0 be a feasible point of (8). A vector q ∈ Rd is called a feasible direction for problem (8) at p0 if p0 +εq is feasible for (8) for all sufficiently small ε > 0. The KKT conditions are of first order, i.e., they involve the gradient of the Lagrangian. The following definition states a second-order condition. ∗  ∗  Definition 6. Let (p , Λ ) be a KKT point of (8). The secondorder sufficiency condition holds for p∗ if for all feasible directions q at p∗ satisfying ∇p f (p∗ )⊤ q = 0, it holds that q ⊤ ∇2p L(p∗ , Λ∗ )q ≥ µkqk2 , for some µ > 0. The second-order sufficiency condition will be useful for the convergence of one of the algorithms to solve BMIs in the sequel. Sections V and VI develop algorithms for solving problems of the form (8) that include BMIs. These algorithms typically return vectors π with non-integer, real entries. Based on the solutions produced by these algorithms, Appendix D details the procedure of actuator selection. V. SDP R ELAXATIONS (SDP-R): A L OWER B OUND ON (8) This section develops a solver for BMI problems based on SDP relaxation of the BMI constraint. To this end, we introduce an additional optimization variable G = ΠZ. With this change of variables, ΠZ is replaced by G and G⊤ replaces Z ⊤ Π in (6b), while the constraint G = ΠZ is added to the problem. Effectively, we have pushed the bilinearity into a new constraint G = ΠZ, which can actually be manipulated to much simpler constraints due to the diagonal structure of Π. Specifically, Z and G are stacks of N matrices     G1 Z1     (12) Z =  ...  , G =  ...  ZN  GN  where Zi and Gi (i = 1, . . . , N ) are both in Rnui ×nx . Due to the diagonal structure of Π, the constraint G = ΠZ is equivalent to Gi = πi Zi ,  i = 1, . . . , N.  (13)  Denote the (l, m) entries of matrices Zi and Gi by Zi,(l,m) and Gi,(l,m) , respectively, where l = 1, . . . , nui and m = 1, . . . , nx . Then, (13) is equivalent to the constraint Gi,(l,m) = πi Zi,(l,m) , i = 1, . . . , N, l = 1, . . . , nui , m = 1, . . . , nx .  (14)  It follows that problem (8) is equivalent to L = minimize ζ + α⊤ (15a) ππ S,Z,ζ,π,G   AS + SA⊤ + αS  Bw   O(15b) subject to −Bu G − G⊤ Bu⊤ ⊤ Bw −αηI (15c) (6c), (6d), (7), (14). The next step is to relax end, define  0 E = 0 0  (14) into an SDP constraint. To this  0 0 0 1 , 1 0    2 e = 0 . 0  (16)  The SDP relaxation of (15) is provided in the next proposition.  Proposition 2. The following SDP is a relaxation of (15) and yields a lower bound on the optimal value of (8) L̃ = minimize (η + 1)ζ + α⊤ ππ S,Z,ζ,π,G,V  subject to  AS + SA⊤ + αS  −Bu G − G⊤ Bu⊤ ⊤ Bw    Bw   O −αηI   Gi,(l,m)  trace EVi,(l,m) − e⊤  Zi,(l,m)  = 0 πi   Gi,(l,m)  Zi,(l,m)  Vi,(l,m) O   πi  Gi,(l,m) Zi,(l,m) πi 1 ∀ i = 1, . . . , N, l = 1, . . . , nui , m = 1, . . . , nx (6c), (6d), (7)  (17a)  (17b)  (17c)  (17d)  (17e)  where Vi,(l,m) ∈ R3×3 are auxiliary optimization variables collected in V for all i, l, and m. The optimal value of (17)   has the property that L̃ ≤ L. If in addition rank Vi,(l,m) = 1 holds for all i, l, and m for the solution of (17), then L̃ = L. Proof of Proposition 2: Introduce an auxiliary optimization variable   Gi,(l,m) (18) vi,(l,m) =  Zi,(l,m)  ∈ R3 πi  With the previous definitions, it can easily be verified that  ⊤ πi Zi,(l,m) − Gi,(l,m) = vi,(l,m) Evi,(l,m) − e⊤ vi,(l,m) . (19)  A relaxation trick can be used at this point. In particular, introduce an additional optimization variable Vi,(l,m) ∈ R3×3 ⊤ and the constraint Vi,(l,m) = vi,(l,m) vi,(l,m) . We have that   ⊤ ⊤ vi,(l,m) Evi,(l,m) = trace vi,(l,m) Evi,(l,m)  6    ⊤ = trace Evi,(l,m) vi,(l,m)  = trace EVi,(l,m) .  (20)  The previous development reveals that constraint (14) is equiv alent to the constraint trace EVi,(l,m) − e⊤ vi,(l,m) = 0, which is linear in Vi,(l,m) and vi,(l,m) , as long as the constraint ⊤ Vi,(l,m) = vi,(l,m) vi,(l,m) is imposed, which is nonconvex. ⊤ The constraint Vi,(l,m) = vi,(l,m) vi,(l,m) is equivalent to   Vi,(l,m) vi,(l,m)  O, rank(Vi,(l,m) ) = 1. (21) ⊤ vi,(l,m) 1 The rank constraint above is nonconvex, and by dropping it, we obtain the convex relaxation (17) of (15). As a relaxation of (15), its optimal value has the property that L̃ ≤ L. Proposition 2 asserts that L̃ = L if rank Vi,(l,m) = 1. Since the rank constraint is nonconvex, it is reasonable to consider surrogates for the rank in an effort to make the relaxation (17) tighter; one such surrogate is the nuclear norm of a matrix [34]. Thus, the constraint kVi,(l,m) k∗ ≤ 1 can be added to promote smaller rank for Vi,(l,m) ; the optimal value of (17) is impacted as follows. Corollary 1. Let L̆ be the optimal value of (17) with the added constraint kVi,(l,m) k∗ ≤ 1. It holds that L̆ ≥ L̃. Proof of Corollary 1: Adding the constraint restricts the feasible set of (17), yielding the stated relationship between the optimal values. VI. C ONVEX A PPROXIMATIONS : A N U PPER B OUND  ON  (8)  The common thread between the previous and the present section is to replace the nonconvex feasible set given by constraints (6b), (6c), (6d), and (7) with convex sets. While the previous section relies on convex relaxations of the nonconvex feasible set, this section develops convex restrictions, i.e., replaces the nonconvex feasible set with a convex subset. The premise is to solve a series of optimization problems, in which the convex subset is improved. Thus, the algorithms in this section fall under the class of successive convex approximations (SCAs). Two SCA algorithms are developed in this section. Due to the convex restriction, the algorithms solve optimization problems that yield upper bounds for the optimal value L of problem (8). Because the SCA algorithms rely on forming convex subsets of the feasible nonconvex set, they must be initialized at interior points of the nonconvex feasible set. The next proposition asserts that such points indeed exist under Assumption 1. Proposition 3. Under Assumption 1, problem (8) is strictly feasible, i.e., it satisfies Slater’s constraint qualification. Proof of Proposition 3: Consider a point p0 that satisfies Assumption 1 (in particular, π 0 = 1 holds). Constraints (6b), (6c), (6d), and (7) can be written in the form of a block diagonal matrix inequality (8b). The implication is that G(p0 ) is negative definite, i.e., all its eigenvalues are negative. By continuity of the eigenvalues as functions of the matrix elements [35, Appendix D], there is a ball of sufficiently small radius around p0 such that for all p is this ball, the eigenvalues  of G(p) remain negative. Any point within the ball satisfying π < 1 together with the associated S, ζ, Z yields a stritly feasible point for constraints (6b), (6c), (6d), and (7). A. SCA using difference of convex functions (SCA-1) The main idea is to replace (6b) with a surrogate convex inequality constraint. To this end, the left-hand side of (6b) is replaced by a convex function in the variables Z, Π, which is denoted by C(Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 ), where Π0 , Z0 are given matrices to be specified later. This approach has been investigated in the context of BMIs for control problems with bilinearities arising in output feedback control problems; see [36]. We first define the following linear function of Π, Z with parameters Π0 , Z0 Hlin (Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 ) = ⊤ ⊤ ⊤ ⊤ ⊤ + Bu Π 0 Π ⊤ 0 Bu − Bu ΠΠ0 Bu − Bu Π0 Π Bu  + Bu Π0 Z0j − Bu ΠZ0j − Bu Π0 Z j + Z0⊤ Π0 Bu⊤ − Z0⊤ ΠBu⊤ − Z ⊤ Π0 Bu⊤ + Z0⊤ Z0 − Z0⊤ Z − Z ⊤ Z0 . The function C(Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 ) is given by  AS + SA⊤ + αS + 1 B Π − Z ⊤  B Π − Z ⊤ ⊤ u u 2 C(·) =  + 21 Hlin (Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 ) ⊤ Bw  (22)  Bw −αηI      . (23)   The following proposition asserts that C(Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 ) is a convex function that upper bounds the left-hand side of (6b).  Proposition 4. It holds for all Π, Z and Π0 , Z0 that   AS + SA⊤ + αS −Bu ΠZ − Z ⊤ ΠBu⊤ Bw   C(Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 ), (24) ⊤ Bw −αηI  and C(Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 ) is convex in Π, Z.  Proof of Proposition 4: To construct the upper bound (24), the bilinear term is written as ⊤  1h −Bu ΠZ − Z ⊤ ΠBu⊤ = Bu Π − Z ⊤ Bu Π − Z ⊤ 2 ⊤ i  (25) − Bu Π + Z ⊤ Bu Π + Z ⊤  ⊤ The term Bu Π − Z ⊤ Bu Π − Z ⊤ is convex in Z and Π since it comes from an affine transformation of the domain of a convex function [37, Example 3.48]. The term ⊤  H(Π, Z) := − Bu Π + Z ⊤ Bu Π + Z ⊤  is concave in Z and Π. We can therefore invoke the fact that the first-order Taylor approximation of a concave function (at any point) is a global over-estimator of the function. Let Π0 , Z0 be the linearization point, and let Hlin (Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 ) denote the linearization of H(Π, Z) at the point (Π0 , Z0 ). It holds that H(Π, Z)  Hlin (Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 ) for all Π0 , Z0 and Π, Z.  (26)  7  The linearization can be derived by substituting Π = Π0 + (Π−Π0 ) and Z = Z0 +(Z −Z0 ) into H(Π, Z) and ignoring all second-order terms that involve (Π − Π0 ) and (Z − Z0 ). The result is (22). Combining (22) with (26) and (25), we conclude that the left-hand side of (6b) is upperbounded as   AS + SA⊤ + αS −Bu ΠZ − Z ⊤ ΠBu⊤ Bw  ⊤ Bw −αηI   AS + SA⊤ + αS    + 1 B Π − Z ⊤ B Π − Z ⊤ ⊤ u u  . (27) 2  1  Bw  + 2 Hlin (Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 ) ⊤ Bw −αηI This can be obtained using the fact that    A1 B A2  O, A  A =⇒ 2 1 B⊤ C B⊤   B O C  which can be proved using the definition of positive semidefiniteness. Inequality (27) holds for all Π0 , Z0 and Π, Z, and its left-hand side is C(Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 ). Therefore, a convex approximation of the BMI is obtained by replacing constraint (6b) with the convex constraint C(Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 )  O. The resulting problem has a restricted feasible set due to (24). Although C(Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 ) is a convex function in Π and Z, it is not linear in Π and Z. Therefore, when we replace (6b) by the constraint C(Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 )  O, a convex constraint is obtained, but not an LMI. Fortunately, the constraint C(Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 )  O can be equivalently written as an LMI as follows. Lemma 2. It holds that C(Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 )  O ⇐⇒ Cs (Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 ) =   AS + SA⊤ + αS 1 + 2 Hlin (Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 )   √1 Bu Π − Z ⊤ ⊤ 2 ⊤ Bw  √1 2  Bu Π − Z −I O   ⊤    Bw     O.  O  −αηI  (28)  Proof of Lemma 2: Applying the Schur complement to C(Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 )  O yields the LMI Cs (Π, Z; Π0 , Z0 ). To summarize, the convex approximation to (6) at Π0 , Z0 is formed by replacing the integer constraints by the box constraints (7), and the BMI (6b) by the constraint the LMI in (28). This problem is stated as follows: L̂ = minimize S,Z,ζ,π  subject to  (η + 1)ζ + α⊤ ππ  (29a)  (6c), (6d), (7), (28).  (29b)  Problem (29) is an SDP with optimal value denoted by L̂, whose relationship with L is as follows. Corollary 2. The optimal value of the convex approximation (29) for all Π0 , Z0 is an upper bound on the optimal value of (8), that is, L ≤ L̂. Proof of Corollary 2: Due to (24) and (28), problem (29) has a restricted feasible set with respect to problem (8). The convex approximation (29) depends on the point Π0 , Z0 , and can be successively improved. The main idea is  to solve a sequence of convex approximations given by (29), where the values of Π0 , Z0 for the next approximating problem are given by the solution of the previous problem. Let k = 1, 2, . . . denote the index of the convex approximation to be solved, and let Sk , ζk , Πk , Zk denote its solution. The k-th problem is obtained by adding a strictly convex reguralizer to the objective (29a), which ensures that the problem has a unique solution. The k-th problem is thus (1)  L̂k = minimize (η + 1)ζ + α⊤ π π + ρJk {S,Z,ζ,π}  (30a)  subject to Cs (Π, Z; Πk−1 , Zk−1 )  O  (30b)  (6c), Hπ ≤ h, 0 ≤ π ≤ 1,  (30c)  where Jk = kζ − ζk−1 k22 + kS − Sk−1 k2F + kZ − Zk−1 k2F + kΠ−Πk−1 k2F ; the linearization point is given by Π0 = Πk−1 , Z0 = Zk−1 ; ρ is the weight of the quadratic regularizers. For k = 1, the point Π0 , Z0 can be selected as any interior point of (8); such is guaranteed to exist due to Proposition 3. Notice that for every k, problem (30) has the form of (8), but the objective is a strictly convex quadratic, and the constraint function is convex. The convergence is established in the following proposition. Proposition 5. Let pk , Λk denote a KKT point of (30). Suppose that the feasible set of (8) is bounded, and that the following hold for problem (30) for k = 1, 2, 3, ... i) Slater’s constraint qualification holds. ii) The Lagrange multiplier Λk is locally unique. iii) Strict complementarity holds for the KKT point. iv) The second-order sufficiency condition holds for the KKT point. Then, the following are concluded: (1) a) It holds that f (pk ) ≥ L and Lk ≥ L for k = 1, 2, 3, ... ∞ b) The sequence {f (pk )}k=1 is monotone decreasing, and converges to a limit fˆ(1) ≥ L. c) Every limit point of the sequence {pk , Λk }∞ k=1 is a KKT point of (8). If the set of KKT points of (8) is finite, then the entire sequence {pk , Λk }∞ k=1 converges to a KKT point of (8). Proof of Proposition 5: Notice that problem (30) has the same feasible set as (29) (with Π0 , Z0 replaced by Πk−1 , Zk−1 ). Corollary 2 establishes that its feasible set is a restriction of the one in (8). It follows that f (pk ) ≥ L, and (1) Lk ≥ L holds because of the added regularizer in (30a). The monotonicity of {f (pk )}∞ k=1 follows from a corresponding result in [36, Lemma 4.2(c)]. The sequence is thus monotone decreasing and bounded [the latter follows from the assumption on the boundedness of the feasible set of (8)]. It is a standard result in analysis that a bounded and monotone decreasing sequence has a limit. Therefore, fˆ(1) ≥ L holds for the limit due to f (pk ) ≥ L. The convergence result of part c) follows [36, Theorem 4.3]. It is emphasized that the existence of at least one limit point is guaranteed by the boundedness of the feasible set. Albeit some of the conditions of the previous proposition may be hard to verify in practice, we encountered no case where the SCA algorithm did not converge. In particular, we  8  tested the algorithm on a variety of dynamic systems with varying sizes and conditions in Section IX. B. Parametric SCA (SCA-2) In this section, we depart from the difference of two convex functions approach used in the previous SCA, and use another approach to obtain an upper bound on the bilinear terms. The developments in this section follow the spirit of the methods presented in [38], where the authors investigate a new approach to solve BMIs that are often encountered in output feedback control problems. First, let F1 (p) denote the left-hand side of (6b). Given Πk and Zk , define ∆Π = Π − Πk and ∆Z = Z − Zk . For any x Q ∈ Sn++ , define further the following function:   −Bu Πk Zk − Zk⊤ Πk Bu⊤ Bw K1 (p; pk , Q) = ⊤ Bw −αηI   ⊤ AS + SA + αS − Bu Πk ∆Z + −∆Z ⊤ Πk Bu⊤ − Bu ∆ΠZk − Zk⊤ ∆ΠBu⊤ O  O O   Bu ∆ΠQ∆ΠBu⊤ + ∆Z ⊤ Q−1 ∆Z O + . (31) O O Similar to Proposition 4, an upper bound on F1 (p) is provided by the next proposition. u Proposition 6. It holds for all p, Πk , Zk and Q ∈ Sn++ that  F1 (p) ≤ K1 (p; pk , Q).  (32)  Proof of Proposition 6: Function F1 (p) is written as F1 (p) = C0 + A(p) + B(p)    O Bw AS + SA⊤ + αS = + ⊤ B −αηI O  w  ⊤ ⊤ −Bu ΠZ − Z ΠBu O + . O O  O O    Substituting Π = Πk + ∆Π = Πk + Π − Πk and Z = Zk + ∆Z = Zk + Z − Zk into B(z) yields   −Bu (Πk + ∆Π)(Zk + ∆Z) B(p) = −(Zk + ∆Z)⊤ (Πk + ∆Π)Bu⊤ O  , O O  where −Bu (Πk + ∆Π)(Zk + ∆Z) = −Bu Πk Zk − Bu Πk ∆Z − Bu ∆ΠZk − Bu ∆Π∆Z and −(Zk + ∆Z)⊤ (Πk + ∆Π)Bu⊤ = −Zk⊤ Πk Bu⊤ − Zk⊤ ∆ΠBu⊤ − ∆Z ⊤ Πk Bu⊤ − ∆Z ⊤ ∆ΠBu⊤ . Given this, B(p) can be rearranged as   −Bu Πk Zk − Zk⊤ Πk Bu⊤ − Bu Πk ∆Z B(p) = −∆Z ⊤ Πk Bu⊤ − Bu ∆ΠZk − Zk⊤ ∆ΠBu⊤ O  O O   −Bu ∆Π∆Z − ∆Z ⊤ ∆ΠBu⊤ O + . O O By combining and grouping these results, we obtain   Bw −Bu Πk Zk − Zk⊤ Πk Bu⊤ F1 (p) = ⊤ Bw −αηI    AS + SA⊤ + αS − Bu Πk ∆Z  + −∆Z ⊤ Πk Bu⊤ − Bu ∆ΠZk − Zk⊤ ∆ΠBu⊤ O   −Bu ∆Π∆Z − ∆Z ⊤ ∆ΠBu⊤ O + . O O    O O  u An upper bound for the last bilinear term for any Q ∈ Sn++ is given as [38, Lemma 1]  −Bu ∆Π∆Z − ∆Z ⊤ ∆ΠBu⊤  Bu ∆ΠQ∆ΠBu⊤ + ∆Z ⊤ Q−1 ∆Z. Combining the previous two results yields (32). The previous proposition suggests that constraint (6b) can be replaced by K1 (p; pk , Q)  O. There are two challenges to be addressed though. First, although K1 (p; pk , Q) is a convex function of p, it is not linear, and thus constraint K1 (p; pk , Q)  O is not an LMI. Second, although Q can remain constant, the approximation can be tightened if Q is allowed to be an optimization variable. The former challenge is addressed by Lemma 3, which is analogous to Lemma 2. Lemma 3. Constraint K1 (p; pk , Q)  O is equivalent to   Ω(p; pk ) ⊤  Bw K(p; pk , Q) =   ∆ΠBu⊤ ∆Z  Bw −αηI O O  Bu ∆Π O −Q−1 O   ∆Z ⊤ O    O, O  −Q (33)  Ω(p; pk ) = −Bu Πk Zk − Zk⊤ Πk Bu⊤ + AS + SA⊤ + αS − Bu Πk ∆Z − ∆Z ⊤ Πk Bu⊤ − Bu ∆ΠZk − Zk⊤ ∆ΠBu⊤ . Proof of Lemma 3: Use the Schur complement. When Q is an optimization variable, function K(p; pk , Q) is not convex in p and Q. An upper bound of K(p; pk , Q) that is linear in p and Q is given in Lemma 5. The following lemma gives a particular matrix property that becomes the foundation for Lemma 5. Lemma 4. Let : Rn → Sm ++ be a mapping defined PQ(x) n m as Q(x) = i=1 xi Qi where Qi ∈ S . The following inequality holds, where the right-hand side is the linearization of −Q(x)−1 around xk : − Q(x)−1  −2Q(xk )−1 + Q(xk )−1 Q(x)Q(xk )−1 . (34) Proof of Lemma 4: Let R(x; xk ) be the first-order Taylor approximation of −Q(x)−1 computed around xk . That is R(x; xk ) = −Q(xk )−1 − [DQ(xk )−1 ](x − xk ).  (35)  By setting ∆x = x − xk , the differential −[DQ(xk )−1 ]∆x is given by [39] [DQ(xk )−1 ]∆x = −Q(xk )−1 [DQ(xk )]∆xQ(xk )−1 n X ∂Q(xk ) ∆xi Q(xk )−1 = −Q(xk )−1 ∂x i i=1  = −Q(xk )−1 Q(x)Q(xk )−1 + Q(xk )−1 .  Substituting the latter into (35) yields R(x; xk ) = −2Q(xk )−1 + Q(xk )−1 Q(x)Q(xk )−1 .  9  Since Q(x) is positive definite, then it follows that −Q(x)−1 is concave [37, Example 3.48]. Because the first-order approximation of a concave function is a global over-estimator, we obtain (34). u Lemma 5. It holds for all p, Q ∈ Sn++ , Πk , Zk , and Qk ∈ nu S++ that K(p; pk , Q)  Ks (p, Q; pk , Qk ) (36)  where Ks (p, Q; pk , Qk ) =  Ω(p; pk ) Bw ⊤  B −αηI w  Qk ∆ΠBu⊤ O ∆Z O   Bu ∆ΠQk ∆Z ⊤ O O  . −2Qk + Q O  O −Q  (37)  Proof of Lemma 5: By linearizing −Q−1 around a given u Qk ∈ Sn++ , an upper bound on K(p; pk , Q) can be derived as follows. Since −Q−1 is concave in Q, then according to Lemma 4, the over approximation of −Q−1 around Qk is −1 −1 −2Q−1 k + Qk QQk . Substituting this over approximation −1 of −Q into K(p; pk , Q) and applying congruence transformation with diag(I, I, Qk , I) as the post and pre-multiplier yields (37). The relation in (36) is obtained due to the fact −1 −1 that −Q−1  −2Q−1 k + Qk QQk . Thus the constraint Ks (p, Q; pk , Qk )  O yields a restricted feasible set relative to constraint (5b). Similarly to Section VI-A, k = 1, 2, 3, ... is the index of the optimization problem to be solved, and pk , Qk denotes its solution. The k-th problem is an SDP and is stated as follows. (2)  L̂k = minimize  {S,Z,ζ,π,Q}  (η + 1)ζ + α⊤ π π + ρJk  subject to Ks (p, Q; pk−1 , Qk−1 )  O  (38a) (38b)  c1 I  Q  c2 I, −2Qk−1 + Q  −c3 I (38c) (38d) (6c), Hπ ≤ h, 0 ≤ π ≤ 1, where ρ, c1 , c2 , and c3 are positive constants, and Jk is the same regularizer as the one in (30). Constraint (38c) guarantees that Q is positive definite, sequence {Qk }∞ k=1 is bounded, and that −2Qk + Q, which appears as a diagonal block in (37) is negative definite for all k. Similar to the first convex approximation, the above problem can be initialized by letting {S0 , Z0 , ζ0 , π0 } be any interior point of (8) and Q0 = I. The algorithm convergence is characterized by the following proposition. Proposition 7. Assume that the MFCQ holds for every feasible point of (8) and that the sequence {pk }∞ k=1 is bounded. Then, the following are concluded: (2) a) It holds that f (pk ) ≥ L and Lk ≥ L for k = 1, 2, . . . ∞ b) The sequence {f (pk )}k=1 is monotone decreasing, and converges to a limit fˆ(2) ≥ L. c) Every limit point of {pk }∞ k=1 is a stationary point of (8). Proof of Proposition 7: The feasible set of problem (38) is a restriction of the one in (8) due to Proposition 6, Lemma 3, (2) Lemma 5. It therefore holds that f (pk ) ≥ L, and Lk ≥ L follows from the addition of the regularizer in the objective. The monotonicity of {f (pk )}∞ k=1 follows from a related result in [38, Lemma 6]. The monotinicity and the boundedness  imply the existence of the limit, similarly to Proposition 5. The convergence in part c) is analogous to [38, Proposition 5]. The existence of at least one limit point is ensured by the boundedness of the sequence {pk }∞ k=1 . Algorithm 2 in Appendix C provides the option to implement one of the two developed convex approximations [cf. (30) and (38)] in an iterative fashion with specific stopping criteria. The next section compares the two approximations in terms of computational effort and their convergence claims. C. Comparing the SCAs and Important Remarks The first convex approximation is simpler to implement and involves a smaller number of SDP constraints and variables; see the difference in dimensions between constraints Ks (p, Q; zk , Qk )  O and Cs (Π, Z; Πk , Zk )  O. In addition, constraint (38c) is added, and an extra variable Q is needed in (38). Both methods rely on constructing a series of feasible sets that are subsets of the original nonconvex feasible set in (8). Each produces a sequence of decreasing objective values {f (pk )}∞ k=1 , yielding upper bounds on the optimal value of (8). It is also worth noting that the first method requires a constraint qualification and additional assumptions on the KKT point to hold for each convex approximation problem k. Slater’s constraint qualification is also an assumption in one of the earliest SCA methods for nonlinear programming [40]. On the other hand, the second method requires only the MFCQ to hold for the original nonconvex problem (8). Both methods have a boundedness assumption; the first method requires the feasible set of (8) to be bounded, the second method only the resulting sequence to be bounded. The boundedness assumption respectively guarantees the existence of at least one limit point of {pk }∞ k=1 . Both methods enjoy the property that every limit point of {pk }∞ k=1 is a stationary point of (8). Remark 4 (Existence of Local Minima). The stationarity is a necessary condition for local optimality (cf. Lemma 1). It is thus not guaranteed that the stationary point is indeed locally optimal. In view of the fact that the methods attempt to solve a nonconvex problem, such convergence result is to be expected. It is worth asking whether the resulting limit point is indeed locally optimal. Sufficient conditions for local optimality of stationary points of nonlinear SDPs have been derived in the literature; see for example [32, Theorem 9]. Note also that the stationary points that SCA-1 and 2 converge to depend in general on the initial linearization point p0 . Remark 5 (Recovering the Optimal Solution of (8)). A comparison with the SDP relaxation of Section V is in order. The method of Section V produces a lower bound L̃ for the optimal value L of (8). The methods of this section derive upper bounds (L̂(1) or L̂(2) ) of L. Therefore, if the difference between the upper and lower bounds is small, we can assert that we have approximately solved nonconvex problem (8). D. Recovering the Integer Solutions Appendix D presents a simple algorithm and a discussion on recovering the integer solutions of the actuator selection from  10  the continuous ones that is generated via (17), (30), and (38). The relationship between the recovered integer solutions and the continuous ones is also discussed in Appendix D. VII. S A A S ELECTION VIA MISDP AND M ETHOD  THE  B IG -M  This section develops an alternative method for solving the optimization problem (5). This alternative can also be applied to other time-varying SaA selection problems with the control and estimation metrics and formulations in Tables VII and VIII in Appendix E. As discussed in the previous sections, the mixed-integer bilinear term Bu ΠZ + Z ⊤ ΠBu⊤ renders the problem nonconvex. An alternative to solving the convex relaxations or approximations is to simply apply the Big-M method on the bilinear term. This technique is quite general [41] and has been used before in the context of multi-vehicle path planning [22], and more recently for actuator and sensor allocation in linear systems with Gaussian disturbances and Kalman filtering [21]. In order to state the Big-M method, we will use the block matrices defined in (12)–(14). In particular, notice that due to the binary nature of πi , constraint (14) can be equivalently written for all l, m as ( πi Zi,(l,m) , if πi = 1 Gi,(l,m) = (39) 0, if πi = 0. By introducing a sufficiently large constant M , it is shown that the previous constraint can be equivalently written as |Gi,(l,m) − Zi,(l,m) | ≤ M (1 − πi ), |Gi,(l,m) | ≤ M πi  (40)  Lemma 6. Under the constraint πi ∈ {0, 1} for all i and for sufficiently large M , then any Z and G satisfying (39) also satisfy (40), and vice versa. Proof of Lemma 6: Suppose that πi = 1. Then, both (39) and (40) are equivalent to Gi,(l,m) = Zi,(l,m) for all (l, m). Suppose now that πi = 0. Then, both (39) and (40) are equivalent to Gi,(l,m) = 0 for all (l, m) and allow Zi,(l,m) to be free. Notice that the proof indicates how big the constant M should be. In particular, it must be larger than the maximum entry of matrix Z that is the optimal solution of (5). In practice, a very large number is selected. The advantage of (40) is that is converts the bilinear constraint (14) to a constraint linear in Z, G and Π. Therefore, the actuator selection problem for L∞ control is written as ∗ BM = minimize  (η + 1)ζ + α⊤ ππ  AS + SA⊤ + αS  subject to −Bu G − G⊤ Bu⊤ ⊤ Bw  (41a)  {S,Z,ζ,π,G}    −S  O Cz S  O −I Dwz    Bw   O −αηI (41b)  ⊤  SCz ⊤  Dwz O −ζI  (41c)  Hπ ≤ h, π ∈ {0, 1}N  (41d)  Θ1 G + Θ2 Z ≤ LM (π).  (41e)  The last constraint in (41) represents the vectorization of the Big-M constraints in (40), where Θ1 , Θ2 and L(π) are suitable matrices, and the latter is a linear mapping in π that depends on M . The optimization still includes the integrality constraints on π, and hence it is a mixed-integer semidefinite program (MISDP). The key point is that it is equivalent to (5). Proposition 8. For sufficiently big M , problems (41) and (5) are equivalent, and thus, have equal optimal values, i.e., f ∗ = ∗ BM . Proof of Proposition 8: Introduce the change of variables G = ΠZ in (5). The resulting problem and (41) have the same feasible sets due to Lemma 6. The widely used convex optimization modeling toolbox YALMIP incorporates modeling of mixed-integer convex programs [42] and interface corresponding general-purpose SDP solvers combined with implementations of branch-and-bound (BB) methods. The BB method is essentially a smart and efficient way to run an exhaustive search over all possible 2N combinations of the binary variables. At most 2N SDPs are then solved in the worst case run of a BB method. However, the empirical complexity of BB algorithms is much smaller than the worst-case one. Thus, such off-the-shelf solvers can be applied to (41). For this purpose, we compare the performance of YALMIP’s BB algorithm with the developed relaxations and approximations (SDP-R, SCA-1, SCA-2) in Section IX. Remark 6 (Computational Complexity). Primal-dual interiorpoint methods forSDPs have a worst-case complexity estimate of O m2.75 L1.5 , where m is the number of variables (a function of N, nx , nu , nz ) and L is the number of constraints [23]. In various problems arising in control systems studies, it is shown that the complexity estimate is closer to  O m2.1 L1.2 which is significantly smaller than the worst case estimate O m2.75 L1.5 [23]. Solving the SCAs involves iteratively obtaining a converging solution to the BMIs, and hence it is difficult to obtain an upper bound on the number of iterations and thus perform any comparison of SCAs with the MISDP (41). But the worst-case complexity of (41) is O 2N m2.75 L1.5 (notice the exponential factor). As for the SDP relaxation, the computational complexity is only that of an SDP, hence it scales better than MISDPs or the SCAs. Remark 7. Replacing the integrality constraint on π with the box constraint in (41) yields an SDP that can be solved using classical SDP solvers. To obtain the binary actuator selection, Algorithm 3 can be implemented. This can significantly reduce the computational time. VIII. S A A S ELECTION  VIA  S UBOPTIMAL ROUTINES  Another alternative to the successive convex approximations, the semidefinite relaxations, and the mixed-integer optimization approach described in the previous sections is a combinatorial greedy algorithms. Greedy algorithms for actuator selection are studied in [8] for Gramian-based metrics and in [18] for optimal feedback control performance metrics in discrete time. We briefly summarize and extend this approach.  11  Algorithm 1 A greedy heuristic for set function optimization. Πs ← ∅ while g(Πs ) > 0 or h(Πs ) 6= 0 do f (Πs ∪ {e}) e⋆ = argmin e∈{1,...,N }\Πs  Πs ← Πs ∪ {e⋆ } end while Π⋆s ← Πs  The greedy algorithm can be viewed as a general combinatorial gradient descent that is applicable in a much broader array of settings than specific Gramian or optimal control metrics. In particular, greedy algorithms can be used to obtain suboptimal, but often good, selections of SaAs in CPSs. The selection problems described above can be formulated as (combinatorial) set function optimization problems. We discuss formulations for actuator selection; sensor selection can be obtained analogously. For any given actuator selection π, let Πs = {i ∈ {1, ..., N } | πi = 1} denote the selected actuator subset; note that Πs ⊆ {1, ..., N }. For any of the problems in Table VII, one can associate an objective or constraint function that is being optimized or satisfied and depends on the selected actuator subset Πs . We will discuss some specific examples for concreteness subsequently. For now, let f : 2{1,...,N } → R be a set function that maps a given actuator selection to a control objective function value, and let g : 2{1,...,N } → R and h : 2{1,...,N } → R be set functions that map a given actuator selection to control constraint function values. Then the actuator selection problem is the constrained set function optimization problem minimize  f (Πs )  (42a)  subject to  h(Πs ) = 0 g(Πs ) ≤ 0.  (42b) (42c)  Πs ⊂{1,...,N }  A common heuristic for solving this problem is the greedy algorithm shown in Algorithm 1, which simply adds at each step the actuator that provides the best marginal performance gain, until the constraints are satisfied. Note that the control objective function values associated with the problems in Table VII are monotone in actuator subsets, since having more actuators can only improve the possible control performance. In addition, Algorithm 1 returns a feasible, though possibly suboptimal solution. One common special case is h(Πs ) = |Πs | − k for some fixed integer k and g. This corresponds to a cardinality constrained set function optimization problem, in which a fixed number k of actuators is added to optimize the control objective function f . We now explain how each of the SaA selection problems in Tables VII and VIII in Appendix E, and combinations thereof, can be cast as a set function optimization problem as described above. For the stabilizability problem in the first row of Table I, we let f be the set function that maps any actuator subset to the number of unstable and uncontrollable modes. We then define the constraint function h = f , and the constraint function g is not used. Then Algorithm 1 can be directly  applied and works as follows: at each iteration the actuator that gives the largest marginal reduction of the number of unstable and uncontrollable modes is added, and this is repeated until an actuator subset that results in zero unstable and uncontrollable modes is found. Similar formulations can be obtained for the output feedback control and nonlinear stabilizability problems by defining analogous set functions that map actuator subsets to the number of unstable modes that cannot by affected by output feedback or by state feedback in the presence of the nonlinearity. Furthermore, for the robust control and LQR problems, one can also define set functions that map an actuator subset to the optimal value of the corresponding SDPs listed in Tables VII and VIII, and then directly apply Algorithm 1. It is also straightforward to handle combinations of the actuator selection problems in Table VII with Algorithm 1. For example, we can optimize robust control performance subject to a stabilizability constraint by taking the set function f to be the optimal value of the robust control SDP, and h to be the number of unstable and uncontrollable modes. Moreover, we could put an additional constraint on the LQR control performance by defining g to be the difference between the optimal value of the LQR control SDP and some desired LQR performance level. Algorithm 1 would then directly apply to find an actuator subset that optimizes robust control performance while providing stabilizability and a given level of LQR control performance. Similar formulations can be easily obtained for all sensor selection problems listed in Table VIII. Although the greedy algorithm does not necessarily produce an optimal subset of sensors and actuators or even one with a sub-optimality guarantee in general, it can produce highly effective subsets in practice and can be applied to a much broader range of control and estimation problems than has been previously considered in the literature. However, the greedy algorithms that have been developed in the literature solve simpler problems at each iteration of the greedy algorithm. When SDPs are considered as a general framework, each individual iteration of the greedy heuristic solves an SDP. This implies that greedy algorithms might not be more efficient than the alternatives developed in the previous sections (SDP-R, SCAs, and Big-M). A further limitation of greedy algorithms occurs during the first iteration when no single element yields a feasible solution to the studied SDP. In this case it is not obvious which sensor or actuator to select since in some sense all yield infeasible solutions. Further development is required in such cases to refine the evaluation of each sensor or actuator. This limitation is experienced in the numerical tests, which are presented in the next section. IX. N UMERICAL T ESTS In this work, we present six different methods to solve the actuator selection problem with a focus on the L∞ control metric (6). We also showed that other control and estimation formulations can be formulated in the same fashion. • To recap, the first four methods rely on relaxing the actuator integer constraints to box constraints.  12  •  •  – SDP-R: The first method is an SDP relaxation providing a lower bound to the optimal solution of the problem with BMIs; see (17). – SDP-RN: The second method is similar to SDP-R with the addition of the nuclear norm constraint to (17) as discussed in Corollary 1. – SCA-1 and SCA-2: The third and fourth methods are successive convex approximations producing upper bounds with different properties; see (29) and (38). – These four methods (SDP-R, SDP-RN, SCA-1, SCA-2) are then followed by a slicing algorithm that returns an integer actuator selection and an upper bound on the optimization problem with MIBMIs (Appendix D). Big-M: The fifth method describes a formulation that leverages disjunctive programming principles and the BigM method to transform problems with MIBMIs (6) into MISDP, which can then solved via a branch-and-bound algorithm; see (41). Greedy Algorithm: The final method is a sub-optimal greedy routine from Section VIII.  This section presents a thorough computational comparison of the developed methods. All the simulations are performed using MATLAB R2016b running on 64-bit Windows 10 with Intel Core i7-6700 CPU with base frequency of 3.4GHz and 16 GB of RAM. YALMIP [43] and its internal branch-and-bound solver are used as a modeling language and MOSEK [44] is used as the SDP solver for all methods.  A. Simulated Dynamic Systems We use two different plants, namely, the mass-spring system and a randomly generated network [45] (the plants from [45] are slightly modified). The state-space matrices of mass-spring system are given as     ON IN ON , Bu = Bw = , A= TN ON IN where TN is a tridiagonal symmetric Toeplitz matrix [45]. The random network has the following structure     X 1 1 0 ẋi = − xi + e−α(i,j) xj + (ui + wi ), 1 2 1 i6 = j | {z } Ai  where the coupling between nodes i and j is determined by the Euclidean distance α(i, j). These distances are unique for every N and randomly generated inside a box of size N/5. Note that in these tests, we made the individual Ai matrix for each subsystem to be stable (in comparison with [45] where Ai is unstable), so that the total number of unstable eigenvalues is smaller for the dynamic network (A still has unstable eigenvalues). Keeping the same structure for the A matrix for the network of unstable nodes as in [45] yields the trivial solution of activating all actuators which is needed to guarantee an L∞ -stable performance—and hence the modification.  B. Parameters, Constraints, and Setup We consider N = 5, 10, . . . , 50 for the two systems. We also use the following specific parameters and constraints. PN • The constraint Hπ ≤ h is represented as i=1 πi ≥ ⌊N/4⌋, where ⌊·⌋ denotes the floor function. We also set  α⊤ π = 1, . . . , 1 , that is all actuators have equal weight; α = 1 and η = 1 (these constants appear in the LMIs). • For SCA-1 and SCA-2, to obtain S0 , ζ0 , and Z0 , we initialize by assuming that Π0 = 0.1Inu , and subsequently solving the L∞ SDP with S0  ǫ1 Inx and ζ0 ≥ ǫ1 , where ǫ1 = 10−8 . All other LMIs are also bounded by −ǫ1 I to guarantee that the initialization is in the relative interior. The regularization parameter is set to ρ = 0.001. We use the value of 0.01 as the tolerance and restrict the number of iterations to 100. Other parameters that are used are c1 = 10−6 , c2 = 106 , and c3 = −10−6 . 2 • The Big-M method constant is chosen as M = 10 . The maximum number of the iterations for the MISDP solver is set to 300. C. Comparing the Five Methods and Relevance to the Theory 1) Results for the Random Network: Table I depicts the results after applying Slicing Algorithm 3 for SDP-R (17), SDPRN, SCA-1 (29), and SCA-2 (38). Note that Algorithm 3 is not applied to the Big-M solutions, as these solutions pare originally binary. Table I presents the performance index (η + 1)ζ, the PN total activated actuators i πi , and the objective function P N value ffinal = (η + 1)ζ + i πi . As mentioned earlier, the presented results for the Big-M method are for 300 iterations for the branch-and-bound solver of YALMIP. The maximum number of iterations is reached while the gap percentage is still between 1% for N = 5 all the way to 56% for N = 50 (the gap, provided in the caption of Table I, increases as N increases). Unfortunately, solving MISDPs would require weeks before the optimal solution (for larger values of N ) is obtained and hence the choice of the default maximum iterations number of 300. The boldfaced numbers in ffinal column in Table I depict the method with the smallest objective function value. While Big-M yields the smallest ffinal in some cases, the other methods (SDP-R, SDP-RN, SCA-1, SCA-2) yield better objective values, while requiring significantly less computational time—often orders of magnitude less. In particular, Fig. 1 and Table II show the computational time (in seconds) for the five methods. As discussed in Remark 6, SDP-R is expected to be computationally more efficient than the other methods— this can be observed from Table II. Since SCA-1 includes a smaller number of constraints and variables than SCA-2 (see Section VI-C), the former requires less computational time in several of the simulations. However, there are instances where the SCAs require less computational time the than semidefinite relaxations (SDP-RN and SDP-R). The unifying theme here is that relaxing the integer constraints and using the convex approximations and relaxations is a good alternative to computationally costly MISDPs. Note that the simulations are performed without optimizing the code structure or using sparse matrices.  13  TABLE I F INAL RESULTS AFTER RUNNING A LGORITHM 3 TO RECOVER THE BINARY ACTUATOR SELECTION AND THE ACTUAL SYSTEM PERFORMANCE FOR THE SYSTEM WITH RANDOM NETWORK . T HE BOLDFACED NUMBERS DESCRIBE THE METHOD THAT OUTPERFORMED OTHER METHODS ( THE MISDP SOLVER ON YALMIP THAT IMPLEMENTS THE B IG -M APPROACH IS TERMINATED AFTER 300 BRANCH - AND - BOUND ITERATIONS ). F OR THE B IG -M METHOD , THE GAP PERCENTAGES ARE 1.2, 10.19, 25.31, 44.90, 47.33, 51.48, 52.63, 52.21, 53.54, 55.91 FOR N = 5, 10, . . . , 50. Performance Index  p  (η + 1)ζ  Total Activated Actuators  PN i  ffinal = (η + 1)ζ +  πi  PN i  πi  N  Big-M  SDP-RN  SDP-R  SCA-1  SCA-2  Big-M  SDP-RN  SDP-R  SCA-1  SCA-2  Big-M  SDP-RN  SDP-R  SCA-1  SCA-2  5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50  1.200 1.496 1.459 1.079 1.232 1.173 1.343 1.201 1.258 0.980  1.133 1.291 1.274 1.198 0.001 1.647 1.578 1.280 1.640 2.236  1.165 1.280 1.397 1.379 1.082 0.995 2.028 1.605 1.086 1.283  1.003 1.117 1.245 1.243 0.911 1.554 1.277 1.284 1.362 1.389  0.986 1.360 1.378 1.320 5.015 2.152 1.255 1.287 1.548 2.426  2 3 6 15 19 24 30 35 40 45  3 5 12 19 25 24 34 38 36 32  3 5 8 14 23 28 23 28 44 43  3 7 13 17 24 28 31 38 40 47  3 5 10 18 17 16 32 33 36 39  3.441 5.239 8.129 16.165 20.517 25.376 31.804 36.442 41.583 45.961  4.284 6.668 13.622 20.435 25.000 26.711 36.489 39.639 38.689 37.001  4.357 6.639 9.952 15.903 24.170 28.991 27.112 30.576 45.180 44.646  4.005 8.248 14.549 18.545 24.831 30.415 32.632 39.649 41.854 48.930  3.971 6.849 11.898 19.742 42.148 20.631 33.575 34.656 38.396 44.885  20  30  40  50  TABLE II CPU TIME FOR THE DIFFERENT METHODS WITH VARIOUS VALUES FOR THE NUMBER OF NODES N . T HESE RESULTS CORRESPOND TO RANDOM NETWORK . N  Big-M  SDP-RN  SDP-R  SCA-1  SCA-2  5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50  3.92 87.47 369.49 1337.97 3774.93 9222.35 19760.87 41038.02 76166.24 131035.62  1.84 3.73 14.18 50.26 142.73 317.55 853.73 1901.40 3103.24 4107.22  1.45 1.36 3.36 19.35 90.88 281.83 303.23 822.92 3201.57 4441.03  2.10 2.97 10.49 33.82 120.51 314.63 615.68 1673.95 2695.33 5785.46  1.84 2.58 8.86 45.17 80.12 127.21 674.92 1258.57 2192.87 4096.90  TABLE III N UMERICAL RESULTS BASED ON GREEDY ALGORITHM FOR THE SYSTEM WITH RANDOM NETWORK (∆t(s) IS THE CPU TIME ). p PN (η + 1)ζ ffinal # of Iterations ∆t(s) N i πi 5 10 15 20 25 30  1.20 1.51 1.51 1.85 6.15 4.84  2 3 6 9 14 9  3.44 5.28 8.29 12.41 51.82 32.39  10 38 75 111 156 111  5.3 14.8 63.3 257.5 932.8 1394.7  2) Discussion on Greedy Algorithms: Greedy Algorithm 1 is implemented. The inequality constraint in the set function optimization is Hπ ≤ h. Table VI shows the objective function values and the computational time for different network size, in addition to the performance index and the number of iterations. The algorithm failed to converge for larger network sizes after two days of computations, and hence terminated. In comparison with the other five methods from Table I, the greedy algorithm yields the best results for N = 20, comparable results for N = 5, 10, 15, and inferior results for N = 25, 30. In addition, the computational time of the greedy algorithm shown in Table III is inferior to that of SDP-RN, SDP-R, SCA-1, and SCA-2, but is still better than the Big-M method; see Table II. Greedy algorithms provide good alternatives to problems where individual subproblem with fixed actuator selection can be executed rapidly. In the case of SDPs, greedy algorithms do not outperform any of the relaxations/approximations methods in terms of  104 12 10 8 6 4 2 10  Fig. 1. CPU time for the different methods with various values for the number of nodes N . These results correspond to the system of random network.  computational time since sub-problems in each iteration of the greedy algorithm requires solving an SDP. This further signifies the value of the proposed SDP relaxations and SCAs. 3) Results for the Mass-Spring Network: Similar to the results corresponding to the random dynamic network, Fig. 2 and Tables IV, V, and VI, show the results for the network of mass-spring systems for different values of N (and for the six methods). The results are consistent with the findings in the previous tests on the random network. The SCAs and the SDP-R produce a better overall objective function value for larger system sizes with much smaller computational time. 4) Final Remark: In this paper, we only utilize the L∞ control problem with actuator selection to exemplify how the proposed relaxations and approximations can provide insights into the solution of a challenging combinatorial optimization problem. We leave the derivations of other sensor and actuator selection problems with different metrics and nonlinear dynamics as an exercise for the interested reader, while emphasizing that all other metrics and CPS dynamics in Tables VII and VIII with SaA selection follow the same developed methods. X. S UMMARY  AND  F UTURE W ORK  This paper puts forth a framework to solve SaA selection problems for uncertain CPSs with various control and esti-  14  TABLE IV F INAL RESULTS AFTER RUNNING A LGORITHM 3 TO RECOVER THE BINARY ACTUATOR SELECTION AND THE ACTUAL SYSTEM PERFORMANCE FOR THE NETWORK OF MASS - SPRING SYSTEM . T HE BOLDFACED NUMBERS DESCRIBE THE METHOD THAT OUTPERFORMED OTHER METHODS ( THE MISDP SOLVER ON YALMIP THAT IMPLEMENTS THE B IG -M APPROACH IS TERMINATED AFTER 300 BRANCH - AND - BOUND ITERATIONS ). F OR THE B IG -M METHOD , THE GAP PERCENTAGES ARE 4.18, 0.46, 32.78, 33.06, 43.11, 44, 46.99, 44.39, 47.19, 46.37 FOR N = 5, 10, . . . , 50. Performance Index  p  (η + 1)ζ  Total Activated Actuators  PN i  ffinal = (η + 1)ζ +  πi  N  Big-M  SDP-RN  SDP-R  SCA-1  SCA-2  Big-M  SDP-RN  SDP-R  SCA-1  SCA-2  Big-M  SDP-RN  SDP-R  5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50  0.0004 1.444 1.444 1.444 1.444 1.444 1.260 1.444 1.444 1.444  1.444 1.444 1.444 1.260 1.260 1.444 1.444 1.444 1.444 1.444  1.444 1.444 1.444 1.444 1.778 1.778 1.778 1.444 1.444 1.444  1.444 1.444 1.444 1.778 1.778 1.615 1.260 1.937 2.403 2.132  1.444 1.444 1.260 1.778 1.615 1.444 1.937 1.444 1.778 2.678  5 6 9 12 17 20 25 28 33 35  4 9 13 19 23 29 33 38 44 48  3 6 9 12 21 27 24 36 40 43  3 6 11 12 21 22 31 26 27 30  3 6 14 12 14 26 19 38 41 26  5.000 8.085 11.085 14.085 19.085 22.085 26.587 30.085 35.085 37.085  6.085 11.085 15.085 20.587 24.587 31.085 35.085 40.085 46.085 50.085  5.085 8.085 11.085 14.085 24.161 30.161 27.161 38.085 42.085 45.085  104 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 10  20  30  40  50  PN i  πi  SCA-1  SCA-2  5.085 8.085 13.085 15.161 24.161 24.609 32.587 29.750 32.774 34.547  5.085 8.085 15.587 15.161 16.609 28.085 22.750 40.085 44.161 33.174  While the majority of prior art focuses on specific metrics or dynamics, the objective of this paper is to present a unifying framework that streamlines the problem of time-varying SaA selection in uncertain and potentially nonlinear CPSs. We plan to study the following related research problems in future work. (1) Simultaneous SaA selection for output feedback control problems: This problem produces more complex integer programs than MIBMIs. (2) Applications to selection of distributed generation in electric power networks with frequency-performance guarantees. (3) Customized branchand-bound and cutting plane methods that can improve the performance of the Big-M method.  Fig. 2. CPU time for the different methods and various number of nodes N .  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  TABLE V  The authors would like to thank Johan Löfberg for his helpful comments and suggestions.  CPU TIME FOR THE DIFFERENT METHODS AND VARIOUS NUMBER OF NODES N FOR THE MASS - SPRING SYSTEM . T HE BOLDFACED ENTRIES INDICATE THE METHOD THAT REQUIRED THE SMALLEST COMPUTATIONAL TIME FOR EACH N . N  Big-M  SDP-RN  SDP-R  SCA-1  SCA-2  5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50  3.55 80.45 301.80 922.24 2549.51 5884.81 12350.41 23295.70 42845.22 74081.63  2.27 5.55 14.38 40.26 115.23 275.38 581.29 1252.22 2817.73 4392.25  1.27 1.96 4.08 11.67 65.09 185.10 239.38 935.92 1581.09 2841.51  1.69 2.44 7.12 14.49 58.04 132.30 391.28 429.34 617.57 1191.08  1.66 2.82 11.56 17.24 38.38 194.07 159.63 878.00 1708.34 918.16  TABLE VI N UMERICAL RESULTS BASED ON GREEDY ALGORITHM FOR THE MASS - SPRING SYSTEM . p PN (η + 1)ζ ffinal # of Iterations ∆t(s) N i πi  5 10 15 20 25 30  1.44 1.44 2.15 1.26 1.26 1.44  3 7 8 16 20 20  5.08 9.08 12.63 17.59 21.59 22.08  28 74 93 175 221 231  12.6 32.1 71.2 356.5 1143.6 2160.8  mation metrics. Given the widely popular SDP formulations of various control and estimation problems (without SaA selection), we present various techniques that aim to recover, approximate, or bound the optimal solution to the combinatorial SaA selection problem via convex programming.  R EFERENCES [1] Y.-Y. Liu, J.-J. Slotine, and A.-L. Barabási, “Controllability of complex networks,” Nature, vol. 473, no. 7346, pp. 167–173, 2011. [2] T. Nepusz and T. Vicsek, “Controlling edge dynamics in complex networks,” Nature Physics, vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 568–573, 2012. [3] J. Ruths and D. Ruths, “Control profiles of complex networks,” Science, vol. 343, no. 6177, pp. 1373–1376, 2014. [4] A. Olshevsky, “Minimal controllability problems,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 249–258, 2014. [5] S. Pequito, S. Kar, and A. Aguiar, “A framework for structural input/output and control configuration selection in large-scale systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 303–318, 2016. [6] F. Pasqualetti, S. Zampieri, and F. Bullo, “Controllability metrics, limitations and algorithms for complex networks,” Control of Network Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 40–52, 2014. [7] T. H. Summers and J. Lygeros, “Optimal sensor and actuator placement in complex dynamical networks,” IFAC Proceedings Volumes, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 3784–3789, 2014. [8] T. Summers, F. Cortesi, and J. Lygeros, “On submodularity and controllability in complex dynamical networks,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 91–101, 2016. [9] V. Tzoumas, M. A. Rahimian, G. Pappas, and A. Jadbabaie, “Minimal actuator placement with bounds on control effort,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 67–78, 2016. [10] G. Yan, G. Tsekenis, B. Barzel, J.-J. Slotine, Y.-Y. Liu, and A.-L. Barabási, “Spectrum of controlling and observing complex networks,” Nature Physics, vol. 11, pp. 779–786, 2015. [11] Y. Zhao, F. Pasqualetti, and J. Cortés, “Scheduling of control nodes for improved network controllability,” in Proc. IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2016, pp. 1859–1864. [12] E. Nozari, F. Pasqualetti, and J. Cortes, “Time-varying actuator scheduling in complex networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.06485, 2016.  15  [13] P. V. Chanekar, N. Chopra, and S. Azarm, “Optimal actuator placement for linear systems with limited number of actuators,” in Proc. American Control Conference, May 2017, pp. 334–339. [14] B. Polyak, M. Khlebnikov, and P. Shcherbakov, “An LMI approach to structured sparse feedback design in linear control systems,” in Proc. European Control Conference, July 2013, pp. 833–838. [15] N. K. Dhingra, M. R. Jovanović, and Z.-Q. Luo, “An ADMM algorithm for optimal sensor and actuator selection,” in Proc. IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2014, pp. 4039–4044. [16] U. Münz, M. Pfister, and P. Wolfrum, “Sensor and actuator placement for linear systems based on H2 and H∞ optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 2984–2989, 2014. [17] A. Argha, S. W. Su, and A. Savkin, “Optimal actuator/sensor selection through dynamic output feedback,” in Proc. IEEE 55th Conference on Decision and Control, Dec. 2016, pp. 3624–3629. [18] T. Summers, “Actuator placement in networks using optimal control performance metrics,” in Proc. IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2016, pp. 2703–2708. [19] T. Summers and J. Ruths, “Performance bounds for optimal feedback control in networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.04528, 2017. [20] H. Zhang, R. Ayoub, and S. Sundaram, “Sensor selection for Kalman filtering of linear dynamical systems: Complexity, limitations and greedy algorithms,” Automatica, vol. 78, pp. 202–210, 2017. [21] J. A. Taylor, N. Luangsomboon, and D. Fooladivanda, “Allocating sensors and actuators via optimal estimation and control,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1060–1067, May 2017. [22] F. W. Kong, D. Kuhn, and B. Rustem, “A cutting-plane method for mixed-logical semidefinite programs with an application to multi-vehicle robust path planning,” in Proc. 49th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, Dec. 2010, pp. 1360–1365. [23] S. P. Boyd, L. El Ghaoui, E. Feron, and V. Balakrishnan, Linear matrix inequalities in system and control theory. SIAM, 1994, vol. 15. [24] A. F. Taha, N. Gatsis, T. Summers, and S. Nugroho, “Actuator selection for cyber-physical systems,” in Proc. American Control Conference, May 2017, pp. 5300–5305. [25] D. G. Eliades, “Fault diagnosis and security monitoring in water distribution systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Cyprus, Faculty of Engineering, 2011. [26] J. G. VanAntwerp and R. D. Braatz, “A tutorial on linear and bilinear matrix inequalities,” Journal of Process Control, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 363– 385, 2000. [27] Y. T. Lee, A. Sidford, and S. C.-w. Wong, “A faster cutting plane method and its implications for combinatorial and convex optimization,” in Proc. IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 2015, pp. 1049–1065. [28] J. van Apeldoorn, A. Gilyén, S. Gribling, and R. de Wolf, “Quantum SDP-Solvers: Better upper and lower bounds,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.01843, 2017. [29] A. A. Ahmadi and G. Hall, “Sum of squares basis pursuit with linear and second order cone programming,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.01597, 2015. [30] T. Pancake, M. Corless, and M. Brockman, “Analysis and control of polytopic uncertain/nonlinear systems in the presence of bounded disturbance inputs,” in Proc. American Control Conference, vol. 1, no. 6, 2000, pp. 159–163. [31] M. Johansson and A. Rantzer, “Computation of piecewise quadratic lyapunov functions for hybrid systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 555–559, 1998.  [32] A. Shapiro, “First and second order analysis of nonlinear semidefinite programs,” Mathematical Programming, vol. 77, no. 1, pp. 301–320, 1997. [33] A. Shapiro and K. Scheinberg, “Duality and optimality conditions,” in Handbook of Semidefinite Programming, H. Wolkowicz, R. Saigal, and L. Vandenberghe, Eds. Springer, 2000, ch. 4, pp. 67–110. [34] B. Recht, M. Fazel, and P. A. Parrilo, “Guaranteed minimum-rank solutions of linear matrix equations via nuclear norm minimization,” SIAM review, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 471–501, 2010. [35] R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson, Matrix Analysis, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2013. [36] Q. T. Dinh, S. Gumussoy, W. Michiels, and M. Diehl, “Combining convex–concave decompositions and linearization approaches for solving bmis, with application to static output feedback,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1377–1390, 2012. [37] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex optimization. Cambridge University Press, 2004. [38] D. Lee and J. Hu, “A sequential parametric convex approximation method for solving bilinear matrix inequalities,” in 2016 IEEE 55th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), Dec 2016, pp. 1965–1970. [39] K. B. Petersen, M. S. Pedersen et al., “The matrix cookbook,” Technical University of Denmark, 2012. [40] B. R. Marks and G. P. Wright, “A general inner approximation algorithm for nonconvex mathematical programs,” Operations Research, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 681–683, 1978. [41] I. E. Grossmann, “Review of nonlinear mixed-integer and disjunctive programming techniques,” Optimization and engineering, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 227–252, 2002. [42] “Integer programming,” YALMIP Wiki, Sept. 1 2015. [Online]. Available: http://users.isy.liu.se/johanl/yalmip/pmwiki.php?n=Tutorials.IntegerProgramming [43] J. Löfberg, “YALMIP: A toolbox for modeling and optimization in matlab,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Computer Aided Control Systems Design, 2004, pp. 284–289. [44] A. Mosek, “The mosek optimization toolbox for matlab manual,” Version 7.1 (Revision 28), p. 17, 2015. [45] [Online]. Available: http://people.ece.umn.edu/users/mihailo/software/lqrsp/ [46] K. Zhou, J. C. Doyle, and K. Glover, Robust and optimal control. New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1996, vol. 40. [47] C. A. Crusius and A. Trofino, “Sufficient LMI conditions for output feedback control problems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 1053–1057, 1999. [48] D. D. Siljak, D. M. Stipanovic, and A. I. Zecevic, “Robust decentralized turbine/governor control using linear matrix inequalities,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 715–722, 2002. [49] C. Scherer and S. Weiland, “Linear matrix inequalities in control,” Lecture Notes, Dutch Institute for Systems and Control, Delft, The Netherlands, vol. 3, 2000. [50] A. Chakrabarty, M. J. Corless, G. T. Buzzard, S. H. Zak, and A. E. Rundell, “State and unknown input observers for nonlinear systems with bounded exogenous inputs,” Proc. American Control Conference, pp. 103–108, 2016. [51] W. Zhang, H. Su, H. Wang, and Z. Han, “Full-order and reduced-order observers for one-sided Lipschitz nonlinear systems using Riccati equations,” Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation, vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 4968–4977, 2012. [52] R. Rajamani, “Observers for Lipschitz nonlinear systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 397–401, 1998.  16  A PPENDIX A N OTATION  A PPENDIX D R ECOVERING THE B INARY S ELECTION  Italicized, boldface upper and lower case characters represent matrices and column vectors—a is a scalar, a is a vector, and A is a matrix. Matrix In is the identity square matrix of size n, and vector 1n is a vector of ones of size n; Om×n defines a zero matrix of size m × n. Sn denotes the set of symmetric matrices of size n; Sn+ and Sn++ are the sets of symmetric positive semidefinite and positive definite matrices. By definition, and unless otherwise specified, we assume that all matrices S and P in the paper i.e., rare positive definite,  P P m n 2 and S, P ∈ Sn++ . kAk, kAkF = i=1 j=1 |aij |  The solutions obtained from (17), (30), and (38) produce a noninteger solution for the actuator selection problem. Since the objective is to determine a binary selection for the actuators, we present in this section a simple slicing routine that returns a binary selection given the solutions to the optimization problems in Sections V and VI. The slicing routine is presented in Algorithm 3. Since the objective of the L∞ problem is to find a feedback gain K = ZS −1 that renders the closed-loop system stable, the slicing algorithm ensures that the spectrum Λ(Acl ) of the closed-loop system matrix Acl = A − Bu ΠK lies on the left-half plane. The slicing routine takes as an input the real-valued solution to the actuator selection Π∗ with πi∗ ∈ [0, 1]. First, the entries of π ∗ are sorted in decreasing order, and the minimum sactuator selection is obtained such that the logistic constraints Hπ ≤ h are satisfied, given that π ∈ {0, 1}N . This ensures that we start the slicing algorithm from the minimum number of actuators, while still satisfying all of the actuatorrelated constraints in (6). The algorithm proceeds by activating the s-highest ranked actuators, followed by solving the L∞ SDP (6a)–(6c) for Z and S. Then, the maximum real part of the eigenvalues of Acl , namely λm , is obtained. If λm < 0, the algorithm exits returning the actuator selection Πs and the associated feedback gain. The algorithm allows the addition of other user-defined requirements, such as a minimum performance index ζ or a maximum λm , which can guarantee a minimal distance to instability. It can also be generalized to other control or estimation problems. For example, in the case of observer design, the closed loop eigenvalues of A − LΓC can be used to determine the optimal sensor selection. Other metrics can be similarly included.  kAk∗ denote the spectral, Frobenius, and nuclear norms of A. The symbol diag(a) denotes a diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries are given by the vector a; diag(A) forms a column vector by extracting the diagonal entries of A. The symbol Λ(A) denotes the set of complex eigenvalues of a matrix A. A PPENDIX B ACTUATOR S ELECTION : T HE L OGISTIC C ONSTRAINTS  The constraint Hπ ≤ h couples the selected actuators across time periods, and is a linear logistic constraint that includes the following scenarios. • Activation and deactivation of SaAs in a specific time-period j. For example, if actuator i cannot be selected at period j, we set πij ≤ 0. • If actuator k is allowed to be selected only after actuator i is selected at period j, we set πkj+1 ≤ πij , for j = 1, . . . , Tf . • If actuator k must be deselected after actuator i is selected at period j, we set πkj+1 ≤ 1 − πij , for j = 1, ...Tf . • Upper and lower bounds on the total number of active SaAs per period can be accounted for. • Other constraints such as minimal number of required active actuators in a certain region of the CPS, and unit commitment constraints that are obtained from solutions day-ahead planning problems, can be included. A PPENDIX C S UCCESSIVE C ONVEX A PPROXIMATION Algorithm 2 illustrates how the SCAs (30) and (38) can be solved sequentially until a maximum number of iterations (MaxIter) or a stopping criterion defined by a tolerance (tol) are met. Algorithm 2 Solving the successive convex approximations. input: MaxIterNum, tol, k = 0, Π0 = Inu while k < MaxIterNum do Option 1: Solve (30) Option 2: Solve (38) (1) or (2) (1) or (2) if |L̂k − L̂k−1 | < tol then break else k ←k+1 end if end while {S ⋆ , ζ ⋆ , Z ⋆ , Π⋆ } ← {S k , ζ k , Z k , Πk };  Algorithm 3 A Slicing Algorithm to Recover the Integer Selection from (17), (30), and (38) input: Π∗ from Algorithm 2, set λm = ∞ Sort π ∗ in a decreasing order s = minimum 1⊤ Nπ π∈{0,1}N ,Hπ≤h  while λm > 0 do Activate the s-highest ranked actuators in π Obtain Πs = blkdiag(π1 Inu1 , . . . , πN InuN ) Given Π = Πs , solve the SDP (6a)–(6c) for Z and S λm = max(real(λ)) where λ ∈ Λ(A − Bu Πs ZS −1 ) s←s+1 end while Return the solution ps consisting of Πs , Z, S. The actuator selection and associated control law returned by Algorithm 3 yield an upper bound U to the optimal value of the actuator selection problem (5). Proposition 9. Let ps denote the solution obtained from Algorithm 3. It holds that f (ps ) = U ≥ f ∗ . Proof of Proposition 9: By construction of Algorithm 3, the point ps is feasible for (5) since the inequality constraints on the actuator selection are satisfied. Thus, it follows that f (ps ) = U ≥ f ∗ .  17  VARIOUS C ONTROLLER AND O BSERVER D ESIGNS  A PPENDIX E SDP F ORMULATIONS  VIA  FOR  D IFFERENT M ETRICS  AND  DYNAMICS  TABLE VII C ONTROLLER D ESIGN FOR VARIOUS CPS DYNAMICS AND OBJECTIVES VIA SDP FORMULATIONS [23], [46]–[48]. CPS Dynamics, Metrics, & Design Objective Stabilization of Linear Systems ẋ = Ax + Bu u, Variable: S  Control Design via SDPs find  Robust L∞ Control of Uncertain Linear Systems ẋ = Ax + Bu u + Bw w z = Cz x + Dvw w u = −Kx = −ZS −1 x, Variables: Z, S, ζ Stabilization through Output Feedback Control ẋ = Ax + Bu u y = Cx u = −Ky = M −1 N y, Variables: M , N , S LQR Control: Minimizing State and Input Energy R min E t∞ x(τ )Qx(τ ) + u(τ )Ru(τ )dτ  ⊤ AS + SA⊤  Bu Bu  min" (η + 1)ζ ⊤ + αS AS + SA⊤ − Bu Z − Z ⊤ Bu s.t. ⊤ Bw   −S O SCz⊤  ⊤   O, ζ > 0 −I Dwz   O Cz S Dwz −ζI  Bw −αηI  #  O  find s.t.  S, N , M ⊤ − B N C  O, B M = SB A⊤ S + SA − C ⊤ N ⊤ Bu u u u  min  trace(W S −1 )  ⊤ AS + SA⊤ + Bu Y + Y ⊤ Bu  S  Y⊤  0  s.t. ẋ = Ax + Bu u + w, w ∼ N (0, W ) ⊤ S −1 x, Variables: Y , S u = −R−1 Bu  S s.t.  s.t.  S −Q−1 0   Y  0 O −R−1  Stabilization of Nonlinear Systems ẋ = Ax + Bu u + φ(x) u = Kx = ZS −1 x, Variables: Z, S, ζ, κS , κZ φ(x) bounded by: φ⊤ (x)φ(x) ≤ α2 x⊤ F ⊤ F x  min ζ + κS + κZ   ⊤ AS + SA⊤ + Bu Z + Z ⊤ Bu I SF ⊤   s.t.  I −I O ≺O −ζI # O " #F S " 1 −κZ I Z ⊤ Z I ≻ O, ζ − 2 < 0 ≺ O, ᾱ I κS I Z −I  Stabilization of Time-Delay Systems P ẋ = Ax + Bu u + L i=1 Ai x(t − τi ) u = Kx = ZS −1 x, Variables: Z, S, S1 , . . . , SL  find Z, S, S1 , . . . , SL PL  ⊤ + AS + SA⊤ + Bu Z + Z ⊤ Bu i=1 Si  SA⊤  1 s.t.  ..   . SA⊤ L  A1 S −S1 .. . O  ... ... .. . ...   AL S O   ..  ≺O .  −SL  TABLE VIII E STIMATORS D ESIGN FOR CPS S VIA SDP FORMULATIONS ; SEE REFERENCES [49]–[52]. O THER SIMILAR FORMULATIONS ARE OMITTED FOR BREVITY. Dynamics & Estimation Objective  Estimator Dynamics  ẋ = Ax + Bu u y = Cx + Du u Variables: P , Y  ˙ = Ax̂ + Bu u + L(y − ŷ) x̂ ŷ = C x̂ + Du u L = P −1 Y  ẋ = Ax + Bu u + Bw w y = Cx + Du u Variables: P , Y , µ  ˙ = Ax̂ + Bu u + L(y − ŷ) x̂ ŷ = C x̂ + Du u L = P −1 Y  Estimator Design via SDPs find s.t.  Y A⊤ P + P A − C ⊤ Y ⊤ − Y C + αP  O  min  µ>0  A⊤ P + P A−   ⊤ ⊤ C Y − Y C − µC ⊤ C P Bw   O ⊤ Bw P −µI µ>0 µ  ⊤  A P + PA − Y C  −C ⊤ Y ⊤ + αP P Bw Y D v     O ⊤  Bw P −αI O  Dv⊤ Y ⊤ O −αI P  µI, µ > 0 {σ, ǫ1 , ǫ2 } > 0   A⊤ P + P A + ǫ1 ρI  ψǫ2 − ǫ1   +ǫ2 δI − σC ⊤ C I P + O  2   ⊤   ψǫ2 − ǫ1 −ǫ2 I I P + 2 Y ,κ > 0   A⊤ P + P A − Y C   P O −C ⊤ Y ⊤ + αP + κβ 2 I P −κI  s.t.  min ẋ = Ax + Bu u + Bw w y = Cx + Du u + Dv v Variables: P , Y , µ  ẋ = Ax + Bu u + φ(x, u) y = Cx + Du u Variables: P , σ, ǫ1 , ǫ2 ρ, δ, ψ are constants defined in [51]. ẋ = Ax + Bu u + φ(x) y = Cx + Du u Variables: P , Y , κ β is the Lipschitz constant [52].  ˙ = Ax̂ + Bu u + L(y − ŷ) x̂ ŷ = C x̂ + Du u L = P −1 Y  ˙ = Ax̂ + Bu u + φ(x̂, u) x̂ −L(y − ŷ) ŷ = C x̂ + Du u 1 L = σP −1 C ⊤ 2 ˙ = Ax̂ + Bu u + φ(x̂) x̂ −L(y − ŷ) ŷ = C x̂ + Du u L = P −1 Y  s.t.  find  s.t.  find s.t.  

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
