Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_5225

Abstract:
arXiv:1604.00892v3 [math.DS] 7 Nov 2016  BEHAVIOUR OF ENTROPY UNDER BOUNDED AND INTEGRABLE ORBIT EQUIVALENCE T IM AUSTIN Abstract Let G and H be infinite finitely generated amenable groups. This paper studies two notions of equivalence between actions of such groups on standard Borel probability spaces. They are defined as stable orbit equivalences in which the associated cocycles satisfy certain tail bounds. In ‘integrable stable orbit equivalence’, the length in H of the cocycle-image of an element of G must have finite integral over its domain (a subset of the G-system), and similarly for the reverse cocycle. In ‘bounded stable orbit equivalence’, these functions must be essentially bounded in terms of the length in G. ‘Integrable’ stable orbit equivalence arises naturally in the study of integrable measure equivalence of groups themselves, as introduced recently by Bader, Furman and Sauer. The main result is a formula relating the Kolmogorov–Sinai entropies of two actions which are equivalent in one of these ways. Under either of these tail assumptions, the entropies stand in a proportion given by the compression constant of the stable orbit equivalence. In particular, in the case of full orbit equivalence subject to such a tail bound, entropy is an invariant. This contrasts with the case of unrestricted orbit equivalence, under which all free ergodic actions of countable amenable groups are equivalent. The proof uses an entropy-bound based on graphings for orbit equivalence relations, and in particular on a new notion of cost which is weighted by the word lengths of group elements.  Contents 1 Introduction  2  2 Background from ergodic theory  8  1  3 Some preliminaries on stable orbit equivalence and cocycles  14  4 Finite-index subgroups  20  5 Virtually Euclidean groups  25  6 Proof of the entropy formula using derandomization  30  7 Subrelations, graphings and a new notion of cost  33  8 Constructing low-cost graphings  37  9 Proof of the derandomization results  47  10 Further questions  49  1 Introduction Let G and H be finitely generated discrete groups, and let T : G ñ pX, µq and S : H ñ pY, νq be free ergodic actions on standard Borel probability spaces. A triple such as pX, µ, T q is called a G-system, and similarly for H. Let |¨|G and |¨|H be length functions on the two groups given by some choice of finite symmetric generating sets, and let dG and dH be the associated right-invariant word metrics. The generating sets may be written as the unit balls BG peG , 1q and BH peH , 1q in these metrics. Recall that a stable orbit equivalence (or SOE) between pX, µ, T q and pY, ν, Sq consists of (i) measurable subsets U Ď X and V Ď Y of positive measure, and (ii) a bi-measurable bijection Φ : U ÝÑ V which satisfies µpΦ´1 Aq νpAq “ µpUq νpV q  for all measurable A Ď V  and ΦpT G pxq X Uq “ S H pΦpxqq X V  for µ-a.e. x.  If µpUq “ νpV q “ 1, then Φ is simply an orbit equivalence, and the systems are said to be orbit equivalent. We often indicate a stable orbit equivalence by Φ : pX, µ, T q ֌ pY, ν, Sq. A stable orbit equivalence can be described in terms of a pair of maps which convert the G-action on the domain to the H-action on the target and vice-versa. 2  For this purpose we make the following definition. An H-valued partial cocycle over pX, µ, T q is a pair pα, Uq in which U Ď X is measurable and ´1  α : tpg, xq P G ˆ X : x P U X T g Uu ÝÑ H is a measurable function which satisfies the cocycle identity: αpgk, xq “ αpg, T k xqαpk, xq  ´1  ´1  whenever g, k P G and x P U XT k U XT pgkq U.  If Φ : pX, µ, T q ֌ pY, ν, Sq is a stable orbit equivalence, and U and V are respectively the domain and image of Φ, then Φ may be described in terms of an H-valued partial cocycle pα, Uq over pX, µ, T q and a G-valued partial cocycle pβ, V q over pY, ν, Sq. They are defined by requiring that ´1  ΦpT g xq “ S αpg,xq pΦpxqq  whenever x P U X T g U  and  ´1  Φ´1 pS h yq “ T βph,yq pΦ´1 pyqq whenever y P V X S h V. These equations specify the cocycles uniquely because the actions are free. Comparing these equations gives the following relations of inversion between α and β: βpαpg, xq, Φpxqq “ g and αpβph, yq, Φ´1pyqq “ h. (1) The category of probability-preserving actions and orbit equivalences has a long history in ergodic theory. If G and H are amenable then the resulting equivalence relation on systems turns out to be trivial: all free ergodic actions of countable amenable groups are orbit equivalent. This is the Connes–Feldman–Weiss generalization of Dye’s theorem: see [Dye59, Dye63, CFW81]. On the other hand, if G is amenable and pX, µ, T q is a free ergodic G-action, then a free ergodic action of another group H can be orbit equivalent to pX, µ, T q only if H is also amenable: see, for instance, [Zim84, Section 4.3]. Among actions of nonamenable groups the relation of orbit equivalence is more complicated. The generalization to stable orbit equivalence has become important because of its relationship with measure equivalence of groups. For any countable groups G and H, a measure coupling of G and H is a σ-finite standard Borel measure space pΩ, mq together with commuting m-preserving actions G, H ñ Ω which both have finite-measure fundamental domains. If a measure coupling exists then G and H are measure equivalent. This notion was introduced by Gromov in [Gro93, Subsection 0.5.E] as a measure-theoretic analog of quasi-isometry. 3  If pΩ, mq is a measure coupling of G and H, then one can use fundamental domains for the G- and H-actions to produce finite-measure-preserving systems for G and H that are stably orbit equivalent. On the other hand, given a stable orbit equivalence between a G-system and an H-system, they can be reconstructed into a measure coupling of the groups: see [Fur99, Theorem 3.3], where Furman gives the credit for this result to Gromov and Zimmer. On account of this correspondence, one can also describe a measure coupling in terms of cocycles over those finite-measure-preserving systems. This time one obtains cocycles over the whole systems, not just partial cocycles. In general, it is fairly easy (though not canonical) to extend a partial cocycle to a whole system (this is well-known, but see Proposition 3.2 below for a careful proof). By the aforementioned result of Zimmer, if G is amenable then H can be measure equivalent to G only if H is also amenable. On the other hand, any amenable group does have actions which are free and ergodic, such as the nontrivial Bernoulli shifts, so the theorem of Connes, Feldman and Weiss shows that any two amenable groups are measure equivalent. 1.1 Integrability conditions and invariance of entropy Recent work of Bader, Furman and Sauer [BFS13] has introduced a refinement of measure equivalence called ‘integrable measure equivalence’. It is obtained by imposing an integrability condition on the cocycles α and β that appear in the description of a measure coupling. Their original results are for hyperbolic groups, but recently this notion has also been studied for amenable groups. It seems to be a significantly finer relation than measure equivalence. The growth type of the groups is an invariant, and among groups of polynomial growth the bi-Lipschitz type of the asymptotic cone is an invariant: both of these results are proved in [Aus16]. The present paper studies stable orbit equivalences which are subject to similar conditions on the integrability or boundedness of their cocycles. It may be seen as an ergodic theoretic counterpart to the study of integrable measure equivalence, or as a continuation of the study of ‘restricted orbit equivalences’ within ergodic theory. Because stable orbit equivalences are described in terms of partial cocycles, we must be a little careful in the choice of integrability condition to impose. This paper focuses on two alternatives. Let Φ : pX, µ, T q ֌ pY, ν, Sq be an SOE and let pα, Uq and pβ, Uq be the partial cocycles which describe it. • We say that Φ is a bounded stable orbit equivalence, or SOE8 , if there is 4  a finite constant C such that |αpg, xq|H ď C|g|G and  ´1  for µ-a.e. x P U X T g U |βph, yq|G ď C|h|H  ´1  for ν-a.e. y P V X S h V ´1  for all g P G and h P H (regarding this condition as vacuous if U X T g U ´1 or V X S h V has measure zero). • We say that Φ is an integrable semi-stable orbit equivalence, or SSOE1 , if pα, Uq may be extended to a full cocycle σ : GˆX ÝÑ H which satisfies the integrability condition ż |σpg, xq|H µpdxq ă 8 @g P G, X  and similarly for pβ, V q. Beware that the extensions of pα, Uq and pβ, V q are not required to satisfy any extended version of (1) beyond their original domains. We use the term ‘semi-stable’ for the second possibility because it requires that α have an extension to all of G ˆ X which is integrable; it depends on more than just the values taken by α itself. We would call Φ an integrable stable orbit equivalence or SOE1 if we required only that ż |αpg, xq|H µpdxq ă 8 @g P G. U XT g´1 U  This is formally weaker than both SSOE1 and SOE8 . The main result of this paper, Theorem A below, concerns SOE8 and SSOE1 , but I do not know whether it holds also for SOE1 . We write OE8 and OE1 for the special cases of the above notions when dom Φ and img Φ both have full measure. In the setting of single probability-preserving transformations, a classical result of Belinskaya [Bel68] asserts that two transformations S and T are integrably orbit equivalent if and only if S is isomorphic to either T or T ´1 . Later, several works studied other notions of ‘restricted’ orbit equivalence for probabilitypreserving transformations, motived by Kakutani equivalence and Feldman’s introduction of loose Bernoullicity: see for instance [ORW82] and [Rud85]. Many of those ideas have been generalized to actions of Zd for d ě 2 and then to more 5  general amenable groups, culminating in the very abstract formulation of Kammeyer and Rudolph in [KR97, KR02]. For Zd -actions with d ě 2, Fieldsteel and Friedman [FF86] have shown that several natural properties are not invariant under integrable, or even bounded, OE, including discrete spectrum, mixing, and the K property. However, entropy is an invariant. Indeed, it is fairly easy to show that OE1 for Zd -systems implies Kakutani equivalence in the sense developed in [Kat77, dJR84] (see Section 5 below), and those works include the result that entropy is invariant under Kakutani equivalence. The present work extends this last conclusion to SOE8 and SSOE1 and to general discrete amenable groups. Theorem A Suppose that G and H are amenable, that pX, µ, T q and pY, ν, Sq are as above, and that Φ : U ÝÑ V is either a SOE8 or a SSOE1. Then µpUq´1 hpµ, T q “ νpV q´1 hpν, Sq.  Remark 1.1. It suffices to assume that only one of G and H is amenable, since the existence of the stable orbit equivalence then implies that the other is too. ⊳  1.2 Derandomization of orbit equivalences We prove Theorem A in two parts. The first part handles the case of the Euclidean lattices Zd . In this case, our various notions of stable orbit equivalence turn out to imply Kakutani equivalence, one of the more classical notions of restricted orbit equivalence. Theorem B Suppose that pX, µ, T q is a Zd -system and pY, ν, Sq is a ZD -system. If they are SOE8 then they are SSOE1 , and if they are SSOE1 then d “ D and they are Kakutani equivalent. This will be proved in Section 5. Theorem A follows for these groups because it is known how entropy transforms under Kakutani equivalences of Zd systems [dJR84]. Moreover, a fairly standard construction (see Section 4) allows one to pass between groups and their finite-index subgroups, and so from Theorem B we can deduce Theorem A for all finitely generated, virtually Abelian groups. 6  In the second part of the proof, all remaining cases are deduced from a result that we call ‘OE derandomization’. It asserts that if a SOE between two systems is a SSOE1 or SOE8 , then it is lifted from a SOE between two factor systems having arbitrarily low entropy (that is, having ‘arbitrarily little randomness’). Curiously, this result seems to require super-linear growth of the acting groups, and so it cannot be used to prove Theorem A for virtually cyclic groups. Thus we need both approaches to prove Theorem A in general. A simpler version of derandomization can be observed among arbitrary integrable cocycles from a system to a group. We state (and later prove) this result first, as motivation for the orbit-equivalence result that we need. Theorem C (Cocycle derandomization) Let G be amenable and have superlinear growth, let pX, µ, T q be a G-system, and let σ : G ˆ X ÝÑ H be an integrable cocycle over T . For any ε ą 0 there is a cocycle τ cohomologous to σ over T such that the factor of pX, µ, T q generated by τ has entropy less than ε. For general cocycles G ˆ X ÝÑ H, not necessarily arising from an SOE, boundedness and integrability are defined in Subsection 2.1. For cocycles which are not partial, boundedness implies integrability, so Theorem C applies in particular to all bounded cocycles. Now suppose that Φ : pX, µ, T q ֌ pY, ν, Sq is an SOE. If U Ď dom Φ is measurable and has positive measure, then the restriction Φ|U still defines an SOE, different from Φ in that the domain and image have been made smaller. The restriction of Φ to U is always understood as a SOE in this way. Theorem D (Orbit-equivalence derandomization) Let G be amenable and have super-linear growth, and let Φ : pX, µ, T q ֌ pY, ν, Sq be an SOE which is either a SSOE1 or a SOE8 . Let ε ą 0. Then there are • a measurable subset U Ď dom Φ with µpUq ą 0, • factor maps π : pX, µ, T q ÝÑ pX 1 , µ1 , T 1 q and ξ : pY, ν, Sq ÝÑ pY 1 , ν 1 , S 1 q whose target systems are still free, • and a SOE Φ1 : pX 1 , µ1, T 1 q ֌ pY 1 , ν 1 , S 1 q such that 1. hpµ1 , T 1 q ă ε and 2. the following diagram commutes: 7  pX, µ, T q /  Φ|U  /  pY, ν, Sq  π  ξ    pX 1 , µ1 , T 1 q /    / Φ1  pY 1 , ν 1 , S 1 q.  For groups of super-linear growth, Theorem A is deduced from Theorem D in Section 6. Then Sections 7 and 8 develop some more technical results, before Theorems C and D are proved in Section 9. Those technical results include a new notion of cost for a graphing on a Borel orbit equivalence relation which takes into account the word lengths of different group elements, and may be of independent interest. It appears in Definition 7.4. Acknowledgements This paper emerged from an ongoing collaboration with Uri Bader, Lewis Bowen, Alex Furman and Roman Sauer. I am also grateful to Oded Regev, Damien Gaboriau and Brandon Seward for some useful references. Finally, I thank the anonymous reviewer for suggestions which clarified various technical steps in the proofs.  2 Background from ergodic theory 2.1 Systems and partial cocycles All measure spaces in this paper are standard Borel and σ-finite. Most are probability spaces. Measure spaces are denoted by pairs such as pX, µq; the σ-algebra of this space will be denoted by BX when it is needed. An observable on a measure space pX, µq is a measurable function ϕ from X to a countable set, and a partial observable on pX, µq is a pair pϕ, Uq consisting of a measurable subset U Ď X and a measurable function ϕ from U to a countable set. A G-system is a triple pX, µ, T q consisting of a standard Borel probability space pX, µq and a µ-preserving measurable action T of G on that space. It is free if the orbit-map g ÞÑ T g x is injective for µ-a.e. x. The Borel orbit equivalence relation of this action is denoted by RT . We assume standard definitions and results about orbit equivalence and cocycles over such systems: see, for instance, [Zim84, Section 4.2]. 8  Conventions seem a little less settled in relation to stable orbit equivalence, and I do not know of a canonical reference. It appears most often in connection with measure equivalence of groups, such as in [Fur99, Fur11, Gab02, Gab05, Sha04]. The present paper uses slightly different conventions, since our interest is in the systems and not just the groups. But I have followed [Fur99, Section 2] where possible. If H is another discrete group, then an H-valued partial cocycle over pX, µ, T q is a pair pα, Uq in which U Ď X is measurable and ´1  α : tpg, xq : x P U X T g Uu ÝÑ H is a measurable function satisfying the cocycle identity αpgk, xq “ αpg, T k xqαpk, xq  ´1  ´1  whenever g, k P G and x P U XT k U XT pgkq U.  This reduces to the usual notion of a cocycle if U “ X. We sometimes write αg for the function ´1 αpg, ¨q : U X T g U ÝÑ H, and if x P U then we write αx for the function αp¨, xq : tg P G : T g x P Uu ÝÑ H. A partial cocycle pα, Uq is non-trivial if µpUq ą 0. Two partial cocycles are considered equal if their sets are equal modulo µ and their functions agree µ-a.e. If pα, Uq is a partial cocycle over pX, µ, T q and V Ď U is measurable, then the restriction of pα, Uq to V is the partial cocycle pα|V , V q where α|V is the ´1 restriction of the map α to the set tpg, xq : x P V X T g V u. To lighten notation we sometimes write this restriction as pα, V q. A cocycle α or partial cocycle pα, Uq is bounded if there is a finite constant C such that |αpg, xq|H ď C|g|G  ´1  for µ-a.e. x P U X T g U, for all g P G.  A cocycle α (not partial) is integrable if ż |αpg, xq|H µpdxq ă 8  @g P G.  Clearly a bounded cocycle is integrable. These usages are consistent with the definitions of SOE8 and SSOE1 in the Introduction. 9  If α : G ˆ X ÝÑ H is a cocycle, then it is bounded if and only if each of the finitely many functions |αps, ¨q|H ,  s P BG peG , 1q,  is essentially bounded on X. The forward implication here is immediate, and the reverse follows by writing a general element of G as g “ sℓ ¨ ¨ ¨ s1 with ℓ “ |g|G and s1 , . . . , sℓ P BG peG , 1q, and then using the cocycle identity αpg, xq “ αpsℓ , T sℓ´1¨¨¨s1 xq ¨ ¨ ¨ αps1 , xq.  (2)  However, we cannot argue this way for a partial cocycle pα, Uq, since the factors ´1 on the right-hand side of (2) may not all be defined for arbitrary x P U X T g U. This is why we use the definition of boundedness given above. 2.2 Entropy Let pX, µq be a probability space. If µ is atomic, then its Shannon entropy is ÿ Hpµq :“ ´ µtxu log µtxu, xPX  with the usual interpretation 0 log 0 :“ 0. If ϕ : X ÝÑ A is an observable, then its Shannon entropy is Hµ pϕq :“ Hpϕ˚ µq. If U Ď X is measurable, then its Shannon entropy is defined to be that of the indicator function 1U : more explicitly, Hµ pUq :“ ´µpUq log µpUq ´ µpXzUq log µpXzUq. If pX, µq is a probability space and pϕ, Uq is a partial observable on it, then the Shannon entropy of pϕ, Uq is defined to be Hµ pϕ; Uq :“ Hµ pUq ` µpUq ¨ Hµ|U pϕq, where µ|U is the measure µ conditioned on U: that is, µ|U pV q :“ µpV X Uq{µpUq. 10  If µpUq “ 0, then we set Hµ pϕ; Uq “ 0 by convention. If pϕ, Uq is a partial observable and V Ď U is measurable, then we abbreviate Hµ pϕ|V ; V q to just Hµ pϕ; V q. Observe that, if pϕ, Uq is a partial observable and ˚ is an abstract point outside the range of ϕ, then we can define a new observable ϕ˚ by " ϕpxq if x P U ˚ ϕ pxq “ ˚ if x P XzU, and we obtain Hµ pϕ; Uq “ Hµ pϕ˚ q. Now let G be a discrete amenable group with a Følner sequence pFn qně1 , and let pX, µ, T q be a G-system. If ϕ : X ÝÑ A is an observable and F Ď G is finite, let ϕF :“ pϕ ˝ T g qgPF : X ÝÑ AF . The factor generated by ϕ is the σ-algebra of subsets of X generated by the levelsets of ϕ and all their images under T g , g P G. If pϕ, Uq is a partial observable, then the factor it generates is defined to be the factor generated by ϕ˚ , the new observable constructed above. As is standard, the Kolmogorov–Sinai (‘KS’) entropy of the system pX, µ, T q and observable ϕ is 1 Hµ pϕFn q. nÝÑ8 |Fn |  hpµ, T, ϕq :“ lim  This may be calculated using any Følner sequence for G. Then the KS entropy of pX, µ, T q is the supremum of hpµ, T, ϕq over all observables ϕ. It is denoted by hpµ, T q. By the Kolmogorov–Sinai theorem, the quantity hpµ, T, ϕq is always equal to the KS entropy of the factor of pX, µ, T q generated by ϕ. The subadditivity of Shannon entropy has the immediate consequence hpµ, T, ϕq ď Hµ pϕq. We extend this to a partial observable pϕ, Uq by defining hpµ, T, pϕ, Uqq to be the KS entropy of the factor generated by pϕ, Uq. By writing this in terms of the extended observable ϕ˚ , we immediately obtain also hpµ, T, pϕ, Uqq ď Hµ pϕ; Uq.  (3)  The following useful estimate may be well-known, but I have not found a reference. It was shown to me by Alex Furman. 11  Lemma 2.1. Let |¨|G be a length function on G corresponding to a finite symmetric generating set. For every ε ą 0 there exists Cε ă 8 such that the following holds. If pg is a value in r0, 1s for every g P GzteG u, then ÿ ÿ ‰ r´pg log pg ´ p1 ´ pg q logp1 ´ pg q ď Cε |g|G pg ` ε. g‰eG  g‰eG  In particular, if pX, µq is a probability space and α : X ÝÑ GzteG u is an observable, then ż Hµ pαq ď Cε  |αpxq|G µpdxq ` ε  Proof. First, Markov’s Inequality gives |tg P GzteG u : pg ě 1{2u| ď 2  ÿ  pg .  g‰eG  On the other hand, if pg ď 1{2 then ´p1 ´ pg q logp1 ´ pg q ď ´pg log pg . We may therefore bound the desired sum as follows: ÿ ‰ r´pg log pg ´ p1 ´ pg q logp1 ´ pg q g‰eG  ď2  ÿ  p´pg log pg q ` log 2 ¨ |tg P GzteG u : pg ě 1{2u|  g‰eG  ď2  ÿ  p´pg log pg q ` 2 log 2  g‰eG  ÿ  |g|G pg .  g‰eG  ř It řtherefore suffices to prove that g‰eG p´pg log pg q may be bounded in terms of g‰eG |g|G pg in the desired way. Next, since G is finitely generated, there is a finite constant c such that |BG peG , nq| ď cn For each n ě 1, let qn :“  ÿ  |g|G “n  12  @n ě 0. pg .  Let µg :“ pg {q|g|G for all g P G, interpreting this as 0 if q|g|G “ 0. Provided qn ‰ 0, the tuple pµg q|g|G“n is a probability distribution on the | ¨ |G -sphere t|g|G “ nu. From this fact we derive the estimate ÿ ÿ p´pg log pg q “ p´pµg qn q logpµg qn qq |g|G “n  |g|G “n  ` ˘ “ qn H pµg q|g|G“n ´ qn log qn ď qn log |BG peG , nq| ´ qn log qn ď cnqn ´ qn log qn .  whenever qn ‰ 0. Finally, some elementary calculus gives ´t log t ď mt ` e´m´1  for any t, m ą 0.  Let k ą 0 be large and fixed, and for each n ě 1 apply this bound with t :“ qn and m :“ kn. It gives ÿ ÿ ÿ p´qn log qn q ď k nqn ` e´kn´1 . ně1  ně1  ně1  Combining this with the previous estimate, we obtain ÿ ÿ ÿ ÿ ÿ p´pg log pg q “ p´pg log pG q ď pc ` kq nqn ` e´kn´1 . g‰eG  ně1 |g|G “n  ně1  ně1  By choosing k large enough we may make the last term here less than ε, so this completes the proof of the first inequality. We obtain the second part of the lemma by applying that first inequality to the values pg :“ µtα “ gu. Corollary 2.2. Suppose that G and H are finitely generated groups, that pX, µ, T q is a G-system, and that α : G ˆ X ÝÑ H is an integrable cocycle over T . For every g P G and every ε ą 0 there exists δ ą 0 for which the following holds: for any measurable U Ď X, if µpUq ă δ  then Hµ pαg ; Uq ă ε.  Proof. First, any sufficiently small δ satisfies µpUq ă δ  ùñ 13  Hµ pUq ă ε{3.  On the other hand, since αg is integrable, for any η ą 0 there is a δ ą 0 such that ż µpUq ă δ ùñ |αpg, xq|H µpdxq ă η. U  By a special case of Lemma 2.1, we may choose C ă 8 so that this turns into Hµ|U pαg q ď Cη{µpUq ` 1, where C does not depend on the value of η. Combining these estimates gives µpUq ă δ  ùñ  Hµ pαg ; Uq ă ε{3 ` Cη ` µpUq ă ε{3 ` Cη ` δ.  Choosing η ă ε{3C and then ensuring that δ ă ε{3, this completes the proof.  3 Some preliminaries on stable orbit equivalence and cocycles 3.1 Generated factors Given a partial cocycle pα, Uq over pX, µ, T q, the factor that it generates is the smallest factor which contains U and with respect to which all of the partial observables ´1 pαg , U X T g Uq are measurable. More explicitly, it is generated by the sets ´1  Ug,h :“ tx P U X T g U : αpg, xq “ hu for g P G and h P H, together with all their T -images. Notice that if we fix g and let h vary over H then the sets Ug,h constitute a measurable partition of ´1 U X T g U. Now suppose that Φ : pX, µ, T q ֌ pY, ν, Sq is an SOE, let U :“ dom Φ and let V :“ img Φ. The compression of Φ is the constant comppΦq :“  νpV q . µpUq  Let pα, Uq be the partial cocycle associated to Φ, and pβ, V q that associated to Φ´1 . Let Ug,h be the sets defined above for the partial cocycle pα, Uq, and let Vh,g  14  be their counterparts for pβ, V q. For any g P G and h P H, the relation between α and β implies that ´1  x P U X T g U and αpg, xq “ h ´1  ðñ  x P U X T g U and ΦpT g xq “ S h Φpxq  ðñ  Φpxq P V X S h V and βph, Φpxqq “ g.  ´1  Therefore ΦpUg,h q “ Vh,g for all g and h, and ΦpT g Aq “ S h ΦpAq  @A Ď Ug,h .  (4)  The next lemma is the first definite step in the direction of Theorem D. Lemma 3.1. Let A be a factor of pX, µ, T q with respect to which pα, Uq is measurable. Then there are • a factor map π : pX, µ, T q ÝÑ pX 1 , µ1 , T 1 q which generates A modulo µ, • another factor map ξ : pY, ν, Sq ÝÑ pY 1 , ν 1 , S 1 q, • and a SOE Φ1 : pX 1 , µ1, T 1 q ÝÑ pY 1 , ν 1 , S 1q such that the diagram pX, µ, T q /  Φ  /  pY, ν, Sq  π  ξ      pX 1 , µ1 , T 1 q /  / Φ1  pY 1 , ν 1 , S 1 q  commutes in the following sense: dom Φ “ π ´1 pdom Φ1 q, and Φ1 ˝ pπ|dom Φq “ ξ ˝ Φ almost surely on this set. Proof. Let A0 :“ A X U, let C0 :“ ΦrA0 s, and let C be the factor of pY, ν, Sq generated by C0 . We now show that C XV “ C0 . The inclusion Ě is obvious. For the reverse, let us show that C is generated as a σ-algebra by a family of sets whose intersections with V are all members of C0 . In particular, let A P A0 , let C :“ ΦpAq, and let ´1 h P H: we will show that D :“ S h C X V still lies in C0 . Since C Ď V , we have 15  ´1  D Ď S h V XV . This right-hand set is partitioned into the subsets Vh,g “ ΦpUg,h q, g P G, and these are all members of ΦrA0 s “ C0 by our assumption that pα, Uq is A-measurable. Therefore D“  ď  gPG  D X Vh,g “  ď  ´1  S h C X Vh,g “  gPG  “  ď  gPG  S  h´1  `  ď  gPG  Sh  ´1  `  C X S h Vh,g  ˘  ˘ ď ´1 ΦpA X T g Ug,h q “ ΦpT g A X Ug,h q, gPG  using (4) for the fourth and fifth equalities. This is explicitly a member of ΦrA0 s “ C0 , as required. Next, since pX, µq and pY, νq are standard Borel, we may choose factor maps π : pX, µ, T q ÝÑ pX 1 , µ1, T 1 q and ξ : pY, ν, Sq ÝÑ pY 1 , ν 1 , S 1q which generate A modulo µ and C modulo ν, respectively. Since U P A0 Ď A and V P C0 Ď C, there are measurable subsets U 1 Ď X 1 and V 1 Ď Y 1 such that U “ π ´1 U 1 and V “ ξ ´1 V 1 modulo negligible sets. Since A X U “ A0 and C X V “ C0 , it follows that A0 “ π ´1 rBU 1 s modulo µ and C0 “ ξ ´1 rBV 1 s modulo ν, respectively. Therefore the set-mapping Φr¨s : A0 ÝÑ C0 defines a measure-algebra equivalence from BU 1 modulo µ1 to BV 1 modulo ν 1 . Since U 1 and V 1 are standard Borel, this arises from a measurable bijection Φ1 : U 1 ÝÑ V 1 . Now a simple diagram-chase shows that this fits into the desired commutative diagram. 3.2 Extensions of partial cocycles and of systems As remarked in the introduction, there is a close relationship between stable orbit equivalence of systems and measure equivalence of the acting groups: [Fur99, Theorem 3.3]. The main results of the present paper concern entropy, which is a property of the systems rather than the groups, so our point of view emphasizes the former. However, some of the results we need are already known in the study of measure equivalence, including most of those in this subsection. The first such result is a general procedure for extending a partial cocycle to a full cocycle. This fact can easily be extracted from the proof of the equivalence between stable orbit equivalence and measure equivalence, but for completeness we include a proof purely in terms of cocycles.  16  Proposition 3.2. If pX, µ, T q is an ergodic G-system and pα, Uq is a non-trivial H-valued partial cocycle over it, then there is a cocycle σ : G ˆ X ÝÑ H such that α “ σ|U . If τ : G ˆ X ÝÑ H is another cocycle satisfying α “ τ|U , then σ and τ are cohomologous over pX, µ, T q. Proof. Part 1. Let us enumerate G “ tg1 “ eG , g2 , g3 , . . .u. Since µpUq ą 0 and the system is ergodic, we have ´ ď ´1 ¯ µ Tg U “ 1 : gPG  that is, U meets almost every T -orbit. Therefore for a.e. x P X there is a minimal n P N such that T gn pxq P U. This choice of gn defines a measurable function γ : X ÝÑ G such that T γpxq pxq P U for a.e. x. We call it the U-return map. We now define σpg, xq by • moving both x and T g x into the set U using the U-return map, and then • taking the value of α that connects those two new points. To be precise, this means that ` ˘ σpg, xq :“ α γpT g xqgγpxq´1 , T γpxq pxq .  To see that this is well-defined, observe that the definition of γ gives T γpxq pxq P U and also ˘ g ´1 ` g T γpT xqgγpxq T γpxq pxq “ T γpT xq pT g xq P U, and so  T γpxq pxq P U X T pγpT  g xqgγpxq´1 q´1  ` ` ˘˘ U “ dom α γpT g xqgγpxq´1 , ¨ .  A simple check using the cocycle equation for α shows that the new map σ also satisfies the cocycle equation: ` ˘ σpgk, xq “ α γpT gk xqgkγpxq´1 , T γpxq pxq ` ˘ “ α γpT gk xqgγpT k xq´1 ¨ γpT k xqkγpxq´1 , T γpxq pxq ` ˘ ` ˘ k “ α γpT gk xqgγpT k xq´1 , T γpT xq pT k xq ¨ α γpT k xqkγpxq´1 , T γpxq pxq “ σpg, T k xqσpk, xq.  17  ´1  Lastly, σ extends α, because if x P U X T g U then γpxq “ γpT g xq “ eG (recalling that we put eG first in our enumeration of G), and so ` ˘ σpg, xq “ α γpT g xqgγpxq´1 , T γpxq pxq “ αpg, xq. Part 2. If τ is another cocycle for which τ|U “ α, then the cocycle equation for τ gives ` ˘ σpg, xq “ α γpT g xqgγpxq´1 , T γpxq pxq ` ˘ “ τ γpT g xqgγpxq´1 , T γpxq pxq “ τ pγpT g xq, T g xq ¨ τ pg, xq ¨ τ pγpxq´1 , T γpxq pxqq “ τ pγpT g xq, T g xq ¨ τ pg, xq ¨ τ pγpxq, xq´1 “ ηpT g xq´1 ¨ τ pg, xq ¨ ηpxq,  where ηpxq :“ τ pγpxq, xq´1 is a measurable function from X to H. So σ is manifestly cohomologous to τ . Remark 3.3. If the partial cocycle pα, Uq satisfies an assumption of boundedness or integrability, then Proposition 3.2 gives no guarantee that its extension σ satisfies the same assumption. We must therefore by quite careful in how we apply this proposition to the study of SSOE1 or SOE8 . In the case of SSOE1 , an integrable extended cocycle is guaranteed by definition, but we sometimes need to perform some other manipulations on a cocycle first and then apply Proposition 3.2, so care is still necessary. ⊳  Now suppose that Φ : pX, µ, T q ֌ pY, ν, Sq is a stable orbit equivalence from a free ergodic G-system to a free ergodic H-system. Let pα, Uq and pβ, V q be the partial cocycles that describe Φ and Φ´1 . We now use Proposition 3.2 to construct a kind of ‘common extension’ of the two systems pX, µ, T q and pY, ν, Sq. This construction can be carried out starting from either pX, µ, T q or pY, ν, Sq. We begin by using the former. First, apply Proposition 3.2 to obtain a cocycle p :“ X ˆ H and let µ α p : G ˆ X ÝÑ H such that α “ α p|U . Now let X p be the σ-finite measure on this space which is the product of µ and counting measure. p µ We define an infinite-measure-preserving action Tp of G ˆ H on pX, pq by setting Tppg,hq px, kq :“ pT g x, α ppg, xqkh´1 q for g P G and h P H. 18  p µ p its invariant, then The resulting system pX, p, Tpq is ergodic. Indeed, if A Ď X p forces A to have been lifted from X, the action of H on the vertical fibres of X but an invariant set lifted from X must be negligible or co-negligible because T is ergodic. Starting with pY, ν, Sq, the analogous construction uses an extension βp of β to define a pG ˆ Hq-action Sp on Yp :“ Y ˆ G that preserves the product νp of ν and counting measure. p µ Lemma 3.4. The infinite-measure-preserving pG ˆ Hq-systems pX, p, Tpq and p p pY , νp, Sq are isomorphic, up to changing the measures by a constant multiple. Proof. Define  p :“ U ˆ teH u Ď X p U  and Vp :“ V ˆ teG u Ď Yp ,  p ÝÑ Vp be the map that results from the obvious identification of U p and let Φ1 : U p with U and V with V . The idea is that Φ1 should be a ‘part’ of the required isomorphism, and now p choose pG ˆ Hq-equivariance tells us how to extend it. Thus, for px, kq P X, pg,hq p (we may do this almost surely by the pg, hq P G ˆ H so that Tp px, kq P U p ergodicity of T ), and let ` ˘ p kq :“ Sppg´1 ,h´1q Φ1 pTppg,hq px, kqq . Φpx,  We must check that this is well-defined. Suppose that pg 1 , h1 q P G ˆ H also 1 1 p , and let pg1 , h1 q :“ pg 1g ´1 , h1 h´1 q. The assumption that satisfies Tppg ,h q px, kq P U p is equivalent to T g x P U and α Tppg,hq px, kq P U ppg, xqkh´1 “ eG , and similarly for pg 1, h1 q. Combining these relations with the cocycle equation for α p, we obtain g ´1 eG “ α ppg 1 , xq ¨ k ¨ ph1 q´1 “ αpg1, T g xqp αpg, xqkh´1 h´1 1 “ αpg1 , T xqh1 .  Hence h1 “ αpg1 , T g xq, and so also g1 “ βph1 , ΦpT g xqq, by (1). From this we deduce that ` ˘ ` ˘ 1 1 1 Φ1 pTppg ,h q px, kqq “ ΦpT g xq, eG “ ΦpT g1 pT g xqq, eG ` ˘ ` ˘ g “ S αpg1 ,T xq pΦpT g xqq, eG “ S h1 pΦpT g xqq, eG ` ˘ “ S h1 pΦpT g xqq, βph1 , ΦpT g xqqeG g1´1 “ Sppg1 ,h1 q pΦ1 pTppg,hq px, kqq. 19  Therefore ˘ 1 1 ´1 ` 1 1 1 1 ´1 Sppg ,h q Φ1 pTppg ,h q px, kqq “ Sppg ,h q Sppg1 ,h1q pΦ1 pTppg,hq px, kqq ˘ ´1 ´1 ` “ Sppg ,h q Φ1 pTppg,hq px, kqq ,  p kq does not depend on which valid choice we showing that the definition of Φpx, make of pg, hq. p is equivariant between the two pG ˆ HqAnalogous reasoning shows that Φ actions. pU p “ Φ1 , and for subsets of U p this amplifies the measure µ Clearly Φ| p by the p is equivariant and both of the systems pX, p µ fixed constant comppΦ1 q. Since Φ p, Tpq p p p p and pY , νp, Sq are ergodic, this fact extends to the whole of Φ. This shows that Φ has the desired properties.  p µ p can be Behind Lemma 3.4 lies a more conceptual fact: pX, p, Tpq and pYp , νp, Sq identified with the measure coupling of G and H that arises from the given stable orbit equivalence, as in the proof of [Fur99, Theorem 3.3]. So far in this section we have not assumed that Φ is a SOE8 or SSOE1 . However, if Φ is a SSOE1 , then by definition we may choose the extended cocycles α p and βp to be integrable. We therefore obtain the following integrable analog of [Fur99, Theorem 3.3]. This corollary is certainly already known to experts, but we record it explicitly for later reference. Corollary 3.5. If there exists a SSOE1 from a G-system to an H-system, then G and H are integrably measure equivalent.  4 Finite-index subgroups Given an SOE between ergodic actions of two groups, and also a finite-index subgroup of each group, one can construct a new SOE between ergodic actions of those subgroups. The construction is explained in this section in case the subgroups are normal. Similar arguments can be carried out without the assumption of normality, but extra technicalities arise which we do not address here. Many of the results we need can be found in [Fur99, Sections 2 and 3], up to the translation between SOE and measure equivalence: see, for instance, [Fur99, Example 2.9]. If pX, µ, T q is a G system and G1 ď G is a subgroup, then T |G1 denotes the restriction of the action to G1 . Our first tool is the following simple lemma. 20  Lemma 4.1. Let pX, µ, T q be an ergodic G-system, and let G1 E G have finite index. Then there is a finite measurable partition P of X into sets of equal measure such that the ergodic components of the system pX, µ, T |G1 q are obtained by conditioning µ on the cells of P. Proof. Let g1 G1 , . . . , gk G1 be the distinct left cosets of G1 in G. Let A be the σ-algebra of T |G1 -invariant sets. It is a factor of the whole G-action, because G1 is normal in G. If A P A has positive measure, then G1 -invariance implies that ď  T gA “  k ď  T gi A.  (5)  i“1  gPG  This set is invariant for the whole G-action and has positive measure, so that measure must equal 1 by ergodicity. Therefore µpAq ě 1{k. So all members of A either have measure zero or have measure at least 1{k, and so A is atomic modulo negligible sets. Letting P be a set of atoms for A modulo negligible sets, we obtain that (i) the action T |G1 is ergodic inside each cell of P, and (ii) the action T permutes the cells of P, and must do so transitively because any union as in (5) has full measure in X. Conclusion (i) implies that the ergodic components of pX, µ, T |G1 q are obtained by conditioning on the cells of P, and conclusion (ii) implies that all those cells have the same measure. Lemma 4.2. In the setting of the previous lemma, if G is amenable and P P P then hpµ|P , T |G1 q “ rG : G1 s ¨ hpµ, T q. Proof. A standard calculation from the definition of KS entropy gives hpµ, T |G1 q “ rG : G1 s ¨ hpµ, T q.  (6)  On the other hand, since all cells of P have equal measure, the affinity of the entropy function gives hpµ, T |G1 q “  1 ÿ hpµ|P , T |G1 q. |P| P PP 21  (7)  Lastly, all of the systems pµ|P , T |G1 q for P P P are conjugate-isomorphic. Indeed, if P, P 1 P P, then we may choose g P G such that T g P “ P 1 , and now the transformation Ψ :“ T g sends the measure µ|P to the measure µ|P 1 and satisfies Ψ ˝ T g1 “ T ϕpg1 q ˝ Ψ for all g1 P G1 , where ϕ P AutpG1 q is conjugation by g. Therefore all the summands on the right-hand side of (7) are equal, and so by (6) they must all be equal to rG : G1 s ¨ hpµ, T q. Now let pX, µ, T q and pY, ν, Sq be free ergodic G- and H-systems respectively. Let Φ : pX, µ, T q ֌ pY, ν, Sq be a SSOE1 or SOE8 , and let U :“ dom Φ and V :“ img Φ. Recall that we always assume G and H are infinite, and let G1 E G and H1 E H be normal subgroups of finite index. In this situation, we will construct an SSOE1 or SOE8 between a free ergodic G1 -system and a free ergodic H1 -system so that the new entropies and new compression are related to the old values in the following simple way. Proposition 4.3. There are a free ergodic G1 -system pX1 , µ1 , T1 q and a free ergodic H1 -system pY1 , ν1 , S1 q such that hpµ1 , T1 q “ rG : G1 s ¨ hpµ, T q and hpν1 , S1 q “ rH : H1 s ¨ hpν, Sq,  (8)  and an SSOE1 (resp. SOE8 ) Φ1 : pX1 , µ1 , T1 q ֌ pY1 , ν1 , S1 q such that comppΦ1 q “  rH : H1 s comppΦq. rG : G1 s  (9)  This proposition enables one to deduce Theorem A for a pair of groups if it is known for a pair of finite-index subgroups. This is important in the case of virtually Euclidean groups, which are treated in the next section. The key to Proposition 4.3 is the infinite-measure-preserving pG ˆ Hq-system of Lemma 3.4. Let α p : G ˆ X ÝÑ H and βp : H ˆ Y ÝÑ G be extensions of α p µ p be the isomorphic and β as given by Lemma 3.2, and let pX, p, Tpq and pYp , νp, Sq pG ˆ Hq-systems that appear in Lemma 3.4.  22  Proof. Step 1. We first construct a new G-system and a new H-system. In a later step we will restrict these to G1 and H1 and then obtain pX1 , µ1 , T1 q and pY1 , ν1 , S1 q as ergodic components of those restrictions. Let G :“ G{G1 and H :“ H{H1 be the finite quotient groups. For elements g P G and h P H let g P G and h P H be their respective images. Now let X1 :“ X ˆ H and Y1 :“ Y ˆ G. Let µ r on X1 be the product of µ and the Haar measure on H, and define νr on Y1 similarly. Let πX : X1 ÝÑ X and πY : Y1 ÝÑ Y be the coordinate projections, so these are rH : H1 s-to-1 and rG : G1 s-to-1, respectively. Define a G-action Tr on pX1 , µ rq by Trg px, hq :“ pT g x, α ppg, xq ¨ hq,  and similarly define an H-action Sr on pY1 , νrq by  p yq ¨ gq. Srh py, gq :“ pS h y, βph,  Then πX intertwines Tr with T and πY intertwines Sr with S.  Step 2. Now let T1 :“ Tr|G1 and S1 :“ Sr|H1 . Doing so gives a free G1 -system pX1 , µ r, T1 q and a free H1 -system pY1 , νr, S1 q. These systems need not be ergodic. We set the issue of ergodicity aside for now, and next construct an SOE between these systems. Let U1 :“ U ˆ teH u  and  V1 :“ V ˆ teG u,  and observe that µ rpU1 q “  1 µpUq rH : H1 s  and νrpV1 q “  1 νpV q. rG : G1 s  (10)  r : U1 ÝÑ V1 by Φpx, r e q :“ pΦpxq, e q. This is an SOE from Define Φ H G pX1 , µ r, T1 q to pY1 , νr, S1 q. To see this, suppose that px, eH q P U1 and g P G1 are such that T1g px, eH q “ pT g x, α ppg, xqq P U1 . Since x, T g x P U, we have α ppg, xq “ αpg, xq. Now the following both hold: (i) The points x and T g x lie in the same class of RT X pU ˆ Uq, and hence their Φ-images lie in the same class of RS X pV ˆ V q, because Φ is an SOE.  (ii) Since T1g px, eH q P U1 , we must have αpg, xq “ eH , and hence αpg, xq P H1 . Therefore the points Φpxq and ΦpT g xq “ S αpg,xq Φpxq actually lie in the same H1 -orbit, not just the same H-orbit. 23  r maps the classes of RT1 XpU1 ˆU1 q into classes of These conclusions show that Φ RS1 X pV1 ˆ V1 q. By the symmetry of the construction, the same holds in reverse, r is an SOE as required. and so Φ Observe that the calculation (10) gives r “ comppΦq  νrpV1 q rH : H1 s “ comppΦq, µ rpU1 q rG : G1 s  where we use the measures µ r and νr on our two new systems.  Step 3. We will now replace µ r and νr with ergodic measures so as to preserve the properties obtained above. This relies on the following observation. Let us identify G and G1 with the corresponding subgroups in the first coordinate of G ˆ H, and similarly for H and H1 . Then the space pX1 , µ rq may be identified with a fundamental domain for the |H1 p p µ action T on the infinite measure space pX, pq, and so pX1 , µ r, T1 q may be iden|G1 H1 p p p tified with the factor of pX, µ p, T q consisting of T -invariant sets. Similarly, pY1 , νr, S1 q may be identified with the SpG1 -invariant factor of pYp , νp, Sp|H1 q. As a result, there is a measure-preserving pG ˆ Hq-action on pX1 , µ rq given p µ by the quotient of the full pG ˆ Hq-system pX, p, Tpq, and T1 is the restriction of that pG ˆ Hq-action to G1 . This pG ˆ Hq-action on pX1 , µ rq is ergodic, because the infinite-measure-preserving system above it is ergodic. On the other hand, G1 – G1 ˆ teH u is normal in G ˆ H, because G1 is normal in G. We may therefore apply Lemma 4.1 to the inclusion of T1 into this larger ergodic pG ˆ Hqaction. It tells us that the G1 -system pX1 , µ r, T1 q has some finite number, say n, of ergodic components, and each of them is obtained by conditioning on an invariant set of measure 1{n. Let P be the partition of X1 consisting of these components. An analogous argument gives a finite partition Q of pY1 , νrq into equal-measure ergodic components for S1 ; let m be the number of these. Crucially, we can now show that n “ m. Since pX1 , µ rq is the quotient of p µ p µ pX, pq by the action Tp|H1 , we may identify P with the partition of pX, pq into |G ˆH ergodic components for the combined action Tp 1 1 . Similarly, Q may be identified with the partition of pYp , νpq into ergodic components for the combined action Sp|G1 ˆH1 . But those two actions are isomorphic up to a constant change of measure, by Lemma 3.4, and so they have the same numbers of ergodic components. To finish our construction, choose one of the ergodic components P P P for which µ rpP X U1 q ą 0. The restriction of P to U1 gives the ergodic decomposition r carries that restriction to the of RT1 X pU1 ˆ U1 q up to negligible sets, and Φ 24  r identifies P X U1 with ergodic decomposition of RS1 X pV1 ˆ V1 q. Therefore Φ Q X V1 for a unique cell Q P Q. Now let µ1 :“ µ r|P and ν1 :“ νr|Q . Then the r restriction Φ1 :“ Φ|P X U1 defines a SOE from pX1 , µ1 , T1 q to pY1 , ν1 , T1 q, and these are a free ergodic G1 -system and a free ergodic H1 -system respectively. For these systems, we may calculate the entropy using Lemma 4.2. On the r because n “ m. Note other hand, we observe that comppΦ1 q just equals comppΦq r to a subset, the equality n “ m is that, although Φ1 is simply a restriction of Φ needed for this second calculation because the measures have also been changed: from µ r and νr to their restrictions µ1 and ν1 . The partial cocycles associated to Φ1 and Φ´1 1 are simply restrictions of those ´1 associated to Φ and Φ . Also, the new measures µ1 and ν1 have bounded Radon– Nikodym derivatives with respect to µ r and νr respectively. Therefore Φ1 is an SSOE1 (resp. SOE8 ) if Φ has this property.  5 Virtually Euclidean groups This section proves Theorem B, which concerns a SOE8 or SSOE1 between actions of Euclidean lattices. From this we deduce Theorem A in case G and H are both virtually Euclidean: that is, they contain finite-index subgroups isomorphic to Euclidean lattices. By intersecting finitely many conjugates, one may assume that those subgroups are normal. Let e1 , . . . , ed be the standard basis of Zd , and let | ¨ | be the corresponding ℓ1 -norm on Zd . The special case of Euclidean lattices is important for two reasons. Firstly, we will make contact with the older notion of Kakutani equivalence for actions of Euclidean lattices, which has been studied much more thoroughly than SSOE1 . I do not know whether these notions are actually equivalent. Secondly, our approach to Theorem A in the remainder of the paper needs the assumption that G and H have super-linear growth, so it does not cover virtually cyclic groups. We therefore need the results of the present section to prove Theorem A in that case. For groups containing a finite-index copy of Zd with d ě 2, we end up with two proofs of Theorem A, one in the present section and the other from the remainder of the paper. We start with Theorem B, which applies to Euclidean lattices themselves, and then prove Theorem A for virtually Euclidean groups using Theorem B and Proposition 4.3. In the Euclidean case, Theorem B connects SOE8 and SSOE1 with the generalization of Kakutani equivalence to Zd -actions developed in [Kat77, dJR84, 25  HB92]. We use the definition of this property from [dJR84, Definition 3]: Definition 5.1. Let M be a real pd ˆ dq-matrix. Two Zd -systems pX, µ, T q and pY, ν, Sq are M-Kakutani equivalent if there is an SOE Φ : pX, µ, T q ֌ pY, ν, Sq with the following properties: (i) dom Φ “ X, and (ii) if α : Zd ˆ X ÝÑ Zd is the cocycle describing Φ, then for any ε ą 0 there are Nε P N and Aε Ď X with µpAε q ą 1 ´ ε such that, if v P Zd has |v| ě N, and x P Aε X T ´v Aε , then |αpv, xq ´ Mv| ď ε|v|. In their paper, del Junco and Rudolph refer to Φ as an ‘orbit injection’, rather than a ‘SOE’, and say that it ‘maps distinct orbits into distinct orbits’. They also make the explicit assumption that M is invertible with | det M| ě 1. However, the paragraph immediately following the proof of their Proposition 3 makes it clear that this is what we call a SOE, and that the other parts of Definition 5.1 actually require that | det M| ě 1. It is helpful to know that part (ii) of Definition 5.1 can be replaced by the following apparently weaker condition: (ii)1 For any ε ą 0 there are Nε P N and Aε Ď X with µpAε q ą 1 ´ ε such that, if 1 ď i ď d, n ě Nε , and x P Aε X T ´nei Aε , then |αpnei , xq ´ nMei | ă εn. The condition that this holds for some basis in Zd is Condition 1 on p93 of [dJR84]. The fact that it implies M-Kakutani equivalence is their Proposition 7. The first assertion of Theorem B reduces our work to the case of SSOE1 . We isolate it as the following lemma. Lemma 5.2. If pX, µ, T q is a Zd -system, pY, ν, Sq is a ZD -system, and they are SOE8 , then the partial cocycles α and β which describe this SOE have extensions to full cocycles Zd ˆ X ÝÑ ZD and ZD ˆ Y ÝÑ Zd which are still bounded. In particular, the systems are SSOE1.  26  Proof. It suffices to show that any bounded ZD -valued partial cocycle over pX, µ, T q can be extended to a bounded cocycle Zd ˆ X ÝÑ ZD . Arguing coordinate-wise it suffices to prove this when D “ 1. Thus, let pα, Uq be a Z-valued partial cocycle over pX, µ, T q, and assume that |αpv, xq| ď C|v| for µ-a.e. x P U X T ´v U, for all v P Zd . For each x P X let Dx :“ tv P Zd : T v x P Uu, the U-return set of x. Since pX, µ, T q is ergodic and µpUq ą 0, this Dx is nonempty for almost every x. By removing a negligible set, we may assume this holds for strictly every x. Now consider x P U, so 0 P Dx . Then the assumed boundedness of α is equivalent to the assertion that the map Dx ÝÑ Z : v ÞÑ αx pvq is C-Lipschitz for the restriction of | ¨ | to Dx . We may therefore apply a standard construction to extend it to a C-Lipschitz map from the whole of Zd to R, and then apply some rounding to produce a Z-valued function. To be specific, for u P Zd , let us define X \ σx0 puq :“ mintαx pvq ` C}u ´ v} : v P Dx u ,  where t¨u is the integer-part function. This is pC ` 2q-Lipschitz, where the extra ‘2’ allows for the rounding. It extends αx , and it satisfies the following slightly extended cocycle identity: σx0 pu ` wq “ σx0 puq ` σT0 u x pwq “ αx puq ` σT0 u x pwq whenever x, T u x P U. (11) Finally, the cocycle equation tells us how to extend σ 0 further to a function on the whole of Zd ˆ X. For each x P X, choose some v P Dx , and let σx puq :“ σT0 v x pu ´ vq ´ σT0 v x p´vq.  (12)  A re-arrangement using equation (11) shows that this right-hand side does not depend on v, so σx puq is well-defined. If x P U then we may use the choice v “ 0, which shows that σ does indeed extend σ 0 . The new function σx is still pC ` 2q-Lipschitz on Zd for each x because σT0 v x has that property. 27  It remains to verify the cocycle identity for σ. Suppose that x P X and u, w P Z , and choose v P Dx . It follows that v ´ w P DT w x . Therefore, using these two points in the right-hand side of (12), we obtain d  σx pu ` wq “ σT0 v x pu ` w ´ vq ´ σT0 v x p´vq “ σT0 v´w pT w xq pu ´ pv ´ wqq ´ σT0 v´w pT w xq p´pv ´ wqq ` σT0 v x pw ´ vq ´ σT0 v x p´vq “ σT w x puq ` σx pwq, as required. Proof of Theorem B. By the preceding lemma, it suffices to assume that Φ : pX, µ, T q ֌ pY, ν, Sq is an SSOE1 . By considering Φ´1 instead if necessary, we may assume that comppΦq ď 1. This SSOE1 between the systems implies an integrable measure equivalence between the two groups, by Corollary 3.5. As shown by Lewis Bowen in [Aus16, Theorem B.2], this requires that they have the same growth, and hence D “ d. Let U :“ dom Φ and V :“ img Φ, and let α : Zd ˆ Y ÝÑ Zd be an integrable cocycle such that pα, Uq describes Φ. Since comppΦq ď 1, we have νpV q ď µpUq. Choose a measurable subset W Ď Y such that W Ě V and νpV q{νpW q “ µpUq. By [Fur99, Proposition r between the relations RT and RS X 2.7], Φ has an extension to an isomorphism Φ r pW ˆ W q: that is, Φ is a SOE which extends Φ, whose domain is the whole of r “ X, X, and whose image is W . It has the same compression as Φ. Since dom Φ d d it is described by a cocycle σ : Z ˆ X ÝÑ Z such that σ|U “ α|U and such that σx is an injection for a.e. x. It does not follow that σ is integrable, but since σ|U “ α|U , the second part of Proposition 3.2 promises that σ is cohomologous to α, say σpv, xq “ αpv, xq ` γpT v xq ´ γpxq for some γ : X ÝÑ Zd . Next, since α is integrable, the cocycle equation and the pointwise ergodic theorem give that ż n´1 αpnei , xq 1 ÿ jei αpei , T xq ÝÑ vi :“ αpei , xq µpdxq as n ÝÑ 8 (13) “ n n j“0 28  for µ-almost every x and for i “ 1, 2, . . . , d. Let M be the pd ˆ dq-matrix whose columns are the vectors vi . r is an M-Kakutani equivalence for this M. We We now show that the SOE Φ have guaranteed condition (i) by construction, and we finish the proof by showing condition (ii)1 instead of (ii). Given ε ą 0, choose rε ă 8 so large that the set Bε :“ tx : |γpxq| ď rε u has µpBε q ą 1 ´ ε{2. Now choose Nε so large that rε ă εNε {2 and so that the set Cε :“ x : |αpnei , xq ´ nvi | ă εn{2 @n ě Nε @i “ 1, 2, . . . , d  (  has µpCε q ą 1 ´ ε{2; this is possible because of (13). Finally, let Aε :“ Bε X Cε . Then µpAε q ą 1 ´ ε, and for any n ě Nε and x P Aε X T ´nei Aε we obtain |σpnei , xq ´ nMei | ď |αpnei , xq ´ nvi | ` |γpxq| ` |γpT nei xq| ă εn{2 ` 2rε ă εn.  Corollary 5.3. The conclusion of Theorem A holds if G and H are virtually Euclidean. Proof. If G and H are strictly Euclidean, then Theorem B reduces this to the corresponding result for Kakutani equivalence. By the explanation which follows the proof of Proposition 3 in [dJR84], the matrix M constructed in the proof of Theorem B must satisfy r “ comppΦq “ comppΦq  1 . | det M|  Now the desired result follows from the equation hpν, Sq “  hpµ, T q , | det M|  which is recalled on the last page of [dJR84] (beware that this equation also appears at the bottom of p91 of their paper, but written incorrectly). Del Junco and 29  Rudolph attribute this equation to an unpublished work of Nadler, but the special case of id-Kakutani equivalence is included as [HB92, Corollary 3], and the general case is proved in the same way. Now suppose that G1 E G and H1 E H are finite-index subgroups isomorphic to Euclidean lattices. Let pX1 , µ1 , T1 q, pY1 , ν1 , S1 q and Φ1 be the systems and SOE given by Proposition 4.3. Then the special case of Euclidean groups gives that hpν1 , S1 q “ comppΦ1 qhpµ1 , T1 q, and now the equations (8) and (9) turn this into the desired conclusion. Remark 5.4. Beyond Kakutani equivalence for Zd -actions, Kammeyer and Rudolph have developed a very abstract notion of ‘restricted orbit equivalences’ between actions of discrete amenable groups: see [KR97, KR02]. I do now know whether OE1 or SSOE1 are examples of restricted orbit equivalences, but if so then their machinery would have several consequences in our setting, such as an analog of Ornstein theory. ⊳  Question 5.5. Is it true that SOE8 implies SSOE1 between actions of other finitely generated amenable groups? Does Kakutani equivalence imply either? ⊳  6  Proof of the entropy formula using derandomization  This section returns to the setting of general amenable-group actions. It derives Theorem A from Theorem D. The more difficult work of proving Theorems C and D occupies the rest of the paper after this. Theorem D leads to Theorem A via the following. Proposition 6.1. Let pX, µ, T q /  Φ  /  pY, ν, Sq  π  ξ      pX 1 , µ1 , T 1 q /  / Φ1  30  pY 1 , ν 1 , S 1 q  be a commutative diagram whose rows are SOEs, whose left column is a factor map of free G-systems, and whose right column is a factor map of free H-systems. Then the relative entropies over those factor maps satisfy µpdom Φq´1 hpµ, T | πq “ νpimg Φq´1 hpν, S | ξq. This result may already be known, but I have not found a suitable reference in the literature. It may be a consequence of Danilenko’s quite abstract results in [Dan01, Section 2], but it seems worth including a more classical proof. A simple approach, suggested to me by Lewis Bowen, is based on the following lemma. Lemma 6.2. Let π : pX, µ, T q ÝÑ pX 1 , µ1 , T 1 q be a factor map of free G-systems. Then there is a commutative diagram pX, µ, Rq  idX  /  pX, µ, T q  π  π    pX 1 , µ1 , R1 q    / idX 1  pX 1 , µ1 , T 1 q  in which R and R1 are single transformations and idX and idX 1 are OEs (equivalently, R and T have the same orbits and R1 and T 1 have the same orbits). Proof. By the main result of [CFW81], there is a single µ-preserving transformation R1 on X 1 which has the same orbits as the action T 1 . Since pX 1 , µ1 , T 1 q is free, this implies the existence of a unique cocycle α : X 1 ÝÑ G such that 1  R1 x1 “ pT 1 qαpx q x1  for x1 P X 1 .  The proof is completed by defining Rx :“ T αpπpxqq x for x P X.  Lemma 6.2 enables us to convert G- and H-actions into Z-actions, for which stable orbit equivalence is easier to understand. For Z-actions, stable orbit equivalence is simply an orbit equivalence between induced transformations, whose entropy is computed by Abramov’s formula.  31  Proof of Proposition 6.1. Let U :“ dom Φ, U 1 :“ dom Φ1 , V :“ img Φ and V 1 :“ img Φ1 . Our assumptions include that U “ π ´1 U 1 and V “ ξ ´1 V 1 . First we invoke Lemma 6.2 on the left-hand side of the diagram in the statement of Proposition 6.1. This produces the larger diagram pX, µ, Rq  idX  /  pX, µ, T q /  π  Φ  /  pY, ν, Sq  π    pX 1 , µ1 , T 1 q  ξ    / idX 1  pX 1 , µ1 , T 1 q /    Φ1  /  pY 1 , ν 1 , S 1 q.  By [RW00, Theorem 2.6], the left-hand square above gives the equality hpµ, R | πq “ hpµ, T | πq.  (14)  Now composing the rows of this diagram, it collapses to pX, µ, Rq /  Φ  /  pY, ν, Sq  π  ξ    pX 1 , µ1 , R1 q /    Φ1  /  pY 1 , ν 1 , S 1q.  In view of (14), it suffices to show that this diagram implies the equality µpUq´1 hpµ, R | πq “ νpV q´1 hpν, S | ξq : that is, we have reduced the desired proposition to the case G “ Z. Applying Lemma 6.2 in the same way on the right-hand side of the diagram, we may reduce to the case in which G “ H “ Z, and so T and S may be regarded as single transformations. However, in this case Φ (resp. Φ1 ) is an OE between the induced transformations TU and SV (resp. TU1 1 and SV1 1 ), and so another appeal to [RW00, Theorem 2.6] gives ˇ ˇ ˘ ˘ ` ` h µ|U , TU ˇ π|U “ h ν|V , SV ˇ ξ|V . Finally, Abramov’s formula for the entropy of induced transformations [Abr59] and the Abramov-Rokhlin formula for the entropy of an extension [AR62] give ˇ ` ˘ ` ˘ ` ˘ h µ|U , TU ˇ π|U “ h µ|U , TU ´ h µ1|U 1 , TU1 1 ` ˘ “ µpUq´1 hpµ, T q ´ hpµ1 , T 1 q “ µpUq´1 hpµ, T | πq, ˇ ` ˘ and similarly for h ν|V , SV ˇ ξ|V . 32  Completed proof of Theorem A, given Theorem D. First suppose that either G or H has linear growth. Lewis Bowen has shown in [Aus16, Theorem B.2] that growth type is an invariant of integrable measure equivalence, so this implies that they both have linear growth, and hence they are both virtually Z. So in this case the result follows from Section 5. Now suppose that both groups have super-linear growth. Let Φ : pX, µ, T q ֌ pY, ν, Sq be either a SSOE1 or a SOE8 , and let c :“ comppΦq. In this case Theorem D gives a positive-measure subset U Ď dom Φ and a diagram of the form pX, µ, T q /  Φ|U  /  pY, ν, Sq  π  ξ    pX 1 , µ1, T 1 q /    / Φ1  pY 1 , ν 1 , S 1 q,  where hpµ1 , T 1 q ă ε and all the systems are free. It follows that ν 1 pimg Φ1 q νpΦpUqq “ 1 . c“ µpUq µ pdom Φ1 q We now combine Proposition 6.1 with Ward and Zhang’s generalization of the Abramov–Rokhlin formula to extensions of amenable-group actions [WZ92, Theorem 4.4]. This gives hpν, Sq ě “ “ ě  hpν, S | ξq chpµ, T | πq ` ˘ c hpµ, T q ´ hpµ1 , T 1 q ` ˘ c hpµ, T q ´ ε .  Since ε ą 0 was arbitrary, it follows that  hpν, Sq ě chpµ, T q, and the reverse inequality holds by symmetry.  7  Subrelations, graphings and a new notion of cost  Most of the rest of the paper will go towards proving Theorem D. The next step is to introduce some more kinds of structure that will be used during the proof. 33  7.1 Graphings Let pX, µ, T q be a G-system and RT Ď X ˆ X its orbit equivalence relation. In this setting, we need some definitions related to graphings and their costs. Graphings go back to Adams’ paper [Ada90], and cost to Levitt’s work [Lev95]. These constructions have since become very important to the study of Borel equivalence relations: see, for instance, Gaboriau’s survey [Gab02]. In order to study integrable orbit equivalence, we need to work with graphings that are always defined with reference to the given G-action, and then with a modified notion of cost that accounts for the lengths of elements of G. We therefore adjust the older definitions in the following way. A T -graphing is a family Γ “ pAg qgPG of measurable subsets of X indexed by G satisfying Ag´1 “ T g Ag  @g P G.  (15)  The associated graphing in Levitt’s sense is the family of partial maps T g |Ag : Ag ÝÑ T g Ag . Ť The vertex set of a graphing Γ is VertpΓq :“ g Ag , and Γ is nontrivial if this set has positive µ-measure. If VertpΓq “ V , we may regard Γ as placing the structure of a graph on each of the equivalence classes in RT X pV ˆ V q, where x and T g x are joined by an edge if x P Ag . Condition (15) is equivalent to this set of edges being symmetric, so we may regard this graph as undirected. The equivalence relation generated by a T -graphing Γ is the smallest Borel equivalence relation which contains px, T g xq whenever g P G and x P Ag . It is denoted by RΓ . Definition 7.1. A T -graphing Γ is orbit-wise connected if RΓ X pV0 ˆ V0 q “ RT X pV0 ˆ V0 q for some V0 Ď VertpΓq with µpVertpΓqzV0 q “ 0. Equivalently, this asserts that for µ-a.e. x P VertpΓq, the edges of RΓ define a connected graph on the set T G x X V0 . The factor of pX, µ, T q generated by the graphing Γ “ pAg qg is simply the smallest factor which contains all the sets Ag . We write hpµ, T, Γq for the KS entropy of this factor.  34  7.2 Graphings and partial cocycles Now suppose that pα, Uq is an H-valued partial cocycle over pX, µ, T q and that Γ “ pAg qg is a T -graphing. Let V :“ VertpΓq, and assume that V Ď U. In view of the relation (15), this implies both Ag Ď U  and Ag´1 “ T g Ag Ď U  @g P G,  ´1  so in fact Ag Ď U X T g U for every g. We may therefore define the restriction of α to Γ to be the restriction of α to the subset tpg, xq : g P G and x P Ag u. ´1  Denote it by α|Γ. If Γ is the ‘naı̈ve’ graphing defined by Ag :“ V X T g V for every g, then this agrees with our previous definition of α|V . The factor generated by α|Γ is the factor A generated by all the partial observables pαg |Ag , Ag q, g P G, and its entropy is hpµ, T, α|Γq :“ hpµ, T, Aq. Lemma 7.2. If Γ is an orbit-wise connected T -graphing, and V :“ VertpΓq, then the factor generated by α|Γ contains the factor generated by pα|V , V q up to negligible sets. Proof. Let A be the factor generated by α|Γ. It contains every Ag , so it contains ´1 their union V , and so it contains all of the intersections V XT g V (although these need not be equal to Ag for any g). Now fix g P G and h P H, and consider the subsets ´1  Vg,h :“ tx P V X T g V : αpg, xq “ hu. As g and h vary, these generate the σ-algebra of pα|V , V q. Since Γ is orbit-wise ´1 connected, we may remove a negligible set so that a point x P V X T g V lies in Vg,h if and only if there is a factorization g “ gk gk´1 ¨ ¨ ¨ g1 such that T gi´1 ¨¨¨g1 x P Agi  @i “ 1, . . . , k  and αpg, xq “ αpgk , T gk´1¨¨¨g1 xq ¨ ¨ ¨ αpg1 , xq “ h. 35  There are only countably many possibilities for the sequence of elements g1 , . . . , gk P G, and similarly for the sequence of elements αpg1, xq, . . . , αpgk , T gk´1¨¨¨g1 xq. Therefore we have expressed Vg,h is a countable union of further subsets all of which manifestly lie in the factor generated by α|Γ. Lemma 7.3. Suppose that pα, Uq is a partial cocycle over pX, µ, T q and that Γ “ pAg qg is a T -graphing for which VertpΓq Ď U. Then ÿ ÿ hpµ, T, α|Γq ď Hµ pAg q ` µpAg qHµ|Ag pαg q. gPG  gPG  Proof. This is a simple application of equation (3): ÿ ÿ hpµ, T, α|Γq ď hpµ, T, pαg |Ag , Ag qq ď Hµ pαg ; Ag q gPG  “  ÿ  Hµ pAg q `  gPG  ÿ  gPG  µpAg qHµ|Ag pαg q.  gPG  In combination, the previous two lemmas allow one to control the entropy of the factor generated by pα|V , V q using any choice of orbit-wise connected graphing with vertex set V . A careful choice of that graphing can give a better upper bound than a more naı̈ve estimate in terms of the partial observables ´1 pαg , V X T g V q. The next definition gives our modified notion of cost. Definition 7.4. The | ¨ |G -cost of a graphing Γ “ pAg qg is ÿ C|¨|G pΓq :“ |g|G ¨ µpAg q. gPG  This differs from Levitt’s definition by the presence of |g|G as a weighting factor. The | ¨ |G -cost will be the basis of several estimates later in the paper. Simplest among these is the following. Lemma 7.5. For every ε ą 0 there is a Cε ă 8 such that for any T -graphing Γ we have hpµ, T, Γq ď Hµ pAeG q ` Cε ¨ C|¨|G pΓq ` ε. 36  Proof. This follows from the bound ÿ ÿ hpµ, T, Γq ď Hµ pAg q “ r´µpAg q log µpAg q ´ µpXzAg q log µpXzAg qs gPG  gPG  and Lemma 2.1. Our principal result about graphings and | ¨ |G -cost is the following, which gives us great flexibility in finding low-cost T -graphings that are still ‘large’ in the sense of orbit-wise connectedness. Proposition 7.6 (Existence of low-cost graphings). Let G be a finitely-generated amenable group of super-linear growth and pX, µ, T q a free ergodic G-system. Let U Ď X have positive measure, and let ε ą 0. Then there is a nontrivial orbit-wise connected T -graphing Γ such that VertpΓq Ď U,  µpVertpΓqq ă ε and C|¨|G pΓq ă ε.  This proposition will be proved in the next section.  8  Constructing low-cost graphings  This section culminates in the proof of Proposition 7.6. First we give two subsections to some preparatory results. Let pX, µ, T q be a free ergodic G-system. 8.1 Følner sets and skeleta The following nomenclature is not standard, but will be useful in the sequel. Definition 8.1. Let pX, dq be a metric space and r ą 0. An r-skeleton of X is a connected graph pV, Eq in which V is an r-dense subset of X (that is, every element of X lies within distance r of some element of V ). Its d-weight is the quantity ÿ wtd pV, Eq “ dpu, vq P r0, `8s. uvPE  Lemma 8.2. Let pX, dq be a compact metric space, let r ą 0, and let pV, Eq be an r-skeleton of pX, dq with d-weight w ă 8. Then any subset Y Ď X has a p2rq-skeleton of d-weight at most 2w ` 2r|V |. 37  Proof. Let W :“ tv P V : dpv, Y q ă ru. Since V is r-dense in the whole of X, one must have Br pW q Ě Y , where Br pW q is the union of all open rballs centred at points of W . For each w P W , pick yw P Y X Br pwq, and let VY :“ tvw : w P W u. Since B2r pVY q Ě Br pW q, the set VY is p2rq-dense in Y . By removing edges from E if necessary, we may assume that it is a spanning tree of V . Then, since V has a spanning tree with d-weight w, its further subset W Ď V has a spanning tree with d-weight at most 2w: this is the classical lower bound of 1{2 for the Steiner`ratio ˘ of a general metric space (see, for W 1 instance, [Cie01, Chapter 3]). Let E Ď 2 be a spanning tree of W with ÿ ÿ wtd pW, E 1 q “ dpw, w 1q ď 2 dpx, yq “ 2w. ww 1 PE 1  xyPE  Let EY :“ tvw vw1 : ww 1 P E 1 u. Now pVY , EY q is a p2rq-skeleton of Y , and wtd pVY , EY q ď wtd pW, E 1 q ` 2r|E 1 | ď 2w ` 2rp|W | ´ 1q ď 2w ` 2r|V |, using the fact that, in a tree such as pW, E 1 q, one has |E 1 | “ |W | ´ 1. Now let G be a finitely generated amenable group and dG a right-invariant word metric on it, as before. Given ε, r ą 0, let us say that a subset F Ď G is pε, rq-Følner if |F | ă 8 and |pBG prq ¨ F qzF | ď ε|F |, where we abbreviate BG peG , rq “: BG prq. The amenability of G asserts that pε, rq-Følner sets exist for every ε and r. The use of two parameters, ε and r, in specifying the Følner condition is somewhat redundant, but in some of the proofs that follow it is convenient to be able to manipulate them separately. We also need our Følner sets to satisfy another condition. Given E Ď G and r ą 0, we say E is r-connected if for any g, h P E there is a finite sequence g “ g0 , g1 , . . . , gm “ h with gi P E and dG pgi , gi`1q ď r for every i “ 0, 1, . . . , m ´ 1. Such a sequence is called an r-path, and the integer m is its length. A set is connected if it is 1-connected. Lemma 8.3. If G is amenable, then for every ε, r ą 0 it has an pε, rq-Følner set which is connected. 38  Proof. Step 1.  Let η :“ ε{|BG prq|. Let F be an pη, rq-Følner set, and let F “ F1 Y ¨ ¨ ¨ Y Fk  be the partition of F into maximal p2rq-connected subsets. Then we must have i‰j and therefore  ùñ  BG prqFi X BG prqFj “ H,  |BG prqF zF | ÿ |BG prqFi zFi | |Fi | “ ¨ . |F | |F | |F | i i“1 k  Since the left-hand side of this equation is at most η, and the right-hand side is an average weighted by the factors |Fi |{|F |, there must be some i ď k for which |BG prqFi zFi | ď η. |Fi |  (16)  So Fi is a p2rq-connected pη, rq-Følner set. Step 2. Now let E :“ BG prqFi . If g, h P Fi and dG pg, hq ď 2r, then there is a 1-path of length at most 2r from g to h in G, by the definition of the word metric dG . The first r elements of that path must be contained in BG pg, rq, and the last r elements must be contained in BG ph, rq, so the whole path is contained in E. Since Fi is p2rq-connected, it follows that E is connected. On the other hand, we have BG prq ¨ E “ pBG prq ¨ Fi q Y pBG prq ¨ pEzFi qq, and the first set in this right-hand union is just E again. Therefore |pBG prq ¨ EqzE| ď |BG prq ¨ pEzFi q| ď |BG prq||EzFi |. By (16), this is at most η|BG prq||Fi | ď ε|E|, so E is pε, rq-Følner. The main results of this section apply to groups of super-linear growth. Curiously, their proofs seem to require the following fact from geometric group theory. Proposition 8.4. If G is a finitely-generated group of super-linear growth, then its growth is at least quadratic: there is a constant c1 ą 0 such that |BG prq| ě c1 r 2  39  @r ě 1.  Proposition 8.4 can be deduced by combining Gromov’s theorem on groups of polynomial growth with the work of Wolf [Wol68], Guivarc’h [Gui71] and Bass [Bas72] on the growth of finitely generated nilpotent groups. However, it also has a more elementary proof: see [Man12, Corollary 3.5]. (The latter proof and reference were pointed out to me by Brandon Seward.) Lemma 8.5 (Skeleta for Følner sets). If G is an amenable group of super-linear growth, then there is a constant c with the following property. For any r ě 1, if F is a connected p1, rq-Følner set, then it has a p2rq-skeleton pV, Eq satisfying wtdG pV, Eq ď c|F |{r. Proof. Let c1 be the constant given by Proposition 8.4. Let V Ď F be a maximal p2rq-separated subset, chosen so that it contains eG . The standard volumecomparison argument gives ˇď ˇ ˇ ˇ BG pg, rqˇ ď |BG prq ¨ F | ď 2|F | |V ||BG prq| “ ˇ gPV  ùñ  |V | ď  2|F | . |BG prq|  Now consider the graph on V in which two points form an edge if the distance between them is at most 5r. This graph is connected, by the connectedness of F and the maximality of V . It therefore contains a spanning tree, whose edge-set is a family E of |V | ´ 1 pairs of points in V . This gives the bound wtdG pV, Eq ď 5r|E| ă 5r|V | ď  10r|F | 10r|F | 20 ď “ |F |{r. 2 |BG prq| c1 r c1  The above lemma and Lemma 8.2 immediately combine to give the following. Corollary 8.6 (Skeleta for subsets of Følner sets). If G is an amenable group of super-linear growth, then there is a constant c with the following property. If r ą 0, F is a connected p1, rq-Følner set, and A Ď F , then A has a p4rq-skeleton pV, Eq satisfying wtdG pV, Eq ď c|F |{r.  40  8.2 Rokhlin subrelations We now return to the G-system pX, µ, T q. If x P X and A is a finite subset of the orbit T G pxq, then we say A is pε, rq-Følner or r-connected if this holds for its pre-image in the group: that is, for the set tg P G : T g x P Au. Since the action is free, this pre-image has the same finite cardinality as A. If we replace x with a different point T h x in the same orbit, then this pre-image of A changes by right-translation by h´1 . This does not affect the properties of being pε, rq-Følner or r-connected, so those properties really depend only on the orbit T G pxq and the set A, not on the particular reference point x. Definition 8.7. Let ε, r ą 0. A subrelation R Ď RT is pε, rq-Rokhlin if it is a Borel equivalence relation, all its equivalence classes are finite and connected, and µtx : rxsR is pε, rq-Følneru ą 1 ´ ε. This definition has many predecessors in the literature, but usually without requiring connectedness. That additional demand adapts it to our present needs. Lemma 8.8. If pX, µ, T q is ergodic and atomless then RT has an pε, rq-Rokhlin subrelation for every ε, r ą 0. Proof. According to one of the key results of [CFW81], RT may be written as Ť ně1 Rn for some increasing sequence R1 Ď R2 Ď ¨ ¨ ¨ Ď of Borel equivalence relations with finite classes. For each i, define R1i Ď Ri by ( R1i “ px, yq P Ri : x and y lie in the same connected component of rxsRi .  These R1i ’s are Borel equivalence relations for which every class rxsR1i is finite and connected. Also, their union is still equal to RT . To see this, let x P X and g P G. There is a finite 1-path e “ g0 , g1 , . . . , gk “ g in G. Since RT “  Ť  ně1  Rn , for each i “ 0, 1, . . . , k ´ 1 we have  pT gi x, T gi`1 xq P Rn  for all sufficiently large n, 41  and therefore in fact pT gi x, T gi`1 xq P R1n  for all sufficiently large n,  since dG pgi , gi`1q “ 1 for each i. Hence, by transitivity, px, T g xq P R1n for all sufficiently large n. Finally, ż BG prq ÿ ż |T g prxsR1 qzrxsR1 | |T prxsR1n qzrxsR1n | n n µpdxq ď µpdxq 1 |rxsR1n | |rxs | R n gPBG prq ÿ ż |ty P rxsR1 : T g y R rxsR1 u| n n “ µpdxq 1 | |rxs R n gPBG prq ÿ “ µtx : px, T g xq R R1n u. gPBG prq  Ť This tends to 0 as n ÝÑ 8 because RT “ ně1 R1n . By Chebychev’s inequality, this implies that µtx : rxsR1n is pε, rq-Følneru ą 1 ´ ε for all sufficiently large n. 8.3 Existence of low-cost graphings We are ready to prove Proposition 7.6. The required T -graphing will be built as a union of a sequence of T -graphings given by the following lemma. Given two measurable subsets U, V Ď X, we say that V is pT, rq-dense in U if T BG prq V Ě U. Lemma 8.9. If G is an amenable group of super-linear growth, then there is a constant c ă 8 with the following property. Let pX, µ, T q be a free G-system and let U Ď X have positive measure. Let 0 ă ε ă µpUq and r ă 8. If R Ď RT is an pε, rq-Rokhlin subrelation, then there is a T -graphing Γ “ pAg qg with the following properties: i) V :“ VertpΓq Ď U, ii) C|¨|G pΓq ď c{r, iii) R X pV ˆ V q “ RΓ , 42  iv) V is pT, 4rq-dense in the set U X tx : rxsR is p1, rq-Følneru (in particular, this implies that µpV q ą 0). Proof. Let c be the constant from Corollary 8.6. Suppose that R is an pε, rqRokhlin subrelation, and let X0 :“ tx : rxsR is p1, rq-Følneru, so X0 is a union of R-classes and µpX0 q ą 1 ´ ε. Since all classes in R are finite, it has a transversal Y Ď X: that is, Y is measurable and contains a unique element from each class of R (see, for instance, [KM04, Example 6.1]). For each x P X0 let us write x for the unique element of rxsR X Y . For y P Y X X0 , let By :“ tg : T g y P U X rysRu Ď G. Since y P X0 and By is contained in tg : T g y P rysRu, Corollary 8.6 gives a p4rq-skeleton pWy0 , Ey0 q for By satisfying wtdG pWy0 , Ey0 q ď c|rysR|{r. Clearly Wy0 and Ey0 may be chosen measurably in y. Now transport these skeleta from G back to X by setting ( 0 Wy :“ T Wy pyq and Ey :“ tT h y, T g yu : th, gu P Ey0 for y P Y X X0 .  The result is a graph pWy , Ey q on a subset of each class rysR Ď X0 . Finally, define the T -graphing Γ “ pAg qg by setting AeG :“ tx P X0 : x P Wx u and Ag :“ tx P X0 : x P Wx and tx, T g xu P Ex u  for g P GzteG u. ´1  This is symmetric: if x P Ag and we set x1 :“ T g x, then tx, T g xu “ tx1 , T g x1 u P Ex and so also x1 P Wx and x1 P Ag´1 . It remains to verify the four required properties.  43  i) For each x P X0 we have 0  Wx “ T Wx pxq Ď T Bx pxq Ď U, by the definition of Bx . Hence Ag Ď U for each g. ii) To estimate the cost, first observe that we may write ď ( T h y : y P Y X X0 and th, ghu P Ey0 . Ag “ hPG  1  This is a disjoint union: if T h y “ T h y 1 among the points allowed above, then this point lies in Wy Ď rysR by the definition of Ey0 , and this implies that h “ h1 and y “ y 1 because T is free and Y contains a unique element in each class of R. Therefore ÿ C|¨|G pΓq “ |g|G ¨ µpAg q gPG  “  ÿÿ  |g|G ¨ µty P Y X X0 : th, ghu P Ey0 u  gPG hPG  “  ż  ż  ÿ  dG ph, ghq µpdyq  Y XX0 th,ghuPE 0 y  wtdG pWy0 , Ey0 q µpdyq Y XX0 ż ż c c c ď |rysR| µpdyq ď |rysR| µpdyq “ . r Y XX0 r Y r  “  iii) Observe that V “  ď  Ag “  ď  Wy .  yPY XX0  g  Therefore R X pV ˆ V q “  ď  Wy ˆ Wy ,  yPY XX0  and this equals RΓ because all the graphs pWy , Ey q are connected. iv) Lastly, if x P U X X0 , then Bx is nonempty, and then Wx0 is p4rq-dense in Bx by construction. This implies that V is pT, 4rq-dense in U X X0 .  44  Proof of Proposition 7.6. Let c be the constant from Lemma 8.9, and choose m P N so that 2´m ă ε{2c. Also, shrink U if necessary so that 0 ă µpUq ă ε. Step 1. For each n ě m, let Rn Ď RT be a p2´n , 2n q-Rokhlin subrelation which also has the property that the set ( n`3 Cn :“ x : rxsRn is p1, 2n q-Følner and T BG p2 q x Ď rxsRn satisfies µpCn q ą 1 ´ 2´n´1µpUq. Now let č W :“ U X Cn , něm  so µpW q ą µpUq{2. Step 2. Applying Lemma 8.9, let Γm “ pAm,g qg be a T -graphing such that V :“ VertpΓm q Ď W has µpV q ą 0, C|¨|G pΓm q ď c{2m , and Rm X pV ˆ V q “ RΓm . Step 3. For each n ě m ` 1 now apply Lemma 8.9 again to obtain a T graphing Γn “ pAn,g qg such that Vn Ď V , C|¨|G pΓn q ă c{2n , Rn X pVn ˆ Vn q “ RΓn , and Vn is pT, 2n`2 q-dense in V . The last conclusion can be obtained from part (iv) of Lemma 8.9 because V is contained in W and W is already contained in Cn by construction. Observe that the choices of Γn for n ą m depend on the choice of Γm in Step 2, but not on each other. Step 4. After finishing this recursion, define Γ “ pAg qg by ď Ag :“ An,g for each g P G. něm  We will show that this has the desired properties. The symmetry property (15) holds for Γ because it holds for each Γn . The vertex set of Γ is equal to V Ď U 45  because VertpΓm q “ V and then VertpΓn q Ď V for every n ě m ` 1. This implies that µpVertpΓqq ă ε, because µpUq ă ε. Also, ÿ ÿ c2´n “ c2´m`1 ă ε. C|¨|G pΓq ď C|¨|G pΓn q ă něm  něm  It remains to show that Γ is orbit-wise connected: that is, that RΓ “ RT X pV ˆ V q. Consider a pair of distinct points x, T g x P V . Choose the least n ě m which satisfies 2n`3 ą |g|G . We will prove that px, T g xq P RΓ by induction on this n. If n “ m, then |g|G ă 2m`3 , and so certainly m`3 q  T BG p2  m`3 q  x X T BG p2  pT g xq ‰ H.  Since also x, T g x P Cm , the definition of Cm now requires that rxsRm “ rT g xsRm . Since Rm X pV ˆ V q “ RΓm , it follows that px, T g xq P RΓm Ď RΓ . Now suppose that n ě m ` 1. Since Vn is pT, 2n`2 q-dense in V , there are h, k P G such that T h x, T k x P Vn and dG peG , hq, dG pg, kq ă 2n`2 . By the inductive hypothesis, this implies that px, T h xq, pT g x, T k xq P RΓ . On the other hand, the triangle inequality now gives dG ph, kq ă 2n`4 , and so n`3 q  T BG p2  n`3 q  pT h xq X T BG p2  pT k xq ‰ H.  Arguing as above, this implies that pT h x, T k xq P Rn , and since these points are also in Vn this implies that pT h x, T k xq P Rn X pVn ˆ Vn q “ RΓn Ď RΓ .  Remark 8.10. It is easy to see that the above conclusion fails if G “ Z, so the assumption of super-linear growth is important. ⊳  46  9 Proof of the derandomization results Proposition 9.1. Let pσ, Uq be a partial cocycle for which at least one of the following holds: i) σ extends to an integrable cocycle G ˆ X ÝÑ H; ii) pσ, Uq is bounded. Then for every ε ą 0 there is a δ ą 0 such that the following holds. If Γ “ pAg qgPG is an orbit-wise connected T -graphing with VertpΓq Ď U, and both µpAeG q ă δ and C|¨|G pΓq ă δ, then hpµ, T, σ|Γq ă ε. Proof. Case (i). Denote the extended cocycle G ˆ X ÝÑ H also by σ. From Γ we define a nearest-neighbour T -graphing Θ “ pBs qsPBG p1q as follows. For each g P G, choose a word of length |g|G in the alphabet BG p1q which evaluates to g, say g “ sg,n sg,n´1 ¨ ¨ ¨ sg,1 where n :“ |g|G . Now define Bg,i :“ T sg,i´1¨¨¨sg,1 Ag  for i “ 1, 2, . . . , n,  and finally let Bs :“  ď  gPG  ď  Bg,i  for each s P BG p1q.  1ďiď|g|G s.t. sg,i “s  This construction has the following two important features. (a) The new cost is bounded by the old cost: C|¨|G pΘq “  ÿ  µpBs q ď  ÿG ÿ |g|  µpBg,i q  gPG i“1  sPBG p1q  “  ÿ  |g| ÿG  µpAg q “  gPG i“1  ÿ  |g|G ¨ µpAg q “ C|¨|G pΓq ă δ.  gPG  (b) Given the collection of sets Ag for g P G and also the collection of partial functions σps, ¨q|Bs for s P BG p1q, they determine all the partial functions σpg, ¨q|Ag using the cocycle identity: σpg, xq “ σpsg,n , T sg,n´1 ¨¨¨sg,1 xq ¨ ¨ ¨ σpsg,1 , xq. 47  In this formula, if x P Ag , then x P Bg,1 Ď Bsg,1 ,  T sg,1 x P Bg,2 Ď Bsg,2 ,  ...,  T sg,n´1 ¨¨¨sg,1 x P Bsg,n´1 .  Therefore the factor generated by σ|Γ is contained in the factor generated by Γ and σ|Θ together. By property (b) above, we have hpµ, T, σ|Γq ď hpµ, T, Γq ` hpµ, T, σ|Θq If δ is sufficiently small, then the first of these terms is at most ε{2 by Lemma 7.5. On the other hand, Lemma 7.3 gives ÿ Hµ pσps, ¨ q; Bs q. hpµ, T, σ|Θq ď sPBG p1q  By property (a) above, if δ is small enough, then we may apply Corollary 2.2 to each summand on the right. This completes the proof in case (i). Case (ii).  In this case we can use Lemma 7.3 more directly: ÿ ÿ hpµ, T, σ|Γq ď Hµ pAg q ` µpAg qHµ|Ag pσpg, ¨ qq. gPG  (17)  gPG  Since we are in case (ii), there is a finite constant C such that for each g the random variable σpg, ¨ q takes values in BH pC|g|G q almost surely. Since H is finitely generated, we have log |BH prq| “ Oprq for all r, and hence Hµ|Ag pσpg, ¨ qq ď log |BH pC|g|G q| “ OpC|g|G q “ Op|g|G q. Therefore the right-hand side of (17) is bounded by a constant multiple of ÿ ÿ Hµ pAg q ` |g|G ¨ µpAg q. gPG  gPG  By Lemma 7.5, the first term here may also be made arbitrarily small if µpAeG q and C|¨|G pΓq are sufficiently small. This completes the proof. Proof of Theorem C. Given ε ą 0, apply case (i) of Proposition 9.1 to the cocycle σ with U :“ X. We obtain a δ ą 0 for which the conclusion of that proposition holds. Now apply Proposition 7.6 to obtain a nontrivial orbit-wise connected T graphing Γ such that VertpΓq Ď U, µpVertpΓqq ă δ and C|¨|G pΓq ă δ. The second 48  of these conditions implies that also µpAeG q ă δ. Therefore, letting A be the factor generated by σ|Γ, the choice of δ implies that hpµ, T, Aq ă ε. Let V :“ VertpΓq. Since Γ is orbit-wise connected, Lemma 7.2 tells us that the partial cocycle pσ|V , V q is also A-measurable. Now apply the first part of Proposition 3.2 to the partial cocycle pσ|V , V q and the factor system of pX, µ, T q generated by A, which must still be ergodic. That proposition gives an A-measurable cocycle τ : G ˆ X ÝÑ H such that σ|V “ τ|V . Since τ is A-measurable, its entropy is also less than ε, and by the second part of Proposition 3.2 it is cohomologous to σ. Proof of Theorem D. Fix ε ą 0. Cases (i) and (ii) of Theorem D correspond to cases (i) and (ii) of Proposition 9.1. Therefore in either case there is some δ ą 0 for which the implication of that proposition holds. Having chosen this δ, Proposition 7.6 gives a non-trivial orbit-wise connected T -graphing Γ “ pAg qgPG such that U :“ VertpΓq Ď dom Φ,  µpVertpΓqq ă δ  and C|¨|G pΓq ă δ.  By the choice of δ this implies that hpµ, T, α|Γq ă ε. Letting A be the factor generated by pα|U , Uq, it now follows by Lemma 7.2 that hpµ, T, Aq ă ε. By enlarging A slightly if necessary, we may assume in addition that it is generated by a factor map to another free G-system. Finally Lemma 3.1 produces the remaining objects with the properties asserted in Theorem D.  10 Further questions Integrable measure equivalence was originally introduced in [BFS13] for actions of lattices in isometry groups of hyperbolic spaces. It would be interesting to know whether any classification of probability-preserving actions of such groups follows from the accompanying assumption of SSOE1 . Since these groups are not amenable, the Kolmogorov–Sinai entropy is not available as an invariant. However, recent years have seen important progress in our understanding of entropylike invariants for non-amenable groups. Question 10.1. If G and H are countable groups, does an SOE8 or SSOE1 between a G-action and an H-action imply a relation between their Rokhlin entropies [Sewa, Sewb]?  49  Question 10.2. If G and H are sofic groups, can one choose sofic approximations to them in such a way that an SOE8 or SSOE1 between a G-action and an Haction imply a relation between their sofic entropies [Bow10a, KL11]? If G “ H is a free group, can one obtain a relation between f-invariants [Bow10b]?  References [Abr59]  L. M. Abramov. The entropy of a derived automorphism. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 128:647–650, 1959.  [Ada90]  Scott Adams. Trees and amenable equivalence relations. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 10(1):1–14, 1990.  [AR62]  L. M. Abramov and V. A. Rohlin. Entropy of a skew product of mappings with invariant measure. Vestnik Leningrad. Univ., 17(7):5–13, 1962.  [Aus16]  Tim Austin. Integrable measure equivalence for groups of polynomial growth. Groups Geom. Dyn., 10(1):117–154, 2016.  [Bas72]  H. Bass. The degree of polynomial growth of finitely generated nilpotent groups. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 25:603–614, 1972.  [Bel68]  R. Belinskaya. Partitions of lebesgue space in trajectories defined by ergodic automorphisms. Funct. Anal. Appl., 2:4–16, 1968.  [BFS13] Uri Bader, Alex Furman, and Roman Sauer. Integrable measure equivalence and rigidity of hyperbolic lattices. Invent. Math., 194(2):313– 379, 2013. [Bow10a] Lewis Bowen. Measure conjugacy invariants for actions of countable sofic groups. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 23(1):217–245, 2010. [Bow10b] Lewis Phylip Bowen. A measure-conjugacy invariant for free group actions. Ann. of Math. (2), 171(2):1387–1400, 2010. [CFW81] A. Connes, J. Feldman, and B. Weiss. An amenable equivalence relation is generated by a single transformation. Ergodic Theory Dynamical Systems, 1(4):431–450 (1982), 1981.  50  [Cie01]  Dietmar Cieslik. The Steiner ratio, volume 10 of Combinatorial Optimization. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 2001.  [Dan01]  Alexandre I. Danilenko. Entropy theory from the orbital point of view. Monatsh. Math., 134(2):121–141, 2001.  [dJR84]  Andrés del Junco and Daniel J. Rudolph. Kakutani equivalence of ergodic Zn actions. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 4(1):89–104, 1984.  [Dye59]  H. A. Dye. On groups of measure preserving transformation. I. Amer. J. Math., 81:119–159, 1959.  [Dye63]  H. A. Dye. On groups of measure preserving transformations. II. Amer. J. Math., 85:551–576, 1963.  [FF86]  Adam Fieldsteel and N. A. Friedman. Restricted orbit changes of ergodic Zd -actions to achieve mixing and completely positive entropy. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 6(4):505–528, 1986.  [Fur99]  Alex Furman. Orbit equivalence rigidity. 150(3):1083–1108, 1999.  [Fur11]  Alex Furman. A survey of measured group theory. In Geometry, rigidity, and group actions, Chicago Lectures in Math., pages 296–374. Univ. Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 2011.  [Gab02]  Damien Gaboriau. On orbit equivalence of measure preserving actions. In Rigidity in dynamics and geometry (Cambridge, 2000), pages 167– 186. Springer, Berlin, 2002.  [Gab05]  D. Gaboriau. Examples of groups that are measure equivalent to the free group. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 25(6):1809–1827, 2005.  [Gro93]  M. Gromov. Asymptotic invariants of infinite groups. In Geometric group theory, Vol. 2 (Sussex, 1991), volume 182 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 1–295. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1993.  [Gui71]  Yves Guivarc’h. Groupes de Lie à croissance polynomiale. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. A-B, 272:A1695–A1696, 1971. 51  Ann. of Math. (2),  [HB92]  J. Roberto Hasfura-Buenaga. The equivalence theorem for Zd -actions of positive entropy. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 12(4):725–741, 1992.  [Kat77]  A. B. Katok. The special representation theorem for multi-dimensional group actions. In Dynamical systems, Vol. I—Warsaw, pages 117–140. Astérisque, No. 49. Soc. Math. France, Paris, 1977.  [KL11]  David Kerr and Hanfeng Li. Bernoulli actions and infinite entropy. Groups Geom. Dyn., 5(3):663–672, 2011.  [KM04]  Alexander S. Kechris and Benjamin D. Miller. Topics in orbit equivalence, volume 1852 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2004.  [KR97]  Janet Whalen Kammeyer and Daniel J. Rudolph. Restricted orbit equivalence for ergodic Zd actions. I. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 17(5):1083–1129, 1997.  [KR02]  Janet Whalen Kammeyer and Daniel J. Rudolph. Restricted orbit equivalence for actions of discrete amenable groups, volume 146 of Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.  [Lev95]  Gilbert Levitt. On the cost of generating an equivalence relation. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 15(6):1173–1181, 1995.  [Man12] Avinoam Mann. How groups grow, volume 395 of London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2012. [ORW82] Donald S. Ornstein, Daniel J. Rudolph, and Benjamin Weiss. Equivalence of measure preserving transformations. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 37(262):xii+116, 1982. [Rud85]  Daniel J. Rudolph. Restricted orbit equivalence. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 54(323):v+150, 1985.  [RW00]  Daniel J. Rudolph and Benjamin Weiss. Entropy and mixing for amenable group actions. Ann. of Math. (2), 151(3):1119–1150, 2000.  52  [Sewa]  Brandon Seward. Krieger’s finite generator theorem for actions of countable groups I. Preprint, available online at arXiv.org: 1405.3604.  [Sewb]  Brandon Seward. Krieger’s finite generator theorem for actions of countable groups II. Preprint, available online at arXiv.org: 1501.03367.  [Sha04]  Yehuda Shalom. Harmonic analysis, cohomology, and the large-scale geometry of amenable groups. Acta Math., 192(2):119–185, 2004.  [Wol68]  Joseph A. Wolf. Growth of finitely generated solvable groups and curvature of Riemanniann manifolds. J. Differential Geometry, 2:421– 446, 1968.  [WZ92]  Thomas Ward and Qing Zhang. The Abramov-Rokhlin entropy addition formula for amenable group actions. Monatsh. Math., 114(34):317–329, 1992.  [Zim84]  Robert J. Zimmer. Ergodic theory and semisimple groups, volume 81 of Monographs in Mathematics. Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 1984.  T IM AUSTIN C OURANT I NSTITUTE OF M ATHEMATICAL S CIENCES , N EW YORK U NIVERSITY, 251 M ERCER S T, N EW YORK NY 10012, USA Email: tim@cims.nyu.edu URL: cims.nyu.edu/˜tim  53

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
