Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_5480

Abstract:
arXiv:1306.6578v1 [physics.comp-ph] 27 Jun 2013  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind Davide Cagnoni∗1,2 , Francesco Agostini2 , Thomas Christen2 , Carlo de Falco1,3 , Nicola Parolini1 and Ivica Stevanović2,4 1  MOX - Dipartimento di Matematica “F. Brioschi,” Politecnico di Milano, 20133 Milano, Italy 2 ABB Switzerland Ltd., Corporate Research, CH-5405 Baden-Dättwil, Switzerland 3 CEN - Centro Europeo di Nanomedicina, 20133 Milano, Italy 4 Laboratory of Electromagnetics and Acoustics, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland  Friday 28th June, 2013  Abstract Ionic wind devices or electrostatic fluid accelerators are becoming of increasing interest as tools for thermal management, in particular for semiconductor devices. In this work, we present a numerical model for predicting the performance of such devices, whose main benefit is the ability to accurately predict the amount of charge injected at the corona electrode. Our multiphysics numerical model consists of a highly nonlinear strongly coupled set of PDEs including the Navier-Stokes equations for fluid flow, Poisson’s equation for electrostatic potential, charge continuity and heat transfer equations. To solve this system we employ a staggered solution algorithm that generalizes Gummel’s algorithm for charge transport in semiconductors. Predictions of our simulations are validated by comparison with experimental measurements and are shown to closely match. Finally, our simulation tool is used to estimate the effectiveness of the design of an electrohydrodynamic cooling apparatus for power electronics applications. PACS: 52.80.-s , 47.65.-d Keywords: corona discharge, electrohydrodynamics, ionic wind, mathematical models, numerical approximation, functional iteration  1  Introduction and motivation  Cooling of electric and electronic devices is a continuous challenge for researchers and engineers. Power electronics trends indicate a continuous increase of power ∗ Corresponding  author: davide.cagnoni@polimi.it  1  2  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  densities and a shrink of component dimensions. These conditions make the thermal management a pillar to guarantee a safe, reliable and affordable operation of electronic components where suitable cooling schemes must be applied. Forced convection air cooling is probably the oldest and still one of the most used approaches for electronic systems cooling. Usually, forced convection is driven by a fan but, for some applications as, for example, the cooling of hot spots or enclosure-contained devices, alternative methods based on ElectroHydrodynamic (EHD) forces have been recently studied and exploited. A representative example of such methods is that of ionic wind induced by a so called corona discharge. Figure 1 schematically illustrates the phenomenon of corona discharge occurring between two electrodes in air. The gas ions formed in the discharge are accelerated by the electric field and exchange momentum with neutral fluid molecules, initiating a drag of the bulk fluid which is referred to as ionic wind. The choice of a positive corona is favorable in industrial applications as it leads to significantly reduced ozone production, and increased durability of the metal electrodes in comparison to negative corona devices.[1] Therefore, in this study, we focus on the case of DC positive corona wind, where the applied voltage at the electrodes is stationary, gas ionization occurs at the anode and charge carriers are mainly O+ 2 ions, as described in Fig. 1(a). Both experimental and numerical studies of EHD phenomena have been presented in recent literature. For example, Adamiak and others [2, 3, 4, 5] studied the DC and pulsed corona discharge between a needle and a plate collector, using different numerical methods (FEM, BEM, FCT etc.) for the approximation of each equation in the PDE system; Ahmedou and Havet [6, 7, 8] used a commercial FEM software to investigate the effect of EHD on turbulent flows; Moreau and Touchard,[9] Huang and others,[10] and Kim and others[11] experimentally studied different EHD devices designed for cooling or air pumping purpose; Chang, Tsubone and others [12, 13, 14] made extensive experimental study of the forced airflow and the corona discharge in a converging duct; Jewell-Larsen and others [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21] and Go and others [22, 23, 24, 25, 26] conducted both experimental and numerical studies aimed at designing and applying ionic wind cooling devices to thermal management of electronic devices. In this paper, we use a numerical approach based on a multiphysics mathematical model that accounts for all relevant electrostatic, fluid, and thermal aspects of the phenomena being considered. Particular attention is devoted to correctly modeling the relation between the electric field at the anode and the amount of charge injected from the anode corona into the neutral gas region. The accuracy of such relation is crucial for increasing the predictive capability of numerical simulations. Here, we present a novel approach for modeling charge injection, which is based on enforcing Kaptsov’s hypothesis[27] and is shown to provide good simulation accuracy using few free model parameters. Our approach to the charge injection modeling is compared to those existing in the literature on a set of benchmark device geometries for which experimental data are available.  Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  3  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  Anode Ionization Region  X  Collisions X  X  Ionic Wind  X+  new collisions  X+  X  X+ eionizing collision cation injection  ehigh energy electron  Cathode  (a) Overall scheme of positive corona in- (b) Zoom on the ionization region to show duced ionic wind. avalanche charge multiplication.  Figure 1: Schematic representation of positive wire-to-plane corona dischargeinduced ionic wind. In ambient air, X represents primarily O2 or N2 molecules, and the dominant ionization reactions are of the type e− + X 2e− + X+ .[28]  2  Governing equations  Modeling of EHD systems requires accounting for a number of interplaying phenomena of different physical nature. Figure 2 summarizes such phenomena and their interactions: electric current due to drifting ions generates bulk fluid flow which, in turn, contributes to ion drift; thermal energy is transported by the flowing fluid while, at the same time, temperature gradients give rise to buoyancy forces; finally electric conduction properties of the gas are influenced by temperature, while electric currents act as heat sources via Joule effect. The system of partial differential equations governing the behavior of each subsystem is introduced below together with most of the constitutive relations for the system coefficients. The PDEs described below are set in an open bounded domain Ω whose typical geometry is shown in Fig. 3; the domain Ω represents the region in space occupied by bulk neutral fluid and drifting positive ions. In our model, the thickness of the ionization layer around the anode is considered to be negligible with respect to the length scale of the overall system. Such region is therefore represented as a portion of the boundary, denoted as ΓA in Fig. 3, and the process of ion injection is modeled by enforcing a suitable set of boundary conditions on ΓA . Existing and new models for such boundary conditions are discussed in Section 3. Unipolar (positive) electrical discharge in fluid is described by Poisson’s equation ~ = −∇ · (ε∇φ) = qNp , ∇ · (εE) (1a) coupled with current continuity equation ∂qNp + ∇ · ~j = 0, ∂t Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  (1b) June 2013  4  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  ce  mb  lo ou  r Fo  Electric Subsystem  ule  Eff  pe  ec t  C  Buoyancy  Fluid Flow Subsystem  ro  Jo  n tio ec v on  C  Ga sP  Convection  rti  es  Thermal Subsystem  Figure 2: Relations between the variables in the EHD system, with arrows pointing to an influenced subsystems from the influencing one. Thicker arrows indicate stronger interactions, while thinner ones indicate minor influence. The chart is adapted from Ref. [29].  ΓI Γin  ΓA  Ω  Γout  ΓC Figure 3: depicted.  Example domain where all the five possible kinds of boundary are  ~ the electric field, φ the electric potential, where ε is the electrical permittivity, E q the elementary (proton) charge, Np the number density of (positive) ions. The current density ~j is given by the sum of three contributions: drift due to electric field, advection, and diffusion:   ~ + ~v − qD∇Np , ~j = qNp µE (2) µ being the ion mobility in the fluid and ~v the fluid velocity field. The diffusion rate D is related to mobility and temperature T through Einstein’s relation D = µkB T q −1 ,  (3)  where kB is Boltzmann’s constant. The flow of incompressible Newtonian fluids is described by the Navier-Stokes equations, which represent the conservation of momentum and mass density:  f~EHD + f~B  ∂~v + (~v · ∇)~v = ν∆~v − ∇e p+ , (1c) ∂t ρ  ∇ · ~v = 0,  where ν is the kinematic viscosity, pe is the modified (non-hydrostatic) pressure pρ−1 − ~g · ~x, ρ being the gas mass density and ~g the gravity acceleration. The Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  5  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  volume force term on the right hand side of the first equation of (1c) consists of the sum of electrohydrodynamic force f~EHD and buoyancy force f~B . As we consider single-phase flows with limited temperature gradients, f~EHD can be expressed as:[30, 31, 32] ~ f~EHD = qNp E. (4) For buoyancy force, due again to the limited temperature gradients, the Boussinesq approximation can be adopted: f~B = ~g [ρ(T ) − ρ] = ~g [ρβexp (Tref )(T − Tref )] ,  (5)  where βexp is the thermal expansion coefficient, and the dependence of the gas density ρ(T ) on temperature T is linearized around a certain reference temperature Tref , at which the reference density ρ is taken. Finally, the temperature equation, which describes heat transfer, reads k Q̇ ∂T + ~v · ∇T − ∆T = , ∂t ρCV ρCV  (1d)  where k is the heat conductivity and CV the mass specific heat. The thermal power production Q̇ on the right hand side of (1d) can be expressed as a balance of terms accounting for the Joule heating caused by the current density ~j and the mechanical power provided by the EHD force f~EHD : ~ − ~v · f~EHD = (qNp µE ~ − qD∇Np ) · E. ~ Q̇ = ~j · E  (6)  In addition to the volume thermal energy generation pertaining to Q̇, thermal energy is also generally exchanged with an external body; it is worth pointing out that, in general, the contribution of the injected energy through the system boundary usually outweighs the volume power production Q̇, for the small electric currents flowing in EHD systems. The coupled system of PDEs (1a)-(1d) presented in this section needs to be completed by a suitable set of initial and boundary conditions. An example of computational domain Ω is shown in Fig. 3; the domain boundary ∂Ω is partitioned into five different subregions ∂Ω = Γin ∪ Γout ∪ ΓI ∪ ΓC ∪ ΓA on which different boundary conditions are enforced. Initial conditions, which are to be set for ion density, velocity, and temperature, are chosen as uniform fields, with values based on the expected “device off” state. The fluid inlet is represented by the boundary region Γin , where Dirichlet conditions are enforced for the velocity ~v and the temperature T , and homogeneous Neumann condition is enforced on pe. Since the inlet is supposed to be far from the electrodes, and thus from the region where major electrical phenomena are localized, the electrical variables are also considered to have vanishing gradients along the outward normal direction ~n on the boundary ∂Ω. At the fluid outlet Γout , we require the normal component of the fluid stress tensor and of the temperature, charge density, and electric potential gradients to vanish, representing again a region which is far from the major phenomena in the system. Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  6  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  The boundary region denoted as ΓI represents an electrically insulating wall ~ + ~v ) and −qD∇Np , and both drift and diffusion current densities (qNp (µE respectively) are supposed to independently vanish. Since ΓI is also a solid wall, the condition of non-penetration ~v · ~n = 0, which we impose on the fluid flow, ~ · ~n = 0. Diffusion currents are instead allows for the drift current to vanish if E damped by the homogeneous Neumann condition for ion density ∇Np · ~n = 0. Additionally, fluid flow is subject to a non-slip condition k~v −(~v ·~n)~nk = ∇e p ·~n = 0. Temperature can either assume an imposed value, or satisfy an imposed thermal energy flux trough the wall surface, depending on the situation at hand. Finally, the regions ΓC and ΓA represent the cathode and anode contacts, respectively. At both electrodes, we enforce Dirichlet condition for the electrostatic potential and no-slip, no-penetration conditions for the fluid flow. The cathode ΓC often coincides with the surface to be cooled, in which case we may impose either fixed heat flux through the surface, or fixed temperature, as we do on ΓI . With regard to the ion density, homogeneous Neumann condition is enforced on ΓC . Physically, this means that the only current allowed through the cathode is due to ion drift: since mass is not allowed to cross the boundary, though, this results in imposing each one of the positive ions hitting the cathode to recombine with an extracted electron. Boundary conditions for ion density on the anode are instead more complicated, and Section 3 is entirely devoted to the derivation and comparison of different models for such boundary conditions.  3  Modeling of charge injection  To trigger the corona discharge, the voltage drop between anode and cathode must exceed a threshold (or onset) value which we denote by Von , while the corresponding magnitude of the electric field at the anode is denoted by Eon . The generally accepted Kaptsov’s hypothesis[27] states that free charge, emitted by the corona for voltages higher than Von , causes a shielding of the anode that results in “clamping” of the anode electric field at the onset value Eon . While Von depends very strongly on the whole device geometry, experimental evidence indicates that Eon is strictly correlated with the curvature radius of the anode contact.[33] At the microscale, corona discharge is generated by the impact ionization of gas molecules and avalanche multiplication of electrons. According to the avalanche model first developed by Townsend [34, 35], cations are generated in an area characterized as the locus of points ~x ∈ Ω such that: ! Z γT exp αT (~r) · d~r ≥ 1, (7) L(~ x)  where γT and αT are parameters depending on the applied electric field, the pressure, and the chemical composition of the gas and the electrodes, whereas L(~x) is the trajectory of a negatively charged particle, which leaves from the cathode and drifts to ~x due to the force exerted on it by the electric field. Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  7  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  Although not of much practical interest when space charge is not negligible, relation (7) provides a rough estimate for the thickness of the ionization region, where the gas can effectively be considered to be in plasma state. Such thickness depends on the geometry of the anode as well as on the gas pressure and on the electric field; in corona discharge regime, it is so small in comparison to the length-scale of the neutral fluid region, that it makes sense to adopt a lumped model for the ionization region and to represent it as a portion of the anode surface. Under such approximation, the only charge carriers within the bulk fluid region are cations.[36] In this section we discuss several possible options for modeling the rate at which such cations are injected into the bulk fluid region. In order to ease the comparison of the different models, we will express all of them in the common form of a Robin-type boundary condition for equation (1b): α Np |ΓA + β ∂~n Np |ΓA = κ,  (8)  where ∂~n Np = ∇Np · ~n is the component of the ion density gradient normal to ΓA . The condition (8) will be in general nonlinear as we allow the coefficients ~ Γ and on α, β, and κ to depend locally on the normal component En = ~n · E| A the density of ions Np |ΓA . The most common approach used in numerical studies of positive corona discharge that appeared in the literature[20, 37, 38, 39] consists in imposing the current at the anode to be equal to the experimentally measured value im . This leads to the following choice of parameters in (8)  α1 Np |ΓA + β1 ∂~n Np |ΓA = κ1 , (9)  α1 = −qµEn , β1 = qD, κ1 = im /s.  Notice that (9) is based on the additional assumption that the component of the ion current density jn = ~n · ~j|ΓA normal to the contact be uniformly distributed along ΓA (hence, we will hereafter refer to this model as uniform). This latter assumption, together with the fact that knowledge of a measured value of the current corresponding to each value of the applied bias is required, strongly limits the ability of simulations based on (9) to provide useful information about the impact of the anode contact geometry on device performance. One possible approach to overcome the drawbacks of (9) is to enforce a pointwise relation between jn and the normal component of the electric field on ΓA . Such relation, as proposed in Ref. [40], accounts for a balance between different contributions that make up the ionic current at the microscale: jn = wNp − jsat H(En − Eon ),  (10)  where H(x) denotes Heaviside’s step function. The parameters appearing in (10) are the maximum allowed current density jsat , the threshold field Eon , and the proportionality constant w (which has dimensions of a velocity times an electric charge) between the backscattering current and the amount of ions Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  8  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  accumulated in the space charge region at the anode. This model will be hereon denoted SCCC, as in “space charge controlled current”. Using (10) to determine the coefficients of the general expression (8) leads to  α2 Np |ΓA + β2 ∂~n Np |ΓA = κ2 , (11)  α2 = w − qµEn , β2 = qD, κ2 = jsat H(En − Eon ).  While this model does not require prior knowledge of the current density, thus apparently solving the main issue of model (9), the quality of its predictions depends critically on the correct choice of its parameters jsat and w and appears to be, for some relevant practical situations, quite poor if these parameters are given bias-independent values. An alternative approach consists of selecting the coefficients of (8) in such a way as to enforce, pointwise on ΓA the negative feedback relation between normal electric field and space charge that is at the basis of Kaptsov’s hypotesis. This can be done, for example, by defining the following model: ( α3 Np |ΓA + β3 ∂~n Np |ΓA = κ3 , (12) α3 = qµEon , β3 = 0, κ3 = qµEn Np |ΓA . Model (12) has only one parameter, the onset field Eon , whose typical magnitude can be, at least roughly, estimated by means of correlations available in literature.[33] On the other hand, (12) presents a further nonlinearity in comparison to (9) and (11), as κ3 depends on Np , thus its implementation requires a suitable linearization approach. Since in this study we are mainly interested in the stationary regime device performance, we adopt the simplest approach and evaluate κ3 in (12) using the latest computed value of Np . This approach will be shown in numerical examples of Section 5 to be very effective in terms of accuracy of the simulation, but to also highly impact the computational time required for the simulated current to reach its regime value. This model was named ideal diode, since it allows arbitrary currents over the threshold, and no current under the threshold. The alternative method of solving the nonlinearity adopted, e.g., in Ref. [2] or Refs. [16, 15] does not seem to reduce such numerical problems. We are therefore lead to consider yet one more type of boundary condition at the anode, where part of the predictive accuracy of (12) is traded off to achieve better numerical efficiency. This latter model is expressed by the following choice of the boundary condition coefficients: ( α4 Np + β4 ∂~n Np = κ4 ,   (13) on α4 = qµEon , β4 = 0, κ4 = qµEon Nref exp EnE−E , ref where Eref is a reference electric field and Nref is a reference cation density. It can be easily verified that the set of points in the Np -En plane that satisfy (13) reduces to the set satisfying (12) as Eref → 0; in such sense, an interpretation Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  9  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  Table 1: Summary of the coefficients for the four boundary models presented Model name Equation α β κ Uniform  (9)  −qµEn  qD  iexp /s  SCCC  (11)  w − qµEn  qD  jsat H (En − Eon )  Ideal diode  (12)  qµEon  0  qµNp En  Exponential diode  (13)  qµEon  0  qµEon Nref exp    En −Eon Eref    of this model as a smoother version of the ideal diode model is possible; to highlight the analogy with (12), thus, this model was named exponential diode. A summary of the kinds of boundary conditions considered in this paper is presented in Table 1 where, for each condition, the corresponding models for the coefficients α, β and κ is reported.  4  Decoupled iterative solution algorithm  The algorithm we developed for the solution of system (1a)-(1d) is constructed by analogy with iterative algorithms used for the solution of similar systems of coupled PDEs that arise in modeling of semiconductor devices by drift-diffusion or hydrodynamic models [41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46] or in electrochemical models for ionic transport in biological systems.[47, 48, 49] The algorithm is constructed by a sequence of four steps: 1. time-semidiscretization by means of Rothe’s method is performed to reduce the initial/boundary value problem (1a)-(1d) to a sequence of boundary value problems, where only derivatives with respect to the spatial coordinates appear; 2. the sub-problems composing the whole system are decoupled and a strategy to iterate among them in order to achieve self consistency is chosen; 3. as the decoupled sub-problems are still nonlinear, inner iterations need be defined to solve them; 4. finally, as the initial problem has been reduced to a set of scalar linear problems, a proper spatial discretization scheme is chosen to solve them numerically. We choose the Backward Euler scheme for time-discretization, as we are mainly interested in capturing steady state behavior rather than accurately Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  k ←k+1  10  E F T  w ~ k = [φk , Npk , ~v k , pek , T k ] [φk+1 , Npk+1 , ~v k , pek , T k ]  [φk+1 , Npk+1 , ~v k+1 , pek+1 , T k ]  w ~ k+1 = [φk+1 , Npk+1 , ~v k+1 , pek+1 , T k+1 ]  w ~ k+1 ≈ w ~k  Figure 4: Block diagram representing the composite fixed point iteration used to solve the system (1a0 )–(1d0 ). describing transient system dynamics, and thus we favor stability over high order accuracy. For the sake of convenience we summarize below the full system (1a)(1d) as it appears after applying time-discretization and enforcing the boundary conditions discussed above. Poisson equation  − ∇ · (ε∇φ) = qNp    φ = V A  φ = 0    ∂~n φ = 0  on on on on  Ω ΓA ΓC ΓI ∪ Γin ∪ Γout  (Time-discretized) Current continuity equation  q(Np − Npold )   + ∇ · (−Dq∇Np + (~v − µ∇φ)qNp ) = 0  δt  αNp + β∂~n Np = κ  ∂~n Np = 0  (1a0 )  on Ω on ΓA on (∂Ω \ ΓA )  Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  (1b0 )  June 2013  11  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  (Time-discretized) Navier-Stokes equations  f~EHD + f~b ~v − ~v old   − ∇ · (ν∇~v ) + (~v · ∇)~v − ∇e p=   δt ρ    ∇ · ~v = 0 ~v = 0      ~v = ~vin    −ν∂~n~v + pe~n = 0  on Ω on on on on  Ω Γ A ∪ ΓC ∪ ΓI Γin Γout  (Time-discretized) Heat equation  ρCV (T − T old )   ~ p − Dq∇Np ) · E ~  + ∇ · (−k∇T + ~v ρCV T ) = (µEqN   δt  k∂~n T = ein   T = Tin    k∂ T = 0 ~ n  (1c0 )  on Ω on ΓA ∪ ΓC ∪ ΓI on Γin on Γout (1d0 )  The outer iteration strategy for decoupling system (1a0 )-(1d0 ) is graphically represented in Fig. 4. The equations are subdivided into three blocks representing the electrical, fluid and thermal subsystems, respectively. In Figure 4 each subsystem is identified in terms of its solution map, namely E for the electrical subsystem (1a0 )-(1b0 ), F for the fluid subsystem (1c0 ) and T for the thermal subsystem (1d0 ). Each of such maps operates on a subset of the components of the complete system state vector w ~ = [φ, Np , ~v , pe, T ] and iteration is performed by applying the fixed point map M = T ◦ F ◦ E until the prescribed tolerance is achieved. The main advantage of decoupling the system according to the physics as outlined above is that each subproblem can then be treated following a specifically tailored approach, which is known to be the most appropriate in its respective field. In particular, the map E is based on the well-known Gummel-map strategy widely used in computational electronics,[46, 42, 43, 50] the map F is composed of an incompressibility-enforcing iteration based on the standard PISO scheme,[51] well established for the solution of incompressible NavierStokes equations. Finally, the map T represents the solution of temperature equation, which is treated as a linear equation, neglecting the gas coefficients variations. The results presented in the next section have been obtained using the finite volume method (FVM) for space discretization. A custom solver has been implemented within the C++ library OpenFOAM.[52] However, the algorithm presented in this section is very general and could be extended to different discretization methods.  Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  12  5  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  Model validation  In this section, three different test geometries are presented, and the results obtained in our simulations are compared to experimental and numerical data. The simulations were obtained with the help of the library swak4Foam [53] for the implementation of the boundary conditions, while the domain meshes were produced with gmsh [54].  5.1  Open wire to wall-embedded collecting electrode arrangement  In this section, we apply our numerical model to the wire-to-plate geometry studied in Refs. [23, 25]. Figure 5 depicts the experimental setup: a flat, insulating plate 125 mm long and 50.8 mm wide, is placed in a laminar, 0.28 m/s air flow, parallel to the plate. In the plate is embedded a 6.35 mm long metal strip, its leading edge 55.25 mm away from the leading edge of the plate, acting as cathode contact. The 0.05 mm diameter wire acting as anode contact is placed 3.15 mm far from the plate, and 4 mm upstream of the cathode strip leading edge. Figure 6 explains the working mechanism of the device. The main conductive channel is highlighted in Fig. 6(a): electric current flows mainly from the anode to the upstream part of the cathode, following the field lines depicted in Fig. 6(b). As shown in Fig. 7, the generated EHD force and the wall reaction combine to reduce the thickness of the boundary layer in the region adjacent to the cathode strip. Figure 8 compares the measured data with the results obtained with different models for the boundary condition. Only three models have been successfully used, since the uniform model proved especially inappropriate in this very asymmetrical geometry: most of the charge injected from the anode side opposite to the cathode would stagnate, generating nonphysical solution as well as numerical misbehaving (due to the reformulation of Poisson’s equation in Gummel’s map algorithm). The SCCC model does not suffer of those issues, since no charge is injected from the low electric field side of the anode; nonetheless it fails to reproduce the correct, convex shape of the current-voltage curve, presenting an  Γin Γin  ΓA ΓI  Γout ΓC  Γout ΓI  Figure 5: Scheme of the computational domain geometry for the device with open wire to wall-embedded collecting electrode arrangement discussed in Subsection 5.1. Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  13  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  (a) Ion number density distribution (m−3 ) in a device region near the electrodes. The ticks on the right show the length scale, each tick is 1 mm.  (b) Electric field lines-of-force (grey) and electric potential isolines (black) in a device region near the electrodes. The scale is the same as in Fig. 6(a).  Figure 6: Electric quantities in the device with open wire to wall-embedded collecting electrode arrangement discussed in Subsection 5.1 at a 3.6 kV applied voltage. The results shown here were obtained with the exponential diode condition.  (a) Air velocity streamlines in a device re- (b) Magnitude of air velocity (m s−1 ) in the gion near the electrodes. The scale is the whole computational domain. The ticks on same as in Fig. 6(a). the right show the length scale, each tick is 10 mm.  Figure 7: Air flow in the device with open wire to wall-embedded collecting electrode arrangement discussed in Subsection 5.1 at a 3.6 kV applied voltage. The results shown here were obtained with the exponential diode condition. excessive shielding effect. Both the ideal and exponential diode model provide better predictions, both qualitatively, with a convex IV curve, and quantitatively, with the maximum prediction error bounded under 33% of the measured current. Additional accuracy could be obtained with a deeper research for the optimum parameters for both models, but this is beyond the scope of this work.  5.2  Convergent duct with wire-to-plate electrode arrangement  In this section, we apply our numerical model to the device experimentally studied in Ref. [12]. The experimental setup is schematically represented in Fig. 9: a duct enclosed between two insulating non-parallel plates, 33 mm deep Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  9  14  0  1  Anode Current [μA] 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  SCCC model Ideal diode model Exp diode model Reference  3000  3300  3600 3900 Applied Voltage [V]  4200  Figure 8: Anode current vs applied voltage in the device with open wire to wall-embedded collecting electrode arrangement discussed in Subsection 5.1, computed applying the four boundary condition models presented in Section 3.  ΓI Γin ΓI  ΓI  ΓC ΓA  Γout  ΓC  Figure 9: Schematic picture of the computational domain geometry for the device with convergent duct with wire-to-plate electrode arrangement discussed in Subsection 5.2. and 117 mm long, with the two openings 24 and 12 mm wide, respectively. The wire acting as anode is placed 60 mm away from the smaller opening and has a diameter of 0.24 mm. Two stripes of conductive material, acting as cathodes, are embedded on the non-parallel plates, ranging from 6 mm away from the wider opening to 36 mm away from the smaller one. Figure 10 shows the basic working principle of the device. The electric field directed from the anode wire towards the cathode plates generates vortices, that are made non-symmetric by the reaction forces of the inclined walls. The non-symmetry produces a net air flow directed, for the particular electrodes arrangement at hand, from the wider cross-section to the smaller cross-section end. For high applied voltages, vortex shedding can be observed (see Fig. 10 again) and the flow becomes non-stationary (quasi-periodic). Figure 11 shows a comparison of the numerical simulation predictions for the anode current to applied voltage characteristics of the device. Simulations were performed with different injection models and compared to measurements from Ref. [12]. The uniform model has been useful in this case, thanks to the  Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  15  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  symmetry of the domain, and matches by construction the experimental current values. The currents predicted by the ideal diode model appears to be in very good agreement with measurements both qualitatively and quantitatively, the relative error being consistently bounded under 17% over a wide range of applied voltages. The exponential diode injection model also correctly captures the qualitative behavior of the IV curve, which is approximately parabolic in accordance to approximate analytic solution for totally axisymmetric geometries. The quantitative error with respect to the measurements is, as expected, higher. Such a loss in accuracy, though, is balanced by the better numerical performance. Figure 12 compares the convergence history of the iterative method when the ideal diode or the exponential diode injection model is applied. The number of time steps required for the electric variables to reach a stationary regime is much higher in the case of the ideal diode condition due to the requirement of a smaller under-relaxation coefficient that is needed to stabilize the method in this case. It is interesting to observe how the convergence over time of the current to its stationary value is non-monotonic. Indeed, a possibly high overshoot in the current is usually observed, if the initial value of the cation density is low. In such situation, the anode contact electric field is initially much higher than at steady state, and thus more intense charge injection occurs. An additional abrupt change in the simulated current may occur, when the charge present in the device, due either to the initial value or the overshooting, is expelled from the channel as shown in Fig. 13; this abrupt change results in a variation of the anode charge density value, and leads to the need of a larger number of fixed point iterations. The above discussion shows that a careful choice of the initial condition is necessary in order to allow for a good performance of the numerical method. Finally, Fig. 14 shows a comparison of the experimental and predicted average velocities on the outlet section, plotted versus the total provided power at the electrical steady state W = iV . The uniform model only provides an approximation of scale of the total flow rate; on the other hand, it underestimates both the high increase in efficiency for smaller applied power and the drop in efficiency at higher power. The ideal diode model, on the contrary, provides a very good approximation for the efficiency of the device, due to the more realistic space distribution of the volume EHD force, even without a-priori knowledge of the expected current. As already stated, this additional accuracy comes at the price of higher computational cost. The real diode approach, in the end, provides a flow rate curve quite similar to the one from the uniform model, even if the points are biased towards the low-power region due to the underestimation of the currents. Moreover, the approach is not dependent on empirical data, since its parameters depend mainly on the electrode radius and could be estimated from similar cases. This result is in our opinion a fair tradeoff between the need of specific empirical data on currents of the uniform model, and the excessive computational effort required by the ideal diode model.  Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  16  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  (a) Electric field lines (grey) and electric potential isolines (black).  (b) Streamlines, sampled every 0.1 s from t = 2.6 s to t = 2.9 s.  Figure 10: Electric field (a) and air velocity (b) in the device with convergent duct with wire-to-plate electrode arrangement discussed in Subsection 5.2 at an applied voltage of 9 kV, these results were obtained with the exponential diode boundary condition.  Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  Anode Current [10-2× mA]  17  14  Reference Uniform model Ideal diode model Exp diode model  12 10 8 6 4 2 0 6  7  8 9 10 Applied Voltage [kV]  11  Figure 11: Anode current vs applied voltage in the device with convergent duct with wire-to-plate electrode arrangement discussed in Subsection 5.2, computed applying three of the boundary condition models presented in Section 3  100 80  10−5  # Iters  Current [A]  10−4  Anode Cur. [A] Cathode Cur. [A] # Gummel Iters  20 0  10−6 −5 10  10−4  10−3 Time [s]  0.01  0.1  (a) Exponential diode model.  100 Anode Cur. [A] Cathode Cur. [A] # Gummel Iters  10−5 10  −6  80 # Iters  Current [A]  10−4  10−7 10−8  20  10−9 10  0  −10  0.2  0.4  0.6 Time [s]  0.8  1  (b) Ideal diode model.  Figure 12: Performance of the iterative algorithm in simulating the device with convergent duct with wire-to-plate electrode arrangement discussed in Subsection 5.2 for an applied voltage of 8 kV. The plots shows anode and cathode currents and the total number of iterations for the electric subsystem solution map E at each time step. Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  18  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  Out Velocity [m/s] 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 1 2 3 4 5 6  Figure 13: Charge distribution in the device with convergent duct with wireto-plate electrode arrangement discussed in Subsection 5.2, sampled every 5 ms from 17 ms to 32 ms for an applied voltage of 8 kV.  0  Uniform model Ideal diode model Exp diode model Reference  0  0.25  0.5 0.75 1 1.25 Input Power [mW]  1.5  1.75  Figure 14: Steady state outlet velocity for the device with convergent duct with wire-to-plate electrode arrangement discussed in Subsection 5.2, computed applying three different boundary models from Section 3  Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  19  6  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  Industrial application example: an EHD cooled condensation radiator  After the model validation carried out in Section 5, we present in this section an example of application of our simulation tool to the design of a cooling apparatus of potential impact in industrial application. In particular, we consider a combination of EHD forced air convection and a two-phase thermosyphon. Two-phase cooling, and in particular two-phase thermosyphons, have been recognized in being beneficial for thermal management of electronics. The usage of pumpless systems together with dielectric fluids and high heat transfer coefficients demonstrated to be a perfect combination for cooling of electronics. Thermosyphon condensers are commonly automotive type heat exchangers. This technology uses numerous multiport extruded tubes with capillary sized channels disposed in parallel and brazed to louvered air fins that meets the required compactness. The heat removal is obtained by means of a forced air stream of air over the condenser body usually imposed by a fan element. If fans represent a standard solution, drawbacks are commonly identified in the reliability (rotating mechanical parts), in the noise and in the occupied volume. An EHD cooled condenser can overcome the limits of a common fan system. For a given condenser size, the EHD cooler will increase the local air speed; for a given temperature of operation of the cooler, the EHD system can enable a global reduction of the system size with reduced noise levels. Last but not least, EHD can locally increase the condensing performances due to generated magnetic field enabling a reduction of the operating temperature of the electric and electronic devices. The result we show in this section pertain to the simulation of a simplified model of EHD cooled thermosyphon, similar to the ones presented in Refs. [55, 56, 57, 58]. Figure 15 depicts the geometry of the device, where the vertical tubes act as cathode and a mesh of thin wires acts as anode. The device is  Figure 15: Geometry of the thermosyphon, with the mesh of wires acting as anode, and the basic periodic cell used as computational domain. Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  20  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  inherently modular, so that simulation is required only for the basic periodic cell, which is in evidence in Fig. 15. On the horizontal boundary planes, periodic condition are imposed, while on the portions of the vertical boundary planes not intersecting the solid components, symmetry conditions are enforced.  Figure 16: Cation number density (m−3 ) isosurfaces, for an applied voltage of 10 kV.  ~ Figure 17: Electric field lines, color scale based on log10 of the magnitude of E expressed in Vm−3 , for an applied voltage of 10 kV.  Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  21  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  Figure 16 shows the distribution of the cation density in the domain. The maximum density is located directly in front of the pipe, and a main conductive region is formed. Figure 17 shows some electric field lines, which are also parallel to the EHD volume force, that triggers the fluid motion.  7  Conclusions  In this work, we studied the numerical approximation of the effects of electric discharge on ambient air flow. First, we proposed an algorithm to deal with the multiphysics mathematical model describing the system, by the coupling of the different and particular approaches already used in the fields of electronic device simulation and computational fluid dynamics. Furthermore, we analyzed the particular phenomenon of corona discharge and proposed a phenomenological approach, which allows for the removal of the plasma subdomain and the electron density conservation equation from the computation. Four different models following this approach have been considered, discussed, and compared. The conclusion is that both the ideal and exponential diode models, proposed in this work, are able to reproduce the correct behavior of the corona discharge EHD system without need of measured data for the electric current in the actual device at hand. Finally, we showed how our models and algorithm can be effectively used in a relevant industrial application.  References [1] G. S. P. Castle, I. I. Inculet, and K. I. Burgess, IEEE Transactions on Industry and General Applications 5, 489 (1969). [2] K. Adamiak and P. Atten, Journal of Electrostatics 61, 85 (2004). [3] P. Atten, A. Adamiak, B. Khaddoura, and J. L. Coulomb, Journal of Optoelectronics and Advanced Materials 6, 1023 (2004). [4] P. Sattari, G. S. P. Castle, and K. Adamiak, IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications 46, 1699 (2010). [5] L. Zhao and K. Adamiak, in Proceedings of the Electrostatics Joint Conference (Boston, MA, 2009). [6] S. O. Ahmedou and M. Havet, Journal of Electrostatics 67, 222 (2009a). [7] S. O. Ahmedou and M. Havet, IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation 16, 489 (2009b). [8] S. O. Ahmedou, M. Havet, and O. Rouaud, Food and Bioprocess Technology 2, 240 (2009). [9] E. Moreau and G. Touchard, Journal of Electrostatics 66, 39 (2008).  Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  22  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  [10] R.-T. Huang, W.-J. Sheu, and C.-C. Wang, Energy Conversion and Management 50, 1789 (2009). [11] C. Kim, D. Park, K. C. Noh, and J. Hwang, Journal of Electrostatics 68, 36 (2010). [12] J. S. Chang, J. Ueno, H. Tsubone, G. D. Harvel, S. Minami, and K. Urashima, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 40, 5109 (2007). [13] H. Tsubone, J. Ueno, B. Komeili, S. Minami, G. D. Harvel, K. Urashima, C. Y. Ching, and J. S. Chang, Journal of Electrostatics 66, 115 (2008). [14] J. S. Chang, H. Tsubone, Y. N. Chun, A. A. Berezin, and K. Urashima, Journal of Electrostatics 67, 335 (2009). [15] S. Karpov and I. Krichtafovitch, in Proceedings of the COMSOL conference (Boston, MA, 2005) pp. 399–403. [16] N. E. Jewell-Larsen, P. Q. Zhang, C. P. Hsu, I. A. Krichtafovitch, and A. V. Mamishev, in 9th AIAA/ASME Joint Thermophysics and Heat Transfer Conference (2006). [17] N. E. Jewell-Larsen, E. Tran, I. A. Krichtafovitch, and A. V. Mamishev, IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation 13, 191 (2006b). [18] C. P. Hsu, N. E. Jewell-Larsen, I. A. Krichtafovitch, S. W. Montgomery, J. T. Dibene II, and A. V. Mamishev, Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems 16, 809 (2007). [19] N. E. Jewell-Larsen, S. V. Karpov, I. A. Krichtafovitch, V. Jayanty, C. P. Hsu, and A. V. Mamishev, in Proceedings of the ESA Annual Meeting on Electrostatics (Minneapolis, MN, 2008) pp. 1–13. [20] N. E. Jewell-Larsen, C. P. Hsu, I. A. Krichtafovitch, S. W. Montgomery, J. T. Dibene II, and A. V. Mamishev, IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation 15, 1745 (2008b). [21] N. E. Jewell-Larsen, H. Ran, Y. Zhang, M. Schwiebert, and A. V. Mamishev, in Proceedings of the Semiconductor Thermal Measurement and Management Symposium, SEMI-THERM (San Jose, CA USA, 2009) pp. 1–7. [22] D. B. Go, S. V. Garimella, and T. S. Fisher, in The Tenth Intersociety Conference on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronics Systems, ITHERM ’06. (2006) pp. 45–53. [23] D. B. Go, S. V. Garimella, and T. S. Fisher, Journal of Applied Physics 102, 053302 (2007). [24] T. S. Fisher, S. V. Garimella, D. B. Go, and R. K. Monja, “Various methods, apparatuses, and systems that use ionic wind to affect heat transfer,” US Patent No. 7545640 (2009). Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  23  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  [25] D. B. Go, R. A. Maturana, T. S. Fisher, and S. V. Garimella, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 51, 6047 (2008). [26] D. B. Go, S. V. Garimella, T. S. Fisher, and V. Bahadur, Plasma Sources Science and Technology 18, 035004 (2009). [27] N. A. Kaptsov, Elektricheskie Yavleniya v Gazakz i Vakuume (OGIZ, Moscow, 1947). [28] W. Zhang, T. S. Fisher, and S. V. Garimella, Journal of Applied Physics 96, 6066 (2004). [29] A. Yabe, Y. Mori, and K. Hijikata, AIAA Journal 16, 340 (1978). [30] J. A. Stratton, Electromagnetic Theory (McGraw Hill, 1941). [31] T. B. Jones, Advances in Heat Transfer 14, 107 (1979). [32] Z. Yu, R. K. Al-Dadah, and R. H. S. Winterton, in Proceedings of the International Conference on Two-Phase Modelling and Experimentation, Vol. 1 (Pisa, Italy, 1999) pp. 463–472. [33] F. W. Peek, Dielectric Phenomena in High Voltage Engineering (McGrawHill, New York, 1929). [34] J. S. Townsend, Nature 62, 340 (1900). [35] J. S. Townsend, Philosophical Magazine 1, 198 (1901). [36] A. Aliat, C. T. Hung, C. J. Tsai, and J. S. Wu, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 42, 1 (2009). [37] A. K. M. Mazumder and F. C. Lai, in Proceedings of the ESA Annual Meeting on Electrostatics (Cleveland, OH, 2011). [38] A. K. M. Mazumder, F. C. Lai, and X. B. Zhao, in Proceedings of the ESA Annual Meeting on Electrostatics (Cleveland, OH, 2011). [39] J. Zhang and F. C. Lai, in Proceedings of the ESA Annual Meeting on Electrostatics (Charlotte, NC, 2010). [40] T. Christen and M. Seeger, Journal of Electrostatics 65, 11 (2007). [41] L. V. Ballestra and R. Sacco, Journal of Computational Physics 195, 320 (2004). [42] F. Brezzi, L. Marini, S. Micheletti, P. Pietra, R. Sacco, and S. Wang, in Numerical Methods in Electromagnetics, Handbook of Numerical Analysis, Vol. 13, edited by W. Schilders and E. ter Maten (Elsevier, 2005) pp. 317– 441.  Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013  24  Multiphysics simulation of corona discharge induced ionic wind  [43] C. de Falco, R. Sacco, and G. Scrofani, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 196, 1729 (2007). [44] C. de Falco, E. Gatti, A. L. Lacaita, and R. Sacco, Journal of Computational Physics 204, 533 (2005). [45] J. Jerome, Analysis of Charge Transport: a Mathematical Study of Semiconductor Devices (Springer-Verlag, 1996). [46] S. Selberherr, Analysis and Simulation of Semiconductor Devices (SpringerVerlag New York, 1984). [47] B. Chini, J. W. Jerome, and R. Sacco, in EuroSime 2006, 7th IEEE International Conference on Thermal, Mechanical and Multiphysics Simulation and Experiments in Micro-Electronics and Micro-Systems (2006) pp. 1–8. [48] J. W. Jerome, B. Chini, M. Longaretti, and R. Sacco, Journal of Computational Electronics 7, 10 (2008). [49] J. W. Jerome and R. Sacco, Nonlinear Analysis, Theory, Methods and Applications 71, e2487 (2009). [50] C. de Falco, J. W. Jerome, and R. Sacco, Journal of Computational Physics 228, 1770 (2009). [51] R. Issa, Journal of computational physics 62, 40 (1986). [52] “OpenFOAM R - The Open Source Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) Toolbox,” . [53] B. Gschaider, “swak4Foam,” . [54] C. Geuzaine and J. F. Remacle, “Gmsh: a three-dimensional finite element mesh generator with built-in pre- and post-processing facilities,” . [55] F. Agostini and B. Agostini, in Proceedings of the IEEE 33rd International Telecommunications Energy Conference, INTELEC (2011) pp. 1–6. [56] B. Agostini and M. Habert, in Proceedings of the 16th International Heat Pipe Conference, IHPC (Lyon, France, 2012) pp. 1–6. [57] M. Habert and B. Agostini, in Proceedings of the 16th International Heat Pipe Conference, IHPC (Lyon, France, 2012) pp. 1–6. [58] F. Agostini and L. Malinowski, in Proceedings of the 13th IEEE Intersociety Conference on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems, ITherm (2012) pp. 1077–1083.  Cagnoni, Agostini, Christen, de Falco, Parolini, Stevanović  June 2013

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
