Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_5414

Abstract:
Separators and Adjustment Sets in Causal Graphs: Complete Criteria and an Algorithmic Framework *  arXiv:1803.00116v2 [cs.AI] 2 Mar 2018  Benito van der Zander Institute for Theoretical Computer Science, Universität zu Lübeck, Germany  Maciej Liśkiewicz Institute for Theoretical Computer Science, Universität zu Lübeck, Germany  Johannes Textor Institute for Computing and Information Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands  Abstract: Principled reasoning about the identifiability of causal effects from non-experimental data is an important application of graphical causal models. We present an algorithmic framework for efficiently testing, constructing, and enumerating m-separators in ancestral graphs (AGs), a class of graphical causal models that can represent uncertainty about the presence of latent confounders. Furthermore, we prove a reduction from causal effect identification by covariate adjustment to m-separation in a subgraph for directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) and maximal ancestral graphs (MAGs). Jointly, these results yield constructive criteria that characterize all adjustment sets as well as all minimal and minimum adjustment sets for identification of a desired causal effect with multivariate exposures and outcomes in the presence of latent confounding. Our results extend several existing solutions for special cases of these problems. Our efficient algorithms allowed us to empirically quantify the identifiability gap between covariate adjustment and the do-calculus in random DAGs, covering a wide range of scenarios. Implementations of our algorithms are provided in the R package DAGITTY . Keywords: Causal inference, Covariate adjustment, Ancestral graphs, d-separation, m-separation, Complexity, Bayesian network, Knowledge representation  Contents 1  Introduction  2  2  Preliminaries 2.1 General backgrounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2 Identification via covariate adjustment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4 5 6  3  Algorithms for m-separation in ancestral graphs 3.1 Linear-time algorithms for testing and finding m-separators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.2 Polynomial time algorithms for minimal and minimum m-separators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.3 The hardness of strong-minimality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7 8 10 14  * This is a revised and extended version of preliminary work presented at the 27th [1] and 30th [2] conferences on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI).  1  Algorithms for minimal m-separators in sparse graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Algorithms for enumerating all m-separators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15 16  4  Empirical analysis of DAG consistency testing 4.1 Simulation setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.2 Empirical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17 18 18  5  Adjustment in DAGs 5.1 Constructive back-door criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.2 CBC vs Pearl’s back-door criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19 19 21  6  Algorithms for testing and computing adjustment sets in DAGs  22  7  Extending the CBC 7.1 Identification by plain formulas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7.2 Identification by generalized parent adjustment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7.3 Identification when X and Y partition V . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24 25 25 26  8  Empirical analysis of identifiability by adjustment 8.1 Instance generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8.2 Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8.3 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27 28 28 29  9  Adjustment in MAGs 9.1 Adjustment amenability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9.2 Adjustment criterion for MAGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9.3 Adjustment set construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37 38 38 41  3.4 3.5  10 Discussion  41  11 Acknowledgments  42  12 References  42  13 Appendix 13.1 Auxiliary lemmas and proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13.2 Further experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13.3 Do-calculus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  44 44 46 46  1 Introduction Graphical causal models are popular tools for reasoning about assumed causal relationships between random variables and their implications [3, 4]. Such models represent the mechanisms that are assumed to generate an observed joint probability distribution. By analyzing the model structure, one can not only determine conditionally independence relationships, but also deduce which variables introduce potential bias (confounding) when the causal effect of certain exposure variables (X) on outcome variables (Y) is to be determined. Confounding is a notorious issue when performing causal inference from observational rather than experimental data, which is often necessary in population research within Epidemiology [5], the Social Sciences [4], or Econometrics. A traditional approach to address confounding is to simply adjust (e.g., stratify) for as many covariates as possible that temporally precede the exposure variable (pre-exposure variables) [6, 7]. This practice has roots in the analysis of data from randomized trials, in which confounding can only occur by chance. For observational data, however,  2  (a) FI  (b) MR  FI  MD LE  (c) MR  FI  MD D  LE  (d) MR  FI  MD D  LE  MR MD  D  LE  D  Figure 1: Causal diagram [5, Chapter 12] describing the effect of low education (LE) on diabetes risk (D) with the covariates family income (FI), mother’s genetic risk to develop diabetes (MR), and mother’s diabetes (MD). The unadjusted estimate (a) is biased due to the common ancestor FI – bias “flows” via the biasing path LE ← FI → MD → D (bold edges). Adjustment for MD (b) blocks this biasing path, but opens a new one because FI and MR become correlated. The minimal adjustments {MD, MR} (c) and {FI} (d) close all biasing paths. Note that, if both FI and MR were unmeasured, it would be impossible to know whether adjustment for only MD would increase or reduce bias. This shows that, unlike for experimental data, conditioning on pre-exposure covariates can be both beneficial and detrimental in observational data. it can be easily shown using graphical causal models that conditioning on one variable can turn a previously nonconfounding variable into a confounder (Figure 1). If that new variable has not been or cannot be measured (e.g., if we could not observe variable MR in Figure 1), then conditioning on a pre-exposure variable could have a detrimental effect. Such examples show that it is impossible to decide which covariate sets one should adjust for to address confounding without at least some knowledge of the causal relationships between the involved covariates. To our knowledge, graphical causal models are currently the only causal inference framework in which it is possible to state a set of causal assumptions and derive from those assumptions a conclusive answer to the question whether, and how, a causal effect of interest is identifiable via covariate adjustment. Covariate adjustment is not complete for identification; other methods like the front-door criterion or do-calculus [3] can permit identification even if covariate adjustment is impossible. In practice, adjustment is however often preferred to such alternatives because its statistical properties are well understood, giving access to useful methodology like robust estimators and confidence intervals. In contrast, knowledge about the statistical properties of e.g. front-door estimation is still lacking [8, 9]1 . A famous result that characterizes valid sets of variables for covariate adjustment in a given graphical model is the back-door criterion by Pearl [3]. We call such sets of variables adjustment sets or simply adjustments. Although the back-door criterion is sound, meaning that sets fulfilling the criterion are indeed valid adjustments, it is not complete – not all valid adjustments fulfill the criterion. It is even possible that none of the valid adjustments in a causal model fulfill the back-door criterion, which would lead a user to incorrectly decide that a different method is required to identify a causal effect of interest. The first sound and complete criterion that characterizes adjustments was given by Shpitser and colleagues [10] for DAGs. This criterion achieves completeness by weakening the simple but overly restrictive condition in the back-door criterion that adjustment sets must not contain any descendants of the exposure variable; such variables can be allowed provided they do not block causal paths or create new biasing paths. However, a characterization of adjustment sets in terms of blocked paths does not yield a practical algorithm for adjustment set construction: Although enumerating all subsets of covariate variables and all paths would work, such a bruteforce approach is only feasible in very small graphs. Thus, the practical relevance of covariate adjustment calls for algorithmically efficient methods that exhaustively characterize all available options. Such methods would ensure that the researcher can devise the best possible strategy to identify a given causal effect. This paper provides efficient algorithms that provide exhaustive answers to the question: Given a causal graph G, which covariates Z can we adjust for to estimate the causal effect of the exposures X on the outcomes Y? We address many variants of this question, such as requiring Z to be minimal or minimum as well as imposing the constraint I ⊆ Z ⊆ R for given sets I, R. All our algorithms handle sets of multiple, possibly interrelated exposures X and outcomes Y, which is important in applications such as case-control studies that screen several putative causes of 1 Quoting [8], “Time will perhaps tell whether results like Pearl’s front-door path adjustment theorem and its generalizations are actually useful for epidemiologic research or whether the results are simply of theoretical interest.”  3  a disease [11]. The basis for our algorithms are theorems that reduce adjustment to d-separation or m-separation in a subgraph, combined with a generic, efficient and flexible algorithmic framework to find, verify, and enumerate separating sets. Our algorithms are guaranteed to find all valid adjustment sets for a given model with polynomial delay. Besides adjustment, the framework is potentially useful for other applications, as we illustrate by applying it to model checking. We also perform an extensive empirical evaluation of the power of covariate adjustment compared to other identification techniques in random DAGs. In real-life applications, not all covariates are equally well suited for adjustment. Measuring some variables may be difficult or expensive, or could be affected by substantial measurement error. For instance, in Figure 1, measuring the variable MR (the genetic risk inherited from the mother) would require knowledge of the genetic variants that lead to a higher diabetes risk and availability of the genomes of the mothers of all study participants, but under these circumstances, it could be measured rather reliably. The family income, on the other hand, could be determined rather easily using a questionnaire, which however would likely suffer from substantial bias (e.g., people with high incomes could be less willing to report them). In such cases algorithms that return adjustment sets in which some (measurement or reliability) cost of all variables in the adjustment is minimized are potentially useful. For this reason, we provide variants to list only those sets that minimize a user-supplied cost function. A model represented as a DAG assumes causal sufficiency, i.e. that every relevant variable is included in the model. If this is not the case and there are unknown latent variables, one can use a maximal ancestral graph (MAG) model that just specifies the ancestral relations between the variables [12]. An adjustment in a MAG remains valid when the MAG is extended by any number of additional latent variables as long as the ancestral relations and m-separating sets are preserved. This is an important feature because the assumption that all relevant confounders have been measured and included in a model is often unrealistic. We show that our entire algorithmic framework for computing adjustment sets can be generalized to MAGs, allowing practitioners to substantially relax the assumption of causal sufficiency that DAG-based analyses rely on. This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces notation and basic concepts. In Section 3, we present algorithms for verifying, constructing, and listing m-separating sets Z in ancestral graphs. All algorithms handle the case of unconstrained separators, minimal and minimum separators as well as the additional constraint I ⊆ Z ⊆ R for given sets I, R. They subsume a number of earlier solutions for special cases of these problems, e.g. the Bayes-Ball algorithm for verification of d-separating sets [13] or the use of network flow calculations to find minimal d-separating sets in DAGs [14, 15]. Section 4 presents DAG consistency testing as a possible application of these algorithms beyond adjustment sets. In Section 5, we present a constructive back-door criterion (CBC) that reduces the construction of adjustment sets to the finding of separating sets in DAGs, explore possible variations of it and compare it to Pearl’s back-door criterion [3]. Section 6 explains how to apply the algorithms of Section 3 to the graphs resulting from the criterion of Section 5, which yields efficient polynomial time algorithms for verifying, constructing, and listing adjustment sets in DAGs. This combination leads to the first efficient implementation of the sound and complete adjustment criterion by Shpitser and colleagues [10]. Section 7 extends our criterion by addressing some cases where, even though covariate adjustment is not possible, it is still not necessary to invoke the do-calculus since the causal effect can be identified in another simple manner. In Section 8 we compare the results and performance of our adjustment criterion (with and without the extensions derived in Section 7) with Pearl’s back-door criterion as well as the IDC algorithm, which finds all identifiable causal effects, on randomly generated DAGs. Finally, in Section 9, we extend our constructive back-door criterion of Section 5 to MAGs, which generalizes the sound but incomplete adjustment criterion for MAGs without constraints by Maathuis and Colombo [16]. The proof techniques introduced in Sections 5 and 9 have been successfully applied to obtain complete and constructive adjustment criteria for several other classes of graphical causal models since the publication of our preliminary version [2], as summarized in Table 1.  2 Preliminaries We denote sets by bold upper case letters (S), and sometimes abbreviate singleton sets {S} as S. Graphs are written calligraphically (G), and variables in upper-case (X).  4  Graph class DAGs MAGs CPDAGs PAGs CGs maximal PDAGs  First sound and complete criterion Shpitser et al. [10] this paper (conference version [2]) Perković et al. [17] Perković et al. [17] van der Zander and Liśkiewicz [18] Perković et al. [20]  First sound and complete constructive criterion this paper (conference version [2]) this paper (conference version [2]) van der Zander and Liśkiewicz [18] Perković et al. [19] van der Zander and Liśkiewicz [18] Perković et al. [20]  Table 1: An overview of our results and and related works for directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), maximal ancestral graphs (MAGs), completed partially directed acyclic graphs (CPDAGs), partial ancestral graphs (PAG), chain graphs (CGs), and maximally oriented partially directed acyclic graphs (PDAGs). A criterion is sound if it is only satisfied by adjustment sets. It is complete if every adjustment set satisfies it. It is constructive if it leads to an efficient algorithm for constructing an adjustment set. Paper [2] is the preliminary conference version of this work, and all subsequent results are based on the techniques developed in this paper.  2.1 General backgrounds Mixed graphs and paths We consider mixed graphs G = (V, E) with nodes (vertices, variables) V and directed (A → B), undirected (A − B), and bidirected (A ↔ B) edges E. Nodes linked by an edge are adjacent and neighbors of each other. A walk of length n is a node sequence V1 , . . . , Vn+1 such that there exists an edge sequence E1 , E2 , . . . , En for which every edge Ei connects Vi , Vi+1 . Then V1 is called the start node and Vn+1 the end node of the walk. A path is a walk in which no node occurs more than once. Given a node set X and a node set Y, a walk from X ∈ X to Y ∈ Y is called X-proper if only its start node is in X. If X is clear from the context, it is omitted and we just say the path is proper. Given a graph G = (V, E) and a node set V′ , the induced subgraph GV′ = (V′ , E′ ) contains the edges E′ = E ∩ (V′ × V′ ) from G that are adjacent only to nodes in V′ . The skeleton of G is a graph with the same nodes in which every edge is replaced by an undirected edge. A connected component is a subgraph in which every pair of nodes is connected by a path. A subgraph containing only a single node is also a connected component. A connected component is a bidirectionally connected component if for every pair of nodes there exists a connecting path that contains only bidirected edges. Throughout, n stands for the number of nodes and m for the number of edges of a graph. Ancestry A walk of the form V1 → . . . → Vn is directed, or causal. A non-causal walk is biasing. If there is a directed walk from U to V, then U is called an ancestor of V and V a descendant of U. A graph is acyclic if no directed walk from a node to itself is longer than 0. All directed walks in an acyclic graph are paths. A walk is anterior if it were directed after replacing all edges U − V by U → V. If there is an anterior path from U to V, then U is called an anterior of V. All ancestors of V are anteriors of V. Every node is its own ancestor, descendant, and anterior. For a node set X, the set of all of its ancestors is written as An(X). The descendant and anterior sets De(X), Ant(X) are analogously defined. Also, we denote by Pa(X), (Ch(X), Ne(X)), the set of parents (children, neighbors) of X. m-Separation A node V on a walk w is called a collider if two arrowheads of w meet at V, e.g., one possible collider is U ↔ V ← Q. There can be no collider if w is shorter than 2. Two nodes U, V are called collider connected if there is a path between them on which all nodes except U and V are colliders. Adjacent vertices are collider connected. Two nodes U, V are called m-connected by a set Z if there is a path π between them on which every node that is a collider is in An(Z) and every node that is not a collider is not in Z. Then π is called an m-connecting path. The same definition can be stated simpler using walks: U, V are called m-connected by Z if there is a walk between them on which all colliders and only colliders are in Z. If U, V are m-connected by the empty set, we simply say they are m-connected. If U, V are not m-connected by Z, we say that Z m-separates them or blocks all paths between them. Two node sets X, Y are m-separated by Z if all their nodes are pairwise m-separated by Z. In DAGs, m-separation is equivalent to the well-known d-separation criterion [3].  5  Ancestral graphs and DAGs A mixed graph G = (V, E) is called an ancestral graph (AG) if the following two conditions hold: (1) For each edge A ← B or A ↔ B, A is not an ancestor of B. (2) For each edge A − B, there are no edges A ← C, A ↔ C, B ← C or B ↔ C. There can be at most one edge between two nodes in an AG [12]. Syntactically, all DAGs are AGs and all AGs containing only directed edges are DAGs. An AG G = (V, E) is a maximal ancestral graph (MAG) if every non-adjacent pair of nodes U, V can be m-separated by some Z ⊆ V \ {U, V}. Every AG G can be turned into a MAG M by adding bidirected edges between node pairs that cannot be m-separated, which preserves all m-separation relationships in the graph [12]. Graph transformations A DAG G = (V, E) is represented by a MAG M = G[LS with nodes V \ (S ∪ L) for sets S, L ⊆ V, whereby M has an edge between a pair of nodes U, V if U, V cannot be d-separated in G by any Z with S ⊆ Z ⊆ V \ L. That edge has an arrowhead at node V, if V < An(U ∪ S). The canonical DAG C(M) of a MAG M is the DAG obtained from M by replacing every ↔ edge with ← L → and every − edge with → S ← with new nodes L or S which form sets L, S. Clearly C(M)[LS = M (see [12]). The augmented graph (G)a of a certain AG G is an undirected graph with the same nodes as G whose edges are all pairs of nodes that are collider connected in G. Two node sets X and Y are m-separated by a node set Z in G if and only if Z is an X-Y node cut in (GAnt(X∪Y∪Z) )a [12]. For DAGs the augmented graph is also called the moralized graph, so the construction of the augmented graph is termed moralization. For any subset A and B of V, by A → B we denote the set of all edges A → B in E, such that A ∈ A and B ∈ B; the sets A ← B, A ↔ B, and A − B are defined analogously. Using this notation, the graph obtained from a graph G = (V, E) by removing all edges entering a certain node set X is written as GX = (V, E \ ((V → X) ∪ (V ↔ X))). The removal of all edges leaving X is written as GX = (V, E \ ((X → V) ∪ (X − V))). The application of both these operations (GX )X′ is abbreviated as GXX′ . Descendants and ancestors in these graphs are written as set subscript at the corresponding function without specifying the graph, e.g. DeX or AnX . This notation is used for DAGs and MAGs. Note that for DAGs in each case only the first kind of edges needs to be removed as there are no ↔ or − edges in DAGs.  2.2 Identification via covariate adjustment Do-operator and identifiability Q A DAG G encodes the factorization of a joint distribution P for the set of variables V = {X1 , . . . , Xn } as P(v) = nj=1 P(x j | pa j ), where pa j denotes a particular realization of the parent variables of X j in G. When interpreted causally, an edge Xi → X j is taken to represent a direct causal effect of Xi on X j . For disjoint X, Y ⊆ V, the (total) causal effect of X on Y is P(y | do(x)) where do(x) represents an intervention that sets X = x. In a DAG, this intervention corresponds to removing all edges into X, disconnecting X from its parents, i.e. constructing the graph GX . Given DAG G and a joint probability density P for V the post-intervention distribution can be expressed in a truncated factorization formula:  Y   P(x j | pa j ) for V consistent with x,   (1) P(v | do(x)) =  X ∈V\X   j  0 otherwise. When all variables in V are observed (we model this by setting R = V), the causal effect P(y | do(x)) of X on Y in a given graph G can be determined uniquely from the pre-intervention distribution P using the factorization above. However, when some variables are unobserved, the question whether P(y | do(x)) is identifiable, i.e., if it can be computed from the pre-intervention distribution independent of the unknown quantities for the unobserved variables V \ R, becomes much more complex. For a formal definition of identifiability see [3, Section 3.2]. Figure 2 shows an example DAG G1 for which the causal effect of X on Y is not identifiable, and two DAGs G2 and G3 for which the effect is identifiable.  Adjustment sets The identification via covariate adjustment, studied in this paper, is defined for DAGs below and can be extend to MAGs in the usual way [16] (we will give a formal definition Section 9).  6  U G1 :  X  U Y  G2 :  X  V  U Y  G3 :  X  Z V  Y  Figure 2: Identification of P(y | do(x)) in graphs with the unobserved nodes V \ R = {U}: In G1 the effect is not identifiable. In G2 , it is identifiable (using the front-door method [3]) but for this DAG no adjustment set Z exists, with Z ⊆ V \ {U}. In G3 the effect can be identified via covariate adjustment Z = {Z}. Definition 1 (Adjustment [3]). Given a DAG G = (V, E) and pairwise disjoint X, Y, Z ⊆ V, Z is called covariate adjustment for estimating the causal effect of X on Y, or simply adjustment (set), if for every distribution P consistent with G we have   if Z = ∅,   P(y | x) (2) P(y | do(x)) =  P   z P(y | x, z)P(z) otherwise.  Identification via covariate adjustment is not complete in the sense that there exist graphs for which P(y | do(x)) is identifiable but for which no covariate adjustment set Z, with Z ⊆ R, exists. For an example of such a DAG see Figure 2. In [21] (see also [3, Section 3.4]) Pearl introduced the do-calculus of intervention that was proven to be complete for identifying causal effects [22, 23]. Based on the rules of the do-calculus, the IDC algorithm proposed by Shpitser and Pearl [24] computes a formula for P(y | do(x)) if (and only if) the effect is identifiable. A drawback of the algorithm is that it can generate very complex formulas, even when a causal effect is also identifiable via covariate adjustment (Expression (2)) or in another simple manner. Also the runtime of the IDC algorithm is higher compared to our algorithms to determine adjustment sets, as we will show later. Minimality In this paper we present methods for computing an adjustment set that satisfies the condition of Definition 1 for a given instance. An important feature of our approach is that it allows also to find adjustment sets satisfying some additional desirable constraints, e.g., minimality. Below we define this notion formally both for adjustment and separation sets. For pairwise disjoint X, Y, Z ⊆ V, and a subset M of V, an m-separator (resp. adjustment set) Z relative to (X, Y) is M-minimal, if M ⊆ Z and no set Z′ ( Z with M ⊆ Z′ is an m-separator (adjustment set) relative to (X, Y). An m-separator (adjustment) Z is M-minimum to a cost function w : V → R+ if M ⊆ Z and P according P ′ ′ no m-separator (adjustment) Z with M ⊆ Z and Z∈Z′ w(Z) < Z∈Z w(Z) exists. If M is an empty set, then the ∅-minimality coincides with the standard notion for minimal/minimum m-separator, resp. adjustment set. We will call the ∅-minimality also strong-minimality. A more detailed explanation of these concepts along with some examples is provided in Section 3.2. In this paper we consider m-separators (adjustments) Z that are supersets of a constraining set I. Thus, beside strongly-minimal separators and adjustments Z, with I ⊆ Z, it is reasonable to investigate I-minimal and I-minimum sets. For a given constraining set I we will abbreviate the I-minimal/minimum Z ⊇ I as weakly-minimal/minimum or just as minimal/minimum. Note a subtle, but important difference between weak and strong minimality. For example, the existence of a weakly-minimal m-separator does not necessarily imply that a strongly-minimal separator exists. E.g., in the DAG X → I ← V → Y, set Z = {I, V} is an I-minimal d-separator relative to (X, Y) but in the graph there exists no strongly-minimal d-separator Z′ , with I ∈ Z′ . On the other hand, it is easy to see that every strongly-minimal m-separator Z, with I ⊆ Z, is also an I-minimal one and the same holds for the minimum sets.  3 Algorithms for m-separation in ancestral graphs In this section, we compile an algorithmic framework for solving a host of problems related to verification, construction, and enumeration of m-separating sets in an ancestral graph G = (V, E) with n nodes in V and m edges in E. The problems are defined in Table 2, which also shows the asymptotic runtimes of our algorithms. The goal is to test or to output either arbitrary m-separating sets Z without further constraints or m-separating sets that have a minimal 7  Verification: For given X, Y, Z and constraint I decide if . . . T EST S EP Z m-separates X, Y T EST M IN S EP Z ⊇ I m-separates X, Y and Z is . . . I-minimal strongly-minimal Construction: For given X, Y and constraints I, R, output an . . . F IND S EP m-separator Z with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R F IND M IN S EP m-separator Z with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R which is . . . I-minimal strongly-minimal F IND M IN C OST S EP m-separator Z with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R which is . . . I-minimum strongly-minimum Enumeration: For given X, Y, I, R enumerate all . . . L IST S EP m-separators Z with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R L IST M IN S EP I-minimal m-separators Z with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R  Runtime  Reference  O(n + m)  Proposition 1  O(n2 ) O(n2 )  Proposition 3 Proposition 3  O(n + m)  Proposition 2  O(n2 ) NP-hard  Proposition 4 Proposition 7  O(n3 ) O(n3 )  Proposition 5 Proposition 6  Delay O(n(n + m)) O(n3 )  Proposition 9 Proposition 10  Table 2: Definitions of algorithmic tasks related to m-separation in an ancestral graph G of n nodes and m edges and the time complexities of algorithms given in this section which solve the associated problems. Throughout, X, Y, R are pairwise disjoint node sets, the set Z is disjoint with P the non-empty sets X, Y, and each of the sets I, R, Z can be empty. A minimum m-separator minimizes the sum Z∈Z w(Z) for a cost function w respecting the given constraints, i.e. w(V) = ∞ for V < R. The construction algorithms output ⊥ if no set fulfilling the listed condition exists. Delay complexity for e.g. L IST M IN S EP refers to the time needed to output one solution when there can be exponentially many solutions (see [26]). size, so that no node can be removed from the set without turning it into a non-separating set. A further constraint is that Z should be bounded by arbitrary given sets I ⊆ R as I ⊆ Z ⊆ R. The variables in I will always be included in the m-separating set, even if the set remains a separator without these variables. This allows to deal with cases where study design (or reviewers) mandate that certain variables be adjusted for. The set V \ R corresponds to a set of unobserved variables, which are known to exist, but have not been (or cannot be) measured. This constraint can also be used to model correlated errors between variables, i.e., rather than connecting such variables with a bidirected edge like in a semi-Markovian model, the variables are connected to another variable not in R. Both constraints together are also an important technical tool for the design of efficient enumeration algorithms and the adjustment algorithms in the later sections. The rest of this section describes our algorithms solving these problems, which are mostly generalizations of existing algorithms from [25, 13, 14, 1]. For each problem, we present the algorithm as a function of the same name as the problem, so that the association between problem and algorithm is easy to follow and the algorithms can be built upon each other. In contrast to the preliminary conference version of this work [2], we state the algorithms separately for sparse and dense graphs, as well as introducing and analyzing a new notion of minimality.  3.1 Linear-time algorithms for testing and finding m-separators The problems T EST S EP and F IND S EP can be solved immediately in the ancestral graph. T EST S EP just requires us to verify the m-separation definition for given sets X, Y, Z. In DAGs d-separation is usually tested with the Bayes-Ball algorithm [13], which can be visualized as sending balls through the graph along the edges, tracking which nodes have been visited from either their parents or children, until all reachable nodes have been visited. In other words, Bayes-Ball is basically a breadth-first-search with some rules that determine if an edge pair lets the ball pass, bounces it back on the same edge or blocks it completely. These rules can be adapted to m-separation as shown in Figure 3, 8  which leads to the following algorithm for testing if a given Z m-separates X and Y in an AG G: function T EST S EP(G, X, Y, Z) P ← {(←, X) | X ∈ X } ⊲ list of pairs (type of edge, node) whose visit is pending Q←P ⊲ all pending and ever visited nodes while P not empty do Let (e, T) be a (type of edge, node) pair of P Remove (e, T) from P for all neighbors N of T do Let T and N be connected by edge f if e, T, f is an m-connecting path segment and ( f, N) < Q then Add ( f, N) to P and Q if M ∈ Y then return false return true Analysis of the Algorithm. From the rules in Figure 3 it is obvious that the following statement about algorithm T EST S EP holds: The ball only passes through the walk segment of two consecutive edges if the segment is an mconnected walk. The correctness follows from the fact that the algorithm searches over all walks starting in X. The runtime is linear as it is a breadth-first-search and each node is visited at most four times. The rules for entering a node through edges → and ↔ as well as through edges ← and − are the same, so an implementation could merge these cases in Q, so each node is visited at most twice.  Proposition 1. Using the algorithm above, the task T EST S EP can be solved in time O(n + m). The next problem F IND S EP asks for a set Z m-separating given X and Y with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R. A canonical solution for this problem is given in the following lemma. Lemma 1. Let X, Y, I, R be sets of nodes with I ⊆ R, R ∩ (X ∪ Y) = ∅. If there exists an m-separator Z0 relative to (X, Y) with I ⊆ Z0 ⊆ R, then Z = Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ I) ∩ R is an m-separator. Proof. Let us consider a proper walk w = X, V1 , . . . , Vn , Y with X ∈ X and Y ∈ Y. If w does not contain a collider, all nodes Vi are in Ant(X ∪ Y) and the walk is blocked by Z, unless {V1 , . . . , Vn } ∩ R = ∅ in which case the walk is not blocked by Z0 either. If the walk contains colliders C, it is blocked, unless C ⊆ Z ⊆ R. Then all nodes Vi are in Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ I) and the walk is blocked, unless {V1 , . . . , Vn } ∩ R = C. Since C ⊆ Z is a set of anteriors, there exists a shortest (possible of length zero) path π j = V j → . . . → W j for each V j ∈ C with W j ∈ X ∪ Y ∪ I (it cannot contain an undirected edge, since there is an arrow pointing to V j ). Let π′j = V j → . . . → W ′j be the shortest subpath of π j that is not blocked by Z0 . Let w′ be the walk w after replacing each V j by the walk V j → . . . → W ′j ← . . . ← V j . If any of the W j is in X ∪ Y we truncate the walk, such that we get the shortest walk between nodes of X and Y. Since π′j is not blocked, w′ contains no colliders except w′j and all other nodes of w′ are not in R, w′ is not blocked and Z0 is not a separator.  This yields the following algorithm to find an m-separator relative to X, Y: function F IND S EP(G, X, Y, I, R) R′ ← R \ (X ∪ Y) Z ← Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ I) ∩ R′ if T EST S EP(G, X, Y, Z) then return Z else return ⊥ Analysis of the Algorithm. The algorithm finds an m-separator due to Lemma 1 and runs in linear time, since the set Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ I) ∩ R can be calculated in linear time and the algorithm T EST S EP runs in linear time as well.  Proposition 2. Using the algorithm above, the task F IND S EP can be solved in time O(n + m).  9  M < Z: →→ →−  ←→ ←← ←↔ ←−  T M  O M ∈ Z:  I  →← →↔  O  I  B  U  O  I  M  M U  O  M B  T  I  −→ −← −↔ −−  T  M  T  B  ↔→ ↔−  T  U  O  I  ↔← ↔↔  B  U  O  I  B  U  O  T M I  T  T  M  M B  U  O  I  B  U  B  U  Figure 3: Expanded rules for Bayes-Ball in AGs, listing (in boxes) all combinations of edge pairs through which the ball is allowed to pass. The Bayes ball starts at the top node T and passes through the middle node M to one of the bottom nodes {O, I, B, U}. Forbidden passes are marked in red. Here, by a pair of edges we mean an edge between T (Top node) and M (Middle node) and M → O (Out-node), resp. M ← I (In-node), M ↔ B (Bidirected edge), and M − U (Undirected edge). The figure above shows all possible types of edges between T and M. We consider two cases: M < Z and M ∈ Z (gray). The leaving edge can correspond to the entering edge, i.e. T can belong to {O, I, B, U}, in which case the ball might return to T, which is called a bouncing ball in the literature. Set R is required to be disjoint with X and Y, because m-separation of a set Z relative to X, Y is not defined when Z contains a node of X or Y, so Z is always a subset of R ⊆ V \ (X ∪ Y). However, our algorithms still remove X ∪ Y from R, as it might prevent bugs in practical implementations and it is reasonable to find a separator that does not contain the variables to be separated.  3.2 Polynomial time algorithms for minimal and minimum m-separators In this section we present algorithms for testing minimal m-separators for both variants of the minimality. We give also algorithms for constructing weakly- and strongly-minimum m-separators Z satisfying constraints I ⊆ Z ⊆ R and for finding weakly-minimal separators. Computing strongly-minimal separators appears to be a hard problem – we discuss its complexity in detail in the next section. This is a very surprising result since finding objects of minimum costs or sizes is, typically, harder than constructing minimal objects. Our algorithms are easily implementable and have runtimes O(n2 ), resp. O(n3 ). These time complexities are reasonable particularly in case of dense ancestral graphs, i.e. graphs with a large number of edges n ≪ m ≤ n2 and O(n + m) = O(n2 ). In Section 3.4 we propose algorithms which are faster then those presented below, when the instance graphs are sparse. The algorithms for minimal m-separators consist of two phases. First we convert the ancestral graph to a special augmented graph. Then, a minimal separator is searched as a vertex cut in the augmented graph. This approach generalizes d-separation algorithms of [14] and [1], particularly the handling of the undirected graph after the moralization step is the same as in [14]. Constructing the augmented graph according to its definition and searching a collider connected path for all pairs of nodes would lead to a suboptimal algorithm. Therefore, we first give an asymptotically optimal (linear time in output size) moralization algorithm for AGs: Lemma 2 (Efficient AG moralization). Given an AG G, the augmented graph (G)a can be computed in time O(n2 ). Proof. The algorithm proceeds in four steps. 1. Start by setting (G)a to the skeleton of G. 10  V and its neighbors Ne(V) in Ga : P  O  P  O  V  N  Case: V < R  Case: V ∈ I  V  V  M  N  P  O  M  N  M  Figure 4: This figure explains the removal of nodes in I and outside of R from the augmented graph (GAnt(X∪Y∪I) )a . Shown is an exemplary node V with all its neighbors in the augmented graph. In the case V ∈ I the node V blocks all paths through V, so the second graph obtained by removing V has no remaining edges. In the case V < R no path is blocked by V, so after removing the node all its neighbors need to be linked to preserve the connectivities as shown in the third graph. The time needed to insert the new edges is O(|V \ R| · |Ne(V \ R)|2 ) = O(n3 ), so this removal of nodes outside R is only used for algorithm L IST M IN S EP in Section 3.5 and the other algorithms handle such nodes with different approaches. 2. Partition G in all its maximal bidirectionally connected components. 3. For each pair U, V of nodes from the same component, add the edge U − V to (G)a if it did not exist already. 4. For each component, identify all its parents and link them all by undirected edges in (G)a . Now two nodes are adjacent in (G)a if and only if they are collider connected in G. All four steps can be performed in time O(n2 ).  Lemma 1 gave us a closed form solution to find an m-separator, which yields a constraint for minimal m-separators: Corollary 1 (Ancestry of M-minimal separators). Given an AG G and three sets X, Y, M, every M-minimal mseparator Z is a subset of Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ M). Proof. Assume there is an M-minimal separator Z with Z * Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ M). Setting I = M and R = Z, Lemma 1 shows that Z′ = Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ M) ∩ Z is an m-separator with M ⊆ Z′ . But Z′ ⊆ Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ M) and Z′ ⊆ Z, so Z , Z′ and Z is not an M-minimal separator.  Corollary 2 (Ancestry of minimal separators). Given an AG G and three sets X, Y, I, every I-minimal or ∅-minimal m-separator is a subset of Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ I). Proof. This follows from Corollary 1 with M = I or M = ∅. In both cases we have Ant(X∪Y∪M) ⊆ Ant(X∪Y∪I).    Corollary 2 applies to minimum separators as well because every minimum separator must be minimal. For all strongly-minimal (i.e., recall, ∅-minimal) or I-minimal m-separator Z satisfying I ⊆ Z the corollary implies Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ Z) = Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ I) and thus (GAnt(X∪Y∪Z) )a = (GAnt(X∪Y∪I) )a , so the augmented graph (GAnt(X∪Y∪Z) )a can be constructed without knowing the actual Z. We will use ma to denote the number of edges in (GAnt(X∪Y∪I) )a . Since nodes in I as well as nodes outside R are known to either be in Z or to be excluded from Z, they do not need to be considered by the algorithms and can be removed from the augmented graph as shown in Figure 4, similarly to the approach in [25]. T EST M IN S EP and F IND M IN S EP can now be solved by a modified breadth-first-search in the graph (GAnt(X∪Y∪Z) )a . We start with providing the function T EST M IN S EP which tests if Z ⊆ R is an M-minimal m-separator relative to (X, Y) in an AC G:  11  Z1  V1 G:  Z2  X  Z1  V1 Y  GAnt(X∪Y∪M) :  X  Z2  Z1  V1 Y  GaAnt(X∪Y∪M) :  X  Z2 Y  V2 Figure 5: The transformation of a graph G to GAnt(X∪Y∪M) to (GAnt(X∪Y∪M) )a with M = ∅. The m-separating set {Z1 , Z2 } is not minimal as no node is reachable from both X and Y, but each node alone {Z1 } or {Z2 } is a minimal m-separator. function T EST M IN S EP(G, X, Y, Z, M, R) if Z \ Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ M) , ∅ or Z * R then return false if not T EST S EP(G, X, Y, Z) then return false G′a ← (GAnt(X∪Y∪M) )a Remove from G′a all nodes of M. Rx ← {Z ∈ Z | ∃ path from X to Z in G′a not intersecting Z \ {Z}} if Z , Rx then return false R y ← {Z ∈ Z | ∃ path from Y to Z in G′a not intersecting Z \ {Z}} if Z , R y then return false return true Analysis of the Algorithm. T EST M IN S EP, runs in O(ma ) because Rx and R y can be computed with an ordinary search that aborts when a node in Z is reached. If each node in Z is reachable from both X and Y, the set is M-minimal as no node can be removed without opening a connecting path as shown in the example of Figure 5. By setting the parameter M = I, the algorithm tests I-minimality of Z. By setting M = ∅, the algorithm tests strong-minimality.  Proposition 3. Using the algorithm above, the task T EST M IN S EP, both for testing I-minimality and strong-minimality, can be solved in time O(ma ) = O(n2 ). The difference between I-minimal and strongly-minimal separation sets Z ⊇ I is illustrated in Figure 5. There are exactly two strongly-minimal separating sets: {Z1 } and {Z2 }. No other m-separator will be strongly-minimal regardless of which nodes are added to a constraining set I. Therefore, for I = ∅, both m-separators satisfy the constraint, for I = {Z1 } or I = {Z2 }, only one of them does and, for a I = {Z1 , Z2 } or V1 ∈ I, no strongly-minimal m-separator satisfies it. The constraint I just chooses some m-separators of a fixed set of strongly-minimal m-separators. On the other hand, when computing an I-minimal m-separator, we treat the nodes of I as fixed and search for a minimal m-separator among all supersets of I. In Figure 5, if I is either {Z1 }, {Z2 } or {Z1 , Z2 }, then I itself is an Iminimal m-separator and no other I-minimal m-separator exists. If I = {V1 }, then {Z1 , V1 } and {Z2 , V1 } are I-minimal. This is an easier and in some sense more natural concept, since it can be modeled by removing the nodes of I from the graph and searching a minimal m-separator for the remaining nodes. From a covariate adjustment perspective, the definition of M-minimality is most meaningful in the case M = ∅ or M = I. However, our algorithms technically also allow M to lie “between” ∅ and I or even partly outside M, even though this is less relevant for our application. For example if ∅ , M ⊂ I, the nodes of M can be ignored for the minimality, while the nodes of I \ M must be unremovable like all nodes in the case of ∅-minimality. In an example in Figure 5, for M = {V1 }, I = {Z1 , V1 } would only accept {Z1 , V1 } as m-separator. M = {Z1 }, I = {Z1 , Z2 } would not allow any. Every m-separator Z ⊆ R is Z-minimal, R-minimal and V-minimal. Next we give an algorithm to find an I-minimal m-separator:  12  function F IND M IN S EP(G, X, Y, I, R) G′ ← GAnt(X∪Y∪I) G′a ← (GAnt(X∪Y∪I) )a Remove from G′a all nodes of I. Z′ ← R ∩ Ant(X ∪ Y) \ (X ∪ Y) Z′′ ← {Z ∈ Z′ | ∃ a path from X to Z in G′a not intersecting Z′ \ {Z}} Z ← {Z ∈ Z′′ | ∃ a path from Y to Z in G′a not intersecting Z′′ \ {Z}} if not T EST S EP(G′ , X, Y, Z) then return ⊥ return Z ∪ I Analysis of the Algorithm. Algorithm F IND M IN S EP begins with the separating set R∩Ant(X∪Y) \ (X∪Y) and finds a subset satisfying the conditions tested by algorithm T EST M IN S EP. As T EST M IN S EP it can be implemented in O(ma ) using a breadth-first-search starting from X (Y) that aborts when a node in Z′ (Z′′ ) is reached.  Algorithm F IND M IN S EP finds an I-minimal m-separator. Note that setting the argument I = ∅ does not lead to a strongly-minimal separator, because then the returned set Z may no longer satisfy the constraint I ⊆ Z ⊆ R. Proposition 4. The algorithm above finds an I-minimal m-separator Z, with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R, in time O(ma ) = O(n2 ). In the problem F IND M IN C OST S EP, each node V is associated with a cost w(V) given P by a cost function w : V → R+ and the task is to find a set Z m-separating X and Y which minimizes the total cost Z∈Z w(Z) under the constraint I ⊆ Z ⊆ R. In order to find an m-separator of minimum size, we can use a function w(V) = 1 ∀V ∈ R that assigns unit cost to each node. Alternatively we might want to find an m-separator that minimizes the cost of measuring the variables in the separator or that minimizes the number of combinations that the values of these variables Q can take. When each node V corresponds to a random variable that can take kV different values, there are V∈V kV combinations, which can be minimized by a logarithmic cost function w(V) = log kV ∀V ∈ R. We again construct the augmented graph and can afterwards solve the problem with any weighted min-cut algorithm. function F IND M IN C OST S EP(G, X, Y, I, R, w) G′ ← GAnt(X∪Y∪I) G′a ← (GAnt(X∪Y∪I) )a Add a node Xm connected to all nodes in X, and a node Ym connected to all nodes in Y. Assign infinite cost to all nodes in X ∪ Y ∪ (V \ R) and cost w(Z) to every other node Z. Remove all nodes of I from G′a . return a minimum vertex cut Z separating Xm and Ym in the undirected graph. Analysis of the Algorithm. The correctness follows from the fact that a minimum set is a minimal set and the minimum cut found in the ancestor moral graph is therefore the minimum m-separating set. The minimum cut can be found using a maximum flow algorithm in O(n3 ) due to the well-known min-cut-max-flow theorem [27, Chapter 6].  Proposition 5. The algorithm above solves in time O(n3 ) the task F IND M IN C OST S EP in case of I-minimality. The runtime primarily depends on the used min-cut/max-flow algorithm. Using a state-of-the-art max-flow algorithm recently presented by Orlin improves the runtime to O(nma ) [28], although this is no necessarily an improvement in our setting, because the augmented graph can have ma = O(n2 ) edges and then O(nma ) and O(n3 ) are the same. Faster max-flow algorithms are also known for specific graph √ classes or specific cost functions. In the special case of a unit cost function w(V) = 1 on undirected graphs an O(ma n) algorithm is known [27], which is not directly applicable, since algorithm F IND M IN C OST S EP changes the nodes X∪Y∪(V\R) to have infinite costs. However, we can apply the max-flow algorithm to a new graph containing only nodes in R′ = (R \ (X ∪ Y)) ∩ Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ I) by removing the nodes of V\R iteratively in O((n−|R|)n2 ) as shown in Figure 4 or by creating a new graph only containing those nodes √ in O(|R′ |ma ) as described in [14], resulting in a total runtime of O(min((n − |R|)n2 , |R′ |ma ) + ma |R′ |) = O(|R′ |ma ) for a unit cost function.  13  The set Z returned by algorithm F IND M IN C OST S EP is also strongly-minimum, unless no strongly-minimum set Z exists under the given constraints I ⊆ Z ⊆ R. To seePthis assume ZPis not strongly-minimum and there exists a strongly-minimum set Z′ satisfying the constraint. Then Z∈Z′ w(Z) < Z∈Z w(Z). But Z′ satisfies I ⊆ Z′ , so Z was not I-minimum, a contradiction. P All strongly-minimum sets for a graph have the same minimum sum Z∈Z w(Z), regardless of the constraint I, so ′ we can test ifP the set returned P by F IND M IN C OST S EP is strongly-minimum by finding one strongly-minimum set Z and testing if Z∈Z w(Z) = Z∈Z′ w(Z). Such a strongly-minimum set Z′ can be obtained by calling F IND M IN C OSTS EP again with parameter I = ∅. Although Z′ might not fulfill the constraint I ⊆ Z′ , it has the same required sum. Thus, we get the following: Proposition 6. Finding an m-separator Z, with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R, which is strongly-minimum can be done in time O(n3 ) The same arguments as above show that Z is M-minimum for any M ⊂ I, if an M-minimum m-separator satisfying the constraints exist.  3.3 The hardness of strong-minimality For most problems it is easier to find a minimal solution than a minimum one, but for m-separators the opposite is true. If a strongly-minimum m-separator exists, it is also strongly-minimal. However there is a gap, where no strongly-minimum m-separator exists, and the I-minimum or I-minimal m-separators are not strongly-minimal. In this section we show that it is hard to find a strongly-minimal m-separator even for singleton X, Y in DAGs, in which m-separation and d-separation are equivalent: Proposition 7. It is an NP-complete problem to decide if in a given DAG there exists a strongly-minimal d-separating set Z containing I. Proof. The problem is in NP, since given Z verifying I ⊆ Z is trivial and the strong-minimality can be efficiently tested by algorithm T EST M IN S EP with parameter I = ∅. To show the NP-hardness we take an instance of 3-SAT, a canonical NP-complete problem [29], and construct a DAG G and a set I, such that a strongly-minimal d-separating set containing I exists in G, if and only if the 3-SAT formula is satisfiable. The 3-SAT instance consists of k variables V1 , . . . , Vk , and ℓ clauses Ci = (Wi,1 ∨ Wi,2 ∨ Wi,3 ) of literals Wi, j ∈ {V1 , . . . , Vk , V1 , . . . , Vk }. It is NP-hard to decide if there exists a Boolean assignment φ : {V1 , . . . Vk } → {true, false} that satisfies the formula C1 ∧ . . . ∧ Cℓ . Let G = (V, E) be defined as: V E  I  = =  =  ∪ ∪ ∪ ∪  {X, Y} ∪ {Vi,l , Vi,r , Vi , Vi , Ii | i ∈ {1, . . . , k}} ∪ {Ii′ | i ∈ {1, . . . , ℓ}} {X ← Vi,l → Vi → Y | i ∈ {1, . . . , k}} {X ← Vi,r → V i → Y | i ∈ {1, . . . , k}} {Ii → Vi,l , Ii → Vi,r , Ii → Y | i ∈ {1, . . . , k}} {Ii′ → X | i ∈ {1, . . . , ℓ}} {Wi, j → Ii′ | i ∈ {1, . . . , ℓ}, Wi, j ∈ Ci } {Ii | i ∈ {1, . . . , k}} ∪ {Ii′ | i ∈ {1, . . . , ℓ}}  The resulting graph is shown in Figure 6. We identify the literal Vi (V i ) in the formula with the node Vi (V i ) in the graph. Vi,l (Vi,r ) is a left (right) node, , l in the index should not be confused with the number of clauses ℓ. “⇐”: Let φ be a Boolean assignment that satisfies the formula. Let Z = I ∪ {Vi , Vi,r | i ∈ {1, . . . , k}, φ(Vi ) = false} ∪ {Vi , Vi,l | i ∈ {1, . . . , k}, φ(Vi ) = true}. To show that Z d-separates X and Y, we begin a breadth first search at X and enumerate all reachable nodes. Immediately reachable are nodes Ii′ , but they are in I ⊆ Z, so the path stops there. The parents Vi,l are reachable, but 14  X V1,l  X  X  V2,l  V1,r  V3,l  V2,r  V3,r ...  V1  I1  V2  V1  Y  I2  V3  V2  Y  I3  V3  Y  I1′  I2′ ...  X  X  Figure 6: Here we show the graph used in the proof of Proposition 7. It represents the first three variables V1 , V2 , V3 , and two clauses (V 1 ∨ V2 ∨ V3 ) and (V1 ∨ V2 ∨ V 3 ). All shown X (Y) nodes can be considered to be a single node X (Y), but we display them separately to reduce the number of overlapping edges in the figure. they are either in Z or only Vi , Ii ∈ Z are reachable and the path stops there. Likewise no path through Vi,r can reach Y. Hence Z is a d-separator. Z is also strongly-minimal: If Vi ∈ Z, Vi,l < Z and Z \ {Vi } would not block the path X ← Vi,l → Vi → Y. A similar path would be opened by removing Vi , Vi,l or Vi,r . Z \ {Ii } is not a d-separator as it would not block either the path X ← Vi,l → Ii → Y or X ← Vi,r → Ii → Y. If a clause Ci is satisfied by a literal V j , Z \ {Ii′ } is not a d-separator, as it would not block the path X ← Ii′ ← V j → Y . Likewise X ← Ii′ ← V j → Y would be opened by removing Ii′ if the clause Ci is satisfied by a literal V j . Therefore Z is a strongly-minimal d-separator. “⇒”: Now we show that a strongly-minimal d-separator Z yields a satisfying assignment φ. For every i the two paths X ← Vi,l → Vi → Y and X ← Vi,r → V i → Y need to be blocked by a node of {Vi,l , Vi } and a node of {Vi,r , Vi }. If neither Vi nor V i are in Z, both Vi,l and Vi,r must be in Z, so Ii is not reachable from X, Z \ {Ii } is a d-separator and Z is not strongly-minimal. Therefore Vi or V i is in Z and the following Boolean assignment φ to the variables is well-defined:   true Vi < Z,     φ(Vi ) =  false V i < Z,    false otherwise. Since Ii′ ∈ I for all i, Ii′ has to be reachable from Y, so there is an open path Ii′ ← V j → Y (or Ii′ ← V j → Y) and V j (or V j ) is not in Z for some j. This V j (or V j ) satisfies clause Ci according to the definition of φ. Hence every clause and the formula is satisfiable.  The moralization of the constructed graph implies that it is also NP-hard to find strongly-minimal vertex separators in undirected graphs and from the characterizations of adjustment sets in the next sections it will follow that it is also NP-hard to find strongly-minimal adjustments in DAGs or ancestral graphs.  3.4 Algorithms for minimal m-separators in sparse graphs Subsection 3.2 gave O(n2 ) algorithms for the problems T EST M IN S EP and F IND M IN S EP in case of I-minimality, which is optimal for dense graphs. The runtime of these algorithms is limited by the time required for construction of the augmented graph, which might contain nodes and edges that have no influence on the minimal m-separator  15  and are thus included unnecessarily. This leads to the question, can we test or find the minimal m-separator without constructing the augmented graph? The obvious way is to test the definition of minimality directly by removing each of the nodes of Z and testing if the smaller set is still an m-separator, which yields O(|Z|(n + m)) = O(|Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ I)|(n + m)) = O(n(n + m)) algorithms. This is generally slower than the previous runtimes, however in sparse graphs that have a low number of edges m ≅ n and a low number of ancestors |Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ I)| ≪ n, it might be faster. This alternative algorithm for T EST M IN S EP in sparse graphs, in case of I-minimality, is as follows function T EST M IN S EP S PARSE(G, X, Y, Z, I, R) if Z \ Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ I) , ∅ or Z * R then return false if not T EST S EP(G, X, Y, Z) then return false G′ ← GAnt(X∪Y∪I) for all U ← Z \ I do if T EST S EP(G′ , X, Y, Z \ {U}) then return false return true An I-minimal m-separator relative to (X, Y) can be computed using the algorithm function F IND M IN S EP S PARSE(G, X, Y, I, R) G′ ← GAnt(X∪Y∪I) Z ← R ∩ Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ I) \ (X ∪ Y) if not T EST S EP(G′ , X, Y, Z) then return ⊥ for all U in Z \ I do if T EST S EP(G′ , X, Y, Z \ {U}) then Z ← Z \ {U} return Z Proposition 8. The tasks T EST M IN S EP and F IND M IN S EP for I-minimal separators can be solved in time O((n + m) · |Ant(X ∪ Y ∪ I)|). The correctness of these algorithms depends on the non-obvious fact that m-separators are monotone: if Z \ V is not an m-separator, no Z \ V with V ∈ V is one either. This monotonicity was proven for d-separation by [14] and we will state their results in terms of m-separation: Lemma 3. Let X, Y be two sets and let Z be an m-separator relative to (X, Y). If the set Z ∪ {Z1 , . . . , Zn } is also an m-separator, where Z1 , . . . , Zn are single nodes which are not in Z then either Z ∪ {Z1 }, or Z ∪ {Z2 }, . . . or Z ∪ {Zn } must be another m-separator between X and Y. Corollary 3. If Z and Z∪Zn are m-separators, where Zn = {Z1 , . . . , Zn }, then there exist a series of n−1 m-separators: Z ∪ Zi , i = 1, . . . , n − 1, with Z1 ⊂ . . . ⊂ Zn−1 ⊂ Zn such that each Zi contains exactly i nodes. Corollary 4. If no single node can be removed from a m-separator Z without destroying m-separability, then Z is minimal. To generalize the proofs of [14] to m-separation, it is sufficient to replace d-separation with m-separation, DAGs with AGs and ancestors with anteriors throughout their arguments. Therefore, we do not repeat the proofs here.  3.5 Algorithms for enumerating all m-separators Lastly, we consider the problem of listing all m-separators and all minimal m-separators between X and Y in G. Since there might be an exponential number of (minimal) m-separators, it is not possible to list them all in polynomial time. For example in a path X ← V ← V ′ ← Y either V or V ′ must be in a minimal m-separator between X and Y, so a graph containing k such paths will have at least 2k different m-separators. Therefore we will describe algorithms running with O(n3 ) delay, which means that at most O(n3 ) time will pass between the start or the output of an mseparator and the output of the next m-separator or the end of the algorithm. They are based on the enumeration algorithm for minimal vertex separators of [26]. 16  function L IST S EP(G, X, Y, I, R) if F IND S EP(G, X, Y, I, R) , ⊥ then if I = R then Output I else V ← an arbitrary node of R \ I L IST S EP(G, X, Y, I ∪ {V}, R) L IST S EP(G, X, Y, I, R \ {V}) Analysis of the Algorithm. Algorithm L IST S EP performs backtracking to enumerate all Z, with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R, aborting branches that will not find a valid separator. Since every leaf will output a separator, the tree height is at most n and the existence check needs O(n + m), the delay time is O(n(n + m)). The algorithm generates every separator exactly once: if initially I ( R, with V ∈ R \ I, then the first recursive call returns all separators Z with V ∈ Z and the second call returns all Z′ with V < Z′ . Thus the generated separators are pairwise disjoint.  Proposition 9. Using the algorithm above, the task L IST S EP can be solved with polynomial delay O(n(n + m)). To enumerate all minimal m-separators we can directly apply Takata’s enumeration algorithm [26] after transforming the ancestral graph to its augmented graph: function L IST M IN S EP(G, X, Y, I, R) G′ ← GAnt(X∪Y∪I) G′a ← (GAnt(X∪Y∪I) )a Add a node Xm connected to all X nodes. Add a node Ym connected to all Y nodes. Remove nodes of I. Remove nodes of V \ R connecting the neighbors of each removed node. Use the algorithm in [26] to list all sets separating Xm and Ym . Analysis of the Algorithm. The correctness is shown by [1] for adjustment sets and generalizes directly to m-separators, because after moralization, both problems are equivalent to enumerating vertex cuts of an undirected graph. The handling of I is shown by [25].  Proposition 10. The task L IST M IN S EP can be solved with polynomial delay O(n3 ).  4 Empirical analysis of DAG consistency testing The concept of m-separation in ancestral graphs, or d-separation in DAGs, is of central importance in the field of Bayesian networks and graphical causal models because it couples the graphical model structure to conditional independencies in the corresponding probability distribution. Perhaps the most direct application of graphical separation is therefore consistency testing, where we check whether a graphical causal model is in fact consistent with the dataset it is intended to represent. If a graphical causal model fails to pass this test, then any downstream analyses, such as implied covariate adjustment sets, are potentially nullified. In this section, we illustrate how the algorithmic framework that we developed in Section 3 can be harnessed for graphical causal model checking by applying it to the problem of deriving basis sets for testing the consistency of a DAG to a given probability distribution. A DAG G is called consistent with a probability distribution P if for all pairwise disjoint subsets X, Y, Z ⊆ V, where only Z may be empty, X and Y are conditionally independent given Z in P whenever Z d-separates X and Y in G. Therefore, to test consistency, we could in principle enumerate all d-separation relations in G and then perform the corresponding conditional independence tests. However, that set of relations can be very large – there is already an exponential number of subsets X and Y to consider, each of which could be separated by an exponential number of sets Z. A basis set of d-separation statements entails all other statements implied by G when combining them using the graphoid axioms [3]. The canonical basis set has the form {∀X ∈ V : X ⊥ ⊥ V \ Pa(X) \ De(X) | Pa(X)}, 17  or in words, every variable must be jointly independent of its non-descendants conditioned on its parents. This basis set only contains n elements but the independencies to be tested can be of very high order. In practice, conditional independence is often tested using methods that do not distinguish between joint and pairwise independence, such as partial correlation or linear regression. In such cases, even simpler basis sets can be derived. For instance, Pearl and Meshkat [30] discuss basis sets for hierarchical linear regression models (also known as path models or structural equation models [31]). We here consider the vertices V = {X1 , . . . , Xn } to be indexed topologically, such that for j > i, we have that X j < An(Xi ). Then we consider basis sets having the form {∀j > i, Xi → X j < E : Xi ⊥ ⊥ X j | Zi j }, or in words, we include one separation statement for every nonadjacent pair of variables. These are pairwise rather than joint independencies, which is equivalent when we measure dependence only by partial correlation [30]. An obvious choice is Zi j = Pa(X j ), in which case we simply obtain a pairwise version of the canonical basis set above. We call that basis set the parental basis set. However, Pearl and Meshkat show that another valid choice is any separating set Zi j that contains only nodes whose distance to X j is smaller than the distance between Xi and X j (where the distance is defined length of a shortest path between two nodes). We call any such set a sparse basis set. Note that every parental basis set is also sparse, but the separators in sparse basis sets can be substantially smaller than in parental basis sets.  4.1 Simulation setup We evaluate the difference between parental and sparse basis sets on random DAGs. These are generated with various numbers of variables n ∈ {10, 25, 50, 100}. The edges are chosen independently with individual probabilities P(edge) = P(edge) ∈    l n−1 ,  parameterized by l = 2, 5, 10, 20:   5 10 20 2 , , , . n−1 n−1 n−1 n−1  10 For small n the probabilities are capped at 1. For example, for n = 10 a parameter P(edge) = min{ 10−1 , 1} = 1 will only generate complete graphs. Parameter l describes the expected number of neighbors of a node in a generated DAG. This leads to an expected number of edges in generated graphs  E[m] ≅ n, (resp. 2.5n, 5n, 10n, depending on parameter l) n(n−1)  as there are 2 possible edges in a DAG of n nodes, each existing with probability P(edge). Our algorithmic framework makes it straightforward to compute sparse basis sets with minimal separating sets by simply setting R = {Xk ∈ V | d(Xk , X j ) < d(Xi , X j )}, where we use d(Xa , Xb ) to denote the distance between two nodes.  4.2 Empirical results We empirically evaluate the sizes of parental and sparse basis sets in these random DAGs (Figure 7). The results show that the benefit of using sparse rather than parental basis sets does not depend much on the size of the DAG but rather on the amount of edges. For instance, when nodes had on average 5 neighbours, sparse basis sets had between 20% and 40% fewer conditioning variables than the canonical parental basis sets. These results provide a first example of how our framework can be applied in the context of graphical causal modelling. In the rest of this paper, we focus on covariate adjustment as our focus application area. However, given that separators play a central role in many aspects of graphical causal models, we expect that there should be many more applications in addition to those shown in this paper.  18  40  60  80  100 20  60  n=25 n=50 n=100  0  % reduction in conditoning set size  40000 20000 0  sum of conditioning set sizes  l=2 l=5 l=10 l=20 parental basis sparse basis  100  20  n  15  10  5  l  Figure 7: Model checking with parental or sparse basis sets for random DAGs. Like above, n denotes the number of nodes in the DAG, and l denotes the expected number of neighbours of each node. The left panel shows the total size of the conditioning sets as a function of n, showing the expected quadratic increase. The right panel emphasizes that the benefit of using a sparse basis set is greatest if the graph is also sparse, in which case the total number of variables that need to be conditioned on can be reduced by up to 90%.  5 Adjustment in DAGs We now leverage the algorithmic framework of Section 3 together with a constructive, sound and complete criterion for covariate adjustment in DAGs to solve all problems listed in Table 2 for adjustment sets rather than m-separators in the same asymptotic time. First, note that the formal definition of adjustments (Definition 1) cannot be used to actually find an adjustment set as there are infinitely many probability distributions that are consistent to a certain graph. Fortunately, it is possible to characterize adjustment sets in graphical terms. Definition 2 (Adjustment criterion (AC) [10]). Let G = (V, E) be a DAG, and X, Y, Z ⊆ V be pairwise disjoint subsets of variables. The set Z satisfies the adjustment criterion relative to (X, Y) in G if (a) no element in Z is a descendant in GX of any W ∈ V \ X which lies on a proper causal path from X to Y and  (b) all proper non-causal paths in G from X to Y are blocked by Z. However, even this criterion does not lead to efficient algorithms to find adjustment sets, because there can be exponentially many paths and blocking one non-causal path might open other paths. We address this problem below by presenting a constructive adjustment criterion that reduces non-causal paths to ordinary m-separation, which can be reduced further to a reachability problem in undirected graphs.  5.1 Constructive back-door criterion The graph of this reduction will be called the proper back-door graph: Definition 3 (Proper back-door graph). Let G = (V, E) be a DAG, and X, Y ⊆ V be pairwise disjoint subsets of pbd variables. The proper back-door graph, denoted as GXY , is obtained from G by removing the first edge of every proper causal path from X to Y. pbd  Note the difference between the proper back-door graph GXY and the famous back-door graph GX of [3]: in GX all pbd  edges leaving X are removed while in GXY only those that lie on a proper causal path (see Figure 9 for an example). pbd  However, to construct GXY still only elementary operations are sufficient. Indeed, we remove all edges X → D in E such that X ∈ X and D is in the subset, which we call PCP(X, Y), obtained as follows PCP(X, Y) = (DeX (X) \ X) ∩ AnX (Y). 19  (3)  pbd  G:  GXY :  Z X1  X2  D1  Y  V  D2  D3  Z X1  X2  D1  Y  V  D2  D3  Figure 8: A DAG that permits exactly two adjustment sets for estimating the causal effect of X = {X1 , X2 } on Y = {Y}: Z = {Z} and Z′ = {Z, V}. The set V \ Dpcp(X, Y) = {X1 , X2 , Z, V}. So, every adjustment is a subset of {Z, V}. The nodes D1 , D2 , D3 are not allowed in any adjustment as they are not in {Z, V} – the set of descendants of a non-X node on the (only) proper causal path X2 → D1 → Y. Moreover, every adjustment must contain the variable Z to block the pbd path between X2 and Y in GXY . Hence, the proper back-door graph can be constructed from G in linear time O(m + n). Note that using the notation PCP the proper back-door graph can be specified as pbd  GXY = (V, E \ (X → PCP(X, Y))). Now we propose the following adjustment criterion. For short, we will denote the set De(PCP(X, Y)) as Dpcp(X, Y). Definition 4 (Constructive back-door criterion (CBC)). Let G = (V, E) be a DAG, and let X, Y, Z ⊆ V be pairwise disjoint subsets of variables. The set Z satisfies the constructive back-door criterion relative to (X, Y) in G if (a) Z ⊆ V \ Dpcp(X, Y) and pbd  (b) Z d-separates X and Y in the proper back-door graph GXY . Figure 8 shows how the constructive back-door criterion can be applied to find an adjustment set in an exemplary DAG. The CBC is surprisingly robust to modifications of its definition and the following extended definition incorporates various possible variants determined by specific parameters: Definition 5 (Parametrization of the constructive back-door criterion (CBC(A, B, C))). Let G = (V, E) be a DAG, and let X, Y, Z ⊆ V be pairwise disjoint subsets of variables. Let A ⊆ X ∪ Y, B ⊆ X, C ⊆ Dpcp(X, Y). The set Z satisfies CBC(A, B, C) relative to (X, Y) in G if (a′ ) Z ⊆ V \ DeAB (PCP(X, Y)), and pbd,C  (b′ ) Z d-separates X and Y in the graph GXY  := (V, E \ (X → (PCP(X, Y) ∪ C))).  Clearly CBC(∅, ∅, ∅) = CBC. The variants CBC(X, ∅, ∅) and CBC(∅, ∅, Dpcp(X, Y)) might be the most interesting. Condition (a) of CBC(X, ∅, ∅) forbids the descendants of PCP(X, Y) in GX , so this condition (a) is identical to condition (a) in Definition 2. Condition (a) of CBC(∅, ∅, Dpcp(X, Y)) forbids exactly those nodes whose incoming edges are removed in its condition (b), which might improve the performance in an implementation as there is no need to calculate separate sets for condition (a) and (b). Note that the definition excludes CBC(∅, Y,∅), which could be considered as modifying condition (a) to forbid the descendants of PCP(X, Y) in the graph GY . This would not lead to a valid criterion as it would allow an adjustment set {Z} in the graph X → Y → Z, where {Z} is not an adjustment. However, removing edges into Y as in the graph GY of CBC(Y, ∅, ∅) does not change the descendants at all, since the relevant Y are in PCP(X, Y) themselves. We can show that none of these modifications change the criterion: Lemma 4. Let G = (V, E) be a DAG, and let X, Y ⊆ V be pairwise disjoint subsets of variables. Let A ⊆ X ∪ Y, B ⊆ X, C ⊆ De(PCP(X, Y)). Then CBC(A, B, C) is equivalent to the CBC. 20  Proof. Let Z be a set that satisfies the CBC. Since Z ⊆ V \ Dpcp(X, Y) = V \ De(PCP(X, Y)) and DeAB (PCP(X, Y)) ⊆ De(PCP(X, Y)), the condition (a′ ) Z ⊆ V \ DeAB (PCP(X, Y)) is satisfied for CBC(A, B, C). Z d-separates X and Y in pbd  pbd,C  pbd,C  pbd  GXY , and thus also in GXY , because every edge or path of GXY also exists in GXY . Thus (b′ ) is true as well. Hence, Z satisfies CBC(A, B, C). To see the other direction, let Z be a set that satisfies CBC(A, B, C), but not CBC. If Z does not satisfies CBC (a), there exists a node Z ∈ V \ DeAB (PCP(X, Y)) that is not in V \ Dpcp(X, Y) = V \ De(PCP(X, Y)). Then there must exist a proper causal path from X to Y on which a node W ∈ V \ X is an ancestor of Z in G, but not in GAB , i.e. there is a causal path from a node of X over W to Z which intersects A ∪ B. We can assume the nodes were choosen such that the length of the subpath between W and Z is minimal. Let W → . . . → Y denote the suffix of the path from X to Y starting in W. Note that this path might consist of only the vertex W. Additionally, for the causal path from W to Z, let W → . . . → A be its shortest prefix with A , W which ends in A ∪ B ∪ X ⊆ X ∪ Y. Notice, W itself cannot be in B and if it is in A it does not change the paths. Then, from the condition (a′ ), we know that no vertex of W → . . . → A belongs to Z. If A ∈ X, this leads to a pbd,C contradiction with the condition (b′ ) since A ← . . . ← W → . . . → Y is a path GXY from X to Y that is not blocked by Z. Otherwise we have A ∈ Y, so A ∈ PCP(X, Y) and the path from A to Z is shorter than the path from W to Z, which contradicts the choice of W. pbd If Z does not satisfies CBC (b), but satisfies CBC (a), there exists a path π between X and Y not blocked in GXY pbd,C  by Z that is blocked in GXY  due to a removed edge X → C with X ∈ X, C ∈ C. If X → C is on π, we can assume it pbd  is the last such edge on π. If the subpath from C to Y is causal, this edge is also removed in GXY , a contradiction. So pbd GXY ,  this subpath becomes non-causal at a collider → C′ ← unblocked in which has a descendant in Z that is also a descendant of C contradicting CBC (a). If the removal of the edge X → C prevents the opening of a collider, C is also the ancestor of a node in Z, which contradicts CBC (a) either.  We will see the usefulness of the parametrization of the constructive back-door criterion in the proof of the main result of this subsection: Theorem 1. The constructive back-door criterion (CBC) is equivalent to the adjustment criterion (AC). Proof. First observe that the condition (a) of the adjustment criterion AC is identical to condition (a′ ) of the constructive back-door criterion CBC(X, ∅, ∅). Assume conditions (a) and (b) of the adjustment criterion AC hold. Due to Lemma 4, it is sufficient to show that condition (b) of the constructive back-door criterion is satisfied. Let π be any pbd pbd proper path from X to Y in GXY . Because GXY does not contain causal paths from X to Y, π is not causal and has to pbd  be blocked by Z in G by the assumption. Since removing edges cannot open paths, π is blocked by Z in GXY as well. Now we show that (a) and (b) of the constructive back-door criterion CBC together imply (b) of the adjustment criterion AC. If that were not the case, then there could exist a proper non-causal path π from X to Y that is blocked pbd pbd in GXY but open in G. There can be two reasons why π is blocked in GXY : (1) The path starts with an edge X → D pbd  that does not exist in GXY . Then we have D ∈ PCP(X, Y). For π to be non-causal, it would have to contain a collider C ∈ An(Z) ∩ De(D) ⊆ An(Z) ∩ Dpcp(X, Y). But because of CBC (a), An(Z) ∩ Dpcp(X, Y) is empty. (2) A collider C pbd on π is an ancestor of Z in G, but not in GXY . Then there must be a directed path from C to Z via an edge X → D with D ∈ An(Z) ∩ PCP(X, Y), contradicting CBC (a).   5.2 CBC vs Pearl’s back-door criterion In this section we relate our constructive back-door criterion to the well-known back-door criterion by Pearl [3]: Definition 6 (Pearl’s back-door criterion (BC) [3]). A set of variables Z satisfies the back-door criterion relative to an ordered pair of variables (X, Y) in a DAG G if: (a) Z ⊆ V \ De(X) and (b) Z blocks every path between X and Y that contains an arrow into X. 21  X1  X1  Y1 Z1  G:  Z1 GX :  Z2 X2  Y2  X1  Y1  X2  Z1  pbd  GXY :  Z2 Y2  Y1  Z2 X2  Y2  Figure 9: A DAG where for X = {X1 , X2 } and Y = {Y1 , Y2 }, Z = {Z1 , Z2 } is a valid and minimum adjustment, but no set fulfills the back-door criterion [3] (Definition 6), and the parents of X are not a valid adjustment set either. Similarly, if X and Y are two disjoint subsets of nodes in G, then Z is said to satisfy the back-door criterion relative to (X, Y) if it satisfies the back-door criterion relative to any pair (X, Y) such that X ∈ X and Y ∈ Y. In Definition 6 condition (b) is often replaced by the equivalent condition that Z d-separates X and Y in the backdoor graph GX . In [1] it was shown that for minimal adjustment sets in X-loop-free DAGs the adjustment criterion and the backdoor criterion of Pearl are equivalent. A DAG is X-loop-free for an exposure set X, if no directed path between two different nodes of X contains a node not in X. If X is a singleton, there are no two different nodes of X and every DAG is X-loop-free, so the criterions are always equivalent for minimal adjustments. In this case it is still possible that an adjustment set Z satisfies the CBC and not the back-door criterion, but there will always be a minimal subset Z′ ⊆ Z that satisfies the back-door criterion. Since an adjustment set satisfying the back-door criterion also satisfies the generalized back-door criterion of [16], and all sets of the generalized back-door criterion satisfy our CBC, all three criterions are equivalent to test the existence of an (minimal) adjustment set for a singleton X in DAGs. The situation changes drastically if the effect of multiple exposures is estimated. Theorem 3.2.5 in [3] claims that the expression for P(y | do(x)) is obtained by adjusting for Pa(X) if Y is disjoint from Pa(X) in graphs without latent nodes, but, as the DAG in Figure 9 shows, this is not true: the set Z = Pa(X1 , X2 ) = {Z2 } is not an adjustment set according to {X1 , X2 } and Y. In this case one can identify the causal effect by adjusting for Z = {Z1 , Z2 } only. Indeed, for more than one exposure, no adjustment set may exist at all even without latent covariates and even though Y ∩ (X ∪ Pa(X)) = ∅, e.g., in the DAG X1 X2 Z Y and for X = {X1 , X2 } and Y = {Y}. In the case of multiple exposures X it is also harder to use the back-door criterion to actually find an adjustment set. Although the back-door criterion reduces adjustment to d-separation in the back-door graph GX , this is not the graph GX , so for each exposure X ∈ X the criterion would find a separate adjustment set, which do not lead directly to a combined adjustment set for all exposures. For an example see Figure 9. Table 3 summarizes the relationships between CBC and the Pearl’s back-door criterion.  6 Algorithms for testing and computing adjustment sets in DAGs Having proved the constructive back-door criterion, we are now licensed to apply our separation algorithms from Section 3 to solve adjustment set problems. This works becasue the adjustment relative to X and Y in G corresponds pbd to an m-separator between X and Y in GXY subject to the constraint given by CBC (a). Table 4 gives an overview of the relevant tasks. A small difference exists between testing and constructing adjustment sets when handling CBC (a): Testing requires us to check if the given set Z contains nodes of Dpcp(X, Y), whereas constructing requires that the returned set Z must not contain any of the nodes inDpcp(X, Y). The latter requirement can be straightforwardly implemented by imposing the constraint Z ⊆ R′ = R \ Dpcp(X, Y), which can be given as parameter to our separation algorithms. Hence T ESTA DJ can be solved by testing if Z ∩ Dpcp(X, Y) = ∅ and if Z is a d-separator in the proper back-door pbd pbd graph GXY using algorithm T EST S EP. Since GXY can be constructed from G in linear time, the total time complexity 22  Statement for arbitrary DAGs and all sets Z: Z satisfies CBC ; Z satisfies back-door Z satisfies CBC ; ∃Z′ satisfying back-door Z satisfies CBC and Z is minimal ; Z satisfies back-door Z satisfies CBC and Z is minimal ; ∃Z′ satisfying back-door  proof Z←X→Y see Figure 9 see Figure 9 see Figure 9  Statement for all X-loop-free DAGs (e.g., for singleton X) and all sets Z: Z satisfies CBC ; Z satisfies back-door Z←X→Y Z satisfies CBC ⇒ ∃Z′ satisfies back-door via minimal Z′ ⊆ Z Z satisfies CBC and Z is minimal ⇒ Z satisfies back-door see [1] Z satisfies CBC and Z is minimal ⇒ ∃Z′ satisfying back-door Z′ = Z Table 3: A summary of the relationship between the existence of a Pearl back-door-adjustment set and the existence of an CBC-adjustment set in unconstrained DAGs and X-loop-free DAGs. Symbol ; means that the implication does not hold, in general. On the other hand, due to the completeness property of CBC, we have that if one replaces in the left hand sides "CBC" by "back-door" and in the right hand sides "back-door" by "CBC", then the corresponding implications are always true.  Runtime Verification: For given X, Y, Z and constraint I decide if . . . T ESTA DJ Z is an adjustment for (X, Y) T EST M INA DJ Z ⊇ I is an adjustment for (X, Y) and Z is . . . I-minimal strongly-minimal  O(n + m) O(n2 ) O(n2 )  Construction: For given X, Y and constraints I, R, output an . . . F INDA DJ adjustment Z for (X, Y) with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R F IND M INA DJ adjustment Z for (X, Y) with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R which is . . . I-minimal strongly-minimal F IND M IN C OSTA DJ adjustment Z for (X, Y) with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R which is . . . I-minimum strongly-minimum  O(n2 ) NP-hard  Enumeration: For given X, Y, I, R enumerate all . . . L ISTA DJ adjustments Z for (X, Y) with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R L IST M INA DJ I-minimal adjsutments Z with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R  Delay O(n(n + m)) O(n3 )  O(n + m)  O(n3 ) O(n3 )  Table 4: Definitions of algorithmic tasks related to adjustment in DAGs, similar to the definitions of Table 2, and the associated time complexities provided in this section. Throughout, X, Y, R are pairwise disjoint node sets, the set Z is disjoint with P the non-empty sets X, Y, and each of the sets I, R, Z can be empty. A minimum adjustment minimizes the sum Z∈Z w(Z) for a cost function w respecting the given constraints, i.e. w(V) = ∞ for V < R. The construction algorithms will output ⊥ if no set fulfilling the listed condition exists. Delay complexity for e.g. L IST M INA DJ refers to the time needed to output one solution when there can be exponentially many solutions (see [26]).  23  of this algorithm is O(n + m). T EST M INA DJ can be solved by testing again if Z ∩ Dpcp(X, Y) = ∅ and calling T EST M IN S EP to verify that Z pbd is minimal within the back-door graph GXY . This leads to a runtime of O(n2 ) which is optimal for dense graphs. pbd  Alternatively T EST M IN S EP S PARSE with its runtime of O(|Ant(X ∪ Y)| · |Edges of (GXY )a |) = O(n(n + m)) can be used in sparse graphs. It is worth noting that since the back-door graph is formed by removing edges, it is even sparser than the input graph. This approach can only work, since the minimal adjustment corresponds to a minimal separator in the proper back-door graph, because every subset of an adjustment satisfies condition CBC (a). It also implies the following corollary which generalizes results of [14]: Corollary 5. If no single node Z can be removed from an adjustment set Z such that the resulting set Z′ = Z \ Z is no longer an adjustment set, then Z is minimal. The problem F INDA DJ can be solved by a closed form solution. For a DAG G = (V, E) and constraints I, R we define the set Adj(X, Y) = An(X ∪ Y ∪ I) ∩ R \ (X ∪ Y ∪ Dpcp(X, Y)). Theorem 2. Let G = (V, E) be a DAG, let X, Y ⊆ V be distinct node sets and I, R constraining node sets with I ⊆ R \ (X ∪ Y ∪ Dpcp(X, Y)). Then the following statements are equivalent: 1. There exists an adjustment Z in G w.r.t. X and Y with I ⊆ Z ⊆ R. 2. Adj(X, Y) is an adjustment w.r.t. X and Y. pbd  3. Adj(X, Y) d-separates X and Y in the proper back-door graph GXY . Proof. The implication (3) ⇒ (2) follows directly from the criterion Def. 4 and the definition of Adj(X, Y). Since the implication (2) ⇒ (1) is obvious, it remains to prove (1) ⇒ (3). Assume there exists an adjustment set Z0 w.r.t. X and Y. From Theorem 1 we know that Z0 ∩ Dpcp(X, Y) = ∅ and pbd pbd that Z0 d-separates X and Y in GXY . Our task is to show that Adj(X, Y) d-separates X and Y in GXY . This follows from pbd  Lemma 1 used for the proper back-door graph GXY if we take I′ = I, R′ = R \ (X ∪ Y ∪ Dpcp(X, Y)).    From Equation (3) and the definition Dpcp(X, Y) = De(PCP(X, Y)) we then obtain immediately: Corollary 6. Given two distinct sets X, Y ⊆ V, Adj(X, Y) can be found in O(n + m) time. The remaining problems, F IND M INA DJ, F IND M IN C OSTA DJ, L ISTA DJ and L IST M INA DJ can be solved using the corresponding algorithms for finding, resp. listing m-separations applied to the proper back-door graph. Since the proper back-door graph can be constructed in linear time the time complexities to solve the problems above are the same in Table 2 and Table 4. The NP-hardness of finding strongly-minimal adjustment sets follows from Proposition 7 and the fact that the graph constructed in the proof of the proposition contains no causal paths between X and Y, so there are no forbidden nodes and that graph is the same as its back-door graph.  7 Extending the CBC While our complete adjustment criterion is guaranteed to find all instances in which a causal effect can be identified via covariate adjustment, it is well known that not all identifiable effects are also identifiable via adjustment. The do-calculus [3] is a complete method that characterizes all identifiable causal effect, but which comes at a price of substantially increased formula and runtime complexity. In this section, we however show that many cases in which covariate adjustment is not applicable do not require the power of the do-calculus either. Specifically, we provide three Lemmas that permit identification of total causal effects in the following three cases (which are not mutually exclusive): (1) X does not have a causal effect on Y; (2) all parents of X are observed; (3) X and Y partition V. While in each case the adjustment criterion may or may not be applicable, our Lemmas will show that identifiability is always guaranteed, and the total effect can be computed by reasonably simple formulas. Moreover, each Lemma provides an easy algorithm for testing whether the corresponding case applies. 24  7.1 Identification by plain formulas One case in which identification is trivial is if there is no causal effect of X on Y at all. When there is a common ancestor of X and Y, then this case is covered by the CBC; however, if there is a reverse causal path from Y to X, then the (void) effect is not obtainable through the adjustment formula. In both of these cases, however, we simply have P(y | do(x)) = P(y), which we will call the plain formula. The following Proposition provides a characterization of all cases in which this plain formula works in terms of d-separation. Proposition 11. Let G = (V, E) be a DAG and let X, Y ⊆ V be disjoint subsets of variables and let R ⊆ V be an arbitrary set of observed variables, with X ∪ Y ⊆ R. Then X and Y are d-separated in GX , expressed symbolically as (Y ⊥ ⊥ X)GX  (4)  if and only if the effect of intervention of X on Y is given by the plain formula P(y | do(x)) = P(y). Particularly, if Y ∈ An(X) then (Y ⊥ ⊥ X)GX and thus P(y | do(x)) = P(y). Proof. The soundness of the statement follows directly by the application of rule 3 (intervention/deletion of actions; for the precise definition of the do-calculus rules see Theorem 4 in the appendix). The completeness of the statement can be shown similarly to the completeness of the adjustment criterion [10]. If Y and X are not d-separated in GX , there exists a shortest causal path X → . . . → Y for X ∈ X, Y ∈ Y. In the subgraph G′ = (V′ , E′ ) consisting only of this path, the causal effect is given by an empty adjustment set P(y | do(x)) = P(y | x). If we take a model P′ where P′ (y | x) , P′ (y) for some values x, y, like e.g. in a model on binary variables X, Y, with   1  1  3 x = y, ′ ′ P (x) = and P (y | x) =    23 x , y, 2  the causal effect is not given by P′ (y). This model can be extended to a model P on the full graph G by assuming all  other variables are independent, i.e. P(v) = faithfulness is not required) and we have  ′ 1 |V\V | ′ ′ P (v ). 2  This model is consistent with G (though not faithful, but  P(y | do(x)) = P(y \ Y)P(y | do(x)) = P(y \ Y)P′ (y | do(x)) , P(y \ Y)P′ (y) = P(y \ Y)P(y) = P(y).   7.2 Identification by generalized parent adjustment Another case that permits the identification of causal effects using simple formulas occurs if the exposure X = X is a singleton and all its parents are observed, i.e. Pa(X) ⊆ R. Then adjusting for the parents of X blocks all biasing paths and suffices for identification, but one needs to be careful as there might be variables Ypa = Pa(X) ∩ Y that are both parentsPand outcome nodes. Proposition 12 below shows that in this case the causal effect is given by P(y | do(x)) = z P(z, ypa)P(ynp | x, z, ypa ), where Ypa ∪ Ynp is a partition of Y and Ypa ∪ Z is a partition of Pa(X). This is a slight generalization of identification via adjustment: we still sum over the values of variables Z and multiply the conditional probability with a factor, but rather than multiplying with the probability of the same variables P(z) that are used in the sum, we multiply with a factor P(z, ypa ) involving additionally the variables in Ypa . The situation is even simpler when Y is also a singleton. Then one of the sets Ypa , Ynp vanishes, so there are only two cases: either Y < Pa(X) and Pa(X) is an adjustment set [3, Theorem 3.2.2], or Y ∈ Pa(X) and no adjustment exists, but the causal effect is identified as P(y | do(x)) = P(y). One can see that in the case Y ∈ An(X) \ Pa(X) the effect of intervention do(X = x) can be given both by the plain expression P(y | do(x)) = P(y) and by adjustment in parents of X. Proposition 12. Let G = (V, E) be a DAG and let X ∈ V be a node with observed parents Pa(X) ⊆ R and Y ⊆ V \ X. Furthermore, let Ypa = Y ∩ Pa(X) and let Ynp = Y \ Pa(X) be a partition of Y = Ypa ∪ Ynp and let Z = Pa(X) \ Ypa  25  form with Ypa a partition of Pa(X) = Ypa ∪ Z. Then    if Z = ∅, i.e. if Pa(X) ⊆ Y, P(ypa )P(ynp | x, ypa ) P(y | do(x)) =  P   z P(z, ypa )P(ynp | x, z, ypa ) if Z , ∅,  where P(ypa ) (resp. P(ynp | x, ypa ) and P(ynp | x, z, ypa)) should be read as 1 if Ypa = ∅ (resp. Ynp = ∅). Proof. This follows from a straightforward calculation using the do-calculus: P(y | do(x)) = P(ypa , ynp | do(x)) X = P(z, ypa, ynp | do(x)) z X  P(z, ypa | do(x))P(ynp | do(x), z, ypa)  =  X  P(z, ypa)P(ynp | do(x), z, ypa)  do-calculus rule 3 in [3] (Ypa , Z ⊥ ⊥ X) in GX  =  X  P(z, ypa)P(ynp | x, z, ypa).  do-calculus rule 2 in [3] (Ynp ⊥ ⊥ X | Z, Ypa ) in GX  =  z  z  z   If some of parents Pa(X) are unobserved, the causal effect might not be identifiable at all, like e.g. in the DAG G1 in Figure 2. To decide if the effect is identifiable in such a case, one can use the CBC criterion which, like for G3 in Figure 2, can confirm the identifiability. However, while the CBC is complete to decide if the effect is expressible via covariate adjustment it is not complete to decide if the effect is identifiable or not. For an example, see the DAG G2 in Figure 2. To solve the identification problem in this case, when the CBC does not work, one has to use a complete criterion, like this based on the do-calculus.  7.3 Identification when X and Y partition V Here we consider the case of DAGs in which X and Y partition the set of variables V, which implies that there are no unobserved nodes. Again, in this case the CBC may not be applicable as there may be an arrow from Y to X, but still the causal effect can be given by a closed-form solution as we present below. Lemma 5. Let G = (V, E) be a DAG and X, Y ⊂ V be a partition of V = X ∪ Y. The following statements hold (a) The causal effect of X on Y is given by P(y | do(x)) =  Y Y∈Y  P(Y = y | Pa(Y)).  (b) If no edge X → Y with X ∈ X, Y ∈ Y exists, the causal effect is also given by the plain formula P(y | do(x)) = P(y). (c) The causal effect can be identified by adjustment if and only if no edge Y → X with X ∈ X, Y ∈ Y exists. (d) If identification by adjustment is possible, the adjustment set is Z = ∅ and the causal effect of X on Y is given by P(y | do(x)) = P(y | x). 26  Proof. For the sake of brevity we will identify values and nodes, i.e. write P(Y | do(X)) to mean P(y | do(x)). To show (a) let Y1 , Y2 , . . . , Yk be a topological ordering of Y, i.e. Y = {Y1 , . . . , Yk }, and for i < j we have: Y j < An(Yi ), Y ∩ An(Yi ) = {Y1 , . . . , Yi } ∩ An(Yi ), and Y ∩ Pa(Yi ) = {Y1 , . . . , Yi−1 } ∩ Pa(Yi ). We calculate P(Y | do(X)) using rules of the do-calculus: P(Y | do(X)) = P(Y1 | do(X))P(Y2 | do(X), Y1 ) . . . P(Yk | do(X), Y1 , . . . , Yk−1 ) = P(Y1 | do(X ∩ Pa(Y1 )))P(Y2 | do(X ∩ Pa(Y2 )), Y1 ) . . . P(Yk | do(X ∩ Pa(Yk )), Y1 , . . . , Yk−1 ) Due to rule 3, since (Yi ⊥ ⊥ X \ Pa(Yi ) | X ∩ Pa(Yi ), Y1 , . . . , Yi−1 ) in GX∩Pa(Yi ) (X\Pa(Yi ))(Y1 ,...,Yi−1 ) . Explanation: blocking the nodes as specified above, there cannot be an open d-path between Yi and X ∈ X \ Pa(Yi ) starting with Yi ← X or Yi ← Y. If X ∈ De(Yi ), X cannot be an ancestor of an Y1 , . . . , Yi−1 , so the edge incoming into X is deleted in GX∩Pa(Yi ) (X\Pa(Yi ))(Y1 ,...,Yi−1) , so there is no d-path Yi → . . . → X. No d-path starting with Yi → . . . → Y ← is open, as no descendant of Yi can be in X ∩ Pa(Yi ), Y1 , . . . , Yi−1 . These two cases cover all d-paths starting with Yi → as there are no nodes not in X ∪ Y. = P(Y1 | X ∩ Pa(Y1 ))P(Y2 | X ∩ Pa(Y2 ), Y1 ) . . . P(Yk | X ∩ Pa(Yk ), Y1 , . . . , Yk−1 ) Due to rule 2, since (Yi ⊥ ⊥ X ∩ Pa(Yi ) | Y1 , . . . , Yi−1 ) in GX∩Pa(Yi ) . Explanation: because under these constraints there cannot be an open d-path between Yi and X ∈ X∩Pa(Yi ) starting with Yi ← X or Yi ← Y as outgoing edges of X ∩ Pa(Yi ) are removed and Y1 , . . . , Yi−1 are observed. There is no causal path Yi → . . . → Pa(Yi ) in a DAG. No d-path starting in Yi → . . . → and containing a collider V is open, as no descendant of Yi can be in Y1 , . . . , Yi−1 . = P(Y1 | X ∩ Pa(Y1 ))P(Y2 | X ∩ Pa(Y2 ), Y1 ∩ Pa(Y2 )) . . . P(Yk | X ∩ Pa(Yk ), {Y1 . . . , Yk−1 } ∩ Pa(Yk )) Due to rule 1, because (Yi ⊥ ⊥ {Y1 , . . . , Yi−1 } \ Pa(Yi ) | (X ∪ {Y1 , . . . , Yi−1 }) ∩ Pa(Yi )) in GX∩Pa(Yi ) . Explanation: under these constraints there cannot be an open d-path between Yi and Y j < Pa(Yi ) with j < i starting with Yi ← X or Yi ← Y as outgoing edges of X ∩ Pa(Yi ) are removed and {Y1 , . . . , Yi−1 } ∩ Pa(Yi ) are observed. There is no causal path Yi → . . . → Y j due to the topological ordering. No d-path Yi → . . . → V ← containing a collider is open, as no descendant of Yi can be in Pa(Yi ) =Q P(Y1 | X ∩ Pa(Y1 ))P(Y2 | X ∩ Pa(Y2 ), Y ∩ Pa(Y2 )) . . . P(Yk | X ∩ Pa(Yk ), Y ∩ Pa(Yk )) = i P(Yi | Pa(Yi )).  This completes the proof for (a). To see statement (b) note, that above we have shown  P(y | do(x)) = P(Y1 | X ∩ Pa(Y1 ))P(Y2 | X ∩ Pa(Y2 ), Y1 ) . . . P(Yk | X ∩ Pa(Yk ), Y1 , . . . , Yk−1 ). By the assumption of (b) we have X ∩ Pa(Yi ) = ∅, so P(y | do(x)) = P(Y1 )P(Y2 | Y1 ) . . . P(Yk | Y1 , . . . , Yk−1 ) = P(y). To see (d) we notice that, since no node is outside of X ∪ Y, the only possible adjustment set is Z = ∅. Finally, we prove (c). An adjustment set Z always satisfies the first condition of the CBC. The backdoor graph is formed by removing all edges X → Y as those edges form a causal path of length one. Edges X → X or Y → Y do not affect d-connectedness between X and Y. Thus Z is an adjustment set, if and only if no edge Y → X exists.  When V = X ∪ Y, the R package causaleffect Q [32], which we used in our experiments that we describe later in this paper, returns the formula P(y | do(x)) = Y∈Y P(Y | An(Y) \ Y) when configured to be fast and find any identification formula rather than a short one. It is easy to see that the above proof also holds Q for An(Y) \ Y rather than Pa(Y), since both sets block all paths into a node Y ∈ Y, so it is worth to mention that Y∈Y P(Y | An(Y) \ Y) = Q P(Y | Pa(Y)). Y∈Y  8 Empirical analysis of identifiability by adjustment As mentioned before, not all identifiable total effects are identifiable via covariate adjustment, but if covariate adjustment is possible, then it is usually preferred to other methods due to its benign statistical properties. This raises the question how often we will actually have to go beyond covariate adjustment when identifying causal effects. The 27  completeness and algorithmic efficiency of the CBC allowed us to perform an empirical analysis of identifiability via adjustment in random graphs, including graphs of substantial size. The basic setup of our experiments is as follows. We (1) generate a random graph; (2) set nodes to be unobserved at random; (3) choose random disjoint subsets X, Y of pre-specified cardinalities from the observed nodes; and (4) test whether P(y | do(x)) is identifiable in the resulting graph. We test the identifiability of P(y | do(x)) using four increasingly powerful criteria: (1) Pearl’s back-door criterion [3]; (2) the CBC; (3) an extended version of the CBC that also covers the special cases discussed in Section 7; and (4) the do-calculus, which characterizes all effects that are identifiable at all. Full details are given below. We included the classic back-door criterion (Definition 6) in our analysis because it is still very present in the applied literature on DAGs (e.g., [4]) whereas the generalized version is still barely mentioned. It is known that the back-door criterion is not complete and can thus fail to identify an adjustment set, which raises the question how often the back-door criterion fails to find an adjustment set when our CBC criterion succeeds. In Section 5.2 it was shown that this is never the case for a singleton X (although the CBC may still find more adjustment sets than the BC). Our extensions to the CBC in Section 7 were motivated by our observation from preliminary experiments that many cases where an effect is not identifiable by adjustment are anyway identifiable due to simple reasons like the absence of any causal path from X to Y, which can be addressed quite easily without invoking the full machinery of the do-calculus. We now proceed to give the technical details of how we set up our empirical analysis.  8.1 Instance generation We evaluate identifiability on random DAGs, which we generate as described in Section 4. The random DAGs are generated with different numbers of variables V |V| = n ∈ {10, 25, 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000, 2000}. These variables are divided into four sets: ordinary observed nodes R, unobserved nodes V \ R, exposure nodes X ⊆ R, and outcome nodes Y ⊆ R (with X ∩ Y = ∅) depending on parameters n o √ P(unobserved) ∈ {0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75} and |X| = |Y| = k ∈ 1, 2, 5, ⌊ n⌋, ⌊0.1n⌋ . To select those sets, we proceed as follows: Initially mark all variables in V as observed. Next, for every node mark it as unobserved with probability P(unobserved) until all nodes are considered or the number of nodes which remain observed reaches the threshold value 2k. Finally, from the observed R pick randomly two disjoint subsets X and Y of size k. The expected size of R is bounded by E[|R|] > n · (1 − P(unobserved)), with the difference being very small for n ≫ 2k, but substantial for n ' 2k. For example for n = 10 and k = |X| = |Y| = 5, all nodes are in R = X ∪ Y = V regardless of the probability P(unobserved) – the case discussed already in Section 7.3. We perform experiments for each parametrization tuple (n, l, k, P(unobserved)),  (5)  where, recall, l determines the probability P(edge) as described in Section 4. In this section we will report our results in detail only for P(unobserved) ∈ {0, 0.75}. The remaining cases are shown in the appendix. We generated 10 000 graphs for each parameter tuple using the function GraphGenerator.randomDAG of our DAGitty library [33] in node.js. Figure 10 shows example instances sampled for n = 10 and illustrates the four cases we are interested in.  8.2 Algorithms The main goal of our experiments was to examine the influence of the instance complexity, like density of a DAG, numbers of exposures and outcomes, and the ratio of unobserved to observed variables, on the identifiability by adjustment compared to general identifiability. Throughout, we use the following abbreviations for the algorithms we examine: 28  X1  (a)  V1  X2  V0  V1  Y2  V2  X3  V3  Y3  Y1 Y2  (c)  X3  V0  Y1  X2  Y3 V3  X1 V1  Y1 V2  (p)  V2  V3  X1  Y3  V4  X3  Y2  X2  (n)  X1  V1  V2  V3  X2  V4  Y1  Y2  X3  Y3  Figure 10: Example DAGs sampled for the parameter tuple n = 10, P(edge) = 2/9, P(unobserved) = 0.5, and k = |X| = |Y| = 3. Nodes are relabeled such that exposures are called X1 , X2 , X3 , outcomes are called Y1 , Y2 , Y3 , and all nodes except V0 are unobserved. Case (a)djustment is identified by using the empty set and by the formula P v0 [P(y1 |x1 )P(v0 |x1 )P(y P 3 |x1 , y1 , v0 , y2 )P(y2 |x1 , v0 )] found by the ID-algorithm. Instance (c)omplex is identified by the complex formula v0 [P(v0 |x1 )P(y1 |x1 , v0 )P(y2 |v0 )P(y3 )] and instance (p)plain is identified by the plain formula P(y1 , y2 , y3 ), although in this case no adjustment set exists. The final example is (n)onidentifiable. CBC: our constructive back-door criterion (Definition 4, Theorem 2). We used our DAGitty library, specifically the function GraphAnalyzer.canonicalAdjustmentSet, which implements algorithm F INDA DJ based on CBC. We also tested another implementation of our CBC criterion, the gac function of the R package pcalg [34]. CBC+ : combination of CBC and plain formula (Proposition 11). We implement the plain formula using the DAGitty function GraphAnalyzer.dConnected, which implements algorithm T EST S EP (Proposition 1). BC: Pearl’s back-door criterion (Definition 6). It has been shown that if an adjustment set Z that satisfies BC exists, it can be found by removing all descendants of X from Z [19]. This means we can implement BC by trivial post-processing of the CBC output. IDC: general identifiability as determined by do-calculus (see [3, Chapter 3.4.2]; we also recall the rules in Theorem 4 in the appendix). Specifically, we use the IDC algorithm by Shpitser and Pearl [24], which is well known to be complete for the identification of causal effects [22, 23], meaning that the algorithm computes a formula involving only the pre-intervention distribution that expresses the causal effect if such a formula exists; otherwise it outputs that identification is impossible. Our experiments are based on the IDC implementation provided by the R package causaleffect [32]. Due to high time complexity, we were only able to use this algorithm for small instances.  8.3 Results The results for all methods and parameters n, k, l described above are shown in Table 5 (for the case P(unobserved) = 0) and in Table 6 (P(unobserved) = 0.75). We now discuss the results in more detail. Identification by adjustment sets or plain formulas Tables 5 and 6 provide counts for instances identifiable by adjustment alone (columns CBC) or by adjustment enhanced by using the plain formula (CBC+ ). The number of effects only identified by the plain formula, but not by CBC, is thus given by the difference between these columns. Figure 11 summarizes the counts for CBC and CBC+ reported in Table 5 and 6 for k = 1, 2, 5 and n ≥ 25. We omit the instances with n = 10, since for k = 5 these cases were discussed separately in Section 7.3. Moreover, for parameter values l = 10 and l = 20 the individual probabilities for edge selection, P(edge) = max{l/(n − 1), 1}, imply that every node has 9 < l neighbors while in our analyses we want that l specifies the expected number of neighbors of a node.  29  n 10 10 10 10 25 25 25 25 50 50 50 50 100 100 100 100 250 250 250 250 250 500 500 500 500 500 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000  k 1 2 3 5 1 2 3 5 1 2 5 7 1 2 5 10 1 2 5 15 25 1 2 5 22 50 1 2 5 32 100 1 2 5 45 200  BC 8893 5543 2359 200 9573 8117 6013 2298 9832 9095 5104 2473 9907 9585 7425 2499 9947 9835 8956 3102 319 9977 9923 9477 3012 10 9990 9965 9734 2923 0 9999 9973 9880 3000 0  l=2 CBC 8893 6061 3395 886 9573 8247 6424 3021 9832 9128 5535 3120 9907 9593 7591 3040 9947 9840 8994 3537 536 9977 9923 9490 3288 29 9990 9966 9736 3191 0 9999 9973 9880 3210 0  CBC+ 10000 8618 5817 1712 10000 9651 8520 5055 10000 9882 7489 4799 10000 9971 9090 4479 10000 9991 9807 4864 731 10000 9996 9948 4413 31 10000 10000 9986 4163 0 10000 10000 9996 4122 0  BC 7205 1033 57 0 8936 4243 1203 39 9476 6688 462 27 9783 8262 1932 15 9894 9284 5051 18 0 9946 9674 7249 3 0 9973 9844 8679 2 0 9988 9940 9450 4 0  l=5 CBC 7205 1980 548 108 8936 4735 1852 243 9476 6938 799 119 9783 8353 2336 48 9894 9327 5325 32 0 9946 9684 7368 14 0 9973 9845 8726 6 0 9988 9940 9471 8 0  CBC+ 10000 4322 1425 216 10000 7003 3524 646 10000 8388 1613 302 10000 9165 3441 137 10000 9696 6261 58 0 10000 9872 8069 17 0 10000 9952 9173 7 0 10000 9981 9713 8 0  BC 5034 0 0 0 7905 1033 46 0 8997 2657 3 0 9494 4600 43 0 9774 6569 469 0 0 9883 7704 1170 0 0 9942 8416 2310 0 0 9972 9023 3608 0 0  l = 10 CBC CBC+ 5034 10000 660 2197 168 663 36 71 7905 10000 1553 3674 212 1046 11 93 8997 10000 3049 4927 16 198 1 25 9494 10000 4834 6162 102 393 0 2 9774 10000 6689 7358 544 994 0 1 0 0 9883 10000 7750 8116 1265 1686 0 0 0 0 9942 10000 8434 8640 2396 2686 0 0 0 0 9972 10000 9029 9119 3648 3869 0 2 0 0  BC 4934 0 0 0 5843 70 0 0 7832 527 0 0 8966 1507 1 0 9621 3151 7 0 0 9799 4184 43 0 0 9885 5130 136 0 0 9938 5928 287 0 0  l = 20 CBC CBC+ 4934 10000 686 2417 174 689 31 65 5843 10000 401 2118 34 587 1 53 7832 10000 866 2729 2 58 0 6 8966 10000 1762 3492 4 92 0 0 9621 10000 3285 4502 17 164 0 0 0 0 9799 10000 4266 4988 48 216 0 0 0 0 9885 10000 5173 5577 149 319 0 0 0 0 9938 10000 5954 6156 300 469 0 0 0 0  Table 5: Numbers of instances for probability P(unobserved) = 0, i.e. all variables are unobserved, that are identifiable by use of BC, CBC, or CBC+ (as defined in Table 5). Gray cells highlight where the BC failed to identify more than 4% of those cases that CBC could identify. Since all variables are observed, all instances are identifiable, thus IDC is not used in this Table.  30  n 10 10 10 10 25 25 25 25 50 50 50 50 100 100 100 100 250 250 250 250 250 500 500 500 500 500 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000  k 1 2 3 5 1 2 3 5 1 2 5 7 1 2 5 10 1 2 5 15 25 1 2 5 22 50 1 2 5 32 100 1 2 5 45 200  BC 6333 2008 610 185 8414 5164 2350 277 9082 6985 1440 254 9527 8295 3391 252 9791 9205 6110 232 3 9882 9596 7774 150 0 9936 9789 8797 94 0 9975 9879 9383 81 0  CBC 6333 2339 980 859 8414 5331 2632 449 9082 7059 1663 388 9527 8316 3562 375 9791 9209 6182 306 4 9882 9598 7801 184 0 9936 9790 8803 107 0 9975 9879 9384 90 0  l=2 CBC+ 9604 6889 4193 1756 9923 8939 6958 3008 9975 9599 5452 2596 9992 9884 7636 2364 10000 9974 9269 2281 221 9999 9993 9754 1757 4 10000 9999 9947 1511 0 10000 9999 9980 1399 0  IDC 9609 8740 8056 10000 9930 9731 9270 8157 9979 9908 9394 8648 9993 9980 9804 9263 10000 9990 9962 9697 9008 -  BC 1935 103 0 0 3647 601 73 0 4651 1098 5 0 5585 1846 20 0 6832 3099 106 0 0 7646 4267 273 0 0 8394 5498 666 0 0 8914 6774 1519 0 0  CBC 1935 228 21 98 3647 728 144 1 4651 1189 16 0 5585 1886 30 0 6832 3138 123 0 0 7646 4280 285 0 0 8394 5507 676 0 0 8914 6777 1535 0 0  l=5 CBC+ 7475 2854 1061 190 8727 4630 2141 456 9237 6078 868 186 9602 7303 1800 74 9814 8509 3344 16 0 9919 9117 4973 3 0 9970 9568 6482 1 0 9988 9791 7906 0 0  IDC 7476 4137 1995 10000 8742 6417 4327 1462 9253 7686 3030 1226 9618 8618 4690 956 9827 9360 6764 703 28 -  BC 978 0 0 0 1340 77 2 0 1699 133 0 0 1985 195 0 0 2493 277 1 0 0 2935 401 1 0 0 3181 525 2 0 0 3685 714 0 0 0  l = 10 CBC CBC+ 978 5944 113 1721 9 512 43 76 1340 6884 130 2501 17 872 0 114 1699 7547 160 3353 1 178 0 19 1985 7980 217 3799 0 331 0 3 2493 8564 286 4914 1 599 0 0 0 0 2935 8885 406 5722 1 990 0 0 0 0 3181 9137 526 6361 2 1471 0 0 0 0 3685 9361 714 7048 0 2159 0 0 0 0  IDC 5944 2260 763 10000 6888 3469 1518 251 7555 4270 482 80 7991 4989 802 15 8579 6073 1323 4 0 -  BC 936 0 0 0 557 4 0 0 697 23 0 0 744 49 0 0 846 46 0 0 0 946 33 0 0 0 1061 51 0 0 0 1099 57 0 0 0  l = 20 CBC CBC+ 936 5877 114 1752 10 547 26 75 557 5696 41 1847 6 554 0 49 697 6031 40 2061 0 73 0 3 744 6414 56 2413 0 84 0 0 846 6793 50 2881 0 136 0 0 0 0 946 7184 34 3166 0 226 0 2 0 0 1061 7422 51 3546 0 245 0 0 0 0 1099 7613 57 3858 0 342 0 0 0 0  IDC 5877 2294 789 10000 5696 2299 780 71 6032 2543 125 10 6416 2940 159 0 6795 3439 248 0 0 -  Table 6: Numbers of instances for P(unobserved) = 0.75 that are identifiable by use of BC, CBC, CBC+ (as defined in Table 5), and by the complete identification do-calculus based algorithm (IDC). Gray cells highlight where the BC failed to identify more than 4% of those cases that CBC could identify. Due to high time complexity, we were unable to run the IDC algorithm on instances labelled with “-”.  31  P(unobserved) = 0  P(unobserved) = 0.75  1000  Legend:  500 250  45%  90%  40%  85%  35%  80%  30%  75%  25%  70%  20%  65%  15%  60%  10%  55%  5%  50%  0%  2, 1  2, 2  5, 1  2, 5  5, 2  10, 1  5, 5  20, 1  10, 2  20, 2  10, 5  l, k  20, 5  2, 1  5, 1  2, 2  10, 1  5, 2  20, 1  2, 5  5, 5  10, 2  20, 2  10, 5  l, k  25  1000 500 250 100 50  2, 1  2, 2  5, 1  10, 1  2, 5  5, 2  20, 1  10, 2  5, 5  20, 2  10, 5  l, k  instance complexity  20, 5  20, 1  10, 1  5, 1  2, 1  2, 2  5, 2  2, 5  10, 2  5, 5  20, 2  10, 5  l, k  25  20, 5  number of nodes  50%  95% 50  2000  CBC+  100%  100  20, 5  number of nodes  CBC  2000  instance complexity  Figure 11: Heatmaps visualizing the number of instances that are identifiable by use our constructive back-door criterion (CBC, top row), and by the use of CBC or the plain formula (CBC+ , bottom row). Black squares depict the worst case in which 0% of instances are identifiable by use of CBC or CBC+ , respectively. White squares mean that 100% of instances are identifiable. The instance complexities l, k (where the expected number of neighbors of a node equals l and |X| = |Y| = k) are sorted by total amount of identifiable instances. Identification by plain formula and identification by adjustment are overlapping concepts. Some cases can be identified using either approach, while in other instances only one of them works. The plain formula solves a surprisingly high number of cases for which adjustment does not work. This can be seen especially in dense graphs, e.g., DAGs in which each node has l = 20 neighbours on average, and for singleton X and Y, i.e. k = 1. For example, for l = 20, k = 1, P(unobserved) = 0.75, in DAGs with n = 2000 (n = 1000, n = 500) nodes, up to 65 % (63 %, 61 %) of all instances are identifiable by the plain formula but not by adjustment. Furthermore, increasing n from 25 to 2000 we observe that this percentage ranges between 51% and the maximum 65%, a rather narrow range. The counts for CBC and CBC+ are illustrated in Figure 11 as gray squares in the columns labeled as (l, k) = (20, 1) (case: P(unobserved) = 0.75). The difficulty of identification by adjustment grows with increasing k and l, but it decreases with increasing number of nodes n, both for P(unobserved) = 0 and for 0.75. In Figure 11, columns are sorted increasingly by the total number of identifiable effects per column. This shows that the most difficult case is (l, k) = (20, 5): for P(unobserved) = 0 the counts grows very slowly with n reaching the maximum value of 3% of identifiable graphs for n = 2000; for P(unobserved) = 0.75 almost no instances are identifiable by adjustment (compare the upper panels in Fig. 11). However, as we can see in Table 6, for n = 250 only 2.5% of cases are identifiable at all. Figures 12 and 13 summarize the difficulty of identification stratified by n (Figure 12) and l (Figure 13), respectively. Comparison of CBC to the back-door criterion by Pearl We were also interested in how often Pearl’s back-door criterion (BC) would fail to find an adjustment set. Tables 5 and 6 show that the difference between BC and the CBC is rather small, especially for simple (or hard) instances where nearly every (or no) DAG has an adjustment set, and as as expected given our results in Section 5.2, for singletons X = {X}, Y = {Y} the counts for BC and CBC are 32  100%  % of identified instances  90% 80% 70% 60% 50%  n = 2000 n = 1000 n = 500 n = 250 n = 100 n = 50 n = 25  40% 30% 20% 10%  2, 1  5, 1  10, 1  20, 1  2, 2  5, 2  10, 2  20, 2  2, 5  5, 5  10, 5  20, 5  l, k  0%  Figure 12: Case P(unobserved = 0.75): Percent of identifiable graphs for fixed numbers of nodes n ∈ {25, 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000, 2000} and with varying expected number of node neighbors l and cardinalities |X| = |Y| = k. The horizontal axis is labeled by (l, k) sorted lexicographically. The curves show the data for CBC+ , i.e., for instances identifiable by adjustment or by plain formula. indeed equal. However, for larger X, Y and parameters where only a few graphs have an adjustment set, the difference between BC and CBC becomes more substantial. The greatest difference occurs for n = 10, |X| = |Y| = 3, m ≅ n, and P(unobserved) = 0, where in 10% of all cases there is an adjustment set whereas BC finds none. This is followed by n = 10, |X| = |Y| = 2, where BC fails to find existing adjustment sets in 7% to 9% of the cases, depending on P(edge) and P(unobserved). Complete identification by do-calculus compared to identification by adjustment or plain formula As explained above, in small graphs we checked for general identifiability of causal effects using the IDC algorithm [24]. Results are shown for P(unobserved) = 0.75 and n ≤ 250 in Table 6. Since the IDC algorithm is complete for the identification problem, the corresponding counts also show how many instances are identifiable at all. It is known that in the case P(unobserved) = 0 the causal effect is always identifiable, so we skip the counts for IDC in Table 5. The cases with n = 10, k = |X| = |Y| = 5 (Table 6) might seem suspicious as the number of identifiable graphs (i.e. counts in column IDC) increases drastically compared to the graphs with smaller X, Y, while in all the other cases (see Table 6) this number decreases with an increased of cardinality of X, Y. However, this is explained by the cap on the number of unobserved nodes. When |X| + |Y| = 10 for n = 10, there are no nodes outside of X ∪ Y remaining that could become unobserved regardless of P(unobserved), similarly to the cases in Table 5, and all graphs must be identifiable as shown in Section 7.3. Figures 12 and 13 present the data for CBC+ (the same data as in the lower right panel of Figure 11) in comparison to identification by IDC. As we observed in Figure 11, the most difficult case for CBC+ is (l, k) = (20, 5) and the difficulty decreases with k and l when n is fixed (Figure 12). The situation is very similar for IDC. In Figure 13, we see that identifiability for both CBC+ and IDC grows roughly in parallel. These experiments also provide a verification of our DAGitty implementation as every adjustment set found by the causaleffect package has been found by DAGitty, as well as a ground truth of the unidentifiable graphs, since a causal effect not identified by the IDC algorithm cannot be identified by any method. Similarly to the results for adjustment sets, one can see that with increasing |X|, |Y|, l the number of identifiable graphs decreases, when P(unobserved) > 0. Specifically, with |X| = |Y| = 1, all causal effects are already identified by plain formula or adjustment without involving the IDC algorithm.  33  n 10 10 10 10 25 25 25 25 50 50 50 50 100 100 100 100 250 250 250 250 250 500 500 500 500 500 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000  k 1 2 3 5 1 2 3 5 1 2 5 7 1 2 5 10 1 2 5 15 25 1 2 5 22 50 1 2 5 32 100 1 2 5 45 200  CBC 0.3 ms 0.5 ms 0.5 ms 0.7 ms 0.5 ms 0.7 ms 0.8 ms 1.0 ms 0.8 ms 1.1 ms 1.5 ms 1.7 ms 1.3 ms 1.6 ms 2.0 ms 2.6 ms 2.9 ms 3.1 ms 3.7 ms 5.3 ms 6.4 ms 5.2 ms 5.5 ms 6.2 ms 9.0 ms 13.4 ms 11.1 ms 11.8 ms 12.4 ms 17.1 ms 33.5 ms 24.6 ms 25.1 ms 26.0 ms 34.5 ms 92.3 ms  l=2 IDC 35.0 ms 70.5 ms 124 ms 242 ms 27.4 ms 54.9 ms 70.3 ms 132 ms 25.9 ms 46.9 ms 142 ms 224 ms 24.5 ms 32.4 ms 91.3 ms 248 ms 25.9 ms 28.2 ms 64.6 ms 462 ms 644 ms -  GAC 13.6 ms 17.9 ms 14.1 ms 15.3 ms 72.1 ms 112 ms 113 ms 114 ms 273 ms 557 ms 680 ms 744 ms 978 ms 1.7 s 3.1 s 4.1 s 6.7 s 9.2 s 21.9 s 48.5 s 1.1 min -  CBC 0.5 ms 0.6 ms 0.8 ms 1.0 ms 0.9 ms 1.3 ms 1.5 ms 1.7 ms 1.6 ms 2.0 ms 2.8 ms 3.3 ms 2.5 ms 3.0 ms 4.1 ms 5.6 ms 5.1 ms 6.0 ms 7.7 ms 13.3 ms 17.4 ms 8.7 ms 10.1 ms 12.3 ms 24.5 ms 46.3 ms 17.2 ms 19.0 ms 21.8 ms 51.3 ms 143 ms 35.1 ms 37.7 ms 41.8 ms 107 ms 505 ms  l=5 IDC 53.6 ms 100 ms 182 ms 296 ms 46.9 ms 121 ms 127 ms 276 ms 51.7 ms 157 ms 414 ms 649 ms 53.1 ms 128 ms 440 ms 843 ms 74.1 ms 130 ms 499 ms 2.8 s 3.2 s -  GAC 49.6 ms 61.9 ms 32.5 ms 52.4 ms 1.9 s 680 ms 695 ms 522 ms -  CBC 0.6 ms 0.8 ms 1.1 ms 1.6 ms 1.6 ms 2.2 ms 2.6 ms 3.1 ms 2.8 ms 3.8 ms 5.6 ms 6.7 ms 4.8 ms 6.1 ms 9.2 ms 13.8 ms 10.2 ms 12.9 ms 19.1 ms 38.9 ms 57.0 ms 18.1 ms 22.7 ms 33.8 ms 89.5 ms 192 ms 35.4 ms 42.6 ms 61.8 ms 225 ms 715 ms 70.8 ms 83.6 ms 120 ms 549 ms 2.7 s  l = 10 IDC 60.4 ms 110 ms 190 ms 306 ms 78.7 ms 193 ms 168 ms 309 ms 151 ms 475 ms 796 ms 1.1 s 366 ms 836 ms 1.7 s 2.4 s 966 ms 2.6 s 6.2 s 19.3 s 12.9 s -  GAC 303 ms 173 ms 121 ms 170 ms 18.5 s 16.4 s 15.1 s 9.5 s -  CBC 0.6 ms 1.0 ms 1.1 ms 1.6 ms 2.9 ms 4.4 ms 5.7 ms 7.1 ms 5.4 ms 7.7 ms 14.2 ms 17.9 ms 9.6 ms 13.6 ms 25.3 ms 47.5 ms 22.2 ms 30.6 ms 56.8 ms 144 ms 252 ms 42.1 ms 58.1 ms 106 ms 391 ms 886 ms 83.2 ms 114 ms 205 ms 1.1 s 3.4 s 178 ms 241 ms 409 ms 2.8 s 13.4 s  l = 20 IDC 59.9 ms 110 ms 187 ms 305 ms 89.7 ms 206 ms 168 ms 305 ms 257 ms 691 ms 937 ms 1.1 s 914 ms 1.8 s 2.7 s 3.0 s 5.1 s 12.0 s 20.7 s 44.1 s 22.9 s -  GAC 169 ms 211 ms 60.7 ms 173 ms 1.6 h 39.9 min 18.9 min -  Table 7: Average time to run DAGitty (CBC), the R package causaleffect (IDC) or the gac function of the R package pcalg (GAC) on one graph with P(unobserved = 0.75). Omitted values indicate experiments we did not run or were unable to run due to runtime issues. On some parametrizations we only ran the gac function on the first 100 graphs rather than the full set of 10000 graphs due to time constraints. The values for IDC include the time spent on loading the generated graphs e.g., for l = 20, ranging from 0.7 ms (n = 10) to 294 ms (n = 250).  34  100%  % of identified instances  90% 80% 70% 60% 50%  l=2 l=5 l = 10 l = 20 l=2 l=5 l = 10 l = 20  40% 30% 20% 10%  2000, 1  1000, 1  500, 1  250, 1  100, 1  50, 1  25, 1  2000, 2  1000, 2  500, 2  250, 2  50, 2  100, 2  25, 2  2000, 5  500, 5  1000, 5  250, 5  100, 5  50, 5  25, 5  n, k  0%  Figure 13: Case P(unobserved = 0.75): Percent of identifiable graphs for fixed density parameter values l ∈ {2, 5, 10, 20} and with varying the number of nodes n and cardinalities |X| = |Y| = k. The horizontal axis is labeled by (n, k) sorted lexicographically. The curves show the data for CBC+ , i.e. for instances identifiable by adjustment or by a plain formula; Crosses show data for IDC, i.e., they show how many cases are identifiable at all. The high time complexity of the IDC algorithm precluded computations for graphs of sizes n ≥ 500. Comparative runtimes of the algorithms Figure 14 (black lines) shows the time needed by DAGitty for these experiments on one core of a 2.1 GHz (up 3 GHz with Turbo Core) AMD Opteron 6272 for graphs with P(unobserved) = 0.75. Graphs with a lower probability P(unobserved) are processed slightly faster. For small sets X and Y the time increases roughly linearly with the number of edges m. For larger sets the time also increases with the size of X, Y, which could either mean that DAGitty does not reach the optimal asymptotic runtime of O(n + m) due to inefficient set operations, or that the time actually only depends on O(An(X, Y)) which can be much smaller than O(m) when the sets and degrees are small. However, for all models of a size currently used in practice, DAGitty finds the adjustment set nearly instantaneously. The runtimes of the causaleffect package are shown as red plot in Figure 14. Since the IDC algorithm is far more complex than the expression of Theorem 2, it performs generally one to two orders of magnitude slower than the implementation in DAGitty, or equivalently in the same time DAGitty can process graphs that are one to two orders of magnitude larger. Due to this speed difference it was not possible for us to run the IDC algorithm experiments on the larger graphs. We also investigated a different implementation of the CBC in the R package pcalg [34]. The gac function in that package implements the CBC criterion for DAGs and other graph classes. Unlike DAGitty, the pcalg package does not find an adjustment set, but only verifies whether a given set meets the criterion. Hence, after loading the graphs in R and calculating the adjacency matrices required by pcalg, we compute the canonical adjustment set Adj(X, Y) in R as Dpcp = De(G, intersect(setminus(De(GNoInX, x), x), An(GNoOutX, y))) z = setminus(An(G, union(x,y)), union(union(x,y),union(Dpcp, obs))) with sets x, y, observed nodes obs, graphs G = G, GNoInX = GX , GNoOutX = GX and helper functions An and De implemented using the subcomponent function of the R package igraph. We then compare the time required by pcalg to test whether z is a valid adjustment set to the time required by DAGitty to find and test a set. The runtimes of the gac function plotted in purple in Figure 14. They show that the gac function is several orders of magnitude slower than DAGitty. These results are expected given that the pcalg package tests the CBC by tracing all m-connected paths using backtracking, an approach that suffers from exponential worst-case complexity; in fact this backtracking algorithm is even slower than the general implementation of the do-calculus in the causaleffect package. Only the cases with small n are shown as the remaining computations did not terminate in reasonable time.  35  2.7 h  2.7 h  1.2 h  1.2 h  32.4 m  32.4 m  14.6 m  14.6 m  6.5 m  6.5 m  2.9 m  2.9 m  ≈  23.9 s  10.7 s  10.7 s  4.8 s  4.8 s  2.2 s  2.2 s  973 ms  973 ms  437 ms  437 ms  196 ms  196 ms  average time  average time  23.9 s  88.2 ms  39.6 ms  ≈  88.2 ms  39.6 ms  17.8 ms  17.8 ms  8.0 ms  8.0 ms  3.6 ms  3.6 ms  1.6 ms  1.6 ms  0.7 ms  0.7 ms  0.3 ms  0.3 ms 10  25  50  100  250  500  1000  9  2000  DAGs of E[m] = 1n edges and |X| = |Y| ∈ {1, 2, 5} black: DAGitty;  17  36  73  148  303  619  1265  2584  5279  10783 22026 44994  expected number of edges  number of nodes  DAGs of E[m] = 10n edges and |X| = |Y| ∈ {1, 2, 5}  red: causaleffect package;  purple: pcalg package;  Figure 14: Average time needed to find an adjustment set and verify it according to the CBC in a single graph with P(unobserved) = 0.75, values n ∈ {10, 25, 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000, 2000}, E[m] ∈ {1n, 10n}, and various cardinalities k of X, Y. The left and the right plot show the same data, but with a different metric on the horizontal axis: the number of nodes n (left) and the expected number of edges m (right). In black we show the statistics for DAGitty, in red – the data for the R package causaleffect and in violet – the data for the gac function of the R package pcalg. Error bars show the minimum and maximum time taken. The plot shows that all small graphs (n ≤ 100) are solved nearly instantanousely (time ≤ 100ms) by DAGitty. Only graphs with a high number of edges and huge X, Y can require a few seconds. Thus DAGitty is one to two magnitudes faster than the causaleffect package or the pcalg package.  36  In summary, our experimental results show that many causal effects in random DAGs cannot be identified by covariate adjustment. Nevertheless, many of these cases are easily addressed by extending the CBC slightly, and then most effects become identifiable without having to resort to do-calculus, at least in the random graphs we tested. This finding is reassuring given that the implementation our our algorithmic framework in DAGitty is the only identification method of those we tested that is applicable to large graphs.  9 Adjustment in MAGs In this final section, we generalize our complete constructive criterion for identifying covariate adjustment sets from DAGs to MAGs, making our algorithmic framework applicable to this class of graphical models as well. Two examples may illustrate why this generalization is not trivial. First, take G = X → Y. If G is interpreted as a DAG, then the empty set is valid for adjustment. If G is however taken as a MAG, then there exists no adjustment set as G represents among others the DAG U X Y where U is an unobserved confounder. Second, take G = A → X → Y. In that case, the empty set is an adjustment set regardless of whether G is interpreted as a DAG or a MAG. The reasons will become clear as we move on. First, let us recall the semantics of a MAG. The following definition can easily be given for AGs in general, but we do not need this generality for our purpose. Definition 7 (DAG representation by MAGs [12]). Let G = (V, E) be a DAG, and let S, L ⊆ V. The MAG M = G[LS is a graph with nodes V \ (S ∪ L) and defined as follows. (1) Two nodes U and V are adjacent in G[LS if they cannot be m-separated by any Z with S ⊆ Z ⊆ V \ L in G. (2) The edge between U and V is U − V if U ∈ An(S ∪ V) and V ∈ An(S ∪ U);  U → V if U ∈ An(S ∪ V) and V < An(S ∪ U); U ↔ V if U < An(S ∪ V) and V < An(S ∪ U).  We call L latent variables and S selection variables. We say there is selection bias if S , ∅. Hence, every MAG represents an infinite set of underlying DAGs that all share the same ancestral relationships. Lemma 6 (Preservation of separating sets [12]). Set Z m-separates X, Y in G[LS if and only if Z ∪ S m-separates X, Y in G.  Selection bias (i.e., S , ∅) substantially complicates adjustment, and in fact nonparametric causal inference in general [35]2 . Due to these limitations, we restrict ourselves to the case S = ∅ in the rest of this section. Note however that recovery from selection bias is sometimes possible with additional population data, and graphical conditions exist to identify such cases [36]. We now extend the concept of adjustment to MAGs in the usual way [16].  Definition 8 (Adjustment in MAGs). Given a MAG M = (V, E) and two variable sets X, Y ⊆ V, Z ⊆ V is an adjustment set for (X, Y) in M if for any DAG G = (V′ , E′ ) for which G[L∅ = M with L = V′ \ V the set Z is an adjustment set for (X, Y) in G. P This definition is equivalent to requiring that P(y | do(x)) is equal to z P(y | x, z)P(z) for every probability distribution P(v′ ) consistent with a DAG G = (V′ , E′ ) for which G[L∅ = M with L = V′ \ V. If one was to extend the ′ ′ definition to include selection bias S, one would need to give a requirement P that holds for all DAGs P G = (V , E ) with L ′ G[P = M and L ∪ S = V \ V. Thereby one can define P(y | do(x)) as z P(y | x, z, s)P(z | s) , z P(y | x, z, s)P(z) S P or s z P(y | x, z, s)P(z, s). The last definition is equivalent to Z ∪ S being an adjustment set in all these DAGs, but existing literature has used the second case[36]. However, the first case captures the spirit of selection bias the most, since in the presence of selection bias the probability distribution is only known given some selected bias s. There is no reason to further generalize this definition to ancestral graphs rather than MAGs as G[LS is always a MAG and every ancestral graph can be converted to a MAG with the same conditional independences [12]. 2 A counterexample is the graph A ← X → Y, where we can safely assume that A is the ancestor of a selection variable. A sufficient and necessary condition to recover a distribution P(y | x) from a distribution P(y | x, s) under selection bias is Y ⊥ ⊥ S | X [36], which is so restrictive that most statisticians would probably not even speak of “selection bias” anymore in such a case.  37  9.1 Adjustment amenability In this section we first identify a class of MAGs in which adjustment is impossible because of causal ambiguities – e.g., the simple MAG X → Y falls into this class, but the larger MAG A → X → Y does not. Definition 9 (Visible edge [35]). Given a MAG M = (V, E), an edge X → D ∈ E is called visible if in all DAGs G = (V′ , E′ ) with G[LS = M for some S, L ⊆ V′ , all d-connected walks between X and D in G that contain only nodes of S ∪ L ∪ X ∪ D are directed paths. Intuitively, an invisible directed edge X → D means that there may exist hidden confounding factors between X and D, which is guaranteed not to be the case if the edge is visible. Lemma 7 (Graphical conditions for edge visibility [35]). In a MAG M = (V, E), an edge X → D in E is visible if and only if there is a node A not adjacent to D where (1) A → X ∈ E or A ↔ X ∈ E, or (2) there is a collider path A ↔ V1 ↔ . . . ↔ Vn ↔ X or A → V1 ↔ . . . ↔ Vn ↔ X where all Vi are parents of D. Definition 10. We call a MAG M = (V, E) adjustment amenable w.r.t. X, Y ⊆ V if all proper causal paths from X to Y start with a visible directed edge. Lemma 8. If a MAG M = (V, E) is not adjustment amenable w.r.t. X, Y ⊆ V then there exists no adjustment set for (X, Y) in M. Proof. If the first edge X → D on some causal path to Y in M is not visible, then there exists a consistent DAG G where there is a non-causal path between X and Y via D that could only be blocked in M by conditioning on D or some of its descendants. But such conditioning would violate the adjustment criterion in G.  Let N(V) denote all nodes adjacent to V, and Sp(V) denote all spouses of V, i.e., nodes W such that W ↔ V ∈ E. The adjustment amenability of a graph M w.r.t sets X, Y can be tested with the following algorithm: function T ESTA DJUSTMENTA MENABILITY(M, X, Y) for all D in Ch(X) ∩ PCP(X, Y) do C ← ∅; A ← ∅ function CHECK(V) if C[V] then return A[V] C[V] ← true A[V] ← ((Pa(V) ∪ Sp(V)) \ N(D) , ∅) for all W ∈ Sp(V) ∩ Pa(D) do if CHECK(W) then A[V] ← true return A[V] for all X in X ∩ Pa(D) do if ¬CHECK(X) then return false Analysis of the Algorithm. The algorithm checks for every edge X → D on a proper causal path to Y whether it satisfies the amenability conditions of Lemma 7 by searching a collider path through the parents of D to a node Z not connected to D; note that condition (1) of Lemma 7 is identical to condition (2) with an empty collider path. Since CHECK performs a depth-first-search by checking every node only once and then continuing to its neighbors, each iteration of the outer for-loop in the algorithm runs in linear time O(n + m). Therefore, the entire algorithm runs in O(k(n + m)) where k ≤ |Ch(X)|.   9.2 Adjustment criterion for MAGs We now show that the adjustment criterion for DAGs generalizes to adjustment amenable MAGs. The adjustment criterion and the constructive back-door criterion are defined like their DAG counterparts (Definitions 2 and 3), replacing “DAG” with “MAG” and d- with m-separation for the latter.  38  M1 : X  M2 :  Z V  Y  X  M3 :  Z V  X  Y  M4 :  Z V  Y  X  M5 :  W V  Y  X2  Z X1  V  Y  Figure 15: Five MAGs in which we search for an adjustment relative to (X, Y) or ({X1 , X2 }, Y). M1 and M3 are not adjustment amenable, since the edge X → V is not visible, so no adjustment exists. In the other three MAGs the edge is visible, due to the node Z in M2 , the node W in M4 and the node X2 in M5 . The only valid adjustment in M2 and M5 is {Z}, and in M4 only the empty set is a valid adjustment. If M1 and M3 were DAGs, the set {Z} would be an adjustment in each. Definition 11 (Adjustment criterion). Let M = (V, E) be a MAG, and X, Y, Z ⊆ V be pairwise disjoint subsets of variables. The set Z satisfies the adjustment criterion relative to (X, Y) in M if (a) no element in Z is a descendant in M of any W ∈ V \ X which lies on a proper causal path from X to Y and (b) all proper non-causal paths in M from X to Y are blocked by Z. Note that the above definition uses “descendants in M” instead “descendants in MX ” as Definition 2. However, Lemma 4 implies that they are the same. Definition 12 (Proper back-door graph). Let M = (V, E) be a MAG, and X, Y ⊆ V be pairwise disjoint subsets of pbd variables. The proper back-door graph, denoted as GXY , is obtained from M by removing the first edge of every proper causal path from X to Y. Definition 13 (Constructive back-door criterion (CBC)). Let M = (V, E) be a MAG, and let X, Y, Z ⊆ V be pairwise disjoint subsets of variables. The set Z satisfies the constructive back-door criterion relative to (X, Y) in M if (a) Z ⊆ V \ Dpcp(X, Y) and pbd  (b) Z m-separates X and Y in the proper back-door graph GXY . Figure 15 shows some examples. Similarly to the CBC for DAGs certain parameters of the CBC for MAGs can be changed without affecting the characterized sets: Definition 14 (Parametrization of the Constructive back-door criterion (CBC(A, B, C))). Let M = (V, E) be a MAG, and let X, Y, Z ⊆ V be pairwise disjoint subsets of variables. Let A ⊆ X ∪ Y, B ⊆ X, C ⊆ De(PCP(X, Y)). The set Z satisfies the CBC(A, B, C) relative to (X, Y) in M if (a) Z ⊆ V \ DeAB (PCP(X, Y)), and pbd,C  (b) Z d-separates X and Y in the graph GXY  := (V, E \ (X → (PCP(X, Y) ∪ C))).  With these definitions we prove: Theorem 3. Given an adjustment amenable MAG M = (V, E) and three disjoint node sets X, Y, Z ⊆ V, the following statements are equivalent: (i) Z is an adjustment relative to (X, Y) in M. (ii) Z fulfills the adjustment criterion (AC) w.r.t. (X, Y) in M. (iii) Z fulfills the constructive back-door criterion (CBC) w.r.t. (X, Y) in M. (iv) Z fulfills a variant of constructive back-door criterion (CBC(A,B,C)) w.r.t. (X, Y) in M. for A ⊆ X ∪ Y, B ⊆ X, C ⊆ De(PCP(X, Y)). 39  X DAG G:  Z  Y W1  1 MAG M = G[W : ∅  W2  X  Y  Z  W2  Figure 16: Illustration of the case in the proof of Theorem 3 where Z descends from W1 which in a DAG G is on a proper causal path from X to Y, but is not a descendant of a node on a proper causal path from X to Y in the MAG M after marginalizing W1 . In such cases, conditioning on Z will m-connect X and Y in M via a proper non-causal path. Proof. The equivalence of (ii), (iii) and (iv) is established by observing that the proofs of Theorem 1 and Lemma 4 generalize to m-separation. Below we establish equivalence of (i) and (ii). ¬(ii) ⇒ ¬(i): If Z violates the adjustment criterion in M, it does so in the canonical DAG C(M), and thus is not an adjustment in M. ¬(i) ⇒ ¬(ii): Let G be a DAG with G[L∅ = M in which Z violates the AC. We show that (a) if Z ∩ Dpcp(X, Y) , ∅ in G then Z ∩ Dpcp(X, Y) , ∅ in M as well, or there exists a proper non-causal path in M that cannot be m-separated; and (b) if Z ∩ Dpcp(X, Y) = ∅ in G and Z d-connects a proper non-causal path in G, then it m-connects a proper non-causal path in M. (a) Suppose that in G, Z contains a node Z in Dpcp(X, Y), and let W = PCP(X, Y) ∩ An(Z). If M still contains at least one node W1 ∈ W, then W1 lies on a proper causal path in M and Z is a descendant of W1 in M. Otherwise, M must contain a node W2 ∈ PCP G (X, Y) \ An(Z) (possibly W2 ∈ Y) such that W2 ↔ A, X → W2 , and X → A are edges in M, where A ∈ An(Z) (possibly A = Z; see Figure 16). Then M contains an m-connected proper non-causal path X → A ↔ W → W2 → . . . → Y. (b) Suppose that in G, Z ∩ Dpcp(X, Y) = ∅, and there exists an open proper non-causal path from X to Y. Then there must also be a proper non-causal walk wG from some X ∈ X to some Y ∈ Y (Lemma 10), which is d-connected by Z in G. Let wM denote the subsequence of wG formed by nodes in M, which includes all colliders on wG . The sequence wM is a path in M, but is not necessarily m-connected by Z; all colliders on wM are in Z because every non-Z must be a parent of at least one of its neighbors, but there can subsequences U, Z1 , . . . , Zk , V on wM where all Zi ∈ Z but some of the Zi are not colliders on wM . However, then we can form from wM an m-connected walk by bypassing some sequences of Z-nodes (Lemma 15). Let w′M be the resulting walk. If w′M is a proper non-causal walk, then there must also exist a proper non-causal path in M (Lemma 10), violating the AC. It therefore remains to show that w′M is not a proper causal path. This must be the case if wG does not contain colliders, because then the first edge of wM = w′M cannot be a visible directed edge out of X. Otherwise, the only way for w′M to be proper causal is if all Z-nodes in wM have been bypassed in w′M by edges pointing away from X. In that case, one can show by several case distinctions that the first edge X → D of w′M , where D < Z, cannot be visible (see Figure 17 for an example of such a case). For simplicity, assume that M contains a subpath A → X → D where A is not adjacent to D; the other cases of edge visibility like A ↔ X → D (Lemma 7). are treated analogously. In G, there are inducing paths (possibly several, see Definition 15) πAX from A to X and πXD from X to D w.r.t ∅, L; πAX must have an arrowhead at X. We distinguish several cases on the shape of πXD . (1) A path πXD has an arrowhead at X as well. Then A, D are adjacent (Lemma 18), a contradiction. (2) No inducing path πXD has an arrowhead at X. Then wG must start with an arrow out of X, and must contain a collider Z ∈ De(X) because wG is not causal. (a) Z ∈ De(D). This contradicts Z ∩ Dpcp(X, Y) = ∅. So (b) Z < De(D). Then by construction of w′M (Lemma 15), wM must start with an inducing Z-trail X → Z, Z1 , . . . , Zn , D, which is also an inducing path from X to D in G w.r.t. ∅, L. Then Z, Z1 , . . . , Zn , D must also be an inducing path in G w.r.t. ∅, L because An(X) ⊆ An(Z). Hence Z and D are adjacent. We distinguish cases on the path X → Z, D in M. (i) If X → Z → D, then Z lies on a proper causal path, contradicting Z ∩ Dpcp(X, Y) = ∅. (ii) If X → Z ↔ D, or X → Z ← D, then we get an m-connected proper non-causal walk along Z and D.   40  L1 DAG G:  Z  X  L2  Z MAG M = G[∅{L1 ,L2 } :  Y  X  Y A  A  Figure 17: Case (b) in the proof of Theorem 3: A proper non-causal path wG = X ← L1 → Z ← Ls → Y in a DAG is d-connected by Z, but the corresponding proper non-causal path wM = X ← Z → Y is not m-connected in the MAG, and its m-connected subpath w′M = X → Y is proper causal. However, this also renders the edge X → Y invisible, because otherwise A could be m-separated from Y by U = {X, Z} in M but not in G.  9.3 Adjustment set construction In the previous section, we have already shown that the CBC is equivalent to the AC for MAGs as well; hence, pbd adjustment sets for a given MAG M can be found by forming the proper back-door graph MXY and then applying the algorithms from the previous section. In principle, care must be taken when removing edges from MAGs as the result might not be a MAG; however, this is not the case when removing only directed edges. Lemma 9 (Closure of maximality under removal of directed edges). Given a MAG M, every graph M′ formed by removing only directed edges from M is also a MAG. Proof. Suppose the converse, i.e. M is no longer a MAG after removal of some edge X → D. Then X and D cannot be m-separated even after the edge is removed because X and D are collider connected via a path whose nodes are all ancestors of X or D [12]. The last edge on this path must be C ↔ D or C ← D, hence C < An(D), and thus we must have C ∈ An(X). But then we get C ∈ An(D) in M via the edge X → D, a contradiction.  pbd  Corollary 7. For every MAG M, the proper back-door graph MXY is also a MAG. For MAGs that are not adjustment amenable, the CBC might falsely indicate that an adjustment set exists even though that set may not be valid for some represented graph. Fortunately, adjustment amenability is easily tested using the graphical criteria of Lemma 7. For each child D of X in PCP(X, Y), we can test the visibility of all edges X → D simultaneously using depth first search. This means that we can check all potentially problematic edges in time O(n+ m). If all tests pass, we are licensed to apply the CBC, as shown above. Hence, we can solve all algorithmic tasks in Table 4 for MAGs in the same way as for DAGs after an O(k(n + m)) check of adjustment amenability, where k ≤ |Ch(X)|. Hence our algorithms can construct an adjustment set for a given MAG M and variables X, Y in O((k + 1)(n + m)) time. If an additional set Z is given, it can be verified that Z is an adjustment set in the same time. Minimal adjustments sets can be constructed and verified in O(k(n + m) + n2 ) or O(n(n + m)) time using our algorithms F IND M INA DJ, T EST M INA DJ for dense or sparse graphs. The algorithms for the remaining problems of finding a minimum cost adjustment set F IND M IN C OSTA DJ and enumerating adjustment sets L ISTA DJ or L IST M I NA DJ in MAGs have the same runtime as the corresponding algorithms in DAGs, since their time surpasses the time required for the adjustment amenability test.  10 Discussion We provide a framework of efficient algorithms to verify, find, and enumerate m-separating sets in MAGs, which we then harness to solve the same problems for adjustment sets in DAGs and MAGs. In both graph classes, this provides a complete and informative answer to the question when, and how, a desired causal effect between multivariate exposures and outcomes can be estimated by covariate adjustment. Adjustment sets in MAGs allow some unmeasured confounders. Even for DAG-based analyses, one can by interpreting the same graph as a MAG possibly generate an  41  adjustment set that is provably valid for a much larger class of DAGs. This allows researchers to partly relax the often untenable assumption that all relevant variables are known and were measured. Our results rest on two key concepts: reduction of adjustment to m-separation in a subgraph (the proper back-door graph), and adjustment amenability for graphical models that are more causally ambiguous than DAGs. Since the publication of the preliminary version of this work [1, 2], these techniques were shown to be applicable to adjustment in four additional classes of graphical causal models: CPDAGs [19], PAGs [19], chain graphs [18], and maximal PDAGs [20]. Likewise, it has been shown that our algorithms remain applicable in the presence of selection bias [37]. As we have illustrated briefly in Section 4, we expect our algorithmic framework to be useful in other areas as well, due to the central of m-separation in the theory of graphical models. The practical feasibility of our algorithms is illustrated by the fact that they underpin both the web application “dagitty.net” as well as the associated R package [33], which currently have a substantial user community. An interesting open question to be pursued in further research would be whether the approaches presented here could be generalized to accommodate confounding that arose by chance in a given sample, rather than for structural reasons [38].  11 Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) grant LI 634/4-1. We also thank Marcel Wienöbst for help in performing the experiments, particularly for implementing the parsing of the generated graph files in R.  12 References References [1] J. Textor, M. Liśkiewicz, Adjustment criteria in causal diagrams: An algorithmic perspective, in: Proceedings of the 27th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, AUAI Press, 2011, pp. 681–688. [2] B. van der Zander, M. Liśkiewicz, J. Textor, Constructing separators and adjustment sets in ancestral graphs, in: Proceedings of the 30th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, AUAI Press, 2014, pp. 907–916. [3] J. Pearl, Causality, Cambridge University Press, 2009. [4] F. Elwert, Graphical causal models, in: Handbook of Causal Analysis for Social Research, Handbooks of Sociology and Social Research, Springer, 2013, pp. 245–273. [5] K. J. Rothman, S. Greenland, T. L. Lash, Modern Epidemiology, Wolters Kluwer, 2008. [6] I. Shrier, Letter to the editor, Statistics in Medicine 27 (2008) 2740–2741. [7] D. Rubin, Author’s reply, Statistics in Medicine 27 (2008) 2741–2742. [8] T. J. VanderWeele, On the relative nature of overadjustment and unnecessary adjustment, Epidemiology 20 (4) (2009) 496–499. doi:10.1097/EDE.0b013e3181a82f12. [9] A. Glynn, K. Kashin, Front-door versus back-door adjustment with unmeasured confounding: Bias formulas for front-door and hybrid adjustments with application to a job training program, Journal of the American Statistical Associationdoi:10.1080/01621459.2017.1398657. [10] I. Shpitser, T. VanderWeele, J. Robins, On the validity of covariate adjustment for estimating causal effects, in: Proceedings of the 26th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, AUAI Press, 2010, pp. 527–536.  42  [11] S. Greenland, Hierarchical regression for epidemiologic analyses of multiple exposures, Environmental Health Perspectives 102 Suppl 8 (1994) 33–39. [12] T. Richardson, P. Spirtes, Ancestral graph Markov models, Annals of Statistics 30 (2002) 927–1223. [13] R. D. Shachter, Bayes-ball: The rational pastime, in: Proceedings of the 14th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, Morgan Kaufmann, 1998, pp. 480–487. [14] J. Tian, A. Paz, J. Pearl, Finding minimal d-separators, Tech. Rep. R-254, University of California, Los Angeles (1998). [15] S. Acid, L. M. de Campos, Searching for Bayesian network structures in the space of restricted acyclic partially directed graphs, Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 18 (2003) 445–490. doi:10.1613/jair.1061. [16] M. H. Maathuis, D. Colombo, A generalized backdoor criterion, Annals of Statistics 43 (3) (2015) 1060–1088. doi:10.1214/14-AOS1295. [17] E. Perković, J. Textor, M. Kalisch, M. Maathuis, A complete generalized adjustment criterion, in: Proceedings of the 31st Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, AUAI Press, 2015, pp. 682–691. [18] B. van der Zander, M. Liśkiewicz, Separators and Adjustment Sets in Markov Equivalent DAGs, in: Proceedings of the 30th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2016, pp. 3315–3321. [19] E. Perković, J. Textor, M. Kalisch, M. Maathuis, Complete graphical characterization and construction of adjustment sets in Markov equivalence classes of ancestral graphs, Tech. Rep. 1606.06904, arXiv:, preprint, arxiv.org/abs/1606.06903 (2016). [20] E. Perković, M. Kalisch, M. Maathuis, Interpreting and using CPDAGs with background knowledge, in: Proceedings of the 33rd Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2017, p. , available at arxiv.org/abs/1707.02171. [21] J. Pearl, Causal diagrams for empirical research, Biometrika 82 (4) (1995) 669–688. [22] I. Shpitser, J. Pearl, Identification of joint interventional distributions in recursive semi-markovian causal models, in: Proceedings of the 21st National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 2, Menlo Park, CA; Cambridge, MA; London; AAAI Press; MIT Press; 1999, 2006, pp. 1219–1226. [23] Y. Huang, M. Valtorta, Pearl’s calculus of intervention is complete, in: Proceedings of the 22nd Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, AUAI Press, 2006, pp. 217–224. [24] I. Shpitser, J. Pearl, Identification of conditional interventional distributions, in: Proceedings of the 22nd Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, AUAI Press, 2006, pp. 437–444. [25] S. Acid, L. M. De Campos, An algorithm for finding minimum d-separating sets in belief networks, in: Proceedings of the 12th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1996, pp. 3–10. [26] K. Takata, Space-optimal, backtracking algorithms to list the minimal vertex separators of a graph, Discrete Applied Mathematics 158 (2010) 1660–1667. doi:10.1016/j.dam.2010.05.013. [27] S. Even, Graph Algorithms, Computer Science Press, 1979. [28] J. B. Orlin, Max flows in O(nm) time, or better, in: Proceedings of the 45th annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, ACM, 2013, pp. 765–774. [29] M. Garey, D. Johnson, Computers and intractability: a guide to the theory of NP-completeness, W. H. Freeman and Company, 1979.  43  [30] J. Pearl, P. Meshkat, Testing regression models with fewer regressors, in: Proceedings of AI-STAT, 1998, pp. 255–259. [31] F. Thoemmes, Y. Rosseel, J. Textor, Local fit evaluation of structural equation models using graphical criteria, Psychological Methods (2017) doi:10.1037/met0000147. [32] S. Tikka, J. Karvanen, Identifying Causal Effects with the R Package causaleffect, Journal of Statistical Software 76 (12) (2017) . doi:10.18637/jss.v076.i12. [33] J. Textor, B. van der Zander, M. S. Gilthorpe, M. Liśkiewicz, G. T. Ellison, Robust causal inference using directed acyclic graphs: the R package ‘dagitty’, International Journal of Epidemiology 45 (6) (2016) 1887– 1894. doi:10.1093/ije/dyw341. [34] M. Kalisch, M. Mächler, D. Colombo, M. Maathuis, P. Bühlmann, Causal inference using graphical models with the R package pcalg, Journal of Statistical Software 47 (11) (2012) . doi:10.18637/jss.v047.i11. [35] J. Zhang, Causal reasoning with ancestral graphs, Journal of Machine Learning Research 9 (2008) 1437–1474. [36] E. Barenboim, J. Tian, J. Pearl, Recovering from Selection Bias in Causal and Statistical Inference, in: Proceedings of the 28th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2014, pp. 2410–2416. [37] J. D. Correa, E. Bareinboim, Causal effect identification by adjustment under confounding and selection biases, in: Proceedings of the 31st AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017, pp. 3740–3746. [38] S. Greenland, M. A. Mansournia, Limitations of individual causal models, causal graphs, and ignorability assumptions, as illustrated by random confounding and design unfaithfulness, Eur. J. Epidemiol. 30 (10) (2015) 1101–1110.  13 Appendix 13.1 Auxiliary lemmas and proofs In this section, we prove several auxiliary lemmas that are necessary for the proof of Theorem 3. Lemma 10. Given a DAG G and sets X, Y, Z ⊆ V satisfying Z ∩ Dpcp(X, Y) = ∅, Z m-connects a proper non-causal path between X and Y if and only if it m-connects a proper non-causal walk between X and Y. Proof. ⇐: Let w be the m-connected proper non-causal walk. It can be transformed to an m-connected path π by removing loops of nodes that are visited multiple times. Since no nodes have been added, π remains proper, and the first edges of π and w are the same. So if w does not start with a → edge, π is non-causal. If w starts with an edge X → D, there exists a collider with a descendant in Z which is in De(D). So π has to be non-causal, or it would contradict Z ∩ Dpcp(X, Y) = ∅. ⇒: Let π be an m-connected proper non-causal path. It can be changed to an m-connected walk w by inserting Ci → . . . → Zi ← . . . ← Ci for every collider Ci on π and a corresponding Zi ∈ Z. Since no edges are removed from π, w is non-causal, but not necessarily proper, since the inserted walks might contain nodes of X. However, in that case, w can be truncated to a proper walk w′ starting at the last node of X on w. Then w′ is non-causal, since it contains the subpath X ← . . . ← Ci .  In all of the below, G = (V, E) is a DAG, Z, L ⊆ V are disjoint, and M = G[L∅ . Definition 15 (Inducing path [12]). A path π = V1 , . . . , Vn+1 is called inducing with respect to Z, L if all non-colliders on π except V1 and Vn+1 are in L, and all colliders on π are in An({V1 , Vn+1 } ∪ Z). Every inducing path w.r.t. Z, L is m-connected by Z.  44  Lemma 11 ([12]). If there is an inducing path π from U ∈ V to V ∈ V with respect to Z, L, then there exists no set Z′ with Z ⊆ Z′ ⊆ (V \ L) such that Z′ d-separates U and V in G or m-separates U and V in G[L∅ . Proof. This is Theorem 4.2, cases (v) and (vi), in [12].    Lemma 12. Two nodes U, V are adjacent in G[L∅ if and only if G contains an inducing path π between U and V with respect to ∅, L. Moreover, the edge between U, V in G[L∅ can only have an arrowhead at U (V) if all such π have an arrowhead at U (V) in G. Proof. The first part on adjacency is proved in [12]. For the second part on arrowheads, suppose π does not have an arrowhead at U, then π starts with an edge U → D. Hence D < An(U), so D ∈ An(V) because π is an inducing path and therefore also U ∈ An(V). Hence, the edge between U and V in G[L∅ must be U → V. The argument for V is identical.  Lemma 13. Suppose Z0 , Z1 , Z2 is a path in G[L∅ on which Z1 is a non-collider. Suppose an inducing path π01 from Z0 to Z1 w.r.t. ∅, L in G has an arrowhead at Z1 , and an inducing path π12 from Z1 to Z2 w.r.t. ∅, L has an arrowhead at Z1 . Then the walk w012 = π01 π12 can be truncated to an inducing path from Z0 to Z2 w.r.t. ∅, L in G. Proof. The walk w012 does not contain more non-colliders than those on π01 or π12 , so they must all be in L. It remains to show that the colliders on w012 are in An(Z0 ∪ Z2 ). Because Z1 is not a collider on Z0 , Z1 , Z2 , at least one of the edges Z0 , Z1 and Z1 , Z2 must be a directed edge pointing away from Z1 . Assume without loss of generality that Z0 ← Z1 is that edge. Then all colliders on π01 are in An(Z0 ∪ Z1 ) = An(Z0 ) ⊆ An(Z0 ∪ Z2 ), and all colliders on π12 are in An(Z1 ∪ Z2 ) ⊆ An(Z0 ∪ Z2 ). Z1 itself is a collider on w012 and is also in An(Z0 ). Hence, the walk w012 is d-connected, and can be truncated to an inducing path that starts with the first arrow of π01 and ends with the last arrow of π12 .  Definition 16 (Inducing Z-trail). Let π = V1 , . . . , Vn+1 be a path in G[L∅ such that V2 , . . . , Vn ∈ Z, V1 , Vn+1 < Z, and for each i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, there is an inducing path w.r.t. ∅, L linking Vi , Vi+1 that has an arrowhead at Vi (Vi+1 ) if Vi ∈ Z (Vi+1 ∈ Z). Then π is called an inducing Z-trail.  Lemma 14. Let π = V1 , . . . , Vn+1 be an inducing Z-trail, and let π′ be a subsequence of π formed by removing one node Vi of π such that Vi ∈ Z is a non-collider on π. Then π′ is an inducing Z-trail. Proof. According to Lemma 13, if Vi is a non-collider on π, then Vi−1 and Vi+1 are linked by an inducing path π that contains an arrowhead at Vi−1 (Vi+1 ) if Vi−1 ∈ Z (Vi+1 ∈ Z). Therefore, Vi−1 and Vi+1 are themselves adjacent, π′ is a path, and is a Z-trail.  Corollary 8. Every inducing Z-trail π = V1 , . . . , Vn+1 has a subpath π′ that is m-connected by Z. Proof. Transform π into π′ by replacing non-collider nodes in Z by the direct edge linking their neighbors until no such node exists anymore. By inductively applying Lemma 14, we see that π′ is also an inducing Z-trail, and every node in Z is a collider because otherwise we would have continued transforming. So π′ must be m-connected by Z.  Lemma 15. Let wG be a walk from X to Y in G, X, Y < L, that is d-connected by Z. Let wM = V1 , . . . , Vn+1 be the subsequence of wG consisting only of the nodes in M = G[L∅ . Then Z m-connects X and Y in M via a path along a subsequence w′M formed from wM by removing some nodes in Z (possibly w′M = wM ). Proof. First, truncate from wM all subwalks between nodes in Z that occur more than once. Now consider all subsequences V1 , . . . , Vn+1 , n > 1, of wM where V2 , . . . , Vn ∈ Z, V1 , Vn+1 < Z, which now are all paths in wM . On those subsequences, every Vi must be adjacent in G to Vi+1 via a path containing no colliders, and all non-endpoints on that path must be in L. So there are inducing paths w.r.t. ∅, L between all Vi , Vi+1 , which have arrowheads at Vi (Vi+1 ) if Vi ∈ Z (Vi+1 ∈ Z). So V1 , . . . , Vn+1 is an inducing Z-trail, and has a subpath which m-connects V1 , Vn+1 given Z. Transform wM to w′M by replacing all inducing Z-trails by their m-connected subpaths. According to Lemma 12, non-colliders on wM cannot be colliders on w′M , as bypassing inducing paths can remove but not create arrowheads.  Moreover, all nodes in Z on w′M are colliders. Hence w′M is m-connected by Z. 45  Corollary 9. Each edge on w′M as defined above corresponds to an inducing path w.r.t ∅, L in G along nodes on wG . Lemma 16. Suppose there exists an inducing path π01 from Z0 to Z1 w.r.t. S, L with an arrowhead at Z1 and an inducing path from Z1 to Z2 w.r.t. S′ , L with an arrowhead at Z1 . Then the walk w012 = π01 π12 can be truncated to an inducing path from Z0 to Z2 w.r.t. S ∪ S′ ∪ {Z1 }, L in G. Proof. The walk w012 does not contain more non-colliders than those on π01 or π12 , so they must all be in L. All colliders on π0,1 and π1,2 as well as Z1 are in An(Z0 , Z1 , Z2 , S, S′ ), and therefore also all colliders of w012 . Hence, the walk w012 is d-connected, and can be truncated to an inducing path that starts with the first arrow of π01 and ends with the last arrow of π12 .  Lemma 17. Suppose Z0 , Z1 , . . . , Zk+1 is a path in G[L∅ with an arrowhead at Zk+1 on which all Z1 , . . . , Zk are colliders. Then there exists an inducing path from Z0 to Zk+1 w.r.t. {Z1 , . . . , Zk }, L with an arrowhead at Zk+1 . Proof. Because all Zi , Zi+1 are adjacent and all Z1 , . . . , Zk are colliders there exist inducing paths πi,i+1 w.r.t. ∅, L from Zi to Zi+1 that have arrowheads at Z1 , . . . , Zk (Lemma 12). The claim follows by repeatedly applying Lemma 16 to the πi,i+1 ’s.  Lemma 18. Suppose A → V1 ↔ . . . ↔ Vk ↔ X → D or A ↔ V1 ↔ . . . ↔ Vk ↔ X → D is a path in G[L∅ (possibly k = 0), each Vi is a parent of D and there exists an inducing path πXD from X to D w.r.t ∅, L that has arrowheads on both ends. Then A and D cannot be m-separated in G[L∅ . Proof. Assume the path is A → V1 ↔ . . . ↔ Vk ↔ X → D. The case where the path starts with A ↔ V1 can be handled identically, since the first arrowhead does not affect m-separation. Assume A and D can be m-separated in G[L∅ , and let Z be such a separator. If V1 is not in Z then the path A → V1 → D is not blocked, so V1 ∈ Z. Inductively it follows, if Vi is not in Z, but all ∀j < i : V j ∈ Z then the path A → V1 ↔ . . . ↔ Vi−1 ↔ Vi → D is not blocked, so Vi ∈ Z for all i. There exist an inducing path πAX from A to X with an arrowhead at X w.r.t. to {V1 , . . . , Vk }, L (Lemma 17) which can be combined with πXD to an inducing path from A to D w.r.t. to {V1 , . . . , Vk , X}, L (Lemma 16). Hence no m-separator of A, D can contain {X, V1 , . . . , Vk } (Lemma 11). Then there cannot exist an m-separator, because every separator must include V1 , . . . , Vk and the path A → V1 ↔ V2 ↔ . . . ↔ Vk ↔ X → D is open without X ∈ Z.   13.2 Further experimental results Tables 8 and 9 in this section show the results of versions of the experiments presented in Section 8 in Tables 5 and 6 in which the parameter controlling the number of unobserved variables is set to 0.25 or 0.5.  13.3 Do-calculus Some of our proofs use the rules of the do-calculus [3] that exchange actions and observations or remove them altogether. We state those rules here for sake of self-containedness. Theorem 4 (Do-Calculus [3]). Given a DAG G and disjoint sets X, Y, Z, W the following rules are valid for all probability distributions P consistent with G Rule 1. (Insertion/deletion of observations) P(y | do(x), z, w) = P(y | do(x), w) if (Y ⊥ ⊥ Z | X, W) in GX Rule 2. (Exchange of actions/observations) P(y | do(x), do(z), w) = P(y | do(x), z, w) if (Y ⊥ ⊥ Z | X, W) in GXZ Rule 3. (Insertion/deletion of actions) P(y | do(x), do(z), w) = P(y | do(x), w) if (Y ⊥ ⊥ Z | X, W) in GX Z(W) where Z(W) is short for Z \ AnX (W).  46  n 10 10 10 10 25 25 25 25 50 50 50 50 100 100 100 100 250 250 250 250 250 500 500 500 500 500 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000  k 1 2 3 5 1 2 3 5 1 2 5 7 1 2 5 10 1 2 5 15 25 1 2 5 22 50 1 2 5 32 100 1 2 5 45 200  BC 8235 4307 1603 184 9306 7312 4863 1466 9668 8555 3727 1449 9818 9341 6215 1453 9917 9712 8293 1728 85 9968 9864 9162 1533 0 9984 9926 9599 1413 0 9994 9963 9800 1541 0  l=2 CBC 8235 4840 2353 823 9306 7466 5250 2060 9668 8600 4167 1946 9818 9354 6404 1813 9917 9712 8343 2014 164 9968 9866 9178 1774 3 9984 9926 9602 1588 0 9994 9963 9802 1728 0  CBC+ 9901 8035 5173 1700 9978 9489 8101 4255 9993 9814 6835 3888 9997 9951 8637 3490 10000 9990 9669 3676 361 10000 9997 9910 3148 10 10000 10000 9984 2801 0 10000 10000 9992 2840 0  BC 4772 528 36 0 7019 2132 416 10 8075 4013 86 4 8886 5742 443 0 9559 7840 2015 0 0 9765 8920 4207 0 0 9903 9490 6613 0 0 9945 9809 8273 0 0  l=5 CBC 4772 1120 313 99 7019 2490 718 65 8075 4222 174 22 8886 5871 595 1 9559 7888 2192 1 0 9765 8933 4343 0 0 9903 9491 6703 0 0 9945 9812 8316 0 0  CBC+ 8938 3545 1168 204 9507 5757 2668 449 9763 7274 1034 233 9879 8400 2122 78 9964 9362 4569 27 0 9986 9762 6662 7 0 9997 9902 8370 1 0 10000 9985 9403 0 0  BC 2452 0 0 0 3549 310 10 0 4408 639 1 0 5158 1013 3 0 6033 1717 9 0 0 6684 2304 46 0 0 7266 3261 75 0 0 7924 4140 210 0 0  l = 10 CBC 2452 349 96 44 3549 485 65 2 4408 777 1 0 5158 1084 11 0 6033 1764 18 0 0 6684 2329 50 0 0 7266 3278 81 0 0 7924 4150 217 0 0  CBC+ 7443 1977 591 76 8141 2815 925 99 8517 3614 158 14 8833 4462 340 1 9208 5611 598 1 0 9455 6352 955 0 0 9615 7194 1486 0 0 9773 7842 2140 0 0  BC 2373 0 0 0 1645 24 0 0 1927 92 0 0 2173 167 0 0 2558 216 0 0 0 2667 303 0 0 0 2831 348 0 0 0 3117 452 0 0 0  l = 20 CBC 2373 379 107 36 1645 126 14 0 1927 145 0 0 2173 209 0 0 2558 236 0 0 0 2667 314 0 0 0 2831 350 0 0 0 3117 456 0 0 0  CBC+ 7469 2004 594 82 6686 1862 523 38 7024 2145 81 7 7271 2564 96 1 7691 3038 158 0 0 7888 3414 186 0 0 8086 3757 261 0 0 8322 4191 356 0 0  Table 8: Numbers of instances for P(unobserved) = 0.25 that are identifiable We did not run the IDC algorithm on these data due to its high time complexity. Gray cells highlight where the BC failed to identify more than 4% of those cases that CBC could identify.  47  n 10 10 10 10 25 25 25 25 50 50 50 50 100 100 100 100 250 250 250 250 250 500 500 500 500 500 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000  k 1 2 3 5 1 2 3 5 1 2 5 7 1 2 5 10 1 2 5 15 25 1 2 5 22 50 1 2 5 32 100 1 2 5 45 200  BC 7418 3289 1000 165 8912 6413 3665 820 9429 7928 2484 735 9725 8858 4828 619 9876 9542 7423 711 12 9937 9779 8625 572 0 9972 9865 9328 475 0 9985 9949 9624 467 0  l=2 CBC 7418 3795 1575 822 8912 6555 4060 1241 9429 7991 2835 1041 9725 8882 5052 828 9876 9546 7498 922 25 9937 9781 8641 685 1 9972 9865 9335 548 0 9985 9949 9626 524 0  CBC+ 9799 7602 4512 1684 9960 9258 7595 3591 9983 9738 6082 3164 9995 9930 8211 2793 9999 9979 9502 2833 243 10000 9998 9852 2245 3 10000 9999 9957 1910 0 10000 10000 9994 1853 0  BC 3102 303 13 0 5107 1115 182 1 6206 2141 21 0 7032 3198 89 0 8259 5055 422 0 0 8992 6569 1162 0 0 9420 7872 2623 0 0 9715 8823 4614 0 0  l=5 CBC 3102 649 138 87 5107 1346 339 20 6206 2272 52 1 7032 3285 129 0 8259 5097 469 0 0 8992 6587 1231 0 0 9420 7881 2683 0 0 9715 8828 4649 0 0  CBC+ 8085 3029 1038 220 9106 5056 2326 419 9487 6516 921 205 9658 7674 1791 90 9908 8865 3608 37 0 9957 9369 5318 3 0 9985 9746 7140 0 0 9992 9937 8529 0 0  BC 1500 0 0 0 1920 154 6 0 2454 260 0 0 2952 403 1 0 3539 575 1 0 0 4038 791 2 0 0 4487 1086 4 0 0 5059 1500 19 0 0  l = 10 CBC 1500 223 57 39 1920 249 24 2 2454 334 1 0 2952 444 1 0 3539 591 1 0 0 4038 802 3 0 0 4487 1094 5 0 0 5059 1503 19 0 0  CBC+ 6515 1910 549 85 7224 2592 880 86 7831 3353 198 20 8281 4069 277 2 8767 5085 613 0 0 9062 5748 925 0 0 9314 6475 1461 0 0 9491 7201 2066 0 0  BC 1520 0 0 0 898 9 0 0 1004 43 0 0 1154 74 0 0 1314 83 0 0 0 1336 98 0 0 0 1525 96 0 0 0 1693 122 0 0 0  l = 20 CBC 1520 251 43 47 898 77 7 0 1004 76 0 0 1154 85 0 0 1314 93 0 0 0 1336 100 0 0 0 1525 98 0 0 0 1693 122 0 0 0  CBC+ 6537 1878 539 76 5913 1803 521 40 6414 2127 64 6 6626 2422 83 0 7069 2925 155 0 0 7354 3210 195 0 0 7565 3660 253 0 1 7799 3905 345 0 0  Table 9: Numbers of instances for P(unobserved) = 0.5 that are identifiable by use of BC, CBC, CBC+ (as defined in Table 5). We did not run the IDC algorithm on these data due to its high time complexity. Gray cells highlight where the BC failed to identify more than 4% of those cases that CBC could identify.  48

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
