Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_5680

Abstract:
arXiv:1410.4667v5 [math.GR] 12 Nov 2016  Irreducible laminations for IWIP Automorphisms of a free product and Centralisers Dionysios Syrigos Abstract For every free product decomposition G = G1 ∗ ... ∗ Gq ∗ Fr , where Fr is a finitely generated free group, of a group G of finite Kurosh rank, we can associate some (relative) outer space O. In this paper, we develop the theory of (stable) laminations for (relative) irreducible with irreducible powers (IWIP) automorphisms. In particular, we examine the action of Out(G, O) ≤ Out(G) (i.e. the automorphisms which preserve the set of conjugacy classes of Gi ’s) on the set of laminations. We generalise the theory of the attractive laminations associated to automorphisms of finitely generated free groups. The strategy is the same as in the classical case (see [1]), but some statements are slightly different because of the existence of the Gi ’s. More precisely, we prove that the stabiliser of the lamination of a relative IWIP is a Z-extension of a subgroup that is consisted of virtually elliptic automorphisms. Note that in the free case, virtually elliptic automorphisms are exactly the finite order automorphisms of Out(Fn ). As a corollary of the previous theorem, we generalise the fact that the centraliser of an IWIP automorphism of a free group, is virtually cyclic. As a direct corollary, if Out(G) is virtually torsion free and every Aut(Gi ) is finite, we prove that the centraliser of an IWIP is virtually cyclic. Finally, we give an example which shows that we cannot expect that in general the centraliser of a relative IWIP (and as a consequence the stabiliser of its stable lamination) is virtually cyclic.  CONTENTS  2  Contents 1 Introduction 2 Preliminaries 2.1 Outer space and O-maps . . . . . . 2.2 Relative Automorphisms . . . . . . 2.3 Train Track Maps and Irreducibility 2.4 Bounded Cancellation Lemma . . . 2.5 N-periodic paths . . . . . . . . . . 2.6 Relative train-track maps . . . . . 2.7 Graph of Groups and Subgroups . . 3 Every two O - maps coincide  3 . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  7 7 10 10 13 14 14 15 16  4 Laminations 16 4.1 Construction of the lamination and properties . . . . . . . . . 17 4.2 Lamination in every tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 5 Action  24  6 Subgroups carrying the lamination  24  7 Stretching map  27  8 Kernel of the homomorphism 29 8.1 Reducible case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 8.2 Irreducible case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 8.3 Discreteness of the Image . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 9 Main Results  34  3  1  Introduction  Let G be a group which splits as a free product G = G1 ∗ ... ∗ Gq ∗ Fr . Guirardel and Levitt in [11] constructed an outer space relative to any free product decomposition for a f.g. group. Let Out(G, O) be the subgroup of Out(G), which consists of the automorphisms which preserve the conjugacy classes of Gi ’s (note that in the case of the Grushko decomposition, Out(G) = Out(G, O)). We could define the notion of irreducibility using representatives of automorphisms which leave invariant subgraphs, but here it is less complicated to use the notion of free factor systems. More specifically, we say that an element φ ∈ Out(G, O) is irreducible relative to O, if the corresponding free factor system G = {[Gi ] : 1 ≤ i ≤ q} is a maximal proper, φ-invariant free factor system. Therefore we define the notion of an irreducible with irreducible powers (or simply IWIP) automorphism relative to O, as in the special case where G is a finitely generated free group. In this paper, we study IWIP automorphisms and in particular we show that we can define the stable (and unstable) lamination Λ associated to an IWIP, using exactly the same method as in the free case. In the classical case, it can be proved that the stabiliser of the lamination is virtually cyclic (see [1]). However, in the general case, the presence of the Gi ’s, does not allow us to get the same statement and as we will see later this is not true in general, but can prove the following generalisation (note that if φ ∈ Out(Fn ) fixes a point of CVn , it has finite order): Theorem 1.1. Let φ be an IWIP relative to some relative outer space O. Let’s denote by Stab(Λ) the Out(G, O)- stabiliser of the stable lamination Λ. Then Stab(Λ) is an infinite cyclic extension of a subgroup A, where every φ ∈ A virtually fixes a point of O. Note that the stabilisers on any point of O is well known by a theorem of [11] and it depends on the valence of non-free vertices of the points and on the Gi ’s. As a consequence of our proof, we can get the following theorems for some special cases: Theorem 1.2. If we suppose that every Inn(Gi ) is finite, then we have that: 1. There is a normal periodic subgroup A of Stab(Λ), such that the group Stab(Λ)/A has a normal subgroup B isomorphic to subgroup q L Out(Gi ) and (Stab(Λ)/A)/B is isomorphic to Z. of i=1  4 2. Let’s suppose that Out(G) is virtually torsion free. Then Stab(Λ) has a (torsion free) finite index subgroup K such that K/B ′ is isomorphic to Z, where B ′ is a normal subgroup of K isomorphic to subgroup of q L Out(Gi ). i=1  Similarly, it can be proved the following: Theorem 1.3. If every Aut(Gi ) is finite and Out(G) is virtually torsion free, then Stab(Λ) is virtually infinite cyclic. As a further motivation to study the laminations for this general case is that we can find the notion of laminations for a free group in a lot of different forms and contexts in the literature and study of them implies important results (for example, see [1] [2], [3], [6], [7] and [12]), therefore it looks like interesting to generalise this notion in a more general context. In addition, further motivation is that we can find natural generalisations for a lot of facts about CVn in the general case, for example in [10], Francaviglia and Martino generalised a lot of tools like train track maps and the Lipschitz metric. But there are some recent papers that show we can also use further methods of studying Out(F n) for Out(G) (where G is written as free product as above) such that the closure of outer space, the Tits alternatives for Out(G), the hyperbolic complex corresponding to Out(G) and the asymmetry of the outer space of a free product (see [14], [15], [16], [19] and [24]). Finally, the author as an application of the results of the present paper generalises a result of Hilion ([13]), about the stabiliser of attractive fixed point of an IWIP automorphism ([25]). Given a group G and an element g ∈ G, a natural question is to study the centraliser C(g) of g in G. In several classes of groups, centralisers of elements are reasonably well-understood and sometimes they are useful to the study of the group. For example, Feighn and Handel in [9] classified abelian subgroups in Out(Fn ) by studying centralisers of elements. Moreover, a well known result for an IWIP automorphism of a free groups (there are several proofs, see [1], [20] or [18]) states that their centralisers are virtually cyclic. Again, it’s not true for a relative IWIP, but in the general case we can get similar statements like the theorems above and namely: Theorem 1.4. Let φ be an IWIP as above. Let’s denote by C(φ) the centraliser of φ in Out(G, O). Then there is normal subgroup A of C(φ), where  5 C(φ) a cyclic extension of A. Moreover, every φ ∈ A virtually fixes a point of O. Moreover, in the special case that the inner automorphisms groups of the factors are finite, we get: Theorem 1.5. If we suppose that every Inn(Gi ) is finite, then we can get the following: 1. There is a normal periodic subgroup A1 of C(φ), such that the group q L Out(Gi ) C(φ)/A1 has a normal subgroup B1 isomorphic to subgroup of i=1  and (C(φ)/A1 )/B1 is isomorphic to Z. 2. Let’s also suppose that Out(G) is virtually torsion free. Then C(φ) has a (torsion free) finite index subgroup A′1 such that A′1 /B1 is isomorphic to Z, where B1 is a normal subgroup of A1 isomorphic to subgroup of q L Out(Gi ). i=1  Also, the following theorem holds (and it is a direct generalisation of the theorem of the free case): Theorem 1.6. If every Aut(Gi ) is finite and Out(G) is virtually torsion free, then Stab(Λ) is virtually infinite cyclic. In fact, we can get stronger results for commensurators of the automorphisms instead of centralisers. Note that there are a lot of IWIP automorphisms that don’t commute with the factor automorphisms of Gi ’s and in particular for them, the theorem above implies that their centralisers are virtually cyclic. On the other hand, there are examples of IWIP automorphisms which have big centraliser (in particular, they are not virtually cyclic). Example 1.7. We fix the free product decomposition G = G1 ∗ < b1 > ∗ < b2 >, where bi are of infinite order and we denote by F2 =< b1 > ∗ < b2 > the "free part". Then in the corresponding outer space O(G, G1 , F2 ), which we denote by O. In each tree T ∈ O there is exactly one non free vertex v1 s.t Gv1 = G1 . Then we define the outer automorphism φ, which satisfies φ(a) = a for every a ∈ G1 , φ(b1 ) = b2 g1 , φ(b2 ) = b1 b2 for some  6 g1 ∈ G1 , then we can see that φ ∈ Out(G, O) is an IWIP relative to O. But then every factor automorphism of G1 that fixes g1 commutes with φ and therefore C(φ) contains the subgroup A of Aut(G1 )Inn(G) that fixes g1 . So if A is sufficiently big, the relative centraliser is not virtually cyclic, but the quotient modulo its intersection with A is (by applying the previous theorem). Since we can change G1 with any group (of finite Kurosh rank) and we can get automorphisms with arbitarily big centralisers. For example, if G1 is isomorphic to F3 and g1 an element of its free basis, we have that C(φ) contains a subgroup which is isomorphic to Aut(F2 )Inn(G). Strategy of the proof: The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we recall some preliminary definitions, facts and well known results about the outer space of a free product. In Section 3, we prove a useful technical lemma for O-maps, more specifically we prove that every two such maps are equal except possibly two bounded (depends only on the map, not the path) paths near the endpoints. The next sections form the main part of this paper and we follow exactly the same approach as in [1]. In section 4, we define the lamination using train track representatives, and then we extend the notion to any tree. Also, we list some useful properties. In Section 5, we define the action of Out(G, O) on the set of irreducible laminations. In Section 6 we define the notion of a subgroup which carries the lamination and then we prove that any such subgroup has finite index in the whole group. In Section 7, which is the most crucial for our arguments, we construct a homomorphism from the stabiliser to group of positive real numbers. Then in Section 8, we study the kernel of this homomorphism, and in particular, we prove that any element of the kernel is non-exponentially growing and in the reducible case it has a relative train track representative with a very good form restricted to the lower strata. Also, we prove the discreteness of the image which allows us to think the previous map, as a homomorphism from the stabiliser to the group of integers. Finally, in Section 9, we prove some useful lemmas and the main results. Acknowledgements. I warmly thank my advisor Armando Martino for his help, suggestions, ideas, and corrections. I would also like to thank Lee Mosher for pointing me out the inconsistency of a statement of the first version of this paper and Ashot Minasyan for his suggestion to generalise the main result using commensurators instead of centralisers. Finally, I would like to thank the anonymous referees that pointed me out that the kernel of the action is trivial and for providing me  7 a counter-example for a previous statement of my results.  2  Preliminaries  2.1  Outer space and O-maps  In this subsection we recall the definitions of outer space and some basic properties. For example, the existence of O - maps between any two elements of the space which is a very useful tool. Everything in the present and the next subsection about the outer space, the O - maps and the train track representatives can be found in [10]. Let G be a group which splits as a finite free product of the following form G = H1 ∗ ... ∗ Hq ∗ Fr , where every Hi is non-trivial, not isomorphic to Z and freely indecomposable. We say that such a group has finite Kurosh rank and such a decomposition is called Gruskho decomposition. For example, every f.g. group admits a splitting as above (by the Grushko’s theorem). We are interested only for groups which have finite Kurosh rank. Now for a group G, as above, we fix an arbitary (non-trivial) free product decomposition G = H1 ∗ ... ∗ Hq ∗ Fr (without the assumption that the Hi ’s are not isomorphic to Z or freely indecomposable), but we additionally suppose that r > 0. These groups admit co-compact actions on R-trees (and vice-versa). It is useful that we can also apply the theory in the case that G is free, and the Gi ’s are certain free factors of G (relative free case). We will define an outer space O = O(G, (Gi )pi=1 , Fr ) relative to the free product decomposition (or relative outer space). The elements of the outer space can be thought as simplicial metric G-trees, up to G-equivariant homothety. Moreover, we require that these trees also satisfy the following: • The action of G on T is minimal. • The edge stabilisers are trivial. • There are finitely many orbits of vertices with non-trivial stabiliser, more precisely for every Hi , i = 1, ..., q (as above) there is exactly one vertex vi with stabiliser Hi (all the vertices in the orbits of vi ’s are called non-free vertices). • All other vertices have trivial stabiliser (and we call them free vertices).  2 Outer space and O-maps  8  The quotient G/T is a finite graph of groups. We could also define the outer space as the space of "marked metric graph of groups" using the quotients instead of the trees, but we won’t use this point of view because here it is easier to work using the trees. However, we use the quotients when the statements in this context are less complicated. We would like to define a natural action of Out(G) on O, but this is not possible since it not always the case that the automorphisms preserve the structure of the trees (i.e. they don’t send non-free vertices to non-free vertices). However, we can describe here the action of a specific subgroup of Out(G) (namely, the automorphisms that preserve the decomposition or equivalently the structure of the trees) on O. Let Aut(G, O) be the subgroup of Aut(G) that preserve the set of conjugacy classes of the Gi ’s. Equivalently, φ ∈ Aut(G) belongs to Aut(G, O) iff φ(Gi ) is conjugate to one of the Gj ’s. The group Aut(G, O) admits a natural action on a simplicial tree by "changing the action", i.e. for φ ∈ Aut(G, O) and T ∈ O, we define φ(T ) to be the element with the same underlying tree with T , the same metric but the action is given by g ∗ x = φ(g)x (where the action in the right hand side is the action of the G-tree T ). Now since the set of inner automorphisms of G, Inn(G) acts trivially on O we can define Out(G, O) = Aut(G, O)/Inn(G) which acts on O as above. Note that in the case of the Grushko decomposition we have Out(G) = Out(G, O). We say that a map between trees A, B ∈ O, f : A → B is an O- map, if it is a G-equivariant, Lipschitz continuous, surjective function. Note here that we denote by Lip(f ) the Lipschitz constant of f . It is very useful to know that there are such maps between any two trees. This is true and, additionally, by their construction they coincide on the non - free vertices (and in section 3, we prove that every two such maps "almost" coincide). More specifically, by [10], we get: Lemma 2.1. For every pair A, B ∈ O; there exists a O-map f : A → B. Moreover, any two O-maps from A to B coincide on the non-free vertices. Let f : A → A be a simplicial (sending vertices to vertices and edges to edge-paths) O-map, where A ∈ O. Then f induces a map (here we denote by Df the map which sends every edge e to the first edge of the edge path f (e)) on the set of turns, sending every turn (e1 , e2 ) to the turn (Df (e1 ), Df (e2 )). Then as usually, we say that the turn (e1 , e2 ) is legal, if for every k the turn (Df k (e1 ), Df k (e2 )) is non-degenerate. This induces a pre-train track structure on the set of edges at each vertex. But there are also different  2 Outer space and O-maps  9  pre-train track structures and one of which we will use later, therefore we need the general definition. Definition 2.2. 1. A pre-train track structure on a G-tree T is a Ginvariant equivalence relation on the set of germs of edges at each vertex of T . Equivalence classes of germs are called gates. 2. A train track structure on a G-tree T is a pre-train track structure with at least two gates at every vertex. 3. A turn is a pair of germs of edges emanating from the same vertex. A legal turn is called a turn for which the two germs belong to different equivalent classes. A legal path, is a path that contains only legal turns. A pre-train track structure induced by some O - map is not always a train track structure, but there are some O - maps (we call them optimal maps) which induce train track structures. But firstly we need the notion of PL maps (which corresponds to piecewise linear homotopy equivalence in the free case). We call a map between two elements of the outer space PL, if it is piecewise linear and O-map. We denote by Amax (f ) the subgraph of A consisting on those edges e of A for which Sf,e = Lip(f ) (i.e. the set of edges which are maximally stretched by f ). Note that Amax is G-invariant and that in literature the set Amax is often referred to as tension graph. As we have seen in the discussion above, for every map there is an induced structure. More specifically, if A, B ∈ O and f : A → B is a PL-map, then the pre-train track structure induced by f on A is defined by declaring germs of edges to be equivalent if they have the same non-degenerate f -image (so if two maps that are collapsed by f , they are not equivalent). We are now in position to define optimal maps: Definition 2.3. Let A, B ∈ O. A PL-map f : A → B is not optimal at v, if Amax has only one gate at v for the pre-train track structure induced by f . Otherwise, f is optimal at v. The map f is optimal, if it is optimal at all vertices. Remark. A PL-map f : A → B is optimal if and only if the pre-train track structure induced by f is a train track structure on Amax . In particular, if f : A → B is an optimal map, then at every vertex v of Amax there is a legal turn in Amax .  2 Relative Automorphisms  10  Note also that by [10], every PL-map is optimal at non-free vertices and for every A, B ∈ O there exists an optimal map from A to B. Therefore we can always choose our O - maps to be optimal and we will use optimal maps without further mention.  2.2  Relative Automorphisms  We denote by Out(G, {Gi }t ) the subgroup of Out(G, O) made of those automorphisms that act as a conjugation by an element of G on each Gi . Since the Gi ’s are free factors of G, each subgroup Gi is equal to its normalizer in G. Therefore, any element of Out(G, O) (i.e. that preserves the conjugacy class of the Gi ’s) induces a well-defined outer automorphism of Gi . Therefore there is a natural homomorphism Out(G, {Gi }t ) → Out(Gi ) and by taking the product over all groups Gi , we get a (surjective) homomorphism p L Out(Gi), with kernel exactly Out(G, {Gi }t ). Out(G, O) → i=1  2.3  Train Track Maps and Irreducibility  In this section we will define the notion of a "good" representative of an outer automorphism. It is a generalisation of train track representatives of automorphisms of free groups, but as we have already mentioned we work in the trees instead of their quotients. For more details for this approach see [10, 23]. As we have seen there are representatives of every outer automorphism (i.e. O-maps from A to φ(A)), but sometimes we can find representatives with better properties. These maps, which are called train track maps, are very useful and every irreducible automorphism has such a representative (we can choose it to be simplicial, as well). For T ∈ O we say that a Lipschitz surjective map f : T → T represents φ if for any g ∈ G and t ∈ T we have f (gt) = φ(g)(f (t)). (In other words, if it is an O-map from T to φ(T ).) We give below the definition of a train track map representing an outer automorphism. We are interested for these maps because we can control their cancellation (it is not possible to avoid it). Definition 2.4. If T ∈ O then a PL-map f : T → T , which representing φ, is a train track map if there is a train track structure on T so that 1. f maps edges to legal paths (in particular, f does not collapse edges)  2 Train Track Maps and Irreducibility  11  2. If f (v) is a vertex, then f maps inequivalent germs at v to inequivalent germs at f (v). In the free case, an automorphism φ is called irreducible, if it there is no φ-invariant free factor up to conjugation (or equivalently the topological representatives of φ haven’t non-trivial proper invariant subgraphs). In our case we know that the Gi ’s are invariant free factors, but we don’t want to have "more invariant free factors". More precisely, we will define the irreducibility of some automorphism relative to the space O or to the free product decomposition. Definition 2.5. We say Φ ∈ Out(G, O) is O-irreducible (or simply irreducible) if for any T ∈ O and for any f : T → T representing Φ, if W ⊆ T is a proper f -invariant G-subgraph then G/W is a union of trees each of which contains at most one non-free vertex. We can also give an alternative algebraic definition, but we need the notion of a free factor system. Suppose that G can be written as a free product, G = G1 ∗ G2 ∗ ...Gp ∗ G∞ . Then we say that the set A = {[Gi ] : 1 ≤ i ≤ p} is a free factor system for G, where [A] = {gAg −1 : g ∈ G} is the set of conjugates of A. Now we define an order on the set of free factor systems for G. More specifically, given two free factor systems G = {[Gi ] : 1 ≤ i ≤ p} and H = {[Hj ] : 1 ≤ j ≤ m}, we write G ⊑ H if for each i there exists a j such that Gi ≤ gHj g −1 for some g ∈ G. The inclusion is strict, and we write G ❁ H, if some Gi is contained strictly in some conjugate of Hj . We can see {[G]} as a free factor system and in fact, it is the maximal (under ⊑) free factor system. Any free factor system that is contained strictly to G is called proper. Note also that the Grushko decomposition induces a free factor system, which is actually the minimal free factor system (relative to ⊑). A more detailed discussion for the theory of free factor systems can be found in [12]. We say that G = {[Gi ] : 1 ≤ i ≤ p} is φ - invariant for some φ ∈ Out(G), if φ preserves the conjugacy classes of Gi ’s. We are only interested for free factor systems that G∞ is a finitely generated free group. In particular, we suppose that G = G1 ∗ G2 ∗ ...Gp ∗ G∞ , and G∞ = Fk for some f.g. free group Fk . In each free factor system G = {[Gi] : 1 ≤ i ≤ k}, we associate the outer space O = O(G, (Gi )pi=1 , Fk ) and any φ ∈ Out(G) leaving G invariant, will act on O in the same way as we have described earlier.  2 Train Track Maps and Irreducibility  12  Definition 2.6. Let G be a free factor system of G which is Φ- invariant for some Φ ∈ Out(G). Then Φ is called irreducible relative to G, if G is a maximal (under ⊑) proper, Φ-invariant free factor system. The next lemma confirms that the two definitions of irreducibility are related. Lemma 2.7. Suppose G is a free factor system of G with associated space of trees O, and further suppose that G is φ-invariant. Then φ is irreducible relative to G if and only if φ is O-irreducible. Moreover, one interesting fact is that for an irreducible automorphism we can give a characterisation of train track maps using the axes of hyperbolic elements. More specifically, if φ is irreducible, then for a map f representing φ ∈ Out(G, O), to be a train track map is equivalent to the condition that there is g ∈ G (hyperbolic element) so that L = axisT (g) (the axis of g) is legal and f k (L) is legal k ∈ N. Now let’s give the definition of an irreducible automorphism with irreducible powers relative to O, which are the automorphisms that we will study. Definition 2.8. An outer automorphism φ ∈ Out(G, O) is called IWIP (irreducible with irreducible powers or fully irreducible), if every φk is irreducible relative to O. The next theorem is very important since we can always choose representatives of irreducible automorphisms with nice properties, as in the free case. It generalises the well known theorem of Bestvina and Handel (see [4]) . In particular, we can apply it on every power of some IW IP . Theorem 2.9 (Francaviglia- Martino). Let φ ∈ Out(G, O) be irreducible. Then there exists a (simplicial) train track map representing φ. The discussion above implies that we can always find an optimal train track representative of an irreducible φ ∈ Out(G, O). This map has the property that the image of every legal path (in particular, of edges) is stretched by a constant number λ ≥ 1 which depends only on φ. We close this subsection with an interesting remark. Remark. Every outer automorphism φ ∈ Out(G) is irreducible relative to some appropriate space (or relative to some free product decomposition).  2 Bounded Cancellation Lemma  2.4  13  Bounded Cancellation Lemma  Let T, T ′ ∈ O and f : T → T ′ be an O- map. If we have a concatenation of legal paths ab where the corresponding turn is illegal, then it is possible to have cancellation in f (a)f (b). But the cancellation is bounded, with some bound that depends only on f and not on a, b . In particular, we can define the bounded cancellation constant of f (let’s denote it BCC(f )) to be the supremum of all real numbers N with the property that there exist A, B, C some points of T with B in the (unique) reduced path between A and C such that dT ′ (f (B), [f (A), f (C)]) = N (the distance of f (B) from the reduced path connecting f (A) and f (C) ), or equivalently is the lowest upper bound of the cancellation for a fixed O-map. The existence of such number is well known, for example a bound has given in [14]: Lemma 2.10. Let T ∈ O, let T ′ ∈ O, and let f : T → T ′ be a Lipschitz map. Then BCC(f ) ≤ Lip(f )qvol(T ), where qvol(T ) the quotient volume of T , defined as the infimal volume of a finite subtree of T whose G-translates cover T . We can also, exactly as in the free case, define a critical constant, Ccrit corresponding to a train track map. Let’s suppose that f is train track map with expanding factor λ (for example, a train track representative of some IWIP φ). If we take a, b, c legal paths and abc is a path in the tree, and let’s denote l = length(b) the length of the middle segment. If we suppose further that satisfies λl − 2BCC(f ) > l, then iteration and tightening of abc will produce paths with the length of the legal leaf segment corresponding to b to be arbitarily long. This is equivalent to ) ) require that l > 2BCC(f , and we call the number Ccrit = 2BCC(f , the critical λ−1 λ−1 constant for f . For every C that exceeds the critical constant there is m > 0 such that b, as above, has length at least C then the length of the legal leaf segment of [f k (abc)] corresponding to b is at least mλk length(b). Therefore we can see that any path which contains a legal segment of length at least Ccrit , has the property that the lengths of reduced f -iterates of the path are going to infinity.  2 N-periodic paths  2.5  14  N-periodic paths  A difference between the free and the general case is that it is not always the case that there are finitely many orbits of paths of a specific length (if there are non-free vertices with infinite stabiliser), but it is true that there are finitely many paths that have different projection in the quotient. Therefore the role of Nielsen periodic paths play the N-periodic paths that we define below. Note that if h : S → S, we say that a point x ∈ S is h-periodic, if there are g ∈ G and some natural k s.t. hk (x) = gx. Definition 2.11. 1. Two paths p, q in S ∈ O are called equivalent, if they project to the same path in the quotient G/S. In particular, their endpoints o(p), o(q) and t(p), t(q) are in the same orbits, respectively. 2. Let h : S → S be a representative of some outer automorphism ψ, let p be a path in S and let’s suppose that the endpoints of p are h - periodic (with period k), then we say that a path p in S is N-periodic (with period k), if the paths [hk (p)], p are equivalent. Geometric and non-Geometric automorphisms: We will define here some notions for automorphisms that have been motivated by the properties of geometric and non-geometric automorphisms, respectively. The terminology also comes from the free case. In that case, we say that φ is geometric if it can be represented as a (pseudo-Anosov) homeomorphism of a punctured surface. It is well known that for the non-geometric case there is an integer m such that it is impossible to concatenate more than m indivisible Nielsen paths for every map f which represents φ. We will generalise this property in order to give our definitions, using the notion of an indivisible N-periodic path as in the free case. In particular: Definition 2.12. We say that some φ has the NGC property , if it is impossible to concatenate more than m indivisible N-periodic paths for every O-map f which represents φ. Otherwise, we say that φ has the GC property.  2.6  Relative train-track maps  Having good representatives of outer automorphisms, is very useful. If our automorphism is irreducible, it is possible to find train track representatives, as we have seen. But even in the reducible case we can find relative train track representative. The existence of such maps it follows from [10] or [5].  2 Graph of Groups and Subgroups  15  That we have is that every automorphism can be represented as an O-map f : T → T such that T has a filtration T0 ⊆ T1 ⊆ ... ⊆ Tk = T by f invariant G-subgraphs, where T0 contains every non- free vertex, we denote by Hr = cl(Tr − Tr−1 ) and we suppose that the transition matrix (it can be defined as in the free case but we count orbits of edges) of every Hr is irreducible (or zero matrix) so we can correspond in every Hr some PF eigenvalue (let’s denote it λr ) . In addition, f has some train track properties (such as mixed turns are legal and the map is r-legal). There is a very interesting corollary that we will use: for every edge-path a in Hr , the reduced image of a, [f (a)], can be written as a concatenation of non-degenerate edgepaths in Ti−1 and Hi with the first and the last contained in Hi . For such a, we can distinguish between two cases for the strata: if there exists some edge of e in Hr such that [f (e)] contains at least two copies (orbits) of e, then we say that the stratum is exponentially growing and we can see the r-lengths of images of edges in Hr expands by λr > 1 and in particular the lengths of reduced f -iterates of edges in Hr are going to infinity (using the train track properties). Otherwise, the stratum called non-exponentially growing and the map f (if we ignore the lower strata) is just a permutation of edges of the same length. An automorphism is called exponentially growing if some representative has at least one exponentially growing stratum. In other case, it is called non-exponentially growing automorphism.  2.7  Graph of Groups and Subgroups  We will recall only some facts for the graph of groups. For more about graph of groups and their subgroups, see [22]. In the special case that we are interested, a graph of groups can be defined as a finite connected graph X (let call Γ the underlying graph) for which in every vertex v we correspond some (vertex) group Gv . We call non free the vertices for which the corresponding group is non-trivial. Then the fundamental group of X, π1 (X) is the free product of π1 (Γ) (which is a f.g. free group) and the vertex groups. We will use a specific kind of subgroups of π1 (X). Let γ be a loop in v0 ∈ V (Γ). Then starting from vo and following the path of γ we meet some non-free vertices (we can return back also, but we have always follow γ). So we can read words of a fixed form, and this process produces words of the fundamental group (we can see it as the group which it consists of all the words constructed as above but without fixing some loop γ). In fact, the set  16 of all such words is a subgroup of π1 (X), which corresponds to γ.  3  Every two O - maps coincide  In [10] it has been proved the existence of O-maps. We will prove that even if in the construction of such maps there is a lot of freedom, the reduced images of all of them coincide, up to bounded error. As a consequence we obtain that their lengths are comparable. Theorem 3.1. Let f, h : A → B be O - maps. Then there exists a positive constant C (which depends only on f , h and A), so that for every path L in A, then [f (L)] and [h(L)] are equal, except possibly some subpaths near their endpoints which their lengths are bounded by C. Proof. Firstly, we suppose that there is at least one non-free vertex which we denote it by v. Then we have that f (v) = h(v). If L = [a, b] is an edge - path, then in distance at most vol(A/G), we can find vertices of the form g1 v, g2v near a, b respectively such that [a, b] ⊆ [g1 v, g2v]. Then [f (L)] is contained in [f (g1 v), f (g2v)], except possibly some segments near a, b of length at most C ′ = vol(A/G)Lip(f ). Similarly, we apply the same argument for [h(g1 v), h(g2v)] and we get a constant C ′′ = vol(A/G)Lip(h). Therefore since [h(g1 v), h(g2v)] = [f (g1 v), f (g2v)], we get [f (L)] = [h(L)] except possibly some segments near a, b which are bounded by C = max(C ′ , C ′′ ) (by definition depends only on Lip(f ), Lip(h), vol(G/A)) If there are no non- free vertices, we are in the free case and the result is well known. Note also that it is not difficult to see that every O-map is a quasiisometry.  4  Laminations  We follow exactly the same approach as in [1] and some of the proofs are essentially the same, but since in this context the definitions have adjusted appropriately, we give detailed proofs for the convenience of the reader. On the other hand, there are a lot of technical issues which are not appeared in the free case and they are addressed separately. In this section we define the notion of the lamination associated to an IWIP.  4 Construction of the lamination and properties  17  Firstly, we use the train track maps to define the lamination in a specific tree and the existence of O-maps between any two trees allows us to generalise it for every tree.  4.1  Construction of the lamination and properties  Let φ ∈ Out(G, O) be an (expanding) irreducible automorphism, with irreducible powers and f : A → A for some A ∈ O be a train track map which represents φ (so it satisfies f (gx) = φ(g)f (x)). We can also suppose that f expand the length of the edges by a uniform factor λ > 1 (this can be done if we choose an optimal train track that represents f , as we have already seen). By changing f with some iterate, if necessary, we can suppose that there is x ∈ A which is a periodic point (f k (x) = x, for some k), in the interior of some edge (in general there exists x s.t. f k (x) = gx since the quotient is finite, but we can change the space A, changing isometrically the action, with φg (A) and there the requested property holds). Now let U some ǫ-neighbourhood, for some small ǫ (we want the neighbourhood to be contained in the interior of the edge) and then there is some N > 0 s.t. f N (U) ⊃ U. We can choose an isometry ℓ : (−ǫ, ǫ) → U and extend it to the unique isometry ℓ : R → A s.t. ℓ(λN t) = f N (ℓ(t)) and then we say that the bi-infinite line ℓ is obtained by iterating a neighbourhood of x. Definition 4.1. • We say that two isometric immersions A : [a, b] → A and B : [c, d] → A, where a, b, c, d ∈ R are equivalent, if there exists an isometry q : [a, b] → [c, d] s.t the triangle commutes (Bq = A). (This relation is an equivalence relation on the set of isometric immersions from a finite interval to A). • If P is an equivalence class and we choose a representative of that class γ : [a, b] → A, we can define f (P ) as the equivalence class of f γ : [a, b] → A, pulled tight and scaled so it is an isometric immersion. • A leaf segment of an isometric immersion R → A is the equivalence class of the restriction to a finite interval. Let ℓ be an isometric immersion, then we correspond the G-set Iℓ (of the leaf segments of ℓ) to ℓ. We can also define an equivalence relation on the set of isometric immersions from R to A.  4 Construction of the lamination and properties  18  Definition 4.2. Let ℓ, ℓ′ be two isometric immersions from R to A, then we say that they are equivalent if Iℓ = GIℓ′ . Namely, we say that they are equivalent if for every leaf segment P of ℓ there is an element g ∈ G and Q a leaf segment of ℓ′ s.t. P = gQ and vice versa (or equivalently every l.s. of ℓ is mapped by some g to a l.s. of ℓ′ ) Remark. Here note that it is obvious that if ℓ(t) = gℓ′(t) (ℓ, ℓ′ are in the same orbit), then ℓ and ℓ′ are equivalent. We will prove that if we construct any other line by iterating a neighbourhood of any other periodic point (here we mean that there is k and g ∈ G s.t. f k (x) = gx) then it is equivalent with ℓ. Lemma 4.3. Let y ∈ A, be any other f -periodic point in the interior of some edge of A and ℓ′ is the obtained by iterating of some neighborhood of y. Then ℓ and ℓ′ are equivalent. Proof. We will show that any l.s. of ℓ is mapped by some element of G to a l.s. of ℓ′ , then the converse follows by symmetry. Since f represents an irreducible automorphism (and the same holds for every power of f ), ℓ′ contains some orbit of every edge, so in particular if x is contained in the interior of the edge e we have that there exists some g ∈ G, s.t. gx ∈ ge ⊆ ℓ′ . So there is an isometry ψ : (−ǫ, ǫ) → (a − ǫ, a + ǫ) with the property ℓ(t) = gℓ′ (ψ(t)). ′ ′ Let N ′ be a natural number s.t. ℓ′ (λN t) = f N (ℓ(t)) and then for any ′ ′ t ∈ U (U as in the definition) we have that ℓ(λkN N t) = f kN N (ℓ(t)) = ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ f kN N (gℓ′(ψ(t))) = φkN N (g)f kN N (ℓ′ (ψ(t))) = φkN N (g)ℓ′(λkN N ψ(t)). But since every prechosen interval is contained in some interval of the form ′ λkN N (−ǫ, ǫ) for large k, we have that for every l.s. of ℓ is mapped by some ′ φkN N (g) ∈ G to some l.s. of ℓ′ . We are now in position to define the stable lamination corresponding to A. Now the stable lamination in A-coordinates Λ = Λ+ f (A) is the equivalence class of isometric immersions from R to A containing some (and by previous lemma any) immersion obtained as above (by iterating a neighborhood of a periodic point). We call the immersions representing Λ leaves of Λ and the leaf segments (l.s.) of some leaf of Λ leaf segments of Λ (by definition of the equivalence relation, every leaf of Λ contains some orbit of every l.s. of Λ).  4 Construction of the lamination and properties  19  Note that the every leaf of the lamination project to the same bi-infinite path in the quotient. We will list some useful properties of the stable lamination. Proposition 4.4.  1. Any edge of A is a leaf segment of Λ.  2. Any f -iterate of a leaf segment is a leaf segment. 3. Any subsegment of a leaf segment is a leaf segment. 4. Any leaf segment is a subsegment of a sufficiently high iterate of an edge. 5. For any leaf segment P there is a leaf segment P ′ such that f (P ′) = P . 6. Let a be a segment which is the period of the axis of some hyperbolic element which crosses k edges (counted with multiplicity). Then any f -iterate of a (pulled tight) can be written as concatenation of less or equal k leaf segments. Proof. 1. This is clear by the proof of the previous lemma, since f represents an irreducible automorphism and this implies that every ℓ contains orbits of every edge, so if ge is contained in ℓ then e is contained in g −1ℓ which is equivalent to ℓ thus is a leaf of Λ, and as consequence e is leaf segment of a leaf therefore it is l.s. of Λ. 2. Firstly, we note that if x is f -periodic then f (x) is f - periodic with the same period(in fact every f m (x) is periodic) and let’s denote ℓ′ the isometric immersion constructed as above, so if P is a l.s. of ℓ, then f (P ) is a l.s. of ℓ′ but since ℓ, ℓ′ are equivalent by lemma, we have that ℓ′ is a leaf of Λ and therefore f (P ) is a l.s. of Λ. So we can do it for every iterate of f . 3. This is obvious, since we restrict the isometric immersion to the subsegment and it is a l.s. of a leaf of Λ and as a consequence a l.s. of Λ. 4. We have that f expands the length of every edge by λ, but we can use for representative the isometric immersion constructed as above (by iterating a periodic neighborhood) and the edge in which the periodic point belongs, then by construction of ℓ every l.s. is contained in an  4 Construction of the lamination and properties  20  high iterate of this edge. For any other representative ℓ′ now we can translate ℓ as above (by some element g ∈ G) to have a common segment that contain the prechosen l.s. and the proof reduced to the first case. 5. Let P be a l.s. of Λ. By (iv) we have that there exists some iterate of an edge and so by ℓ an iterate of a l.s. P ′′ s.t. P is contained in f m (P ′′ ) and since iterates of l.s. are l.s. and subsegments are l.s. as well, we have that there is P ′ subsegment of f m−1 (P ′′ ) with the property P = f (P ′ ) 6. This is obvious since edges are l.s. and f -iterates of l.s. are l.s.. We note that (ii) implies that f k (ℓ) is a leaf of the lamination, for every k. Definition 4.5. We say that a sequence ai of isometric immersions [0, 1]i → A (where the metric on [0, 1]i is scalar multiple of the standard part which depends on i), (weakly) converges to Λ, if for every L > 0 the ratio, m({x ∈ [0, 1]i |the L- nbhd of x is a leaf segment}) m([0, 1]i ) converges to 1. Proposition 4.6. Suppose that a is a segment in A which corresponds to the period of the axis of some hyperbolic element, which is not N-periodic. Then the sequence (of tightenings of f i (a)), [f i (a)] weakly converges to Λ. Note that such hyperbolic elements always exist. For example the basis elements of the free group, are not N-periodic by definition of irreducibility. Proof. Suppose that a can be written as a concatenation of k l.s. then we have k − 1 illegal turns (we don’t count the endpoints) and since f is a train track map we have that the number of illegal turns in [f k (a)] is nonincreasing so it contains less than or equal to k − 1 l.s.. Therefore if the lengths of reduced iterates of a is bounded, and since there are finitely many inequivalent paths with length less than or equal to a specific number, we have that a is N-preperiodic and therefore periodic because a corresponds to  4 Construction of the lamination and properties  21  a group element, which leads to a contradiction to the hypothesis. Therefore some [f i (a)] contains arbitarily long legal segments (> Ccrit ), and since the length of [f j (a)] expands for large j, we have that there are finitely many L-nbds contain points without the requested property (of the endpoints of the concatenation of l.s. so at most k) and the measure of these is at most 2Lk, as a consequence the ratio converges to 1. Definition 4.7. An isometric immersion l : R → A is quasiperiodic (qp), if for every L > 0 there exists L′ > 0 s.t. for every l.s. P of ℓ of length L and for every l.s. Q of length L′ there is g ∈ G s.t. gP ⊆ Q (P is mapped by g to a subsegment of Q). Proposition 4.8. Every leaf of Λ is quasiperiodic. Proof. We will first prove it for some ℓ which has constructed by iterating neighbourhood of a periodic point. We first verify it for leaf segments Π that consists of only two edges. If we choose L0 > 2maxe (len(e)), then if a l.s. P has length ≥ L0 , then it contains a subleaf segment which is an edge. Then there is N(we can also choose it to be multiple of k) s.t. f N restricted to any edge crosses some orbit of every turn that they crossed by leaves of Λ+ f (A). So in particular for the chosen Π the iterate of f takes the orbit of that turn, so there exists g ∈ G such that Π ⊆ gf N (P ). Now if P ′ is any l.s. of length λN L0 , then P ′ = f N (P ) for some P l.s. of length L0 and therefore Π ⊆ gP ′. For the general case, let L > 0 be given, then there is M > 0 (we choose it to have the property λ−M L < 2min(len(e))) s.t. any l.s. of length ≤ λ−M L is a subsegment of a two-edge l.s. as above and let L′ = λM +N L0 . So let P be a l.s. of length L and P ′ be a l.s. of length L′ . Then by the properties we have that P = f M (Π) where Π is contained to a l.s. as in the special case(by the choice of M, since Π has length λ−M L), and similarly P ′ = f M (Π′ ) for a l.s. Π′ of length λN L0 . By the special case we have that Π ⊆ gΠ′ and this implies that P = f M (Π) ⊆ ΦM (g)f M (Π′ ) = ΦM (g)P ′. Since ℓ is ΦM (g)-invariant, we have the requested property. For any other equivalent isometric immersion ℓ′ , if we have P l.s. of length L and Q l.s. of length L′ then we can find an isometric immersion ℓ like the first case with Q as common segment. Then by the equivalence there exists g1 ∈ G s.t. g1 P is l.s. of ℓ, and by quasiperiodicity of ℓ, there is g2 s.t. g2 P ⊆ Q and g2 P is a l.s. of ℓ′ , so we have that ℓ′ is quasiperiodic.  4 Lamination in every tree  4.2  22  Lamination in every tree  Suppose that f : A → A and Λ+ f (A) as above and B ∈ O. Then we know that there exists an optimal map(in particular O -map) τ : A → B. Then for any immersion ℓ : R → A we denote by τ (ℓ) : R → B the unique (up to precomposition by an isometry of R) pulled tight to be the isometric immersion corresponding to τ ℓ. Lemma 4.9. • If ℓ, ℓ′ : R → A are equivalent leaves, then τ (ℓ), τ (ℓ′ ) are equivalent. • If ℓ is quasiperiodic, then τ (ℓ) is quasiperiodic. Proof. Every optimal map τ by [10], can be factored as the composition of a homeomorphism and a finite sequence of folds. We have just to prove that the lemma is true for homeomorphism and folds. Firstly, let suppose that τ is homeomorphism. In particular [τ (ℓ)] = τ (ℓ) and the same holds for ℓ′ as well. Let P ′ is a l.s. of τ (ℓ), then there is some l.s. of ℓ P s.t. P ′ = τ (P ), so there is a translation of P by some element of the group, gP which is contained in ℓ′ , therefore τ (gP ) = gP ′ is contained in τ (ℓ′ ). The converse follows by symmetry and so τ (ℓ) and τ (ℓ′ ) are equivalent. Suppose now that ℓ is quasiperiodic, fix a L > 0 let P ′ l.s. of τ (ℓ) of length L. Then there is a l.s. P of length at most K (by Bounded Cancellation Lemma there exists such K which doesn’t depend on P but only on L) s.t. P ′ = τ (P ). Then we can define L′′ = L′ Lip(τ ), where L′ is the constant corresponding by quasiperiodicity to K and we have that if we choose any Q′ l.s. of τ (ℓ) of length L′′ then there exists a l.s. Q of ℓ of length at least L′ s.t. τ (Q) = Q′ . Then Q contains orbits of any l.s. of length at most K, in particular it contains some translation of P for some g ∈ G and therefore as above Q′ contains some translation of P ′ . So τ (ℓ) is quasiperiodic. We suppose that τ is an equivariant isometric simple fold of some segments starting from the same point v and has the same τ - image, let call them a, b and c be the corresponding segment in the quotient. For the first statement, we note that is obvious for a l.s. of [τ (ℓ)] which don’t contain some orbit of c, since there τ is the identity. On the other hand, if P ′ is l.s. of τ (ℓ) which contains some orbits of c, then there exists P which contain the same number of orbits as the folded turn and [τ (P )] = P ′ (it is concatenation of the segments before and after the folds). Since ℓ, ℓ′ are  4 Lamination in every tree  23  equivalent we have that we can find g ∈ G s.t. gP is contained in ℓ′ , then [τ (gP )] is a a l.s. of [τ (ℓ′ )]. But [τ (gP )] is just a translation (by g) of τ (P ), and therefore as above we obtain that [τ (ℓ)], [τ (ℓ′ )] are equivalent. For the quasiperiodity of [τ (ℓ)] we fix a number L > 0 and we call M the maximum number of orbits of v which there are in a segment of length L, and L′ is the number corresponds by quasiperiodicity for L′′ = L+2Mlen(a). Now let P ′ be a l.s. of length L, then there is P which contains the same number of orbits of the folded turn and [τ (P )] = P ′ as above. Then P has length at most L′′ , some translation of it is contained in every l.s. of ℓ of length L′ . Now let choose Q any l.s. of [τ (ℓ)] of length L′ then the preimage has length at least L′ , and therefore the preimage has the requested property. So Q contains a translation of P ′ as above. Definition 4.10. The stable lamination of f : B → B in the B-coordinates is the equivalence class Λ+ f (B) containing τ (ℓ) for some (and by previous lemma any) leaf of Λ+ (A). f Using again the property that τ is factored as the composition of a homeomorphism and a finite sequence of folds combined with the result for the Λ+ f (A), we have the following proposition. Proposition 4.11. Let a be a segment which is the period of the axis of a hyperbolic element in A, which is not N- periodic. Then the sequence {[τ (f i (a))]} weakly converges to Λ+ f (B) Lemma 4.12. Suppose that h : B → B is any other train track map repre+ senting Φ. Then Λ+ f (B) = Λh (B) Proof. Let a be a periodic segment as in 4.6 and 4.11. Then the sequences + [τ (f i (a))], [hi (τ (a))] weakly converge to Λ+ h (B) and to Λf (B), respectively by the previous propositions. But τ f i , hi τ are O-maps from A to φ(B), so their reduced images coincide in every path, after deleting some bounded + segments near endpoints. Then there are leaves ℓ, ℓ′ of Λ+ h (B) and Λf (B) respectively with arbitrarily long common leaf segments. Since they are both quasiperiodic, it follows that they are equivalent. Indeed, let P be a l.s. of ℓ of length L then there exists L′ s.t. for every l.s. of length L′ , P ′ there is some g ∈ G s.t. P ⊆ gP ′. But we can find a common segment Q of ℓ and ℓ′ of length at least L′ , so by quasiperiodicity P ⊆ gQ ⊆ ℓ and since Q ⊆ ℓ′ we have that P ⊆ gQ ⊆ gℓ′ and therefore g −1 P ⊆ ℓ′ .  24 We have proved that for every l.s. of ℓ there is an element of the group that map this l.s. to a l.s. of ℓ′ and similarly we can prove the converse so ℓ and + ℓ′ are equivalent by definition. Therefore Λ+ h (B) = Λf (B) So we have proved that we can use any train track representative to define the set of laminations, in particular we give the following definition: Definition 4.13. The stable lamination Λ+ Φ associated to some IWIP Φ ∈ Out(G, O) is the collection {Λ+ (B)|B ∈ O} where f : A → A is a train f track representative of Φ. The unstable lamination Λ− Φ of Φ is the stable −1 lamination of Φ .  5  Action  Let φ be an IWIP and f : T → T be an optimal train track representative of φ. We denote by IL the set of stable laminations Λ+ φ , as φ ranges over all IWIP automophisms relative to O. The group Out(G, O) acts on IL via + ψΛ+ φ = Λψφψ−1  (1)  More specifically, if ℓ is a leaf of Λ+ φ in the S-coordinates and h : S → S an O map representing ψ, then [h(ℓ)] represents a leaf of Λ+ ψφψ−1 . We are interested to study the stabiliser of the action for a fixed automorphism. Note that obviously the centraliser, which we denote by C(φ), of the IWIP φ in Out(G, O) is a subgroup of Stab(Λ). We will equip T with a specific train-track structure, the minimal train-track structure; more specifically we declare a turn legal, if it is crossed by some leaf of Λ+ f . The properties of the lamination imply that a turn is legal iff there is a f -iterate of an edge of T that crosses the turn.  6  Subgroups carrying the lamination  From now and for the rest of the sections, we fix a group of finite Kurosh rank G with some (non-trivial) free product decomposition, the relative outer space O which corresponds to this decomposition, some expanding IWIP φ  25 relative to O and the associated lamination Λ+ φ = Λ. This section is devoted to prove that it is not possible for a proper subtree to contain every leaf of the lamination. Moreover, we will prove that every relative train track representative of some automorphism of the stabiliser, after passing to some power, induces the identity on the quotient restricted to any proper invariant subraph (which is union of strata). Definition 6.1. Let A be a subgroup of G of finite Kurosh rank, and let’s denote T ∈ O and TA the minimal invariant A- subtree. We suppose also that for every v ∈ V (TA ), StabA (v) = StabG (v). Then we say that A carries the lamination Λ, if there exist some leaf ℓ of Λ which is contained in TA . Remark. 1. Every two leaves of the lamination project to the same biinfinite path in Γ. 2. For every vertex v of T there exist g ∈ G s.t. gv ∈ TA (in particular, TA contains some orbit of any non-free vertex). Proposition 6.2. If a A is a subgroup of G, as in the previous definition, which carries Λ+ φ then A has finite index in G. Proof. Let f : T → T be a train-track representative of φ , Γ = G/T and let H → Γ be an isometric immersion corresponding to A ≤ G. Then by our assumptions H is finite graph of groups and by the remarks contains every non-free vertex. Therefore (using also the assumption that the corresponding vertex groups are full), we can complete the immersion, by adding vertices and edges, to a connected finite-sheeted covering space p : Γ′ → Γ and therefore we have that T ′ = T (where T ′ is Bass-Serre tree of Γ′ ). Now we know that if A has infinite index, then we are really adding new edges in Γ′ or equivalently we add new orbits of edges in T . But then using irreducibility we can reach a contradiction. More specifically, we choose e (edge of T ) such that f (e) starts with e. Then for every n the path f n (e) is a path of TA . So if we choose any edge e1 (lift of some edge in Γ′ − H) there does not exist n and g ∈ G such that f n (ge′ ) passes through e1 (since e1 is in different orbit of edges in TA ), but this contradicts the fact that the transition matrix corresponding to f , denote it by A(f ), is irreducible. As a consequence, A must have finite index in G. Proposition 6.3. Let ψ ∈ Stab(Λ), and let h : S → S be a relative traintrack representative of ψ. Then we can find some S ′ ∈ O (which is topologically the same with S, but possibly with different marking) and a relative  26 train track representative h : S ′ → S ′ of ψ with the following property: let denote by S0 some h-invariant G-subgraph of S ′ (without free vertices of valence 1) that is a union of strata. Then there is a k s.t. if we restrict hk to S0 induces the identity in G/S0 . Proof. Let ℓ be a leaf in S-coordinates and let S0 be a proper h-invariant subgraph. The quasiperiodicity implies that there is an upper bound to the length of both S0 and S − S0 segments, and hence only finitely many segments occur (since there are finitely many lengths corresponding to edgepaths of bounded length in the quotient and quasiperiodicity implies that there are finitely many orbits of leaf segments of a specific length). Using the same argument we have that it is not possible for ℓ to contain arbitarily long segments of a proper subgraph since then the quasiperiodicity implies that ℓ is contained in that subgraph which contradicts to the previous proposition. Therefore ℓ is a concatenation of non-degenerate segments in S0 and in S − S0 (otherwise would lift to a proper subgraph of H, which is impossible as we have already noticed). Now we have that all S0 -segments are hpreperiodic (there exist M, N s.t. hM (L), hN (L) are in the same orbit) or else h-iteration will produce arbitrarily long leaf segments contained in S0 contradicting quasiperiodicity. We can start with the disjoint union X of copies of the segments and the natural immersion X → S and we identify two endpoints of X if they are mapped to the same point of S. Then fold to convert the resulting map to an immersion π : X ′ → S. But ℓ lifts to X ′ (by construction) and so by previous proposition we have again that X ′ = S (it corresponds to a finite covering space of graph of groups). In particular, any simple periodic segment (the period of the axis of a simple loop or a loop corresponding to an element of some Gvi where vi has valence 1) in S0 lifts to X ′ . Consequently, this segment is a concatenation of paths in S0 each of which is h-preperiodic, and therefore this segment is N-periodic (since it corresponds to an element of the group and so we have inverse). Thus every such segment a in S0 is equivalent to some power hk (a) (note that there is a uniform bound for the powers) and hence for some k, hk restricted to S0 induces the identity on the quotient, since h is relative train track.  27  7  Stretching map  In this section we will see that we can define a homomorphism from the stabiliser of the lamination to R. Lemma 7.1. Suppose that h : S → S is an O- map that represents ψ ∈ Out(G, O). Then there exists a positive number λ = λ(h, Λ) such that for every ǫ > 0 there is N > 0 so that if L is a leaf segment of Λ of length > N, −λ <ǫ then length([h(L)]) length(L) Proof. We note that since f is IWIP, we have that the transition matrix M = A(f ) is irreducible (as it is every power of M) and therefore we can apply the Perron - Frobenius theorem to M, as a consequence we have that long leaf segments of Λ cross orbits of edges of T with frequencies close to those determined by the components of the PF eigenvector. Now fix large k and then large l.s. are concatenation of l.s. of the form f k (e), for some edges of T , each orbit of edges with definite frequency.(For k = 1 this is the statement above, for k > 1 apply P.F theorem for f k ). If M is large enough, then for any l.s. L with length(L) > M we can think L as concatenation of l.s. of the form f k (e) (there are possible some shorts segments contained in the first and the final segment, which are not of this form but we can ignore them since their contribution in lengths is neligible). Now let C be the bounded cancellation constant for h : T → T , and let’s k denote le = len(f k (e)), leh = len([h(fP (e))]), Ne be the number of occurrences k of orbits of f (e) in L and N = Ne , then we have that NNe → re , as len(L) → ∞ (re is the PF component of the eigenvector that corresponds to e) by the PF theorem. P h Note that the numbers Ne , le , leh depends on k, so we define ak = P rreellee . We P have that len(L) = Ne le and by bounded cancellation lemma: P P Ne (leh − 2C) len([h(L)]) Ne leh P ≤ AM = (2) ≤ P Ne le len(L) Ne le and subdividing the sums by N we have that P Ne h P Ne h l − 2C NNe l len([h(L)]) N e P Ne ≤ P NNe e ≤ AM = len(L) l l N e N e  (3)  where the term 2C PNNee le converges to 0 as k → ∞ and as we noted above Ne → re , as len(L) → ∞. As a consequence, for every ǫ for large k = k(ǫ) N  28 and for large M = M(ǫ, k), ak − ǫ ≤ AM ≤ ak + ǫ. Firstly, we send M → ∞ and then for every ǫ > 0 for large k, ak − ǫ ≤ lim inf AM ≤ lim sup AM ≤ ak + ǫ  (4)  Therefore sending ǫ to 0, k to infinity, we have that, choosing a subsequence of ak that converges to a, a ≤ lim inf AM ≤ lim sup AM ≤ a  (5)  and therefore lim AM = lim inf AM = lim sup AM = a. As consequence we have the requested property that there exists a positive number λ s.t. len([h(L)]) → λ, as len(L) is going to infinity. len(L) Lemma 7.2. Using the notation as above and choosing any other representative h′ of ψ, we have that λ(h, Λ) = λ(h′ , Λ). In particular, the number doesn’t depend on the representative but only on ψ. Proof. Let h, h′ be O-maps which represent ψ as in the previous lemma. Therefore by the proposition 3.1 for any L, [h(L)] = [h′ (L)], up to bounded error that doesn’t depend on L. Therefore for every L, len([h(L)]) ≤ len([h′ (L)])+ C, where C is positive fixed and as a consequence C len([h(L)] − len([h′ (L)])) ≤ →0 len(L) len(L) for large len(L). Therefore since len([h(L)]) → λ(h, Λ) and len(L) consequence λ(h, Λ) = λ(h′ , Λ).  len([h′ (L)]) len(L)  → λ(h′ , Λ), we have as a  Lemma 7.3. Using the notation above we have that σ : Stab(Λ) → R+ , where σ(ψ) = λ(h, Λ), is a well defined homomorphism. Proof. Since we have that ψ ∈ Stab(Λ), this means that [h(ℓ)] is a leaf (for any leaf ℓ) and as a consequence σ is a well defined map. We will prove that σ is homomorphism. So we have to prove that for any ψ1 , ψ2 ∈ Stab(Λ) it holds that σ(ψ1 )σ(ψ2 ) = σ(ψ1 ψ2 ). We choose representatives h1 , h2 of ψ1 , ψ2 respectively, and by defi1 (L)]) 2 (L)]) nitions len([h → σ(ψ1 ) and len([h → σ(ψ2 ). Moreover, h1 h2 represents len(L) len(L) ψ1 ψ2 (by previous lemma we can choose any representative).  29 Therefore since  len([h1 (h2 (L))]) len(h2 (L)  → σ(ψ1 ψ2 ), for len(L) → ∞ and  len([h1 [h2 (L)]]) len([h2 (L)]) up to bounded len[h2 (L)] len(L] 1 [h2 (L)]]) → σ(ψ1 ) (as finity, it holds len([h len[h2 (L)]  =  len([h1 (h2 (L))]) len[h2 (L)]  =  error. But now sending len(L) to in-  len[h2 (L)] converges to infinity when len(L) → ∞ and the fact that [h1 [h2 (L)]]) and [h1 (h2 (L))] are in bounded distance and the bound doesn’t depend on L). Therefore by uniqueness of the limit, we have that σ(ψ1 ψ2 ) = σ(ψ1 )σ(ψ2 ).  8  Kernel of the homomorphism  Now we investigate the properties of the kernel, We would like to prove that ker(σ) contains as subgroup of finite index the intersection of the stabiliser with the kernel of the action. But firstly, we aim to prove that the subgroup ker(σ) contains only non- exponentially growing automorphisms. We will prove it separately for irreducible and reducible automorphisms.  8.1  Reducible case  In the reducible case we will see that the automorphisms of the Stab(Λ), have representatives of a very specific form. More specifically, every stratum except the top, is non-exponentially growing and moreover the representative restricted to each stratum is just a permutation of edges. Therefore we can calculate the value of σ, using only the top stratum if it is exponentially growing. Proposition 8.1. If ψ ∈ Stab(Λ) is exponentially growing and there exists some k s.t. ψ k reducible, then ψ ∈ / Ker(σ) Proof. Let h : S → S be a relative train track representative of ψ(we can change h with some power if it is necessary). Firstly, we note that every stratum, except possibly the top one, is nonexponentially growing. This is true, since otherwise if some Hr is exponentially growing and e ∈ Hr we have that the lengths of tightenings of hiterates of e are arbitarily long (by the train track properties) and they are l.s. (by definition of the stabiliser of the lamination), but this means that we have arbitarily long segments contained in some proper subgraph (since h(Gr ) ⊆ Gr ), which is impossible as we have seen in 6.2.  8 Irreducible case  30  Therefore if ψ is exponentially growing then we suppose, changing h with some iterate if it is necessary, that there exists H0 which is union of strata, all of them are non-exponentially growing, h restricted to H0 induces the identity in the quotient, and that the top stratum is exponentially growing, so if we have a leaf of the lamination and using the subgraph-overgraph decomposition of the leaf, it is implied that the lengths of long l.s. grow exponentially and in fact the actual value is the Perron-Frobenius eigenvalue that corresponds to the unique exponentially growing stratum.  8.2  Irreducible case  Now let’s suppose that ψ is an IWIP. We have two cases and we will prove the theorem independently for automorphisms that have the NGC and the rest automorphisms that have the GC (the dichotomy is the same as in the free case, but for the automorphisms with GC we need arguments of different nature). We will prove again that the value of σ corresponds to the Perron - Frobenious eigenvalue of ψ (or ψ −1 ). Lemma 8.2. Let h : S → S be a train track map representing some irreducible ψ ∈ Out(G, O). Then for every C > 0 there is a number M > 0 such that if L is any path, then one of the following holds: 1. [hM (L)] contains a legal segment of length > C 2. [hM (L)] has fewer illegal turns that L 3. L is concatenation x · y · z, such that y is N-preperiodic and x, z have length ≤ 2C and at most one illegal turn. Proof. Choose M to be a natural number that exceeds the number of inequivalent legal edge paths of length ≤ 2C. Now assume that L is a path such that the second statement fails, so [hM (L)] has the same number of illegal turns with L (since h is train track map, sends edges to legal paths and legal turns to legal turns so it is not possible the image of a path to have more illegal turns than the path). So each h- iteration of L amounts to iterating maximal legal subsegments of L and cancelling portions of adjacent ones. If, in addition, the first fail as well, then each maximal legal segment (which has length ≤ C) of L, except possibly the ones that contain the endpoints  8 Irreducible case  31  must have two iterates that after cancellation yield equivalent segments (otherwise we will have M equivalent legal segments of length ≤ C, but this contradicts to the choice of M). Therefore, we have that each segment contains a preperiodic point so that these points subdivide L as x · y1 · ... · ym · z, and we have that this path satisfies the third statement. Firstly we will prove a useful lemma for IWIP automorphisms which satisfy the property NGC and then we see that how we can use it for GC automorphisms. Lemma 8.3. Let ψ, ψ −1 irreducible automorphisms (IWIP’S), h : S → S train track map representing ψ, h′ : S ′ → S ′ representing ψ −1 and let’s suppose that there is an integer m so that it is impossible to concatenate more than m N- periodic in S and in S ′ . Let τ : S → S, τ ′ : S ′ → S ′ , O-maps. Then for any C > 0 there are constants N0 > 0 and L0 such that if j is line or a path of length ≥ L0 and if j ′ the isometric immersion obtained from [τ j], then one of the following holds: (A) [hM (j))] contains a legal segment of length > C (B) [h′M (j ′ )] contains a legal segment of length > C Proof. Without loss, we may assume that C is larger than the critical constants for h and for h′ . Let M be the larger of the two integers guaranteed by previous lemma applied to h, C and h′ , C. We will fix a large integer s = s(h, h′ , τ, τ ′ , M). Suppose that (A) does not hold with N0 = sM. We will apply the previous lemma only to hM -admissible segments (a segment L ⊆ j so that hM (∂L) ⊆ [hM (j)]). By our assumption the first of the previous lemma doesn’t hold. If we further restrict to segments L with > m + 2 illegal turns, then we can’t have the third case either. So for such segments the second is always true. We can represent j as a concatenation of such segments of uniformly bounded length and the uniform bound does not depend on j, but only on h, h′ , τ, τ ′ , M (since we will apply the same argument using [τ h(j)], h′ instead of j, h respectively). Say p is an upper bound to the number of illegal turns in each segment (there are finitely since they are of uniformly bounded length). Fix a with p−1 <a< p 1. For long enough segments L in j the ratio  number of illegal turns in [hM (L)] number of illegal turns in L  <a  8 Irreducible case  32  (since the number of illegal turns in L than p and number of illegal turns in [hM (L)] is strictly less that the number of illegal turns in L). By applying the same argument to hM (j) and then to h2M (j) etc, we see that for given s > 0 and long enough segments L ⊆ j (the length depends of illegal turns in [hsM (L)] < as , on s as well ), we have number number of illegal turns in L or else (A) holds with N0 = sM. Since legal segments have length above by C and below by the length of the shortest edge(with the exception of the two containing the endpoints), the length can be compared with two inequalities to the number of illegal turns. Therefore if (A) fails, there exists sM (L)] < Aas . Similarly, we a constant A = A(h, C) with the property length[h length(L) can use the same argument using [τ hsM j] in place of j and with h′ in place of h. If (B) fails as well,(with N0 = sM) we reach a similar conclusion that length[h′sM τ hsM (L)] < Bas for some B depends only on h′ , C. length[τ hsM (L) Firstly, we note that h′sM τ hsM , τ are both O-maps so they coincide to every path, except some bounded error near endpoints, in particular for long L, we have that the ratio of their lengths is bounded above by 2 and below by 1/2. Therefore multiplying the above inequalities and changing h′sM τ hsM by τ we have the inequality : length[τ (L)] length[hsM (L)] < 2ABa2s . length[τ hsM (L)] length(L)  (6)  sM  length[h (L)] length[τ (L)] 1 ′ On the other hand, length(τ > 2Lip(τ )Lip(τ ′ ) using again that τ τ hsM L) length(L) and the identity are both O- maps as above. But sending s to infinity we have a contradiction, since a < 1.  Geometric Case: In the proof of the previous lemma we have used the property that there is an integer m so that it is impossible to concatenate more than m N- periodic paths in j (and the iterates [hM (j)]) and the same is true for j ′ (and the iterates [h′M (j ′ )]). The previous lemma is true for NGC automorphisms for every j. But if we apply this when j is some leaf of the lamination and h ∈ Stab(Λ), we can prove that this always the case. Lemma 8.4. If ℓ is some leaf of the lamination, then there is an integer m so that it is not possible for ℓ to contain a concatenation of m subpaths that each of them is N-periodic. Proof. Choose f : T → T , stable train track representative (this is possible by [5], since N-periodic paths correspond to Nielsen periodic paths in the  8 Irreducible case  33  quotient or see [23] for a different approach), then there is exactly one path in Γ = G/T in which every (indivisible) N-periodic path projects. We suppose that there is no bound in the number of concatenation of INP in ℓ. So by quasiperiodicity we have that every leaf segment is contained in some concatenation of equivalent paths of the form P1 P2 ...Pn (where every Pi is a path that projects to the loop P ). But then the subgroup that is constructed by the graph of groups corresponding to this loop (see the section 2.6. of the preliminaries), carries the lamination and therefore has finite index (by 6.2) in G, which is impossible. Therefore the lemma 8.3 is true, in this case, if we restrict to h ∈ Stab(Λ) and ℓ some leaf of the lamination. Definition 8.5. We say that a sequence {Λi } of irreducible laminations in IL if for some (any) tree H every leaf segment of Λ in S - coordinates is a leaf segment of Λi in S -coordinates for all but finitely many i. Proposition 8.6. Let Λ = Λ+ φ ∈ IL and let ψ ∈ Aut(G, O) which is an − IWIP. Suppose that ψ ∈ Stab(Λ), then Λ = Λ+ ψ or Λ = Λψ . We note again that if a segment contains a legal segment with length larger than Ccrit then the length of reduced iterates converge to infinity. Proof. In the non-geometric case: Using the notation of the previous lemmas. Let ℓ be a leaf of Λ in the S -coordinates. We apply the lemma to [hK ℓ] with K > 0 and C larger the critical constants of h and h′ . If for some K > 0 (A) holds, then if follows from quasiperiodicity that the forward iterates weakly converges to Λ+ ψ , since we have that the length of reduced images converges to infinity and so we have arbitarily long legal segments and the quasiperiodicity implies that some translation of every leaf segment is finally contained in the reduced images. The remaining possibility is that [τ hK ℓ] contains an S ′ legal segment of length > C for all K > 0. But this means that [τ ℓ] which equals to [h′K τ hK ℓ] up to bounded error, contains an arbitarily high h′ -iterate of a legal segment and quasiperiodicity now implies that Λ = Λ− h. Now in the geometric case, we use the same argument but only for h ∈ Stab(Λ) and we have the same result that Λ = Λ± h  8 Discreteness of the Image  34  Note that we have proved that for automorphisms with the property NGC, it is true for every IWIP ψ (relative to O) either the forward ψ − iterates of Λ weakly converges to Λ+ ψ or Λ = Λψ . Corollary 8.7. If ψ ∈ Stab(Λ) is exponentially growing, then ψ ∈ / Ker(σ) Proof. For reducible automorphisms, we have already proved it in 8.1. For irreducible ones, we have by the previous proposition that Λ = Λ+ ψ (changing ψ with ψ −1 , if it necessary) and so we can choose f = h, where h is the train track representative of ψ, in the proof of 7.1, and then σ(ψ) is obviously equal to the Perron - Frobenious eigenvalue which is greater than 1, since ψ is exponentially growing(it is an IWIP).  8.3  Discreteness of the Image  We will prove that the image of the homomorphism σ is discrete and therefore we can see σ as a homomorphism σ : Stab(Λ) → Z. Lemma 8.8. σ(Stab(Λ)) is a discrete set. Proof. This is true since by the proofs of the propositions (8.1, 8.7), every σ(ψ) other than 1, occurs as the Perron- Frobenius eigenvalue for an irreducible integer matrix of uniformly bounded size. It is well known then that the set of such numbers form a discrete set and as a consequence σ(Stab(Λ)) is an infinite discrete subset of R and is hence isomorphic to Z.  9  Main Results  In this section, we will state and prove the main theorems. We use the same notation as in the sections above. Lemma 9.1. Let h : S → S be a relative train track representative of ψ ∈ Ker(σ). Then there is some k such that hk induces the identity on G\S. Moreover, there are appropriate representatives of orbits of non -free vertices v1 , ..., vq , such that h(vi ) = vi . In particular, hk fixes S. Proof. Let ψ ∈ Ker(σ) and h′ : S → S be a RTT train track representative of ψ.  35 By 8.7, possibly after changing ψ with some iterate ψ k , we can suppose that there is a relative train track representative, h′k = h : S → S and a maximal proper h-invariant G-subgraph S0 of S (we denote by H0 the quotient S0 /G) s.t. the restriction of h on S0 induces the identity in H0 . For the top stratum we can suppose that it contains a single edge e and that h(e) = ea, where a is some segment of S0 (since it is non-exponentially growing). But then since h is a relative train track and h ∈ Stab(Λ), we have that h-iterates of e produces arbitarily long segments of the lamination that are contained in S0 which contradicts quasiperiodicity, except if the leaf of the lamination is of the form (in the quotient, so every a, e correspond to orbits): ...eab−1 e−1 x−1 eab0 e−1 x0 eab1 e−1 x1 eab2 e−1 ... for some integers bi and xi are contained in S0 (or H0 in the quotient). In this case, the lamination is carried by the subgroup which is the fundamental group of the graph of groups which consists of the disjoint union of two graph of groups corresponding to H0 (which contains all the non-free vertices with full stabilisers) that are joined by an edge corresponding to e. But by 6.2, this leads to a contradiction since it is obvious that this subgroup is not of finite index (and by construction it contains the full stabilisers of vertices). Therefore we have that h(e) = e and then h induces also the identity on Γ − H0 (Γ = G/T ) and so on Γ. Now suppose h(e1 ) = e1 , h(e2 ) = g0 e2 , where g0 ∈ Gv as above, where e1 e2 is a legal path. Then since h is a isometry we have that we will have as leaf segments of the form e1 gn e2 where gn = ψ n (g1 ). But since there are finitely many inequivalent paths of a specific length, we can get that after passing some power if needed, that there is some g ∈ Gv such that h(ge2 ) = ge2 and after changing the fundamental domain (in particular, e2 with ge2 ), we have that h fixes pointwise the fundamental domain. Since this can be done for every vertex we have that we can suppose that every edge of the fundamental domain is fixed by h (after possibly passing to some power). Therefore h is an automorphism that sends a path of the form g1 e1 , ..., gm em to the path ψ(g1 )e1 , ..., ψ(gm )em where gi , ψ(gi ) ∈ G(ei ) , and as a consequence h depends only on the induced automorphisms on each Gi . As conclusion of the discussion above, if we denote the subgroup ker(σ) by A, we get: Theorem 9.2. Then there is normal subgroup A of Stab(Λ), where Stab(Λ) a cyclic extension of A. Moreover, every φ ∈ A virtually fixes a point of O.  36 As a consequence, using the properties of Out(G, {Gi }t ) and the proof of the lemma above we get: Theorem 9.3. If every Inn(Gi ) is finite, then: 1. There is a normal periodic subgroup A of Stab(Λ), such that the group Stab(Λ)/A has a normal subgroup B isomorphic to subgroup q L Out(Gi ) and (Stab(Λ)/A)/B is isomorphic to Z. of i=1  2. Let’s also suppose that Out(G) is virtually torsion free. Then Stab(Λ) has a (torsion free) finite index subgroup K such that K/B ′ is isomorphic to Z, where B ′ is a normal subgroup of K isomorphic to subgroup q L Out(Gi ). of i=1  Finally, we have that: Theorem 9.4. If every Aut(Gi ) is finite and Out(G) is virtually torsion free, then Stab(Λ) is virtually infinite cyclic. One could possibly expect that actually every automorphism of the kernel of the stretching map, virtually fixes the same point of O. However, our attempts to prove it using train track methods or providing a counter-example were unsuccessful. If this fact is true, we could improve our results, as the stabilisers of points can be described in terms of the automorphisms groups of the Gi ’s (see [11]). A direct corollary of the previous theorem is the following. Let’s denote C(φ) the relative centraliser of φ in Out(G, O). As we have seen, C(φ) is a subgroup of Stab(Λ) and so we get: Theorem 9.5. Then there is normal subgroup B of C(φ), where C(φ) is a cyclic extension of A. Moreover, every φ ∈ B virtually fixes a point of O. Moreover, if every Inn(Gi ) is finite, then: 1. There is a normal periodic subgroup A1 of C(φ), such that the group q L Out(Gi ) C(φ)/A1 has a normal subgroup B1 isomorphic to a subgroup of i=1  and (C(φ)/A1 )/B1 is isomorphic to Z.  37 2. Let’s also suppose that Out(G) is virtually torsion free. Then C(φ) has a (torsion free) finite index subgroup K1′ such that K1′ /B1′ is isomorphic to Z, where B1′ is a normal subgroup of K1′ isomorphic to subgroup of q L Out(Gi ). i=1  Also, we have that: Theorem 9.6. If we further suppose that every Aut(Gi ) is finite and Out(G) is virtually torsion free, then C(φ) is virtually (infinite) cyclic. Note that in the case in which O corresponds to the Grushko decomposition of G, we have that the previous theorem generalises the theorem in the classical case that the centraliser of an IWIP (for f.g. free groups with the absolute notion of irreducibility) is virtually cyclic since there are no Gi ’s and so the factor automorphisms are trivial in the free case. Additionally, we can take also relative results for the free and for the general case. This is possible since we can use the fact that every automorphism is irreducible relative to some appropriate space. Moreover, note that if φ doesn’t commute with the automorphisms of the free factors then C(φ) is virtually cyclic. But as we will see, in the general case there are examples that this is not true. In particular, we can find centralisers of IWIP automorphisms (relative to some space) which contain big subgroups and as a consequence they are not virtually cyclic. In fact, we can get something stronger than the previous theorem. Remember that if G is a group and H is a subgroup of G, the commensurator (or virtual normalizer) of H in G is the subgroup CommG (H) =: {g ∈ G|[H : H ∩ g −1 Hg] < ∞, and [g −1 Hg : H ∩ g −1Hg] < ∞}. Here we have that the commensurator CommOut(G,O) (φ) contains COut(G,O) (φ) for every automorphism φ. But for every IWIP φ the subgroup CommOut(G,O) (φ) stabilises the lamination, since for ψ ∈ CommOut(G,O) (φ) there are n, m such that ψφm ψ −1 = φn , we get a similar statement as above for commensurators of IWIP automorphisms instead of centralisers. Now let’s give an example of a relative IWIP which has (relative) centraliser which fails to be virtually cyclic. Example 9.7. As in the introduction, we fix the free product decomposition G = G1 ∗ < a > ∗ < b >, where a, b are of infinite order and we denote by  38 F2 =< a > ∗ < b > the "free part". Then in the corresponding outer space O(G, G1 , F2 ), which we denote by O. In each tree T ∈ O there is exactly one non free vertex v1 s.t Gv1 = G1 . Then we define the outer automorphism φ, which satisfies φ(g) = g for every g ∈ G1 , φ(a) = bg1 , φ(b) = ab for some non-trivial g1 ∈ G1 , then φ ∈ Out(G, O) is an IWIP relative to O. But every factor automorphism of G1 that fixes g1 commutes with φ and therefore C(φ) contains the subgroup A of Aut(G1 )Inn(G) that fixes g1 . So the centraliser is not virtually cyclic if A is sufficiently big. We will prove that φ is an IWIP relative to O. Firstly, note that there are no φ -invariant free factor systems of the form {[G1 ], [< b >]} or {< G1 , b >} that contain the free factor system {[G1 ]}. So the only possible case is the case where there is a φ-invariant free factor system of the form {[G1 ], [< x, y >]}. Using the fact that we have two free factors, we can assume that the free factors G1 and < x, y > are actually φ-invariant. Therefore after possibly changing the basis we can suppose that the projection map from G to G/ << G1 >>=< a, b > sends x, y to a, b, respectively. Moreover, we can see that x = am, y = bn, where m, n ∈<< G1 >>. By the relations, φ(G1 ) = G1 and φ(< x, y >) =< x, y >, we have that φ induces the identity on G1 (after possibly conjugacy with an element of G1 ). In the first case, we can see that φ(x) = xy and φ(y) = x. Then we get the identities (am)(bn) = ab(φ(m)) and am = ag1 φ(n). By combining these together, we have that mbg1−1 φ−1 (m) = bφ(m) which easily leads to a contradiction to the fact that m ∈<< G1 >>. Similarly, we get a contradiction in the second case. Therefore there is no such a φ-invariant free factor system. In the case that G1 is isomorphic to F3 and g1 an element of its free basis, we have that C(φ) contains a subgroup which is isomorphic to Aut(F2 )Inn(G).  REFERENCES  39  References [1] Mladen Bestvina, Mark Feighn and Michael Handel, Laminations, trees, and irreducible automorphisms of free groups, Geometric and Functional Analysis GAFA, May 1997, Volume 7, Issue 2, pp 215-244 [2] Mladen Bestvina, Mark Feighn, and Michael Handel, The Tits alternative for Out (Fn) I: Dynamics of exponentially-growing automorphisms, Annals of Mathematics-Second Series 151.2 (2000): 517-624. [3] Mladen Bestvina, Mark Feighn, and Michael Handel. The Tits Alternative for II: A Kolchin Type Theorem, Annals of mathematics (2005): 1-59. [4] Mladen Bestvina and Michael Handel, Train tracks and automorphisms of free groups. Annals of Mathematics (2), vol. 135 (1992), no. 1, pp. 1–51 [5] D. J. Collins. and E.C. Turner, Efficient representatives for automorphisms of free products, The Michigan Mathematical Journal 41 (1994), no. 3, 443–464. doi:10.1307/mmj/1029005072. http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.mmj/1029005072. [6] Thierry Coulbois and Arnaud Hilion and Martin Lustig, R-trees and laminations for free groups I: Algebraic laminations, J. Lond. Math. Soc, (2008), No. 3, 723–736 [7] Thierry Coulbois and Arnaud Hilion and Martin Lustig, R-trees and laminations for free groups II: The dual lamination of an R-tree, J. Lond. Math. Soc., 78 (2008), No. 3, 737—754. [8] Marc Culler and Karen Vogtmann, Moduli of graphs and automorphisms of free groups, Invent. Math., 84(1):91–119, 1986. [9] Mark Feighn and Michael Handel, Abelian subgroups of Out(Fn ), Geometry and Topology 13.3 (2009): 1657-1727. [10] Stefano Francaviglia and Armando Martino, Stretching factors, metrics and train tracks for free products, arXiv:1312.4172, 2013 [11] Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt, The Outer space of a free product, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 94 (2007) 695–714  REFERENCES  40  [12] Michael Handel and Lee Mosher, Relative free splitting and free factor complexes I: Hyperbolicity, 2014, arXiv:1407.3508 [13] Arnaud Hilion, On the Maximal Subgroup of Automorphisms of a Free Group FN which Fix a Point of the Boundary ∂FN , International Mathematics Research Notices, 01/2007; 2007(18). DOI: 10.1093/imrn/rnm066 [14] Camille Horbez, Hyperbolic graphs for free products, and the Gromov boundary of the graph of cyclic splittings, arXiv:1408.0544v2 2014 [15] Camille Horbez, The boundary of the outer space of a free product, arXiv:1408.0543v2, 2014 [16] Camille Horbez, The Tits alternative for the automorphism group of a free product, arXiv:1408.0546, 2014 [17] Ilya Kapovich, Algorithmic detectability of iwip automorphisms, Bull. London Math. Soc. (2014) 46 (2): 279-290 January 9, 2014 [18] Ilya Kapovich and Martin Lustig, Stabilisers of R-trees with isometric free actions, Journal of Group Theory. Volume 14, Issue 5, Pages 673–694, ISSN (Online) 1435-4446, ISSN (Print) 1433-5883, DOI: 10.1515/jgt.2010.070, August 2011 [19] Ilya Kapovich and Martin Lustig, Invariant laminations for irreducible automorphisms of free groups, Q. J Math first published online January 30, 2014 doi:10.1093/qmath/hat056 [20] Martin Lustig, Conjugacy and Centralizers for Iwip Automorphisms of Free Groups, Geometric Group Theory, Trends in Mathematics, 2007,doi:10.1007/978-3-7643-8412-811, 197-224. [21] Erika Meucci, Relative Outer Automorphisms of Free Groups, Ph.D. thesis, University of Utah (2011). [22] Jean-Pierre Serre, Trees, Translated from the French original by John Stillwell. Corrected 2nd printing of the 1980 English translation. Springer Monographs in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2003). APA [23] Mihalis Sykiotis, Stable representatives for symmetric automorphisms of groups and the general form of the Scott conjecture, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 356 (2004), no. 6, 2405–2441.  REFERENCES  41  [24] Dionysios Syrigos, Asymmetry of outer space of a free product arXiv:1507.01849, 2015 [25] Dionysios Syrigos, Stabiliser of an Attractive Fixed Point of an IWIP Automorphism, in preparation. SCHOOL OF MATHEMATICS, UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHAMPTON, HIGHFIELD, SOUTHAMPTON, SO17 1BJ, UNITED KINGDOM. E-mail address: D.Syrigos@soton.ac.uk

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
