Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_5861

Abstract:
QUADRIC COMPLEXES  arXiv:1711.05844v2 [math.GR] 9 Apr 2018  NIMA HODA  Abstract. Quadric complexes are square complexes satisfying a certain combinatorial nonpositive curvature condition. These complexes generalize 2dimensional CAT(0) cube complexes and are a square analog of systolic complexes. We introduce and study the basic properties of these complexes. Using a form of dismantlability for the 1-skeleta of finite quadric complexes we show that every finite group acting on a quadric complex stabilizes a complete bipartite subgraph of its 1-skeleton. Finally, we prove that C(4)-T(4) small cancellation groups act on quadric complexes.  The study of groups acting on combinatorially nonpositively curved spaces has been an ongoing theme in group theory tracing its origins to Dehn’s study of the fundamental groups of closed hyperbolic surfaces [7], continuing with small cancellation theory [10] and reaching more recent developments after the advent of geometric group theory [11]. One such development is the introduction of systolic complexes by Januszkiewicz and Świa̧tkowski [19] and independently by Haglund [12]. This class of simplicial complexes first arose years earlier in the form of bridged graphs defined by Soltan and Chepoi [29, 6] in the context of metric graph theory. The flag completions of bridged graphs are precisely the systolic complexes so these are essentially the same objects. The development of systolic complexes represents a simplicial version of the cubical combinatorial nonpositive curvature theory of CAT(0) cube complexes which were introduced by Gromov [11] but which can be traced back to median graphs studied in metric graph theory [2, 23, 20, 6]. These two theories have since been given a common generalization in the form of the bucolic complexes [4]. In this paper we introduce the combinatorial nonpositive curvature theory of quadric complexes. Quadric complexes are closely related to systolic complexes but have square rather than triangular 2-cells, as in the case of CAT(0) cube complexes. We emphasize that although 2-dimensional CAT(0) cube complexes are quadric, the same does not hold in higher dimensions where these theories differ strikingly. Quadric complexes are defined by a disc diagrammatic nonpositive curvature condition, similar to that described in Wise’s presentation of systolic complexes [30]. As in the case of systolic complexes, the 1-skeleta of quadric complexes can be characterized by forbidden isometric subgraph conditions. Moreover, the cell structure of a quadric complex can be recovered from its 1-skeleton. We thus find that the 1-skeleta of quadric complexes are precisely the hereditary modular Date: April 10, 2018. 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 20F65, 57M20, 20F06; Secondary 05C12. Key words and phrases. quadric complexes, square complexes, combinatorial nonpositive curvature, invariant biclique, small cancellation theory, C(4)-T(4), geometric group theory, dismantlable graphs. During the course of this research, the author was partially funded by an NSERC CGS M, an ISM scholarship and a Lorne Trottier fellowship. 1  2  NIMA HODA  graphs studied in metric graph theory [3]. Hence, as for systolic complexes and CAT(0) cube complexes, a theory arising naturally in geometric group theory has a precursor in metric graph theory. By some doubling, subdivision of squares and identification of cells, quadric complexes can also be viewed as right-angled triangle complexes. They can thus be viewed as a generalization of the folder complexes of Chepoi [6], whose leg graphs satisfy our forbidden subgraph conditions but which are further restricted. Our main results are the following two theorems. Theorem (Theorem 2.9, Invariant Biclique Theorem). Let G be a finite group acting on a locally finite quadric complex X, which is not equal to a single vertex. Then G stabilizes a biclique of X. In order to prove the Invariant Biclique Theorem finite quadric complexes we use the fact, first proved by Bandelt [3, Theorem 2], that the 1-skeleta of finite quadric complexes satisfy a form of dismantlability. Our proof follows that of Hensel et al. [16] and Chepoi [5] for finite systolic complexes. We then apply a theorem of Hanlon and Martinez-Pedroza [14] to lift this result to locally finite quadric complexes. The bidismantlability of 1-skeleta of quadric complexes also plays an essential role in an upcoming proof of the contractibility of quadric complexes after the addition of certain higher dimensional cells [17]. Theorem (Theorem 3.11). Let G be a group admitting a finite C(4)-T(4) presentation ⟨S | R⟩. Then G acts properly and cocompactly on a quadric complex. We call a group acting properly and cocompactly on a quadric complex a quadric group. The proof that finitely presented C(4)-T(4) groups are quadric uses the construction of a square complex XY from a given 2-complex Y with embedded 2-cells. We show that this square complex XY is simply connected when Y is and that it is quadric when Y is additionally C(4)-T(4). 0.1. Structure of the Text. The rest of this section gives some basic definitions used throughout the text and states conventions followed in the remaining sections. Section 1 defines our main objects of study, quadric complexes and quadric groups, and gives some of their basic properties. Section 2 defines bidismantlability for bipartite graphs and uses this property to prove the Invariant Biclique Theorem. Finally, Section 3 recalls the definition and basic properties of C(4)-T(4) complexes and proves that C(4)-T(4) groups are quadric. 0.2. Basic Definitions. For fundamental notions such as that of CW-complexes and the fundamental group see Hatcher’s textbook on algebraic topology [15]. Let X and Y be 2-dimensional CW-complexes. A combinatorial map from X to Y is a continuous map whose restriction to every open cell e of X is a homeomorphism from e to an open cell of Y . Two such maps are considered the same if they are homotopic via a homotopy that is a combinatorial map at each instant of time. (Such a homotopy necessarily restricts to an isotopy on each cell.) A 2-complex is combinatorial if the attaching map of each of its 2-cells is a combinatorial map from the circle S1 endowed with the structure of a 1-dimensional CW-complex (i.e. a cycle graph). A combinatorial 2-complex X is locally finite if every cell of X intersects finitely many other cells. A graph is a 1-dimensional CW complex Γ. Every such complex is combinatorial. The valence of a 0-cell of Γ is the number of ends of 1-cells incident to it. If no  QUADRIC COMPLEXES  3  1-cell of Γ has both of its endpoints attached to the same 0-cell and no two 1-cells of Γ have their endpoints attached to the same unordered pair of 0-cells then Γ is simplicial. The vertex set of any connected graph has a natural metric, the standard graph metric, defined for a pair of vertices u and v by the number of edges in the shortest path connecting u and v. A simplicial graph Γ is bipartite if its 0-cells can be partitioned into two sets such that no 1-cell has both of its endpoints in the same part. If every pair of 0-cells from different parts is joined by a 1-cell then Γ is a complete bipartite graph or a biclique. It is a fact that a simplicial graph is bipartite if and only if it has no cycles of odd length, where a cycle is a closed path. A square complex is a combinatorial 2-complex whose 2-cells are squares, that is its 2-cell boundaries are endowed with the structure of 4-cycles. A disc diagram D is a compact contractible subspace of the 2-sphere S2 with the structure of a combinatorial 2-complex. A disc diagram D is nonsingular if it is homeomorphic to a closed 2-cell and is otherwise singular. The topological boundary of D is denoted ∂D. The boundary ∂D is always a subgraph of the 1skeleton D1 of D. A disc diagram D ⊊ S2 induces the structure of a combinatorial 2-complex on S2 with D a subcomplex and S2 \D an open 2-cell. The attaching map S1 → ∂D of this 2-cell can be made combinatorial by pulling back the cell structure of ∂D. This turns S1 into a cycle denoted ∂◦ D. The resulting combinatorial map ∂◦ D → ∂D is the boundary path of D. Let X be a combinatorial complex. If C is a type of combinatorial complex then a C in X is a C along with a combinatorial map from C to X. When D is a disc diagram in X, we abuse notation by also referring to the concatenation ∂◦ D → ∂D → X as the boundary path of D. 0.3. Conventions Followed in the Text. We use the following conventions throughout the text unless otherwise stated. Maps and complexes are combinatorial. Complexes are connected. Simply connected implies connected. Distances between vertices in graphs are always measured by the standard graph metric. The notation |·, ·| is used to denote distance. For graphs we use the terms vertex and edge in place of 0-cell and 1-cell. For square complexes we use the terms vertex, edge and square. For more general 2-complexes we use 0-cell, 1-cell and 2-cell. Acknowledgements. The author would like to thank Daniel T. Wise for many invaluable discussions during this research. 1. Quadric Complexes We now define our main object of study, quadric complexes. Section 1.2 describes locally minimal disc diagrams in quadric complexes and shows that they are CAT(0) square complexes. In Section 1.2.1 we recall properties of such disc diagrams that are needed throughout the rest of the text. Section 1.4 characterizes the 1-skeleta of quadric complexes as those graphs whose every isometrically embedded cycle is a 4-cycle. By a theorem of Bandelt [3] these graphs are precisely those known as hereditary modular graphs in the metric graph theory literature. We use this characterization in Section 1.5 to prove an embedding theorem for finite simply connected square complexes. Finally, in Section 1.7 we state a general theorem of Hanlon and Martinez-Pedroza that implies that finitely presented subgroups of quadric groups are quadric and state another theorem of theirs needed in the proof of the Invariant Biclique Theorem.  4  NIMA HODA  (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f)  (g)  Figure 1. Figures for Definition 1.1.  (a)  (b)  Figure 2. A square and its reflection about a horizontal line. Definition 1.1. A locally quadric complex is a square complex X satisfying the following conditions. (1) The attaching map of every square is an immersion. (2) In any disc diagram in X of the form of Figure 1a, the two squares are the same and are oriented as in Figure 1b. (3) For any disc diagram in X of the form of Figure 1c with immersed boundary, there is a replacement square with the same boundary. (4) For any disc diagram in X of the form of Figure 1d with immersed boundary there is a replacement disc diagram in X of the form of one of Figure 1e, Figure 1f or Figure 1g having the same boundary. A locally quadric complex is quadric if it is also simply connected. The arrows shown above in some of the open squares indicate orientation. For example, reflecting the square in Figure 2a about a horizontal line results in the square Figure 2b. Condition 1.1.2 implies that no two squares have the same attaching map. Conditions 1.1.3 and 1.1.4 are nonpositive curvature requirements having important consequences for disc diagrams in locally quadric complexes. Quadric complexes are similar in nature to systolic complexes. This is especially apparent in the presentation given by Wise [30]. Wise also introduces generalized (p, q)-complexes which encompass systolic complexes as a subclass of generalized (3, 6)-complexes and quadric complexes as a subclass of (4, 4)-complexes [30]. The following proposition follows immediately from Definition 1.1. Proposition 1.2. The class of locally quadric complexes is closed under the operations of taking full subcomplexes and taking covering spaces. A full subcomplex is one that includes any cell whose boundary is in the subcomplex. Definition. A group is quadric if it acts properly and cocompactly on a quadric complex. If X is a locally quadric complex, then its universal cover X̃ is quadric and so its fundamental group π1 (X) is quadric.  QUADRIC COMPLEXES  5  Figure 3. A disc diagram in the presentation of Example 1.4. 1.1. Examples. We now discuss a few classes of examples of quadric complexes and groups. It follows immediately from Definition 1.1 that CAT(0) square complexes are quadric. The following example of Elsner and Przytycki [8] is of a nonpositively curved square complex whose fundamental group does not virtually act properly and cocompactly on a systolic complex [8, Theorem 4.1]. Example 1.3. ⟨a, b, c | aba−1 b, c−1 ac = b⟩ Hence, this group is quadric but not virtually systolic. This shows that though the quadric and systolic theories share many similarities, they are nevertheless distinct. Let n be a positive integer and let σ be a permutation of {1, 2, . . . , n}. The presentation Example 1.4. ⟨g1 , g2 , . . . , gn | gi gσ(i) = gj gσ(j) , for all i ̸= j⟩ is locally quadric and so presents a quadric group. Indeed, no disc diagram of the form of Figure 1d has immersed boundary and any disc diagram of the form of Figure 1c with immersed boundary is as in Figure 3 and so has boundary which bounds a square. Setting n = 3 and letting σ be the permutation (1 2 3) in Example 1.4 we obtain a presentation of the braid group B3 on three strands. By Theorem 3.11, C(4)-T(4) small cancellation groups are quadric. In particular, the Artin group Example 1.5. ⟨a, b, c | ab = ba, bcb = cbc⟩ is quadric. However, by Huang, Jankiewicz and Przytycki [18, Theorem 1.2], this group does not virtually act properly and cocompactly on a CAT(0) cube complex. In general, Artin groups whose defining graphs are triangle free are C(4)-T(4) (see Pride [27]) and many triangle-free defining graphs of 2-dimensional or 3-generator Artin groups violate the necessary and sufficient conditions of Huang, Jankiewicz and Przytycki [18] for virtual cocompact cubulation.1 1.2. Nonpositive Curvature of Disc Diagrams. The nonpositive curvature conditions 1.1.3 and 1.1.4 in Definition 1.1 imply that any nullhomotopic closed path in a locally quadric complex bounds a nonpositively curved disc diagram. 1Thanks to Jingyin Huang for bringing this class of examples to the author’s attention.  6  NIMA HODA  A disc diagram D in a 2-complex X has minimal area if it contains the minimal number of 2-cells over all disc diagrams in X having the same boundary path. A disc diagram D in a quadric complex is locally minimal if every internal vertex of D is incident to at least four squares. Lemma 1.6. Let X be a locally quadric complex and D a minimal area disc diagram in X. Then D is locally minimal. Proof. Suppose v is an internal vertex of D incident to k < 4 squares. By Condition 1.1.1, k ≥ 2. Let D′ be the union of closed 2-cells incident to v. Suppose first that k = 2. Then D′ either has the form of the disc diagram in Condition 1.1.2 or that of the disc diagram in Condition 1.1.3. In the former case the outer boundaries of the two squares in D′ are equal so that D can be replaced by a disc diagram obtained by cutting out D′ and gluing together these outer boundaries. In the latter case D′ can be replaced by a single square. In either case we contradict the minimality of the area of D. Suppose now that k = 3. Then D′ has the form of the disc diagram in Condition 1.1.4 and so can be replaced by a pair of squares. This also contradicts the minimality of the area of D. □ We see from the proof of Lemma 1.6 that, given a disc diagram D in a locally quadric complex, we can obtain a locally minimal disc diagram with the same boundary path by performing a finite number of replacements. Each replacement reduces the number of squares, though the locally minimal disc diagram we ultimately obtain may not be of minimal area. 1.2.1. CAT(0) Disc Diagrams. Locally minimal disc diagrams in locally quadric complexes are CAT(0) square complexes, i.e., CAT(0) cube complexes of dimension two [11]. This means that the metric on such disc diagrams obtained by making each square isometric to a unit Euclidean square satisfies a nonpositive curvature condition concerning the thinness of its triangles. Such complexes have been studied extensively in the geometric group theory literature [28, 31, 32, 25, 13, 24] as well as in the metric graph theory literature, via their 1-skeleta [6], median graphs [2, 23, 20]. We refer to disc diagrams that are CAT(0) square complexes as CAT(0) disc diagrams for brevity. Such disc diagrams are amenable to standard arguments using a combinatorial version of the Gauss-Bonnet Theorem as well as to wellknown dual curve constructions. These and other well-known properties of CAT(0) disc diagrams will be recalled in the rest of this section. Most of these results can be found in Wise’s study of minimal area cubical disk diagrams [31]. Let v be a vertex of a disc diagram D with square 2-cells. Let δ(v) denote the valence of v and ρ(v) the number of squares incident to v. The curvature of v is κ(v) = 2π − δ(v)π +  ρ(v) π. 2  This definition views the squares of D as being Euclidean and so flat. All of the curvature of D is then concentrated at its vertices. Proposition 1.7 (Gauss-Bonnet Theorem for CAT(0) Disc Diagrams). Let D be a disc diagram with square 2-cells and assume that D is not a single vertex. The  QUADRIC COMPLEXES  7  sum of the curvatures of vertices of D is 2π, i.e., ∑ κ(v) = 2π. v vertex  Proof. The Euler characteristic χ(D) of D can be computed by subtracting the number of its edges from the number of its vertices and squares. That is, each edge contributes −1 to the Euler characteristic and each vertex or square contributes 1. Evenly distributing the −1 of each edge to its vertices and the 1 from each square to the vertices on its boundary gives the sum ∑ κ(v) , 2π v vertex which then must equal χ(D) = 1.  □  Corollary 1.8 (Greendlinger’s Lemma for CAT(0) Disc Diagrams). Let D be a CAT(0) disc diagram and assume that D is not a single 0-cell. Then there are at least two positively curved vertices on the boundary ∂D of D. If D has no valence 1 vertices then there are at least four vertices on ∂D with curvature π2 . Proof. The CAT(0) property implies that no interior vertex of D is positively curved. Then, by Proposition 1.7, there must be at least 2π positive curvature on ∂D. The curvature of vertices is bounded above by π, since D is not a single 0-cell and so there must be at least two positively curved vertices of ∂D. If D has no valence 1 vertices then the curvature of its vertices is bounded above by π2 and this is the least positive curvature of a vertex of D. Hence ∂D must have at least four vertices of π2 curvature. □ Definition. Let D be a disc diagram with square 2-cells. The midcube of an edge e of D is the midpoint of e. The midcube of a square of D is the closed line segment joining the midcubes of a pair of its opposing edges. A dual curve α of D is a minimal subspace of D satisfying the following conditions. (1) Some midcube of D is contained in α. (2) If α intersects a midcube µ of D nontrivially then it contains µ. The squares of D are in one-to-one correspondence with the intersections of its dual curves. If D is CAT(0) and has boundary path length |∂◦ D| = n then it has n 2 dual curves. Let D be a disc diagram with square 2-cells. A nonogon of D is a dual curve of D homeomorphic to the circle S 1 . A self-intersecting dual curve of D forms a monogon of D. A pair of dual curves of D that intersect twice form a bigon of D. Finally, three pairwise intersecting dual curves form a triangle of D. Proposition 1.9. If D is a CAT(0) disc diagram then it has no nonogons, monogons, bigons or triangles. Proof. If D has a nonogon, monogon, bigon or triangle, then it has a polygon whose boundary consists of 0, 1, 2, or 3 dual curves. Let D′ be the set of squares of D intersecting this polygon and let D′′ be the disc diagram consisting of the interior cells of D′ . Since D′ is CAT(0), D′′ has no vertices of valence 1 and is not a single vertex. But D′′ is also CAT(0) and so, by Corollary 1.8, it has at least four vertices on its boundary with curvature π2 . At most three of these may occur at corners  8  NIMA HODA  of the polygon and so one must introduce a valence 3 vertex in the interior of D′ , contradicting the CAT(0) property of D. □ The technique of eliminating n-gons of dual curves for low n of disc diagrams in square complexes comes from unpublished lecture notes of Casson and has been developed in the context of CAT(0) cube complexes [28, 32]. The absence of triangles in CAT(0) disc diagrams distinguishes them from general disc diagrams in CAT(0) cube complexes of dimension at least 3. Such disc diagrams may have triangles, as they contain internal vertices of valence 3, though they do not have nonogons, monogons or bigons. Definition. Let D be a CAT(0) disc diagram. A rail ζ of D is a subpath of the boundary path ∂◦ D of D embedded in the boundary ∂D of D satisfying the following conditions. (1) The total curvature of the vertices of ζ is π. (2) The curvature of each endpoint of ζ is positive. (3) Each internal vertex of ζ has zero curvature. The vertices of the boundary ∂D of D not contained in rails are the nonrail vertices of ∂D. Remark 1.10. The length n = |ζ| of ζ may be zero. In this case ζ is a single vertex of π curvature. More generally, there is a 1 × n grid of squares [0, 1] × [0, n] in D where ζ = {1} × [0, n] and where [0, 1] × {0, n} is also contained in ∂D. The dual curve { 12 } × [0, n] is the associated dual curve of ζ and the path {0} × [0, n] is the inner path of ζ. Proposition 1.11. Let D be a nonsingular CAT(0) disc diagram. Then the nonrail vertices of the boundary ∂D of D have nonpositive total curvature. Proof. Since D is nonsingular, its boundary path ∂◦ D → ∂D is an isomorphism so we can identify ∂◦ D and ∂D. Fix an orientation of the boundary path ∂◦ D of D. A positively curved nonrail boundary vertex v has π2 curvature. Let v̄ be the next vertex of nonzero curvature in a walk along ∂◦ D in the positive direction starting on v. Because v is nonrail, v̄ must be negatively curved. So v̄ is nonrail and has curvature at most − π2 . The map v ↦→ v̄ from the positively curved nonrail boundary vertices to the negatively curved nonrail boundary vertices is injective. Hence the contribution of each positively curved nonrail boundary vertex to the total curvature is cancelled by a negatively curved nonrail boundary vertex. Thus the total curvature of the nonrail boundary vertices is nonpositive. □ Corollary 1.12. Let D be a nonsingular CAT(0) disc diagram. Then D has two disjoint rails. Proof. Since D is CAT(0), its internal vertices are all nonpositively curved. Then, by Proposition 1.7, the boundary ∂D of D must have total curvature at least 2π. By Proposition 1.11, this curvature is concentrated in the endpoints of rails of D. Thus D must have at least two rails ζ1 and ζ2 . If ζ1 and ζ2 are disjoint then we are done so assume they intersect. Then ζ1 and ζ2 share an endpoint so that their combined curvature is strictly less than 2π. Then D must have some third rail ζ3 . □ Some pair of the ζi must be disjoint or else ∂D has total curvature 3π 2 . Proposition 1.13. Let D be a CAT(0) disc diagram such that D is not a single closed cell. Then D has two rails whose associated dual curves are disjoint.  QUADRIC COMPLEXES  9  Figure 4. A path e1 γ ′ e2 twice crossing a dual curve α of a CAT(0) disc diagram, as in the proof of Lemma 1.14. The dual curve α is shown as a dotted line. Note that this does not hold when D is a single vertex, edge or square. Proof. We proceed by induction on the number of cutpoints of D, where a vertex v of D is a cutpoint if D \ v has more than one connected component. If D has no cutpoints then it is nonsingular and so, by Corollary 1.12, D has two disjoint rails, ζ1 and ζ2 . Because ζ1 and ζ2 are disjoint, their associated dual curves do not cross. So we need only concern ourselves with the possibility that they coincide. If they do then D is a 1 × n grid of squares and, since D is not a single cell, we must have n > 1. Then the two rails of D that are perpendicular to the ζi have disjoint associated dual curves. This covers the base case of the induction. Now, suppose D has a cutpoint v. Let C1 and C2 be two components of D \ v and let Di be the subdisc Ci ∪ v, for each i. The dual curves of D1 are disjoint from those of D2 and so we need only show that each Di has a rail disjoint from v. But each Di is one of the following: a single edge, a single square or a CAT(0) disc diagram that is not a single closed cell and which has fewer cutpoints than D. The first two cases are immediate and the last follows from the induction hypothesis. □ Lemma 1.14. Let D be a CAT(0) disc diagram and let γ be a geodesic of its 1-skeleton D1 . Then γ does not cross any dual curve of D more than once. Proof. Suppose γ crosses the dual curve α at least twice. Let e1 and e2 be two directed edges along which γ crosses α such that the subpath γ ′ of γ from the terminal point of e1 to the initial point of e2 does not cross α. Let β be the path of D1 from the initial point of e1 to the terminal point of e2 running parallel to α. Let D′ be the subdisc of D with boundary ∂D′ = e1 γ ′ e2 β −1 , as in Figure 4. Now, suppose we chose γ, α and the ei so as to minimize the area of D. Then no dual curve starts and ends on γ ′ . Hence the dual curves starting on γ ′ end on β. The subdisc D′ is CAT(0) so, by the prohibition in Proposition 1.9 of bigons, every dual curve starting on β must end on γ ′ . So the dual curves of γ ′ and β are one and the same. Then γ ′ and β have the same length and so β is a shorter path than e1 γ ′ e2 . Then γ is not a geodesic—a contradiction. □ Proposition 1.15. Let D be a CAT(0) disc diagram and let u and v be vertices of D. Then the distance between u and v in the 1-skeleton D1 if D is equal to the number n of dual curves of D separating u from v.  10  NIMA HODA  Proof. Let γ be a geodesic of D1 from u to v. Then γ must cross the dual curves separating u from v and so must traverse at least n edges. Suppose γ traversed some additional edge e and let α be the dual curve containing the midcube of e. By Lemma 1.14, α is not a dual curve separating u and v. But then α must be traversed a second time if γ is to end at v. This is impossible, by Lemma 1.14 and so γ traverses exactly n edges and the distance |u, v| between u and v in D1 is n. □ 1.3. Quadratic Isoperimetric Function and Word Problem. The CAT(0) property of disc diagrams in quadric complexes immediately implies the following proposition and corollary. Proposition 1.16. Let G = ⟨S | R⟩ be a finite presentation of a group. If the associated cell complex is locally quadric, then the presentation has a quadratic isoperimetric function. Proof. The number of squares in a CAT(0) disc diagram is at most quadratic in the length |∂◦ D| of its boundary path. Indeed, if |∂◦ D| = n( then ) D has less than n n dual curves. Then, by Proposition 1.9, there are less than intersections of dual 2 ( ) curves in D and so less than n2 squares. □ Corollary 1.17. Let G = ⟨S | R⟩ be a finite presentation of a group. If the associated combinatorial cell complex is quadric, then G has decidable word problem. Proof. Since ⟨S | R⟩ has a quadratic isoperimetric function, it has a recursive isoperimetric function. It follows that G has decidable word problem [9, Theorem 2.1 and Lemma 2.2]. □ 1.4. 4-Bridged Graphs. We now use the properties of disc diagrams in quadric complexes developed in Section 1.2.1 to characterize them by their 1-skeleta. A graph Γ is n-bridged if every isometrically embedded cycle of Γ has length n. 3bridged graphs are known as bridged graphs in the metric graph theory literature [1] and 4-bridged graphs are the same as the hereditary modular graphs of metric graph theory [3]. Note that a 4-bridged graph is simplicial and bipartite. Any immersed 4-cycle or 6-cycle in a bipartite simplicial graph is embedded. Any embedded 6cycle in a 4-bridged graph has a diagonal, i.e., an edge joining a pair of opposing vertices. Proposition 1.18. Let X be a square complex. Then X is quadric if and only if it is 4-flag and its 1-skeleton X 1 is 4-bridged. 4-flag means that every embedded 4-cycle in X bounds a unique square and that the boundary of every square is an embedded 4-cycle. Proof. Suppose X is quadric. Simple connectivity of X and the fact that its 2-cells all have even boundary length imply that cycles in X have even length. The CAT(0) property of disc diagrams in X further implies that no embedded cycle has length 2 and that each embedded 4-cycle bounds a square: the only CAT(0) disc diagram with boundary path length 2 (resp. 4) is a single edge (resp. square). So X is 4-flag and any embedded cycle has length at least 4. It remains to show that no embedded cycle γ of length greater than 4 is isometrically embedded in X. To do this, take a locally minimal (and hence CAT(0)) disc diagram D in X with boundary path γ. By Proposition 1.13, D has two rails whose associated dual curves are disjoint.  QUADRIC COMPLEXES  11  A short computation shows that the inner path (see Remark 1.10) of one of these rails must be shorter than either of the two paths joining its endpoints in γ. Now, suppose X is 4-flag and X 1 is 4-bridged. Conditions 1.1.1 and 1.1.2 are satisfied by 4-flagness and because X 1 is simplicial. Since, additionally, X 1 is bipartite, any immersed 4-cycle or 6-cycle in X 1 must be embedded. Then Condition 1.1.3 follows by 4-flagness and Condition 1.1.4 follows because the 4-bridged property implies that any embedded 6-cycle has a diagonal, which splits the 6-cycle into two embedded 4-cycles joined along the diagonal. □ Compare Proposition 1.18 with the fact that a simplicial complex is systolic if and only if it is flag (in the usual sense) and its 1-skeleton is 3-bridged [6]. The 4-flag completion Γ of a graph Γ is the square complex obtained by gluing a unique square to each embedded 4-cycle of Γ. Proposition 1.18 states that the 4-flag completion of a 4-bridged graph is quadric and that every quadric complex can be obtained in this way. In other words, the map X ↦→ X 1 is a bijection from the class of quadric complexes to the class of 4-bridged graphs with inverse Γ ←[ Γ. The proof of the “if” part of Proposition 1.18 relied only on the fact that X is 4-flag and that X 1 is simplicial, bipartite and has a diagonal for each of its embedded 6-cycles. So we immediately have the following lemma. Lemma 1.19. Let Γ be a simplicial graph and assume that the 4-flag completion Γ of Γ is simply connected. Then Γ is 4-bridged if and only if every embedded 6-cycle in Γ has a diagonal. Proof. Simply connectedness of Γ implies that Γ is bipartite. By Proposition 1.18 we need only show that Γ is quadric. This follows by exactly the same argument as in the “if” part of the proof of Proposition 1.18. □ 1.5. Finite Square Complex Embedding Theorem. The following theorem shows that the automorphism groups of many finite simply connected square complexes are quadric. Theorem 1.20 (Finite Square Complex Embedding Theorem). Let G be a group acting on a finite simply connected square complex X that satisfies the following conditions: (1) the attaching map of every square is an immersion; and (2) no two squares of X have the same attaching map; and (3) the 1-skeleton X 1 of X is simplicial. Then X embeds equivariantly into a finite quadric complex X ′ . Proof. Since X is simply connected, X 1 is bipartite. It is also simplicial and so immersed 4-cycles and 6-cycles in X 1 are embedded. Then X is a subcomplex of the 4-flag completion X 1 of X 1 . This embedding is equivariant and so we can assume that X was 4-flag to begin with. We give an algorithmic proof. If the number of embedded 6-cycles of X 1 that do not have a diagonal is 0, then X is quadric by Lemma 1.19 so we take X ′ to be X and are done. Otherwise take some diagonal-free embedded 6-cycle γ in X 1 and choose an unordered pair {u, v} of opposing vertices of γ. Obtain a new complex X ′′ from X by first adding an edge joining gu and gv for each translate {gu, gv} of {u, v} and then gluing a square to each new embedded 4-cycle. The resulting complex X ′′ has simplicial 1-skeleton and is simply connected, as any path passing  12  NIMA HODA  through one of the new edges {gu, gv} can be homotoped to a path passing instead through gγ. It is also 4-flag and so satisfies conditions 1.20.1 and 1.20.2. Finally, X embeds into X ′′ equivariantly, so we may replace X with X ′′ and continue. This algorithm must terminate because, while the number n = #X 0 of vertices in X does not increase, the number ( ) of edges increases in each step and a simplicial graph on n vertices has at most n2 edges. □ If the action of G on X in Theorem 1.20 is free or proper or faithful then so is its action on X ′ . 1.6. Balls in the 1-Skeleton. Balls in the 1-skeleton of a quadric complex are not generally convex (e.g. consider the standard square tiling of the plane).2 This is in contrast to the 1-skeleton of a systolic complex, where a neighborhood of any convex subgraph is convex. Balls in the 1-skeleton of quadric complexes are isometrically embedded, however, and this fact is crucial in our proof in Section 2 of the Invariant Biclique Theorem. A ball Br (v) of radius r centered at a vertex v of a graph Γ is the full subgraph on the set of all vertices of Γ at distance at most r to v. The following lemma is an easy corollary of a theorem of Bandelt [3, Theorem 2(ii)]. We give a disc diagrammatic proof. Lemma 1.21. Let X be a quadric complex. The balls of its 1-skeleton X 1 are isometrically embedded subgraphs. Proof. Let Br (v) be the ball of radius r centered at some vertex v of X. Let a and b be vertices of Br (v) and take geodesics α from v to a and β from v to b. For each geodesic γ of X 1 from a to b there is a minimal area disc diagram D in X with boundary path ∂◦ D = αγβ −1 . Choose (γ, D) minimizing the area of D. By Lemma 1.14, no dual curve of D both starts and ends on one of α, β, or γ. Furthermore, no two dual curves starting on γ cross. Indeed, any such crossing would imply an innermost such crossing (i.e. one nearest γ) and so a vertex of π2 curvature in the interior of γ. But this would contradict the minimality of (γ, D). Therefore, γ = γα γβ is the disjoint union of two subpaths γα and γβ where all dual curves of D starting on γα end on α and all those staring on γβ end on β. It follows, by Proposition 1.15, that every vertex u in the interior of γ is closer to v than a (if u ∈ γα ) or b (if u ∈ γβ ). That is, γ ⊂ Br (v). □ 1.7. Two Results of Hanlon and Martinez-Pedroza. We end this section by stating two theorems of Hanlon and Martinez-Pedroza that apply to quadric complexes and groups. Theorem 1.22 ([14, Theorem 1.1]). Let C be any category of complexes closed under taking full subcomplexes and covering spaces. The category of groups acting properly and cocompactly on simply connected complexes in C is closed under taking finitely presented subgroups. Corollary 1.23. A finitely presented subgroup of a quadric group is quadric. Theorem 1.22 generalizes a theorem of Wise which applies to finitely presented subgroups of torsionfree groups [30]. In order to prove Theorem 1.22, Hanlon and Martinez-Pedroza use the following theorem, which we use in the proof of the Invariant Biclique Theorem. 2In fact, there exist quadric complexes wherein the convex hull of a ball of radius 1 is infinite.  QUADRIC COMPLEXES  13  Theorem 1.24 ([14, Theorem 4.1]). If G is a group acting properly on a simply connected locally finite complex X and H is a finitely presented subgroup of G, then H acts cocompactly on a simply connected complex X ′ that maps H-equivariantly into X through an F -tower X ′ → X. An F -tower is a composition of covering maps and inclusions of full subcomplexes and so, if X is locally quadric, then X ′ is quadric. We need only the following special case of the theorem. Corollary 1.25. If G is a finite group acting on a simply connected locally finite quadric complex X, then G acts on a finite quadric complex X ′ that immerses G-equivariantly into X. 2. The Invariant Biclique Property We first prove the Invariant Biclique Theorem for finite quadric complexes and then generalize this result to locally finite quadric complexes by applying Corollary 1.25 of Hanlon and Martinez-Pedroza. We prove the finite version of the theorem by showing that finite 4-bridged graphs are bidismantlable—a theorem of Bandelt [3, Theorem 2]—and that each such graph has a biclique invariant under all of its automorphisms. Our proof of the latter, in Section 2.1, follows that in Hensel et al. [16] showing that dismantlable graphs have invariant cliques—original proved by Polat [26]. In Section 2.2 we apply the breadth-first search algorithm to show that 4-bridged are bidismantlable, a technique used by Chepoi [5] to give an alternate proof of the theorem of Anstee and Farber [1] that bridged graphs are dismantlable. 2.1. Dismantling Bipartite Graphs. A metric sphere Sr (u) of radius r centered at a vertex u in a graph Γ is the full subgraph on the set of vertices of Γ at distance r from u. If Γ is bipartite and Sr (u) is a metric sphere in Γ then Sr (u) has no edges. The neighbours of any vertex v ∈ Sr (u) are in Sr−1 (u) and Sr+1 (u). Definition 2.1. Let Γ be a finite bipartite simplicial graph. If u and v are distinct vertices of Γ then u is bidominated by v if every neighbour of u is a neighbour of v, i.e., if there is a containment S1 (u) ⊂ S1 (v) of metric spheres. Γ is bidismantlable or just bidismantlable if there exists a sequence Γ = Γ1 , Γ2 , . . . , Γn of graphs ending on a biclique such that, for each i < n, Γi+1 = Γi \ vi for some vi bidominated in Γi . In other words, Γ is bidismantlable if we can obtain a biclique from Γ by successively removing bidominated vertices. These definitions are modified from the standard ones, which require a dominated vertex to be a neighbour of its dominator and require a dismantlement to end on a clique. The modification is necessary to work with bipartite graphs which, by the original definitions, are dismantlable only in the case of trees. Note that if u bidominates v in Γ then u bidominates v in every full subgraph of Γ containing u and v. The bidomination relation is transitive. If u bidominates v which bidominates w then u bidominates w. At each step of a bidismantlement of a graph, there may be several bidominated vertices that could potentially be removed. The following lemma and proof, which are adapted from Lemma 2.5 of Hensel et al. [16], show that these choices can be made arbitrarily.  14  NIMA HODA  Lemma 2.2. If Γ is a finite bidismantlable simplicial graph and a vertex v is bidominated in Γ by a vertex u, then Γ \ v is bidismantlable. Proof. Let Γ = Γ1 , Γ2 , . . . , Γn and v1 , v2 , . . . , vn be as in Definition 2.1. If n = 1 then Γ is a biclique and then so is Γ \ v so that we are done. Also, if v1 = v then Γ \ v = Γ2 , which we know is bidismantlable. So we may assume that n > 1 and that v ̸= v1 . If v1 is bidominated in Γ \ v then we can remove it to obtain Γ2 \ v. And if v is bidominated in Γ2 then Γ2 \ v is bidismantlable by induction on n. So if both of these conditions hold, then Γ \ v is bidismantlable and we are done. We assume that either: (I) v1 is not bidominated in Γ \ v or (II) v is not bidominated in Γ2 . Case I: v1 is not bidominated in Γ \ v. Then v must have been the only bidominator of v1 in Γ. It follows that v1 = u (otherwise u bidominates v1 in Γ \ v). Case II: v is not bidominated in Γ2 . Then v1 = u and the bidominator of v1 in Γ must be v (or else it bidominates v in Γ2 ). In either case we find that v bidominates u in Γ and that v1 = u. But u bidominates v in Γ so u and v have the same set of neighbours. Hence Γ \ v ∼ = Γ \ u = Γ \ v1 = Γ2 , which is bidismantlable. □ The following theorem is the main result of this section, the invariant biclique theorem for finite bidismantlable graphs. Its proof is adapted from Theorem 2.4 of Hensel et al. [16]. Theorem 2.3. Let Γ be a finite bidismantlable simplicial graph with automorphism group G. Then G stabilizes a biclique of Γ. Proof. The proof is by induction on the number #Γ0 of vertices of Γ. If #Γ0 = 2 then Γ is a biclique. This proves the base case. For #Γ0 > 2 let D be the set of bidominated vertices of Γ and consider the following two cases. Case I: No two vertices of D have the same set of neighbours. It follows that every bidominated vertex v ∈ D has a bidominator in Γ\D. Otherwise we could construct a sequence v = v1 , v2 , v3 , . . . in D starting on v such that vi is bidominated by vi+1 , for each i. But D is finite so this sequence must have repeated vertices, contradicting the assumption of this case. Now D is invariant under G and hence so is the full subgraph Γ′ = Γ \ D. But Γ′ is bidismantlable, by Lemma 2.2, and so stabilizes a biclique, by induction. Case II: There is a pair of vertices of D that have the same set of neighbours. Define a relation ∼ on the vertex set of Γ by u ∼ v if u and v have the same set of neighbours (S1 (u) = S1 (v)). This is an equivalence relation so we can take the quotient graph Γ′ = Γ/∼. The quotient Γ′ can also be obtained by successively removing bidominated vertices starting with Γ, since a vertex of Γ is bidominated by every other member of its equivalence class. So, by Lemma 2.2, Γ′ is bidismantlable. The action of G descends to an action on Γ′ and the quotient map Γ → Γ′ is Gequivariant. But Γ′ has fewer vertices than Γ and so, by induction, has a stable biclique B. The preimage of an edge in Γ′ is a biclique in Γ and so the preimage of B is an invariant biclique of Γ. □ 2.2. Breadth-First Search and 4-Bridged Graphs. In order to show that finite 4-bridged graphs are bidismantlable we present a well-known algorithmic tool, the breadth-first search. This algorithm gives us a spanning tree and a numbering of the vertices of a 4-bridged graph which we can use to dismantle it, as in Chepoi  QUADRIC COMPLEXES  (a)  (b)  15  (c)  Figure 5. Figures for Lemma 2.5 and Lemma 2.6. [5] for the case of bridged graphs. Bandelt first proved the bidismantlability of 4-bridged graphs [3, Theorem 2]. Definition 2.4. Breadth-first search (BFS) is an algorithm taking as input a finite simplicial graph Γ on n vertices and a starting vertex u ∈ Γ. The BFS algorithm visits all of the vertices of Γ, starting with u, numbering the ith vertex it visits with the number i. The algorithm proceeds as follows. (1) Assign the number 1 to u. (2) As long as there remains a vertex of Γ that is not assigned a number, repeat the following two steps. (a) Let v be the least numbered vertex of Γ that has an unnumbered neighbour. (b) Take an arbitrary unnumbered neighbour w of v and assign to it the next available number (i.e. the least positive integer not yet assigned to a vertex). The strict total order induced on the vertices of Γ by these numbers is called the BFS order. We denote a BFS order with starting vertex u by ≺u or just ≺. A BFS order with starting vertex u is not necessarily unique due to the arbitrary choices made during an execution of the BFS algorithm. However, the order is always compatible with the distance of vertices from u. Precisely, if the vertex v is closer to u than the vertex w then v precedes w in any BFS order with starting vertex u, i.e., |v, u| < |w, u| =⇒ v ≺u w. Fix a BFS order on Γ with starting vertex u. A neighbour w of a vertex v is called a pseudoparent of v if it precedes v in the BFS order. The minimal pseudoparent of w in the BFS order is the parent of w, denoted Pw. Every vertex of Γ other than the starting vertex u has a parent. If v ≺ w for some vertices v and w of Γ having parents Pv and Pw then Pv ⪯ Pw. The subgraph Γ′ of Γ defined by the parent relation is a spanning tree of Γ. If Γ is bipartite (e.g. if Γ is 4-bridged) and if v and w are adjacent vertices of Γ then one of v or w is a pseudoparent of the other. If Γ is bipartite, then the pseudoparents of a vertex v are all strictly closer to u than v is. Lemma 2.5. Let Γ be a locally finite 4-bridged graph and run the BFS algorithm on Γ starting at an arbitrary vertex u. Let v and w be vertices of Γ with parents Pv and Pw. If w is a pseudoparent of v, then Pw is a pseudoparent of Pv.  16  NIMA HODA  Proof. The proof is by induction on |v, u|, which is at least 2 since w is assumed to have a parent. If |v, u| = 2 then Pw = u = P2 v and so the lemma holds. Suppose the lemma holds for 2 ≤ |v, u| < r. We will prove it for |v, u| = r. If w = Pv then Pw = P2 v is the parent, and so a pseudoparent, of Pv. So we may assume that w ̸= Pv. By the definition of parent, this implies that Pv ≺ w. Since Γ is bipartite, it also implies that |Pv, w| = 2 in Γ. But the ball Br−1 (u) contains Pv and w so, by Lemma 1.21, Pv and w have a common pseudoparent x. Now, if Pw = x or Pw = P2 v then we are done, so assume that Pw ̸= x and Pw ̸= P2 v. Then, since Pv ≺ w, we have P2 v ≺ Pw ≺ x and so P2 v ̸= x. Hence the graph in Figure 5a is embedded in Γ. By induction, the parent Px of x is a pseudoparent of both Pw and P2 v as in the graph in Figure 5b which is also embedded in Γ. Then, as Γ is 4-bridged, the 6-cycle v, Pv, P2 v, Px, Pw, w, v must have a diagonal. But Px cannot be adjacent to v, as |Px, u| = |v, u| − 3, and P2 v cannot be adjacent to w, since P2 v ≺ Pw and Pw is the parent of w. Hence Pw and Pv must be adjacent so that Pw is a pseudoparent of Pv. □ Lemma 2.6. Let Γ be a locally finite 4-bridged graph and run the BFS algorithm on Γ starting at some vertex u. Let x be any vertex of Γ at distance r = |x, u| ≥ 2 from u. Then x is bidominated in Br (u) by the parent of its ≺-maximal pseudoparent. Proof. Let w be the maximal pseudoparent of v in the BFS order. We want to show that every neighbour of v in Br (u) is also a neighbour of Pw. But the neighbours of v in Br (u) are precisely its pseudoparents. So it suffices to show that Pw is adjacent to every pseudoparent of v. This holds for the pseudoparents Pv and w, by Lemma 2.5. Let y be any other pseudoparent of v. We will show that Pw is adjacent to y. By Lemma 2.5, Py is a pseudoparent of Pv. If Py and Pw coincide then we are done, so we may assume otherwise. Then |Py, Pw| = 2 in Γ and so, by Lemma 1.21, Py and Pw have a common pseudoparent x as shown in the graph in Figure 5c which is embedded in Γ. Then, as Γ is 4-bridged, the 6-cycle v, y, Py, x, Pw, w, v must have a diagonal. But x and v cannot be adjacent since x is too close to u relative to v. Nor can Py and w be adjacent because the facts y ≺ w and Py ̸= Pw imply Py ≺ Pw and yet Pw is the parent of w. Hence Pw and y are adjacent. □ Corollary 2.7. Finite 4-bridged graphs with at least two vertices are bidismantlable. Proof. Take any vertex u of Γ. By Lemma 2.6, for r ≥ 2, every vertex v of the metric sphere Sr (u) is bidominated in Br (u) by some vertex w in Sr−2 (u). Hence, we may successively remove vertices at maximal distance from u, until the biclique B1 (u) is all that remains. □ Corollary 2.8. A group G acting on a finite quadric complex X not equal to a single vertex, stabilizes a biclique of X. Proof. The 1-skeleton X 1 of X is 4-bridged, by Proposition 1.18, and every automorphism of X restricts to an automorphism of X 1 which is bidismantlable, by Corollary 2.7. So by Theorem 2.3, X has an invariant biclique. □ Theorem 2.9 (Invariant Biclique Theorem). Let G be a finite group acting on a locally finite quadric complex X, which is not equal to a single vertex. Then G stabilizes a biclique of X.  QUADRIC COMPLEXES  17  Figure 6. A 2-cell with a 1-cell attached. Proof. By Corollary 1.25 of Hanlon and Martinez-Pedroza, we have a finite quadric complex X ′ mapping G-equivariantly into X. By Corollary 2.8, G stabilizes a biclique of X ′ . The image of this biclique is an invariant biclique of X. □ 3. C(4)-T(4) Groups Small cancellation theory traces its origins to the work of Dehn on hyperbolic surface groups [7] and has played a significant role in the study of infinite groups since then. The standard textbook on the subject is Lyndon and Schupp [21]. We recall the definition of the C(p) and T(q) small cancellation properties in Section 3.1. Section 3.1.1 develops disc diagrammatic properties and the Strong Helly Property of C(4)-T(4) complexes. These properties are crucial in the proof that C(4)-T(4) groups are quadric, given in Section 3.2. The proof relies on a construction associating a square complex XY to a simply connected 2-complex Y . We prove that this square complex, on which the automorphism group of Y acts, is always simply connected and that it is quadric when Y is C(4)-T(4). 3.1. The C(p) and T(q) Properties. Definitions of the C(p) and T(q) properties and disc diagrammatic consequences can be found elsewhere [21, 22]. We include them here for completeness and because we require a Greendlinger’s Lemma for C(4)-T(4) Disc Diagrams (Corollary 3.3) that gives four sites of positive curvature on the boundary. Before defining the C(p) and T(q) properties we give some supporting definitions. Definition 3.1. Let D be a disc diagram. An arc α of D is a minimal subgraph of its 1-skeleton D1 satisfying the following conditions. (1) There is at least one 1-cell in α. (2) If α contains a 0-cell of valence 2 of D1 , then it contains both of its incident 1-cells. A 0-cell v of D is a node of D if it has valence other than 2. If a node v is incident to an arc α then v is a node of α. The arcs of a disc diagram D are, possibly closed, paths. If D is a single 2-cell then its only arc has no nodes. If D is a single 2-cell F with a 1-cell e attached, as in Figure 6 then it has two arcs: a closed arc containing the boundary of F and an arc containing only e. The former arc has a single node, the valence 3 0-cell of e. The latter has both endpoints of e as nodes. If an arc α of a disc diagram D contains a 1-cell on the boundary ∂D of D then α lies entirely on ∂D. If α contains a 1-cell incident on its two sides to the 2-cells F1 and F2 (with F1 and F2 possibly the same 2-cell) then this holds for every 1-cell of α. An arc of a disc diagram D is a boundary arc if it lies on the boundary ∂D of D. A boundary arc with a valence 1 node is a spur. The valence 1 nodes of a spur are  18  NIMA HODA  (a) A daisy with five petals.  (b) A jasmine with six petals.  Figure 7. A square and its reflection about a horizontal line. called its tips. A non-boundary arc is an internal arc. If an arc contains a 1-cell that is contained in the boundary of a 2-cell F , then it is an arc of the 2-cell F . Let D be a disc diagram in a 2-complex Y and let F1 and F2 be two intersecting 2-cells of D. An arc α of F1 and F2 is foldable if, when the boundary paths of F1 and F2 are based and oriented so as to coincide on the length of α, they map to the same closed path of Y . A disc diagram D in a 2-complex is reduced if it has no foldable arcs. Given a disc diagram D in a 2-complex Y we can obtain a reduced disc diagram D′ in Y with the same boundary path by performing a finite number of reductions starting from D. Each reduction removes a pair of 2-cells F1 and F2 that have a foldable arc. Definition. A daisy D with p petals is a disc diagram satisfying the following conditions. (1) It has a central 2-cell F which has p arcs, each of positive length and which together cover the boundary of F . (2) Each arc of F is given by its intersection with a 2-cell of D called a petal, whose remaining boundary is a boundary arc. (3) The boundary ∂D of D is the concatenation of the boundary arcs of its petals. See Figure 7a for an example of a daisy. Definition. A jasmine D with p petals is a disc diagram satisfying the following conditions. (1) There is a single internal 0-cell v in D. (2) There are p 2-cells in D called petals, all of which are incident to v. (3) The internal arcs of D are all 1-cells, each of which is incident to v. (4) The boundary ∂D of D is the concatenation of the boundary arcs of its petals. See Figure 7b for an example of a jasmine. A 2-complex Y satisfies the C(p) property if its 2-cells are immersed and any daisy in Y with fewer than p petals is foldable along an arc of its central 2-cell. A 2-complex Y satisfies the T(q) property if its 2-cells are immersed and any jasmine in Y is foldable along one of its internal arcs. A group presentation ⟨S | R⟩ satisfies C(p) or T(q) if its associated complex does. Note that if D is a reduced disc diagram in a C(p) (resp. T(q)) complex, then D is C(p) (resp. T(q)). If D is a disc diagram in a 2-complex of minimal area or one with the least number of cells of any dimension then it is reduced. If a 2-complex Y is C(p) or T(q) then so is its universal cover Ỹ . If a group G has a finite C(p) (resp. T(q)) presentation  QUADRIC COMPLEXES  19  Y = ⟨S | R⟩ then it acts freely and cocompactly on a simply connected C(p) (resp. T(q)) complex, namely the universal cover Ỹ of the presentation. 3.1.1. C(4)-T(4) Complexes. A C(4)-T(4) complex is one satisfying both the C(4) and T(4) properties. These include, for example, CAT(0) square complexes. We develop well-known disc diagrammatic tools in this section for the study of C(4)-T(4) complexes. We use these tools to present standard proofs that 2-cells of C(4)-T(4) complexes are embedded and of the Strong Helly Theorem, which is required in the proof that C(4)-T(4) groups are quadric. Let D be a C(4)-T(4) disc diagram. The curvature of a 2-cell F of D is κ(F ) = 2π −  ν(F ) π, 2  where ν(F ) is the number of nodes on the boundary of F . Let δ(v) denote the valence of a node v and ρ(v) the number of 2-cells incident to v. The curvature of a node v of D is ρ(v) π. κ(v) = 2π − δ(v)π + 2 Proposition 3.2 (Gauss-Bonnet Theorem for C(4)-T(4) Disc Diagrams). Let D be a disc diagram. The sum of the curvatures of nodes and 2-cells of D is 2π, i.e., ∑ ∑ κ(F ) + κ(v) = 2π. F 2-cell  v node  Proof. The cells of D can be partitioned into its nodes, its open arcs (i.e. arcs minus their nodes) and its open 2-cells. Then its Euler characteristic χ(D) can be computed by subtracting the number of arcs from the number of nodes and 2-cells. That is, each arc contributes −1 to the Euler characteristic and each node or 2-cell contributes 1. Evenly distributing the −1 of each arc to its nodes and distributing 1 4 from the contribution of each 2-cell to each of the nodes on its boundary gives the sum ∑ κ(F ) ∑ κ(v) + , 2π 2π F 2-cell  v node  which then must equal χ(D) = 1.  □  Let D be a disc diagram. A boundary 2-cell of D is a 2-cell of D with a boundary arc. A site of positive curvature on the boundary ∂D of a disc diagram D is the tip of a spur or a boundary 2-cell with fewer than four nodes on its boundary. Corollary 3.3 (Greendlinger’s Lemma for C(4)-T(4) Disc Diagrams). Let D be a C(4)-T(4) disc diagram and assume that D is not a single 0-cell or 2-cell. Then there are at least two positive curvature sites on the boundary ∂D of D. If D has no spurs and every boundary 2-cell of D has at least three nodes on its boundary then there are at least four positive curvature sites on ∂D, each of which consists of a 2-cell with three nodes on its boundary. Proof. An internal node v of D has ρ(v) = δ(v) and so has curvature κ(v) = 2π − δ(v)π +  δ(v) δ(v) π = 2π − π, 2 2  20  NIMA HODA  (a) Proposition 3.4  (b) Proposition 3.5  (c) Proposition 3.7  Figure 8. Disc diagrams from the proofs of various propositions. which, by the T(4) property, is nonpositive. For a boundary node v, ρ(v) < δ(v) so that, δ(v) π. κ(v) < 2π − 2 π But κ(v) is an integer multiple of 2 , so if δ(v) ≥ 3 then κ(v) is nonpositive. But δ(v) ̸= 0, by assumption, and δ(v) ̸= 2, by Definition 3.1, so only if a node v has valence δ(v) = 1, i.e., v is the tip of a spur, can it have positive curvature and in this case κ(v) = π. By assumption, D is not a single 2-cell and so κ(F ) is always less than 2π for a 2cell F of D. If F has no boundary arc then, by the C(4) property, κ(F ) ≤ 0. So only boundary 2-cells can have positive curvature. Then the only positive curvature in D comes from boundary 2-cells and tips of spurs, neither of which have curvature 2π. It follows, by Proposition 3.2, that there are at least two sites of positive curvature on ∂D. If we add the assumption that D has no spurs and all its boundary 2-cells have at least three nodes then the only sites of positive curvature on ∂D are boundary 2-cells with exactly three nodes. These provide only π2 curvature and so, by Proposition 3.2, there must be at least four of them. □ Proposition 3.4. Let Y be a simply connected C(4)-T(4) complex. Then every 2-cell F1 of Y is embedded. Proposition 3.5. Let Y be a simply connected C(4)-T(4) complex and let F1 and F2 be a pair of intersecting 2-cells of Y . Then the intersection F1 ∩ F2 of these 2-cells is connected. Corollary 3.6. 2-cells of a simply connected C(4)-T(4) complex Y intersect along paths, possibly closed, in its 1-skeleton Y 1 . Proposition 3.7 (Helly Property). Let F1 , F2 and F3 be pairwise intersecting 2-cells of a simply connected C(4)-T(4) complex. Then F1 ∩ F2 ∩ F3 is nonempty. Proof scheme of Propositions 3.4, 3.5 and 3.7. Each proof follows the same pattern. We assume the statement does not hold, and let the Fi , γi and vi be a counterexample, where vi is a 0-cell on the boundary of Fi and Fi+1 and γi is an embedded path from vi−1 to vi on the boundary of Fi . Let D be a disc diagram in Y with boundary path the concatenation of the γi , as in Figure 8. Now, pick the counterexample (Fi , γi , vi )i and D so as to minimize the total number of cells in  QUADRIC COMPLEXES  21  ⋃ D. Let D′ = D ∪ i Fi be disc diagram obtained from D by gluing in the Fi along the γi , as in Figure 8. Then D′ is reduced. Since this is a counterexample and since D satisfies the C(4) property, D is not a single 0-cell or 2-cell. By minimality and the fact that 2-cells are immersed, D has no spurs. Also, any boundary 2-cell of D that has fewer than ⋃ three nodes would give a foldable arc of some Fi in the disc diagram D′ = D ∪ i Fi obtained from D by gluing the Fi along the γi . This would contradict minimality. Then, by Corollary 3.3, there are four sites of positive curvature on the boundary ∂D of D. One of these must occur away from a vi and so give a foldable arc of an Fi in D′ , contradicting minimality. □ Proposition 3.8 (Strong Helly Property). Let F1 , F2 and F3 be pairwise intersecting 2-cells of a simply connected C(4)-T(4) complex. Then the intersection of a pair of the 2-cells is contained in the remaining 2-cell, i.e., Fσ(1) ∩ Fσ(2) ⊂ Fσ(3) for some permutation σ of the indices. Proof. This follows immediately from Proposition 3.4, Corollary 3.6, Proposition 3.7 and the T(4) property. □ 3.2. Quadrization of 2-Complexes. We define now our main construction for this section, the quadrization of a 2-complex. We use the properties developed above to study the quadrization of C(4)-T(4) complexes and finally to prove that C(4)-T(4) groups are quadric. Let Y be a 2-complex whose 2-cells are embedded. Let Y0 and Y2 be the sets of 0-cells and 2-cells of Y . Let ΓY be the bipartite graph on the vertex set Y0 ∪ Y2 where an edge joins v ∈ Y0 and F ∈ Y2 whenever v appears on the boundary of F . The quadrization XY of Y is the 4-flag completion XY = ΓY of the graph ΓY . Note that if a group G acts properly and cocompactly on Y then it acts properly and cocompactly on the quadrization XY . If every 1-cell of Y appears on the boundary of a 2-cell then the quadrization XY of Y is connected. For the rest of this section, we will assume that every 1-cell of a 2-complex Y is contained in the boundary of at least one 2-cell. This is not a serious restriction, since each 1-cell of Y not appearing on the boundary of a 2-cell can be subdivided (if it is not embedded) and then thickened to a 2-cell to obtain a new 2-complex Y ′ which deformation retracts to Y . The original complex Y embeds Aut(Y )equivariantly into Y ′ via a continuous map Y → Y ′ , which thus faithfully preserves group actions. Furthermore, if Y is C(4)-T(4) then so is Y ′ . Lemma 3.9. Let Y be a 2-complex with embedded 2-cells. If Y is simply connected then so is its quadrization XY . Proof. Suppose XY is not simply connected. Let α be any closed essential path α of XY . In Y , α corresponds to a cyclic sequence F0 , v1 , F2 , v3 , . . . , F2n−2 , v2n−1 , F0 of 2-cells and 0-cells such that, for every i, the 2-cell F2i contains the 0-cells v2i−1 and v2i+1 on its boundary (indices modulo 2n). Let β2i and γ2i be the two paths on the boundary of F2i from v2i−1 to v2i+1 . Let δ0 , δ2 , . . . , δ2n−2 be any sequence with each δ2i ∈ {β2i , γ2i }. Then the concatenation δ = δ0 δ2 · · · δ2n−2 is a closed path in Y . So there is a disc diagram D in Y with boundary path ∂◦ D = δ. Now, choose α, the δ2i and D so as to minimize the total number of 0-cells, 1-cells and 2-cells of D. Because the 2-cells of Y are embedded, any tip of a spur of  22  NIMA HODA  Figure 9. The disc diagram D from the proof of Lemma 3.9. If, as on the left, it has a 2-cell F then the disc diagram on the right exists, contradicting minimality of D. D must be one of the 0-cells v2i+1 . Let u be the 0-cell of the spur incident to this v2i+1 . Then F2i , v2i+1 , F2i+2 , u, F2i is a 4-cycle in XY and so is nullhomotopic. But then we can replace v2i+1 with u in α and D with D \ e, where e is the 1-cell of the spur joining u and v2i+1 . This contradicts the minimality of our choices and so D has no spurs. Suppose D has a 2-cell. Then D must have a 2-cell F that intersects its boundary ∂D. Let w be a 0-cell in the intersection of F and ∂D. Then w is contained in some δ2i and so some F2i in XY . But then we can replace the subpath F2i in α with F2i , w, F , w, F2i and replace D with D \ F , as shown in Figure 9. This contradicts the minimality of our choices. So D has no 2-cells. Therefore, D is a spurless tree, i.e., a single 0-cell, x. It follows that v2i+1 = x, for every i, so that α is F0 , x, F2 , x, . . . , F2n−2 , x, F0 . This path is clearly nullhomotopic, which is a contradiction. □ Lemma 3.10. Let Y be a simply connected 2-complex. If Y is C(4)-T(4) then its quadrization XY is quadric. Proof. By Proposition 3.4, the 2-cells of Y are embedded, so by Lemma 3.9, XY is simply connected. Then, by Lemma 1.19 and Proposition 1.18, it suffices to show that embedded 6-cycles of XY1 have diagonals. An embedded 6-cycle in XY corresponds to a triple of pairwise intersecting 2-cells F1 , F2 and F3 in Y and three 0-cells, one contained in each of the three pairwise intersections. By Proposition 3.8, F1 ∩ F2 ⊂ F3 , after possibly reindexing. Then the 0-cell contained in F1 ∩ F2 is incident to F3 . Hence the 6-cycle has a diagonal. □ Theorem 3.11. Let G be a group admitting a finite C(4)-T(4) presentation ⟨S | R⟩. Then G is quadric. Proof. The action of G on the universal cover Ỹ of the complex Y associated to the presentation ⟨S | R⟩ is free and cocompact. The quadrization XỸ of Ỹ is quadric, by Lemma 3.10. Since the action of G on the 0-cells and 2-cells of Ỹ preserves incidences, G acts on XỸ . The stabilizers of 0-cells and 2-cells are trivial in Ỹ , so then are the stabilizers of vertices and edges in XỸ . Square stabilizers in XỸ are  QUADRIC COMPLEXES  23  finite. Indeed, any 4-cycle in XỸ1 corresponds to a pair of 2-cells whose intersection contains two 0-cells. Any nontrivial element g ∈ G stabilizing the 4-cycle must swap the 0-cells and swap the 2-cells. Then the 2-cells have the same attaching map and g restricts to the antipodal map on their union, which is a sphere S. It follows that g is the only nontrivial element of G stabilizing the 4-cell. So the action of G on the quadric complex XỸ is proper. This action is also cocompact and so we are done. □ References [1] R. P. Anstee and M. Farber. On bridged graphs and cop-win graphs. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B, 44(1):22–28, 1988. [2] S. P. Avann. Metric ternary distributive semi-lattices. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 12(3):407–414, 1961. [3] H.-J. Bandelt. Hereditary modular graphs. Combinatorica, 8(2):149–157, 1988. [4] B. Brešar, J. Chalopin, V. Chepoi, T. Gologranc, and D. Osajda. Bucolic complexes. Adv. Math., 243:127–167, 2013. [5] V. Chepoi. Bridged graphs are cop-win graphs: an algorithmic proof. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B, 69(1):97–100, 1997. [6] V. Chepoi. Graphs of some CAT(0) complexes. Adv. in Appl. Math., 24(2):125–179, 2000. [7] M. Dehn. Papers on group theory and topology. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987. Translated from the German and with introductions and an appendix by John Stillwell, With an appendix by Otto Schreier. [8] T. Elsner and P. Przytycki. Square complexes and simplicial nonpositive curvature. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 141(9):2997–3004, 2013. [9] S. M. Gersten. Isoperimetric and isodiametric functions of finite presentations. In Geometric Group Theory: Proceedings of the Symposium held in Sussex, Volume 1, volume 181 of London Mathematical Society Lecture Notes Series, pages 79–96. Cambridge University Press, New York, 1991. [10] M. Greendlinger. Dehn’s algorithm for the word problem. Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 13(1):67– 83, 1960. [11] M. Gromov. Hyperbolic groups. In Essays in group theory, volume 8 of Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ., pages 75–263. Springer, New York, 1987. [12] F. Haglund. Complexes simpliciaux hyperboliques de grande dimension. Preprint, 2003. [13] F. Haglund and D. T. Wise. Special cube complexes. Geom. Funct. Anal., 17(5):1551–1620, 2008. [14] R. G. Hanlon and E. Martı́nez-Pedroza. Lifting group actions, equivariant towers and subgroups of non-positively curved groups. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 14(5):2783–2808, 2014. [15] A. Hatcher. Algebraic topology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002. [16] S. Hensel, D. Osajda, and P. Przytycki. Realisation and dismantlability. Geom. Topol., 18(4):2079–2126, 2014. [17] N. Hoda. Bisimplicial complexes and asphericity. In preparation, 2018. [18] J. Huang, K. Jankiewicz, and P. Przytycki. Cocompactly cubulated 2-dimensional Artin groups. Comment. Math. Helv., 91(3):519–542, 2016. [19] T. Januszkiewicz and J. Świa̧tkowski. Simplicial nonpositive curvature. Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci., 104(1):1–85, 2006. [20] S. Klavžar and H. M. Mulder. Median graphs: characterizations, location theory and related structures. J. Combin. Math. Combin. Comput., 30:103–127, 1999. [21] R. C. Lyndon and P. E. Schupp. Combinatorial group theory. Classics in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2001. Reprint of the 1977 edition. [22] J. P. McCammond and D. T. Wise. Fans and ladders in small cancellation theory. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 84(3):599–644, 2002. [23] L. Nebeský. Median graphs. Comment. Math. Univ. Carolinae, 12(2):317–325, 1971. [24] G. A. Niblo and L. D. Reeves. Groups acting on CAT(0) cube complexes. Geom. Topol., 1(1):1–7, 1997. [25] G. A. Niblo and L. D. Reeves. The geometry of cube complexes and the complexity of their fundamental groups. Topology, 37(3):621–633, 1998.  24  NIMA HODA  [26] N. Polat. Finite invariant simplices in infinite graphs. Period. Math. Hungar., 27(2):125–136, 1993. [27] S. J. Pride. On Tits’ conjecture and other questions concerning Artin and generalized Artin groups. Invent. Math., 86(2):347–356, 1986. [28] M. Sageev. Ends of group pairs and non-positively curved cube complexes. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 71(3):585–617, 1995. [29] V. P. Soltan and V. D. Chepoi. Conditions for invariance of set diameters under dconvexification in a graph. Kibernetika (Kiev), 19(6):14–18, 1983. [30] D. T. Wise. Sixtolic complexes and their fundamental groups. Preprint, 2003. [31] D. T. Wise. The structure of groups with a quasiconvex hierarchy, 2011. pp. 1–189. Submitted. [32] D. T. Wise. From riches to raags: 3-manifolds, right-angled Artin groups, and cubical geometry, volume 117 of CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathematics. Published for the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences, Washington, DC; by the American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2012.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
