Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_5767

Abstract:
ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS  arXiv:1603.05725v1 [math.GR] 17 Mar 2016  GOULNARA N. ARZHANTSEVA AND MARK F. HAGEN  Abstract. We provide an analogue of Strebel’s classification of geodesic triangles in classical C 0 ( 16 ) groups for groups given by Wise’s cubical presentations satisfying sufficiently strong metric cubical small-cancellation conditions. Using our classification, we prove that, except in specific degenerate cases, such groups are acylindrically hyperbolic.  Contents Introduction 1. Acylindrical hyperbolicity and WPD elements 2. Triangles in cubical small-cancellation groups 3. Detecting WPD elements using the classification of triangles 4. The hyperbolic space H and the coarse projection 5. Proof of Theorem B References  1 6 7 16 19 20 25  Introduction A cubical presentation of a group is a natural high-dimensional generalization of both a “classical” and a “graphical” presentation of a group in terms of generators and relators. The theory of cubical presentations, and especially the cubical small-cancellation theory developed by Wise [Wis, Section 3], has begun to play a significant role in geometric group theory following spectacular solutions of the virtual Haken conjecture by Agol and of Baumslag’s conjecture on one-relator groups with torsion by Wise. Topologically, a classical presentation of a group G consists of a wedge X of circles and a collection of combinatorial immersions Yi → X of circles so that the presentation complex X ∗ formed from X by coning off the various Yi satisfies e ∗ of X ∗ is a Cayley graph of G π1 X ∗ ∼ = G. The 1–skeleton Cay(X ∗ ) of the universal cover X with respect to the generating set implicit in the choice of X. A graphical presentation is a natural generalization of this: X is allowed to be an arbitrary graph, and each Yi → X becomes an immersion of graphs. In [Wis], it is observed that allowing even more flexibility in the choice of X can lead to more tractable “presentations” for a given group. This leads to the notion of a cubical presentation: X is now a nonpositively-curved cube complex and each Yi is a connected nonpositively-curved cube complex equipped with a local isometry Yi → X. The presentation complex X ∗ is defined analogously, and there is a generalized Cayley graph Cay(X ∗ ) which is the cubical part of the universal cover of X ∗ , i.e. the cover of X corresponding to ker(π1 X → π1 X ∗ ). The analogy with classical presentations is clear: the cube complex X is a kind of “high-dimensional generating 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 20F06, 20F65, 20F67. Key words and phrases. Cubical small-cancellation, acylindrically hyperbolic group. G.N. Arzhantseva was partially supported by her ERC grant ANALYTIC no. 259527. M.F. Hagen was supported by the EPSRC grant of Henry Wilton. 1  2  G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN  e is the “high-dimensional tree” taking the place of the free set”, the CAT(0) cube complex X group on the generating set in the classical case, and Cay(X ∗ ) corresponds to a Cayley graph. The advantage is that some of the complication of the group has been “stored” in the organized, tractable cubical structure of X, leaving us to worry only about the interactions between the various Yi , and between each Yi and the cubical structure of X. The latter problem is handled by cubical small-cancellation theory, in which “generalized overlaps” between the various Yi (i.e. shadows of Yi on Yj , as propagated through the intervening cubes) are small in the appropriate metric sense. In this setting, there are powerful tools – specifically, the ladder theorem and the cubical Greendlinger lemma (see Section 2) – that allow one to extract considerable geometric and algebraic information about a group from a smallcancellation cubical presentation. The small-cancellation conditions of interest in this paper are the cubical C 0 (α) conditions, for α > 0. These say that |P | < αkYi k for all P, i, where kYi k denotes the length of a shortest essential closed combinatorial path in Yi and |P | is the length of the geodesic piece P . A piece is a path in the “generalized overlap” between distinct elevations e of the various Yi , or between such elevations and hyperplane-carriers in X. e to X One advantage of passing to cubical presentations is that many groups that do not admit classical presentations satisfying strong small-cancellation conditions nonetheless admit cubical presentations with these properties. For example, if G is the fundamental group of a nonpositivelycurved cube complex X, then G admits a cubical presentation with no relators, and therefore satisfies arbitrarily strong cubical small-cancellation conditions; on the other hand, G does not in general satisfy strong classical small-cancellation conditions, as can be seen by considering, for instance, right-angled Artin groups. Later in this introduction, we list more examples of cubical small-cancellation groups. Our first result is geometric. We classify geodesic triangles in the generalized Cayley graph of a cubical small-cancellation group in terms of the disc diagrams that they bound in the presentation complex. This is a cubical analogue of Strebel’s classification of geodesic triangles in C 0 ( 61 ) groups (Theorem 43 of [Str90]), which says that any geodesic triangle bounds a disc diagram of one of a small number of very specific combinatorial types: Theorem A (Classification of triangles). There exists α > 0 so that the following holds. Let X be a nonpositively-curved cube complex, let I be a (possibly infinite) index set and let {Yi → X : i ∈ I} be a set of local isometries. Suppose that the cubical presentation hX | {Yi }i∈I i satisfies the cubical C 0 (α) condition. Let X ∗ be the presentation complex and x, y, z be 0–cells e ∗ . Then there exists a geodesic triangle ∆ in X e ∗ , with corners x, y, z, of the universal cover X ∗ so that ∆ is the boundary path of a disc diagram D → X of one of 9 types; in particular, D is the union of 3 padded ladders. Moreover, any other geodesic triangle with corners x, y, z is square-homotopic to ∆. The precise (longer) statement is Theorem 2.16, which explains exactly what the “9 types” of disc diagram are; a padded ladder is a disc diagram of the type in Figure 2. The α required in our 1 proof is 144 . Conceptually, our theorem says that any geodesic triangle bounds a disc diagram which is square-homotopic (fixing corners) to a disc diagram which is a “thickened tripod”. Theorem A can be used to recover existing results of a similar character by imposing various conditions on X or I. • If I = ∅, then Theorem A says that any three vertices in a CAT(0) cube complex determine a geodesic tripod, which is a consequence of the fact that CAT(0) cube complexes are exactly the simply-connected cube complexes whose 1–skeleta are median graphs [Che00]. • If X is a wedge of circles and each Yi is an immersed circle, then hX | {Yi }i is a classical 1 C 0 ( 144 ) presentation, and the original Strebel classification for classical C 0 ( 16 ) groups applies, and follows from Theorem A.  ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS  3  • If dim X = 1 (i.e. X is a graph) and each Yi → X is an immersion of graphs, then we have graphical presentations, which are the setting for graphical small-cancellation theory. In this setting, there is a classification of triangles that holds under weaker smallcancellation conditions than are required in the cubical setting. Indeed, the classification of triangles is completely combinatorial, and Strebel’s proof actually applies in the setting of the (3, 7)–diagrams used by Gruber-Sisto in their proof of acylindrical hyperbolicity for graphical small-cancellation groups [GS14]; this combinatorial observation was made by Gruber [Gru15, Remark 3.11]. While the result about (3, 7)–diagrams suffices for graphical small-cancellation groups, one cannot extend it directly to disk diagrams over cubical presentations since the presence of squares means that such diagrams need not satisfy the (3, 7) condition. We foresee several applications of Theorem A to the thorough investigation of cubical smallcancellation groups (cf. in classical small-cancellation theory, the classification of triangles is crucial in calculating the conformal dimension of the boundary [Mac], in proving growth tightness [Sam], the rapid decay property [AD12], SQ-universality [Gru], etc.). In this paper, we focus on acylindrical hyperbolicity, inspired by the corresponding result for graphical small-cancellation groups [GS14]. A group G is acylindrically hyperbolic if it admits a nonelementary acylindrical action on a hyperbolic space (acylindricity generalizes uniform properness in a natural way). The notion of acylindrical hyperbolicity, due to Osin [Osi15a], unifies several generalizations of relative hyperbolicity [BF02, DGO11, Ham08, Sis] and provides a class of groups with many strong properties: if G is acylindrically hyperbolic, then G is SQuniversal, contains normal free subgroups, and is C ∗ –simple if and only if it has no finite normal subgroup [DGO11]; G contains Morse elements and thus all asymptotic cones of G contain cutpoints [Sis14]; the bounded cohomology of G has infinite dimension in dimensions 2 [HO13] and 3 [FPS15]; every commensurating endomorphism of G is an inner automorphism [AMS], etc. The class of acylindrically hyperbolic groups is now known to be vast, see e.g. [Bow08, Osi15a, DGO11, MO15, Osi15b, BF08, GS14, BHS14, PS15]. Our second result adds Wise’s cubical small-cancellation groups to this notable list: Theorem B (Acylindrical hyperbolicity from cubical small-cancellation). Let X be a compact 1 ) cubical nonpositively-curved cube complex and let hX | {Yi }i∈I i be a (possibly infinite) C 0 ( 144 ∗ presentation with each Yi compact. Let X denote the presentation complex. Then one of the following holds: (1) π1 X ∗ is finite; (2) π1 X ∗ is two-ended; e of X contains a convex (3) each Yi is contractible, π1 X ∗ = π1 X, and the universal cover X π1 X–invariant subcomplex splitting as the product of unbounded cube complexes; (4) π1 X ∗ is acylindrically hyperbolic. In the case where X is a compact cube complex and I = ∅ (i.e. in the purely cubical case), the failure of π1 X to be hyperbolic corresponds to large complete bipartite subgraphs of the e as shown independently contact graph – the intersection graph of the hyperplane-carriers – of X, e by coning off the hyperplane-carriers is alin [Hag14] and [Che00]; the space H obtained from X ways hyperbolic [Hag14]. In [BHS14], it is shown that under natural extra hypotheses, the action of π1 X on H is acylindrical, while in any case any g ∈ π1 X acting loxodromically on H actually acts as a WPD element in the sense of [BF02] (see also Definition 1.2 below); together with results in [Hag13] characterizing the loxodromic isometries of H, and a result of Osin connecting WPD elements to acylindricity [Osi15a], this implies the virtually cyclic/product/acylindrically hyperbolic trichotomy of Theorem B in the case where I = ∅. This trichotomy (in the purely cubical case) also follows from the Caprace-Sageev rank-rigidity theorem [CS11] and general results about groups acting on CAT(0) spaces and containing rank-one elements [Osi15a, Sis],  4  G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN  although the first argument seems more amenable to generalization along the lines of Theorem B (since that is what we do in the present paper). The comparison with the acylindrical hyperbolicity result of Gruber-Sisto, for graphical smallcancellation groups, is interesting; our results about cubical small-cancellation groups do not follow from corresponding results about graphical small-cancellation presentations, since the latter viewpoint does not account for high-dimensional cubes. On the other hand, restricting Theorems A and B to the case where dim X = 1 and each Yi is a graph, one does not reprove 1 the results of [GS14] or [Str90] in full generality, since the cubical C 0 ( 144 ) condition is a priori more restrictive than the small-cancellation conditions needed in the classical and graphical cases (which are the classical C 0 ( 61 ) and the graphical Gr(7) conditions, respectively). Theorem B is proved roughly as follows. First, we create a hyperbolic π1 X ∗ –space H by coning off each hyperplane-carrier N (H) and each relator Yi in the generalized Cayley graph Cay(X ∗ ). This procedure is a common generalization of the constructions used in the purely cubical case (where the space obtained from coning off the hyperplane-carriers is quasi-isometric to the contact graph) [Hag14] and in the graphical case (where the space is obtained from coning off each relator graph Yi by attaching the complete graph on its vertices) [GS14]. Next, we apply Theorem A to show that if g ∈ π1 X ∗ acts loxodromically on H, then g is a WPD isometry of H, and therefore Osin’s theorem tells us that π1 X ∗ is acylindrically hyperbolic or virtually cyclic. It remains to find loxodromic isometries of H. This is done in Section 5 over a series of lemmas. e (and whether Roughly, we show that if g̃ ∈ π1 X acts loxodromically on the contact graph of X there are such g̃ is well-understood [Hag13]), and g̃ survives in the quotient π1 X → π1 X ∗ , then the image g of g̃ has the desired properties. It is then a matter of using the small-cancellation e was a product), or some assumptions to show that either no such g̃ was available (so, roughly, X ∗ Yi → X is π1 –surjective, or there is some WPD element g ∈ π1 X . Remark 1 (Compactness). It is in the parts of the proof dealing with product decompositions that compactness of X plays a role, since we need to invoke tools from [CS11] that require either a proper cocompact action on a cube complex, or some more exotic hypotheses about the boundary. Accordingly, one could modify the hypotheses about X and obtain a similar conclusion to that of Theorem B in various ways, mainly by weakening the statement about product decompositions. The natural conclusion if conclusions (2) − (4) of the theorem fail is e is a π1 X–invariant subcomplex; to get from here to that there is some Yi → X so that Yei ⊆ X conclusion (1) is the unique place where compactness of Yi plays a role. Remark 2 (No proof by cubulation). Cubical small-cancellation theory is partly motivated by the fact that groups satisfying strong classical small-cancellation conditions act nicely on CAT(0) cube complexes [Wis04, Theorem 1.2]. This generalizes in various ways to cubical presentations: if hX | {Yi }i satisfies the generalized B(6) condition, one can often cubulate the corresponding group; see, for instance, [Wis, Theorem 5.50]. It is tempting to try to prove Theorem B using this approach, together with the abovementioned results about acylindrical hyperbolicity of groups acting on cube complexes. However, there are various problems with this approach. First, the cubulations one can obtain via the generalized B(6) condition may not be nice enough to invoke the results from [CS11] needed to find rank-one elements in the absence of a product decomposition. Second, the generalized B(6) condition requires each Yi to have a wallspace structure, compatible with the local isometry Yi → X, generalizing the wallspace structure on a circle in which each wall is a pair of antipodal points. (Compare with the lacunary walling condition on graphical presentations from [AO14].) At the same time, no cubical C 0 (α) small-cancellation condition implies the generalized B(6) condition, and indeed there are groups that are covered by Theorem B but which do not admit an action on a CAT(0) cube complex with no global fixed point. This can already be seen in the 1–dimensional case: Proposition 7.1 of [OW07] yields, for any α > 0, a graphical presentation  ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS  5  hX | Y i, where X is a graph and Y → X an immersed graph, satisfying the graphical (hence 1–dimensional cubical) C 0 (α) condition, with the additional property that the group thus presented has Kazhdan’s property (T ), and thus cannot act fixed-point-freely on a CAT(0) cube complex [NR98]. Remark 3 (Acylindrical action on a quasi-tree). Combining Theorem B with a very recent result of Balasubramanya [Bal16] shows that any cubical small-cancellation group G covered by Theorem B either satisfies one of the conclusions (1) − (3) or acts acylindrically and nonelementarily on a quasi-tree. Examples of cubical small-cancellation groups. We list here fundamental examples and recipes for building examples, of cubical small-cancellation groups to which Theorem A and Theorem B apply. It is inspired by the list in Section 3.p of [Wis]: 1 (1) Classical C 0 ( 144 ) small-cancellation groups: if F is a free group and {hzi i}i∈I a malnormal collection of cyclic subgroups, then there are n0i > 1 so that the group F/hh{zini }i∈I ii satisfies the appropriate small-cancellation condition whenever ni > n0i for all i. 1 ) small-cancellation groups. (2) Graphical C 0 ( 144 (3) Classical/RAAG hybrid: let X be the Salvetti complex of a right-angled Artin group A, with presentation graph G, and let {gi }i∈I be a collection of independent elements, none e of which is supported on a proper join in G (i.e. each gi is a rank-one isometry of X). More generally, choose {hgi i}i∈I to be a malnormal collection of cyclic subgroups, each e Then for each i there exists ni > 0 so of which has a convex cocompact core Yei in X. ni 1 e ) presentation. that, letting Yi = hgi i\Yi , the cubical presentation hX | {Yi }i is a C 0 ( 144 (4) More generally, let X be a special cube complex, in the sense of [HW08]. Let {Yi → X} be a collection of local isometries of cube complexes so that the resulting cubical presentation hX | {Yi }i satisfies the cubical C 0 (α) condition for some α > 0. Each Yi has residually finite fundamental group since it is special, and thus, for any n ∈ N, there is a finite cover Ybi → Yi with kYbi k > nkYi k; thus the related cubical presentation hX | {Ybi }i satisfies the cubical C 0 ( αn ) condition. See [Wis, Section 3.q]. (5) Given letters x, y and m > 1, let (x, y)m denote the first half of the word (xy)m . Consider the Artin group A = ha1 , a2 , . . . , an | (ai , aj )mij = (aj , ai )mij whenever i 6= ji. (Note that we follow the convention of letting mij = ∞ to indicate that there is no b = ha1 , a2 , . . . , an | [ai , aj ] whenever mij = 2i be the relation between ai , aj .) Let A underlying right-angled Artin group, X be its Salvetti complex, and Γ be its presentation graph (a graph with a vertex for each ai and with an edge from ai to aj when mij = 2). b obtained by adding the relations (ai , aj )mij = (aj , ai )mij That is, A is a quotient of A b with when mij 6= 2. Observe that each element gij = (ai , aj )mij (aj , ai )−mij of A, e mij 6= 2, is a rank-one isometry of X, since, if it is supported in a join in the presentation b then it is supported in a factor of that join. Hence there is a convex graph Γ of A, e that is cocompactly stabilized by hgij i, and which is just the subcomplex Yeij of X convex hull of a combinatorial gij –axis. Let Yij be the quotient of Yeij by the hgij i– action, so that hX | Yij whenever 2 < mij < ∞i is a cubical presentation for the Artin group A. Clearly, Yij has systole 2mij , so in order to impose a condition on mij ensuring 1 that this presentation satisfies the cubical C 0 ( 144 ) condition, we need only investigate the cone-pieces and wall-pieces. If P̃ is a cone-piece between Yeij and Yek` , then |P̃ | = 1. On the other hand, if ai , aj lie in the link of some ak in Γ, then any geodesic in Yeij is a wall-piece, but otherwise wall-pieces have length 6 1. Hence suppose that A satisfies the following:  6  G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN  • for all i 6= j, either mij = 2 or mij = ∞ or mij > 72; • for all i 6= j such that there exists k with mik = mjk = 2, we have either mij = 2 or mij = ∞. 1 Then the above cubical presentation for A is C 0 ( 144 ) and our acylindricity theorem applies to A. There is a related recipe in Section 20 of [Wis] for building C(6) cubical 1 presentations of Artin groups (cf. [AS83]) but it is harder to see when these are C 0 ( 144 ). In a similar manner, up to some limited worries about torsion, one should be able to 1 ) presentaproduce many examples of Coxeter groups that virtually admit cubical C 0 ( 144 tions; the base cube complex should be the Davis complex of the underlying right-angled Coxeter group. Outline of the paper. In Section 1, we recall the definitions of acylindrical hyperbolicity and WPD elements, and a result of Osin connecting them. Section 2 begins with a discussion of cubical presentations, disc diagrams, and the features of cubical small-cancellation theory needed in the proof of the classification of triangles, Theorem A, which also occurs in this section. In Section 3, we give a list of conditions on a cubical small-cancellation group G acting on a hyperbolic space H sufficient to ensure that G contains an element acting on g as a WPD element. In Section 4, we produce such a space H, formed from a generalized Cayley graph Cay(X ∗ ) by coning off both the relators and the hyperplane-carriers. Finally, in Section 5, we explain when one can find elements of G acting loxodromically on H; in concert with the results of the preceding two sections, this completes the proof of Theorem B. We assume basic knowledge of CAT(0) and nonpositively-curved cube complexes and cubical presentations; familiarity with the background material in [Wis12] is sufficient. Acknowledgments. MFH thanks the Fakultät für Mathematik of Universität Wien for hospitality during a visit in which much of the work on this project was completed, and is also grateful to Dani Wise for numerous discussions about cubical small-cancellation theory over the years. Both authors thank Kasia Jankiewicz for answering a question about short inner paths. 1. Acylindrical hyperbolicity and WPD elements The notion of an acylindrically hyperbolic group was defined in [Osi15a], as follows: Definition 1.1 (Acylindrical action, acylindrical hyperbolicity). Let (X, d) be a metric space and let G act on X by isometries. Then the action is acylindrical if for each  > 0, there exists R > 0 and N ∈ N so that for all x, y ∈ X for which d(x, y) > R, we have |{g ∈ G : d(x, gx) 6 , d(y, gy) 6 }| 6 N. Let X be Gromov-hyperbolic and let G act by isometries on X. The action of G is elementary if the limit set of G on ∂X has at most two points. If G acts non-elementarily and acylindrically on a hyperbolic space, then G is said to be acylindrically hyperbolic. When G is a cubical small-cancellation group, we will construct an explicit action of G on a hyperbolic space H, but this will not necessarily be the action that witnesses acylindrical hyperbolicity. Instead, the action will be nice enough that G contains a WPD isometry of H, which will in turn yield an acylindrical action on some other hyperbolic space. More precisely: Definition 1.2 (WPD element [BF02]). Let G act by isometries on the space X. Then h ∈ G is a WPD element if for each  > 0 and each x ∈ X, there exists M ∈ N so that |{g ∈ G : d(x, gx) 6 , d(hM x, ghM x) 6 }| < ∞. In [Osi15a], Osin showed that if G is not virtually cyclic and acts on a hyperbolic space H, and some g ∈ G acts on H as a loxodromic WPD element, then G is acylindrically hyperbolic. This fact is instrumental in the proof of Theorem 4.3 below, and thus in the proof of Theorem B.  ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS  7  2. Triangles in cubical small-cancellation groups In this section, X denotes a connected nonpositively-curved cube complex with universal e When doing geometry in X, e we never use the CAT(0) metric and instead only use cover X. (1) e the usual graph metric on X in which each 1–cube has length 1 and a combinatorial path is e We fix a geodesic if and only if it contains at most one edge intersecting each hyperplane of X. (possibly infinite) index set I, and for each i ∈ I, let Yi → X be a local isometry of connected cube complexes. Each Yi is necessarily nonpositively-curved. Following [Wis], the associated cubical presentation is hX | {Yi }i∈I i and the corresponding cubical presentation complex X ∗ is formed as follows. For each i ∈ I, let C(Yi ) be the relator on Yi , i.e. the space formed from Yi × [0, 1] by collapsing Yi × {1} to a point. This space has an obvious cell-structure so that ∼ Yi → Yi × {0} ,→ C(Yi ) is a combinatorial embedding. For each i ∈ I, we attach C(Yi ) to X along Yi × {0} using the above local isometry. The resulting complex is X ∗ . The group of our interest is defined by G = π1 X ∗ . We say that hX | {Yi }i∈I i is a cubical presentation for G. e ∗ of X ∗ is a nonpositively-curved cube complex with cones attached. The universal cover X e ∗ consisting only of cubes (i.e. the complement of the open cones). Let Cay(X ∗ ) be the part of X This is the generalized Cayley graph of G with the given cubical presentation. Note that there e → Cay(X ∗ ) → X; the generalized Cayley graph is the nonpositively-curved are covering maps X cube complex obtained by taking the cover of X corresponding to the kernel of π1 X → π1 X ∗ . Remark 2.1. (Classical and graphical presentations) When X is a wedge of circles and each Yi is an immersed combinatorial circle, then hX | {Yi }i∈I i is a group presentation in the usual sense (each C(Yi ) is a disc) and Cay(X ∗ ) is the associated Cayley graph of G. When X is a graph and each Yi is an immersed graph, then the above cubical presentation is a graphical presentation in the sense of [RS87, Gro03, Oll06]. Remark 2.2 (Elevations). Note that the local isometries Yi → X lift to local isometries Yi → Cay(X ∗ ) (in fact, under the small-cancellation conditions we shall soon be assuming, the latter e of maps are embeddings [Wis, Section 4]). We use the term elevation to refer to a lift Yei → X e e the map Yi → Yi → X, where Yi → Yi is the universal covering map. Since Yi → X is a local e is a combinatorial embedding with convex image. isometry, it is π1 –injective and Yei → X We now review some background about cubical small-cancellation theory, details of which can be found in [Wis]. Definition 2.3 (Abstract cone-piece, abstract wall-piece, cone-piece, wall-piece, piece). Given a e and convex subcomplexes U, V , let Proj(U → V ) be the subcomplex CAT(0) cube complex X, of V defined as follows. First, a closed 1–cube e of V is in Proj(U → V ) if e is dual to a hyperplane intersecting U . Then add any cube of V whose 1–skeleton appears. Let hX | {Yi }i∈I i be a cubical presentation. Let A, B ∈ {Yi }i∈I . An abstract cone-piece e → A), e where B, e A e are components of the preimages of of B in A is a component of Proj(B e e 6= A. e If H is a hyperplane B, A respectively, under the covering map X → X, satisfying B of X not intersecting B, then, likewise, an abstract wall-piece of H in B is a component of e → B), e where N (H) e denotes the carrier of H. e A cone-piece is a path in an abstract Proj(N (H) cone-piece, and a wall-piece is a path in an abstract wall-piece, and a piece is a path which is either a cone-piece or a wall-piece. Definition 2.4 (C 0 (α) condition). The cubical presentation hX | {Yi }i∈I i satisfies the cubical C 0 (α) small-cancellation condition if diam(P) < αkYi k for all abstract pieces P and all i ∈ I, where kYi k denotes the infimum of the lengths of essential closed paths in Yi . In this case, we say that hX | {Yi }i∈I i is a C 0 (α) presentation and G = π1 X ∗ is a C 0 (α) group.  8  G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN  Given a cubical presentation hX | {Yi }i∈I i and a closed path P → X that is nullhomotopic in X ∗ , van Kampen’s lemma provides a disc diagram (D, ∂p D) → (X ∗ , X) whose boundary path ∂p D = P . (We always use the operator ∂p , applied to a disc diagram, to denote the boundary path.) The 2–cells of such a diagram are either squares (mapping to 2–cubes of X ⊆ X ∗ ) or 2–simplices mapping to cones over the various Yi . Since P avoids cone-points, the 2–simplices of D are partitioned into classes: for each vertex of D mapping to a cone-point in X ∗ , the incident 2–simplices are arranged cyclically around the vertex to form a subspace C of D which is equal to the cone on its boundary path (a path in D mapping to X). The subspace C is a cone-cell. In practice, we ignore the subdivision of C into 2–simplices and regard C as a 2–cell of D. The complexity of D is the pair (c, s), where c is the number of cone-cells and s is the number of squares. Taking the complexity in lexicographic order, we always consider diagrams (D, ∂p D) → (X ∗ , X) which are minimal in the sense that the complexity of D is lexicographically minimal among diagrams with boundary path ∂p D. This implies that for each cone-cell C, the path ∂p C → D → Y → X is essential. Remark 2.5 (Dual curves and hexagon moves). Let D → X be a square diagram. A dual curve in D is a path which is the concatenation of midcubes of squares of D that starts and ends on ∂p D, where a midcube of a square [− 21 , 12 ]2 is obtained by restricting exactly one coordinate to 0 and a midcube of a 1–cube is its midpoint. If X is a nonpositively-curved cube complex, then each dual curve maps to a hyperplane. If K is a dual curve in D, then the union of all closed cubes intersecting K is its carrier. More generally, if D → X ∗ is a disc diagram, then one can define dual curves as above, but any dual curve has its two ends either on ∂p D or on the boundary path of a cone-cell of X ∗ . A hexagon move is a homotopy of the diagram D → X ∗ that fixes the boundary path and the cone-cells and their boundary paths, while modifying the square part of D. Specifically, if s1 , s2 , s3 are squares in D arranged cyclically around a central vertex v, forming a hexagonal subdiagram E of D, then X must contain a 3–cube c with a corner at the image of v formed by the images of s1 , s2 , s3 . The (hexagonal) boundary path of E maps to a combinatorial path in c, and we can replace E by a diagram E 0 formed from the other 3 squares on the boundary of c; this yields a new diagram D0 → X ∗ , with the same boundary path as D, formed by replacing E by E 0 . This modification is a hexagon move. Hexagon moves are used to reduce area in various ways; detailed accounts can be found in e.g. [Wis, Wis12]. Definition 2.6 (External cone-cell, internal cone-cell, internal path). The cone-cell C of the disc diagram D is external if ∂p C = QS, where Q is a non-trivial subpath of ∂p D (i.e. containing at least one 1–cell) and S is an internal path in the sense that no 1–cell of S lies on ∂p D. The cone-cell C is internal if ∂p C and ∂p D have no common non-trivial subpath. Remark 2.7 (Rectification, angling, and curvature). Given a disc diagram (D, ∂p D) → (X ∗ , X), one can rectify D, to produce a rectified diagram D̄, by removing some internal open 1–cells, so that D is subdivided into cone-cells, rectangles which are obtained from square ladders by deleting the internal open 1–cells, and complementary regions called shards. The specific procedure for doing so is discussed in [Wis, Section 3.f], but we will not require the details here. After rectifying D, each corner in each of the resulting 2–cells is assigned an angle according to one of several possible schemes. Although we need not get into the details of the angle-assignments, we will need to assume that they follow the split-angling defined in [Wis]. As explained in [Wis, Section 3.g], this yields a notion of curvature in D concentrated at 0–cells and 2–cells. Definition 2.8 (Generalized corner, spur, shell). A (positively-curved) shell C in the disc diagram D is an external cone-cell whose curvature is positive; the boundary path of a shell has the form QS, where the outer path Q is a subpath of the boundary path of D, and the inner path S has no open 1–cell on ∂p D. A spur in D is a vertex v in ∂p D so that the incoming and  ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS  9  outgoing 1–cells of ∂p D map to the same 1–cell of X, i.e. v is the second vertex in a subpath of ∂p D of the form ee−1 , where e → X is a 1–cell. A generalized corner is a path ef in D, where each of e, f is an edge, so that the dual curves emanating from e, f cross inside a square s of D, as shown in Figure 1.  Figure 1. ef and ab are generalized corners of the shaded squares. ef lies on the boundary of D, while ab lies on the boundary of a cone-cell. Remark 2.9 (Defects and curvature). We now briefly review some notions related to curvature, from [Wis], that we will require below. Given a rectified disc diagram D̄, we can assign an angle ∠(c) – a real number – to each corner c of each 2–cell (i.e. to each 1–cell of each vertex-link). The defect d(c) P at the corner c is d(c) = 2π − ∠(c). The curvature κ(v) at a vertex v of D̄ is κ(v) = 2π − ∠(c) − πχ(Lk(v)), where Lk(v) is the link of v and the P sum is taken over the 1–cells c of Lk(v). The curvature κ(f ) at a 2–cell f of D̄ is κ(f ) = 2π − d(c), where c varies over the corners of f . We will need the following theorem, which follows immediately from the “combinatorial GaussBonnet Theorem”, i.e. Theorem 4.6 in [MW02]; this theorem dates, in one form or another, to [Bri48, Ger87, BB96]. Theorem 2.10 (Gauss-Bonnet for diagrams). Let D̄ → X ∗ be a rectified disc diagram. Then X X κ(f ) + κ(v) = 2π, f  v  where f varies over the 2–cells of D̄ and v varies over the 0–cells of D̄. Remark 2.11 (Pushing generalized corners to the boundary). If ef is a generalized corner of a square s, and ef lies along ∂p D, and the subdiagram bounded by the carriers of the dual curves emanating from e, f is a square diagram, then we can perform a series of hexagon moves (see [Wis, Section 2]) to homotop D, fixing its boundary path, so that there is a square with boundary path ef e0 f 0 , i.e. we can move squares to the boundary. If, on the other hand, the same situation occurs except ef lies on the boundary of some cone-cell C mapping to a relator Y , then convexity of Y allows us to “absorb” the square s into C, lowering complexity of D. e ∗) Definition 2.12 (Padded ladder, ladder). A padded ladder is a disc diagram D → X ∗ (or X with the following structure. First, there is a sequence C1 , . . . , Cn , where each Ci is a cone-cell or vertex of D, so that Ci , Ck lie in distinct components of D − Cj whenever i < j < k. The diagram D is an alternating union of these vertices and cone-cells with a sequence of subdiagrams R0 , . . . , Rn called pseudorectangles, so that: (1) ∂p D is a concatenation P1 P2−1 , where each of P1 , P2 starts on R0 and ends on Rn .  10  G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN  P1 = ν0 ρ0 α1 ρ1 · · · αn ρn and P2 = %0 γ1 %1 · · · γn %n µn+1 . ∂p Ci = µi αi νi−1 γi−1 . −1 ∂p Ri = νi ρi µ−1 i+1 %i . Each Ri is a square diagram, i.e. contains no cone-cells. For each i, any dual curve in Ri emanating from ρi ends on %i and vice versa. Hence any dual curve emanating from νi ends on µi+1 and vice versa. (7) For each i, no two dual curves emanating from µi cross. See Figure 2 for a picture illustrating the notation. We say that Ri is horizontally degenerate if |µi+1 | = |νi | = 0 and vertically degenerate if |ρi | = |%i | = 0. If R0 , Rn are vertically degenerate, (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)  Figure 2. A padded ladder. then D is a ladder. (A padded ladder is thus a special case of what Jankiewicz calls a generalized ladder in [Jan14], while the definition of ladder given here is equivalent to that in [Wis]). We require the following three crucial facts, due to Wise [Wis]. These are tailored to our 1 ) condition specific situation; the statements in [Wis] are more general. (That the cubical C 0 ( 12 suffices to make a cubical presentation “small-cancellation” in the sense required in the following theorems can be seen by tracing through various computations in [Wis, Section 3] or consulting the list of examples in Section 3.p of [Wis].) 1 Theorem 2.13 (Ladder theorem). Let hX | {Yi }i be a cubical C 0 ( 12 ) presentation. Let D → ∗ X be a minimal disc diagram such that the corresponding rectified diagram has exactly two positively-curved cells along ∂p D. Then D is a ladder.  Theorem 2.14 (Greendlinger’s lemma). Under the hypotheses of Theorem 2.13, if D → X ∗ is a minimal disc diagram, then either D consists of a single vertex or cone-cell, or D is a ladder, or D contains at least three shells or spurs or generalized corners along ∂p D. 1 The following, with C 0 ( 18 ) replaced by C 0 ( 12 ), is Lemma 3.46 of [Wis]; the improved constant follows from a result of Jankiewicz [Jan14].  Theorem 2.15 (Short inner paths). Let hX | {Yi }i be a cubical C 0 ( 18 ) presentation. Let D → X ∗ be a disc diagram and let C be a shell in D with boundary path QS, with Q a maximal common subpath of ∂p C and ∂p D, and S an internal path. Suppose that QS is essential in the relator Y to which C maps, and that S is of minimal length among all paths S 0 → Y that are homotopic rel endpoints in Y to S. Finally, suppose that the total curvature contribution from C is < π. Then |S| < |Q|. 2.1. The classification theorem. Using the above fundamental results, we produce a cubical small-cancellation version of Strebel’s classification of triangles in classical small-cancellation groups [Str90]. An exposed square in a disc diagram D is a square with two consecutive edges  ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS  11  on ∂p D. A tripod is a triangle diagram with no cone-cells or squares. We can now state our classification of triangles: 1 Theorem 2.16 (Classification of triangles in cubical C 0 ( 144 ) groups). Let hX | {Yi }i∈I i be a 1 0 cubical presentation satisfying the C ( 144 ) condition. Let α, β, γ → Cay(X ∗ ) be combinatorial geodesics so that αβγ is a geodesic triangle. Then there exists a disc diagram (D, ∂p D) → (X ∗ , X) with boundary path α0 β 0 γ 0 → Cay(X ∗ ) → X ∗ lying in X, so that the following hold. First, α → X and α0 → X co-bound a bigon B → X (i.e. they are square-homotopic) and the same is true of β, β 0 and γ, γ 0 . Second, D is of one of the following types. (1) (3–shell generic:) D has exactly three external cone-cells, C1 , C2 , C3 , respectively containing the points α ∩ β, β ∩ γ, γ ∩ α. There is exactly one cone-cell M that intersects α, β, γ. Moreover, D is the union of three ladders, L1 , L2 , L3 so that Li ∩ Lj = M for all i, j. In particular, every cone-cell except M intersects exactly two of the geodesics α, β, γ. (2) (3–shell tripod:) D has exactly three external cone-cells, C1 , C2 , C3 , respectively containing the points α ∩ β, β ∩ γ, γ ∩ α. Every other cone-cell intersects exactly two of the geodesics α, β, γ. In this case, D is the union of 3 (possibly padded) ladders L1 , L2 , L3 and a tripod triangle P1 P2 P3 → X so that Li intersects the other two ladders in the path Pi . (3) (2–shell generic:) Same as 3–shell generic, except exactly one of C1 , C2 , C3 is a spur or exposed square instead of a cone-cell. (4) (2–shell tripod:) Same as 3-shell tripod, except exactly one of C1 , C2 , C3 is a spur or exposed square instead of a cone-cell. (5) (1–shell generic:) Same as 2–shell generic, except exactly two of C1 , C2 , C3 are spurs or exposed squares. (6) (1–shell tripod:) Same as 2–shell tripod, except exactly two of C1 , C2 , C3 are spurs or exposed squares. (7) (No-shell generic:) Same as 3–shell generic, except C1 , C2 , C3 are all spurs or exposed squares. (8) (No-shell tripod:) Same as 3–shell tripod except C1 , C2 , C3 are all spurs or exposed squares. This includes the case where αβγ is nullhomotopic in X, in which case D is a tripod. (9) (Degenerate triangle:) D is a single vertex or cone-cell, or D is a ladder. In this case, at least one of α, β, γ is trivial. The diagram D → X ∗ is a standard diagram for the triangle αβγ. The eight non-degenerate cases are shown in Figure 3.  Remark 2.17 (Media and small-cancellation parameters). Note that the standard diagram depends only on the endpoints of the geodesics α, β, γ. Just as it is usual in CAT(0) cube complexes to homotop geodesics, fixing their endpoints, in order to minimize the area of diagrams, here we are not married to particular geodesics, just to square-homotopy classes rel endpoints. In particular, if αβγ bounds a disc diagram in X, then D is a tripod. When I = ∅, Theorem 2.16 just says: any three 0–cubes in a CAT(0) cube complex determine a geodesic tripod. More generally, as illustrated by Figure 3, Theorem 2.16 should be interpreted as saying that the vertices of the triangle have a “median” which is either a vertex or a cone-cell, and there is a geodesic triangle connecting the given three points, each of whose sides passes within a wall-piece of the “median”. In other words, given 0-cells a, b, c ∈ Cay(X ∗ ), the “convex hulls” of the three possible pairs mutually coarsely intersect. At the other extreme, when X is a graph and each Yi is an immersed circle, Theorem 2.16 generalizes a weak version of Strebel’s classification of triangles [Str90, Theorem 43]; specifically,  12  G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN  Figure 3. Clockwise from top left: cases (1),(3),(5),(7),(8),(6),(4),(2) from Theorem 2.16. The features of positive curvature are labelled, and the constituent ladders in some cases are labelled. Any of the spurs may instead be exposed squares and vice versa. The ladder case is not shown.  Theorem 2.16 provides the same classification as Strebel’s result, but, because the proof must work in the more general context of cubical presentations, we require stronger metric smallcancellation conditions than Strebel needs in the classical setting. 1 rather than 16 comes from our invocation of: the ladder theorem and Our need for 144 1 Greendlinger lemma from [Wis], which require C 0 ( 12 ) condition (although Jankiewicz has im1 0 proved this to C ( 8 ) condition in the case of the Greendlinger lemma [Jan14]); the short inner 1 ). It paths condition, which requires C 0 ( 18 ); and Lemma 3.46 of [Wis], which requires C 0 ( 12 appears that in the classical case, when there are no squares, each of these statements holds 1 under the C 0 ( 16 ) condition. However, we use C 0 ( 144 ) to do appropriate curvature computations analogous to those in the proof of Theorem 3.20 of [Wis], to rule out internal cone-cells in diagrams. It seems as though one must make small modifications in order to have this part of the curvature-based proof work under C 0 ( 16 ) condition whenever there are no squares. Proof of Theorem 2.16. This is essentially a meticulous application of Theorem 2.14, Theorem 2.13, and Theorem 2.15, following and followed by appropriately chosen square homotopies; the main point is a curvature computation to eliminate the possibility of internal cone-cells (in the Strebel classification in the case of classical C 0 ( 16 ) condition, one of the primary features is that the disc diagrams do not have internal cells). This computation, using a slightly modified 1 version of the proof of Theorem 3.20 of [Wis], is why we need the C 0 ( 144 ) condition. 0 0 0 Choosing α , β , γ and constructing D: Given a geodesic P → Cay(X ∗ ), let [P ] be the set of geodesics Q that have the same endpoints as P and the additional property that P Q−1 bounds a disc diagram containing no cone-cells, i.e. there is a disc diagram E → X whose boundary path is P Q−1 → Cay(X ∗ ) → X ∗ . e ∗ so that ∂p D = α0 β 0 γ 0 , where α0 ∈ [α], β 0 ∈ [β], γ 0 ∈ [γ]. Choose a disc diagram D → X Choose D so that the complexity is minimal among all disc diagrams with the given properties. Abusing notation slightly, we now temporarily regard D as the rectified diagram constructed in [Wis, Section 3]. This means that certain square ladders are regarded as single (rectangular) 2–cells, cone-cells are regarded as single cells, and the remaining parts of the diagram are 2–cells (formed by ignoring non-boundary 1–cells in certain square subdiagrams) called shards. Angles are assigned to corners according to the split-angling of [Wis, Section 3]. Applying the ladder theorem: By Theorem 2.13, either D is a ladder, so assertion (9) holds, and we are done, or D has at least 3 “features of positive curvature” – spurs, generalized corners, or shells – along ∂p D. We assume the latter.  ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS  13  Applying the Greendlinger lemma: By Theorem 2.14, D has at least 3 features of positive curvature along the boundary, each of which is a shell, a spur, or a generalized corner. We may assume that all generalized corners along ∂p D are actually squares with corners on ∂p D. Indeed, let s be a square in D with a generalized corner on ∂p D, i.e. the two dual curves K1 , K2 intersecting s end at consecutive 1–cubes e1 , e2 on ∂p D. By a sequence of hexagon moves, we can modify D – without changing its boundary path or complexity – so that s lies along the boundary, i.e. e1 , e2 are consecutive 1–cubes of s. No positive curvature along geodesics (after square homotopy): Let s be a square of D so that ∂p s and ∂p D have a common subpath e1 e2 . For i ∈ {1, 2}, let e0i be the 1–cube of s opposite ei . If e1 e2 is a subpath of one of the three constituent geodesics of ∂p D (say, α0 ), then we can modify α0 in its square-homotopy class by replacing e1 e2 by e02 e01 , resulting in a new diagram with the same number of cones and fewer squares. This contradicts our minimality assumption. Hence any square s with a corner on the boundary lies at the transition from α to β, or β to γ, or γ to α. Now suppose that C is a positively-curved shell in D whose outer path P is a subpath of one of the named geodesics, say α and whose inner path we denote S. P Suppose P is a subpath of one of the named geodesics bounding D, say α. Now, κ(C) = 2π − c d(c), where c varies over the corners of C. The definition of the split-angling (see [Wis, Section 3]) says that d(c) = 0 at each corner c formed by a pair of 1–cells on ∂p C both lying on ∂p D. Since α is a geodesic, it cannot be the case that |S| = 0, since otherwise we could replace P by S to shorten α. Thus, C has two corners, c1 , c2 , at the 0–cells where P, S meet. Each of these has angle π/2 by definition P of the split-angling (see Figure 64 of [Wis]) and thus d(c1 ) = d(c2 ) = π/2. Thus, κ(C) = π − c d(c), where c varies over the corners at non-endpoint vertices of S. Hence, P if c d(c) > 0, the short inner paths condition, Theorem 2.15, shows that replacing P by S yields a strictly shorter path joining the endpoints of α, a contradiction. On the other hand, if P d(c) = 0, then Lemma 3.46 of [Wis] implies that S can be written as the concatenation of at c most 7 pieces, and the small-cancellation assumption then implies that |S| < |P |, contradicting that α is a geodesic. Hence any such shell C has outer path P = AB, where A is a nontrivial terminal subpath of α, β, or γ and B is a nontrivial initial subpath of β, γ, or α. Finally, since α, β, γ are geodesic, a spur of the form ee−1 cannot occur along each of α, β, γ so the only spurs consist of overlaps between α, β or β, γ or γ, α. Hence, D has exactly three features of positive curvature along the boundary, which are subdiagrams C1 , C2 , C3 . For each i, ∂p Ci = OI, where O is a subpath of ∂p D and I is an internal path, and O has at least one 1-cube on each of two distinct subpaths α, β, γ of the boundary. No internal cone-cells: Let C be a cone-cell of D. Recall that C is internal if its boundary 1 ” part path intersects ∂p D in a set containing no 1–cube. By slightly modifying the “quick 24 of the proof of Theorem 3.20 of [Wis], we see that our small-cancellation condition is strictly 1 stronger than the C 0 ( 72 ) condition required to ensure that each internal cone-cell contributes < −4π of curvature, and all remaining internal features of the diagram contribute nonpositive curvature. Suppose that there are n > 0 internal cone-cells. Let v be a 0–cube of D. Then the curvature contribution from v is: (1) 6 0 if v is internal or not contained in a 2–cell and not a spur; (2) π if v is a spur; (3) π2 if v is the corner of a square along ∂p D. (Because we are in the rectified diagram, natural candidates for internal features of positive curvature, i.e. 0–cubes with three incident cyclically-arranged squares – have been relegated to the insides of shards, and do not actually contribute any positive curvature in the split-angling.)  14  G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN  Let f be a 2–cell of D (a cone-cell, rectangle, or a shard of the corresponding rectified diagram [Wis]). Then the curvature contribution is: (1) 6 0 if f is a rectangle or shard; (2) < −4π if f is an internal cone-cell; (3) at most 2π if f is a shell. Hence, our three features of positive curvature contribute a total of at most 6π of curvature, while the sum of the remaining curvatures is < −4nπ. This contradicts Theorem 2.10 unless n = 0. Hence there are no internal cone-cells. No shortly-external cone-cells: A cone-cell C in D is shortly external if its boundary path has the form QI, where I is internal and Q is a subpath of α, β, or γ. Note that |Q| 6 |I| since 1 α, β, γ are geodesics. Hence, by C 0 ( 144 ), the path I contains more than 72 = 3 · 24 transitions between pieces and thus the total angle-defect along I is more than 6π, so that the curvature contribution from C is less than −4π, so, as above, the Gauss-Bonnet theorem ensures that there are no shortly external cells in D. At this point, we have completed the curvature computations in the proof, and now regard D as an ordinary (not rectified) diagram. This amounts to filling in the shards and rectangles with their constituent squares as in the original diagram. Analysis of the cone-cells: Let C be a cone-cell in D. Suppose that for some δ ∈ {α, β, γ}, there is a subpath δ 0 = P QR of δ, where P, R are subpaths of the boundary path of C, and the terminal vertex of P and initial vertex of R subtend a subpath Q0 of ∂p C, so that QQ0 is a subdiagram E of D between C and ∂p D. If E contains no cone-cell, then E is a square diagram between the relator Yi to which C maps and the geodesic Q, so by local convexity of Yi in X, we have that E → X factors through Yi → X. Hence E could have been absorbed into the cone-cell C, whence minimality of the complexity of D ensures that E is trivial, i.e. Q = (Q0 )−1 . Moreover, we may assume that Q, Q0 have no common 1–cell, by considering a minimal example. Thus, assume C is innermost, so that any cone-cell C0 in E embeds and has connected intersection with Q, and assume that E contains such a cone-cell C0 . Then C0 is not internal in E, for then it would be internal in D. Moreover, C0 cannot be a shell with outer path on Q, because then it would either be an already considered illegal feature of positive curvature or a shortly-external cone-cell in D. If C0 is a shell, it must therefore have outer path (within E) of the form T U , where T is a terminal subpath of Q and U an initial subpath of Q0 . But then C0 is shortly-external in D, which is impossible. Hence any cone-cell C0 in E has boundary path of the form T I1 U1 I2 U2 · · · Ik Uk Ik+1 , where each Ii is internal to E, each Ui is a subpath of Q0 , and T is a subpath of Q. But then C0 is either a positively-curved shell in D or shortly-external in D, neither of which is possible. Thus E is a square diagram, which was dealt with above. We conclude that for each cone-cell C of D, the path ∂p C has connected intersection with each of α, β, and γ. Moreover, ∂p C intersects at least two of the paths α, β, γ. Dividing into cases: We are now in the following situation: D is not a ladder, and has precisely 3 features of positive curvature along its boundary path, which are subdiagrams C1 , C2 , C3 . The subdiagram C1 has boundary path ABI, where A is a nontrivial terminal subpath of α, B is a nontrivial initial subpath of β, and I is a (possibly trivial) path. Moreover, either C1 is a single cone-cell (a shell) or C1 is a spur, |I| = 0, and A is an edge and B = A−1 , or C1 is a square, |A|, |B| > 1, and |I| 6 2. The same description holds for C2 (with β, γ replacing α, β) and C3 (with γ, α replacing α, β). Moreover, every cone-cell C of D not in {C1 , C2 , C3 } has connected intersection with each of α, β, γ and intersects at least 2 of these paths. We call C a median-cell if C actually intersects all three of these paths, and a tail-cell otherwise. We emphasise that if C is a median cell, then it has nonempty, connected intersection with each of α, β, γ. Hence, if C is a median-cell,  ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS  15  then C separates D into three complementary components, each disjoint from one of the paths α, β, γ. Hence C is the unique cone-cell of D intersecting each of α, β, γ. (We note that there may be other disc diagrams with the same boundary path, containing a different median-cell.) We now divide into cases. First, if D contains a median-cell, then we are in one of the generic cases, i.e. we will show that one of (7),(5),(3),(1) holds, according to how many of {C1 , C2 , C3 } are spurs or shells. Otherwise, we will show that one of (8),(6),(4),(2) holds. This will complete the proof. The generic cases: Suppose that D has a (unique) median-cell M and let i ∈ {1, 2, 3}. Let δ, δ 0 ∈ {α, β, γ} be the parts of the boundary path of D that intersect Ci . Let ∂p M = AP1 BP2 CP3 , where A, B, C are respectively subpaths of α, β, γ and P1 , P2 , P3 are internal paths. Write α = ᾱAα̌, β = β̄B β̌, γ = γ̄C γ̌. Consider the subdiagram L1 bounded by Aα̌β̄BP2 CP3 . The ladder theorem (Theorem 2.13) and our above analysis of the possible features of positive curvature in (the rectification of) D shows that L1 is a ladder. The ladders L2 , L3 are constructed analogously. The tripod cases: Suppose there is no median. Then we have a subdiagram T of D with boundary path AP1 BP2 CP3 , where A is a subpath of α, B a subpath of β, C a subpath of γ, and P1 , P2 , P3 internal subpaths that lie on innermost cone-cells in D or, if they do not exist, spurs or exposed squares in {C1 , C2 , C3 }. By construction, T is a possibly degenerate square diagram, and by convexity of relators and minimality, for each path Q ∈ {A, B, C, P1 , P2 , P3 }, no two dual curves in T emanating from Q can cross. Moreover, no dual curve travels from Q to Q or to the next named subpath, for otherwise we could reduce complexity. Some possibilities are shown in Figure 4.  Figure 4. Some possibilities for the internal square subdiagram in the tripod cases. e (the CAT(0) cube complex X, e not the For convenience, we lift T to a diagram T → X generalized Cayley graph). Here, analysis of the dual curves shows that T decomposes as required; the analysis is indicated in Figure 5. First, consider dual curves in T traveling from A  Figure 5. The final square diagram analysis in the tripod cases.  16  G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN  to B, B to C, or C to A. Taking the union of all carriers of such dual curves yields rectangles attached to P1 , P2 , P3 . Now consider the subdiagram that remains. It is a hexagon bounded by subpaths of A, B, C and parts of carriers of dual curves. Dual curves in the subdiagram must travel from a subpath of A, B, or C to the antipodal dual-curve carrier. Dual curves emanating from the same “syllable” of the boundary path do not cross, and we conclude, as at right in Figure 5, that this subdiagram is a “corner of a subdivided cube”. It is now easy to deduce the padded ladder decomposition of D. (Various parts of the picture may be degenerate, as suggested in Figure 4.)  3. Detecting WPD elements using the classification of triangles In this section, we make the following assumptions and conventions: 1 (1) hX | {Yi }i∈I i is a cubical presentation satisfying the C 0 ( 144 ) condition, X ∗ is the pree ∗ is the universal cover. We assume that X is locally finite, sentation complex, and X although we do not assume X is uniformly locally finite. For example, X can contain finite cubes of arbitrarily large dimension. e (1) . (2) Denote by d the graph metric on Cay(X ∗ )(1) , and by dXe the graph metric on X ∗ H (3) Let there be a δ–hyperbolic space H and a map Π : Cay(X ) → 2 so that: (a) There exists e > 0 so that diam(Π(x)) 6 e for all x ∈ Cay(X ∗ ). (b) There exists f > 0 so that dH (Π(x), Π(y)) 6 fd(x, y) + f whenever x, y ∈ Cay(X ∗ )(0) are not cone-points. (c) If Yi ⊂ Cay(X ∗ ) is any relator, then diam(Π(Yi )) 6 e. (d) π1 X ∗ acts by isometries on H in such a way that Π is π1 X ∗ –equivariant. (e) Let {Ij } be a set of combinatorial intervals, each of positive length, so that there Q is a cubical immersion j Ij → X, lifting to a cubical isometric embedding ι : Q ∗ j Ij → Cay(X ). Then diam(im(Π ◦ ι)) 6 e. Under these conditions, we will prove a lemma showing that π1 X ∗ contains a WPD isometry of H. Later, we choose specific H and Π allowing the lemma to be invoked. e be a padded ladder with boundary Lemma 3.1 (Ladders are thin between cone-cells). Let L → X ∗ path αβγ, where α, β : [0, n] → Cay(X ) are geodesics and γ is a piece. Then there exists a uniform constant κ0 so that for all t 6 n, either d(α(t), β(t)) 6 κ0 or α(t), β(t) lie on the boundary path of a common cone-cell in L. Proof. Write α = α0 η1 α1 · · · ηn αn and β = β0 η10 · · · ηn0 βn , where each αi , βi lies on the top or bottom boundary path of one of the constituent pseudorectangles of L and each ηi , ηi0 lies on the boundary path of a cone-cell or cut-vertex. Denote by pi the maximal piece in L between the ith cone-cell or cut-vertex and the ith pseudorectangle, so that the ith pseudorectangle is −1 bounded by αi p−1 i+1 βi pi . See Figure 6, at left.  Figure 6. Ladders are thin relative to cone-cells.  ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS  17  By the small-cancellation conditions, there is a uniform M so that |pi | 6 M for all i. Since α, β are geodesics, we have ||ηi | − |ηi0 || 6 2M for all i, for otherwise we could construct shortcuts, as shown at right in Figure 6. The lemma now follows easily.  e and none of its axes As usual (see e.g. [CS11]), g̃ ∈ π1 X is rank-one if it is hyperbolic on X lies in an isometrically embedded Euclidean half-plane. e and suppose that g̃ is rank-one. Then for Lemma 3.2. Let g̃ ∈ π1 X act hyperbolically on X, (0) e e are each x̃ ∈ X , there exists κ1 so that the following holds: if n > 0 and P, Q : [0, d] → X n combinatorial geodesics joining x̃, g x̃, then dXe (P (t), Q(t)) 6 κ1 for 0 6 t 6 d. e be a combinatorial geodesic axis for g̃ and let ã ∈ α be a 0–cube. Given Proof. Let α → X e (1) (where dn = d e (x̃, g n x̃)) be combinatorial geodesics joining n > 0, let P, Q : [0, dn ] → X X e be a minimal-area disc diagram with boundary path P Q−1 . Note that x̃, g n x̃ and let D → X e is actually an isometric embedding on the 1–skeleton. Indeed, every dual curve in D → X D travels from P to Q since P, Q are geodesics. Hence each dual curve maps to a distinct hyperplane, so that for any vertices v, v 0 ∈ D, the number of dual curves of D separating v, v 0 e separating their images. is equal to the number of hyperplanes in X Fix t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , dn }. The above discussion shows that dXe (P (t), Q(t)) is bounded by the number of dual curves in D that travel from P ([0, t)) to Q((t, dn ]), plus the number of dual curves from Q([0, t)) to P ((t, dn ]). Each dual curve of the former type crosses each dual curve of the latter type. If no κ1 with the claimed property exists, then since all but at most 2dXe (ã, x̃) hyperplanes that cross any given Pn cross α, we have that for all N , there are two sets H, V of hyperplanes, each of cardinality N , so that H ∩α 6= ∅ for all H ∈ H∪V and such that H ∩V 6= ∅ whenever H ∈ H, V ∈ V. This contradicts that g̃ is rank-one, since it implies that the convex hull of α contains 0–cubes arbitrarily far from α.  Lemma 3.3 (Loxodromic implies WPD). Suppose g ∈ π1 X ∗ acts loxodromically on H. Then for all  > 0, x ∈ H, there exists R ∈ N so that |{h ∈ G | dH (hx, x) 6 , dH (hg R x, g R x) 6 }| < ∞, i.e. g is a WPD element. Proof. Fix  > 0 and let x ∈ H; since H is Hausdorff-close to Cay(X ∗ ) ⊂ H, we can assume x is a vertex of Cay(X ∗ ). Fix R > 10( + δ + e)/τ , where τ > 1 is the translation length of g on H, and let y = g R x. Let h ∈ π1 X ∗ satisfy dH (Π(x), Π(hx)) < , dH (Π(y), Π(hy)) < . Let α be a combinatorial Cay(X ∗ )–geodesic from y to x, let β be a Cay(X ∗ )–geodesic from x to hx, let η be a geodesic from hy to y, and let γ be a geodesic from hx to y, so that we have geodesic triangles αβγ and η(hα)−1 γ with common side γ. Applying the classification of triangles: By Theorem 2.16, we have a minimal disc e ∗ , with boundary path αβ(hα)−1 η, with the following structure: diagram D = D1 ∪γ D2 → X • D1 has boundary path αβγ and D2 has boundary path η(hα)−1 γ. • For i ∈ {1, 2}, the diagram Di decomposes as Bi1 ∪ Bi2 ∪ Bi3 ∪ Si , where Si is a standard diagram in the sense of Theorem 2.16 and each Bij is a bigon diagram in X (i.e., no cone cells). The boundary path of Si is a geodesic triangle Ai Bi Ci , where A1 α−1 , B1 β −1 , C1 γ −1 are the boundary paths of B11 , B12 , B13 respectively, and A2 (hα), B2 η −1 , and C2 γ −1 are the boundary paths of B21 , B22 , B23 respectively. e ∗ projects under Π to a set • Si contains a constituent padded ladder Li whose image in X of diameter at least R −2(+δ +e), along with two ladders projecting to sets of diameter 6 10( + δ + e) (which will play no role in the remainder of the proof). Specifically, the padded ladder L1 is the subdiagram of D1 obtained as follows: either D1 is a ladder, in which case L1 = D1 , or there is a cone-cell or tripod with 3 complementary components,  18  G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN  all of whose closures are padded ladders; L1 is the padded ladder among these that contains y. The padded ladder L2 is defined analogously. The above notation is summarized in Figure 7.  Figure 7. The two triangles in the proof of Lemma 3.3. The padded ladder L1 is the subdiagram of S1 between the red subdiagram (cone-cell or union of 3 square grids) intersecting A1 , B1 , C1 and the point y. The ladder L2 is the subdiagram of S2 between the analogous red subdiagram (at right) and hx. Consequences of axiality of g: Since g acts loxodromically on H and since Π(A1 ), Π(α) fellow-travel in H (so Π ◦ A1 is a quasi-isometric embedding with constants independent of R, ), the following hold, where A01 is the part of A1 on the boundary path of the ladder L1 : • A01 = ρ0 σ1 ρ1 · · · σs ρs , where each ρi lies on a pseudorectangle and each σi lies on the boundary path of a cone-cell; • |σi |, |ρi | 6 ∆, where ∆ depends only on g and x, with the following exception: we may have |ρi | > ∆ if the pseudorectangle carrying ρi is horizontally degenerate. Similarly, the maximal subpath A02 of A2 lying on the ladder L2 decomposes as %0 ς1 · · · ς` %` , where each %i lies on a pseudorectangle, each ςi lies on a cone-cell, and each |ςi |, |%i | 6 ∆, except that we may have |%i | > ∆ if %i is carried on a horizontally degenerate pseudorectangle. See Figure 8. For each i, let Ri be the pseudorectangle carrying ρi and let ρ0i be the part of the boundary path of Ri parallel to (i.e. crossing the same dual curves as) ρi . Let Ki be the cone-cell carrying σi and let σi0 be the part of ∂p Ki between ρ0i−1 and ρ0i , as shown in Figure 8. Let C10 = ρ00 σ10 ρ01 · · · σs0 ρ0s be the part of C1 formed by concatenating these paths. Define ςi0 , %0i , and the resulting subpath C20 of C2 analogously. Conclusion: Arguing as in the proof of Lemma 3.2 shows that C10 , C20 synchronously fellowtravel at distance ξ1 depending on ∆. Lemma 3.1, which shows that the pseudorectangles between ρi , ρ0i and between %i , %0i are uniformly thin, shows that if t2 − t1 > 2∆, then there exists t ∈ [t1 , t2 ] so that d(A01 (t), C10 (t)) 6 ξ2 , where ξ2 is a uniform constant coming from the small-cancellation condition, and the same holds for A02 , C20 . A reparameterization computation then shows that there exists ξ3 = ξ3 (κ0 , κ1 , , ∆), independent of x, y, so d(A1 (t), A2 (t)) 6 ξ3 for some t. Lemma 3.2 then produces a uniform ξ so that d(z, hz) 6 ξ, where z = α(t). Since Cay(X ∗ ) is locally finite and π1 X ∗ acts freely on Cay(X ∗ ), the action of π1 X ∗ on Cay(X ∗ ) is metrically proper and hence there are only finitely many such h, as claimed.   ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS  19  Figure 8. The ladder L1 . 4. The hyperbolic space H and the coarse projection 1 Let hX | {Yi }i be a cubical C 0 ( 144 ) presentation and define a space H as follows. First, 0 ∗ e let H be the 1–skeleton of X . This consists of the 1–skeleton of Cay(X ∗ ), together with a combinatorial cone on each lift of each Yi . We form H from H0 by adding a combinatorial cone on the carrier of each hyperplane. We also have a projection Π : Cay(X ∗ ) → H, defined as follows. On the 1–skeleton of Cay(X ∗ ), we declare Π to be the inclusion. If c is a cube of Cay(X ∗ ) with dim(c) > 2, we send c arbitrarily to a point in the image of its 1–skeleton. However, we require this choice to be made π1 X ∗ –equivariantly, so that Π is π1 X ∗ –equivariant. Obviously Π is 1–Lipschitz on the 1–skeleton of Cay(X ∗ ). By construction, Π sends each cone to a set of diameter 6 2, while cubical product subcomplexes of Cay(X ∗ ) are sent to subsets of H with diameter at most 4. Hence, to see that H and Π satisfy the conditions required in Section 3, we need only to prove that H is hyperbolic.  Lemma 4.1 (Square bigons have thin projection). Let α, β → Cay(X ∗ ) be geodesics with e ∗ that does not contain common endpoints, and suppose that αβ bounds a disc diagram D → X any cone-cells. Then Π(α), Π(β) lie at uniformly bounded Hausdorff distance in H. Proof. Let e be a 1–cube of α and let K be the dual curve in D emanating from e and mapping to a hyperplane H of Cay(X ∗ ). Since α is a geodesic, K terminates at a 1–cube f of β, whence dH (Π(e), Π(f )) 6 2. Hence Π(α) ⊆ N2 (Π(β)), the closed 2-neighborhood of Π(β), and the proof is complete by symmetry.  Proposition 4.2. There exists δ > 0 so that the graph H is δ–hyperbolic. Proof. It suffices to prove that the 0–skeleton of Cay(X ∗ ), with the subspace metric inherited from H, is hyperbolic. First, suppose that αβγ is a geodesic triangle in Cay(X ∗ ). Then Lemma 4.1 combines with Theorem 2.16 and the fact that Π sends cones to uniformly bounded sets to show that each of Π(α), Π(β), Π(γ) is contained in the δ 0 –neighborhood in H of the union of the other two, for some uniform δ 0 . The Guessing Geodesics Lemma (see e.g. [Ham07, Proposition 3.5][Bow14, Proposition 3.1]) now implies that H is δ–hyperbolic for some δ.   20  G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN  1 Theorem 4.3. Let hX | {Yi }i∈I i be a C 0 ( 144 ) presentation with X locally finite, and let G = ∗ π1 X . Then any g ∈ G acting loxodromically on the space H constructed above acts on H as a WPD element, whence either G is virtually cyclic or acylindrically hyperbolic.  Proof. The assertion that g is a WPD element follows from Lemma 3.3; hyperbolicity of H comes from Proposition 4.2. Applying [Osi15a, Theorem 1.2.(AH3 ⇒ AH2 )] completes the proof.  5. Proof of Theorem B 5.1. Preservation of loxodromics. In this section, we study the question of when G contains a loxodromic isometry of H, using knowledge of which elements of π1 X act loxodromically on e of X, e which is the intersection graph of the set of hyperplane-carriers in the contact graph C X ∗ e e X. Let p : X → Cay(X ) be the obvious covering map (regarding Cay(X ∗ ) as the cover of X e be the graph obtained from corresponding to the subgroup K = hh{π1 Yi }i∈I ii of π1 X). Let H (1) e X by coning off the 1–skeleton of each hyperplane-carrier. b from H e by coning off every subgraph of X e (1) ⊂ H e which is the 1–skeleton Form a new graph H e e b → H, of an elevation Yi ,→ X of some Yi → X. Observe that p induces a quotient map p̂ : H (1) e which restricts to p on X and which sends the cone-point vH over the hyperplane-carrier N (H) to the cone-point vp(H) over the hyperplane-carrier p(N (H)). The map p also sends the e ∗ of Yi → X. cone over each Yei to the cone over the corresponding lift Yi → X Remark 5.1. It is not hard to adapt the proof of Proposition 3.1 of [BHS14] to show that (1) e In conjunction with the smalleach Yei is (uniformly) quasiconvex in the hyperbolic graph H. b is again hyperbolic. We will not require this fact. cancellation assumption, this shows that H e and a vertex Lemma 5.2. Let Γ be the graph with a vertex for each hyperplane-carrier in X, e e for each lift of each Yi to X, with adjacency corresponding to intersection. Then Γ is π1 X– b and H e is π1 X–equivariantly quasi-isometric to C X. e equivariantly quasi-isometric to H Proof. This is proved in [Hag14, Section 5] in the case where I = ∅, so that Γ is the contact e and H e the space formed from X e by coning off hyperplane-carriers; here we imitate graph of X (0) (0) b that proof. Define a map f : Γ → H as follows: if v is a vertex of Γ, corresponding to a e (either a lift of some Yei or a hyperplane-carrier), then let f (v) ∈ H b (0) be the conesubcomplex C e lies in a hyperplane-carrier, point over the corresponding subcomplex. Since each point of X (0) b the map f is quasi-surjective, i.e. H lies in a uniform neighborhood of the image of f . To see that f is a quasi-isometric embedding, one argues exactly as in [Hag14, Section 5].  e Then either g̃ acts Lemma 5.3 (Loxodromics persist I). Let g̃ ∈ π1 X act loxodromically on H. b e e loxodromically on H or g̃ stabilizes some elevation Yi ⊂ X of some Yi → X. b is quasi-isometric to the intersection graph Γ of the set of hyperplaneProof. By Lemma 5.2, H e and this graph is connected. Hence it suffices to show carriers and lifts of the various Yei in X, that hg̃i acts loxodromically on Γ provided g̃ 6∈ K. e⊆X e be a combinatorial geodesic axis for g̃ (by replacing X e by its first cubical subdiLet A e and fix n > 0. Let vision, we may assume that such an axis exists [Hag]). Fix a 0–cube ã ∈ A n e P be the subpath of A joining ã to g ã. b be a geodesic of Γ joining vertices corresponding to subcomplexes containing ã and Let Q n b be C0 , . . . , CN , where each Ci is either a hyperplane-carrier g ã. Let the vertex-sequence of Q e or a lift of some Yei to X. e Then we have a combinatorial path Q = α0 · · · αN joining ã to in X n e g ã, where each αi is a geodesic in Ci . The closed path QP −1 bounds a disc diagram D → X. b and then chosen Q, and then chosen D, so that the area of Suppose that we have chosen Q, D is minimal among all possible such choices. Let K be a dual curve in D emanating from P .  ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS  21  e and combinatorial geodesics are characterized by Then K ends on Q, since P is a geodesic of X the fact that they don’t contain two 1–cubes dual to the same hyperplane. If K is a dual curve emanating from Q, then it emanates from some αi . Suppose that K ends on αj . Then j 6= i since αi is a geodesic. If |i − j| > 2, then since the hyperplane to which K maps has carrier b is a Γ–geodesic. If j = i ± 2, then we can Γ–adjacent to Ci , Cj , we have contradicted that Q b replace Ci±1 with the carrier of the hyperplane to which K maps, providing a new choice of Q leading to a lower-area choice of D. Finally, if j = i ± 1, then we can apply hexagon moves to show that αi has a terminal segment coinciding with an initial segment of αi+1 (say); we can remove the resulting spur. We conclude that D can be chosen so that all dual curves travel from b is a geodesic of X. e Q to P . In other words, Q e Since g̃ acts loxodromically on H, Lemma 5.2 shows that there is a constant κ0 > 1 so that e there are at most κ0 hyperplanes that intersect A e and also intersect for all hyperplanes H of X, e H (i.e. A has uniformly bounded projection to each hyperplane). Hence, for each i for which Ci is a hyperplane-carrier, at most κ0 dual curves in D travel from P to αi . e of Yi → X, We now claim that there exists κ1 so that, for all i ∈ I and all elevations Yei ⊆ X e e e there are at most κ1 hyperplanes intersecting Yi and A. First, since g is loxodromic on H, 0 0 e H ∩A) e > Lemma 5.2 and Theorem 2.3 of [Hag13] imply that there exists κ such that if dXe (H∩A, 0 0 0 e e κ , for hyperplanes H, H , then H ∩ H = ∅. It follows that the cubical convex hull B of A lies e Suppose that no κ1 with the desired property exists. Then at finite Hausdorff distance from A. e e →B e is the combinatorial for any L > 0, there exists Yi so that diam(gBe (Yei )) > L, where gBe : X closest-point projection, or gate map; see e.g. [BHS14]. Translating by elements of hg̃i and 1 e lies in Nr (Yei ) ) condition now shows that there exists a unique Yei so that A applying the C 0 ( 144 e=A e and g̃ Yei , we have g̃ ∈ Stab(Yei ). for some r > 0. Since the same is true of g̃ A We have shown that if g̃ does not stabilize some elevation of some Yi , then dXe (ã, g n ã) 6 (κ0 + κ1 )N 6 (κ0 + κ1 )(λdHb (ã, g n ã) + µ), where λ, µ are constants for the quasi-isometry b Since the left-hand side grows linearly in n, it follows that g̃ is loxodromic on H. b Γ → H.  e and let g = g̃K ∈ Lemma 5.4 (Loxodromics persist II). Let g̃ ∈ π1 X act loxodromically on H ∗ e of some Yi → X. π1 X . Then either g acts loxodromically on H or g̃ stabilizes an elevation to X e ∗ is an embedding, by the small-cancellation conditions and [Wis, Proof. Each lift Yi → X Theorem 4.1]. It suffices to show that if g is not loxodromic on H, then g stabilizes some lift to e ∗ of some Yi . Note that for each i, the elevations Yei to X e of Yi → X correspond to the lifts X ∗ e to X of Yi → X. e be a combinatorial axis for g̃ in X e and let ã ∈ A e be a 0–cube. Recall that p : X e → Let A ∗ n n Cay(X ) is the universal covering map. Let a = p(ã), so that g a = p(g̃ ã) for each n > 0. Fixing n > 0, choose a sequence C0 , . . . , CN satisfying: e ∗ or Cj → X e ∗ is a lift of • for each j 6 N , either Cj is the carrier of a hyperplane in X some Yi → X (abusing notation, we use the same name for Cj as for its image); • a ∈ C0 and g n a ∈ CN ; • Cj ∩ Cj+1 6= ∅ for all j 6 N ; • N is minimal with the above properties. Let P be a combinatorial geodesic of Cay(X ∗ ) joining a to g n a. For each j, let αi be a combinatorial geodesic of Cj so that Q = α0 α2 · · · αN is a piecewise-geodesic from a to g n a with e ∗ be a minimal disc diagram with boundary path P Q−1 . Moreover, no backtracks. Let D → X choose the Cj , P, and Q subject to the above constraints so that D has minimal area among all diagrams constructed in the preceding manner. By Theorem 2.15 and the fact that P is a geodesic, D does not contain a positively-curved shell whose outer path is a subpath of P . Likewise, suppose that K is a positively-curved shell  22  G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN  with boundary path OI, where the out path O is a subpath of Q. Then the relator Y to which K maps intersects Ci , Cj for some i, j, and we can replace O by I in Q to obtain a new collection of data of the above type leading to a disc diagram which is a subdiagram of D with one fewer cone-cells, contradicting minimality. Hence, if there is a positively-curved shell in D, its outer path lies at the transition from P to Q. The same holds for spurs by construction. By performing square homotopies, we see that D decomposes as D = D0 ∪P 0 L ∪P 00 D1 , where e ∗ are square diagrams (i.e. factor as D0 , D1 → X e → X e ∗ ) bounded by geodesic D0 , D1 → X 0 00 bigons ∂p D0 = P P and ∂p D1 = P Q, and no generalized corners in L lie along P 0 , P 00 . The subdiagram L is bounded by P 0 P 00 . Theorem 2.13 shows that L is a ladder; let {Rk } and {Kk } respectively denote the constituent pseudorectangles and cone-cells of L. See Figure 9. e while half-flats project to diameter–6 3 Since g̃ is rank-one (because it is loxodromic on H, e there exists κ0 , independent of n, so that sets in the contact graph), and since D0 , D1 lift to X, 0 P, P lie at Hausdorff distance at most κ0 , and the same is true of P 00 , Q. In other words, the square bigons D0 , D1 are κ0 –thin.  Figure 9. The diagram D and its environs, in the proof of Lemma 5.4. Let r = |{Rk }| denote the number of constituent pseudorectangles of L. Then there exists K1 , independent of n, so that r > K1 n. Indeed, this can be seen by considering a lift of D0 or e and applying Lemma 5.3. D1 to X Lemma 3.1 and the fact that g does not stabilize a lift of a relator combine to show that there is a uniform bound (independent of n) on the number of pseudorectangles of L whose boundary paths can come κ0 –close to a given Cj . Otherwise, we would find (analogously to the proof of Lemma 5.3) some Yi → Cay(X ∗ ) with hgia lying in a fixed neighborhood of Yi . The small-cancellation assumptions would then show that gYi = Yi . Combining the above two conclusions shows that N grows linearly in n, whence g is loxodromic on H, as required, unless g stabilizes some Yi .  5.2. Building loxodromics in practice. In this section, we discuss how to find g̃ ∈ π1 X so e without stabilizing any of the Yei . that g̃ acts loxodromically on H We now introduce the assumption that X is compact (although we still put no restriction on e the set of relators Yi → X). We also assume, for the moment, that π1 X acts essentially on X, e in the sense that X does not contain a π1 X–invariant proper convex subcomplex. This is not a real restriction: in our application, we will be able to reduce to this case. These assumptions are imposed in order to use the double-skewering lemma of Caprace-Sageev [CS11], of which we use the following form from [Hag13]:  ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS  23  Lemma 5.5 (Strong double-skewering). Let G act properly, essentially, and cocompactly on a e Suppose H, V are hyperplanes with d e (H, V ) > 3. Then there exists CAT(0) cube complex X. CX e g ∈ G so that V separates H, gH, and g acts loxodromically on C X. e be an elevation of some Yi → X, and let C Yei be the subgraph of the contact Let Yei ,→ X e e spanned by the vertices corresponding to the hyperplanes intersecting the graph C = C X of X convex subcomplex Yei (so C Yei is a copy of the contact graph of Yei ). For convenience, we now e which are elevations of relators Yi → X. denote by R the collection of all subcomplexes Yei of X The following result reflects a general small-cancellation intuition. It is of independent interest and might be useful even in classical and certain graphical small-cancellation presentations. We denote by Nr (C Ye ) the closed r-neighborhood of C Ye . Lemma 5.6 (Quasiconvex malnormal collection). Let Se denote the set of all elevations Yei to e of relators. Then there exists ∆ : [0, ∞) → [0, ∞) so that: X (1) C Ye is ∆(0)–quasiconvex in C for all Ye ∈ R. (2) If Ye , Ye 0 ∈ R are distinct, then for all r > 0, diam(Nr (C Ye ) ∩ C Ye 0 ) 6 ∆(r). Remark 5.7. The above lemma does not use compactness of X. Proof of Lemma 5.6. We first prove assertion (1). Let H, V ∈ C Ye be vertices (i.e. hyperplanes crossing Ye ) and let x, y ∈ Ye be 0–cubes in the carriers of H, V respectively. Then by Proposition 3.1 of [BHS14], there exists a geodesic H = H0 , H1 , . . . , Hn = V of C and a geodesic e that joins x to y and has the property that γi lies in the carrier of Hi for γ = γ0 γ1 · · · γn of X e each hyperplane crossing γ corresponds to a vertex of C Ye , each i. Now, since Ye is convex in X, e and hence dC (Hi , C Yi ) 6 1 for each i, i.e. C contains a geodesic joining H, V and lying 1–close to C Ye ; the claim now follows since C is hyperbolic. We now prove (2). Let Ye , Ye 0 be distinct and fix r > 0. Choose hyperplanes H 0 , V 0 that cross 0 Ye and correspond to vertices in C Ye 0 whose closest vertices in CY , denoted H, V respectively, satisfy dC (H, H 0 ) 6 r, dC (V, V 0 ) 6 r. Choose C–geodesic sequences of hyperplanes H = H0 , . . . , Hs = H 0 , V = V0 , . . . , Vt = V 0 with s, t 6 r. We must show that dC (H 0 , V 0 ) is bounded in terms of r. At the expense of adding 2r to our eventual bound, we may assume that none of the Hi or Vj , with i < s, j < t, crosses Ye 0 . Let P, P 0 → Ye , Ye 0 be combinatorial geodesics joining N (V ), N (H) and N (H 0 ), N (V 0 ) respectively. For each i, let Qi → N (Hi ) be a geodesic, and Ri → N (Vi ) be a geodesic, so that Q Q e Let D → X e be a minimal-area disc diagram S = P i Qi P 0 j Rj is a closed path in X. bounded by S, and suppose that all of the above paths and hyperplanes were chosen (fixing H, H 0 , V, V 0 ) so as to minimize the area of the resulting diagram D. Note that dC (H 0 , V 0 ) is bounded by the number of dual curves in D emanating from P 0 . Let K be such a dual curve. By minimality of the area of D (allowing P 0 and the Qi , Ri to vary), we can assume that K does not end on Qs or Rt . Hence K ends either on P , on Qi for 0 6 i < s, or on Rj for 0 6 j < t. Let M > 0 bound the lengths of geodesic cone-pieces and wall-pieces; such a bound exists by our small-cancellation assumptions. Then the number of dual curves traveling from P 0 to P is at most M , since P, P 0 are geodesics and thus any two such curves map to distinct hyperplanes. Next, since Hi (respectively Vj ) has the property that Hi (respectively Vj ) does not cross Ye 0 , then there are at most M dual curves traveling from P 0 to Qi (respectively Rj ). This completes the proof, with ∆(r) 6 2M r + 2r.   24  G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN  Lemma 5.8. There exists R > 0 so that the following holds. Suppose that there exist distinct Ye , Ye 0 ∈ R with C Ye , C Ye 0 subgraphs of C of diameter at least 10R. Then there exists g̃ ∈ π1 X acting loxodromically on C and not stabilizing any element of R. Proof. Let π : C → C Ye be the coarse closest-point projection, which exists since C Ye is uniformly quasiconvex by Lemma 5.6. Let π 0 be the corresponding projection to C Ye 0 . Lemma 5.6 implies that π(C Ye 0 ) has diameter bounded by some ∆ depending on the hyperbolicity constant of C and the quasiconvexity constant ∆(0), and the same is true of π 0 (C Ye ). Let R be a constant to be determined, and choose vertices H, H 0 ∈ C Ye , C Ye 0 , respectively, so that dC (H, π(C Ye 0 )) > R and dC (H 0 , π 0 (C(Ye ))) > R. Let γ → C be a geodesic joining H, H 0 . Then thin quadrilateral considerations show that γ passes uniformly close to π(C Ye 0 ) and to π 0 (C Ye ), so that dC (H, H 0 ) > 2 provided R is sufficiently large. e satisfy the hypotheses of Lemma 5.5, Now, since dC (H, H 0 ) > 2, the hyperplanes H, H 0 of X e in X e passes through both hyperplanes H, H 0 , so that π1 X contains an element g̃ whose axis A and projects to a quasigeodesic axis A in C containing the vertices H, H 0 . Hence either g̃ has the desired property, or g̃ stabilizes some Ye 00 ∈ R − {Ye , Ye 0 }. e crosses Ye 00 . Let α be the subpath of A e between In the latter case, every hyperplane crossing A 0 0 the 1–cubes dual to H, H , let the geodesic β → N (H ) join the endpoint of α to a closest vertex of N (H 0 ) ∩ Ye 0 , let the geodesic γ → Ye 0 join the endpoint of β to a point y 0 ∈ Ye 0 as close as possible to Ye , let the geodesic ζ join y 0 to a closest point y ∈ Ye , let η → Ye 0 join y to a closest e be point of N (H), let θ → N (H) join the endpoint of η to the initial point of α, and let D → X a disc diagram with boundary path αβγζηθ, with minimal area for its boundary path and with each of the named geodesics chosen in its path-homotopy class so that the resulting diagram is minimal. Observe that |η|, |γ| > R since these paths must project to paths in C of length at least R. Now, no dual curve in D travels from η ∪ γ to ζ because such dual curves map to hyperplanes crossing Ye ∪ Ye 0 , while the hyperplanes crossing ζ are exactly those separating Ye , Ye 0 , by our choice of y, y 0 . Similarly, no dual curve travels from η to θ or γ to β. Hence at least R3 dual curves emanating from η travel to α, or to γ, or to β. In either of the former cases, Ye contains a cone-piece of length R3 , provided R > 3M , where M is the bound on geodesic pieces coming from the small-cancellation conditions. Otherwise, since H 0 cannot cross Ye – it was chosen to be very C–distant from C Ye – β provides a wall-piece in Ye of length R3 , which is again impossible if R > 3M . This completes the proof.  Lemma 5.9. Let g̃ act loxodromically on C and suppose that there exists B such that diam(C Ye ) 6 B for all Ye ∈ R. Then g̃ does not stabilize any element of R. Proof. This is obvious.    Definition 5.10 (Normalized). The cubical presentation hX | {Yi }i∈I i is normalized if the nonpositively-curved cube complex Yi is not contractible for each i ∈ I. 1 Lemma 5.11 (Building loxodromics). Suppose that hX | {Yi }i∈I i is a normalized C 0 ( 144 ) cubical presentation with X compact and each Yi compact. Then one of the following holds: (A) π1 X ∗ is finite; e contains a π1 X–invariant convex subcomplex decomposing (B) I = ∅, and π1 X ∗ = π1 X, and X as the product of two unbounded subcomplexes; e and not stabilizing any Yei . (C) there exists g̃ ∈ π1 X acting loxodromically on H  e i.e. there is no convex, Proof. We first reduce to the case where π1 X acts essentially on X, e π1 X–invariant proper subcomplex in X. Indeed, by Proposition 3.5 of [CS11], there is a π1 X– e ⊆ X. e Let Z denote the quotient of Z e by π1 X, so invariant, π1 X–essential convex subcomplex Z  ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS  25  e ,→ X e descends to a local isometry Z → X. We form a new cubical presentation for π1 X ∗ that Z by attaching to Z all of the components of each fiber product Yi ⊗X Z → Z and then normalizing (discarding contractible relators). Pieces in the new cubical presentation arise by intersecting e with Z, e so C 0 ( 1 ) condition persists. Thus, assume π1 X acts essentially on X. e pieces in X 144 If I = ∅, then either (B) holds, or the Irreducibility Criterion of [CS11] provides hyperplanes H, H 0 at C–distance at least 3, whence Lemma 5.5 and Lemma 5.2 show that (C) holds. If there exist distinct Ye , Ye 0 ∈ R with C Ye , C Ye 0 subgraphs of C of diameter at least 10R, then Lemma 5.8 provides g̃ ∈ π1 X so that g̃ does not stabilize an element of R and acts loxodromically e Thus conclusion (C) holds in this case. If Ye ∈ R has on C, and therefore, by Lemma 5.2, on H. the property that C Ye has diameter > 10R, and Ye is unique with this property, then g Ye = Ye for all g ∈ π1 X, and conclusion (A) holds. Indeed, since Y is compact and Ye is π1 X–invariant, e = Ye .) π1 Y has finite index in π1 X. (In fact, essentiality shows X e It remains to consider the case in which C Y is uniformly bounded for all Ye . Lemma 5.9 and Lemma 5.2 show that conclusion (C) holds exactly if there exists g̃ acting loxodromically on C. Applying the Irreducibility Criterion and Lemma 5.5 as above show that if conclusion (C) does e decomposes as a product A × B of unbounded subcomplexes. In particular, not hold, then X hyperplanes have the form A × H or V × B, where H, V are respectively hyperplanes of B, A. In this case, we claim that either conclusion (B) or (A) holds. Indeed, suppose Ye ∈ R. Then Ye = A0 × B 0 , where A0 , B 0 ⊂ A, B are convex subcomplexes. e that does not If A0 = A, B 0 = B, then (A) holds. Hence let V × B be a hyperplane of X cross Ye , where V is a hyperplane of A not crossing A0 . Then any geodesic in B 0 is a wall-piece, so diam(B 0 ) 6 M . If there is also a hyperplane A × H so that H does not cross B 0 , then we can conclude that diam(A0 ) 6 M , whence diam(Ye ) 6 2M . In particular, since we can take M 1 th of the length of any geodesic in Ye projecting to an essential closed path in X, to be 6 144 there is no essential closed path in Y , so Y is contractible; since our cubical presentation was normalized, Y cannot exist. Otherwise, diam(B 0 ) 6 M and A = A0 , which means that there are infinite wall-pieces, and infinite cone-pieces between Ye and its translates, so such Ye cannot exist. Thus (B) holds. This completes the proof.  5.3. The proof. We conclude with: Proof of Theorem B. We are interested in a statement about π1 X ∗ , and discarding relators does not weaken small-cancellation conditions, so we assume that hX | {Yi }i∈I i is normalized. The theorem now follows from Lemma 5.11, Lemma 5.4, and Theorem 4.3.   References [AD12] Goulnara Arzhantseva and Cornelia Drutu. Geometry of infinitely presented small cancellation groups, Rapid Decay and quasi-homomorphisms. arXiv:1212.5280, 2012. [AMS] Yago Antolin, Ashot Minasyan, and Alessandro Sisto. Commensurating endomorphisms of acylindrically hyperbolic groups and applications. Groups, Geometry, and Dynamics, to appear. arXiv:1310.8605, 2013. [AO14] Goulnara Arzhantseva and Damian Osajda. Graphical small cancellation groups with the Haagerup property. arXiv:1404.6807, 2014. [AS83] Kenneth I. Appel and Paul E. Schupp. Artin groups and infinite Coxeter groups. Invent. Math., 72(2):201–220, 1983. [Bal16] Sahana Balasubramanya. Acylindrical group actions on quasi-trees. arXiv:1602.03941, 2016. [BB96] Werner Ballmann and Serguei Buyalo. Nonpositively curved metrics on 2-polyhedra. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 222(1):97–134, 1996. [BF02] Mladen Bestvina and Koji Fujiwara. Bounded cohomology of subgroups of mapping class groups. Geometry & Topology, 6(1):69–89, 2002. [BF08] Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn. A hyperbolic Out(Fn )-complex. arXiv:0808.3730, 2008.  26  G.N. ARZHANTSEVA AND M.F. HAGEN  [BHS14] Jason Behrstock, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces I: curve complexes for cubical groups. arXiv:1412.2171, 2014. [Bow08] Brian H Bowditch. Tight geodesics in the curve complex. Inventiones mathematicae, 171(2):281–300, 2008. [Bow14] Brian H Bowditch. Uniform hyperbolicity of the curve graphs. Pacific J. Math, 269(2):269–280, 2014. [Bri48] I.A. Brin. Gauss-Bonnet theorems for polyhedra. Uspekhi Mat. Nauk, 3:226–227, 1948. [Che00] Victor Chepoi. Graphs of some CAT(0) complexes. Advances in Applied Mathematics, 24(2):125–179, 2000. [CS11] Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace and Michah Sageev. Rank rigidity for CAT(0) cube complexes. Geom. Funct. Anal., 21:851–891, 2011. [DGO11] François Dahmani, Vincent Guirardel, and Denis Osin. Hyperbolically embedded subgroups and rotating families in groups acting on hyperbolic spaces. arXiv:1111.7048, 2011. [FPS15] Roberto Frigerio, Beatrice M Pozzetti, and Alessandro Sisto. Extending higher-dimensional quasicocycles. Journal of Topology, 8(4):1123–1155, 2015. [Ger87] Steve M Gersten. Reducible diagrams and equations over groups. Springer, 1987. [Gro03] Mikhail Gromov. Random walk in random groups. Geometric and Functional Analysis, 13(1):73–146, 2003. [Gru] Dominik Gruber. Infinitely presented C(6)-groups are SQ-universal. J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2), 92(1):178– 201. [Gru15] Dominik Gruber. Infinitely presented graphical small-cancellation groups. PhD thesis, Universität Wien, 2015. [GS14] Dominik Gruber and Alessandro Sisto. Infinitely presented graphical small cancellation groups are acylindrically hyperbolic. arXiv:1408.4488, 2014. [Hag] Frédéric Haglund. Isometries of CAT(0) cube complexes are semi-simple. arXiv:0705.3386, 2007. [Hag13] Mark F Hagen. The simplicial boundary of a CAT(0) cube complex. Alg. Geom. Topol., 13:1299–1367, 2013. [Hag14] Mark F Hagen. Weak hyperbolicity of cube complexes and quasi-arboreal groups. J. Topol., 7(2):385– 418, 2014. [Ham07] Ursula Hamenstadt. Geometry of the complex of curves and of Teichmüller space. Handbook of Teichmüller theory, 1:447–467, 2007. [Ham08] Ursula Hamenstädt. Bounded cohomology and isometry groups of hyperbolic spaces. Journal of the European Mathematical Society, 10(2):315–349, 2008. [HO13] Michael Hull and Denis Osin. Induced quasicocycles on groups with hyperbolically embedded subgroups. Algebraic & Geometric Topology, 13(5):2635–2665, 2013. [HW08] Frédéric Haglund and Daniel T Wise. Special cube complexes. Geometric and Functional Analysis, 17(5):1551–1620, 2008. [Jan14] Kasia Jankiewicz. Greendlinger’s lemma in cubical small-cancellation theory. arXiv:1401.4995, 2014. [Mac] John M. Mackay. Conformal dimension and random groups. Geom. Funct. Anal., 22(1):213–239. [MO15] Ashot Minasyan and Denis Osin. Acylindrical hyperbolicity of groups acting on trees. Mathematische Annalen, 362(3-4):1055–1105, 2015. [MW02] Jonathan P McCammond and Daniel T Wise. Fans and ladders in small cancellation theory. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 84(3):599–644, 2002. [NR98] Graham Niblo and Martin Roller. Groups acting on cubes and Kazhdan’s property (T). Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 126(3):693–699, 1998. [Oll06] Yann Ollivier. On a small cancellation theorem of Gromov. Bulletin of the Belgian Mathematical Society Simon Stevin, 13(1):75–90, 2006. [Osi15a] Denis Osin. Acylindrically hyperbolic groups. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 2015. [Osi15b] Denis Osin. On acylindrical hyperbolicity of groups with positive first `2 -Betti number. arXiv:1501.03066, 2015. [OW07] Yann Ollivier and Daniel Wise. Kazhdan groups with infinite outer automorphism group. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 359(5):1959–1976, 2007. [PS15] Piotr Przytycki and Alessandro Sisto. A note on acylindrical hyperbolicity of mapping class groups. arXiv:1502.02176, 2015. [RS87] Eliyahu Rips and Yoav Segev. Torsion-free group without unique product property. Journal of Algebra, 108(1):116–126, 1987. [Sam] Andrea Sambusetti. Growth tightness of surface groups. Expo. Math., 20(4):345–363. [Sis] Alessandro Sisto. Contracting elements and random walks. Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik, to appear. arXiv:1112.2666, 2011.  ACYLINDRICAL HYPERBOLICITY OF CUBICAL SMALL-CANCELLATION GROUPS  27  [Sis14] Alessandro Sisto. Quasi-convexity of hyperbolically embedded subgroups. Mathematische Zeitschrift, pages 1–10, 2014. [Str90] Ralph Strebel. Appendix. Small cancellation groups. In Sur les groupes hyperboliques d’après Mikhael Gromov (Bern, 1988), volume 83 of Progr. Math., pages 227–273. Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, MA, 1990. [Wis] Daniel T. Wise. The structure of groups with a quasiconvex hierarchy. 205 pp., preprint 2011. [Wis04] Daniel T Wise. Cubulating small cancellation groups. Geometric & Functional Analysis, 14(1):150–214, 2004. [Wis12] Daniel Wise. From Riches to Raags: 3-manifolds, right-angled Artin Groups, and Cubical Geometry, volume 117. American Mathematical Society, 2012. University of Vienna, Faculty of Mathematics, Oskar-Morgenstern-Platz 1, 1090 Wien, Austria E-mail address: goulnara.arzhantseva@univie.ac.at Department of Pure Maths. and Math. Stats., University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK E-mail address: markfhagen@gmail.com

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
