Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 7
ArXiv ID: hf_5317

Abstract:
Protograph-based Quasi-Cyclic MDPC Codes for McEliece Cryptosystems  arXiv:1801.07484v1 [cs.IT] 23 Jan 2018  Gianluigi Liva and Hannes Bartz  Abstract—In this paper, ensembles of quasi-cyclic moderatedensity parity-check (MDPC) codes based on protographs are introduced and analyzed in the context of a McEliece-like cryptosystem. The proposed ensembles significantly improve the error correction capability of the regular MDPC code ensembles that are currently considered for post-quantum cryptosystems without increasing the public key size. The proposed ensembles are analyzed in the asymptotic setting via density evolution, both under the sum-product algorithm and a low-complexity (errorand-erasure) message passing algorithm. The asymptotic analysis is complemented at finite block lengths by Monte Carlo simulations. The enhanced error correction capability remarkably improves the scheme robustness with respect to (known) decoding attacks. Index Terms—McEliece cryptosystem, moderate-density parity-check codes, quasi-cyclic codes, information set decoding.  I. I NTRODUCTION Moderate-density parity-check (MDPC) codes [1] have been recently proposed as underlying coding scheme for McEliecelike cryptosystems [2], [3]. The family of MDPC codes admit a parity-check matrix of moderate density1 , yielding codes with large minimum distance. In [2], a McEliece cryptosystem based on quasi cyclic (QC)-MDPC codes that defeats information set decoding attacks on the dual code due to the moderate density parity-check matrix, is presented. For a given security level, the QC-MDPC cryptosystem allows for very small key sizes compared to other McEliece variants. In this paper, we introduce a variation on the scheme of [2]. In particular, we investigate the adoption of MDPC ensembles based on protographs [4] to improve the error correction capability of the code underlying the cryptosystem. We focus on protographs containing state variable nodes (VNs). The use of state VNs allows designing codes that can be decoded over an extended Tanner graph that is sparser than the reduced Tanner graph associated with the code’s (moderate-density) parity-check matrix. For the introduced ensembles, we relate the density of the extended Tanner graph to the density of the reduced Tanner graph. The lower density of the extended Tanner graph allows remarkable gains in terms of error correction capability with G. Liva and H. Bartz are with with the Institute of Communication and Navigation of the Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR), 82234 Wessling, Germany (e-mail: {gianluigi.liva,hannes.bartz}@dlr.de) 1 The existence of a MDPC matrix for a binary linear block code does not rule out the possibility that the same code fulfills a (much) sparser paritycheck matrix. As in most of the literature, we neglect the probability that a code defined by a randomly-drawn moderate parity check matrix admits a sparser parity-check matrix.  respect to the ensembles of [2]. The improvement is analyzed both in the asymptotic setting via density evolution (DE) [5] and at finite block length via Monte Carlo simulations, under two decoding algorithms: The sum-product algorithm (SPA) and the less complex Algorithm E from [5]. For one of the proposed ensembles, a gain of 40% in the weight of error patterns (decodable with a target error probability) is observed with respect to the ensembles of [2], rendering the scheme more resilient to information set decoding (ISD) attacks [6]. II. P RELIMINARIES A. Circulant Matrices A binary circulant matrix A of size Q is a Q ˆ Q matrix with coefficients in F2 obtained by cyclically shifting its first row a “ pa0 , a1 , . . . , aQ´1 q to the right, yielding ¨ ˛ a0 a1 ¨ ¨ ¨ aQ´1 ˚ aQ´1 a0 ¨ ¨ ¨ aQ´2 ‹ ˚ ‹ A“˚ . .. .. ‹ . .. ˝ .. . . . ‚ a1  a2  ¨¨¨  a0  The set of Q ˆ Q circulant matrices together with the matrix multiplication and addition forms a `commutative ` ring ˘and it ˘is isomorphic to the polynomial ring F2 rXs{ X Q ´ 1 , `, ¨ . In particular, we can associate to the circulant A a polynomial apXq “ a0 ` a1 X ` . . . ` aQ´1 xQ´1 P F2 rXs. Consider two Q ˆ Q circulants A and B and their associated polynomials apXq and bpXq. Denote by C “ A ` B and D “ AB. Then, the circulants C and D are associated to the polynomials ` cpXq ˘“ apXq ` bpXq and dpXq “ apXq ¨ bpXq mod X Q ´ 1 . We indicate the vector of coefficients of a polynomial apXq as a “ pa0 , a1 , . . . , aQ´1 q. The weight of a polynomial apXq is the number of its non-zero coefficients. We indicate both weights with the operator wht p¨q, i.e., wht papXqq “ wht paq. B. QC-MDPC-based Cryptosystems A binary MDPC code of length n, dimension k and row weight dc is defined by a binary parity-check matrix H whose rows have (moderate) Hamming weight dc . For n “ N Q, dimension k “ KQ, redundancy2 m “ M Q with M “ N ´K for some integer Q, the parity-check matrix HpXq of a QCMDPC code in polynomial form is a M ˆ N matrix. Without loss of generality we consider in the following codes with M “ 1. This family of codes covers a wide range of code 2 We  assume here parity-check matrices without redundant rows.  rates and is of particular interest for cryptographic applications since the parity-check and generator matrices can be described in a very compact way. The parity-check matrix of QC-MDPC codes with M “ 1 has the form ` ˘ HpXq “ h0 pXq h1 pXq . . . hN ´1 pXq . (1) Let DECH p¨q be an efficient decoder for the code defined by the parity-check matrix H. The cryptosystem operates in the following manner. 1) Key Generation: The private key is generated as a paritypiq check matrix of the form (1) with wht phi pXqq “ dc for řN ´1 piq i “ 0, . . . , N . The matrix H with row weight dc “ i“0 dc is the private key. The public key is the corresponding binary k ˆ n generator matrix G in systematic form3 (note that the generator matrix can be described by KQ bits, yielding a small public key size). 2) Encryption: To encrypt a plaintext u P Fk2 a user computes the cyphertext c P Fn2 using the public key G as c “ x ` e where x “ uG and e is an error vector uniformly chosen from all vectors from Fn2 of Hamming weight wht peq “ e . 3) Decryption: To decrypt a cyphertext the authorized recipient uses the private key to obtain x̂ “ DECH pcq. Since G is in systematic form the plaintext corresponds (in case of correct decoding) to the first k bits of x̂. C. Protograph-based Codes A protograph P [4] is a small bipartite graph comprising a set of N0 VNs (also referred to as VN types) tV0 , V1 , . . . , VN0 ´1 u and a set of M0 check nodes (CNs) (i.e., CN types) tC0 , C1 , . . . , CM0 ´1 u. A VN type Vj is connected to a CN type Ci by bij edges. A protograph can be equivalently represented in matrix form by an M0 ˆ N0 matrix B. The jth column of B is associated to VN type Vj and the ith row of B is associated to CN type Ci . The pi, jq element of B is bij . A larger graph (derived graph) can be obtained from a protograph by applying a copy-and-permute procedure. The protograph is copied Q times, and the edges of the different copies are permuted preserving the original protograph connectivity: If a type-j VN is connected to a type-i CN with bij edges in the protograph, in the derived graph each type-j VN is connected to bij distinct type-i CNs (observe that multiple connections between a VN and a CN are not allowed in the derived graph). The derived graph is a Tanner graph with n0 “ N0 Q VNs and m0 “ M0 Q CNs that can be used to represent a binary linear block code. A protograph P defines a code ensemble C . For a given protograph P, consider all its possible derived graphs with n0 “ N0 Q VNs. The ensemble C is the collection of codes associated to the derived graphs in the set. Protographs allow specifying graphs which contain VNs which are associated to codeword symbols, as well as VNs which are not associated to codeword symbols. The latest class of VNs are often referred to as state or punctured VNs. The term “punctured” is used since the code associated with the derived graph can be seen as a punctured version of a longer 3 In [2] the use of a CCA2-secure conversion is proposed, which allows using G in systematic-form without leaking information.  code associated with the same graph for which all the VNs are associated to codeword bits. The introduction of state VNs in a code graph allows designing codes with a remarkable performance [7]. The QC-MDPC codes introduced in [2] admit a protograph representation. In particular, for the rate 1{2 case, the base matrix has the form B“  `  b00  b01  ˘  .  (2)  Here, N0 “ N “ 2 and M0 “ M “ 1. The expansion of the protograph can be performed in a structured manner yielding a QC-MDPC with parity-check ` ˘ matrix in polynomial form HpXq “ h00 pXq h01 pXq with wht phij pXqq “ bij . In the remainder of the paper, we will focus on rate 1{2 codes, and we will denote the ensemble defined by (2) as the reference ensemble or CA . In particular, we will consider as a study case the shortest public key size considered in [2] for 80 bit security where Q “ 4801 is the public key size, and n “ 9602 is the MDPC code block length. For this specific case, the reference ensemble is obtained by setting b00 “ b01 “ 45 yielding a total row weight of 90. This choice of parameters was introduced in [2] to obtain the security level of 80 bits.  D. Decoding Algorithms Denote by v0 , v1 , . . . , vn0 ´1 the n0 VNs in the code Tanner graph, and by c0 , c1 , . . . , cm0 ´1 then m0 CNs. The neighborhood of a VN v is N pvq, and similarly N pcq denotes the neighborhood of the CN c. The message from v to c is denoted by mvÑc , and the message from c to v is denoted by mcÑv . The channel message is mch . If a codeword bit is associated to v (i.e., v is not a state VN), then we denote it with a slight abuse of notation by x, with x “ `1 stands for a 0 and x “ ´1 stands for a 1. The bit in the cyphertext associated to x is c, with c “ ´x if an error is introduced, c “ x otherwise. For state VNs, no cyphertext bits are produced at the encryption stage. We consider next two decoding algorithms. The first algorithm is the classical SPA, for which we introduce a generalization allowing an attenuation of the extrinsic information produced at the CNs. As we shall see, the attenuation can be used as a heuristic method to improve the performance at low error rates. The second algorithm is the Algorithm E introduced in [5], which reduces the decoding complexity by limiting the message alphabet to the ternary set t´1, 0, `1u. As observed in [5], Algorithm E benefits also from the introduction of a heuristic scaling parameter. Here, nevertheless, the parameter is used to amplify the channel message, and it plays a role not only at low error rates, but also in the so-called waterfall performance of the code. While in [5] it was suggested to vary the scaling parameter with the iteration number, here we will keep the scaling parameter fixed throughout the iterations. In both cases, the scaling parameter is indicated by ω. 1) Scaled Sum-Product Algorithm: The channel message is initialized as n´e mch “ c ln n  for the VNs associated to a cyphertext bit (recall that c “ ˘1 is the cyphertext bit), whereas mch “ 0 for the state VNs. At the VNs, ÿ mvÑc “ mch ` mc1 Ñv (3) c1 PN pvqzc  while at the CNs » mcÑv “ ω2 tanh´1 –  ź v1 PN pcqzv  fi ´m 1 ¯ v Ñc fl tanh 2  Proposition 1. The Hamming weight of each row of H is upper bounded by b11 ` b01 b10 ` b12 ` b02 b10 . (4)  with final decision, after iterating (3), (4) a given number of times, given by fi » ÿ mcÑv fl . x̂ “ sign –mch ` cPN pvq  2) Algorithm E: The channel message is initialized as mch “ c for the VNs associated to a cyphertext bit (recall that c “ ˘1 is the cyphertext bit), whereas mch “ 0 for the state VNs. At the VNs, fi » ÿ (5) mc1 Ñv fl mvÑc “ sign –ωmch ` c1 PN pvqzc  while at the CNs mcÑv “  ź  mv1 Ñc  (6)  v1 PN pcqzv  with final decision, after iterating (5), (6) a given number of times, given by » fi ÿ x̂ “ sign –mch ` mcÑv fl . cPN pvq  Observe that the scaling parameter is de-activated (i.e., it is set to 1) in the final decision. III. P ROTOGRAPH - BASED MDPC E NSEMBLES We introduce next protograph-based MDPC ensembles which make use of state VNs. For all the ensembles we adopt a base matrix in the form ˆ ˙ 1 b01 b02 B“ (7) b10 b11 b12 where the column on the left of the vertical delimiter is associated to state VNs. The expansion of the protograph can be performed in a structured manner yielding a QC-MDPC. In particular, we first obtain a binary matrix in polynomial form ˆ ˙ 1 γ01 pXq γ02 pXq (8) ΓpXq “ γ10 pXq γ11 pXq γ12 pXq with wht pγij pXqq “ bij . The parity-check matrix is ` ˘ HpXq “ h00 pXq h01 pXq  code defined by (9) can be described as punctured version of a longer code which has Γ as its parity-check matrix, where the first Q bits in each codeword are punctured. The following proposition established a relationship between the weights of the rows of (8) and the weight of the rows of (9).  (9)  with h00 pXq “ rγ11 pXq ` γ01 pXqγ10 pXqs mod pX Q ´ 1q and h01 pXq “ rγ12 pXq ` γ02 pXqγ10 pXqs mod pX Q ´ 1q. In this case, N0 “ 3 and M0 “ 2, yielding a Tanner graph (associated with the matrix Γ) with n0 “ 3Q VNs. By comparing with the block length n “ 2Q, one finds that the  Proof. Follows by triangle’s inequality. In the remainder of the paper, coefficients of the base matrix are chosen such that upper bound given by Proposition 1 matches the weight of the rows of the parity check matrix of the reference ensemble, i.e., b01 b10 ` b11 ` b02 b10 ` b12 “ 90. The number of distinct matrices (8) with a base matrix of the form (7), i.e. the number of different private keys in an ensemble C, is ˆ ˙ ˆ ˙ źˆ ˙ Q 1 Q ź Q “ . NpCq “ Q 1 i,j bij bij i,j The size of the key space NpCq for different ensembles is given in Table I. We provide next a DE analysis of protograph-based ensembles.4 1) Sum-Product Algorithm: When the SPA is used, we resort to quantized DE. We refer to [8] for the details. The extension to protograph ensembles is straightforward and follows the footsteps of [9], [10]. Simplified approaches based on the Gaussian approximation are discarded due to the large CN degrees [11] used by the MDPC code ensembles. 2) Algorithm E: In the following, we provide an extension of the DE analysis of protograph ensembles for Algorithm E, which was originally introduced in [5] for unstructured ensembles. Rather than stating the complete DE, we sketch the analysis by showing how message probabilities are updated at VNs and CNs. Let us consider the transmission over a binary symmetric channel (BSC) with error probability δ. We make use of the conventional assumption of the all-zero codeword transmission. It follows that all the message probabilities derived next are conditioned to the transmission of a zero value. Due to the mapping p0 Ø `1, 1 Ø ´1q at the decoder input, we have that messages exchanged by VNs and CNs take values in t´1, 0, `1u, whereas the messages associated with the channel observations take values in t´ω, 0, `ωu. In either case, 0 is the value associated with an erasure (which replaces the channel observation in the case of a state VN). We consider first a degree-d CN c of a given type. We assume the CN to be connected to d VNs, each of different type (having some VNs of the same type being a particular case). For ease of notation, we assume the d VNs to be v0 , v1 , . . . , vd´1 . At piq a given iteration, we denote by q` the probability that the message from vi to c takes value `. Similarly, we denote by 4 The codes that will be adopted in practice are QC, and hence represent a sub-ensemble of the (larger) protograph-based MDPC ensemble. Anyhow, we consider the results of the analysis as accurate in predicting the error correction capability of the corresponding protograph-based QC-MDPC ensembles.  piq  p` the probability that the message from c to vi takes value `, after the CN elaboration. We have that « ff ¯ ź´ ¯ 1 ź ´ pjq piq pjq pjq pjq p´1 “ q ` q´1 ´ q`1 ´ q´1 (10) 2 j‰i `1 j‰i ¯ ź´ piq pjq p0 “ 1 ´ 1 ´ q0 (11) j‰i piq  p`1 “  « 1 ź´ 2  j‰i  pjq  pjq  ¯  q`1 ` q´1 `  ź´  pjq  pjq  q`1 ´ q´1  NpCq  CA  p45 45q  2715  ˜  ˜ CC  Moreover, we introduce the channel message probability vector m :“ pm´ω , m´ω`1 , . . . , m`ω q with m0 “ 1 and m` “ 0 for all ` ‰ 0 if v is a state VN, whereas m´ω “ δ, m`ω “ 1 ´ δ and m` “ 0 for all ` ‰ ˘ω otherwise. the ”Æ We introduce ı piq pjq intermediate probability vector z :“ f m i.e., j‰i p z piq is the convolution of the probability vectors associated to the messages at the input of v, with the exception of the one received from ci . We have that ÿ piq ÿ piq piq piq piq piq q´1 “ z` q0 “ z0 q`1 “ z` . (13) `ą0  Observe that (13) fully describe the evolution of the message probabilities at the CNs. By iterating them with (10), (11) and (12) for all VN/CN types specified by the protograph, one can track the evolution of the message probabilities. Denote by f “ pf´1 , f0 , f`1 q the final a posteriori probability (APP) estimate probability vector at v (obtained after a given number of iterations). We have that ÿ ÿ f´1 “ z` f0 “ z0 f`1 “ z` `ă0  Base matrix  . (12)  It follows that (10), (11) and (12) fully describe the evolution of the message probabilities at the CNs. Let us consider now a degree-d VN v of a given type. We assume the VN to be connected to d CNs, each of different type (having some CNs of the same type being a particular case). Again, for ease of notation, we assume the d CNs to be c0 , c1 , . . . , cd´1 . We shall introduce next the probability vectors ´ ¯ ´ ¯ piq piq piq piq piq piq q piq :“ q´1 , q0 , q`1 . ppiq :“ p´1 , p0 , p`1  ”Æ  Ensemble  CB  ff ¯  j‰i  `ă0  TABLE I T HRESHOLDS COMPUTED FOR DIFFERENT PROTOGRAPHS , n “ 9602  `ą0  ı  pjq with z :“ f m1 and m1 :“ pm1´1 , m10 , m1`1 q and jp m1´1 “ δ, m10 “ 0 and m1`1 “ 1 ´ δ if v is not a state VN, and m1´1 “ 0, m10 “ 1 and m1`1 “ 0 otherwise. Successful decoding convergence is declared if f´1 Ñ 0 and f0 Ñ 0 as the iteration count tends to infinity, for all VN types.  3) Asymptotic Error Correction Capability Estimates: To estimate the error correction capability of the ensembles under consideration, we computed the iterative decoding threshold over a BSC with error probability δ. The thresholds are computed under the SPA and Algorithm E decoding. We ‹ denote the former as δSPA and the latter as δE‹ . Table I provides the decoding threshold for some ensembles with base matrix in the form (7), together with the reference ensemble from [2]. In ‹ particular, we provide the products nδSPA and nδE‹ as rough estimates of the error correction capability of codes drawn from ensembles with finite block length n, for the study case  1  8  8  5  5  5  1  22  22  2  1  1  ‹ nδSPA pωq  113 p1q  57 p1q  112 p0.5q  106 p14q  ¸ 2328 ¸ 2446  nδE‹ pωq  132  25 p1q 57 p4q  171 p1q  43 p1q  155 p0.8q  128 p8q  of n “ 9602. The values represent a first estimate of the maximum error pattern weights for which decoding succeeds with high probability. The ensemble that exhibits the largest iterative decoding threshold under both SPA and Algorithm E decoding is ensemble CC . The gain in the weight of error patterns (decodable with high probability) with respect to the reference ensemble is here in the order of 50% under the SPA, while under Algorithm E the gain reduces to 20%. A. Error Correction Capability at Finite Length Monte Carlo simulations have been performed to measure the actual error correction capability of the codes with base matrices in the form (7). In particular, for a given ensemble and the given block length n “ 9602, QC-MDPC codes have been obtained by expanding the base matrix with 4801 ˆ 4801 circulant matrices of suitable weight, with the circulants picked uniformly at random. The results, in terms of block error rate vs. weight of the error pattern, for the reference ensemble and for the ensemble CC are depicted in Figure 1. The performance measured with Algorithm E are in good accordance with the gain predicted by the iterative decoding threshold analysis. At a block error rate of 10´5 the code from CC allows operating with around 20 errors more than what is allowed by the code drawn from the reference ensemble. Under SPA decoding, the codes drawn from both ensembles showed performance curves with signs of slope change at moderate-high error floors, preventing the achievement of low block error rates with reasonably-high error pattern weights. We conjecture that the reason for this behavior might be found in the numerous trapping sets affecting the dense graphs (recall that the code construction does not leverage on any girth optimization technique, due to the need of generating the private key uniformly at random). To mitigate this effect, we made use of the attenuation parameter ω in (4) to reduce the magnitude of the extrinsic estimated provided at the output of the CNs.5 This heuristic approach turns out to be effective in improving the error correction capability at low block error rates. The choice of the scaling factors has been carried out by searching via simulations the largest value of ω for which no sign of error floor appears at a block error rate greater than 10´5 . Surprisingly, the use of a scaling parameter ω “ 0.5 with codes from the reference ensemble allows 5 The use of soft information scaling was used in a similar manner in [12] to improve the performance of block turbo codes in the error floor region.  the May-Meurer-Thomae variant of ISD [15]. Consider the QC-MDPC code ensemble CA for 80 bit security with n “ 9602, k “ 4801, dc “ 90 from [2]. For decoding we consider Algorithm E. The work factor for the key distinguishing attack for CA and CC is WFdist p9602, 4801, 90q “ 280.6 . Figure 1 shows that for CC we have a block error rate of 10´6 for e « 102 whereas for CA we have e « 84. It follows that the work factor of the decoding attack for ensemble is, according to [2, Tab. 1], 281.0 for the reference ensemble, and 298.3 for the scheme based on the ensemble CC .  100 Code Code Code Code Code Code  10−1  Block Error Rate  10−2  A, A, C, C, A, C,  SPA, ω = 1 SPA, ω = 0.5 SPA, ω = 1 SPA, ω = 0.8 Alg. E, ω = 13 Alg. E, ω = 8  10−3  10−4  V. C ONCLUSIONS  10−5  10−6  10−7  0  20  40  60  80  100  120  140  160  180  Weight of the error pattern  Fig. 1. Block error rate for some codes from the ensembles CA and CC in Table I. SPA (with and without scaling) and Algorithm E with 100 iterations.  Protograph-based moderate-density parity-check (MDPC) code ensembles are introduced and analyzed in the context of a McEliece-like cryptosystem. The proposed ensembles significantly improve the error correction capability of the MDPC code ensembles that are currently considered for postquantum cryptosystems, without increasing the public key size. The enhanced error correction capability remarkably improves the robustness with respect to decoding attacks. R EFERENCES  attaining remarkable gain at low error rates without sacrificing the waterfall region performance (the later result in accordance with the DE analysis). For the code designed from ensemble CC , the introduction of the scaling coefficient entails a visible loss in the waterfall region (again, in accordance with the DE analysis). We expect that a further optimization of the algorithm (e.g., by allowing variable scaling coefficients across iterations/edge types) may reduce the loss in the waterfall region. Even accounting for the loss introduced by the scaling coefficient, codes drawn from ensemble CC show gains in error correction capability in order of 40% compared to CA . IV. S ECURITY In this section we estimate the security level of the proposed protograph-based MDPC McEliece cryptosystem. For the analysis we use the pessimistic assumption that the system is broken as soon as the QC-MDPC parity-check matrix HpXq in (9) is reconstructed. This means that we assume that the effort for obtaining the extended matrix ΓpXq (see (8)) from HpXq is below the security level of the cryptosystem. We denote by WFISD pn, m, eq the cost of decoding an error pattern of Hamming weight e with a pn, mq linear code (ISD is assumed here). The cost of distinguishing a key, i.e. to recover one weight-dc row of the (sparse) parity check matrix HpXq is denoted by WFdist pn, m, dc q. For the QC case the cost of recovering the whole secret key equals WFdist pn, m, dc q. We compute the work factors of the key distinguishing attack WFdist pn, m, dc q and the work factor for the key recovery attack and the decoding attack WFdec pn, m, dc q for the QC-MDPC McEliece cryptosystem according to [2, Tab. 1], i.e., WFdist pn, m, dc q “ WF?ISD pn, n ´ m, dc q{m and WFdec pn, m, eq “ WFISD pn, m, eq{ m. The work factor estimates include the possible gains obtained by using the decodeone-out-of-many approach [13]. We use the non-asymptotic results from [14, Sec. 3.3] to estimate the work factor for  [1] S. Ouzan and Y. Be’ery, “Moderate-Density Parity-Check Codes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:0911.3262, 2009. [2] R. Misoczki, J. P. Tillich, N. Sendrier, and P. S. L. M. Barreto, “MDPCMcEliece: New McEliece variants from Moderate Density Parity-Check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Istanbul, Turkey, Jul. 2013, pp. 2069–2073. [3] M. Baldi, QC-LDPC code-based cryptography. Springer Science & Business, 2014. [4] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” NASA JPL, Pasadena, CA, USA, IPN Progress Report 42-154, Aug. 2003. [5] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The Capacity of Low-Density ParityCheck Codes Under Message-Passing Decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599 – 618, Feb. 2001. [6] J. Stern, “A method for finding codewords of small weight,” in Proc. International Colloquium on Coding Theory and Applications, Toulon, France, Nov. 1988, pp. 106–113. [7] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C. Jones, and K. Andrews, “Capacityapproaching protograph codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 876–888, August 2009. [8] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001. [9] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC code design based on EXIT analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (Globecom), Washington, US, Dec. 2007, pp. 3250–3254. [10] P. Pulini, G. Liva, and M. Chiani, “Unequal Diversity LDPC Codes for Relay Channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 5646–5655, Nov. 2013. [11] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001. [12] R. M. Pyndiah, “Near-optimum decoding of product codes: block turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 1003–1010, Aug. 1998. [13] N. Sendrier, “Decoding One Out of Many,” Post-quantum cryptography, pp. 51–67, 2011. [14] Y. Hamdaoui and N. Sendrier, “A Non Asymptotic Analysis of Information Set Decoding,” IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, vol. 2013, p. 162, 2013. [15] A. May, A. Meurer, and E. Thomae, “Decoding Random Linear Codes in Op20.054n q.” in Proc. International Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology and Information Security (ASIACRYPT), Seoul, South Korea, Dec. 2011, pp. 107–124.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 7. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
