Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_5544

Abstract:
Stable gonality is computable Ragnar Groot Koerkamp∗  Marieke van der Wegen†  arXiv:1801.07553v1 [cs.DM] 23 Jan 2018  Abstract Stable gonality is a multigraph parameter that measures the complexity of a graph. It is defined using maps to trees. Those maps, in some sense, divide the edges equally over the edges of the tree; stable gonality asks for the map with the minimum number of edges mapped to each edge of the tree. This parameter is related to treewidth, but unlike treewidth, it distinguishes multigraphs from their underlying simple graphs. Stable gonality is relevant for problems in number theory. In this paper, we show that deciding whether the stable gonality of a given graph is at most a given integer k belongs to the class NP, and we give an algorithm that computes the stable gonality of a graph in O((1.33n)n mm poly(n, m)) time.  1  Introduction  The gonality of an algebraic curve X is the minimal degree of a morphism to P1 . Algorithms are known that, given equations for X, compute the gonality (using Gröbner basis algorithms), cf. for example [10]. Various analogues of gonality have been defined in graph theory, see [2, 5, 6]. In this paper, we are concerned with the computation of the so-called stable gonality sgon(G) of a multigraph G, which is defined as the direct analogue of the above geometric definition: sgon(G) is the minimal degree of a finite harmonic morphism of a refinement of G to a tree, where a refinement of G is given by iteratively subdividing edges or adding leaves (cf. 2.1-2.6 infra). Our main result says: Theorem A. There is an algorithm that, given a graph G, computes its stable gonality sgon(G) in time O((1.33n)n mm poly(n, m)). Furthermore, deciding whether a graph has stable gonality at most a given integer is in NP. The gonality of a non-archimedean tropical curve (i.e., the minimal degree of a tropical morphism to the tropical projective line; see [1]) equals the stable gonality of the associated reduction graph. Hence our result shows that deciding whether the gonality of a tropical curve is at most some given integer is in NP. Other notions of gonality of graphs have been introduced, using the analogue of linear systems, cf. [3, 2], [6, A.6]; these turn out to be different from ∗  Mathematical Institute, Utrecht University, PO Box 80.010, 3508 TA Utrecht, The Netherlands, ragnar.grootkoerkamp@gmail.com (now at Google) † Department of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University, PO Box 80.089, 3508 TB Utrecht, The Netherlands, m.vanderwegen@uu.nl  1  stable gonality, as shown in [5, Example 4] and by an example of Luo in [1, Example 5.13]. For one of these notions, divisorial gonality, an algorithm is known that computes the divisorial gonality of a graph in O(nk poly(n, m)) time, where n is the number of vertices, m the number of edges and k the divisorial gonality of the graph [7]. In [4], an algorithm is given to decide whether a graph has gonality 2 or not, for all notions of gonality. This algorithm runs in time O(n log n + m) if G has n vertices and m edges. It is not immediately clear that stable gonality of a graph is computable in general, since its definition involves three quantifiers over infinite sets. In this paper we bound the number of refinements, trees and morphisms that we have to consider and give an algorithm to compute the stable gonality of a graph, which shows that stable gonality is computable. Computing stable gonality is relevant in the theory of diophantine equations. More specifically, if X is a smooth projective curve defined over a global field K with stable reduction graph G at some non-archimedean place, it is known that gon(X) ≥ sgon(G) [6, §4]. The following “uniform boundedness result” follows: X has only finitely many points in the union of all field extensions of K of degree at most (sgon(G) − 1)/2 [6, §11].  2  Preliminaries  Stable gonality is a multigraph parameter, so in this paper, we consider multigraphs; whenever we write graph, we mean finite undirected connected multigraph. In this section, we will define stable gonality as in [6, Definition 3.6], using finite harmonic morphisms. Definition 2.1. Let G and H be loopless graphs. A finite morphism is a map φ : G → H, such that • φ(v) ∈ V (H) for all v ∈ V (G), • φ(e) = φ(u)φ(v) ∈ E(H) for all e = uv ∈ E(G), together with, for every edge e ∈ E(G), an index rφ (e) ∈ N. Definition 2.2. Let φ : G → H be a finite morphism. Let v ∈ V (G) be a vertex of G and e ∈ Eφ(v) an edge in H. The index of v in the direction of e is X rφ (d). d∈Ev ,φ(d)=e  We write mφ,e (v) for this number. We can think of these indices as follows: a vertex v has a certain weight, namely the sum of the indices of the edges incident to v. The index in the direction of an edge e incident to φ(e) indicates how much of this weight is send to the edge e. In order for a morphism to be harmonic, we want that every vertex distributes its weight equally over all edges incident to φ(v). Definition 2.3. A finite morphism φ : G → H is harmonic if, for all v ∈ V (G) and for all e, e0 ∈ Eφ(v) , X X rφ (f ) = rφ (d). d∈Ev ,φ(d)=e0  f ∈Ev ,φ(f )=e  2  In other words, φ is harmonic if for every vertex the index in each direction is the same. We call this number the index of v and denote it by mφ (v). A consequence of a finite morphism being harmonic is that the total weight that is mapped to each edge is equal. We call this amount the degree of the finite harmonic morphism. Definition 2.4. The degree of a finite harmonic morphism φ : G → H is X X mφ (u), rφ (d) = deg(φ) = u∈φ−1 (v)  d∈φ−1 (e)  for any choice of e ∈ E(H) or v ∈ V (H). This number is independent of the choice [3, Lemma 2.4]. Definition 2.5. Let G be a graph. A refinement of G is a graph H that can be obtained by applying the following operations finitely many times: • add a new leaf, i.e. a vertex of degree 1; • subdivide an edge by adding a vertex of degree 2. We call a vertex of G0 \G from which there are two disjoint paths to vertices of G, internal added vertices, we call the other vertices of G0 \G external added vertices. Definition 2.6. Let G be a graph. The stable gonality of G is sgon(G) = min{deg(φ) | φ : H → T a finite harmonic morphism, H a refinement of G, and T a tree}. Example 2.7. Consider the graph in Figure 1. We can map this graph to the path graph on five vertices as follows: φ(a) = p1 , φ(b) = p2 , φ(c) = φ(d) = p3 , φ(e) = p4 and φ(f ) = p5 , see Figure 1 for an illustration. Give the edge ef index 2, and all other edges index 1. This is a finite morphism. We can check that φ is harmonic. Consider, for example, vertex e. There are two edges incident to φ(e), namely p3 p4 and p4 p5 . We can compute X mφ,p3 p4 = rφ (x) = rφ (ce) + rφ (de) = 2, x∈Ee (G),φ(x)=p3 p4  X  mφ,p4 p5 =  rφ (x) = rφ (ef ) = 2.  x∈Ee (G),φ(x)=p4 p5  c a  b  f  e 2 d  p1  p2  p3  p4  p5  Figure 1: The graph G of Example 2.7 and a finite harmonic morphism of degree 2.  3  u  v  u  v  v0  Figure 2: The banana graph admits, after refining, a finite harmonic morphism of degree 2.  We see that these sums are indeed equal, and mφ (e) = 2. Analogously, we can check that mφ (a) = mφP (b) = mφ (f ) = 2 and mφ (c) = mφ (d) = 1. The degree of φ is x∈V (G),φ(x)=p4 mφ (x) = mφ (e) = 2. So we conclude that sgon(G) ≤ 2. Example 2.8 ([6, Example 3.9]). The banana graph Bm is a graph with 2 vertices u and v and m ≥ 2 edges, see Figure 2. Let φ : Bm → T be a finite harmonic morphism to a tree T . It follows that φ(u) 6= φ(v), otherwise the edges uv are not send to an edge φ(u)φ(v). It follows that all m edges are mapped to the edge φ(u)φ(v), thus deg(φ) ≥ m. By refining Bm first, we can obtain finite harmonic morphisms with lower degree. Consider the refinement G0 where every edge is subdivided once. Let T be a tree with a vertex v 0 and m leaves, see Figure 2. Let φ : G0 → T be the map such that φ(u) = φ(v) = v 0 and all other vertices are mapped to a unique leaf. Assign index 1 to every edge of G0 . Now we see that φ is a finite harmonic morphism of degree 2. Stable gonality is related to other graph parameters, like treewidth and the first Betti number. Treewidth only depends on the underlying simple graph of a multigraph, but stable gonality distinguishes multigraphs and their underlying simple graphs. The following inequalities hold for all graphs G with m edges and n vertices: tw(G) ≤ sgon(G) ≤ b m−n+4 c [6, 8]. 2 Lastly, we introduce notation for a part of a graph from a given vertex v in the direction of a given vertex u. Definition 2.9. Let G be a graph and u, v vertices. Let U be the connected component of G − v containing u. By Gv (u) we denote the induced subgraph on U ∪ {v}. By Guv we denote the graph (Gu (v))v (u). We say we add Gv (u) to a vertex w in a graph H, when we add a copy of Gv (u) to H and identify v with w. We say we refine edge uv of G as Tu0 v0 , when we remove uv from G, add a copy of Tu0 v0 and identify u with u0 and v with v 0 .  3  Algorithm overview  In this paper we will give an algorithm to compute the stable gonality of a graph. Notice that this is not initially trivial: there are infinitely many refinements of a graph, there are infinitely many trees and there are infinitely many finite harmonic morphisms, since there are infinitely many assignments of indices to the edges. We bound the trees and maps that we have to consider, then our algorithm enumerates all those trees and maps. The algorithm considers all tuples α = (T, f, r), where • T is a tree with at most n = |V (G)| vertices, 4  • f : V (G) → V (T ) is a surjective map, • r : E(G) → [b m−n+4 c], where we denote [k] for the set {1, 2, 3, . . . , k}, is 2 a map assigning indices to the edges of G. Given such a tuple, we construct a finite harmonic morphism φα from a refinement of G to a tree constructed from T by optionally adding at most m leaves. We compute the degree of φα , and output the minimum degree over all tuples α. The remainder of this section covers the construction of φα and analyses the runtime of the algorithm. The remainder of the paper proves that the assumptions made by the algorithm are valid. Sections 4 and 5 show that it suffices to only consider trees T of size at most n and indices rφ (e) at most b(m − n + 4)/2c. Section 6 proves that there exists a finite harmonic morphism of the form φα that attains the minimal degree sgon(G) indeed.  3.1  Construction of φα  We now explain how to construct a refinement H and a finite harmonic morphism φα from a tuple α = (T, f, r). First we set φ(v) = f (v) for every vertex v of G. For each edge uv ∈ E(G) with f (u) = f (v), we add a vertex euv to uv. Besides, we add a leaf e0uv to f (u). We assign index 1 to those new edges and set φ(euv ) = e0uv . This is depicted in the second column of Figure 3. Write T 0 for the tree we constructed from T by adding these leaves. Now, for every edge uv ∈ E(G) with f (u) 6= f (v), we refine uv as Tf0 (u)f (v) . Assign index r(uv) to all those new edges and use the identity map to map this part of the refinement to Tf0 (u)f (v) . This is the third column in the figure. In the last column, we ensure that our map is harmonic: for every vertex v ∈ V (G), let e ∈ Ef (v) be the edge such that mφ,e (v) is maximal. Now, for every edge e0 = f (v)u0 ∈ Ef (v) with mφ,e0 (v) < mφ,e (v), we add Tf0 (v) (u0 ) to v, assign index mφ,e (v) − mφ,e0 (v) to these new edges and use the identity map to map this part of the refinement to Tf0 (v) (u0 ). Let Hα be the refinement constructed in this way, and set φα = φ. Now φα is a finite harmonic morphism from Hα to T 0 .  3.2  Runtime analysis  We now analyse the runtime of the algorithm. We first count the number of pairs (T, f ) where T is a tree and f is a surjective map from G to T . By Cayley’s formula, there are k k−2 labelled trees of size k [9, Section 2.3.4.4]. The number n of unlabelled partitions of the n vertices of G into k non-empty sets is k , the Stirling number of the second kind [9, Section 1.2.6]. By assigning one label to each set,  we see that the number of surjective maps to a fixed tree of size 1 ≤ k ≤ n is nk indeed. Summing over all trees of size at most n, the total number of pairs (T, f ) is n X  k  k−2  k=1    n . k  We will bound this quantity. When we first choose one vertex for each set, and then distribute the remaining n − k vertices amongst those sets, we overcount 5  lx x  x  w  u  w  y  y  u evw  v  u  e0vw Figure 3: Consider the map where every vertex is mapped to the vertex of the tree below it. When both ends of an edge are mapped to the same vertex, for example edge vw, we add a vertex evw and map it to a new vertex e0vw . Then, we refine edges for which the ends are not mapped to the same vertex, like edge uy, as the part of the tree they correspond with. Lastly, we add copies of part of the tree, like lx , to make sure the morphism is harmonic at every vertex. In this example, all edges have index 1.  the number of unlabelled partitions. Hence, n X  k  k−2  k=1  n k  ≤  n k    k n−k . This implies    X     n n X n k−2 n n−k n n ≤ k k ≤ k . k k k k=1  k=1   n n−k By Stirling’s approximation we have nk ≤ ( nk )k ( n−k ) [9, Section 1.2.6]. We infer that   X  n−k n n n X X k k−2 n n n −k −(n−k) n k ≤ k · n · k · (n − k) = n · . k n−k k=1  k=1  k=1  Now write x for k/n. We have   k n−k  (n−k)/n   =  x 1−x  1−x .  Since this has a finite limit in both x → 0 and x → 1, we may consider the maximum on the x ∈ (0, 1) interval. A calculation shows that  this maximum P is less than 1.33. Substituting this in the bound on nk=1 k k−2 nk yields n X k=1  k k−2    X n n ≤ nn · 1.33n ≤ n · (1.33n)n ≤ (1.33n)n+1 . k k=1   m−n+4  The number of functions r : E(G) → assigning indices to the 2  m−n+4 m . edges is 2 When we are given a tuple α = (T, f, r), the construction of H and φα can be done in polynomial time in n and m. The calculation of the degree can 6  also be done in polynomial time. It follows that the runtime of our algorithm is bounded by     m−n+4 m . O poly(n, m) · (1.33n)n 2 Remark. In practice, it can be useful to do some pre-processing first, although this does not change the runtime in general. Before trying all tuples α, we can contract all vertices of degree one or two. The graph obtained in this way is called a stable graph. It is known that this stable graph has the same stable gonality as the graph we started with [6, Lemma 5.4].  4  Bounding the size of the tree  In this section we will show that we only have to consider finite harmonic morphisms to trees with at most |V (G)| internal (i.e. non leaf) vertices. In particular, we show that any finite harmonic morphism can be transformed in such a way that every internal vertex of T is covered by at least one vertex of G. Definition 4.1. Let a graph G, a refinement H of G, a tree T , and a finite harmonic morphism φ : H → T be given. A transformation of φ is a new finite harmonic morphism φ0 : H 0 → T 0 where H 0 is again a refinement of G and T 0 a tree, such that deg(φ0 ) ≤ deg(φ). Remark. From here on H and H 0 will always be refinements of G while T and T 0 will always be trees. The phrase let φ : H → T be given will implicitly assume this. Definition 4.2. Let G be a graph with a refinement H. A vertex v ∈ V (H) is alien if it is not a vertex in G. Let φ : H → T be a finite harmonic morphism. A vertex v 0 ∈ V (T ) is alien if all vertices in φ−1 (v 0 ) are alien. The main lemma of this section is that we can remove all internal alien vertices from T . Lemma 4.3. Let φ : H → T be given. There exists a transformation φ0 : H 0 → T 0 such that T 0 has no internal alien vertices. To prove this we contract all internal alien vertices in T to a neighbour, while simultaneously contracting all edges in the preimages of these edges. Lemma 4.4. Let φ : H → T be given, and let v 0 be an internal alien vertex of T with a neighbour u0 . There exists a transformation φ0 : H 0 → T /u0 v 0 . Proof. Let v1 , . . . , vk be the vertices of H that are mapped to v 0 and let u1 , . . . , ul be the vertices that are mapped to u0 . We will construct a refinement H 0 of G as follows. Consider a vertex v := vi . Notice that v is an alien vertex of H, so there are at most two edges vw1 and vw2 such that Hv (w1 ) and Hv (w2 ) contain vertices of G.  7  2 v  u1  2 v 2  2 u2  v0  v0 u0  Figure 4: In the first case of the proof of Lemma 4.4, we contract vertex v to all its neighbours uj mapping to u0 .  w1  x1  w1 v  w2  x2  u1  u1 v  w2  2  u2  u2  w0  x0  v0  w0  x0  v 0 = u0  u0 Figure 5: In the second case of the proof of Lemma 4.4, we contract vertex v to all its neighbours xi mapping to x0 6= u0 . We also remove all other trees from v, and copy them to all uj .  Case 1: If there is at most one vertex uj neighbouring v such that Hv (uj ) contains vertices of G, then contract all edges vuj , and keep all indices. This process is shown in Figure 4. Case 2: Now suppose that there are two vertices uj1 and uj2 that are neighbours of v such that Hv (uj1 ) and Hv (uj2 ) contain vertices of G. Since v 0 is internal, there is a neighbour x0 of v 0 not equal to u0 . Contract v to all its neighbours that map to x0 . Then, for each neighbour y of v that maps to a vertex different from x0 and u0 , remove the tree Gv (y) from H and add a copy of Tv0 (φ(y)) to each of the uj . We assign index rφ (vuj ) to the trees that we just added to uj , while all other edges keep their current index. This is demonstrated in Figure 5. Repeat this for all vertices vi . Write H 0 for the resulting graph. In the construction of H 0 , we never contract two vertices of G to the same vertex, so H 0 is a refinement of G. Now consider the map φ0 : H 0 → T /u0 v 0 we constructed. This map is a finite harmonic morphism with degree at most  8  the degree of φ. Proof of Lemma 4.3. Repeatedly apply Lemma 4.4. It follows that, for any given morphism φ : H → T , there is a transformation φ0 : H 0 → T 0 such that φ0 (V (G)) is a connected subtree of T with at most n vertices. So, for our algorithm it suffices to only consider trees of size at most n and surjective maps to those trees.  5  Bounding the indices  Cornelissen et al. [6, Theorem 5.7] gave an upper bound on the stable gonality of a graph G:   m−n+4 sgon(G) ≤ . 2 From this it follows that all finite harmonic morphisms φ : H → T , from a refinement H of G to a tree T with deg(φ) = sgon(G), assign index at most b m−n+4 c to the edges of H. Hence it is sufficient for our algorithm to only 2 c]. considers functions r : E(G) → [b m−n+4 2  6  Reduction to φα  In this section, we will prove that our algorithm will find a finite harmonic morphism of minimal degree. Let G be a graph. We know that there exists a refinement H of G, a tree T and a finite harmonic morphism φ of degree sgon(G). We will show that we can transform φ to a morphism φα for some tuple α. In all lemmas we assume G to be the given graph, H a refinement, T a tree and φ : H → T a finite harmonic morphism of degree sgon(G). First, we will prove that, when two vertices u, v are mapped to the same vertex, we can refine the edges uv by adding just one vertex. For ease of notation we give the following two graphs names: we write P3 for the path on three vertices and C2 for the cycle of length two. Lemma 6.1. Let φ : H → T be given. Let uv ∈ E(G) be an edge such that 0 ∈ φ(u) = φ(v). There exists a transformation φ0 : H 0 → T 0 such that Ruv 0 0 {P3 , C2 }, where Ruv is the refinement of uv in H . Proof. Let Ruv be the refinement of the edge uv in H. Let x be the neighbour of u in Ruv and let y be the neighbour of v. Replace Ruv by P3 when φ(u) 6= φ(v), and by C2 when φ(u) = φ(v). Write w for the new vertex. Assign index 1 to the two new edges. If mφ (u) > 1, add a leaf w1 to u and assign index mφ (u) − 1 to it. Do the same for v. For all vertices z ∈ φ−1 (φ(v))\Ruv , add a leaf wz to z and assign index mφ (z) to the edge zwz . Add a copy of Tφ(u) (φ(x)) to u and assign index rφ (ux) to all edges in this tree. Add a copy of Tφ(v) (φ(y)) to v and assign index rφ (vy) to the edges. Write H 0 for this refinement of G. Add a vertex w0 to φ(v) in T and write T 0 for this new tree. Let φ0 : H 0 → T 0 be the map that sends all vertices of z ∈ V (H) to φ(z), that sends w, w1 , w2 and all vertices wz to w0 and uses the identity map to send the 9  vertices of the trees we added. Notice that φ0 is a finite harmonic morphism with deg(φ0 ) ≤ deg(φ). Second, we will prove that for two vertices u, v that are not mapped to the same vertex, we can refine the edges uv as Tφ(u)φ(v) . Lemma 6.2. Let φ : H → T be given. Let uv ∈ E(G) be an edge such that 0 φ(u) 6= φ(v). There exists a transformation φ0 : H 0 → T such that Ruv = 0 0 Tφ(u)φ(v) , where Ruv is the refinement of uv in H . Proof. Let x be the neighbour of u in Ruv and let y be the neighbour of v. We distinguish three cases. First suppose that φ(x) ∈ Tuv and φ(y) ∈ Tuv . Replace Ruv by Tφ(u)φ(v) in H. Assign index min{rφ (ux), rφ (vy)} to the new edges. Assume, without loss of generality, that rφ (ux) ≤ rφ (vy). If rφ (ux) < rφ (vy), add a copy of the tree Tφ(u) (φ(x)) to u and assign index rφ (vy) − rφ (ux) to the new edges. Write H 0 for this new refinement of G. Let φ0 : H 0 → T be the map that sends all vertices of w ∈ V (H) to φ(w) and uses the identity map to send the new vertices to Tuv and Tφ(u) (φ(x)). Notice that φ0 is a finite harmonic morphism with deg(φ0 ) ≤ deg(φ). Now suppose that φ(x) ∈ / Tuv and φ(y) ∈ / Tuv . Replace Ruv by Tφ(u)φ(v) in H. Assign index 1 to the new edges. Add a copy of Tφ(u) (φ(x)) to u and assign index rφ (ux) + 1 to its edges. For all neighbours z of φ(u) such that z 6= φ(x) and z ∈ / Tφ(u)φ(v) , add a copy of Tφ(u) (z) to u and assign index 1 to the new edges. Do the same for vertex v. Write H 0 for this refinement of G. Let φ0 : H 0 → T be the map that sends all vertices w ∈ V (H) to φ(w) and uses the identity map for all new vertices. Notice that by the choice of the indices φ0 is a finite harmonic morphism with deg(φ0 ) ≤ deg(φ). In the last case, suppose, without loss of generality, that φ(x) ∈ Tuv and φ(y) ∈ / Tuv . Replace Ruv by Tφ(u)φ(v) in H. Assign index 1 to the new edges. Add a copy of Tφ(v) (φ(y)) to v and assign index rφ (vy) + 1 to its edges. For all neighbours z of φ(v) such that z 6= φ(y) and z ∈ / Tφ(u)φ(v) , add a copy of Tφ(v) (z) to v and assign index 1 to the new edges. If rφ (ux) > 1, add a copy of Tφ(u) (φ(x)) to u and assign index rφ (ux) − 1 to its edges. Write H 0 for this refinement of G. Let φ0 : H 0 → T be the map that sends all vertices w ∈ V (H) to φ(w) and uses the identity map for all new vertices. Notice that by the choice of the indices φ0 is a finite harmonic morphism with deg(φ0 ) ≤ deg(φ). Lastly, we prove two lemmas that ensure that there are not more external added vertices than necessary. Lemma 6.3. Let φ : H → T be given. Let v 0 ∈ V (T ) be a leaf such that all vertices v ∈ V (H) with φ(v) = v 0 are external added vertices. Define T 0 = T \{v 0 }. There exists a transformation φ0 : H 0 → T 0 . Proof. Remove all vertices that are mapped to v 0 from H. If H becomes disconnected, remove all connected components that do not contain a vertex of G. Since all removed vertices were external added vertices, there is only one remaining component. Write H 0 for this graph. Define φ0 : H 0 → T 0 as 10  the restriction of φ to H 0 . Notice that φ0 is a finite harmonic morphism, and deg(φ0 ) ≤ deg(φ). Lemma 6.4. Let φ : H → T be given. Let v be a vertex of G and u0 a neighbour of φ(v). There exists a transformation φ0 : H 0 → T such that v has at most one external added neighbour u such that φ0 (u) = u0 , and moreover, Gv (u) = Tφ(v) (u0 ). Proof. Let u1 , . . . , ul ∈ be the external added neighbours of v such that φ(ui ) = u0 . Remove all trees Gv (ui ) from G and add one copy of Tφ(v) (u0 ) P to v. Assign index li=1 rφ (vui ) to all new edges. Notice that φ0 is a finite harmonic morphism, and deg(φ0 ) ≤ deg(φ). Lemma 6.5. Let G be a graph with sgon(G) = k. Then there is a refinement H of G, a tree T and a finite harmonic morphism φ : H → T of degree k, that satisfy the following properties: • T does not contain internal alien vertices; • for every edge uv ∈ E(G) such that φ(u) = φ(v), it holds that Ruv ∈ {P3 , C2 }, where Ruv is the refinement of uv in H, moreover, the two edges of Ruv have index 1; • for every edge uv ∈ E(G) such that φ(u) 6= φ(v), it holds that Ruv = Tφ(u)φ(v) , where Ruv is the refinement of uv in H, moreover, every edge in Ruv is assigned the same index; • for every vertex v 0 ∈ V (T ), let v1 , . . . , vl be the vertices of H such that φ(vi ) = v 0 , then, not all of v1 , . . . , vl are external added vertices. • for every vertex v ∈ V (G) and for every neighbour u0 of φ(v), v has at most one external added neighbour u such that φ0 (u) = u0 , and moreover, Gv (u) = Tφ(v) (u0 ). Proof. This follows from Lemmas 4.3, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, and 6.4. Now we are ready to prove that our algorithm will find a morphism of minimal degree. Theorem 6.6. Let G be a graph with sgon(G) = k. There is a tuple α such that φα has degree k. Proof. By Lemma 6.5 we know that there is a refinement H of G, a tree T and a finite harmonic morphism φ : H → T of degree k which satisfy the properties in Lemma 6.5. By Section 5, we know that all indices are at most b m−n+4 c. 2 0 Define T as the subtree of T that consists of the vertices φ(V (G)). Notice that by Section 4, T 0 is connected and has at most n vertices. Define f : G → T 0 as φ restricted to V (G). Now let r(uv) be the index that is assigned to every edge in Ruv . Let α be the tuple (T 0 , f, r). By the properties of φ and the construction of φα , it follows that φα = φ. Thus φα has degree sgon(G).  11  7  Stable gonality is in NP  In this section we consider the decision problem “stable gonality problem”: Given a graph G and an integer k, does it hold that sgon(G) ≤ k? Theorem 7.1. The stable gonality problem belongs to the class NP. Proof. Let (G, k) be an instance of the stable gonality problem. By Theorem 6.6 we know that there is a tuple α = (T, f, r) as in section 3 such that φα has degree sgon(G). This tuple has polynomial size. Given a tuple α, we can construct φα in polynomial time, and we can compute its degree in polynomial time. So for a yes-instance (G, k), there is a tuple α = (T, f, r) with polynomial size and deg(φα ) ≤ k, and we can check in polynomial time whether a tuple is a certificate for (G, k). For a no-instance no such tuple exists.  8  NP-hard subproblem  As described in section 3, for a given graph G our algorithm considers all tuples α = (T, f, r). The tree T 0 that is constructed from this tuple and the vertices that will be internally added to G do not depend on r. The question arises whether we can construct an r such that φ(T,f,r) has minimal degree when we are already given the pair (T, f ). This problem turns out to be NP-hard. For the proof we will use a reduction from the three-dimensional matching problem: Let A, B, C be finite, disjoint sets, let S ⊆ A × B × C and let k be a natural number. Does there exist a set M ⊆ S with |M | ≥ k such that every element of A∪B ∪C is contained in at most one tuple in M . We call such a set M a matching. This problem is known to be NP-hard, even when restricted to cases where |A| = |B| = |C| = k and for every element of A ∪ B ∪ C there are at least two tuple in S containing this element. Theorem 8.1. Given a graph G, a pair (T, f ) and an integer k. The following problem is NP-hard: Does there exist a function r : E(G) → [b(m − n + 4)/2c] such that the morphism φ(T,f,r) has degree at most k. Proof. Let (A1 , A2 , A3 , S, k) be an instance of the three-dimensional matching problem, where |A1 | = |A2 | = |A3 | = k and for every element of A1 ∪ A2 ∪ A3 there are at least two tuples in S containing this element. Define A = A1 ∪ A2 ∪ A3 . Construct the following graph G. Add two vertices ua and va for every vertex a ∈ A and add a vertex ws for every s ∈ S. Add an edge between ua and va for every a ∈ A. For every tuple s = {x, y, z} ∈ S, we add edges vx ws , vy ws , vz ws and edges ux vx , uy vy , and uz vz . See Figure 6 for an illustration. Let T be the tree that consists of vertex w, vertices ui , vi for 1 ≤ i ≤ 3, and edges ui vi and vi w for 1 ≤ i ≤ 3. Define f : V (G) → V (T ) as follows:   w if x = ws for s ∈ S, f (x) = vi if x = va with a ∈ Ai ,   ui if x = ua with a ∈ Ai . 12  ub  uc vb  ua  vc wq wt  va  u1 ud  vd  u2 v1  v2 w  wr  ws  vf  ve  v3  uf  ue  u3  Figure 6: An example of the graph G and tree T constructed in the proof of Theorem 8.1 for the sets A1 = {a, b}, A2 = {c, d}, A3 = {e, f } and S = {(a, c, e), (a, c, f ), (b, d, e), (b, d, f )}.  Now (G, T, f, |S| + k) is an instance of our problem. Notice that the degree of φ(T,f,r) will be at least |S| + k for any r, since at least |S| + k edges map to each edge ui vi . We will now prove that there is an r such that φ(T,f,r) has degree |S| + k if and only if there is a matching M ⊆ S with |M | ≥ k. Given a perfect matching M ⊆ S, that is, a matching with |M | = k, we can find a φ of degree |S|+k by putting index 2 on all edges wm va with m ∈ M and a ∈ m. Now suppose that φ has degree |S| + k. This implies that each edge ua va has index 1 and that there are no externally added vertices mapped ui for all i. Given a vertex va . Either one of the edges va ws has index 2, or va has an external added neighbour that is mapped to w. In the last case, there is an external added vertex mapped to one of the vertices ui , which yields a contradiction. So, exactly one of the edges va ws must have index 2; the others will have index 1. At each vertex ws , all three edges will have the same index. This index must be either 1 or 2, since otherwise there will be an external added vertex that is mapped to a vertex ui . This implies that there are exactly k vertices s ∈ S with index 2, while all other vertices s have index 1. These k tuples (a1 , a2 , a3 ) will form a matching, and hence we can solve the three-dimensional matching problem using the problem of finding an optimal r.  9  Conclusion  Stable gonality is defined using three infinite loops: there are infinitely many refinements of a graph, there are infinitely many trees, and there are infinitely many finite harmonic morphisms from a refinement to a tree. In this paper we bounded the refinements, trees and morphism which we have to consider. This yields an algorithmto compute the stable gonality of a graph in m O poly(n, m) · (1.33n)n m−n+4 time. From these bounds it also follows 2 that the stable gonality problem is in NP. Some interesting questions remain open. Firstly: is there a faster algorithm to compute the stable gonality of a graph? Secondly, we do not know whether 13  it is NP-hard to decide whether stable gonality is at most k for any k. Thirdly, are there problems which are untractable with treewidth as parameter, that are tractable with stable gonality as parameter? Lastly, is there a variant of Courcelle’s theorem for graphs of bounded stable gonality?  References [1] Omid Amini, Matthew Baker, Erwan Brugallé, and Joseph Rabinoff. Lifting harmonic morphisms II: Tropical curves and metrized complexes. Algebra & Number Theory, 9(2):267–315, 2015. doi:10.2140/ant.2015. 9.267. [2] Matthew Baker. Specialization of linear systems from curves to graphs. Algebra & Number Theory, 2(6):613–653, 2008. With an appendix by Brian Conrad. doi:10.2140/ant.2008.2.613. [3] Matthew Baker and Serguei Norine. Riemann–Roch and Abel–Jacobi theory on a finite graph. Advances in Mathematics, 215(2):766 – 788, 2007. doi:10.1016/j.aim.2007.04.012. [4] Jelco M. Bodewes, Hans L. Bodlaender, Gunther Cornelissen, and Marieke van der Wegen. Recognizing hyperelliptic graphs in polynomial time. preprint, arXiv:1706.05670, 2017. [5] Lucia Caporaso. Gonality of algebraic curves and graphs. In Algebraic and Complex Geometry, In Honour of Klaus Hulek’s 60th Birthday, volume 71 of Springer Proceedings in Mathematics & Statistics, pages 77– 108. Springer, 2014. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-05404-9. [6] Gunther Cornelissen, Fumiharu Kato, and Janne Kool. A combinatorial Li–Yau inequality and rational points on curves. Mathematische Annalen, 361(1):211–258, 2015. doi:10.1007/s00208-014-1067-x. [7] Josse van Dobben de Bruyn. Reduced divisors and gonality in finite graphs. Bachelor’s thesis, Leiden University, 2012. URL: https://www.universiteitleiden.nl/binaries/content/assets/ science/mi/scripties/bachvandobbendebruyn.pdf. [8] Josse van Dobben de Bruyn and Dion Gijswijt. Treewidth is a lower bound on graph gonality. preprint, arXiv:1407.7055v2, 2014. [9] Donald E. Knuth. The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 1: Fundamental Algorithms. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1968. [10] Josef Schicho, Frank-Olaf Schreyer, and Martin Weimann. Computational aspects of gonal maps and radical parametrization of curves. Applicable Algebra in Engineering, Communication and Computing, 24(5):313–341, 2013. doi:10.1007/s00200-013-0205-0.  14

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
