Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_5379

Abstract:
Human motion primitive discovery and recognition  arXiv:1709.10494v3 [cs.RO] 13 Feb 2018  Marta Sanzari, Valsamis Ntouskos, Simone Grazioso, Francesco Puja, Fiora Pirri  Abstract— We present a novel framework for the automatic discovery and recognition of human motion primitives from motion capture data. Human motion primitives are discovered by optimizing the ‘motion flux’, a quantity which depends on the motion of a group of skeletal joints. Models of each primitive category are computed via non-parametric Bayes methods and recognition is performed based on their geometric properties. A normalization of the primitives is proposed in order to make them invariant with respect to anatomical variations and data sampling rate. Using our framework we build a publicly available dataset of human motion primitives based on motion capture sequences taken from well-known datasets. We expect that our framework, by providing an objective way for discovering and categorizing human motion, will be a useful tool in numerous research fields related to Robotics including human inspired motion generation, learning by demonstration, and intuitive human-robot interaction.  I. I NTRODUCTION Robots involved in collaborative and assisting activities need to understand what a person is doing [1] recognizing how an activity evolves in its own way. Activities involving interaction and collaboration, such as carrying together an heavy object, sustaining a weight, preparing the table (see for example the ActivityNet challenge [2]) presuppose long term interactions. They should be clearly distinguished from individual actions such as pick and place, push [3] or crouch, jump, kick [4], considered in robotics imitation and in simple action recognition (for a recent survey see [5]). Due to its complexity an activity might be better interpreted as a function combining movement primitives as basis functions plus residual motion. Indeed, the compositional nature of human activities, under body and kinematics constraints, has attracted the interest of many research areas beyond robotics [1], [6], [7], in computer vision [8], [9], in neurophysiology [10], [11], in sports and rehabilitation [12], and in biomechanics [13]. The goal of this work is to automatically discover the start and end points where primitives of 6 identified body parts occur along the motion trajectory of a whole activity, and recognize each of the occurred primitives, in order to be further used in collaborative tasks. The idea is that these primitives sort out a non-complete set of human movements, which combined together can form a wide range of human activities, in so providing a compositional approach to both human-robot interaction and human-robot collaboration. For *This work was supported by the EU FP7 TRADR (609763) and the EU H2020 SecondHands (643950) projects The authors are with ALCOR Lab, DIAG, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy {sanzari, ntouskos, grazioso, puja,  pirri}@diag.uniroma1.it  example, consider human-robot collaboration in some industrial task, where a robot needs to help a human. If the robot can discover the early motion primitives and recognize them it might be able to both recognize the performed activity, from few moves, and predict the further movements, in order to timely and accurately intervene to collaborate. The novel contribution of this research is to provide a robot with the initial ability to automatically discover and recognize the movement primitives of human activities. Further work on categorizing activities from primitives and anticipating next movements is in progress and not analyzed here. The steps of discovering and recognition are already particularly difficult, because a ground truth is not available, which is the reason why we have made publicly available an initial motion primitive database. Given three MoCap databases [14], [15], [16] we introduce the motion flux method to discover the intervals where primitives occur on motion trajectories, and recognize the primitive, for each activity in the databases. Here recognition means that we automatically assign a label to the motion primitive of the body part and retain the motion about which we can also produce its average trajectory. The recognition model unsupervisedly collects discovered motion primitives, amid different subjects and activities, into categories. Each primitive category is approximated by a mixture distribution with a number of components discovered by the model, to cope with the high variation across subjects and activities. For example, for the upper limbs it is known that the range of motion varies from person to person and is influenced by gait speed [17]. This is in turn influenced by the specific task, and determining ranges of motion is still a research topic [18] (for a review on range of motions for upper limbs, see [17]). For this reason we choose a non-parametric Bayesian method generating the parameters for each motion primitive category. The probabilistic model, given a motion trajectory, suitably segmented by the motion flux, infers the category the motion primitive belongs to. Experiments show that the motion flux is a good model for segmenting the motion of body parts, since it discovers specific motion primitives coherently with the outcome of manually segmented activities. Note that manual segmentation is used just to verify the predictive accuracy of the motion flux. Likewise, the unsupervised non-parametric model provides a good classification of similar motion primitives, as shown in the results (see Section IV). The approach therefore is quite general and it turns out to be very useful to any researcher who would like to explore the compositional nature of any activity, using both the proposed method and the motion primitives database provided. Furthermore, to the best of our  Primitive Model Training Primitive Discovery and Recognition  Shoulder external rotation and elbow flexion  Elbow upper medial flexion  Elbow extension  Shoulder circling  Elbow extension  Elbow flexion  Elbow upper medial extension  Elbow upper medial extension  Elbow flexion  Elbow upper medial flexion  [residual motion]  1  Fig. 1: Overview of motion primitive discovery and recognition framework. The top section shows primitives of the group ‘Arm’ from six different categories. Primitives are discovered by maximizing the motion flux energy function, presented here above the colored bar, though deprived of velocity and length components. These sets of primitives are used to train the hierarchical models for each category. Primitives are then recognized according to the learned models. The recognized motion primitive categories are depicted with different colors. At the bottom, the group motion in the corresponding interval is shown.  knowledge just few works, among which we recall [8], [9], have faced the problem of discovering motion primitives in video or motion capture (MoCap) sequences quantitatively evaluating the ability to recognize them. The contribution of the work, schematically shown in Fig. 1 is threefold: 1. We introduce the motion flux method to discover motion primitives, relying on the variation of the velocity of a group of joints. 2. We introduce a hierarchical model for the recognition of the unlabeled primitives, discovered by the motion flux. 3. We created a new dataset of human motion primitives from three public MoCap databases ([15], [16], [14]). The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we explore related work. In Section III after some notation and preliminaries we introduces motion primitives discovery based on the concept of maximal flux, and further introduce the normalization applied to motion primitives, the features space and the hierarchical model. Section IV presents an experimental evaluation of primitive discovery and recognition together and introduces the motion primitives dataset. Future works are discussed in the concluding Section V. II. R ELATED WORK Human motion primitives are investigated in several research areas, from robotics to vision, to neurophysiology. In robotics the paradigm of transferring human motion primitives to robot movements is paramount for imitation learning and, more recently to implement human-robot col-  laboration [19]. In computer vision, the interpretation of motion primitives as simple individual actions or gestures is often purported, in any case they are related to segmentation of videos and 3D motion capture data. In neuroscience they are modeled and discovered analyzing the dynamics of human skeleton joints, with relevant applications on neuronal activation during motion or rehabilitation. A good amount of research in robotics has approached primitives in terms of Dynamic Movement Primitives (DMP) [19] to model elementary motor behaviors as attractor systems, representing them with differential equations. Typical applications are learning by imitation or learning from demonstration [20], [21], [22], [23], learning task specifications [24], modeling interaction primitives [1]. Motion primitives are represented either via Hidden Markov models or Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM). [25] present an approach based on HMM for imitation learning of arm movements, and [26] model arm motion primitives via GMM. Datasets of motion primitives available in robotics community, such as [14], [27], [28] consider primitives needed for a robot to replicate human motion. It is arguable why human primitive and robot primitive should be different. One of the contribution of our work is to fill the discrepancy between the two different designations of motion primitives. It is apparent that in most of the approaches motion primitives are only observed and modeled, instead we are able to learn and model them using respectively the motion flux quantity and a hierarchical model. The main contribution of our work  is indeed the introduction of a new ability for a robot to automatically discover motion primitives observing 3D joints raw pose data. The outcome of our approach is also a motion primitives database not requiring human manual operation. In computer vision many approaches explore video sequences segmentation to align similar action behaviors [29] or for spatio-temporal annotation as in [30]. Lu et al. [31] propose to use a hierarchical Markov Random Field model to automatically segment human action boundaries in videos. Similarly, [32] develop a motion capture segmentation method. Besides these works, only [33], [8], [9], [34] have targeted motion primitives, to the best of our knowledge. [33] focuses on 2D primitives for drawing, on the other hand [8] does not consider 3D data and generate the motion field considering Lukas-Kanade optical flow for which Gaussian mixture models are learned. None of these approaches provide quantitative results for motion primitives, but only for action primitives, which makes their method not directly comparable with ours. [9], [34] use 3D data and explicitly mention motion primitives, providing quantitative results. The authors account for the velocity field via optical flow basing the recognition of motion primitives on harmonic motion context descriptors. Since [9] deal only with upper torso gestures we compare with them only the primitives they mention. In [34] the authors achieve motion primitives segmentation from wrist trajectories of sign language gestures, obtaining unsupervised segmentation with Bayesian Binning. Again here no comparison for motion primitives discovery or recognition is possible as original data are not available. In neurophysiology motion primitives are widely explored by [35], [10], [36], [37], [38], where the idea that kinetic energy and muscular activity are optimized in order to conserve energy is commonly employed. Our view of motion primitive shares this hypothesis of energy minimality during motion, likewise the idea to characterize movements using the proper geometric properties of the skeleton joints space motion. However, for primitive discovery, we go beyond these approaches capturing the variation of the velocity of a group of joints using this as the baseline for computing the change in motion by maximizing the motion flux. III. M ETHODOLOGY A. Preliminaries Human motion primitives are those movements spanning an interval of time in which a change in position of a body part takes place. Examples are lean forward the torso, flex the knee. As defined, motion primitives involve parts of the human skeleton hence to study human motion primitives we partition it as shown in Fig. 2, into 6 groups. Here the skeleton is composed by a set of joints J = {jl }Jl=1 , with J=17 and with respect to joints groups are defined as Gm ⊂J , with m= {1, . . ., 6} corresponding to head, torso, right and left arm, right and left leg. Each group has one parent joint pm ∈Gm , which is the group joint closest to the root joint root ∈ J according to the skeleton hierarchy. All joints have 3DOF except the left and right elbows and the  TABLE I: DOF joints and their composition in each group Joints Joint 1 Joint 2 Joint 3  G1 3 3 3  G2 3 3 3  G3 3 1 3  G4 3 1 3  G5 3 1 3  G6 3 1 3  left and right knees with 1DOF each. Table I resumes the DOF composition of the joints included in each group. Each group pose is normalized at each frame of the sequence in so defining a common reference system to make different groups and activities pose invariant. Given that a pose of the j-th joint at the n-th frame of a MoCap sequence is indicated by Tjn ∈SE(3) we define the transformation as follows. Joints j∈Gm are transformed first according to the transformation Tpnm of their parent at the current frame, and then by the transformation Tp1m of their parent at frame 1. The normalized pose of joint j at frame n is: 1 T̂jn = (Troot )−1 Tp1m (Tpnm )−1 Tjn ,  ∀j ∈ Gm .  (1)  The above transformation maps each joint to the root of the 1 . initial MoCap frame, denoted as Troot  Group 1 Head Group 2 Torso Group 3 RArm Group 4 LArm Group 5 RLeg Group 6 LLeg  Fig. 2: Skeleton with defined groups B. Motion Primitive Discovery Motion primitives are segments of the joint trajectories of each group. We identify motion primitives as trajectory segments where the variation of the velocity of the joints is maximal and where the endpoints of the segment correspond to stationary poses of the subject. Stationarity is assessed by means of the norm of the velocity of the joints, while variation of the joints velocity is captured by means of the motion flux quantity defined below. Preprocessing To overcome problems related to the sampling frequency of the poses, we compute smooth versions of the trajectories of the joints by cubic spline interpolation. More specifically, let ξj : I ⊂ R 7→ R3 be the trajectory of the j-th joint. A smooth trajectory is obtained by cubic spline interpolation. This interpolation provides a continuous-time trajectory for all the joints of the group with smooth velocity and continuous acceleration, satisfying natural constraints of human motion. Motion Flux The motion flux captures the variation of the velocity of a group with respect to its rest pose. Due to the pose normalization described previously in the preliminaries,  group poses that correspond to stationary poses of the subject are aligned with the direction of the gravity vector. Based on this observation, the total variation of the joint group velocity is evaluated along this direction. Definition III.1 (Motion Flux). Let G be a specific group of joints, vj the velocity of joint j ∈ G and g the unit vector corresponding to the direction of the gravity vector. The motion flux with respect to the time interval I = [t1 , t2 ] is defined as Z t2 . X |v̇j (t) · g| dt. (2) Φ(t2 , t1 ) = j∈G  t1  Discovery Based on the previous concepts we can now provide a formal definition of a motion primitive. Definition III.2 (Motion Primitive). A motion primitive of a group of joints G = {j1 , j2 , j3 } is given by the curves sharing the same temporal segment on their trajectories {ξj }j∈G . Namely, γ = {[ξj1 (t), ξj2 (t), ξj3 (t)]T |t∈I} for a suitable time interval I = [tstart , tend ]. In order to discover motion primitives we have to specify the corresponding time interval. This is done by performing an optimization based on the motion flux of a group G, as defined in eq. (2). The time interval defining a motion primitive is identified by two time instances where the velocity of the group is minimal while the motion flux within the interval is maximal. In order to avoid excessively long primitives we consider also a regularizer based on the primitive length. More specifically, the time interval of a motion primitive is identified by maximizing the following energy-like function:  αX . kvj (ρ)k2 +kvj (t0 )k2 P (ρ; t0 ) = Φ(ρ, t0 )− 2 j∈G X −β (sj (ρ) − sj (t0 )), (3) j∈G  Rt  where sj (t)= 0 kξ˙j (τ )kdτ is the arc length function of ξj . In eq. (3), α acts as penalizer associated to the softconstraint on the stationarity of the poses at the start and end of the primitive, while β controls the strength of the regularization on the primitive length. Both α and β depend on the scaling of the data and the sampling rate of the joint trajectories. Given a starting time instant t0 , a motion primitive is extracted by identifying the time instant ρ, which corresponds to a local maximum of (3). The optimality condition of (3) gives:  X v̇j (ρ) −βkξ˙j (ρ)k =0. (4) |v̇j (ρ) · g| −α kvj (ρ)k j∈G  Given the one-dimensional nature of the problem, finding the zeros of (4) and verifying whether they correspond to local maxima of (3) is trivial. A set of primitives is extracted from a sequence by sequentially finding the set of time instances which maximize . (3), namely T = {ρ ∈ R|P (ρ; ρ̄) → max, ρ̄ ∈ T } ∪ {t0 }.  0.3 0.2 0.1  -0.3 -0.2 -0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5 45 40  Normalization  35 30 25  0.3 -30  20  0.2  -5  0.1  -0.35 -0.3 -0.25 -0.2 -0.15  Motion Flux  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  Motion Primitives  -35 0  5  10  15  -40  0.5  Component of Motion Primitive Model  Fig. 3: Left: Motion flux of three motion primitives of group G3 labeled as ‘Elbow Flexion’, discovered from sequences taken from different datasets. Middle: Motion primitives before and after the normalization, for clarity only the curve of the outmost joint is shown. Right: First component of the DPM model learned from all discovered motion primitives labeled as ‘Elbow Flexion’. (Best seen on screen, zoomed-in)  C. Motion Primitive Recognition The motion flux discovers for each specified body part, among the six groups indicated in Figure 2, unlabeled motion primitives for the whole trajectory of each activity in the databases considered. As specified in the previous paragraph an unlabeled motion primitive is γ : I ∈ R 7→ R9 , with γ ∈ Γ, Γ the complete set of them in the database, and I the interval of definition. As the motion primitives are unlabeled they need to be recognized and classified into categories. To this end we first collect a set ΓT ⊂ Γ into the specific categories they belong to, by manually choosing them, and leave a set Γ\ΓT unlabeled for test and validation. The set ΓT constitutes the training set for the recognition model and it is formed by the 70% of primitives in Γ. In the following we describe the three steps of the recognition model, defined by normalization, feature selection and model generation, and finally the recognition. Normalization As we noted in the introduction, and also shown in Figure 3, there is a significant variation for the same primitive across subjects, activities and sampling rates, leading to quite dissimilar curves for the same primitive. In order to alleviate this difficulty we apply a normalization reconciling at least arc length of the same primitive. To obtain the most suitable normalization of arc length we proceeded experimentally testing several scaling factors for each γ ∈ ΓT . The best candidate is the one with the most coherent distribution of arc length, across all activities and body parts G. Let kv̄k be the average velocity along γ, let `G be the length of the limb corresponding to group G and A the area covered by group G during its motion. The box plots in Fig. 4 show the arc length distribution of motion cuts of a specific category for groups G1 and G4. The first box, in each box plot, corresponds to the original distribution and the following boxes correspond to the distributions resulting by scaling the original one with kv̄k, kv̄k/AG , 1/`G , and 1/AG , respectively. The plots suggest that normalization  1  1  0.8  0.8  0.6  0.6  Component 1 of DPM model for Elbow Flexion  Component 4 of DPM model for Shoulder Abduction 40  0.4  50  35  45  0.4  40  0  0  Original  v̄  v̄/AG  1/G  1/AG  Original  30 Z-axis  0.2  Z-axis  0.2  35 30 25  v̄  v̄/AG  1/G  1/AG  Fig. 4: Arc length distribution of original and scaled primitives of a specific category for group G1 (left) and G4 (right). The first box in each box plot, corresponds to the original distribution, the next four are obtained as detailed in the text.  according to 1/`G gives the best results, as it minimizes outliers (indicated by red crosses in Figure 4). Since this is consistent across the activities and the groups we chose the scaling constant kG = 1/`G . Model Generation Given the normalized primitives, as described in the previous paragraph, we obtain, by differentiation, both the curvature κ(s(t)) and the torsion τ (s(t)). We choose these features as they suffice to specify a curve up to a rigid transformation. The data including position, curvature and torsion, form a vector in RN ×5 with N the number of observations, and since for each group G we consider only the two most external joints, the observation related to group G is, finally, a vector y ∈ RN ×10 . Given that the number of primitive categories (shown in Fig. 6) is M , the training data for the S-th primitive category, with S = 1, . . . , M is DS = {yS1 , . . . , ySq }, with q the number of primitive γ for category S, in the training set ΓT . As argued before each primitive spans a wide range of motions in terms of the defined features, namely position, curvature and torsion for the two selected joints of a group and normalization only partially solves it. This high variation can be captured by a distribution with an unknown number of components such as an infinite mixture distribution. A good generative model to approximate the distribution of the observations is the Dirichlet process mixture (DPM) [39], [40]. The Dirichlet process assigns probability measures to the set of measurable partitions of the data space. This induces in the limit a finite mixture since, by the discreteness of the distributions sampled from the process, parameters have positive probability to take the same value, in so realizing components of the mixture. Here we assume a conjugate model. Namely the prior for the probability measure is centered on a normal model, assuming the data are realizations of normal distributions, with precision priors given by the Wishart distribution and location parameters prior being normal too, while the DP precision parameter α is estimated according to a mixture of gamma distributions. Models for each dataset DS , S = 1, . . ., M are fitted following the classical approach of [41]. We consider a DPM model for each primitive, where number of components is proportional to the value of the parameter α and the size of data DS . Recognition Recognition amounts to assign a label to an unlabeled primitive discovered by the motion flux, by choosing  20 15 -25  20 10 -30  -35 Y-axis  0 -40  -45  -10  X-axis  25  20  15 -25  10 -30  -35  0 -40 Y-axis  -45  -10 -50  -20  X-axis  Fig. 5: Manifold generated by a component of the DPM model for Elbow Flexion on the left and from a component of Shoulder Abduction on the right.  the model that best fits the test primitive. Consider all the generated models M1 , . . ., Ms and let γ be an unlabeled primitive from the test set Γ\ΓT , the model MS that best fits it assigns to γ the primitive category S. To choose the best model we introduce a window of hypotheses and a cost function as follows. Let us denote y? the primitive γ reduced to the two external joints and augmented with the same features computed for the DPM model. Let MS be a model generated for the primitive category S, we define p(MS |y? ) = p(y? |θS? ), where N XY πSk f (yi? |θSk ), S=1, . . ., M θS? = arg max θSk  (5)  k i=1  Here θS are the precision and mean parameters for the model MS , and k varies on the number of components of the model MS . The set of hypotheses for y? is:   (6) H= (MS , cS ) p(MS |y? )≥λ, S = 1, . . ., M with 0≤λ≤ max(p(MS |y? )) and cS the component identified by θS? . Clearly when λ = 0, H includes all the models, and when λ = max(p(MS |y? )) it is the maximum likelihood model. This solution is preferable to Bayesian model averaging that considers all the data, first because we have only the training set labeled by the primitive categories, and second because our interest is in the manifold of the chosen components cS in H. In fact, the interesting thing about components of a specific model, sharing the same statistics, is that they form manifolds capturing the similarity found in idiosyncratic parts of the trajectories of all primitives in the category, see Figure 5. Basing on these findings we define a cost function to choose the best hypothesis from H adding further geometric structure to each component in H. For each segment in the manifold of cS ∈ H we compute the tangent t, normal n, n0 , and binormal b vectors. Based on these vectors, we compute n×n0 the ruled surface R = kn×n 0 k , forming a ribbon of tangent planes. Let y0 be the features specifying position in y? and let yrS be the projection of y0 on the ruled surface Rj of the j-th curve in cS ∈ H. Moreover, let ŵ be the closest point of y? to yrS . We denote the curvature and torsion distances as δκ (yrS , ŵ) and δτ (yrS , ŵ), respectively. Additionally, given  the Frenet frames at ŵ and at y0 we compute the rotation R between the two frames. Let FR = trace((I − R)(I − R)> ), with I the identity matrix. We define the following cost function for y? X X kyrS −ŵk+ L(y? |H) = (7) cS ∈H ŵ∈cS δκ (yrS , ŵ)+δτ (yrS , ŵ)+FR . The label S for the motion primitive γ, discovered by motion flux, is the one of model MS associated with component cS having a curve segment minimizing the cost L: c?S = arg min L(y? |H). cS ∈H ŵ∈cS  (8)  Algorithm 1 summarizes the model generation steps. Input: Training set ΓT Output: Hierarchical DPM models MS , S=1, . . ., M foreach S and corresponding G do form the set ΓTS foreach γl ∈ ΓTS do parametrize γ, for joints jl1 , jl2 ∈ G and positions xjl1 :jl2 , compute κjl1 :jl2 and τjl1 :jl2 y ← (xjl1 :jl2 , κjl1 :jl2 , τjl1 :jl2 )> Build feature matrix (y1 , . . ., yq )> ∈ R(N ×10) Fit DPM MS according to [41] Add MS to the list of generated models end end return Models MS , S = 1, . . ., M . Algorithm 1: Motion primitive model generation. Algorithm 2 summarizes the recognition of an unlabeled test primitive γ ∈ Γ\ΓT . Input: y? , feature augmentation of an unlabeled motion primitive γ of two external joints of group G Output: Category Ŝ for γ Build hypotheses set H according to (6) Compute L according to (7) Find cS ∈ H with curve segment minimizing the cost L according to (8) return Primitive category Ŝ. Algorithm 2: Recognition of motion primitives IV. E XPERIMENTS In this section we evaluate the accuracy of the motion primitives discovered using the motion flux. We examine also the accuracy of primitive classification based on the DPM models established for each primitive category. The evaluation is performed on MoCap sequences taken from three widely used publicly available MoCap datasets. Datasets The datasets we consider in this work are the Human3.6M dataset (H3.6M) [15], the CMU Graphics Lab MoCap database (CMU) [16] and the KIT Whole-Body Human Motion Database (KIT-WB) [14]. The sampling rates  used in these datasets are 50Hz for H3.6M, 60/120Hz for CMU and 100Hz for KIT-WB. In order to have the same sampling rate for all sequences we have transformed them to 50Hz. The pose of the joints specified in Fig. 2 are extracted for each frame of the sequences as described in the preliminaries. For KIT-WB the trajectories of the joints are computed from the marker positions taken from the C3D files. Table II shows for each dataset the total number of motion primitives discovered based on the motion flux for each group Gm , m= 11, . . ., 6. TABLE II: Number of discovered motion primitives H3.6M CMU KIT  G1 185 146 159  G2 89 63 51  G3 203 172 148  G4 186 137 115  G5 128 106 87  G6 112 74 63  Motion Primitive Discovery To evaluate the accuracy of motion flux, we created a baseline relying on the subjective response of 18 participants to an experimental test. This was necessary to mitigate the difficulty in measuring accuracy, due to the lack of a ground truth. For each MoCap sequence in a randomly selected group of activities W in the database, with W = WG1 ∪ ... ∪ WG6 , we asked 18 participants to manually segment the sequences into motions they consider meaningful and not further dividable into shorter motions. The participants were able to freely navigate through the videos and define endpoints for manually segmenting motion primitives. As a result each group Gm has been segmented by three different participants. We use the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) metrics to assess the accuracy of the discovered primitive endpoints with respect to the manually segmented ones, in terms of number of frames. We let G {êi }N i=1 to be the automatically discovered endpoints based on the motion flux for a group G, with NG the number of G primitives for G. We let {ēi }N i=1 be the average P3 positions of the manually defined endpoints (i.e. ēi = 31 j=1 eij ), then the MAE and RMSE metrics are defined as: s PNG PNG 2 |ē − ê | i i i=1 i=1 (ēi − êi ) M AE= , RM SE= . NG NG Results shown in Table III proves that the proposed method discovers motion primitives whose endpoints are close to the endpoints of the manually segmented ones. TABLE III: Accuracy of discovered primitive endpoints MAE RMSE  G1 3.1 4.1  G2 3.8 4.5  G3 2.6 3.7  G4 2.9 3.8  G5 4.7 5.6  G6 4.6 5.7  Overall 3.9 5.2  Motion Primitive Recognition We split the unlabeled primitives of each group into training (70%), keeping the remaining for both test and validation. The labeled primitives form the set shown in Fig. 6. A DPM model is computed for each set of primitives sharing the same label as described in the motion primitive recognition section. We assess the accuracy  4)  t Ar  m (G  Sho R ulder abd uctio El oll the n (1) El bow wri st ( bo 2) w flex ( ex ten 3) (4 )  3)  ten (15)  ial flex (1  Roll the wrist (2)  (G  Elbow flex (3)  ow  Elb  Elbow exten (4)  we r  pe  up  Righ  Torso (G2)  pper med  w  H  dial exten (16)  m ed r m ial e low x ed ial ten e rm Sho fle (1 edi uld al f x (1 5) er i lex 4) nte Sho rna ulde l ro (13) r ex t (1 tern 2) al ro Sho ulde t (1 r cir 1) cling Shou (10) lder Should addu er int ction rot an ( 9) d elbo Should w flex er ext ro (8) t and e lbow fl Shoulder ex (7) int rot an d elbow exten (6 ) Shoulder ex t rot and el bow exten (5)  L  )  1)  (G  ) (5 ten ex (6) ow ten lb ex de 7) ow an x( elb ot fle tr nd ow ex ta (8) elb er nt ro flex and ld i ow ou er rot elb Sh ould r ext and Sh ulde nt rot (9) o er i Sh tion uld duc Sho der ad 10) ul ing ( Sho ) circl r t (11 o ulde nal r Sho exter ) lder ot (12 Shou rnal r er inte ex (13) Should edial fl lower m Elbow 4)  lo  rm  A eft  G6  Shoulder abduction (1)  Right Leg (G5)  d ea  er medial ex  bo  g(  4) t( igh ) r nd ft (5 Be oll le t (6) R ll righ Ro ) Exten (7  Elbow u  bo w  Le  Elbow upper me  El  ft  Elbow low  El  Le  Body  int er Kn nal r ee ex ot ( Kne ten ( 7) e fle 6) x (5 Hip addu ction (4)) Hip abduction (3) (2) xten Hip e ex (1) l f p Hi 6) (1 ten x e ial ed m r pe up w bo El  Raise the head (3) Turn bott om-right (4) Turn le ft (5) Roll le ft (6) Roll right (7) Turn botto m Turn -left (8) toprigh Tur t (9) n to p-le ft (1 Be 0) Ra nd fo i r Be se wa rd nd tor (1) lef so ( 2 t( 3) )  Lean forward (1)  Turn right (2)  Knee lower medial exten (10)  rot (8)  flex (9)  Leg external  Knee lower medial  al rot (7) Leg intern ten (6) Knee ex ) flex (5 Knee ) on (4 dducti Hip a (3) ction ) abdu n (2 Hip exte (1) Hip flex Hip ) 10 n ( 9) ( xte l e flex (8) l dia ot me dia l r er me rna low er te low g ex ee Le Kn  ee  Kn  Le g  Fig. 6: Diagram showing the motion primitives of each group. Abbreviation ext stands for external, int for internal, rot for rotation, exten for extension, and flex for flexion.  of primitive recognition based on Algorithm 2 with respect to the validation set defined on the primitives discovered based on the motion flux. Table IV presents the average accuracy for each group, as well as an ablation study with respect to the components of the cost function defined in eq. (8). The confusion matrices for each group are also provided in the supplementary material. The results suggest that the DPM classification together with the proposed recognition algorithm capture the main characteristics of each motion primitive category. TABLE IV: Recognition accuracy and ablation study Group G1 G2 G3 G4 G5 G6 Average  Projection on tangent plane 0.82 0.85 0.80 0.80 0.87 0.86 0.83  Frenet frame rotation 0.80 0.82 0.80 0.79 0.86 0.86 0.82  Torsion  Curvature  All  0.70 0.75 0.73 0.75 0.72 0.71 0.73  0.72 0.75 0.74 0.77 0.72 0.73 0.76  0.84 0.86 0.82 0.83 0.88 0.88 0.85  Comparison We compare our results with [9], where performance is evaluated for a subset of 4 primitives of the arms (called gestures), namely Point right, Raise arm, Clap and Wave. The authors perform two tests, one without noise in the start and end frames of the primitives and one where the primitives are affected by noise. In the noise-free case their overall accuracy is 94.4% while in the presence of noise the accuracy is 86.9%. Our results are not directly comparable  with the ones of [9] as the definition of the primitives is different and the dataset built by the authors is not publicly available. We notice though that the overall accuracy of our framework for the arms (Groups 3 and 4) is 85.1% which is similar to the accuracy reported in [9] in the non-ideal case. Motion Primitives Dataset The dataset of manually annotated motion primitives extracted from the MoCap sequences of the H3.6M [15], CMU [16] and KIT-WB [14] datasets has been made publicly available at https://github. com/MotionPrimitives/MotionPrimitives. The dataset provides the start and end frames of each motion primitive together with the corresponding label as well as a reference to the MoCap sequence from which the motion primitive has been extracted. Discussion The results show that our framework discovers and recognizes motion primitives with high accuracy with respect to the manually defined baseline while providing competitive results with respect to [9], the only work, to the best of our knowledge, providing quantitative results on similarly defined motion primitives. Additionally, given the importance of studying human motion in a wide spectrum of research fields, ranging from robotics to bioscience, we believe that the human motion primitives dataset will be particularly useful in exploring new ideas and for enriching knowledge in these areas.  V. C ONCLUSIONS We introduce a novel framework for the automatic discovery and recognition of human motion primitives from sequences of 3D poses. The relevance of our work is two fold. First, the proposed method is interesting for any researcher wanting to study motion primitives of complex activities, without having to resort to manual segmentation. Second the work is an essential step toward two kinds of interesting applications. The first application is the simulation of complex activities using the devised primitives modeling robot avatars for doing any kind of tasks that can be composed by the selected primitives. A second application is to recognize activities basing on few initial motion primitives performing a search on a parse tree for the foreseen possible activities in so being able to predict the next movement for accurate human-robot collaboration. Both require to study suitable composition grammars that build activities like phrases, which is work in progress. Our future work will extend the current motion primitives database with additional activities, and combine simulation and prediction to study human-robot collaboration in terms of reaction time, common humanrobot space and accuracy of anticipation. R EFERENCES [1] H. B. Amor, G. Neumann, S. Kamthe, O. Kroemer, and J. Peters, “Interaction primitives for human-robot cooperation tasks,” in ICRA, 2014, pp. 2831–2837. [2] B. Ghanem, J. C. Niebles, C. Snoek, F. C. Heilbron, H. Alwassel, R. Khrisna, V. Escorcia, K. Hata, and S. Buch, “Activitynet challenge 2017 summary,” arXiv:1710.08011, 2017. [3] M. J.-Y. Chung, A. L. Friesen, D. Fox, A. N. Meltzoff, and R. P. Rao, “A bayesian developmental approach to robotic goal-based imitation learning,” PloS one, vol. 10, no. 11, p. e0141965, 2015. [4] Z. Wang, K. Mülling, M. P. Deisenroth, H. Ben Amor, D. Vogt, B. Schölkopf, and J. Peters, “Probabilistic movement modeling for intention inference in human–robot interaction,” The Int. J. of Robotics Research, vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 841–858, 2013. [5] S. Herath, M. Harandi, and F. Porikli, “Going deeper into action recognition: A survey,” Image and Vis. Comp., vol. 60, pp. 4–21, 2017. [6] F. L. Moro, N. G. Tsagarakis, and D. G. Caldwell, “On the kinematic motion primitives (kmps)–theory and application,” Frontiers in neurorobotics, vol. 6, 2012. [7] P. Azad, T. Asfour, and R. Dillmann, “Toward an unified representation for imitation of human motion on humanoids,” in Robotics and Automation, 2007, pp. 2558–2563. [8] Y. Yang, I. Saleemi, and M. Shah, “Discovering motion primitives for unsupervised grouping and one-shot learning of human actions, gestures, and expressions,” TPAMI, vol. 35, no. 7, 2013. [9] M. B. Holte, T. B. Moeslund, and P. Fihl, “View-invariant gesture recognition using 3D optical flow and harmonic motion context,” Comp. Vis. and Im. Underst., vol. 114, no. 12, pp. 1353–1361, 2010. [10] T. Flash and B. Hochner, “Motor primitives in vertebrates and invertebrates,” Curr. Op. in Neurob., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 660–666, 2005. [11] F. Polyakov, “Affine differential geometry and smoothness maximization as tools for identifying geometric movement primitives,” Biological cybernetics, vol. 111, no. 1, pp. 5–24, 2017. [12] L. H. Ting, H. J. Chiel, R. D. Trumbower, J. L. Allen, J. L. McKay, M. E. Hackney, and T. M. Kesar, “Neuromechanical principles underlying movement modularity and their implications for rehabilitation,” Neuron, vol. 86, no. 1, pp. 38–54, 2015. [13] N. Hogan and D. Sternad, “Dynamic primitives of motor behavior,” Biological cybernetics, pp. 1–13, 2012. [14] C. Mandery, O. Terlemez, M. Do, N. Vahrenkamp, and T. Asfour, “The kit whole-body human motion database,” in ICAR, 2015, pp. 329–336. [15] C. Ionescu, D. Papava, V. Olaru, and C. Sminchisescu, “Human3.6m: Large scale datasets and predictive methods for 3d human sensing in natural environments,” TPAMI, vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 1325–1339, 2014.  [16] CMU Mocap Database. http://mocap.cs.cmu.edu/. [17] A. de los Reyes-Guzmán, I. Dimbwadyo-Terrer, F. Trincado-Alonso, F. Monasterio-Huelin, D. Torricelli, and A. Gil-Agudo, “Quantitative assessment based on kinematic measures of functional impairments during upper extremity movements: A review,” Clinical Biomechanics, vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 719–727, 2014. [18] D. H. Gates, L. S. Walters, J. Cowley, J. M. Wilken, and L. Resnik, “Range of motion requirements for upper-limb activities of daily living,” American J. of Occupational Therapy, vol. 70, no. 1, 2016. [19] A. J. Ijspeert, J. Nakanishi, H. Hoffmann, P. Pastor, and S. Schaal, “Dynamical movement primitives: learning attractor models for motor behaviors,” Neural computation, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 328–373, 2013. [20] A. Gams, T. Petri, M. Do, B. Nemec, J. Morimoto, T. Asfour, and A. Ude, “Adaptation and coaching of periodic motion primitives through physical and visual interaction,” RAS, vol. 75, pp. 340–351, 2016. [21] P. Pastor, H. Hoffmann, T. Asfour, and S. Schaal, “Learning and generalization of motor skills by learning from demonstration,” in ICRA, 2009, pp. 763–768. [22] J. Kober and J. R. Peters, “Policy search for motor primitives in robotics,” in Adv. in neural inf. proc. systems, 2009, pp. 849–856. [23] D.-H. Park, H. Hoffmann, P. Pastor, and S. Schaal, “Movement reproduction and obstacle avoidance with dynamic movement primitives and potential fields,” in ICHR, 2008, pp. 91–98. [24] A. L. P. Ureche, K. Umezawa, Y. Nakamura, and A. Billard, “Task parameterization using continuous constraints extracted from human demonstrations,” IEEE Trans. Robot., 2015. [25] T. Asfour, F. Gyarfas, P. Azad, and R. Dillmann, “Imitation learning of dual-arm manipulation tasks in humanoid robots,” in International Conference on Humanoid Robots, 2006, pp. 40–47. [26] R. Luo and D. Berenson, “A framework for unsupervised online human reaching motion recognition and early prediction,” in IROS, 2015, pp. 2426–2433. [27] C. Mandery, O. Terlemez, M. Do, N. Vahrenkamp, and T. Asfour, “Unifying representations and large-scale whole-body motion databases for studying human motion,” IEEE Trans. on Robotics, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 796–809, 2016. [28] J. F.-S. Lin, M. Karg, and D. Kulić, “Movement primitive segmentation for human motion modeling: A framework for analysis,” IEEE Trans. on Human-Mach. Syst., vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 325–339, 2016. [29] D. Gong, G. Medioni, and X. Zhao, “Structured time series analysis for human action segmentation and recognition,” TPAMI, vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 1414–1427, 2014. [30] I. Lillo, J. C. Niebles, and A. Soto, “A hierarchical pose-based approach to complex action understanding using dictionaries of actionlets and motion poselets,” in CVPR, 2016. [31] J. Lu, R. Xu, and J. J. Corso, “Human action segmentation with hierarchical supervoxel consistency,” in CVPR, 2015, pp. 3762–3771. [32] D. Bouchard and N. Badler, Semantic Segmentation of Motion Capture Using Laban Movement Analysis. Springer, 2007, pp. 37–44. [33] D. D. Vecchio, R. M. Murray, and P. Perona, “Decomposition of human motion into dynamics-based primitives with application to drawing tasks,” Automatica, vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 2085–2098, 2003. [34] D. Endres, Y. Meirovitch, T. Flash, and M. A. Giese, “Segmenting sign language into motor primitives with bayesian binning,” Frontiers in computational neuroscience, vol. 7, 2013. [35] E. Bizzi and F. A. Mussa-Ivaldi, “Toward a neurobiology of coordinate transformations,” in The Cognitive Neurosciences, 1995, pp. 495–506. [36] T. Flash, Y. Meirovitch, and A. Barliya, “Models of human movement: Trajectory planning and inverse kinematics studies,” RAS, vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 330–339, 2013. [37] P. Viviani and T. Flash, “Minimum-jerk, two-thirds power law, and isochrony: converging approaches to movement planning.” J. of Exp. Psy.: Human Perception and Performance, vol. 21, no. 1, p. 32, 1995. [38] T. Flash and A. A. Handzel, “Affine differential geometry analysis of human arm movements,” Bio. Cyb., vol. 96, no. 6, pp. 577–601, 2007. [39] T. S. Ferguson, “A bayesian analysis of some nonparametric problems,” Ann. Stat., pp. 209–230, 1973. [40] C. E. Antoniak, “Mixtures of dirichlet processes with applications to bayesian nonparametric problems,” Ann. Stat., pp. 1152–1174, 1974. [41] S. Jain and R. M. Neal, “A split-merge markov chain monte carlo procedure for the dirichlet process mixture model,” J. of Comp. and Graph. Statistics, 2004.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
