Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_5277

Abstract:
GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  arXiv:1310.5373v2 [math.GR] 26 Nov 2016  YVES CORNULIER AND ROMAIN TESSERA  Abstract. We study the Dehn function of connected Lie groups. We show that this function is always exponential or polynomially bounded, according to the geometry of weights and of the 2-cohomology of their Lie algebras. Our work, which also addresses algebraic groups over local fields, uses and extends Abels’ theory of multiamalgams of graded Lie algebras, in order to provide workable presentations of these groups.  Contents 1. Introduction 1.1. Dehn function of Lie groups 1.2. Riemannian versus Combinatorial Dehn function of Lie groups 1.3. Main results 1.4. The obstructions as “computable” invariants of the Lie algebra 1.5. Examples 1.6. Description of the strategy 1.7. Sketch of the proof of Theorem F 1.8. Introduction to the Lie algebra chapters 1.9. Guidelines 1.10. Acknowledgements 2. Dehn function: preliminaries and first reductions 2.A. Asymptotic comparison 2.B. Definition of Dehn function 2.C. Dehn vs Riemannian Dehn 2.D. Two combinatorial lemmas on the Dehn function 2.E. Gromov’s trick 3. Geometry of Lie groups: Metric reductions and exponential upper bounds 3.A. Reduction to triangulable groups 3.B. At most exponential Dehn function  3 3 5 6 11 12 15 17 20 23 23 23 24 24 26 28 29 30 30 31  Date: November 25, 2016. 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 17B70, 20F05, Secondary 08B25, 13N05, 17B56, 17B65, 19C09, 20F14, 20F69, 22D05, 22E15, 22E25, 57M07. The authors are supported by ANR Project GAMME (ANR-14-CE25-0004). 1  2  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  3.C. Reduction to split triangulable groups 4. Gradings and tameness conditions 4.A. Grading in a representation 4.B. Grading in a standard solvable group 4.C. Tameness conditions in standard solvable groups 4.D. Cartan grading and weights 5. Algebraic preliminaries about nilpotent groups and Lie algebras 5.A. Divisibility and Malcev’s theorem 5.B. Powers and commutators in nilpotent groups 5.C. Lazard’s formulas 6. Dehn function of tame and stably 2-tame groups 6.A. Tame groups 6.B. Length in nilpotent groups 6.C. Application of Gromov’s trick to standard solvable groups 6.D. Dehn function of stably 2-tame groups 6.E. Generalized tame groups 7. Estimates of areas using algebraic presentations 7.A. Affine norm on varieties over normed fields 7.B. Area of words of bounded combinatorial length 8. Central extensions of graded Lie algebras 8.A. Basic conventions 8.B. The blow-up 8.C. Homology and restriction of scalars 8.D. Auxiliary descriptions of H2 (g)0 and Kill(g)0 9. Abels’ multiamalgam 9.A. 2-tameness 9.B. Lemmas related to 2-tameness 9.C. Multiamalgams of Lie algebras 9.D. Multiamalgams of groups 10. Presentations of standard solvable groups and their Dehn function 10.A. Outline of the section 10.B. Abels’ multiamalgam 10.C. Algebraic and geometric presentations of the multiamalgam 10.D. Presentation of the group in the 2-tame case 10.E. Quadratic estimates and concluding step for standard solvable groups with zero Killing module 10.F. Area of welding relations 10.G. Concluding step for standard solvable groups 10.H. Dehn function of generalized standard solvable groups 11. Central and hypercentral extensions and exponential Dehn function 11.A. Introduction of the section 11.B. FC-Central extensions 11.C. Hypercentral extensions  34 36 36 38 40 43 46 46 47 51 51 52 55 59 60 61 64 64 66 73 74 76 80 85 92 92 93 94 98 101 101 103 104 105 108 110 115 116 117 117 117 119  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  11.D. Proof of Theorem 11.C.4 11.E. An example without central extensions 12. G not 2-tame 12.A. Combinatorial Stokes formula 12.B. Loops in groups of SOL type 12.C. Groups with the SOL obstruction References  3  121 124 127 127 128 133 135  1. Introduction 1.1. Dehn function of Lie groups. The object of study in this paper is the Dehn function of connected Lie groups. For a simply connected Lie group G endowed with a left-invariant Riemannian metric, this can be defined as follows: the area of a loop γ is the infimum of areas of filling discs, and the Dehn function δG (r) is the supremum of areas of loops of length at most r. The asymptotic behaviour of δG (when r → +∞) actually does not depend on the choice of a left-invariant Riemannian metric. If G is an arbitrary connected Lie group and K a compact subgroup such that G/K is simply connected (e.g. K is a maximal compact subgroup, in which case G/K is diffeomorphic to a Euclidean space), we can endow G/K with a G-invariant Riemannian metric and thus define the Dehn function δG/K (r) in the same way; its asymptotic behaviour depends only on G, neither on K nor on the choice of the invariant Riemannian metric, and is called the Dehn function of G. Let us provide some classical illustrating examples. If for some maximal compact subgroup K, the space G/K has a negatively curved G-invariant Riemannian metric, then the Dehn function of G has exactly linear growth. Otherwise, G is not Gromov-hyperbolic, and by a very general argument due to Bowditch [Bo95] (not specific to Lie groups), the Dehn function is known to be at least quadratic. On the other hand, the Dehn function is at most quadratic whenever G/K can be endowed with a non-positively curved invariant Riemannian metric, notably when G is reductive. It is worth emphasizing that many simply connected Lie groups G fail to have a non-positively curved homogeneous space G/K and nevertheless have a quadratic Dehn function. Characterizing Lie groups with a quadratic Dehn function is a very challenging problem, even in the setting of nilpotent Lie groups. Indeed, although connected nilpotent Lie groups have an at most polynomial Dehn function, there are examples with Dehn function of polynomial growth with arbitrary integer degree. Besides, the Dehn function of a connected Lie group is at most exponential, the prototypical example of a Lie group with an exponential Dehn function being the three-dimensional SOL group. A simple main consequence of the results we describe below is the following theorem.  4  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Theorem A. Let G be a connected Lie group. Then the Dehn function of G is either exponential or polynomially bounded. Using the well-known fact that polycyclic groups are virtually cocompact lattices in connected Lie groups, we deduce Corollary B. The Dehn function of a polycyclic group is either exponential or polynomially bounded. Let us mention that in both results, “polynomially bounded” cannot be improved to “of polynomial growth”, since S. Wenger [We11] has exhibited some simply connected nilpotent Lie groups (with lattices) with a Dehn function satisfying n2 ≺ δ(n) 4 n2 log n. Our results are more precise than Theorem A: we characterize algebraically which ones have a polynomially bounded or exponential Dehn function. In order to state the result, we describe below two “obstructions” implying exponential Dehn function; the first being related to SOL, and the second to homology in degree 2; these two obstructions appeared in a related context in Abels’ seminal work on p-adic algebraic groups [Ab87]. We prove that each of these obstructions indeed implies that the Dehn function has an exponential growth, and conversely that if none of these obstructions is fulfilled, then the group has an at most polynomial Dehn function, proving in a large number of cases that the Dehn function is at most quadratic or cubic. These results can appear as unexpected. Indeed, it was suggested by Gromov [Gro93, 5.A9 ] that the only obstruction should be related to SOL. This has been proved in several important cases [Gro93, Dru04, LP04] but turns out to be false in general. Our approach relies on the dynamical structure arising from the action of G on itself by conjugation. A crucial role is played by some naturally defined subgroups that are contracted by suitable elements. The presence of these subgroups is a non-discrete feature, which is invisible in any cocompact lattice (when such lattices exist). In particular, it sounds unlikely that Corollary B can be proved directly with no reference to ambient Lie groups, and the obstructions themselves are not convenient to state directly in terms of the structure of those discrete polycyclic groups. The remainder of this introduction is organized as follows: in §1.2, we define a combinatorial Dehn function for compactly presented locally compact groups, and use it to state a version of Theorem A for algebraic p-adic groups. Then §1.3 is dedicated to our main results. The most difficult part of the main theorem is the fact that in the absence of the two obstructions, the Dehn function is polynomially bounded. In §1.4, we describe a useful characterization of these obstructions in terms of Lie algebra gradings. We apply these results to various concrete examples in §1.5. We outline the general strategy in §1.6. We introduce an additional condition under which we prove that the Dehn function is quadratic (Theorem F). In §1.7, we sketch the proof of this theorem; this allows us emphasize the key  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  5  ideas of our approach. A substantial part of our work is purely algebraic and possibly of interest for other purposes, we introduce it independently in §1.8. 1.2. Riemannian versus Combinatorial Dehn function of Lie groups. The previous approaches consisted of either working with groups admitting a cocompact lattice and using combinatorial methods, or using the Riemannian definition. Our approach, initiated in [CT10], consists of extending the combinatorial language and methods to general locally compact compactly generated groups. In particular, Lie groups are treated as combinatorial objects, i.e. groups endowed with a compact generating set and the corresponding Cayley graph. The object of study is the combinatorial Dehn function, usually defined for discrete groups, which turns out to be asymptotically equivalent to its Riemannian counterpart. This unifying approach allows to treat p-adic algebraic groups and connected Lie groups on the same footing. We now give the combinatorial definition of Dehn function (rechristening the above definition of Dehn function as Riemannian Dehn function); see §2.B for more details. Let G be a locally compact group, generated by a compact subset S. Let FS be the free group over the (abstract) set S and FS → G the natural epimorphism, and K its kernel (its elements are called relations). We say that G is compactly presented if for some ℓ, K is generated, as a normal subgroup of FS , by the set Kℓ of elements with length at most ℓSwith respect to S, or equivalently if K is generated, as a group, by the union g∈FS gKℓ g −1 of conjugates of Kℓ in FS ; this does not depend on the choice of S; the subset Kℓ is called a set of relators. Assuming this, if x ∈ K, the area definition S of x is by −1 the number area(x) defined as its length with respect to g∈FS gKℓ g . Finally, the Dehn function of G is defined as δ(n) = sup{area(x) : x ∈ K, |x| ≤ n}.  In the discrete setting (S finite), this function takes finite values, and this remains true in the locally compact setting. If G is not compactly presented, a good convention is to set δ(n) = +∞ for all n. The Dehn function of a compactly presented group G depends on the choices of S and ℓ, but its asymptotic behavior does not. In addition, for a simply connected Lie group, the combinatorial and Riemannian Dehn functions have the same asymptotic behavior, see Proposition 2.C.1. With this definition at hand, we can now state a version of Theorem A in a non-Archimedean setting. Theorem C. Let G be an algebraic group over some p-adic field. Then the Dehn function of G is at most cubic, or G is not compactly presented. Before providing more detailed statements, let us compare Theorems A and C. It is helpful to have in mind a certain analogy between Archimedean and non-Archimedean groups, where exponential Dehn function corresponds to not  6  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  compactly presented. On the other hand, a striking difference between these two theorems is the absence for p-adic groups of polynomial Dehn functions of arbitrary degree. The explanation of this fact can be summarized as follows. In the connected Lie group setting, Dehn functions of “high polynomial degree” witness to the presence of simply connected non-abelian nilpotent quotients, see Theorem 10.H.1 for a precise statement. By way of contrast, any totally disconnected, compactly generated locally compact nilpotent group is compact-by-discrete; and if a compactly generated locally compact group G is isomorphic to the group of Qp -points of some p-adic algebraic group, then any nilpotent quotient of G is compact-by-abelian. 1.3. Main results. We now turn to more comprehensive statements. Let us first introduce the two main classes of groups we will be considering in the sequel. Definition 1.1. A real triangulable group is a Lie group isomorphic to a closed connected group of real triangular matrices. Equivalently, it is a simply connected solvable group in which for every g, the adjoint operator Ad(g) has only real eigenvalues. It can be shown that every connected Lie group G is quasi-isometric to a real triangulable Lie group. Namely, there exist compactly generated Lie groups G1 , G2 , G3 and maps G ← G1 → G2 ← G3 ,  where G3 is real triangulable, and each arrow is a proper continuous homomorphism with cocompact image and thus is a quasi-isometry, see Lemma 3.A.1. Let A be an abelian group and consider a representation of A on a K-vector space V , where K is a finite product of complete normed fields. Let V0 be the largest A-equivariant quotient of V on which A acts with only eigenvalues of modulus one. Definition 1.2. A locally compact group is a standard solvable group if it is topologically isomorphic to a semidirect product U ⋊ A so that (1) A is a compactly generated locally compact Q abelian group (2) U decomposes as a finite direct product Ui , where each Ui is normalized by A and can be written as Ui = Ui (Ki ), where Ui is a unipotent group over some nondiscrete locally compact field of characteristic zero Ki ; (3) (U/[U, U])0 = {0}.  For a group G satisfying (1) and (2), condition (3) implies that G is compactly generated, and conversely if U is totally disconnected, the failure of condition (3) implies that G is not compactly generated. If G is a compactly generated p-adic group as in Theorem C, then it has a Zariski closed cocompact subgroup which is a standard solvable group (with a single i and Ki = Qp ). Many real Lie groups have a closed cocompact standard solvable group; however, for instance, a simply  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  7  connected nilpotent Lie group is not standard solvable unless it is abelian. We now introduce a very special but important class of standard solvable groups. Definition 1.3. A group of SOL type is group U ⋊ A, where U = K1 × K2 , where K1 , K2 are nondiscrete locally compact fields of characteristic zero, and A ⊂ K∗1 × K∗2 is a closed subgroup of K∗1 × K∗2 containing, as a cocompact subgroup, the cyclic group generated by some element (t1 , t2 ) with |t1 | > 1 > |t2 |. Note that this is a standard solvable group. We call it a non-Archimedean group of SOL type if both K1 and K2 are non-Archimedean. Example 1.4. If K1 = K2 = K and A is the set of pairs (t, t−1 ), then G is the usual group SOL(K). More generally, A is the set of pairs (tk , t−ℓ ) where (k, ℓ) is a fixed pair of positive integers, then this provides another group, which is unimodular if and only k = ℓ. Another example is (R × Qp ) ⋊ Z, where Z acts as the cyclic subgroup generated by (p, p) (note that |p|R > 1 > |p|Qp ); the latter contains the Baumslag-Solitar group Z[1/p] ⋊ Z as a cocompact lattice. Also, define, for λ > 0, the group SOLλ as the semidirect product R2 ⋊ R where R is identified with the subgroup {(t, tλ ) : t > 0} of (R∗ )2 . Note that SOL1 has index 2 in SOL(R); there are obvious isomorphisms SOLλ ≃ SOLλ−1 , and the SOLλ , for λ ≥ 1, are pairwise non-isomorphic. These are the only real triangulable groups of SOL type. Definition 1.5. (SOL obstruction) A locally compact group has the SOL obstruction (resp. non-Archimedean SOL obstruction) if it admits a homomorphism with dense image to a group of SOL type (resp. non-Archimedean SOL type). That the SOL obstruction implies that the Dehn function grows at least exponentially is the contents of the forthcoming Theorems E.1 and E.2. In the positive direction, we start with following result, which generalizes [Gro93, 5.A9 ], [Dru04, Theorem 1.1 (2)], [LP04] and [CT10]. Theorem D. Let G = U ⋊ A be a standard solvable group. Suppose that every closed subgroup of G containing A (thus of the form V ⋊ A with V a closed Ainvariant subgroup of U) is a standard solvable group and does not satisfy the SOL obstruction. Then G has an at most quadratic Dehn function. The main result of [CT10] is essentially the case when the normal subgroup U is abelian (but on the other hand works in arbitrary characteristic), which itself generalizes results of Gromov [Gro93], Druţu [Dru04], Leuzinger-Pittet [LP04]. Theorem D turns out to be a particular instance of the much more general Theorem F below, but is considerably easier: the material is the length estimates of the beginning of Section 6 and Gromov’s trick described in §2.E. A direct proof of Theorem D is given in §6.D. In [Gro93, 5.B′4 ], quoth Gromov, “We conclude our discussion on lower and upper bounds for filling area by a somewhat pessimistic note. The present methods lead to satisfactory results only in a few special cases even in the friendly geometric surroundings of solvable and nilpotent groups.”  8  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Indeed, for standard solvable groups without the SOL obstruction, it seems that Theorem D is the best result that can be gotten without bringing forward new ideas. The first example of a standard solvable group without the SOL obstruction but not covered by Theorem D is Abels’ group A4 (K) (see the previous subsection). In this particular example, the authors obtain a quadratic upper bound for the Dehn function in [CT13]. In this case, the group is tractable enough to work with explicit matrices, but such a pedestrian approach becomes hopelessly intricate in an arbitrary group as in Theorem E.4. In a more general context, we have to deal with groups without the SOL obstruction but not satisfying the assumptions of Theorem D. In this context, we have to introduce the 2-homological obstruction. For this, we need to recall a fundamental notion introduced and studied by Guivarc’h [Gui80] and later by Osin [Os02]. Let G be a real triangulable group. Its exponential radical G∞ is defined as the intersection of its lower central series and actually consists of the exponentially distorted elements in G. Let g∞ be its Lie algebra. In the case of a standard solvable group, the role of exponential radical is played by U itself (it can be checked to be equal to the derived subgroup of G, so is a characteristic subgroup). Definition 1.6. (2-homological obstruction) • The real triangulable group G is said to satisfy the 2-homological obstruction if H2 (g∞ )0 6= {0}, or equivalently if the A-action on H2 (g∞ ) has some nonzero invariant vector. • The standard solvable group G = U⋊A is said to satisfy the 2-homological obstruction if H2 (u)0 6= {0}, that is to say, H2 (uj )0 6= {0} for some j. If moreover j can be chosen so that Kj is non-Archimedean, we call it the non-Archimedean 2-homological obstruction. In most cases, including standard solvable groups, the 2-homological obstructions can be characterized by the existence of suitable central extensions. For instance, if a real triangulable group G has a central extension G̃, also real triangulable, with nontrivial kernel Z such that Z ⊂ (G̃)∞ then it satisfies the 2-homological obstruction. The converse is true when G admits a semidirect decomposition G∞ ⋊ N, but nevertheless does not in general, see §11.E. We are now able to state our main theorem, which immediately entails Theorems A and C. Theorem E. Let G be a real triangulable group, or a standard solvable group. • if G satisfies one of the two non-Archimedean (SOL or 2-homological) obstructions, then G is not compactly presented; • otherwise G is compactly presented and has an at most exponential Dehn function. Moreover, in this case  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  9  – if G satisfies one of the two (SOL or 2-homological) obstructions, then G has an exponential Dehn function; – if G satisfies none of the obstructions, then it has a polynomially bounded Dehn function; in the case of a standard solvable group, the Dehn function is at most cubic. This result can be seen as both a generalization and a strengthening of the following seminal result of Abels [Ab87]. Theorem (Abels). Let G be a standard solvable group over a p-adic field. Then G is compactly presented if and only if it satisfies none of the non-Archimedean obstructions. Let us split Theorem E into several independent statements. The first two provide lower bounds and the last two provide upper bounds on the Dehn function. Theorem E.1. Let G be a standard solvable or real triangulable group. If G satisfies the SOL (resp. non-Archimedean SOL) obstruction, then G has an at least exponential Dehn function (resp. is not compactly presented). We provide a unified proof of both assertions of Theorem E.1 in Section 12. Note that the non-Archimedean case is essentially contained in the “only if” (easier) part of Abels’ theorem above, itself inspired by previous work of BieriStrebel, notably [BiS78, Theorem A]. Part of the proof consists in estimating the size of loops in the groups of SOL type, where our proof is inspired by the original case of the real 3-dimensional SOL group, due to Thurston [ECHLPT92], which uses integration of a well-chosen differential form. Our method in Section 12 is based on a discretization of this argument, leading to both a simplification and a generalization of the argument. Theorem E.2. Let G be a standard solvable or real triangulable group. If G satisfies the 2-homological (resp. non-Archimedean 2-homological) obstruction, then G has an at least exponential Dehn function (resp. is not compactly presented). The case of standard solvable groups reduces, after a minor reduction, to a simple and classical central extension argument, see §11.B. The case of real triangulable groups is considerably more difficult; in the absence of splitting of the exponential radical, we construct an “exponentially distorted hypercentral extension”. This is done in Section 11. Theorem E.3. Let G be a real triangulable group. Then G has an at most exponential Dehn function. Let G = U ⋊ A be a standard solvable group and U ◦ the identity component in U. If G/U ◦ is compactly presented, then G is compactly presented with an at most exponential Dehn function. Since compact presentability is stable under taking extensions [Ab72], for an arbitrary locally compact group G with a closed connected normal subgroup C,  10  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  it is true that G is compactly presented if and only G/C is compactly presented. We do not know if this can be generalized to the statement that if G/C has Dehn function 4 f (n), then G has Dehn function 4 max(f (n), exp(n)). Theorem E.3, which follows from Theorem 3.B.1 and Corollary 3.B.6, contains two particular instances where the latter assertion holds, which are enough for our purposes. The first instance, namely that every connected Lie group has an at most exponential Dehn function, was asserted by Gromov, with a sketch of proof [Gro93, Corollary 3.F′5 ]. Example 1.7. Fix n ∈ Z with |n| ≥ 2. Consider the group Gn = (R × Qn ) ⋊n Z, where Qn is the product of Qp where p ranges over distinct primes divisors of n. Here U ◦ ≃ R and G/U ◦ ≃ Qn ⋊n Z, which, as a hyperbolic group (it is an HNN ascending extension of the compact group Zn ), has a linear Dehn function. So, by Theorem E.3, Gn has an at most exponential Dehn function. Since |n| ≥ 2, it admits a prime factor p, so Gn admits the group of SOL type (R × Qp ) ⋊n Z as a quotient, and therefore Gn satisfies the SOL obstruction and thus has an at least exponential Dehn function by Theorem E.1. We conclude that Gn has an exponential Dehn function. This provides a new proof that its lattice, the Baumslag-Solitar group BS(1, n) = ht, x | txt−1 = xn i,  has an exponential Dehn function. This is actually true for arbitrary BaumslagSolitar groups BS(m, n), |m| = 6 |n|, for which the exponential upper bound was first established in [ECHLPT92, Theorem 7.3.4 and Example 7.4.1] and independently in [BGSS92], and the exponential lower bound, attributed to Thurston, was obtained in [ECHLPT92, Example 7.4.1]. Let us provide a useful corollary of Theorems E.1 and E.3. Corollary E.3.a. Let G = U ⋊ A be a standard solvable group in which A has rank 1 (i.e., has a closed infinite cyclic cocompact subgroup). Then exactly one of the following occurs • G satisfies the non-Archimedean SOL obstruction and thus is not compactly presented; • G satisfies the SOL obstruction but not the non-Archimedean one; it is compactly presented with an exponential Dehn function; • G does not satisfy the SOL obstruction; it has a linear Dehn function and is Gromov-hyperbolic. It is indeed an observation that if A has rank 1 and G does not satisfy the SOL obstruction, then some element of A acts on G as a compaction (see Definition 4.B.4) and it follows from [CCMT15] that G is Gromov-hyperbolic, or equivalently has a linear Dehn function. In this special case where A has rank 1, the 2-homological obstruction, which may hold or not hold, implies the SOL obstruction and is accordingly unnecessary to consider; see also Theorem D.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  11  Turning back to Theorem E, the fourth and most involved of all the steps is the following. Theorem E.4. Let G be a standard solvable (resp. real triangulable) group not satisfying neither the SOL nor the 2-homological obstructions. Then G has an at most cubic (resp. at most polynomial) Dehn function. The proof of Theorem E.4 for standard solvable groups is done in Section 6, relying on algebraic preliminaries, occupying Sections 8 and 9. We actually obtain, with some additional work, a similar statement for “generalized standard solvable groups”, where A is replaced by some nilpotent compactly generated group N (see Theorem 10.H.1). The case of real triangulable groups requires an additional step, namely a reduction to the case where the exponential radical is split, in which case the group is generalized standard solvable. This reduction is performed in §3.C, and relies on results from [C11]. 1.4. The obstructions as “computable” invariants of the Lie algebra. The obstructions were introduced above in a convenient way for expository reasons, but the natural framework to deal with them uses the language of graded Lie algebras, which we now describe. Let G be either a standard solvable group U ⋊ A or a real triangulable group with exponential radical also denoted, for convenience, by U. Let u be the Lie algebra of U; it is a Lie algebra (over a finite product of nondiscrete locally compact fields of characteristic zero). It is, in a natural way, a graded Lie algebra. In both cases, the grading takes values into a finite-dimensional real vector space, namely Hom(G/U, R). It is introduced in §4.B, relying on Theorem 4.A.2 (see §1.5 for a representative particular case.) In this setting, there are useful restatements (see Propositions 4.C.3 and 4.D.9) of the obstructions. We say that α ∈ Hom(G/U, R) is a weight of G (or of U, when u is endowed with the grading) if uα 6= 0 and is a principal weight of G if α is a weight of U/[U, U]. The definitions imply that 0 is not a principal weight (although it can be a weight). We say that two nonzero weights α, β are quasi-opposite if 0 ∈ [α, β], i.e., β = −tα for some t > 0. We write U = Ua × Una as the product of its Archimedean and non-Archimedean parts. Then we have the following restatements: • G satisfies the SOL obstruction ⇔ U admits two quasi-opposite principal weights (Propositions 4.C.3 and 4.D.9); • G satisfies the non-Archimedean SOL obstruction ⇔ Una admits two quasi-opposite principal weights (Proposition 4.C.3 applied to G/G0 ); • G satisfies the 2-homological obstruction ⇔ H2 (u)0 6= {0}; • G satisfies the non-Archimedean 2-homological obstruction ⇔ H2 (una )0 6= {0}; • G fails to satisfy the assumption of Theorem D ⇔ 0 belongs to the interval joining some pair of weights.  12  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Here, H2 (u) denotes the homology of the Lie algebra u; the grading on u in the real vector space Hom(G/U, R) canonically induces a grading of H2 (u) in the same space (see §8.A), and H2 (u)0 is its component in degree zero. Another important module associated to u is Kill(u), the quotient of the second symmetric power u ⊚ u by the submodule generated by elements of the form [x, y] ⊚ z − x ⊚ [y, z]; thus, in case of a single field (that is, U = U1 in Definition 1.2), the invariant quadratic forms on u are elements in the dual of Kill(u). Theorem F. Let G = U ⋊ A be a standard solvable group not satisfying any of the SOL or 2-homological obstructions. Suppose in addition that Kill(u)0 = {0}. Then G has an at most quadratic Dehn function (thus exactly quadratic if A has rank at least two). Theorem F is proved in §10.E. Part of it is proved along with Theorem E.4 and involves the same difficulties, except that the welding relations do not appear. The condition Kill(u)0 6= {0} corresponds to the existence of certain central extensions of G as a discrete group. Using asymptotic cones, it will be shown in a subsequent paper that it implies, in many cases (without the SOL and 2homological obstructions), that the Dehn function grows strictly faster than a quadratic function. 1.5. Examples. Let us give a few examples. All are standard solvable connected Lie groups G = U ⋊ A so that the action of A on the Lie algebra u of U is Rdiagonalizable. In this context, we call Hom(A, R) the weight space. The grading of the Lie algebra u in Hom(A, R) is given by uα = {u ∈ u | ∀v ∈ A, v −1 uv = eα(v) u}.  When we write the set of weights, we use boldface for the set of principal weights. We underline the zero weight (or just denote  to mark zero if zero is not a weight). 1.5.1. Groups of SOL type. For a group of SOL type (Definition 1.3), the weight space is a line and the weights lie on opposite sides of zero: 1  2 By definition it satisfies the SOL obstruction. On the other hand, it satisfies the 2-homological obstruction only in a few special cases. For instance, (R×Qp )⋊p Z does not satisfy the 2-homological obstruction, and the real group SOLλ (see Example 1.4) satisfies the 2-homological obstruction only for λ = 1. 1.5.2. Gromov’s higher SOL groups. For the group R3 ⋊R2 where R2 acts on R3 as the group of diagonal matrices with positive diagonal entries and determinant one (often called higher-dimensional SOL group, but not of SOL type nor even satisfying the SOL obstruction according to our conventions), the weight space is a plane in which the weights form a triangle whose center of gravity is zero:  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  13  2  1  3  Since there are no opposite weights, we have (u ⊗ u)0 = 0 and therefore H2 (u)0 and Kill(u)0 (which are subquotients of (u⊗u)0 ) are also zero. It was stated with a sketch of proof by Gromov that this group has a quadratic Dehn function [Gro93, 5.A9 ]. Druţu obtained in [Dru98, Corollary 4.18] that it has a Dehn function 4 n3+ε , and then obtained a quadratic upper bound in [Dru04, Theorem 1.1], a result also obtained by Leuzinger and Pittet in [LP04]. The quadratic upper bound can also be viewed as an illustration of Theorem D. (The assumption that 0 is the center of gravity is unessential: the important fact is that 0 belongs to the convex hull of the three weights but does not lie in the segment joining any two weights.) 1.5.3. Abels’ first group. The group G = A4 (K) consists of matrices of the form   1 u12 u13 u14 0 s2 u23 u24  ×   0 0 s3 u34  ; si ∈ K , uij ∈ K. 0 0 0 1  Its weight configuration is given by  23 13  24 14  12  34  This example is interesting because it does not satisfy the SOL obstruction but admits opposite weights. A computation shows that H2 (u)0 = 0 and Kill(u)0 = 0 (see Abels [Ab87, Example 5.7.1]). If Ḡ = Ū ⋊ A is the quotient of G by its one-dimensional center, then G does not satisfy the SOL obstruction but satisfies H2 (ū)0 6= 0, i.e. satisfies the 2-homological obstruction. This example was studied specifically by the authors in the paper [CT13], where it is proved that it has a quadratic Dehn function, which also follows from Theorem F. 1.5.4. Abels’ second group. This group was introduced in [Ab87, Example 5.7.4]. Consider the group U ⋊ A, where A ≃ R2 and U is the group corresponding to the quotient of the free 3-nilpotent Lie algebra generated by the 3-dimensional K-vector space of basis (X1 , X2 , X3 ) by the ideal generated by [Xi , [Xi , Yj ]] for  14  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  all i, j ∈ {1, 2, 3}. Its weight structure is as follows 2 12 1  23 ∗∗  3  31 (The sign ∗∗ indicates that the degree 0 subspace u0 is 2-dimensional.) A computation (see Remark 8.D.3) shows that H2 (u)0 = 0 and Kill(u)0 is 1-dimensional. This example was introduced by Abels as typically difficult because although H2 (u)0 vanishes, U is not the multiamalgam of its tame subgroups (see §1.7); as we show in this paper, this is reflected in the fact that Kill(u)0 is nonzero. This results in a significant additional difficulty in order to estimate the Dehn function, which is at most cubic by Theorem E.4.  1.5.5. Semidirect products with SL3 . We consider the groups V (K) ⋊ SL3 (K), where V is one of the following three irreducible modules: V = V10 , the standard 3-dimensional module; V20 = Sym2 (V10 ), the 6-dimensional second power of V10 and V11 , the 8-dimensional adjoint representation. (The notation is borrowed from [FuH, Lecture 13], writing Vij instead of Γij .) These groups are not solvable but have a cocompact K-triangulable subgroup, namely V (K) ⋊ T3 (K), where T3 (K) is the group of lower triangular matrices. It is a simple verification that for an arbitrary nontrivial irreducible representation, the group V (K) ⋊ T3 (K) admits exactly three principal weights, namely the two principal negative roots r21 , r32 of SL3 itself, and the highest weight of the representation Vab , which can be written as aL1 − bL3 , where ±L1 , L2 , L3 are the minimal vectors of the weight lattice, arranged as in the following picture.  L2 r21  −L3  L1   −L1 r31  L3  −L2 r32  The three principal weights always form a triangle with zero contained in its interior. In particular, V (K) ⋊ T3 (K) does not satisfy the SOL obstruction. Let us write the weight diagram for each of the three examples (we mark some other points in the weight lattice as · for the sake of readability). More specifically, for V10 , the weights configuration looks like  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  L2  15  L1  r21   .  .  .  L3 r31 r32 We see that there are no quasi-opposite weights at all. This is accordingly a case for which Theorem D applies directly. Thus K3 ⋊ SL3 (K) has a quadratic Dehn function (it can be checked to also hold for Kd ⋊ SLd (K) for d ≥ 3). For V20 , writing Lij = Li + Lj , the weights are as follows 2L2  L12  2L1  .  .  r21  .   L23  .  L13 .  .  r31  r32  . 2L3 . Thus there are quasi-opposite weights but no opposite weights. Theorem 10.E.1 implies that V20 (K) ⋊ SL3 (K) has a quadratic Dehn function. For V11 , writing Lij = Li − Lj , the weights are as follows L23 .  L13 .  . r21 , L21 .  . .  ∗∗  L12 .  .  . . r31 , L31 r32 , L32 In this case, there are opposite weights, there is an invariant quadratic form in degree zero (akin to the Killing form), defined by φ(rji , Lij ) = 1 for all i < j and all other products being zero, so Kill(u)0 6= 0. However, a simple computation shows that H2 (u)0 = 0. So Theorem E.4 implies that sl3 (K) ⋊ SL3 (K) has an at most cubic Dehn function. 1.6. Description of the strategy. Let us now describe the main ideas that underlie the proof of Theorems E.4 and F. We then proceed to sketch, with more details, the proof of Theorem F. General picture. A central idea, already essential in Gromov’s approach is to use non-positively curved subgroups (called tame subgroups in the sequel). It was previously used in Abels’ work on compact presentability of p-adic groups [Ab87]. Abels considers a certain abstract group, obtained by amalgamating the tame subgroups over their intersections (more details are given in 1.7). Our  16  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  combinatorial approach to the Dehn function allows us to take advantage of the consideration of this “multiamalgam” Ĝ. One similarly defines a multiamalgam of the tame Lie subalgebras, denoted by ĝ. Strategy. To simplify the discussion, let us assume that G is standard solvable over a single nondiscrete locally compact field of characteristic zero K, satisfying none of the SOL and 2-homological assumptions. Roughly speaking, the strategy is as follows. Ideally, one would like to obtain Ĝ = G; this turns out to be true under the additional assumption that Kill(u)0 vanishes. In general we obtain that Ĝ is a central extension of G, and describe generators of the central kernel. Second, we need to be able to decompose any combinatorial loop into boundedly many loops corresponding to relations in the tame subgroups. It turns out that both steps are quite challenging. While Abels’ work provides substantial material to tackle the first step, we had to introduce completely new ideas to solve the second one. The first step: giving a compact presentation for G. Under the assumption that the group G does not satisfy the SOL obstruction, we show, improving a theorem of Abels, that the multiamalgam is a central extension of G. Thus we have Ĝ = Û ⋊ A, where Û is a central extension of U, whose central kernel is centralized by A. At first sight, it seems that the condition H2 (u)0 = 0 should be enough to ensure that Ĝ = G. However, it turns out that in general, Û is a “wild” central extension, in the sense that it does not carry any locally compact topology such that the projection onto U is continuous. This strange phenomenon is easier to describe at the level of the Lie algebras. There, we have that ĝ = û ⋊ a, where û is a central extension in degree 0 of u, seen as Lie algebras over Q. Now, if in the last statement, we could replace Lie algebras over Q by Lie algebras over K, then clearly H2 (u)0 = 0 would imply that û = u. This happens if and only if the natural morphism H2Q(u)0 → H2 (u)0 is an isomorphism; we show in Section 8 that this happens if and only if the module Kill(u)0 (see §1.4) vanishes. In fact, there are relatively simple examples, already pointed out by Abels where Kill(u)0 does not vanish (see the previous subsection). As a consequence, even when none of the obstructions hold, we need to complete the presentation of G with a family of so-called welding relations, which encode generators of the kernel of Û → U. At the Lie algebra level, these relations encode K-bilinearity of the Lie bracket. The second step: reduction to special relations. The second main step is to reduce the estimation of area of arbitrary relations to that of relations of a special form (e.g., relations inside a tame subgroup). This idea amounts to Gromov and is instrumental in Young’s approach for nilpotent groups [Y06] and for SLd≥5 (Z) [Y13]; it is also used in [CT10, CT13]. The main difference in this paper is that we have to perform such an approach without going into explicit calculations (which would be extremely complicated for an arbitrary standard solvable group, since the unipotent group U is essentially arbitrary). Our trick to avoid calculations is to use a presentation of U that is stable under “extensions of  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  17  scalars”. Let us be more explicit, and write U = U(K), so that U(A) makes sense for any commutative K-algebra A. We actually provide a presentation, based on Abels’ multiamalgam and welding relations, of U(A) for any K-algebra A. When applying it to a suitable algebra A of functions of at most polynomial growth, we obtain area estimates (in the sketch of §1.7, we do this with the algebra A of sequences of elements of at most exponential growth). This is the core of our argument; it is performed in §10.E (in the setting of Theorem F) and in §10.G in general, relying on the general approach developed in §7.B. The presentation itself is established in Sections 8 and 9. Last step: computation of the area of special relations. For a standard solvable group not satisfying the SOL and 2-homological obstructions, these relations are of two types: those that are contained (as loops) in a tame subgroup and thus have an at most quadratic area; and the more mysterious welding relations. We show that welding relations have an at most cubic area. When the welding relations are superfluous, namely when Kill(u)0 vanishes, Theorem 10.E.1 asserts that G then has an at most quadratic Dehn function. A study based on the asymptotic cone, in a paper in preparation by the authors, will show that conversely, in some cases where Kill(u)0 does not vanish, the Dehn function of G grows strictly faster than quadratic. We mention this to enhance the important role played by the welding relations in the geometry of these groups. We suspect that they might be relevant as well in the study of the Dehn function of nilpotent Lie groups. 1.7. Sketch of the proof of Theorem F. In the following, we emphasize the main ideas, omitting some technical issues occurring in the detailed, rigorous proof completed in §10.E. To begin with, let us explain in detail the notion of multiamalgam. Let G be a group and (Hi ) a family of subgroups. The multiamalgam Ĝ of the Hi is the quotient of the free product of the Hi by the obvious amalgamation relations (identifying Hi ∩ Hj to its image in both Hi and Hj for all i, j). We say that G is the multiamalgam of the Hi if the canonical homomorphism Ĝ → G is an isomorphism. L Basic example: suppose that G = Gi . Then G is the multiamalgam of the family of subgroups (Gi ⊕ Gj )i6=j . This is because G is the quotient of the free product by the commutation relations, and each of these commutation relations lives within one pair of summands. Consider now a standard solvable group G = U ⋊ A satisfying the hypotheses of Theorem F. We call tame subgroup of G a subgroup of the form V ⋊ A, where V is a closed A-invariant subgroup such that some element of A acts on V as a contraction. Let (Ui ⋊ A)1≤i≤ν be the family of maximal tame subgroups. There are finitely many.  18  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  We now define a presentation of the multiamalgam Ĝ. Let Si be a compact symmetric neighborhood of 1 in Ui , F T a compact symmetric generating subset of A with nonempty interior, and S = Si ⊔ T . Let R be the set of bounded length relators of the following four types: • • • •  bounded length relators of (A, T ), relators of length 3 inside S, relators of the form ts′ t−1 s−1 for s, s′ ∈ S, t ∈ T , (amalgamation relators) relators of the form s−1 s′ when s ∈ Si , s′ ∈ Sj have the same image in Ui ∩ Uj .  Fix k ≥ 1 and let ℘ ∈ {1 . . . , ν}k be a k-tuple of indices. Let W℘ (n) be the set Q of group words in the free group FS of the form kj=1 tj sj t−1 j where tj ∈ FT with |tj | ≤ n and sj ∈ S℘j . Let δ℘ (n) be the supremum of areas (for the presentation hS | Ri) of those null-homotopic words in W℘ (n). Gromov’s trick (see §2.E) says that there exists k and ℘ such that δ℘ (n)  n2 implies that the Dehn function of G is  n2 . Showing that Gromov’s trick can be performed requires some length estimates which take some work but we do not insist on this here. So we fix k and are reduced to showing δ℘ (n)  n2 . For each n, we fix some w(n) ∈ W℘ (n); we decompose it as w(n) =  k Y  tj (n)sj (n)tj (n)−1 .  i=1  Let us proceed to show that the area of w(n) is finite and quadratically bounded in terms of n. For each n, define σj (n) as the element of U℘j represented by Q tj (n)sj (n)tj (n)−1 . Then ki=1 σj (n), viewed as an element of the free product U1 ∗ · · · ∗ Uν , has a trivial image in U. Let Kexp be the K-algebra of sequences in K with at most exponential growth. Viewing σj as a function of n, simple estimates show that σj ∈ U℘j (Kexp ). Using the universal property of the multiamalgam, there is a canonical well\ exp ) of the U (Kexp ) to U(Kexp ). defined homomorphism from the multiamalgam U(K i It is at this point that we use in an essential way the assumptions of Theorem F, namely that G does not satisfy the SOL and 2-homological obstructions, and Kill(u)0 = {0}. These assumptions, thanks to the preliminary algebraic work \ exp ) → U(Kexp ) is an of Sections 8 and 9, imply that this homomorphism U(K isomorphism (Corollary 9.D.4). For q, r ∈ {1, . . . , ν}, denote by ηqr the inclusion of Uq ∩ Ur into Uq . So, the multiamalgam of the Ui (Kexp ) is the quotient of the free product by the normal subgroup generated by the relators ηqr (x)ηrq (x)−1 , when (q, r) ranges over pairs and x ranges over Uq (Kexp ) ∩ Ur (Kexp ). Therefore, there exists a finite family (µm (n))1≤m≤p of elements of U(Kexp ), and elements qm , rm ∈ {1, . . . , ν}, such that µm (n) ∈ Uqm ∩ Urm , elements (gm (n)) in  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  19  the free product of the Ui (Kexp ) such that k Y  σj =  p Y  −1 . gm ηqm rm (µm )ηrm qm (µm )−1 gm  m=1  j=1  Thus for every n we have, in U1 ∗ · · · ∗ Uν k Y j=1  σj (n) =  p Y  gm (n)ηqm rm (µm )(n)ηrm qm (µm )(n)−1 gm (n)−1 .  m=1  Denote by g\ m (n) a choice of word of length ≤ Cn representing gm (n) in Uqm ⋊A, in the generators Sqm ∪ T ; this can be done because gm (n) has exponential size, so can be written as t−cn stcn with s ∈ Sqm and t ∈ T , and c independent of n. \ We also define simultaneously ηqm r\ m (µm )(n) and ηrm qm (µm )(n) to be of the form t−cn stcn and t−cn s′ tcn , with s ∈ Sqm , s′ ∈ Srm having the same image in Uqm ∩Urm . So the word p Y −1 ′ −1 \ −1 g\ \ g\ w (n) = w(n) m (n) . m (n) ηqm rm (µm )(n) ηrm qm (µm )(n) m=1  is null-homotopic in (U1 ∗ · · · ∗ Uν ) ⋊ A and has an at most linear length. \ −1 for Let us obtain a uniform bound on the area of ηqm r\ m (µm )(n)ηrm qm (µm )(n) each m. We have (µm )(n)−1 = t−cn ss′−1 tcn ; (µm )(n)ηr q \ ηq r\ m m  m m  since ss′ −1 is a relator, its area is equal to 1. Thus the area of w(n)w ′(n) is ≤ p (independently of n). This shows that we are reduced to proving that w ′(n) has an at most quadratic area. For convenience, we rewrite ′  ′  w (n) =  ν Y  hm (n),  m=1  where hm is a word in T ∪ S℘′m for some ν ′ and ν ′ -tuple ℘′ , independent of n. Q′ Let us show that the area of a word w ′ = νm=1 hm that is null-homotopic P in |hm | (U1 ∗ · · · ∗ Uν ′ ) ⋊ A is at most quadratic with respect to the total length ′ ′ (with a constant depending only on ℘ ). This is shown by induction on ν . Since w ′ is null-homotopic, there exists either m such that hm is null-homotopic, or there exists m such that ℘′m = ℘′m+1 . In the second case, this reduces to the case of ν ′ − 1. In the first case, it also reduces to the case of ν ′ − 1, at the cost of replacing hm with 1, which has at most quadratic cost since U℘′m ⋊ A has an at most quadratic Dehn function. So w ′ (n) has an at most quadratic area. It follows that w(n) has an at most quadratic area. Since this holds for every choice of w, this shows that δ℘ (n)  n2 . Thus G has an at most quadratic Dehn function.  20  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  This completes the sketch of proof of Theorem F. The first two conditions (absence of SOL and 2-homological obstructions) were necessary as otherwise, the Dehn function is at least exponential. On the other hand, in the proof of Theorem E.4 we also have to proceed when the Killing module is not assumed zero in degree 0. In this case, U can be described as a quotient of the multiamalgam by some welding relators, in a way that is inherited to U(Kexp ) (see 10.D). So, in the above proof, some further relations appear (in addition to the \ −1 ), and we establish (§10.F) that these further relaηqm r\ m (µm )(n)ηrm qm (µm )(n) tions have at most cubic area with respect to some compact presentation (where the additional relators are some welding relations of bounded length). 1.8. Introduction to the Lie algebra chapters. Although Sections 8 and 9 can be viewed as technical sections when primarily interested in the results about Dehn functions, they should also be considered as self-contained contributions to the theory of graded Lie algebras. Recall that graded Lie algebras form a very rich theory of its own interest, see for instance [Fu, Kac]. Let us therefore introduce these chapters independently. In this context, the Lie algebras are over a given commutative ring A, with no finiteness assumption. This generality is essential in our applications, since we have to consider (finite-dimensional) Lie algebras over an infinite product of fields. We actually consider Lie algebras graded in a given abelian group W, written additively. 1.8.1. Universal central extensions. Recall that a Lie algebra is perfect if g = [g, g]. It is classical that every perfect Lie algebra admits a universal central extension. We provide a graded version of this fact. Say that a graded Lie algebra is relatively perfect in degree zero if g0 ⊂ [g, g] (in other words, H1 (g)0 = {0}). In §8.B, to any graded Lie algebra g, we canonically associate another graded Lie algebra g̃ along with a graded Lie algebra homomorphism τ : g̃ → g, which has a central kernel, naturally isomorphic to the 0-component of the 2-homology module H2 (g)0 . Theorem G. (Theorem 8.B.4) Let g be a graded Lie algebra. If g is relatively τ perfect in degree zero, then the morphism g̃ → g is a graded central extension with kernel in degree zero, and is universal among such central extensions. An important feature of this result is that it applies to graded Lie algebras that are far from perfect: indeed, in our case, the Lie algebras are even nilpotent. 1.8.2. Restriction of scalars. In §8.C, we study the behavior of H2 (g)0 under restriction of scalars. We therefore consider a homomorphism A → B of commutative rings. If g is a Lie algebra over B, then it is also a Lie algebra over A and therefore to avoid ambiguity we denote its 2-homology by H2A(g) and H2B (g) according to the choice of the ground ring. There is a canonical surjective Amodule homomorphism H2A(g) → H2B (g); we call its kernel the welding module  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  21  and denote it by W2A,B(g). It is a graded A-module, and W2A,B(g)0 is also the kernel of the induced map H2A (g)0 → H2B (g)0 . These considerations led us to introduce the Killing module. Let g be a Lie algebra over the commutative ring B. Consider the homomorphism T from g⊗3 to the symmetric square g ⊚ g, defined by T (u ⊗ v ⊗ w) = u ⊚ [v, w] − [u, w] ⊚ v  (all tensor products are over B here). The Killing module is by definition the cokernel of T . The terminology is motivated by the observation that for every Bmodule m, HomB (KillB (g), m) is in natural bijection with the module of invariant B-bilinear forms g × g → m. If g is graded, then Kill(g) is canonically graded as well. Theorem H. Let Q ⊂ K be fields of characteristic zero, such that K has infinite transcendence degree over Q. Let g be a finite-dimensional graded Lie algebra over K, relatively perfect in degree zero (i.e., H1 (g)0 = {0}). Then the following are equivalent: (i) W2Q,K (g)0 = {0}; (ii) W2Q,R(g ⊗K R)0 = {0} for every commutative K-algebra R; (iii) KillK (g)0 = {0}. In particular, assuming moreover that H2 (g)0 = {0}, these are also equivalent to: (iv) H2Q (g)0 = {0}; (v) H2Q (g ⊗K R)0 = {0} for every commutative K-algebra R. The interest of such a result is that (iii) appears as a checkable criterion for the vanishing of a complicated and typically infinite-dimensional object (the welding module). Let us point out that this result follows, in case g is defined over Q, from the results of Neeb and Wagemann [NW08]. In our application to Dehn functions (specifically, in the proof of Theorems 10.E.1 and 10.G.1), we make an essential use of the implication (iii)⇒(v), where Q = Q, K is a nondiscrete locally compact field, and R is a certain algebra of functions on K. That (iii) implies the other properties actually does not rely on the specific hypotheses (restriction to fields, finite dimension), see Corollary 8.C.8. The converse, namely that the negation of (iii) implies the negation of the other properties, follows from Theorem 8.C.13. 1.8.3. Abels’ multiamalgam. Section 9 is devoted to the study of Abels’ multiamalgam ĝ and to its connection with the universal central extension g̃ → g. Here, we again consider arbitrary Lie algebras over a commutative ring R, but we now assume that the abelian group W is a real vector space. Given a graded Lie algebra, a Lie subalgebra is called tame if 0 does not belong to the convex hull of its weights. Abels’ multiamalgam ĝ is the (graded) Lie algebra obtained by amalgamating all tame subalgebras of g along their intersections (see 9.C for details); it comes with a natural graded Lie algebra homomorphism ĝ → g. Abels  22  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  defines a 2-tame nilpotent graded Lie algebra to be such that 0 does not belong to the convex hull of any pair of principal weights (this condition is related to the condition that the SOL-obstruction is not satisfied). A more general notion of 2-tameness, for arbitrary W-graded Lie algebras, is introduced in 9.A. Although Abels works in a specific framework (p-adic fields, finite-dimensional nilpotent Lie algebras), his methods imply with minor changes the following result. Theorem (essentially due to Abels, see Theorem 9.C.2). If g is 2-tame, then ĝ → g is the universal central extension in degree 0. In other words, ĝ is canonically isomorphic to g̃. This means that in this case, ĝ is an excellent approximation of g, the discrepancy being encoded by the central kernel H2 (g)0 . We actually need the translation of this result in the group-theoretic setting, which involves significant difficulties. Assume now that the ground ring R is a commutative algebra over the field Q of rationals. Recall that the BakerCampbell-Hausdorff formula defines an equivalence of categories between nilpotent Lie algebras over Q and uniquely divisible nilpotent groups. Then g is the Lie algebra of a certain uniquely divisible nilpotent group G, and we can define the multiamalgam Ĝ of its tame subgroups, i.e. those subgroups corresponding to tame subalgebras of g. Note that it does not follow from abstract nonsense that Ĝ is controlled in any way by g, because Ĝ is defined in the category of groups and not of uniquely divisible nilpotent groups. In a technical tour de force, Abels [Ab87, §4.4] managed to prove that Ĝ is nilpotent and asked whether the extension Ĝ → G is central. The following theorem, which we need for our estimates of Dehn function, answers the latter question positively. Theorem I (Theorem 9.D.2). Let g be a 2-tame nilpotent graded Lie algebra over a commutative Q-algebra R. If g is 2-tame, then Ĝ is nilpotent and uniquely divisible, and Ĝ → G corresponds to ĝ → g under the equivalence of categories. In particular, the kernel of Ĝ → G is central and canonically isomorphic to H2Q (g)0 . 1.8.4. On the “computational” aspect. Let g be a Lie algebra (over some commutative ring) graded in some abelian group. Theorems E and F involve the conditions H2 (g)0 = {0} and Kill(g)0 = {0}. Typically, in the cases of interest, g is a finite-dimensional nilpotent Lie algebra over a field, and these conditions mean the surjectivity of some explicit matrices. ThereLare simple families of examples for which g has dimension ≃ n3 , while g▽ = α6=0 gα has dimension 2 ≃ n , so that most of the contribution to dim(g) is in degree zero. Hence, when computing H2 (g)0 and Kill(g)0 , the main contribution comes from those terms involving g0 . It turns out that under mild assumptions fulfilled in both theorems (implied by the failure of the SOL obstruction), we can get rid of these terms. Namely, recalling that the homology module H2 (g) is the cokernel of the map d3 : Λ3 g → Λ2 g, we observe (see §8.D.1 for details) that d3 maps (Λ3 g▽ )0 → Λ2 g▽ ;  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  23  let H2▽ (g)0 be the cokernel of the latter module homomorphism; it is endowed with a canonical map H2▽ (g)0 → H2 (g)0 . Similarly, Kill(u) is the cokernel of the map T : g⊗3 → S 2 g (the second symmetric power) mapping x ⊗ y ⊗ z to [x, y] ⊚ z − x ⊚ [y, z], which maps ((g▽ )⊗3 )0 into (S 2 g▽ )0 ; let Kill▽ (g)0 be the cokernel of the latter; it admits a canonical module homomorphism into Kill(g)0 . The following theorem is contained in Theorem 8.D.2 for H2 and in Theorem 8.D.9 for the Killing module. Theorem J. Let g be a nilpotent Lie algebra (over any commutative P ring) graded in some real vector space. Suppose that for every α we have g0 = β ∈{0,α,−α} [gβ , g−β ]. / ▽ ▽ Then the natural module homomorphisms H2 (g)0 → H2 (g)0 and Kill (g)0 → Kill(g)0 are isomorphisms. The assumption is satisfied if g is nilpotent and 2-tame, that is, g/[g, g] has no pair {α, β} of weights such that 0 belongs to the segment [α, β] [Ab87, Lemma 4.3.1(c)]. 1.9. Guidelines. • The reader interested in the proof of Theorem E.1 can directly go to Section 12, which is essentially independent. • The reader interested in the proof of Theorem E.2 can directly go to Section 11, and refer when necessary to the preliminaries of Sections 4, 5, and, more scarcely, Section 8. • The reader interested in the proof of the polynomial upper bounds will find the first important steps in Section 3 and the weight definitions in Section 4, and then can proceed to Sections 6, 7, and 10, and refer when necessary to all the preceding sections. • The reader interested specifically in the algebraic results, as described in §1.8, can directly go to Sections 8 and 9, and refer when necessary to the preliminary Section 5. Although being of preliminary nature here, Sections 2 (introducing the Dehn function) and 4 (weights and tameness conditions, Cartan grading) can be read for their own interest. 1.10. Acknowledgements. We are grateful to Christophe Pittet for several fruitful discussions. We thank Cornelia Druţu for discussions and pointing out useful references. We thank Pierre de la Harpe for many useful corrections. We are grateful to the referee for a thorough work and various suggestions improving the presentation of the paper. 2. Dehn function: preliminaries and first reductions This section contains general preliminaries on the Dehn function. In particular, we state Gromov’s trick in §2.E, essentially following arguments from [CT10].  24  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  2.A. Asymptotic comparison. Definition 2.A.1. If f, g are real functions defined on any set where ∞ makes sense (e.g., in a locally compact group, it usually refers to convergence to the point at infinity in the 1-point compactification), we say that f is asymptotically bounded by g and write f  g if there exists a constant C ≥ 1 such that for all x close enough to ∞ we have f (x) ≤ Cg(x) + C;  if f  g  f we write f ≃ g and say that f and g have the same asymptotic behavior, or the same ≃-asymptotic behavior. Definition 2.A.2. If f, g are non-decreasing non-negative real functions defined on R+ or N, we say that f is bi-asymptotically bounded by g and write f 4 g if there exists a constant C ≥ 1 such that for all x f (x) ≤ Cg(Cx) + C;  if f 4 g 4 f we write f ≈ g, and say that f and g have the same bi-asymptotic behavior, or the same ≈-asymptotic behavior.  Besides the setting, the essential difference between ≃-asymptotic and ≈asymptotic behavior is the constant at the level of the source set. For instance, 2n ≈ 3n but 2n ≃ / 3n .  2.B. Definition of Dehn function. If G is a group and S any subset, we denote by |g|S the (possibly infinite) word length of g ∈ G with respect to S; the length | · |S takes finite values on the subgroup generated by S. If H is a group and R ⊂ H, we define the area of an element as the S w ∈ H −1 (possibly infinite) word length of w with respect to the union h∈H hRh ; we denote it by areaR (w). It takes finite values on the normal subgroup generated by R. Now let S be an abstract set and FS the free group over S, and π : FS → G a surjective homomorphism. Its kernel is denoted by K; elements in K are called relations. If a subset R of K is given, the elements in the normal subgroup generated by R are called null-homotopic. Thus any null-homotopic word is a relation, and conversely, if R generates K as a normal subgroup (then R is called a system of relators), then relations are null-homotopic. By a common abuse of terminology, elements in a system of relators are called relators. We define the Dehn function δS,π,R(n) = max(⌊n/2⌋, sup{areaR (w) : w ∈ K, |w|S ≤ n}).  (The term n/2 is not serious, and only avoids some pathologies. Intuitively, it corresponds to the idea that the area of a word sn s−n , which is zero by definition, should account for at least n.) We like to think of δS,π,R as the Dehn function of G, but in this general setting, this function as well as its asymptotic behavior can depend on the choice of S, π and R. It can also take infinite values. Note  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  25  that often S is a given subset of G and since π is obviously chosen as the unique homomorphism extending the identity of S, we write the Dehn function as δS,R . Let now G be a compactly generated LC-group (LC-group means locally compact group), and S a compact generating symmetric subset whose interior contains 1. View S as an abstract set and consider the surjective homomorphism FS → G which is the identity on S, and K its kernel. Let K(d) be the intersection of K with the d-ball in (FS , | · |S ). We say that G is compactly presented if for some d ≥ 0, the subset K(d) generates K as a normal subgroup. This does not depend on the choice of S (but the minimal value of d can depend). If so, the function δS,K(d) takes finite values (see Lemma 2.B.2 below), and its ≈-asymptotic behavior does not depend on the choice of S and d. The latter is then called the Dehn function of G. If G is not compactly presented, we say by convention that the Dehn function is infinite. For instance, when we say that a compactly generated LC-group G has a Dehn function < f (n), we allow the possibility that G is not compactly presented, i.e. its Dehn function is (eventually) infinite. Proposition 2.B.1. The ≈-behavior of the Dehn function is a quasi-isometry invariant of the compactly generated locally compact group. On the proof. This follows from a more general statement for arbitrary connected graphs. In this case, the Dehn function can be defined as soon that the graph is large-scale simply connected, i.e., can be made simply connected by adding 2cells with a bounded number of edges, thus defining a notion of area for arbitrary loops. The quasi-isometry invariance of the asymptotic behavior of the Dehn function for arbitrary connected graph is similar to the usual one showing that the Dehn function is a quasi-isometry invariant among finitely generated groups, see [Al91] or [BaMS93, Theorem 26].  Lemma 2.B.2. As above, let G be an LC-group with a compact symmetric generating subset S, and K the kernel of the canonical homomorphism FS → G. Assume that, for some d ≥ 4, the intersection K(d) of the d-ball in FS with K generates K as a normal subgroup. Then δS,K(d) (n) is finite for all n. Proof. Fix n. Denote by S n the product of n copies of S, with the product topology (rather than the n-ball in FS ). Consider the product map p : S n → FS , and let (S n )0 be the inverse image of K(n) in S n ; thus (S n )0 is a closed subset of S n , hence is compact. By assumption, the area function areaK(d) ◦ p takes finite values on (S n )0 . We have to show that it is bounded on (S n )0 ; thus it is enough to show that this function is locally bounded. Indeed, given s = (s1 , . . . , sn ) ∈ (S n )0 , there exists a neighborhood V of s in (S n )0 such that for all s′ = (s′1 , . . . , s′n ) ∈ V and all 1 ≤ k ≤ n, we have the element (s1 . . . sk )−1 (s′1 . . . s′k ) represents an element tk ∈ S. Note that tn = 1.  26  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Fix s′ ∈ V , and define t1 , . . . , tn ∈ S as above. Set t0 = 1, and define, for 0≤k≤n s(k) = (s1 , . . . , sk , tk , s′k+1 , . . . , s′n ) ∈ (S n+1 )0 Then p(s(0) ) = p(s′ ), p(s(n) ) = p(s), and for all 0 ≤ k ≤ n − 1  −1 −1 ′ ′ −1 ′ ′ ′ areaK(d) (p(s−1 s )) =area (s . . . s ) s t s t (s . . . s ) k+1 k+1 (k) K(d) k+2 n k+1 k+2 n k (k−1) −1  =areaK(d) (s′k+1 t−1 k sk+1 tk+1 ) ≤ 1;  it follows that areaK(d) (p(s′ )−1 p(s)) ≤ n. Therefore  areaK(d) (p(s′ )) ≤ areaK(d) (p(s)) + n,  proving the local boundedness.  ∀s′ ∈ V,    2.C. Dehn vs Riemannian Dehn. Let X is a Riemannian manifold. If γ is a Lipschitz loop in X, define the area of γ as the infimum of areas of Lipschitz disc fillings of γ. Define the filling function of X as the function mapping r to the supremum F (r) of areas of all Lipschitz disc fillings of Lipschitz loops of length ≤ r.  Proposition 2.C.1. Let G be a locally compact group with a proper cocompact isometric action on a simply connected Riemannian manifold X. Then G is compactly presented and the Dehn function of G satisfies δ(n) ≈ max(F (n), n).  (The max(·, n) is essentially technical: unless X has dimension ≤ 1 or is compact, it can be shown that F (r) grows at least linearly.) The proof is given, for G discrete, by Bridson [Bri02, Section 5]. Here we only provide a complete proof of the easier inequality F (n) 4 δ(n), because the proof in [Bri02] makes a serious use of the assumption that G is finitely presented. For the converse inequality δ(n) 4 max(F (n), n), the (highly technical) proof given in [Bri02] uses general arguments of filling in Riemannian manifolds and a general cellulation lemma, and the remainder of the proof carries over our broader context, so we shall only provide a brief sketch of the converse. Lemma 2.C.2. Let X be a simply connected Riemannian manifold with Isom(X) acting cocompactly on X. Then the Riemannian area of loops of bounded length is bounded. Proof. Write G = Isom(X). By cocompactness, there exists r0 such that for every x ∈ X, the exponential is (1/2, 2)-bilipschitz from the r0 -ball in Tx X to X. In particular, given a loop of length ≤ r0 , it passes through some point x; its inverse image by the exponential at x has length ≤ 2r0 and can be filled by a disc of area ≤ πr02 in Tx X, and its image by the exponential is a filling of area ≤ 4πr02 in X. Now fix a positive integer m0 ≥ 6/r0 . Let D be an m−1 0 -metric lattice in X, that is, a maximal subset in X in which any two distinct points have distance  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  27  −1 ≥ m−1 to some element in 0 . Note that every point in X is at distance ≤ m0 D. Also note that, by properness of X, the intersection of D with any bounded subset is finite. For any x, y ∈ D with d(x, y) ≤ 3m−1 0 , fix a geodesic path S(x, y) between x and y. Consider a compact subset Ω such that GΩ = X. Consider a 1-Lipschitz loop f : [0, k] → X and let us bound the Riemannian area of f by some constant depending only of k. By homogeneity, we can suppose that f (0) ∈ Ω. For all 0 ≤ n ≤ km0 , let xn be a point in D that is m−1 0 −1 −1 close to f (nm0 ). Fix geodesic paths joining xn and f (nm0 ). So there is a homotopy from f to the concatenation of the S(xn , xn+1 ) through km0 “squares” of perimeter at most 6m−1 0 ≤ r0 . By the above, each of these km0 squares can be filled with area ≤ π4r02. The remaining loop is a concatenation of k segments of the form S(xn , xn+1 ) with xn ∈ D (with n taken modulo km0 ). For given k, there are only finitely many such loops, since all the points xn are at distance ≤ k/2 + m−1 0 to Ω. Since X is simply connected, each of these loops has finite area. So the remaining loop has area ≤ ak for some ak < ∞. So we found a Lipschitz filling of the original loop, of area ≤ ak + km0 πr02 .   Partial proof of Proposition 2.C.1. Fix a compact symmetric generating set S in G and a set R of relators. Fix x0 ∈ X. Set r = sups∈S d(x0 , sx0 ). If s ∈ S, fix a r-Lipschitz map js : [0, 1] → X mapping 0 to x0 and 1 to sx0 . If w = s1 . . . sk , define jw : [0, k] → X as follows: if 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k − 1 and 0 ≤ t ≤ 1, jw (ℓ + t) = s1 . . . sℓ jsℓ+1 (t). It is doubly defined for an integer, but both definitions coincide. So jw is r-Lipschitz. If w represents 1 in G, then jw (0) = jw (k). If w is a word in the letters in S and represents the identity, let A(w) be the area of the loop jw . By Lemma 2.C.2, A(w) is bounded when w is bounded. Also, it is clear that A(gwg −1) = A(w) for all group words g. This shows that there exists a constant C > 0, namely C = supr∈R A(r), such that A(w) ≤ Carea(w) for some constant C. For some r0 , every point in X is at distance ≤ r0 of a point in Gx0 . Consider a loop of length k in X, given by a 1-Lipschitz function u : [0, k] → X. For every n (modulo k), let gn x0 be a point in Gx0 with d(gn x0 , u(n)) ≤ r0 . We have d(gn x0 , gn+1 x0 ) ≤ 2r0 + 1. By properness, there exists N (depending only on r0 ) such that gn−1 gn+1 ∈ S N . If σn is a word of length N representing gn−1 gn+1, and σ = σ0 . . . σk−1 , then we pass from u to jσ by a homotopy consisting of k squares of perimeter ≤ 4r0 +2. By Lemma 2.C.2, there is a bound M0 on the Riemannian area of such squares. So the Riemannian area of u is bounded by kM0 + A(jσ ) ≤ kM0 + Carea(σ) ≤ kM0 + δS,R (Nk). This shows that F (k) ≤ kM0 + δS,R (Nk). For the (more involved) converse inequality, we only give the following sketch: let ρ > 0 be such that each point in X is at distance < ρ/8 to Gx0 , and assume in addition that ρ > ρκ = 2√π κ , where κ is an upper bound on the sectional curvature of X. Let S be the set of elements in G such that d(gx0 , x0 ) ≤ ρ and R the set of words in FS , of length at most 12 and representing 1 in G. Then the proof in  28  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  [Bri02, §5.2] shows that hS | Ri is a presentation of G with Dehn √ function δ(n) bounded above by 4λκ (F (ρn) + ρn + 1), where λκ = 1/ min(4 κ/π, α(r, κ)) and α(r, κ) is the area of a disc of radius r in the standard plane or sphere of constant curvature κ.  2.D. Two combinatorial lemmas on the Dehn function. This subsection contains several general lemmas about the Dehn function, which will be used at some precise parts of the paper. 2.D.1. Free products. Recall that a function R≥0 → R is superadditive if it satisfies f (x + y) ≥ f (x) + f (y) for all x, y. For instance, the function r 7→ r α is superadditive for every α ≥ 1. Lemma 2.D.1. Let f be a superadditive function. Let (Gi ) be a finite family of (abstract) groups, each with a presentation hSi | Ri i, with Dehn function ≤ f . Then the free F product F H of the Gi has Dehn function δ ≤ f with respect to the presentation h Si | Ri i.  Proof. Let w = s1 . . . sn be a null-homotopic word with n ≥ 1. Because H is a free product, there exists i and 1 ≤ j ≤ j + k − 1 ≤ n such that every letter sℓ for j ≤ ℓ ≤ j + k − 1 is in Si and sj . . . sj+k−1 represents the identity in Gi . So, with the corresponding cost, which is ≤ f (k), we can simplify w to the null-homotopic word s1 . . . sj−1sk . . . sn . Thus δ(n) ≤ f (k) + δ(n − k) (with 1 ≤ k ≤ n). Using the property that f is superadditive, we can thus prove by induction on n that δ(n) ≤ f (n) for all n. (This argument is used in [GS99] for finitely generated groups.)  2.D.2. Conjugating elements. Lemma 2.D.2. Let hS | Ri be a group presentation, and r a bound on the length of the words in R. Then for every Q null-homotopic w ∈ FS , with length n and area α, we can write, in FS , w = αi=1 gi ri gi−1 with ri ∈ R±1 ∪ {1} and gi ∈ FS , with the additional condition |gi |S ≤ n + rα. Proof. We start with the following claim: consider a connected polygonal planar complex, with n vertices on the boundary (including multiplicities); suppose that the number of polygons is α and each has at most r edges. Fix a base-vertex. Then the distance in the one-skeleton of the base-vertex to any other vertex is ≤ n + rα. Indeed, pick an injective path: it meets at most n boundary vertices. Other vertices belong to some face, but each face can be met at most r times. So the claim is proved. Now a van Kampen diagram for a null-homotopic word of size n and area α with relators of length ≤ r satisfies these assumptions, the distance from the identity to some vertex corresponds to the length to the conjugating element that comes into play. Thus the gi can be chosen with |gi |S ≤ n + rα.   GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  29  2.E. Gromov’s trick. Definition 2.E.1. Let FS be the free group over an abstract set S, let G be an arbitrary group, and let π : FS → G be a surjective homomorphism. We call (linear) combing of (G, π) (or, informally, of G if π is implicit), a subset F ⊂ FS such that 1 ∈ F and some constant C ≥ 1, we have the property that π(S)n ⊂ π(S Cn ∩ F ) for all n ≥ 0.  Example 2.E.2. Let T be any generating subset of a finitely generated abelian group A. Suppose that {t1 , . . . , tℓ } ⊂ T is also a generating subset. Then the Q m set of words { ℓj=1 tj j } where (mj ) ranges over Zℓ , is a combing of FT → A. If every element of T is equal or inverse to some ti , the constant C can be taken equal to 1. The following is, up to minor changes explained below, established in [CT10, Proposition 4.3]:  Theorem 2.E.3 (Gromov’s trick). Let f : R>0 → R>0 be a function such that for some α > 1, the function r 7→ f (r)/r α is non-decreasing. Let S be an abstract set, let G be an arbitrary group, and let π : FS → G be a surjective homomorphism. Let R ⊂ FS be a subset contained in Ker(π). Consider a combing F ⊂ FS . Assume that for all n, the area with respect to R of any w ∈ Ker(π) of the form w = w1 w2 w3 with maxi |wi | ≤ n with wi ∈ F is ≤ f (n). Then hS | Ri is a presentation of G (i.e., R generates Ker(π) as a normal subgroup) and for some constants C ′ , C ′′ > 0, the Dehn function of G with respect to R is ≤ C ′ f (C ′′ n). Remark 2.E.4. The statement in [CT10, Proposition 4.3] is awkward because it purportedly considers a locally compact group without specifying a presentation and gives a conclusion on its Dehn function as a function (and not an asymptotic type of function). Actually the local compactness assumption is irrelevant and the correct statement is the one given here, the proof given in [CT10] applying without modification. The setting is just that of a group presentation; it is even not necessary to assume that the relators have bounded length. Second, the assumption was for words w of length ≤ n, while here we assume that all wi have length ≤ n; this is more natural and handy, and requires no change in the proof. Third, [CT10, Proposition 4.3] is stated with the function n 7→ nα for α > 1, but it relies on [CT10, Lemma 4.1], which allows much more general functions. At the time [CT10] it was not obvious to the author how to state a general result without a complicated technical assumption, but it turns out that the non-decreasing assumption of f is very general: we are not even aware of any non-hyperbolic compactly presented locally compact group whose Dehn function is not ≈-equivalent to a function f such that, say, f (r)/r 3/2 is non-decreasing. Proof of Theorem 2.E.3. We first claim that for any k ≥ 3, any n and any w = w1 . . . wk ∈ Ker(π) with wi ∈ F and supi |wi | ≤ n, we have areaR (w) ≤ fk (n) =  30  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  kf (Ckn/2). Indeed, for every i the length of π(w1 . . . wi ) is ≤ n/2, so we can find ui ∈ F with π(ui ) = π(w1 . . . wi ) and |ui | ≤ Cn/2, with u0 = uk = 1. Then w=  k Y i=1  wi =  k Y  ui−1 wi u−1 i ;  i=1  −1 since π(ui−1 wi u−1 i ) = 1, by assumption we have areaR (ui−1 wi ui ) ≤ f (Ckn/2). Then, denoting δ = δS,R , by [CT10, Lemma 4.2], we have, for all n ≥ k,  δ(n) ≤ kδ(2(C + 1)n/k) + fk (C⌈n/k⌉),  ∀n ≥ k  (where we have fk (C⌈n/k⌉) rather than fk (Ck⌈n/k⌉) because we consider here P supi |wi | rather than i |wi |). So, using that ⌈n/k⌉ ≤ 2n/k, we have δ(n) ≤ kδ(2(C + 1)n/k) + kf (C 2 n),  ∀n ≥ k.  If we define uk (r) = kf (C 2 r), then we claim that zuk (y)/uk (yz) tends to zero uniformly in y ≥ 1, k ≥ 1, when z → ∞. Indeed, writing f (r) = r α v(r) with v non-decreasing, we have zuk (y) z(C 2 y)αv(C 2 y) v(C 2 y) 1 = = ≤ α−1 . 2 α 2 α−1 2 uk (yz) (C yz) v(C yz) z v(C yz) z This uniform convergence to zero allows to use [CT10, Lemma 4.1], which yields that for some r0 , some k, and some constant c > 0, we have f (r) ≤ cuk (r) for all r ≥ r0 . Thus δ(r) ≤ ckf (C 2 r) for all r ≥ r0 . (Here the value of the constant C ′ = ck is hidden behind the estimates from the proof [CT10, Lemma 4.1] but the constant C ′′ = C 2 is explicit, C being given in Definition 2.E.1.)  3. Geometry of Lie groups: Metric reductions and exponential upper bounds In the study of upper bounds for the Dehn function of Lie groups, there are two important reduction steps, described in this section. The first (§3.A) allows to reduce the problem to triangulable groups, with no cost on the Dehn function. The second (§3.C) passes to a generalized standard solvable group, with a polynomial cost on the Dehn function. In between (§3.B), we describe a general retraction argument in Lie groups, proving in particular that connected Lie groups have an at most exponential Dehn function. 3.A. Reduction to triangulable groups. The following lemma is essentially borrowed from [C08]. Lemma 3.A.1. For every connected Lie group G, there exists a series of proper homomorphisms with cocompact images G ← G1 → G2 ← G3 , with G3 triangulable. In particular, G3 is quasi-isometric to G and the Dehn functions of G3 and G are ≈-equivalent.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  31  Proof. Let N be the nilradical of G. By [C08, Lemma 6.7], there exists a closed cocompact solvable subgroup G1 of G containing N, and a cocompact embedding G1 ⊂ H2 with H2 a connected solvable Lie group, such that H2 is generated by G1 and its center Z(H2 ). In particular, every normal subgroup of G1 is normal in H2 . Let W be the largest compact normal subgroup of H2 and define L2 = H2 /W , so L2 is a connected solvable Lie group whose derived subgroup has a simply connected closure. By [C08, Lemma 2.4], there are cocompact embeddings L2 ⊂ G2 ⊃ G3 , with G2 and G3 connected Lie groups, and G3 triangulable. The latter statement follows from the fact that continuous proper homomorphisms with cocompact images are quasi-isometries, along with Proposition 2.B.1, which says that the ≈-behavior of the Dehn function is a quasi-isometry invariant.  3.B. At most exponential Dehn function. Theorem 3.B.1 (Gromov). Every connected Lie group has an at most exponential Dehn function. As usual, Gromov gives a rough sketch of proof [Gro93, Corollary 3.F′5 ], but we are not aware of a complete written proof. The basic idea is that the law can be described using polynomials and exponentials, but this is not enough because iterated exponentials would be an issue. A workable lemma is the following. ′ Recall that an exponential polynomial Rn → Rn is a real-valued function each of whose n′ coordinates is a polynomial in the coordinates x1 , . . . , xn and in exponentials eλj xi for suitable complex scalar numbers λj . Lemma 3.B.2. Every simply connected solvable Lie group is isomorphic to a Lie group described as (Rm × Rℓ , ∗) with the law of the form (u1 , v1 ) ∗ (u2 , v2 ) = (P (v1 , v2 , u1 , u2), v1 + v2 ); (u, v)−1 = (T (v, u), −v),  where P is an exponential polynomial depending polynomially on the variable (u1 , u2 ) (that is, not involving exponentials in the coordinates of u1 and u2 ), and where T is an exponential polynomial depending polynomially on the variable u. For instance, the law of SOLλ can be described as (x1 , y1, v1 ) ∗ (x2 , y2, v2 ) = (ev2 x1 + x2 , e−λv2 y1 + y2 , v1 + v2 )  (here (ℓ, m) = (2, 1)).  Proof. Let N be the derived subgroup of G and H a Cartan subgroup; both are a simply connected nilpotent Lie group. By [Bou, Chap. 7,§1,2,3] (see also Proposition 4.D.4), we have NH = G. Consider a supplement subspace of the Lie algebra of M = N ∩H in the Lie algebra of H, and define V as its exponential (it is usually not a subgroup). Set m = dim(V ) and ℓ = dim(N). We identify V and N to Rm and Rℓ through the exponential and a choice of bases of log(V ) and log(N).  32  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  The product map M × V → H is an algebraic isomorphism of varieties, which yields a decomposition H = M × V , for which the law is given by polynomials; for the moment we just need to use the fact that the product (0, v)(0, v ′) can be described as (Q(v, v ′ ), v + v ′ ) for some polynomial Q on 2k variables. The adjoint action of h on n is given by some Lie algebra homomorphism φ : h → End(n). If h ∈ H and n ∈ N, we have hnh−1 = exp(Ad(h) log(n)) = exp(exp(φ(log(h))) log(n)).  Beware that in this expression, the first exp is the exponential of the Lie algebra N, with inverse log (both being polynomials), while the second is the operator exponentiation on n. The operator exp(φ(log(h))) is a polynomial in the entries and exponentials of the coefficients of log(h) (the exponentials appear because φ(log(h)) is not necessary nilpotent), possibly with complex coefficients. Hence after identification of H and N to real vector spaces using the Lie algebras, we can write hnh−1 = R(h, n), where R is a polynomial in the coefficients of h and n, and in some (possibly complex) exponentials of the coefficients of h. Also, describe the product of 3 elements in N by a polynomial: nn′ n′′ = S(n, n′ , n′′ ). The product map yields a decomposition G = V N, and for v, v ′ ∈ V , n, n′ ∈ N, we have (nv)(n′ v ′ ) = nvn′ v −1 v(vv ′), so in coordonates, we have    (n, v)(n′ , v ′ ) = S n, vn′ v −1 , Q(v, v ′) , v + v ′    = S n, R(v, n′), Q(v, v ′ ) , v + v ′ .  That the inverse map has the given form is similar, since (nv)−1 = (v −1 n−1 v)v −1.   Lemma 3.B.3. If G is a simply connected solvable Lie group with a left-invariant Riemannian metric, there is an exponentially Lipschitz strong deformation retraction of G to the trivial subgroup, i.e. a map F : G × [0, 1] → G such that for all g, F (g, 0) = g and F (g, 1) = 1, and such that for some constant C, if B(n) is the n-ball in G then F is exp(Cn)-Lipschitz in restriction to B(n) × [0, 1]. Proof. We identify G with Rm × Rℓ and write its law as  (u1 , v1 ) ∗ (u2 , v2 ) = (u1 + u2 , P (u1, u2 , v1 , v2 )); (u, v)−1 = (−u, −v),  with P as in Lemma 3.B.2. Define, for ((u, v), t, τ ) ∈ G × [0, 1]2 , s((u, v), t, τ ) = (tu, τ v). We need an upper bound on the differential of s at a given point (u0 , v0 , t0 , τ0 ). Let Lg denote the left translation by g, given by h 7→ g ∗ h.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  33  Then    L−1 ◦ s L(u0 ,v0 ) (u, v), t, τ (t0 u0 ,τ0 v0 )   = T (τ0 v0 , t0 u0 ), −τ0 v0 ∗ tP (v0 , v, u0, u), τ v0 + τ v    = P − τ0 v0 , τ v0 + τ v, T (τ0 v0 , t0 u0 ), tP (v0 , v, u0, u) , −τ0 v0 + τ v0 + τ v  We can write it as Q(τ0 v0 , τ v0 , τ v, v0 , v; t0 , t, u0, u), where Q = (Q1 , Q2 ), Q1 is an exponential polynomial depending polynomially on the last four variables and Q2 is a polynomial. It follows that each partial derivative of Q1 with respect to the variables (u, v, t, τ ) is an exponential polynomial R in the same variables, polynomial on the last four variables (with coefficients depending only the group law). Each such partial derivative, when (u, v, t, τ ) = (0, 0, t0, τ0 ), is equal to R(τ0 v0 , τ0 v0 , 0, v0 , 0; t0 , t0 , u0 , 0), which can be rewritten as R′ (τ0 v0 , v0 ; t0 , u0 ), with R′ an exponential polynomial that is polynomial in the last two variables. Hence, keeping in mind that τ0 , t0 belong to [0, 1], the partial derivatives of Q1 at (0, 0, t0, τ0 ) at any (0, 0, t0, τ0 ) are bounded above by c1 ec2 kv0 k (1 + ku0 k)c3 , where c1 , c2 are positive constants depending only on the group law and the choice of left-invariant Riemannian metric µ. Therefore, the differential of s at any (u0 , v0 , t0 , τ0 ), for the left-invariant Riemannian metric µ, has the same bound. If (u0 , v0 ) ∈ B(2n) (the 2n-ball around 1 in G), then kv0 k ≤ n (up to rescaling µ) and ku0 k ≤ ec4 n (for some fixed constant c4 ). So, for every (u0 , v0 , t0 , τ0 ) ∈ B(2n) × [0, 1]2 , the differential of s at (u0 , v0 , t0 , τ0 ) is bounded by eCn , for some positive constant C only depending on (G, µ). In particular, since any two points in B(n) can be joined by a geodesic within B(2n), we deduce that the restriction of s to B(n) × [0, 1]2 is eCn -Lipschitz. The function (g, t) 7→ s(g, t, t) is the desired retraction. (We used an extra variable τ by anticipation, in order to reuse the argument in the proof of Proposition 3.B.5.)  Proof of Theorem 3.B.1. By Lemma 3.A.1, we can restrict to the case of a simply connected solvable (actually triangulable) group G. Given a loop of size n in G based at the unit element, Lemma 3.B.3 provides a Lipschitz homotopy with exponential area to the trivial loop.  Remark 3.B.4. Using Guivarc’h’s estimates on the word length in simply connected solvable Lie groups [Gui73, Gui80], we see that there exists a constant C ′ such that if B(n) is the n-ball in G, then F (B(n), [0, 1]) is contained in the ball B(C ′ n) (here F is the function constructed in the proof of Lemma 3.B.3). Thus in particular, F provides a filling of every loop of linear size, with exponential area and inside a ball of linear size. In particular, any virtually connected Lie group (and cocompact lattice therein) has a linear isodiametric function.  34  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Let G = (Ua ×Una )⋊Zd be a standard solvable group. The group G1 = Ua ⋊Zd can be embedded as a closed cocompact subgroup into a virtually connected Lie group G2 with maximal compact subgroup K. Consider a left-invariant Riemannian metric on the connected manifold G2 /K. The composite map G1 → G2 /K is a G-equivariant quasi-isometric injective embedding; endow G1 with the induced metric. Endow Una ⋊ Zd with a word metric with respect to a compact generating subset, and endow G with a metric induced by the natural quasi-isometric embedding G → (Una ⋊ Zd ) × G2 . Proposition 3.B.5. Let G be a standard solvable group of the form (Ua × Una ) ⋊ Zd , with the above metric. Then there is an exponentially Lipschitz homotopy between the identity map of G and its natural projection π to Una ⋊ Zd . Namely, for some constant C, there is a map  σ : (Ua × Una ) ⋊ Zd × [0, 1] → (Ua × Una ) ⋊ Zd , such that for all g ∈ G, σ(g, 0) = g and σ(g, 1) = π(g), and σ(g, t) = g if g ∈ Una ⋊ Zd , and σ is eCn -Lipschitz in restriction to B(n) × [0, 1].  Proof. As in the definition of standard solvable group, write G = U ⋊Zd and U = Ua ×Una . Since Ua is a simply connected nilpotent Lie group, we can identify it to its Lie algebra thorough the exponential map. Define, for (v, w, u) ∈ Ua ×Una ⋊Zd and t ∈ [0, 1], σ(v, w, u, t) = (tv, w, u). By the computation in the proof of Lemma 3.B.3, σ is eCn -Lipschitz in restriction to B(n) × [0, 1]; the presence of w does not affect this computation.  Corollary 3.B.6. Under the assumptions of the proposition, if G/U 0 ≃ Una ⋊ A is compactly presented with at most exponential Dehn function, then G has an at most exponential Dehn function. Proof. Given a loop γ of size n in G, the retraction of Proposition 3.B.5 interpolates between γ and its projection γ ′ to G/G0 . The interpolation has an at most exponential area because the retraction is exponentially Lipschitz; γ ′ has linear length and hence has at most exponential area by the assumption. So γ has an at most exponential area.  3.C. Reduction to split triangulable groups. Proposition 3.C.1 ([C11]). Let G be a triangulable real group and E = G∞ its exponential radical. There exists a triangulable group Ğ = E ⋊ V and a homeomorphism φ : G → Ğ, so that, denoting by dG and dĞ left-invariant word distances on G and Ğ • φ restricts to the identity E → E, • E is the exponential radical of Ğ • V is isomorphic to the simply connected nilpotent Lie group G/E,  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  35  • the map φ quasi-preserves the length: for some constant C > 0, C −1 |g| ≤ |φ(g)| ≤ C|g|;  ∀g ∈ G  and is logarithmically bilipschitz D(|g| + |h|)−1 dG (g, h) ≤ dĞ (g, h) ≤ D(|g| + |h|)dG (g, h);  ∀g, h ∈ G,  where C ′ > 0 is a constant and where D is an increasing function satisfying D(n) ≤ C ′ log(n) for large n.  Corollary 3.C.2. Set {H, L} = {G, Ğ}. Suppose that the Dehn function δL of L satisfies δL (n) 4 nα . Then for any ε > 0, the Dehn function δH of H satisfies δH (n) 4 log(n)α+ε δL (n log(n)) 4 log(n)2α+ε nα . Proof. Suppose, more precisely, that every loop of length n in L can be filled with area δ(n) in a ball of radius s(n); note that s can be chosen to be asymptotically equal to δ (by Lemma 2.D.2). Start with a combinatorial loop γ of length n in H. It maps (by φ or φ−1 ) to a “loop” in L, in the Cn-ball, in which every pair of consecutive vertices are at distance ≤ C log(n). Join those pairs by geodesic segments and fill the resulting loop γ ′ of length ≤ Cn log(n) by a disc consisting of δ(Cn log(n)) triangles of bounded radius (say, ≤ C), inside the s(Cn log(n))-ball. Map this filling back to H. We obtain a “loop” γ ′′ consisting of Cn log(n) points, each two consecutive being at distance ≤ C log(s(Cn log(n))), with a filling by δ(Cn log(n)) triangles of diameter at mostC log(s(Cn log(n))). Interpolate γ ′′ by geodesic segments, so as to obtain a genuine loop γ1 . So γ ′′ is filled by γ and Cn log(n) “small” loops of size ≤ C log(s(Cn log(n))) + 1 ≤ C log(C ′ (Cn log(n))α ) + 1 ≤ C1 log(n).  The loop γ ′′ itself is filled by δ(Cn log(n)) triangles of diameter at most C log(s(Cn log(n))) and thus of size ≤ 3C1 log(n). We know that H has its Dehn function bounded above by C2 ecn . So each of ′ these small loops has area ≤ C2 exp(3c(C1 log(n))) = C ′ nc . We deduce that γ can be filled by ′  ′  (Cn log(n) + δ(Cn log(n)))C ′ nc  n1+c +max(1,α) triangles of bounded diameter. We deduce that H has a Dehn function of polynomial growth, albeit with an outrageous degree, the constants c′ being out of control. Anyway, this provides a proof that H has a Dehn function ≤ C3 nq for some q, and we now repeat the above argument with this additional information. The small loops of size C1 log(n) therefore have area ≤ C3 (C1 log(n))q and the δ(Cn log(n)) triangles filling γ ′′ can now be filled by ≤ C3 (3C log(s(Cn log(n))))q  36  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  triangles of bounded diameter. We deduce this time that γ can be filled by at most Cn log(n)C3 (C1 log(n))q + 3CC3 log(s(Cn log(n)))q δ(Cn log(n)) ≈ log(s(n log(n)))q δ(n log(n)) triangles of bounded diameter. We have log(s(n log n)) ≤ log(s(n2 ))  log(n2α )  log(n), so we deduce that the Dehn function of γ is 4 log(n)q δ(n log(n)). Since δ(n) 4 nα , the previous reasoning can be held with q of the form α + ε for any ε > 0. This proves the desired result.  Remark 3.C.3. A variant of the proof of Corollary 3.C.2 shows that if the Dehn function of Ğ is exponential, then the Dehn function of G is < exp(n/ log(n)2 ), but is not strong enough to show that the Dehn function of G is exponential, nor even < exp(n/ log(n)α ) for small α ≥ 0. 4. Gradings and tameness conditions This preliminary section describes basics on the weight decomposition of standard solvable groups and real triangulable groups. In §4.A, we state a general weight decomposition theorem for finite-dimensional representations of nilpotent groups over complete normed fields. We use it to introduce weights in standard solvable groups in §4.B, where we provide some useful characterizations. We introduce the tameness conditions in §4.C, which allow to reinterpret the SOL obstructions in a more conceptual way. In §4.D, we deal with the Cartan grading in real triangulable groups, which is also needed in §11. 4.A. Grading in a representation. Lemma 4.A.1. Let H ⊂ G be an inclusion of finite index between nilpotent groups. Then any homomorphism f : H → R has a unique extension f˜ : G → R.  Proof. If g ∈ G and g k ∈ H, the element f (g k )/k does not depend on k, we define it as f˜(g); note that this is the only possible choice for f˜ and already proves uniqueness. To prove the existence, we need to check that f˜ is a homomorphism. Since checking f˜(xy) = f˜(x) + f˜(y) only involves two elements, we can suppose that G and H are finitely generated. We can also suppose that they are torsionfree, as the problem is not modified if we mod out by the finite torsion subgroups. So G and H have the same rational Malcev closure, and every homomorphism H → R extends to the rational Malcev closure. Necessarily, the extension is equal to f˜ in restriction to G, so f˜ is a homomorphism. (Note that R could be replaced in the lemma by any torsion-free divisible nilpotent group.)   GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  37  Recall that for every complete normed field K, the norm on K extends to every finite extension field in a unique way [DwGS, Theorem 5.1, p. 17]. Theorem 4.A.2. Let K be a non-discrete complete normed field. Let N be a nilpotent topological group and V a finite-dimensional vector space with a continuous linear N-action ρ : N → GL(V ). Then there is a canonical decomposition M V = Vα , α∈Hom(N,R)  where, for α ∈ Hom(N, R), the subspace Vα is the sum of characteristic subspaces associated to irreducible polynomials whose roots have modulus eα(ω) for all ω ∈ N; moreover we have, for α ∈ Hom(N, R)   n 1/n α(ω) Vα ={0} ∪ v ∈ V r {0} : ∀ω ∈ N, lim kρ(ω) · vk = e n→+∞   n 1/n α(ω) = v ∈ V : ∀ω ∈ N, lim kρ(ω) · vk ≤ e n→+∞  (Note that we do not assume that ρ(N) has a Zariski-connected closure.)  Proof. Let us begin with the case when K is algebraically closed. Let N be the Zariski closure of ρ(N); decompose its identity component N0 = D × U into diagonalizable and unipotent parts. Consider the corresponding projections d and u into D and U. Define N 0 = ρ−1 (N0 ); it is an open subgroup of finite index in N. Let D be the (ordinary) closure of the projection d(ρ(N 0 )). WeLcan decompose, with respect to D, the space V into weight subspaces: V = γ∈Hom(D,K∗ ) Vγ , where Vγ = {v ∈ V : ∀d ∈ D, d · v = γ(d)v}. Write (log |γ|)(v) L = log(|γ(v)|), so log |γ| ∈ Hom(D, R). For δ ∈ Hom(D, R), define Vδ = {γ: log |γ|=δ} Vγ , so L that V = δ∈Hom(D,R) Vδ . If δ ∈ Hom(D, R), then δ ◦ d ◦ ρ ∈ Hom(N 0 , R). So by Lemma 4.A.1, it uniquely extends to a homomorphism δ̂ : N → R, which is continuous because its restriction δ ◦ d ◦ ρ to N 0 is continuous. Note that δ 7→ δ̂ is obviously injective. P If v ∈ Vδ r {0} and ω ∈ N 0 , write it as a sum v = γ∈I vγ where 0 6= vγ ∈ Vγ , where I is a non-empty finite subset of Hom(D, K∗ ), actually consisting of elements γ for which log |γ| = δ. Then, changing the norm if necessary so that the norm is the supremum norm with respect to the norms on the Vγ (which does not affect the limits because of the exponent 1/n), we have kρ(ω)n vk1/n = sup ku(ρ(ω))nd(ρ(ω))n vγ k1/n γ∈I  =|γ(d(ρ(ω)))| sup ku(ρ(ω))n vγ k1/n γ∈I  = exp(δ̂(ω)) sup ku(ρ(ω))n vγ k1/n ; γ∈I  38  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  the spectral radii of both u(ρ(ω)) and its inverse being equal to 1 and vγ 6= 0, we deduce that lim ku(ρ(ω))nvγ k1/n = 1. It follows that lim kρ(ω)n vk1/n = exp(δ̂(ω)) for all ω ∈ N 0 and v ∈ Vδ r {0}. If ω ∈ N, there exists k such that ω k ∈ N 0 . Writing fω (n) = kρ(ω)n vk1/n , we therefore have lim fω (kn) = lim fωk (n)1/k = exp(δ̂(ω k ))1/k = exp(δ̂(ω));  n→∞  n→∞  on the other hand a simple verification shows that limn→∞ f (n + 1)/f (n) = 1, and it follows that limn→∞ fω (n) = exp(δ̂(ω)). It follows in particular that the spectral radius of ρ(ω)±1 on Vδ is exp(±δ̂(ω)) and since the δ̂ are distinct, it follows that Vδ is the sum of common characteristic subspaces associated to eigenvalues of modulus exp(δ̂(ω)) for all ω. Conversely, suppose that v ∈ V and that there exists α ∈ Hom(N, R) suchSthat for all ω ∈ N we have lim kρ(ω)n · vk1/n ≤ eα(ω) , and let us check that v ∈ Vδ . n→+∞ P Observe that lim (kρ(ω)n · vk kρ(ω −1)n · vk)1/n ≤ 1. Write v = δ∈J vδ with n→+∞  vδ ∈ Vδ and suppose by contradiction that J contains two distinct elements δ1 , δ2 . So δ̂1 6= δˆ2 and there exist ω0 ∈ N such that δˆ1 (ω) > δˆ2 (ω). Then 1 ≥ lim (kρ(ω0 )n · vk kρ(ω0−1)n · vk)1/n n→+∞  ≥ lim kρ(ω0 )n · vδ1 k1/n kρ(ω0−1 )n · vδ2 k1/n n→+∞  = exp(δˆ1 (ω0 ) − δˆ2 (ω0 )) > 1, S a contradiction; thus v ∈ Vδ . This concludes the proof in the algebraically closed case. Now let K be arbitrary. The above decomposition can be done in an algebraic closure of K, and is defined on a finite extension L of K, so W = V ⊗K L = L α∈Hom(N,R) Wα , where Wα satisfies all the characterizations. Consider a Klinear projection π of L onto K; it extends to a K-linear projection π ′ = idV ⊗K π of P W ′= V ⊗K L onto V , which commutes with the ′ action of ρ(N). Clearly V = α π (Wα ). Since K is a complete normed field, π is Lipschitz. It then follows from the definition that π ′ maps Wα into itself (where we naturally consider the inclusion V ⊂ W ): this follows from the characterization of those elements of Wα as those v ∈ W such that for all ω ∈ N we have lim kρ(ω)n · vk1/n ≤ eα(ω) . It n→+∞ L L follows that V = α Vα , where Vα = π ′ (Wα ) = α (Wα ∩ V ). So the proof is complete. S Note that the proof, as a byproduct, characterizes the elements v of α∈Hom(N,R) Vα as those in V for which, for all ω ∈ N, we have lim (kρ(ω)n ·vk kρ(ω)−n ·vk)1/n ≤ n→+∞  1 (which is actually a limit, and equal to 1, if v 6= 0).    4.B. Grading in a standard solvable group. Let G = U ⋊ A be a standard solvable group in the sense of Definition 1.2. It will be convenient to consider the  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  39  Qτ  product ring K = j=1 Kj ; it is endowed with the supremum norm, and view U as U(K). We thus call G a standard solvable group over K. In a first reading, the reader can assume there is a single field K = K1 . Since K is a finite L product of fields, a finite length K-module is the same as a direct sum V = Vj , where each Vj is a P finite-dimensional Kj -vector space. The length of V as a K-module, is equal to j dimKj Vj . Q Let uj be the Lie algebra of Uj . So u = j uj is a Lie algebra over K and the exponential map, which is truncated by nilpotency, is a homeomorphism u → U. This conjugates the action of D on U to a linear action on u, preserving the Lie algebra structure; for convenience we denote it as an action by conjugation. We endow uj with the action of A, and with the grading in Hom(A, R), as L introduced in Theorem 4.A.2. Thus u itself is graded by uα = u j j,α . The finite-dimensional vector space W = Hom(A, R) is called the weight space. This is a Lie algebra grading: [uα , uβ ] ⊂ uα+β ,  ∀α, β ∈ Hom(A, R).  Note that since A is a compactly generated locally compact abelian group, it is isomorphic to Rd1 × Zd2 × K for some integers d1 , d2, and K a compact abelian group. In particular, if d = d1 + d2 , then the weight space W = Hom(A, R) is a d-dimensional real vector space. If we split u as the direct sum u = ua ⊕ una of its Archimedean and nonArchimedean parts, the weights of ua and una , respectively, are called Archimedean weights and non-Archimedean weights. Example 4.B.1. Assume that the action of A on u is diagonalizable. If Kj = R and the diagonal entries are positive, we have (uj )α = {x ∈ uj : ∀v ∈ A, v −1 xv = eα(v) x}  and if Kj = Qp and the diagonal entries are powers of p, we have (uj )α = {x ∈ uj : ∀v ∈ A, v −1 xv = p−α(v)/ log(p) x}. Example 4.B.2 (Weights in groups of SOL type). Let G = (K1 × K2 ) ⋊ A be a group of SOL type as in Definition 1.3, where A contains as a cocompact subgroup the cyclic subgroup generated by some element (t1 , t2 ) with |t1 | > 1 > |t2 |. Then the weight space is a one-dimensional real vector space, and with a suitable normalization, the weights are α1 = log(|t1 |) > 0 and α2 = log(|t2 |) < 0, and Uαi = Ki . It is useful to think of the weight αi with multiplicity qi , namely the dimension of Ki over the closure of Q in Ki (which is isomorphic to R or Qp for some p). In particular, G is unimodular if and only if q1 α1 + q2 α2 = 0. For instance, if G = (R × Qp ) ⋊p Z, then u = R × Qp , ulog(p) = R × {0}, u− log(p) = {0} × Qp . For an arbitrary standard solvable group, we define the set of weights Wu = {α : uα 6= {0}} ⊂ Hom(A, R).  40  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  It is finite. Weights of the abelianization u/[u, u] are called principal weights of u. Lemma 4.B.3. Every weight of u is a sum of ≥ 1 principal weights; 0 is not a principal weight. Proof. The first statement is a generality about L nilpotent graded Lie algebras. If P is the set of principal weights and v = α∈P uα , then u = v + [u, u], i.e., v generates u modulo the derived subalgebra. A general fact about nilpotent Lie algebras (see Lemma 6.B.3 for a refinement of this) then implies that v generates u. The first assertion follows. The condition that 0 is not a principal weight is a restatement of Definition 1.2(3).  Definition 4.B.4. If U is a locally compact group and v a topological automorphism, v is called a compaction if there exists a compact subset Ω ⊂ U that is a vacuum subset for v, in the sense that for every compact subset K ⊂ U there exists n ≥ 0 such that v n (K) ⊂ Ω. If every neighborhood of 1 is a vacuum subset, we say that v is a contraction. Proposition 4.B.5. Let U ⋊ A be a standard solvable group. Equivalences: (i) some element of A acts as a compaction of U; (ii) some element of A acts as a contraction of U; (iii) 0 is not in the convex hull in W of the set of weights; (iv) 0 is not in the convex hull in W of the set of principal weights. Proof. Automorphisms of U are conjugate, through the exponential, to linear automorphisms; in particular, contractions and compactions coincide, being characterized by the condition that all eigenvalues have modulus < 1. Thus (i)⇔(ii). By Lemma 4.B.3, weights are sums of principal weights, and thus (iii)⇔(iv). If v ∈ A acts as a contraction of U, then α(v) < 0 for every weight α. Thus α 7→ α(v) is a linear form on W, which is positive on all weights. Thus (ii)⇒(iii). Conversely, let L be the set of linear forms ℓ of W = Hom(A, R) such that ℓ(α) > 0 for every weight α ∈ Wu . Suppose that 0 is not in the convex hull of Wu , or equivalently that L 6= ∅. Since the image of A in the bidual W ∗ linearly spans W ∗ , it has a cocompact closure in bidual W ∗ ; since L is a nonempty open convex cone, it follows that it has a non-empty intersection with the image of A in the bidual W ∗ . Thus there exists v ∈ A such that α(v) > 0 for every weight α. So (iii)⇒(ii) holds.  4.C. Tameness conditions in standard solvable groups. Motivated by Proposition 4.B.5, we introduce the following terminology: Definition 4.C.1. We say that the standard solvable group G = U ⋊ A (or the graded Lie algebra u) is • tame if 0 is not in the convex hull of the set of weights;  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  41  • 2-tame if 0 is not in the segment joining any pair of principal weights; • stably 2-tame if 0 is not in the segment joining any pair of weights. To motivate the adjective “stably”, observe that u is stably 2-tame if and only if every graded subalgebra of u is 2-tame. The importance of 2-tameness, first brought forward by Abels, will appear gradually in the paper, starting with Proposition 4.C.3. Remark 4.C.2. Clearly tame ⇒ stably 2-tame ⇒ 2-tame ;  the converse implications do not hold in general; however they hold when W is 1-dimensional, i.e. when A has a discrete cocompact infinite cyclic subgroup. Also, when u is abelian, then 2-tame and stably 2-tame are obviously equivalent. The following characterization of 2-tameness will be needed to show in §4.C.3 that if G is not 2-tame then it has an at least exponential Dehn function. Proposition 4.C.3. Let G = U ⋊ A be a standard solvable group. Then G is not 2-tame if and only if there exists a group V ⋊ E of type SOL (see Definition 1.3) and a homomorphism f into V ⋊ E whose image contains V and is dense. Proof. In general, let V ⋊ E be a standard solvable group, and consider a continuous homomorphism f : U ⋊ A → V ⋊ E with dense image (assuming that the closure of the image is cocompact would be enough). Since U and V are the derived subgroups of the two groups, we have f (U) ⊂ V . Since f (U) ⊂ V , passing to the quotients, f induces a continuous homomorphism A → E with dense image, which induces an injective linear map f ∗ : Hom(E, R) → Hom(A, R). Denote by f the L Lie algebra map it induces u → v. If we consider the weight decomposition u = α∈Hom(A,R) uα , we see that either f (uα ) is zero, or α has the form f ∗ (β) and f (uα ) ⊂ vβ . In particular, f (u) is contained in the sum of vβ , where β ranges over elements in Hom(E, R) such that f ∗ (β) is a weight of U ⋊ A. In particular, if we assume that f (U) = V , we deduce that f ∗ maps weights to weights. Assume now that V ⋊ E is a group of type SOL; since E is abelian, f factors through a homomorphism U/[U, U] ⋊ A → V ⋊ E. Recall from Example 4.B.2 that for a group of SOL type, the set of weights consists of a quasi-opposite pair, i.e. a pair of nonzero elements such that the segment joining them contains zero. Since f ∗ is injective R-linear and maps weights to weights, we deduce that U/[U, U] ⋊ A admits a quasi-opposite pair of weights. Conversely, suppose that U ⋊ A, where U/[U, U] has two nonzero weights α, β with β = tα for some t < 0. To construct the map f , first mod out by [U, U], so we are reduced to the case when U is abelian. Modding out if necessary by all other nonzero weights, we  42  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  L can suppose that u = uα ⊕ uβ . Write uα = j uj,α, and mod out all uj,α except one, so that uα is a Lie algebra over a single field Kj ; again modding out by a maximal invariant subspace and possibly replacing Kj with a finite extension, we can assume that uα is 1-dimensional over Kj , with a scalar action. Similarly we can assume that uβ is 1-dimensional over Kj ′ , with a scalar action. We can mod out by the kernel of the homomorphism A → K∗j × K∗j ′ ; let B be the closure of its image. Since α and β are proportional, E contains a cyclic cocompact subgroup. The resulting group V ⋊E, where V = Kj ×Kj ′ , is of type SOL and the resulting homomorphism U ⋊ A → V ⋊ E has a dense image containing V .  Remark 4.C.4. The homomorphism to a group of type SOL cannot always be chosen to have a closed image. For instance, let Z2 act on R2 by (m, n) · (x, y, z) = (2−m 3−n x, 2m 3n y). Let G = R2 ⋊ Z2 be the corresponding standard solvable group. Then every nontrivial normal subgroup of G contains either R × {0} or {0} × R; thus every proper quotient of G is tame and it follows that no quotient of G is of SOL type. Let G = U ⋊ A is a standard solvable group in the sense of Definition 1.2. The Lie algebra u of U admits a grading in the weight space W = Hom(A, R), introduced in §4.B. Define the set of weights of u as the finite subset Wu = {α ∈ W : uα 6= {0}}. We say that a subset of Wu is conic if it is of the form Wu ∩ C, with C an open convex cone not containing 0. Let C be the set of conic subsets of Wu . If C ∈ C, define M uC = uα ; α∈C  this is a graded Lie subalgebra of u; clearly it is nilpotent. Let UC be the closed subgroup of U corresponding to uC under the exponential map and GC = UC ⋊A. In particular, if v ∈ A, define H(v) = {α ∈ Wu : α(v) > 0}.  Definition 4.C.5. The GH(v) are called the essential tame subgroups of G. The GC are called the standard tame subgroups of G. Note that each essential tame subgroup is standard tame, and there finitely many standard tame subgroups; moreover every standard tame subgroup is a finite intersection of essential tame subgroups. Remark 4.C.6. These notions can be developed in a broader context, avoiding references to gradings and Lie algebras. Let G be a locally compact group with a fixed semidirect product decomposition G = U ⋊ A. A tame subgroup of G (relative to the given semidirect decomposition) is defined as a subgroup of the form V ⋊ A, which is tame, i.e., in which some element of A acts on V as a compaction (in the sense of Definition 4.B.4).  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  43  For v ∈ A, if we define Uv as the contraction subgroup   −n n (4.C.7) x ∈ U : lim v xv = 1 , n→+∞  then v acts as a compaction on Uv ([CCMT15, Prop. 6.17]) and therefore Uv ⋊ A is tame. We call this a essential tame subgroup. Then standard tame subgroups are defined as finite intersections of essential tame subgroups; this can be shown to match the previous definition in the setting of standard solvable groups. 4.D. Cartan grading and weights. Here we introduce the notion of Cartan grading, especially in the context of real triangulable Lie algebras; this will especially be needed in §11. Triangulable Lie groups are not standard solvable in general and although the treatment is analogous to that in §4.B, we have to face some specific difficulties. All Lie algebras in this §4.D are finite-dimensional over a fixed field K of characteristic zero. T Definition 4.D.1. If g is a Lie algebra, let g∞ = k≥1 gk be the intersection of its lower central series, so that g/g∞ is the largest nilpotent quotient of g. Definition 4.D.2. If G is a triangulable Lie group with Lie algebra g, define its exponential radical G∞ as the intersection of its lower central series (so that its Lie algebra is equal to g∞ ). We need to recall the notion of Cartan grading of a Lie algebra, which is used in §11.D and §11.E. Let n is a nilpotent Lie algebra; denote by n∨ the space of homomorphisms from n to K (that is, the linear dual of n/[n, n]). Let v be an n-module (finite-dimensional) with structural map ρ : n → gl(v). If α ∈ n∨ , define the characteristic subspace [ vα = {v ∈ v : ∀g ∈ n, (ρ(g) − α(g))k v = 0}. k≥1  The subspaces vα generate their direct sum; we say that v is K-triangulable L if v = v α∈n∨ α ; this is automatic if K is algebraically closed. If v is a Ktriangulable n-module, the above decomposition is called the natural grading (in n∨ ) of v as an n-module. If v = v0 , we call v a nilpotent n-module. Definition 4.D.3 ([Bou]). A Cartan subalgebra of g is a nilpotent subalgebra that is equal to its normalizer.  We use the following proposition, proved in [Bou, Chap. 7,§1,2,3] (see Definition 4.D.1 for the meaning of g∞ ). Proposition 4.D.4. Every Lie algebra admits a Cartan subalgebra. If n is a Cartan subalgebra, then g = n + g∞ and n contains the hypercenter of g (the union of the ascending central series).  44  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  If g is solvable, any two Cartan subalgebras of g are conjugate by some elementary automorphism exp(ad(x)) with x ∈ g∞ (here ad(x) is a nilpotent endomorphism so its exponential makes sense).  Let us provide a simple way to recognize a Cartan subalgebra. Proposition 4.D.5. Let g be a Lie algebra graded in some abelian group W (see §8.A if necessary). Assume that g0 is nilpotent and that for every α 6= 0, we have [g0 , gα ] = gα . Then g0 is a Cartan subalgebra in g. Proof. We have to show that the normalizer h of g0 in g is g0 itself. This is a graded subalgebra; hence we have to show that hα = 0 for all α 6= 0. Since [g0 , hα ] is contained in both g0 and gα , we deduce that [g0 , hα ] = 0. To show that h = g0 , it is enough to do it in the case K is algebraically closed. For α 6= 0, we can decompose the module gα with respect to the action of the nilpotent Lie algebra g0 as a sum of characteristic subspaces Vλ , for homomorphisms λ : g0 → K. Then V0 = 0 since the contrary would contradict [g0 , gα ] = gα . On the other hand, since hα is contained in the centralizer of g0 , it is contained in V0 . We deduce that it is zero.  Example 4.D.6. For λ ∈ K, let g(λ) be the 4-dimensional Lie algebra with basis (u, x, y, z) and nonzero brackets [x, y] = z, [u, x] = x, [u, y] = λy, [u, z] = (1+λ)z. Then a Cartan subalgebra is given as follows: • if λ ∈ / {−1, 0}, it can be taken to be the 1-dimensional subalgebra generated by u; • if λ = −1, as the abelian subalgebra generated by u, z; • if λ = 0, as the abelian subalgebra generated by u, y. Indeed, we can consider the grading in Z for which u has weight 0, x has weight 1, y has weight λ, and z has weight 1 + λ. Then it satisfies the condition of Proposition 4.D.5. Other illustrating examples of Cartan subalgebras in triangulable Lie algebras can be found in [C08, Ex. 4.1 and 4.2]. We now turn to a partial converse for Proposition 4.D.5. Let g be a Lie algebra and n a Cartan subalgebra. For the adjoint representation, g is an n-module. Assume that g is K-triangulable as an n-module (e.g., this holds if K is algebraically closed). The corresponding natural grading is called the Cartan grading of g (relative to the Cartan subalgebra n); moreover the Cartan grading determines n, namely n = g0 . We call weights the set of α such that gα 6= 0. The Cartan grading is a Lie algebra grading, i.e. satisfies [gα , gβ ] ⊂ gα+β for all α, β ∈ n∨ . In addition it satisfies [g0 , gα ] = gα for all α 6= 0; hence it fulfills the conditions of Proposition 4.D.5. We have n+g∞ = g, and g∞ ⊂ [g, g], so the projection n → g/[g, g] is surjective, inducing an injection (g/[g, g])∨ ⊂ n∨ . Now assume that g is K-triangulable. Then all the weights of the Cartan grading lie inside the subspace (g/[g, g])∨ of n; the advantage is that this space  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  45  does not depend on n, allowing to refer to a weight α without reference to a the choice of a Cartan subalgebra (although the weight space gα still depends on this choice). In view of Proposition 4.D.4, any two Cartan gradings of g are conjugate. In particular, the set of weights, viewed as a finite subset of (g/[g, g])∨ , does not depend on the Cartan grading. Actually, the subspace linearly spanned by weights is exactly (g/r)∨, where r ⊃ [g, g] is the nilpotent radical of g. The principal weights of g are by definition the weights of the Lie algebra g∞ /[g∞ , g∞ ] (that is, the nonzero weights of the Lie algebra g/[g∞ , g∞ ]); note that every nonzero weight is a sum of principal weights, as a consequence of the following lemma, which relies on the (basic) results of §8.A.2. L Lemma 4.D.7. Define g▽ = α6=0 gα . Then g∞ is the subalgebra generated by g▽ .  Proof. It is clear from the definition that [n, gα ] = gα for all α 6= 0 and therefore g▽ ⊂ g∞ . Conversely, since g0 = n is nilpotent, Lemma 8.A.5 implies that g∞ is contained in the subalgebra generated by g▽ .  If m is a g-module, define mg = {x ∈ m : ∀g ∈ g, gx = 0}. Lemma 4.D.8. Let g be a K-triangulable Lie algebra with a Cartan grading, and i ≥ 1. Then Hi (g∞ )g 6= {0} if and only if Hi (g∞ )0 6= {0}. Proof. By definition of Cartan grading, we have Hi (g∞ )g ⊂ Hi (g∞ )0 ; this provides one implication. Note, that Hi (g∞ ) is a trivial g∞ -module, hence can be viewed as a (g/g∞ )module, and for any α, Hi (g∞ )α is a nonzero g0 -submodule; since it is stable under both g0 and g∞ ; since g = g∞ + g0 we deduce that each Hi (g∞ )α is a g-submodule of Hi (g∞ ) and Hi (g∞ )g0 = Hi (g∞ )g . On the other hand, it follows from the definition of Cartan grading that (g⊗i )0 is a nilpotent g0 -module; hence its subquotient Hi (g∞ )0 is also a nilpotent g0 module and hence is a nilpotent g-module by the previous remark. Hence if Hi (g∞ )0 6= 0, then Hi (g∞ )g0 is nonzero as well.   Now consider a real triangulable Lie algebra g, or the corresponding real triangulable Lie group. We call weights of g the weights of graded Lie subalgebra g∞ endowed with the Cartan grading from g (note that since g = g0 + g∞ , this is precisely the set of weights of the graded Lie algebra g, except possibly the 0 weight). We define a real triangulable Lie algebra g, or the corresponding real triangulable Lie group G, to be tame, 2-tame, or stably 2-tame exactly in the same fashion as in Definition 4.C.1. In the case G is also a standard solvable group U ⋊ D, we necessarily have u = g∞ and its grading is also the Cartan grading; in particular whether G is tame (resp. 2-tame, stably 2-tame) does not depend on whether G is viewed as a real triangulable Lie group or a standard solvable Lie group.  46  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  For α > 0, define SOLα as the semidirect product R2 ⋊ R, where the action is given by t · (x, y) = (et x, e−αt y). Note that apart from the obvious isomorphisms SOLα ≃ SOL1/α , they are pairwise non-isomorphic. In a way analogous to Proposition 4.C.3, we have Proposition 4.D.9. Let G be a real triangulable group. Then G is not 2-tame if and only if it admits SOLα as a quotient for some α > 0. Proof. The “if” part can be proved in the same lines as the corresponding statement of Proposition 4.C.3 and is left to the reader. Conversely, assume that G is not 2-tame. Clearly, G/[G∞ , G∞ ] is not 2-tame, so we can assume that G∞ is abelian. Endow g with a Cartan grading; then since g∞ is abelian, 0 is not a weight of g∞ and hence g = g∞ ⋊ g0 . Let G = G∞ ⋊ G0 be the corresponding decomposition of G. In the same way as in the proof of Proposition 4.C.3, we can pass to a quotient that is still not 2-tame, for which the new G∞ is 2-dimensional. Since the action of G0 on G∞ is given by two proportional weights, its kernel has codimension 1 in N; in particular this kernel is normal in G; we see that the quotient is necessarily isomorphic to SOLα for some α > 0.  5. Algebraic preliminaries about nilpotent groups and Lie algebras 5.A. Divisibility and Malcev’s theorem. Recall that a group G is divisible (resp. uniquely divisible) if for every n ≥ 1, the power map G → G mapping x to xn , is surjective (resp. bijective). The following lemma is very standard. Lemma 5.A.1. Every torsion-free divisible nilpotent group is uniquely divisible. Proof. We have to check that xk = y k ⇒ x = y holds in any torsion-free nilpotent group. Assume that xk = y k and embed the finitely generated torsion-free nilpotent group Γ = hx, yi into the group of upper unipotent matrices over the reals. Since the latter is uniquely divisible (the k-th extraction of root being defined by some explicit polynomial), we get the result.  Let NQ be the category of nilpotent Lie algebras over Q (of possibly infinite dimension) with Lie algebras homomorphisms, and N the category of nilpotent groups with group homomorphisms, and NQ its subcategory consisting of uniquely divisible (i.e. divisible and torsion-free, by Lemma 5.A.1) groups. If g ∈ NQ , consider the law ⊛g on g defined by the Campbell-Baker-Hausdorff formula. Theorem 5.A.2 (Malcev [Mal49a, St70]). For any nilpotent Lie algebra g over Q, (g, ⊛g ) is a group and if f : g → h is a Lie algebra homomorphism, then f is also a group homomorphism (g, ⊛g ) → (h, ⊛k ). In other words, g 7→ (g, ⊛g ), f 7→ f is a functor from NQ to N . Moreover, this functor induces an equivalence of categories NQ → NQ .  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  47  The contents of the last statement is that • any group homomorphism (g, ⊛g ) → (h, ⊛h ) is a Lie algebra homomorphism; • any uniquely divisible nilpotent group (G, •) has a unique Q-Lie algebra structure g = (G, +, [·, ·]) such that ⊛g = •. Recall that an element in a group is divisible if it admits n-roots for all n ≥ 1. Lemma 5.A.3 (see Lemma 3 in [Ho77]). In a nilpotent group, divisible elements form a subgroup. Lemma 5.A.4 (see Theorem 14.5 in [Ba60]). Let G be nilpotent and uniquely divisible, with lower central series (Gn ). Then G/Gn is torsion-free (hence uniquely divisible) for all n.  The following lemma is needed in the proof of Theorem 9.D.2. Lemma 5.A.5. In the category of s-nilpotent groups, any free product of uniquely divisible groups is uniquely divisible. Proof. First, the free groups in this category are torsion-free: to see this, it is enough to consider the case of a free group of finite rank in this category; such a group is of the form F/F i with F a free group; it is indeed torsion free for all i: this is a result about the lower central series of a non-abelian free group and is due to Magnus [Mag35] (see also [Se, IV.6.2]). Let G1 , G2 be torsion-free uniquely divisible s-nilpotent groups and G1 ∗s G2 their s-nilpotent free product, which is divisible by Lemma 5.A.3. Denote by (N i ) the lower central series of G1 ∗ G2 . Let g be a non-trivial element in G1 ∗s G2 = (G1 ∗ G2 )/N s+1 and let us show that g is not torsion in this group. By [Mal49b], a free product of torsion-free nilpotent groups is residually torsion-free nilpotent, and therefore there exists t ≥ s + 1 such that the image of g is not torsion in (G1 ∗G2 )/N t . Applying Lemma 5.A.4 to (G1 ∗G2 )/N t , we see that (G1 ∗G2 )/N s+1 is torsion-free, so since g is non-trivial, it is not torsion. So G1 ∗s G2 is uniquely divisible by Lemma 5.A.1.  5.B. Powers and commutators in nilpotent groups. This subsection includes several lemmas, which will be used at various places of the paper. Denote by ((·, ·)) group commutators, namely ((x, y)) = x−1 y −1 xy,  and n-fold group commutators (5.B.1)  ((x1 , . . . , xn )) = ((x1 , ((x2 , . . . , xn )))).  Define similarly n-fold Lie algebra brackets. When n ≥ 2 is not specified, we just call them iterated group commutators or Lie algebra brackets. If G is a group, its lower central series is defined by G1 = G and Gi+1 = ((G, Gi )) (the group generated by commutators ((x, y)) when (x, y) ranges over G × Gi ).  48  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  The group G is s-nilpotent if Gs+1 = {1}. In particular, 0-nilpotent means trivial, 1-nilpotent means abelian, and more generally, s-nilpotent means that (s + 1)fold group commutators vanish in G. Similarly, if g is a Lie algebra, its lower central series is defined in the same way (and does not depend on the ground commutative ring), and s-nilpotency has the same meaning. The following lemma will be used in the proof of Lemma 6.E.4. Lemma 5.B.2. Let N be an s-nilpotent group, and let i be an integer. Then there exists an integer m = m(i, s) such that for all x, y ∈ N, we can write ((x, y i )) = w1 . . . wm ,  where each wj (1 ≤ j ≤ m) is an iterated commutator (or its inverse) whose letters are x±1 or y ±1, that is, wj = ((tj,1 , . . . , tj,kj )) for some kj ≥ 2 and tj,i ∈ {x±1 , y ±1}. Example 5.B.3. In a 3-nilpotent group N, we have, for all x, y ∈ N and i ∈ Z ((x, y i )) = ((x, y))i ((y, x, y))−i(i−1)/2 .  Proof of Lemma 5.B.2. We shall prove the lemma by induction on s. The statement is obvious for s = 0 (i.e. when N is the trivial group), so let us suppose s ≥ 1. Applying the induction hypothesis modulo the s-th term of the descending series of N, one can write ((x, y i )) = wz, where w has the form w1 . . . wm′ where m′ = m(i, s − 1), and where z lies in the s-th term of the lower central series of the subgroup generated by x and y, which will be denoted by H. Since the word length according to S = {x±1 , y ±1} of both ((x, y i )) and w is bounded by a function of i and s, this is also the case for z. Now H is generated by the set of iterated commutators T = {((x1 , x2 . . . , xs )) | x1 , . . . , xs ∈ S}. Therefore, z can be written as a word in T ±1 , whose length only depends on s and i. So the lemma follows.  The following lemma will be used in the proof of Lemma 6.B.3. Lemma 5.B.4. In any uniquely divisible s-nilpotent group, if xi = exp vi ((x1 , . . . , xs )) = exp[v1 , v2 , . . . , vs ]. Proof. (Refer to (5.B.1) for the conventions defining iterated Lie brackets or group commutators.) Use the convenient convention to identify the group and the Lie algebra through the exponential and with this convention, the lemma simply states that ((x1 , . . . , xs )) = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xs ]  ∀x1 , . . . , xs ∈ G.  We prove the result by induction on s; it is trivial for s = 1 (abelian groups); assume it holds for s − 1. By induction, ((x2 , . . . , xs )) = [x2 , . . . , xs ] + O(s), where O(s) means some combination of s-fold Lie algebra brackets.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  49  It follows from the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula that if [x, y] is central then ((x, y)) = [x, y]. We can apply this to x = x1 and y = ((x2 , . . . , xs )). This yields ((x1 , ((x2 , . . . , xs )))) = [x1 , [x2 , . . . , xs ] + O(s)] = [x1 , . . . , xs ].  The following proposition is the key new feature in the proof of Theorem 9.D.2. Proposition 5.B.5. Let x, y be elements of a uniquely divisible nilpotent group G. Let N be the normal subgroup generated by the elements of the form xr y −r , where r ranges over Q. Then N is divisible. Equivalently, G/N is torsion-free. We need the following lemma. Lemma 5.B.6. Let x, y be elements of a uniquely divisible nilpotent group G, and n an integer. Then (xy −1 )1/n is contained in the normal subgroup generated by {x1/k y −1/k : k ∈ Z}. Proof. Let G be s-nilpotent. By [BrG11, Lemma 5.1] (see however Remark 5.B.7), there exists a sequence of rational numbers a1 , b1 , . . . , ak , bk such that in any uniquely divisible s-nilpotent group H and any u, v ∈ H, we have −1 1/n  (uv )  =u  1/n −1/n  v  k Y  uai v bi .  i=1  √ P P In particular, picking (H, u, v) = (R, 1, 2), we see that ai = bi = 0. Qk ai bi Therefore, if d is a common denominator to a1 , . . . , bk and n, i=1 u v as well as u1/n v −1/n belong to the normal subgroup generated by u1/d v −1/d , hence (uv −1 )1/n as well. In particular, this applies to (H, u, v) = (G, x, y).  Remark 5.B.7. In the above proof, we used [BrG11, Lemma 5.1] to be concise. However, this is not very natural, because the latter is proved using the HallPetrescu formula; the problem is that in this formula, exponents are put outside the commutators. The proof of the Hall-Petrescu formula can easily be modified to prove by induction on the degree of nilpotency a similar formula with exponents inside the commutators. In [BrG11], in order to shorten the argument (as we also do), instead of processing this induction, they work with a much simpler induction based on the Hall-Petrescu formula; this is very unnatural, because if we do not allow ourselves to use the Hall-Petrescu formula, to go through the latter is very roundabout; moreover the exponents ak , bk obtained in [BrG11] depend on s, while in a direct induction, we pass from the s-nilpotent case to the (s + 1)nilpotent case by multiplying on the right by some suitable iterated commutator of powers. Proof of Proposition 5.B.5. By Lemma 5.B.6, N contains elements (xr y −r )ρ for any ρ ∈ Q. So N is generated as a normal subgroup by the divisible subgroups Nr = {(xr y −r )ρ : ρ ∈ Q}, and therefore N is divisible by Lemma 5.A.3.   50  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  The following lemma is used in the proof of Lemma 9.B.1. Lemma 5.B.8. Let g be a Lie algebra over the commutative ring R. Let m be a generating R-submodule of g. Define g[1] = m, and by induction the submodule g[i] = [g[1] , g[i−1] ] for i ≥ 2 (namely, the submodule generated by the brackets of the given Let (gi ) be the lower central series of g. Then for all i we have P form). i [m] g = m≥i g . Proof. Let us check that    (5.B.9)   g[i] , g[j] ⊂ g[i+j]  ∀i, j ≥ 1.  Note that (5.B.9) holds when either i = 1 or j = 1. We prove (5.B.9) in general by induction on k = i + j ≥ 2, the case k = 2 being already settled. So suppose that k ≥ 3 and that the result is proved for all lesser k. We argue again by induction, on min(i, j), the case min(i, j) = 1 being settled. Let us suppose that i, j ≥ 2 and i + j = k and let us check that (5.B.9) holds. We can suppose that j ≤ i. By the Jacobi identity and then the induction hypothesis [g[i] , g[j]] =[g[i] , [g[1] , g[j−1] ]] ⊂[g[1] , [g[i] , g[j−1] ]] + [g[j−1] , [g[1] , g[i] ]]  ⊂[g[1] , g[i+j−1] ] + [g[j−1] , g[1+i] ]  ⊂g[i+j] + [g[j−1] , g[1+i] ]  Since j ≤ i, we have min(j − 1, i + 1) < min(i, j), the induction hypothesis yields [g[j−1] , g[1+i] ] ⊂ g[i+j] and (5.B.9) is proved. It follows from (5.B.9) that, defining for all i ≥ 1 X g{i} = g[j] , j≥i  the graded submodule g{i} is actually a Lie subalgebra of g. Let us check by induction on i ≥ 1 that gi = g{i} . Since g[1] generates g, it follows that g{1} = g = g1 . Now, suppose i ≥ 2 and the equality holds for i − 1. Then gi is, in our notation, the Lie subalgebra generated by # " X [g, gi−1 ] = [g, g{i−1} ] = g, g[j] j≥i−1  =  X   j≥i−1  X  g, g[j] = g[j+1] = g{i} ; j≥i−1  since g{i} is a Lie subalgebra we deduce that gi = g{i} .    GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  51  5.C. Lazard’s formulas. Lazard’s formulas (which will be used in §10.D and §10.F) are, in a sense, inversion formulas for the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula: roughly speaking, they express the Lie algebras laws in terms of the group law; actually it involves taking roots and we find it convenient to state them by “canceling denominators” as below. Here, F2 denotes the free group on 2 generators). Theorem 5.C.1 (Lazard [La54]). For every s ≥ 1, there exist group words As , Bs ∈ F2 and positive integers qs , qs′ , such that for every simply connected snilpotent Lie group G with Lie algebra g, and all x, y ∈ G, writing X = log(x) ∈ g, Y = log(y) ∈ g, we have log(As (x, y)) = qs (X + Y ) and log(Bs (x, y)) = qs′ [X, Y ]  Here A stands for Add, and B for Bracket. Remark 5.C.2. We see that we have the formal equality of group words As (x, 1) = xqs . Indeed, As (x, 1) has the form xℓ for some ℓ ∈ Z, and by evaluation in R we obtain ℓ = qs . Similarly, we have the formal equality Bs (x, 1) = 1. The usual Lie ring axioms are reflected in the following proposition: Proposition 5.C.3. In every s-nilpotent group G, abbreviating A = As , B = Bs , q = qs , we have identities ∀x, y, z ∈ G, A(x, y) = A(y, x); B(x, y) = B(y, x)−1 ; B(A(x, y), z) = A(B(x, z), B(y, z)) ; A(A(x, y), z q ) = A(xq , A(y, z)) ; B(xk , y) = B(x, y k ) = B(x, y)k  ∀k ∈ Z.  Proof. If G is a simply connected nilpotent Lie group, this follows from the corresponding identities in the Lie algebra: commutativity of addition, anticommutativity of the bracket, distributivity, associativity of addition; in the last equality if follows from the fact that log(xk ) = k log(x). Therefore this holds in every subgroup of such a group G, and in particular in any finitely generated free s-nilpotent group, and therefore in any s-nilpotent group, by substitution.  6. Dehn function of tame and stably 2-tame groups In §6.A, we introduce the class of tame groups, showing in particular that their Dehn function is at most quadratic. In §6.C, we formulate and prove a version of Gromov’s trick for standard solvable groups involving its tame subgroups. This result relies on some lengths estimates on nilpotent algebraic groups over local fields, which are obtained in §6.B. Then §6.D is dedicated to the proof of Theorem D from the introduction (which is reformulated in terms of 2-tameness). Finally we extend this result to generalized 2-tame groups in §6.E.  52  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  6.A. Tame groups. We introduce here a class of locally compact groups, called tame groups, including tame standard solvable groups from Definition 4.C.1. Tame groups are, for our purposes, the best-behaved. Using a “large-scale Lipschitz homotopy”, these groups are shown to be compactly presented with an at most quadratic Dehn function and a have simple presentation (Theorem 6.A.4 and Corollary 6.A.7). While standard solvable groups are “usually” not tame, their geometrical study will be based on the family of their tame subgroups. Definition 6.A.1. We call a tame group any locally compact group with a semidirect product decomposition G = U ⋊ A, where A is a compactly generated abelian group, such that some element of A acts as a compaction of U (in the sense of Definition 4.B.4), in which case we call U ⋊ A a tame decomposition. Recall that this means that there S exist v ∈ A and a compact subset Ω (called vacuum subset) of U such that n≥0 v n Ωv −n = U uniformly on compact subsets, in the sense that for every compact subset K of U there exists n such that K ⊂ v n Ωv −n . If we apply so that v −n Ωv n ⊂ Ω, we see, by replacing Ω S this to−nΩ itself, S with the larger 0≤k≤n−1 v Ωv n = k≥0 v −n Ωv n , that we can suppose v −1 Ωv ⊂ Ω, in which case we call Ω a stable vacuum subset.  Remark 6.A.2. If G = U ⋊ A is a tame decomposition, and if W is the largest compact subgroup in A, then W admits a direct factor A′ in A (isomorphic to Rk × Zℓ for some k, ℓ ≥ 0), so that G = UW ⋊ A′ ; if x ∈ A acts as a compaction on U then it also acts as a compaction on UW , and so does the projection of x on A′ (because the set of compactions of a given locally compact group is stable by multiplication by inner automorphisms [CCMT15, Lemma 6.16]). This shows that assuming that A = Rk × Zℓ is not really a restriction. We are going to prove that tame groups are compactly presented with an at most quadratic Dehn function; in order to make quantitative statements, we use the following language. Let v ∈ A be an element acting (by conjugation on the right) as a compaction of U. Let m be an integer. Let SU be a compact symmetric subset of U with unit. Let T be a compact symmetric generating subset of A with unit. Definition 6.A.3. We say that (m, SU , T ) is adapted to U ⋊ A and v if v ∈ T , the subset SU is a stable vacuum subset for the right conjugation u 7→ v −1 uv by v, and there exist non-negative integers k, ℓ ≥ 1 with k + ℓ ≤ m such that v −k SU2 v k ⊂ SU and (v ℓ w)−1 SU (v ℓ w) ⊂ SU for all w ∈ T . There always exists such an adapted triple; more precisely, for every symmetric generating subset T of A containing {1, v} and every symmetric stable vacuum subset SU ⊂ U of v, (m, SU , T ) is adapted for all m large enough. Also, if SU is a stable vacuum subset for some v ∈ A and T is arbitrary, then (2, SU , T ∪ {v ±k}) is adapted to v k for large enough k.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  53  Theorem 6.A.4. Let G be a tame group with a tame decomposition U ⋊ A, with an element v acting as a compaction of U. Denote by π the canonical projection G → A. Let (m, SU , T ) be adapted to U ⋊ A and v in the above sense. Then S = SU ∪ T is a compact generating subset of G, and G being endowed with the corresponding word metric, the function γ : G × N → G;  (g, n) 7→ gv n  is 1-Lipschitz in each variable and satisfies: γ(g, 0) = g, and d(γ(g, n), v nπ(g)) ≤ 1 whenever n ≥ m|g|.  The function γ should be understood as “locally” a large-scale homotopy between the identity of G and its projection onto A. This is only “local” since the time needed to reach A depends on the size of the element. See however Remark 6.A.10. Proof of Theorem 6.A.4. Since v −1 SU v ⊂ SU , we have v −1 Sv ⊂ S. So, for n ≥ 0, the automorphism g 7→ v −n gv n is 1-Lipschitz, and since the left multiplication by v n is an isometry, we deduce that γ(·, n) is 1-Lipschitz. Also, assuming that v ∈ T , it is immediate that γ(g, ·) is 1-Lipschitz. It remains to prove the last statement. Consider an element in U, of size at most n. We can write it as n Y g= si u i i=1  with si ∈ T and ui ∈ SU . Defining ti = si . . . sn , we deduce ! n Y g = tn ti ui t−1 . i i=1  So tn = π(g) and  v −ℓn gv ℓn = π(g)  n Y  !  ℓn . v −ℓn ti ui t−1 i v  i=1  ℓn By definition of ℓ, the element vi = v −ℓn ti ui t−1 belongs to SU . So i v ! n Y v −ℓn gv ℓn = π(g) vi . i=1  −k  Since v we obtain  (SU2 )v k  ⊂ SU , setting j = ⌈log2 (n)⌉, we have v −kj (SUn )v kj ⊂ SU . Thus  v −ℓn−k⌈log2 (n)⌉ gv ℓn+k⌈log2 (n)⌉ ∈ π(g)SU , since for all n we have ⌈log2 (n)⌉ ≤ n and k +ℓ ≤ n, we obtain d(gv mn , v mn π(g)) ≤ 1.  A first consequence is an efficient way of writing elements in a tame group:  54  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Corollary 6.A.5. Under the assumptions of Theorem 6.A.4, for every x ∈ G of with |x|S = n, we can write x = π(x)v mn sv −mn and s ∈ SU . Proof. Define s = (v mn π(x))−1 γ(x, mn). By the theorem, s ∈ SU , while x = π(x)v mn sv −mn .  The corollary allows us to introduce the following definition, which will be used in the sequel. Let G = U ⋊ A be tame and v ∈ A act as a compaction on U. Let (m, SU , T ) be adapted to U ⋊ A and v in the sense of Definition 6.A.3, and S = SU ∪ T . By Corollary 6.A.5, if x ∈ U and n = |x|S , the element s = v −mn xv mn belongs to SU . Definition 6.A.6. For x ∈ U with |x|S = n as above, we define x ∈ FS as the word v mn sv −mn , which has length 2mn + 1 and represents x. We now write the consequence of Theorem 6.A.4, that tame groups have a “nice” presentation and a good control on the Dehn function. Corollary 6.A.7. Under the assumptions of Theorem 6.A.4, G admits a presentation with generating set S in which the relators are the following (1) All relators of the form s1 s2 s3 for s1 , s2 , s3 ∈ SU , whenever s1 s2 s3 = 1 in U; (2) all relators of the form ws1 w −1 s2 whenever w ∈ T , s1 , s2 ∈ A and ws1w −1 s2 = 1 in G; (3) a finite set R3 of defining relators of A (with respect to the generating subset T ) including all commutation relators. The Dehn function of this presentation is bounded above by mn2 +δT,R3 (n), where δT,R3 is the Dehn function of the presentation hT | R3 i of the abelian group A. Corollary 6.A.8. If G is a tame locally compact group, then it has an at most quadratic Dehn function.  This follows since A has an at most quadratic Dehn function. Remark 6.A.9. Since G has a 1-Lipschitz retraction onto A (namely the canonical projection), we deduce that the Dehn function of G is exactly quadratic when A has rank at least 2. On the other hand, if A has rank one (i.e., contains Z as a cocompact lattice), then G is hyperbolic and thus its Dehn function is linear [CCMT15]. Proof of Corollary 6.A.7. Start from a combinatorial loop γ0 = (ui )i of length n. This is a combinatorial loop in the Cayley graph of (G, S), i.e., d(ui , ui+1 ) ≤ 1. Since γ : (g, n) 7→ gv n is 1-Lipschitz by Theorem 6.A.4, each γj = (ui v j )i is also a loop of length n. Define µj as the loop (v j π(ui ))i in A. We know that for j ≥ mn, we have d(µj (i), γj (i)) ≤ 1 for all i. So the “homotopy” consists in γ0  γ1  ···  γmn  µmn  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  55  and is finished by a homotopy from µmn to a trivial loop inside A. So we have to describe each step of this homotopy. To go from γj to γj+1 , we use n squares, each with vertices of the form (ui v j , ui+1 v j , ui+1 v j+1, ui v j+1 ) for i = 1, . . . n (modulo n). To describe this square, we discuss whether u−1 i ui+1 belongs to SU or T : in the first case this is a relator of the form (2) and in the second case it is a relator of the form (3). To go from γmn to µmn , we use n squares vith vertices (ui v mn , ui+1 v mn , π(ui+1)v mn , π(ui )v mn ). −1 We discuss again: if u−1 i ui+1 ∈ T , this is a relator of the form (3). If ui ui+1 ∈ SU , actually π(ui ) = π(ui+1 ) and this square actually degenerates to a triangle of the form (1). Finally, the loop µmn , of length n can be homotoped within A to a constant loop with area ≤ δT,R3 (n).   Remark 6.A.10 (Asymptotic cones of tame groups are contractible). Let X be a metric space and ω a nonprincipal ultrafilter on the set of positive integers. If (xn ), (yn ) are sequences in X, define dω ((xn ), (yn )) = limω d(xn , yn )/n ∈ [0, ∞]. The asymptotic cone (Coneω (X), dω ) is defined as the metric space consisting of those sequences (xn ) with dω ((xn ), (x0 )) < ∞, modulo identification of (xn ) and (yn ) whenever dω ((xn ), (yn )) = 0. A straightforward corollary of Theorem 6.A.4 is that if G is a tame locally compact group, then all its asymptotic cones are contractible. Indeed, the largescale Lipschitz mapping γ induces a Lipschitz map γ̃ : Coneω (G) × R≥0 → Coneω (G) ((xn ), t) 7→ γ(xn , ⌊tn⌋)  such that γ̃(x, 0) = x and γ̃(x, t) ∈ Coneω (A) if t ≥ C|x|. Defining h(x, t) = γ̃(x, t|x|), then h is continuous, h(x, 0) = x and h(x, C) ∈ Coneω (A) for all x ∈ Coneω (G). In other words, h is a homotopy between the identity of Coneω (G) and a map whose image is contained in Coneω (A). Since Coneω (A) is (bilipschitz) homeomorphic to a Euclidean space, this shows that Coneω (G) is contractible. 6.B. Length in nilpotent groups. As in Definition 1.2, Qd let G = U ⋊ A be a standard solvable group. We fix a decomposition U = j=1 U(j) , where U(j) = U(j) (Kj ), where Kj is some nondiscrete locally compact field. We write K = Ld Kj . We say that a subgroup V of U is K-closed if it is a direct product Qdj=1 j=1 V(j) , where V(j) = V ∩ U(j) is Zariski-closed in U(j) . The condition that V is K-closed is equivalent to the requirement that log(V ) is a Lie K-subalgebra of the Lie K-algebra u of U. When K is R or Qp for some prime p, it is just equivalent to the condition that V is closed (for the ordinary topology) and divisible.  56  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  We fix on G an admissible finite family U1 , . . . , Uν of tame subgroups of U, where by admissible we mean it fulfills all the following conditions: (1) each Ui is K-closedSin U (2) U is generated by νi=1 Ui . (3) each Ui is normalized by A. For instance, we can choose them to be the standard tame subgroups (there are finitely many, see Definition 4.C.5), but in the proof of Theorem 6.D.1 we will make another choice. We can find a compact symmetric subset T ⊂ A containing 1 and compact symmetric subsets Si of Ui containing 1, such that for Severy i, Si is a stable vacuum subset for some element of T . Define S = T ∪ i Si . We assume that Si = S ∩ Ui for all i (we can always replace Si with S ∩ Ui so that it holds). Notation 6.B.1. For r ∈ [−∞, +∞] and n ∈ N, let T n ⊂ FS be the n-ball of (r) FT and define Si as the set elements of FS of the form tst−1 , where s ∈ Si and t ∈ T max(0,⌊r⌋) . Let π be the canonical projection FS → G.  Theorem 6.B.2. Fix a standard solvable group G, an admissible family of tame subgroups and generating subset as above. There exist constants λ > 0, µ1 , µ2 > 1, a positive integer κ and a κ-tuple (q1 , . . . , qκ ) of elements in {1, . . . , ν} satisfying • for every small enough norm k · k on u, denoting by U[r] the exponential of the r-ball in (u, k · k), we have, for all n, the inclusions S n ⊂ U[µn2 ]T n ,  U[µn1 ] ⊂ S n ,  U[µn1 ]T n ⊂ S 2n . (λn)  • the n-ball S n of G is contained in the projection π Sq1 is itself contained in the (κλ + 1)n-ball).   (λn) . . . Sqκ T n (which  We first need a general lemma. Q Lemma 6.B.3. Fix an integer s ≥ 1. Let K = Kℓ be a finite product of nondiscrete locally compact fields of characteristic zero (or of characteristic p > s). Let u be a s-nilpotent finite length Lie algebra L over K (finite length just means that under the canonical decomposition u = uℓ , each uℓ is finite-dimensional over Kℓ ) and fix a submultiplicative norm k · k on u. Let U be the corresponding nilpotent topological group; if x ∈ U, write kxk = k log(x)k. Let (ui )1≤i≤c be K-subalgebras of u; suppose that the ui generate u as a Ksubalgebra modulo [u, u]. Let Ui = exp(ui ) ⊂ U be the corresponding subgroups. Then there exists an integer κ and S a constant K such that every element x ∈ U can be written x1 . . . xκ with xk ∈ i ui , and supk kxk k ≤ K max(kxk, 1).  Proof. We argue by induction on s. If s = 1, the assumption is that u isL abelian and generated by the ui . So there exist subspaces hi , so Phi ⊂ ui such that u = if x ∈ u and pi is the projection to hi , then x = ci=1 pi (x), and if K0 = sup kpi k (operator norm) then kpi (x)k ≤ K0 kxk.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  57  Suppose now s > 1 and that the result is proved for s − 1. Denoting by (ui ) the lower central series, we choose the norm on u/ui to be the quotient norm. We use the induction hypothesis modulo U s , so that there exist d′ and K ′ ≥ 1 such that every x ∈ U can be written as y1 . . . yd′ z, with kyi k ≤ K ′ max(kxk, 1) and z ∈ U s . By the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula, there exists a constant C > 0 (depending on s and d′ ) such that for all x1 , . . . xd′ +1 in u, we have kx1 · · · xd′ +1 k ≤ C sup max(kxi ks , kxi k). i  −1 Since z = yd−1 ′ . . . y1 x, we deduce   kzk ≤C max sup max(kyi ks , kyi k), max(kxks , kxk) i  ≤C max max(K ′s , K s kxks ), max(kxks , kxk) = C ′ K ′s max(kxks , 1).  Consider the K-multilinear map (u/[u, u])s → us given by the s-fold bracket. Since its image generates us as a K-submodule and since the ui generate u modulo [u, u], we can find a finite sequence (ij )1≤j≤j0 and a fixed finite family (κjk )1≤j≤j L 0 ,1≤k≤s with κjk ∈ uij such that, setting ζj = [κ′j1 , . . . , κjs ] we have s u = j Kζj (we can normalize so that kζj k = 1). Denote C = supj,k kκjk k. Let K ′′ be the supremum of the j. P norm of projections onto the submodules Kζ ′′ Then we can write z = j λj ζj with λj ∈ K, satisfying supj |λj | ≤ K kzk. If L is a normed field, denote β(L) = inf{|x| : |x| ∈ L, |x| > 1}. Define α0 = supℓ β(Kℓ ) ≥ 1 (it only depends on K). Hence for any elementQλ ∈ K, there exist µ1 , . . . , µs ∈ K with Q supk |µk | ≤ |λ|1/s α0 , such that λ = sk=1 µk . We apply this to write λj = sk=1 µjk , with |µjk | ≤ |λj |1/s α0 . Now identify the Lie algebra and the group through the exponential map. By Lemma 5.B.4, we have λj ζj = ((µj1 κj1 , . . . , µjsκjs )). We have |µjk κjk | ≤ α0 C ′ K ′′  1/s  kzk1/s ≤ α0 C ′ (CK ′′ )  and x = y1 . . . yd  Y  1/s  max(K ′ kxk, K ′  1/s  kxk1/s )  ((µj1 κj1, . . . , µjs κjs )),  j  which is a bounded number of terms in  S  Ui , each with norm  ≤ max(Akxk, Bkxk1/s ), where A = K ′ max(α0 C ′ (CK ′′ )1/s , 1) and B = α0 C ′ (CK ′′ K ′ )1/s .    58  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Proof of Theorem 6.B.2. We can identify U with its Lie algebra u through the exponential map. Use an embedding of U into matrices over K to define a matrix norm k · k′ on U, which is submutiplicative. Since both the embedding of U into its image and its inverse are polynomial maps, there is a polynomial control of the two norms k · k and k · k′ with respect to each other, say kuk ≤ max(Akuk′ k , B) ′ and kuk′ ≤ max(A′ kukk , B ′ ), with A, A′ ≥ 1, B, B ′ ≥ 0. Let us now prove the existence of µ2 > 1 such that the inclusion S n ⊂ U[µn2 ]T n holds for all n. Any element x in S n can be rewritten as a product ua, where a ∈ T n and u is a product of at most n elements, each of which has the form tat−1 , where t ∈ T n and a ∈ U ∩ S. If C1 ≥ 1 is an upper bound for kak when a ∈ U ∩ S and λ1 ≥ 2 is an upper bound for the Lipschitz constant of elements of T viewed as operators on u, we obtain ktat−1 k ≤ C1 λn1 . Hence ′ ′ ′ ′ ktat−1 k′ ≤ max(A′ C1k λnk 1 , B ). Since k · k is submultiplicative, it follows that ′ ′ ′ k′ k′ ′ n kuk′ ≤ max(nA′ C1k λnk 1 , n). Defining λ2 = 2A C1 λ1 , we obtain kuk ≤ λ2 for all k ′ k kk ′ nkk ′ k n. In turn, we deduce kxk ≤ max(An A C c , An , B). Thus there exists µ2 and n0 such that for all n ≥ n0 and all x = ua ∈ S n we have kuk ≤ µn2 ; enlarging µ2 if necessary we can ensure n0 = 0. Hence S n ⊂ U[µn2 ]T n holds for all n. The Ui generate U modulo [U, U] (because u0 ⊂ [u, u] and uα is contained in one of the ui for every nonzero weight α). Hence we can apply Lemma 6.B.3: there exists c3 ≥ 1 Q and a κ-tuple (q1 , . . . , qκ ) ∈ {1, . . . , ν}κ such that every x ∈ U can be written as κℓ=1 xℓ with xℓ ∈ Uqℓ with supℓ kxℓ k ≤ ec3 max(1, kxk). Then there exists c4 such that for every i and every y ∈ Ui , there exists t ∈ T and m ∈ N such that m ≤ c4 max(1, log kyk) and tm yt−m ∈ Si . In other words, for (c max(1,log kyk)) every i and y ∈ Ui , we have y ∈ Si 4 . In particular, setting c5 = c3 c4 xℓ ∈ Sq(cℓ 4 max(1,log kxℓ k)) ⊂ Sq(cℓ 4 [c3 +max(0,log kxk)]) ⊂ Sq(cℓ 5 max(1,log kxk)) ; thus if we set c5 = c3 c4 we have xℓ ∈ Sq(cℓ 5 max(1,log kxk)) Hence, for every r > 0 we have U[er ] ⊂  κ Y ℓ=1  Sq(cℓ 5 max(1,r)) ⊂ S κc5 max(1,r) ; −1  in particular, if C = κc5 and µ = eC , U[µn ] ⊂ S max(n,C) Thus U[µn ] ⊂ S n for all n ≥ C. In particular, U[µn−C ] ⊂ S n−C ⊂ S n for all n ≥ 0. Multiplying the norm by µ−C redefines U[µn−C ] to be U[µn ] and hence with this new norm we have U[µn ] ⊂ S n for all n.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  59  For the second inclusion, let us go back to the inclusion of U[er ], which yields (for all n ≥ 0), with λ = c5 log µ2 > 0 κ Y n 5 ,λn)) U[µ2 ] ⊂ Sq(max(c ; ℓ ℓ=1  as in the previous case, multiplying the norm allows to assume c5 = 0.    6.C. Application of Gromov’s trick to standard solvable groups. As above, let U1 , . . . , Uν be an admissible family of tame subgroups in U. If c is a positive integer Q and ℘ is a c-tuple of elements in {1, . . . , ν}, we can consider the product U℘ = cℓ=1 U℘ℓ . Then we can define, for r ≤ ∞, a set of null-homotopic words U℘ (r) = {w = w1 . . . wc | π(w) = 1, ∀ℓ, wℓ ∈ S℘(r)ℓ } ⊂ FS .  If R is a subset of the kernel of FS → G consisting of words of bounded length, define δ℘,S,R(n) = sup areaS,R (w) ∈ [0, ∞]. w∈U℘ (n)  (The area can a priori take infinite values, since we do not assume that R normally generates the kernel.) The following theorem is an essential reduction in the study of the Dehn function of standard solvable groups. Theorem 6.C.1. Let G = U ⋊A be a standard solvable group. Fix an admissible family U1 , . . . , Uν of tame subgroups and generating subsets as in §6.B; also fix a subset R of the kernel of π : FS → G. Let f be a function such that r 7→ f (r)/r α is non-decreasing for some α > 1. Suppose that for every c and every c-tuple ℘ ∈ {1, . . . , ν}c we have δ℘,S,R(n) 4 f (n). Then G is compactly presented by hS | Ri and has Dehn function 4 f (n). Remark 6.C.2. The proof actually even shows that the following holds, G, S and R being fixed as well α > 1: There exists c and a c-tuple ℘ satisfying: if for some f we have δ℘,S,R (n) 4 f (n), then G is compactly presented by hS | Ri and has Dehn function 4 f (n). However, we will only use the result in the slightly weaker form given in Theorem 6.C.1. (λn)  (λn)  Proof. Denote Wn = Sq1 . . . Sqκ T n , with λ, k as given by Theorem 6.B.2 (we use the notation of 6.B.1). Hence π(Wn ) contains the n-ball in G; note that Wn is contained in the [(2κλ + 1)n + κ]-ball of FS , which itself is contained in the κ′ n-ball, where κ′ = 2κλ + κ + 1. A simple observation is that T 3n ; Sq(λn+2n) . . . Sq(λn+2n) Sq(λn+n) . . . Sq(λn+n) Wn Wn Wn ⊂ Sq(λn) . . . Sq(λn) κ κ κ 1 1 1  in particular, setting λ′ = λ + 2, and defining ℘ℓ+pκ = qℓ for 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ κ, p ∈ {0, 1, 2}, we have ′  ′  Wn Wn Wn ∩ Ker(π) ⊂ S℘(λ1 n) . . . S℘(λ3κn) ∩ Ker(π) = U℘ (λ′ n).  60  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Thus the assumption implies that words in Wn Wn Wn ∩ Ker(π) have an area 4 f (n). By Theorem 2.E.3, it follows that hS | Ri is a presentation of G and has a Dehn function 4 f (n).  6.D. Dehn function of stably 2-tame groups. The following is a reformulation of Theorem D from the introduction. Theorem 6.D.1. Let G = U ⋊ A be a stably 2-tame standard solvable group (see Definition 4.C.1). Then G has a linear or quadratic Dehn function (linear precisely when A has rank one). Remark 6.D.2. Theorem 6.D.1 is actually a corollary of Theorem 10.E.1, because for a stably 2-tame group, we have H2 (u)0 = 0 and Kill(u)0 = 0 (because both are subquotients of (u ⊗ u)0 which is itself trivial if u is stably 2-tame). The point is that Theorem 10.E.1 is considerably more difficult, since it relies on the work of §7.B and the algebraic work of §8 and §9. Proof of Theorem 6.D.1. If A has rank one, then G is tame and thus hyperbolic, see Remark 6.A.9, and thus has a linear Dehn function. Otherwise, A being a retract of G, the Dehn function has a quadratic lower bound. Now let us prove the quadratic upper bound. We prove the quadratic upper bound by arguing by induction on the length ℓ of u as a K-module. If ℓ ≤ 2, then G is tame, hence has an at most quadratic Dehn function. Assume now that ℓ ≥ 2 and the result is proved for lesser ℓ. In order to apply Theorem 6.C.1, we first need to choose a suitable admissible family of tame subgroups. Let P be the (finite) set of principal weights, Lthat is, the set of weights of u/[u, u]. Given a principal weight α; define u[α] = t>0 utα ; this is a graded Lie algebra (beware that uα need not be a Lie subalgebra). Let α1 , . . . , αµ be representatives of the principal weights modulo positive collinearity; write U[αi ] = exp(u[αi ] ). Then we choose U[α1 ] , . . . , U[αµ ] as admissible family of tame subgroups, and we let S1 , . . . Sν be finite generating subsets of the U[αi ] ’s satisfying the conditions of §6.B. We let β ≥ 1 be an integer such that for all (n) (n) (βn) n ≥ 1, S1 S1 ⊂ S1 (the existence of β follows from the second part of Theorem 6.B.2 applied to U[α1 ] ⋊ A, for the admissible family {U[α1 ] }). Let v be the sum of [u, u] and all uβ when β ranges over all weights not positively collinear to α1 ; then v is a graded ideal. Note that u = u[α1 ] + v. Define V = exp(v). Let V1 , . . . , Vν be the standard tame subgroups of V and denote by Σi a compact subset of Vi (with all the previous requirements we made for Si ). Fix k ≥ 1, ℘ ∈ {1, . . . , µ}k . For positive integers n1 , . . . , nk , consider an (n ) (n ) element w in FS belonging to S℘11 . . . S℘kk , we do the following: if there are any (n) (m) two consecutive occurrences of S1 , we glue them using the inclusion S1 S1 ⊂ (β max(m,n)) S1 in G. The cost of this is at most quadratic since it lies in the tame  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  61  subgroup U[α1 ] ⋊ A. If not, we consider i maximal such that ℘i = 1. If i = 1 or i does not exist, say we are done. Otherwise j = ℘i−1 6= 1. We first observe (n ) (n ) (n ) (n ) (n ) (n ) that Sj j S1 i is contained in Sj i S1 j ((Sj j , S1 i )) (inclusion in FS ). Then α1 and αj belong to a single standard tame subgroup, and hence the commutator belongs to a single standard tame subgroup of V ⋊ A. So the commutator can be rewritten in V ⋊ A, thanks to the second part of Theorem 6.B.2, as an element (c(n +n )) (c(n +n )) of Σq1 1 2 . . . Σqκ 1 2 , where cSand κ only depend on G. We note that doing this, we make some generators in Σi appear, but they stay at the right of any occurrence of S1 . Therefore we can reiterate some bounded number of times (say P (c′ n) ′ ≤ k 2 ) until we obtain a word w w with |w | ≤ c n (n = n ), w ∈ S , 1 2 2 i 1 1 S S and w2 a word in i≥2 Si ∪ i Σi ∪ T . In particular, assuming that w represents the trivial element in G, w1 represents an element of V . There exists a standard tame subgroup of U containing U[α1 ] ; then its intersection with V is a standard ′′ tame subgroup, say V1 . So w1 can be replaced with some element w1′ of Σc1 n with quadratic cost since the word w1−1 w1′ lies in a tame subgroup of G. So from w we passed with quadratic cost to a word in V of length ≤ C|w|. Since by induction V has an at most quadratic Dehn function, we deduce that w has an at most quadratic area with respect to n. Since this works for every ℘ (with constants possibly depending on ℘), we can apply Theorem 6.C.1 to conclude that G has an at most quadratic Dehn function.  6.E. Generalized tame groups. Definition 6.E.1. A locally compact group is generalized tame if it has a semidirect product decomposition U ⋊ N where some element c of N acts on U as a compaction, and N is nilpotent and compactly generated. Thus, the assumption that N is abelian in tame groups is relaxed to nilpotent. If G = U ⋊ N is a tame generalized standard solvable group it is tempting to believe that, in a way analogous to §6.A, there is a large-scale Lipschitz deformation retraction of G onto N. However, the proof only carries over when the element c of N acting as a compaction of N can be chosen to be central in N. Unfortunately, this can not always be assumed and, in order to get an upper bound on the Dehn function, we need a more complicated approach. Theorem 6.E.2 (The generalized tame case). Consider a generalized standard solvable group G = U ⋊ N such that there exists c ∈ N acting on U as a compaction. Let δN be the Dehn function of N, and let f be a function such that δN 4 f and r 7→ f (r)/r α is non-decreasing for some α > 1. Then the Dehn function δG of G satisfies δN 4 δG 4 f . In particular, if f can be chosen to be ≈-equivalent to the Dehn function of N, then δG ≈ δN . Note that in all examples we are aware of, we can indeed choose f to be ≈equivalent to δN , such that r 7→ f (r)/r 2 is non-decreasing (unless N admits Z as  62  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  a lattice, in which case G is tame and has a linear Dehn function). In general, we can always fix α > 1 and consider the function r 7→ f (r) = r α sup1≤s≤r s−α δN (s). Remark 6.E.3. Theorem 6.E.2 has some similarity with a theorem of Varopoulos [Var00, Main theorem, p. 57] concerning connected Lie groups. Namely, for a simply connected Lie group of the form U ⋊ N with U, N simply connected nilpotent Lie groups such that N contains an element acting as a contraction on N, he proves that there exists a “polynomially Lipschitz” homotopy from the identity of G to its projection on N. To prove the theorem, we need the following lemma, whose proof is much more complicated than we could expect at first sight (see Remark 6.E.6). Lemma 6.E.4. Relations of the form sw t, where s and t belong to SU and where w is a word of length ≃ n in SN have area 4 δN (n). Proof. For the sake of readability, we first consider the (easier) case when N is 2-nilpotent. Denote j = in, where i is an integer to be determined latter in the proof, but that will only depend on G and S (hence is to be considered as bounded). Up to conjugating by a power of c, it is enough to evaluate the area of the j j relation swc tc . Since conjugation by c is a contraction (see Definition 4.B.4), it j turns out that tc = u−1 ∈ SU . It is straightforward to check that the relation j j tc u has area  j. Hence we are left to consider the relation swc u. Denoting y = ((w, cn )) = w −1 c−n wcn , we have (6.E.5)  wcj = cj w((w, cj )) = cj y i .  Moreover the area of the relation ((w, cj ))y −i is controlled by the Dehn function of N, so we are reduced to compute the area of j  i  (sc )wy u. Denote Na the Zariski closure of the range of N in Aut(U). The algebraic group Na decomposes as a direct product AV where A (resp. V ) is semisimple (resp. unipotent). Let us write c = cd cv and w = wd wv according to this decomposition. Endow the Lie algebra of U with some norm. The crucial observation is that y = ((w, cn )) = ((wv , cnv )). It follows that the matrix norm of y (acting on the Lie algebra of U) is at most CnD for some C, D depending only on G and S. Let K > 1 be a constant such that the matrix norm of every subword of wy is at most K n . Let z be a prefix of wy i: it is of the form ry k , where r is a subword of wy, and k ≤ i. The matrix norm of z is therefore at most CinD K n . Since c acts as a contraction, one can choose i be such that the matrix norm of ci is less than K −2 . Hence the matrix norm of cj z is less than CinD K −n which is bounded by some function of i, C, D and K. It follows that for any prefix r of cj wy i has bounded matrix norm. Let aq for q = 1, 2, . . . be the sequence of letters of the word cj wy i , and let zq = a1 . . . aq . It follows that the elements szq  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  63  are bounded in U. Now let t−1 q be words in SU of bounded length representing the elements szq . We conclude by reducing successively the relations (tq−1 )aq tq whose area are bounded. This solves the case where N is 2-nilpotent. If N is not assumed to be 2-nilpotent, then the relation ((a, bi )) = ((a, b))i does not hold anymore. Therefore we cannot simply replace ((w, cj )) by ((w, cn ))i , as we did above. We shall use instead a more complicated formula, namely the one given by Lemma 5.B.2. According to that lemma, one can write ((w, cj )) as a product of m iterated commutators (or their inverses) in the letters w ±1 and c±n . The rest of the proof is then identical to the 2-nilpotent case, replacing in the previous proof, the power of commutators y i = ((w, cn ))i by this product of (iterated) commutators.  Remark 6.E.6. Lemma 6.E.4 is not as trite as it may look at first sight, and fails when N is not nilpotent. For instance, consider the free group F2 = hs, ti, and the semidirect product U ⋊ F2 , where U ≃ R is written as N = {(ux )x∈R } is written multiplicatively, sxs−1 = x2 for all x ∈ N and [t, N] = 1. Write −1 mn = s−n tsn . Then mn v1 m−1 n v1 can be shown to have an exponential area. Lemma 6.E.7. Consider a semidirect product of groups G = U ⋊ N; let c be an of N and Ω a symmetric subset of U such that ΩΩ ⊂ c−1 Ωc and S element −n n Ωc = U. Let T be a symmetric generating subset of N containing n≥0 c S {1, c}, such that t∈T tΩt−1 ⊂ c−1 Ωc. Then S = Ω ∪ T generates G and S n ⊂ (c−2n Ωc2n )T n ⊂ S 5n+1 . Proof. It is immediate that S generates G. By an immediate induction, we have k Ω2 ⊂ c−k Ωck . In particular, Ωn ⊂ c−⌈log2 n⌉ Ωc⌈log2 n⌉ .  Qn −1 t ω t Consider a word w of length n in S. Then it can be rewritten as t, i i i i=1 where each ti and t belong to T n and each ωi belong to Ω. Thus, in G, we have S n ⊂ (c−n Ωcn )n T n = c−n Ωn cn T n  ⊂ c−n−⌈log2 n⌉ Ωcn+⌈log2 n⌉ T n ⊂ c−2n Ωc2n T n ⊂ S 5n+1    Proof of Theorem 6.E.2. Since N is a Lipschitz retract of G, we have δN 4 δG ; let us prove that δG 4 f . We pick the 1-element family (U1 ), where U1 , as an admissible family of subgroups; we let S1 be a stable vacuum subset for some element c ∈ T acting as a compaction on U. We first bound (assuming c ∈ T ) the area of relations of length ≤ n, of the Q3 −ni ni  ′ form w = c ω c w with ωi ∈ Ω and w ′ a word in T (necessarily i i=1 ni ≤ n). Since w ′ is a relation in N, with cost ≤ f (n), we can replace w ′ with the word. Then after conjugation by cn , we are reduced to the word Q3 trivial n−ni ωi cni −n . The element cn−ni ωi cni −n represents an element si ∈ Ω, and i=1 c by Lemma 6.E.4, the cost to pass from cn−ni ωi cni −n to si is 4 f (n). Hence the area of w is 4 f (n).  64  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  We can apply Lemma 6.E.7 (if necessary, replace c with a large power ck of it and replace T with T ∪ {c±k } for its hypotheses to be fulfilled. Thanks to the length estimates of Lemma 6.E.7, we can use Gromov’s trick (Theorem 2.E.3) to conclude that the Dehn function of G is  f .  We also need a generalization of Theorem 6.B.2. We define an admissible family of subgroups as in 6.B (A being replaced with N), and let T be a compact symmetric generating subset of N. Since the proof of the following theorem is an immediate adaptation of that of Theorem 6.B.2, we omit the proof. Theorem 6.E.8. Fix a generalized standard solvable group G, an admissible family of tame subgroups and generating subset as above. There exists a constant λ > 0, a positive integer κ and a κ-tuple (q1 , . . . , qκ ) of elements in {1, . . . , ν} such  (λn) (λn) that for every n, the n-ball of G is contained in the projection π Sq1 . . . Sqκ T n .  7. Estimates of areas using algebraic presentations In this section, we provide a new method allowing to obtain upper bounds on the Dehn function of groups with “enough algebraic structure”. The basic idea is to consider a group G given by an “algebraic presentation”, that is, it is isomorphic to the quotient of a free product νi=1 Ui (K) of algebraic groups Ui over some locally compact field K (or, more generally, a finite product of such fields), by the subgroup generated by finitely many “algebraic families of relators”. An algebraic family of relators is an algebraic subvariety of some Ui1 × · · · × Uiℓ , where (i1 , ..., iℓ ) is a fixed sequence of integers from 1, .., ν, which is interpreted as a set of words of length ℓ of the free product. In order to get estimates, we need to suppose that G itself is of the form G(K), and assume that the above presentation holds in a very strong sense. Namely, we need to assume that for every commutative K-algebra A, the group G(A) is the quotient of νi=1 Ui (A) by the relators (evaluated in A). Our main result consists in controlling the size and word length of a set of relations that belong to a same algebraic family. More precisely, consider some algebraic family M of relations: namely a subvariety of some Uj1 × · · · × Ujk such that for every K-algebra A, the A-points of this variety are mapped to the neutral element of GA . Then there exists an integer N such that every element ν x = (x1 , . . . , xk ) of M can be written as a word of length at most N in i=1 Ui (A) consisting of a product of conjugates of relators. Moreover the norms of the letters of this word are polynomially controlled by the norms of the xi ’s.  ∗  ∗  ∗  7.A. Affine norm on varieties over normed fields. 7.A.1. Norms. In this paragraph, let (K, | · |) be a normed field. The affine space Ad (K) = Kd is endowed with the sup norm k · k.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  65  Let X be an affine K-variety with basepoint x0 (a fixed element of X(K)). For every d and every pointed closed K-embedding φ : X → Ad (pointed means mapping x0 to 0), we can define a “length function” on X(K) by ℓφ (x) = kφ(x)k. The following proposition asserts that up to polynomial distortion, this length is unique. Proposition 7.A.1. Let φ, ψ be two choices of pointed embeddings. Then for some positive constants C, c > 0, ℓψ (x) ≤ C max(ℓφ (x)c , 1),  ∀x ∈ X(K)  ′  Proof. If the embeddings are into Ad and Ad , with say d′ ≤ d, using that the ′ trivial embedding Ad (K) ⊂ Ad is isometric, we can enlarge d′ to assume that d = d′ . Now consider the isomorphism η = ψ ◦ φ−1 : φ(X) → ψ(X). Then η extends to a regular map η1 : Ad → Ad : indeed, first view η as a regular map φ(X) → Ad , which is the same as the data of d regular maps φ(X) → A1 and remind that regular maps on φ(X) are by definition restrictions of regular maps of the affine space. Then, viewing Ad embedded into A2d as the left factor Ad × {0}, we can extend η to a K-automorphism η̃ : A2d → A2d (x, y) 7→ (η1 (x) + y, x) Now if c is the total degree of η̃, there exist a positive constant C such that for all u ∈ A2d (K) we have kη̃(u)k ≤ C max(kukc, 1); therefore for all x ∈ X(K) we have  ℓψ (x) = kψ(x)k = kη ◦ φ(x)k ≤ C max(kφ(x)k, 1) = C max(ℓψ (x)c , 1).   Note that the analogue for distances is not true: for instance if we take the disjoint union of two lines K × {0, 1}, setting φ(x, t) = (x, t) (two parallel lines) and ψ(x, t) = (x, tx2 ) (a line and a parabola), then considering the sequence of pairs of points (n, 0) and (n, 1) we see that kψ(x) − ψ(y)k cannot be bounded in terms of kφ(x) − φ(y)k. Example 7.A.2. Assume that K has characteristic zero. Let U be a unipotent group over K. Given an embedding ψ of U as a Zariski-closed subgroup of SLd , and fixing a norm on the algebra of matrices, we obtain two norms on U: the one given by this embedding, and the one given by the embedding ψ̄ of the Lie algebra u into sld , pulled back to U through the exponential. Each of these two norms on U is polynomially bounded by the other, by Proposition 7.A.1.  66  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Remark 7.A.3. We can define the logarithmic length on X(K) associated to φ as Lφ (x) = log(1 + ℓφ (x)). As a consequence of Proposition 7.A.1, for any two choices ψ and φ, we have Lψ ≃ Lφ , i.e. there exist positive constants c ≥ 1 and C ≥ 0 such that c−1 Lφ (x) − C ≤ Lψ (x) ≤ cLφ (x) + C,  ∀x ∈ X(K).  7.A.2. Ring of polynomial growth functions. Let K be a normed field. Endow K with the supremum norm and consider the algebra PY = PY (K) of functions from Y × R≥0 to K that have most polynomial growth with respect to the real variable, uniformly in Y , that is, satisfying ∃c, α > 0, c′ ∈ R, ∀t ≥ 0, ∀y ∈ Y, kf (y, t)k ≤ ctα + c′ . Lemma 7.A.4. Let Y be a set. Then for any K-affine variety X, there are canonical bijections ∼  X(KY ) → X(K)Y ,  ∼  X(PY (K)) → PY (X(K))  Proof. The first equality is formal: if A = K[X], then, Hom being in the category of K-algebras, we have X(KY ) = Hom(K[X], KY ) = Hom(K[X], K)Y = X(K)Y . Given a K-closed embedding of X into the d-dimensional affine space, it is just given by the function Ad (KY ) → Ad (K)Y   Φ (f1 , . . . , fd ) 7→ y 7→ (f1 (y), . . . , fd (y)) . Then Φ(X(KY )) = X(K)Y and Φ(Ad (PY (K))) = PY (Ad (K)), and hence PY (X(K)) = X(K)Y ∩ PY (Ad (K)) = Φ(X(KY ) ∩ Ad (PY (K))) = Φ(X(PY (K))).    7.A.3. Remark. All the results from this §7.A immediately to the case of X(K) when K is a finite product of normed fields (endowed with the sup norm). The only difference lies in the language: K-affine Q variety should be replaced with: affine scheme of finite type over K; if K = kj=1 Kj , this is just the data of one Kj -affine variety over Kj for each j. 7.B. Area of words of bounded combinatorial length.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  67  7.B.1. The setting: generators (*). By K we mean a finite product of normed fields (in a first reading, we can assume it is a single normed field). We recall the reader familiar with varieties but not schemes that it is not much here: over a single field, “scheme of finite type” can be thought of as “variety” and “affine group scheme of finite type” as “linear algebraic group”. Over a finite product Q Kj of fields, the datum of a scheme is just the datum of one scheme over each of the fields Kj . Nevertheless, we stick to the word “scheme” because it is the only rigorous setting in which the assertions we state are precise. Let U1 , . . . , Uν be affine K-group schemes of finite type. Write Ui = Ui (K). We need to introduce some “norm function” on each Ui . For this, as explained in §7.A, we fix a closed K-embedding of Ui into SLq , so that the norm, written kuk, of any element u of Ui makes sense (using the operator norm on q × q matrices, where Kq is endowed with the sup norm). 7.B.2. The setting: relators (**). We are going to introduce some functors X from the category of commutative (associative unital) K-algebras to the category of sets, denoted by A 7→ X[A], we use brackets rather than parentheses to emphasize that these objects are possibly not representable by a scheme. We need to consider words of some given length whose letters belong to the disjoint union of the Ui . To do so, we fix integers 1 ≤ ω1 , . . . , ω|ω| ≤ ν. Hence we Q|ω| can consider the product Uω = ℓ=1 Uωℓ . Thus Uω (A) =  |ω| Y  Uωℓ (A)  ℓ=1  is an obvious way to parameterize the set of words uω1 . . . uω|ω| with uωℓ ∈ Uωℓ (A) for all ℓ. We are going to consider closed subschemes of Uω , which can then be used to parameterize sets of words. Formally, this is done as follows. Let H[A] be the ν free product i=1 Ui (A). There is an obvious product map  ∗  πAω : Uω (A) → H[A],  (u1 , . . . , u|ω| ) 7→ u1 . . . u|ω| .  Now fix finitely many closed subschemes R1 , . . . , Rξ ⊂ Uω (they will play the role of algebraically parameterized relators). For convenience, write R[A] = R1 (A) ∪ · · · ∪ Rξ (A) for any K-algebra A (if K were a field, it would be representable by a closed subscheme and we could then assume ξ = 1; anyway this is not an issue); clearly the πAω together define a map πA : R[A] → H[A]. Define Q[A] as the quotient of H[A] by the normal subgroup generated by πA (R[A]). Informally, Q is a group generated by algebraic generators and algebraic sets of relators. A priori, Q is not representable by a group scheme over K (for instance, if R is empty, Q[A] is the free product H[A]).  68  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  7.B.3. A family of relations (***). Now given an integer c ≥ 0 and a c-tuple ℘ = (℘1 , . . . , ℘c ) of integers in {1, . . . , ν}, so we have the product U℘ (A) =  c Y  U℘i (A)  i=1  and we define L℘ [A] = {(f1 , . . . , fc ) ∈ U℘ (A) : f1 . . . fc ≡ 1 in Q[A]} . (It should rather be denoted LR,℘ [A]) but since R is fixed we omit it in the notation.) In other words, denoting by N[A] the normal subgroup of H[A] generated by R[A], we have L℘ [A] = (πA℘ )−1 (N[A]). We cannot a priori represent L℘ as a K-closed subscheme of U℘ . We obtain results in case it turns out to be a closed subscheme, or more generally when it contains a K-closed subscheme. Namely, let M ⊂ U℘ be a K-closed subscheme and assume that it is contained in L℘ , in the sense that for every (reduced) commutative K-algebra A we have M(A) ⊂ L℘ [A] (equality as subsets of U℘ (A)). Also assume that the unit element of U℘ (K) belongs to M(K) (this is no restriction since it belongs to L℘ [K]). Define V[A] as the union of all Uj (A) in H[A]. The following lemma roughly says that any element x = (x1 , . . . , xc ) ∈ M(K) can be written as a product of boundedly many conjugates of relators whose coefficients are controlled by polynomials in the size of x. Lemma 7.B.1. Fix U1 , . . . , Uν as in (*), ω and R as in (**). Given any ℘ and any family M of relations as in (***), there exist positive integers m, µ, α satisfying the following: for all x = (x1 , . . . , xc ) ∈ M(K), there exist • elements ρkℓ (x) ∈ Uωℓ (K), 1 ≤ k ≤ m, 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ |ω|, such that setting   |ω| Y ρ˜k (x) = (ρk1 (x), . . . , ρk|ω| (x)) ∈  Uωℓ  (K), ℓ=1  we have ρ˜k (x) ∈ R[K] for every k; • elements hkℓ (x) in V[K], 1 ≤ k ≤ m, 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ µ,  satisfying the inequalities  khkℓ (x)k, kρkℓ (x)k ≤ (2 + kxk)α − 2,  ∀k, ℓ;  and such that, setting ρk (x) = πK (ρ˜k (x)) =  |ω| Y ℓ=1  ρkℓ (x),  hk (x) =  µ Y ℓ=1  hkℓ (x),  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  69  we have the equality in H[K]: (7.B.2)  x1 . . . xc =  m Y  hk (x)ρk (x)hk (x)−1 .  k=1  Remark 7.B.3. That for every x we can write an equality as in (7.B.2) follows directly from the fact that M(K) ⊂ L℘ [K], but this gives such an equality with m, µ depending on x, and with an efficient upper bound on the norm of relators and conjugating elements. Lemma 7.B.1 is a uniform version of this fact, and relies on the stronger inclusion M(A) ⊂ L℘ [A] for some well-chosen K-algebra A. While a suitable choice of A would be the algebra Kexp (as in the sketch of proof of §1.7), we find more convenient to work with the algebra PY (K) introduced in §7.A.2. The difference is unessential, and especially allows us to avoid to argue by contradiction as we did in §1.7. Proof of Lemma 7.B.1. Let us fix an abstract set Y ; we will assume that its cardinal is at least equal to that of K. The ring PY (K) (§7.A.2) can be described as the set of functions Y × R≥0 → K satisfying ∃α > 0, ∀t ≥ 0, ∀y ∈ Y, kf (y, t)k ≤ (2 + t)α − 2.  For any affine K-scheme X of finite type (with a given embedding in an affine space), X(K) inherits of a norm and the set PY (X(K)) is well-defined. There is an obvious inclusion L℘ [PY (K)] ⊂ PY [L℘ (K)]. It is not necessarily an equality (see Example 7.B.8); however the equality M(PY (K)) = PY (M(K)) holds (see Lemma 7.A.4). For x ∈ U℘ (K), recall that kxk = max1≤i≤c kxi k. Now assume that Y is infinite of cardinal at least equal to that of K. We claim that there exists a function f = (f1 , . . . , fc ) : (Y × R≥0 ) → M(K)  satisfying (a) kf (y, t)k ≤ t for all (y, t) ∈ Y × R≥0 ; (b) for every x = (x1 , . . . , xc ) ∈ M(K), there exists y ∈ Y such that f (y, kxk) = x. To construct such an f , consider an arbitrary injective map x 7→ y(x) from U℘ (K) to Y (it exists because of the cardinality assumption on Y ); for each x ∈ M(K), define f (y(x), kxk) = x and define f (y, t) = 1 for every (y, t) not of the form (y(x), kxk), where 1 here denotes the unit element (1, . . . , 1) of U℘ (K), which belongs to M(K) by assumption. By construction, f takes values in M(K). By (a), f ∈ PY (M(K)). Hence f ∈ M(PY (K)) = M(P), where write P = PY (K) as a shorthand. So, by the inclusion M(P) ⊂ L℘ (P), we have f ∈ L℘ (P). Hence πP℘ (f ) = f1 . . . fc ∈ H[P] belongs to the normal subgroup generated by πPω (R[P]). This means that there exist • integers m, µ;  70  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  • ρkℓ ∈ Uiℓ (P), 1 ≤ k ≤ m, 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ |ω|, such that setting ρ˜k = (ρk1 , . . . , ρk|ω| ) ∈ Uω (P), we have ρ˜k ∈ R[P] for every k; • elements hkℓ in V[P], 1 ≤ k ≤ m, 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ µ, such that, setting ρk = πP (ρ˜k ) =  |ω| Y  ρkℓ ,  hk =  (7.B.4)  f1 . . . fc =  hkℓ ,  ℓ=1  ℓ=1  we have, in H[P], the equality  µ Y  m Y  hk ρk h−1 k .  k=1  Hence for all y ∈ Y and t ∈ R≥0 , we have the equality in H[K] m Y f1 (y, t) . . . fc (y, t) = hk (y, t)ρk (y, t)hk (y, t)−1, k=1  Qµ  Q where ρk (y, t) = ℓ=1 ρkℓ (y, t) and hk (y, t) = µℓ=1 hkℓ (y, t). Since each of the elements ρkℓ , hkℓ belongs to some Ui (P), there exists α > 0 such that for all k, ℓ and all y, t, we have kρkℓ (y, t)k ≤ (2 + t)α − 2,  khkℓ (y, t)k ≤ (2 + t)α − 2.  Hence for all x = (x1 , . . . , xc ) ∈ M(K), choosing one y = y(x) satisfying (b) and t = kxk, and using the shorthands ρkℓ (x) = ρkℓ (y(x), kxk),  ρk (x) = ρk (y(x), kxk) =  µ Y ℓ=1  ρkℓ (x),  hkℓ (x) = hkℓ (y(x), kxk),  hk (x) = hk (y(x), kxk) =  µ Y  hkℓ (x),  ℓ=1  we precisely obtain that the norms of both ρkℓ (x) and hkℓ (x) is bounded above by (2 + kxk)α − 2 and that the equality (7.B.2) holds in H[K].  7.B.4. Generating subsets and presentations (****). Keep the previous setting (with Ui , R given). Assume that we have, in addition, a group H, subgroups H1 , . . . , Hν generating H, and homomorphisms ψi : Ui → Hi (in the examples we have in mind, all ψi are given as inclusions). We assume that the resulting homomorphism H[K] → H is trivial on R[K], or equivalently factors through Q[K]. Let hSi | Πi i be a presentation of Hi . We suppose that for each i and for every x ∈ Ui , the word length of ψi (x) with respect to the generating subset Si of Hi is ≃ log(1 + kxk). For x ∈ Ui , fix a representing word x in Si of ψi (x), of size ≃ log(1 + kxk). Assume in addition the following: • all presentations hSi | Πi i have Dehn function bounded above by some superadditive function δ1 ;  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  71  • there is a subset R ⊂ R[K] and a function δ2 such that F for every F r = (r1 , . . . , r|ω| ) ∈ R[K], the area of r1 . . . r|ω| with respect to h i Si | i Πi ∪ |ω| Ri is finite and ≤ δ2 (maxℓ=1 |rℓ |Si ). 7.B.5. The fundamental theorem. Theorem 7.B.5. In the above setting (*),(**), (****), and given a family of relations as in (***), there exist constants s, s′ , m > 0 such that for every x = (x1 ,F . . . , xc )F∈ M(K), denoting n = maxi |xi |Si , the area of x1 . . . xc with respect to h i Si | i Πi ∪ Ri is ≤ δ1 (sn) + mδ2 (s′ n). Proof. Fix x as above. As in Lemma 7.B.1, write the equality in H[K] m Y (7.B.6) x1 . . . xc = hk (x)ρk (x)hk (x)−1 k=1  (with all the additional features of the statement of the lemma). Defining [x] = log(2 + kxk) and similarly [u] = log(2 + kuk) for any i and u ∈ Ui (K), the upper bounds on khkℓ (x)k and kρkℓ (x)k provided by the lemma can be rewritten as [hkℓ (x)], [ρkℓ (x)] ≤ α[x]. F Q|ω| Q Define S = Si . Write ρ̂k (x) = ℓ=1 ρkℓ (x) and ĥk (x) = µℓ=1 hkℓ (x). Define the word in the free group over S w = (x1 . . . xc )−1  m Y  ĥk (x)ρ̂k (x)ĥk (x)−1  k=1  Hence, by (7.B.6), the image of w in H[K] is trivial. Denoting by | · | the word length in H[K] with respect to S. By assumption, there exist γ, ζ ≥ 1 such that for every i and u ∈ Ui (K), we have ζ −1[u] ≤ |u|Si ≤ γ[u]; in particular |u| ≤ γ[u]. Also define n = maxci=1 |xi |S℘i . Hence n ≥ ζ −1 max[xi ] ≥ ζ −1 [x] i  and |w| ≤  c X i=1  |xi | +  m X k=1     |ω| X ℓ=1  |ρkℓ (x)| + 2  µ X ℓ=1    |hkℓ (x)|    |ω| µ c m X X X X  [ρkℓ (x)] + 2 [hkℓ (x)] ≤γ  [xi ] +   i=1  k=1  ℓ=1  ≤γ(c + mα(|ω| + 2µ))[x] ≤ sn,  ℓ=1  where s = ζγ(c + mα(|ω| + 2µ)). By Lemma 2.D.1 (Dehn function of free products of presentations), the area F F of w with respect to h Si | Πi i is ≤ δ1 (sn).  72  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  We have, by definition of w: x1 . . . xc =  m Y  ĥk (x)ρ̂k (x)ĥk (x)−1  k=1  !  w −1 ;  S S the area of ρ̂k (x) with respect to the presentation P = h Si | Πi ∪ Ri is     |ω| |ω| ≤ δ2 max |ρkℓ (x)|Si ≤ δ2 max γ[ρkℓ (x)] ≤ δ2 (γα[x]) ≤ δ2 (γαζn) ℓ=1  so the area of  ℓ=1  Qm  k=1  ĥ(x)ρ̂k (x)ĥk (x)−1 with respect to the presentation P is ≤ mδ2 (γαζn).  Therefore the area of x1 . . . xc with respect to P is ≤ δ1 (sn) + mδ2 (γαζn).    7.B.6. Restatement of the theorem involving a group word. Let Fc be the free group on the generators t1 , . . . , tc . We say that w ∈ Fc is essential if all ti appear in the reduced form of w (possibly with a negative exponent). We call the word t1 . . . tc , which is essential, the tautological word; denote it by τ . Let w be an essential word in Fc′ , of length c (necessarily c ≥ c′ if w is essential). Let ℘′ be a c′ -tuple of elements of {1, . . . , ν}. Write w as a reduced word, namely w = w1 . . . wc with wi ∈ {tj , t−1 j ,1 ≤ j ≤ ±1 ′ c }; if wi = tj , we write W (i) = j and w[i] = ±1. Let us define a c-tuple ℘ = w • ℘′ of elements in {1, . . . , ν}: for 1 ≤ i ≤ c, write ′ ′ ℘i = j if wi ∈ {tj , t−1 j }. For instance τ • ℘ = ℘ ; another less trivial example is −1 w(t1 , t2 , t3 ) = t2 t−2 1 t3 t2 ,  ℘′ = (5, 6, 3)  Define (w • U℘′ )(A) as  ⇒  w • ℘′ = (6, 5, 5, 3, 6). w[k]  {(u1, . . . , uc ) ∈ U℘ (A) : ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , c′ }, ∀k, ℓ ∈ W −1 ({j}), uk  w[ℓ]  = uℓ }.  Thus w • U℘′ is a closed subscheme of U℘ . In the above example, we have  (w • U℘′ )(A) = {(u6, u5 , u5 , u3, u−1 6 ) | (u3 , u5 , u6 ) ∈ (U3 × U5 × U6 )(A)}.  When w is essential, we have an isomorphism φw of schemes U℘′ → w • U℘′ , defined on U℘′ (A) by w[1]  w[c]  φw (u1, . . . , uc′ ) = (uW (1) , . . . , uW (c)) Note that φτ is the identity. If M′ is a closed subscheme of U℘′ , we define w • M′ = φw (M); this is a closed subscheme of w • U℘′ . The following theorem seems to be a generalization of Theorem 7.B.5 (namely when w = t1 . . . tc ), but is actually a simple consequence. It will be useful to refer to it. Let ℘ be a c-tuple of elements in {1, . . . , ν}. If w ∈ Fc , denote by Lw ℘ [A] the set of (x1 , . . . , xc ) ∈ U℘ (A) such that w(x1 , . . . , xc ) equals 1 in Q[A].  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  73  Theorem 7.B.7. In the above setting (*),(**), (****), let c′ be a positive integer and ℘′ a c′ -tuple of elements of {1, . . . , ν}. Let M′ be a closed subscheme of U℘′ and let w be an essential word in Fc′ , such that M′ (A) ⊂ Lw ℘′ [A] for all A. ′ Then there exist constants s, s , m > 0 such that for every x = (x1 , . . . , xSc′ ) ∈ ′ M S (K), denoting n = maxi |xi |S′ i , the area of w(x1 , . . . , xc′ ) with respect to h Si | Πi ∪ Ri is ≤ δ1 (sn) + mδ2 (s n).  Proof. Define ℘ = w • ℘′ and M = w • M′ as above. Thus πA℘ (M(A)) is precisely the set elements of the form w(x1 , . . . , xc′ ) ∈ H[A] with (x1 , . . . , xc′ ) ∈ M′ (A). In particular, M(A) ⊂ Lw ℘ [A]. Hence M satisfies the assumption of (***) and Theorem 7.B.5 can be applied.  Example 7.B.8. Here is an example in which the inclusion L℘ [KY ] ⊂ L℘ [K]Y is strict. We choose K = R, ν = 1, and U1 (A) = A for every A (so U1 is the 1-dimensional unipotent group. We choose R = R1 to be the singleton {1} (formally, R(A) = {1} ⊂ A). Hence Q(A) is equal to A/Z1A , and for ℘ = {1}, we have L℘ [A] = Z1A . In particular, the inclusion L℘ [KY ] ⊂ L℘ [K]Y is proper as soon as Y contains two distinct elements. Anyway this example is not really serious because assuming that R is a subscheme containing 0 (which could easily be arranged), we would have L℘ [KY ] = L℘ [K]Y for every finite Y , and the serious issue is when Y is infinite. Indeed, now defining R = R1 as equal to {0, 1} (namely R = Spec(R[t]/(t2 − t))), we have R(A) equal to the set of idempotents in A, and hence L℘ [A] is the additive subgroup of A generated by idempotents. In particular, L℘ [RY ] is equal to the set of bounded functions Y → Z, while L℘ [R]Y is equal to the set of all functions Y → Z, which differs from the former if Y is infinite. The inclusion L℘ [PY (R)] ⊂ PY (L℘ (R)) is also proper, since then L℘ [PY (R)] is equal to the set of bounded functions Y → Z, while PY (L℘ (R)) is equal to the set of all functions Y → Z of at most polynomial growth, uniformly in Y . 8. Central extensions of graded Lie algebras This section contains results on central extensions of graded Lie algebras, which will be needed in Section 9. Let Q ⊂ K be fields of characteristic zero (for instance, Q = Q and K is a nondiscrete locally compact field). To any graded Lie algebra, we associate a central extension in degree zero, which we call its “blow-up”, whose study will be needed in Section 9. We are then led to following problem: given a Lie algebra g over K, we need to compare the homologies H2K (g) and H2Q (g) of g viewed as a Lie algebra over K and as a Lie algebra over Q by restriction of scalars. When g is defined over Q, i.e. g = K ⊗Q l, this problem has been tackled in several papers [KL82, NW08]. Here most of the work is carried out over an arbitrary commutative ring; this generality will be needed as we need to apply the results over suitable rings of functions.  74  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  8.A. Basic conventions. The following conventions will be used throughout this chapter. The letter R denotes an arbitrary commutative ring (associative with unit). Unless explicitly stated, modules, Lie algebras are over the ring R and are not assumed to be finitely generated. The reader is advised not to read this part linearly but rather refer to it when necessary. Gradings. We fix an abelian group W, called the weight space. By graded module, we mean an R-module V endowed with a grading, namely an R-module decomposition as a direct sum M V = Vα . α∈W  Elements of Vα are called homogeneous elements of weight α. An R-module homomorphism f : V → W between graded R-modules is graded if f (Vα ) ⊂ Wα for all α. If V is a graded module and V ′ is a subspace, it is a graded submodule if it is generated by homogeneous elements, in which case it is naturally graded and so is the quotient V /V ′ . By the weights of V we generally mean the subset WV ⊂ W consisting of α ∈ W such that Vα 6= {0}. We use the notation M V▽ = Vα . α6=0  By gradedLLie algebra we mean a Lie algebra g endowed with an R-module grading g = gα such that [gα , gβ ] ⊂ gα+β for all α, β ∈ W.  Tensor products. If V, W are modules, the tensor product V ⊗ W = V ⊗R W is defined in the usual way. The symmetric product V ⊚ V is obtained by modding out by the R-linear span of all v ⊗ w − w ⊗ v and the exterior product V ∧ V is obtained by modding out by the R-linear span of all v ⊗w + w ⊗v (or equivalently all v⊗v if 2 is invertible in R). More generally the nth exterior product V ∧· · ·∧V is obtained by modding out the nth tensor product V ⊗ . . . ⊗ V by all tensors v1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ vn + w1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ wn , whenever for some 1 ≤ i 6= j ≤ n, we have wi = vj , wj = vi and wk = vk for all k 6= i, j. If W1 , W2 are submodules of V , we will sometimes denote by W1 ∧W2 (resp. W1 ⊚ W2 ) the image of W1 ⊗ W2 in V ∧ V (resp. V ⊚ V ). In case W1 = W2 = W , the latter map factors through a module homomorphism W ∧ W → V ∧ V (resp. W ⊚ W → V ⊚ V ), and this convention is consistent when this homomorphism is injective, for instance when W is a direct factor of V . If V, W are graded then V ⊗ W is also graded by M (V ⊗ W )α = Vβ ⊗ Wγ . {(β,γ):β+γ=α}  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  75  When V = W , we see that V ∧ V and V ⊚ V are quotients of V ⊗ V by graded submodules and are therefore naturally graded; for instance if W has no 2-torsion   M (V ∧ V )0 = (V0 ∧ V0 ) ⊕  Vα ⊗ V−α  . α∈(W−{0})/±  Homology of Lie algebras. Let g be a Lie algebra (always over the commutative ring R). We consider the complex of R-modules d  given by  d  d  d  4 3 2 1 · · · g ∧ g ∧ g ∧ g −→ g ∧ g ∧ g −→ g ∧ g −→ g −→ 0  d2 (x1 , x2 ) = −[x1 , x2 ]  d3 (x1 , x2 , x3 ) = x1 ∧ [x2 , x3 ] + x2 ∧ [x3 , x1 ] + x3 ∧ [x1 , x2 ]  and more generally the boundary map X dn (x1 , . . . , xn ) = (−1)i+j [xi , xj ] ∧ x1 ∧ · · · ∧ xbi ∧ · · · ∧ xbj ∧ · · · ∧ xn ; 1≤i≤j≤n  and define the second homology group H2 (g) = Z2 (g)/B2 (g), where Z2 (g) = Ker(d2 ) is the set of 2-cycles and B2 (g) = Im(d3 ) is the set of 2-boundaries. (We will focus on di for i ≤ 3 although the map d4 will play a minor computational role in the sequel. This is of course part of the more general definition of the nth homology module Hn (g) = Ker(dn )/Im(dn+1 ), which we will not consider.) If A → R is a homomorphism of commutative rings, then g is a Lie A-algebra by restriction of scalars, and its 2-homology as a Lie A-algebra is denoted by H2A (g). If g is a graded Lie algebra, then the maps di are graded as well, so H2 (g) is naturally a graded R-module. Iterated brackets. In a Lie algebra, we define the n-fold bracket as the usual bracket for n = 2 and by induction for n ≥ 3 as [x1 , . . . , xn ] = [x1 , [x2 , . . . , xn ]].  Central series and nilpotency. Define the lower central series of the Lie algebra g by g1 = g and gi+1 = [g, gi ] for i ≥ 1. We say that g is s-nilpotent if gs+1 = {0}. 8.A.1. The Hopf bracket. Consider a central extension of Lie algebras p  0 → z → g → h → 0.  Since z is central, the bracket g ∧ g → g factors through an R-module homomorphism B : h ∧ h → g, called the Hopf bracket. It is unique for the property that B(p(x) ∧ p(y)) = [x, y] for all x, y ∈ g (uniqueness immediately follows from surjectivity of g ∧ g → h ∧ h). Lemma 8.A.1. For all x, y, z, t ∈ h we have B([x, y]∧[z, t]) = [B(x∧y), B(z∧t)].  76  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Proof. Observe that if x̄, ȳ are lifts of x and y then B(x ∧ y) = [x̄, ȳ], and that [x̄, ȳ] is a lift of [x, y]. In view of this, observe that both terms are equal to [[x̄, ȳ], [z̄, t̄]].  8.A.2. 1-tameness. Definition 8.A.2. We say that a Lie algebra g is 1-tame if it is generated by L g▽ = α6=0 gα .  Lemma 8.A.3. P Let g be a graded Lie algebra. Then g is 1-tame if and only if we have g0 = β [gβ , g−β ], where β ranges over nonzero weights.  Proof. One direction is trivial. Conversely, if g is 1-tame, then g0 is generated as an abelian group by elements of the form x = [x1 , . . . , xk ] with k ≥ 2 and xi homogeneous of nonzero weight. So x = [x1 , y] with y = [x2 , . . . , xk ] ∈ g▽ and x1 ∈ g▽ .  Lemma 8.A.4. Let g be a graded Lie algebra. Then the ideal generated by g▽ coincides with the Lie subalgebra generated by g▽ and in particular is 1-tame. Proof. Let h be the subalgebra generated by g▽ ; it is enough to check that h is an ideal, and it is thusPenough to check that [g0 , h] ⊂ h. Set h1 = g▽ and hd = [g▽ , hd−1 ], so that h = d≥1 hd . It is therefore enough to check that [g0 , hd ] ⊂ hd for all d ≥ 1. This is done by induction. The case d = 1 is clear. If d ≥ 2, x ∈ g0 , y ∈ g▽ , z ∈ hd−1 , then using the induction hypothesis [x, [y, z]] = [y, [x, z]] − [[y, x], z] ∈ [g▽ , hd−1 ] ⊂ hd  and we are done.    We use this to obtain the following result, which will be used in Section 11. Lemma 8.A.5. Let g be a graded Lie algebra with lower central series (gi ), and assume that g0 is s-nilpotent. Then gs+1 is contained the subalgebra generated T in ∞ i by g▽ . In particular, if g0 is nilpotent and g = g , then g∞ is contained in the subalgebra generated by g▽ .  Proof. By Lemma 8.A.4, it is enough to check that gs+1 is contained in the ideal j generated by g▽ . It is sufficient to show that gs+1 ∩ g0 ⊂ j. Each element x of gs+1 ∩ g0 can be written as a sum of nonzero (s + 1)-fold brackets of homogeneous elements. Each of those brackets involves at least one element of nonzero degree, since otherwise all its entries would be contained in g0 and it would vanish. So x belongs to the ideal generated by g▽ .  8.B. The blow-up. Definition 8.B.1. Let g be an arbitrary graded Lie R-algebra (the grading being in the abelian group W). Define the blow-up graded algebra g̃ as follows. As a graded R-module, g̃α = gα for all α 6= 0, and g̃0 = (g ∧ g)0 /d3 (g ∧ g ∧ g)0 .  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  77  Define a graded R-module homomorphism τ : g̃ → g by τ (x) = x if x ∈ g̃▽ and τ (x ∧ y) = [x, y] if x ∧ y ∈ g̃0 (which of course factors through 2-boundaries). Let us define the Lie algebra structure [·, ·]′ on g̃. Suppose that x ∈ g̃α , y ∈ g̃β . • if α + β 6= 0, define [x, y]′ = [τ (x), τ (y)]; • if α + β = 0, define [x, y]′ = τ (x) ∧ τ (y). Lemma 8.B.2. With the above bracket, g̃ is a Lie algebra and τ is a Lie algebra homomorphism, whose kernel is central and naturally isomorphic to H2 (g)0 . Its image is the ideal g▽ + [g, g] of g. Proof. Let us first check that τ is a homomorphism (of non-associative algebras). Let x, y ∈ g̃ have weight α and β. In each case, we apply the definition of [·, ·]′ and then of τ . If α + β 6= 0 τ ([x, y]′ ) = τ ([τ (x), τ (y)]) = [τ (x), τ (y)];  if α + β = 0 then τ ([x, y]′ ) = τ (τ (x) ∧ τ (y)) = [τ (x), τ (y)].  By linearity, we deduce that τ is a homomorphism. Since τα is an isomorphism for α 6= 0 and τ0 = −d2 , the kernel of τ is equal by definition to H2 (g)0 . Moreover, by definition the bracket [x, y]′ only depends on τ (x) ⊗ τ (y), and it immediately follows that Ker(τ ) is central in g̃. Let us check that the bracket is a Lie algebra bracket; the antisymmetry being clear, we have to check the Jacobi identity. Take x ∈ g̃α , y ∈ g̃β , z ∈ g̃γ . From the definition above, we obtain • if α + β + γ 6= 0, [x, [y, z]′ ]′ = [τ (x), [τ (y), τ (z)]]; • if α + β + γ = 0, [x, [y, z]′ ]′ = τ (x) ∧ [τ (y), τ (z)] (the careful verification involves discussing on whether or not β + γ is zero). Therefore, the Jacobi identity for (x, y, z) immediately follows from that of g in the first case, and from the fact we killed 2-boundaries in the second case. We have τ (g̃▽ ) = g▽ and τ (g̃0 ) = [g, g]0 . Therefore the image of τ is equal to g▽ + [g, g]. The latter is an ideal, since it contains [g, g].  Definition 8.B.3. We say that a graded Lie algebra g is relatively perfect in degree zero if it satisfies one of the following (obviously) equivalent definitions (a) 0 is not a weight of g/[g, g]; (b) g0 ⊂ [g, g]; (c) g = g▽ + [g, g]; (d) g̃ → g is surjective (in view of Lemma 8.B.2). (e) g is generated by g▽ + [g0 , g0 ]; Note that if g is 1-tame, then it is relatively perfect in degree zero, but the converse is not true, as shows the example of a nontrivial perfect Lie algebra with grading concentrated in degree zero. The interest of this notion is that it is  78  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  satisfied by a wealth of graded Lie algebras that are very far from perfect (e.g., nilpotent). Theorem 8.B.4. Let g be a graded Lie algebra. If g is relatively perfect in degree τ zero (e.g., g is 1-tame), then the blow-up g̃ → g is a graded central extension with kernel in degree zero, and is universal among such central extensions. That is, p for every surjective graded Lie algebra homomorphism h → g with central kernel z = z0 , there exists a unique graded Lie algebra homomorphism φ : g̃ → h so that the composite map g̃ → h → g coincides with the natural projection. Proof. By Lemma 8.B.2, g̃ → g is a central extension with kernel in degree zero. Denote by Bh : g ∧ g → h the Hopf bracket associated to h → g (see §8.A). Let us show uniqueness in the universal property. Clearly, φ is determined on g̃▽ . So we have to check that φ is also determined on [g̃, g̃]. Observe that the map g̃ ∧ g̃ → h, x ∧ y 7→ φ([x, y]) = [φ(x), φ(y)] factors through a map w : g ∧ g → h, so w(τ (x) ∧ τ (y)) = [φ(x), φ(y)] for all x, y ∈ g̃. Since p ◦ φ = τ and since h is generated by the image of φ and by its central ideal Ker(p), we deduce that for all x, y ∈ h, we have w(p(x) ∧ p(y)) = [x, y]. By the uniqueness property of the Hopf bracket (see §8.A), we deduce that w = Bh . So for all x, y ∈ g̃, φ([x, y]) is uniquely determined as Bh (τ (x) ∧ τ (y)). Now to prove the existence, define φ : g̃ → h to be p−1 on g̃▽ , and φ(x ∧ y) = Bh (x ∧ y) if x ∧ y ∈ g̃0 . It is clear that φ is a graded module homomorphism and that p ◦ φ = τ . Let us show that φ is a Lie algebra homomorphism, i.e. that the graded module homomorphism σ : g̃ ∧ g̃ → h, (x ∧ y) 7→ φ([x, y]′) − [φ(x), φ(y)] vanishes. Since p ◦ φ is a homomorphism and p▽ is bijective, we have (p ◦ σ)▽ = 0, so it is enough to check that σ vanishes in degree 0. If x and y have nonzero opposite weights, noting that p ◦ φ is the identity on g▽ , φ([x, y]′) = φ(x ∧ y) = Bh (x ∧ y) = [p−1 (x), p−1 (y)] = [φ(x), φ(y)].  If x ∧ y and z ∧ t belong to g̃0 = (g ∧ g)0 , then, using Lemma 8.A.1, we have φ([x ∧ y, z ∧ t]′ ) =φ([x, y] ∧ [z, t]) = Bh ([x, y] ∧ [z, t])  =[Bh (x ∧ y), Bh (z ∧ t)] = [φ(x ∧ y), φ(z ∧ t)].  By linearity, we deduce that σ0 = 0 and therefore φ is a Lie algebra homomorphism.  Corollary 8.B.5. If g is relatively perfect in degree zero then g̃˜ = g̃. ˜ → g has kernel z concentrated in degree zero, so it immeProof. Observe that g̃ diately follows that [z, g▽ ] = 0. We need to show that z is central in ˜g̃. Since ˜ ˜g̃]] = {0}. By the Jacobi identity, g = [g, g] + g▽ , it is enough to show that [z, [g̃, ˜ [z, ˜g̃]]. Now since g̃ → g has a central kernel, [z, ˜g̃] is contained in ˜ ˜g̃]] ⊂ [g̃, [z, [g̃, ˜ = {0}. Thus z is central in ˜ [z, g̃]] the kernel of g̃˜ → g̃, which is central in ˜g̃. So [g̃, ˜ The universal property of g̃ then implies that g̃˜ → g̃ is an isomorphism.  g̃.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  79  Remark 8.B.6. There is an immediate generalization of this blow-up construction, where we replace {0} by an arbitrary subset X ⊂ W, defining g̃α to be equal to gα if α ∈ / X and to (Λ2 g/d3 (Λ3 g))α if α ∈ X . Then immediate adaptations of Lemma 8.B.2, Theorem 8.B.4 and its corollary hold, with essentially no change P in the proofs. (Definition 8.B.3 is valid replacing g0 with gX = α∈X gα and g▽ with gWrX , except that we have to remove (the analogue of) Condition (e) of Definition 8.B.3. Nevertheless, under the assumption that that no weight in X is the sum of a weight X and of a weight in W r X , Condition (e) is still equivalent; in particular this works if X is a subgroup of W and in particular for X = {0}. Otherwise, the reader can find examples with gradings in {0, 1} and X = {1}, where the first four conditions hold but not (e).) Lemma 8.B.7. Let g be a graded Lie algebra and g̃ its blow-up. If g is 1-tame, then so is g̃. Proof. Suppose that g is 1-tame. Then by linearity, it is enough to check that for every x ∈ g0 and u, v of nonzero opposite weights, the element x ∧ [u, v] belongs to [g̃▽ , g̃▽ ]. This is the case since modulo 2-boundaries, this element is equal to u ∧ [x, v] + v ∧ [u, x] ∈ (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 .  Lemma 8.B.8. Let gi be finitely many graded Lie Q algebras (all graded in the same abelian group) and g̃i their blow-up. If g = gi satisfies the assumption that Q Q g g/[g, g] has no opposite weights, then Q the natural L homomorphism gi → g̃i is an isomorphism. Equivalently, H2 ( i gi )0 → H2 (gi )0 is an isomorphism. Q Proof. For each i, there are homomorphisms g → gj → gi , whose composition i Q is the identity, and hence H2 (gi )0 → H2 ( gj )0 → H2 (gi )0 , whose composition is the identity again. So we obtain homomorphisms Y  M M H2 (gi )0 → H2 gi → H2 (gi )0 , 0  whose compositionQis the identity. To finish the proof, we have to L Q check that H2 (gi )0 → H2 ( gi )0 is surjective, L or equivalently that in Z2 ( gi )0 , every element x is the sum of an element in i Z2 (gi )0 and a boundary. Now observe that Y  M M Z2 gi = Z2 (gi )0 ⊕ (gi ∧ gj )0 . 0  i<j  So we have to prove that for i 6= j, gi ∧ gj consists of boundaries. Given an element x ∧ y (x ∈ gi , y ∈ gjP homogeneous), the assumption on g/[g, g] implies that, for instance, y is a sum k [zk , wk ] of commutators. Projecting if necessary into gj , we can suppose that all zk and wk belong to gj . So X X x∧y = x∧ [zk , wk ] = d3 (x ∧ zk ∧ wk ).  k  k  80  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  8.C. Homology and restriction of scalars. We now deal with two commutative rings A, B coming with a ring homomorphism A → B (we avoid using R as the previous results will be used both with R = A and R = B). If g is a graded Lie algebra over B, it can then be viewed as a graded Lie algebra over A by restriction of scalars. This affects the definition of the blow-up. There is an obvious surjective graded Lie algebra homomorphism g̃A → g̃B . The purpose of this part is to describe the kernel of this homomorphism (or equivalently of the homomorphism H2A (g)0 → H2B (g)0 ), and to characterize, under suitable assumptions, when it is an isomorphism. Our main object of study is the following kernel. Definition 8.C.1. If g is a Lie algebra over B, we define the welding module W2A,B(g) as the kernel of the natural homomorphism H2A (g) → H2B(g), or equivalently of the homomorphism (g ∧A g)/B2A (g) → (g ∧B g)/B2B (g). If g is graded, it is a graded module as well, and W2A,B (g)0 then also coincides with the kernel of g̃A → g̃B . The following module will also play an important role. Definition 8.C.2. If g is a Lie algebra over B, define its Killing module Kill(g) (or KillB (g) if the base ring need be specified) as the cokernel of the homomorphism T :g⊗g⊗g → g⊚g u ⊗ v ⊗ w 7→ u ⊚ [v, w] + v ⊚ [u, w]. If g is graded, it is graded as well. Note that we can also write T (u ⊗ w ⊗ v) = [u, v] ⊚ w − u ⊚ [v, w], and thus we see that the set of B-linear homomorphisms from Kill(g) to any B-module M is naturally identified to the set of the so-called invariant bilinear maps g × g → M. Lemma 8.C.3. Let v be a B-module. Then the kernel of the natural surjective A-module homomorphism v ⊗A v → v ⊗B v is generated, as an abelian group, by elements (8.C.4)  λx ⊗A y − x ⊗A λy  with λ ∈ B, x, y ∈ v. The same holds with ⊗ replaced by ⊚ or ∧. Proof. Endow v ⊗A v with a structure of a B-module, using the structure of Bmodule of the left-hand v, namely λ(x ⊗ y) = (λx ⊗ y) if λ ∈ B, x, y ∈ v. Let W be the subgroup generated by elements of the form (8.C.4); it is clearly an A-submodule, and is actually a B-submodule as well. The natural A-module surjective homomorphism φ : (v ⊗A v)/W → v ⊗B v is B-linear. To show it is a bijection, we observe that by the universal property of v⊗B v, we have a B-module homomorphism ψ : v ⊗B v → (v ⊗A v)/W mapping x ⊗B y to x ⊗A y modulo W . Clearly, ψ and φ are inverse to each other.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  81  Let us deal with ∧, the case of ⊚ being similar. The group v ∧A v is defined as the quotient of v ⊗A v by symmetric tensors (i.e. by the subgroup generated by elements of the form x ⊗ y + y ⊗ x), and the group v ∧B v is defined the quotient of v ⊗B v by symmetric tensors. By the case of ⊗, this means that v ∧B v is the quotient of v ⊗A v by the subgroup generated by symmetric tensors and elements (8.C.4). This implies that that v ∧B v is the quotient of v ∧A v by the subgroup generated by elements (8.C.4) (with ⊗ replaced by ∧)  Proposition 8.C.5. For any Lie algebra g over B, the A-module homomorphism Φ : B ⊗A g ⊗A g → W2A,B(g) λ ⊗ x ⊗ y 7→ λx ∧ y − x ∧ λy  is surjective. If g is graded and is 1-tame, then Φ0 : B ⊗A (g ⊗A g)0 → W2A,B (g)0 is surjective in restriction to B ⊗ (g▽ ⊗ g▽ )0 . Proof. The group (g ∧A g)/B2A (g) is defined as the quotient of g ∧A g by 2boundaries, and (g ∧B g)/B2B (g) is the quotient of g ∧B g by 2-boundaries, or equivalently, by Lemma 8.C.3, is the quotient of g ∧A g by 2-boundaries and elements of the form λx ∧A y − x ∧A λy.  (8.C.6)  It follows that the kernel of (g ∧A g)/B2A (g) → (g ∧B g)/B2B (g) is generated by elements of the form (8.C.6), proving the surjectivity of Φ. For the additional statement, define W ′ = Φ(B ⊗ (g▽ ⊗ g▽ ))0 . We have to show that any element λx ∧A y − x ∧A λy as in (8.C.6) with x, y of zero weight belongs to W ′ . By linearity and Lemma 8.A.3, we can suppose that y = [z, w] with z, w of nonzero opposite weight. So, modulo boundaries, λx ∧ [w, z] − x ∧ λ[w, z] = − w ∧ [z, λx] − z ∧ [λx, w] − x ∧ λ[w, z] = − w ∧ λ[z, x] + λw ∧ [z, x],  which belongs to W ′ .    Proposition 8.C.7. Let g be a Lie algebra over B. Then the map Φ : B ⊗A g ⊗A g → W2A,B(g) of Proposition 8.C.5 factors through the natural projection B ⊗A g ⊗A g → B ⊗A KillA (g); moreover in restriction to B ⊗A g ⊗A [g, g], it factors through B ⊗A KillB (g). In particular, if g is graded and relatively perfect in degree 0 (e.g., 1-tame), then Φ0 factors through B ⊗A KillB (g). Proof. All ⊗, ∧, ⊚ are meant over A.  82  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Write Φλ (x ⊗ y) = Φ(λ ⊗ x ⊗ y). It is immediate that Φλ (y ⊗ x) = Φλ (x ⊗ y) (even before modding out by 2-boundaries), and thus Φλ factors through g ⊚ g. Let us now check that Φλ factors through KillA (g). Modulo 2-boundaries: Φλ (x ⊚ [y, z] − y ⊚ [z, x]) =λx ∧ [y, z] − x ∧ λ[y, z]  − λy ∧ [z, x] + y ∧ λ[z, x]  = − z ∧ [λx, y] + z ∧ [x, λy] = 0.  For the last statement, by Lemma 8.C.3, we have to show that Φλ (µx ⊚ [y, z]) = Φλ (x ⊚ µ[y, z]) for all x, y, z ∈ g and µ ∈ B. Indeed, using the latter vanishing we get Φλ (µx ⊚ [y, z]) = Φλ (y ⊚ [z, µx]) = Φλ (y ⊚ [µz, x]) = Φλ (x ⊚ [y, µz]).    In turn, we obtain, as an immediate consequence: Corollary 8.C.8. Let g be a graded Lie algebra over B; assume that g is relatively perfect in degree 0. If KillB (g)0 = {0} then W2A,B (g)0 = {0}.  Proof. By Propositions 8.C.5 and 8.C.7, Φ0 induces a surjection B ⊗A Kill(g)B0 → W2A,B(g)0 .   Under the additional assumptions that A = Q is a field of characteristic 6= 2 and g is defined over Q, i.e. has the form l ⊗Q B for some Lie algebra l over Q, Corollary 8.C.8 easy follows from [NW08, Theorem 3.4]. We are essentially concerned with finite-dimensional Lie algebras g over a field K of characteristic zero (K playing the role of B) and A = Q, but nevertheless in general we cannot assume that g be defined over Q. We will also use the more specific application. Q Corollary 8.C.9. Assume that A = Q and B = K = τj=1 Kj is a finite product of locally compact fields Kj , each isomorphic to R or some Qp . Let BKj be the closed unit ball in Kj . Assume that g is finite-dimensional over K, that is, g = Q g with gj finite-dimensional over Kj . Suppose that g is 1-tame and g/[g, g] j j has no opposite weights. For every j and weight α, let Vj,α be a neighbourhood of K 0 in gj,α = (gj )α . Then the welding module W2 (g)Q,K = Ker H2 (g)Q 0 → H2 (g)0 is generated by elements of the form Φ(λ ⊗ x ⊗ y) with λ ∈ BKj and x ∈ Vj,α, y ∈ Vj,−α, where α ranges over nonzero weights and j = 1, . . . , τ . Proof. By Proposition 8.C.5, W2A,B (g) is generated by elements of the form Φ(λ′ ⊗ x′ ⊗ y ′), with λ′ ∈ K and x′ , y ′ ∈ g are homogeneous of nonzero opposite weight. By linearity and Lemma 8.B.8, these elements for which [[ Kj × gj,α × gj,−α (λ′ , x′ , y ′) ∈ j α6=0  are enough. Given such an element (λ′ , x′ , y ′) ∈ Kj × gj,α × gj,−α , using that Kj = Q + BKj , write λ′ = ε + λ with ε ∈ Q and λ ∈ BK . Also, since gj,±α =  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  83  QVj,±α, write x′ = µx and y ′ = γy with µ, γ ∈ Q, x ∈ Vj,α, y ∈ Vj,−α. Clearly, by the definition of Φ, we have Φ(ε ⊗ x′ ⊗ y ′) = 0, so Φ(λ′ ⊗ x′ ⊗ y ′ ) = Φ(λ ⊗ µx ⊗ γy) = µγΦ(λ ⊗ x ⊗ y),  and Φ(λ ⊗ x ⊗ y) is of the required form.    8.C.1. Construction of 2-cycles. We now turn to a partial converse to Corollary 8.C.8. Define HCA1 (B) (or HC1 (B) if A is implicit) as the quotient of B ∧A B by the A-submodule generated by elements of the form uv ∧ w + vw ∧ u + wu ∧ v. This is the first cyclic homology group of B (which is usually defined in another manner; we refer to [NW08] for the canonical isomorphism between the two). Lemma 8.C.10. Assume that K is a field of characteristic zero and Q a subfield. Suppose that K contains an element t that is transcendental over Q. Assume that either K has characteristic zero, or K ⊂ Q((t)). Then HCQ 1 (K) 6= {0}. More Q −1 precisely, the image of t ∧ t in HC1 (K) is nonzero. Proof. We denote W by the Q-linear subspace of K ∧Q K generated by elements of the form uv ∧ w + vw ∧ u + wu ∧ v. Let us begin with the case of Q((t)). Define a Q-bilinear map F : Q((t))2 → Q by X  X X kxk y−k . (8.C.11) F xi ti , yj tj = k∈Z  Observe that the latter sum is finitely supported. (In Q[t, t−1 ], the above map appears in the definition of the defining 2-cocycle of affine Lie algebras, see [Fu].) We see that F is alternating by a straightforward P i computation, and that −1 F (t, t ) = 1. Setting f (x ∧ y) = F (x, y), if x = xi t , etc., we have X k(xy)k z−k f (xy ∧ z) = k∈Z  =  X k∈Z  =− thus  k  X  i+j=k  X  xi yj z−k  kxi yj zk ;  i+j+k=0  f (xy ∧ z + yz ∧ x + zx ∧ y) = −  X  (k + i + j)xi yj zk = 0.  i+j+k=0  −1 Hence f factors through a Q-linear map from HCQ 1 (Q((t))) → Q mapping t ∧ t to 1. The proof is thus complete if K ⊂ Q((t)). Now assume that K has characteristic zero; let us show that t ∧ t−1 has a nontrivial image in HC1 (K). Since K has characteristic S zero, the above definition −∞ (8.C.11) immediately extends to the field Q((t )) = n>0 Q((t1/n )) of Puiseux  84  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  −∞ series and hence t ∧ t−1 has a nontrivial image in HCQ ))) for every field 1 (Q((t Q of characteristic zero. To prove the general result, let (uj )j∈J be a transcendence basis of K over Q(t). Replacing Q by Q(tj : j ∈ J) if necessary, we can suppose that K is algebraic over Q(t). Let Q̂ be an algebraic closure of Q. By the Newton-Puiseux Theorem, Q̂((t−∞ )) is algebraically closed. By the Steinitz Theorem, there exists a Q(t)-embedding of K into L = Q̂((t−∞ )). This induces a Q-linear homomorphism Q −1 −1 HCQ in HCQ 1 (K) → HC1 (L) mapping the class of t∧t 1 (K) to the class of t∧t b −1 in HCQ in HCQ 1 (L), which is 1 (L); the latter is mapped in turn to the class t ∧ t nonzero. So the class of t ∧ t−1 in HCQ  1 (K) is nonzero.  Theorem 8.C.12. Let g be a Lie algebra over B, which is defined over A, i.e. g ≃ B ⊗A gA for some Lie algebra gA over A. Consider the homomorphism ϕ : (g ∧A g)/B2A (g) → M = HCA1 (B) ⊗ KillA (gA ) (λ ⊗ x) ∧ (µ ⊗ y) 7→ (λ ∧ µ) ⊗ (x ⊚ y).  Then ϕ is well-defined and surjective, and ϕ(W2A,B (g)) = 2M. In particular, if 2 is invertible in A, gA is a graded Lie algebra and M0 = HC1 (B) ⊗ Kill(gA )0 6= {0}, then W2A,B(g)0 6= {0}. The above map ϕ was considered in [NW08], for similar motivations. Assuming that A is a field of characteristic zero, the methods in [NW08] can provide a more precise description (as the cokernel of an explicit homomorphism) of the kernel W2A,B(g) = Ker(H2A (g) → H2B (g)). Since we do not need this description and in order not to introduce further notation, we do not include it. Proof of Theorem 8.C.12. Let us first view ϕ as defined on g∧A g. The surjectivity is trivial. By Proposition 8.C.5 (with grading concentrated in degree 0), we see that W2A,B(g) is generated by elements of the form λx∧µy −µx∧λy with x, y ∈ gA (we omit the ⊗ signs, which can here be thought of as scalar multiplication); the image by ϕ of such an element is 2(λ∧µ)(x⊚y), which belongs to 2M. Conversely, since 2M is generated by elements of the form 2(λ ∧ µ)(x ⊚ y), we deduce that ϕ(W2A,B(g)) = 2M. Let us check that ϕ vanishes on 2-boundaries (so that it is well-defined on g ∧A g modulo 2-boundaries): ϕ(tx ∧ [uy, vz]) = (t ∧ uv) ⊗ (x ⊚ [y, z]);  ϕ(uy ∧ [vz, tx]) = (u ∧ vt) ⊗ (y ⊚ [z, x]) = (u ∧ vt) ⊗ (x ⊚ [y, z]); ϕ(vz ∧ [tx, uy]) = (v ∧ tu) ⊗ (z ⊚ [x, y]) = (v ∧ tu) ⊗ (x ⊚ [y, z])  and since t ∧ uv + u ∧ vt + v ∧ tu = 0 in HC1 (A), the sum of these three terms is zero. The last statement clearly follows.   GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  85  8.C.2. The characterization. Using all results established in the preceding paragraphs, we obtain Theorem 8.C.13. Let g be a finite-dimensional graded Lie algebra over a field K of characteristic zero, assume that g/[g, g] has no opposite weights. Let Q be a subfield of K, so that K has infinite transcendence degree over Q. We have equivalences • W2Q,K (g)0 = {0} (i.e., H2Q (g)0 → H2K (g)0 is an isomorphism); • KillK (g)0 = {0}. Corollary 8.C.14. Under the same assumptions, we have equivalences • H2Q (g)0 = {0} (i.e. the blow-up g̃ → g is an isomorphism); • H2K (g)0 = KillK (g)0 = {0}.    The interest is that in both the theorem and the corollary, the first condition is a problem of linear algebra in infinite dimension, while the second is linear algebra in finite dimension (not involving Q) and is therefore directly computable in terms of the structure constants of g. Proof of Theorem 8.C.13. Suppose that KillK (g)0 = 0. By Corollary 8.C.8, the induced homomorphism H2Q (g)0 → H2 (g)0 is bijective. Conversely, suppose that KillK (g)0 6= 0. Since g is finite-dimensional over K, there exists a subfield L ⊂ K, finitely generated over Q, such that g is defined over L, i.e. we can write g = gL ⊗L K. Obviously, KillK (g) = KillL (gL ) ⊗L K, so KillL (gL ) 6= 0. Let (x ⊚L y) be the representative of a nonzero element in KillL (gL ). Let λ be an element of K, transcendental over L. By Lemma 8.C.10, the element λ ∧ λ−1 has a nontrivial image in HCL1 (K). By Theorem 8.C.12 (applied with (A, B) = (L, K)), we deduce that cL = λx ∧L λ−1 y − λ−1 x ∧L λy  is not a 2-boundary, i.e. is nonzero in H2L (g)0 . In particular the element cQ (written as cL with ∧Q instead of ∧L ) is nonzero in H2K (g)0 since its image in H2L (g) is cL , while its image cK in g ∧K g and hence in H2K (g)0 is obviously zero.  8.D. Auxiliary descriptions of H2 (g)0 and Kill(g)0 . We now prove the result including Theorem J as a particular case. In this subsection, all Lie algebras are over a fixed commutative ring R. Definition 8.D.1. Let g be a graded P Lie algebra. We say that g is doubly 1-tame if for every α we have g0 = β ∈{0,α,−α} [gβ , g−β ]. /  In view of Lemma 8.A.3, doubly 1-tame implies 1-tame, and the reader can easily find counterexamples to the converse. This definition will be motivated in Section 9, because it is a consequence of 2-tameness (Lemma 9.B.1(1)), which will be introduced therein. The purpose of this subsection is to provide descriptions of H2 (g)0 and Kill(g)0 .  86  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  8.D.1. The tame 2-homology module. Let us begin with the trivial observation that if α + β + γ = 0 and α, β, γ 6= 0, then α + β, β + γ, γ + α 6= 0. It follows that d3 maps (g▽ ∧ g▽ ∧ g▽ ) into g▽ ∧ g▽ . Define the tame 2-homology module H2▽ (g)0 = (Ker(d2 ) ∩ (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 )/d3 (g▽ ∧ g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 .  We are going to prove the following result.  Theorem 8.D.2. Let g be a graded Lie algebra. The natural homomorphism H2▽ (g)0 → H2 (g)0 induced by the inclusion (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 → (g ∧ g)0 is surjective if g is 1-tame, and is an isomorphism if g is doubly 1-tame. Remark 8.D.3. In Abels’ second group (§1.5.4), (g ∧ g)0 and (g ∧ g ∧ g)0 have dimension 4 and 5, while (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 and (g▽ ∧ g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 have dimension 3 and 2. Thus, we see that the computation of H2▽ (g)0 is in practice easier than the computation of H2 (g)0 . Lemma 8.D.4. Let g be any graded Lie algebra. If g is 1-tame, then (1)  g0 ∧ g0 ⊂ Im(d3 ) + (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 ;  (2)  g0 ∧ g0 ∧ g0 ⊂ Im(d4 ) + g0 ∧ (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 ;  Proof. Observe that (1) is a restatement of Lemma 8.B.7. The second assertion is similar: if u, v have nonzero opposite weights and x, y ∈ g0 , then, modulo Im(d4 ), the element x ∧ y ∧ [u, v] is equal to y ∧ u ∧ [v, x] − [x, y] ∧ u ∧ v + x ∧ v ∧ [u, y] − y ∧ v ∧ [u, x] − x ∧ u ∧ [v, y],  which belongs to g0 ∧ (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 .    Proposition 8.D.5. Consider the following R-module homomorphism Φ : g▽ ⊗ g▽ ⊗ g▽ ⊗ g▽ → (g▽ ∧ g▽ )/d3 (g▽ ∧ g▽ ∧ g▽ ) u ⊗ v ⊗ x ⊗ y 7→ x ∧ [y, [u, v]] − y ∧ [x, [u, v]].  If g is doubly 1-tame, then there exists an R-module homomorphism Ψ : g0 ⊗ g0 → (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 /d3 (g▽ ∧ g▽ ∧ g▽ )0  such that whenever α, β are non-collinear weights, we have Ψ([x, y] ⊗ [u, v]) = Φ(u ⊗ v ⊗ x ⊗ y),  ∀x ∈ gα , y ∈ g−α , u ∈ gβ , v ∈ g−β .  Moreover, Ψ is antisymmetric, i.e. factors through g0 ∧ g0 .  Proof. Suppose that α, β are non-collinear weights and that x ∈ gα , y ∈ g−α , u ∈ gβ , v ∈ g−β . We have d3 ◦ d4 (x ∧ y ∧ u ∧ v) = 0. If we write this down in (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 /d3 (g▽ ∧ g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 , four out of six terms vanish and we get which expands as (8.D.6)  d3 ([x, y] ∧ u ∧ v) + d3 ([u, v] ∧ x ∧ y) = 0,  Φ(u ⊗ v ⊗ x ⊗ y) + Φ(x ⊗ y ⊗ u ⊗ v) = 0.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  87  Define, for w ∈ g0 , Ψx,y (w) = x ∧ [y, w] − y ∧ [x, w]. The mapping (x, y) 7→ Ψx,y ∈ Hom(g0 , (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 /d3 (g▽ ∧ g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 ) is bilinear and in particular extends to a homomorphism σ : (g▽ ⊗ g▽ )0 → Hom(g0 , (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 /d3(g▽ ∧ g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 ). P Since g is doubly 1-tame, any w ∈ g0 can be written as [ui , vi ] with ui ∈ gβi , vi ∈ g−βi , βi ∈ / {0, ±α}, so, using (8.D.6) X Ψx,y (w) = Φ(ui ⊗ vi ⊗ x ⊗ y) i  =−  X i  Φ(x ⊗ y ⊗ ui ⊗ vi ) =  X  Ψui ,vi ([x, y]).  i  This shows that σ(x ⊗ y) only depends on [x, y], i.e. we can write σ(x ⊗ y) = σ ′ ([x, y]). Define, for z, w ∈ g0 Ψ(z ⊗ w) = σ ′ (z)(w).  By construction, whenever z = [x, y] and w = [u, v], with x ∈ gα , y ∈ g−α , u ∈ gβ , v ∈ g−β and α, β are not collinear, we have Ψ([x, y] ⊗ [u, v]) = Φ(u ⊗ v ⊗ x ⊗ y); from (8.D.6) we see in particular that Ψ is antisymmetric.    Proof of Theorem 8.D.2. If g is 1-tame, the surjectivity immediately follows from Lemma 8.D.4(1). Now to show the injectivity of the map of the theorem, suppose that c ∈ (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 is a 2-boundary and let us show that c belongs to d3 (g▽ ∧ g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 . In view of Lemma 8.D.4(2), we already know that c belongs to d3 (g ∧ g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 , and let us work again modulo d3 (g▽ ∧ g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 , so that we can suppose that c belongs to d3 (g0 ∧ (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 ), and we wish to check that c = 0. Since g is doubly 1-tame, we can write X c= d3 ([ui , vi ] ∧ xi ∧ yi ) with xi ∈ gαi , yi ∈ g−αi , ui ∈ gβi , vi ∈ g−βi , αi , βi nonzero and αi 6= ±βi . Write wi = [ui , vi ]. Then ! ! X X c= wi ∧ [xi , yi ] + (xi ∧ [yi , wi ] + yi ∧ [wi , xi ]) , i  i  the first term belongs to g0 ∧ g0 and the second to (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 /d3 (g▽ ∧ g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 ; since c is assumed to lie in (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 we deduce that X (8.D.7) wi ∧ [xi , yi ] = 0 i  88  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  in g0 ∧ g0 . Therefore X X c= xi ∧ [yi , wi ] + yi ∧ [wi , xi ] = Φ(ui ⊗ vi ⊗ xi ⊗ yi ). i  i  Now using Proposition 8.D.5 we get ! X X c= Ψ(wi ∧ [xi , yi ]) = Ψ wi ∧ [xi , yi ] = 0 i  i  again by (8.D.7).    8.D.2. The tame Killing module. Definition 8.D.8. Let g be a graded Lie algebra over R. Consider the R-module homomorphism T : (g ⊚R g) ⊗R g → g ⊚R g u ⊚ v ⊗ w 7→ u ⊚ [v, w] + v ⊚ [u, w].  By definition, Kill(g) is the cokernel of T . We define Kill▽ (g)0 as the cokernel of the restriction of T to ((g▽ ⊚ g▽ ) ⊗ g▽ )0 → (g▽ ⊚ g▽ )0 .  Note that T satisfies the identities, for all x, y, z  T (x ⊚ y ⊗ z) + T (y ⊚ z ⊗ x) + T (z ⊚ x ⊗ y) = 0.  There is an canonical homomorphism Kill▽ (g)0 → Kill(g)0 .  Theorem 8.D.9. Let g be a graded Lie algebra. If g is 1-tame then the homomorphism Kill▽ (g)0 → Kill(g)0 is surjective; if g is doubly 1-tame then it is an isomorphism. Lemma 8.D.10. Let g be an arbitrary Lie algebra. Then we have the identity T (w, x, [y, z]) = T ([x, z], w, y) − T ([x, y], w, z)  − T ([w, y], x, z) + T ([w, z], x, y);  Proof. Use the four equalities T ([x, z], w, y) =w ⊚ [[x, z], y] + [x, z] ⊚ [w, y], T ([y, x], w, z) =w ⊚ [[y, x], z] + [y, x] ⊚ [w, z],  T ([w, z], x, y) =x ⊚ [[w, z], y] + [w, z] ⊚ [x, y], T ([y, w], x, z) =x ⊚ [[y, w], z] + [y, w] ⊚ [x, z];  the sum of the four right-hand terms is, by the Jacobi identity and cancelation of ([·, ·] ⊚ [·, ·])-terms, equal to −w ⊚ [[z, y], x] − x ⊚ [[z, y], w] = T (w, x, [z, y]).   Lemma 8.D.11. Let g be an arbitrary graded Lie algebra.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  89  • Let α, α′, β, β ′ be nonzero weights, with α + β, α + β ′ , α′ + β, α′ + β ′ 6= 0, and (x, x′ , y, y ′) ∈ gα × gα′ × gβ × gβ ′ . Then, modulo T (g▽ ⊚ g▽ ⊗ g▽ ), we have T (x, x′ , [y, y ′]) = 0.  (1)  T ([x, x′ ], y, y ′) = T ([y, y ′], x, x′ ).  (2)  and  • Let α0 , β, γ, γ ′ be weights with β, γ, γ ′ 6= 0, α0 ∈ / {−γ, −γ ′ }. For all ′ w0 ∈ gα0 , x ∈ gβ , y ∈ gγ , y ∈ gγ ′ we have T (w0 , x, [y, y ′]) = T ([x, y ′ ], w0 , y) − T ([x, y], w0, y ′).  (3)  • Let α, α′, β, β ′ be nonzero weights with α + α′ , β + β ′ 6= 0. For all x ∈ gα , x′ ∈ gα′ , y ∈ gβ , y ′ ∈ gβ ′ we have T (x, y, [x′ , y ′]) = T ([x, y ′], y, x′) − T ([y, x′], x, y ′ ).  (4)  Proof. These are immediate from the formula given by Lemma 8.D.10 applied to (x, x′ , y, y ′), resp. (x, y, x′ , y ′), resp. (w0 , x, y, y ′), resp. (x, y, x′ , y ′).  Lemma 8.D.12. Let g be a doubly 1-tame graded Lie algebra. • Let α, β, γ be weights with α, β 6= 0 and α + β + γ = 0, and (x, y, z) ∈ gα × gβ × gγ . Then, modulo T (g▽ ⊚ g▽ ⊗ g▽ ), we have T (x, y, z) = 0.  (1)  • Let α, α′ , β, β ′ be weights, with α, β 6= 0 and α + α′ + β + β ′ = 0, and (x, x′ , y, y ′) ∈ gα × gα′ × gβ × gβ ′ . Then, modulo T (g▽ ⊚ g▽ ⊗ g▽ ), we have T ([x, y ′ ], y, x′) = T ([y, x′], x, y ′ ).  (2)  Proof. Let us check the first assertion. If γ 6= 0 this is trivial, P so assume γ = 0 (so α = −β). Since g is doubly 1-tame, we can write z = [ui , vi ] with ui , vi of opposite weights, not equal to ±α. Then Lemma 8.D.11(1) applies. Let us check the second assertion. We begin with two particular cases • α + β ′ 6= 0. Then α′ + β 6= 0 and by (1), modulo T (g▽ ⊚ g▽ ⊗ g▽ ), both T ([x, y ′ ], y, x′) and T ([y, x′], x, y ′ ) are zero. • α + β ′ = 0, α + α′ 6= 0. Then α′ , β ′ are nonzero, so we obtain the assertion by applying Lemma 8.D.11(4) and then (1) of the current lemma. Finally, the only remaining case is when (α, β, α′, β ′) 6= (α, α, −α, −α), as we assume now. To tackle this last case, let us use this to prove first the following: if γ is a nonzero weight, w0 ∈ g0 , z ∈ gγ ,z ′ ∈ g−γ , then T (w0 , z, z ′ ) + T (w0 , z ′ , z) = 0. Indeed, since g is doubly 1-tame, this reduces by linearity to w0 = [u, u′] with  90  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  u ∈ gδ , u′ ∈ g−δ and δ ∈ / {0, ±γ}. So, using twice (2) in one of the cases already proved, we obtain T (w0 , z, z ′ ) =T ([u, u′], z, z ′ ) =T ([z, z ′ ], u, u′)  = − T ([z ′ , z], u, u′)  = − T ([u, u′], z ′ , z) = − T (w0 , z ′ , z)  Now suppose that (α, β, α′, β ′ ) = (α, α, −α, −α). Then, using the antisymmetry property above and again using one last time one already known case of (2), we obtain T ([x, y ′ ], y, x′) = − T ([x, y ′ ], x′ , y) = − T ([x′ , y], x, y ′) = T ([y, x′], x, y ′ ).    Lemma 8.D.13. Let g be a 1-tame graded Lie algebra. Then (1) (g ⊚ g)0 = T (g ⊚ g ⊗ g)0 + (g▽ ⊚ g▽ )0 ; (2) T (g ⊚ g▽ ⊗ g▽ )0 = T (g ⊚ g ⊗ g)0 . Proof. Suppose that x, y ∈ g0 . To show that x ⊚ y belongs to the right-hand term in (1), it suffices by linearity to deal with the case when y = [u, v] with u, v homogeneous of nonzero opposite weight. Then x ⊚ [u, v] = T (x, u, v) − u ⊚ [x, v], which is the sum of an element in ((g ⊚ g) ⊗ g)0 and an element in (g▽ ⊚ g▽ )0 . So (1) is proved. Let us prove (2). By linearity, it is enough to prove that any element T (x, y, [u, v]), where x, y have weight zero and u, v have nonzero opposite weight, belongs to T (g ⊗ g▽ ⊗ g▽ )0 : the formula in Lemma 8.D.10 expresses T (x, y, [u, v]) as a sum of four terms in T (g ⊗ g▽ ⊗ g▽ )0 .  Proposition 8.D.14. Let g be a doubly 1-tame graded Lie algebra. Then T (g ⊚ g ⊗ g) ∩ (g▽ ⊚ g▽ )0 ⊂ T ((g▽ ⊚ g▽ ⊗ g▽ )0 ). Proof. Fix u, v ∈ nβ , n−β (β 6= 0) and consider the R-module homomorphism Φu,v : g0 → M = (g ⊚ g)0 /T ((g▽ ⊚ g▽ ⊗ g▽ )0 ) w 7→ u ⊚ [v, w]. The mapping (u, v) 7→ Φu,v ∈ HomR (g0 , M) is bilinear. Therefore it extends to a mapping s 7→ Φ̂s defined for all s ∈ (g▽ ⊗ g▽ )0 .  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  91  P  P If s = xi ⊗ yi ∈ g ∧ g, we write hsi = [xi , yi ]. Now, for s, s′ ∈ (g▽ ⊗ g▽ )0 , define Ψ̂(s ⊗ s′ ) = Φ̂s (hs′ i) ∈ M. In other words, Ψ̂((u ⊗ v) ⊗ (x ⊗ y)) = u ⊚ [v, [x, y]].  We have1  Ψ̂((u ⊗ v) ⊗ (x ⊗ y)) =u ⊚ [v, [x, y]]  = − T ([x, y], u, v) + [x, y] ⊚ [u, v]  and similarly Ψ̂((x ⊗ y) ⊗ (u ⊗ v)) = −T ([u, v], x, y) + [u, v] ⊚ [x, y], so Ψ̂((u ⊗ v) ⊗ (x ⊗ y)) − Ψ̂((x ⊗ y) ⊗ (u ⊗ v))  =T ([u, v], x, y) − T ([x, y], u, v) = 0  by Lemma 8.D.12(2). Thus, Ψ̂ is symmetric and we can write Ψ̂(s⊗s′ ) = Ψ̂(s⊚s′ ). Note that (trivially) Ψ̂(s ⊚ s′ ) = 0 whenever s′ is a 2-cycle (i.e. hs′ i = 0), so by the symmetry Ψ̂ factors through a map Ψ : g0 ⊚ g0 → M such that Ψ̂(s ⊚ s′ ) = Ψ(hsi ⊚ hs′ i)  for all s, s′ ∈ (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 . In other words, we can write u ⊚ [v, [x, y]] = Ψ([u, v] ⊚ [x, y]). Now consider some element in T (g ⊚ g ⊗ g) ∩ (g▽ ⊚ g▽ )0 . By Lemma 8.D.13, it can be taken in T (g ⊚ g▽ ⊗ g▽ ). We write it as X τ= T (xi , yi , zi ), with xi , yi , zi homogenous and yi , zi of nonzero weight. Since we work modulo T (g▽ ⊚ g▽ ⊗ g▽ )0 , we can suppose xi is of weight zero for all i, and we have to prove that τ = 0. So ! ! X X τ= xi ⊚ [yi , zi ] + yi ⊚ [xi , zi ] , i  i  the first term belongs to g0 ∧ g0 and the second to the quotient Kill▽ (g)0 of (g▽ ∧ g▽ )0 by T (g▽ ⊚ g▽ ⊗ g▽ )0 , so X (8.D.15) xi ⊚ [yi , zi ] = 0. i  1Given  a map defined on a tensor product such as Ψ, we freely view it as a multilinear map when it is convenient.  92  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  P  Now, writing xi = j [uij , vij ] with uij , vij of nonzero opposite weight X τ= yi ⊚ [xi , zi ] i  =  X  yi ⊚ [zi , [uij , vij ]]  i,j  =  X  Ψ([yi , zi ] ⊚ [uij , vij ])  i,j  =  X i  Ψ([yi , zi ] ⊚ xi ) = Ψ  X i  [yi , zi ] ⊚ xi  !  = 0 by (8.D.15).    Proof of Theorem 8.D.9. The first statement follows from Lemma 8.D.13(1) and the second from Proposition 8.D.14.  9. Abels’ multiamalgam 9.A. 2-tameness. In this section, we deal with real-graded Lie algebras, that is, Lie algebras graded in a real vector space W. As in Section 8, Lie algebras are, unless explicitly specified, over the ground commutative ring R. Let g be a real-graded Lie algebra. P We say that P ⊂ W is g-principal if g is generated, as a Lie algebra, by gP = α∈P gα (note that this only depends on the structure of Lie ring, not on the ground ring R). We say that P (or (g, P)) is k-tame if whenever α1 , . . . , αk ∈ P, there exists an R-linear form ℓ on W such that ℓ(αi ) > 0 for all i = 1, . . . , k. Note that P is 1-tame if and only if 0 ∈ / P and is 2-tame2 if and only if for all α, β ∈ P we have 0 ∈ / [α, β]. Note that k-tame trivially implies (k − 1)-tame. We say that the graded Lie algebra g is k-tame if there exists a g-principal k-tame subset. Note that for k = 1 this is compatible with the definition in §8.A.2. Example 9.A.1. As usual, we write Wg = {α : gα 6= {0}}.  • g = sl3 with its standard Cartan grading, Wg = {αij : 1 ≤ i 6= j ≤ 3} ∪ {0} (with αij = ei − ej , (ei ) denoting the canonical basis of R3 ); then {α12 , α23 , α31 } and {α21 , α13 , α32 } are g-principal and 2-tame. • If P1 is the set of weights of the graded Lie algebra g/[g, g], then any g-principal set contains P1 ; conversely if g is nilpotent then P1 itself is g-principal. Thus if g is nilpotent, then g is k-tame if and only if 0 is not in the convex hull of k weights of g/[g, g].  2This  paper will not deal with k-tameness for k ≥ 3 but this notion is relevant to the study of higher-dimensional isoperimetry problems.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  93  9.B. Lemmas related to 2-tameness. This subsection gathers a few technical lemmas needed in the study of the multiamalgam in §9.C and §9.D. The reader can skip it in a first reading. The following lemma was proved by Abels under more specific hypotheses (g nilpotent and finite-dimensional over a p-adic field). As usual, by [gβ , gγ ] we mean the module generated by such brackets. In a real vector space, we write [[α, β]] for the segment joining α and β (so as to avoid any confusion with Lie brackets). Lemma 9.B.1. Let g be a real-graded Lie algebra and P ⊂ W a g-principal subset. Suppose that (g, P) is 2-tame. Then P (1) for any ω ∈ W, we have g0 = β [gβ , g−β ], with β ranging over W − Rω; P (2) if R+ α ∩ P = ∅, then gα = [gβ , gγ ], with (β, γ) ranging over pairs in W − Rα such that β + γ = α.  Lemma 9.B.1 is a consequence of the more technical Lemma 9.B.2 below (with i = 1). Actually, the proof of Lemma 9.B.1 is based on an induction which makes use of the full statement of Lemma 9.B.2. Besides, while Lemma 9.B.1 is enough for our purposes in the study of the multiamalgam of Lie algebras in §9.C, the statements in Lemma 9.B.2 involving the lower central series are needed when studying multiamalgams of nilpotent groups in §9.D.  Lemma 9.B.2. Under the assumptions of Lemma 9.B.1, let (gi ) be the lower central series of g and giα = gi ∩ gα (note that gi0 thus means (gi )0 and can be distinct from (g0 )i ). Then P P (1) for any ω ∈ W, we have gi0 = j+k=i β [gjβ , gk−β ], with β ranging over W r Rω; P P (2) if R+ α ∩ P = ∅, then giα = j+k=i [gjβ , gkγ ], with (β, γ) ranging over pairs in W r Rα suchPthat βP + γ = α; (3) if α ∈ / P, then giα = j+k=i [gjβ , gkγ ], with (β, γ) ranging over pairs in W such that β + γ = α and 0 does not belong to the segment [[β, γ]]. P Proof. Define g[1] = α∈P gα , and by induction the submodule g[i] = [g[1] , g[i−1] ] [i] for i ≥ 2; note that this depends on the choice of P. Define gα = gα ∩ g[i] . Note that each g[i] is a graded submodule of g. Let us prove by induction on i ≥ 1 the following statement: in the three cases, i X h [j] X [k] [i] gβ , gγ (9.B.3) gα ⊂ j,k≥1, j+k=i β+γ=α...  where in each case (β, γ) satisfies Pthe additional requirements of (1), (2), or (3) (we encode this in the notation β+γ=α... ). Since in all cases, α ∈ / P, the case i = 1 is an empty (tautological) statement. Suppose that i ≥ 2 and the inclusions (9.B.3) are proved up to i − 1. Consider [i] [1] x ∈ gα . By definition, x is a sum of elements of the form [y, z] with y ∈ gβ , [i−1] z ∈ gγ with β + γ = α. If β and γ are linearly independent over R, the  94  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  additional conditions are satisfied and we are done. Otherwise, since β ∈ P, we have β 6= 0 and we can write γ = rβ for some r ∈ R. There are three cases to consider: • r > 0. Then we are in Case (3), and 0 ∈ / [[β, γ]], so the additional condition in (3) holds. • r = 0. Then β = α 6= 0 is a principal weight, which is consistent with none of Cases (1), (2) or (3). • r < 0. Then since β ∈ P, we have R+ γ ∩ P = ∅, so we can apply the induction hypothesis of Case (2) to z; by linearity, this reduces to [j] [k] z = [u, v] with u ∈ gδ , v ∈ gε , j + k = i − 1, δ + ε = rβ, and δ, ε not collinear to β. Note that α = β + δ + ε. By the Jacobi identity, i h i h [j] [k+1] [k] [j+1] (9.B.4) x = [y, [u, v]] ∈ gδ , gα−δ + gε , gα−ε .  Note that none of δ, α − δ, ε, α − ε belongs to Rα. Hence we are done in both Cases (2) or (3). In case (1), if ω ∈ Rβ, then since δ and ε are not collinear to ω, we see that (9.B.4) satisfies the additional conditions of (1). However, the case ω ∈ / Rβ is trivial since then the writing x = [y, z] itself already satisfies the additional condition of (1). At this point, (9.B.3) is proved. By Lemma 5.B.8, for all i ≥ 1, we have P P [ℓ] i g = ℓ≥i g[ℓ] . In particular giα = ℓ≥i gα and we have X X  j X X  j   gβ , gkγ , gβ , gkγ ⊂ g[ℓ] α ⊂ j+k=i β+γ=α...  j+k=ℓ β+γ=α...  so  giα ⊂  X  X  j  gβ , gkγ ,  j+k=i β+γ=α...    and since the inclusion gjβ , gkγ ⊂ giα is clear, we get the desired equality X X  j  gβ , gkγ . giα =    j+k=i β+γ=α...  9.C. Multiamalgams of Lie algebras. 9.C.1. The definition. By convex cone in a real vector space, we mean any subset stable under addition and positive scalar multiplication (such a subset is necessarily convex). Let C be the set of convex cones of W not containing 0. Let g be a real-graded Lie algebra over the ring R. If C ∈ C, define M gC = gα ; α∈C  this is a graded Lie subalgebra of g (if Wg is finite, gC is nilpotent). Denote by x 7→ x̄ the inclusion of gC into g.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  95  Definition 9.C.1. Define ĝ = ĝR as the multiamalgam (or colimit) of all gC , where C ranges over C.  This is by definition an initial object in the category of Lie algebras h endowed with compatible homomorphisms gC → h. It can be realized as the quotient of the Lie R-algebra free product of all gC , by the ideal generated by elements x − y, where x, y range over elements in gC , gD such that x̄ = ȳ and C, D range over C. Note that among those relators, we can restrict to homogeneous x, y as the other ones immediately follow. Since the free product as well as the ideal are graded, ĝ is a graded Lie algebra; in particular, ĝ is also the multiamalgam of the gC in the category of Lie algebras graded in W. The inclusions gC → g induce a natural homomorphism ĝ → g. 9.C.2. Link with the blow-up. Let g̃ be the blow-up introduced in §8.B. For every C ∈ C, the structural homomorphism g̃C → gC is an isomorphism, and therefore we obtain compatible homomorphisms gC → g̃C ⊂ g, inducing, by the universal property, a natural graded homomorphism ĝ → g̃.  Theorem 9.C.2. If g is 1-tame, then the natural Lie algebra homomorphism κ : ĝR → g̃R is surjective, and if g is 2-tame, κ is an isomorphism. In particular, if g is 2-tame then the kernel of ĝR → g is central in ĝ and is canonically isomorphic (as an R-module) to H2R (g)0 . To prove the second statement, we need the following lemma. Lemma 9.C.3 (Abels). If g is 2-tame, then ĝ → g has central kernel, concentrated in degree zero. Proof of Theorem 9.C.2 from Lemma 9.C.3. If g is 1-tame, then so is g̃ by Lemma 8.B.7, and the surjectivity of κ follows, proving the first assertion. If g is 2-tame, then by Lemma 9.C.3, ĝ → g has central kernel concentrated in degree zero, so by the universal property of the blow-up (Theorem 8.B.4), there is a section s of the natural map κ. By uniqueness in the universal properties, s ◦ κ and κ ◦ s are both identity and we are done. The last statement is then an immediate consequence of Lemma 8.B.2.   Proof of Lemma 9.C.3. If α is a nonzero weight of g, then there exists C ∈ Cg such that α ∈ C. By the amalgamation relations, the composite graded homomorphism gα → gC → ĝ does not depend on the choice of C. We thus call it iα and call its image mα . Let us first check that whenever α, β are non-zero non-opposite weights, then we have the following inclusion in ĝ (9.C.4)  [mα , mβ ] ⊂ mα+β .  We begin with the observation that if γ, δ are nonzero weights with δ ∈ / R− γ, then (9.C.5)  iγ+δ ([gγ , gδ ]) = [mγ , mδ ].  96  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Indeed, in the above definition of i, we can choose C to contain both γ and δ. In particular if α ∈ / R− β, then (9.C.4) is clear. Let us prove (9.C.4) assuming that α ∈ R− β. P By 2-tameness, we can suppose that R+ β ∩ P = ∅, so by Lemma 9.B.1(2), gβ ⊂ [gγ , gδ ], where (γ, δ) ranges over the set Q(β) of pairs of weights such that γ +Pδ = β and γ, δ are not in Rβ(= Rα). So, applying (9.C.5), we obtain mβ ⊂ (γ,δ)∈Q(β) [mγ , mδ ]. Therefore X [mα , mβ ] ⊂ [mα , [mγ , mδ ]]. (γ,δ)∈Q(β)  Note that γ and α + δ are not collinear, since otherwise we would infer that α = −β. If we fix such (γ, δ) ∈ Q(β), we get, by the Jacobi identity and using that α, γ, δ are pairwise non-collinear [mα , [mγ , mδ ]] ⊂[mγ , [mδ , mα ]] + [mδ , [mα , mγ ]] ⊂[mγ , mδ+α ] + [mδ , mα+γ ] ⊂mγ+δ+α = mα+β ,  and finally [mα , mβ ] ⊂ mα+β . So (9.C.4) is proved. Now define v0 as the submodule of ĝ X (9.C.6) v0 = [mγ , m−γ ]. γ6=0  We are going to check that for every α 6= 0 (9.C.7)  and (9.C.8)  [mα , v0 ] ⊂ mα [v0 , v0 ] ⊂ v0 .  Before proving (9.C.7), let us first check that for every nonzero α, if X (α) is the set of nonzero weights not collinear to α then X (9.C.9) [mα , m−α ] ⊂ [mβ , m−β ]. β∈X (α)  Indeed, by 2-tameness, we can suppose that R+ (−α) ∩ P = ∅, and apply Lemma 9.B.1(2), so X g−α ⊂ [gγ , gδ ]; (γ,δ)∈Q(−α)  by (9.C.5) we deduce  m−α ⊂ so [mα , m−α ] ⊂  X  [mγ , mδ ];  (γ,δ)∈Q(−α)  X  (γ,δ)∈Q(−α)  [mα , [mγ , mδ ]].  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  97  If (γ, δ) ∈ Q(−α), we have, by the Jacobi identity and then (9.C.4) [mα , [mγ , mδ ]] ⊂[mγ , [mδ , mα ]] + [mδ , [mα , mγ ]] ⊂[mγ , mδ+α ] + [mδ , mα+γ ] =[mγ , m−γ ] + [mδ , m−δ ];  we thus deduce (9.C.9). We can now prove (9.C.7), namely if α, γ 6= 0, then [mα , [mγ , m−γ ]] ⊂ mα . By (9.C.9) we can assume that α and γ are not collinear, in which case (9.C.7) follows from (9.C.4) by an immediate application of Jacobi’s identity. To prove (9.C.8), we need to prove that v0 is a subalgebra, or equivalently that for every α 6= 0, we have [v0 , [mα , m−α ]] ⊂ v0 .  Indeed, using the Jacobi identity and then (9.C.7) [v0 , [mα , m−α ]] ⊂[mα , [m−α , v0 ]] + [m−α , [v0 , mα ]] ⊂[mα , m−α ] + [m−α , mα ] ⊂ v0 .  so (9.C.8) is proved. We can now conclude the proof of the lemma. By the previous claims (9.C.4),  L (9.C.7), and (9.C.8), if v0 is defined as in (9.C.6) the submodule m ⊕ v0 α α6=0 is a Lie subalgebra of ĝ. Since the mα for α 6= 0 generate ĝ by definition, this proves that this Lie subalgebra is all of ĝ. Therefore, if φ : ĝ → g is the natural map, we see that φα is the natural isomorphism mα → gα . Thus Ker(φ) is contained in ĝ0 . If z ∈ Ker(φ) and x ∈ mα for some α 6= 0, then φ([z, x]) = [φ(z), φ(x)] = [0, φ(x)] = 0, so [z, x] = φ−1 α (φ([z, x])) = 0. Thus z centralizes mα for all α; since these generate ĝ, we deduce that z is central.  9.C.3. On the non-2-tame case. There is a partial converse to Theorem 9.C.2: if R is a field and g/[g, g] is not 2-tame, then ĝ has a surjective homomorphism onto a free Lie algebra on two generators. In particular, if g is nilpotent (as in all our applications), g̃ is nilpotent as well but ĝ is not. The argument is straightforward: the assumption implies that there is a graded surjective homomorphism g → h, where h is the abelian 2-dimensional algebras with weights α, β with β ∈ R− α, inducing a surjective homomorphism ĝ → ĥ. Now it follows from the definition that h is the free product of the 1-dimensional Lie algebras hα and hβ and hence is not nilpotent.  98  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  9.D. Multiamalgams of groups. In this part, g is a nilpotent real-graded Lie algebra over a commutative Q-algebra R of characteristic zero (although the results would work in characteristic p > s + 1, where s is the nilpotency length of the Lie algebra involved). For C ∈ Cg , let G and GC be the groups associated to g and gC by Malcev’s equivalence of categories between nilpotent Lie algebras over Q and uniquely divisible nilpotent groups, described in Theorem 5.A.2. Let the embedding GC → G corresponding to gC → g be written as g 7→ ḡ. Let Ĝ be the corresponding amalgam, namely the group generated by the free product of GC for C ∈ Cg , modded out by the relators xy −1 whenever x̄ = ȳ. The following result was proved by Abels [Ab87, Cor. 4.4.14] assuming that R = Qp and that g is finite-dimensional. This is one of the most delicate points in [Ab87]. We provide a sketch of the (highly technical) proof, in order to indicate how his proof works over our general hypotheses. Theorem 9.D.1 (Abels). Suppose that g is 2-tame and s-nilpotent. Then Ĝ is (s + 1)-nilpotent. For the purpose of Section 6, we need a stronger result. Abels asked [Ab87, 4.7.3] whether Ĝ → G is always a central extension. This is answered in the positive by the following theorem. Theorem 9.D.2. Under the same hypotheses, the nilpotent group Ĝ is uniquely divisible, and its Lie algebra is ĝQ in the natural way. In particular, the homomorphism Ĝ → G has a central kernel, naturally isomorphic to H2Q (g)0 as a Q-linear space. Proof. Our proof is based on Theorem 9.D.1 and some generalities about nilpotent groups, which are gathered in §5. Since by Theorem 9.D.1, Ĝ is nilpotent, and since it is generated by divisible subgroups, it is divisible (see Lemma 5.A.3). Therefore by the (standard) Lemma 5.A.1, to check that Ĝ is uniquely divisible, it is enough to check that it is torsion-free. Since Ĝ is known to be (s + 1)-nilpotent, we see that Ĝ is the multiamalgam (=colimit) of the GC within the category K of (s + 1)-nilpotent groups. Therefore, Ĝ is the quotient of the free product W in K of the GC by amalgamations relations. By Lemma 5.A.5, W is a uniquely divisible torsion-free nilpotent group. Since, for x, y ∈ W , whenever xy −1 is an amalgamation relation, xr y −r is an amalgamation relation as well for all r ∈ Q, Proposition 5.B.5 applies to show that the normal subgroup N generated by amalgamation relations is divisible. Therefore Ĝ/N is torsion-free, hence uniquely divisible. It follows that Ĝ is also the multiamalgam of the GC in the category K0 of uniquely divisible (s + 1)-nilpotent groups. By Malcev’s Theorem 5.A.2, this category is equivalent to the category of (s + 1)-nilpotent Lie algebras over Q. Therefore, if H is the group associated to ĝ and H → GC are the homomorphisms  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS  99  associated to gC → ĝ, then H and the family of homomorphisms GC → H satisfy the universal property of multiamalgam in the category K0 , and this gives rise to a canonical isomorphism Ĝ → H. In particular, by Theorem 9.C.2, the kernel W of Ĝ → G is central in Ĝ, and isomorphic to H2Q (g)0 .   Corollary 9.D.3. Under the same hypotheses, if moreover H2R (g)0 = {0} then the central kernel of Ĝ → G is generated, as an abelian group, by elements of the form [ exp([λx, y]) exp([x, λy])−1 , λ ∈ R, x, y ∈ gC . C  Q If R = j=1 Rj is a finite product of Q-algebras (so that g = j gj canonically), then those elements exp([λx, y]) exp([x, λy])−1 with λ ∈ Rj and x, y ∈ gj are enough. Qτ  Proof. The additional assumption and Theorem 9.D.2 imply that the kernel of Ĝ → G is naturally isomorphic, as a Q-linear space, to the kernel W2Q,R (g) of the natural map H2Q (g)0 → H2R (g)0 . Let N be the normal subgroup of G generated by elements of the form [ exp([λx, y]) exp([x, λy])−1 , x, y ∈ gC , λ ∈ R;  clearly N is contained in the kernel W of Ĝ → G. By Proposition 5.B.5, N is divisible, i.e., N is a Q-linear subspace of W . Therefore Ĝ/N is uniquely divisible and its Lie algebra can be identified with ĝ/N. By definition of N, in Ĝ/N we S have exp([λx, y]) = exp([x, λy]) for all x, y ∈ gC . So in the Lie algebra of Ĝ/N, which is equal to ĝ/N we have [λx, y] = [x, λy]. Since by Proposition 8.C.5, the subgroup WSis generated by elements of the form exp([λx, y] − [x, λy]) when x, y range over GC and λ ranges over R, it follows that N = W . It remains to prove theQlast statement. By Lemma 8.B.8, H2 (g)0 can be identified with the product j H2 (gj )0 . In particular, by Proposition 8.C.5, it is S generated by elements of the form [λx, y] − [x, λy] when x, y ∈ gj,C , λ ∈ Rj , and j = 1, . . . , τ . Then, we can conclude by a straightforward adaptation of the above proof.  Corollary 9.D.4. Under the same hypotheses, if moreover H2R (g)0 = KillR (g)0 = {0}, then Ĝ → G is an isomorphism.  Proof. As observed in the proof of Corollary 9.D.3, since H2R (g)0 = 0, the kernel of Ĝ → G is isomorphic to W2Q,R (g)0 . Since KillR (g)0 = 0, Corollary 8.C.8 implies that W2Q,R (g)0 = 0.   Proof of Theorem 9.D.1 (sketched). We only sketch the proof; the proof in [Ab87] (with more restricted hypotheses) is 8 pages long. Here the hypotheses are more general since Abels works with p-adic groups. The theorem is stated here assuming that R is a Q-algebra, but more generally, it works under the assumption that  100  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  R is a Z[1/s!]-module, and in particular when it is a vector space over a field of characteristic p > s. Fix a 2-tame g-principal subset P. Let S denote the set of all half-lines R>0 w (w 6= 0) in W. Consider the lower central series (Gi ). Let MCi be the image of Gi ∩ GC in Ĝ and MC = MC1 . Let Ai be the normal subgroup of Ĝ generated by all MCi , where C ranges over S. Abels also introduces more complicated subgroups. Let L denote the set of lines of W (i.e. its projective space). Each line L ∈ L contains exactly two half lines: L = S1 ∪ {0} ∪ S2 . Define the following subgroups of Ĝ  1 M[L] = M[L] = hMS1 ∪ MS2 i  and, by induction i M[L]  =  *  MSi 1  ∪  MSi 2  +  [  j k M[L] , M[L] , ∪ j+k=i  where ((·, ·)) denote the subgroup generated by group commutators. Abels proves the following lemma [Ab87, 4.4.11]: if L ∈ L and C is a open cone in W such that L + C ⊂ C, then  k (9.D.5) MCj , M[L] ⊂ MCj+k .  k is a complicated object, while the right-hand term MCj+k The interest is that M[L] is a reasonable one. Abels obtains [Ab87, Prop. 4.4.13] the following result, which can appear as a group version of Lemma 9.B.2(1): for any L0 ∈ L and any i, the ith term of the i lower central series Ĝi is generated, as a subgroup and modulo Ai , by the M[L] where L ranges over L − {L0 }, or, in symbols, + * [ i M[L] Ai . (9.D.6) Ĝi = L6=L0  It is important to mention here that all three items of Lemma 9.B.2 are needed in the proof of (9.D.6) (encapsulated in the proof of [Ab87, Prop. 4.4.7]). This is also the step where the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula is used to convey properties from the Lie algebra g to G. To conclude the proof, suppose that G is s-nilpotent. We wish to prove that ((Ĝ, Ĝs+1 )) = {1}. Since Ĝ is easily checked to be generated by MS for S ranging over S, it is enough to check, for each S ∈ S   (9.D.7) MS , Ĝs+1 = {1}.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 101  Now since G is s-nilpotent, As+1 = {1}, so we can forget “modulo As+1 ” in (9.D.6) (with i = s + 1), so (9.D.7) follows if we can prove s+1 ((MS , M[L] )) = {1}  for all L ∈ L with maybe one exception L0 ; namely, we choose L0 to be the line generated by S. Then S + L is an open cone, (9.D.5) applies and we have s+1 s+1 s+2 ((MS , M[L] )) ⊂ ((MS+L , M[L] )) ⊂ MS+L = {1}.    Remark 9.D.8. As we observed, Theorem 9.D.1 works when R is only assumed to be a Z[1/s!]-module. It follows that Theorem 9.D.2 works when R is assumed to be a Z[1/(s + 1)!]-module, and in particular when it is a vector space over a field of characteristic p > s + 1. 10. Presentations of standard solvable groups and their Dehn function 10.A. Outline of the section. This section, which is the most important of the paper, contains the conclusions of the proofs of Theorems E.4 and F and relies on essentially all the preceding sections. Let G = U ⋊ A be a standard solvable group. In §10.B we consider the multiamalgam Ĝ of (standard) tame subgroups (which are finitely many) along their intersections (regardless of any topology), as originally introduced by Abels. This group admits a canonical homomorphism onto G. Under the assumption that G is “2-tame” (which means that G does not satisfy the SOL obstruction, which is one of the hypotheses of Theorem E), we use the algebraic results of Section 9 to check in §10.D that the kernel of the canonical homomorphism Ĝ → G is central in G. Moreover, assuming that G does not satisfy the 2homological obstruction, the work of §10.B provides an explicit generating family of the central kernel, called welding relations. This provides us with a first “algebraic” presentation of G, defined as follows. Let U1 ⋊ A, . . . , Uν ⋊ A be the standard tame subgroups. We consider the presentation P whose set of generators is the disjoint union ν G A⊔ Ui , i=1  and whose set of relators are the following • all tame relations, namely relations of length 3 defining the group law in each of the Ui ⋊ A; • all amalgamation relations of length 2, namely if some u ∈ Ui ∩Uj , then in this disjoint union it corresponds to two generators ui ∈ Ui and uj ∈ Uj , and the relator is then u−1 i uj ; • all “algebraic” welding relations, introduced in §10.B (where F “algebraic” means that these are words with letters in the alphabet Ui ).  102  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Next we obtain a compact presentation P1 of G, informally by replacing elements of the various Ui with efficient representative words, and restricting to generators and relators in a large enough compact subset. It is given by a set of generators S=T⊔  ν G  Si ,  i=1  where T is in bijection with some compact generating subset of A and Si is in bijection with some compact subset of Ui so that Si ∪ T generates Ui ⋊ A. From §6.C, we have a way to associate to each i and each u ∈ Ui , a word u in the generators Si ⊔ T . Replacing each u with u is a way to pass from any word in the previous generators to a word in these new generators, which we call its geometric realization. The reader should keep in mind that even when we consider algebraic words of bounded length, their geometric realization can be unbounded since the length of u with respect to S is unbounded when u varies. The relators of P1 are:  • defining relators of each Ui ⋊ A of bounded length; • amalgamation relations of length 2, of the form s−1 i sj for si ∈ Si and sj ∈ Sj representing the same element in Ui ∩ Uj ; • geometric realizations of algebraic welding relators whose length is bounded by some suitable number.  To obtain an upper bound of the Dehn function of P1 , we proceed in 3 steps  (1) we first bound the area of a special class of relations, namely those geometric realizations of those algebraic relators; namely for the geometric realization of tame and amalgamation relations we obtain a quadratic upper bound (with respect to the word length with respect to S), and for the geometric realization of welding relations we obtain in §10.F a cubic upper bound. (2) the general method developed in §7.B allows to use these estimates so as to bound a more general class of relations, the so-called “relations of bounded combinatorial length”, that is, when n0 is fixed, we consider all geometric realizations of algebraic relations of length ≤ n0 , and for such relations we show an asymptotic cubic upper bound (the constant depending on n0 ). (3) We conclude thanks to Gromov’s trick, which ensures that it is enough to consider such relations of bounded combinatorial length, using that the efficient words u indeed have a bounded combinatorial length.  The conclusions of these steps are written down in §10.E in the absence of welding relators, thus proving Theorem F, and in §10.G otherwise, ending the proof of Theorem E.4. Let us pinpoint that §10.E also provides information in the case where there are welding relators, in order to get quadratic estimates on the area of relations  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 103  that follow only from the other types of relators. This is crucial in §10.F, where the cubic estimate is obtained by using ≃ n times a homotopy of area ≃ n2 . 10.B. Abels’ multiamalgam. Let G be any group and consider a family (Gi ) of subgroups. We define the multiamalgam (or colimit) to be an initial object in the category of groups H endowed with homomorphisms H → G and Gi → H, such that all composite homomorphisms Gi → H → G are equal to the inclusion. Such an object is defined up to unique isomorphism commuting with all homomorphisms. It can be explicitly constructed as follows: consider the free product H of all Gi , denote by κi : Gi → H the inclusion and mod out by the normal subgroup generated by the κi (x)κj (x)−1 whenever x ∈ Gi ∩ Gj . If the family (Gi ) is stable under finite intersections, it is enough to mod out by the elements of the form κi (x)κj (x)−1 whenever x ∈ Gi and Gi ⊂ Gj . Clearly, the multiamalgam does not change if we replace the family (Gi ) by a larger family (G′j ) such that each G′j is contained in some Gi ; in particular it is no restriction to assume that the family is closed under intersections. Also, the image of Ĝ → G is obviously equal to the subgroup generated by the Gi . Remark 10.B.1. Our (and, originally, Abels’) motivation in introducing the multiamalgam is to obtain a presentation of G. Therefore, in this point of view, the ideal case is when Ĝ → G is an isomorphism. In many interesting cases, which will be studied in the sequel, Ĝ → G is a central extension. On the other hand, if the Gi have pairwise trivial intersection, the multiamalgam of the Gi is merely the free product of the Gi , and this generally means that the kernel of Ĝ → G is “large”. Example 10.B.2. Consider a group presentation G = hS | Ri in which every relator involves at most two generators. If we consider the family of subgroups generated by 2 elements of S, the homomorphism Ĝ → G is an isomorphism. Instances of such presentations are presentations of free abelian groups, Coxeter presentations, Artin presentations. Lemma 10.B.3. In general, let G be any group, (Gi ) any family of subgroups. Suppose that each Gi has a presentation hSi | Ri i and that Si ∩Sj generates Gi ∩Gj for all i, j. Then F F the multiamalgam of all Gi has a presentation with generators Si , relators Ri and, for all (i, j) the relators of size two identifying an element of Si and of Sj whenever they are actually equal (if (Gi ) is closed under finite intersections, those (i, j) such that Gi ⊂ Gj are enough). Proof. This is formal.    Following a fundamental idea of Abels, we introduce the following definition. Definition 10.B.4. Let G be a locally compact group G with a semidirect product decomposition G = U ⋊A (as in §4.C). Consider the family (Gi = Ui ⋊A)1≤i≤ν  104  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  of its tame subgroups. Let Û be the multiamalgam of the Ui along their intersections; it inherits a natural action of A, and we define Ĝ = Û ⋊ A. Remark 10.B.5. By an easy verification, Ĝ is the multiamalgam of the Gi . 10.C. Algebraic and geometric presentations of the multiamalgam. Let G = U ⋊ A be a standard solvable group and (Gi )1≤i≤ν the family of its standard tame subgroups, Gi = Ui ⋊ A. Consider the free product H = i Ui . There is a canonical surjective homomorphism p : H → Û . Besides, there are canonical homomorphisms ji : Ui → H, so that p ◦ ji is the inclusion Ui ⊂ Û. Recall that ui is defined as equal to uC(i) for some subset C(i) of the weight space, stable under addition and not containing 0.  ∗  Lemma 10.C.1 (Algebraic presentation of the multiamalgam). The multiamalgam Û is, through the canonical map p, the quotient of H by the normal subgroup generated by pairs ji (x)ji′ (x)−1 where (i, i′ ) ranges over pairs such that C(i) ⊂ C(i′ ) and x ranges over Ui . Our goal is to translate this presentation into a compact presentation of Ĝ. Let F S̄i be disjoint copies of the Si . Define the disjoint union S̄ = i S̄i ⊔ T and S FS̄ the free group over S̄; note that there is a canonical surjection S̄ → S = i Si ⊔ T . Denote by ζi the canonical bijection Si → S̄i . There is a canonical surjection ζ : S̄ → S given as the identity on T and as ζi on Si . There is a canonical surjective homomorphism π̄ : FS̄ → H ⋊ A, and by composition, p ◦ π̄ is a canonical surjection FS̄ → Û . If ιi is the inclusion of Si into FS̄ , then p ◦ π̄ ◦ ιi is the inclusion of Si into Û . Let us introduce some important sets of elements in the kernel of the map FS̄ → Û . We fix a presentation of A over T , including all commutation relators between generators. (See §2.B for basic conventions about the meaning of relations and relators.) S • R̄tame = i R̄tame,i , where R̄tame,i consists of all elements in Ker(π)∩FT ⊔Si . We call these S 1tame relations. 1 1 • R̄tame = i R̄tame,i , where R̄tame,i consists of all elements in R̄tame,i that are relators in the presentation of Gi given in Corollary 6.A.7, as well as the relators in R̄tame,i of length two; we call these tame relators. • Ramalg consists of the elements of the form σi (w)−1 σi′ (w), where w ranges over FSi ⊔T , and where (i, i′ ) ranges over pairs such that C(i) ⊂ C(i′ ), and σi : FSi ∪T → FS̄ is the unique homomorphism mapping every s ∈ Si to ζi (s) and every t ∈ T to itself. We call these amalgamation relations; 1 • Ramalg consists of those amalgamation relations for which w ∈ Si . These are words of length at most two. We call these amalgamation relators.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 105 1 is just the free group FS . We define Note that the quotient of FS̄ by Ramalg 1 1 Rtame and Rtame as the images of R̄tame and R̄tame in FS̄ .  Proposition 10.C.2 (Geometric presentation of the multiamalgam). The multiamalgam Û is, through the canonical map p◦ π̄, the quotient of FS̄ by the normal 1 1 subgroup generated by R̄tame ∪Ramalg , and is also the quotient of FS by the normal 1 subgroup generated by Rtame . Proof. The quotient of FS̄ by the (normal subgroup generated by) tame relations is obviously isomorphic to ( i Ui ) ⋊ A. Since by Corollary 6.A.7, for each i, 1 R̄tame,i is contained in the normal subgroup generated by R̄tame,i , it follows that ( i Ui ) ⋊ A is also the quotient of FS̄ by the tame relators. Denote by Ji′ the inclusion of Ui′ into i Ui . By Lemma 10.B.3, the quotient of i Ui by the relations Ji (u)−1 Ji′ (u) for (i, i′ ) ranging over pairs such that C(i) ⊂ C(i′ ), is the multiamalgam Û . It follows that the quotient of ( i Ui ) ⋊ A 1 by the Ramalg is Û , and since obviously Ramalg is normally generated by Ramalg , 1 we deduce that the quotient of ( i Ui ) ⋊ A by the Ramalg is also Û. 1 1 ∪Ramalg . The second assertion Hence Û is naturally the quotient of FS̄ by R̄tame follows.   ∗ ∗  ∗  ∗  ∗  ∗  Proposition 10.C.3 (Quadratic filling of tame and amalgamation relations). For the presentation 1 1 hS̄ | R̄tame ∪ Ramalg i  of Ĝ, the tame relations have an at most quadratic area with respect to their length, and the amalgamation relations σi (w)−1σi′ (w) have an area bounded above by the length of w. In the presentation 1 hS | Rtame i  of Ĝ, the tame relations have an at most quadratic area with respect to their length. Proof. The tame relations have an at most quadratic area by Corollary 6.A.7. Let us consider an amalgamation relation. It has the form σi (w)−1 σi′ (w) with w of length n; then with cost ≤ n we can replace all letters ζi (s) for s ∈ Si with ζi′ (s); the resulting word is then equal to σi′ (w)−1 σi′ (w) = 1. The second assertion immediately follows.  Proposition 10.C.2 is a first step towards a compact presentation of G. 10.D. Presentation of the group in the 2-tame case. The following two theorems, which use the notion of 2-tameness introduced in Definition 4.C.1, are established in Section 9 (Theorem 9.D.2 and Corollary 9.D.3), relying on Section 8. In the following statements, Also, recall Ldwe identify Ui with its image in Û . L that the decomposition K = j=1 Kj induces a decomposition u = j u(j) , and L ui = j ui(j) .  106  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Theorem 10.D.1 (Presentation of a 2-tame group, weak form). Assume that G = U ⋊ A is a 2-tame standard solvable group. Then the homomorphism Ĝ → G has a central kernel. If moreover the degree zero component of the second homology group H2 (u)0 vanishes, the kernel of Ĝ → G is generated by elements of the form [ exp([λx, y]) exp([x, λy])−1, 1 ≤ j ≤ d, x, y ∈ ui(j) , λ ∈ Kj , . i  We pinpoint the striking fact that H2 (u)0 = {0} does not imply that Ĝ → G is an isomorphism. This was pointed out by Abels [Ab87, 5.7.4], and relies on the fact that the space H2Q (u)0 of 2-homology of u, where u is viewed as a (huge) Lie algebra over the rationals, can be larger than H2 (u)0 . On the other hand, the fact that Ĝ → G has a central kernel is a new result, even in Abels’ framework (u finite-dimensional nilpotent Lie algebra over Qp ); Abels however proved that Û is (s + 1)-nilpotent if U is s-nilpotent and this is a major step in the proof. Actually, in order to use the results of §7.B, we need a (stronger) stable form of Theorem 10.D.1, namely holding over an arbitrary commutative K-algebra. We can view U as the Q group of K-points of U, where U is an affine algebraic group over the ring K = Kj . Thus, for every commutative K-algebra A, U(A) is the group associated to the nilpotent Lie Q-algebra u ⊗K A. Similarly, Ui is defined b so that Ui (A) ⊂ U(A) is the exponential of ui ⊗K A, and we define U[A] as the corresponding multiamalgam of the Ui (A).  Theorem 10.D.2 (Presentation of a 2-tame group, strong (stable) form). Assume that G = U ⋊ A is a 2-tame standard solvable group. Then for every Kb algebra A, the homomorphism U[A] → U(A) has a central kernel, which remains b central in U[A] ⋊ A. If moreover the zero degree component of the second homolb ogy group H2 (u)0 vanishes, the kernel of U[A] → U(A) is generated by elements of the form [ exp([λx, y]) exp([x, λy])−1, x, y ∈ Ui(j) (A), λ ∈ Aj , j = 1 . . . , d. i  Note that weLcould state the theorem without decomposing along the decomposition K = j Kj , but we really need this statement when we estimate the area of welding relations in §10.F. Note that Theorem 10.D.1 is equivalent to the case A = K of Theorem 10.D.2, given the trivial observation that the kernels of Ĝ → G and Û → U coincide. Theorem 10.D.1 involves the Lie algebra bracket; in order to translate it into a purely group-theoretic setting, we need to use Lazard’s formulas from §5.C. We can now restate the second statement of Theorem 10.D.1 with no reference to the Lie algebra in the conclusion (except taking real powers):  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 107  Theorem 10.D.3. Let G = U ⋊ A be a 2-tame standard solvable group such that H2 (u)0 = {0}. Choose s so that U is s-nilpotent. Then the (central) kernel of Ĝ → G is generated by elements of the form [ Bs+1 (xλ , y)Bs+1(x, y λ)−1 , x, y ∈ Ui(j) , λ ∈ Kj , j = 1 . . . , d, i  λ  where x denotes exp(λ log(x)).  Again we need a stable form of the latter result. Theorem 10.D.4. Let G = U ⋊ A be a 2-tame standard solvable group such that H2 (u)0 = {0}. Choose s so that U is s-nilpotent.L Then for every commutative Kalgebra A, denoting Aj = A ⊗K Kj (so that A = j Aj canonically), the (central) kernel of Û[A] → U(A) is generated by elements of the form [ Ui(j) (A), λ ∈ Aj , j = 1 . . . , d, Bs+1 (xλ , y)Bs+1(x, y λ )−1 , x, y ∈ i  where xλ denotes exp(λ log(x)). We can view the elements  Bs+1 (xλ , y)Bs+1(x, y λ)−1  ∗  as elements of the free product H = i Ui ; now x, y range over the disjoint union F x, y ∈ Ui(j) . We call these welding relations in the free product H. By substitution, Theorem 10.D.3 gives rises to the set of relations in FS (10.D.5) ( )  −1   G Rweld = Bs+1 xλ , y Bs+1 x, y λ : x, y ∈ Ui(j) , λ ∈ Kj , j = 1 . . . , d . i  1 in the free group FS . We call these welding relations. We define the set Rweld of ′ ′ welding relators as those welding relations for which kxk , kyk , |λ| ≤ 1, where k · k′ is the prescribed Lie algebra norm. It follows from Corollary 8.C.9 that G has a presentation with relators those of Ĝ (given in Lemma 10.B.3) along with welding relators. At this point, this already reproves Abels’ result.  Corollary 10.D.6 (Compact presentation of G). Let G be a standard solvable group. Assume that G is 2-tame and H2 (una )0 = {0}. Then: (a) (Abels) G is compactly presented; (b) if H2 (u)0 = {0}, a compact presentation of G is given by (10.D.7)  1 1 1 hS̄ | R̄tame ∪ Ramalg ∪ Rweld i.  (c) if H2 (u)0 = {0} and Kill(u)0 = {0}, a compact presentation of G is given by 1 1 hS̄ | R̄tame ∪ Ramalg i.  108  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Proof. First assume that H2 (u)0 = {0}. The above remarks show that if π ′ is 1 the natural projection FS → Ĝ, then π ′ (Rweld ) generates normally the kernel of Ĝ → G. Therefore, by Proposition 10.C.2, G admits the compact presentation (10.D.7). This proves (b). To obtain (a), It remains to prove that G is compactly presented only assuming H2 (una )0 = {0}, but then G/G0 is compactly presented by the previous case, and it follows that G is compactly presented. 1 Finally (c) is by combining Proposition 10.C.2, which says that hS̄ | Rtame ∪ 1 Ramalg i is a presentation of Ĝ (for an arbitrary standard solvable group), and Corollary 9.D.4, which says that the natural projection Û → U is an isomorphism (and hence Ĝ → G as well).  Remark 10.D.8. Let us pinpoint that this does not coincide, at this point, with Abels’ proof. Abels did not prove that the kernel of Ĝ → G is generated by welding relators. Instead (assuming that G is totally disconnected), he considered the multiamalgamated product U̇ of all Ui and a compact open subgroup Ω of U, and Ġ = U̇ ⋊ A, assuming that Ω is generated by the intersections Ω ∩ Ui , so that Û → U̇ and Ĝ → Ġ are surjective. S Defining Si = Ui ∩ Ω and using S = Si ∪ T as a generating subset of G (recall that T Sis a compact generating subset of A), we see that Ω is boundedly generated by Si (for instance, by the Baire category theorem). It follows that Ġ is the quotient of Ĝ by a normal subgroup normally generated by generators of bounded length. Hence Ġ is boundedly presented by S. There is a natural projection Ġ → G. Since welding relators are killed by the amalgamation with Ω, we know that the natural projection Ġ → G is an isomorphism. Not having the presentation by welding relators, Abels used instead topological arguments [Ab87, 5.4, 5.6.1] to reach the conclusion that Ġ → G is indeed an isomorphism; thus G is compactly presented. This approach, with the use of a compact open subgroup is, however, “unstable”, in the sense that it does not yield a presentation of U(A) ⋊ A when A is an arbitrary commutative K-algebra, and the presentation with welding relators will be needed in the sequel in a crucial way when we obtain an upper bound on the Dehn function. 10.E. Quadratic estimates and concluding step for standard solvable groups with zero Killing module. Let us call the rank of A the unique d such that A admits a copy of Zd as a cocompact lattice. Theorem 10.E.1. Let G = U ⋊ A be a standard solvable group. If G is 2-tame and H2 (u)0 and Kill(u)0 both vanish, then the Dehn function of G is quadratic (or linear in case A has rank ≤ 1). If A has rank 0 then G is compact; if A has rank 1, then 2-tame implies tame, and in that case, the Dehn function is linear (see Remark 6.A.9). Otherwise, if  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 109  A has rank at least 2, the Dehn function is at least quadratic. So the issue is to obtain a quadratic upper bound. Fix c and a c-tuple (℘1 , . . . , ℘c ) of elements in {1, . . . , ν}. Recall that U℘ (r) ⊂ (r) FS̄ denotes the set of null-homotopic words of the form w1 . . . wc , with wℓ ∈ S℘ℓ . Theorem 6.C.1 reduces the proof of Theorem 10.E.1 to proving that, for each given ℘, words in U℘ (r) have an at most quadratic area with respect to r. We now proceed to prove this. We also prove a statement holding for more specific relations but without the vanishing assumptions, which will be used in the sequel. Theorem 10.E.2. Let G = U ⋊ A be a 2-tame standard solvable group. Let U1 , . . . , Uν be its standard tame subgroups. Then (1) Assume that H2 (u)0 and Kill(u)0 both vanish. Fix an integer c and any c-tuple (℘1 , . . . , ℘c ) of elements in {1, . . . , ν}. Then for r ≥ 0, the area of words in U℘ (r) ⊂ FS̄ is quadratically bounded in terms of r. (2) Let s be such that U is s-nilpotent (that is, U (s+1) = {1}). Then for every (s+2) group word w(x1 , . . . , xc ) that belongs to the (s + 2)-th term Fc of the F lower central series of the free group Fc , and for any u1 , . . . , uc in i Ui , the relation w(u1, . . . , uc ) in Ĝ has an at most quadratic area with respect to its total length (the constant not depending on c). Proof. Theorem 10.E.1 makes use of the results of §7.B. With the notation of §7.B, for any K-algebra A we have H[A] = νi=1 Ui (A). Let us encode the amalgamation relations. For any 1 ≤ i 6= j ≤ ν, write Uij (A) = Ui (A) ∩ Uj (A), and Q let sij be the inclusion of Uij (A) into Ui (A). Define a closed subscheme Rij of νi=1 Ui by defining  ∗  Rij (A) = {(u1 , . . . , uν ) : uk = 1 ∀k ∈ / {i, j}, ui , uj ∈ Uij (A), and ui uj = 1}. S Define R[A] = i<j Rij (A). Thus, taking the quotient of H[A] by πA (R[A]) means amalgamating the Ui along their intersections; we thus denote this quotient as 1 1 b U[A] (in §7.B it was denoted as Q[A]). Define R = R̄tame ∪ Ramalg . Using this, we now prove (1) and (2) separately. We begin with (1). Since u is 2-tame and H2 (u)0 and Kill(u)0 vanish, for every commutative K-algebra A, we have H2A (u ⊗K A)0 = H2K (u)0 ⊗K A = {0}, and similarly KillA (u ⊗K A)0 = {0}. Thus by Corollary 9.D.4, Û[A] → U(A) is an isomorphism for every A. It follows that L℘ (defined in §7.B.3) is a closed subscheme of U℘ , so we can apply Theorem 7.B.5 with M = L℘ . It gives an upper bound of the areas of elements in M(K) in terms of upper bounds on the Dehn functions of the Ui and of the areas of the relations of the form u1 . . . uν with (u1 , . . . , uν ) ∈ R[K]. In this case, the Ui have at most quadratic Dehn function by Corollary 6.A.8, and the amalgamation relations have an at most linear area by Proposition 10.C.3. Thus by Theorem 7.B.5, elements of M(K) have an at most quadratic area with respect to their length and R.  110  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  b To prove of (2), we argue as follows. By Theorem 9.D.1, U[A] is (s+1)-nilpotent ′ ′ w for every A; thus, defining M = U℘ , we have M (A) ⊂ L℘ (A) (with the notation of Theorem 7.B.7. By Proposition 10.C.3, the tame and amalgamation relations have an at most 1 1 quadratic area with respect to the presentation hS̄ | R̄tame ∪ Ramalg i. We are thus in position to apply Theorem 7.B.7, which yields the desired result.  10.F. Area of welding relations. We now bound the area of welding relations, making use of the quadratic bound on the area of general nilpotency relations from §10.E. Theorem 10.F.1. If the standard solvable group G = U ⋊ A is 2-tame, then welding relations in G have an at most cubic area. S More precisely, there exists a constant K such that for all j, all x, y ∈ i Ui(j) , and all λ ∈ Kj , the welding relation (10.D.5) has area at most Kn3 , with n = log(1 + kxk + kyk + |λ|). Let us assume that the subgroup U, in Theorem 10.F.1, is s-nilpotent. In all this subsection, we write A = As+1 , B = Bs+1 , q = qs+1 . Theorem 10.E.2(2) applies to the group words corresponding to equalities of Proposition 5.C.3, providing Theorem 10.F.2. If G is 2-tame and U is s-nilpotent, for all x ∈ UC1 , y ∈ UC2 and z ∈ UC3 , the relations A(x, y) = A(y, x); B(x, y) = B(y, x)−1 B(A(x, y), z) = A(B(x, z), B(y, z)); A(A(x, y), z q ) = A(xq , A(y, z)) B(xk , y) = B(x, yk ) = B(x, y)k 1 1 have an at most quadratic area in Ĝ for the presentation hS̄ | R̄tame ∪ Ramalg i.    (By “the relation w = w ′ has an at most quadratic area, we mean the relation w −1 w ′ has an at most quadratic area.) Note that in the last case, the quadratic upper bound is of the form ck n2 , where ck may depend on k. Although we only use it as a lemma in the course of proving Theorem 10.F.1, we state Theorem 10.F.2 as a theorem, because it provides a geometric information which is not encoded in the Dehn function, namely a quadratic area for certain types of loops. We now proceed to prove Theorem 10.F.1. Using (with quadratic cost) the “bilinearity” of B (or restricting scalars from the beginning), we can suppose that Kj is equal to R or Qp (although the forthcoming argument can be adapted  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 111  with unessential modifications to their finite extensions). If Kj = Qp , define πj = p. If Kj = R, define πj = 2. We consider the following finite subset of Q: ( ) n−1 X Λ1j (n) = λ = εi πji : εi ∈ {−πj + 1, . . . , πj − 1} ⊂ Q ⊂ Kj . i=0  Lemma 10.F.3. For every κ > 0, there exists K > 0 such that for all n ∈ N, all S j, all x, y ∈ Ui(j) with log(1 + kxk + kyk) ≤ n and all λ ∈ Λj1 (κn), the welding relation     −1  B xλ , y B x, y λ  has area ≤ Kn3 .  Proof. We can work for a given j, so we write π = πj . Write λ=  κn−1 X  εi π i  i=0  If we set  (εi ∈ {−π + 1, . . . , π − 1}).  λi =  κn−1 X  εk π k−i ,  k=i  we have λ0 = λ, λκn = 0, and, for all i Set z = q −1 y and σi =  Pi  λi = πλi+1 + εi  εi π i (so σ−1 = 0); consider the word    Φi = A B λi x, π i z , B (x, σi−1 z) j=1  Here, for readability, we write λx (etc.) instead of xλ . This is natural since x can be identified to its Lie algebra logarithm. For i = 0, σi−1 = 0 so, since 1 = 1 and, formally, B(x, 1) = 1 and A(x, 1) = xq (see Remark 5.C.2), we have Φ0 = B λx, z  q  .  For i = κn, λn = 0 and σi−1 = λ so this is (using that formally B(1, y) = 1 and A(1, y) = y q ) q Φκn = B x, λz .  Let us show that we can pass from Φi to Φi+1 with quadratic cost. In the following computation, each means one operation with quadratic cost, i.e., 2 with cost ≤ K0 n for some constant K0 only depending on the group presentation. The tag on the right explains why this quadratic operation is valid, namely: • (1) means both the homotopy between loops lies in one tame subgroup. • (2) means the operation follows from Theorem 10.F.2; to be specific:  112  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  – (2)distr left for B(A(x, y), z) = A(B(x, z), B(y, z)) and similarly (2)distr right on the right – (2)Q for an equality of the type B(x, y k ) = B(xk , y) = B(x, y)k , with k an integer satisfying |k| ≤ max(q, π). – (2)assoc for the identity A(A(x, y), z q ) = A(xq , A(y, z)). • Or a tag referring to a previous computation, written in brackets.  (10.F.4)  λi x = q(πλi+1 q −1 x + εi q −1 x) q  πλi+1 q −1 x + εi q −1 x  q −1 −1 πλi+1 q x + εi q x   A πλi+1 q −1 x, εi q −1 x  (1) (1) (1)  So by substitution we obtain (10.F.5)   B λi x, π i z      B A πλi+1 q −1 x, εi q −1 x , π i z      A B πλi+1 q −1 x, π i z , B εi q −1 x, π i z      A B πλi+1 q −1 x, π i z , B q −1 x, εi π i z  [10.F .4] (2)distr left (2)Q  Independently we have  (10.F.6)  B (x, σi−1 z)    q B q −1 x , σi−1 z  q B q −1 x, σi−1 z  Again by substitution, this yields  (1) (2)Q  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 113  (10.F.7)     Φi =A B λi x, π i z , B (x, σi−1 z)     q     , B q −1 x, σi−1 z [10.F .5, 10.F .6] A A B πλi+1 q −1 x, π i z , B q −1 x, εi π i z   q      A B πλi+1 q −1 x, π i z , A B q −1 x, εi π i z , B q −1 x, σi−1 z (2)assoc (10.F.8)   q    −1 i −1 i A B πλi+1 q x, π z , B q x, A εi π z, σi−1 z By similar arguments q  B πλi+1 q −1 x, π i z  and     −1 i B q x, A εi π z, σi−1 z  (2)Q  (2)distr right    B λi+1 x, π i+1 z ,    −1 i B q x, q(εi π z + σi−1 z)   B x, εi π i z + σi−1 z  (1) (2)Q  =B (x, σi z)  so substituting from (10.F.8) we get     Φi A B λi+1 x, π i+1z , B (x, σi z)  = Φi+1  in quadratic cost, say ≤ K1 n2 (noting that each Φi has length ≤ K2 n for some fixed constant K2 ). Note that the constant K1 only depends on the group presentation, because the above estimates use a quadratic filling only finitely many times, each among finitely many types (note that we used (2)Q only for k in a bounded interval, only depending on K and s). It follows that we can pass from Φ0 to Φκn with cost ≤ K1 κn3 . On the other hand, by substitution of type (2)Q , we can pass with quadratic cost from B(λx, y) to B(λx, q −1 y)q = Φ0 and from Φκn = B(x, λq −1 y)q to B(x, λy). So the proof of the lemma is complete.  Conclusion of the proof of Theorem 10.F.1. Let now Λ2j (n) be the set of quotients λ′ /λ′′ with λ′ , λ′′ ∈ Λ1j (n), λ′′ 6= 0. Lemma 10.F.3 immediately extends to the case when λ ∈ Λ2j . It follows from the definition that Λ2j (κn) contains all P i elements of the form λ = κn i=−κn εi πj , with εi ∈ {−πj , . . . , πj }. If Kj = R, πjκn Λ2j (κn) contains all integers between −πj−2κn and πj2κn . Thus 2 Λj (κn) contains a set which is |π −κn |-dense in the ball of radius |π κn |. If Kj = Qp , π κn Λ2j (κn) contains a |π 2κn |-dense subset of Zp . Thus Λ2j (κn) contains a |π κn |-dense subset of the ball of radius |π −κn |. In both cases, defining ̺j =  114  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  max(|πj |, |πj |−1 ), we obtain that Λ2j (κn) contains a ̺−κn -dense subset of the ball j of radius ̺κn in K . j j We now fix j and write ̺ = ̺j , π = πj . We pick κ = 2/ log(̺), so that ̺κn = e2n . We assume that n ≥ log(1/|q|), where |q| is the norm of q in Kj (if Kj = R this is an empty condition). It follows that ̺−κn |q|−1en ≤ 1. Now fix λ ∈ Kj with |λ| ≤ en . We need to prove that we can pass from B(λx, y) to B(x, λy) with cubic cost; clearly it is enough to pass from B(λx, y)q to B(x, λy)q with cubic cost. Since |λ| ≤ en ≤ ̺κn , we can write λ = µ+qε with µ ∈ Λ2 (κn) and |qε| ≤ ̺−κn . So |ε| ≤ ̺−κn |q|−1 ≤ e−n . Also, assume that n ≥ log(̺). So we can find an integer k with n/ log(̺) ≤ k ≤ 2n/ log(̺). Thus, if we define η = π ±k , with the choice of sign so that |η| > 1; we have en ≤ |η| ≤ e2n ≤ en |ε|−1. Using a computation as in (10.F.4), we obtain, with quadratic cost   B(λx, y) =B (µ + qε)x, y   B A(µq −1 x, εx), y     A B µq −1 x, y , B(εx, y)  [10.F .4] (2)distr left  and similarly, with quadratic cost.    B x, λy A B(x, µq −1 y), B(x, εy) By the previous case, with cubic cost we have     −1 −1 B x, µq y B µq x, y So it remains to check that with cubic cost we have  (10.F.9)  B(εx, y)  B(x, εy).  If η is the element introduced above, observe that η ∈ Λ2j (κn) and en ≤ |η| ≤ en |ε|−1. We have, with cubic cost (10.F.10)  B(εx, y)  B(ηεx, η −1 y);  B(η −1 x, ηεy)  B(x, εy).  Since max(|ηε|, |η|−1) ≤ e−n , it follows that all four elements ηεx, η −1 y, η −1 x, εy have norm at most one, and it follows that we can perform     (10.F.11) B ηεx, η −1 y B η −1 x, ηεy  by application of a single welding relator. So (10.F.9) follows from (10.F.10) and (10.F.11).   GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 115  10.G. Concluding step for standard solvable groups. Theorem 10.G.1. Let G be a standard solvable group. If G is 2-tame and H2 (u)0 = 0 then its Dehn function is at most cubic. Exactly as in the proof of Theorem 10.E.1, Theorem 6.C.1, along with the cubic bound on the area of welding relators provided by Theorem 10.F.1, allows to reduce the proof of Theorem 10.G.1 to the following: Theorem 10.G.2. Let G = U ⋊ A be a 2-tame standard solvable group with H2 (u)0 = 0; let U1 , . . . , Uν be its standard tame subgroups; fix a positive function n 7→ g(n) such that n 7→ g(n)/n2 is eventually non-decreasing. Assume that the welding relations in G of length n have an area  g(n). Fix c and a c-tuple (℘1 , . . . , ℘c ) of elements in {1, . . . , ν}. Then words in U℘ (n) 1 1 1 have an area, for the presentation hS̄ | R̄tame ∪ Ramalg ∪ Rweld i, asymptotically bounded above by g(n). (We state the theorem with an arbitrary function g(n), because we do not know if the cubic bound is optimal; this might depend on G even assuming Kill(u)0 6= 0.) Proof. The proof follows the same lines as Theorem 10.E.2(1); let us highlight the differences. We need to include welding relations in the definition of R: namely, defining Rij as in the proof of Theorem 10.E.2, we will define R[A] = Rweld [A] ∪ Rij (A), where Rweld is defined as follows. Let s be such that U is s-nilpotent. Define w ∈ F4 as equal to w(x, x′ , y, y ′) = Bs+1 (x, y)Bs+1(x′ , y ′)−1 , where Bs+1 is a word as given by Theorem 5.C.1. L We wish to define (recall that K = dj=1 Kj ) [ Rweld [A] = Wii′ (j) (A), 1≤i,i′ ≤ν,1≤j≤d  Qν  and we have to define Wii′ (j) ⊂ ℓ=1 Ui . Define, for V, V′ unipotent K-groups, the following subscheme M′ = M′V,V′ of V × V × V′ × V′ defined by λ  M′ (A) = {(v1 , v2 , v1′ , v2′ ) ∈ (V × V × V′ × V′ )(A) : ∃λ ∈ A : v1 = v2λ , v2′ = v1′ }.  Here v λ means exp(λ log(v)). That it is a subscheme can be seen on the Lie algebra, where it corresponds to the 4-tuples (v1 , v2 , v1′ , v2′ ) such that there exists λ such that v1 = λv2 and v2′ = λv1′ . Then writing in coordinates, this is equivalent to the condition that ′ ′ ′ ′ v1i′ − v1i • v2i v1i′ − v1i v2i′ = v2i v2i′ = 0 for all i, i′ , ′ ′ • v2i v2i = v1i v1i for all i; hence it is indeed a subscheme. Using the notation of §7.B.6, we have (w • M′V,V′ )(A) = {Bs+1(xλ , y)Bs+1(x, y λ )−1 | x ∈ V(A), y ∈ V′ (A), λ ∈ K}.  116  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Hence if we define Wii′ (j) = w • M′Ui(j) ,Ui′ (j) , we have . Wii′ (j) (A) = {Bs+1 (xλ , y)Bs+1(x, y λ )−1 | x ∈ Ui(j) (A), y ∈ Ui′ (j) (A), λ ∈ Kj }. Now the definition of R is complete, and by Theorem 10.D.4, the quotient of H[A] by the normal subgroup generated by R[A] is canonically U(A), for every commutative K-algebra A. Hence we can, as in the proof of Theorem 10.E.2(1), define M as equal to L℘ . Fix c and a c-tuple ℘ of elements in {1, . . . , ν}. By Theorem 10.D.4, denoting 1 1 1 R = R̄tame ∪ Ramalg ∪ Rweld , we have R ⊂ R[K]; by Theorem 10.D.6(b), the kernel of the quotient map from FS̄ to G is generated as a normal subgroup by R. By assumption (and Proposition 10.C.3), the words defined by the relations in R[K] have area  g(r) with respect to their length r. Hence by Theorem 7.B.5, the area of words x1 . . . xc with xi ∈ U℘i is  g(r), where r = maxi |xi |. Since this holds for every given ℘, by Theorem 6.C.1 (which encapsulates Gromov’s trick), we deduce that the Dehn function of G is 4 g(n).  10.H. Dehn function of generalized standard solvable groups. We define a generalized standard solvable group as a locally compact group of the form U ⋊ N, where the definition is exactly as for standard solvable groups (Definition 1.2), except that N is supposed to be nilpotent instead of abelian. Recall from §6.E that such a group is generalized tame if some element c of N acts on U as a compaction. Clearly split triangulable Lie groups, i.e. of the form G = G∞ ⋊ N, are special cases of generalized standard solvable groups. Theorem 10.H.1. Let G be a generalized standard solvable group not satisfying any of the (SOL or 2-homological) obstructions. Suppose that the Dehn function of N is bounded above by some function f such that r 7→ f (r)/r α is non-decreasing for some α > 1. Then the Dehn function of G satisfies δG (n) 4 nf (n). If moreover Kill(u)0 = {0}, then δG (n) 4 f (n). Note that in all examples we are aware of, the function f can be chosen to be equivalent to the Dehn function of N. The proof follows similar steps as in the case of standard solvable groups, so we only sketch it. The first step is an upper bound for the Dehn function of generalized tame groups, which was obtained in §6.E. Sketch of proof of Theorem 10.H.1. Theorem 6.E.2 implies that the generalized standard tame subgroups of G (i.e., the Ui ⋊ N, where Ui are the standard tame subgroups of U) have their Dehn function  f (n). The remainder of the proof follows the same steps as Theorems 10.E.1 and 10.G.1, allowing a reduction to giving estimates on the area of amalgamation and welding relations of some given combinatorial length. The amalgamation relations have a linearly bounded area with respect to their length, by the same trivial argument as in Proposition  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 117  10.C.3. In case Kill(u)0 = {0}, this provides δN as an upper bound for the Dehn function. In the context of generalized standard groups, the analogue of Theorem 10.E.2 holds (with the same proof using Gromov’s trick and the results of §7.B), with an estimate 4 f (n) instead of 4 n2 . Accordingly, the same holds for its corollary, Theorem 10.F.2. The remainder of the proof of the generalized tame analogue of Theorem 10.F.1 works in the same way: we perform ≃ n times a homotopy of area 4 f (n) instead of 4 n2 , which yields an area 4 nf (n) for welding relators. The concluding step is exactly as in §10.G and yields a Dehn function 4 nf (n).  11. Central and hypercentral extensions and exponential Dehn function In this section, unless explicitly specified, all Lie algebras are finite-dimensional over a field K of characteristic zero. 11.A. Introduction of the section. The purpose of this section is to prove the negative statements of the introduction in presence of 2-homological obstructions (Theorem E.2), gathered in the following theorem. Theorem 11.A.1. (1) If G is a standard solvable group (see Definition 1.2) satisfying the non-Archimedean 2-homological obstruction, then G is not compactly presented; (2) if G is a standard solvable group satisfying the 2-homological obstruction, then it has an least exponential Dehn function (possibly infinite); (3) if G is a real triangulable group with the 2-homological obstruction, then it has an at least exponential Dehn function. (1) and (2) are proved, by an elementary argument relying on central extensions, in §11.B. (3) is much more involved. The reason is that the exponential radical g∞ is not necessarily split in g and the non-vanishing of H2 (g)0 does not necessarily yield a central extension of g in degree zero (an explicit counterexample is given in §11.E). We then need some significant amount of work to show that it provides, anyway, a hypercentral extension. 11.B. FC-Central extensions. We use the following classical definition, which is a slight weakening of the notion of central extension. Definition 11.B.1. Consider an extension (11.B.2)  i e 1→Z→G → G → 1.  e in the sense We say that it is an FC-central extension if i(Z) is FC-central in G, e that is that every compact subset of i(Z) is contained in a compact subset of G invariant under conjugation.  118  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  This widely used terminology is (lamely) borrowed from the discrete case, in which it stands for “Finite Conjugacy (class)”. In the following, the reader can assume, in a first reading, that the FC-central extensions (defined below) are central. The greater generality allows to consider, for instance, the case when Z is a nondiscrete locally compact field on which the action by conjugation is given by multiplication by elements of modulus 1. e genConsider now an FC-central extension as in (11.B.2), and assume that G erated by a compact subset S (symmetric with 1); Fix k, set Wk = Z ∩ S k , and S W̌k = g∈Ge gWk g −1 , which is a compact subset of Z by assumption. The following easy lemma, is partly a restatement of [BaMS93, Lemma 5] (which deals with finitely generated groups and assumes Z is central). Lemma 11.B.3. Keep the notation of Definition 11.B.1. Let e γ be any path in e the Cayley graph of G with respect to S, joining 1 to an element z of Z. Let γ be the image of e γ in the Cayley graph of G (with respect to the image of S). If e γ m can be filled by m (≤ k)-gons, then z ∈ W̌k .  Proof. If e γ can be filled by m (≤ k)-gons, then z can be written (in the free group Q −1 e e over S, hence in G̃) as z = m i=1 hi ri hi , where ri , hi ∈ G, ri ∈ Ker(G → G) = Z having length ≤ k with respect to S, i.e. ri ∈ Wk . Thus hi ri h−1 ∈ W̌k ; hence i m z ∈ W̌k .  In Definition 11.B.1, the group Z may or not be compactly generated; if it is the case, let U a compact generating set of Z, and define the distortion of Z in G as dG,Z (n) = max(n, sup{|g|U : g ∈ Z, |g|S ≤ n}); if Z is not compactly generated set dG,Z (n) = +∞. Note that this function actually depends on S and U as well, but its ∼-equivalence class only depends on (G, Z).  Proposition 11.B.4. Given a FC-central extension as in Definition 11.B.1, if G is compactly presented, then Z is compactly generated and its Dehn function satisfies δG (n)  dG,Z (n). Proof. By Lemma 11.B.3, if G is presented by S and relators of length ≤ k, then Z is generated by W̌k , which is compact. If U is a compact generating set for Z, then Wk ⊂ U ℓ for some ℓ. Write d(n) = dG,Z (n) (relative to S and U) and δ(n) = δG (n). Consider g ∈ Z with e joining 1 and |g|S ≤ n and |g|U = d(n). Taking e γ to be a path of length ≤ n in G g as in Lemma 11.B.3, we obtain that the loop γ in G has length ≤ n and area m, and Lemma 11.B.3 implies that d(n) = |g|U ≤ mℓ. So δ(n) ≥ d(n)/ℓ.  Proof of (1) and (2) in Theorem 11.A.1. In the setting of (1), we assume that G = U ⋊ A satisfies the non-Archimedean 2-homological obstruction, so that for  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 119  some j, Kj is non-Archimedean and the condition Z = H2 (uj )0 6= 0 means that the action of A on Uj can be lifted to an action on a certain FC-central extension i  1 → Z → Ũj → Uj → 1,  so that i(Z) is contained and FC-central in [Ũj , Ũj ]; here ũ is the blow-up of the graded Lie algebra u, as defined in §8.B, and Z ≃ H2 (uj ). Thus it yields an FC-central extension (11.B.5)  i  1 → Z → Ũ ⋊ A → U ⋊ A → 1,  Q where Ũ = Ũj × j ′ 6=j Uj ′ ; note that Ũ ⋊A is compactly generated. By Proposition 11.B.4, it follows that U ⋊ A is not compactly presented. In the setting of (2), the proof is similar, with Kj being Archimedean; there is a difference however: in (11.B.5), Z need not be FC-central in Ũ ⋊ A, because of the possible real unipotent part of the A-action. Note that i(Z) is central in Ũ . We then consider an A-irreducible quotient Z ′′ = Z/Z ′ of Z and consider the FC-central extension i  1 → Z ′′ → Ũ ⋊ A → U ⋊ A → 1.  Since the real group Uj is globally exponentially distorted (in the sense that all elements of exponential size in Uj have linear size in Uj ⋊ A), it follows that i(Z ′′ ) is exponentially distorted as well and by Proposition 11.B.4, it follows that U ⋊ A has an at least exponential Dehn function.  11.C. Hypercentral extensions. To prove Theorem 11.A.1(3), the natural approach seems to start with a real triangulable group G with H2 (g∞ )0 6= 0 and find a central extension of G with exponentially distorted center. If the exponential radical of G is split, i.e. if G = G∞ ⋊ A for some nilpotent group A, the existence of such a central extension follows by a simple argument similar to that in the proof of Theorem 11.A.1(2). Unfortunately, in general such a central extension does not exist; although there are no simple counterexamples, we construct one in §11.E. Nevertheless, in order to prove Theorem 11.A.1(3), the geometric part of the argument is the following variant of Proposition 11.B.4. Proposition 11.C.1. Let G be a connected triangulable Lie group and G∞ its exponential radical (see Definition 4.D.2). Suppose that there exists an extension of connected triangulable Lie groups 1 −→ N −→ H −→ G −→ 1  with N hypercentral in H (i.e. the ascending central series of H covers N) and with N ∩ H ∞ 6= {1}. Then G has an (at least) exponential Dehn function. Proof. We fix a compact generating set S in H, and its image S ′ in G. Let hn ∈ N be an element of linear size n in H and exponential size ≃ en in N. Pick a path of size n joining 1 to h in H, i.e. represent h by a word γn = x1 . . . xn in H with  120  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  xi ∈ S. Push this path forward to G to get a loop of size n in G; let an be its area. So in the free group over S, we have γn =  an Y  −1 gnj rnj gnj  j=1  where rj is a relation of G (i.e. represents the identity in G) of bounded size. By a standard argument using van Kampen diagrams (see Lemma 2.D.2), we can choose the size of gnj to be at most ≤ C(an + n), where C is a positive constant only depending on (G, S ′ ). Push this forward to H to get hn =  an Y  −1 gnj rnj gnj ,  j=1  where rnj here is a bounded element of N, and gnj has length ≤ C(an + n) in H. Since the action of H on N by conjugation is unipotent, we deduce that the size −1 in N of gnj rnj gnj is polynomially bounded with respect to an + n, say  (an + n)d (uniformly in j). Therefore hn has size  (an + n)d+1 . Since (hn ) has exponential growth in N, we deduce that (an ) also grows exponentially.  Let us emphasize that at this point, the proof of Theorem 11.A.1(3) is not yet complete. Indeed, given a real triangulable group G with H2 (g∞ )0 6= 0, we need to check that we can apply Proposition 11.C.1. This is the contents of the following theorem. If V is a G-module, V G denotes the set of G-fixed points. Also, see Definition 4.D.1 for the definition of g∞ . Theorem 11.C.2. Let G be a triangulable Lie group. Suppose that H2 (g∞ )G 6= {0}. Then there exists an extension of connected triangulable Lie groups 1 −→ N −→ H −→ G −→ 1 with N hypercentral in H and with N ∩ H ∞ 6= {1}. The theorem will easily follow from the analogous (more general) result about solvable Lie algebras. By epimorphism of Lie algebras we mean a surjective homomorphism, and we denote it by a two-headed arrow h ։ g. Such an epimorphism is k-hypercentral if its kernel z is contained in the kth term hk of the ascending central series of h; when k = 1, that is, when z is central in h, it is simply called a central epimorphism. Also, if m is a g-module, we write mg = {m ∈ m : ∀g ∈ g, gm = 0}. Definition 11.C.3. We say that a hypercentral epimorphism h ։ g between Lie algebras has polynomial distortion if the induced epimorphism h∞ ։ g∞ is bijective; otherwise we say it has non-polynomial distortion.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 121  The terminology is motivated by the fact that if G, H are triangulable Lie groups and H ։ G is a hypercentral epimorphism, then its kernel is polynomially distorted in H if and only if the corresponding Lie algebra hypercentral epimorphism has polynomial distortion (in the above sense), and otherwise the kernel is exponentially distorted in H. Theorem 11.C.4. Let g be a K-triangulable Lie algebra. Assume that H2 (g∞ )g 6= {0}. Then there exists a hypercentral epimorphism h ։ g with non-polynomial distortion. The condition H2 (g∞ )g 6= {0} can be interpreted as H2 (g∞ )0 6= {0}, where g is endowed with a Cartan grading (see §4.D, especially Lemma 4.D.8). Theorem 11.C.4 will be proved in §11.D.  Proof of Theorem 11.C.2 from Theorem 11.C.4. Theorem 11.C.4 provides a hypercentral epimorphism h ։ g, with kernel denoted by z, and with non-polynomial distortion, i.e. h∞ ∩ z 6= {0}. Since z is hypercentral, the action of g on z is nilpotent, hence triangulable, and since moreover g and z are triangulable, we deduce that h is triangulable. Let H → G be the corresponding surjective homomorphism of triangulable Lie groups and Z its kernel, which is hypercentral. Then H ∞ ∩ Z 6= {1}, because the Lie algebra counterpart holds. So the theorem is proved.  11.D. Proof of Theorem 11.C.4. Lemma 11.D.1. Let g ։ h ։ l be epimorphisms of Lie algebras such that the composite homomorphism is a hypercentral epimorphism. If g ։ l has polynomial distortion then so does h ։ l. Proof. This is trivial.    Lemma 11.D.2. Let g be a Lie algebra and (T t )t∈K be a one-parameter group of unipotent automorphisms of g. Let h ։ g be a central epimorphism. Then there exists a Lie algebra k with an epimorphism ρ : k ։ h such that the composite homomorphism k ։ g is a central epimorphism, and such that the action of (T t ) lifts to a unipotent action on k. Remark 11.D.3. The conclusion of Lemma 11.D.2 cannot be simplified by the requirement that k = h, as we can see, for instance, by taking h to be the direct product of the 3-dimensional Heisenberg algebra and a 1-dimensional algebra and a suitable 1-parameter subgroup of unipotent automorphisms of g = h/[h, h]. Proof of Lemma 11.D.2. Set z = Ker(h ։ g) and denote the Hopf bracket (see §8.A.1) by [·, ·]′ : g ∧ g → h. Pick a linear projection π : h → z and define b(x ∧ y) = π([x, y]′ ). This gives a linear identification of h with g ⊕ z, for which the law is given as [ hx1 , z1 i , hx2 , z2 i ] = h [x1 , x2 ] , b(x1 ∧ x2 ) i  122  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  (in this proof, we write pairs hx, zi rather than (x, z) for the sake of readability). Observe that T t naturally acts on g ∧ g, preserving Z2 (g) and B2 (g). If c ∈ g ∧ g, define the function αc : K → z u 7→ b(T u c). If d is the dimension of g, let W denote the space of K-polynomial mappings of degree < 2d from K to z; the dimension of W is 2d dim(z). Now t 7→ T t is a polynomial of degree < d valued in the space of endomorphisms of g, so is also polynomial of degree < 2d valued in the space of endomorphisms of g ∧ g. So αc is a polynomial of degree < 2d, from K to z. If c ∈ g ∧ g is a boundary then αc = 0. So α defines a central extension k = g ⊕ W (as a vector space) of g with kernel W , with law [hx1 , ζ1 i, hx2 , ζ2 i] = h[x1 , x2 ], αx1 ∧x2 i,  hx1 , ζ1 i, hx2 , ζ2 i ∈ g ⊕ W.  From now on, since elements of W are functions, it will be convenient to write elements of k as hx, ζ(u)i, where u is thought of as an indeterminate. For t ∈ K, the automorphism T t lifts to an automorphism of k given by T t (hx, ζ(u)i) = hT t x, ζ(u + t)i. This is obviously a one-parameter subgroup of linear automorphisms; let us check that these are Lie algebra automorphisms (in the computation, for readability we write the brackets as [·; ·], with semicolons instead of commas). [ T t (hx1 , ζ1(u)i) ; T t (hx2 , ζ2 (u)i) ] = [ hT t x1 , ζ1 (u + t)i ; hT t x2 , ζ2 (u + t)i ] = h [T t x1 ; T t x2 ] , αT t x1 ∧T t x2 (u) i  = h [T t x1 ; T t x2 ] , b(T u (T t x1 ∧ T t x2 )) i = h T t [x1 ; x2 ] , b(T t+u x1 ∧ T t+u x2 ) i = h T t [x1 ; x2 ] , αx1 ∧x2 (t + u) i = T t (h [x1 ; x2 ] , αx1 ∧x2 (u)i )  = T t ( [ hx1 , ζ1 (u)i ; hx2 , ζ2 (u)i ] ), so these are Lie algebra automorphisms. Now the mapping k → h ρ : hx, ζ(u)i 7→ hx, ζ(0)i  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 123  is clearly a surjective linear map; it is also a Lie algebra homomorphism: indeed [ ρ(hx1 , ζ1 (u)i) ; ρ(hx2 , ζ2 (u)i) ] = [ hx1 , ζ1 (0)i ; hx2 , ζ2(0)i ] = h [x1 ; x2 ] , b(x1 ∧ x2 ) i = h [x1 ; x2 ] , αx1 ∧x2 (0) i  = ρ(h [x1 ; x2 ] , αx1 ∧x2 (u)i )  = ρ([ hx1 , ζ1 (u)i ; hx2 , ζ2(u)i ])    Lemma 11.D.4. The statement of Lemma 11.D.2 holds true if we replace, in both the hypotheses and the conclusion, central by k-hypercentral. Proof. The case k = 1 was done in Lemma 11.D.2. Decompose h ։ g as h ։ h1 ։ g, with h ։ h1 central (with kernel z) and h1 ։ g (k − 1)-hypercentral. By induction hypothesis, there exists k with k ։ h1 such that the composite epimorphism k ։ g is (k − 1)-hypercentral and such that (T t ) lifts to k. Consider the fibered product h ×h1 k of the two epimorphisms h ։ h1 and k ։ h1 , so that the two lines in the diagram below are central extensions and both squares commute. ?g ?  0 /  z /  hO  //  O  0  z  0 /  O  h ×h1 k OO  hO 1  /; k ✇✇; ✇ ✇ ✇✇ ✇✇ ✇ ✇ /  0  m Applying Lemma 11.D.2 again to h ×h1 k ։ k, we obtain m ։ h ×h1 l so that the composite epimorphism m ։ k is central and so that (T t ) lifts to m. So the composite map m ։ h is the desired homomorphism.  We say that a Lie algebra g is spread if it can be written as g = n ⋊ s where n is nilpotent, s is reductive and acts reductively on n. It is spreadable if there exists such a decomposition. When g is solvable, s is abelian and a Cartan subalgebra of g is given by the centralizer h = Cg (s) = Cn (s) × s. In particular, the s-characteristic decomposition of g coincides with the h-characteristic decomposition, and the associated Cartan gradings are the same. This remark is useful when we have to deal with a homomorphism n1 ⋊ s → n2 ⋊ s which is the identity on s: indeed such a homomorphism is graded for the Cartan gradings. Proof of Theorem 11.C.4. We first prove the result when g is spread, so g = u⋊d. Let k be the dimension of u/g∞ . We argue by induction on k.  124  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Suppose that k = 0. We have a grading of g∞ , valued in d∨ . Consider the ∞ and a blow-up construction (Lemma 8.B.2): it gives a graded Lie algebra gf ∞ ։ g∞ with central kernel concentrated in degree zero graded surjective map gf ∞ and isomorphic to H2 (g )0 . This grading, valued in d∨ , defines a natural action ∞ and the epimorphism g ∞ ⋊ d ։ g∞ ⋊ d is central. By construction, f of d on gf ∞ ∞ ⋊ d)∞ so this (hyper)central epimorphism the kernel H2 (g )0 is contained in (gf has non-polynomial distortion. Now suppose that k ≥ 1. Let n be a codimension 1 ideal of g containing g∞ ⋊d. Since n contains g▽ ⊕ d, the intersection of n with u0 is a hyperplane in u0 . So there exists a one-dimensional subspace l ⊂ u0 , such that g = n ⋊ l. Note that the grading of g, valued in d∨ , extends that of n and n∞ = g∞ and in particular, H2 (n∞ )0 6= {0}. By induction hypothesis, there exists a hypercentral epimorphism h ։ n, with non-polynomial distortion. By Lemma 11.D.4, there exists a hypercentral epimorphism m ։ h (with kernel z) so that the action of ead(l) on n lifts to a unipotent action on m. This corresponds to a nilpotent action of l on m. Let zi be the intersection of the ith term of the ascending central series of m with z, so zℓ = z for some ℓ. On each zi+1 /zi , the action of l is nilpotent and the adjoint action of m is trivial. So the action of m⋊l on each zi+1 /zi , hence on z, is nilpotent. That is, z is hypercentral in m ⋊ l (this is where the argument would fail with “hypercentral” replaced by “central”). So m ⋊ l ։ g is the desired hypercentral epimorphism: by Lemma 11.D.1, m ։ n has non-polynomial distortion and therefore so does m ⋊ l ։ g. Now the result is proved when g is spread. In general, fix a faithful linear representation g → gln , and let h = u ⋊ d be the splittable hull of g in gln (that is, the subalgebra generated by semisimple and nilpotent parts of elements of g for the additive Jordan decomposition, see [Bou, Chap. VII, §5]). If n is any Cartan subalgebra of h, then n′ = n ∩ g is a Cartan subalgebra of g [Bou, Chap. VII, §5, Ex. 8]. Now n = (u ∩ n) + n′ , but every n-weight of h vanishes on u ∩ n. So the n-grading of h extends the n′ -grading of g (in other words, the embedding g ⊂ h is a graded map). In particular, since g∞ = h∞ , this equality is an isomorphism of graded algebras and we deduce that H2 (h∞ )0 6= {0}. So we obtain a hypercentral extension m ։ h, with non-polynomial distortion because g∞ = h∞ . By taking the inverse image of g in m, we obtain the desired hypercentral extension of g.  11.E. An example without central extensions. We prove here that in the conclusion of Theorem 11.C.2, it is not always possible to replace, in the conclusion, hypercentral by central. We begin with the following useful general criterion. Proposition 11.E.1. Let g be a finite-dimensional solvable Lie algebra with its Cartan grading. Then g has no central extension with non-polynomial distortion if and only if the image of (Ker(d2 ) ∩ (g▽ ∧ g▽ ))0 in H2 (g)0 is zero (i.e. it is contained in Im(d3 )).  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 125  Proof. Suppose that the image of the above map is nonzero. By the blow-up construction (Lemma 8.B.2), we obtain a central extension ğ ։ g with kernel H2 (g)0 concentrated in degree zero. By the P assumption, there exist xi , yi in g, of nonzero opposite weights ±αi , such that xi ∧P yi is a 2-cycle and is nonzero in H2 (g)0 . This means that in ğ, the element z = [xi , yi ] is a nonzero element of the central kernel H2 (g)0 . So z ∈ ğ∞ and the central epimorphism ğ ։ g does not have polynomial distortion. Conversely, suppose that there exists a central epimorphism ğ ։ g with nonpolynomial distortion, with kernel z. Note that the Cartan grading lifts to ğ, so that the kernel z is concentrated in degree zero. By assumption, z ∩ ğ∞ contains a P nonzero element z. By Lemmas 8.A.3 and 8.A.4, wePcan write, in ğ, z = [xi , yi ] with xi , yi of nonzero opposite weights. Thus in g, xi ∧ yi is a nonzero element of H2 (g)0 .  Let G̃ be the 15-dimensional R-group of 6 × 6 upper triangular matrices of the form  (11.E.2)   1 x12 u13 u14 0 0 0 1  t3 u34 0 0  0 t4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0   u16 x26   u36  , u46  x56  1  u15 x25 u35 u45 1 0  where t3 , t4 are nonzero. Its unipotent radical Ũ consists of elements of the form (11.E.2) with t3 = t4 = 1 and its exponential radical Ẽ consists of elements in Ũ for which x12 = x25 = x26 = x56 = 0. If D denotes the (two-dimensional) diagonal subgroup in G̃, the quotient G̃/Ẽ is isomorphic to the direct product of D with a 4-dimensional unipotent group (corresponding to coefficients x12 , x25 , x26 , x56 ). Note that the extension 1 → Ẽ → Ũ → Ũ /Ẽ → 1 is not split. Let Z the 2-dimensional subgroup of Ũ consisting of matrices with all entries zero except u16 and x26 . Note that Z is hypercentral and has non-trivial intersection with the exponential radical of G̃. Define G = G̃/Z; it is 13-dimensional. The weights of E = Ẽ/Z are arranged as follows (the principal weights are in boldface) (11.E.3)  14 13  15  tt tt t t tt tt  45 46  34  35 36  126  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  and the other basis elements of weight zero in g are 33, 44, 12, 25, 56. We see that e is 2-tame. Besides, H2 (e)0 6= 0, as 13 ∧ 36 is a 2-cycle in degree 0 that is not a 2-boundary, as follows from the observation that e has an obvious nontrivial central extension in degree zero, given by at the level of groups by 1 → Z/Z ′ → Ẽ/Z ′ → E → 1, where Z ′ is the one-dimensional subgroup at position 26 (that is, the subgroup of Z consisting of matrices with u16 = 0), which is normalized by Ẽ but not by Ũ . Since H2 (g∞ )0 6= {0}, by Theorem 11.C.4 there exists a hypercentral epimorphism h → g with non-polynomial distortion. By contrast, every central epimorphism h → g has polynomial distortion. This follows from Proposition 11.E.1 and the following proposition. Proposition 11.E.4. Let g be the above 13-dimensional triangulable Lie algebra. Then in H2 (g)0 , the image of (Ker(d2 ) ∩ (g▽ ∧ g▽ ))0 is zero. Proof. To streamline the notation, we denote by ij the elementary matrix usually denoted by Eij , with 1 at position (i, j) and zero everywhere else (including the diagonal). By considering each pair of nonzero opposite weights in (11.E.3), we can describe the map d2 on a basis of the 4-dimensional space (u▽ ∧ u▽ )0 . d  2 13 ∧ 35 7−→ −15 14 ∧ 45 7−→ −15,  13 ∧ 36 7−→ 0, 14 ∧ 46 7−→ 0;  accordingly a basis of (Ker(d2 ) ∩ (g▽ ∧ g▽ ))0 is given by 13 ∧ 35 − 14 ∧ 45,  13 ∧ 36,  14 ∧ 46;  we have to check that these are all boundaries; let us snatch them one by one: d  3 12 ∧ 25 ∧ 56 7−→ 56 ∧ 15. 13 ∧ 34 ∧ 45 7−→ 13 ∧ 45 − 14 ∧ 45 13 ∧ 35 ∧ 56 7−→ 56 ∧ 15 + 13 ∧ 36 14 ∧ 45 ∧ 56 7−→ 56 ∧ 15 + 14 ∧ 46.    Combining with Proposition 11.E.1, we get: Corollary 11.E.5. We have H2 (g∞ )0 6= {0}, but there is no central extension of Lie groups j  1 −→ R −→ Ğ −→ G −→ 1 with j(R) exponentially distorted in Ğ.    GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 127  12. G not 2-tame Here we prove that any group satisfying the SOL obstruction has an at least exponential Dehn function. The method also provides the result that any group satisfying the non-Archimedean SOL obstruction is not compactly presented. 12.A. Combinatorial Stokes formula. Definition 12.A.1. Let X be a set and let R be any commutative ring. We call a closed path a sequence c = (c0 , . . . , cn ) of points in X with c0 = cn (so we can view it as indexed by Z/nZ). If α, β are functions X → R, we define Z X βdα = β(ci )(α(ci+1) − α(ci−1 )) c  i∈Z/nZ  =  X  i∈Z/nZ  β(ci )α(ci+1) − β(ci+1 )α(ci ).  Clearly, this is invariant if we shift indices. The following properties are immediate consequences of the definition. • (Antisymmetry) We have Z Z βdα = − αdβ. c  c  • (Concatenation) If c0 = ci = cn and we write c′ = (c0 , . . . , ci ) and c′′ = (ci , . . . , cn ), Z Z Z βdα = βdα + βdα. c  c′  c′′  • (Filiform vanishing) If n = 2 then the integral vanishes. More generally, the integral vanishes when c is filiform, i.e., n is even and ci = cn−i for all i. R R R Indeed, the difference c βdα − c′ βdα − c′′ βdα is equal to β(c0 )[(α(ci+1 ) − α(ci−1 )) + (α(c1 ) − α(cn−1 ))  −(α(c1 ) − α(ci−1 )) − (α(ci+1 ) − α(cn−1 ))] = 0.  The filiform vanishing is immediate for n = 2 and follows in general by an induction based on the concatenation formula. Now let us deal with a Cayley graph of a group G with a generating set S, and we consider paths in the graph, that is sequences of vertices linked by edges. Thus any closed path based at 1 can be encoded by a unique element of the free group FS , which is a relation (i.e. an element of the kernel of FS → G), and conversely, if r is a relation, we denote by [r] the corresponding closed path based at 1. Note that G acts by left translations on the set of closed paths. The above properties imply the following  128  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  • (Product of relations) If r, r ′ are relations, we have Z Z Z βdα = βdα + βdα. [rr ′ ]  [r ′ ]  [r]  • (Conjugate of relations) If r is a relation and γ ∈ FS , Z Z βdα = βdα. [γrγ −1 ]  γ·[r]  • (Combinatorial Q Stokes formula) Suppose that a relation r is written as a product r = i=1 γi ri γi−1 of conjugates of relations. Then Z k Z X βdα. βdα = [r]  i=1  γi ·[ri ]  The formula for products follows from concatenation if there is no simplification in the product rr ′ , and follows by also using the filiform vanishing otherwise. The formula for conjugates also follows using the filiform vanishing. The Stokes formula follows from the two previous by an immediate induction.  Remark 12.A.2. The above combinatorial Stokes formula is indeed analogous to the classical Stokes formula on a disc: here the left-hand term is thought of as an integral along the boundary, while the right-hand term is a discretized integral over the surface. 12.B. Loops in groups of SOL type. Let K1 and K2 be two nondiscrete locally compact normed fields. Consider the group Z, G = (K1 × K2 ) ⋊(ℓ1 ,ℓ−1 2 ) where |ℓ2 |K2 ≥ |ℓ1 |K1 > 1, with group law written so that the product depends affinely on the right term: ′ ′ (x, y, n)(x′ , y ′, n′ ) = (x + ℓn1 x′ , y + ℓ−n 2 y , n + n ).  Write |ℓ1 |K1 = |ℓ2 |µK2 with 0 < µ ≤ 1. Now we can also view x and y as the projections to the coordinates in the above description. In the next lemmas, we consider a normed ring K (whose norm is submultiplicative, not necessarily multiplicative), and functions A : K1 → K, and B : K2 → K, yielding functions α, β : G → K defined by α = A ◦ x and β = B ◦ y. Lemma 12.B.1. Suppose that A is 1-Lipschitz and that B satisfies the Hölderlike condition |B(s) − B(s′ )| ≤ |s − s′ |µ , ∀s, s′ ∈ K2 . R Then c βdα is bounded on triangles of bounded diameter, that is, when c ranges over triples (ci )i∈Z/3Z with ci ∈ G such all c−1 i cj belong to some given compact subset of G.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 129  Proof. Let us consider a triangle T of bounded diameter (viewed as a closed path of length three), i.e. three points (g0 , g0 h, g0 h′ ), where h and h′ are bounded (but R not g0 !). Note that as a consequence of the antisymmetry relation, T βdα does not change if we add constants to both α and β. We can therefore assume that α(g0 ) = β(g0 ) = 0. Hence Z βdα = β(g0h)α(g0 h′ ) − β(g0 h′ )α(g0h). T  In coordinates, suppose that g0 = (x0 , y0, n0 ), h = (x, y, n) and h′ = (x′ , y ′, n′ ). Then g0 h = (x0 +ℓn1 0 x, y0 +ℓ2−n0 y, n0 +n), and g0 h′ = (x0 +ℓn1 0 x′ , y0 +ℓ2−n0 y ′ , n0 +n′ ). Since A(x0 ) = B(x0 ) = 0, we have Z βdα = B(y0 + ℓ2−n0 y)A(x0 + ℓn1 0 x′ ) − B(y0 + ℓ2−n0 y ′)A(x0 + ℓn1 0 x). T  By our assumptions on A and B, we have Z βdα ≤ |ℓ2−n0 y|µ|ℓn1 0 x′ | + |ℓ2−n0 y ′ |µ |ℓn1 0 x| T  = |y|µ|x′ | + |y ′|µ |x|,  which is duly bounded when h, h′ are bounded.    Fix n ≥ 1. We consider the relation  γ1,n = tn xt−n ytn x−1 t−n y −1;  this defines a closed path of length 4n + 4, where x, y and t denote (by abuse of notation) the elements (1, 0, 0) , (0, 1, 0) and (0, 0, 1) of G = K1 × K2 ⋊ Z. Lemma 12.B.2. Consider A, B, α, β as introduced before Lemma 12.B.1. Suppose that A(0) = B(1) = 0. Then we have Z βdα = 2B(0)A(ℓn1 ). γ1,n  Proof of Lemma 12.B.2. To simplify the notation, let us R denote by c the closed path of length 4n + 4 defined by γ1,n . In the integral c βdα, only those points ci for which “βdα” is nonzero, i.e. both α(ci+1 ) 6= α(ci−1 ) and β(ci ) 6= 0, do contribute. In this example as well as the forthcoming ones, this will make most terms be equal to zero. The closed path c can be decomposed as c0 = (0, 0, 0), (0, 0, 1), . . . , (0, 0, n − 1), (0, 0, n) = cn , cn+1 = (ℓn1 , 0, n), (ℓn1 , 0, n − 1), . . . , (ℓn1 , 0, 1), (ℓn1 , 0, 0) = c2n+1 ,  c2n+2 = (ℓn1 , 1, 0), (ℓn1 , 1, 1), . . . , (ℓn1 , 1, n − 1), (ℓn1 , 1, n) = c3n+2 , c3n+3 = (0, 1, n), (0, 1, n − 1), . . . , (0, 1, 1), (0, 1, 0) = c4n+3 .  130  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  We see that x(ci+1 ) 6= x(ci−1 ) only for i = n, n + 1, 3n + 2, 3n + 3. Moreover, for i = 3n + 2, 3n + 3, y(ci ) = 1, so B(y(ci )) = 0. Thus Z n+1 X βdα = B(y(ci ))(A(x(ci+1 )) − A(x(ci−1 ))) = 2B(0)(A(ℓn1 ) − A(0)); i=n  whence the result.    To illustrate the interest of the notions developed here, note that this is enough to obtain the following result. Proposition 12.B.3. Under the assumptions above, if 2 6= 0 in K1 , the group G = (K1 × K2 ) ⋊(ℓ1 ,ℓ−1 Z 2 )  has at least exponential Dehn function, and if both K1 and K2 are ultrametric then G is not compactly presented. Remark 12.B.4. Actually the lower bound in Proposition 12.B.3 is optimal: if either K1 or K2 is Archimedean, then G has an exponential Dehn function. Indeed, the upper bound follows from Corollary 3.B.6. We use the following convenient language: in a locally compact group G with a compact system of generators S, we say that a sequence of null-homotopic words (wn ) in FS has asymptotically infinite area if for every R, there exists N(R) such that no wn for n ≥ N(R) is contained in the normal subgroup of FS generated by null-homotopic words of length ≤ R. By definition, the non-existence of such a sequence is equivalent to G being compactly presented. R Proof of Proposition 12.B.3. Set I = γ1,n βdα. Define K = K1 × K2 . We need to use suitable functions A : K1 → K and B : K2 → K satisfying the hypotheses of Lemmas 12.B.1 and 12.B.2. For x ∈ K2 , define o(x) ∈ K1 to be equal to 1 if |x| < 1 and to 0 if |x| ≥ 1; also define Λ(x) = max(1 − |x|, 0) ∈ R; also keep in mind that any Archimedean locally compact field naturally contains R as a closed subfield. We define A and B according to whether K1 and K2 are Archimedean: • K2 non-Archimedean (K1 arbitrary): A(x1 ) = (x1 , 0) and B(x2 ) = (o(x2 ), 0); • K1 and K2 both Archimedean: A(x1 ) = (x1 , 0) and B(x2 ) = (Λ(x2 ), 0); • K2 Archimedean, K1 non-Archimedean: A(x1 ) = (0, |x1 |) and B(x2 ) = (0, Λ(x2)). (Note that the cases K1 Archimedean and not K2 , and vice versa, cannot be treated simultaneously because of the dissymmetry resulting from the condition µ ≤ 1.) Since A(0) = B(1) = (0, 0), Lemma 12.B.2 implies that I = 2B(0)A(ℓn1 ), and thus I = (2ℓn1 , 0) in the first two cases, and I = (0, 2|ℓ1|n ) in the last case. It is clear that in each case, A is 1-Lipschitz. We have to check the Hölderlike condition for B, which is clear when K2 is non-Archimedean. If K2 is  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 131  Archimedean, we need to check the Hölder-like condition for f (x2 ) = max(0, 1 − |x2 |) ∈ R. Indeed, if s, s′ ∈ K2 , if both |s|, |s′| ≥ 1, then f (s) = f (s′ ); if |s| ≤ 1 ≤ |s′ |, then |f (s) − f (s′)| = 1 − |s|; then since 1 ≤ |s′ | ≤ |s′ − s| + |s|, we deduce 1−|s| ≤ |s−s′ |. If |s−s′ | ≤ 1, we deduce that |f (s)−f (s′)| ≤ |s−s′ | ≤ |s−s′ |µ If |s − s′ | ≥ 1, we directly see |f (s) − f (s′ )| = 1 − |s| ≤ 1 ≤ |s − s′ |µ . Finally if both |s|, |s′| ≤ 1, we have |f (s) − f (s′ )| = |s| − |s′ | ≤ 1. Thus the inequality is again clear if |s − s′ | ≥ 1, and otherwise |f (s) − f (s′ )| = |s| − |s′ | ≤ |s − s′ | ≤ |s − s′ |µ . RTherefore by Lemma 12.B.1, for each R there is a bound C(R) on the norm of βdα over any triangle of diameter ≤ R. We now again discuss: • K1 and K2 both non-Archimedean, I = (2ℓn1 , 0): by ultrametricity of K1 , Rand the combinatorial Stokes theorem, C(R) is a bound for the norm of βdα over an arbitrary loop that can be decomposed into triangles of diameter ≤ R. Since (|2|K1 |ℓ1 |nK1 ) goes to infinity, this shows that for every R there exists n0 such that for every n ≥ n0 , the loop γ1,n cannot be decomposed into triangles of diameter ≤ R. Thus the sequence (γ1,n ) has asymptotically infinite area. This shows that G is not compactly presented. • K1 Archimedean, K2 arbitrary, I = (2ℓn1 , 0). Fix R so that every combinatorial loop in G can be decomposed into triangles of diameter ≤ R. Suppose that γ1,n can be decomposed into jn triangles of diameter ≤ R. By the combinatorial Stokes formula (see §12.A) and Lemma 12.B.1, |I| ≤ C(R)jn . It follows that jn ≥ 2|ℓ1 |nK1 /C(R). Hence the area of γ1,n grows at least exponentially, so the Dehn function of G grows at least exponentially. • K2 Archimedean, K1 non-Archimedean: I = (0, 2|ℓ1 |n ). The argument is exactly as in the previous case.   Remark 12.B.5. The assumption that K1 does notR have characteristic two can P be removed, but in that case we need to redefine βdα as i β(ci )(α(ci+1 ) − α(ci )). The drawback of this definition is that the integral is not invariant under conjugation. However, with the help of Lemma 2.D.2, it is possible to conclude. Since we are not concerned with characteristic two here, we leave the details to the reader. However Proposition 12.B.3 is not enough for our purposes, because we do not only wish to bound below the Dehn function of the group G, but also of various groups H mapping onto G. In general, the loop γ1,n does not lift to a loop in those groups, so we consider more complicated loops γk,n in G, which eventually lift to the groups we have in mind. However, to estimate the area, we will go on working in G, because we know how to compute therein, and because obviously the area of a loop in H is bounded below by the area of its image in G.  132  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Define by induction −1 γk,n = γk−1,n gk γk−1,n gk−1 . Here, gk denotes the element (0, yk , 0) in the group G, where the sequence (yi ) in K2 satisfies the following property: y1 = 1 and for any non-empty finite subset I of integers, X yi ≥ 1. i∈I  For instance, if K2 is ultrametric, this is satisfied by yi = ℓi2 ; if K2 = R, the constant sequence yi = 1 works. The sequence (y R i ) will be fixed once and for all. Fix n. We wish to compute, more generally, γk,n βdα. Write the path γk,n as (ci ). Note that for given n, ci does not depend on k (because γk,n is an initial segment of γk+1,n). Write the combinatorial length of γk,n as λk,n (λ1,n = 4n + 4, λk+1,n = 2λk,n + 2). Lemma 12.B.6. The number n being fixed, we have (1) There exists a sequence finite subsets Fi of the set of positive integers, such P that for all i, we have y(ci ) = j∈Fi yj , and satisfying in addition: for all i < λk,n and all k ≥ 1, we have Fi ⊂ {1, . . . , k}. Moreover y(ci ) 6= 0 (and thus Fi 6= ∅), unless either – i ≤ 2n + 2, or – i = λj,n for some j. (2) Assume that 1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1, or n + 2 ≤ i ≤ 2n + 2, or i = λj,n for some j. Then x(ci−1 ) = x(ci+1 ). Proof. (1) The sequence (Fi ) is constructed for i < λk,n , by induction on k. For k = 1, we set Fi = ∅ if i ≤ 2n − 1 and Fi = {1} if 2n + 2 ≤ i ≤ 4n + 3 = λ1,n − 1, and it satisfies the equality for y(ci ) (see the proof of Lemma 12.B.2, where ci is made explicit for all i ≤ λ1,n = 4n + 4). Now assume that k ≥ 2 and that Fi is constructed for i < λ = λk−1,n with the required properties. We set Fλ = ∅; since cλ = (0, 0, 0), the condition holds for i = λ. It remains to deal with i when λ < i < λk,n ; in this case ci = gk c2λ−i , so y(ci ) = yk +y(ci ). Thus if we set Fi = {k}∪F2λ−i , remembering by induction that F2λ−i ⊂ {1, . . . , k − 1}, we deduce that P y(ci ) = j∈Fi yj ; clearly Fi ⊂ {1, . . . , k}. (2) This was already checked for i ≤ 2n + 2 (see the proof of Lemma 12.B.2). In the case i = λj,n , we have ci−1 = gj and ci+1 = gj+1, so x(ci−1 ) = x(ci+1 ).  Lemma 12.B.7. Under the assumptions of Lemma 12.B.2, we have Z βdα = |2ℓ1|nK1 . γk,n  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 133  Proof. By Lemma 12.B.6, if both |y(ci )| < 1 and x(ci−1 ) 6= x(ci+1 ), then i = n or i = n + 1. It follows that the desired integral on γk,n is the same as the integral on γ1,n computed in Lemma 12.B.2.  12.C. Groups with the SOL obstruction. Theorem 12.C.1. Let G1 be a locally compact, compactly generated group, and suppose there is a continuous surjective homomorphism G1 → G = (K1 × K2 ) ⋊(ℓ1 ,ℓ−1 Z, 2 ) where 0 6= 2 in K1 . Suppose that G1 has a nilpotent normal subgroup H whose image in G contains K1 × K2 . Then • the Dehn function of G is at least exponential. • if both K1 and K2 are ultrametric, then G is not compactly presented. Proof. Let k0 be the nilpotency length of H and fix k ≥ k0 . Using Lemma 12.B.7 and arguing as in the proof of Proposition 12.B.3 (using Lemma 12.B.7 instead if Lemma 12.B.2), we obtain that the loops γk,n , which have linear length with respect to n, have at least exponential area, and asymptotically infinite area in case K1 and K2 are both ultrametric. Lift x, y, and gk to elements x̃, ỹ, g˜k in H and t to an element t̃ in G; set X̃n = t̃n x̃t̃−n ; since H is normal, X̃n ∈ H. This lifts γk,n to a path γg k,n based at −1 1; let vk,n be its value at λk,n , so v1,n = X̃n ỹ X̃n−1 ỹ −1 and vk+1,n = vk,n g˜k vk,n g˜k −1 . We see by an immediate induction that vk,n belongs to the (k + 1)th term in the lower central series of H. Since k ≥ k0 , we see that γg k,n is a loop of G, of linear length with respect to n, mapping to γk,n. In particular, its area is at least the area of γk,n. So we deduce that γg k,n has at least exponential area with respect to n, and has asymptotically infinite area in case K1 and K2 are both ultrametric.  We will also need the following variant, in the real case. Theorem 12.C.2. Let G1 be a locally compact, compactly generated group, and suppose there is a continuous homomorphism with dense image G1 → G = (R × R) ⋊ R,  so that the element t ∈ R acts by the diagonal matrix (ℓt1 , ℓ−t 2 ) (ℓ2 ≥ ℓ1 > 0). Suppose that G1 has a nilpotent normal subgroup H whose image in G contains R × R. Then the Dehn function of G is at least exponential. Proof. Since the homomorphism has dense image containing R × R, there exists some element t̃ mapping to an element t of the form (0, 0, τ ) with τ > 0. Changing the parameterization of G if necessary (replacing ℓi by ℓτi for i = 1, 2), we can suppose that τ = 1. Then lift x and y and pursue the proof exactly as in the proof of Theorem 12.C.1.   134  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Remark 12.C.3. To summarize the proof, the lower exponential R bound is obtained by finding two functions α, β on G1 such that the integral βdα is bounded on triangles of bounded diameter, and a sequence (γn ) of combinatorial loops of R linear diameter such that γn βdα grows exponentially. This approach actually also provides a lower bound on the homological Dehn function [Ger92, BaMS93, Ger99] as well. Let us recall the definition. Let G be a locally compact group with a generating set S and a subset R of the kernel of FS → G consisting of relations of bounded length, yielding a polygonal complex structure with oriented edges and 2-faces. Let A denote either Z or R. For i = 0, 1, 2, let Ci (G, A) be the A-module freely spanned by the set of vertices, resp. oriented edges, resp. oriented 2-faces. Endow each Ci (G, A) with the ℓ1 norm. There are usual boundary operators ∂  ∂  C2 (G, A) →2 C1 (G, A) →1 C0 (G, A). satisfying ∂1 ◦ ∂2 = 0. If Z1 (G, R A) is the kernel of ∂1 , then it is easy to extend, by linearity, the definition of c βdα (from §12.A) to c ∈ Z1 (G, A). Following [Ger99], define, for c ∈ Z1 (G, A) HFillA G,S,R (c) = inf{kP k1 : P ∈ C2 (G, A), ∂2 (P ) = c}.  and A HδG,S,R (n) = sup{HFill(z)A G,S,R : z ∈ Z1 (G, Z), kzk1 ≤ n}.  Clearly, if c is a basis element (so that its area makes sense)  G,S,R Z (c) ≤ ∞; HFill(c)R G,S,R ≤ HFill(c)G,S,R ≤ area  it follows that Z R (n) ≤ δ\ (n) ≤ HδG,S,R HδG,S,R G,S,R (n),  where δ\ G,S,R is the smallest superadditive function greater or equal to δG,S,R . (Examples of non-superadditive Dehn functions of finite presentations of groups are given in [GS99]; however the question, raised in [GS99], whether any Dehn function of a finitely presented group is asymptotically equivalent to a superadditive function, is still open.) The function HFill(c)A G,S,R is called the A-homological Dehn function of (G, R, S) Z (the function HFill(c)G,S,R is called abelianized isoperimetric function in [BaMS93]). If finite, it can be shown by routine arguments that its ≈-asymptotic behavior only depends on G. Some Bestvina-Brady groups [BeBr97] provide examples of finitely generated groups with finite homological Dehn function but infinite Dehn function. Until recently, no example of a compactly presented group was known for which the integral (or even real) homological Dehn function is not equivalent to the integral homological Dehn function; the issue was raised, for finitely presented groups, both in [BaMS93, p. 536] and [Ger99, p. 1]; the first examples have finally been obtained by Abrams, Brady, Dani and Young in [ABDY13].  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 135  Let us turn back to G1 (a group satisfying the hypotheses of Theorem 12.C.1 or 12.C.2): for this example, since R consists of relations of bounded length, it followsR that the integral of βdα over the boundary of any polygon is bounded. Since γn βdα grows exponentially, it readily follows that HFillR G1 (γn ) grows at R Z least exponentially and hence HδG1 (n) (and thus HδG1 (n)) grows at least exponentially. References [Ab72]  H. Abels. Kompakt definierbare topologische Gruppen. Math. Ann. 197 (1972), 221– 233. [Ab87] H. Abels. “Finite presentability of S-arithmetic groups. Compact presentability of solvable groups”. Lecture Notes in Math. 1261, Springer, 1987. [ABDY13] A. Abrams, N. Brady, P. Dani, R. Young. Homological and homotopical Dehn functions are different. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110 (2013), no. 48, 19206–19212. [Al91] J. Alonzo. Inégalités isopérimétriques et quasi-isométries. C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris. Sér. 311, 761–764 (1991). [AW76] R. Azencott, E.N. Wilson. Homogeneous Manifolds with Negative Curvature. I. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 215 (1976) 323–362. [Ba60] G. Baumslag. Some aspects of groups with unique roots. Acta Math. 104 (1960) 217–303. [BGSS92] G. Baumslag, S. M. Gersten, M. Shapiro, and H. Short, Automatic groups and amalgams, these proceedings.in: Algorithms and Classification in Combinatorial Group Theory, G. Baumslag and C. F. Miller III, eds., MSRI Publications 23, Springer, New York, 1992, 179–194. [BaMS93] G. Baumslag, C. Miller III, H.Short. Isoperimetric inequalities and the homology of groups. Inv. Math 113 (1993), 531–560. [BeBr97] M. Bestvina, N. Brady. Morse theory and finiteness properties of groups. Invent. math. 129, 445–470 (1997) [BiS78] R. Bieri, R. Strebel. Almost finitely presented soluble groups. Comment. Math. Helv., 53(2):258–278, 1978. [Bou] N. Bourbaki. “Groupes et algèbres de Lie”. Éléments de Mathématique, Masson, Paris (1981). [Bo95] B. Bowditch. A short proof that a subquadratic isoperimetric inequality implies a linear one. Michigan Math. J. 42(1) (1995) 103–107. [BrG11] E. Breuillard, Ben Green. Approximate groups, I: the torsion-free nilpotent case. J. Inst. Math. Jussieu 10 (2011), no. 1, 37–57. [Bri02] M. Bridson. The geometry of the word problem. In “Invitations to geometry and topology” (editors M. Bridson, S. Salamon), Oxford Grad. Texts Math. 7, Oxford Univ. Press (2002) 29–91. [C08] Y. Cornulier. Dimension of asymptotic cones of Lie groups. J. of Topology 1 (2008) 342–361. [C11] Y. Cornulier. Asymptotic cones of Lie groups and cone equivalences. Illinois J. Math. 55(1) (2011), 237–259. [CCMT15] P.-E. Caprace, Y. Cornulier, N. Monod, R. Tessera. Amenable hyperbolic groups. J. Eur. Math. Soc. 17 (2015), 2903-2947. [CT10] Y. Cornulier and R. Tessera. Metabelian groups with quadratic Dehn function and Baumslag-Solitar groups. Confluentes Math. Vol. 2, No. 4 (2010) 431–443.  136  [CT11]  CORNULIER AND TESSERA  Y. Cornulier and R. Tessera. Contracting automorphisms and Lp -cohomology in degree one. Ark. Mat. 49(2) (2011) 295–324. [CT13] Y. Cornulier and R. Tessera. Dehn function and asymptotic cones of Abels’ group. J. Topology 6(4) (2013), 982–1008. [Dru98] C. Druţu. Remplissage dans des réseaux de Q-rang 1 et dans des groupes résolubles, Pacific J. Math. 185 (1998), 269–305. [Dru04] C. Druţu. Filling in solvable groups and in lattices in semisimple groups. Topology 43 (2004) 983–1033. [DwGS] B. Dwork, G. Gerotto, F. Sullivan. An Introduction to G-Functions. Princeton University Press, Annals of Mathematical Studies 133, 1994. [ECHLPT92] D. Epstein, J. Cannon, D. Holt, S. Levy, M. Paterson, W. Thurston, William. “Word processing in groups”. Jones and Bartlett Publishers, Boston, 1992. xii+330 pp. [Fu] J. Fuchs. Affine Lie Algebras and Quantum Groups, Cambridge University Press, 1992) [FuH] W. Fulton, J. Harris. Representation theory. A first course. Graduate Texts in Math. 129, Springer, 2004. [Ger92] S. M. Gersten. Dehn functions and L1 -norms of finite presentations, in: Algorithms and Classification in Combinatorial Group Theory, G. Baumslag and C. F. Miller III, eds., MSRI Publications 23, Springer, New York, 1992, 195–224. [Ger99] S. Gersten. Homological Dehn functions and the word problem. Unpublished manuscript (24 pages), 1999, http://www.math.utah.edu/~sg/Papers/df9.pdf [GH01] J. Groves, S. Hermiller. Isoperimetric inequalities for soluble groups. Geom. Dedicata 88 (2001) 239–254. [Gro93] M. Gromov. Asymptotic invariants of infinite groups. Geometric Group Theory, London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. (G. Niblo and M. Roller, eds.), no. 182, 1993. [GS99] V. Guba, M. Sapir. On Dehn functions of free products of groups. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 127 (1999), no. 7, 1885–1891. [Gui73] Y. Guivarc’h. Croissance polynomiale et périodes des fonctions harmoniques. Bull. Soc. Math. France 101 (1973) 333–379. [Gui80] Y. Guivarc’h. Sur la loi des grands nombres et le rayon spectral d’une marche aléatoire. Astérisque 74 (1980) 47–98. [Ho77] R. E. Howe. The Fourier transform for nilpotent locally compact groups. I. Pacific J. Math. Volume 73, No 2 (1977), 307–327. [La54] M. Lazard. Sur les groupes nilpotents et les anneaux de Lie. Ann. Sci. École Normale Supérieure Sér 3, 71 (1954), no. 2, 101–190. [LP04] E. Leuzinger, Ch. Pittet. On quadratic Dehn functions. Math. Zeitschrift 248(4), 2004 725–755. [Kac] V. G. Kac. Infinite dimensional Lie algebras. Cambridge Univ. Press, 1990. [KL82] C. Kassel and J.-L. Loday. Extensions centrales d’algèbres de Lie. Ann. Inst. Fourier 32 (1982), no. 4, 119–142. [Mag35] W. Magnus. Beziehungen zwischen Gruppen und Idealen in einem speziellen Ring. Math. Ann. 111 (1935), 259–280. [Mal49a] A. I. Malcev, On a class of homogeneous spaces, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 13 (1949) 9-32; English translation, Amer. Math. Soc. Transl., no. 39 (1951). [Mal49b] A. I. Malcev. Generalized nilpotent algebras and their associated groups. Mat. Sbornik (N.S.) 25 (67) (1949), 347–366. [NW08] K-H. Neeb and F. Wagemann. The second cohomology of current algebras of general Lie algebras Canad. J. Math. Vol. 60 (4) (2008) 892–922.  GEOMETRIC PRESENTATIONS OF LIE GROUPS AND THEIR DEHN FUNCTIONS 137  [Os02] [Se] [St70] [Var00] [We11] [Y06] [Y13]  D. V. Osin. Exponential radical of solvable Lie groups. J. Algebra 248 (2002), 790–805. J-P. Serre. Lie algebras and Lie groups. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 1500. SpringerVerlag, Berlin, 1992. I. Stewart. An algebraic treatment of Malcev’s theorems concerning nilpotent Lie groups and their Lie algebras. Compositio Math. 22 (1970) 289?312. N. Varopoulos. A geometric classification of Lie groups. Rev. Mat. Iberoam. 16(1) (2000) 49–136. S. Wenger. Nilpotent groups without exactly polynomial Dehn function, J. Topology 4 (2011), 141–160. Robert Young. Filling inequalities for nilpotent groups. arXiv:math/0608174 (2006). Robert Young. The Dehn function of SL(n; Z). Annals of Math. 177(3) (2013), 9691027.  Laboratoire de Mathématiques, Bâtiment 425, Université Paris-Sud 11, 91405 Orsay, FRANCE E-mail address: yves.cornulier@math.u-psud.fr E-mail address: romain.tessera@math.u-psud.fr

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
