Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_5174

Abstract:
arXiv:1605.05163v1 [math.GR] 17 May 2016  CHARACTER VARIETIES AND ACTIONS ON PRODUCTS OF TREES DAVID FISHER, MICHAEL LARSEN, RALF SPATZIER, AND MATTHEW STOVER  1. Introduction In this note we address a question that arose during the MSRI special semester on Dynamics on Moduli Spaces of Geometric Structures. Question 1. Let Σg be a surface group of genus g ≥ 2. Is there a discrete and faithful representation of Σg into Aut(Y ) for Y a locally compact Euclidean building. Can we take Y to be a finite product of bounded valence trees? The question was motivated by recent results in the theory of Anosov representations [KLP, GGKW] which we discuss in somewhat more detail later in this introduction. We note that producing a free action on a product of infinite-valence trees is an easy exercise in Bass–Serre theory. Indeed, one selects the actions associated with the splittings arising from a family of essential simple closed curves that fill the surface. Moreover, it is easy to use the fact that surface groups are fully residually free to produce such an action on an infinite product of finite-valence trees. We approach only the special case of Question 1 for products of trees and from two distinct directions. First we attempt a construction of an action via arithmetic methods, in particular using actions on trees coming from representations into algebraic groups over fields of positive characteristic. This approach may also be interesting for building linear representations of other groups in other contexts. Second, we prove some results indicating that any positive answer to the question must DF was partially supported by NSF Grant DMS-1308291. ML was partially supported by NSF Grant DMS-1401419. MS was supported by NSF Grant DMS1361000, and also acknowledges support from U.S. National Science Foundation grants DMS 1107452, 1107263, 1107367 ”RNMS: Geometric structures And Representation varieties” (the GEAR Network). RS was partially supported by NSF Grant DMS- 1307164. This project was begun at MSRI during the special semester on Dynamics on Moduli Spaces of Geometric Structures, the authors thank the Institute for its support and hospitality. 1  2  D. FISHER, M. LARSEN, R. SPATZIER, AND M. STOVER  be given by a highly irreducible action. These irreducibility results obstruct some avenues for building the representations by methods of geometric topology. Our approach to building examples leads us to: Question 2. Let Σg be the fundamental group of a closed oriented surface of genus g ≥ 2. Does there exist a faithful representation of Σg into PGL2 (K) for some global field K of characteristic p > 0? We show that a positive answer to Question 2 implies a positive answer to Question 1. This is probably known, but we include a proof for the benefit of the reader. Theorem 3. Suppose Γ is a finitely generated group that admits a faithful representation into PGL2 (K) for K a global field of characteristic p > 0. Then Γ admits a discrete and faithful representation into Aut(Y ) for Y a product of finite-valence trees. A result of this kind with K of characteristic zero was famously exploited by Bass [B] to show that lattices in SL2 (C) with a nonintegral trace admit nontrivial actions on a tree. He then used this to show that the associated hyperbolic 3-manifold is Haken. The analogous result in characteristic zero is that a finitely generated subgroup of SL2 (K), with K a number field, admits a discrete action on a finite product of hyperbolic planes, hyperbolic 3-spaces, and trees (with at least one of these sets nonempty). Our first approach to Question 2 can also be thought of as a method for proving the linearity of certain finitely generated groups Γ, which we illustrate in our study of surface group representations into linear groups in characteristic p > 0. This method may be of interest in other contexts, as it uses an unusual variant of ping pong for groups generated by torsion elements. For example, we obtain: Theorem 4. For every p ≥ 5 and g ≥ 2, there exists a finite extension K of Fp (x, y) and a faithful representation from Σg into PGL2 (K). Our techniques also allow us to prove the following. Theorem 5. Let Σg be the fundamental group of a closed Riemann surface of genus g. If p ≥ 5 and g ≥ 2, for every field K of characteristic p and transcendence degree r ≥ 2, there exists n such that GLn (K) contains a subgroup isomorphic to Σg . Proving linearity results in sufficiently high transcendence degree by appealing to a universal representation was suggested to us by the construction of “strongly dense” free subgroups by Breuillard, Green,  CHARACTER VARIETIES AND PRODUCTS OF TREES  3  Guralnick, and Tao [BGGT]. It is also reminiscent of the use of “tautological representations” by Culler and Shalen in their study of essential surfaces in knot complements [CS]. The general method is as follows. We begin by embedding Γ into a (possibly) larger group ∆, also finitely generated. Fix an adjoint simple group G over Fp and suppose that there exists an irreducible component X of the character variety Hom(∆, G)/G for which the associated representation is generically Zariski-dense. If K is the function field of X, then there exists a finite extension L/K and a homomorphism from Γ to G(L) that represents the generic point of X. Composing with the adjoint representation of G, we obtain a linear representation of ∆, and therefore Γ, over L. It remains to consider whether or not this homomorphism is faithful. To prove this, we require a subgroup Ξ ⊂ G(K) such that for every δ ∈ ∆ \ {1} there exists a homomorphism ψ : ∆ → Ξ such that δ 6∈ ker φ. Regarding ψ as a G-representation of ∆, it determines a point on X. In other words, ∆ must be “residually Ξ”. This implies linearity over Fp (x1 , . . . , xr ), where r := dim X, and therefore over every characteristic p field of transcendence degree ≥ r. For our application, Γ will be the surface group Σg . Without loss of generality we can replace Γ with a cocompact Fuchsian group ∆ that contains Σ2 (and hence Σg for all g ≥ 2). Fix p, and let G = PGL2 . The point of introducing a group ∆ which contains Γ, instead of working directly with Γ itself, is that we can find an appropriate cocompact Fuchsian group ∆ with a PGL2 -character variety of dimension 2, whereas the character variety of Σg is 6(g − 1)-dimensional. Since this dimension is the transcendence degree of the function field K of our component X, this replacement is key to finding representations with K of transcendence degree 2 over Fp . There do exist choices of ∆ having PGL2 -representation variety of dimension 1, for example nonorientable Fuchsian groups generated by reflections in the sides of a quadrilateral. However, we could not succeed in finding a suitable Ξ to implement the last step of the above method for such a ∆. That is, our methods do produce surface group representations, but we cannot prove that they are faithful. As a result, we do not know if Σg is ever linear over a global field of positive characteristic. We now state some results restricting the possible positive answers to Question 1. We state the first only for a product of two trees, as the more general statement is somewhat technical. Let Γ be a torsion free hyperbolic group, let T1 and T2 be simplicial trees of bounded valence, and let ρ : Γ → Aut(T1 × T2 ) be a discrete faithful representation. Passing to a subgroup of index 2, we can assume that ρ(Γ) preserves  4  D. FISHER, M. LARSEN, R. SPATZIER, AND M. STOVER  both trees. Let ρi : Γ → Aut(Ti ) be the induced representations. Then we have: Theorem 6. Either Γ is free or ρ1 and ρ2 are faithful and indiscrete. One can formulate a version of this theorem for products of n bounded valence simplicial trees, but the formulation is more complicated; see Theorem 3 below. An easy corollary of that theorem is: Corollary 7. Suppose that Γ is a torsion free, hyperbolic group that is not free. Then Γ does not admit a faithful homomorphism into a finite direct product of nonabelian free groups. This corollary is also a very special case of the main results of [BHMS], where it is shown that any F P∞ subgroup of F1 × · · · × Fn is a finite product of free groups. We mention the corollary here as it is an obstruction to many approaches to constructing positive answers to Question 1. For a product of two free groups, a short argument, analyzing projections as we do, is given in [K, Proposition 4.1]. For contrast, those notes construct surface subgroups in right angled Artin groups that are quite closely related to a product of free groups [K, Theorem 4.4]. We now discuss some geometric motivation behind Question 1. Representations of surface groups into real and complex Lie groups have been of significant interest since the foundational work of Fricke and Klein. However, there has also been a recent surge of activity centered around the notion of an “Anosov representation”, which is a dynamical generalization of the discrete and faithful representations into PSL2 (R) associated with complete hyperbolic structures on the underlying surface. For surface groups, this was first defined by Labourie [L], and one key feature is that any Anosov representation is discrete and faithful. Recently, [KLP] (see also [GGKW]) gave dynamics-free definitions that could be used to define Anosov representations into linear algebraic groups over any local field. However, one can show that the theory is empty for surface groups acting on spaces with totally disconnected Furstenberg boundary (e.g., Euclidean buildings). Elementary arguments using arithmetic groups provide a wealth of faithful representations into algebraic groups over local fields of characteristic zero (e.g., PGL2 (Qp )), but these representations have large vertex stabilizers in their actions on the associated building. These constructions extend to more general locally compact groups as seen in [BGSS]. However, in all contexts, discrete and faithful representations are more difficult to construct.  CHARACTER VARIETIES AND PRODUCTS OF TREES  5  We also mention that Question 1 is obviously relevant to whether irreducible lattices in the isometry groups of higher rank Euclidean buildings contain surface subgroups. This question is analogous to Gromov’s famous surface subgroup conjecture for hyperbolic groups. We now briefly outline the paper. In §2, we give some general facts on character varieties. In §3 we concentrate on surface groups and prove Theorem 5 by a direct construction. In §4 we give the proof of Theorem 4. Finally in section 5 we discuss Theorem 6, its more general form for n trees, and Corollary 7. 2. Generalities on character varieties In this section, ∆ will denote any finitely generated group and G any adjoint simple algebraic group over a field k. Let A∆,G denote the coordinate ring of the affine scheme Hom(∆, G). The conjugation action of G on Hom(∆, G) determines a dual action of G on A∆,G , and we let B∆,G denote the ring of invariants and X∆,G := Spec(B∆,G ) be the G-character variety of ∆. If σ is any representation of G, m is an integer in [0, dim σ], and δ ∈ ∆, then the map from G-representations ρ of ∆ to (−1)m times the xdim σ−m coefficient of the characteristic polynomial of σ(ρ(δ)) lies in B∆,G , and we denote this function by T (σ, m, δ). The natural morphism Hom(∆, G) → X∆,G is submersive [GIT, Thm. 1.1]. For the remainder of this section, fix an irreducible component X of X∆,G with generic point η. This corresponds to picking a minimal prime ideal I0 of B∆,G to specify the component X and then taking the field of fractions K of B∆,G /I0 to specify the generic point η. Then the fiber over η is nonempty and thus has a point lying on a finite extension L of the residue field K of η, which determines a homomorphism (1)  fη : ∆ → G(L)  such that if b̄ denotes the image of b ∈ B∆,G in B∆,G /I0 ⊂ K ⊂ L, then for all δ ∈ ∆, the characteristic polynomial of fη (δ) is dim Xσ  (−1)m T (σ, m, δ)xdim σ−m .  m=0  The following gives a sufficient condition for fη to be faithful when k has positive characteristic.  6  D. FISHER, M. LARSEN, R. SPATZIER, AND M. STOVER  Proposition 8. Suppose that ∆ has no p-torsion. For every nontrivial δ ∈ ∆, suppose that there exists a field extension M/Fp and a homomorphism g : ∆ → G(M) associated with a point in X(M) such that g(δ) does not have order pt for any integer t ≥ 0. Then the homomorphism fη defined in (1) is injective. Proof. Suppose that δ ∈ ker fη and let σ denote the adjoint representation of G. Since the characteristic polynomial of the trivial matrix is (x − 1)dim G , for all integers 0 ≤ m ≤ dim G, the function   dim G T (σ, m, δ) − m vanishes at η, and hence vanishes on all of X (i.e., maps to zero under b 7→ b̄ and therefore under B∆,G → B∆,G /p for any prime ideal p containing I0 ). Since g belongs to X(M) and δ is in the kernel of fη , the characteristic polynomial of σ(g(δ)) is (x − 1)dim G , and therefore t σ(g(δ)) is unipotent. If pt > dim G, then σ(g(δ p )) = 1, which implies t g(δ p ) = 1, and this is a contradiction if δ is nontrivial.  Remark. A similar statement holds in characteristic zero with the same proof, where we instead assume that X(M) contains a point associated with a representation g for which g(δ) is not unipotent. This type of argument appears in Culler and Shalen’s celebrated paper on character varieties of fundamental groups of 3-manifolds [CS]. There ∆ is the fundamental group of a one-cusped hyperbolic 3-manifold M of finite volume, X is the component of the SL2 (C) character variety containing a representative for the discrete and faithful representation of ∆ associated with the complete structure on M, and g is an element of ∆ representing a nontrivial loop on the boundary torus. At the expense of increasing the dimension of the representation, we obtain that ∆ is linear over a purely transcendental field of degree r = dim(X). Corollary 9. If p is a prime, G is adjoint simple algebraic group over Fp , ∆ is a finitely generated group without p-torsion, and X∆,G has an r-dimensional closed subscheme satisfying the assumptions of Proposition 8, then ∆ is linear over Fp (x1 , . . . , xr ). Proof. We showed that there is an injective homomorphism to G(L), with L a finite extension of the function field K of X. Note that K is a finitely generated extension of Fp of transcendence degree r. Under the adjoint representation of G, we then obtain an injective homomorphism from ∆ to GLn (L), where n := dim G. Choosing r algebraically  CHARACTER VARIETIES AND PRODUCTS OF TREES  7  independent elements x1 , . . . , xr ∈ L, we obtain a purely transcendental subfield k := Fp (x1 , . . . , xr ) of which L is a finite extension, say of degree l. Then ∆ can be realized as a subgroup of GLnl (k).  Remark. In the above, we can replace X with any irreducible closed subscheme of X∆,G . In fact, embedding a group Γ in a larger group ∆ does precisely this by considering representations of Γ that extend up to ∆. 3. Surface groups For this section we fix ∆ := ha, b, c, d | a3, b2 , c2 , d3 , abcdi. Then ∆ is a compact oriented Fuchsian group in which every element of finite order is conjugate to a±1 , b, c, d±1 , or 1. There is a homomorphism from ∆ onto S3 sending a and d to (123), b to (12), and c to (23). The kernel Γ is of index 6 and contains no nontrivial torsion element. Its Euler characteristic is χ(Γ) = 6χ(∆) = 6(2 − 4 + 1/3 + 1/2 + 1/2 + 1/3) = −2. and it follows that it is isomorphic to Σ2 . Consequently, linear representations of ∆ determine representations of Σg for all g ≥ 2. Let ˜ = hA, B, C, D, Z | A3 = B 2 = C 2 = D 3 = Z, Z 2 = ABCD = 1i. ∆ The map (A, B, C, D, Z) 7→ (a, b, c, d, 1) gives a surjective homomor˜ ˜ → ∆ with central kernel hZi ∼ phism ∆ = Z/2Z. Every element in ∆ can be written as Z i times a word in the symbols A±1 , B, C, i ∈ {0, 1}. Replacing the left hand side by the right in (2)  CABC = BA−1 CBA−1  and (3)  CBA−1 C = ABCAB  we can reduce the number of symbols of type C. We say a word is reduced if no two consecutive symbols are equal or inverse to one another and all replacements of type (2) and (3) have been made. Up to powers of Z, the inverse of a word in A, A−1 , B, C is obtained by reversing the order of symbols and interchanging A and A−1 ; in particular, this process sends reduced words to reduced words. A word is cyclically reduced if every word obtained from it by cyclic permutation of symbols in reduced. Note that such a permutation does not affect the conjugacy class and therefore does not affect character values.  8  D. FISHER, M. LARSEN, R. SPATZIER, AND M. STOVER  Proposition 10. Let K be an algebraically closed field of characteristic ˜ there exists Tδ ∈ Z[u, v, w] such that if ρ : ∆ ˜ → p ≥ 5. For all δ ∈ ∆, SL2 (K) is any representation such that ρ(A), ρ(B), ρ(C), ρ(D) have orders 6, 4, 4, and 6 respectively, then tr(ρ(δ)) = Tδ (tr(ρ(BC)), tr(ρ(CA)), tr(ρ(AB))). Proof. Let χ denote the character tr ◦ ρ. It suffices to prove that χ(w) = Tδ (χ(BC), χ(CA), χ(AB)) for all reduced words w. We prove this by induction on the length of w. As χ(zδ) = −χ(δ), it suffices to consider words without occurrence of Z, and moreover, we may assume w is cyclically reduced. For length 0, χ(w) = 2. For length 1, χ(A) = 1, χ(B) = χ(C) = 0. For length 2 the character value does not depend on the order of the symbols. Unless A−1 appears, there is nothing to check. Moreover, χ(A−1 B) = χ((A−1 B)−1 ) = −χ(BA), χ(A−1 C) = χ((A−1 C)−1 ) = −χ(CA). The cyclically reduced words of length 3, up to inversion, cyclic permutation, and multiplication by Z, are ABC and ACB. We have χ(ABC) = χ(D −1 ) = χ(D) = 1. From the SL2 identity tr(x)tr(y) = tr(xy) + tr(x−1 y),  (4) we deduce  χ(ACB) = χ(A)χ(CB) − χ(A−1 CB) = χ(CB) − χ(A−1 CB) = χ(BC) − χ(BCA) = χ(BC) − 1. For words cyclically reduced words w of length l ≥ 4, we may assume, after cyclic permutation of the symbols of w if necessary, that the first symbol of w either coincides with or is inverse to the kth symbol for some k ∈ [2, l − 1]. Defining x and y to be the product of the first k − 1 symbols of w and the remaining l − k + 1 symbols respectively, we can then use (4) to express χ(w) as a polynomial with Z-coefficients in terms of χ-values of words strictly shorter than w.  ˜ SL2 )/SL2 Theorem 11. The component of the character variety Hom(∆, containing the representations that are faithful when restricted to hAi, hBi, hCi, and hDi is birationally equivalent to the affine cubic surface  S := Spec K[u, v, w]/(uvw + u2 + v 2 + w 2 − u − 2) .  CHARACTER VARIETIES AND PRODUCTS OF TREES  9  ˜ SL2 )/SL2 → A3 mapping Proof. We consider the morphism φ : Hom(∆, χ 7→ (χ(BC), χ(CA), χ(AB)). For K not of characteristic 2 or 3, the conditions χ(A) = χ(ABC) = 1 and χ(B) = χ(C) = 0 cut out the open and closed subscheme X of ˜ SL2 )/SL2 consisting of representations ρ faithful on the finite Hom(∆, cyclic groups generated by A, B, C, D. The following identity for triples (X, Y, Z) of 2 × 2 matrices can be verified easily: tr(X)tr(Y )tr(Z)tr(XY Z) + tr(Y Z)tr(ZX)tr(XY ) + tr(XY Z)2 X X + det Xtr(Y Z)2 + tr(X)2 det Y Z − 4 det XY Z X X − det Xtr(Y )tr(Z)tr(Y Z) − tr(X)tr(Y Z)tr(XY Z) = 0, where each indicated sum is a symmetric sum of 3 terms (including the specified one) given by cycling permuting X, Y and Z. This implies the following identity for triples (x, y, z) in SL2 : tr(x)tr(y)tr(z)tr(xyz) + tr(yz)tr(zx)tr(xy) + tr(xyz)2 X X + tr(yz)2 + tr(x)2 X X = tr(y)tr(z)tr(yz) + tr(x)tr(yz)tr(xyz) + 4. It follows that the restriction of φ to X maps to S. To see this recall that we map A → x, B → y and C → z and that χ(A) = 1, χ(B) = χ(C) = 0 and χ(ABC) = 1 and let the variable u = χ(BC), v = χ(CA) and w = χ(AB). Since S is irreducible, to show that φ|X is dominant it suffices to prove the image is 2-dimensional. We can do this by projecting the image onto the u-w plane. Setting       q r i 0 s 1 A = −1+q−q2 ,B= ,C= , 0 −i −1 − s2 −s 1−q r we obtain a triple in X which maps to ((2q − 1)i, 2si) as long as there exists a solution r to the equation s(q 2 − q + 1) i(s2 + 1)r − + R(s, q) = 0 r for an explicit polynomial R. As long as s is not a 4th root of unity or q is not a 6th root of unity, this has at least one solution r. Finally, φ|X is an isomorphism at every point in X corresponding to an absolutely irreducible representation [N]. As long as χ(BC) 6∈ {±2},  10  D. FISHER, M. LARSEN, R. SPATZIER, AND M. STOVER  ρ(B) and ρ(C) cannot lie in a common Borel subgroup of SL2 , and it follows that χ is absolutely irreducible.  ˜ on the function Our goal now is to show that the representation of ∆ field of the cubic surface S from Theorem 11 is faithful. By Proposition 8, this provides a faithful representation of ∆ into PGL2 over a field of transcendence degree 2 and characteristic p, which completes the proof of Theorem 4. To achieve this, we use Proposition 8 and the following result, which shows that ∆ is residually Ξ for Ξ a virtually free group (in fact, Ξ is isomorphic to the modular group PSL2 (Z)). Proposition 12. For every nontrivial element δ ∈ ∆ there exists N such that for every n > N, δ is not in the kernel of the homomorphism ψn : ∆ → Ξ := hx, y | x3 , y 2i defined by a 7→ x, b 7→ y, c 7→ (xy)n y −1(xy)−n , d 7→ (xy)n x−1 (xy)−n . Proof. Let S(a, b) denote the set of finite strings α in the symbols a, a−1 , b such that an a or a−1 can only be followed by a b and vice versa. Let S(c, d) denote the set of finite strings γ in c, d, and d−1 such that d or d−1 can only be followed by c, and vice versa, and moreover, every γ is nonempty, and γ cannot begin or end with the substring cd or d−1 c. For any element α ∈ S(a, b) (resp. γ ∈ S(c, d)), we denote by ᾱ (resp. γ̄) the element of Ξ obtained by substituting x for a and y for b (resp. y −1 for c and x−1 for d). Every element δ ∈ ∆ can be written uniquely as a word α0 γ 1 α1 · · · γ k αk , for some k ≥ 0, some αi ∈ S(a, b) and some γj ∈ S(c, d). Thus ψn (δ) = ᾱ0 (xy)n γ̄1 (yx−1 )n ᾱ1 · · · (xy)n γ̄k (yx−1)n ᾱk . As γi cannot begin with d−1 c or end with cd, at most one symbol pair cancels in (xy)n γ̄i , and at most one pair cancels in γ̄i (yx−1 )n . Therefore, if n is larger than the maximum length of the αi , the expression as a whole is nontrivial in Ξ as claimed.  Remark. The group ∆ is the free product of Ξ with itself amalgamated over the subgroup generated by ab = (cd)−1. Geometrically this splits the sphere with four cone points of orders 3, 2, 2, 3 along the curve dividing the cone points into two sets of 2, 3. The map ψ0 is the natural projection onto Ξ from this free product with amalgamation, and ψn for n ≥ 1 is the composition of a Dehn twist of order n around ab with ψ0 . The above algebraic calculation means that the curve obtained  CHARACTER VARIETIES AND PRODUCTS OF TREES  11  from δ after a sufficiently high power of the Dehn twist must map to a nontrivial reduced word in the group Ξ ∼ = Z/2 ∗ Z/3 under ψ0 . This strategy was first used by Baumslag to show that surface groups are residually free [Ba]. Proposition 13. For all p ≥ 3, there exists an injective homomorphism Ξ → PGL2 (Fp (t)). Proof. We use the construction of Hausdorff [H, Anh. pp. 469–472], which we recast in a somewhat more conceptual form. Consider the homomorphism ι defined by     0 1 0 1 x 7→ , y 7→ , −1 −1 t 0 where [M] denotes the image of M ∈ GL2 (Fp (t)) in PGL2 (Fp (t)). To prove ι is injective, we consider the action of Ξ on P1 (Fp (t)) which it determines. There is a natural map P1 (Fp (t)) → P1 (Fp ) characterized by (P (t) : Q(t)) 7→ (P (0) : Q(0)), where P (t) and Q(t) are relatively prime polynomials. Whereas ι(x) induces a well-defined operation on all of P1 (Fp ), ι(y) maps P1 (Fp ) \ {∞} to ∞ but is not well-defined at ∞. Since the ι(x)-orbit of ∞ is {0, −1, ∞}, it follows that for every nontrivial g, ι(g) maps 1 to 0, −1, or ∞. Thus ι is injective.  We conclude by proving Theorem 5. There is a natural morphism ˜ SL2 ) → Hom(∆, PGL2 ) which is surjective with finite fibers Hom(∆, By Theorem 11, the generic point η of S maps to the generic point of a 2-dimensional component of X∆,PGL2 . This component contains points representing all homomorphisms ∆ → PGL2 which lift to homomor˜ → SL2 where A, B, C, and D map to points of order 6, 4, 4, phisms ∆ and 6 respectively, i.e., all points representing homomorphisms where a and b maps to points of order 3 and 2, respectively. By Corollary 9, Proposition 12, and Proposition 13, this implies the theorem. 4. The proof of Theorem 3 Let K be a global field of characteristic p > 0. Then K is the function field of a unique smooth projective curve C over Fp . Each place ν of K determines a nonarchimedean local field Kν , the completion of K with respect to the topology induced by the equivalence class of valuations determined by ν. Let Oν be the valuation ring of Kν and Y A⊂ Kν ν  12  D. FISHER, M. LARSEN, R. SPATZIER, AND M. STOVER  be the adele ring of K, i.e., the restricted direct product of the Kν with respect to the Oν . The diagonal embedding of K into A is well-known to be discrete [CF, §II.14], and this extends to a discrete embedding of PGL2 (K) into PGL2 (A). Therefore, if ρ : Γ → PGL2 (K) is a faithful representation, then ρ extends to a discrete representation of ρA : Γ → PGL2 (A). Since Γ is finitely generated, this in fact determines a discrete representation of Γ into Y ρS : Γ → G = PGL2 (Kν ) ν∈S  for some finite nonempty collection S of places of K. Indeed, each generator γ of Γ in a fixed generating set lies in PGL2 (Oν ) for all but a finite set Sγ of places. Since the image of Γ under ρA is discrete, each Sγ must be nonempty, and we take S to be the union of the Sγ over our finite generating set. We refer the reader to [S] for the definition of the tree Tν associated with the group PGL2 (Kν ). Recall that Tν is a (q + 1)-regular tree, where q is the cardinality of the residue field of K. That the image of ρ̂ is discrete means that ρS (Γ) acts discretely on Y X= Tν . ν∈S  In particular, we have shown that Γ acts discretely and faithfully on a finite product of finite-valence trees, which proves Theorem 3. Remark. In general, one has little control over the number of trees. However, when the representation is constructed from a curve on the SL2 (Fp )-character variety of Γ, there is a bound. Let X be an affine curve of characters of Γ, and assume that the generic point of X determines a representation of Γ into SL2 (K), where K is the function field of X. Let C be the smooth complete curve associated with X and f : C → X be the normalization, which is a birational morphism. The points C r f −1 (X) are sometimes called the ideal points of X. The image of Γ in SL2 (Kν ) lies in SL2 (Oν ) for every ν associated with a point in f −1 (X). Indeed, the translation length on Tν is associated with the valuation of the trace, and the character must have a pole at the point on C associated with ν in order to have nontrivial translation length. However, characters are finite-valued on the affine part of X, so the set S described above consists only of ideal points.  CHARACTER VARIETIES AND PRODUCTS OF TREES  13  5. Actions on products of trees Our goal is to prove the following generalization of Theorem 6: Theorem 14. Suppose that Γ is a torsion free hyperbolic group that is not free. Let X = T1 × · · · × Tn Q be a product of finite-valence trees, Gi = Aut(Ti ), and G = Gi . Let σi denote the projection of G onto Gi . If ρ : Γ → G is a discrete and faithful representation, then there are at least two i such that ρi = σi ◦ ρ is faithful and has indiscrete image. Moreover, suppose ρ1 , . . . , ρr are faithful representations and the other ρi are not. Then the representation ρ1 × · · · × ρr : Γ → G1 × · · · × Gr is discrete and faithful. Before embarking upon the proof, we prove Corollary 7 from the introduction: Proof. Consider a discrete and faithful action of Fi on a tree Ti . Then the composition Y Y Γ→ Fi → Aut(Ti ) is discrete and faithful, which contradicts Theorem 14.    We will repeatedly use the following theorem of Serre: Theorem 15. A torsion free, discrete group of isometries of a (single) tree is free. In the proof of the theorem, we will also use the following lemma. Lemma 16. Let Γ be a torsion-free hyperbolic group. Then any two nontrival normal subgroups of Γ have nontrivial intersection. Proof. Let K and L be normal subgroups of Γ. Pick x ∈ K and y ∈ L nontrivial elements, which we can assume to be distinct, else we would be done. In fact, we can assume that xn 6= y m for any n, m ∈ Z. Then it is a consequence of ping-pong in hyperbolic groups that there are positive n, m such that hxn , y mi is a free group of rank two. However, we also have 1 6= [xn , y m ] ∈ K ∩ L, so the intersection of K and L is nontrivial. We now prove Theorem 14.    14  D. FISHER, M. LARSEN, R. SPATZIER, AND M. STOVER  Proof of Theorem 14. Suppose that ρ1 , . . . , ρr are faithful, r ≥ 0, and that ρr+1 , . . . , ρn are not. We also assume that r < n, else we would be done. Let Ki be the kernel of ρi . Lemma 16 implies that K=  n \  Ki  i=r+1  is a nontrivial normal subgroup of Γ. In particular, we see that r ≥ 1, since otherwise ρ would have a nontrivial kernel. Perhaps after replacing Γ with a subgroup of finite index, we can assume that there is a vertex pi ∈ Ti with nontrivial stabilizer ∆i ∈ Γ for 1 ≤ i ≤ r. Indeed, Γ is not free, so the image of the faithful representation ρi is indiscrete. It follows that Γ has a fixed point on Ti , which we can assume to be a vertex after passage to a finite index subgroup. Consider x ∈ K and y ∈ ∆i . Our goal is to find an element in K ∩ ∆i , so we can assume x and y do not lie in a cyclic subgroup. As in the lemma above, using ping-pong and passing to powers of x and y, we may assume they generate a nonabelian free group. Then [x, y k ] = x(y k x−1 y −k ) ∈ K. for every k ∈ Z. We claim that there is some k ≥ 1 such that we also have [x, y k ] ∈ ∆i , so then [x, y k ] ∈ K ∩ ∆i . To prove this, consider the action of Γ on Ti induced by ρi , where we have (y k x−1 y −k ) · pi = (y k x−1 ) · pi . Since y k fixes pi , the points {(y k x−1 )·pi } are all vertices of Ti at distance dTi (pi , x · pi ) from pi . There are only finitely many such points, so there must be k1 , k2 ∈ Z with k1 6= k2 such that (y k1 x−1 ) · pi = (y k2 x−1 ) · pi , which implies that (y k1−k2 x−1 ) · pi = x−1 · pi , and hence that xy k x−1 · pi = pi with k = k1 − k2 , and it follows that [x, y k ] ∈ ∆i , as claimed. As we assumed that x and y generate a free subgroup, we also know [x, y k ] 6= 1. Now suppose that r = 1. Then there is exactly one i such that ρi is faithful and we only have ∆i for i = 1. Then the element [x, y k ]  CHARACTER VARIETIES AND PRODUCTS OF TREES  15  constructed above (or xn in the degenerate case where x and y have a common power) has a global fixed point p = (p1 , . . . , pn ) ∈ X, where pi is any point on Ti for 2 ≤ i ≤ n. This proves that r ≥ 2, i.e., that at least two ρi are faithful, and hence indiscrete. Now consider the representation ρ1 × · · · ρr : Γ → G1 × · · · × Gr . It is evidently faithful, since each ρi is faithful by assumption. We must prove that the image is discrete. If not, then we could find y ∈ Γ with a fixed point p = (p1 , . . . , pr ) ∈ T1 × · · · × Tr . Let ∆ be the stabilizer of p in Γ. Then the above argument applied to ∆ in place of ∆i produces a nontrivial element γ ∈ ∆ ∩ K. However, γ then fixes the point (p1 , . . . , pr , pr+1, . . . , pn ) ∈ T1 × · · · × Tn , where pi ∈ Ti is arbitrary for i ≥ r + 1. This violates discreteness of ρ, which shows that ρ1 × · · · × ρr must be discrete. This completes the proof of the theorem.  Remark. These arguments apply to a much wider class of groups. For example, Theorem 14 holds for Gromov hyperbolic groups with torsion but with trivial center. In nonuniform lattices in rank one Lie groups, one finds an appropriate loxodromic element x ∈ K (e.g., using the fact that the limit set of K is the limit set of Γ), and uses the fact that a loxodromic element is centralized only by the maximal cyclic subgroup of Γ containing it, to prove the theorem with a variant of the above argument. Instead of showing that hx, yi is free of rank one or two, one must argue with ping-pong that it is either cyclic or that one can pass to powers such that hxn , y mi is free of rank two, and be careful of elliptic and parabolic elements. For higher rank lattices, there is an entire literature that shows much stronger and more general results than Theorem 14. References [B]  [Ba]  Bass, Hyman: Finitely generated subgroups of GL2 . The Smith conjecture (New York, 1979), 127–136. Pure Appl. Math., 112. Academic Press, 1984. Baumslag, Gilbert: On generalised free products. Math. Z. 78 1962 423– 438.  16  D. FISHER, M. LARSEN, R. SPATZIER, AND M. STOVER  [BGSS] Breuillard, Emmanuel; Gelander, Tsachik; Souto, Juan; Storm, Peter: Dense embeddings of surface groups. Geom. Topol. 10 (2006), 13731389. [BGGT] Breuillard, Emmanuel; Green, Ben; Guralnick, Robert; Tao, Terence: Strongly dense free subgroups of semisimple algebraic groups. Israel J. Math. 192 (2012), no. 1, 347–379. [BHMS] Bridson, Martin R.; Howie, James; Miller, Charles F., III; Short, Hamish The subgroups of direct products of surface groups. Dedicated to John Stallings on the occasion of his 65th birthday. Geom. Dedicata 92 (2002), 95103. [CF] Algebraic number theory. Edited by J. W. S. Cassels and A. Fröhlich. Academic Press, London, 1967. [CS] Culler, Marc; Shalen, Peter: Varieties of group representations and splittings of 3-manifolds. Ann. of Math. (2) 117 (1983), no. 1, 109–146. [GGKW] Guéritaud, F.; Guichard, O.; Kassel, F.; Wienhard, A.: Anosov representations and proper actions. arXiv:1502.03811 [H] Hausdorff, Felix: Grundzüge der Mengenlehre. Chelsea Publishing Company, New York, 1949. [KLP] Kapovich, M.; Leeb, B.; Porti, J.: Morse actions of discrete groups on symmetric space. arXiv:1403.7671 [K] Koberda, Thomas: Right angled Artin groups and their subgroups, course notes, see http://faculty.virginia.edu/Koberda/raagcourse.pdf [L] Labourie, François: Anosov flows, surface groups and curves in projective space. Invent. Math. 165 (2006), no. 1, 51–114. [GIT] Mumford, D.; Fogarty, J.; Kirwan, F.: Geometric invariant theory. Third edition. Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (2), 34. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994. [N] Nakamoto, Kazunori: Representation varieties and character varieties. Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. 36 (2000), no. 2, 159–189. [S] Serre, J.-P: Trees. Translated from the French original by John Stillwell. Corrected 2nd printing of the 1980 English translation. Springer Monographs in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003. Department of Mathematics, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405, U.S.A. E-mail address: fisherdm@indiana.edu Department of Mathematics, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405, U.S.A. E-mail address: mjlarsen@indiana.edu Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, U.S.A. E-mail address: spatzier@umich.edu Department of Mathematics, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, U.S.A. E-mail address: mstover@temple.edu

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
