Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_5606

Abstract:
arXiv:1801.02325v1 [cs.CV] 8 Jan 2018  Long-term Multi-granularity Deep Framework for Driver Drowsiness Detection Jie Lyu  Zejian Yuan  Dapeng Chen  Xi’an Jiaotong University Email: jiejielyu@outlook.com  Xi’an Jiaotong University Email: yuan.ze.jian@xjtu.edu.cn  Xi’an Jiaotong University Email: dapengchenxjtu@foxmail.com  Abstract—For real-world driver drowsiness detection from videos, the variation of head pose is so large that the existing methods on global face is not capable of extracting effective features, such as looking aside and lowering head. Temporal dependencies with variable length are also rarely considered by the previous approaches, e.g., yawning and speaking. In this paper, we propose a Longterm Multi-granularity Deep Framework to detect driver drowsiness in driving videos containing the frontal faces. The framework includes two key components: (1) Multigranularity Convolutional Neural Network (MCNN), a novel network utilizes a group of parallel CNN extractors on well-aligned facial patches of different granularities, and extracts facial representations effectively for large variation of head pose, furthermore, it can flexibly fuse both detailed appearance clues of the main parts and local to global spatial constraints; (2) a deep Long Short Term Memory network is applied on facial representations to explore long-term relationships with variable length over sequential frames, which is capable to distinguish the states with temporal dependencies, such as blinking and closing eyes. Our approach achieves 90.05% accuracy and about 37 fps speed on the evaluation set of the public NTHU-DDD dataset, which is the state-of-theart method on driver drowsiness detection. Moreover, we build a new dataset named FI-DDD, which is of higher precision of drowsy locations in temporal dimension.  cannot distinguish blinking and closing eyes. Spatiotemporal descriptor [6] is proposed to collect spatial and temporal features but not good at distinguishing states with long-term dependencies, such as yawning and speaking. Besides, these handcrafted descriptors are not enough powerful to describe large variation of head pose and classify confusing states, e.g., looking aside and lowering head lead to large pose variation, while yawning and laughing are similar but belong to different states. Recently, deep learning methods are widely used to learn facial spatial representations automatically from global face [7], [8], [9]. Nevertheless, the global face without well alignment is weak to provide effective representations for large pose variation. Moreover, it is not flexible to fuse the configurations of local regions and concentrate representations on the most important parts such as eyes, nose and mouth on which the majority of drowsy information focuses. It is another challenge to distinguish easy-to-confuse states, such as blinking and closing eyes. 3D-CNN with fixed time windows [7] tried to describe spatial and temporal features, but it does not have enough capability to model long-term relationships with variable time length.  I. I NTRODUCTION We propose a Long-term Multi-granularity Deep It is reported that about 1.24 million people die on Framework (LMDF) to detect driver drowsiness from roads every year, while driver drowsiness accounts for well-aligned facial patches. Our method applies align6% [1] of them. Driver drowsiness indicates a driver is ment technology to obtain the well-aligned facial lack of sleep, which can be detected by the variation of patches over frames, and these patches mainly locate physiological signal [2], vehicle trajectory [3], [4] and in the informative regions that supply critical drowsy facial expressions [5]. However the first two methods information. A group of parallel convolutional paths are are hard to satisfy the requirement of convenience applied on the patches, and the outputs of these layers and timeliness. Drowsiness can be reflected by facial are fused by a fully connected layer to generate spatial expression, such as nodding, yawning and closing eyes. representations, which is named as Multi-granularity We therefore aim to develop a drowsiness detection Convolutional Neural Network (MCNN). MCNN is method based on video. Video-based method is possible able to fuse appearance of those well-aligned patches to give the warning prompts and receive the driver’s and capture local to global constraints. To explore temporal dynamical characteristics, a deep Long Short feedback in time, being of great value in practice. Video-based drowsiness detection is still full of Term Memory (LSTM) network is applied to the challenges, mainly stemming from the illumination spatial representations over sequential frames, which condition change, head pose variation, and temporal can distinguish the states with temporal relationships, dependencies. In particular, the large variation of head such as yawning and laughing, blinking and closing pose causes serious deformation of facial shape, which eyes. The proposed method can thus not only extract makes it difficult to extract effective spatial representa- effective facial representations on single-frame images, tions. Conventionally, approach based on aligned facial but also mine temporal clues on videos. points [5] is a better way to represent drowsy features, The contributions of our approach are mainly in however, ignoring temporal relationships means it three aspects: (1) We propose a Long-term Multi-  granularity Deep Framework to learn facial spatial features and their long-term temporal dependencies. (2) We propose MCNN to learn the facial representations from the most important parts, which makes the detector robust to large pose variation. (3) We build a Forward Instant Driver Drowsiness Detection (FI-DDD) dataset with higher precision of drowsy locations in temporal dimension, which is a good test bed for evaluating practical systems that are required to detect drowsiness in time.  important parts and flexibly fuse configurations of different regions. Recently, Multi-granularity methods have achieved several excellent results in other applications of computer vision. Qing Li et al. [21] proposed temporal multi-granularity approach of action recognition. Their method achieved the state-of-the-art performance on action benchmarks, but cannot capture detailed appearance clues and local to global spatial information. Dong C. et al. [22] applied multi-scale patches based on face alignment on face recognition. Dequan W. et al. [23] utilized multi-granularity regions, detected by three granularities convolutional neural network, to generate multi-granularity descriptor for fine-grained categorization, but this method cannot process sequential frames. Different from the above, our method can capture spatial multi-granularity information and longterm temporal dependencies. Particularly, our MCNN can learn representations on the most significant regions from well-aligned multi-granularity patches, and the proposed method has achieved the state-of-the-art accuracy on NTHU-DDD dataset for driver drowsiness detection.  II. R ELATED W ORK Driver drowsiness detection is becoming a hot topic of Advanced Driver Assistant System (ADAS). Many traditional methods are applied to deal with this problem. The change of pupil diameter was utilized by Shirakata et al. [10] to detect imperceptible drowsiness, which is effective but it is not convenient for a driver to take the equipment. Nakamura et al. [5] utilized face alignment to estimate the degree of drowsiness via kNN, which cannot achieve online performance. Spatialtemporal features for driver drowsiness detection was proposed by Mahdi et al. [6], which was based on hough transformation, cannot work well in practical driving environment. Besides, the representations of those III. O UR A PPROACH methods are hand-crafted, which may be not flexible The proposed method utilizes Multi-granularity Conto adapt to complex situations faced in driving, while volutional Neural Network (MCNN) to learn facial our method automatically learns facial representations, representations from single-frame images. The repreenwhich is more effective to the practical task. tations, extracted from well-aligned facial patches, Deep learning approaches such as CNN have contains both detailed appearance information of the achieved success in representing information on images main parts and local to global constraints. Furthermore, [11], [12], [13], and many researchers also applied our approach takes advantages of a deep Long Short CNN on driver drowsiness detection. Park et al. [14] Term Memory (LSTM) network to explore dynamical combined the results of three existing networks by characteristics of the facial representations from sequenSVM to present the categories of videos, which cannot tial frames. The detailed structure of our Long-term detect driver drowsiness online. 3D-CNN is applied to Multi-granularity Deep Framework combining MCNN extract spatial and temporal information by Yu et al. and LSTMs is shown as Fig.1. [7], and the methods can only capture features with fixed temporal window. The above two methods utilize A. Well-aligned Multi-granularity Patches global face image, which cannot flexibly configure those It is well known that drowsy information is focused patches containing the majority of drowsy information. on several main facial parts such as eyes, nose and Moreover, they are hard to capture dependencies with mouth. Alignment provides an excellent way to extract variable temporal length. Due to the well performance of LSTMs on sequential well-aligned features over frames, which effectively data [15], [16], [17], more and more researchers propose represent facial drowsy states. Besides, global patch combinations of CNN and LSTMs to learn spatial provides rough information to estimate the states of a and temporal representations of sequential frames. driver’s head and full face, which assists the decision It is interesting that Liang M. et al. [18] came up of driver’s drowsy states when the locations of parts with convolutional layers with intra-layer recurrent are not precise. Our method takes advantages of local connections to integrate the context information for regions and global face at the same time. object recognition. Jeff D. et al. [19] provided a method We utilize face alignment technology to locate facial which extracts visual features from images by CNN shape points. Given an image I t with a face in the and learns the long-term dependencies from sequential t-th frame, we detect landmark points of facial shape data by LSTMs. Especially, the approach of Jiang W. S t via regressing local binary features proposed by et al. [20] processes image with CNN and models Ren et al. [24]. From those points, it is convenient sequential labels by LSTMs concurrently, and then to get the locations of main parts and important local combines the two representations via projection layers. regions. According to center points and specific sizes However, none of the above methods apply multi- of all regions, we crop those patches from the original granularity method to concentrate representations on image and resize them into the same size, which are  ΦlM Φ Mp  It  Φ  M g  I tl I  I    t p  xtc  Φ  I t +1  M p  Φ  M g  WR , bR  ×3    I tc ,k  xt  LSTM  z  Softmax  t  C C  Φ (θ k )    I tg  Multi-granularity ΦlM  ht −1  W Cf , bCf t c  ht  CNN  I tl +1  RNN  W Cf , bCf  I  t +1 c    I  t +1 c,k  WR , bR  ×3    xtc+1  I tp+1  xt+1  LSTM  z t +1  Softmax  Φ (θ ) C    I tg+1  yt  y t +1  C k  ht +1  Fig. 1. The long-term multi-granularity deep framework for driver drowsiness detection. The first stage is well-aligned multi-granularity patches which consist of local regions, main parts and global face. Parallel convolutional layers are well-applied to process patches respectively and fully connected layer fuses local and global clues and generates a representation, which is the second stage of the framework. The first two stages construct the Multi-granularity CNN (MCNN). Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) with multiple LSTM blocks mining the clues in temporal dimension together with a fully connected layer form the third stage.  the well-aligned multi-granularity patches as the input layers of the convolutional neural network. Those patches, including local regions, main parts, and the global face, are produced by three different mappings. Shown as Fig.2, a mapping ΦM p can select center points of eyes, nose, and mouth from facial shape S t , and crop patches of those parts from the input image I t with given sizes sp . And the mapping still needs to convert the patches into an unified size su . Thus the single-granularity patches of those main parts Itp are M generated. The operations of mapping ΦM l and Φg M are similar to the mapping Φp , while the differences lie in the locations and sizes of regions. The mapping ΦM l selects the corners of the eyes and mouth and the sides of the nose as the interest of regions with size sl and output local patches Itl . A global facial region with size sg is chosen by the mapping ΦM g which finally produces a global facial patch Itg . Formally, the mappings are represented as t t Iti = ΦM i (I , S , si , su ), i ∈ {l, g, p}.  (1)  t  Processing the input image I by the three mappings, we can obtain a set of well-aligned patches Itc consisting of the main parts, local regions and global face, and it is presented as Itc = {Itl,: , Itp,: , Itg,: },  (2)  where Iti,: , i ∈ {l, p, g} represents all elements of a patch set Iti . Compared with the original image, the patches set Itc , including both detailed appearance clues of parts and rough information of full face, have more advantages to describe the facial states. Meanwhile, the relations between local and global regions are implied, which is the basis of mining useful features. Therefore, we take the set of patches Itc as the input layer of CNN to learn effective representations.  Φ Mp  I tc  ΦlM  It  Φ Mg  Fig. 2. The procedure of extracting multi-granularity facial patches which include the main parts, local regions and global face such three granularities.  B. Learning Facial Representations Our approach learns representations by convolutional neural network but not hand-crafted for its well performance in learning spatial features. We apply several convolutional layers to processing each one in the set of patches Itc independently. To fuse the information of all patches, a fully connected layer is arranged after all convolutional operations, which generates N dimensional descriptors combining local and global clues. Every patch needs to be processed by convolutional t operations at first. For a patch Ic,k , the k-th one of t patch set Ic with length L, three convolutional layers are utilized to capture the spatial feature. The first one is made with convolution and rectified linear units (ReLU) activation followed by a max-pooling operation, which projects a normalized 3-channel image to a higher dimensional representation. Only convolution and ReLU activation are selected in the second layer to enlarge the dimension of representation sequentially.  And the structure of the third convolutional layer is similar to the first layer but with different parameters to decrease the dimension. A representation xtk of the patch Itc,k can be generated by a mapping ΦC consisting of those convolutional layers with parameters θkC , which is presented as xtk = ΦC (θkC , Itc,k ), k = 1, 2, . . . , L,  (3)  where θkC is the k-th element of convolutional parameter set θ C . A fully connected layer is utilized to combine those representations extracted by the mapping ΦC from the set of patches. But before combining operation, we concatenate those representations into a long vector xtc , formed as  easier to be trained. The memory cell can store longterm information in its vector, which can be rewritten or done other operations for the next time step. Besides, the number of hidden units should be chosen according to the dimension of the input representation xt . We employ multiple layers LSTMs to mine the temporal features for driver drowsiness. A mapping ΦR containing three layers LSTMs with parameters θ R is utilized to explore temporal clues of the representation xt generated by MCNN extractor and presents the hidden states ht3 of the third layer as a representation containing temporal dependencies, which is presented as ht3 = ΦR (θ R , ht−1 , xt ), (6)  t−1 t−1 where ht−1 = {ht−1 1 , h2 , h3 } is the parameter set = = 1, 2, . . . , L. (4) of these LSTM blocks in the last step. A fully connected layer with weight WR and a With a specific weighted matrix WfC and bias vector bias vector bR is used to project the output of the t bC mapping ΦR into a two-dimensional vector that is f , the combining N -dimensional representation x can be presented by the fully connected layer as then decoded by softmax operation to the probabilities p(c|ht3 , WR , bR ) of the two categories. To solve the t C t C x = max{Wf xc + bf , 0}, (5) parameters, we take advantage of Adam optimizer to train the LSTMs with cross-entropy objective function. in which 0 is a zero vector. The label y t of the current frame can be predicted The descriptor xt contains not only detailed appearance information implied in every part, but also as the class with the maximum probability. the constrained relations between local regions and y t = arg max p(c|ht3 , WR , bR ), c ∈ {0, 1} (7) global face. The effectiveness of the descriptor can be c improved by appropriate objective functions and proper Similarly, the labels y of the sequential data can be training methods. obtained. Driver drowsiness detection is a binary classified IV. E XPERIMENTS problem, thus the state of an input frame is just drowsy or not. We label drowsiness with 1 as the positive A dataset named National TsingHua University sample and normal state with 0 as the negative sample. Drowsy Driver Detection (NTHU-DDD) is provided And a label c are expressed with a one-hot vector yc , on the challenge of ACCV2016 workshop for driver such as a vector [0, 1] means the positive label. drowsiness detection, on which we compare our apTo train the parameters of the convolutional neural proach with others. To make the sequential labels close network, we project the representation xt into the to the practical driving environments, we relabel the probabilities of each category c ∈ {0, 1}, by another video set with instant detecting principle. A new dataset fully connected layer with weights WpC and a bias is generated from the relabeled video set and it is t C C vector bC called Forward Instant Driver Drowsiness Detection p , and the probability vector p(c|x , Wp , bp ) are normalized via a softmax layer. The cross entropy (FI-DDD) on which we learn parameters and analyze which can indicate the correct rate of classification the performance of several subnetworks. While the is selected as the objective function, and we utilize performance of our entire approach is evaluated on the the adam optimizer to train the whole convolutional original NTHU-DDD dataset, we thus train a set of neural network. The visual representations can also be parameters to achieve long-term memory performance. generated by the convolutional layers and the first fully Finally, the accuracy 90.05% is obtained by our Longconnected layer. term Multi-granularity Deep Framework (LMDF) on the evaluation set of the NTHU-DDD dataset, and the C. Exploring Dynamical Characteristics proposed method achieves about 37 fps on GPU Tesla The representation xt is extracted in a frame, while M40. whether a driver is drowsy or not is judged by a certain period. We apply LSTMs to model the temporal A. Dataset  xtc  [xtk ], k  dynamical characteristics of spatial representations on driver drowsiness detection. A LSTM block consists of an input gate, a forget gate, an output gate and a memory cell. Because of the three gates, the LSTM block can learn long-term dependencies in sequential data and its parameters are  NTHU-DDD Dataset: The NTHU dataset includes five scenarios listed as glasses, no glasses, glasses at night, no glasses at night and sunglasses. The training set involves 18 volunteers consisting of 10 men and 8 women who act as drivers with four different states in every scenario, while the evaluation set has four  volunteers including two men and two women. Nonsleepy videos contain only normal state, while sleepy videos combine normal and drowsy states together. Besides, blinking with nodding and yawning videos only record drowsy eyes and mouth respectively. NTHUDDD dataset offers four annotation files recording the states of drowsiness, eyes, head and mouth for every video. Table I gives the labels of drowsiness and three main parts. It is worth emphasizing that the labels  B. Implementation Details  Face Alignment: We apply face alignment technology to locate those facial shape points for all videos. Face detection and tracking are combined to increase detecting rate and provide more accurate positions for faces on videos. Face alignment algorithm is based on those face positions. The face detector is from OpenCV and the approach of face tracking is proposed by Danelljan et al. [25]. We implement the method of Ren et al. [24] and retrain the model, and preprocess all videos to obtain the 51 landmark points for every TABLE I T HE LABELED STATES OF EACH PART ON NTHU-DDD DATASET frame. Those frames with no face will be recognized as the empty and filled with zero coordinates for landmark label sub0 1 2 points. class Multi-granularity: We obtain Multi-granularity drowsiness normal drowsy patches considering two factors: different positions eyes normal sleepy head normal nodding looking aside and different sizes. We design to choose 15 positions mouth normal yawning talking & laughing from facial shape points, which are divided into three granularities: 1 global face with size sg = (160 × 160), on NTHU-DDD dataset are long-term memory, which 4 main parts with size sp = (64 × 64) and 10 local means that the states of a frame may depend on the regions with size sl = (32 × 32). The specific locations frames in the previous several seconds. of all patches are shown as Fig.2. Before sent to CNN, FI-DDD Dataset: A problem comes due to the long- those patches are resized to size su = (64 × 64), term memory in NTHU-DDD, which is that a driver normalized to [-0.5, 0.5], and are converted to 3 would still receive the warning prompts even if he channels to ensure that our framework can process had revised his drowsy states to the normal for a few RGB data. Dataset Usage: A static image set, required for seconds. At the same time, those labels are unable to locate the drowsy states with high precision in temporal training the CNN parameters, are sampled from the dimension. To solve these problems, we relabel those videos of FI-DDD with a specific frame interval. The videos with instant principle, which means the latency results of CNN is directly related to multi-granularity is limited within 0.5 second namely 15 frames for 30 patches and CNN parameters, we thus analyze the FPS videos. Those typical states, such as closing eyes, effects of those factors on the static image set. While yawning and lowering head, are still considered as one all experiments for analyzing the effects of LSTMs of the evidences to judge whether a frame is drowsy. parameters are carried on FI-DDD dataset. To compare Those videos are cut into several clips which contain with the previous methods, we evaluate the proposed only the drowsy or the normal states alternatively method on the evaluation set of NTHU-DDD dataset. according to our labels. To describe the transitional states between the normal and the drowsy, we reserve C. Experimental Analysis ten normal frames at the head and the tail of every To further explain the effects of alignment, multiclip with drowsiness. We name the relabeled dataset granularity and CNN extractor, several groups of with Forward Instant Driver Drowsiness Detection (FI- experiments are conducted on the static image set. We DDD) which includes 14 drivers on trainset and 4 ones also provide experiments on FI-DDD dataset to verify on testset. The trainset of FI-DDD at day time has the effectiveness of LSTMs for detection drowsiness 157 clips and the testset has 92 clips, while at night on video. scenarios, the trainset has 126 ones and the testset has 1) The Importance of Alignment: It is essential 75 clips with about 530 frames on average. to carry out experiments to explain the significance of Static image set: To train the parameters of CNN alignment and the effects of locating precision. and analyze the effects of several factors, we build a None-alignment vs With Alignment: We provide static image set by sampling lots of frames from the another two none-alignment methods to sample those FI-DDD dataset. The samples on the image set are multi-granularity patches in facial bounding box: Unilabeled with drowsiness or normality, and the labels form Sampling (US) and Specific Sampling (SS). The can almost indicate the truth states of the corresponding corresponding sizes of our Aligned sampling (AS) images, even if a small amount of images are matched method and the two none-alignment ones are the same. with wrong labels due to lack of temporal dependence. Fig.3(Left) shows the comparison of AS, US and SS. The static image set has 7498 images in day time, AS considering alignment achieves the best accuracy and trainset includes 5239 images and testset has 2259 87.4% on the testset of the static image set, which is images. It has 2653 images in night scenario, and 4.9% higher than SS method and 6.2% higher than trainset includes 1750 images, testset has 903 images. US one. As a conclusion, alignment of facial patches,  providing aligned representations, is an effective way to improve the accuracy on driver drowsiness detection.  Acc  Acc  Acc  Acc  granularity is the slowest compared with the others, and that of local regions is the fastest. While multigranularity method achieves good performance on both 0.9 87.4% convergent speed and accuracy. Aligned points can 0.88 87.4% 0.85 83.5% achieve higher precision on those local regions with 0.86 79.7% abundant boundary texture, which results in more 0.8 0.84 aligned representations and easier being classified. 74.1% 0.75 82.5% 70.3% Nevertheless, multi-granularity patches containing more 0.82 81.2% 0.7 aligned information is more effective on driver drowsi0.8 0.65 US SS AS 0 5 10 15 20 25 ness detection. Methods σ(px) Effects of positions and sizes: We change the positions and sizes of facial patches respectively. Shown Fig. 3. Left: the comparison of different sampling methods, sampling over uniform distribution(US), sampling specific locations(SS) and as Fig.5(Left), facial main parts, including eyes, nose our proposed sampling with aligned positions(AS); Right: the effect of and mouth, obtain the best accuracy 83.6% compared alignment precision, σ is the standard deviation of normal distribution. The results(Acc) are achieved by CNN on testset of the static image with the other single-granularity method. Obviously, the set. combination of those three granularities achieves the best accuracy 87.4%. A conclusion comes that the most Effects of alignment precision: We evaluate the effective representation is extracted from the three main effects of the alignment precision, and research the facial parts, while the fusion of local and global clues is influence quantitatively by adding random noise with an excellent way to obtain better facial representations. Gaussian distribution N (0, σ) over the well-aligned We set their sizes as the same and change the sizes to facial points. Fig.3(Right) shows the results on testset research the difference between single-size and multiof the static image set, from which, we discover that granularity methods, keeping the locations of these the accuracy is decreasing with the increasing standard patches invariable. Fig.5(Right) shows different regions deviation of noise and even less than 80% if σ ≥ 10 px. with different sizes achieve 2.3% accuracy more than While the accuracy is more than 83% with σ less than that of those single-size patches. The phenomenon is 5 px, we make a conclusion that the proposed MCNN the result of that different physiological parts are of is robust to the corrupted locations if σ ≤ 5 px. different sizes, e.g., the size of global face is bigger 2) The Effects of Multi-granularity Patches: Multi-granularity patches consist of local regions, main than single eye. The above analysis presents that multiparts and global face. It is significant to conduct granularity method is an effective way to represent experiments and explain the importance of those gran- facial features. ularities on driver drowsiness detection. We apply a 87.4% 87.4% 0.88 0.88 fully connected layer and softmax operation to classify 0.86 0.86 85.1% 84.9% 83.6% 0.84 0.84 83.1% representations presented by MCNN extractor, and 82.2% 0.82 0.82 analyze the effects of multi-granularity patches by 0.8 0.8 79.1% results of the classification. 0.78  0.78  0.9  0.76  0.76 GF  MP  LR  Locations  Mg  32 32x  0  64 x16 64x 160 Sizes  Mg  Acc  0.8  0.7 Multi-granularity Global face Local region Main parts  0.6  0.5  0  50  100  150  Training times/(100 times)  Fig. 4. The comparison of different granularities, global face, main parts, local regions and multi-granularity patches. The Curve of accuracies(Acc) over training times are achieved by CNN with different granularities on testset of the static image set.  Learning curve on different granularities: We take four different granularities, listed as local regions, main parts, global face and the combination of the above, into account to analyze the effects of multigranularity facial patches. Fig.4 illustrates the comparisons of those granularities, from which, we know that the convergent speed of method with global face  Fig. 5. Left: The comparison of patches with different positions, GF-the global face, MP-main parts(eyes, nose and mouth), LR-local regions(the corner of eyes, the sides of nose and the boundary of mouth); Right: the comparison of patches with different sizes at all locations. Mg represents multi-granularity patches.  3) The Parameters Selection of MCNN Extractor: The structure parameters of the convolutional layers are listed as Table II. A patch with size 64×64 processed by those convolutional layers is projected to a tensor with size 16 × 16 × 4. And a representation of the patch is generated by reshaping the tensor to a 1024-dimensional vector, which is the input of a fully connected layer. A fully connected layer is applied to combine the multi-granularity clues and generate MCNN representations. The number of its hidden units N , namely the dimension of representation, has effects on the combination of those patches. Changing the number of hidden units N , we explore the relations between the dimension of MCNN representations and classification  Layers 1st  2nd  3rd  Operations Convolution Activation Max pooling Convolution Activation Max pooling Convolution Activation Max pooling  Attributions size:[5 × 5 × 3 × 32] ReLU strides:[2 × 2] size:[5 × 5 × 32 × 64] ReLU Not Used size:[5 × 5 × 64 × 4] ReLU strides:[2 × 2]  accuracy with well-aligned multi-granularity facial patches. The comparison of different dimensions is shown as Fig.6, which indicates that the number of dimension almost has no influence on the convergent speed. But 256-dimensional representations achieve the highest accuracy. Therefore it is reasonable for us choose the number of hidden units as 256.  MCNN-Only method obtains 72.7% accuracy, while the accuracy achieved by MCNN+LSTMs is 15.6% more than that by MCNN-Only. The reason is that the LSTMs have ability to mine the clues in temporal dimension which is significant for recognizing lots of ambiguous states, such as closing eyes and blinking. Comparing the accuracies of different granularities, we discover that the well-aligned multi-granularity facial patches still achieve the best performance. The accuracy of the main parts ranks the second, which means the granularity of main parts certainly plays the most important role in improving the effectiveness compared to the other two granularities. 0.9 0.85 0.8  Acc  TABLE II T HE PARAMETERS OF THE THREE CONVOLUTIONAL LAYERS . T HOSE STRUCTURE PARAMETERS ARE THE SAME IN ALL PARALLEL CONVOLUTIONAL PATHS .  0.75  0.9  0.7  0.85  0.65  0.8  0.6  Acc  Global Face Local Regions Main Parts Multi-granularity  88.3% 83.9% 79% 79.4%  72.7% 69.9% 67.1% 67%  MCNN-Only  MCNN+LSTMs  0.75 N=128 N=256 N=512 N=1024  0.7 0.65  0  50  100  Fig. 7. The comparison of accuracies achieved via MCNN only and MCNN+LSTMs on the testset of FI-DDD dataset. Different granularities are still presented. 150  Traning times/(100 times)  D. Comparisons with The Previous Methods Fig. 6. The comparison of different dimensional MCNN representations on accuracies and convergent performance achieved by CNN on testset of the static image set in daytime.  We evaluate the whole method on the evaluation set and compare with the previous methods [7], [14], [9] achieved on the same dataset. Due to the long-term 4) The Significance of LSTMs: We first apply memory characteristics on NTHU-DDD dataset, the MCNN to detect driver drowsiness on video, but max memory length is set to 120 frames and other it has no capacity to capture the temporal clues. parameters keep the same as the above experiments. MCNN+LSTMs is considered to deal with this draw- Especially for night scenarios, we retrain a model back. It is necessary to compare the situation with with the night data of NTHU-DDD to detect driver LSTMs [26] and that without LSTMs for understanding drowsiness on near-infrared videos. Accuracy: Table III presents the comparison of our the effects of LSTMs. All experiments at this part are carried on the FI-DDD dataset in day-time scenarios. method and the previous work [7], [14], [9] and the Parameters setting: The representations given by proposed method achieves 90.05% accuracy, as the MCNN extractor are 256-dimensional, and the number state-of-the-art method of driver drowsiness detection. Speed: We measure time consumption of all modules of hidden units in each LSTM block is equal to 256. The forget gate is enabled and the max memory step is of our proposed method. From Table IV, CNN costs set to 60 frames. We randomly select a batch with 1000 the most time and the approach achieves about 3 fps on samples to train the LSTMs parameters with learning CPU platform. While on GPU platform, the proposed rate 3e−4 . The fully connected layer projects the states method can achieve 37 fps and satisfy the real-time of the last LSTM block to a 2-dimensional vector which performance requirements. is decoded to the probability of drowsiness by a softmax V. C ONCLUSION operation. MCNN-Only vs MCNN+LSTMs: The experiments We propose an effective and efficient Long-term are carried on four different granularities to research the Multi-granularity Deep Framework to detect driver effects of the multi-granularity and LSTMs. Fig.7 shows drowsiness on videos. Well alignment of facial patches the accuracy of MCNN only and MCNN+LSTMs for ensures the effectiveness of representations under large detecting videos on testset under different granularities. pose variation, and multi-granularity patches efficiently  TABLE III T HE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT METHODS ON THE EVALUATION SET OF NTHU-DDD DATASET WITH THE DETAILED INFORMATION OF ENVIRONMENTS . Methods Yu et al. [7] Park et al. [14] MSTN [9] Ours  Platform GPU GPU-M40  Spatial Features 3D-DCNN DDD Network CNN MCNN  TABLE IV T IME CONSUMPTION OF EACH MODULES OF THE PROPOSED METHOD . OTHERS INCLUDE READING , WRITING AND SOME CONVERTING OPERATIONS . Time(ms)  Module  Platform CPU(E5)+GPU(M40) CPU(I7)  Mg  CNN  11.1 5.6  10.7 302.3  LSTMs Others 0.6 0.6  4.5 3.2  Total 26.9 311.7  concentrate on the most significant regions. Multigranularity Convolutional Neural Network (MCNN) can effectively learn both detailed appearance information of the main parts and local to global spatial constraints. The deep Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) network works well on learning the temporal dependencies of spatial representations for driver drowsiness detection. Moreover, we build a dataset named Forward Instant Driver Drowsiness Detection with higher precision of drowsy locations in temporal dimension. The dataset performs well in training model parameters and analyzing effects of several factors. Finally, we evaluate our method on the evaluation set of NTHU-DDD dataset and achieve 90.05% accuracy and about 37 fps speed as the state-of-the-art method on driver drowsiness detection. R EFERENCES [1] W. H. Organization, “Global status report on road safety 2013: Supporting a decade of action : Summary,” in World Health Organization, 2013. [2] J. Wang and Y. Gong, “Recognition of multiple drivers’ emotional state,” in IEEE International Conference Pattern Recognition,December 8-11, 2008, pp. 1–4. [3] A. Colic, O. Marques, and B. Furht, Driver Drowsiness Detection - Systems and Solutions, ser. Springer Briefs in Computer Science. Springer, 2014. [4] M. Rezaei and R. Klette, “Look at the driver, look at the road: No distraction! no accident!” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, June 23-28, 2014, pp. 129–136. [5] T. Nakamura, A. Maejima, and S. Morishima, “Detection of driver’s drowsy facial expression,” in Asian Conference on Pattern Recognition, Naha,Japan, November 5-8, 2013, pp. 749–753. [6] B. Akrout and W. Mahdi, “Spatio-temporal features for the automatic control of driver drowsiness state and lack of concentration,” Mach. Vis. Appl., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2015. [7] S. L. Jongmin Yu, Sangwoo Park and M. Jeon, “Representation learning, scene understanding, and feature fusion for drowsiness detection,” in Asian Conference on Computer Vision Workshop, 2016. [8] Y.-G. K. Xuan-Phung Huynh, Sang-Min Park, “Detection of driver drowsiness using 3d deep neural network and semisupervised gradient boosting machine,” in Asian Conference on Computer Vision Workshop, 2016.  Sequential Features feature fusion SVM LSTMs LSTMs  Speed 24∼32 fps 60 fps 37 fps  Accuracy 72.60% 73.06% 85.52% 90.05%  [9] C.-T. H. Tun-Huai Shih, “Mstn: Multistage spatial-temporal network for driver drowsiness detection,” in Asian Conference on Computer Vision Workshop, 2016. [10] S. T, K. Tanida, J. Nishiyama, and H. Y, “Detect the imperceptible drowsiness,” SAE Int. J. Passeng. Cars - Electron Electr. Syst., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 98–108, 2010. [11] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Proceedings, December 3-6, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United States., 2012, pp. 1106–1114. [12] Y. Sun, X. Wang, and X. Tang, “Deep learning face representation from predicting 10, 000 classes,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Columbus, OH, USA, June 23-28, 2014, pp. 1891–1898. [13] L. Yann, B. Yoshua, and H. Geoffrey, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521, 2015. [14] S. K. Sanghyuk Park, Fei Pan and C. D. Yoo, “Driver drowsiness detection system based on feature representation learning using various deep networks,” in Asian Conference on Computer Vision Workshop, 2016. [15] J. Mao, W. Xu, Y. Yang, J. Wang, and A. L. Yuille, “Deep captioning with multimodal recurrent neural networks (m-rnn),” CoRR, vol. abs/1412.6632, 2014. [16] A. Graves, A. Mohamed, and G. E. Hinton, “Speech recognition with deep recurrent neural networks,” CoRR, vol. abs/1303.5778, 2013. [17] A. N. Chernodub and D. Nowicki, “Sampling-based gradient regularization for capturing long-term dependencies in recurrent neural networks,” in ICONIP, Kyoto, Japan, October 16-21, Proceedings, Part II, 2016, pp. 90–97. [18] M. Liang and X. Hu, “Recurrent convolutional neural network for object recognition,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Boston, MA, USA, June 7-12, 2015, pp. 3367–3375. [19] J. Donahue, L. A. Hendricks, S. Guadarrama, M. Rohrbach, S. Venugopalan, T. Darrell, and K. Saenko, “Long-term recurrent convolutional networks for visual recognition and description,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Boston, MA, USA, June 7-12, 2015, pp. 2625–2634. [20] J. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Mao, Z. Huang, C. Huang, and W. Xu, “CNN-RNN: A unified framework for multi-label image classification,” CoRR, vol. abs/1604.04573, 2016. [21] Q. Li, Z. Qiu, T. Yao, T. Mei, Y. Rui, and J. Luo, “Action recognition by learning deep multi-granular spatio-temporal video representation,” in ICMR, New York, New York, USA, June 6-9, 2016, pp. 159–166. [22] D. Chen, X. Cao, F. Wen, and J. Sun, “Blessing of dimensionality: High-dimensional feature and its efficient compression for face verification,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2013, pp. 3025–3032. [23] D. Wang, Z. Shen, J. Shao, W. Zhang, X. Xue, and Z. Zhang, “Multiple granularity descriptors for fine-grained categorization,” in IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, Santiago, Chile, December 7-13, 2015, pp. 2399–2406. [24] S. Ren, X. Cao, Y. Wei, and J. Sun, “Face alignment at 3000 FPS via regressing local binary features,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, June 23-28, 2014, pp. 1685–1692. [25] M. Danelljan, G. Häger, F. S. Khan, and M. Felsberg, “Accurate scale estimation for robust visual tracking,” in British Machine Vision Conference, Nottingham, UK, September 1-5, 2014. [26] K. Greff, R. K. Srivastava, J. Koutník, B. R. Steunebrink, and J. Schmidhuber, “LSTM: A search space odyssey,” CoRR, vol. abs/1503.04069, 2015.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
