Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_5458

Abstract:
Training Better CNNs Requires to Rethink ReLU Gangming Zhao1,4 , Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,4∗ , Jingdong Wang5 , He Guan1,2,4 1  arXiv:1709.06247v1 [cs.CV] 19 Sep 2017  Research Center for Brain-inspired Intelligence, CASIA 2 National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA 3 CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Microsoft Research  Abstract With the rapid development of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs), numerous works focus on designing better network architectures (i.e., AlexNet, VGG, Inception, ResNet and DenseNet etc.). Nevertheless, all these networks have the same characteristic: each convolutional layer is followed by an activation layer, a Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) layer is the most used among them. In this work, we argue that the paired module with 1:1 convolution and ReLU ratio is not the best choice since it may result in poor generalization ability. Thus, we try to investigate the more suitable convolution and ReLU ratio for exploring the better network architectures. Specifically, inspired by Leaky ReLU, we focus on adopting the proportional module with N:M (N>M) convolution and ReLU ratio to design the better networks. From the perspective of ensemble learning, Leaky ReLU can be considered as an ensemble of networks with different convolution and ReLU ratio. We find that the proportional module with N:M (N>M) convolution and ReLU ratio can help networks acquire the better performance, through the analysis of a simple Leaky ReLU model. By utilizing the proportional module with N:M (N>M) convolution and ReLU ratio, many popular networks can form more rich representations in models, since the N:M (N>M) proportional module can utilize information more effectively. Furthermore, we apply this module in diverse DCNN models to explore whether is the N:M (N>M) convolution and ReLU ratio indeed more effective. From our experimental results, we can find that such a simple yet effective method achieves better performance in different benchmarks with various network architectures and the experimental results verify that the superiority of the proportional module. In addition, to our knowledge, it is the first time to introduced the proportional module in DCNN models. We think that our proposed method can help many researchers design the better network architectures.  Introduction Nowadays, with the available of large scale image datasets eg ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015)) as well as high performance computing resources eg GPU, deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al. 1998) have been dominant in many computer vision applications, especially for image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton ∗  Corresponding author. (zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn) Copyright c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.  f (y)  f (y) f (y) = y  f (y) = 0  y  f (y) = y  y  Figure 1: ReLU vs. LReLU. 2012; Chatfield et al. 2014; Szegedy et al. 2015a; Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; He et al. 2016a; Zhao et al. 2016a; He et al. 2016c). One of the key factors of deep learning system is to utilize Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) shown on the left of the Figure 1 to replace sigmoid and tanh function. Saturated activation functions like sigmoid and tanh lead to the so called ”vanishing gradient”. ReLU prunes the negative values to zero, and retains the positive part that alleviates the problem of vanishing gradient. And the activations are sparse after passing ReLU, X Glorot et al. (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio ) think the superior performance of ReLU comes from this sparsity. Recently, to achieve better performance, ie, get better DCNN models, a great number of works focus on designing better network architecture, such as deeper (Szegedy et al. 2015a; Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; He et al. 2016a) or wider (Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2016; Zeiler and Fergus 2014) networks. Though with different architectures, all these networks have a same characteristic: each convolutional layer is followed by an activation function like Rectified Linear Unit layer (Nair and Hinton 2010). Specific, we only consider the paired module which is composed of ReLU. We argue that the paired module with 1:1 convolution and ReLU ratio leads to the negative influence on many popular networks. In this paper, we utilize a simple leaky ReLU model to investigate more suitable convolution and ReLU ratio to design the better network architectures. We call 1:1 convolution and ReLU ratio module as paired module. In the contrast, we call N:M convolution and ReLU  ratio module as proportional module. Paired module is only composed of the non-linear unit. But we think that the linear unit can help different networks express the distribution of data better. N-M (N>M) proportional module not only comprises the non-linear unit but also integrates the linear unit into models and it mixes the non-linear and linear information in the process of learning, which can further improve the capability of models. From the perspective of ensemble learning, the Leaky ReLU model shown in Figure 3(a) can be considered as an ensemble of networks with different convolution and ReLU ratio. This network add a shortcut that connect two convolutional layers while cross a ReLU layer among these two convolutional layers. Derived by formula (1),  x, x ≥ 0; (1) y = max(wx, 0) + wx = 0.5x, x < 0. We find that because the addition of this shortcut, ReLU in this network become Leaky ReLU whose negative halfaxis slope is 0.5. From another aspect, we think this network is an ensemble of networks with different convolution and ReLU ratio. Inspired by this model, we explored a better proportional module for designing the better network architectures. The contribution of this paper includes two parts: • By the analysis of networks shown in Figure 3(a), we find a better proportional module that can be applied in many DCNN models to improve model performance. • It is the first time that proportional module is introduced into DCNN models. By utilizing a better proportional module with N:M (N>M) convolution and ReLU ratio, the models can fit the distribution of data well.  Related Work With the rapid development of deep learning, many efforts have been made to improve the DCNN learning algorithm, such as ReLU for model expression ability. Dropout and Batch Normalization for both performance and efficiency improvement. In addition, GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al. 2015b), ResNet (He et al. 2016b) (He et al. 2016c), Deep Fusion Network (DFN) (Zhao et al. 2016b), Xception (Chollet 2016), ResNeXt (Xie et al. 2016) and IGCNets (Zhang et al. 2017) are shown to be able to effectively train a deeper or wider network with better performance. Furthermore, many researches including (Stewart and Ermon ; Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017) explore the theory of Deep Learning, which effectively improve the interpretability of deep learning.  Rectifier Units Among these advances, ReLU is one of several factors to the success of Deep Learning. Despite the great improvement of performance, there still have many recent improvements of activation functions containing leaky rectified linear (LReLU) (Maas, Hannun, and Ng ) shown on the right of Figure 1, randomized leaky rectified linear (RReLU) (Maas, Hannun, and Ng ) and parametric rectified linear (PReLU)  Input  Input  Input  Conv  Conv  Conv  BN  Input  Input  BN  BN  Input  ReLU  ReLU  ReLU  Conv  Conv  Conv  Conv  Conv  Conv  BN  BN  BN  BN  BN  BN  ReLU  ReLU  ReLU  +  +  +  Conv  Conv  Conv  ReLU  ReLU  ReLU  +  +  +  Figure 2: Pre-activation building block and building block. (He et al. 2015), which are benefit to the optimization of network and can improve the performance in some cases. In addition, Shang et al. (Shang ) proposed concatenated rectified linear (CReLU) to alleviate the problem of negative correction in convolutional layers. Furthermore, exponential linear units (ELUs) (Clevert, Unterthiner, and Hochreiter 2015) are proposed to speed up learning in deep neural networks and acquire higher classification accuracies, but ELUs increase the computational complexity of networks. In contrast with ELUs, our proposed method can effectively improve the performance of many DCNN models with no extra computational cost.  Regularization Method Batch Normalization Batch Normalization (BN) was proposed by Sergey et al. (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015) to alleviate the internal covariate shift problem. As another regularizer, Dropout is gradually replaced by BN. Currently, BN is widely applied in almost all CNN models. BN normalizes each dimension xk − E[x(k) ] xˆk = p V ar[x(k) ]  (2)  where the expectation and variance are computed over data during training phase. In addition, BN can scale and shift the normalized value: y k = γ (k) x̂(k) + β (k)  (3)  BN allows researchers to create deeper and wider networks, and it is one of important keys to the great success of ResNet. Generally, networks are composed of the sequence of CONV-BN-ReLU. Also, the sequence of BNReLU-CONV can further improve the performance of some networks like ResNet. Proportional module also can be considered as a regularization method to alleviate the overfitting of models. It explores more flexibly combinational methods of CONV, BN and ReLU. For example, the sequence of CONV-BN-CONV-BN-ReLU is a 2:1 proportional module, it effectively improves the performance of networks in our experiments. But whether is the combinational method the best module in CNN models. We need to do more experiments to explore the influence of different proportional module on networks.  The Relationship of Proportional Module and BN In this section, we will illustrate the relationship of proportional module and BN. Simplicity, we adopt building block and pre-activation building block to explain it. The adopted module is shown in Figure 2. • For building block, y = BN (W2 ∗ M ax(BN (W1 ∗ x)), 0) + x  Conv ReLU  (4)  +  • If drop the first ReLU, y = BN (W2 ∗ (BN (W1 x))) + x  Input  (5)  (6)  We find that if we drop the first ReLU and BN, two convolutional layers will become a convolution with larger receptive field in building block. Similarly, if drop the last ReLU and BN, we find pre-activation building block is also like this. • For pre-activation block, y = W2 ∗M ax(BN (W1 ∗M ax(BN (x), 0)), 0)+x (7) • If drop the first ReLU y = W2 ∗ M ax(BN (W1 ∗ BN (x)), 0) + x  Conv ReLU  Conv  Conv  Conv  Conv  Conv  Conv  Conv  ReLU  ReLU  Conv  Conv  Conv  Conv  ReLU  ReLU  ReLU  FC  FC  FC  FC  3:3  3:2  3:1  3:0  + Conv ReLU +  (8)  FC  • If drop the first ReLU and BN y = W2 ∗ M ax(BN (W1 ∗ x), 0) + x  Conv ReLU  • If drop the first ReLU and BN, y = BN (W2 ∗ ((W1 x))) + x  Input  (9)  For another case, if we drop the first ReLU and BN of preactivation building block or the last ReLU and BN of building block, the analysis result of the first case will not appear, but whether is the first BN of pre-activation building block or the last BN of building block redundant. We still need more experiments and theoretical analysis to explore the influence of this BN. In our paper, we adopt the different strategy to regularize DCNNs by utilizing our proposed proportional module to replace the conventional paired module. In another aspect, proportional module combines the linear and non-linear information in a variety of ways to form more rich representations of data. Furthermore, Kaiming He et al. (He et al. 2016b) (He et al. 2016c) proposed ResNet can be considered as another method to combine two types of information. We apply proportional module into ResNet, which can further improve the performance of it. In conclusion, proportional module cannot only act as a regularizer but also as a method which can reduce the information loss in forward and backward prorogation process of ReLU.  Approach Leaky ReLU: From the Perspective of Ensemble Learning In this section, we utilize a simple ensemble of networks to introduce our method. This network is shown in Figure 3 and it has introduced in section 1. We think this model  (a)  (b)  Figure 3: (a) An ensemble of networks, it cannot only be considered as a Leaky ReLU model but also an ensemble of networks with different convolution and ReLU ratio; (b) the expanded form of (a), it is the ensemble of networks with different convolution and ReLU ratio including 1:1, 3:2, 3:1 and 3:0. cannot only be considered as a Leaky ReLU model but also as an ensemble of networks with different convolution and ReLU ratio. For example, we think that the network shown in Figure 3(a) is an ensemble of networks with different convolution and ReLU ratio including 1:1, 3:2, 3:1 and 3:0 and its expanded form is shown in Figure 3(b). We con-  Model Paired Module Ensemble Module  Depth  Accuracy  84 84  44.16 ± 0.57 58.52 ± 0.19  Table 1: Comparison between paired module and ensemble module of the plain network on CIFAR-100. Depth means the number of Convolutional layers. Ensemble Module means, for per ReLU, we add a shortcut connect two convolutional layers and cross ReLU among these two convolutional layers.  Pre-Pr-M  Pre-Pa-M  Pre-Pa-M  Pre-Pa-M  Pre-Pr-M  Pre-Pa-M  Pre-Pr-M  Pre-Pa-M  Pre-Pr-M  Pre-Pa-M  f (y)  tt Pre-Pa-M  Pre-Pa-M  Pre-Pr-M  +  +  +  +  Pa-M  f (y) = 0  Pa-M  + Pa-M  Pr-M  Pa-M  Pa-M  Pr-M  + Pr-M  + Pr-M  f (y) = y  +  Figure 4: The pre-activation bottleneck block and preactivation block with different combinational methods of proportional module and paired module. Pre-Pa-M means the sequence of BN-ReLU-Conv; Pre-Pr-M means the sequence of BN-Conv.  Pa-M  f (y) f (y) = y  Pa-M  Pa-M  Figure 5: The different merge and run blocks, which are composed of proportional module and paired module. PaM means the sequence of Conv-BN-ReLU, Pr-M means the sequence of Conv-BN. The below Pa-M means this ReLU is placed after element-wise and the below Pr-M means there is no ReLU after element-wise. Here, we omit the elementwise symbol. We call these block in Figure as Type1, 2 and 3 Cross-Proportional Module from the left to right, separately. In addition, Type1, 2 and 3 block can compose more network architectures, one parts of them are shown in Figure 10. duct the comparison experiment between traditional paired module and ensemble module in an 84-depth plain network on CIFAR-100 dataset. We find that the performance of ensemble module is much higher than the conventional paired module. We think the plain network composed of ensemble module can be considered as a combinational network with different convolution and ReLU ratio. From this comparative experiment, we think N¿M proportional module can help models achieve the better performance.  Combinatorial Method for Diverse Modules In this section, we will introduce the different combinatorial method of diverse modules in networks including ResNet and Deep Fusion Network. Paired module has two forms: • a convolutional layer is followed a ReLU we call this module as Pro-Paired Module and • a convolutional layer is placed in the after of ReLU we call this module as Pre-Paired Module. Also, there are two identical forms in proportional module. We apply these four modules into plain network, ResNet and Deep Fusion Network (DFN), separately. The build block is the first residual module proposed by Kaiming He et al. (He et al. 2016b), we apply proportional  y  y  Figure 6: A Rectifier Unit and A Linear Unit. module into this model. These blocks are shown in Figure 4. Among these model, Pre-Pa-M means Pre-activation paired module (the sequence of BN-ReLU-Conv); Pre-Pr-M means Pre-activation proportional module (the sequence of BN-Conv). In addition, Kaiming He et al. (He et al. 2016a) proposed the bottleneck block. We utilize Pre-Pr-M (BN-Conv) to replace some Pre-Pa-M (BN-ReLU-Conv) and conduct experiments to compare the performance of these models. These blocks are shown in Figure 4. Deep Fusion Network (DFN) (Zhao et al. 2016a) is proposed by Zhao, Liming et al., who present a merge and run fusion scheme to combine two sub-networks, they call this network as deeply merge-and-run fused network (DFNMR). DFN-MR performs superiorly to existing popular networks like ResNet. DFN-MR is composed of Pa-M (the sequence of Conv-BN-ReLU), in our experiments, we utilize Pr-M (the sequence of Conv-BN) to replace Pa-M. There are many methods to replace Pa-M. We list three replaced methods shown in Figure 5.  Linear Unit The conventional paired module only includes non-linear unit. In our paper, we think the linear unit is also an important factor to improve the expression ability of different models. N-M (N>M) Proportional Module combine the non-linear unit and the linear unit that can further improve the performance of different models. Figure 6 shows the rectifier unit and the linear unit. The linear unit retains the all information, which can further improve the performance of networks by work in combination with rectifier unit. In addition, although the non-linear unit maintains the depth property of a network, it still has the negative influence on many popular networks including ResNet, DFNMR etc. In this paper, we utilize proportional module to integrate the linear unit into models by changing the convolution and ReLU ratio to reduce information loss in forward and backward propagation process of ReLU.  Experiments In this section, we will introduce our experiments on plain network, ResNet (He et al. 2016a; He et al. 2016c) and Deep Fusion Network (DFN) (Zhao et al. 2016a). In the first sec-  tion, we will briefly describe the datasets. Then in next section, we explore the influence of our methods by applying proportional module to plain network. In addition, we adopt two popular networks including DFN and ResNet to combine paired module and proportional module for further exploring the better performance. All the tables show the average classification accuracy from 5 runs and the standard deviation (mean ± std).  Datasets In our experiments, we use two datasets that are commonly used for image recognition: CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. All the two datasets are detailed as follows. CIFAR-10 The CIFAR-10 dataset has 50,000 images for training and 10,000 for testing. All images are tiny RGB images with a size of 32 × 32, falling into 10 categories with 6,000 images per class. CIFAR-100 The CIFAR-100 dataset is similar to the CIFAR-10, except that it has 100 classes. There are 600 images per class, where we use 500 images for training and 100 images for testing.  The Various Networks The Plain Network In this section, we utilize plain network to verify that the N:M (N>M) convolution and ReLU ratio is indeed effective. The plain network we adopted is introduced in (He et al. 2016b). The paired module is commonly adopted in plain network. We argue that although ReLUs alleviate the problem of vanishing gradient caused by sigmoid and tanh activation function, the redundancy of ReLUs is an important reason why the accuracy of deeper network gets saturated. In approach section, we have known that the network shown in Figure 3(a) can be considered as an ensemble of networks with different convolution and ReLU ratio. In this section, we want conduct experiments on CIFAR-100 to explore whether is N:M (N>M) convolution and ReLU ratio indeed effective. We conduct comparative experiment of the 2:1 convolution and ReLU ratio and 1:1 ratio to explore the influence of this ratio in plain network. To show the ratio of convolution and ReLU, we call these modules Paired Module and 2:1 Proportional Module. Table 2 shows that our experimental results. From Table 2, we can find that the proportion of convolutional layer and ReLU has an important influence on plain network. In addition, (He et al. 2016a) has verified that the degradation problem becomes more serious with the network depth increasing. a proportional module with 2:1 convolution and ReLU ratio can alleviate degradation problem effectively. And 2:1 proportional module improves the performance of the conventional paired module by 3.98% and 11.82% in 62 and 84-layer plain networks. Analysis For plain network, the redundancy of ReLUs is one of important reasons why the accuracy of deeper network gets saturated. Our experimental results verify that the N:M (N>M) convolution and ReLU ratio is indeed effective, especially in deeper networks. So, 2:1 convolution and ReLU ratio may be a more suitable proportional module, but whether can the module improve the performance of other more popular networks like ResNet.  Model Paired Module 2-1 Proportional Module Paired Module 2-1 Proportional Module Paired Module 2-1 Proportional Module Ensemble Module  Depth 38 38 62 62 84 84 84  Accuracy 64.04 ± 0.14 64.25 ± 1.44 56.88 ± 1.16 60.86 ± 1.18 44.16 ± 0.57 55.98 ± 2.59 58.52 ± 0.19  Table 2: Comparison between 1:1 convolution and ReLU ratio and 2:1 convolution and ReLU ratio in plain network on CIFAR-100. Depth means the number of convolutional layers. I this table, Proportional Module means the network adopt the 2:1 convolution and Relu ratio. Paired Module means the network adopt the 1:1 convolution and ReLU ratio. Ensemble Module means the leaky ReLU model shown in Figure 3(a). Depth / C-R 62 62 110 164  1:1 Pre-Paired 2:1 Pre-Proportional CIFAR-10 93.59±0.20 93.97±0.23 CIFAR-100 71.43±0.32 72.19±0.18 72.46±0.10 73.41±0.10 73.00±0.31 74.12±0.22  Table 3: Comparison between 1:1 and 2:1 convolution and ReLU ratio in pre-activation block shown in Figure 4 on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. C-R means the convolution and ReLU ratio. 1:1 Pre-Paired Module and 2:1 Pre-Proportional Module means two different ratios in pre-activation block.  In next section, we will utilize ResNet as baseline to explore the influence of the proportional module. ResNet In this section, we use build block and preactivation bottleneck block for explore the influence of different convolution and ReLU ratio, specifically, we adopt the various combinational method of modules to investigate whether can N:M (N>M) convolution and ReLU module help improve the generalization of networks. We have introduced these models in section Combinatorial Method for Diverse Modules. In next section, we will introduce the experimental results of these modules in different residual module. Building Block Table 3 shows the results of preactivation build block of ResNet on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR100. For 62-layer ResNet, a build block with 2:1 convolution and ReLU ratio (the sequence of BN-Conv-BN-ReLUConv) achieves 93.97 recognition rate that is higher than the corresponding baseline on CIFAR-10. For CIFAR-100, this strategy also achieves the better performance in 62layer ResNet. Then we increase the depth of network to 110 and 164, we find our method improves the recognition rate by 0.9816 and 1.1136 on CIFAR-100. In addition, Figure 7 shows the test recognition rates of pre-activation block in 110-layer ResNet with 1:1 and 2:1 convolution and ReLU ratio as a function of number of epochs on CIFAR-10.  Figure 7: The Accuracy of 110-layer ResNet with Pre-Paired Module and Pre-Proportional Module on CIFAR-10.  Figure 9: The Accuracy of 164-layer ResNet with Bottleneck Pre-Paired Module (baseline) and Bottleneck PreProportional Module on CIFAR-100. Types1, 2 and 3: Without the first, second and third ReLU. Analysis The building block and pre-activation bottleneck block are the most used residual module. From our experimental results, we find that 2:1 convolution and ReLU ratio can help building block achieves the better performance. But for bottleneck block, we find some interesting phenomenon: • With the depth increasing, the influence of single ReLU is reduced.  Figure 8: The Accuracy of 110-layer ResNet with Bottleneck Pre-Paired Module (baseline) and Bottleneck PreProportional Module on CIFAR-100. Types1, 2 and 3: Without the first, second and third ReLU. Among of this, Pre-Paired Module means we adopt 1:1 convolution and ReLU ratio in pre-activation block of ResNet, 2:1 Pre-Proportional Module means we adopt 2:1 convolution and ReLU ratio. As shown in Figure 7, we can find that 2:1 Pre-Proportional Module can further improve the performance of traditional 110-layer ResNet. Pre-activation Bottleneck Block Figure 8 shows the test recognition rates of pre-activation bottleneck block in 110layer ResNet with 1:1 and 3:2 convolution and ReLU ratio as a function of number of epochs on CIFAR-100. Among of this, Bottleneck Pre-Proportional Module means the conventional pre-activation bottleneck block and 3-2 Bottleneck Pre-Proportional Module means we drop one of three ReLUs. So, it has three types, Types1, 2, 3 correspond to drop the first, second and third ReLU, separately, which are shown in Figure 4. As shown in Figure 8, we can find that Types1, 2 of 3-2 Bottleneck Pre-Proportional Module improve the performance of baseline and experimental results show that drop the first ReLU yielded the best accuracy. But the performance of Types3 3-2 Bottleneck Pre-Proportional Module is reduced. But as shown in Figure 9, we can find that although the experiments in 164-layer ResNet have the similar results compared with 110-layer ResNet, drop the third ReLU also improves the accuracy of baseline. In addition, we find the improvements of 164-layer ResNet with 3:2 convolution and ReLU ratio are higher than the improvements of 110-layer ResNet.  • The influence of last ReLU in a pre-activation bottleneck is the most important. For the first phenomenon, we think that with the depth increasing, the redundancy of ReLU become serious, so the influence of single ReLU is reduced. For the last phenomenon, we think that there are two reasons, • The first reason: the first ReLU leads to information loss, which inhibit the learning effect of the first convolutional layer. • The second reason: two convolutional layers before the last ReLU can learn a better transformation of data. And when this transformation of data was passed ReLU, the whole network can acquire the better non-linear information. Deep Fusion Network In this section, we utilize merge and run block to explore the influence of different convolution and ReLU ratio on Deep Fusion Network. The module we used is shown in Figure 5. We find that Type1 Cross Proportional Module achieves the better performance on CIFAR 10 and CIFAR 100, but the improvement is not higher enough. Type2 Cross Proportional Module cannot improve the performance compared with baseline. Furthermore, we utilize a compose of Type1, 2 and 3 Cross Proportional Module shown in Figure 10 to explore more diverse network architectures. We only conducts the experiments in Mix1 Cross Proportional Module. We find the module acquires worse performance than Type2 Cross Proportional Module. Analysis From our experimental results shown on Table 4, we can find that the first ReLU in block is more important than the ReLU after element-wise. We think the first ReLU  Model DFN-MR1 (Zhao et al. 2016b) Type1 Cross Proportional-M Type2 Cross Proportional-M Mix1 Cross Proportional-M  Depth Accuracy CIFAR-100 110 75.59 ± 0.19 110 75.61 ± 0.38 110 74.53 ± 0.80 110 73.70 ± 0.46  DFN-MR1 (Zhao et al. 2016b) Type1 Cross Proportional-M  CIFAR-10 110 95.04 ± 0.06 110 95.26 ± 0.14  Table 4: Comparison between paired module and cross proportional module in DFN-MR1 on CIFAR-100. DFN-MR1 means we adopt the conventional paired module in DFNMR1 model, Type1, 2 Cross Proportional-M mean we adopt the modules shown in Figure 5 in DFN-MR1, Mix1 Cross Proportional-M means we adopt the module shown in Figure 10 in DFN-MR1. Depth means the number of Convolutional layers.  Pa-M  Pr-M  Pa-M  Pr-M  Pa-M  + Pa-M  Pa-M  Pa-M  Pa-M  + Pa-M  Pa-M  Pa-M  +  Pr-M  Pa-M  Pa-M  Pa-M  + Pa-M  Pr-M  Pr-M + Pa-M  Pa-M +  Pa-M  Pr-M  Pa-M  Figure 10: The compose of Type1, 2and 3 cross proportional module. We call these model as Mix1, 2 and 3 Cross Proportional Module.  the better performance in many popular networks. We think, from the first aspect, the redundancy of ReLUs is an important reason why the accuracy of deeper network gets saturated, from another aspect, the module with N:M (N>M) convolution and ReLU can utilize information more effectively since it reduces the information loss in forward and backward prorogation process of ReLU and integrates the non-linear information and linear information into models, which can help many popular networks fit the distribution of data better.  Conclusion In this work, we argue that the conventional paired module with 1:1 convolution and ReLU ratio is not the best choice to design the network architectures. From the perspective of ensemble learning, Leaky ReLU model shown in Figure 3(a) can be considered as an ensemble of networks with different convolution and ReLU ratio. From a simple comparative experiment, we found that N:M (N>M) convolution and ReLU ratio can help network acquire better performance. Furthermore, we conducted different experiments to explore the more suitable proportional module. From our experimental results, we find that the most of proportional module could enrich the expressive power of the network, since it can leverage the linear information. Although the non-linearity preserves the depth property of a network, the linear information still cannot be ignored for learning a better distribution of data. Experimental results show that such a simple design has superior performance than the corresponding baselines. To our knowledge, it is the first time to introduced the proportional module in DCNN models. We think that the simple method can help many researchers design the better network architectures. In addition, for future work, we will utilize Reinforcement Learning to assemble adaptively the Conv and ReLU.  References has an important effect on the expression of the blocks because ReLU controls the non-linearity of the whole block. Furthermore, Type2 Cross Proportional Module and Mix1 Cross Proportional Module cannot acquire the better performance, these experimental results further verify the important of first ReLU.  Discussion Almost all DCNN models including AlexNet, VGG, Inception, ResNet, DFN and DenseNet have the same characteristic: convolutional layer is followed by a ReLU layer. We argue that the paired module with 1:1 convolution and ReLU ratio is not the best choice. Inspired by leaky ReLU, we think the proportional module can help us design a better networks. Thus, we try to investigate the more flexible proportional module to design the better network architectures. From the perspective of ensemble learning, Leaky ReLU model shown in Figure 3 revels that the N:M (N>M) convolution and ReLU ratio may be a better module. In our experiments, we find that the proportional module acquires  [Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017] Bacon, P.-L.; Harb, J.; and Precup, D. 2017. The option-critic architecture. [Chatfield et al. 2014] Chatfield, K.; Simonyan, K.; Vedaldi, A.; and Zisserman, A. 2014. Return of the devil in the details: Delving deep into convolutional nets. In BMVC. [Chollet 2016] Chollet, F. 2016. Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02357. [Clevert, Unterthiner, and Hochreiter 2015] Clevert, D.-A.; Unterthiner, T.; and Hochreiter, S. 2015. Fast and accurate deep network learning by exponential linear units (elus). arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07289. [Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio ] Glorot, X.; Bordes, A.; and Bengio, Y. Deep sparse rectifier neural networks. [He et al. 2015] He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; and Sun, J. 2015. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 1026– 1034.  [He et al. 2016a] He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; and Sun, J. 2016a. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In CVPR, 770–778. [He et al. 2016b] He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; and Sun, J. 2016b. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 770–778. [He et al. 2016c] He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; and Sun, J. 2016c. Identity mappings in deep residual networks. In ECCV, 630–645. [Ioffe and Szegedy 2015] Ioffe, S., and Szegedy, C. 2015. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 448–456. [Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012] Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, I.; and Hinton, G. E. 2012. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In NIPS, 1097–1105. [LeCun et al. 1998] LeCun, Y.; Bottou, L.; Bengio, Y.; and Haffner, P. 1998. Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE 86(11):2278– 2324. [Maas, Hannun, and Ng ] Maas, A. L.; Hannun, A. Y.; and Ng, A. Y. Rectifier nonlinearities improve neural network acoustic models. [Nair and Hinton 2010] Nair, V., and Hinton, G. E. 2010. Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines. In ICML, 807–814. [Russakovsky et al. 2015] Russakovsky, O.; Deng, J.; Su, H.; Krause, J.; Satheesh, S.; Ma, S.; Huang, Z.; Karpathy, A.; Khosla, A.; Bernstein, M.; et al. 2015. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. IJCV 115(3):211–252. [Shang ] Shang, W. Understanding and improving convolutional neural networks via concatenated rectified linear units. [Simonyan and Zisserman 2015] Simonyan, K., and Zisserman, A. 2015. Very deep convolutional networks for largescale image recognition. In ICLR. [Stewart and Ermon ] Stewart, R., and Ermon, S. Label-free supervision of neural networks with physics and domain knowledge. [Szegedy et al. 2015a] Szegedy, C.; Liu, W.; Jia, Y.; Sermanet, P.; Reed, S.; Anguelov, D.; Erhan, D.; Vanhoucke, V.; and Rabinovich, A. 2015a. Going deeper with convolutions. In CVPR, 1–9. [Szegedy et al. 2015b] Szegedy, C.; Liu, W.; Jia, Y.; Sermanet, P.; Reed, S.; Anguelov, D.; Erhan, D.; Vanhoucke, V.; and Rabinovich, A. 2015b. Going deeper with convolutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 1–9. [Xie et al. 2016] Xie, S.; Girshick, R.; Dollár, P.; Tu, Z.; and He, K. 2016. Aggregated residual transformations for deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05431. [Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2016] Zagoruyko, S., and Komodakis, N. 2016. Wide residual networks. In BMVC.  [Zeiler and Fergus 2014] Zeiler, M. D., and Fergus, R. 2014. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In ECCV, 818–833. [Zhang et al. 2017] Zhang, T.; Qi, G.-J.; Xiao, B.; and Wang, J. 2017. Interleaved group convolutions for deep neural networks. [Zhao et al. 2016a] Zhao, L.; Wang, J.; Li, X.; Tu, Z.; and Zeng, W. 2016a. On the connection of deep fusion to ensembling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.07718. [Zhao et al. 2016b] Zhao, L.; Wang, J.; Li, X.; Tu, Z.; and Zeng, W. 2016b. On the connection of deep fusion to ensembling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.07718.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
