Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_5169

Abstract:
The Packing While Traveling Problem S. Polyakovskiya,∗, F. Neumanna a School  arXiv:1512.08831v2 [cs.DS] 21 Mar 2017  of Computer Science The University of Adelaide Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.  Abstract This paper introduces the Packing While Traveling problem as a new non-linear knapsack problem. Given are a set of cities that have a set of items of distinct profits and weights and a vehicle that may collect the items when visiting all the cities in a fixed order. Each selected item contributes its profit, but produces a transportation cost relative to its weight. The problem asks to find a subset of the items such that the total gain is maximized. We investigate constrained and unconstrained versions of the problem and show that both are N P-hard. We propose a pre-processing scheme that decreases the size of instances making them easier for computation. We provide lower and upper bounds based on mixed-integer programming (MIP) adopting the ideas of piecewise linear approximation. Furthermore, we introduce two exact approaches: one is based on MIP employing linearization technique, and another is a branch-infer-andbound (BIB) hybrid approach that compounds the upper bound procedure with a constraint programming model strengthened with customized constraints. Our experimental results show the effectiveness of our exact and approximate solutions in terms of solution quality and computational time. Keywords: Combinatorial optimization; non-linear knapsack problem; linearization technique; piecewise approximation; hybrid optimization.  1. Introduction Generally, the traditional statements of routing problems studied in the operations research literature base the computation of transportation costs on a linear function. However, in real practice, it might be necessary to deal with costs that have a nonlinear nature. For example, the study on the factors affecting truck fuel economy published by GOODYEAR (2008) reveals that vehicle miles per gallon decreases as gross combination weight increases assuming speed ∗ Corresponding  author Email addresses: sergey.polyakovskiy@adelaide.edu.au (S. Polyakovskiy), frank.neumann@adelaide.edu.au (F. Neumann)  Preprint submitted to Elsevier  March 22, 2017  is maintained constant. In other words, a heavily loaded truck will use much more fuel than a lightly loaded one, and this relation is not linear. In recent years, the research on dependence of fuel consumption on different factors, like a travel velocity, a load’s weight, and vehicle’s technical specifications, in various Vehicle Routing Problems (VRP) has gained attention from the operations research community. Mainly, this interest is motivated by a wish to be more accurate with the evaluation of transportation costs, and therefore to stay closer to reality. Indeed, an advanced precision would immediately benefit to transportation efficiency measured by the classic petroleum-based costs and the novel greenhouse gas emission costs. Furthermore, the proper estimation of costs and its computational simplicity should evolve optimization approaches and enhance their performance. In VRP in general, and in the Green Vehicle Routing Problems (GVRP) that consider energy consumption in particular, given are a depot and a set of customers that are to be served by a set of vehicles collecting (or delivering) required items. While the set of items is fixed, the goal is to find a route for each vehicle such that the total size of assigned items does not exceed the vehicle’s capacity and the total transportation cost over all vehicles is minimized. We refer to the book of Toth & Vigo (2014) and the recent surveys of Laporte (2009) and Lin et al. (2014) for an extended overview on VRP and GVRP. Oppositely to VRP and GVRP, we consider the situation of a single vehicle whose route is given, but items can be either collected or skipped. This situation gives rise to a problem that we designate as Packing While Traveling (PWT). In the PWT, the items are distributed among the cities. The vehicle visits all the cities in a specific order and collects the items of its choice. Each item has a profit and a weight, and the vehicle may collect any unless the total weight of chosen items exceeds the vehicle’s capacity. The vehicle travels between two cities with a velocity that depends on the weight of the items collected in all the previously attended cities. Being selected, an item contributes its profit to the overall reward. However, its weight slows down the vehicle. This leads to a transportation cost depended on a traveling time, and therefore has a negative impact on the reward. The problem asks to find a packing plan that maximizes the difference between the total profit of the selected items and their transportation cost. The PWT arises as a baseline problem in some practical applications. For example, a supplier having a single truck has to decide on goods to purchase going through a fixed route in order to maximize profitability of future sales. Specifically, there might exist only a single major route that a vehicle has to follow while any deviations from it in order to visit particular cities on the way may be negligible with respect to the length of the route. The importance of items may be variable and affected by a specific demand, therefore the profits of items can be altered accordingly from trip to trip. Obviously, PWT is a part of a larger picture as a potential subproblem in various VRP with non-linear costs. Indeed, the objective function of the PWT studied here is constructed similarly to one that may be based on the dependence between a fuel cost to drive a distance unit and a gross combination weight as provided in GOODYEAR (2008). 2  The PWT originates from the Traveling Thief Problem (TTP) introduced by Bonyadi et al. (2013). The TTP combines the classical Traveling Salesperson Problem (TSP) with the 0-1 Knapsack Problem (KP) and allows permutation of the order of the cities. The PWT uses the same cost function as the TTP, and the only difference is the assumption of a fixed route. In this sense, any approach to the PWT can also be applied to the TTP as a subroutine to solve its packing component. The TTP has been introduced and studied mainly by the evolutionary computation community during the last few years. A benchmark set based on the TSP and KP instances has been presented in Polyakovskiy et al. (2014). Approaches to handle the TTP include various meta-heuristics such as evolutionary algorithms, randomized local search and co-evolutionary approaches. Mei et al. (2015) solve the problem approximately with the twostage memetic algorithm, which consists of a tour improvement stage and an item picking stage. For the former stage, the local search operators have been adopted different to those that are traditional for the TSP. The second stage is solved either by a constructive heuristic or by means of genetic programming. Mei et al. (2016) propose two meta-heuristics for TTP: one is the cooperative co-evolution approach that solves the sub-problems separately and transfers the information between them in each generation, and another is the memetic algorithm that solves TTP as a whole. Faulkner et al. (2015) provide multiple constructive heuristics where solutions are obtained by finding a near-optimal TSP tour by applying the Chained Lin-Kernighan heuristic (Applegate et al. (2003)) to the underlying TSP part first, and then selecting a subset of items heuristically. The results produced by the heuristics have been compared then to the same approach where items are selected now by the approximate MIPbased approach of Polyakovskiy & Neumann (2015). They conclude that, when giving the same time limit, constructive heuristics perform generally better since are able to check more TSP tours as the packing part can be solved much faster than the MIP-based approach does. Indeed, existing approaches solve the TTP by fixing one of the components, usually the TSP, and then tackling the KP. Lourenço et al. (2016) follow in a different direction and propose an evolutionary algorithm that addresses both sub-problems at the same time. Their experimental results show that solving the TTP as a whole creates conditions for discovering solutions with enhanced quality, and that fixing one of the components might compromise the overall results. Recently, the formulation of the TTP, which allows to skip cities and to visit one city by multiple thieves, has been investigated by Chand & Wagner (2016). To our best knowledge, no exact approach has been proposed for the TTP so far. Vansteenwegen et al. (2011) give a review on the so-called orienteering problem that is somehow related to TTP. There a set of vertices is given, each with a score, and the goal is to determine a path, limited in length, that visits some vertices and maximizes the sum of the collected scores. Feillet et al. (2005) present a classification of traveling salesman problems with profits (TSPs with profits) and survey the existing literature on this field. TSPs with profits are a generalization of the TSP where it is not necessary to visit all vertices. A profit is associated with each vertex. The overall goal is the simultaneous optimization 3  of the collected profit and the travel costs. In this sense, TTP has some relation to the Prize Collecting TSP (Balas (1989)) where a decision is to be made on whether to visit a given city. In the Prize Collecting TSP, a city-dependent reward is obtained when a city is visited and a city-dependent penalty has to be paid for each non-visited city. In contrast to this, TTP requires that each given city is visited. Furthermore, each city has a set of available items with weights and profits and a decision has to be made on which items to pick. TTP also relates to the traveling salesman subtour problem studied by Westerlund et al. (2006), where given is an undirected graph with edge costs and both revenues and weights on the vertices, and the goal is to find a subtour that includes a depot vertex, satisfies a knapsack constraint on the vertex weights, and that minimizes edge costs minus vertex revenues along the subtour. Beham et al. (2015) discuss optimization strategies for integrated knapsack and traveling salesman problems and study the Lagrangian decomposition to the knapsack constrained profitable tour problem. In substance, the PWT considers a trade-off between the profits of collected items and the transportation cost affected by their total weight. It represents a class of nonlinear knapsack problems. Knapsack problems belong to the core combinatorial optimization problems and have been frequently studied in the literature from the theoretical as well as experimental perspective (Garey & Johnson (1979); Martello & Toth (1990); Kellerer et al. (2004)). While the classical knapsack problem asks for maximization of a linear pseudo-Boolean function under a single linear constraint, different generalizations and variations have been investigated such as the multiple knapsack problem (Chekuri & Khanna (2005)) and multi-objective knapsack problems (Erlebach et al. (2001)). Furthermore, knapsack problems with nonlinear objective functions have been studied in the literature from different perspectives (Bretthauer & Shetty (2002)). Hochbaum (1995) considers the problem of maximizing a separable concave objective function subject to a packing constraint and provided an FPTAS. An exact approach for a nonlinear knapsack problem with a nonlinear term penalizing the excessive use of the knapsack capacity has been given by Elhedhli (2005). Recently, Wu et al. (2016) have investigated the role of the rent rate in the PWT, which is an important parameter in combining the total profit of selected items and the associated transportation cost. Specifically, the rent rate is a constant defining how much one needs to pay per unit time of traveling by the vehicle. The product of the rent rate and the total traveling time constitutes the transportation cost. In the TTP, when the value of the rent rate is small, searching for an efficient solution of the knapsack component becomes prioritized. From another hand, when the value of the rent rate is large, the TSP part of the TTP starts to play a dominating role. In this paper, the rent rate is formally introduced in Section 2 along with the PWT’s statement. The theoretical and experimental investigations of Wu et al. (2016) show how the values of the rent rate influence the difficulty of a given problem instance through the items that can be excluded by the pre-processing scheme presented in this research. Furthermore, their investigations show how to create instances that are hard to be solved by simple evolutionary algorithms. The preliminary ver4  sion of our study on the PWT has appeared in Polyakovskiy & Neumann (2015). Here, we significantly improve our earlier results. We introduce an upper bound technique that along with the enhanced pre-processing scheme allows to solve a lager range of instances to optimality and to dramatically decrease running times. Furthermore, we introduce a hybrid approach that combines constraint programming with the upper bound procedure. It is superior on many test instances and produces optimal results in a very short time. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We give the formal statement of the PWT in Section 2 and discuss its complexity in Section 3. Section 4 addresses sequencing constraints that are repeatedly used later on in our approaches. In Section 5, we provide a pre-processing scheme which allows to identify unprofitable and compulsory items, and therefore decrease the size of the PWT’s instances. Section 6 explains lower and upper bound techniques. In Sections 7 and 8, we introduce our two exact approaches: one that is based on MIP, and a hybrid one that adopts a branch-infer-and-bound paradigm. Finally, we report on the results of our experimental investigations in Section 9 and finish with some conclusions. 2. Problem Statement The Packing While Traveling problem can be formally stated as follows. Given is a route N = (1, 2, . . . , n + 1) as a sequence of n + 1 unique cities and a set M of m items distributed among first n cities. Distance di > 0 between two consecutive cities (i, i + 1) is known, for any 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Every city i contains a set of distinct items Mi = {ei1 , . . . , eimi }, M = ∪ni=1 Mi . Each item eik ∈ M has a positive integer profit pik and a weight wik , 1 ≤ k ≤ mi . There is a single vehicle that visits all the cities in the order of a route N . The vehicle may collect any item in any city unless the total weight of selected items exceeds its capacity W . Collecting an item eik leads to a profit contribution pik , but increases the transportation cost as the weight wik slows down the vehicle. The vehicle travels along (i, i + 1) with velocity vi ∈ [υmin , υmax ] which depends on the weight of the items collected in the first i cities. When the vehicle is empty, it runs with its maximal velocity υmax . And vice verse, it runs with minimal velocity υmin > 0 when is completely full. The objective is to find a subset of M such that the difference between the profit of the selected items and the transportation cost is maximized. To state the problem precisely, we give a nonlinear binary integer program m formulation. Let a binary decision vector x ∈ {0, 1} represent a solution of the problem such that xik = 1 iff eik is selected. Then the travel time ti = dvii along (i, i + 1) is the ratio of the distance di and the current velocity υi = υmax − ν  mj i X X  wjk xjk  j=1 k=1  which is determined by the weight of the items collected in cities 1, . . . , i. The −υmin is constant and defined by the input parameters. The value ν = υmaxW 5  velocity depends on the weight of the chosen items linearly. The overall transportation cost is given by the sum of the transportation costs along all the edges (i, i + 1), 1 ≤ i ≤ n, multiplied by a given rent rate R > 0. In summary, the problem is given by the following nonlinear binary program (PWTc ):    max  m n X i X  pik xik −   i=1 k=1  Rdi υmax − ν  mj i X X  wjk xjk         (1)  j=1 k=1  s.t.  mi n X X  wik xik ≤ W  i=1 k=1  xik ∈ {0, 1} , eik ∈ M  Here, (1) is a non-monotone submodular function. u c P We also consider the unconstrained version PWT of PWT where W ≥ eik ∈M wik such that every selection of items yields a feasible solution. Given a real value B, the decision variant of PWTc and PWTu has to answer the question whether the value of (1) is at least B. 3. Complexity of the Problem In this section, we investigate the complexity of PWTc and PWTu . PWTc is N P-hard as it is a generalization of the classical N P-hard 0-1 knapsack problem (Martello & Toth (1990)). In fact, assigning zero either to the rate R or to every distance value di in PWTc , we obtain the KP. We demonstrate that in contrast to the KP the unconstrained version PWTu of the problem remains N P-hard. We show this by reducing the N P-complete subset sum problem (SSP) to the decision variant of PWTu which asks whether there is a solution with objective value at least B. The input for SSP is given by m positive integers S = {s1 , . . . , sm } and a positive integer Pm Q. The question is m whether there exists a vector x ∈ {0, 1} such that k=1 sk xk = Q. Theorem 1. PWTu is N P-hard. Proof. We start with encoding the instance of SSP given by the set of integers S and the integer Q as the instance I of PWTu having two cities. The first city contains all the m items while the second city is a destination point free of items. We set the Pmdistance between two cities as d1 = 1, the capacity of the vehicle as W = k=1 sk , and set p1k = w1k = sk , 1 ≤ k ≤ m. Subsequently, we set 2 υmax = 2 and υmin = 1 which implies ν = 1/W and define R∗ = W (2 − Q/W ) . Consider the nonlinear function fR∗ : [0, W ] → R defined as fR∗ (w) = w −  6  R∗ . 2 − w/W  fR∗ defined on the interval [0, W ] is a continuous p concave function that reaches its unique maximum in the point w∗ = W ·(2− R∗ /W ) = Q , i.e. fR∗ (w) < fR∗ (w∗ ) for w ∈ [0, W ] and w 6= w∗ . Then fR∗ (Q) is the maximum value for fR∗ when being restricted to integer input, too. Therefore, we set B = fR∗ (Q) and the objective function for PWTu is given by gR∗ (x) =  m X  p1k xk −  k=1  2−  1 W  R∗ m X  . w1k xk  k=1  m There exists an such that gR∗ (x) ≥ B = fR∗ (Q) = 2 (Q − W ) iff P Pmx ∈ {0, 1} P m m s x = w x = k k 1k k k=1 k=1 k=1 p1k xk = Q. Therefore, the instance of SSP has answer YES iff the optimal solution of the PWTu instance I has objective value at least B = fR∗ (Q). Obviously, the reduction can be carried out in polynomial time which completes the proof.  4. Sequencing Constraints In this section, we derive a set of constraints that speed up the reasoning to be done within our algorithms. Specifically, the constraints establish priority among the items positioned in the same or different cities of the route. The first portion of the constraints results from the fact that item eil in city i should not be selected prior to another item eik , 1 ≤ l, k ≤ mi and l 6= k, positioned in the same city when the condition (pil < pik ) ∧ (wil ≥ wik ) holds. This constraint (SCi ) has the form of xil ≤ xik , l 6= k, eil , eik ∈ Mi : (pil < pik ) ∧ (wil ≥ wik ) .  Let ∆ji l denote a lower bound on the cost of transportation of item ejl from city j to succeeding city i computed as  ∆ji l =R    i−1 X    da    a=j  1 υmax − ν  wjl +  a X b=1  !− wbc    ,  a X c υmax − ν wb 1  b=1  where wbc is the total weight of the compulsory items collected in city b. Compulsory items must be a part of an optimal solution (see Section 5 for details). Specifically, ∆ji l is based on the difference between traveling with all the compulsory items and item ejl and traveling with all the compulsory items only. In this case, no other items are picked up and the vehicle runs with the maximal feasible velocity that it may achieve on each of the edges. Then another set of constraints uses the fact that item ejl in city j should not  be selected prior to item eik in city i such that the condition pjl − ∆ji < p ik ∧ (wjl ≥ wik ) holds. l This constraint (SCii ) takes the form of xjl ≤ xik , j < i, ejl ∈ Mj , eik ∈ Mi :  7      pjl − ∆ji l < pik ∧ wjl ≥ wik .  ji  Similarly, let ∆l denote an upper bound on the cost of transportation of item ejl from city j to succeeding city i computed as    ji  ∆l = R  i−1 X    da    a=j  1 υmax − ν · min  a X  !− wbmax , W  υmax − ν  min  b=1  1 a X  ! wbmax , W  − wjl    ! ,   b=1  where wbmax is the total weight of all the items existing in city b. Specifically, ji ∆l represents the difference between traveling having the vehicle loaded as much as possible and doing so but leaving a free space just for item ejl . In this case, as many items as possible are picked up and the vehicle travels with the least feasible velocity that it may achieve on each of the edges. Then one more set of constraints arises from the fact that ik in city  i should not  item eji be selected prior to item ejl in city j such that pjl − ∆l > pik ∧ (wjl ≤ wik ) holds. This constraint (SCiii ) has the following form: xjl ≥ xik , j < i, ejl ∈ Mj , eik ∈ Mi :      ji pjl − ∆l > pik ∧ wjl ≤ wik .  5. Pre-processing In this section, we introduce a pre-processing scheme to identify items of a given instance I that can be either directly included or discarded. Excluding such items from solution process can significantly speed up algorithms. We distinguish between two kinds of items that are identified in the pre-processing: compulsory and unprofitable items. We call an item compulsory if its inclusion in any feasible solution increases the objective function value, and call an item unprofitable if it does not do that. Therefore, an optimal solution must contain all compulsory items while all unprofitable items must be discarded. In order to identify compulsory and unprofitable items, we consider the total transportation cost that a set of items produces. Definition 1 (Total Transportation Cost). Let O ⊆ M be a subset of items. We define the total transportation cost along route N when the items of O are selected as tO = R ·  n X i=1  di υmax − ν  Pi  j=1  P  ejk ∈Oj  wjk  ,  where Oj = Mj ∩ O, 1 ≤ j ≤ n, is the subset of O selected in city j. Based on the given instance I, we can identify unprofitable items for PWTc according to the following proposition. c Proposition 1 (Unprofitable Item, PWT Case). Let I be an arbitrary  c instance of PWT . If pik ≤ R t{eik } − t∅ , then eik is an unprofitable item.  8   Proof. We assume that pik ≤ R t{eik } − t∅ holds. Let M ∗ ⊆ PM \{eik } denote an arbitrary subset of items excluding eik such that wik + ejl ∈M ∗ wjl ≤ W holds. We consider tM ∗ ∪{eik } and tM ∗ . Since the velocity depends linearly on the weight of collected items and the travel time ti = di /vi along (i, i + 1) depends inversely proportional on the velocity vi , the inequality t{eik } − t∅ ≤ tM ∗ ∪{eik } − tM ∗ holds. Therefore, pik ≤ R tM ∗ ∪{eik } − tM ∗ holds for any M ∗ ⊆ M \ {eik } that completes the proof. Proposition 1 helps to determine whether the profit pik of item eik is large enough to cover the least incremental transportation cost it incurs when selected in the packing plan x. In this case, the least incremental transportation cost results from accepting the selection of eik as only selected item in x versus accepting empty x as a solution. It is important to note that Proposition 1 can reduce PWTc problem to PWTu by excluding items so that the sum of the weights of all remaining items does not exceed the weight bound W . In this case, we can further refine the set of items by searching for those ones that must be a part of any solution of PWTc . We identify compulsory items for the unconstrained case according to the following proposition. u Proposition 2 (Compulsory Item, PWT  Case). Let I be an arbitrary u instance of PWT . If pik > R tM − tM \{eik } , then eik is a compulsory item.  Proof. We work under the assumption that pik > R tM − tM \{eik } holds. In the case of PWTu , all the existing items can fit into the vehicle at once and all subsets O ⊆ M are feasible. Let M ∗ ⊆ M \ {eik } be an arbitrary subset of items excluding eik , and consider tM \M ∗ and tM \M ∗ \{eik } , respectively. Since the velocity depends linearly on the weight of collected items and the travel time ti = di /vi along (i, i +1) depends inversely proportional on the  velocity vi , we have tM − tM \{eik }  ≥ tM \M ∗ − tM \M ∗ \{eik } . This implies that pik > R tM \M ∗ − tM \M ∗ \{eik } holds for any subset M \ M ∗ of items which completes the proof.  For the unconstrained variant PWTu , Proposition 2 is valid to determine whether item eik is able to cover by its pik the largest possible incremental transportation cost it may generate when has been selected in x. Here, the largest possible incremental transportation cost is computed with respect to the worst case scenario when all the possible items are selected along with eik , and therefore the vehicle has the maximal possible load and the least velocity, versus accepting all the items but eik . In the unconstrained case, having compulsory items included according to Proposition 2, we may identify some more unprofitable items. Indeed, compulsory items contribute to the collected weight and therefore limit the potential positive contribution of other items. As a result, some of the items may become unprofitable after a number of compulsory items has been detected. We find unprofitable items for PWTu with respect to the following proposition.  9  Proposition 3 (Unprofitable Item, PWTu Case). Let I be an arbitrary in stance of PWTu and M c be the set of all compulsory items. If pik ≤ R tM c ∪{eik } − tM c , then eik is an unprofitable item.  Proof. We assume that pik ≤ R tM c ∪{eik } − tM c holds. Let M ∗ ⊆ M \ {M c ∪ {eik }} be an arbitrary subset of M that does not include any item of M c ∪ {eik } and consider tM c ∪M ∗ and tM c ∪M ∗ ∪{eik } . Since the velocity depends linearly on the weight of collected items and the travel time ti = di /vi along (i, i + 1) depends inversely proportional  on the velocity vi , we have tM c ∪{eik } − tM c ≤  tM c ∪M ∗ ∪{eik } − tM c ∪M ∗ . Hence, we have pik ≤ R tM c ∪M ∗ ∪{eik } − tM c ∪M ∗ for any M ∗ ⊆ M \ {M c ∪ {eik }} which completes the proof. Proposition 3 determines for PWTu whether the profit pik of item eik is large enough to cover the least incremental transportation cost resulted from its selection along with all known compulsory items. Specifically, in Proposition 3 the list incremental transportation cost follows from accepting the selection of eik along with the set of compulsory items M c in x versus accepting just the selection of M c as a solution. One can see that Proposition 3 is a special case of Proposition 1 with only the difference that it has t∅ replaced by tM c . It takes only a linear time to check any instance of PWTc for unprofitable items with respect to Proposition 1. In fact, each item eik can be checked in a constant time if the total length of the path from city i to city n + 1 is known. When dealing with PWTu , Propositions 2 and 3 can be applied iteratively to the remaining set of items until no compulsory or unprofitable item is found. The running time of all the rounds of the search is bounded  by O nm2 . Our preliminary investigation has shown that it is rather timeconsuming to solve large and even moderate-sized unconstrained instances due to the time spent on computing the incremental transportation cost for each of the items separately as the Propositions 2 and 3 advise. Indeed, we cannot perform the pre-processing step reasonably fast with respect to the time limits we apply in Section 9. Obviously, slow pre-processing can easily stultify all benefits of its use. To manage this, we use the reasoning similar to one that the sequencing constraints adopt in Section 4. Specifically, we deduce whether item eik is compulsory or unprofitable from the answer concerning item ejl for which it has been already obtained. Algorithm  1 sketches the pseudocode of the enhanced algorithm, which runs in O m3 , but operates up to two orders of magnitude faster in practice and allows to handle the largest instances of the test suite (see Section 9 for details). The pre-processing algorithm works as follows. The loop (6-25) searches for compulsory items and the loop (30-53) searches for unprofitable ones. Once either no compulsory or no unprofitable item has been found within the corresponding loop, the algorithm terminates (cf. lines 26 and 54). We use two Boolean variables µuik and µcik that take value true to mark item eik as unprofitable and compulsory, respectively. Both values are initialized as µuik = Pi µcik = f alse. Subsequently, variable wmax = b=1 wbmax computes the maxii 10  mal possible weight of the items that canPbe collected in city i and in all the i preceding cities. Similarly, variable wci = b=1 wbc computes the total weight of compulsory items existing in city i and in all the preceding cities. We use wmax i and wci to calculate, respectively, the largest possible incremental cost cmax and the minimal possible incremental cost cmin for each of the items in the loops of our algorithm (cf. lines 8-25 and lines 32-53). Furthermore, to make reasoning on the properties of item eik with respect to the known properties of item ejl , we introduce the dummy profit p0jl of ejl . Specifically, when item ejl has been shown to be either compulsory or not, or either unprofitable or not, p0jl defines how large or small profit pik must be with respect to computed cmax or cmin to let eik have the same property as ejl (cf. lines 12, 15, 36, and 39). For example, when item eik is proved to be compulsory independently of any another item (cf. line 25), its p0ik is set to cmax (cf. line 24). This means that eik would be compulsory even if its profit was less than pik , but mainly greater than cmax . Therefore, to become a compulsory item as pik is, another item, say ei0 k0 in city i0 : i0 ≤ i, should have a weight that is smaller or equal to wik and its profit pi0 k0 minus the corresponding largest possible incremental cost must be strictly larger than p0ik (cf. line 15). Similarly, when eik is proved to be not a compulsory item independently of any other item, its p0ik is also set to cmax (cf. line 24). This is because eik would not be compulsory even if its profit was larger than pik , but mainly less or equal to cmax . Therefore, to stay as not a compulsory item as pik is, another item, say ei0 k0 in city i0 : i0 ≤ i, should have a weight that is greater or equal to wik and its profit pi0 k0 minus the corresponding least possible incremental cost must be at most p0ik (cf. line 12). The same reasoning is to be done for the case when eik is proved as a compulsory item according to already known compulsory item ejl . Here, p0ik is set to p0jl +cmax where cmax plays a role of the largest cost of transportation of eik from city i to succeeding city j (cf. line 17). In such a way, when considering other items in the future iterations, they are compared to item ejl through the current item eik since eik implicitly points to ejl using the assigned dummy profit p0ik . The same reasoning is valid for proving eik to be not a compulsory item according to already known noncompulsory item ejl where p0ik is set to p0jl + cmin (cf. line 13). In a similar way, we proceed with deduction of unprofitable items in the loop (30-53). Utilizing the dummy profits of items significantly strengthen deductions by relating the items to one of the items’ group rapidly. Before applying our approaches given in Section 6, Section 7, and 8, we remove all unprofitable and compulsory items from the set M using these pre-processing steps. 6. Lower and Upper Bounds In practice, approximation of nonlinear terms is an efficient way to deal with them. Although an approximate solution is likely to be different from an exact one, it might be close enough and obtainable in a reasonable computational time. In this section, we propose lower and upper bound techniques based on mixed-integer programming (MIP) adopting the ideas of piecewise linear approximation. 11  Algorithm 1: The Pre-processing Algorithm c 1 initialize the indicator variables µu ik = µik = f alse for each item eik ∈ M ; 2 while true do 3 set f lag ← f alse; 4 for each city i from 1 to n do 5 calculate wmax ; i 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19  for each city i from n to 1 do   c for each item eik ∈ Mi : ¬ µu ik ∨ µik do cmax ← 0; cmin ← 0; initialize f lag 0 ← f alse; for each city j from i to n do for each item ejl ∈ Mj : ¬µu ∧ ((i 6= j) ∨ (k > l)) do jl       0 if ¬µc jl ∧ wik ≥ wjl ∧ pik − cmin ≤ pjl then p0ik ← p0jl + cmin ; f lag 0 ← true; break;     0 if µc jl ∧ wik ≤ wjl ∧ pik − cmax > pjl then c µik ← true; p0ik ← p0jl + cmax ; f lag ← true; f lag 0 ← true; break;  20  if f lag 0 then break;  21  cmin ← cmin + Rdj   22  1  1  ; cmax ← cmax + Rdj  − υmax −νwmax υmax −ν wmax −wik j j    23 24 25  if ¬f lag then break; set f lag ← f alse; for each city i from 1 to n do calculate wc i;  30  for each city i from n to 1 do  33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43    c for each item eik ∈ Mi : ¬ µu ik ∨ µik do cmax ← 0; cmin ← 0; initialize f lag 0 ← f alse; for each city j from i to n do for each item ejl ∈ Mj : ¬µc ∧ ((i 6= j) ∨ (k > l)) do jl       0 if ¬µu jl ∧ wik ≤ wjl ∧ pik − cmax > pjl then 0 0 pik ← pjl + cmax ; f lag 0 ← true; break;     0 if µu jl ∧ wik ≥ wjl ∧ pik − cmin ≤ pjl then µu ← true; ik p0ik ← p0jl + cmin ; f lag ← true; f lag 0 ← true; break;  44  if f lag 0 then break;  45  cmin ← cmin + Rdj   46 47  if cmin ≥ pik then µu ik ← true; p0ik ← cmin ;      48 49 50 51  52 53 54    if f lag 0 then break; p0ik ← cmax ; if cmax < pik then µc ik ← true; f lag ← true;  26 27 28 29  31 32    1 1 ;  −  υmax −νwc υmax −ν wc +wik j j   1 1 ;   − υmax −νwc υmax −ν wc +wik j j  f lag ← true; f lag 0 ← true; break;     1  1  ; cmax ← cmax + Rdj  − υmax −νwmax υmax −ν wmax −wik j j if f lag 0 then break; p0ik ← cmin ; if ¬f lag then break;  12  6.1. Lower Bound  τ τ τ τ  τ  τ  τ  τ  a)  b)  Figure 1: Piecewise linear approximation of t (υ) = 1/υ  Consider an arbitrary edge (i, i + 1) and the traveling time t0i ∈ [tmin , tmax ] per distance unit along it, for any i = 1, . . . , n. Here, tmin = 1/υmax and tmax = 1/υmin bound t0i from below and from above, respectively. We partition the interval [tmin , tmax ] into λ equal-sized sub-intervals and determine thus a set T = {τ1 , . . . , τλ } of straight line segments to approximate the curve of the function t (υ) as illustrated in Figure 1a. Each segment τ ∈ T is characterized by its minimal velocity υτmin and its corresponding maximum traveling time per , and by its maximum velocity υτmax and its corresponding distance unit tmax τ  min max min , t and . Specifically, υ minimum traveling time per distance unit t τ τ τ  max min are the endpoints of segment τ referred to as breakpoints. We υτ , tτ   approximate t0i by the linear combination of tmin and tmax if υi ∈ υτmin , υτmax . τ τ Our lower bound MIP-based model uses three types of variables in addition to the binary decision variable xik for each item eik ∈ M from Section 2. Let wi be a real variable equal to the total weight of selected items when traveling along the (i, i + 1). Let pi be a real variable equal to the difference of the total profit of selected items and their total transportation cost when delivering them to city i + 1. Let Ti ⊆ T , 1 ≤ i ≤ n, denote a set of possible segments i.e.  may relate,  to whichvelocity υi of the vehicle Ti = τ ∈ T : υτmin ∈ υimin , υimax ∨ υτmax ∈ υimin , υimax , where υimax = Pi υmax − ν j=1 wjc is the maximal possible velocity that the vehicle can move along (i,i + 1) when packing in all compulsory items only, and υimin = υmax −  Pi max ν · min , W the minimum possible velocity along (i, i + 1) afj=1 wj ter having packed in all items available in cities 1, . . . , i. Actually, we have   υi ∈ υimin , υimax . When υi ∈ υτmin , υτmax for τ ∈ T , any point in between endpoints of τ is a weighted sum of them. Let Bi denote a set of all break13  points that the linear segments of Ti have. Then the value of the real variable yib ∈ [0, 1] is a weight assigned to the breakpoint Pb ∈ Bi associated with the pair of values (υ , t ). When the linear combination b b b∈B P Pi υb yib under the constraint 0 y = 1 equals υ , the linear combination i b∈Bi ib b∈Bi tb yib overestimates ti . This underestimates the resulting profit minus the total transportation cost and gives a valid lower bound for PWTc (and PWTu ) that can be obtained by solving the following linear mixed 0-1 program (LBλ ): max p LB (x) = pn s.t. pi = pi−1 +  pci  (2) X  +  pik xik − Rdi  eik ∈Mi  X  wi = wi−1 + wic +  X  tb yib , i = 1, . . . , n  (3)  b∈Bi  wik xik , i = 1, . . . , n  (4)  eik ∈Mi  νwi +  X  υb yib = υmax , i = 1, . . . , n  (5)  b∈Bi  X  yib = 1, i = 1, . . . , n  (6)  b∈Bi  wn ≤ W  (7)  xik ∈ {0, 1} , eik ∈ M  (8)  yib ∈ [0, 1] , i = 1, . . . , n, b ∈ Bi  (9)  pi ∈ R, i = 1, . . . , n  (10)  wi ∈ R≥0 , i = 1, . . . , n  (11)  p0 = w0 = 0  (12)  The value of λ in LBλ sets its precision. Indeed, the precision of the lower bound may be increased at the cost of a running time as this also increases the number of segments, and thus raises the number of y-type variables to be involved. Equation (2) defines the objective function p LB (x) as pn that is the difference of the total profit of selected items delivered to city n + 1 and their total transportation cost. Since the transportation cost is approximated in LBλ , the actual objective value for PWTc (and PWTu ) should be computed on the values of the decision variables of vector x. The resulting value then is also a valid lower bound. Equation (3) computes the difference pi of the total profit of selected items and their total transportation cost when arriving at city i + 1 by summing up the value P of pi−1 concerning (i − 1, i), the profit of compulsory items pci and the profit eik ∈Mi pik xik of items selected in city i, and subtracting the approximated transportation cost along (i, i + 1). Equation (4) gives the weight wi of the selected items when the vehicle departs city P i by summing up wi−1 , the weight of compulsory items wic and the weight eik ∈Mi wik xik of items selected in city i. Remind that we determine compulsory items according to the Proposition 2 of Section 5 when the problem is unconstrained. Equation (5) implicitly defines segment τ ∈ Ti to which the velocity of the vehicle υi belongs and sets the weights for its endpoints. Equation (6) forces the total weight of the breakpoints of Bi be exactly 1. Equation (7) imposes the capacity constraint, and Eq. (8) declares xik as binary. Equation (9) states yib as a real 14  variable defined in [0, 1]. Equation (10) declares pi as a real variable, while Eq. (11) defines wi as a non-negative real. Finally, Equation (12) establishes the base cases for p0 and w0 . Obviously, one can relax the integrality imposed on the x-type variables that leads to a linear programming model. In fact, this generally worsens the lower bound value, but gives an advantage in running time. 6.2. Upper Bound We now describe the upper bound technique that adopts the piecewise linear approximation proposed for the lower bound. This time, our goal is to underestimate the traveling time t0i that the vehicle spends to pass a distance unit when traveling along the (i, i + 1), for any i = 1, . . . , n. We utilize the same set of breakpoints Bi generated from the set of linear segments Ti . In each point b ∈ Bi , we draw a tangent to the curve of the function t (υ) = 1/υ as depicted in Figure 1b. Subsequently, a new set of points B i is derived from the left and the rightmost points of Bi , and the points of intersection of each pair of neighboring tangents. This yields totally |Bi | + 1 points that produce a new set of |Bi | linear segments T i resulted from connecting every two closest points in B i . Then a valid upper bound for PWTc (and PWTu ) can be obtained via the model of LBλ with only the difference that the set of breakpoints B i is used instead of Bi . We designate this altered model as UBλ and the corresponding objective function as p UB (x). Again, one can manage precision of the upper bound adjusting the value of λ. Furthermore, the integrality imposed on the x-type variables may be relaxed to speed up computations at the price of the upper bound’s quality. 7. Mixed-Integer Programming-Based Approach Both PWTc and PWTu belong to the specific class of fractional binary programming problems for which several efficient reformulation techniques exist to handle nonlinear terms. We follow the approach of Li (1994) and Tawarmalani et al. (2002) to reformulate PWTc (and PWTu ) as a linear mixed 0-1 program. It is applicable since the denominator of each fractional term in (1) is not equal to zero since υmin > 0. We start with introduction of auxiliary real-valued   variPi Pmj ables yi , i = 1, . . . , n, such that yi = 1/ υmax − ν j=1 k=1 wjk xjk . The variables yi express the travel time per distance unit along the edge (i, i + 1). According to Li (1994), we can reformulate PWTc as a mixed 0-1 quadratic program by replacing (1) with (13) and adding the set of constraints (14) and (15). max  n X  mi X  i=1  k=1  ! pik xik − Rdi yi  s.t. υmax yi + ν  mj i X X  wjk xjk yi = 1, i = 1, . . . , n  (13)  (14)  j=1 k=1  yi ∈ R+ , i = 1, . . . , n  15  (15)  According to Tawarmalani et al. (2002), if z = xy is a polynomial mixed 0-1 term where x is binary and y is a real-valued variable, then it can be linearized via the set of linear inequalities: (i) z ≤ U x; (ii) z ≥ Lx; (iii) z ≤ y + L (x − 1); (iiii) z ≥ y + U (x − 1). Here, U and L are the upper and lower bounds on y, i.e. L ≤ y ≤ U . We can linearize the xjk yi term in (14) by introducing a i new real-valued variable zjk = xjk yi and new linear constraints. Let pci and wic denote the total profit and the total weight of the compulsory items in city i obtained with respect to Proposition 2. Similarly, let wimax be the total weight of the items (including all the compulsory items) in city i. Then variable  yi , Pi c i = 1, . . . , n, can be bounded from below by Li = 1/ υmax − ν j=1 wj and   P i max , W . In summary, we from above by Ui = 1/ υmax − ν · min j=1 wj can formulate PWTc (and PWTu ) as the following linear mixed 0-1 program (MIPλ ): max p MIP (x) =  n X  pci +  i=1  s.t. υmax yi + ν  ! pik xik − Rdi yi  k=1   wic  mi X  +  mj i X X   i  wjk zjk  = 1, i = 1, . . . , n  j=1 k=1 i zjk ≤ Ui xjk , i, j = 1, . . . , n, j ≤ i, ejk ∈ Mj i zjk ≥ Li xjk , i, j = 1, . . . , n, j ≤ i, ejk ∈ Mj  i zjk ≥ yi + Ui xjk − 1 , i, j = 1, . . . , n, j ≤ i, ejk ∈ Mj  i zjk ≤ yi + Li xjk − 1 , i, j = 1, . . . , n, j ≤ i, ejk ∈ Mj mi n X X  wik xik ≤ W  (16)  p LB (x) ≤ p MIP (x) ≤ p UB (x)  (17)  i=1 k=1  xik ∈ {0, 1} , eik ∈ M i zjk ∈ R+ , i, j = 1, . . . , n, j ≤ i, ejk ∈ Mj  yi ∈ R+ , i = 1, . . . , n  A solution of LBλ can be used as a starting solution for MIPλ and can yield the lower bound value p LB (x). In its turn, UBλ can provide the upper bound value p UB (x). To set the value of λ to be used in both LBλ and UBλ , we specify its value through the notation MIPλ . To strengthen the relaxation of MIPλ , the sequencing constraints of Section 4 can be imposed as valid inequalities as has been earlier proposed in Polyakovskiy & Neumann (2015). However, our current investigations show that they are not beneficial anymore when the upper bound produced by UBλ is applied in Eq. 17. An effective set of inequalities in order to obtain tighter relaxations can be obtained from the reformulation-linearization technique (RLT) by Sherali & Adams (1999), which uses 3n additional inequalities for the capacity constraint (16). Specifically, multiplying (16) by yl , Ul − yl and yl − Ll , l = 1, . . . , n, we obtain the following inequalities: 16  mi n X X  l wik zik ≤ W yl ;  i=1 k=1 mi n X X  Ul  wik xik −  mi n X X  i=1 k=1 mi n X X  i=1 k=1 mi n X X  i=1 k=1  i=1 k=1  l wik zik − Ll  l wik zik ≤ Ul W − W yl ;  wik xik ≤ W yl − Ll W.  8. Branch-Infer-and-Bound Approach Constraint programming (CP) has been shown to be a promising solution technique for various combinatorial optimization problems (Rossi et al. (2006, 2008)). It deals with a problem consisting of a set of variables X = {x1 , . . . , xn } and a finite set of constraints C given on the elements of X. Each variable xi ∈ X is associated with a domain Di of available values. When the domain of every variable xi is reduced to a singleton {vi }, a values vector v = (v1 , . . . , vn ) is obtained. A satisfiability problem asks for a decision vector x = v such that all the constraints in C are satisfied simultaneously. A constraint optimization problem involves in addition an objective function f (x) that is to be either maximized or minimized over the set of all feasible solutions. In CP, constraints are given in a declarative way, but are viewed individually as special-purpose procedures that operate on a solution space. Each procedure applies a filtering algorithm that eliminates those values from the domains of the involved variables which cannot be a part of any feasible solution with respect to that constraint. The restricted domains generated by the constraints are in effect elementary in-domain constraints that restrict a variable to a domain of possible values. They become a part of a constraint store. To link all the procedures together in order to solve a problem as a whole, the constraint store is passed on to the next constraint to be processed. In such a way, the results of one filtering procedure are propagated to the others. In general, filtering algorithms are called repeatedly to achieve a certain level of consistency. This is because achieving arc consistency for one constraint might make other constraints inconsistent. Specifically, constraint c ∈ C involving variables xi and xj is said to be arc consistent with respect to xi if for each value v 0 ∈ Di there is an allowed value of xj . A constraint satisfaction problem is arc consistent iff every constraint c ∈ C is arc consistent with respect to xi as well as to xj . Therefore, multiple runs of filtering are required for those constraints that share common variables of X. This process is called constraint propagation. CP aims to enumerate solutions with respect to the constraint store in order to find the best feasible solution. To cope with this, a search tree is used, and every variable xi with domain Di is examined in some node of the tree. If Di = ∅, an infeasible solution is found. If |Di | > 1, one can branch on xi by partitioning Di into smaller domains, each corresponding to a branch. The domains of the variables decrease as they are reduced via constraint propagation when one descends into the tree. In the 17  case of the constraint optimization problem, the search continues unless either the best solution is determined over those solutions where all the domains are singletons, or at least one of the domains is empty for every leaf node of the search tree. Certainly, the order in which the variables are instantiated and how the domains are partitioned matters for a running time. Combining CP with the branch-and-cut method is a natural hybridization which results from the complementary strengths of both techniques. It gives rise to the so-called branch-infer-and-relax (BIR) approach presented by Bockmayr & Hooker (2005). The idea of BIR is to combine filtering and propagation used in CP with relaxation and cutting plane generation used in MIP. In each node of a search tree, constraint propagation creates a constraint store of in-domain constraints, while polyhedral relaxation creates a constraint store of inequalities. The two constraint stores can enrich each other, since reduced domains impose bounds on variables, and bounds on variables can reduce domains. The inequality relaxation is solved to obtain a bound on the optimal value, which prunes the search tree as in the branch-and-cut method. Here, to solve PWTc (and PWTu ), we adopt this idea and introduce a branch-infer-and-bound approach that compounds CP and the upper bound introduced in Section 6.2. Specifically, we substitute the relaxation used in BIR with a stand-alone upper bound procedure to be executed in each node of the search tree in order to prune some of its branches. In each node, we create a refined set of items M 0 = M \ ∪eik ∈M eik : |Dik | = 1 and add the weight and profit of those items whose Dik = {1} to wic and wimax in the model of p UB (x), respectively. In other words, we treat the items accepted by the search as compulsory. Finally, we apply UBλ to x formed on M 0 and prune a branch if the resulting p UB (x) is smaller than the objective value of the best incumbent solution known. Similarly to the previous MIP formulations, our CP model bases the search on binary decision vector x where variable xik takes the value of 1 to indicate that item eik ∈ M is chosen. To speed up computations, it employes an auxiliary integer variable wi that calculates the total weight of the items selected in city i and all the preceding cities when traveling along the edge (i, i + 1), for any i = 1, . . . , n. Again, wic and pci denote the total weight and the total profit of compulsory items collected in city i. Here, we assume that the both values come out of the pre-processing step. The model has the following objective function and constraints (BIBλ ):  18  max p BIB (x) =  n X  pci +  i=1  mi X  pik xik −  k=1  s.t. wi = wi−1 + wic +  X  Rdi υmax − νwi  !  wik xik , i = 1, . . . , n  (18) (19)  eik ∈Mi n X  wic  i=1  +  mi X  ! wik xik  ≤W  (20)  k=1  xil ≤ xik , i = 1, . . . , n, eil , eik ∈ Mi : (pil < pik ) ∧ (wil ≥ wik ) , l 6= k,    xjl ≤ xik , i = 1, . . . , n, j < i, ejl ∈ Mj , eik ∈ Mi : pjl − ∆ji l < pik ∧ wjl ≥ wik    ji xjl ≥ xik , i = 1, . . . , n, j < i, ejl ∈ Mj , eik ∈ Mi : pjl − ∆l > pik ∧ wjl ≤ wik  sequencing xjl , [w1 , . . . , wn ] , j = 1, . . . , n,   ji ejl ∈ Mj : ∃eik ∈ Mi , j < i : pjl − ∆l ≤ pik ≤ pjl − ∆ji l  (24)  xik ∈ {0, 1} , eik ∈ M  (25)  wi ∈ {0, . . . , W } , i = 1, . . . , n  (26)  w0 = 0  (27)  (21) (22) (23)  Function 18 represents the objective function of the problem. For each edge (i, i + 1), i = 1, . . . , n, it sums up the profits of items taken in city i minus the cost of transportation of all the items that have been placed to the vehicle in city i and all the cities prior to i. Equation (19) calculates the weight wi of all the items taken in the cities 1, . . . , i. Equation (20) is a capacity constraint. Equations (21), (22) and (23) impose the set of redundant sequencing constraints SCi , SCii , and SCiii of Section 4, respectively. This set may be rather small, and therefore might have a limited impact on inference of in-domain constraints during the search. Indeed, more constraints might be involved if wbc in ∆ji l of ji  constraint SCii was larger and wbmax in ∆l of constraint SCiii was smaller. The values of these two variables wbc and wbmax can in fact be considered as initial lower and upper bounds on the weight of the items collected in city b. As one descends into the tree, items are either collected or rejected. Being picked up in some city, an item contributes its weight that increases the lower bound. Being rejected, it lowers the upper bound. We include those constraints into the pool that still may work out when the lower or upper bound on the weight reaches a certain level. Specifically, (24) adds a redundant customized constraint for each item ejl that has at least one related item eik , j < i, such that their mutual sequencing depends on the weight of the items collected in cities j, . . . , i − 1. Equations (25) and (26) define the domains of the variables. Finally, Equation (27) sets the base case w0 = 0. We assume a depth-first search strategy for traversing the binary search tree and instantiate variables in the order in which the cities appear in N . No order is given to the items within the same city. Therefore, at the moment when item eik is to be instantiated by the search, the domains of the variables associated with the items in cities 1, . . . , i − 1 and with those in city i that appear prior 19  to eik in the set Mi have been already reduced to singletons. Accordingly, the domain of variable wi is reduced to a singleton once the decision variables of the items in city i have been all fixed to singletons. The customized sequencing constraint sequencing(xjl , [w1 , . . . , wn ]) applies to variable xjl for which there exists at least one item, say xik , such that pjl − ji ∆l ≤ pik ≤ pjl − ∆ji l holds and j < i. Algorithm 2 sketches the pseudocode of the corresponding filtering algorithm. We use a Boolean variable Θejl eik , which takes value true to indicate the situation when selection of items ejl and eik may be potentially sequenced. First, the algorithm initializes variables wmax and wmin that, respectively, represent the upper and lower bounds on the weight of collected items that the vehicle has in city i. It sets both variables to the sum of weights of items collected in the cities prior to city j, i.e. wj−1 , and adds the weight of item ejl if its variable xjl has been fixed to 1 (cf. line 1). Then the algorithm starts exploring the items positioned in the cities succeeding j. Each time the next city i is taken into consideration, it adds the weight of all the items existing in i to wmax and the weight of all the compulsory items in i to wmin (cf. line 5). In each city i, the algorithm examines the items that the city contains. When the corresponding variable xik of item eik is a singleton, the algorithm modifies the bounds on collected weight accordingly (cf. lines 10 and 11). Subsequently, if Θejl eik is true, it tries to establish a sequencing relation between eik and ejl . If the condition in line 13 holds, it excludes 1 from domain Dik , and therefore declines item eik since ejl is assumed to be rejected by the search. At the same time, it lowers wmax by the value of wik . On the other hand, if the condition in line 18 holds, it excludes 0 from domain Dik , and therefore selects item eik because ejl is assumed to be selected. In addition, it increases wmin by the value of wik . If no relation has been established at that stage, the algorithm adds eik to the set of items M ∗ . Continuing to explore other items, it tries to prove each item of M ∗ to be unprofitable every time it finishes investigating city i (cf. line 31). Furthermore, having all the cities analyzed, the algorithm returns back to set M ∗ and tries to prove each of its items to be compulsory if the instance I at hands refers to PWTu (cf. line 37). 9. Computational Experiments In this section, we investigate the effectiveness of the proposed approaches by experimental studies. On the one hand, we assess the advantage of the pre-processing scheme in terms of quantity of discarded items and auxiliary decision variables. On the other hand, we evaluate our LBλ , MIPλ , and BIBλ models in terms of solution quality and running time. The program code is implemented in JAVA using the IBM Optimization Studio 12.6.2. To solve the mixed-integer programs LBλ , UBλ and MIPλ , we use Cplex with default settings. When running UBλ , we increase Cplex’s precision by setting the relative tolerance on the gap between the best integer objective and the objective of the best node remaining to 1e−7. To solve the constrained program within BIBλ , we use CP Optimizer switched to the depth-first search mode and set  20  Algorithm 2: The Filtering Algorithm of Constraint sequencing(xjl , [w1 , . . . , wn ]) 1 initialize wmax ← wj−1 + wjl xjl ; initialize wmin ← wj−1 + wjl xjl ; 2 initialize M ∗ ← ∅; jj jj 3 set ∆ ← 0; ∆ ← 0; l l 4 for each city i from j to n do max ; wmin ← wmin + wc ; 5 wmax ← wmax + wi i 6 for each item eik ∈ Mi , eik 6= ejl do 7 initialize f lag ← true;  8 if DomainSize Dik ≤ 1 then 9 f lag ← f alse; 10 if xik = 0 then wmax ← wmax − wik ; 11 if xik = 1 then wmin ← wmin + wik ; 12  if Θe e then jl ik      ji if wjl ≤ wik ∧ pjl − ∆ > pik ∧ xjl = 0 then l  if DomainSize Dik = 2 then wmax ← wmax − wik ; f lag ← f alse;  RemoveValue Dik , 1 ;       ji if wjl ≥ wik ∧ pjl − ∆ < pik ∧ xjl = 1 then l  if DomainSize Dik = 2 then wmin ← wmin + wik ; f lag ← f alse;  RemoveValue Dik , 0 ;  13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24  if f lag then  M ∗ ← M ∗ ∪ eik ; in+1 in+1 initialize ∆ ← 0; ∆ ← 0; k k  25  26 27 28 29  30 31 32 33 34  35 36 37  ∆  ji+1 ji ← ∆ + Rdi l l    1 1  − υ −ν min(wmax ,W ) υmax −ν min(wmax ,W )−wik  max    ;  ji+1 ji 1 1       −   ; ∆ ← ∆ + Rdj l l υmax −ν min wmin ,W +wik υmax −ν min wmin ,W for each item eab ∈ M ∗ do   an+1 an+1 1 1  −  ; ∆ ← ∆ + Rdi  b b υmax −ν min(wmax ,W )−wab υmax −ν min wmax ,W j   an+1 an+1 1  1   −  ; ← ∆ + Rdj  b b υmax −ν min wmin ,W +wab υmax −ν min wmin ,W an+1 if pab − ∆ ≤ 0 then b  RemoveValue Dab , 1 ; wmax ← wmax − wab ;  M ∗ ← M ∗ \ eab ; ∆  if ProblemType(I) ≡PWTu then for each item eab ∈ M ∗ do  an+1 if pab − ∆ > 0 then RemoveValue Dab , 0 ; b  the relative tolerance gap to 0. Furthermore, we limit the parallel mode to only a single thread for Cplex and CP Optimizer to make them both comparable to each other when dealing with the small size instances in Section 9.1. We set the number of threads to the maximum number of cores available when investigating the large size instances in Section 9.2. The test instances are adopted from the benchmark set B of Polyakovskiy et al. (2014). This benchmark set is constructed on TSP instances from TSPLIB introduced by Reinelt (1991) augmented by a set of items distributed among all the cities but the first one. We use the set of items available in each city and obtain the route from the corresponding TSP instance by running the Chained Lin-Kernighan heuristic proposed by Applegate et al. (2003). Given the permu-  21  tation π = (π1 , π2 , . . . , πn ) of the cities computed by the Chained Lin-Kernighan heuristic, where π1 is free of items, we use N = (π2 , π3 , . . . , πn , π1 ) as the route for our problem. We consider the uncorrelated (uncorr), uncorrelated with similar weights (uncorr-s-w), and bounded strongly correlated (b-s-corr) types of items’ generation, and set υmin and υmax to 0.1 and 1 as proposed for B. 9.1. Computational Experiments on the Set of Small Size Instances Here, using a set of small instances, our goal is to evaluate the performance of our pre-processing scheme and the performance of the proposed approximate and exact approaches. Unlike experiments carried out in our earlier research (Polyakovskiy & Neumann (2015)), here we are able to find optimal solutions to all the small instances within the same time limit. Therefore, the main focus of our investigation with respect to the exact approaches is their running times rather than any qualitative performance measures. We study three families of small size instances based on the TSP problems eil51, eil76, and eil101 with 51, 76 and 101 cities, respectively. This series of experiments has been carried out on PC with 4 Gb RAM and a 3.06 GHz Dual Core processor. The results of the experiments are shown in Table 1. All the instances of a family have the same route N . We consider instances with 1, 5, and 10 items per city. The postfixes 1, 6 and 10 in the instances’ names indicate the vehicle’s capacity W . The greater the value of a postfix is, the larger W is given. Column 2 specifies the total number of items m. Ratio α = 100 · (m − m0 ) /m in Column 3 denotes a percentage of items discarded in a pre-processing step, where m0 is the number of items left after pre-processing. Column ver identifies by “u” whether PWTc has been reduced to PWTu by pre-processing. Columns 5-7 report results for LBλ with λ = 100. Specifically, column 5 gives ρ as a ratio between the lower bound obtained by LB100 and the optimum obtained by the branch-infer-and-bound approach. Column 6 contains the running time t of LB100 . Column 7 shows a rate β that is a percentage of auxiliary y-type variables used in practice by LBλ .PAt most λn variables is n required by LBλ . Thus, β is computed as β = 100 · ( i=1 |Bi |) / (λn). Column 8 presents the running time t for the MIP-based exact approach MIPλ when λ is set to 1000. Therefore, both LBλ and UBλ incorporated into MIPλ use λ = 1000 as well to compute initial lower and upper bounds. The time limit of 1 day has been given to MIPλ in total, while LBλ and UBλ have got the time limit of 2 hours each. The running time of MIPλ provided in the table includes the total time taken by LBλ and UBλ . For most of the instances except the instance “uncorr-s-w 01” of the family eil101, this time is found negligible. Column 9 reports ω as a relative gap in percents that compares the running time of MIPλ to the smallest running time over all the algorithms studied in the experiment. In general, ω is to be computed as ω = 100 · tALG − tMIN /tMIN , where tALG is the running time of a particular algorithm and tMIN is the minimum over the running times of the various configurations of MIPλ and BIBλ investigated here. The rest columns of the table describe results for the branch-infer-and-bound approach BIBλ with λ ∈ {500, 1000, 1500}. Furthermore, two cases of BIBλ for 22  λ = 1000 have been studied. BIB1000 is exactly that one which is described in Section 8. BIB1000 no seq. is its copy that does not include the customized sequencing constraints to the model. In such way, we evaluate the impact of the constraint on the performance of BIBλ . We employ LB100 , which we give 2 hours of running time limit, to provide BIBλ with a lower bound to be used then to 1500 prune the search tree. Within BIB500 , BIB1000 , BIB1000 , we run no seq. , and BIB λ the variant of UB where the integrality constraints on x-type decision variables are removed. This makes UBλ a linear program and significantly speeds up computations at the very small cost of solution quality. Each of the columns t reports the total computational time for the corresponding BIBλ and includes the time taken by LB100 . Similarly, each of the columns named ω does when reporting ω that compares the running time of BIBλ to the smallest running time found over the studied MIPλ and BIBλ approaches. The least running time obtained for a particular instance is marked by bold and underlined in the entry t of the corresponding approach. The entries of the table marked by “-” indicate that optimal solutions have not been obtained within the given time limit. 9.1.1. Performance of the Pre-processing Scheme Here, we evaluate the performance of our pre-processing scheme by calculating the percentage of discarded items and auxiliary decision variables. We aim to understand for which classes and types of the instances the pre-processing scheme works fine and which instances are hard to be reduced. Furthermore, we wonder how many of the instances of PWTc become those of PWTu . The results of the experiments demonstrate efficiency of the pre-processing scheme. It is rather good with respect to the instances of uncorr type and removes on average 31.6% of their items. Concerning the uncorr-s-w type of the instances, it is able to exclude on average 18.5% of the items that they contain. Within these two categories, the instances with large W are rather liable to reduction to instances of PWTu . Because W is large, they get more chances to loose enough items so that the total weight of rest items becomes less or equal to W . The pre-processing scheme does not work well for the b-s-corr type of the instances. No instance of this type has been reduced to PWTu . Because the profit of an item approaches its weight, the pre-processing encounters a difficulty to find unprofitable items for this instance type. In general, the way of how profits and weights are generated is not an obstacle in itself for the preprocessing to be successful. There are other factors, like the value of rent rate R, the value of capacity W , and a distance to the destination from the city where an item is positioned, that hinder its application. For example, if a route is long enough, some items in the first cities can be shown to be unprofitable even in the case of their b-s-corr type of generation. Clearly, the fact that we cannot handle the instances of this type is a proper property of the benchmark suite B. Obviously, discarding items within pre-processing reduces the number of auxiliary variables in LBλ . The rate β demonstrates that in practice LB100  23  uses a very reduced set of them. The average over all the entries is just 48.5%. Therefore, less than a half of all possible variables is used only. In general, β is significantly small when W is large, since latter results in a slower growth of  diapason υimin , υimax in LBλ , for i = 1, . . . , n. In other words, the instances with large W require less number of auxiliary decision variables comparing to the instances where W is smaller. 9.1.2. Performance of the Approximate Approach We now aim to evaluate the performance of LB100 concerning its running time and solution quality compared to optima. LB100 is particularly fast and its model is solved to optimality in a very short time for all the small size instances. Only one instance of the whole test suite causes a difficulty in terms of running time. The approximate approach looks very swift even with instances of the b-scorr type and produces very good approximation for reasonably small λ = 100. The ratio ρ close to 1 points out that LB100 obtains approximately the same result as the optimal objective value is, but in a shorter time. Therefore, LBλ gives an advanced trade-off in terms of computational time and solution’s quality comparing to the exact approaches. The larger λ = 1000 has been tested in our earlier experiments (Polyakovskiy & Neumann (2015)). However, it results to a very limited improvement in the value of the total reward at the larger cost of running time, and more importantly at the larger cost of memory consumption. Indeed, as λ increases, the approach requires more memory as the number of auxiliary variables grows. 9.1.3. Performance of the Exact Approaches In this part of the analysis, our goal is to evaluate the performance of the MIPλ and BIBλ approaches and determine which classes and types of the instances are hard to be solved by each of them. Since all the instances can be solved to optimality, we treat a time spent to achieve an optimal solution as hardness of an instance. Comparing to the earlier results, we see now that the unconstrained instances of the problem are not to be easier to handle as it has been previously observed (Polyakovskiy et al. (2014); Polyakovskiy & Neumann (2015)). Now, our mixedinteger programming approach is able to solve all the small size instances to optimality as it is strengthened with the upper bound UBλ . Specifically, MIPλ takes much less time than the given limit and can be executed on an ordinary PC instead of the highly productive computational cluster that has been previously utilized. The results show that the instances of the uncorr-s-w type are harder to solve for MIPλ comparing to other types. This fact looks interesting. Comparing to the b-s-corr type, this type has around 20% of items per instance excluded by the pre-processing step and needs much less auxiliary variables, but takes more time to achieve an optimal solution. This also differs PWT from the classical 0-1 knapsack problem for which the b-s-corr type is shown to be the hardest one (Martello et al. (1999)). The b-s-corr type is not easier to solve than the  24  uncorr type in terms of running time, nor the latter is when compared to the former. MIPλ outperforms BIBλ mainly on the set of b-s-corr type instances with the least capacity W . BIB500 is superior on the wide range of instances. It is highly effective for the set of uncorr and uncorr-s-w type instances with large capacity. Depending on the parameter λ, performance of BIBλ can be further improved for some instances. Specifically, setting λ to larger values allows BIBλ to solve b-s-corr type instances with many items and large capacity faster. The further increase of λ up to 1500, leads to the best result for some of those instances. However, this degrades performance of BIBλ on other instances. Performance of BIBλ with the values of λ less than 500 and greater than 1500 have also been investigated. However, using too small or too large values increases the running time of the approach. The same behavior has been observed for MIPλ , for which the value of 1000 is the most promising one. In summary, we argue that selecting λ = 1000 represents a good balance when the classification of instances is unknown, e.g. a new problem instance is to be solved. BIB1000 works reasonably fast over all the instances. Although it loses against BIB500 on many instances, these loss are insignificant when compared to gains on some other instances, for example, on those ones prefixed by “b-s-corr 10”. 9.1.4. Impact of the Sequencing Constraints Here, we are interested in understanding the impact of the sequencing constraints on the performance of the CP Search. We wonder how strong the constraint can be in pruning the search tree and for which types and classes of the instances it performs well. Table 2 presents the details on the constraint programming search performed by BIBλ on small size instances of the benchmark suite. Columns 1-3 specify the instance’s name, the total number of items m, and the version of the problem solved. Other columns of the table describe results for BIBλ with λ ∈ {500, 1000, 1500}. Each of the sections shows the number of branches b totally explored and the number of fails f obtained by the CP solver during the search when the corresponding parameter value λ is in use. Furthermore, each of the columns “UBλ runs” reports the number of successful UBλ runs, say rs , that resulted in pruning of the search tree and the total number of runs, say rt . The two values are separated by “|”. In the parentheses, it also gives a percentage of successful runs η computed as η = 100 · rs /rt . The sequencing constraints of BIBλ look weak when dealing with the instances of the b-s-corr type. This can be observed from the results, which show that the number of UBλ runs considerably decreases when λ increases. This means that BIBλ needs to tighten the upper bound by increasing the value of λ in order to achieve a better performance for this type of the instances. In other words, BIBλ relies more on a tight upper bound to prune the search tree rather than on the sequencing constraints. In contrast, considering other types of the instances, the growth of the number of runs is not that much for them. Moreover, the number of explored branches b and the number of fails f obtained  25  remain almost the same for different values of λ. This means that BIBλ extensively rely on the sequencing constraints when solving the uncorr and uncorr-s-w types of the instances. When we turn off the sequencing constraints in the case of BIB1000 no seq. , the approach explores more branches with respect to the uncorr and uncorr-s-w types and spends more time to do this, while the number of branches traversed and the running time stay almost the same for the b-s-corr type. The reason why the sequencing constraints are weak with respect to the b-s-corr type is the same as for the pre-processing scheme which also has low performance when dealing with this type. 9.2. Computational Experiments on the Set of Large Size Instances The goal of our second experiment is to understand how fast LBλ finds the approximate solutions of larger size instances and how efficient the preprocessing scheme is in this case. Solving large size instances turns out to be costly and requires computational capacity beyond that of an ordinary computer. Therefore, this series of experiments has been carried out on a computational cluster with 128 Gb RAM and 2.8 GHz 48-cores AMD Opteron processor. We use the same settings for the MIP solver as in our first experiment and set λ = 100 for LBλ . We investigate two families of the largest size instances of benchmark suite B, namely those based on the TSP problems pla33810 and pla85900 with 33810 and 85900 cities, respectively. Table 3 reports the results. Columns 1-4 specify the instance’s name, the total number of items m, the percentage of items discarded within the pre-processing step α, and the version of the problem solved. The rest of the table describes the results for LB100 100 is run without any preand for its two special cases: LB100 no pre-pr. when LB 100 100 does not use the reasoning based processing at all and LBred. pre-pr. when LB on the sequencing constraints to accelerate deduction of compulsory and unprofitable items when a problem in hand is unconstrained (see Section 5 for details). Columns 5 and 10 provide the running time t of LB100 (including the time taken by pre-processing) and of LB100 no pre-pr. , respectively, while columns 6 and 11 give details on β, which is the percentage of auxiliary y-type variables that they use. The way to calculate α and β is given in Section 9.1. Columns 8 and 12 100 report ω as a relative gap in percents that compares the running times of  LB 100 ALG MIN MIN −t /t , and LBno pre-pr. . Specifically, ω is computed as ω = 100 · t MIN and t is the miniwhere tALG is the running time of LB100 or LB100 no pre-pr. mum of their running times. Column tp gives the pre-processing time taken by LB100 . Column γ shows a ratio between the number of y-type variables used 100 by LB100 . Column ρ gives a ratio between the upper bound no pre-pr. and LB λ obtained by UB with the same λ = 100 and the lower bound LB100 . We do not provide runtime and some other results for LB100 red. pre-pr. as it always performs worse than LB100 . For it, we only show the ratio η between the pre-processing 100 time of LB100 to evaluate a speedup gained by red. pre-pr. and that one of LB utilizing the sequencing constraints for deduction of compulsory and unprofitable items in the case of PWTu . Note that in LB100 red. pre-pr. the pre-processing  26  Table 1: Results of Computational Experiments on Small Size Instances instance  m α, % ver  LB100 ρ  MIP1000  t, sec β, %  t, sec  ω, %  t, sec  ω, %  BIB1000 no seq. t, sec ω, %  t, sec  ω, %  instance family eil51 2.3 34.9 1.7 3.2 255.5 0.9 0.8 104.2 0.4 2.9 84.3 1.6 1.4 52.6 0.9 1.6 379.2 0.3 4.5 0.0 23.2 2.5 0.0 2.9 1.9 0.0 1.9 10.4 127.5 4.6 65.1 2353.2 2.7 20.4 2512.1 0.8 7.1 97.4 3.6 41.7 2520.9 1.6 83.3 7761.7 1.1 8.9 0.0 28.9 20.9 0.0 27.3 55.6 633.3 7.6 12.9 12.0 11.5 81.6 1369.8 5.6 93.1 7093.6 1.3 12.1 149.1 4.9 147.7 4854.8 3.0 208.2 9788.2 2.1 29.9 0.0 226.7 71.3 0.0 316.7 100.8 294.4 87.9  0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 412.4 14.0 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 223.5 31.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 657.2 344.1 243.8  3.5 1.7 0.5 3.1 1.7 0.4 49.0 6.4 3.7 9.1 4.2 1.0 6.8 2.4 1.3 58.3 53.7 9.8 22.1 8.3 1.5 8.7 3.9 2.3 324.1 149.0 25.7  107.4 82.8 30.9 94.1 84.8 9.6 982.1 152.1 100.1 97.6 57.0 28.1 87.9 50.0 19.2 552.7 157.3 29.4 91.4 49.2 19.4 79.2 32.4 11.1 982.6 109.0 0.4  6.4 3.2 0.6 7.6 2.3 0.5 52.0 6.3 3.5 21.5 7.3 1.8 40.8 5.8 2.3 65.6 55.4 9.5 68.5 17.8 3.4 63.3 9.9 4.6 396.9 161.5 25.6  6.1 2.6 0.6 4.8 2.7 0.4 77.8 11.0 6.4 14.7 6.1 1.2 10.4 3.5 1.5 94.1 57.4 16.1 35.8 12.0 1.9 13.1 5.3 2.6 535.0 235.7 27.4  256.9 184.7 58.0 205.0 190.9 28.1 1620.7 333.1 241.0 220.7 131.7 60.0 187.1 118.8 42.7 953.0 175.0 112.5 210.4 116.6 43.4 168.9 78.5 21.5 1687.3 230.4 7.0  t, sec  BIB500  ω, %  uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr  01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10  50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 250 250 250 250 250 250 250 250 250 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500  42.0 14.0 12.0 30.0 24.0 34.0 4.0 0.0 0.0 39.2 16.4 54.4 20.8 14.0 19.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 37.0 15.2 51.4 20.2 15.2 18.6 0.0 0.0 0.0  c c u c c u c c c c c u c c u c c c c c u c c u c c c  1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 0.99998 1.00000 0.99997 1.00000 1.00000 0.99993 1.00000 1.00000 0.99990 1.00000 0.99993 0.99995 1.00000  0.2 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.2  55.8 39.2 11.1 77.4 35.8 13.2 89.7 53.4 25.7 65.5 38.3 10.9 88.0 44.6 15.7 90.2 55.8 26.7 67.7 38.8 11.6 89.1 44.2 16.1 91.3 55.4 26.0  uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr  01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10  75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 375 375 375 375 375 375 375 375 375 750 750 750 750 750 750 750 750 750  26.7 14.7 48.0 26.7 17.3 16.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 38.1 16.0 9.9 14.9 12.3 14.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 32.5 14.8 43.1 16.7 13.5 14.4 0.0 0.0 0.0  c c u c c u c c c c c u c c u c c c c c u c c u c c c  1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 0.99998 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 0.99999 1.00000 0.99999  0.3 0.3 0.1 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 1.0 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.5 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.2  76.7 33.9 11.3 78.2 40.7 16.6 93.5 58.9 25.5 66.3 37.0 11.8 89.7 46.8 17.0 94.1 56.6 27.5 71.4 39.0 13.0 88.7 45.7 17.0 93.7 55.4 25.9  uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr  01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10  100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000  49.0 16.0 57.0 25.0 17.0 15.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 38.8 14.4 51.4 20.4 14.2 16.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 37.0 15.1 50.4 19.7 13.7 15.9 0.0 0.0 0.0  c c u c c u c c c c c u c c u c c c c c u c c u c c c  instance family eil101 1.00000 0.4 60.7 7.4 144.7 3.0 0.99993 0.3 39.7 20.5 746.2 2.4 1.00000 0.2 10.0 4.8 524.7 0.8 1.00000 0.3 90.3 6.8 70.2 4.0 1.00000 0.4 41.9 17.2 1001.7 1.6 1.00000 0.2 17.2 39.6 3748.5 1.0 1.00000 0.5 94.4 12.7 0.0 60.2 1.00000 0.4 56.2 11.3 8.5 10.4 0.99990 0.2 28.2 16.6 4.5 15.9 1.00000 0.4 65.9 31.6 120.2 14.4 1.00000 0.3 39.2 397.3 4678.5 8.3 1.00000 0.2 11.4 212.8 9707.2 2.2 1.00000 4.5 88.4 88.7 293.4 22.5 1.00000 0.4 44.8 365.2 6825.2 5.3 1.00000 0.2 16.3 525.4 16328.3 3.2 1.00000 0.4 93.5 64.6 0.0 433.8 1.00000 0.5 54.8 248.7 154.4 458.6 0.99998 0.4 26.1 381.1 118.2 2264.5 0.99999 0.4 66.6 240.8 166.3 90.4 1.00000 0.5 39.1 1293.3 4648.3 27.2 1.00000 0.2 11.7 625.8 13008.4 4.8 0.99993 3355.4 88.4 7158.2 97.8 3618.7 1.00000 0.5 45.1 1187.7 9252.4 12.7 1.00000 0.2 16.5 2162.6 28539.7 7.6 0.99996 1.4 93.0 456.5 0.0 7802.0 1.00000 0.3 55.2 661.4 32.1 38211.7 0.99999 0.2 26.8 874.5 30.0 -  instance family eil76 5.4 9.5 5.0 0.0 9.8 433.3 1.8 0.0 1.9 303.0 0.5 0.0 4.9 2.3 4.8 0.0 7.8 495.3 1.3 0.0 10.8 1437.9 0.7 0.0 6.2 0.0 215.6 3371.7 8.6 68.3 5.1 0.0 6.7 15.5 5.8 0.0 30.6 204.5 10.0 0.0 162.0 2825.0 5.5 0.0 105.4 7412.1 1.4 0.0 26.4 205.8 8.6 0.0 165.9 4625.3 3.5 0.0 230.9 10782.5 2.1 0.0 24.4 0.0 51.2 110.4 83.5 47.0 149.0 162.1 181.4 579.8 92.7 247.3 92.1 332.9 21.3 0.0 429.8 2564.3 19.6 21.7 306.7 8792.8 3.8 10.4 117.0 950.9 11.1 0.0 472.0 7119.9 6.5 0.0 823.7 17214.5 4.8 0.0 161.4 0.0 183.8 13.8 259.6 67.3 975.0 528.1 281.7 106.7 20261.7 14767.4  27  BIB1000  10.4 110.1 3.3 80.5 0.6 20.1 9.6 99.0 2.2 67.9 0.9 31.1 463.3 7362.1 11.1 117.7 9.8 68.7 19.9 98.0 9.6 73.0 1.6 15.6 15.3 77.1 5.4 52.5 2.4 14.7 100.2 311.6 56.8 0.0 26.7 0.0 33.4 57.0 16.1 0.0 3.4 0.0 19.2 72.0 7.8 19.6 5.1 7.3 287.4 78.0 175.8 13.2 176.7 29.7  278.1 252.2 50.2 381.5 144.7 36.1 1049.0 146.0 89.3 368.7 175.2 131.3 1026.9 262.0 120.0 634.2 165.7 25.5 493.1 221.4 160.2 1200.5 231.5 118.6 1225.8 126.4 0.0  20.7 316.6 4.3 134.7 1.0 112.2 30.4 529.9 5.0 283.8 1.5 119.4 510.3 8119.1 11.5 124.7 10.1 73.8 48.9 386.5 17.5 216.1 6.0 329.1 347.2 3917.0 15.7 348.4 4.1 94.9 116.8 379.6 59.4 4.6 27.6 3.5 131.9 520.2 40.0 148.1 10.4 201.6 255.2 2190.9 23.5 258.9 10.8 127.2 388.3 140.5 203.1 30.9 185.2 35.9  BIB1500  17.7 257.6 5.2 183.2 0.7 53.2 15.6 224.3 3.2 147.7 1.1 59.8 770.3 12305.6 19.1 272.8 11.1 90.4 32.4 222.2 14.5 162.6 1.8 30.0 24.3 181.0 7.4 110.7 2.9 34.5 154.4 533.9 98.2 72.9 37.8 41.8 52.8 148.3 22.8 41.1 3.6 3.6 28.9 159.8 10.2 56.3 5.6 17.7 442.4 174.0 155.2 0.0 136.3 0.0  0.0 6.0 98.5 12.9 325.4 10.3 0.0 4.0 65.9 8.3 241.5 6.0 0.0 1.0 28.5 1.8 136.2 1.2 0.0 7.9 95.3 25.7 537.4 12.4 0.0 2.6 65.0 6.0 285.0 3.8 0.0 1.3 25.6 2.1 106.7 1.6 373.0 126.5 893.6 135.5 964.3 209.2 0.0 22.9 119.6 22.9 119.1 40.1 0.0 27.3 71.7 27.0 69.3 41.6 0.0 28.0 94.8 76.3 430.7 43.8 0.0 13.7 64.2 26.3 216.9 19.6 0.0 2.5 16.5 5.6 157.1 3.0 0.0 39.4 74.7 1924.5 8437.4 60.2 0.0 7.7 46.2 20.7 293.1 10.7 0.0 3.5 10.7 7.3 128.3 4.0 571.5 624.6 867.0 773.4 1097.2 991.3 369.2 97.8 0.0 101.6 3.9 166.2 1196.4 219.1 25.4 228.3 30.7 174.7 0.0 115.0 27.2 571.4 532.1 168.9 0.0 37.3 37.1 91.5 236.1 46.6 0.0 5.0 5.2 10.9 127.3 5.6 0.0 3754.5 3.8 - 3946.9 0.0 13.3 4.7 34.8 173.9 17.0 0.0 7.9 4.3 15.4 104.1 8.5 1609.3 6130.9 1243.1 7992.7 1651.0 9258.4 7531.9 919.5 83.7 1007.2 101.2 500.7 - 1646.7 144.9 1760.5 161.8 672.5  237.6 147.2 63.4 207.0 144.2 59.1 1543.2 284.5 161.3 204.8 135.7 38.8 167.2 102.7 25.4 1434.6 70.0 0.0 86.9 71.1 18.3 9.1 33.9 13.0 1928.3 0.0 0.0  Table 2: Details on the CP Search Performed by BIBλ on Small Size Instances instance  BIB500  m ver b  f  BIB1000 UBλ runs  BIB1000 no seq.  BIB1500  UBλ runs  b  f  instance family eil51 42 20 16|64 (25%) 34 17 17|65 (26%) 22 11 11|36 (31%) 46 21 14|84 (17%) 36 16 16|64 (25%) 8 4 4|33 (12%) 676 334 220|609 (36%) 100 50 50|139 (36%) 90 45 45|129 (35%) 110 52 50|254 (20%) 130 64 64|324 (20%) 36 18 18|145 (12%) 58 29 24|268 (9%) 48 23 23|255 (9%) 30 14 14|225 (6%) 600 296 265|1188 (22%) 662 331 331|885 (37%) 232 116 116|452 (26%) 964 470 354|1034 (34%) 266 131 131|683 (19%) 36 18 18|285 (6%) 66 33 28|474 (6%) 94 45 45|509 (9%) 36 16 16|440 (4%) 4486 2238 2148|6128 (35%) 2804 1396 1391|3305 (42%) 628 314 313|1102 (28%)  91 72 50 163 62 26 722 104 92 293 228 151 415 175 187 684 700 238 2292 610 269 466 386 382 5310 3212 650  44 35 22 79 30 12 355 51 45 138 112 74 203 86 90 338 350 119 1132 301 131 224 191 187 2639 1601 324  26|119 31|101 20|58 41|199 30|94 12|54 278|754 61|169 54|155 97|472 112|456 73|264 154|749 85|415 86|404 366|1112 420|1104 143|547 809|2482 300|1104 128|548 167|1160 191|911 187|872 3034|7044 1915|4433 388|1346  instance family eil76 46 44|138 (32%) 26 26|107 (24%) 5 5|45 (11%) 54 33|170 (19%) 19 17|96 (18%) 10 10|74 (14%) 3100 2684|6446 (42%) 55 55|178 (31%) 112 112|272 (41%) 106 102|438 (23%) 79 79|461 (17%) 22 21|230 (9%) 92 89|545 (16%) 38 37|437 (8%) 15 15|345 (4%) 278 227|1901 (12%) 207 207|771 (27%) 290 289|935 (31%) 175 170|851 (20%) 172 172|970 (18%) 46 46|510 (9%) 74 70|836 (8%) 36 35|736 (5%) 11 11|667 (2%) 871 744|5281 (14%) 932 930|2597 (36%) 2450 2435|5635 (43%)  199 91 58 338 94 65 6856 128 246 473 302 545 3624 266 156 662 454 668 1094 869 626 1668 384 550 2324 2158 5288  97 44 28 167 46 29 3419 63 123 236 148 268 1806 127 77 325 227 331 545 430 307 824 191 274 1150 1077 2640  65|254 44|149 28|91 86|433 42|151 28|121 3592|8249 76|233 148|353 178|785 146|653 260|718 1386|4938 126|661 76|528 318|1252 272|973 396|1217 419|1924 427|1610 301|1091 630|3122 187|1200 271|1342 1170|3725 1290|3470 3150|7241  b  f  UBλ runs  b  f  UBλ runs  (22%) (31%) (35%) (20%) (32%) (22%) (37%) (36%) (35%) (21%) (24%) (28%) (21%) (21%) (21%) (33%) (38%) (26%) (33%) (27%) (23%) (14%) (21%) (21%) (43%) (43%) (29%)  42 34 22 46 36 8 676 100 90 110 130 36 58 48 30 600 444 232 932 266 36 66 94 36 4486 1960 354  20 17 11 21 16 4 334 50 45 52 64 18 29 23 14 296 222 116 455 131 18 33 45 18 2238 976 177  16|64 (25%) 17|65 (26%) 11|36 (31%) 14|84 (17%) 16|64 (25%) 4|33 (12%) 220|609 (36%) 50|139 (36%) 45|129 (35%) 50|254 (20%) 64|324 (20%) 18|145 (12%) 24|268 (9%) 23|255 (9%) 14|225 (6%) 265|1188 (22%) 222|670 (33%) 116|452 (26%) 344|1014 (34%) 131|683 (19%) 18|285 (6%) 28|474 (6%) 45|509 (9%) 18|440 (4%) 2148|6128 (35%) 976|2453 (40%) 177|830 (21%)  (25%) (30%) (30%) (20%) (28%) (23%) (44%) (32%) (42%) (23%) (22%) (36%) (28%) (19%) (14%) (25%) (28%) (33%) (22%) (27%) (28%) (20%) (16%) (20%) (31%) (37%) (44%)  96 56 10 110 38 20 6210 110 174 212 160 46 186 78 30 568 414 472 352 348 58 150 74 22 1754 686 1890  46 26 5 54 19 10 3096 55 87 106 79 23 92 38 15 278 207 233 175 172 29 74 36 11 871 343 943  44|138 (32%) 26|107 (24%) 5|45 (11%) 33|170 (19%) 17|96 (18%) 10|74 (14%) 2680|6437 (42%) 55|178 (31%) 87|226 (38%) 102|438 (23%) 79|461 (17%) 23|230 (10%) 89|545 (16%) 37|437 (8%) 15|345 (4%) 227|1901 (12%) 207|771 (27%) 233|822 (28%) 170|851 (20%) 172|970 (18%) 29|475 (6%) 70|836 (8%) 35|736 (5%) 11|667 (2%) 744|5281 (14%) 343|1416 (24%) 940|2615 (36%)  uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr  01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10  50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 250 250 250 250 250 250 250 250 250 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500  c c u c c u c c c c c u c c u c c c c c u c c u c c c  42 34 22 46 36 8 676 100 90 110 152 36 58 48 30 600 1148 412 1032 332 36 66 96 38 8318 21858 6402  20 17 11 21 16 4 334 50 45 52 75 18 29 23 14 296 572 206 508 164 18 33 46 17 4154 10918 3199  16|64 (25%) 17|65 (26%) 11|36 (31%) 14|84 (17%) 16|64 (25%) 4|33 (12%) 220|609 (36%) 50|139 (36%) 45|129 (35%) 50|254 (20%) 75|346 (22%) 18|145 (12%) 24|268 (9%) 23|255 (9%) 14|225 (6%) 265|1188 (22%) 567|1388 (41%) 205|628 (33%) 376|1080 (35%) 163|755 (22%) 18|285 (6%) 28|474 (6%) 46|511 (9%) 16|442 (4%) 4061|9992 (41%) 10771|22543 (48%) 3167|6844 (46%)  uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr  01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10  75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 375 375 375 375 375 375 375 375 375 750 750 750 750 750 750 750 750 750  c c u c c u c c c c c u c c u c c c c c u c c u c c c  96 56 10 110 38 20 6218 110 318 212 160 46 200 78 32 568 3360 5232 488 1254 174 152 136 28 2576 39336 1664464  46 26 5 54 19 10 3100 55 159 106 79 22 99 38 14 278 1679 2610 243 624 84 75 65 13 1282 19666 832213  44|138 (32%) 26|107 (24%) 5|45 (11%) 33|170 (19%) 17|96 (18%) 10|74 (14%) 2684|6446 (42%) 55|178 (31%) 157|358 (44%) 102|438 (23%) 79|461 (17%) 21|230 (9%) 96|560 (17%) 37|437 (8%) 14|347 (4%) 227|1901 (12%) 1667|3708 (45%) 2572|5543 (46%) 238|991 (24%) 610|1891 (32%) 71|604 (12%) 71|838 (8%) 62|803 (8%) 13|677 (2%) 1152|6124 (19%) 19490|39884 (49%) 819235|1652903 (50%)  uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr  01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10  100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000  c c u c c u c c c c c u c c u c c c c c u c c u c c c  instance family eil101 48 24 24|97 (25%) 48 24 24|97 (25%) 91 46 36|151 (24%) 48 24 24|97 (25%) 90 42 42|161 (26%) 90 42 42|161 (26%) 151 72 72|228 (32%) 90 42 42|161 (26%) 26 13 13|62 (21%) 26 13 13|62 (21%) 96 47 46|127 (36%) 24 12 12|60 (20%) 44 21 12|121 (10%) 44 21 12|121 (10%) 149 73 34|269 (13%) 44 21 12|121 (10%) 20 9 9|97 (9%) 20 9 9|97 (9%) 74 35 32|161 (20%) 20 9 9|97 (9%) 22 11 11|105 (10%) 22 11 11|105 (10%) 67 31 30|158 (19%) 22 11 11|105 (10%) 720 360 296|870 (34%) 720 360 296|870 (34%) 756 377 376|1015 (37%) 720 360 296|870 (34%) 144 72 72|237 (30%) 144 72 72|237 (30%) 152 76 91|294 (31%) 144 72 72|237 (30%) 582 291 289|658 (44%) 460 230 230|544 (42%) 466 233 280|660 (42%) 426 213 213|510 (42%) 200 100 98|494 (20%) 200 100 98|494 (20%) 485 242 199|872 (23%) 200 100 98|494 (20%) 196 98 98|606 (16%) 196 98 98|606 (16%) 360 176 176|840 (21%) 196 98 98|606 (16%) 48 22 20|282 (7%) 44 22 21|278 (8%) 242 119 107|486 (22%) 44 22 22|278 (8%) 626 308 253|1098 (23%) 612 301 247|1084 (23%) 27178 13577 10687|35473 (30%) 612 301 247|1084 (23%) 68 33 33|488 (7%) 68 33 33|488 (7%) 300 148 144|815 (18%) 68 33 33|488 (7%) 28 14 14|445 (3%) 28 14 14|445 (3%) 202 101 100|704 (14%) 28 14 14|445 (3%) 6140 3065 2870|9999 (29%) 3732 1862 1702|7038 (24%) 4416 2203 2432|5966 (41%) 3706 1849 1689|7012 (24%) 11490 5742 5695|11887 (48%) 714 357 356|1194 (30%) 758 379 454|1487 (31%) 670 335 334|1150 (29%) 119750 59866 59499|115983 (51%) 4822 2408 2403|5161 (47%) 5044 2519 3017|6460 (47%) 2224 1111 1111|2642 (42%) 2148 1073 1063|2854 (37%) 1082 540 537|1726 (31%) 4006 2002 1679|5659 (30%) 896 447 444|1538 (29%) 986 491 486|1851 (26%) 750 374 371|1607 (23%) 1954 970 966|3011 (32%) 508 253 253|1357 (19%) 126 58 47|637 (7%) 76 38 37|572 (6%) 482 239 232|1057 (22%) 76 38 37|572 (6%) 32440 16204 12353|31686 (39%) 31940 15954 12152|31158 (39%) - 31826 15897 12107|31031 (39%) 376 185 172|1261 (14%) 96 47 47|955 (5%) 463 226 223|1530 (15%) 96 47 47|955 (5%) 36 17 15|875 (2%) 34 17 17|872 (2%) 350 175 174|1375 (13%) 34 17 17|872 (2%) 242728 121358 120894|252979 (48%) 73622 36807 36423|82106 (44%) 84676 42324 50052|103974 (48%) 65682 32837 32463|73997 (44%) 2087110 1043547 1025660|2115122 (48%) 7142 3570 3561|8126 (44%) 7758 3876 4640|10501 (44%) 1882 941 938|2867 (33%) - 35006 17496 17387|35797 (49%) 37988 18985 22651|46530 (49%) 7190 3589 3579|8131 (44%)  96 56 10 110 38 20 6218 110 224 212 160 46 186 78 30 568 414 586 352 348 92 150 74 22 1754 1866 4906  28  scheme decides whether an item is compulsory or unprofitable or none of these cases independently of other items whose properties are already known. The results show that the pre-processing step is important and leads to great speeding-up. The pre-processing scheme excludes on average 27.7% of items per instance of the uncorr type and 13.2% of items per instance of the uncorr-s-w type. The instances of these two types are vulnerable for reduction when the problem is PWTu and when capacities are large. Furthermore, they are processed relatively fast as require much less number of auxiliary variables. Pre-processing allows LB100 to accelerate computations for the uncorr and uncorr-s-w types of the instances by 328% and 421% on average, respectively. The average value of ratio γ is 1.5 for the uncorr type against 1.2 for the uncorr-s-w type. Interestingly, despite on the larger portion of auxiliary y-type variables excluded for the uncorr type, its speeding-up indicator ω is less than that one of the uncorr-s-w type. Pre-processing is rather costly when applied to the unconstrained instances. However, the reasoning based on the sequencing constraints significantly improves the situation. This is shown by the values of η, which indicate that the time taken by pre-processing can be reduced up to ∼400 times when comparing LB100 to LB100 red. pre-pr. . Otherwise, the running often dominates one of LB100 time of LB100 no pre-pr. that leads to avoiding red. pre-pr. the pre-processing stage when dealing with PWTu . In general, LB100 proves its ability to master large instances in a reasonable time. It needs less than ∼30 minutes to find an approximate solution to any instance of family pla33810. Almost all the instances of family pla85900 can be solved approximately within 1 hour; it takes no longer than ∼4 hours for any of them. The quality of approximate solutions is outstanding as is confirmed by the very small values of ratio ρ. 10. Conclusion We have introduced a new non-linear knapsack problem where items to be selected are subject to the total reward that a vehicle obtains by summing up the profits of chosen items and the subtracting costs resulted from their transportation along a fixed route. We have shown that both the constrained and unconstrained versions of the problem are N P-hard. Our proposed preprocessing scheme can significantly decrease the size of instances making them easier for computation. The experimental results show that small size instances can be solved to optimality in a reasonable time by any of the two proposed exact approaches. Larger instances can be efficiently handled by our approximate approach producing near-optimal solutions. As a future work, this problem has several natural generalizations. The first evident generalization is for sure the traveling thief problem where the sequence of cities may be changed. This variant asks for the mutual solution of the traveling salesman and knapsack problems. Another interesting situation takes place when cities may be skipped because are of no worth, for example any item stored there has in fact low or negative contribution to the total reward.  29  Table 3: Results of Computational Experiments on Large Size Instances instance  m α, % ver  LB100 t, sec β, %  uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr  01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10  33809 33809 33809 33809 33809 33809 33809 33809 33809 169045 169045 169045 169045 169045 169045 169045 169045 169045 338090 338090 338090 338090 338090 338090 338090 338090 338090  29.0 c 12.8 c 35.9 u 19.3 c 11.2 c 8.7 c 0.0 c 0.0 c 0.0 c 30.6 c 12.8 c 35.8 u 15.2 c 11.7 c 9.0 c 0.0 c 0.0 c 0.0 c 31.6 c 12.8 c 35.9 u 15.2 c 11.9 c 9.0 c 0.0 c 0.0 c 0.0 c  uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr uncorr uncorr uncorr uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w uncorr-s-w b-s-corr b-s-corr b-s-corr  01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10 01 06 10  85899 85899 85899 85899 85899 85899 85899 85899 85899 429495 429495 429495 429495 429495 429495 429495 429495 429495 858990 858990 858990 858990 858990 858990 858990 858990 858990  32.4 13.5 40.8 16.4 12.3 13.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 32.5 13.6 40.4 16.3 12.8 13.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 33.2 13.6 40.6 16.4 12.7 13.2 0.0 0.0 0.0  c c u c c u c c c c c u c c u c c c c c u c c u c c c  tp ω, %  ρ  LB100 no pre-pr. t, sec β, % ω, %  γ  LB100 red. pre-pr. η  instance family pla33810 515 78.7 0 0 1.001 342 42.8 0 0 1.001 52 15.0 13 0 1.001 435 89.5 0 0 1.001 607 47.7 0 0 1.001 25 18.2 0 0 1.001 447 93.6 0 0 1.001 566 56.3 0 0 1.001 563 26.5 0 0 1.001 587 76.6 0 0 1.001 1204 42.7 0 0 1.001 157 14.7 94 36 1.001 348 90.5 0 0 1.001 590 47.2 0 0 1.001 549 18.0 0 0 1.001 1384 93.7 0 0 1.001 438 56.4 0 0 1.002 718 26.3 0 0 1.002 1589 75.4 0 0 1.001 1023 42.6 0 0 1.001 947 14.7 238 0 1.001 1209 90.5 0 0 1.001 966 47.1 0 0 1.001 1156 18.0 0 0 1.001 829 93.6 0 0 1.001 873 56.3 0 0 1.002 1095 26.3 0 0 1.002  3358 2083 334 1411 2795 251 463 610 603 3050 2299 115 1561 2141 6245 1410 442 814 9315 1645 1224 5125 2033 3621 857 947 1176  93.6 551 1.19 56.3 509 1.32 26.4 543 1.76 93.5 225 1.04 56.2 361 1.18 26.3 902 1.44 93.6 4 1.00 56.3 8 1.00 26.5 7 1.00 93.6 419 1.22 56.2 91 1.32 26.4 0 1.79 93.5 348 1.03 56.2 263 1.19 26.3 1037 1.46 93.7 2 1.00 56.4 1 1.00 26.3 13 1.00 93.5 486 1.24 56.2 61 1.32 26.3 29 1.79 93.5 324 1.03 56.2 111 1.19 26.3 213 1.46 93.6 3 1.00 56.3 8 1.00 26.3 7 1.00  1 1 10 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 8 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 1 1 1 1 1 1  instance family pla85900 2514 73.8 0 0 1.002 3028 41.6 0 0 1.002 213 13.7 59 0 1.002 1683 88.6 0 0 1.002 1985 46.6 0 0 1.002 158 17.2 3 0 1.002 3967 93.6 0 2 1.002 1570 56.3 0 0 1.002 3491 26.4 0 0 1.002 3436 73.6 0 0 1.002 5495 41.4 0 0 1.002 1471 13.8 936 58 1.001 2380 90.2 0 0 1.002 4508 46.3 0 0 1.002 545 17.4 23 0 1.001 3105 93.6 0 0 1.002 5483 56.2 0 0 1.002 4751 26.3 0 0 1.002 6904 72.6 0 0 1.002 5510 41.4 0 0 1.002 3650 13.9 1544 0 1.001 4859 90.2 0 0 1.002 7095 46.3 0 0 1.002 5058 17.4 68 0 1.001 5474 93.5 0 0 1.002 12566 56.2 0 0 1.002 13806 26.4 0 0 1.002  10614 40283 323 9566 13408 1165 3903 1575 3627 27833 47092 934 20790 10825 1311 3145 5457 4872 11982 7860 4627 43064 15904 12868 5498 12681 13981  93.5 322 1.27 56.1 1230 1.35 26.3 52 1.92 93.5 468 1.06 56.2 575 1.20 26.3 637 1.53 93.6 0 1.00 56.3 0 1.00 26.4 4 1.00 93.5 710 1.27 56.2 757 1.36 26.3 0 1.90 93.5 773 1.04 56.2 140 1.21 26.3 141 1.51 93.6 1 1.00 56.2 0 1.00 26.3 3 1.00 93.5 74 1.29 56.2 43 1.36 26.3 27 1.90 92.9 786 1.03 56.2 124 1.21 26.3 154 1.51 93.5 0 1.00 56.2 1 1.00 26.4 1 1.00  1 1 28 3 1 393 1 1 1 1 1 18 1 1 256 1 1 1 1 1 16 1 1 183 1 1 1  30  Finally, the possibility to pickup and deliver the items is for certain one another challenging problem. The outcomes of our research can further be adopted to solve routing problems with nonlinear cost functions, for example those when such a measure as gallon per vehicle mile versus load is used. 11. Acknowledgements We want to thank the referees for their valuable suggestions which helped to improve the paper. This research has been supported through ARC Discovery Project DP130104395. 12. References References Applegate, D., Cook, W. J., & Rohe, A. (2003). Chained lin-kernighan for large traveling salesman problems. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 15 , 82–92. Balas, E. (1989). The prize collecting traveling salesman problem. Networks, 19 , 621–636. Beham, A., Fechter, J., Kommenda, M., Wagner, S., Winkler, S. M., & Affenzeller, M. (2015). Optimization strategies for integrated knapsack and traveling salesman problems. In R. Moreno-Dı́az, F. Pichler, & A. QuesadaArencibia (Eds.), Computer Aided Systems Theory – EUROCAST 2015: 15th International Conference, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain, February 813, 2015, Revised Selected Papers (pp. 359–366). Cham: Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-27340-2_45. Bockmayr, A., & Hooker, J. N. (2005). Constraint programming. In G. N. K. Aardal, & R. Weismantel (Eds.), Discrete Optimization (pp. 559 – 600). Elsevier volume 12 of Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science. doi:10.1016/S0927-0507(05)12010-6. Bonyadi, M. R., Michalewicz, Z., & Barone, L. (2013). The travelling thief problem: The first step in the transition from theoretical problems to realistic problems. In Proceedings of the IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, CEC 2013, Cancun, Mexico, June 20-23, 2013 (pp. 1037–1044). IEEE. doi:10.1109/CEC.2013.6557681. Bretthauer, K. M., & Shetty, B. (2002). The nonlinear knapsack problem algorithms and applications. European Journal of Operational Research, 138 , 459–472. Chand, S., & Wagner, M. (2016). Fast heuristics for the multiple traveling thieves problem. In Proceedings of the 2016 Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation GECCO ’16. New York, NY, USA: ACM. doi:10.1145/2908812.2908841. 31  Chekuri, C., & Khanna, S. (2005). A polynomial time approximation scheme for the multiple knapsack problem. SIAM J. Comput., 35 , 713–728. Elhedhli, S. (2005). Exact solution of a class of nonlinear knapsack problems. Oper. Res. Lett., 33 , 615–624. Erlebach, T., Kellerer, H., & Pferschy, U. (2001). Approximating multi-objective knapsack problems. In F. K. H. A. Dehne, J.-R. Sack, & R. Tamassia (Eds.), WADS (pp. 210–221). Springer volume 2125 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Faulkner, H., Polyakovskiy, S., Schultz, T., & Wagner, M. (2015). Approximate approaches to the traveling thief problem. In Proceedings of the 2015 Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation GECCO ’15 (pp. 385– 392). New York, NY, USA: ACM. doi:10.1145/2739480.2754716. Feillet, D., Dejax, P., & Gendreau, M. (2005). Traveling salesman problems with profits. Transportation Science, 39 , 188–205. doi:10.1287/trsc.1030.0079. Garey, M., & Johnson, D. (1979). Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness. W. H. Freeman. GOODYEAR (2008). Factors Affecting Truck Fuel Economy. http://www.goodyeartrucktires.com/pdf/resources/publications/Factors Affecting Truck Fuel Economy.pdf. Hochbaum, D. S. (1995). A nonlinear knapsack problem. Oper. Res. Lett., 17 , 103–110. Kellerer, H., Pferschy, U., & Pisinger, D. (2004). Knapsack Problems. Springer, Berlin, Germany. Laporte, G. (2009). Fifty years of vehicle routing. Transportation Science, 43 , 408–416. doi:10.1287/trsc.1090.0301. Li, H.-L. (1994). A global approach for general 0-1 fractional programming. European Journal of Operational Research, 73 , 590 – 596. doi:10.1016/ 0377-2217(94)90257-7. Lin, C., Choy, K., Ho, G., Chung, S., & Lam, H. (2014). Survey of green vehicle routing problem: Past and future trends. Expert Systems with Applications, 41 , 1118 – 1138. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2013.07.107. Lourenço, N., Pereira, F. B., & Costa, E. (2016). An evolutionary approach to the full optimization of the traveling thief problem. In F. Chicano, B. Hu, & P. Garcı́a-Sánchez (Eds.), Evolutionary Computation in Combinatorial Optimization: 16th European Conference, EvoCOP 2016, Porto, Portugal, March 30 - April 1, 2016, Proceedings (pp. 34–45). Cham: Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-30698-8_3.  32  Martello, S., Pisinger, D., & Toth, P. (1999). Dynamic programming and strong bounds for the 0-1 knapsack problem. Manage. Sci., 45 , 414–424. doi:10. 1287/mnsc.45.3.414. Martello, S., & Toth, P. (1990). Knapsack Problems: Algorithms and Computer Implementations. John Wiley & Sons. Mei, Y., Li, X., Salim, F., & Yao, X. (2015). Heuristic evolution with genetic programming for traveling thief problem. In 2015 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC) (pp. 2753–2760). doi:10.1109/CEC.2015.7257230. Mei, Y., Li, X., & Yao, X. (2016). On investigation of interdependence between sub-problems of the travelling thief problem. Soft Computing, 20 , 157–172. doi:10.1007/s00500-014-1487-2. Polyakovskiy, S., Bonyadi, M. R., Wagner, M., Michalewicz, Z., & Neumann, F. (2014). A comprehensive benchmark set and heuristics for the traveling thief problem. In Proceedings of the 2014 Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation GECCO ’14 (pp. 477–484). New York, NY, USA: ACM. Polyakovskiy, S., & Neumann, F. (2015). Packing while traveling: Mixed integer programming for a class of nonlinear knapsack problems. In L. Michel (Ed.), Integration of AI and OR Techniques in Constraint Programming (pp. 332–346). Springer International Publishing volume 9075 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-18008-3_23. Reinelt, G. (1991). TSPLIB - A Traveling Salesman Problem Library. ORSA Journal on Computing, 3 , 376–384. doi:10.1287/ijoc.3.4.376. Rossi, F., van Beek, P., & Walsh, T. (2008). Chapter 4 constraint programming. In V. L. Frank van Harmelen, & B. Porter (Eds.), Handbook of Knowledge Representation (pp. 181 – 211). Elsevier volume 3 of Foundations of Artificial Intelligence. doi:10.1016/S1574-6526(07)03004-0. Rossi, F., Beek, P. v., & Walsh, T. (2006). Handbook of Constraint Programming (Foundations of Artificial Intelligence). New York, NY, USA: Elsevier Science Inc. Sherali, H., & Adams, W. (1999). A Reformulation Linearization Technique for Solving Discrete and Continuous Nonconvex Problems. J Kluwer Academic Publishing, Boston, MA. Tawarmalani, M., Ahmed, S., & Sahinidis, N. (2002). Global optimization of 0-1 hyperbolic programs. Journal of Global Optimization, 24 , 385–416. doi:10.1023/A:1021279918708. Toth, P., & Vigo, D. (2014). Vehicle Routing. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. doi:10.1137/1.9781611973594.  33  Vansteenwegen, P., Souffriau, W., & Oudheusden, D. V. (2011). The orienteering problem: A survey. European Journal of Operational Research, 209 , 1 – 10. doi:http://10.1016/j.ejor.2010.03.045. Westerlund, A., Göthe-Lundgren, M., & Larsson, T. (2006). A stabilized column generation scheme for the traveling salesman subtour problem. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 154 , 2212 – 2238. doi:10.1016/j.dam.2005.04.012. International Symposium on Combinatorial Optimization CO’02. Wu, J., Polyakovskiy, S., & Neumann, F. (2016). On the impact of the renting rate for the unconstrained nonlinear knapsack problem. In Proceedings of the 2016 Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation GECCO ’16 (pp. 413–419). New York, NY, USA: ACM. doi:10.1145/ 2908812.2908862.  34

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
