Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 9
ArXiv ID: hf_5598

Abstract:
arXiv:1804.00497v1 [cs.CV] 28 Mar 2018  µNet: A Highly Compact Deep Convolutional Neural Network Architecture for Real-time Embedded Traffic Sign Classification Alexander Wong, Mohammad Javad Shafiee, Michael St. Jules Dept. of Systems Design Engineering University of Waterloo, DarwinAI {a28wong, mjshafiee}@uwaterloo.ca, {michael}@darwinai.ca  Abstract Traffic sign recognition is a very important computer vision task for a number of real-world applications such as intelligent transportation surveillance and analysis. While deep neural networks have been demonstrated in recent years to provide state-of-the-art performance traffic sign recognition, a key challenge for enabling the widespread deployment of deep neural networks for embedded traffic sign recognition is the high computational and memory requirements of such networks. As a consequence, there are significant benefits in investigating compact deep neural network architectures for traffic sign recognition that are better suited for embedded devices. In this paper, we introduce µNet, a highly compact deep convolutional neural network for real-time embedded traffic sign recognition based on macroarchitecture design principles as well as microarchitecture optimization strategies. The resulting overall architecture of µNet is thus designed with as few parameters and computations as possible while maintaining recognition performance. The resulting µNet possesses a model size of just ∼1MB and ∼510,000 parameters (∼27x fewer parameters than state-of-the-art) while still achieving a human performance level top-1 accuracy of 98.9% on the German traffic sign recognition benchmark. Furthermore, µNet requires just ∼10 million multiply-accumulate operations to perform inference. These experimental results show that highly compact, optimized deep neural network architectures can be designed for real-time traffic sign recognition that are wellsuited for embedded scenarios.  Figure 1. Example images of traffic signs from the German traffic sign recognition benchmark [19].  results for traffic sign recognition, with much of the research focused on designing deep convolutional neural networks for improved accuracy [4, 5, 11, 1, 2]. Despite the fact that such traffic sign recognition networks have shown state-of-the-art object detection accuracies beyond what can be achieved by previous state-of-theart methods, a key challenge for enabling the widespread deployment of deep neural networks for embedded traffic sign recognition is the high computational and memory requirements of such networks. For example, the committee of deep convolutional neural networks proposed by Ciresan et al. [5] consists of ∼38.5 million parameters while the ensemble of deep convolutional neural networks trained via hinge loss as proposed by Jin et al. [11] consists of ∼23.2 million parameters. More recently, the state-of-the-art deep convolutional network with spatial transformers proposed  1. Introduction Traffic sign recognition can be considered an important computer vision task for a number of real-world applications such as intelligent transportation surveillance and analysis (see Figure 1). The arrival of modern breakthroughs in deep learning [14, 12] has resulted in significant state-of-the-art 1  by Arcos-Garcia et al. [2], while having fewer parameters than the aforementioned approaches, still consisted of over ∼14 million parameters. At a significantly smaller sizes than the aforementioned configurations, the macroarchitectures proposed by Ciresan et al. [5] as well as that proposed by proposed by Aghdam et al. [1] still consist of ∼1.5 million parameters and ∼1.74 million parameters, respectively. As such, the design of more compact and efficient deep neural network architectures for traffic sign recognition is highly desired for embedded applications. Recently, there has been an increasing focus in exploring small deep neural network architectures that are more suitable for embedded devices [9, 10, 17, 7, 1, 21, 18, 22]. For example, in the work by Iandola et al. [10], three key design strategies were leveraged to create compact macroarchitectures: 1) filter quantity reduction, 2) input channel reduction, and 3) late downsampling in the network. As a result of such design strategies, a compact SqueezeNet macroarchitecture was introduced that comprised of Fire modules that was ∼50X smaller than AlexNet with comparable accuracy on ImageNet [6] for 1000 classes. In the work by Howard et al. [9], they leveraged depth-wise separable convolutions to reduce the number of parameters, as well as two global hyperparameters based on network width and resolution for finding the tradeoff between latency and accuracy. Sandler et al. [17] expanded upon this by introducing an inverted residual structure that enabled further reductions in the number of parameters while maintaining high performance. In the work by Hasanpour et al. [7], additional design principles such as gradual expansions with minimum allocation, homogeneous groups of layers, local correlation preservation, and balanced distribution of neurons enable the design of a simple yet efficient SimpNet deep neural network architecture with significantly fewer parameters while achieving strong performance. In the work by Wong et al. [21], rather than taking a balanced distribution strategy as in [17], a non-uniform microarchitecture optimization strategy was leveraged instead where the different microarchitectures of individual modules and layers in a deep neural network are designed to possess highly non-uniform architectural configurations that are highly optimized to have as few parameters as possible while still maintaining overall accuracy and performance. This strategy allowed Wong et al. to develop a highly optimized Tiny SSD deep convolutional neural network that achieved improved performance (∼4.2% higher than Tiny YOLO [16]) while being extremely compact (∼26x smaller than Tiny YOLO [16]). As such, the design of highly efficient deep neural network architectures that are well-suited for real-time embedded computer vision tasks while achieving strong performance can lead to very promising results and is worth further exploration and investigation. In an attempt to achieve strong accuracy while satisfy-  Table 1. The optimized network architecture underlying µNet  Type / Stride Conv / s1 Conv / s1 Conv / s1 Conv / s1 FC / s1 FC / s1 Softmax / s1  Filter Shape 1×1×1 5 × 5 × 29 3 × 3 × 59 3 × 3 × 74 1 × 300 1 × 300 Classifier  Input Size 48 × 48 48 × 48 22 × 22 10 × 10 1 × 1184 1 × 300 1 × 43  ing real-time embedded requirements (i.e., fewer parameters and computations), we take inspiration from the macroarchitecture design principles introduced in [9, 10, 17] and the non-uniform microarchitecture optimization strategy employed by [21] to design highly compact yet powerful deep neural networks for real-time embedded applications and scenarios. The resulting network architecture achieved in this paper is µNet, a highly compact deep convolutional neural network designed specifically for real-time embedded traffic sign recognition. In µNet’s highly optimized network architecture, the underlying microarchitecture of each convolutional layer in the network is highly non-uniform and designed with as few parameters and computations as possible while maintaining recognition performance. Furthermore, the macroarchitecture of the proposed µNet network employs network components that encourage improved computational efficiency and efficacy in embedded environments. This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the highly optimized network architecture and design considerations underlying the proposed µNet network. Section 3 presents experimental results that evaluate the efficacy of the proposed µNet network for real-time embedded traffic sign recognition, along with a discussion on some key observations about the network. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 4.  2. Network architecture of µNet Leveraging macroarchitecture design principles from [9, 10, 17, 1] and a non-uniform microarchitecture optimization strategy [21], the overall network architecture of the proposed µNet network for real-time embedded traffic sign recognition is inspired by the network macroarchitecture described in [1] and takes the following design considerations into account to greatly improve the efficiency of the resulting deep convolutional neural network while maintaining strong accuracy: • Choice of each neuron’s activation function for reduced computational complexity • Optimizing microarchitectures of each convolutional  layer non-uniformly for reduced number of parameters • Incorporate additional layer to macroarchitecture to further reduce number of parameters and computational complexity while maintaining strong accuracy • Optimizing parameter precision for reduced model size while maintaining strong accuracy Table 1 shows the overall architecture of the proposed µNet network architecture, and each of the design considerations in the design of µNet is discussed in detail below.  2.1. Choice of neural activation function The first design consideration in obtaining an ideal network architecture for real-time embedded traffic sign recognition is the choice of activation functions used for each neuron in the deep neural network. In previously proposed network architectures such as that proposed in Ciresan et al. [5] and in Aghdam et al. [1], activation functions such as the scaled hyperbolic tangent function [13] and the parametric rectifier linear unit (PReLU) function [8] were used for each neuron, respectively (see Fig. 2a and Fig. 2b). While more practical than the sigmoid function, activation functions such as the scaled hyperbolic tangent function and the PReLU function still have higher computational complexity than the popular rectified linear unit (ReLU) function (see Fig. 2c) and thus may be less suitable for real-time embedded applications. To reduce the computational complexity of the proposed µNet network architecture, the rectified linear unit (ReLU) function is used instead as the activation function for each neuron in the deep neural network as it is more suitable for real-time embedded applications.  2.2. Non-uniform microarchitecture optimization The second design consideration in obtaining an ideal network architecture for real-time embedded traffic sign recognition is to optimize the architecture of the proposed µNet network in a way that provides optimal, albeit highly nonuniform microarchitectures for each convolutional layer in the resulting network architecture. One of the key challenges to identifying the ideal microarchitecture for each of the individual convolutional layers in the deep neural network is to achieve a fine balance between modeling performance and model size as well as computations involved. While a number of existing techniques have focused on uniform finetuning of microarchitectures [9, 17], the strategy employed here is the strategy proposed in [21], which instead focuses on highly non-uniform microarchitecture optimizations as it was found by the authors to yield a better balance between modeling performance and model size as well as reduced computations. Taking that mentality into account here, in terms of obtaining the ideal microarchitectures within the proposed µNet  Figure 2. Scaled hyperbolic tangent vs. PReLU vs. ReLU.  network, the key design parameters of the microarchitectures of each convolutional layer are the number of convolutional filters that form the microarchitecture. In an effort to achieve more optimized microarchitectures at a more fine-grain level, the number of convolutional filters of each size in each convolutional layer is optimized such that the layers have as few parameters as possible while still maintaining the overall accuracy of the network. The key advantage with leveraging such a non-uniform microarchitecture optimization strategy compared to a uniform fine-tuning strategy is that each layer has its own unique information density limits and thus the degree of microarchitecture optimization that can be achieved for each layer can differ substantially. Therefore, a non-uniform microarchitecture optimization strategy allows significantly greater flexibility in obtaining the ideal microarchitectures for each convolutional layer with the optimal information densities without being constrained by the need for uniformity. As a result, the proposed µNet network architecture possesses a highly non-uniform network architecture that is optimized for real-time embedded scenarios. This non-uniform nature of the proposed µNet network architecture can be clearly observed in Table 1, where the number of convolutional filters in each convolutional layer are not fixed multiples of that in previous convolutional layers.  Figure 3. Example images of each of the 43 traffic sign types from the German traffic sign recognition benchmark [19].  2.3. Macroarchitecture augmentation The third design consideration in obtaining an ideal network architecture for real-time embedded traffic sign recognition is to incorporate additional layers to the macroarchitecture of the µNet network that enable further reductions in computational complexity to be made while maintaining strong accuracy. Taking inspiration from [9, 10, 17] where 1×1 convolutional layers are leveraged to reduce the number of parameters in the network while preserving modeling performance, an additional 1×1 convolutional layer is incorporated at the beginning of proposed µNet network architecture. This 1×1 convolutional layer sits before a 5 × 5  convolutional layer and acts as a pointwise feature transform layer where new features are built through computing linear combinations of the input channels. Based on empirical experiments, the addition of this additional pointwise convolutional layer enables us to greatly reduce the number of filters needed in the 5×5 convolutional layer to obtain strong modeling accuracy. In addition to reducing the number of parameters in the proposed µNet network, the reduction in the number of convolutional filters in the 5×5 convolutional layer is very important as the convolutional filters are used to convolve inputs at the original image resolution, and as such reducing the number of convolutional filters result in  a significant reduction in the number of computations that need to be performed. Table 2. Top-1 accuracy results and number of parameters of µNet on German traffic sign recognition benchmark (GTSRB) [19]. The results of several state-of-the-art traffic sign recognition are provided, along with the average human performance, for comparison purposes.  Model Number of Top-1 accuracy Name parameters (GTSRB) Human [20] [15] 98.8% STDNN [2] 14M 99.7% EPCNN [1] 5.22M 99.7% HLSGD [11] 23.2M 99.6% MCDNN [5] 38.5M 99.5% PCNN† [1] 1.74M 99.3% CDNN† [5] 1.54M 98.5% µNet 0.51M 98.9% † average reported top-1 accuracy  Table 3. Resource usage of µNet.  Model Size 1.05MB  Total number of Parameters 0.51M  Total number of MACs 10.5M  training policy with the base learning rate set to 0.007, the momentum set to 0.9, the learning rate decay step size set to 1000, and the learning rate decay rate set to 0.9996. A l2 weight decay with rate 0.00001 was also used on the filters and matrices, with all filter and matrix weights initialized via Xavier initialization, and the biases were initialized to 0.  3. Experimental Results and Discussion To study the efficacy of the proposed µNet for real-time embedded traffic sign recognition, we evaluate the following: • Top-1 accuracy on the German traffic sign recognition benchmark (GTSRB) [19] • Resource usage (model size, number of parameters, number of multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations • Information density [3] For evaluation purposes, the following state-of-the-art traffic sign recognition networks were also compared: • STDNN [2], deep convolutional neural network with spatial transformers, • HLSGD [11]: hinge loss trained deep convolutional neural network, • MCDNN [5]: multi-column deep convolutional neural network,  2.4. Parameter Precision Optimization The fourth design consideration in obtaining an ideal network architecture for real-time embedded traffic sign recognition is to optimize the precision of the parameters used in the proposed µNet network. For embedded applications, the computational requirements and memory requirements are typically quite strict and as such an effective strategy to address these requirements is to reduce the data precision of parameters in a deep neural network. In particular, embedded processors often support accelerated mixed precision operations, and as a result leveraging such parameter precision considerations into the design of the deep neural network can result in noticeable improvements in computational time as well as memory storage for embedded scenarios. For the µNet network architecture, all parameters are characterized with half precision floating-point data representations to enable further model size reductions while still achieving strong performance.  2.5. Training Here, we will discuss the training policy for learning the proposed µNet network. The proposed µNet network was trained for 60,000 iterations in the Caffe framework with a training batch size of 50. Stochastic gradient descent with momentum and exponential decay was utilized as the  • EPCNN [1]: ensemble of practical deep convolutional neural networks, • PCNN [1]: practical deep convolutional neural network, • CDNN [5]: Ciresan deep convolutional neural network.  3.1. Dataset The German traffic sign recognition benchmark (GTSRB) [19] used for evaluation purposes in this paper consists of color images of traffic signs (one traffic sign per image) with image sizes varying from 15×15 to 250×250 pixels. There are a total of 39,209 color images in the training set and a total of 12,630 images in the test set. To balance the number of samples in different classes as well as improve the generality of the resulting network, a number of different data augmentation techniques were leveraged including: i) rotation, ii) shifting, iii) sharpening, iv) Gaussian blur, v) motion blur, vi) HSV augmentation, and vii) mirroring. An example of each of the 43 types of traffic signs is shown in Figure 3. As standard for evaluating performance using GTSRB, all images are cropped and all images are resized to 48×48 pixels [5]. To evaluate the accuracy of the network, the top-1 accuracy was computed on the GTSRB test set.  Figure 4. Information density of µNet on German traffic sign recognition benchmark (GTSRB) [19]. The results of several state-of-the-art traffic sign recognition are provided for comparison purposes. Higher is better.  3.2. Information density The model efficiency of the proposed µNet network and the six state-of-the-art traffic sign recognition networks also being compared were assessed by means of its information density, a metric introduced in [3] to obtain a better understanding of the amount of relative performance a given deep neural network captured with respect to a fundamental building block. More specifically, the information density (D) of a deep neural network N is defined as the performance of the deep neural network (denoted by aN ) divided by the number of parameters needed for representing it (denoted by bN ), D=  aN bN  (1)  By taking into account both model size and network performance by means of a single metric, information density (expressed as percent of top-1 accuracy per parameter in this paper) provides a good representation of the network’s ability to utilize its full modeling capacity, with higher information density indicating better network efficiency.  3.3. Discussion Table 2 shows the number of parameters and the top1 accuracy of the proposed µNet network on the GTSRB test dataset, along with the number of parameters and top-1 accuracies for six state-of-the-art traffic sign recognition networks. A number of interesting observations can be made. First, the resulting µNet possesses just ∼510,000 parameters, which is ∼27.5x fewer than the state-of-the-art STDNN net-  work [2]. Even when compared to the smallest state-of-theart traffic sign recognition network compared in this paper (i.e., the CDNN network [5], which µNet outperforms), the proposed µNet network still has ∼3x fewer parameters. The significantly fewer number of parameters in the proposed µNet network compared to all of the evaluated state-of-theart traffic sign recognition networks illustrates its efficacy for greatly reducing the computational and memory requirements, making the use of µNet very well suited for real-time embedded traffic sign recognition purposes. Second, it can be observed that the resulting µNet was still able to achieve a top-1 accuracy of 98.9% on the GTSRB test dataset, which is just ∼0.8% lower than that achieved using the state-of-theart STDNN network, and ∼0.4% higher than that achieved by the smallest tested network outside of the proposed µNet (i.e., CDNN [5]). Third, it can be observed that the top-1 accuracy of the proposed µNet network was equivalent to the average human performance reported in [20]. The top-1 accuracy results exhibited by µNet illustrates the efficacy of this proposed network for providing strong embedded traffic sign recognition capabilities despite its significantly smaller size compared to other state-of-the-art networks. Figure 4 shows the information density of the proposed µNet network on the GTSRB test dataset, along with the information density for six state-of-the-art traffic sign recognition networks. It can be observed that the information density of the resulting µNet is significantly higher than all of the other tested traffic sign recognition networks, by as much as ∼75x higher in the case of MCDNN [5]. The high information density of the proposed µNet network when compared to the other evaluated state-of-the-art traffic sign  recognition networks further illustrate the network efficiency of the proposed network. Table 3 shows the resource usage of the proposed µNet network, which is very important for evaluating its efficacy for real-time embedded applications given that both memory and computational resources are very limited in such cases. A number of interesting observations can be made. First, it can be observed that the proposed µNet network is just ∼1.05MB in size, which can be contributed to the fact that not only is the number of parameters being very low compared to existing state-of-the-art networks but also a result of the fact that the parameters are represented with half-precision float-point values. Second, it can be observed that the proposed µNet network requires just ∼10.5 million multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations to perform inference, making it very well-suited for real-time embedded traffic sign recognition. These experimental results clearly demonstrate that very small yet accurate deep neural network architectures can be designed for real-time traffic sign recognition that are well-suited for embedded scenarios.  4. Conclusions In this paper, a highly compact deep convolutional neural network called µNet is introduced for real-time embedded traffic sign recognition. By designing a highly optimized network architecture where each layer’s microarchitecture is optimized to have as few parameters as possible, along with macroarchitecture augmentation and parameter precision optimization, the resulting µNet network achieves a good balance between accuracy and model size as well as inference speed. The resulting µNet possess a model size of just ∼1MB and ∼510,000 parameters (∼27x fewer parameters than state-of-the-art), requires just ∼10 million multiply-accumulate operations to perform inference, while still achieving a top-1 accuracy of 98.9% on the German traffic sign recognition benchmark, thus achieving humanlevel performance. These experimental results show that very small yet accurate deep neural network architectures can be designed for real-time traffic sign recognition that are well-suited for embedded scenarios.  [3]  [4]  [5]  [6]  [7]  [8]  [9]  [10]  [11]  [12]  [13]  [14] [15] [16]  Acknowledgment [17]  The authors thank Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Canada Research Chairs Program, DarwinAI, and Nvidia for hardware support. [18]  References [1] H. Aghdam, E. Heravi, and D. Puig. A practical approach for detection and classification of traffic signs using convolutional neural networks. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 2016. [2] A. Arcos-Garcia, J. Alvarez-Garcia, and L. M.Soria-Morillo. Deep neural network for traffic sign recognition systems: An  [19]  analysis of spatial transformers and stochastic optimisation methods. In Neural Networks, pages 158–165, 2018. A. Canziani, A. Paszke, and E. Culurciello. An analysis of deep neural network models for practical applications. arXiv:1605.07678, 2017. M. U. M.-J. S. J. Ciresan, D. A committee of neural networks for traffic sign classification. In IEEE International joint conference on neural networks, 2011. M. U. M.-J. S. J. Ciresan, D. Multi-column deep neural network for traffic sign classification. In Neural Networks, 2012. J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database. In CVPR09, 2009. S. H. Hasanpour, M. Rouhani, M. Fayyaz, M. Sabokrou, and E. Adeli. Towards principled design of deep convolutional networks: Introducing simpnet. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06205, 2018. K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pages 1026–1034, 2015. A. G. Howard, M. Zhu, B. Chen, D. Kalenichenko, W. Wang, T. Weyand, M. Andreetto, and H. Adam. Mobilenets: Efficient convolutional neural networks for mobile vision applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04861, 2017. F. N. Iandola, S. Han, M. W. Moskewicz, K. Ashraf, W. J. Dally, and K. Keutzer. Squeezenet: Alexnet-level accuracy with 50x fewer parameters and¡ 0.5 mb model size. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07360, 2016. Z. C. Jin J., Fu K. Traffic sign recognition with hinge loss trained convolutional neural networks. In IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, pages 1991–2000, 2014. A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In NIPS, 2012. B. L. B. Y. LeCun, Y. and P. Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 1998. Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton. Deep learning. Nature, 2015. A. Peters. Number of neurons and synapses in primary visual cortex. In Cerebral cortex, pages 267–294. Springer, 1987. J. Redmon. YOLO: Real-time object detection. https://pjreddie.com/darknet/yolo/, 2016. M. Sandler, A. Howard, and M. Z. A. Z. L.-C. Chen. Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks: Mobile networks for classification, detection and segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.04381, 2018. M. J. Shafiee, F. Li, B. Chwyl, and A. Wong. Squishednets: Squishing squeezenet further for edge device scenarios via deep evolutionary synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.07459, 2017. J. Stallkamp, M. Schlipsing, J. Salmen, and C. Igel. The german traffic sign recognition benchmark: a multi-class classification competition. IEEE International joint conference on neural networks, 2011.  [20] J. Stallkamp, M. Schlipsing, J. Salmen, and C. Igel. Man vs. computer: Benchmarking machine learning algorithms for traffic sign recognition. Neural networks, 32:323–332, 2012. [21] A. Wong, M. Shafiee, F. Li, and B. Chwyl. Tiny ssd: A tiny single-shot detection deep convolutional neural network for real-time embedded object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06488, 2018. [22] B. Wu, F. Iandola, P. H. Jin, and K. Keutzer. Squeezedet: Unified, small, low power fully convolutional neural networks for real-time object detection for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.01051, 2016.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 9. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
