Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_5999

Abstract:
Preprint version; final version available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems (Accepted) DOI: 10.1109/TCDS.2017.2754143 1  DAC-h3: A Proactive Robot Cognitive Architecture to Acquire and Express Knowledge About the World and the Self  arXiv:1706.03661v2 [cs.AI] 18 Sep 2017  Clément Moulin-Frier*, Tobias Fischer*, Maxime Petit, Grégoire Pointeau, Jordi-Ysard Puigbo, Ugo Pattacini, Sock Ching Low, Daniel Camilleri, Phuong Nguyen, Matej Hoffmann, Hyung Jin Chang, Martina Zambelli, Anne-Laure Mealier, Andreas Damianou, Giorgio Metta, Tony J. Prescott, Yiannis Demiris, Peter Ford Dominey, and Paul F. M. J. Verschure  Abstract—This paper introduces a cognitive architecture for a humanoid robot to engage in a proactive, mixed-initiative exploration and manipulation of its environment, where the initiative can originate from both the human and the robot. The framework, based on a biologically-grounded theory of the brain and mind, integrates a reactive interaction engine, a number of state-of-the art perceptual and motor learning algorithms, as well as planning abilities and an autobiographical memory. The architecture as a whole drives the robot behavior to solve the symbol grounding problem, acquire language capabilities, execute goal-oriented behavior, and express a verbal narrative of its own experience in the world. We validate our approach in humanrobot interaction experiments with the iCub humanoid robot, showing that the proposed cognitive architecture can be applied in real time within a realistic scenario and that it can be used with naive users. Index Terms—Cognitive Robotics, Distributed Adaptive Control, Human-Robot Interaction, Symbol Grounding, Autobiographical Memory Manuscript received December 31, 2016; revised July 25, 2017; accepted August 09, 2017. The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Research Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP/2007-2013) / ERC Grant Agreement n. FP7-ICT612139 (What You Say Is What You Did project), as well as the ERC’s CDAC project: Role of Consciousness in Adaptive Behavior (ERC-2013-ADG 341196). M. Hoffmann was supported by the Czech Science Foundation under Project GA17-15697Y. P. Nguyen received funding from ERC’s H2020 grant agreement No. 642667 (SECURE). T. Prescott and D. Camilleri received support from the EU Seventh Framework Programme as part of the Human Brain (HBP-SGA1, 720270) project. C. Moulin-Frier, J.-Y. Puigbo, S. C. Low, and P. F. M. J. Verschure are with the Laboratory for Synthetic, Perceptive, Emotive and Cognitive Systems, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08002 Barcelona, Spain. P. F. M. J. Verschure is also with Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST) and Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. T. Fischer, M. Petit, H. J. Chang, M. Zambelli, and Y. Demiris are with the Personal Robotics Laboratory, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ, U.K. G. Pointeau, A.-L. Mealier, and P. F. Dominey are with the Robot Cognition Laboratory of the INSERM U846 Stem Cell and Brain Research Institute, Bron 69675, France. U. Pattacini, P. Nguyen, M. Hoffmann, and G. Metta are with the Italian Institute of Technology, iCub Facility, Via Morego 30, Genova, Italy. M. Hoffmann is also with the Department of Cybernetics, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague. D. Camilleri, A. Damianou, and T. J. Prescott are with the Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, U.K. A. Damianou is now at Amazon.com. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCDS.2017.2754143 *C. Moulin-Frier and T. Fischer contributed equally to this work.  I. I NTRODUCTION HE so-called Symbol Grounding Problem (SGP, [1], [2], [3]) refers to the way in which a cognitive agent forms an internal and unified representation of an external word referent from the continuous flow of low-level sensorimotor data generated by its interaction with the environment. In this paper, we focus on solving the SGP in the context of human-robot interaction (HRI), where a humanoid iCub robot [4] acquires and expresses knowledge about the world by interacting with a human partner. Solving the SGP is of particular relevance in HRI, where a repertoire of shared symbolic units forms the basis of an efficient linguistic communication channel between the robot and the human. To solve the SGP, several questions should be addressed: • How are unified symbolic representations of external referents acquired from the multimodal information collected by the agent (e.g., visual, tactile, motor)? This is referred to as the Physical SGP [5], [6]. • How to acquire a shared lexicon grounded in the sensorimotor interactions between two (or more) agents? This is referred to as the Social SGP [6], [7]. • How is this lexicon then used for communication and collective goal-oriented behavior? This refers to the functional role of physical and social symbol grounding. This paper addresses these questions by proposing a complete cognitive architecture for HRI and demonstrating its abilities on an iCub robot. Our architecture, called DAC-h3, builds upon our previous research projects in conceiving biologically grounded cognitive architectures for humanoid robots based on the Distributed Adaptive Control theory of mind and brain (DAC, presented in the next section). In [8] we proposed an integrated architecture for generating a socially competent humanoid robot, demonstrating that gaze, eye contact and utilitarian emotions play an essential role in the psychological validity or social salience of HRI (DAC-h1). In [9], we introduced a unified robot architecture, an innovative Synthetic Tutor Assistant (STA) embodied in a humanoid robot whose goal is to interactively guide learners in a science-based learning paradigm through rich multimodal interactions (DAC-h2). DAC-h3 is based on a developmental bootstrapping process where the robot is endowed with an intrinsic motivation to act and relate to the world in interaction with social peers.  T  2 Preprint version; final version available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems (Accepted) DOI: 10.1109/TCDS.2017.2754143  Levinson [10] refers to this process as the human interaction environment, including social partners, in a way that facilitates engine: a set of capabilities including looking at objects of the acquisition of symbolic knowledge. Third, it needs to interest and interaction partners, pointing to these entities [11], actively maintain engagement with the social partners for a demonstrating curiosity as a desire to acquire knowledge [12] fluent interaction. Finally, the acquired symbols need to be and showing, telling and sharing this knowledge with others used in high-level cognitive functions dealing with linguistic [11], [13]. These are also coherent with the desiderata for communication and autobiographical memory. In this section, we review related works on each of these developmental cognitive architectures proposed in [14] stating that a cognitive architecture’s value system should manifest topics along with a brief overview of the solution adopted by both exploratory and social motives, reflecting the psychology the DAC-h3 architecture. of development defended by Piaget [15] and Vygotsky [16]. This interaction engine drives the robot to proactively control A. Functionally-driven vs. biologically-inspired approaches in its own acquisition and expression of knowledge, favoring the social robotics grounding of acquired symbols by learning multimodal repreThe methods used to conceive socially interactive robots sentations of entities through interaction with a human partner. derive predominantly from two approaches [17]. FunctionallyIn DAC-h3, an entity refers to an internal or external referent: designed approaches are based on reverse engineering methods, it can be either an object, an agent, an action, or a body part. assuming that a deep understanding of how the mind operates In turn, the acquired multimodal and linguistic representations is not a requirement for conceiving socially competent robots of entities are recruited in goal-oriented behavior and form the (e.g. [18], [19], [20]), whilst biologically-inspired robots are basis of a persistent concept of self through the development based on theories of natural and social sciences and expect two of an autobiographical memory and the expression of a verbal main advantages of constraining cognitive models by biological narrative. knowledge: to conceive robots that are more understandable We validate the proposed architecture following a humanto humans, as they reason using similar principles, and to robot interaction scenario where the robot has to learn concepts provide an efficient experimental benchmark from which the related to its own body and its vicinity in a proactive manner underlying theories of learning can be confronted, tested and and express those concepts in goal-oriented behavior. We show refined (e.g. [21], [22], [23]). One specific approach used a complete implementation running in real-time on the iCub huby Demiris and colleagues for the mirror neuron system is manoid robot. The interaction depends on the internal dynamics decomposing computational models implemented on robots of the architecture, the properties of the environment and the into brain operating principles which can then be linked and behavior of the human. We analyze a typical interaction in detail compared to neuroimaging and neurophysiological data [23]. and provide videos showing the robustness of our system in The proposed DAC-h3 cognitive architecture takes advantage various environments (https://github.com/robotology/wysiwyd). of both methods. It is based on an established biologicallyOur results show that the architecture autonomously drives grounded cognitive architecture of the brain and the mind (the the iCub to acquire a number of concepts about the present DAC theory, presented below) that is adapted for the HRI entities (objects, humans, and body parts), whilst proactively domain. However, while the global structure of the architecture maintaining the interaction with a human and recruiting those is constrained by biology, the implementation of specific concepts to express more complex goal-oriented behavior. We modules can be driven by their functionality, i.e. using statealso run experiments with naive subjects in order to test the of-the-art methods from machine learning that are powerful effect of the robot’s proactivity level on the interaction. at implementing particular functions without being directly In Section II we position the current contribution with respect constrained by biological knowledge. to related works in the field and rely on this analysis to emphasize the specificity of our approach. Our main contribution is described in Section III and consists in the proposal B. Cognitive architectures and the SGP Another distinction in approaches for conceiving social and implementation of an embodied and integrated cognitive architecture for the acquisition of multimodal information about robots, which is of particular relevance for addressing the external word referents, as well as a context-dependent lexicon SGP, reflects a divergence from the more general field of shared with a human partner and used in goal-directed behavior cognitive architectures (or unified theories of cognition [24]). and verbal narrative generation. The experimental validation Historically, two opposing approaches have been proposed to of our approach on an iCub robot is provided in Section IV, formalize how cognitive functions arise in an individual agent from the interaction of interconnected information processing followed by a discussion in Section V. modules in a cognitive architecture. Top-down approaches rely on a symbolic representation of a task, which has to be II. R ELATED W ORKS AND P RINCIPLES OF THE P ROPOSED decomposed recursively into simpler ones to be executed by A RCHITECTURE the agent. These rely principally on methods from symbolic Designing a cognitive robot that is able to solve the SGP artificial intelligence (from the General Problem Solver [25] requires a set of heterogeneous challenges to be addressed. First, to Soar [26] or ACT-R [27]). Although relatively powerful at the robot has to be driven by a cognitive architecture bridging solving abstract symbolic problems, top-down architectures are the gap between low-level reactive control and symbolic not able to solve the SGP per se because they presuppose knowledge processing. Second, it needs to interact with its the existence of symbols. Thus they are not suitable for  C. MOULIN-FRIER, T. FISCHER et al.: DAC-H3: A PROACTIVE ROBOT COGNITIVE ARCHITECTURE  3  addressing the problem of how these symbols can acquired between layers, as well as from lateral information processing from low-level sensorimotor signals. The alternative, bottom- within each layer. up approaches instead implement behavior without relying on complex knowledge representation and reasoning. This is C. Representation learning for solving the SGP typically the case in behavior-based robotics [28], emphasizing As we have seen, a cognitive architecture solving the SGP lower-level sensory-motor control loops as a starting point needs to bridge the gap between low-level sensorimotor data of behavioral complexity as in the Subsumption architecture and symbolic knowledge. Several methods have been proposed [29]. These approaches are not suitable to solve the SGP either for compressing multimodal signals into symbols. A solution because they do not consider symbolic representation as a based on geometrical structures was offered by Gärdenfors with necessary component of cognition (referred as intelligence the notion of conceptual spaces (e.g., [42]), whereby similarity without representation in [28]). between concepts is derived from distances in this space. Lieto Interestingly, this historical distinction between top-down et al. [43] advocate the use of the conceptual spaces as the representation based and bottom-up behavior based approaches lingua franca for different levels of representation. still holds in the domain of social robotics [30], [31]. RepresenAnother approach has been proposed in [44], [45], which tation based approaches rely on the modeling of psychological involves a single class of mental representations called “Semanaspects of social cognition (e.g. [32]), whereas behavior tic Pointers”. These representations are particularly suited in based approaches emphasize the role of embodiment and solving the SGP as they support binding operations of various reactive control to enable the dynamic coupling of agents modalities, which in turn result in a single representation. This [33]. Solving the SGP, both in its physical and social aspects, representation (which might have been initially formed by an therefore requires the integration of bottom-up processes for input of a single modality) can then trigger a corresponding acquiring and grounding symbols in the physical interaction concept, whose occurrence leads to simulated stimuli in the with the (social) environment and top-down processes for taking other modalities. Furthermore, while semantic pointers can advantage of the abstraction, reasoning and communication be represented as vectors, the vector representation can be abilities provided by the acquired symbol system. This has been transformed in neural activity which makes the implementation referred to as the micro-macro loop, i.e. a bilateral relationship biologically plausible and allows mapping to different brain between an emerged symbol system at the macro level and a areas. physical system consisting of communicating and collaborating Other approaches consider symbols as fundamentally sensoagents at the micro level [34]. rimotor units. For example, Object-Action Complexes (OACs) Several contributions in social robotics rely on such hybrid build symbolic representations of sensorimotor experience and architectures integrating bottom-up and top-down processes behaviors through the learning of object affordances [46] (for (e.g. [35], [36], [37], [38]). In [35], an architecture called a review of affordance-based approaches, see [47]). In [48], a embodied theory of mind was developed to link high-level framework founded on joint perceptuo-motor representations cognitive skills to the low-level perceptual abilities of a is proposed, integrating declarative episodic and procedural humanoid and implementing joint attention and intentional memory systems for combining experiential knowledge with state understanding. In [36], or [37], the architecture combines skillful know-how. deliberative planning, reactive control, and motivational drives In DAC-h3, visual, tactile, motor and linguistic information for controlling robots in interaction with humans. about the present entities is collected proactively through In this paper, we adopt the principles of the Distributed reactive control loops triggering sensorimotor exploration in Adaptive Control theory of the mind and the brain (DAC, [39], interaction with a human partner. Abstract representations are [40]). DAC is a hybrid architecture which posits that cognition learned on-line using state-of-the-art machine learning methods is based on the interaction of four interconnected control loops in each modality (see Section III). An entity is therefore operating at different levels of abstraction (see Figure 1). The represented internally in the robot’s memory as the association first level is called the somatic layer and corresponds to the between abstracted multimodal representations and linguistic embodiment of the agent within its environment, with its labels. sensors and actuators as well as the physiological needs (e.g. for exploration or safety). Extending bottom-up approaches with drive reduction mechanisms, complex behavior is bootstrapped D. Interaction paradigms and autonomous exploration in DAC from the self-regulation of an agent’s physiological Learning symbolic representations from sensorimotor signals needs when combined with reactive behaviors (the reactive requires an autonomous interaction of a robot with the physical layer). This reactive interaction with the environment drives the and social world. Several interaction paradigms have been dynamics of the whole architecture [41], bootstrapping learning proposed for grounding a lexicon in the physical interaction of processes for solving the physical SGP (the adaptive layer) and a robot with its environment. Since the pioneering paradigm the acquisition of higher-level cognitive representations such as of language games proposed in [49], a number of multiabstract goal selection, memory and planning (the contextual agent models have been proposed showing how particular layer). These high-level representations in turn modulate the properties of language can self-organize out of repeated dyadic activity at the lower levels via top-down pathways shaped by interactions between agents of a population (e.g. [50], [51]). behavioral feedback. The control flow in DAC is therefore In the domain of HRI, significant progress has been made distributed, both from bottom-up and top-down interactions in allowing robots to interact with humans, for example in  4 Preprint version; final version available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems (Accepted) DOI: 10.1109/TCDS.2017.2754143  learning shared plans [52], [53], [54], learning to imitate actions final challenge to address concerns the use of the acquired [55], [56], [57], [58], and learning motor skills [59] that can symbols for higher-level cognition, including language learning, be used for engaging in joint activities. Other contributions autobiographical memory and narrative expression. have focused on lexicon acquisition through the transfer of Several works address the ability of language learning in sensorimotor and linguistic information from the interaction robotics. The cognitive architecture of iTalk [70] focuses between a teacher and a learner through imitation [60] or action on modeling the emergence of language by learning about [61], [62]. However, in most of these interactions, the human the robot’s embodiment, learning from others, as well as is in charge and the robot is following the human’s lead: the learning linguistic capability. Cangelosi et al. [71] propose that choice of which concept to learn is left to the human and the action, interaction and language should be considered together robot must identify it. In this case, the robot must solve the as they develop in parallel, and one influences the others. referential indeterminacy problem described by Quine [63], Antunes et al. [72] assume that language is already learned, where the robot language learner has to extract the external and address the issue that linguistic input typically does not concept that was referred to by the human speaker. However, have a one-to-one mapping to actions. They propose to perform acquiring symbols by interacting with other agents is not only a reasoning and planning on three different layers (low-level robot unidirectional process of information transfer between a teacher perception and action execution, mid-level goal formulation and and learner [10]. plan execution, and high-level semantic memory) to interpret Autonomous exploration and proactive behavior solves this the human instructions. Similarly, [73] proposes a system to problem by allowing robots to take the initiative in exploring recognize novel objects using language capabilities in one shot. their environment [64] and interacting with people [65]. The In these works, language is typically used to understand the benefit of these abilities for knowledge acquisition has been human and perform actions, but not necessarily to talk about demonstrated in several developmental robotics experiments. past events that the robot has experienced. In [66], it is shown how a combination of social guidance A number of works investigate the expression of past events and intrinsic motivation improve the learning of object visual by developing narratives based on acquired autobiographical categories in HRI. A similar mechanism is adopted in [67] memories [74], [75], [76]. In [75], a user study is presented for learning complex sensorimotor mappings in the context which suggests that a robot’s narrative allows humans to get an of vocal development. In [68], planning conflicts due to the insight into long term human-robot interaction from the robot’s uncertainty of the detected human’s intention are resolved by perspective. The method in [76] takes user preferences into proactive execution of the corresponding task that optimally account when referring to past interactions. Similarly to our reduces the system’s uncertainty. In [69], the task is to acquire framework, it is based on the implementation and cooperation human-understandable labels for novel objects and learning how between both episodic and semantic memories with a dialog to manipulate them. This is realized through a mixed-initiative system. However, no learning capabilities (neither language interaction scenario and it is shown that proactivity improves nor knowledge) are introduced by the authors. the predictability and success of human-robot interaction. In the proposed DAC-h3 architecture, the acquired lexicon A central aspect of the DAC-h3 architecture is the robot’s allows the robot to execute action plans for achieving goalability to act proactively in a mixed-initiative scenario. This oriented behavior from human speech requests. Relevant allows self-monitoring of the robot’s own knowledge acquisi- information throughout the interaction of the robot with humans tion process, removing dependence on the human’s initiative. is continuously stored in an autobiographical memory used Interestingly, proactivity in a sense reverses the referential for the generation of a narrative self, i.e., a verbal description indeterminacy problem mentioned above by shifting the re- of the own robot’s history over the long term (able to store sponsibility of solving ambiguities to the agent who is endowed and verbally describe interactions from a long time ago, e.g. a with the adequate prior knowledge to solve it, i.e., the human, period of several months). in a HRI context. The robot is now in charge of the concepts In the next section, we describe how the above features are it wants to learn, and can use joint attention behaviors to guide implemented in a coherent cognitive architecture made up of the human toward the knowledge it wants to acquire. In the functional YARP [77] modules running in real-time on the proposed system, this is realized through a set of behavioral iCub robot. control loops, by self-regulating knowledge acquisition, and by proactively requesting missing information about entities III. T HE DAC- H 3 C OGNITIVE A RCHITECTURE from the human partner. This section presents the DAC-h3 architecture in detail, which is an instantiation of the DAC architecture for human-robot E. Language learning, autobiographical memory and narrative interaction. The proposed architecture provides a general frameexpression work for designing autonomous robots which act proactively for We have just described the main components that a robot 1) maintaining social interaction with humans, 2) bootstrapping requires to solve the SGP: a cognitive architecture able to the association of multimodal knowledge with its environment process both low-level sensorimotor data and high-level sym- that further enrich the interaction through goal-oriented action bolic representation, mechanisms for linking these two levels plans, and 3) express a verbal narrative. It allows a principled in abstract multimodal representations, as well autonomous organization of various functional modules into a biologically behaviors for proactively interacting with the environment. The grounded cognitive architecture.  C. MOULIN-FRIER, T. FISCHER et al.: DAC-H3: A PROACTIVE ROBOT COGNITIVE ARCHITECTURE  A. Layer and module overview  5  SELF MODEL  SOMATIC  REACTIVE  ADAPTIVE  CONTEXTUAL  Auto In DAC-h3, the somatic layer consists of an iCub humanoid ABM Biographical NSL robot equipped with advanced motor and sensory abilities Memory for interacting with humans and objects. The reactive layer ensures the autonomy of the robot through drive reduction Episodic Action Goals Memory Plans mechanisms implementing proactive behaviors for acquiring OPC and expressing knowledge about the current scene. This TASK MODEL allows the bootstrapping of adaptive learning of multimodal OPC PT SSM representations about entities in the adaptive layer. More Action Perception Associations specifically, the adaptive layer learns high-level multimodal Selection representations (visual, tactile, motor and linguistic) for the OR LRH KSL SRL categorization of entities (objects, agents, actions and body AD parts) and associates them in unified representations. Those Allostatic representations form the basis of an episodic memory for goalSensations Behaviors Controller oriented behavior through planning in the contextual layer, SR PASAR ARE which deals with goal representation and action planning. Within the contextual layer, an autobiographical memory of the robot is formed that can be expressed in the form of a Sensors Needs Effectors verbal narrative. The complete DAC-h3 architecture is shown in Figure 1. WORLD SELF ACTION It is composed of structural modules reflecting the cognitive modules proposed by the DAC theory. Each structural module might rely on one or more functional modules implementing more specific functionalities (e.g. dealing with motor control, object perception, and scene representation). The complete system described in this section, therefore, integrates several state-of-the-art algorithms for cognitive robotics and integrates Figure 1. The DAC-h3 cognitive architecture (see Section III) is an implementation of the DAC theory of the brain and mind (see Section II-B) them into a structured cognitive architecture grounded in adapted for HRI applications. The architecture is organized as a layered control the principles of the DAC theory. In the remainder of this structure with tight coupling within and between layers: the somatic, reactive, section, we describe each structural module layer by layer, adaptive and contextual layers. Across these layers, a columnar organization exists that deals with the processing of states of the world or exteroception as well as their interaction with the functional modules, and (left, red), the self or interoception (middle, blue) and action (right, green). provide references which provide more detail for the individual The role of each layer and their interaction is described in Section III. White boxes connected with arrows correspond to structural modules implementing modules.  WORLD  B. Somatic layer The somatic layer corresponds to the physical embodiment of the system. We use the iCub robot, an open source humanoid platform developed for research in cognitive robotics [4]. The iCub is a 104 cm tall humanoid robot with 53 degrees of freedom (DOF). The robot is equipped with cameras in its articulated eyes allowing stereo vision, and tactile sensors in the fingertips, palms of the hand, arms and torso. The iCub is augmented with an external RGB-D camera above the robot head for agent detection and skeleton tracking. Finally, an external microphone and speakers are used for speech recognition and synthesis, respectively. The somatic layer also contains the physiological needs of the robot that will drive its reactive behaviors, as described in the following section on the reactive layer. C. Reactive layer Following DAC principles, the reactive layer oversees the self-regulation of the internal drives of a cognitive agent from the interaction of sensorimotor control loops. The drives aim at self-regulating internal state variables (the needs of the somatic layer) within their respective homeostatic ranges. In biological  the cognitive modules proposed in the DAC theory. Some of these structural modules rely on functional modules, indicated by acronyms in the boxes next to the structural modules. Acronyms refer to the following functional modules. SR: Speech Recognizer; PASAR: Prediction, Anticipation, Sensation, Attention and Response; AD: Agent Detector; ARE: Action Rendering Engine; OR: Object Recognition; LRH: Language Reservoir Handler; SSM: Synthetic Sensory Memory; PT: Perspective Taking; SRL: Sensorimotor Representation Learning; KSL: Kinematic Structure Learning; OPC: Object Property Collector; ABM: Autobiographical Memory; NSL: Narrative Structure Learning.  terms, such an internal state variable could, for example, reflect the current glucose level in an organism, with the associated homeostatic range defining the minimum and maximum values of that level. A drive for eating would then correspond to a self-regulation mechanism where the agent actively searches for food whenever its glucose level is below the homeostatic minimum and stops eating even if food is present whenever it is above the homeostatic maximum. A drive is therefore defined as the real-time control loop triggering appropriate behaviors whenever the associated internal state variable goes out of its homeostatic range, as a way to self-regulate its value in a dynamic and autonomous way. In the social robotics context that is considered in this paper, the drives of the robot do not reflect biological needs as above but are rather related to knowledge acquisition and expression in social interaction. At the foundation of this developmental  6 Preprint version; final version available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems (Accepted) DOI: 10.1109/TCDS.2017.2754143  bootstrapping process is the intrinsic motivation to interact and communicate. As described by Levinson [10] (see Introduction), a part of the human interaction engine is a set of capabilities that include the motivation to interact and communicate through universal (language independent) manners; including looking at objects of interest and at the interaction partner, as well as pointing to these objects. These reactive capabilities are built into the reactive layer of the architecture forming the core of the DAC-h3 interaction engine. These interaction primitives allow the DAC-h3 system and the human to share attention around specific entities (body parts, objects, or agents), and to bootstrap learning mechanisms in the adaptive layer that associate visual, tactile, motor and linguistic representations of entities as described in the next section. Currently, the architecture implements the following two drives: one for knowledge acquisition and one for knowledge expression. However, DAC-h3 is designed in a way that facilitates the addition of new drives for further advancements (see Section V). First, a drive for knowledge acquisition provides the iCub with an intrinsic motivation to acquire new knowledge about the current scene. The internal variable associated with this drive is modulated by the number of entities in the current scene with missing information (e.g. unknown name, or missing property). The self-regulation of this drive is realized by proactively asking the human to provide missing information about entities, for instance, their name via speech, synchronized with gaze and pointing; or asking the human to touch the robot’s skin associated with a specific body part. Second, a drive for knowledge expression allows the iCub to proactively express its acquired knowledge by interacting with the human and objects. The internal variable associated with this drive is modulated by the number of entities in the current scene without missing information. The self-regulation is then realized by triggering actions toward the known entities, synchronized with verbal descriptions of those actions (e.g. pointing towards an object or moving a specific body part, while verbally referring to the considered entity). The implementation of these drives is realized through the three structural modules described below, interacting with each other as well as with the surrounding layers: 1) sensations, 2) allostatic controller, and 3) behaviors (see Figure 1). 1) Sensations: The sensations module deals with low-level sensing to provide relevant information for meaning extraction in the adaptive layer. Specifically, the module detects presence and position of other agents and their body parts (agent detector functional module; of interest are the head location for gazing at the partner and the location of the hands to detect pointing actions) based on the input of the RGB-D camera. Similarly, it detects objects based on a texture analysis and extracts their location using the stereo vision capabilities of the iCub [78]. The prediction, anticipation, sensation, attention and response functional module (PASAR; [79]) calculates the saliency of agents based on their motion (increased velocity leads to increased saliency), and similarly the saliency for objects is increased if they move or the partner points at them. Finally, the speech recognition functional module extracts text from human speech sensed by a microphone using the MicrosoftTM Speech API. The functionalities of the sensations module  can, therefore, be summarized as dimensionality reduction and saliency computation, and the resulting data are used for bootstrapping knowledge in higher layers of the architecture. 2) Allostatic Controller: In many situations, several drives which may conflict with each other can be activated at the same time (in the case of this paper, the drive for knowledge acquisition and the drive for knowledge exploration). Such possible conflicts can be solved through the concept of an allostatic controller [80], [81], defined as a set of simple homeostatic control loops and dealing with their scheduling to ensure an efficient global regulation of the internal state variables. The scheduling is decided according to the internal state of the robot and the output of the sensations module. The decision of which drive to follow depends on several factors: the distance of each drive level to their homeostatic boundaries, as well as predefined drive priorities (in DAC-h3, knowledge acquisition has priority over knowledge expression, which results in a curious personality). 3) Behaviors: To regulate the aforementioned drives, the allostatic controller is connected to the behaviors module, and each drive is linked to corresponding behaviors which are supposed to bring it back into its homeostatic range whenever needed. The positive influence of such a drive regulation mechanism on the acceptance of the HRI by naive users has been demonstrated in previous papers [82], [83]. The drive for knowledge acquisition is regulated by requiring information about entities through coordinated behaviors. Those behaviors depend on the type of the considered entity: • In the case of an object, the robot produces speech (e.g. “What is this object?”) while pointing and gazing at the unknown object. • In the case of an agent, the robot produces speech (e.g. “Who are you?”) while looking at the unknown human. • In the case of a body part, the robot either asks for the name (e.g. “How do you call this part of my body?”) while moving it or, if the name is already known from a previous interaction, asks the human to touch the body part while moving it (e.g., “Can you touch my index while I move it, please?”). The multimodal information collected through these behaviors will be used to form unified representations of entities in the adaptive layer (see next section). The drive for knowledge expression is regulated by executing actions towards known entities, synchronized with speech sentences parameterized by the entities’ linguistic labels acquired in the adaptive layer (see next section). Motor actions are realized through the action rendering engine (ARE [84]) functional module which allows executing complex actions such as push, reach, take, look in a coordinated human-like fashion. Language production abilities are implemented in the form of predefined grammars (for example asking for the name of an object). Semantic words associated to entities are not present at the reactive level, but are provided from the learned association operating in the adaptive layer. The iSpeak module implements a bridge between the iCub and a voice synthesizer by synchronizing the produced utterance with the lip movements of the iCub to realize a more vivid interaction [85].  C. MOULIN-FRIER, T. FISCHER et al.: DAC-H3: A PROACTIVE ROBOT COGNITIVE ARCHITECTURE  7  D. Adaptive layer collector (OPC), a functional module storing all information The adaptive layer oversees the acquisition of a state space associated with a particular entity at the present moment in a of the agent-environment interaction by binding visual, tactile, proto-language format as detailed in [82]. An entity is defined motor and linguistic representations of entities. It integrates as a concept which can be manipulated and is thus the basis functional modules for maintaining an internal representation for emerging knowledge. In DAC-h3, each entity has a name of the current scene, visually categorizing entities, recognizing associated, which might be unknown if the entity has been and sensing body parts, extracting linguistic labels from discovered but not yet explored. More specifically, higher level human speech, and learning associations between multimodal entities such as objects, body parts and agents have additional representations. They are grouped in three structural modules intrinsic properties. For example, an object also has a location described below: perceptions, associations and action selection and dimensions associated with it. Furthermore, whether the object is currently present is encoded as well, and if so, its (see Figure 1). 1) Perceptions: The object recognition functional mod- saliency value (as computed by the PASAR module described ule [86] is used to learn the categorization of objects directly in Section III-C). On the other hand, a body part is an entity from the visual information given by the iCub eyes with resort which contains a proprioceptive property (i.e. a specific joint), to the most recent deep convolutional networks. The bounding and a tactile information property (i.e. association with tactile boxes of the objects found in the Sensations module are fed to sensors). Thus, the OPC allows integrating multiple modalities the learning module for the recognition stage. The output of of one and the same entity to ground the knowledge about the system consists of the 2D (in the image plane) and 3D (in the self, other agents, and objects, as well as their relations. the world frame) positions of the identified objects along with Relations can be used to link several instances in an ontological the corresponding classification scores as stored in the objects model (see Section III-E1: Episodic Memory). Learning the multimodal associations that form the internal properties collector memory (explained below). representations of entities relies on the behavior generated by There are two functional modules related to language the knowledge acquisition drive operating at the reactive level understanding and language production, both integrated within (see previous section). Multimodal information about entities the language reservoir handler (LRH). The comprehension of generated by those behaviors is bound together by registering narrative discourse module receives a sentence and produces the acquired information in the specific data format used by the representation of the corresponding meaning, and can the OPC. For instance, the language reservoir handler module thus transform human speech into meaning. The module for described above deals with speech analysis to extract entity narrative discourse production receives a representation of labels from human replies (e.g. “this is a cube”; {P:is, A:this, meaning and generates the corresponding sentence (meaning O:cube, R:∅}). The extracted labels are associated with the to speech). The meaning is represented in terms of PAOR: acquired multimodal information which depends on the entity predicate(arguments), where arguments correspond to thematic type: visual representations generated by the object recognition roles (agent,object,recipient). Both models are implemented as recurrent neuronal networks based on reservoir computing module in case of an object or agent detector in case of an agent, as well as motor and touch information in case of a [87], [88], [89]. The synthetic sensory memory (SSM) module is currently body part. The associations of representations can also be applied to the employed for face recognition and action recognition using a fusion of RGB-D data and object location data as provided developmental robot itself (instead of external entities as above), from the sensations module. In terms of action recognition, to acquire motor capabilities or to learn the links between motor SSM has been trained to automatically segment and recognize joints and skin sensors of its body [93]. Learning self-related the following actions: push, pull, lift, drop, wave, and point, representations of the robot’s own body schema is realized by while also actively recognizing if the current action is known the sensorimotor representation learning functional module or unknown. More generally, it has been shown that SSM dedicated to forward model learning [94]. The module receives provides abilities for pattern learning, recall, pattern completion, sensory data collected from the robot’s sensors (e.g. cameras, imagination and association [90]. The SSM module is inspired skin, joint encoders) and allows accurate prediction of the next by the role of the hippocampus by fusing multiple sensory input state given the current state and an action. Importantly, the streams and representing them in a latent feature space [91]. forward model is learned based on sensory experiences rather During recall, SSM performs classification of incoming sensory than based on known mechanical properties of the robot’s body. The kinematic structure learning functional module [95], data and returns a label along with an uncertainty measure corresponding to the returned label, which is a use case of [96] estimates an articulated kinematic structure of arbitrary the action and face recognition tasks within DAC-h3. SSM objects (including the robot’s body parts and humans) using is also capable of imagining novel inputs or reconstructing visual input videos of the iCub eye cameras. This again is based previously encountered inputs and sending the corresponding on sensory experiences rather than known properties of the generated sensory data. This allows for the replay of memories agents, which is important to autonomously identify the abilities of other agents. Based on the estimated articulated kinematic as detailed in [92]. 2) Associations: The associations structural module pro- structures [95], we also allow the iCub to anchor two objects’ duces unified representations of entities by associating the kinematic structure joints by observing their movements [96] multimodal categories formed in the perception module. Those and formulating the problem of finding corresponding kinematic unified representations are formed in the objects properties joint matches between two articulated kinematic structures. This  8 Preprint version; final version available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems (Accepted) DOI: 10.1109/TCDS.2017.2754143  Figure 2. Examples of the kinematic structure correspondences which the iCub has found. The top figure shows the correspondences between the left and right arm of the iCub, which can be used to infer the body part names of one arm if the corresponding names of the other arm are known. Similarly, the bottom figure shows correspondences between the robot’s body and the human’s body.  allows the iCub to infer correspondences between its own body parts (its left arm and its right arm), as well as between its own body and the body of the human as retrieved by the agent detector [93] (see Figure 2). Finally, based on these correspondences, the perspective taking functional module [97] enables the robot to reason about the state of the world from the partner’s perspective. This is important in situations where the views of the robot and the human diverge, for example, due to objects which are hidden to the human but visible to the robot. More importantly, perspective taking is thought to be an essential element for successful cooperation and to ease communication, for example by resolving ambiguities [98]. By mentally aligning the selfperspective with that of the human partner, this module allows algorithms (concerned with the visuospatial perception of the world) to reason as if the input was acquired from an egocentric perspective; which allows to use learning algorithms trained on egocentric data to reason on data acquired from the human’s perspective without the need of adapting them. 3) Action Selection: The action selection module uses the information from associations to provide context to the behaviors module at the reactive level. This context corresponds to entity names which are provided as parameters to the behaviors module, for instance pointing at a specific object or using the object linguistic label in the parameterized grammars defined at the reactive level. This module also deals with the scheduling of action plans from the contextual layer according to the current state of the system as explained in the following. E. Contextual layer The contextual layer deals with higher-level cognitive functions that extend the time horizon of the cognitive agent, such as an episodic memory, goal representation, planning and the formation of a persistent autobiographical memory of the robot interaction with the environment. These functions rely on the unified representations of entities acquired at the adaptive level. The contextual layer consists of three functional modules that are described below: 1) episodic memory, 2) goals and  action plans, and 3) autobiographical memory used to generate a narrative structure. 1) Episodic Memory: The episodic memory relies on advanced functions of the object property collector (OPC) to store and associate information about entities in a uniform format based on the interrogative words “who” (is acting), “what” (they are doing), “where” (it happens), “when” (it happens), “why” (it is happening) and “how” called an H5W data structure [82]. It is used for goal representation and as elements of the autobiographical memory. H5W have been argued to be the main questions any conscious being must answer to survive in the world [99], [100]. The concept of relations is the core of the H5W framework. It links up to five concepts and assigns them with semantic roles to form a solution to the H5W problem. We define a relation as a set of five edges connecting those nodes in a directed and labeled manner. The labels of those edges are chosen so that the relation models a typical sentence from the English grammar of the form: Relation → Subject Verb [Object] [Place] [Time]. The brackets indicate that the components are optional; the minimal relation is therefore composed of two entities representing a subject and a verb. 2) Goals and action plans: Goals can be provided to the iCub from human speech, and a meaning is extracted by the language reservoir handler, forming the representation of a goal in the goals module. Each goal consequently refers to the appropriately predefined action plan, defined as a state transition graph with states represented by nodes and actions represented by edges of the graph. The action plans module extracts sequences of actions from this graph, with each action being associated with a pre- and a post-condition state. Goals and action plans can be parameterized by the name of a considered entity. For example, if the human asks the iCub to take the cube, this loads an action plan for the goal “Take an object” which consists of two actions: “Ask the human to bring the object closer” and “Pull the object”. In this case, each action is associated with a pre- and post-condition state in the form of a region in the space where the object is located. In the action selection module of the adaptive layer, the plan is instantiated toward a specific object according to the knowledge retrieved from the associations module (e.g. allowing to retrieve the current position of the cube). The minimal sequence of actions achieving the goal is then executed according to the perceived current state updated in real-time, repeating each action until its post-condition is met (or cease making the effort after a predefined timeout). Although quite rigid in its current implementation, in the sense that action plans are predefined instead of being learned from the interaction, this planning ability allows closing the loop of the whole architecture, where drive regulation mechanisms at the reactive layer can now be bypassed through contextual goal-oriented behavior. Limitations of this system are discussed in Section V: Conclusions. 3) Autobiographical Memory: The autobiographical memory (ABM [101], [102], [103]) collects long term information (days, months, years) about interactions motivated by the human declarative long term memory situated in the medial temporal lobe, and the distinction between facts and events  C. MOULIN-FRIER, T. FISCHER et al.: DAC-H3: A PROACTIVE ROBOT COGNITIVE ARCHITECTURE  9  [101]. It stores data (e.g. objects locations, human presence) from the beginning to the end of an episode by taking snapshots of the environmental information from the episodic memory containing the pre-conditions and effects of episodes. This allows the generation of high-level concepts extracted by knowledge-based reasoning. In addition, the ABM captures continuous information during an episode (e.g. images from the camera, joints values) [102], which can be used by reasoning modules focusing on the action itself, leading to the production of a procedural memory (e.g. through learning from motor babbling or imitation) [103]. The narrative structure learning module builds on the language processing and ABM capabilities. Narrative structure learning occurs in three phases: 1) First the iCub acquires experience in a given scenario, which generates the meaning representation in the ABM. 2) The iCub then formats each story in term of initial states, goal states, actions and results (IGARF graph [89]). 3) The human then provides a narration (that is understood using the reservoir system explained in Section III-D) for the scenario. By mapping the events of the narration to the event of the story, the robot can extract the meaning of different discourse functions words (such as “because”). It can thus automatically generate the corresponding form-meaning mapping that defines the individual grammatical constructions and their sequencing that defines the narrative construction of a new narrative. F. Summary on the DAC-h3 architecture  Figure 3. The setup consists of an iCub robot interacting with objects on the table and a human in front of it. The table is separated (indicated by horizontal lines) into three areas: I for the area only reachable by the iCub, S for the shared area, and H for the human-only area (compare with Section IV-A).  The DAC-h3 architecture, therefore, integrates several stateof-the-art algorithms for cognitive robotics and integrates them into a structured cognitive architecture grounded in the wysiwyd. It consists of all modules described in the last section principles of the DAC theory. The drive reduction mechanisms implemented in either C++ or Python, and relies on the YARP in the reactive layer allow a complex control of the iCub middleware [77] for defining their connections and ensuring robot which proactively interacts with humans. In turn, this their parallel execution in real-time. allows the bootstrapping of adaptive learning of multimodal representations about entities in the adaptive layer. Those representations form the basis of an episodic memory for goal- A. Experimental setup We consider an HRI scenario where the iCub and a human oriented behavior through planning in the contextual layer. The life-long interaction of the robot with humans continuously feed face each other with a table in the middle and objects placed an autobiographical memory able to retrieve past experience on it. The surface of the table is divided into three distinct from request and to express it verbally in a narrative. Altogether, areas, as shown in Figure 3: this allows the iCub to interact with humans in complex 1) an area which is only reachable by the iCub (I), scenarios, as described in the next section. 2) an area which is only reachable by the human (H), and 3) an area which is reachable by both agents (S for Shared). IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS The behaviors available to the iCub are the following: This section validates the cognitive architecture described • “Acquire missing information about an entity”, which is in the previous section on a real demonstration with an iCub described in more detail in Section IV-B1. humanoid robot interacting with objects and a human. We first • “Express the acquired knowledge”, which is described in describe the experimental setup, followed by the behaviors more detail in Section IV-B2. provided to the robot (self-generated and human-requested). • “Move an object on the table”, either by pushing it from Finally, we analyze the DAC-h3 system in two ways: a complete region I to S or pulling it from region S to I, version reporting the full complexity of the system through • “Ask the human to move an object”, either by asking to multiple video demonstrations and the detailed analysis of a push the object from region H to S or by asking to pull particular interaction, as well as a simplified version showing it from region S to H. the effect of the robot’s proactivity level on naive users. • “Show learned representations on screen” while explaining The code for reproducing these experiments on any iCub what is being shown, e.g. displaying the robot kinematic robot is available open-source at https://github.com/robotology/ structure learned from a previous arm babbling phase.  10 Preprint version; final version available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems (Accepted) DOI: 10.1109/TCDS.2017.2754143  “Interact verbally with the human” while looking at her/him. This is used for replying to some human requests as described in Section IV-C. These behaviors are implemented in the behaviors module and can be triggered from two distinct pathways as shown in Figure 1. The behaviors for acquiring and expressing knowledge are triggered through the drive reduction mechanisms implemented in the allostatic controller (Section III-C) and are self-generated by the robot. The remaining behaviors are triggered from the action selection module (Section III-D), scheduling action sequences from the goals and action plans modules (Section III-E). In the context of the experiments described in this section, these behaviors are requested by the human partner. We describe these two pathways in the two following subsections.  enters the scene, the iCub asks for her/his name, which is stored alongside representations of its face in the synthetic sensory memory module. Similarly, the robot stores all objects it has previously encountered in its episodic memory implemented by the object property collector module. When the chosen entity is an object, the robot asks the human to provide the name of interest while pointing at it. Then, the visual representation of the object computed by the object recognition module is mapped to the name. When the chosen entity is a body part (left-hand fingers), the iCub first raises its hand and moves a random finger to attract the attention of the human. Then it asks for the name of that body part. This provides a mapping between the robot’s joint identifier and the joint’s name. This mapping can be extended to include tactile information by asking the human to touch the body part which is being moved by the robot. Once a behavior has been triggered, the drive is reset to B. Self-generated behavior its default value and decays again as explained above (the Two drives for knowledge acquisition and knowledge ex- amount of the decay being reduced according to what has been pression implement the interaction engine of the robot (see acquired). Section III-C). They regulate the knowledge acquisition process 2) Drive to express knowledge: This drive regulates how the of the iCub and proactively maintain the interaction with the iCub expresses the acquired knowledge through synchronized human. The generated sensorimotor data feeds the adaptive speech, pointing and gaze. It aims at maintaining the interaction layer of the cognitive architecture to acquire multimodal with the human by proactively informing her/him about its information about the present entities (see Section III-D). current state of knowledge. The drive level decays proporIn the current experiment, the entities are objects on the tionally to the amount of already acquired information about table, body parts (fingers of the iCub), human partners, and the present entities. When below a given threshold (meaning actions. The acquired multimodal information depends on that a significant amount of information has been acquired), the considered entity. Object representations are based on it triggers a behavior alternating gazing toward the human visual categorization and stereo-vision based 3D localization and a known entity, synchronized with speech expressing the performed by the object recognition functional module. Body knowledge verbally, e.g. “This is the octopus”, or “I know you, part representations associate motor and touch events. Agents you are Daniel”. Once such a behavior has been triggered, the and actions representations are learned from visual input in the drive is reset to its default value and decays again as explained synthetic sensory memory module presented in Section III-D1. above (the amount of the decay changing according to what is Each entity is also associated with a linguistic label learned learned by satisfying the drive for knowledge acquisition). by self-regulating the two drives detailed below. These two drives allow the robot to balance knowledge 1) Drive to acquire knowledge: This drive maintains a acquisition and expression in an autonomous and dynamic curiosity-driven exploration of the environment by proactively way. At the beginning of the interaction, the robot has little requesting the human to provide information about the present knowledge about the current entities and therefore favors entities, e.g. naming an object or touching a body part. The behaviors for knowledge acquisition. By acquiring more and drive level decays proportionally to the amount of missing more knowledge, it progressively switches to behaviors for information about the present entities (e.g. the unknown name knowledge expression. If new entities are introduced, e.g. a of an entity). When below a given threshold, it triggers a new object or another human, it will switch back to triggering behavior following a generic pattern of interaction, instantiated more behaviors for knowledge acquisition and so on. according to the nature of the knowledge to be acquired. It begins with a behavior to obtain a joint attention between the human and the robot toward the entity that the robot wants C. Human-requested behavior to learn about. After the attention has been attracted toward The representations which are acquired through satisfying the desired entity, the iCub asks for the missing information the drives introduced above allow a more complex interaction (e.g. the name of an object or of the human, or in the case of through goal-oriented behavior managed by the contextual layer a body part the name and touch information) and the human (see Figure 1 and Section III-E). Goals can be provided to replies accordingly. In a third step, this information is passed the iCub from human speech and a meaning is extracted by to the adaptive layer and the knowledge of the robot is updated the language reservoir handler, forming the representation of in consequence. a goal in the goals module. Each goal is associated with an Each time the drive level reaches the threshold, an entity is action plan on the form of a sequence of actions together with chosen in a pseudo-random way within the set of perceived their pre- and post-conditions in the action plans module. The entities with missing information, with a priority to request the action selection module takes care of the execution of the plan name of a detected unknown human partner. Once a new agent according to the associations known to the robots, triggering •  C. MOULIN-FRIER, T. FISCHER et al.: DAC-H3: A PROACTIVE ROBOT COGNITIVE ARCHITECTURE  Push  I  Pull  Ask Pull  S  Ask Push  H  Figure 4. State transition graph used for generating the action plans of the goals “Give” and “Take”. Nodes correspond to the table regions indicated in Figure 3. Arrows correspond to the actions to be executed for realizing a transition. According to the observed current state of the object, the iCub will execute the action which brings it closer to the goal state. For example, if the goal is to take an object which is in the human area, the robot will first ask the human to push it, and subsequently pull it into its own area.  the appropriate behaviors according to its current perception of the scene updated in real time. Goal achievement bypasses the reactive behavior described in the previous subsection by freezing all the drive levels during the execution of the plan. The available goals are described below.  11  First I wanted to get the toy. First you have the toy. Then I fail to grasp it. After I fail to grasp, I reasoned. Because I reasoned, I ask for the toy to you Finally you gave me the toy Now I have the toy I have the toy because you gave it to me You gave the toy to me because I wanted it Figure 5. Example of a narrative generated by the robot. The language reservoir handler will decompose the words in the narrative discourse in 3 categories: the discourse function words (DFW) which direct the discourse from one sentence to the other, the open class words (OCW) which correspond to the meaningful words in terms of vocabulary of the sentence, and the closed class words (CCW) which have a grammatical function in the sentence (see [89]).  1) Give or take an object: These goals are generated from a 5) Show the learned kinematic structure: As for the previous human verbal request, e.g. “Give me the octopus” or “Take the goals, this goal is generated through verbal requests. When cube”. Here, the goal is represented as a region on the table, asked “What have you learned from your arm babbling?”, either the human area H (for the “Give” goal) or the iCub area the iCub refers the human to look at the screen where the I (for the “Take” goal), where the mentioned object should kinematic structures of its arms are displayed. Also, lines be placed. Action plans are generated from the state-transition which connect nodes of the kinematic structures indicate the graph shown in Figure 4. State perception is updated in real- correspondences which the iCub has found between its left and time according to the perceived location of the object computed right arm. Similarly, the iCub displays the correspondences through stereo-vision in the object recognition module. which it has found between one of its arms and the body of 2) Point to an object: This goal is generated through a the human (see Figure 2). This knowledge is further employed verbal request, e.g. “Point to the octopus”. If the mentioned to point to the human’s arm, which is interesting as both the object is not known to the iCub, it will first ask the human to name as well as the kinematic location of the human’s arm are point to it to learn the new association between the name and inferred from self-learned representations and mapping these the object’s visual representation. Once the name is known, or representations to the partner. if it was already known, the iCub will point to the object. 3) Say the name of a recognized action: This goal is D. Scenario Progression generated through a verbal request, e.g. “How do you call We first show how the full DAC-h3 system we have just this action?” formulated just after the human has performed described is able to generate a complex human-robot interaction an action on an object. Six actions can be recognized by by providing videos of live interactions (see https://github.com/ the synthetic sensory memory module: “push”, “pull”, “lift”, robotology/wysiwyd) and a detailed description of a particular “drop”, “wave”, and “point”. The reply from the iCub provides interaction. Then, in the next subsection, we will analyze the name of the action and the object as well as the hand used more specifically the effect of the robot’s proactivity level by the human, e.g. “You pushed the cube with your left hand”. on naive users. In both cases, we consider a mixed-initiative 4) Say what happened during a past interaction with a scenario, where the iCub behaves autonomously as described human: This goal is generated through a verbal request, in Section IV-B, and so does the human. The human can e.g. “What have you done the other day?”. Based on its interrupt the robot behavior by formulating verbal requests as past interactions with the environment and with humans, the described in Section IV-C. The scenario can follow various iCub has stored all the relevant information in its autobio- paths according to the interaction between the iCub’s internal graphical memory (see Section III-E), including its own drives, drive dynamics, its perception of the environment, and the motivations, and actions, as well of the actions of the human behavior of the human. Here, we describe one particular instance of the scenario. (both, spoken and physically enacted). The narrative handler functional module can generate a narrative discourse from the Figure 6 shows the corresponding drive dynamics and humancontent of the autobiographical memory and to generate an robot interactions, and Figure 1 shows the connections between action plan in the form of a sequence of sentences. The human the modules of the cognitive architecture. Each of the numbered can request more detailed information about an event using items below refers to its corresponding number in Figure 6. sentences like “What happened next?” or “Why did you do 1) At the beginning of the interaction, the iCub has only that?”, this later question being answered according to the limited knowledge about the current scene. In the sensastored drive levels and goal states of the considered events. tions module, the agent detector detects the presence of The robot can also learn a set of questions that it can re-use a human and extracts its skeleton. The object recognition in the context of another story. Figure 5 shows an example of module performs blob detection for extracting objects on a generated narrative. the table from the visual input of the eye cameras and  12 Preprint version; final version available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems (Accepted) DOI: 10.1109/TCDS.2017.2754143  Knowledge acquisition  Drive level  Knowledge expression  1 2 3  5  6  Acquire  Acquire  Express  8 Ask push  Pull  Aquire  Take the cube  7  4 Time  Figure 6. Drive level dynamics during a typical mixed-initiative scenario described in Section IV-D. Each drive starts at its default value and decays following the dynamics described in Section IV-B. When reaching a given threshold (dashed horizontal line) the associated behavior is triggered (green rectangles), the corresponding drive level is reset to its default value and both drive levels are frozen for the duration of the behavior. Human behavior is indicated by the red rectangles, being either a reply to a question asked by the iCub (small rectangles) or a request to the iCub triggering goal oriented behavior (here: “Take the cube”). The numbers refer to the description of the scenario progression in the main text.  2)  3)  4)  5)  trains a classifier to categorize them. The 3D locations of the present objects are also computed in object recognition through stereo vision. This forms a first incomplete representation of the scene in the episodic memory where the object property collector registers the location and type of each detected entity (here objects and an agent). It also contains slots for unknown body parts of the iCub, here the five fingers of its right hand. The presence of a large amount of missing information (presence of unknown objects, human and body parts) in the sensations module makes the drive for knowledge acquisition to decay rapidly in the allostatic controller and the drive for knowledge expression is kept constant (since there is no knowledge to express yet). When the knowledge acquisition drive level is below threshold, it triggers the associated behavior (behaviors module) for acquiring information about an entity. The choice of the unknown entity is pseudo-random, with priority for requesting the name of an unknown human. This makes the robot look at the human. The visual input is passed to the perceptions module where the synthetic sensory memory segments the face from the background and attempts to recognize it from previously seen faces. If it does not recognize the face, the robot asks, “I do not know you, who are you?”. The human can then reply, e.g., saying “I am Daniel”. The level of the drive is reset to its default value and both drives are frozen during the behavior execution. The perceived speech is analyzed by the language reservoir handler in perceptions to extract the name “Daniel” and is associated with the face representation in the associations module. Thus, the next time the iCub will interact with this person, it will directly recognize him and not ask for his name. Once this interaction is achieved, the drives continue to decay. Since the iCub has just acquired more information, the decay of the drive for knowledge acquisition is slower  and the one for knowledge expression is increased. Still, the drive for knowledge acquisition reaches the threshold first. The behavior for acquiring information is therefore triggered again. This time, the random choice of an unknown entity makes the robot point to an object and ask, “What is this object?”. The human replies e.g. “This is the cube”. The language reservoir handler extracts the name of the object from the reply and the associations module associates it with the visual representation of the pointed object from object recognition. Now the cube can later be referred by its name. 6) The drives continue to decay. This time, the drive for knowledge expression reaches the threshold first. This triggers the behavior for expressing the acquired knowledge. A known entity is chosen, in this example it is the cube, which the robot points at while saying “This is a cube”. 7) The human asks “Take the cube”. A meaning is extracted by the language reservoir handler in perceptions and forms the representation of a goal to achieve in the goal module (here the desired location of the object, i.e. the region of the iCub I for the goal “take”, see Figure 4). An action plan is built in action plans with the sequence of two actions “Ask the human to push the object” then “Pull the object”, together with their pre- and post-conditions in term of states (I, S or H). The action selection module takes care of the realization of the plan. First, it instantiates the action plan toward the considered object, here the cube, through its connection with associations. Then, it executes each action until its associated post-condition is met (repeating it up to three times before giving up). Since the cube is in the human area H, the iCub first triggers the behavior for interacting verbally with the human, asking “Can you please bring the cube closer to the shared area?”. The human pushes the cube to the shared area S and the state transition is noticed by the robot thanks to the real-time object localization performed in the object recognition module. Then the robot triggers a motor action to pull the cube. Once the goal is achieved (i.e. the cube is in I), the drive levels which were frozen during this interaction continue to decay. 8) The drive for knowledge acquisition reaches the threshold first. The associated behavior now chooses to acquire the name of a body part. The robot triggers the behavior for raising its hand and moving a random unknown body part, here the middle finger. It looks at the human and asks “How do you call this part of my body?”. The name of the body part is extracted from the human’s reply and is associated with the joint that was moved in associations. The interaction continues following the dynamics of the drives and interrupted by the requests from the human. Once all available information about the present entities is acquired, the drive for knowledge acquisition stops to decay. However, the robot still maintains the interaction through its drive for knowledge expression and the human can still formulate requests for goal-oriented behavior. When new entities are introduced, e.g. an unknown object or another human entering  C. MOULIN-FRIER, T. FISCHER et al.: DAC-H3: A PROACTIVE ROBOT COGNITIVE ARCHITECTURE  the scene, the drive for knowledge acquisition decays again and the process continues.  13  Initial conﬁguration  I S H  Goal conﬁguration  I S H  E. Effect of the robot’s proactivity level on naive users We now test the DAC-h3 architecture with naive users having to perform a collaborative task with the iCub robot. For this aim, we conduct experiments on six subjects and compare different configurations of the DAC-h3 drive system reflecting Figure 7. The experimental task. Each panel shows a top view of the table, where the three letters I, S and H indicates the iCub, Shared and Human different levels of robot’s proactivity. areas as in Figure 3. Starting from the initial configuration of object positions To better control the experiment, we simplify the setup de- on the left, the subject is asked to achieve the goal configuration on the right. scribed above by limiting it to object tagging and manipulation. This is done by interacting with the iCub following the instructions described above. The three objects are: an octopus (orange object on the left of the This means that in this study we do not use the functionalities table), a blue cube (blue object in the middle) and a duck (yellow object on for agent or body part tagging, action recognition, kinematic the right). structure learning and narrative discourse. The iCub can only proactively tag or point at objects on the table, whereas the We run the experiment with six naive subjects on three human can reply to object tagging requests and provide orders different conditions. The three conditions correspond to three for taking or giving an object. These orders trigger action plans different levels of the robot’s proactivity, defined by setting combining object manipulation by the iCub with requests to different drive decays in the allostatic controller module. The the human to do so, as described above. We note that, due two drives for knowledge acquisition and knowledge expression to the distributed implementation of the DAC-h3 systems as are initialized to a default value of 0.5. Then, they decay interacting YARP modules operating in parallel, deactivating linearly at a rate of n ∗ δ unit/s, where δ is a constant value obj functionalities simply requires to not launch the corresponding defining the proactivity level. For the knowledge acquisition modules and does not imply any modification in the code. drive, n is the number of perceived objects which are obj Three objects are placed on the table: an octopus, a blue cube unknown to the robot. For the knowledge expression drive, and a duck. Initially, the names of the objects are unknown to the iCub and they are placed on the table as shown on it is the number of known objects. Therefore, the drive for Figure 7 (left). The task given to the subjects is to achieve a knowledge acquisition (resp. knowledge expression) decays goal configuration of object positions (Figure 7, right). The proportionally to the number of unknown objects (resp. known objects). We define three conditions: medium proactivity (δ experiment terminates when the task is achieved. To do so, the subject is instructed to interact with the iCub for knowledge acquisition = 0.01, for knowledge expression in the following way. At any time of the interaction, s/he can = 0.004), slow proactivity (δ for both drives are 2.5 times provide speech orders on the form of the sentences “Give me lower than in medium proactivity) and fast proactivity (δ for the <object name>” and “Please take the <object name>”, both drives are 2.5 times higher than in medium proactivity). where <object name> is the name of one of the three objects. Corresponding behaviors are triggered when a drive value goes These names are provided to the subject before the experiment below 0.25. For example, for the knowledge acquisition drive starts to make the speech recognition more robust. Whenever in the medium-proactive condition (δ = 0.01) at the beginning the iCub asks the subject for the name of an object, s/he can of the interaction when all objects are unknown (nobj = 3), it reply with “This is the <object name>”. Moreover, whenever takes approximately 8 seconds for the drive to decay completely the iCub asks to show a specific object, the subject can point from the default value of 0.5 to the threshold 0.25. Figure 8 shows the interaction diagrams for the six subjects to it using her/his right hand. This latter behavior is added to the state transition graph described in Figure 4 and executed grouped by condition. In the slow-proactive condition, we when the subject requests to perform an action on an object observe that the task can be solved very rapidly, as seen by which is unknown to the iCub. To augment the difficulty of the subject S1. Here the iCub has initiated only the first action the task, the subject is asked to not move objects on its own (Tagging (knowledge acquisition)). With drives decaying slower, the robot acts less often by its own initiative, which leads to the initiative, but only when the iCub asks to do so. Achieving the goal configuration requires a complex interac- subject leading the interaction according to its own goal. Since tion between the subject and iCub. For example, moving the the iCub is rarely acquiring information by itself, the subject octopus from the human region to the iCub region requires to has to request actions on objects which are not yet known first inform the iCub about which object the octopus is, and to the robot, triggering tagging behaviors (Tagging (human then asking the iCub to take that object. Informing the robot points)) prior to asking or moving objects. However, solving about the name of an object can occur either from the iCub’s the task can also be quite long in this condition as seen by initiative through the knowledge acquisition drive, or from the subject S2. This can be due to several factors such as the human’s initiative by requesting an action on this object (when robot’s failure to perceive or manipulate objects, or the time the object is unknown to the iCub, it will first ask the human required by the subject to fully apprehend the system. This to point at it). Since the octopus is not within the reach of can also be due to the personality or the mood of the subject the iCub, the robot will first ask the human to move it to the who can her/himself be more or less proactive. shared region, before executing the motor action for pulling At the other extreme, in the fast proactive condition (bottom the object in the iCub region. of the figure), we observe that the interaction is dominated  14 Preprint version; final version available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems (Accepted) DOI: 10.1109/TCDS.2017.2754143  Slow robot’s proactivity Robot initiated  S1 Human initiated Robot initiated  S2 Human initiated  Tagging (knowledge acquisition) Pointing (knowledge expression) Tagging (human points) Robot moves object Ask human to move object Tagging (knowledge acquisition) Pointing (knowledge expression) Tagging (human points) Robot moves object Ask human to move object  Medium robot’s proactivity Robot initiated  S3 Human initiated Robot initiated  S4 Human initiated  Tagging (knowledge acquisition) Pointing (knowledge expression) Tagging (human points) Robot moves object Ask human to move object Tagging (knowledge acquisition) Pointing (knowledge expression) Tagging (human points) Robot moves object Ask human to move object  Fast robot’s proactivity Robot initiated  S5 Human initiated Robot initiated  S6 Human initiated  Tagging (knowledge acquisition) Pointing (knowledge expression) Tagging (human points) Robot moves object Ask human to move object Tagging (knowledge acquisition) Pointing (knowledge expression) Tagging (human points) Robot moves object Ask human to move object  0  100 200 Time in s  300  400  500  600  Figure 8. Interaction diagrams for the six subjects (S1 to S6, two per condition) interacting with the iCub to solve the task described in Figure 7. Top: slow proactivity condition. Middle: medium proactivity. Bottom: fast proactivity. In each condition, the first five rows shows the interaction of one subject (e.g. S3 in the medium proactivity condition) and the five last rows the the interaction of another subject (e.g. S4 in the medium proactivity condition). For each subject, the colored bars show the times (x-axis) when specific actions (y-axis) are executed by the iCub. The two first rows (Tagging (knowledge acquisition) and Pointing (knowledge expression)) are actions initiated by the iCub through its drive regulation system in the allostatic controller as described in section IV-B. The three last rows (Tagging (human points), Robot moves object and Ask human to move object) are actions initiated by the human through a speech order and executed by the iCub through action plans in the contextual layer, as described in section IV-C. They are sequenced according to the current state of the world and the current knowledge of the robot. The vertical arrow in each subject’s interaction plot shows the time at which all the three object names are known to the robot.  by the iCub’s self-generated actions (Tagging (knowledge acquisition) and Pointing (knowledge expression)). There is little time for the subject to request orders through speech between two consecutive actions of the iCub and it requires some time to succeed doing it. In consequence, solving the task can require quite a long time as seen by the subject S6. However, the names of all objects tend to be acquired faster in this condition (vertical arrows). This is because the drive for knowledge acquisition decays rapidly, especially at the beginning of the interaction where all objects are unknown, pushing the iCub to ask the name of everything around. Indeed, the three first actions are Tagging (knowledge acquisition) for both S5 and S6. Finally, in the medium-proactive condition, we observe a  mixed initiative between the iCub and the subject. A possible positive effect of such a moderate proactivity of the robot is to maintain the social interaction when the subject is less proactive by her/himself, preventing long silent gaps in the interaction but still largely allowing the human to take the initiative. We observe a better interplay between iCub- and human-initiated actions in this condition. Subjects are also asked to fill pre- and post-questionnaires before and after the interaction. The pre-questionnaire attempts at characterizing the personality traits of the subject, while the post-questionnaire evaluates subjective feelings about the interaction. As the main focus of this paper is on presenting a coherent cognitive architecture rather than the evaluation of the emerging human-robot interaction, we do not analyze these  C. MOULIN-FRIER, T. FISCHER et al.: DAC-H3: A PROACTIVE ROBOT COGNITIVE ARCHITECTURE  data in this paper. Providing a solid statistical analysis will require acquiring data of many more subjects which will be the aim of a follow-up paper. However, the presented human-robot interaction study shows that proactivity is an important factor in HRI and that it can be controlled by simple modifications of the drive dynamics. As observed in Figure 8, the level of robot’s proactivity has a clear influence on the resulting interaction by modulating the interplay between the robot and human initiatives.  15  an adaptive-contextual control loop allows the robot to satisfy human requests, triggering goal-oriented behavior relying on the acquired knowledge. Those goal-oriented behaviors are related to action planning for object passing, pointing, action recognition, narrative expression and kinematic structure learning demonstration. We have shown that these two control loops lead to a welldefined interplay between robot-initiated and human-initiated behaviors, which allows the robot to acquire multimodal representations of entities and link them with linguistic symbols, as well as to use the acquired knowledge for goal-oriented V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORKS behavior. This allows the robot to learn reactively as well as This paper has introduced DAC-h3, a proactive robot cogni- proactively. Reactive learning occurs in situations where the tive architecture to acquire and express knowledge about the robot requires obtaining new knowledge to execute a human world and the self. The architecture is based on the Distributed order (e.g. grasping an object with an unknown label), and thus Adaptive Control (DAC) theory of the brain and mind, which leads to an efficient interaction for acquiring the information provides a biologically grounded framework for organizing var- before acting according to the human desire. At the same time, ious functional modules into a coherent cognitive architecture. the robot can also learn proactively to optimize its cognitive Those modules implement state-of-the-art algorithms modeling development by triggering learning interactions itself, which various cognitive functions for autonomous self-regulation, allows the robot to learn without having to wait for the human whole-body motor control, multimodal perception, knowledge to teach new concepts. Moreover, this is supposed to reduce the representation, natural language processing, and goal-oriented cognitive load of the human teacher, as the robot 1) chooses behavior. They are all implemented using the YARP robotic the target entity of the learning interaction, 2) engages the joint middleware on the iCub robot, ensuring their parallel execution attention by making the human aware of the target entity, and in real time and providing synchronous and asynchronous 3) asks for the corresponding label. Therefore, the human only communication protocols among modules. needs to provide the label, without having to be concerned The implementation of DAC-h3 is flexible so that existing about the prior knowledge of the robot. modules can easily be replaced by more sophisticated ones We have implemented the entire DAC-h3 architecture and in the future. Moreover, most modules can be configured presented an HRI scenario where an iCub humanoid robot according to the user’s needs, for example by adding new interacts with objects and a human to acquire information drives or more complex grammars into the system. This makes about the present objects and agents as well as its own body DAC-h3 a general framework for designing autonomous robots, parts. We have analyzed a typical interaction in detail, showing especially in HRI setups. The underlying open-source code how DAC-h3 is able to dynamically balance the knowledge contains some modules which are specific to the iCub robot acquisition and expression processes according to the properties (modules related to action execution; which work on both real of the environment, and to deal with a mixed initiative scenario and simulated iCub’s), but all cognitive nodes (autobiographical where both the robot and the human are behaving autonomously. memory, allostatic controllers, etc.) can be freely used with In a series of video recordings, we show the ability of DAC-h3 other robots (most easily with YARP-driven robots, but thanks to adapt to different situations and environments. We have to YARP-ROS intercommunication also with ROS driven also conducted experiments with naive subjects on a simplified robots). version of the scenario, showing how the robot’s proactivity The main contribution of this paper is not about the modeling level influences the interaction. of the specific functional modules, which already have been Adapting the proactivity level also provides a step towards published (see Section III), but rather about the integration personalities of robots. The curiousness (i.e. favoring proactive of a heterogeneous collection of modules into a coherent and learning) or talkativeness (i.e. communicating about its own operational cognitive architecture. For this aim, the DAC-h3 knowledge) of the robot is determined by the decay rates of architecture is organized as a layered control structure with tight the corresponding drives. Thus the personality of the robot can coupling within and between layers (Figure 1 and Section III): be altered by a simple modification of the decay values, as the somatic, reactive, adaptive, and contextual layers. Across done for skill refinement by Puigbo et al. [104]. these layers, a columnar organization exists that deals with The current work has the following limitations. First, some the processing of states of the world or exteroception, the of the available abilities deserve to be better integrated into the self or interoception, and action. Two main control loops HRI scenario. For example, this is the case for the kinematic generate the behavior of the robot. First, a reactive-adaptive structure learning process which is currently executed in a control loop ensures autonomy and proactivity through the separated learning phase instead of being fully integrated self-regulation of internal drives for knowledge acquisition within the interaction scenario. Similarly, the narrative can and expression. It allows the robot to proactively manage only be generated from specific chunks of the robot’s history its own knowledge acquisition process and to maintain the as recorded in the autobiographical memory. Second, in this interaction with a human partner, while associating multimodal paper, we do not provide a statistical analysis of the HRI information about entities with their linguistic labels. Second, experiments. The reason is that we focus on the description  16 Preprint version; final version available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems (Accepted) DOI: 10.1109/TCDS.2017.2754143  of the entire architecture and on their theoretical principles. A thorough statistical analysis will require collecting much more data to fully demonstrate the utility of some of these principles, for example how proactivity helps to solve the referential indeterminacy problem, as well as the effect of the robot’s autonomy on the acceptability of the system by naive users. Third, although DAC-h3 can solve parts of the Symbol Grounding Problem (SGP), it still presupposes a symbolic concept of an entity which is given a priori to the system. Therefore, our contribution is more about the ability to proactively acquire multimodal information about these entities and linking them to linguistic labels that can be reused to express complex goal-oriented behavior later on. We are currently extending the proposed architecture in the following ways. First, we are better integrating some of the available abilities within the interaction scenario as mentioned above. This will allow starting the knowledge acquisition process from scratch in a fully autonomous way. Second, we are considering to use more biologically plausible and/or computationally scalable models for some of the existing modules, namely the action planning and action selection modules. These are currently algorithmic implementations using predefined action plans. We want to replace it with an existing model of rule learning grounded in the neurobiology of the prefrontal cortex which can learn optimal action policies from experience to maximize long-term reward [105]. An interesting feature of this model for solving the SGP is that it relies on neural memory-units encoding sensorimotor contingencies with causal relationships learned through adaptive connections between them. An alternative solution is to use state-of-the art AI planners such as the Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL), where multi-agent planning extensions are particularly relevant in the context of social robotics [106]. Third, we are also integrating more low-level reactive control abilities through an acquired notion of a peri-personal space [107], where the robot will be able to optimize its own action primitives to maintain safety distances with aversive objects (e.g. a spider) in real time while executing reaching actions toward other objects. Finally, we are working on a self-exploration process to autonomously discover the area which is reachable by the robot, similarly to Jamone et al. [108], and subsequently employing this self-model and applying it to the human partner to estimate his/her reachability. R EFERENCES [1] S. Harnad, “The symbol grounding problem,” Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 335 – 346, 1990. [2] S. Coradeschi and A. Saffiotti, “An introduction to the anchoring problem,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 43, no. 2–3, pp. 85 – 96, 2003. [3] T. Taniguchi, T. Nagai, T. Nakamura, N. Iwahashi, T. Ogata, and H. Asoh, “Symbol emergence in robotics: a survey,” Advanced Robotics, vol. 30, no. 11-12, pp. 706–728, 2016. [4] G. Metta et al., “The iCub humanoid robot: An open-systems platform for research in cognitive development,” Neural Networks, vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 1125–1134, 2010. [5] P. Vogt, “The physical symbol grounding problem,” Cognitive Systems Research, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 429–457, 2002. [6] P. Vogt and F. Divina, “Social symbol grounding and language evolution,” Interaction Studies, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 31–52, 2007. [7] A. Cangelosi, “The grounding and sharing of symbols,” Pragmatics & Cognition, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 275–285, 2006.  [8] S. Lallée et al., “Towards the synthetic self: making others perceive me as an other,” Paladyn Journal of Behavioral Robotics, vol. 6, no. 1, 2015. [9] V. Vouloutsi et al., “Towards a Synthetic Tutor Assistant: The EASEL Project and its Architecture,” in International Conference on Living Machines, 2016, pp. 353–364. [10] S. C. Levinson, “On the human interaction engine,” in Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research, Symposium 134. Berg, 2006, pp. 39–69. [11] U. Liszkowski, M. Carpenter, A. Henning, T. Striano, and M. Tomasello, “Twelve-month-olds point to share attention and interest,” Developmental science, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 297–307, 2004. [12] D. E. Berlyne, “A theory of human curiosity,” British Journal of Psychology. General Section, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 180–191, 1954. [13] M. Tomasello, M. Carpenter, J. Call, T. Behne, and H. Moll, “Understanding and sharing intentions: The origins of cultural cognition,” Behavioral and brain sciences, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 675–691, 2005. [14] D. Vernon, C. von Hofsten, and L. Fadiga, “Desiderata for developmental cognitive architectures,” Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures, vol. 18, pp. 116–127, 2016. [15] J. Piaget, The construction of reality in the child. New York, NY, US: Basic Books, 1954. [16] L. Vygotsky, Mind in Society: Development of Higher Psychological Processes. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1978. [17] T. Fong, I. Nourbakhsh, and K. Dautenhahn, “A survey of socially interactive robots,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 143–166, 2003. [18] J. Pineau, M. Montemerlo, M. Pollack, N. Roy, and S. Thrun, “Towards robotic assistants in nursing homes: Challenges and results,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 271–281, 2003. [19] I. R. Nourbakhsh, J. Bobenage, S. Grange, R. Lutz, R. Meyer, and A. Soto, “An affective mobile robot educator with a full-time job,” Artificial Intelligence, vol. 114, no. 1, pp. 95–124, 1999. [20] A. G. Di Nuovo, D. Marocco, S. Di Nuovo, and A. Cangelosi, “Autonomous learning in humanoid robotics through mental imagery,” Neural Networks, vol. 41, pp. 147–155, 2013. [21] B. Adams, C. Breazeal, R. A. Brooks, and B. Scassellati, “Humanoid robots: a new kind of tool,” IEEE Intelligent Systems and their Applications, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 25–31, 2000. [22] K. Dautenhahn and A. Billard, “Bringing up robots or - the psychology of socially intelligent robots: From theory to implementation,” in Conference on Autonomous Agents, 1999, pp. 366–367. [23] Y. Demiris, L. Aziz-Zadeh, and J. Bonaiuto, “Information Processing in the Mirror Neuron System in Primates and Machines,” Neuroinformatics, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 63–91, 2014. [24] A. Newell, Unified theories of cognition. Harvard University Press, 1990. [25] A. Newell, J. C. Shaw, and H. A. Simon, “Report on a general problemsolving program,” IFIP Congress, pp. 256–264, 1959. [26] J. E. Laird, A. Newell, and P. S. Rosenbloom, “SOAR: An architecture for general intelligence,” Artificial Intelligence, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1–64, 1987. [27] J. R. Anderson, The Architecture of Cognition. Harvard University Press, 1983. [28] R. A. Brooks, “Intelligence without representation,” Artificial Intelligence, vol. 47, no. 1-3, pp. 139–159, 1991. [29] R. Brooks, “A robust layered control system for a mobile robot,” IEEE Journal on Robotics and Automation, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 14–23, 1986. [30] Á. Miklósi and M. Gácsi, “On the utilization of social animals as a model for social robotics,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 3, no. 75, pp. 1–10, 2012. [31] K. Dautenhahn, “Socially intelligent robots: dimensions of human-robot interaction.” Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences, vol. 362, no. 1480, pp. 679–704, 2007. [32] P. Carruthers and P. Smith, Theories of Theories of Mind. Cambridge University Press, 1996. [33] E. Di Paolo and H. De Jaegher, “The interactive brain hypothesis,” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, vol. 6, no. 163, pp. 1–16, 2012. [34] T. Taniguchi, “Symbol emergence in robotics for long-term human-robot collaboration,” in IFAC Symposium on Analysis, Design, and Evaluation of Human-Machine Systems, 2016, pp. 144 – 149. [35] B. Scassellati, “Investigating models of social development using a humanoid robot,” in IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 2003, pp. 2704–2709. [36] A. Stoytchev and R. Arkin, “Combining deliberation, reactivity, and motivation in the context of a behavior-based robot architecture,”  C. MOULIN-FRIER, T. FISCHER et al.: DAC-H3: A PROACTIVE ROBOT COGNITIVE ARCHITECTURE  [37]  [38]  [39] [40]  [41] [42] [43] [44] [45] [46] [47]  [48] [49] [50] [51]  [52]  [53]  [54] [55] [56] [57] [58] [59]  in IEEE International Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Robotics and Automation, 2001, pp. 290–295. M. Malfaz, Á. Castro-Gonzalez, R. Barber, and M. A. Salichs, “A Biologically Inspired Architecture for an Autonomous and Social Robot,” IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 232–246, 2011. M. Scheutz, G. Briggs, R. Cantrell, E. Krause, T. Williams, and R. Veale, “Novel mechanisms for natural human-robot interactions in the diarc architecture,” in Proceedings of AAAI Workshop on Intelligent Robotic Systems, 2013. P. F. M. J. Verschure, T. Voegtlin, and R. J. Douglas, “Environmentally mediated synergy between perception and behaviour in mobile robots,” Nature, vol. 425, no. 6958, pp. 620–624, 2003. P. F. M. J. Verschure, C. M. A. Pennartz, and G. Pezzulo, “The why, what, where, when and how of goal-directed choice: neuronal and computational principles,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, vol. 369, no. 1655, pp. 1–14, 2014. J.-Y. Puigbò, C. Moulin-Frier, and P. F. Verschure, “Towards selfcontrolled robots through distributed adaptive control,” in Biomimetic and Biohybrid Systems, 2016, pp. 490–497. P. Gärdenfors, Conceptual Spaces. The Geometry of Thought. Cambridge, MIT Press, 2000. A. Lieto, A. Chella, and M. Frixione, “Conceptual spaces for cognitive architectures: A lingua franca for different levels of representation,” Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures, vol. 19, pp. 1–9, 2017. C. Eliasmith, T. C. Stewart, X. Choo, T. Bekolay, T. DeWolf, Y. Tang, and D. Rasmussen, “A large-scale model of the functioning brain,” Science, vol. 338, no. 6111, pp. 1202–1205, 2012. P. Blouw, E. Solodkin, P. Thagard, and C. Eliasmith, “Concepts as Semantic Pointers: A Framework and Computational Model,” Cognitive Science, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 1128–1162, 2016. N. Krüger et al., “Object–Action Complexes: Grounded abstractions of sensory–motor processes,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 740–757, 2011. L. Jamone, E. Ugur, A. Cangelosi, L. Fadiga, A. Bernardino, J. Piater, and J. Santos-Victor, “Affordances in psychology, neuroscience and robotics: a survey,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems, 2016. D. Vernon, M. Beetz, and G. Sandini, “Prospection in Cognition: The Case for Joint Episodic-Procedural Memory in Cognitive Robotics,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 2, no. 19, pp. 1–14, 2015. L. Steels, “The synthetic modeling of language origins,” Evolution of Communication, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–34, 1997. F. Kaplan, “Semiotic schemata: Selection units for linguistic cultural evolution,” in International Conference on Artificial Life, 2000, pp. 372–381. C. Moulin-Frier, J. Diard, J.-L. Schwartz, and P. Bessière, “COSMO (“Communicating about Objects using Sensory-Motor Operations”): a Bayesian modeling framework for studying speech communication and the emergence of phonological systems,” Journal of Phonetics, vol. 53, pp. 5–41, 2015. S. Lallée et al., “Cooperative human robot interaction systems: IV. Communication of shared plans with Naïve humans using gaze and speech,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2013, pp. 129–136. S. Lallée et al., “Towards a platform-independent cooperative human robot interaction system: III an architecture for learning and executing actions and shared plans,” IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 239–253, 2012. M. Petit et al., “The coordinating role of language in real-time multimodal learning of cooperative tasks,” IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 3–17, 2013. S. Calinon, F. D’halluin, E. L. Sauser, D. G. Caldwell, and A. G. Billard, “Learning and reproduction of gestures by imitation,” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 44–54, 2010. Y. Demiris and A. Meltzoff, “The robot in the crib: A developmental analysis of imitation skills in infants and robots,” Infant and Child Development, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 43–53, 2008. S. Schaal, “Is imitation learning the route to humanoid robots?” Trends in cognitive sciences, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 233–242, 1999. K. Lee, Y. Su, T.-K. Kim, and Y. Demiris, “A syntactic approach to robot imitation learning using probabilistic activity grammars,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 1323–1334, 2013. M. Ewerton, G. Maeda, J. Peters, and G. Neumann, “Learning motor skills from partially observed movements executed at different speeds,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2015, pp. 456–463.  17  [60] A. Billard and K. Dautenhahn, “Grounding communication in autonomous robots: an experimental study,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 71–79, 1998. [61] A. Cangelosi, E. Hourdakis, and V. Tikhanoff, “Language acquisition and symbol grounding transfer with neural networks and cognitive robots,” in IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Network Proceedings, 2006, pp. 1576–1582. [62] D. Marocco, A. Cangelosi, K. Fischer, and T. Belpaeme, “Grounding action words in the sensorimotor interaction with the world: experiments with a simulated iCub humanoid robot,” Frontiers in Neurorobotics, vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 1–15, 2010. [63] M. Quine, Word and object. MIT Press, 1960. [64] P.-Y. Oudeyer, F. Kaplan, and V. V. Hafner, “Intrinsic motivation systems for autonomous mental development,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 265–286, 2007. [65] C. Breazeal and B. Scassellati, “Infant-like social interactions between a robot and a human caregiver,” Adaptive Behavior, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 49–74, 2000. [66] S. Ivaldi et al., “Object learning through active exploration,” IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 56–72, 2013. [67] C. Moulin-Frier, S. M. Nguyen, and P.-Y. Oudeyer, “Self-Organization of Early Vocal Development in Infants and Machines: The Role of Intrinsic Motivation,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 4, no. 1006, 2014. [68] O. C. Schrempf, U. D. Hanebeck, A. J. Schmid, and H. Worn, “A novel approach to proactive human-robot cooperation,” in IEEE International Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive Communication, 2005, pp. 555–560. [69] I. Lutkebohle et al., “The curious robot - structuring interactive robot learning,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2009, pp. 4156–4162. [70] F. Broz et al., “The ITALK Project: A Developmental Robotics Approach to the Study of Individual, Social, and Linguistic Learning,” Topics in Cognitive Science, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 534–544, 2014. [71] A. Cangelosi et al., “Integration of action and language knowledge: A roadmap for developmental robotics,” IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 167–195, 2010. [72] A. Antunes, L. Jamone, G. Saponaro, A. Bernardino, and R. Ventura, “From human instructions to robot actions: Formulation of goals, affordances and probabilistic planning,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2016, pp. 5449–5454. [73] E. A. Krause, M. Zillich, T. E. Williams, and M. Scheutz, “Learning to Recognize Novel Objects in One Shot through Human-Robot Interactions in Natural Language Dialogues,” in AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2014, pp. 2796–2802. [74] J. Dias, W. C. Ho, T. Vogt, N. Beeckman, A. Paiva, and E. André, “I know what I did last summer: Autobiographic memory in synthetic characters,” in International Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, 2007, pp. 606–617. [75] D. S. Syrdal, K. Dautenhahn, K. L. Koay, and W. C. Ho, “Views from within a narrative: Evaluating long-term human–robot interaction in a naturalistic environment using open-ended scenarios,” Cognitive Computation, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 741–759, 2014. [76] G. Sieber and B. Krenn, “Towards an episodic memory for companion dialogue,” in International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents, 2010, pp. 322–328. [77] P. Fitzpatrick, G. Metta, and L. Natale, “Towards long-lived robot genes,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 29–45, 2008. [78] S. Fanello et al., “3D Stereo Estimation and Fully Automated Learning of Eye-Hand Coordination in Humanoid Robots,” in IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots, 2014, pp. 1028–1035. [79] Z. Mathews, S. B. i Badia, and P. F. Verschure, “PASAR: An integrated model of prediction, anticipation, sensation, attention and response for artificial sensorimotor systems,” Information Sciences, vol. 186, no. 1, pp. 1–19, 2012. [80] M. Sanchez-Fibla et al., “Allostatic control for robot behavior regulation: a comparative rodent-robot study,” Advances in Complex Systems, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 377–403, 2010. [81] M. S. Fibla, U. Bernardet, and P. F. Verschure, “Allostatic control for robot behaviour regulation: An extension to path planning,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2010, pp. 1935–1942. [82] S. Lallee and P. F. Verschure, “How? Why? What? Where? When? Who? Grounding Ontology in the Actions of a Situated Social Agent,” Robotics, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 169–193, 2015.  18 Preprint version; final version available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems (Accepted) DOI: 10.1109/TCDS.2017.2754143  [83] V. Vouloutsi, K. Grechuta, S. Lallée, and P. F. Verschure, “The influence of behavioral complexity on robot perception,” in Conference on Biomimetic and Biohybrid Systems, 2014, pp. 332–343. [84] U. Pattacini, F. Nori, L. Natale, and G. Metta, “An experimental evaluation of a novel minimum-jerk cartesian controller for humanoid robots,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2010, pp. 1668–1674. [85] A. Parmiggiani et al., “The Design of the iCub Humanoid Robot,” International Journal of Humanoid Robotics, vol. 9, no. 4, 2012. [86] G. Pasquale, C. Ciliberto, L. Rosasco, and L. Natale, “Object identification from few examples by improving the invariance of a deep convolutional neural network,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2016, pp. 4904–4911. [87] X. Hinaut and P. F. Dominey, “Real-Time Parallel Processing of Grammatical Structure in the Fronto-Striatal System: A Recurrent Network Simulation Study Using Reservoir Computing,” PloS one, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1–18, 2013. [88] X. Hinaut, M. Petit, G. Pointeau, and P. F. Dominey, “Exploring the acquisition and production of grammatical constructions through humanrobot interaction with echo state networks,” Frontiers in Neurorobotics, vol. 8, no. 16, pp. 1–17, 2015. [89] A.-L. Mealier, G. Pointeau, P. Gardenfors, and P.-F. Dominey, “Construals of meaning: The role of attention in robotic language production,” Interaction Studies, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 41–69, 2016. [90] A. Damianou, C. H. Ek, L. Boorman, N. D. Lawrence, and T. J. Prescott, “A top-down approach for a synthetic autobiographical memory system,” in Biomimetic and Biohybrid Systems, 2015, pp. 280–292. [91] A. C. Damianou and N. D. Lawrence, “Deep gaussian processes.” in Artificial Intelligence and Statistics Conference, 2013, pp. 207–215. [92] D. Camilleri, A. Damianou, H. Jackson, N. Lawrence, and T. Prescott, “iCub Visual Memory Inspector: Visualising the iCub’s Thoughts,” in Conference on Biomimetic and Biohybrid Systems, 2016, pp. 48–57. [93] M. Zambelli, T. Fischer, M. Petit, H. J. Chang, A. Cully, and Y. Demiris, “Towards anchoring self-learned representations to those of other agents,” in Workshop on Bio-inspired Social robot Learning in Home Scenarios at IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2016. [94] M. Zambelli and Y. Demiris, “Online Multimodal Ensemble Learning using Self-learnt Sensorimotor Representations,” in IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems, vol. 9, no. 2, 2017, pp. 113–126. [95] H. J. Chang and Y. Demiris, “Highly Articulated Kinematic Structure Estimation combining Motion and Skeleton Information,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2017, to be published. [96] H. J. Chang, T. Fischer, M. Petit, M. Zambelli, and Y. Demiris, “Kinematic structure correspondences via hypergraph matching,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp. 4216–4225.  [97] T. Fischer and Y. Demiris, “Markerless Perspective Taking for Humanoid Robots in Unconstrained Environments,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2016, pp. 3309–3316. [98] M. Johnson and Y. Demiris, “Perceptual Perspective Taking and Action Recognition,” International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 301–308, 2005. [99] T. J. Prescott, N. Lepora, and P. F. M. J. Vershure, “A future of living machines? International trends and prospects in biomimetic and biohybrid systems,” in Conference on Bioinspiration, Biometrics and Bioreplication, 2014. [100] P. Verschure, “Formal minds and biological brains II: From the mirage of intelligence to a science and engineering of consciousness,” in IEEE Intelligent Systems Trends and Controversies, 2013, pp. 33–36. [101] G. Pointeau, M. Petit, and P. F. Dominey, “Successive Developmental Levels of Autobiographical Memory for Learning Through Social Interaction,” IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 200–212, Sep. 2014. [102] M. Petit, T. Fischer, and Y. Demiris, “Lifelong Augmentation of MultiModal Streaming Autobiographical Memories,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 201–213, 2016. [103] M. Petit, T. Fischer, and Y. Demiris, “Towards the emergence of procedural memories from lifelong multi-modal streaming memories for cognitive robots,” in Workshop on Machine Learning Methods for HighLevel Cognitive Capabilities in Robotics at IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2016. [104] J.-Y. Puigbo, C. Moulin-Frier, V. Vouloutsi, M. Sanchez-Fibla, I. Herreros, and P. F. J. Verschure, “Skill refinement through cerebellar learning and human haptic feedback: An iCub learning to paint experiment,” in IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots, 2015, pp. 447–452. [105] A. Duff, M. Sanchez Fibla, and P. F. M. J. Verschure, “A biologically based model for the integration of sensory-motor contingencies in rules and plans: A prefrontal cortex based extension of the Distributed Adaptive Control architecture,” Brain Research Bulletin, vol. 85, no. 5, pp. 289–304, 2011. [106] D. L. Kovacs, “A Multi-Agent Extension of PDDL3.1,” in Workshop on International Planning Competition at the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, 2012, pp. 19–27. [107] A. Roncone, M. Hoffmann, U. Pattacini, L. Fadiga, and G. Metta, “Peripersonal space and margin of safety around the body: learning tactile-visual associations in a humanoid robot with artificial skin,” PLoS ONE, vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 1–32, 2016. [108] L. Jamone, M. Brandao, L. Natale, K. Hashimoto, G. Sandini, and A. Takanishi, “Autonomous online generation of a motor representation of the workspace for intelligent whole-body reaching,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 556–567, 2014.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
