Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_5977

Abstract:
Robust Routing in Interdependent Networks  arXiv:1709.03033v1 [cs.DS] 10 Sep 2017  Jianan Zhang, and Eytan Modiano  Abstract—We consider a model of two interdependent networks, where every node in one network depends on one or more supply nodes in the other network and a node fails if it loses all of its supply nodes. We develop algorithms to compute the failure probability of a path, and obtain the most reliable path between a pair of nodes in a network, under the condition that each supply node fails independently with a given probability. Our work generalizes the classical shared risk group model, by considering multiple risks associated with a node and letting a node fail if all the risks occur. Moreover, we study the diverse routing problem by considering two paths between a pair of nodes. We define two paths to be d-failure resilient if at least one path survives after removing d or fewer supply nodes, which generalizes the concept of disjoint paths in a single network, and risk-disjoint paths in a classical shared risk group model. We compute the probability that both paths fail, and develop algorithms to compute the most reliable pair of paths.  Thus, nodes in the demand network and nodes in the supply network can be viewed as demand nodes and supply nodes, respectively. Given that a demand node fails if it loses all of its supply nodes, supply node failures may lead to correlated demand node failures, which makes it difficult to route traffic through reliable paths in the demand network. We develop techniques to tackle the failure correlation. This simplified one-way dependence exists in current systems. For example, routers and processors in a communication network depend on the electric power. Moreover, as we will see later, the analysis based on this simplified scenario can be applied to interdependent networks under certain assumptions.  s  I. I NTRODUCTION Many modern systems are interdependent, such as smart power grids, smart transportation, and other cyber-physical systems [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. In interdependent networks, one network depends on another to properly function. For example, in smart grids, power generators rely on messages from the control center to adjust to the power demands, while the control center relies on the electric power to operate. Due to the interdependence, failures in one network may cascade to another. It is important to understand the robustness of interdependent networks which are prone to cascading failures. Most previous studies on interdependent networks have focused on the network connectivity based on random graph models, in the asymptotic regime where the number of nodes approaches infinity [6], [7]. The finite-size arbitrary-topology graph models, which represent real communication and physical networks, have been largely overlooked in the interdependent networks literature. A few exceptions include [4], [5], which model interdependent power grids and communication networks by graphs with topologies specified by the real networks. Similarly, we abstract interdependent networks by graphs with specified topologies, which can be tailored for a wide range of applications. In this paper, we study robust routing problems in interdependent networks, by characterizing the effects of failures in one network on the other network. For an overview of the problems and challenges, it is helpful to consider a simplified scenario where a demand network depends on a supply network, illustrated by Fig. 1. Every node in the demand network is supported by one or more nodes in the supply network. The authors are with the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. This work was supported in part by DTRA grants HDTRA1-13-1-0021 and HDTRA1-14-1-0058.  t  demand network  supply network Fig. 1. Every node in the demand network G1 is supported by two nodes in the supply network G2 .  The robust routing problems have been extensively studied under both independent failure and correlated failure scenarios. If edges or nodes fail independently, the most reliable path between a source-destination pair can be viewed as a shortest path, where the length is a function of the failure probability. In the case of correlated failures, it is difficult to find a path with any performance guarantee in general [8]. If correlation only exists among edges or nodes that fail simultaneously, the network can be viewed using a shared risk group model (Fig. 2) [9], [10]. The shared risk group model captures correlated failures in an overlay network when underlay failures occur, and is commonly used to study the cross-layer reliability, such as logical link failures caused by fiber failures in optical networks [11], [12], [13], [14]. The most reliable path contains the smallest number of risks if all risks are equally likely to occur, and can be obtained by integer programming [11]. Interdependent networks have similarities with the classical shared risk group model, in that two demand nodes share a risk if they have at least one common supply node. However, the key difference is that a demand node does not necessarily fail if a risk occurs (i.e., a supply node fails), since a demand node may have multiple supply nodes, whereas a node fails  3 4  1 3  2  1  2  3  4  Fig. 2. A shared risk node group model, where nodes labeled by the same number share the same risk.  if its associated risk occurs in the classical shared risk group model. The reliability of a path in interdependent networks, in contrast to the classical shared risk group model, can no longer be characterized by the number of risks that the path contains. For example, if all the nodes in a path depend on a single supply node and thus the path has a single risk, removing a single supply node would disconnect the path. In contrast, if every node in a path has multiple supply nodes, the path would be more robust and can resist a larger number of supply node failures, although the path has more “risks”. In addition to the most reliable path, a backup path can be used to further improve reliability, through diverse routing. Intuitively, a pair of reliable paths should share the minimum number of risks (or be risk-disjoint) in the shared risk group model [11], [13]. However, in interdependent networks, it is easy to construct examples where two paths that share many supply nodes can withstand a larger number of supply node failures than two paths that share a smaller number of supply nodes (e.g., Fig. 3). New metrics, other than the number of risks shared by two paths, need to be identified to characterize their reliability. 1 2  3 4  s  1 2  t 1 2  5 6  3 4  s  t 1 4  2 3  Fig. 3. The two numbers in each node represent its two supply nodes. The two st paths in the left figure share two supply nodes, and can be both disconnected after removing supply nodes {1, 2}. The two st paths in the right figure share four supply nodes, but they cannot be both disconnected after removing any two supply nodes.  Diverse routing problems have been studied under correlated link failures. The correlation between a pair of logical links is obtained either by measurement [15] or by analysis of the underlay physical topology [16]. Heuristic algorithms have been developed to find multiple reliable paths, and their performance was evaluated by simulation [15], [17], [18]. In contrast, we explicitly bound the gap between the failure probability and the optimization objective, and develop algorithms that have provable performance.  In this paper, we develop an analytically tractable framework to study the following robust routing problems in interdependent networks. Single-path routing: Compute the probability that a specified path fails. Obtain the most reliable path between a source-destination pair. Diverse routing: Compute the probability that two specified paths both fail. Obtain the pair of most reliable paths between a source-destination pair. By generalizing the concept of disjoint paths to interdependent networks, we characterize the level of disjointness between two paths to study diverse routing. In contrast to the classical shared risk group model where a node fails if its risk occurs, in interdependent networks a node fails if a combination of risks occur. In view of this, our methods extend the shared risk group model. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to study the robust routing problem in interdependent networks. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we state our model for interdependent networks and failures. In Section III, we prove the complexity, and develop approximation algorithms to compute the path failure probability. In Section IV, we develop algorithms to find the most reliable path between a pair of nodes. In Section V, we study the diverse routing problem in interdependent networks, and find a pair of reliable paths whose failure probability is minimized. Section VI provides numerical results. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper. II. M ODEL We consider a demand network G1 and a supply network G2 , where every demand node in G1 depends on one or more supply nodes in G2 . We assume that every supply node provides substitutional supply to the demand nodes, and a demand node is functioning if it is directly connected to at least one supply node. To study the impact of node failures in G2 on G1 , it is equivalent to study the following model. Consider a graph G(V, E, SV ), where nodes V and edges E are identical to nodes and edges in G1 , and SV are the supply node sets, each of which is a set of nodes in G2 that provide supply to a node in V . In this model, each node vi ∈ V is a demand node, supported by a set of supply nodes Si ∈ SV , and vi fails if all the nodes in Si fail. (Note that nodes V may have different number of supply nodes.) Finally, let s, t ∈ V be a source-destination pair. Under the condition that supply nodes fail independently with given probabilities, and following the convention that s, t do not fail, we study the robust routing problems in G(V, E, SV ). Remark. The analysis for this model can be directly applied to interdependent networks, as long as the interdependence is bidirectional (i.e., if v ∈ G1 depends on u ∈ G2 , then u depends on v as well) and failures initially occur in one network. It suffices to observe that, given a set of failed nodes S ⊆ G2 , a node v ∈ G1 fails if and only if its supply nodes are all in S. Notice that the failure of v does not further  lead to node failures in G2 , because all the nodes that v supports, which are exactly the supply nodes for v due to the bidirectional interdependence, have failed. III. C OMPUTING  THE RELIABILITY OF A PATH  If every node has a single supply node, the path failure probability is given by 1 − (1 − p)r , where each supply node fails independently with probability p and the path is supported by r supply nodes. In contrast, if every node has more than one supply node, computing the path failure probability becomes #P -hard. The proof can be found in the Appendix. Theorem 1. Computing the failure probability of a path is #P -hard, if every node has two or more supply nodes and each supply node fails independently with probability p. Although it is #P -hard to compute, the path failure probability can be well approximated. We apply the solution to the DNF probability problem and propose an (ǫ, δ)-approximation algorithm based on importance sampling, which approximates the path failure probability to within a multiplicative factor 1 ± ǫ with probability at least 1 − δ. The DNF probability problem computes the probability that a Disjunctive Normal Form (DNF) formula is true, when literals are set to be true independently with given probabilities. A DNF formula is a disjunction of clauses, each of which is a conjunction of literals, and takes the following form: m (x11 ∧ · · · ∧ x1n1 ) ∨ (x21 ∧ · · · ∧ x2n2 ) ∨ · · · ∨ (xm 1 ∧ · · · ∧ xnm ). Let v1 −· · ·−vm be a path in G(V, E, SV ). The key observation is that computing the path failure probability can be formulated by a DNF probability problem, in which a clause Ci represents a node vi in the path and the literals xij in clause Ci represent the supply nodes of vi . For completeness, we state Algorithm 1 that approximates the path failure probability, by adapting the algorithm that approximates the DNF probability in [19]. The intuition behind this importance sampling algorithm is as follows. Some events, although rare, are important in determining the path failure probability, especially when the path failure probability is small. The algorithm samples in a space consisting of important events, each of which is a set of supply node failures U that lead to the path failure. In this space, the failure of U may appear multiple times, given that multiple choices of vi in Step 2 may lead to the same U in Step 3. The algorithm then remove the duplicated U via sampling in Step 4. To prove the correctness of the algorithm, we take the following two steps. First, following a similar analysis to [19], P we proveQthat the path failure probability is given by E[I] 1≤k≤m 1≤j≤ns (vk ) p(ukj ), where E[I] is the expectation of I in Step 4 of the algorithm. Second, by repeating the loop a sufficiently large number of times, E[I] can be approximated to within factor 1 ± ǫ with probability at least 1 − δ. The details of the proof can be found in the Appendix. The advantage of this algorithm over a naı̈ve Monte-Carlo algorithm (e.g., by repeatedly simulating the supply node failure events and counting the fraction of trials in which the  Algorithm 1 Estimating the path failure probability based on importance sampling. Initialization: 1) Given a path {v1 , v2 , . . . , vm }, let {uij |j = 1, . . . , ns (vi )} denote the set of supply nodes of vi , where ns (vi ) is the number of supply nodes of vi . Main loop: 2) Among {v1 , v2 , . . . , vm }, randomly choose vi with probability X Y Y p(ukj ). p(uij )/ 1≤j≤ns (vi )  1≤k≤m 1≤j≤ns (vk )  If every demand node has an identical number of supply nodes, and the supply node failure probability p(uij ) is identical, then node vi is chosen with probability 1/m. 3) If vi is chosen, set all of its supply nodes {uij |j = 1, . . . , ns (vi )} to be failed. The other supply nodes are randomly set to be failed with their respective failure probabilities. Let U denote the set of failed supply nodes. 4) Test whether vi is the first failed node among {v1 , v2 , . . . , vm }, given that U fail (and no other supply nodes fail). If true, set I = 1; otherwise, set I = 0. Repeat the loop for a = 3m ln(2/δ)/ǫ2 iterations. Result: 5) Count the number of I = 1 and denote the number by b. An (ǫ, δ)-approximation P Qof the path failure probability is given by b/a 1≤k≤m 1≤j≤ns (vk ) p(ukj ). path fails) is that the number of iterations in the naı̈ve MonteCarlo algorithm is large when the path failure probability is small1 . In contrast, by sampling in a more important space, the number of iterations is reduced. Note that the only quantity that needs to be estimated in Algorithm 1 by simulation is E[I], and that Pr(I = 1) ≥ 1/m. We conclude this section by the following theorem, whose proof is in the Appendix. Theorem 2. The path failure probability can be estimated to within a multiplicative factor 1 ± ǫ with probability 1 − δ, in time O(m2 ns ln(1/δ)/ǫ2 ), where m is the path length and ns is the maximum number of supply nodes for a demand node. Although the failure probability of a specific path can be well approximated by the importance sampling algorithm, the algorithm hardly gives an intuition for path properties that characterize a reliable path. In the remainder of this section, we develop indicators and bounds on the path failure probability, which can be used for finding the most reliable path. A. Small and identical failure probability Consider a path v1 −· · ·−vm in G(V, E, SV ). Let Fi denote the event that all the supply nodes of vi fail. Let F denote the 1 If F occurs in b out of a trials, Pr(F ) ∈ (1 ± ǫ)b/a with probability 1 − δ, under the condition that b = Ω(ln(1/δ)/ǫ2 ). The total number of trials a = Ω(ln(1/δ)/ǫ2 )/ Pr(F ) is large when Pr(F ) is small.  event that the path fails. Clearly, the path fails if at least one node vi loses all of its supply nodes (F = ∪1≤i≤m Fi ). By the inclusion-exclusion principle, we have X X Pr(F ) = Pr(Fi ) − Pr(Fi1 ∩ Fi2 ) 1≤i≤m  1≤i1 <i2 ≤m  + · · · + (−1)m−1 Pr(F1 ∩ F2 · · · ∩ Fm ).  (1)  Directly computing the path failure probability is difficult, given that there are m summations in the j-th term of the j inclusion-exclusion formula. We first reduce the number of events in the inclusion-exclusion formula, and then further simplify the computation under the condition that the supply node failure probability is small and identical. To reduce the number of events, some redundant events can be ignored. For example, if Fi occurs only if Fj occurs, then the event Fi is redundant in determining F with the knowledge of Fj . To see this, note that 1) if Fj occurs, then the path fails regardless of Fi ; 2) if Fj does not occur, then Fi does not occur as well. If the supply nodes of vj form a subset of the supply nodes of vi , then Fi is redundant. With an abuse of language, we call a node vi redundant if Fi (i.e., the state of vi ) is redundant. With this simplification, we derive the following result. Let ns (vi ) denote the number of distinct supply nodes of vi . Let nmin = min1≤i≤m ns (vi ). After removing the redundant s nodes sequentially, let m̄ be the number of remaining nodes supply nodes. The path failure probability that each have nmin s can be estimated by the following theorem. Theorem 3. If every supply node fails independently with probability p ≤ ǫ/m, then the path failure probability satisfies min min (1 − ǫ)m̄pns ≤ Pr(F ) ≤ (1 + ǫ)m̄pns . Proof. We first reduce the number of failure events that appear in the inclusion-exclusion formula by removing the redundant nodes. Note that determining whether a node is redundant and removing the redundant node are done sequentially. Thus, among the set of nodes that have the same supply nodes, one node remains. Let D denote the nodes in the path excluding the redundant nodes. First, we consider the first term in Eq. (1) that provides an upper bound on the path failure probability, known as the union bound. Let D1 ⊂ D denote the set of nodes that each have nmin supply nodes, and let m̄ = |D1 |. The remaining s nodes D2 = D \ D1 each have nmin + 1 or more supply s nodes. Thus, the first term of Eq. (1) is at most min  + (m − m̄)ppns  min  + ǫpns ,  Pr(F ) ≤m̄pns  ≤m̄pns  order for a pair of nodes in D1 to fail. At least nmin +2 supply s nodes need to be removed in order for a pair of nodes to fail if at least one node belongs D2 . The absolute of the  to  value m m̄ nmin +1 nmin +2 s s second term is at most m̄ p + [ − ]p .A 2 2 2 lower bound on Pr(F ) is   m̄2 min min m2 2 nmin ppns + p p s Pr(F ) ≥m̄pns − 2 2 min min ≥m̄pns − ǫm̄pns , for p ≤ ǫ/m. For the special case where every node in the path has the same number ns of distinct supply nodes, let m̄ be the number of nodes, in the path, among which no pair of nodes share the same set of ns supply nodes. The following stronger result can be proved in a similar approach. Corollary 1. If every supply node fails independently with probability p ≤ 2ǫ/m̄, then the path failure probability satisfies (1 − ǫ)m̄pns ≤ Pr(F ) ≤ m̄pns . Proof. If node vi and vj in the path share the same set of supply nodes, then vi and vj must fail simultaneously, and F = ∪1≤i≤m Fi = ∪1≤i≤m,i6=j Fi . Thus, in the calculation of path failure probability Pr(F ), nodes that have the same set of supply nodes can be represented by a single node. Let {v̄1 , v̄2 , . . . , v̄m̄ } denote the nodes in the path such that the supply nodes of v̄i differ from the supply nodes of v̄j by at least one supply node, i 6= j, m̄ ≤ m. The first term of Eq. (1) is m̄pns , since every node has ns distinct supply nodes and the probability that a node fails is pns . Moreover, the union of the supply nodes of v̄i and v̄j has size at least ns + 1, and the probability that both v̄i and v̄j fail (because of their supply nodes’ failures) is at most pns +1 . The absolute ns +1 value of the second term of Eq. (1) is at most m̄ ≤ 2 p 2 ns +1 ns m̄ p /2 ≤ ǫm̄p , for p ≤ 2ǫ/m̄. Therefore, Pr(F ) ∈ [(1 − ǫ)m̄pns , m̄pns ] given that p ≤ 2ǫ/m̄. Thus, we have obtained the following two reliability indicators for a path. These combinatorial properties are useful in finding a reliable path, which will be studied in the next section. min • ns : the minimum number of distinct supply nodes for a node in the path. min • m̄: the number of combinations of ns supply node failures that lead to the failure of at least one node in the path.  min  min  for p ≤ ǫ/m. Next, we consider the first two terms that provide a lower bound on the path failure probability (cf . Bonferroni inequalities). For any pair of nodes vj , vk ∈ D, the union of their supply node sets contains at least max(ns (vj ), ns (vk )) + 1 nodes, because neither supply node set includes the other as a subset. At least nmin + 1 supply nodes have to be removed in s  B. Arbitrary failure probability In contrast with the case where supply node failure probability is small and identical, it is difficult to characterize the reliability of a path by its combinatorial properties, with limited knowledge of node failure probabilities. Therefore, we obtain bounds on path failure probability that will be useful in finding a reliable path. First, we develop an upper bound on the path failure probability. Let p(vi ) be the failure probability of node vi , under the  condition that each of its supply nodes uij fails independently with probability p(uij ). The path failure probability, under the condition that the failures of V are positively correlated, is no larger than the path failure probability by assuming that the failures of V are independent.  there are three possibilities. First, each node in P has at least one survived supply node in US , and P survives regardless of the state of uij . Second, there exists at least one node in P whose supply nodes are all in UF . Thus, P fails regardless of the state of uij . Third, P survives if and only if uij survives. The last case occurs if for some nodes in Pji , all the other Lemma 1. The failure probability of a path P where a supply supply nodes have failed except uij . The probability that P i node uij fails independently with probability p(u ) is upper j Q survives is given by 1−p(uij ). By replacing uij with nd (uij , P ) bounded by 1 − vi ∈P (1 − p(vi )). distinct nodes, each of which supports a node in Pji and Proof. If nodes vi and ∪k vk do not share any supply node, fails independently with probability 1 − (1 − p(ui ))1/nd (uij ) , j then the event that vi survives and the event that ∪k vk the probability that all the nd (ui , P ) nodes survive is (1 − j i i survive are independent. Otherwise, if they share one or more p(uij ))nd (uj ,P )/nd (uj ) ≥ 1 − p(uij ). In this case, each node common supply nodes, the two events are positively correlated. in Pji has at least one survived supply node, and the path P Therefore, survives. Thus, by the law of total probability, the probability that P Pr(vi and ∪k vk survive) ≥ Pr(vi survives) Pr(∪k vk survive), survives never decreases after the above replacement. and After repeatedly replacing each supply node that supports Pr(vi survives| ∪k vk survive) ≥ 1 − p(vi ). multiple demand nodes by distinct nodes, each of which The reliability of a path P = v1 − v2 − · · · − vm is given supports a single demand node and fails independently with the specified probability, the demand node failures become by independent. Let p̃(vi ) denote the failure probability of a Pr(P survives) = Pr(∪k∈{1,...,m} vk survive) demand node vi after the replacement of supply nodes. The failure = Pr(v1 survives) Pr(v2 survives|v1 survives) Q probability of a path can be computed efficiently as 1 − vi ∈P (1 − p̃(vi )), and is a lower bound on the failure . . . Pr(vm survives| ∪k∈{1,...,m−1} vk survive) Y probability of the same path in the original problem. ≥ (1 − p(vi )). vi ∈P Let nd denote the maximum number of demand nodes that a supply node supports, and let ns denote the maximum number of supply nodes for a demand node. The following lemma Then, we develop a lower bound on the path failure proba- bounds the ratio between the upper and lower bounds. Its proof bility. The intuition is as follows. After replacing a supply node can be found in the Appendix. that supports multiple demand nodes by multiple independent Lemma 3. For any path, the ratio of the upper bound on its supply nodes with sufficiently small failure probability, the failure probability obtained in Lemma 1 to the lower bound path failure probability does not increase. In the original graph obtained in Lemma 2 is at most (nd )ns . G(V, E, SV ), consider a node vi ∈ V . Let U i denote the set of supply nodes of vi , let uij ∈ U i denote one supply Proof. We aim to prove Q node, let p(uij ) denote the failure probability of uij , and let 1 − vi ∈P (1 − p(vi )) i i Q nd (uj ) denote the number of nodes that uj supports. Let ≤ nnd s , Q 1 − vi ∈P (1 − p̃(vi )) i p̃(vi ) = ui ∈U i p̃(uj ) denote the failure probability of vi j if uij fails independently with probability p̃(uij ) = 1 − (1 − given ns i (2) 1 − p(vi ) ≥ (1 − p̃(vi ))nd , p(uij ))1/nd (uj ) . A lower bound on the path failure probability is as follows, whose proof follows a similar technique in [20] which will be proved in Lemma 7. and is in the technical report. Given p(vi ), p̃(vi ) ∈ (0, 1), with Eq. (2), Y Y ns Lemma 2. The failure probability of a path P where a supply 1 − (1 − p(v )) ≤ 1 − (3) (1 − p̃(vi ))nd . i i i node uj fails independently with probability p(uj ) is lower vi ∈P vi ∈P Q bounded by 1 − vi ∈P (1 − p̃(vi )). and Y Proof. Let U P = ∪1≤i≤m U i denote the set of supply nodes 0< (1 − p̃(vi )) < 1. for the nodes in path P . Let uij ∈ U P denote one supply vi ∈P node. Let nd (uij ) denote the total number of demand nodes Moreover, let that uij supports. Let Pji denote the set of nodes in P that are ns f (x) = 1 − xnd − nnd s (1 − x). supported by uij and |Pji | = nd (uij , P ) ≤ nd (uij ). We follow a similar method in [20] to prove the claim. Since f (1) = 0 and Given the realizations of U P \ uij = US ∪ UF , where US ns f ′ (x) = nnd s (1 − xnd −1 ) ≥ 0, denote the survived nodes and UF denote the failed nodes,  for 0 < x ≤ 1 and nnd s ≥ 1, f (x) is an increasing function, and f (x) ≤ 0, for 0 < x ≤ 1 and nnd s ≥ 1. Q Let x = vi ∈P (1 − p̃(vi )) ∈ (0, 1), since f (x) ≤ 0, we obtain that Y Y ns 1− (1 − p̃(vi ))nd ≤ nnd s (1 − (1 − p̃(vi ))). vi ∈P  vi ∈P  With Eq. (3), Y Y 1− (1 − p(vi )) ≤ nnd s (1 − (1 − p̃(vi ))). vi ∈P  vi ∈P  The claim is proved. IV. F INDING  THE MOST RELIABLE PATH  In this section, we aim to compute the most reliable path between a source-destination pair s, t ∈ V in G(V, E, SV ). We first prove that it is NP-hard to approximately compute the most reliable path. We then develop an algorithm to compute the most reliable path when the supply nodes fail independently with an identically small probability, and finally develop an approximation algorithm under arbitrary failure probabilities. Hardness of approximation: Although the failure probability of any given path can be approximated to within factor 1 ± ǫ for any ǫ > 0, it is NP-hard to obtain an st path whose failure probability is less than 1 + ǫ times the optimal for a small ǫ. The proof can be found in the Appendix. Theorem 4. Computing an st path whose failure probability is less than 1 + ǫ times the failure probability of the most reliable st path is NP-hard for ǫ < 1/m, where m is the maximum path length. A. Small and identical failure probability If every supply node fails independently with an identically small probability, there are two reliability indicators: nmin s and m̄. Recall that nmin is the minimum number of supply s nodes for a node in the path, and that m̄ is the number of combinations of nmin supply node failures that disconnect the s path. With the two indicators, the path failure probability can be approximated to within a multiplicative factor 1 ± ǫ by min m̄pns , under the condition that p ≤ ǫ/m. Moreover, the is more important (and has a higher priority to indicator nmin s be optimized) than m̄. We next develop algorithms to optimize the two indicators. Given a graph G(V, E, SV ) and a pair of nodes (s, t), the problem of computing an st path with the maximum nmin can s be formulated as the maximum capacity path problem, where the capacity of a node equals the number of its distinct supply nodes and the capacity of a path is the minimum node capacity along the path. The maximum capacity path can be obtained by a modified Dijkstra’s algorithm, and can be obtained in linear time [21].  However, it is NP-hard to minimize m̄, even in the special case where every demand node has a single supply node. The result follows from the NP-hardness of computing a path with the minimum colors in a colored graph [12]. We develop an integer program to compute the path P with the minimum m̄, under the condition that nmin s (P ) = minvi ∈P ns (vi ) is maximized. The following pre-processing reduces the size of the integer program. First, compute k = maxP ∈P nmin s (P ), where P is the set of all the st paths, using the linear-time maximum capacity path algorithm. Then, remove all the nodes that have fewer than k distinct supply nodes and their attached edges, and denote the remaining graph by G′ (V ′ , E ′ , SV ′ ). The removed nodes and edges will not be used by the optimal path. Let V ′′ ⊆ V ′ denote the nodes among which each has exactly k distinct supply nodes. We aim to find a path VP where the number of distinct supply node sets for VP ∩ V ′′ is minimized. Let Si denote the set of supply nodes of i ∈ V ′′ . Let SV ′′ denote the union of these sets. Let xij denote the flow variable which takes a positive value if and only if edge (i, j) belongs to the selected path. An st path is identified by constraint (5). A node i is on the selected path if at least one of xij and xji is positive. Let h(Si ) denote whether removing supply nodes Si disconnects the selected path. If a node i is on the selected path and has k supply nodes, then h(Si ) must be one, guaranteed by constraint (6). All the other nodes either do not belong to the selected path or have more than k supply nodes, and their supply node failures are not considered. The objective minimizes m̄, which is the number of combinations of k supply node failures that disconnect the path. min  X  h(Si )  (4)  Si ∈SV ′′    1, if i = s, xji = −1, if i = t, (5) xij − s.t.  0, otherwise. {j|(i,j)∈E ′ } {j|(j,i)∈E ′ } X X xji ≤ 2h(Si ), ∀i ∈ V ′′ \ s, t,(6) xij + X  X  {j|(i,j)∈E ′ } {j|(j,i)∈E ′ } xij ≥ 0, ∀(i, j) ∈ E ′ ,  h(Si ) = {0, 1},  ∀Si ∈ SV ′′ .  B. Arbitrary failure probability If nodes Ṽ in a graph G̃(Ṽ , Ẽ) fail independently, the probability that a path survives is the product of the survival probabilities of nodes along the path. The most reliable path can be obtained by the classical shortest path algorithm, by replacing the length of traversing a node ṽi by − ln(1−p(ṽi )), where p(ṽi ) is the failure probability P of ṽi . It is easy to see that Q the length of a path P is ṽi ∈P − ln(1 − p(ṽi )) = − ln ṽi ∈P (1 − p(ṽi )).Q The shortest path has the smallest failure probability 1 − ṽi ∈P (1 − p(ṽi )). Compared with the above simple model, the difficulty in obtaining the most reliable st path in interdependent networks is the failure correlations of nodes V ⊆ G(V, E, SV ). The  failure Q probability of a path can no longer be characterized by 1 − vi ∈P (1 − p(vi )). Moreover, let s − · · · − vi − · · · − t be the most reliable st path. The sub-path s − · · · − vi may not be the most reliable path between s and vi . Thus, the labelcorrection approach in dynamic programming (e.g., Dijkstra’s algorithm) cannot be used, even though the failure probability of a given path can be approximated. Given the bounds obtained in the previous section, we propose Algorithm 2 to compute a path whose failure probability is within (nd )ns times the optimal failure probability. Recall that the bounds on path survival probability are the product of (original or new) node survival probabilities, which exactly match the path survival probability in the case of independent node failures. Algorithm 2 An approximation algorithm to compute a reliable st path in G(V, E, SV ). 1) For each vi ∈ V , compute p̃(vi ) as follows. Let uij be a supply node of vi with failure probability p(uij ). If uij supports nd (uij ) nodes, let p̃(uij ) = 1 − (1 − i p(uij ))1/nd (uj ) . Let p̃(vi ) be the failure probability of vi if uij fails independently with probability p̃(uij ). 2) Compute the most reliable st path assuming that vi fails independently with probability p̃(vi ). The most reliable path can be obtained by a standard shortest path algorithm (e.g., Dijkstra’s algorithm), by letting − ln(1 − p̃(vi )) be the length of traversing node vi .  Theorem 5. The failure probability of the path obtained by Algorithm 2 is at most (nd )ns times the failure probability of the most reliable st path under arbitrary supply node failure probabilities. Proof. Let the path obtained by Algorithm 2 be P ′ and let the path with the minimum failure probability be P ∗ . Let p(P ′ ) and p(P ∗ ) denote their failure probabilities. Moreover, let p̃(P ′ ) and p̃(P ∗ ) denote their failure probabilities by assuming that each node vi fails independently with probability p̃(vi ). We have p(P ′ ) ≤ nnd s p̃(P ′ ) ≤ nnd s p̃(P ∗ ) ≤ nnd s p(P ∗ ), where the first inequality follows from Lemma 3 and the last inequality follows from Lemma 2. Remark. If ns = 1 and every supply node fails independently with an identically small probability, our result reduces to the following result in the classical shared risk group model: The number of risks associated with the shortest path is at most nd times the number of risks associated with the minimum-risk path [13]. V. R ELIABILITY  OF A PAIR OF PATHS  To study diverse routing in interdependent networks, we consider the simplest case of two st paths in this section. Given that computing the failure probability of a single path is #P hard if every node has more than one supply node, it is  also #P hard to compute the failure probability of two paths2 . To see this, note that if two paths have the same number of nodes and each node in the first path has identical supply nodes as its corresponding node in the second path, then the probability that both paths fail equals the probability that a single path fails. Fortunately, we are still able to obtain 1 ± ǫapproximation of the failure probability in polynomial time. A. Small and identical failure probability A central concept in diverse routing is the disjoint paths or risk disjoint paths [11], [12], [10]. In the classical shared risk group model, if every risk occurs independently with an identically small probability p = o(1/m2 ), the probability that two paths fail is Θ(f (m)p2 ) if they are risk disjoint and Θ(f (m)p) if they share one or more risks, where m is the maximum path length and f (m) is a function of m. Thus, risk-disjointness characterizes the order of the reliability of two paths. In interdependent networks where every demand node has multiple supply nodes, if nodes in P 1 do not share any supply nodes with nodes in P 2 , then P 1 and P 2 are risk disjoint. However, risk-disjointness does not suffice to characterize the reliability of two paths, for the following two reasons. First, the failure probability of a demand node depends on the number of supply nodes for it, which is not related to risk-disjointness. Second, if P 1 and P 2 share some supply nodes, the failure probability depends further on the maximum number of supply node failures that the two paths can withstand. To study the reliability of two paths in interdependent networks, we define d-failure resilient paths as follows. Definition 1. Two paths are d-failure resilient if removing any d supply nodes would not disconnect both paths. Remark. In the classical graph model G̃(Ṽ , Ẽ), two disjoint paths are 1-failure resilient while two overlapping paths are 0-failure resilient. In the classical shared risk group model, two risk disjoint paths are 1-failure resilient while two paths that share risks are 0-failure resilient. Two paths can never be more than one failure resilient. Thus, the disjointness or riskdisjointness suffices to characterize (the order of) the reliability of two paths in these models. 1) Evaluation of failure probability: Consider two paths 2 1 −t −t, P 2 = s−v12 −v22 −· · ·−vm P 1 = s−v11 −v21 −· · ·−vm 2 1 between a pair of nodes (s, t). We study the event that at least one node in P 1 and at least one node in P 2 both fail. Let Fik denote the event that all the supply nodes of vik fail, and let F k denote the event that the k-th path fails, k ∈ {1, 2}. Then F 1 ∩ F 2 = ∪1≤i≤m1 ,1≤j≤m2 (Fi1 ∩ Fj2 ). For simplicity of presentation, let F both = F 1 ∩ F 2 and Fij = Fi1 ∩ Fj2 . Let Sij denote the union of supply nodes of vi1 and vj2 . 2 Meanwhile, it is still simple to compute the failure probability of two paths if every node has a single supply node, by first computing the probability that the first path fail, and then computing the probability that the second path fail while the first path does not fail (i.e., none of the supply nodes of the first path fail), both in polynomial time, and summing the two probabilities.  To decide whether two paths are d-failure resilient, we consider the number of supply node failures that lead to the event Fij , and denote the number by dij . Then d = min1≤i≤m1 ,1≤j≤m2 dij − 1. Moreover, let m̄ be the number of pairs of nodes, one from each path, such that each pair of nodes in total have d + 1 distinct supply nodes and any two pairs do not have the same set of d + 1 supply nodes. (I.e., m̄ combinations of d + 1 supply node failures each disconnect both paths.) The next theorem formalizes the connection between the reliability of two paths and d. Theorem 6. If every supply node fails independently with probability p ≤ ǫ/(m1 m2 ), then the probability that two dfailure resilient paths with lengths m1 , m2 both fail satisfies (1 − ǫ)m̄pd+1 ≤ Pr(F both ) ≤ (1 + ǫ)m̄pd+1 . Proof. First consider the events Fij = Fi1 ∩ Fj2 , 1 ≤ i ≤ m1 , 1 ≤ j ≤ m2 . Let Sij denote the union of supply nodes of vi1 and vj2 . Then the event Fij occurs if and only if all the nodes Sij fail. By a similar argument as the proof of Theorem 3, if Si1 j1 is a subset of Si2 j2 , then Fi2 j2 occurs only if Fi1 j1 occurs, and Fi2 j2 is redundant. In the following we only consider S = {Sij |1 ≤ i ≤ m1 , 1 ≤ j ≤ m2 , none of Sij is a subset of another.}. The cardinality of S at most m1 m2 . By the inclusion-exclusion principle, Pr(F both ) can be computed as follows. X Pr(F both ) = Pr(Sij fail) Sij ∈S  −  X  Pr(Si1 j1 ∪ Si2 j2 fail)  Si1 j1 ,Si2 j2 ∈S  + · · · + (−1)|S|−1 Pr(∪Sij ∈S Sij fail).  (7)  Since two paths are d-failure disjoint, the number of nodes in Sij is d + 1 for some i ∈ {1, . . . , m1 }, j ∈ {1, . . . , m2 } while the number of nodes in all the other Sij is larger than d + 1. Let S1 ⊆ S be the union of the supply node sets, each of which contains d + 1 nodes, and let m̄ = |S1 |. The first term in Eq. (7) is at most m̄q d+1 + (|S| − m̄)q d+2 . Therefore, Pr(F both ) ≤m̄q d+1 + m1 m2 qq d+1 ≤m̄q d+1 + ǫq d+1 , if q ≤ ǫ/(m1 m2 ). We next consider the supply node failures of two pairs of nodes. Recall that S1 consists of supply node sets that each contain d + 1 nodes. Let S2 = S \ S1 be the remaining supply node sets that each contain d + 2 or more nodes. The union of two sets Si1 j1 ∪Si2 j2 (Si1 j1 , Si2 j2 ∈ S1 ) contains at least d+2 nodes. The union Si1 j1 ∪ Si2 j2 (Si1 j1 , Si2 j2 ∈ S2 , or Si1 j1 ∈ S1 , Si2 j2 ∈ S2 ) contains at least d + 3 nodes.  d+2 Themabsolute  value of the second term is at most m̄ + [ 12m2 − 2 q  m̄ 2   d+3 ]q . To conclude,  m̄2 d+1 (m1 m2 )2 2 d+1  qq + q q 2 2 d+1 d+1 ≥m̄q − ǫm̄q ,  Pr(F both ) ≥m̄q d+1 −  if q ≤ ǫ/(m1 m2 ).  2) Finding the most reliable pair of paths: From Theorem 6, we know that the probability that two d-failure resilient paths both fail is smaller for larger values of d. Moreover, for a fixed d, the failure probability is proportional to m̄, the number of combinations of d + 1 supply node failures that disconnect both paths. We have obtained two reliability indicators for two paths: d and m̄. Unfortunately, computing the pair of st paths that have the maximum d and the minimum m̄ are both NP-hard, even in the special case where every demand node has a single supply node. This special case reduces to the classical shared risk group model. In this special case, d = 1 if there exist two risk-disjoint paths, and d = 0 otherwise. The NP-hardness of determining the existence of two risk-disjoint paths between an st pair has been proved in [11]. Moreover, in this special case, for two paths that share common supply nodes, m̄ is the number of overlapping risks between the two paths (i.e., removing any of the m̄ supply nodes disconnects both paths). The NP-hardness of the least coupled paths problem, which computes a pair of paths that share the minimum number of risks in the classical shared risk group model, has also been proved in [11]. We develop an integer program to compute a pair of st paths with the maximum d in G(V, E, SV ). Let variable xkij denote whether edge (i, j) is part of the k-th path, and let variable bki denote whether node i is part of the k-th path, k ∈ {1, 2}. Same as before, let Si denote the supply nodes of node i. Constraints (9) guarantee that two paths are nodedisjoint. Notice that these constraints can be dropped if there is no restriction on the physical disjointness of two paths. Constraints (10) guarantee that at least d + 1 supply nodes need to be removed in order for one node in each path to fail (i.e., b1i = b2j = 1, i, j ∈ V ), where M is a sufficiently large number, e.g., twice the maximum number of supply nodes for a demand node. max  d  (8)  1, if i = s,  X X −1, if i = t, k ∈ {1, 2}, xkji = xkij − s.t.  0, otherwise. {j|(i,j)∈E} {j|(j,i)∈E} X X xkji ≤ 2bki , ∀i ∈ V, k ∈ {1, 2} xkij + {j|(i,j)∈E} {j|(j,i)∈E} b1i + b2i ≤ 1, ∀i ∈ V  \ s, t,  d + 1 ≤ |Si ∪ Sj | + M (2 − xkij ∈ {0, 1}, bki ∈ {0, 1},  (9) b1i  −  b2j ), ∀i, j  ∀(i, j) ∈ E, k ∈ {1, 2}, ∀i ∈ V, k ∈ {1, 2}.  ∈ V \ s, t,(10)  A slightly modified integer program suffices to minimize m̄ under the condition that d is maximized. Let h(Si ∪ Sj ) denote whether removing the union of supply nodes for i and j disconnects both paths. Constraints (12) guarantee that if i and j belong to two different paths, i.e., b1i = b2j = 1, then h(Si ∪ Sj ) = 1. Otherwise, h(Si ∪ Sj ) = 0 in the optimal solution. Let a positive value w(|Si ∪ Sj |) denote its weight, which is a decreasing function of the cardinality |Si ∪ Sj |. We aim to minimize the total weights of supply node failures that disconnect two paths. In order to guarantee that d is maximized, w(l)/w(l + 1) should be sufficiently large for any integer l, e.g., |V |2 /2. Since there are at most |V |(|V | − 1)/2 pairs of nodes, larger d is always preferable and has a higher priority to be optimized over m̄. min  X  w(|Si ∪ Sj |)h(Si ∪ Sj )  (11)  Si ,Sj ∈SV    1, if i = s, −1, if i = t, k ∈ {1, 2}, xkji = xkij − s.t.  0, otherwise. {j|(i,j)∈E} {j|(j,i)∈E} X X k k k xji ≤ 2bi , ∀i ∈ V, k ∈ {1, 2} xij + X  X  {j|(i,j)∈E} {j|(j,i)∈E} b1i + b2i ≤ 1, ∀i ∈ V \ s, t, h(Si ∪ Sj ) ≥ b1i + b2j − 1, ∀i, j ∈ V \ xkij ∈ {0, 1}, ∀(i, j) ∈ E, k ∈ {1, 2},  s, t,  (12)  h(Si ∪ Sj ) ∈ {0, 1}, ∀i, j ∈ V.  p̃(vi ) of a node vi in Step 1 of Algorithm 2, let − ln(1− p̃(vi )) be the length of traversing node vi , and compute two node disjoint paths with the minimum total lengths. The two paths can be efficiently obtained using a slightly modified shortest augmenting path algorithm [22]. The computation is outlined in Algorithm 3. The reason for the graph transformation in Step 1 is to simplify the computation of a residual graph, to which the shortest augmenting path algorithm can be applied. Algorithm 3 A heuristic to compute a pair of reliable st path in G(V, E, SV ). 1) Transform G(V, E, SV ) with node failure probabilities to a directed graph G′ with edge failure probabilities using the standard approach. (Split every node v into vin and vout . Add a directed edge from vin to vout , which has length − ln(1 − p̃(vi )). Add a directed edge from v1out to v2in and a directed edge from v2out to v1in , both with zero length, if an edge exists between v1 and v2 in G(V, E, SV ).) 2) Compute the shortest path P1′ from sout to tin in G′ . 3) Compute the residual graph. Remove all the edges in P1′ . Add a backward edge from v2′ to v1′ with a negated length if an edge from v1′ to v2′ is part of P1′ . 4) Compute the shortest path P2′ from sout to tin in the residual graph. 5) Combine P1′ and P2′ by cycle cancellation. The two paths become node-disjoint and can be mapped to two paths in G(V, E, SV ).  B. Arbitrary failure probability 1) Evaluation of failure probability: We use a similar importance sampling approach to Algorithm 1 and formulate the problem of computing the failure probability of two paths as a DNF probability problem. A clause Cij represents a pair of nodes vi1 and vj2 . Literals in Cij represent the union of supply nodes of vi1 and vj2 . A literal is true if and only if the supply node that it represents fails, and the probability that the literal is true is the same as the supply node failure probability. The disjunction of clauses is true if and only if at least one clause is true, in which case both paths fail because at least one node from each path fails. The rest of the computation follows the same manner as Algorithm 1, by replacing a node in Algorithm 1 by a pair of nodes. An (ǫ, δ)-approximation of the failure probability Pr(F both ) can be obtained in O(m21 m22 ns ln(1/δ)/ǫ2 ) time. 2) Finding the most reliable pair of paths: It is more difficult to find two paths that have the smallest failure probability. Recall Theorem 6. The failure probability of two paths is Θ(f (m1 , m2 )pd+1 ) if they are d-failure resilient when the supply node failure probability p is small, where f (m1 , m2 ) is a function of two path lengths. As a corollary of the fact that it is NP-hard to compute two paths that have the maximum level of resilience d, it is also NP-hard to compute two paths whose failure probability is within a factor α from the optimal, where α is any function of the network size. Thus, we develop the following heuristic. After computing the failure probability  VI. N UMERICAL  RESULTS  We study the robust routing problems in the XO backbone communication network with 60 nodes and 75 edges [23], by assuming that the XO nodes are supported by 36 randomly generated supply nodes within the continental US. The XO network topology is depicted in Fig. 4, and the supply nodes are marked as triangles. The x-axis represents the longitude and the y-axis represents the latitude. We do not claim that the XO network needs supply from these randomly generated points, and we use this example only to provide a visualization of the robust routing problems using available data. First, we assume that every XO node depends on two nearest supply nodes and every supply node fails independently with probability 10−2 . Since the supply node failure probability is small and identical, we are able to obtain the most reliable path and pair of paths by optimizing the reliability indicators using integer programs. To identify the most reliable path, since nmin s (P ) = 2 for any path P , we only need to compute a path with the minimum m̄ using the integer program in Section IV. The most reliable path is colored red in Fig. 4, for which m̄ = 8. To evaluate the path failure probability, by Corollary 1, setting ǫ = 4 × 10−2 , Pr(F ) ∈ [7.68×10−4, 8×10−4]. To compare, using Algorithm 1, we obtain 7.9686 × 10−4 as a (1 ± 0.01)-approximation of the path failure probability with probability 0.99. These results suggest that the two reliability indicators (nmin s , m̄) well  50 Seattle  40  30 Miami 20 -120  -110  -100  -90  -80  Fig. 4. Topology of the XO network and randomly generated triangle supply nodes. The most reliable Seattle-Miami path is colored red under the condition that supply node failure probability is small and identical and every XO node depends on two nearest supply nodes.  characterize the path failure probability when the supply node failure probability is small and identical. We compute the most reliable pair of paths connecting Seattle-Miami using the integer programs in Section V. The two paths are plotted in Fig. 5, and they are 1-failure resilient (d = 1). The failure probability of both paths is approximately 1.0388 × 10−4 . In contrast, the most reliable pair of paths connecting Seattle-Denver are 3-failure resilient and their failure probability is approximately 2.9800 × 10−8 . Thus, the level of resilience well indicates the reliability of two paths.  paths, the paths have average failure probability 3.9732×10−3, which improves the reliability of a single path. We compare the performance of the heuristic (Algorithm 3) with the optimal pair of paths. Since it is difficult to obtain the optimal pair of paths under arbitrary failure probabilities, we use the integer program (11), under the condition that supply nodes fail independently with probability 10−2 . If every XO node depends on two nearest supply nodes, the failure probabilities of two optimal paths and two paths obtained by the heuristic are approximately 1.0388 × 10−4 and 1.0773 × 10−4 , respectively. If every XO node depends on three nearest supply nodes, the failure probability of two optimal paths and two paths obtained by the heuristic are approximately 1.0200 × 10−6 and 1.0508 × 10−6, respectively. These experiments validate the performance of our heuristic algorithm. Finally, we report the running times of the algorithms, executed in a workstation that has an Intel Xeon Processor (E5-2687W v3) and 64GB RAM. The integer programs that find the most reliable path and pair of paths (under small and identical supply node failure probability) can both be solved within 1 second. The approximation algorithm to find a reliable path and the heuristic to find a pair of paths (under arbitrary failure probabilities) can both be solved within 0.1 second. The evaluation of the failure probability of one path or a pair of paths by Algorithm 1 takes several minutes, by setting ǫ = δ = 0.01. Thus, the algorithms (integer programs and Algorithms 2 and 3) can be used to find reliable routes in realistic size networks. VII. C ONCLUSION  50 Seattle Denver 40  30 Miami 20 -120  -110  -100  -90  -80  We studied the robust routing problem in interdependent networks. We developed approximation algorithms to compute the path failure probability, and identified reliability indicators for a path, based on which we develop algorithms to find the most reliable route in interdependent networks. We also studied diverse routing in interdependent networks, and developed approximation algorithms to compute the probability that two paths both fail and to find two reliable paths. Our work extends the shared risk group models, and provides a new framework to study robust routing problems in interdependent networks. A PPENDIX  Fig. 5. The most reliable pair of paths between Seattle-Miami are colored red, under the condition that supply node failure probability is small and identical and every XO node depends on two nearest supply nodes.  Next, we assume that an XO node depends on Ns randomly chosen supply nodes, where Ns is uniformly chosen among 1, 2, and 3. Let the failure probability of each supply node be uniformly and independently chosen from [0.005, 0.015]. We use Algorithm 2 to obtain a reliable path connecting SeattleMiami. Averaged over 10 trials, the path failure probability is approximately 2.1032 × 10−2 , while the lower bound on the failure probability of the most reliable path is 5.2365 × 10−3 . The obtained path has failure probability around four times the lower bound. Moreover, by using the heuristic to find a pair of  A. Computational complexity In this section, we prove the complexity of computing the path failure probability and finding the most reliable path. Theorem 1. Computing the failure probability of a path is #P -hard, if every node has two or more supply nodes and each supply node fails independently with probability p. Proof. The problem of computing the path failure probability can be reduced from a monotone DNF counting problem. A monotone DNF counting problem aims to compute the number of satisfying assignments of literals, for a DNF formula that has no negated literals. The monotone DNF counting problem is #P -hard, even if every clause contains two literals [24].  (The original paper [24] considers conjunctive normal form counting, monotone 2-CNF(SAT). It is easy to see the equivalence between the monotone 2-DNF and monotone 2-CNF by applying De Morgan’s law and negating all the literals.) Given a monotone DNF counting problem, construct a path as follows. Each node in the path represents a clause, and its supply nodes represent the literals in the clause. (See Fig. 6 for an example.)  demand  supply  1 2  2 3  1 3  1 4  p = o(1/m2 ). The failure probability of a path supported by m̄ ≤ m supply nodes is 1 − (1 − p)m̄ = m̄p + o(p). Suppose that the most reliable path is supported by m̄min supply nodes and has failure probability pmin = m̄min p + o(p). For ǫ < 1/m ≤ 1/m̄min, a path with failure probability strictly smaller than (1 + ǫ)pmin < (m̄min + 1)p + o(p) is supported by exactly m̄min supply nodes. Computing a path that is supported by the minimum number of supply nodes in this example is NP-hard, which is known as the minimum color path problem in [12]. Therefore, computing a path that has failure probability within 1 + ǫ times the optimal is NPhard for ǫ < 1/m. B. Approximating the path failure probability by importance sampling  1  2  3  4  Fig. 6. A path constructed from a monotone DNF formula (x1 ∧ x2 ) ∨ (x2 ∧ x3 ) ∨ (x1 ∧ x3 ) ∨ (x1 ∧ x4 ).  If every supply node fails independently with probability 1/2, then the path failure probability is N/2m , where m is the total number of supply nodes (literals), and N is the number of combinations of supply node failures that lead to the failure of at least one node, which equals the number of satisfying assignments for the DNF formula. Thus, the failure probability of a path under p = 1/2 gives an answer to the monotone DNF counting problem. To conclude, computing the path failure probability is #P -hard if every node has two or more supply nodes. Remark. We further consider the complexity of computing the path reliability, with additional restrictions on the maximum number of demand nodes that any supply node supports. If every supply node supports at most two demand nodes, in addition to the restriction that every demand node has at most two supply nodes, then the failure probability can be computed in polynomial time, when every supply node fails independently with an identical probability. The computation follows from the algorithm in [25], which relates the number of satisfying assignments of a DNF formula, where each literal appears at most twice and each clause contains two literals, to the number of independent sets in a graph with node degree at most two. Nevertheless, if every supply node supports three or more demand nodes, the computation becomes #P -hard even if every demand node has at most two supply nodes, because counting the number of independent sets in a graph with node degree three is #P -hard [26]. Theorem 4. Computing an st path whose failure probability is less than 1 + ǫ times the failure probability of the most reliable st path is NP-hard for ǫ < 1/m, where m is the maximum path length. Proof. We prove that computing such a path is NP-hard even in the following restricted case. Consider a graph where every node has a single supply node, and every supply node fails independently with an identically small probability  In this section, we prove the correctness of Algorithm 1 and Theorem 2. Lemma P 4. The Q path failure probability is given by E[I] 1≤k≤m 1≤j≤ns (vk ) p(ukj ).  Proof. Let Vs denote the set of all supply nodes. Let U denote a set of failed supply nodes that lead to the failure of at least one of {v1 , v2 , . . . , vm } (i.e., the failure of the path). Let U = {U1 , U2 , . . . , UR } denote all the sets of supply node failures that lead to the failure of the path. Let p(u) denote the failure probability of node u. Let Pr(exactly Ur fail) denote the probability that supply nodes Ur fail and all the other supply nodes Vs \ Ur do not fail. Since the events that Ur fail while the others do not fail are mutually exclusive for different r, the path failure probability is given by X Pr(F ) = Pr(exactly Ur fail) 1≤r≤R  =  X  Y  1≤r≤R u∈Ur  p(u)  Y  (1 − p(u)).  (13)  u∈Vs \Ur  Let {ukj |j = 1, . . . , ns (vk )} denote the set of supply nodes of vk . Let mr denote the number of demand node failures, among {v1 , v2 , . . . , vm }, if supply nodes Ur fail. Then, by summing the failure probabilities of demand nodes p(vk ) = Q k 1≤j≤ns (vk ) p(uj ), k = 1, . . . , m, the probability that supply nodes Ur fail is counted mr times. X X Y p(ukj ) = mr Pr(exactly Ur fail) 1≤r≤R  1≤k≤m 1≤j≤ns (vk )  =  X  1≤r≤R  mr  Y  u∈Ur  p(u)  Y  (1 − p(u)).  (14)  u∈Vs \Ur  We now construct the relationship between the left hand sides of Eq. (13) and Eq. (14) using E[I]. In Algorithm 1, the value of I in Step 4 depends on both vi (obtained in Step 2) and U (obtained in Step 3). In the remainder of the proof, we first compute the probability that a specific U is obtained (in an iteration of the main loop), and then compute Pr(I = 1|U ) (i.e., the probability that vi is the first failed node given that U fail). As a consequence, Pr[I = 1] can be determined using the law of total probability.  Consider an iteration of the main loop. Let Pr(Ur ) denote the probability that Ur is obtained in Step 3 of Algorithm 1. Let r(t), t = 1, . . . , mr denote the indices of failed nodes vr(t) among {v1 , v2 , . . . , vm } if Ur fail (mr ≤ m). We have Q r(t) X  1≤j≤ns (vr(t) ) p(uj ) P Q Pr(Ur ) = k 1≤k≤m 1≤j≤ns (vk ) p(uj ) 1≤t≤mr  Y Y × (1 − p(u)) (15) p(u) r(t)  u∈Ur \{uj  ,1≤j≤ns (vr(t) )} u∈Vs \Ur  Q  Q  p(u) u∈Vs \Ur (1 − p(u)) Q k 1≤k≤m 1≤j≤ns (vk ) p(uj ) 1≤t≤mr Q Q mr u∈Ur p(u) u∈Vs \Ur (1 − p(u)) P Q = . k 1≤k≤m 1≤j≤ns (vk ) p(uj ) X  =  u∈Ur  P  (16) (17)  To see this, note that there are mr choices of {vr(t) |t = 1, . . . , mr } which may lead to Ur . In Eq. (15), the first term (in the product) is the probability of choosing vr(t) and setting r(t) its supply nodes U r(t) = {uj |j = 1, . . . , ns (vr(t) )} to be failed; the second term is the probability that Ur \ U r(t) fail; the last term is the probability that the remaining supply nodes Vs \ Ur do not fail. Eq. (16) implies that vr(t) , t ∈ {1, . . . , mr } contribute equally to the occurrence of Ur . Namely, Pr(vr(t) has been chosen in Step 2|Ur ) r(t)  Q 1≤j≤ns (vr(t) ) p(uj ) Q = P k 1≤k≤m 1≤j≤ns (vk ) p(uj )  Y Y (1 − p(u)) Pr(Ur ) × p(u) r(t)  u∈Ur \{uj  ,1≤j≤ns (vr(t) )} u∈Vs \Ur  =1/mr , for t ∈ {1, . . . , mr }. Given U r , the probability that vr(1) has been chosen in Step 2 of Algorithm 1 is 1/mr . Thus, Pr[I = 1|Ur ] = 1/mr . By the law of total probability, X Pr[I = 1] = Pr[I = 1|Ur ] Pr(Ur ) 1≤r≤R  =  P  1≤r≤R  P  Q  u∈Ur  1≤k≤m  p(u) Q  Q  u∈Vs \Ur (1 − k 1≤j≤ns (vk ) p(uj )  p(u))  .  Since I is an indicator variable, E[I] = Pr(I = 1). X Y p(ukj ) E[I] 1≤k≤m 1≤j≤ns (vk )  =  X  Y  1≤r≤R u∈Ur  p(u)  Y  (1 − p(u))  u∈Vs \Ur  = Pr(F ).  Next, we prove that E[I] can be estimated accurately within 3m ln(2/δ)/ǫ2 iterations.  Lemma 5. Pr    E[I] − b/a ≥ ǫE[I] ≤ δ, E[I]  where a = 3m ln(2/δ)/ǫ2 is the number of iterations of the main loop of Algorithm 1, b is the number of observations of I = 1, and 0 < ǫ < 1. Namely, by repeating a = 3m ln(2/δ)/ǫ2 times, one obtains an (ǫ, δ)-approximation of E[I]. Proof. The proof is based on the Chernoff inequality and is a standard result in estimation theory. From the proof of Lemma 4, we know that Pr(I = 1|U r ) = 1/mr ≥ 1/m for all U r . Thus, Pr(I = 1) ≥ 1/m. To estimate E[I] within 1 ± ǫ accuracy (0 < ǫ < 1), let the number of trials be a = 3m ln(2/δ)/ǫ2 .  X  X X Pr Ii − E[Ii ] ≥ ǫ E[Ii ] 1≤i≤a P 2  ≤ exp(−  ǫ  1≤i≤a  1≤i≤a E[Ii ]  1≤i≤a P 2  ) + exp(−  ǫ  2 ǫ2 a/m 3 ln(2/δ) ≤ 2 exp(− ) = 2 exp(− ) 3 3 ≤ δ.  1≤i≤a  E[Ii ]  3  )  Finally we prove the time complexity of the algorithm. Theorem 2. The path failure probability can be estimated to within a multiplicative factor 1 ± ǫ with probability 1 − δ, in time O(m2 ns ln(1/δ)/ǫ2 ), where m is the path length and ns is the maximum number of supply nodes for a demand node. Proof. Consider an iteration of the main loop of Algorithm 1. In Step 2, obtaining vi takes O(mns ) time. In Step 3, obtaining U takes O(mns ) time, because the total number of supply nodes is at most O(mns ). In Step 4, testing whether vi is the first failed node under the failure of U takes O(mns ) time, given that checking whether a node fail takes O(ns ) time and there are at most m nodes in the path. Since 3m ln(2/δ)/ǫ2 iterations are sufficient, the total running time of Algorithm 1 is O(m2 ns ln(1/δ)/ǫ2 ). C. Bounds on path failure probability Lemma 6. 1 − (1 − p1 p2 )αβ ≤ [1 − (1 − p1 )α ][1 − (1 − p2 )β ], for p1 , p2 ∈ (0, 1), α, β ∈ (0, 1]. Proof. Let g(x) = (1 − x)γ − (1 − γx), for x ∈ [0, 1), γ ∈ (0, 1]. By taking the derivatives, g ′ (x) = −γ(1 − x)γ−1 + γ; g ′′ (x) = γ(γ − 1)(1 − x)γ−2 .  Since g(0) = 0, according to the mean value theorem, g(x) = g ′ (ξ)x, where 0 < ξ ≤ x < 1. Substituting g(x) and g ′ (ξ), (1 − x)γ − (1 − γx) = 1 − (1 − x)γ = 1 − (1 − x)γ  g ′ (ξ)x γx − g ′ (ξ)x γx(1 − ξ)γ−1 .  =  (18)  Given g ′′ (x) < 0 for x, γ ∈ (0, 1), g(x) is strictly concave for x, γ ∈ (0, 1). For 0 < x1 < x2 < 1, g(x2 ) < g(x2 )/x2  <  g(x1 ) − g(0) x2 , x1 g(x1 )/x1 . g(0) +  Given that g(x1 ) = g ′ (ξ1 )x1 , g(x2 ) = g ′ (ξ2 )x2 , 0 < ξ1 < x1 , 0 < ξ2 < x2 , and that g ′ (x) is decreasing in x, we have ξ1 < ξ2 . If γ = 1, then g(x) = g ′ (x) = 0 for x ∈ [0, 1). Clearly, there also exist ξ1 < ξ2 such that g(x1 ) = g ′ (ξ1 )x1 , g(x2 ) = g ′ (ξ2 )x2 . Applying Eq. (18), [1 − (1 − p1 )α ][1 − (1 − p2 )β ] = αp1 (1 − η1 )α−1 βp2 (1 − η2 )β−1 = αβp1 p2 (1 − η1 )α−1 (1 − η2 )β−1 , for 0 < η1 < p1 , 0 < η2 < p2 , and αβ  1 − (1 − p1 p2 )  ,  for 0 < η3 < p1 p2 . Moreover, η3 ≤ min(η1 , η2 ), because p1 p2 ≤ min(p1 , p2 ). Given 0 < α, β ≤ 1, (1 − η1 )α−1 (1 − η2 )β−1 ≥ (1 − η3 )α−1 (1 − η3 )β−1 = (1 − η3 )α+β−2 ≥ (1 − η3 )αβ−1 ,  (1 − (1 − p(ui2 ))1/nd )] 2  ≤ (1 − p(ui1 )p(ui2 ))1/nd , where the last inequality follows from Eq. (19), by letting p1 = p(ui1 ), p2 = p(ui2 ), α, β = 1/nd, which we proved in Lemma 6. 1 − (1 − p1 p2 )αβ ≤ [1 − (1 − p1 )α ][1 − (1 − p2 )β ],  (19)  for p1 , p2 ∈ (0, 1), α, β ∈ (0, 1]. Consider the third supply node of vi which has failure probability p(ui3 ). We have p̃(ui3 ) ≥ 1 − (1 − p(ui3 ))1/nd . 2 Moreover, notice that p̃(ui1 )p̃(ui2 ) ≥ 1 − (1 − p(ui1)p(ui2 ))1/nd . By letting p1 = p(ui1 )p(ui2 ), p2 = p(ui3 ), α = 1/n2d, β = 1/nd in Eq. 19, we have  1 − β, αβ − 1,  and h2 (x) = (1 − η3 )x is decreasing in x for η3 ∈ (0, 1). Therefore, 1 − (1 − p1 p2 )αβ ≤ [1 − (1 − p1 )α ][1 − (1 − p2 )β ].  Lemma 7.  1 − p̃(ui1 )p̃(ui2 )p̃(ui3 ) ≤ (1 − p(ui1 )p(ui2 )p(ui3 ))1/nd . By repeating the process until all the supply nodes of vi are considered, and let ns (vi ) ≤ ns denote the number of supply nodes of vi , we have ns (vi )  1 − p̃(vi ) ≤(1 − p(vi ))1/nd  ns  ≤(1 − p(vi ))1/nd .  R EFERENCES  where the first inequality follows from the fact that h1 (x) = (1 − x)α is decreasing in x if x ∈ (0, 1) and α ∈ (0, 1], and the last inequality follows from ≤ ≤  1 − p̃(ui1 )p̃(ui2 ) ≤ 1 − [(1 − (1 − p(ui1 ))1/nd )  3  αβ−1  = αβp1 p2 (1 − η3 )  α(1 − β) α+β−2  for any supply node uij , the result trivially holds. focus on the case ns ≥ 2. Recall that p(vi ) = Q where Q We next i i p̃(u ) p(u ) and p̃(v ) = i j (i.e., a demand node fails j uij uij if and only if all of its supply nodes fail), where uij are the supply nodes of vi . Consider two supply nodes of vi and let p(ui1 ) and p(ui2 ) be their failure probabilities. Moreover, p̃(ui1 ) and p̃(ui2 ) satisfy p̃(ui1 ) ≥ 1 − (1 − p(ui1))1/nd and p̃(ui2 ) ≥ 1 − (1 − p(ui2))1/nd . Then,  ns  1 − p(vi ) ≥ (1 − p̃(vi ))nd , where p̃(vi ) is defined before Lemma 2. Proof. For ns = 1, every node has a single supply node. Let uij be the supply node of vi . Since 1 − p(uij ) ≥ (1 − p̃(uij ))nd  [1] O. Yagan, D. Qian, J. Zhang, and D. Cochran, “Optimal allocation of interconnecting links in cyber-physical systems: Interdependence, cascading failures, and robustness,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1708–1720, 2012. [2] V. Rosato, L. Issacharoff, F. Tiriticco, S. Meloni, S. Porcellinis, and R. Setola, “Modelling interdependent infrastructures using interacting dynamical models,” Int. J. Critical Infrastructures, vol. 4, no. 1-2, pp. 63–79, 2008. [3] C.-G. Gu, S.-R. Zou, X.-L. Xu, Y.-Q. Qu, Y.-M. Jiang, H.-K. Liu, T. Zhou et al., “Onset of cooperation between layered networks,” Physical Review E, vol. 84, no. 2, p. 026101, 2011. [4] M. Parandehgheibi and E. Modiano, “Robustness of interdependent networks: The case of communication networks and the power grid,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Atlanta, 2013, pp. 2164–2169. [5] M. Parandehgheibi, K. Turitsyn, and E. Modiano, “Modeling the impact of communication loss on the power grid under emergency control,” in Proc. IEEE SmartGridComm, Miami, 2015, pp. 356–361. [6] S. V. Buldyrev, R. Parshani, G. Paul, H. E. Stanley, and S. Havlin, “Catastrophic cascade of failures in interdependent networks,” Nature, vol. 464, no. 7291, pp. 1025–1028, 2010. [7] J. Shao, S. V. Buldyrev, S. Havlin, and H. E. Stanley, “Cascade of failures in coupled network systems with multiple support-dependence relations,” Physical Review E, vol. 83, no. 3, p. 036116, 2011.  [8] S. Yang, S. Trajanovski, and F. A. Kuipers, “Shortest paths in networks with correlated link weights,” in Proc. IEEE Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Hong Kong, 2015, pp. 660–665. [9] D. Xu, Y. Xiong, C. Qiao, and G. Li, “Failure protection in layered networks with shared risk link groups,” IEEE network, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 36–41, 2004. [10] D. Coudert, P. Datta, S. Pérennes, H. Rivano, and M.-E. Voge, “Shared risk resource group complexity and approximability issues,” Parallel Processing Letters, vol. 17, no. 02, pp. 169–184, 2007. [11] J. Q. Hu, “Diverse routing in optical mesh networks,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 489–494, 2003. [12] S. Yuan, S. Varma, and J. P. Jue, “Minimum-color path problems for reliability in mesh networks,” in Proc. INFOCOM 2005, Miami, 2005, pp. 2658–2669. [13] H.-W. Lee, E. Modiano, and K. Lee, “Diverse routing in networks with probabilistic failures,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 1895–1907, 2010. [14] M. F. Habib, M. Tornatore, F. Dikbiyik, and B. Mukherjee, “Disaster survivability in optical communication networks,” Computer Communications, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 630–644, 2013. [15] W. Cui, I. Stoica, and R. H. Katz, “Backup path allocation based on a correlated link failure probability model in overlay networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Network Protocols, Paris, 2002, pp. 236–245. [16] Q. Zheng, G. Cao, T. F. La Porta, and A. Swami, “Cross-layer approach for minimizing routing disruption in ip networks,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 1659–1669, 2014. [17] C. Tang and P. K. McKinley, “Improving multipath reliability in topology-aware overlay networks,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops, Columbus, Ohio, 2005, pp. 82–88. [18] T. Fei, S. Tao, L. Gao, and R. Guerin, “How to select a good alternate path in large peer-to-peer systems?” in Proc. INFOCOM 2006, Barcelona, April 2006, pp. 1–13. [19] R. M. Karp, M. Luby, and N. Madras, “Monte-carlo approximation algorithms for enumeration problems,” Journal of algorithms, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 429–448, 1989. [20] W. Gatterbauer and D. Suciu, “Oblivious bounds on the probability of boolean functions,” ACM Transactions on Database Systems (TODS), vol. 39, no. 1, p. 5, 2014. [21] A. P. Punnen, “A linear time algorithm for the maximum capacity path problem,” European J. Oper. Res., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 402–404, 1991. [22] J. Edmonds and R. M. Karp, “Theoretical improvements in algorithmic efficiency for network flow problems,” Journal of the ACM (JACM), vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 248–264, 1972. [23] XO Communications, “Network map.” [Online]. Available: http://www.xo.com/about/network/Pages/maps.aspx [24] L. G. Valiant, “The complexity of enumeration and reliability problems,” SIAM Journal on Computing, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 410–421, 1979. [25] D. Roth, “On the hardness of approximate reasoning,” Artificial Intelligence, vol. 82, no. 1, pp. 273–302, 1996. [26] C. Greenhill, “The complexity of counting colourings and independent sets in sparse graphs and hypergraphs,” Computational Complexity, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 52–72, 2000.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
