Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_5791

Abstract:
Improved Approximation for Node-Disjoint Paths in Planar Graphs∗ Julia Chuzhoy†  David H. K. Kim‡  Shi Li§  arXiv:1603.05520v1 [cs.DS] 17 Mar 2016  March 18, 2016  Abstract We study the classical Node-Disjoint Paths (NDP) problem: given an n-vertex graph G and a collection M = {(s1 , t1 ), . . . , (sk , tk )} of pairs of vertices of G called demand pairs, find a maximumcardinality set of node-disjoint paths connecting the demand pairs. NDP is one of the most basic routing problems, that has been studied extensively. Despite this, there are still wide √ gaps in our understanding of its approximability: the best currently known upper bound of O( n) on its approximation ratio is achieved via a simple greedy algorithm, while the best current negative result shows that the problem does not have a better than Ω(log1/2−δ n)-approximation for any constant δ, under standard complexity assumptions. Even for planar graphs no better approximation algorithms are known, and to the best of our knowledge, the best negative bound is APX-hardness. Perhaps the biggest obstacle to obtaining better approximation algorithms for NDP is that most currently known approximation algorithms for this type √ of problems rely on the standard multicommodity flow relaxation, whose√integrality gap is Ω( n) for NDP, even in planar graphs. In this paper, we break the barrier of O( n) on the approximability of the NDP problem in planar graphs and obtain an Õ(n9/19 )-approximation. We introduce a new linear programming relaxation of the problem, and a number of new techniques, that we hope will be helpful in designing more powerful algorithms for this and related problems.  ∗  An extended abstract is to appear in STOC 2016 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago. Email: cjulia@ttic.edu. Supported in part by NSF grant CCF-1318242. ‡ Computer Science Department, University of Chicago. Email: hongk@cs.uchicago.edu. Supported in part by NSF grant CCF-1318242. § Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo. Part of the work done while the author was at the Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago. Email: shil@buffalo.edu. †  1  Introduction  In the Node-Disjoint Paths (NDP) problem, we are given an n-vertex graph G, and a collection M = {(s1 , t1 ), . . . , (sk , tk )} of pairs of vertices of G, called source-destination, or demand, pairs. The goal is to route as many of the demand pairs as possible, by connecting each routed pair with a path, so that the resulting paths are node-disjoint. We denote by NDP-Planar the special case of the problem where the input graph G is planar, and by NDP-Grid the special case where G is the √ √ ( n × n)-grid. NDP is one of the most basic problems in the area of graph routing, and it was initially introduced to the area in the context of VLSI design. In addition to being extensively studied in the area of approximation algorithms, this problem has played a central role in Robertson and Seymour’s Graph Minor series. When the number of the demand pairs k is bounded by a constant, Robertson and Seymour [RS90, RS95] have shown an efficient algorithm for the problem, as part of the series. When k is a part of input, the problem becomes NP-hard [Kar72, EIS76], even on planar graphs [Lyn75], and even on grid graphs [KvL84]. Despite the importance of this problem, and many efforts, its approximability is still poorly understood. The following simple greedy algorithm achieves √ an O( n)-approximation [KS04]: while G contains any path connecting any demand pair, choose the shortest such path P , add P to the solution, and delete all vertices of P from G. Surprisingly, this elementary algorithm is the best currently known approximation algorithm for NDP, even for planar graphs. Until recently, this was also the best approximation algorithm for NDP-Grid. On the negative side, it is known that there is no O(log1/2−δ n)-approximation algorithm for NDP for any constant δ, unless NP ⊆ ZPTIME(npoly log n ) [AZ05, ACG+ 10]. To the best of our knowledge, the best negative result for NDP-Planar and for NDP-Grid is APX-hardness [CK15]. Perhaps the biggest obstacle to obtaining better upper bounds on the approximability of NDP is that the common approach to designing approximation algorithms for this type of problems is to use the multicommodity flow relaxation, where instead of connecting the demand pairs with paths, we send a (possibly fractional) √ multicommodity flow between them. The integrality gap of this relaxation is known to be Ω( n), even for planar graphs, and even for grid graphs. In a recent work, Chuzhoy and Kim [CK15] showed an Õ(n1/4 )-approximation algorithm for NDP-Grid, thus bypassing the integrality gap obstacle for this restricted family of graphs. The main result of this paper is an Õ(n9/19 )-approximation algorithm for NDP-Planar. We also show that, if the of the optimal solution to the NDP-Planar instance is  value OPT1/19 OPT, then we can efficiently route Ω poly log n demand pairs. Our algorithm is motivated by the work of [CK15] on NDP-Grid, and it relies on approximation algorithms for the NDP problem on a disc and on a cylinder, that we discuss next. We start with the NDP problem on a disc, that we denote by NDP-Disc. In this problem, we are given a planar graph G, together with a set M of demand pairs as before, but we now assume that G can be drawn in a disc, so that all vertices participating in the demand pairs lie on its boundary. The NDP problem on a cylinder, NDP-Cylinder, is defined similarly, except that now we assume that we are given a cylinder Σ, obtained from the sphere, by removing two disjoint open discs (caps) from it. We denote the boundaries of the discs by Γ1 and Γ2 respectively, and we call them the cuffs of Σ. We assume that G can be drawn on Σ, so that all source vertices participating in the demand pairs in M lie on Γ1 , and all destination vertices lie on Γ2 . Robertson and Seymour [RS86] showed an algorithm, that, given an instance of the NDP-Disc or the NDP-Cylinder problem, decides whether all demand pairs in M can be routed simultaneously via node-disjoint paths, and if so, finds the routing efficiently. Moreover, for each of the two problems, they give an exact characterization of instances for which all pairs in M can be routed in G. Several other very efficient algorithms are known for both problems [RLWW96, SAN90]. However, for our purposes, we need to consider the optimization version of both problems, where we are no longer guaranteed that all demand pairs in M can be routed, and would like to route the largest possible subset of the demand pairs. We are not aware of any results  1  for these two special cases of the NDP problem. In this paper, we provide O(log k)-approximation algorithms for both problems. Other Related Work. A problem closely related to NDP is the Edge-Disjoint Paths (EDP) problem. It is defined similarly, except that now the paths chosen to the solution are allowed to share vertices, and are only required to be edge-disjoint. It is easy to show, by using a line graph of the EDP instance, that NDP is more general than EDP (though this transformation inflates the number of the graph vertices, so it may not preserve approximation factors that depend on n). This relationship breaks down in planar graphs, since the resulting NDP instance may no longer be planar. √ The approximability status of EDP is very similar to that of NDP: there is an O( n)-approximation algorithm [CKS06], and it is known that there is no O(log1/2−δ n)-approximation algorithm for any constant δ, unless NP ⊆ ZPTIME(npoly log n ) [AZ05, ACG+ 10]. We do not know whether our techniques can be used to obtain improved approximation algorithms for EDP on planar graphs. As in the NDP problem, we can use the standard multicommodity flow LP-relaxation of the problem, in order √ √ to obtain an O( n)-approximation algorithm, and the integrality gap of the LP-relaxation is Ω( n) even in planar graphs. For several special cases of the problem better algorithms are known: Kleinberg [Kle05], building on the work of Chekuri, Khanna and Shepherd [CKS05, CKS04], has shown an O(log2 n)-approximation LP-rounding algorithm for even-degree planar graphs. Aumann and Rabani [AR95] showed an O(log2 n)-approximation algorithm for EDP on grid graphs, and Kleinberg and Tardos [KT98, KT95] showed O(log n)-approximation algorithms for broader classes of nearlyEulerian uniformly high-diameter planar graphs, and nearly-Eulerian densely embedded graphs. Recently, Kawarabayashi and Kobayashi [KK13] gave an O(log n)-approximation algorithm for EDP when the input graph is either 4-edge-connected planar or Eulerian planar. It appears that the restriction of the graph G to be Eulerian, or nearly-Eulerian, makes the EDP problem significantly simpler, and in particular improves the integrality gap of the LP-relaxation. The analogue of the grid graph for the EDP problem is the wall graph: the integrality gap of the standard LP-relaxation for EDP on wall √ √ graphs is Ω( n), and until recently, no better than O( n)-approximation algorithms for EDP on walls were known. The work of [CK15] gives an Õ(n1/4 )-approximation algorithm for EDP on wall graphs. A variation of the NDP and EDP problems, where small congestion is allowed, has been a subject of extensive study. In the NDP with congestion (NDPwC) problem, the input is the same as in the NDP problem, and we are additionally given a non-negative integer c. The goal is to route as many of the demand pairs as possible with congestion at most c: that is, every vertex may participate in at most c paths in the solution. EDP with Congestion (EDPwC) is defined similarly, except that now the congestion bound is imposed on edges and not vertices. The classical randomized rounding technique of Raghavan and Thompson [RT87] gives a constant-factor approximation for both problems, if the congestion c is allowed to be as high as Θ(log n/ log log n). A recent line of work [CKS05, Räc02, And10, RZ10, Chu12, CL12, CE13, CC] has lead to an O(poly log k)-approximation for both NDPwC and EDPwC problems, with congestion c = 2. For planar graphs, a constant-factor approximation with congestion 2 is known for EDP [SCS11]. All these algorithms perform LP-rounding of the standard multicommodity flow LP-relaxation of the problem and so it is unlikely that they can be extended to routing with no congestion. Our Results and Techniques. Given an instance (G, M) of the NDP problem, we denote by OPT(G, M) the value of the optimal solution to it. Our first result is an approximation algorithm for NDP-Disc and NDP-Cylinder. Theorem 1.1 There is an efficient O(log k)-approximation algorithm for the NDP-Disc and the NDPCylinder problems, where k is the number of the demand pairs in the instance. 2  We provide a brief high-level overview of the techniques we use in the proof of Theorem 1.1. We define a new intermediate problem, called Demand Pair Selection Problem (DPSP). In this problem, we are given two disjoint directed paths σ and σ 0 , and a set M = {(s1 , t1 ), . . . , (sk , tk )} of pairs of vertices that we call demand pairs, such that all vertices in {s1 , . . . , sk } lie on σ, and all vertices in {t1 , . . . , tk } lie on σ 0 . For any pair of vertices v, v 0 ∈ V (σ), we denote v ≺ v 0 if v lies before v 0 on σ, and we denote v  v 0 if v = v 0 or v ≺ v 0 . For every pair v, v 0 ∈ V (σ 0 ) of vertices, we define the relationships v ≺ v 0 and v  v 0 similarly. We say that two demand pairs (s, t), (s0 , t0 ) ∈ M cross, if either (i) {s, t} ∩ {s0 , t0 } = 6 ∅, or (ii) s ≺ s0 and t0 ≺ t, or (iii) s0 ≺ s and t ≺ t0 . We are also given a set K of constraints that we describe below. The goal of the DPSP problem is to find a maximum-cardinality subset M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs, such that no two pairs in M0 cross, and all constraints in K are satisfied. There are four types of constraints in K, and each constraint is defined by a quadruple (i, x, y, w), where i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} is the constraint type, x, y ∈ V (σ) ∪ V (σ 0 ) are vertices, and w is an integer. In a type-1 constraint (1, x, y, w), we have x, y ∈ V (σ), and the constraint requires that the number of the demand pairs (s, t) ∈ M0 with x  s  y is at most w. Similarly, in a type-2 constraint (2, x, y, w), we have x, y ∈ V (σ 0 ), and the constraint requires that the number of the demand pairs (s, t) ∈ M0 with x  t  y is at most w. If (3, x, y, w) ∈ K is a type-3 constraint, then x ∈ V (σ) and y ∈ V (σ 0 ) must hold. The constraint requires that the number of the demand pairs (s, t) ∈ M0 with s  x and y  t is at most w. Similarly, if (4, x, y, w) ∈ K is a type-4 constraint, then x ∈ V (σ) and y ∈ V (σ 0 ) must hold, and the constraint requires that the number of the demand pairs (s, t) ∈ M0 with x  s and t  y is at most w. We show that both NDP-Disc and NDP-Cylinder reduce to DPSP with an O(log k) loss in the approximation factor. The reduction from NDP-Disc to DPSP uses the characterization of routable instances of NDP-Disc due to Robertson and Seymour [RS86]. Finally, we show a factor-8 approximation algorithm for the DPSP problem. The main result of our paper is summarized in the following two theorems. Theorem 1.2 There is an efficient O(n9/19 · poly log n)-approximation algorithm for the NDP-Planar problem. Theorem 1.3 There is an efficientalgorithm, that, given an instance (G, M) of NDP-Planar, com1/19 putes a routing of Ω (OPT(G,M)) demand pairs of M via node-disjoint paths in G. poly log n Notice that when OPT(G, M) is small, Theorem 1.3 gives a much better that Õ(n9/19 )-approximation. We now give a high-level intuitive overview of the proof of Theorem 1.2. Given an instance (G, M) of the NDP problem, we denote by T the set of vertices participating in the demand pairs in M, and we refer to them as terminals. We start with a quick overview of the Õ(n1/4 )-approximation algorithm of [CK15] for the NDP-Grid problem, since their algorithm was the motivation for this work. The main observation of [CK15] is that the instances of NDP-Grid, for which the multicommodity √ flow relaxation exhibits the Ω( n) integrality gap, have terminals close to the grid boundary. When all terminals are at a distance of at least Ω(n1/4 ) from the boundary of the grid, one can find an Õ(n1/4 )-approximation via LP-rounding (but unfortunately the integrality gap remains polynomial in n even in this case). When the terminals are close to the grid boundary, the integrality gap of the √ LP-relaxation becomes Ω( n). However, this special case of NDP-Grid can be easily approximated via simple dynamic programming. For example, when all terminals lie on the grid boundary, the √ integrality gap of the LP-relaxation is Ω( n), but a constant-factor approximation can be achieved via standard dynamic programming. More generally, when all terminals are within distance at most O(n1/4 ) from the grid boundary, we can obtain an O(n1/4 )-approximation via dynamic programming. Overall, we partition the demand pairs of M into two subsets, depending on whether the terminals lie close to or far from the grid boundary, and obtain an Õ(n1/4 )-approximation for each of the two resulting problem instances separately, selecting the better of the two solutions as our output. 3  This idea is much more difficult to implement in general planar graphs. For one thing, the notion of the “boundary” of a planar graph is meaningless - any face in the drawing of the planar graph can be chosen as the outer face. We note that the standard multicommodity flow LP-relaxation performs poorly not only when all terminals are close to the boundary of a single face (a case somewhat similar to NDP-Disc), but also when there are two faces F and F 0 , and for every demand pair (s, t) ∈ M, s is close to the boundary of F and t is close to the boundary of F 0 (this setting is somewhat similar to NDP-Cylinder). The notion of “distance”, when deciding whether the terminals lie close to or far from a face boundary is also not well-defined, since we can subdivide edges and artificially modify the graph in various ways in order to manipulate the distances without significantly affecting routings. Intuitively, we would like to define the distances between the terminals in such a way that, on the one hand, whenever we find a set M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs, such that all terminals participating in the pairs in M0 are far enough from each other, then we can route a large subset of the demand pairs in M0 . On the other hand, if we find a set M00 ⊆ M of demand pairs, with all terminals participating in the pairs in M00 being close to the boundary of some face (or a pair of faces), then we can find a good approximate solution to instance (G, M00 ) (for example, by reducing the problem to NDP-Disc or NDPCylinder). Since we do not know beforehand which face (or faces) will be chosen as the “boundary” of the graph, we cannot partition the problem into two sub-problems and employ different techniques to solve each sub-problem as we did for NDP-Grid. Instead, we need a single framework in which both cases can be handled. We assume that every terminal participates in exactly one demand pair, and that the degree of every terminal is 1. This can be achieved via a standard transformation, where we create several copies of each terminal, and connect them to the original terminal. This transformation may introduce up to O(n2 ) new vertices. Since we are interested in obtaining an Õ(n9/19 )-approximation for NDP-Planar, we denote by N the number of the non-terminal vertices in the new graph G. Abusing the notation, we denote the total number of vertices in the new problem instance by n. It is now enough to obtain an Õ(N 9/19 )-approximation for the new problem instance. Our first step is to define a new LP-relaxation of the problem. We assume that we have guessed correctly the value OPT of the optimal solution. We start with the standard multicommodity flow LP-relaxation, where we try to send OPT flow units between the demand pairs, so that the maximum amount of flow through any vertex is bounded by 1. We then add the following new set of constraints to the LP: for every subset M0 ⊆ M of the demand pairs, for every value OPT(G, M0 ) ≤ z ≤ k, the total amount of flow routed between the demand pairs in M0 is no more than z. Adding this type of constraints may seem counter-intuitive. We effectively require that the LP solves the problem exactly, and naturally we cannot expect to be able to do so efficiently. Since the number of the resulting constraints is exponential in k, and since we do not know the values OPT(G, M0 ), we indeed cannot solve this LP efficiently. In fact, our algorithm does not attempt to solve the LP exactly. Instead, we employ the Ellipsoid algorithm, that in every iteration produces a potential solution to the LPrelaxation. We then show an algorithm that, given such a potential solution, either finds an integral solution routing Ω̃(OPT/N 9/19 ) demand pairs, or it returns some subset M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs, whose corresponding LP-constraint is violated. Therefore, we use our approximation algorithm as the separation oracle for the Ellipsoid algorithm. We are then guaranteed that after poly(n) iterations, we will obtain a solution routing the desired number of demand pairs, as only poly(n) iterations are required for the Ellipsoid algorithm in order to find a feasible LP-solution. The heart of the proof of Theorem 1.2 is then an algorithm that, given a potential (possibly infeasible) solution to the LP-relaxation, either finds an integral solution routing Ω̃(OPT/N 9/19 ) demand pairs, or returns some subset M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs, whose corresponding LP-constraint is violated. We can assume without loss of generality that the fractional solution we are given satisfies all the standard multicommodity flow constraints, as this can be verified efficiently. For simplicity of exposition, we 4  assume that every demand pair in M sends the same amount of w∗ flow units to each other. We assume for now that the set T of terminals is αWL -well-linked, for αWL = Θ(w∗ / log n) - that is, for every pair (T 0 , T 00 ) of disjoint equal-sized subsets of vertices of T , we can connect vertices of T 0 to vertices of T 00 by at least αWL · |T 0 | node-disjoint paths. We discuss this assumption in more detail below. We assume that we are given a drawing of G on the sphere. Our first step is to define the notion of distances between the terminals. In order to do so, we first construct enclosures around them. Throughout the proof, we use a parameter ∆ = OPT2/19 . We say that a curve γ on the sphere is a G-normal curve iff it intersects the drawing of G only at its vertices. The length of such a curve is the number of vertices of G it contains. An enclosure around a terminal t is a disc Dt containing t, whose boundary, that we denote by Ct , is a G-normal curve of length exactly ∆, so that at most O(∆/αWL ) terminals lie in Dt . We show an efficient algorithm to construct the enclosures Dt around the terminals t, so that the following additional conditions hold: (i) if Dt ⊆ Dt0 for any pair t, t0 ∈ T of terminals, then Dt = Dt0 ; and (ii) if Dt ∩ Dt0 = ∅, then there are ∆ node-disjoint paths connecting the vertices of Ct to the vertices of Ct0 . We now define the distances between pairs of terminals. For every pair (t, t0 ) ∈ T , distance d(t, t0 ) is the length of the shortest G-normal curve, connecting a vertex of Ct to a vertex of Ct0 . Next, we show that one of the following has to happen: either there is a large collection M̃ ⊆ M of demand pairs, such that all terminals participating in the pairs in M̃ are at a distance at least Ω(∆) from each other; or there is a large collection M̃0 ⊆ M of demand pairs, and two faces F, F 0 in the drawing of G (with possibly F = F 0 ), such that for every demand pair in M̃0 , one of its terminals is within distance at most Õ(∆) from the boundary of F , and the other is within distance at most Õ(∆) from the boundary of F 0 . In the former case, we show that we can route a large subset of the demand pairs in M̃ via node-disjoint paths, by constructing a special routing structure called a crossbar (this construction exploits well-linkedness of the terminals and the paths connecting the enclosures). In the latter case, we reduce the problem to NDP-Disc or NDP-Cylinder, depending on the distance between the faces F and F 0 , and employ the approximation algorithms for these problems   0 M̃ ) to route Ω̃ OPT(G, demand pairs from M̃0 in G. If the resulting number of demand pairs routed poly(∆) is close enough to OPT, then we return this as our final solution. Otherwise, we show that the LPconstraint corresponding to the set M̃0 of demand pairs is violated, or equivalently, the amount of flow sent by the LP solution between the demand pairs in M̃0 is greater than OPT(G, M̃0 ). So far we have assumed that the terminals participating in the demand pairs in M are αWL -welllinked. In general this may not be the case. Using standard techniques, we can perform a well-linked decomposition: that is, compute a subset U ⊆ V (G) of at most OPT/64 vertices, such that, if we denote the set of all connected components of G \ U by {G1 , . . . , Gr }, and for each 1 ≤ i ≤ r, we denote by Mi ⊆ Gi the set of the demand pairs contained in Gi , then the terminals Prparticipating in the demand pairs in Mi are αWL -well-linked in Gi . We are then guaranteed that i=1 OPT(Gi , Mi ) ≥ 63 64 OPT. It is then tempting to apply the algorithm described above to each of the graphs separately.   Indeed, if, for each 1 ≤ i ≤ r, we find a set Pi of node-disjoint paths, routing Ω  OPT(Gi ,Mi ) 9/19  Ni  ·poly log n  demand  pairs of Mi in Gi (where Ni denotes the number of the non-terminal vertices in Gi ), then we obtain an O(N 9/19 · poly log n)-approximate solution overall. Assume now that for some 1 ≤ i ≤ r, we find a subset M0i ⊆ Mi of demand pairs, such that OPT(Gi , M0i ) < w∗ |M0i |/16. Unfortunately, the set M0i of demand pairs does not necessarily define a violated LP-constraint, since it is possible that OPT(G, M0i ) >> OPT(Gi , M0i ), if the optimal routing uses many vertices of U (and possibly from some other graphs Gj ). In general, the number of vertices in set U is relatively small compared to OPT, so in the global accounting across all instances (Gi0 , Mi0 ), only a small number of paths can use the vertices of U . But for any specific instance (Gi , Mi ), it is possible that most paths in the optimal solution to instance (G, Mi ) use the vertices of U . In order to overcome this difficulty, we need to 5  perform a careful global accounting across all resulting instances (Gi , Mi ). Organization We start with preliminaries in Section 2. Section 3 is devoted to the proof of Theorem 1.1. Since this is not our main result, and the proof is somewhat long (though not very difficult), most of the proof appears in Section B of the Appendix. Sections 4–7 are devoted to the proof of Theorem 1.2: Section 4 provides an overview of the algorithm and some initial steps; Section 5 introduces the main technical tools that we use: enclosures, shells, and a partition of the terminals into subsets; and Sections 6 and 7 deal with Case 1 (when many terminals are far from each other) and Case 2 (when many terminals are close to the boundaries of at most two faces), respectively. We prove Theorem 1.3 in Section 8, and provide conclusions in Section 9. For convenience, we include in Section D of the Appendix a table of the main parameters used in the proof of Theorem 1.2.  2  Preliminaries  Given a graph G and a subset U of its vertices, we denote by N (U ) the set of all neighbors of U , that is, all vertices v ∈ V (G) \ U , such that there is an edge (u, v) ∈ E(G) for some u ∈ U . We say that two paths P and P 0 are internally disjoint iff for every vertex v ∈ P ∩ P 0 , v is an endpoint of both P and P 0 . Given a path P and a subset U of vertices of G, we say that P is internally disjoint from U iff every vertex in P ∩ U is an endpoint of P . Similarly, P is internally disjoint from a subgraph G0 of G iff P is internally disjoint from V (G0 ). Given a graph G and a set M of demand pairs in G, for every subset M0 ⊆ M of the demand pairs, we denote by T (M0 ) the set of all vertices participating in the demand pairs in M0 . For a subset M0 ⊆ M of the demand pairs, and a sub-graph H ⊆ G, let OPT(H, M0 ) denote the value of the optimal solution to instance (H, M0 ). Given a drawing of any planar graph H in the plane, and given any cycle C in H, we denote by D(C) the unique disc in the plane whose boundary is C. Similarly, if C is a closed simple curve in the plane, D(C) is the unique disc whose boundary is C. When the graph H is drawn on the sphere, there are two discs whose boundaries are C. In such cases we will explicitly specify which of the two discs we refer to. Given any disc D (in the plane or on the sphere), we use D◦ to denote the disc D without its boundary. We say that a vertex of H belongs to disc D, and denote v ∈ D, if v is drawn inside D or on its boundary. Given a planar graph G, drawn on a surface Σ, we say that a curve C in Σ is G-normal, iff it intersects the drawing of G at vertices only. The set of vertices of G lying on C is denoted by V (C), and the length of C is `(C) = |V (C)|. For any disc D, whose boundary is a G-normal curve, we denote by V (D) the set of all vertices of G lying inside D or on its boundary. Definition 2.1 Let γ, γ 0 be two curves in the plane or on the sphere. We say that γ and γ 0 cross, iff there is a disc D, whose boundary is a simple closed curve that we denote by β, such that: • γ ∩ D is a simple open curve, whose endpoints we denote by a and b; • γ 0 ∩ D is a simple open curve, whose endpoints we denote by a0 and b0 ; and • a, a0 , b, b0 ∈ β, and they appear on β in this circular order. Given a graph G embedded in the plane or on the sphere, we say that two paths P, P 0 in G cross iff their images cross. Similarly, we say that a path P crosses a curve γ iff the image of P crosses γ.  6  Sparsest Cut. In this paper we use the node version of the sparsest cut problem, defined as follows. Suppose we are given a graph G = (V, E) with a subset T ⊆ V of its vertices called terminals. A vertex cut is a tri-partition (A, C, B) of V , such that there are no edges in G with one endpoint in A and another in B. If (A ∪ C) ∩ T , (B ∪ C) ∩ T 6= ∅, then the sparsity of the cut (A, C, B) is |C| min{|A∩T |,|B∩T |}+|C∩T | . The sparsest cut in G with respect to the set T of terminals is a vertex cut (A, C, B) with (A ∪ C) ∩ T , (B ∪ C) ∩ T 6= ∅, whose sparsity is the smallest among all such cuts. Amir, Krauthgamer and Rao [AKR03] showed an efficient algorithm, that, given any planar graph G with a set T ⊆ V (G) of terminal vertices, computes a vertex cut (A, C, B) in G, whose sparsity with respect to T is within a constant factor of the optimal one. We denote this algorithm by AAKR , and the approximation factor it achieves by αAKR , so αAKR is a universal constant. In the special case of the sparsest cut problem that we consider in our paper, all terminals have degree 1, and no edge of G connects any pair of terminals. We show that in this case we can compute a near-optimal solution (A, C, B) to the sparsest cut problem with C ∩ T = ∅. The proof of the following observation uses standard techniques and is deferred to the Appendix. Observation 2.1 Let G be a planar graph and let T ⊆ V (G) be a subset of its vertices called terminals, with |T | ≥ 3. Assume that the degree of every terminal is 1, and no edge of G connects any pair of terminals. Then there is an efficient algorithm to compute a vertex cut (A, C, B) in G, whose sparsity is within a factor αAKR of the optimal one, and C ∩ T = ∅. Nested Segments. Suppose we are given a graph G, a cycle C in G, and a collection Σ of (not necessarily disjoint) segments of C, where each segment is either C itself, or a sub-path of C. We say that Σ is a nested set of segments of C iff for all σ, σ 0 ∈ Σ, either σ ⊆ σ 0 , or σ 0 ⊆ σ, or σ and σ 0 are internally disjoint - that is, every vertex in σ ∩ σ 0 is an endpoint of both segments. We define a set of nested segments of a closed curve C, and of a path P in G similarly. Decomposition of Forests. A directed forest F is a disjoint union of arborescences τ1 , . . . , τr for some r ≥ 1, where in each arborescence τi , all edges are directed towards the root. We use the following simple claim about partitioning directed forests into collections of paths. Similar decompositions were used in previous work, see e.g. Lemma 3.5 in [Kle05]. The proof is included in Appendix for completeness. Claim 2.2 There  is an efficient algorithm, that, given a directed forest F with n vertices, computes a partition R = R1 , . . . , Rdlog ne of V (F ) into subsets, such that for each 1 ≤ j ≤ dlog ne, F [Rj ] is a collection of disjoint directed paths, that we denote by Pj . Moreover, for all v, v 0 ∈ Rj , if there is a directed path from v to v 0 in F , then they both lie on the same path in Pj . Routing on a Disc. Assume that we are given an instance (G, M) of the NDP-Disc problem, where G is drawn in a disc D whose boundary is denoted by C. We need the following two definitions. Definition 2.2 We say that two demand pairs (s, t), (s0 , t0 ) ∈ M cross iff either {s, t}∩{s0 , t0 } = 6 ∅, or (s, s0 , t, t0 ) appear on C in this circular order. We say that the set M of demand pairs is non-crossing if no two demand pairs in M cross. Definition 2.3 Let C be a closed simple curve and M a set of demand pairs with all vertices of T (M) lying on C. We say that M is an r-split collection of demand pairs with respect to C, iff there is a partition M1 , . . . , Mr of the demand pairs in M, and there is a partition {σ1 , σ2 , . . . , σ2r } of C into  7  disjoint segments, such that σ1 , . . . , σ2r appear on C in this circular order, and for each 1 ≤ i ≤ r, for every demand pair (s, t) ∈ Mi , either s ∈ σ2i−1 and t ∈ σ2i , or vice versa. Finally, the following lemma allows us to partition any set of demand pairs into a small collection of split sets. The proof appears in the Appendix. Lemma 2.3 There is an efficient algorithm, that, given a closed simple curve C in the plane and a set M of κ demand pairs, whose corresponding terminals lie on C, computes a partition M1 , . . . , M4dlog κe of M, such that for each 1 ≤ i ≤ 4 dlog κe, set Mi is ri -split with respect to C for some integer ri ≥ 0. Routing on a Cylinder. Assume that we are given an instance (G, M) of the NDP-Cylinder problem, where Γ1 and Γ2 are the cuffs of the cylinder. Definition 2.4 We say that a set M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs is non-crossing if there is an ordering (si1 , ti1 ), . . . , (sir , tir ) of the demand pairs in M0 , such that si1 , si2 , . . . , sir are all distinct and appear in this counter-clock-wise order on Γ1 , and ti1 , ti2 , . . . , tir are all distinct and appear in this counterclock-wise order on Γ2 . It is immediate to verify that if we are given any instance (G, M) of NDP-Cylinder, and any set M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs that can all be routed via node-disjoint paths in G, then set M0 is non-crossing. Tight Concentric Cycles. We start with the following definition. Definition 2.5 Given a planar graph H drawn in the plane and a vertex v ∈ V (H) that is not incident to the infinite face, min-cycle(H, v) is the cycle C in H, such that: (i) v ∈ D◦ (C); and (ii) among all cycles satisfying (i), C is the one for which D(C) is minimal inclusion-wise. It is easy to see that min-cycle(H, v) is uniquely defined. Indeed, consider the graph H \ v, and the face F in the drawing of H \ v where v used to reside. Then the boundary of F contains exactly one cycle C with D(C) containing v, and C = min-cycle(H, v). We next define a family of tight concentric cycles. Definition 2.6 Suppose we are given a planar graph H, an embedding of H in the plane, a simple closed H-normal curve C, and an integral parameter r ≥ 1. A family of r tight concentric cycles around C is a sequence Z1 , Z2 , . . . , Zr of disjoint simple cycles in H, with the following properties: • D(C) ( D(Z1 ) ( D(Z2 ) ( · · · ( D(Zr ); • if H 0 is the graph obtained from H by contracting all vertices lying in D(C) into a super-node a, then Z1 = min-cycle(H 0 , a); and • for every 1 < h ≤ r, if H 0 is the graph obtained from H by contracting all vertices lying in D(Zh−1 ) into a super-node a, then Zh = min-cycle(H 0 , a). We will sometimes allow C to be a simple cycle in H. The family of tight concentric cycles around C is then defined similarly.  8  Monotonicity of Paths and Cycles. Suppose we are given a planar graph H, embedded into the plane, a simple H-normal curve C in H, and a family (Z1 , . . . , Zr ) of tight concentric cycles around C. Assume further that we are given a set P of κ node-disjoint paths, originating at the vertices of C, and terminating at some vertices lying outside of D(Zr ). We would like to re-route these paths to ensure that they are monotone with respect to the cycles, that is, for all 1 ≤ h ≤ r, and for all P ∈ P, P ∩ Zh is a path. We first discuss re-routing to ensure monotonicity with respect to a single cycle, and then extend it to monotonicity with respect to a family of concentric cycles. Definition 2.7 Given a graph H, a cycle C and a path P in H, we say that P is monotone with respect to C, iff P ∩ C is a path. The proof of the following lemma is deferred to the Appendix. Lemma 2.4 Let H be a planar graph embedded into the plane, C a simple cycle in H, and P a collection of κ simple internally node-disjoint paths between two vertices: vertex s lying in D◦ (C), and vertex t 6∈ D(C), that is incident on the outer face. Assume further that H is the union of C and the paths in P, and that C = min-cycle(H, s). Then there is an efficient algorithm to compute a set P 0 of κ internally node-disjoint paths connecting s to t in H, such that every path in P 0 is monotone with respect to C. We now define monotonicity with respect to a family of cycles. Definition 2.8 Let H be a graph, Z = (Z1 , . . . , Zr ) a collection of r disjoint cycles, and P a collection of node-disjoint paths in H. We say that the paths in P are monotone with respect to Z, iff for every 1 ≤ h ≤ r, every path in P is monotone with respect to Zh . The following theorem allows us to re-route sets of paths so they become monotone with respect to a given family of tight concentric cycles. Its proof is a simple application of Lemma 2.4 and is deferred to the Appendix. Theorem 2.5 Let H be a planar graph embedded in the plane, C any simple closed H-normal curve or a simple cycle in H, and Z = (Z1 , . . . , Zr ) a family of r tight concentric cycles in H around C. Let Y ( H be any connected subgraph of H lying completely outside of D(Zr ), and let P be a set of κ node-disjoint paths, connecting a subset A ⊆ V (C) of κ vertices to a subset B Sr⊆ V (Y ) of κ vertices, 0 so that the paths of P are internally disjoint from V (C) ∪ V (Y ). Let H = ( h=1 V (Zh )) ∪ P. Then there is an efficient algorithm to compute a collection P 0 of κ node-disjoint paths in H 0 , connecting the vertices of A to the vertices of B, so that the paths in P 0 are monotone with respect to Z, and they are internally node-disjoint from V (C) ∪ V (Y ).  3  Routing on a Disc and on a Cylinder  In this section we prove Theorem 1.1. In order to do so, we define a new problem, called Demand Pair Selection Problem (DPSP), and show an 8-approximation algorithm for it. We then show that both NDP-Disc and NDP-Cylinder reduce to DPSP. Demand Pair Selection Problem We assume that we are given two disjoint directed paths, σ and σ 0 , and a collection M = {(s1 , t1 ), . . . , (sk , tk )} of pairs of vertices of σ ∪ σ 0 that are called demand pairs, where all vertices of S = {s1 , . . . , sk } lie on σ, and all vertices of T = {t1 , . . . , tk } lie on σ 0 9  (not necessarily in this order). We refer to the vertices of S and T as the source and the destination vertices, respectively. Note that the same vertex of σ may participate in several demand pairs, and the same is true for the vertices of σ 0 . Given any pair a, a0 of vertices of σ, with a lying before a0 on σ, we sometimes denote by (a, a0 ) the sub-path of σ between a and a0 (that includes both these vertices), and we will sometimes refer to it as an interval. We define intervals of σ 0 similarly. For every pair v, v 0 ∈ V (σ) of vertices, we denote v ≺ v 0 if v lies strictly before v 0 on σ, and we denote v  v 0 , if v ≺ v 0 or v = v 0 hold. Similarly, for every pair v, v 0 ∈ V (σ 0 ) of vertices, we denote v ≺ v 0 if v lies strictly before v 0 on σ 0 , and we denote v  v 0 , if v ≺ v 0 or v = v 0 hold. We need the following definitions. Definition 3.1 Suppose we are given two pairs (a, b) and (a0 , b0 ) of vertices of σ ∪ σ 0 , with a, a0 ∈ σ and b, b0 ∈ σ 0 . We say that (a, b) and (a0 , b0 ) cross iff one of the following holds: either (i) a = a0 ; or (ii) b = b0 ; or (iii) a ≺ a0 and b0 ≺ b; or (iv) a0 ≺ a and b ≺ b0 . Definition 3.2 We say that a subset M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs is non-crossing iff for all distinct pairs (s, t), (s0 , t0 ) ∈ M0 , (s, t) and (s0 , t0 ) do not cross. Our goal is to select the largest-cardinality non-crossing subset M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs, satisfying a collection K of constraints. Set K of constraints is given as part of the problem input, and consists of four subsets, K1 , . . . , K4 , where constraints in set Ki are called type-i constraints. Every constraint K ∈ K is specified by a quadruple (i, a, b, w), where i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} is the constraint type, a, b ∈ V (σ ∪ σ 0 ), and 1 ≤ w ≤ |M| is an integer. For every type-1 constraint K = (1, a, b, w) ∈ K1 , we have a, b ∈ V (σ) with a ≺ b. The constraint is associated with the sub-path I = (a, b) of σ. We say that a subset M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs satisfies K iff the total number of the source vertices participating in the demand pairs of M0 that lie on I is at most w. Similarly, for every type-2 constraint K = (2, a, b, w) ∈ K2 , we have a, b ∈ V (σ 0 ) with a ≺ b, and the constraint is associated with the sub-path I = (a, b) of σ 0 . A set M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs satisfies K iff the total number of the destination vertices participating in the demand pairs in M0 that lie on I is at most w. For each type-3 constraint K = (3, a, b, w) ∈ K3 , we have a ∈ V (σ) and b ∈ V (σ 0 ). The constraint is associated with the sub-path La of σ between the first vertex of σ and a (including both these vertices), and the sub-path Rb of σ 0 between b and the last vertex of σ 0 (including both these vertices). We say that a demand pair (s, t) ∈ M crosses K iff s ∈ La and t ∈ Rb . A set M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs satisfies K iff the total number of pairs (s, t) ∈ M0 that cross K is bounded by w. Finally, for each type-4 constraint K = (4, a, b, w) ∈ K4 , we also have a ∈ V (σ) and b ∈ V (σ 0 ). The constraint is associated with the sub-path Ra of σ between a and the last vertex of σ (including both these vertices), and the sub-path Lb of σ 0 between the first vertex of σ 0 and b (including both these vertices). We say that a demand pair (s, t) ∈ M crosses K iff s ∈ Ra and t ∈ Lb . A set M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs satisfies K iff the total number of pairs (s, t) ∈ M0 that cross K is bounded by w. Given the paths σ, σ 0 , the set M of the demand pairs, and the set K of constraints as above, the goal in the DPSP problem is to select a maximum-cardinality non-crossing subset M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs, such that all constraints in K are satisfied by M0 . The proof of the following theorem is deferred to the Appendix. Theorem 3.1 There is an efficient 8-approximation algorithm for DPSP.  10  We then use Theorem 3.1 in order to design O(log k)-approximation algorithms for NDP-Disc and NDP-Cylinder. The remainder of the proof of Theorem 1.1 appears in Section B of the Appendix. The algorithm for NDP-Disc exploits the exact characterization of routable instances of the problem given by Robertson and Seymour [RS86], in order to reduce the problem to DPSP. The algorithm for NDP-Cylinder reduces the problem to NDP-Disc and DPSP.  4  Algorithm Setup  The rest of this paper mostly focuses on proving Theorem 1.2; we prove Theorem 1.3 using the techniques we employ for the proof of Theorem 1.2 in Section 8. We assume without loss of generality that the input graph G is connected - otherwise we can solve the problem separately on each connected component of G. Let T = T (M). It is convenient for us to assume that every terminal participates in exactly one demand pair, and that the degree of every terminal is 1. This can be achieved via a standard transformation of the input instance, where we add a new collection of terminals, connecting them to the original terminals. This transformation preserves planarity, but unfortunately it can increase the number of the graph vertices. If the original graph G contained n vertices, then |M| can be as large as n2 , and so the new graph may contain up to n2 + n vertices, while our goal is to obtain an Õ(n9/19 )-approximation. In order to overcome this difficulty, we denote by N the number of the non-terminal vertices in the new graph G, so N is bounded by the total number of vertices in the original graph, and by n the total number of all vertices in the new graph, so n = O(N 2 ). Our goal is then to obtain an efficient O(N 9/19 · poly log n)-approximation for the new problem instance. From now on we assume that every terminal participates in exactly one demand pair, and the degree of every terminal is 1. If (s, t) is a demand pair, then we say that s is the mate of t, and t is the mate of s. We denote |M| = k. Throughout the algorithm, we define a number of sub-instances of the instance (G, M), but we always use k to denote the number of the demand pairs in this initial instance. We can assume that k > 100, as otherwise we can return a routing of a single demand pair. We assume that we are given a drawing of G on the sphere. Throughout the algorithm, we will sometimes select some face of G as the outer face, and consider the resulting planar drawing of G.  4.1  LP-Relaxations  Let us start with the standard multicommodity flow LP-relaxation of the problem. Let G0 be the directed graph, obtained from G by bi-directing its edges. For every edge e ∈ E(G0 ), for each 1 ≤ i ≤ k, there is an LP-variable fi (e), whose value is the amount of the commodity-i flow through edge e. We denote by xi the total amount of commodity-i flow sent from si to ti . For every vertex v, let δ + (v) and δ − (v) denote the sets of its out-going and in-coming edges, respectively. We denote [k] = {1, . . . , k}. The standard LP-relaxation of the NDP problem is as follows.  11  (LP-flow1) Pk  max  i=1 xi  s.t. P  e∈δ + (si ) fi (e)  P  e∈δ + (v) fi (e)  P  e∈δ + (v)  = Pk  = xi  ∀i ∈ [k]  P  e∈δ − (v) fi (e)  i=1 fi (e)  ≤1  ∀i ∈ [k], ∀v ∈ V (G0 ) \ {si , ti } ∀v ∈ V (G0 )  (flow conservation)  (vertex capacity constraints) 0  fi (e) ≥ 0  ∀i ∈ [k], ∀e ∈ E(G )  ∗ We will make two changes to (LP-flow1). First, we will assume that we know the the Pkvalue X of optimal solution, and instead of the objective function, we will add the constraint i=1 xi ≥ X ∗ . We ∗ can do so using standard methods, by repeatedly guessing the value X  and ∗running  the algorithm X for each such value. It is enough to show that the algorithm routes Ω N 9/19 ·poly demand pairs, log n ∗ when the value X is guessed correctly.  Recall that for a subset M0 ⊆ M of the demand pairs, and a sub-graph H ⊆ G, OPT(H, M0 ) denotes the value of the optimal solution to instance (H, M0 ). For every subset M0 ⊆ M of the demand pairs, we add the constraint that the total flow between all pairs in M0 is no more than z, for all integers z between OPT(G, M0 ) and k. We now obtain the following linear program that has no objective function, so we are only interested in finding a feasible solution.  (LP-flow2) Pk  i=1 xi  ≥ X∗  P  e∈δ + (si ) fi (e)  P  e∈δ + (v) fi (e)  P  e∈δ + (v)  P  = Pk  (1)  = xi  P  e∈δ − (v) fi (e)  i=1 fi (e)  (si ,ti )∈M0  ≤1  xi ≤ z  fi (e) ≥ 0  ∀i ∈ [k]  (2) 0  ∀i ∈ [k], ∀v ∈ V (G ) \ {si , ti } (flow conservation)(3) ∀v ∈ V (G0 )  (vertex capacity constraints) (4)  ∀M0 ⊆ M, ∀z ∈ Z : OPT(G, M0 ) ≤ z ≤ k 0  ∀i ∈ [k], ∀e ∈ E(G )  (5) (6)  We say that a solution to (LP-flow2) is semi-feasible iff all constraints of types (1)–(4) and (6) are satisfied. Notice that the number of the constraints in (LP-flow2) is exponential in k. In order to solve it, we will use the Ellipsoid Algorithm with a separation oracle, where our approximation algorithm itself will serve as the separation oracle. This is done via the following theorem, which is our main technical result. Theorem 4.1 There is an efficient algorithm, that, given any semi-feasible solution to (LP-flow2),  X∗ either computes a routing of at least Ω N 9/19 ·poly log n demand pairs of M via node-disjoint paths, or returns a constraint of type (5), that is violated by the current solution.  We can now obtain an O N 9/19 · poly log n -approximation algorithm for NDP-Planar via the Ellipsoid algorithm. In every iteration, we start with some semi-feasible solution to (LP-flow2), and apply the  X∗ algorithm from Theorem 4.1 to it. If the outcome is a solution routing at least Ω N 9/19 ·poly log n 12  demand pairs in M, then we obtain the desired approximate solution to the problem, assuming that X ∗ was guessed correctly. Otherwise, we obtain a violated constraint of type (5), and continue to the next iteration of the Ellipsoid Algorithm. Since the Ellipsoid Algorithm is guaranteed to terminate with a feasible solution after a number of iterations that is polynomial in the number of the  LP X∗ variables, this gives an algorithm that is guaranteed to return a solution of value Ω N 9/19 ·poly log n in time poly(n). From now on we focus on proving Theorem 4.1. We note that, using standard techniques, we can efficiently obtain a flow-paths decomposition of any semi-feasible solution to (LP-flow2): we can efficiently find, for every demand pair (si , ti ), a collection Pi of paths, connecting si to ti , and for each path P ∈ Pi , compute a value f (P ), such that: • For each i ∈ [k],  P  P ∈Pi  f (P ) = xi ;  • For each i ∈ [k], |Pi | ≤ n; and P P • For each v ∈ V (G), i∈[k] P ∈Pi : f (P ) ≤ 1. v∈P  It is sometimes more convenient to work with the above flow-paths decomposition version of a given semi-feasible solution to (LP-flow2). We now assume that we are given some semi-feasible solution (x, f ) to (LP-flow2), and define a new fractional solution based on it, where the flow between every demand pair is either 0 or w∗ , for some 1 value w∗ > 0. First, for each demand pair (si , ti ) with xi ≤ 2k , we set xi = 0 and we set the corresponding flow values fi (e) for all edges e ∈ E to 0. Since we can assume that X ∗ ≥ 1 if the graph is connected, the total amount of flow between the demand pairs remains at least X ∗ /2. We then partition the remaining demand pairs into q = dlog 2ke subsets, where for 1 ≤ j ≤ q, set Mj 1 contains all demand pairs (si , ti ) with 21j < xi ≤ 2j−1 . There is some index 1 ≤ j ∗ ≤ q, such that the total flow between the demand pairs in Mj ∗ is at least Ω(X ∗ / log k). Let w∗ = 21j . We further modify the LP-solution, as follows. First, for every demand pair (si , ti ) 6∈ Mj ∗ , we set xi = 0, and the corresponding flow values fi (e) for all edges e ∈ E to 0. Next, for every demand pair (si , ti ) ∈ Mj ∗ , we let βi = w∗ /xi , so βi ≤ 1. We set xi = w∗ , and the new flow values fi (e) are obtained by scaling the original values by factor βi . This gives a new solution to (LP-flow2), that we denote by (x0 , f 0 ). The total amount of flow sent in this solution is Ω(X ∗ / log k), and it is easy to verify that constraints (2)– (4) and (6) are satisfied. For every demand pair (si , ti ) ∈ Mj ∗ , x0i = w∗ , and for all other demand pairs (si , ti ), x0i = 0. It is easy to see that for every demand pair (si , ti ), x0i ≤ xi . Therefore, if we find a constraint of type (5) that is violated by the new solution, then violated by the old  it is also  X∗ solution. Our goal now is to either find an integral solution routing Ω N 9/19 ·poly log n demand pairs, or to find a constraint of type (5) violated by the new LP-solution. In particular, if we find a subset M0 ⊆ Mj ∗ of demand pairs, with OPT(G, M0 ) ≤ w∗ |M0 |/2, then set M0 defines a violated constraint of type (5) for (LP-flow2). Since from now on we only focus on demand pairs in Mj ∗ , for simplicity we denote M = Mj ∗ .  4.2  Well-Linked Decomposition  Like many other approximation algorithms for routing problems, we decompose our input instance into a collection of sub-instances that have some useful well-linkedness properties. Since the routing is on node-disjoint paths, we need to use a slightly less standard notion of node-well-linkedness, defined w∗ below. Throughout this paper, we use a parameter αWL = 512·αAKR ·log k .  13  Definition 4.1 Given a graph H and a set T 0 of its vertices, we say that T 0 is αWL -well-linked in H iff for every pair T1 , T2 of disjoint equal-sized subsets of T , there is a set P of at least αWL · |T1 | node-disjoint paths in H, connecting vertices of T1 to vertices of T2 . Definition 4.2 Given a sub-graph H ⊆ G and a subset M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs with T (M0 ) ⊆ V (H), we say that (H, M0 ) is a well-linked instance, iff T (M0 ) is αWL -well-linked in H. The following theorem uses standard techniques, and its proof is deferred to Appendix. Theorem 4.2 There is an efficient algorithm to compute a collection G1 , . . . , Gr of disjoint sub-graphs of G, and for each 1 ≤ j ≤ r, a set Mj ⊆ M of demand pairs with T (Mj ) ⊆ V (Gj ), such that: • For all 1 ≤ j ≤ r, (Gj , Mj ) is a well-linked instance; • For all 1 ≤ j 6= j 0 ≤ r, there is no edge in G with one endpoint in Gj and the other in Gj 0 ; Pr j • j=1 |M | ≥ 63|M|/64; and S  ∗ ·|M| r • V (G) \ ≤ w 64 . j=1 V (Gj ) For each 1 ≤ j ≤ r, let Wj P = w∗ |Mj | be the contribution of the demand pairs in Mj to the current flow solution and let W = rj=1 Wj = Ω(X ∗ / log k). Let nj = |V (Gj )|, and let Nj be the number of the non-terminal vertices in Gj . The main tool in proving Theorem 4.1 is the following theorem. Theorem 4.3 There is an efficient algorithm, that computes, for every 1 ≤ j ≤ r, one of the following:   1/19 1. Either a collection P j of node-disjoint paths, routing Ω Wj / poly log n demand pairs of Mj in Gj ; or 2. A collection M̃j ⊆ Mj of demand pairs, with |M̃j | ≥ |Mj |/2, such that OPT(Gj , M̃j ) ≤ w∗ |M̃j |/8. Before we prove Theorem 4.3, we show that Theorem 4.1 follows from it. We apply Theorem 4.3 to every instance (Gj , Mj ), for 1 ≤ j ≤ r. We say that instance (Gj , Mj ) is a type-1 instance, if instance otherwise. Let I1 =  the first joutcome happens for it, and we say that it is a type-2 j ) is a type-2 instance . We conj | (Gj , M ) is a type-1 instance , and similarly, IP = j | (G , M 2 j sider two cases, where the first case happens when j∈I1 Wj ≥ W/2.   P X∗ Case 1: W ≥ W/2. We show that in this case, our algorithm returns a routing of Ω j j∈I1 N 9/19 ·poly log n demand pairs. We need the following lemma, whose proof is deferred to the Appendix. The proof uses standard techniques: namely, we show that the treewidth of each graph Gj is at least Ω(Wj / log k), and so Gj must contain a large grid minor. Lemma 4.4 For each 1 ≤ j ≤ r, Nj ≥ Ω(Wj2 / log2 k). The number of the demand pairs we route in each type-1 instance (Gj , Mj ) is then at least:  14  1/19  Ω  Wj  poly log n  ! =Ω  !  Wj 18/19  Wj  =Ω  · poly log n !  Wj  18/19 Nj log k · poly log n   Wj =Ω . 9/19 N · poly log n p    P W Overall, since W ≥ W/2, the number of the demand pairs routed is Ω = j j∈I1 N 9/19 ·poly log n   X∗ Ω N 9/19 ·poly . log n P P P S |Mj | j 0 j 0 Case 2: ≥ j∈I2 |M̃ | ≥ j∈I2 2 j∈I2 Wj ≥ W/2. Let M = j∈I2 M̃ . Then |M | = |M| 1 Pr j j=1 |M | ≥ 8 . We claim that the following inequality, that is violated by the current LP4 solution, is a valid constraint of (LP-flow2): X  x0i ≤ w∗ |M0 |/2.  (7)  (si ,ti )∈M0  In order to do so, it is enough to prove that OPT(G, M0 ) < w∗ |M0 |/2. Assume otherwise, and let 0 ∗ ∗ 0 ∗ P ∗ be the optimal solution for instance S(G, M ), so|P | ≥ w |M |/2. We say that a path P ∈ P is r bad if it contains a vertex of V (G) \ j=1 V (Gj ) . The number of such bad paths is bounded by ∗  ∗  0  ∗  ·|M| | the number of such vertices - namely, at most w 64 ≤ w |M ≤ |P2 | . Therefore, at least w∗ |M0 |/4 8 paths in P ∗ are good. Each such path must be contained in one of the graphs Gj corresponding to a j j type-2 instance. For each j ∈ IP the demand pairs routed by good paths 2 , let M̂ ⊆ M̃ be the set of P ∗ j ∗ 0 ∗ j of P . Then, on the one hand, j∈I2 |M̂ | ≥ w |M |/4 = w j∈I2 |M̃ |/4, while, on the other hand, since all demand pairs in M̂j can be routed simultaneously in Gj , for all j ∈ I2 , |M̂j | ≤ w∗ |M̃j |/8, a contradiction. We conclude that OPT(G, M0 ) < w∗ |M0 |/2, and (7) is a valid constraint of (LP-flow2).  From now on, we focus on proving Theorem 4.3. Since from now on we only consider one instance (Gj , Mj ), for simplicity, we abuse the notation and denote Gj by G, and Mj by M. As before, we denote T = T (M). We denote by W = w∗ · |M| the total amount of flow sent between the demand pairs in the new set M in the LP solution (note that this is not necessarily a valid LPsolution for the new instance, as some of the flow-paths may use vertices lying outside of Gj ). We use n to denote the number of vertices in G. Value k - the number of the demand pairs in the original instance - remains unchanged. Our goal is to either find a collection of node-disjoint paths routing Ω(W 1/19 / poly(log(nk))) demand pairs of M in G, or to find a collection M̃ ⊆ M of at least |M|/2 demand pairs, such that OPT(G, M̃) ≤ w∗ |M̃|/8. We will rely on the fact that all terminals are αWL -well-linked in G, for αWL = Θ(w∗ / log k). We assume that G is connected, since otherwise all terminals must be contained in a single connected component of G and we can discard all other connected components. We assume that we are given an embedding of the graph G into the sphere. For every pair v, v 0 ∈ V (G) of vertices, we let dGNC (v, v 0 ) be the length of the shortest G-normal curve connecting v to v 0 in this embedding, minus 1. It is easy to verify that dGNC is a metric: that is, dGNC (v, v) = 0, dGNC (v, v 0 ) = dGNC (v 0 , v), and the triangle inequality holds for dGNC . The value dGNC (v, v 0 ) can be computed 15  efficiently, by solving an appropriate shortest path problem instance in the graph dual to G. Given a vertex v and a subset U of vertices of G, we denote by dGNC (v, U ) = minu∈U {dGNC (v, u)}. Similarly, given two subsets U, U 0 of vertices of G, we denote dGNC (U, U 0 ) = minu∈U,u0 ∈U 0 {dGNC (u, u0 )}. Finally, given a G-normal curve C, and a vertex v in G, we let dGNC (v, C) = minu∈V (C) {dGNC (v, u)}. Over the course of the algorithm, we will sometimes select some face of the drawing of G as the outer face and consider the resulting drawing of G in the plane. The function dGNC remains unchanged, and it is only defined with respect to the fixed embedding of G into the sphere.  5  Enclosures, Shells, and Terminal Subsets  In this section we develop some of the technical machinery that we use in our algorithm, and describe the first steps of the algorithm. We start with enclosures around the terminals.  5.1  Constructing Enclosures    Throughout the algorithm, we use a parameter ∆ = W 2/19 . We assume that W > Ω(∆), since otherwise W is bounded by a constant, and we can return the routing of a single demand pair. The goal of this step is to construct enclosures around the terminals, that are defined below. Recall that G is embedded on the sphere. Definition 5.1 An enclosure for terminal t ∈ T is a simple disc Dt containing the terminal t, whose boundary is denoted by Ct , that has the following properties. (Recall that V (Dt ) is the set of all vertices of G contained in Dt .) • Ct is a simple closed G-normal curve with `(Ct ) = ∆; • |T ∩ V (Dt )| ≤ 4∆/αWL ; and • V (Dt ) induces a connected graph in G. The goal of this section is to prove the following theorem. Theorem 5.1 There is an efficient algorithm, that constructs an enclosure Dt for every terminal t ∈ T , such that for all t, t0 ∈ T : • If Dt ⊆ Dt0 , then Dt = Dt0 ; and • If Dt ∩ Dt0 = ∅, then there are ∆ node-disjoint paths between V (Ct ) and V (Ct0 ) in G. Notice that since `(Ct ) = ∆, every vertex of V (Ct ) is an endpoint of a path connecting V (Ct ) to V (Ct0 ). In order to prove the theorem, we need the following two simple claims. Claim 5.2 Let D be any disc on the sphere, whose boundary C is a simple G-normal curve, such that 1 ≤ |V (D)| < |V (G)| − 1, and G[V (D)] is connected (we allow D to consist of a single point, which must coincide with a vertex of G). Then we can efficiently find a disc D0 with V (D) ( V (D0 ) and |V (D0 )| = |V (D)| + 1, such that G[V (D0 )] is a connected graph. Moreover, if C 0 is the boundary of D0 , then C 0 is a simple G-normal curve with `(C 0 ) = `(C) + 1.  16  Proof: If D consists of a single point corresponding to a vertex v ∈ V (G), then let u be any neighbor of v in G. It is easy to construct a disc D0 whose boundary only contains the vertices v and u, and has all the required properties, with V (D0 ) = {v, u}. We now assume that |V (D)| > 1. Let u ∈ V (C) be any vertex that has a neighbor in V (G) \ V (D): since G is connected and |V (D)| < |V (G)|, such a vertex exists. Let u0 be a vertex lying next to u on C. Then there must be a vertex v ∈ V (G) \ V (D), such that: (i) edge e = (u, v) belongs to G; and (ii) there is a simple G-normal curve γ 0 connecting u0 to v, that intersects G only at its endpoints, and intersects D only at u0 . Let σ, σ 0 be the two segments of C whose endpoints are u and u0 . Notice that due to the edge e = (u, v), there is also a G-normal curve γ connecting u to v, that intersects G only at its endpoints, and intersects D only at u. Let C1 be the concatenation of σ, γ and γ 0 , and let C2 be the concatenation of σ 0 , γ and γ 0 . Let x ∈ V (G) \ (V (D) ∪ {v}) be any vertex (such a vertex exists since |V (D)| < |V (G)| − 1), and let F be any face in the drawing of G ∪ C ∪ γ ∪ γ 0 incident on x. We can view the face F as the outer face of our drawing, to obtain a drawing of G ∪ C ∪ γ ∪ γ 0 in the plane. Using this view, curve C1 defines a disc D1 and curve C2 defines a disc D2 in the plane. Exactly one of these discs contains the disc D - assume w.l.o.g. that it is D1 . We then set D0 = D1 and C 0 = C1 . It is now immediate to verify that D0 has all required properties. Claim 5.3 Let H be any connected planar graph drawn on a sphere, and let s and t be two distinct vertices of H. Assume that the maximum number of internally node-disjoint paths between s and t in H is κ. Then we can efficiently find a simple closed H-normal curve C of length κ on the sphere, separating s from t, with s, t 6∈ V (C). Moreover, if U and U 0 denote the sets of vertices lying strictly on each side of C, then H[U ∪ V (C)] and H[U 0 ∪ V (C)] are both connected. Proof: By Menger’s theorem, we can efficiently find a set X ⊆ V (H) \ {s, t} of κ vertices such that s and t are separated in the graph H \ X. Let P = {P1 , . . . , Pκ } be any set of κ internally node-disjoint paths connecting s to t in H, and let H 0 be the sub-graph of H obtained by taking the union of the paths in P. The drawing of H 0 on the sphere consists of κ faces, where the boundary of each face is the union of two distinct paths in P. We assume that the faces are F1 , . . . , Fκ , and we assume without loss of generality that the boundary of each face Fi is Pi ∪ Pi+1 (and the boundary of Fκ is Pκ ∪ P1 ). Notice that for each 1 ≤ i ≤ κ, X contains exactly one internal vertex of Pi , that we denote by xi . Let Pis , Pit be the two paths in Pi \ {xi }, where Pis is the path containing s, so Pit contains t. Fix some 1 ≤ i ≤ κ, and let Hi ⊆ H be the graph induced by all vertices lying inside Fi or on its s to boundary. Let Hi0 = Hi \ {xi , xi+1 }. Then there is no path in Hi0 connecting a vertex of Pis ∪ Pi+1 t t a vertex of Pi ∪ Pi+1 : such a path would contradict the fact that s is disconnected from t in H \ X. Therefore, there is a curve γi , connecting xi to xi+1 inside Fi , that intersects H only at its endpoints. Curve γi partitions Fi into two subfaces: Fi0 and Fi00 , with s lying on the boundary of Fi0 and t lying on the boundary of Fi00 . Since H is a connected graph, and γi only intersects H at its endpoints, both subgraphs induced by the vertices lying in Fi0 and its boundary, and in Fi00 and its boundary, are connected. We build the curve C by concatenating all curves γi for 1 ≤ i ≤ κ. It is easy to verify that C has all required properties. Proof of Theorem 5.1. We show an efficient algorithm to construct the enclosures with the desired properties. Throughout the algorithm, we maintain a set {Dt }t∈T of enclosures, such that for every pair t, t0 ∈ T of terminals, if Dt ⊆ Dt0 , then Dt = Dt0 . 17  The initial set of enclosures is obtained as follows. For each terminal t ∈ T , let Dt0 be the disc containing a single point - the image of the vertex t. We apply Claim 5.2 ∆ − 1 times to Dt0 , to obtain a disc Dt whose boundary is a simple G-normal curve of length ∆, and Dt0 ⊆ Dt , while |V (Dt )| = ∆. By Claim 5.2, V (Dt ) induces a connected sub-graph in G. Since |V (Dt )| = ∆, Dt is a valid enclosure for t. While there is a pair t, t0 of terminals with Dt ( Dt0 , we set Dt = Dt0 . This finishes the definition of the initial set of enclosures. We then perform a number of iterations. In every iteration, we consider all pairs t, t0 of terminals with Dt ∩ Dt0 = ∅, and check whether there are ∆ node-disjoint paths connecting the vertices of V (Ct ) to the vertices of V (Ct0 ) in G. If so, then we say that (t, t0 ) is a good pair. If all such pairs are good, then we terminate the algorithm, and output the current set of enclosures. Otherwise, let (t, t0 ) be a bad pair. Let H be the graph constructed from G, as follows: we delete all vertices of V (Dt \ Ct ), and add a source vertex a to the interior of Dt . We then connect a to every vertex of V (Ct ) with an edge. Similarly, we delete all vertices of V (Dt0 \ Ct0 ), and add a destination vertex b to the interior of Dt0 . We then connect b to every vertex of V (Ct0 ). Let κ ≤ ∆ − 1 be the maximum number of internally node-disjoint paths connecting a to b in H. We apply Claim 5.3 to find an H-normal closed curve C of length κ, separating a from b. Then C defines a G-normal curve of length κ, such that, if U and U 0 denote the sets of vertices of G lying strictly on each side of C, then V (Dt ) ⊆ U ∪ V (C); V (Dt0 ) ⊆ U 0 ∪ V (C); and both G[U ∪ V (C)] and G[U 0 ∪ V (C)] are connected. Notice that either |U ∩ T | ≤ |T |/2 or |U 0 ∩ T | ≤ |T |/2 holds - we assume w.l.o.g. that it is the former. Let D be the disc whose boundary is C, with Dt ⊆ D. Since `(C) < ∆, from the well-linkedness of the terminals |V (D) ∩ T | ≤ ∆/αWL . We next apply Claim 5.2 to D repeatedly to obtain a disc D0 , whose boundary C 0 is a simple G-normal curve of length ∆, so that D ⊆ D0 ; |V (D0 )| ≤ |V (D)| + ∆, and G[D0 ] is a connected graph. It is easy to verify that D0 is a valid enclosure for terminal t. We replace Dt with D0 . If there is any terminal t00 with Dt00P ( D0 , then we replace Dt00 with D0 as well. This finishes the description of an iteration. Notice that t∈T |V (Dt )| increases by at least 1 in every iteration, and so the number of iterations is bounded by |V (G)|.   Distances between terminals. For every pair t, t0 of terminals, we define the distance d(t, t0 ) between t and t0 to be the length of the shortest G-normal open curve, with one endpoint in V (Ct ) and another in V (Ct0 ). (Notice that if Dt ∩ Dt0 6= ∅, then d(t, t0 ) = 1). We repeatedly use the following simple observation (a weak triangle inequality): Observation 5.4 For all t, t0 , t00 ∈ T , d(t, t00 ) ≤ d(t, t0 ) + d(t0 , t00 ) + ∆/2. Proof: Let γ be a G-normal curve of length d(t, t0 ) connecting a vertex of Ct to a vertex of Ct0 , and let γ 0 be defined similarly for d(t0 , t00 ). Let u, u0 ∈ V (Ct0 ) be the vertices that serve as endpoints of γ and γ 0 , respectively, and let σ be the shorter of the two segments of Ct0 between u and u0 , so the length of σ is at most ∆/2 + 2. By combining γ, σ and γ 0 , we obtain a G-normal curve of length at most d(t, t0 ) + d(t0 , t00 ) + ∆/2, connecting a vertex of Ct to a vertex of Ct00 .  5.2  Constructing Shells  Suppose we are given some terminal t ∈ T and an integer r ≥ 1. In this section we show how to construct a shell of depth r around t, and explore its properties. Shells play a central role in our algorithm. In order to construct the shell, we need to fix a plane drawing of the graph G, by choosing one of the faces Ft of the drawing of G on the sphere as the outer face. The choice of the face Ft will affect the construction of the shell, but once the face Ft is fixed, the shell construction is fixed as well. 18  We require that for every vertex v on the boundary of Ft , dGNC (v, Ct ) ≥ r + 1, and that Ct separates all vertices on the boundary of Ft from t. We note that when we construct shells for different terminals t, t0 , we may choose different faces Ft , Ft0 , and thus obtain different embeddings of G into the plane. We now define a shell. Definition 5.2 Suppose we are given a terminal t ∈ T , a face Ft in the drawing of G on the sphere, and an integer r ≥ 1, such that for every vertex v on the boundary of Ft , dGNC (v, Ct ) ≥ r + 1, and Ct separates t from the boundary of Ft . A shell Z r (t) of depth r around t with respect to Ft is a collection Z r (t) = (Z1 (t), Z2 (t), . . . , Zr (t)) of r tight concentric cycles around Ct . In other words, all cycles Zh (t) are simple and disjoint from each other, and the following properties hold. For each 1 ≤ h ≤ r, let D(Zh (t)) be the disc whose boundary is Zh (t) in the planar drawing of G with Ft as the outer face. Then: J1. Dt ( D(Z1 (t)) ( D(Z2 (t)) ( · · · ( D(Zr (t)); and J2. for every 1 ≤ h ≤ r, if H is the graph obtained from G by contracting all vertices lying in D(Zh−1 (t)) into a super-node a, then Zh (t) = min-cycle(H, a) (when h = 1, we contract Dt into a super-node a). Notice that from this definition we immediately obtain the following additional properties: J3. For every 1 ≤ h ≤ r, for every vertex v ∈ V (Zh (t)), there is a G-normal curve of length 2 connecting v to some vertex of V (Zh−1 (t)) (or to a vertex of V (Ct ) if h = 1). J4. For every 1 ≤ h ≤ r, for every vertex v ∈ V (Zh (t)), there is a G-normal curve γ(v) of length h + 1 connecting v to some vertex of V (Ct ), so that γ(v) ⊆ D(Zh (t)), and it is internally disjoint from Zh (t) and Ct . Let Ũ be the set of all vertices v ∈ V (G) \ V (Dt ), such that dGNC (v, Ct ) < r + 1. Clearly, G \ Ũ 6= ∅, since the vertices on the boundary of Ft do not lie in Ũ . We let Yt be the connected component of G \ Ũ containing the vertices on the boundary of Ft . The following additional property follows from the definition of the shell: J5. All vertices of Yt lie outside D(Zr (t)). Indeed, from Property (J4), for each 1 ≤ h ≤ r, Zh (t) ∩ Yt = ∅. Since Yt is connected, Zr (t) must separate V (Dt ) from Yt . For convenience, we will always denote Z0 (t) = Ct and D(Z0 (t)) = Dt . Note that Z0 (t) is not a cycle in G – it is a simple closed G-normal curve, and so it is not part of the shell. We build the cycles Z1 (t), . . . , Zr (t) one-by-one, and we maintain the invariant that for each 1 ≤ h ≤ r, (Z1 (t), . . . , Zh (t)) is a shell of depth h around t with respect to Ft . Assume that we have defined Z0 (t), . . . , Zh−1 (t) for some 1 ≤ h < r, such that the above invariant holds. In order to define Zh (t), consider the drawing of the graph G in the plane with Ft as the outer face, and delete all vertices lying in D(Zh−1 (t)) from it. Consider the face F where the deleted vertices used to be. Let Γ be the inner boundary of F . Then Γ must contain a single simple cycle Z, such that D(Zh−1 (t)) ⊆ D(Z) (if no such cycle exists, then from Invariant (J4), for some vertex v on the boundary of Ft , there is a G-normal curve of length at most r + 1 connecting v to Ct , which 19  contradicts the choice of Ft ). We let Zh (t) = Z. It is easy to see that the invariant continues to hold. This finishes the construction of the shell. We now study its properties. For each 1 ≤ h ≤ r, we let Uh be the set of all vertices of G lying in D◦ (Zh (t)) \ D(Zh−1 (t)). Let Rh be the set of all connected components of G[Uh ]. Each connected component R ∈ Rh may have at most one neighbor in V (Zh (t)) from the definition of the shell, and it may have a number of neighbors in V (Zh−1 (t)). We say that R ∈ Rh is a type-1 component if it has one neighbor in V (Zh (t)), and at least one neighbor in V (Zh−1 (t)). We denote by u(R) the unique neighbor of R in V (Zh (t)), and we denote by L(R) the set of the neighbors of R that belong to V (Zh−1 (t)). We say that R is a type-2 component, if it has at least one neighbor in V (Zh−1 (t)) and no neighbors in V (Zh (t)). In this case, we let L(R) be the set of the neighbors of R lying in V (Zh−1 (t)), and u(R) is undefined. Otherwise, we say that it is a type-3 component. In this case, it has exactly one neighbor in V (Zh (t)), that we denote by u(R), and no neighbors in V (Zh−1 (t)), so we set L(R) = ∅ (see Figure 1(a)). We sometimes refer to the vertices in set L(R) as the legs of R. Zh (t)  Zh (t)  Zh−1 (t)  Zh−1 (t)  σ( R1  R2  R  R)  σ(  �  R  )  R�  R3 u(R)  (a) The three types of components in Rh : R1 is of type 1, R2 is of type 2, and R3 is of type 3.  (b) Definitions of vertices u(R) and segments σ(R)  Figure 1: Structure of the shells Consider now any type-1 or type-2 component R ∈ Rh . For each such component R, we define a segment σ(R) of Zh−1 (R) containing all vertices of L(R) as follows. If |L(R)| = 1, then let σ(R) consist of the unique vertex of L(R). Otherwise, we let σ(R) be the smallest (inclusion-wise) segment of Zh−1 (t) containing all vertices of L(R), such that, if we let C be the union of σ(R) and the outer boundary of the drawing of G[V (R) ∪ L(R)], then C separates R from t (see Figure 1(b)). Notice that {σ(R) | R ∈ Rh is of type 1 or 2} is a nested set of segments S of Zh−1 (t). For consistency, for each type-3 component R, we define σ(R) = ∅. We denote R = rh=1 Rh . We will repeatedly use the following theorem. Theorem 5.5 There is an efficient algorithm, that computes, for every 1 ≤ h ≤ r, for every component R ∈ Rh , a disc η(R) ⊆ D(Zh (t)), whose boundary, denoted by γ(R), is a simple closed G-normal curve of length at most 2h + 1 + ∆/2, such that: 1. For all R ∈ R, G[V (R) ∪ L(R)] ⊆ η(R), and, if u(R) is defined, then u(R) ∈ η(R); S 2. For all R ∈ R, γ(R) is disjoint from all vertices in R0 ∈R V (R0 ). In particular, for all R0 ∈ R, either R0 ⊆ η(R), or R0 lies completely outside η(R); and 3. For all 1 ≤ h ≤ r, for all R, R0 ∈ Rh , either η(R) ⊆ η(R0 ), or η(R0 ) ⊆ η(R), or η ◦ (R) ∩ η ◦ (R0 ) = ∅. Moreover, if R0 ⊆ η(R), then σ(R0 ) ⊆ σ(R).  20  Proof: We use the planar drawing of G where Ft is the outer face. Fix some 1 ≤ h ≤ r. Let R1h , R2h , and R3h be the sets of type-1, type-2, and type-3 components of Rh , respectively. For every type-3 component R ∈ R3h , we let γ(R) be a simple closed G-normal curve containing a single vertex of G vertex u(R), such that the disc η(R), whose boundary is γ(R), contains R, and it is disjoint from all other components of R. Consider now any type-1 component R ∈ Rh , and let a(R), a0 (R) be the endpoints of σ(R). Let H ⊆ G be obtained from G[V (R) ∪ L(R)], by adding all edges connecting u(R) to V (R) to it. We draw two G-normal curves, γ1 (R) connecting u(R) to a(R), and γ10 (R), connecting u(R) to a0 (R) on either side of R, such that the curves γ1 (R), γ10 (R) do not contain any other vertices of G, and they follow the boundary of the drawing of H from the outside. Let γ 0 (R) be the union of γ1 (R) and γ10 (R), and let η 0 (R) be the disc whose boundary is the union of γ 0 (R) and σ(R). Similarly, given any type-2 component R ∈ Rh , we denote by a(R), a0 (R) be the endpoints of σ(R). Let H = G[V (R) ∪ L(R)], and let γ 0 (R) be a simple G-normal curve connecting a(R) to a0 (R), such that γ 0 (R) does not contain any other vertices of G, and it follows the boundary of the drawing of H from the outside. Let η 0 (R) be the disc whose boundary is the union of γ 0 (R) and σ(R).   Clearly, we can draw the curves γ1 (R), γ10 (R) | R ∈ R1h ∪ γ 0 (R) | R ∈ R2h , so that for all R, R0 ∈ R1h ∪ R2h , either η 0 (R) ⊆ η 0 (R0 ), or η 0 (R0 ) ⊆ η 0 (R), or the interiors of η 0 (R) and η 0 (R0 ) are disjoint. 0 0 0 0 0 Moreover, if S η (R) ⊆ η00(R ), then σ(R) ⊆ σ(R ). Notice that the curves γ (R) are disjoint from all vertices in R00 ∈R V (R ).  Let A = a(R), a0 (R) | R ∈ R1h ∪ R2h . Recall that from Property (J4), for every vertex a ∈ A, there is a G-normal curve γ(a) of length at most h, connecting a to some vertexSv ∈ V (Ct ), such that γ(a) ⊆ D(Zh−1 (t)). In particular, γ(a) must be disjoint from all vertices in R∈R V (R), as it must contain one vertex from each cycle Z1 (t), . . . , Zh−1 (t), and a vertex of Z0 (t). Let Γ = {γ(a) | a ∈ A}. We can assume without loss of generality that the curves in Γ are non-crossing, and moreover, whenever two such curves meet, they continue together. In other words, if γ(a)∩γ(a0 ) 6= ∅, then this intersection is a simple G-normal curve that contains a vertex of Ct . We say that a component R ∈ R1h ∪ R2h is good if γ(a(R)) and γ(a0 (R)) intersect, and we say that it is bad otherwise. From our assumption, if R is good, then γ(a(R)) ∩ γ(a0 (R)) is a curve, connecting some vertex v to some vertex of Ct . We then let γ(R) be the union of γ 0 (R), the segment of γ(a(R)) from a(R) to v, and the segment of γ(a0 (R)) from a0 (R) to v, and we let η(R) be the disc whose boundary is γ(R). Notice that for every component R0 ∈ R1h ∪ R2h , if η 0 (R0 ) ⊆ η 0 (R), then R0 is also a good component, and η(R0 ) ⊆ η(R). For every bad component R ∈ R1h ∪ R2h , we let b(R), b0 (R) ∈ V (Ct ) be the endpoints of γ(a(R)) and γ(a0 (R)), respectively, and we let σ 0 (R) be the segment of Ct , whose endpoints are b(R) and b0 (R), such that the disc whose boundary is γ 0 (R) ∪ σ 0 (R) ∪ γ(a(R)) ∪ γ(a0 (R)) does not contain Dt . Notice that the segments σ 0 (R) for all bad components R form a nested set of intervals on Ct . This is since their corresponding segments σ(R) are nested, and the curves in Γ are non-crossing. We say that a bad component R is large, iff σ 0 (R) contains more than ∆/2 + 1 vertices. Let R0 be the set of all large bad components of R1h ∪ R2h . Then we can find an ordering (R1 , R2 , . . . , R` ) of the components in R0 , so that σ 0 (R1 ) ⊆ σ 0 (R2 ) ⊆ · · · ⊆ σ 0 (R` ). For every bad component R 6∈ R0 , we let γ(R) be the union of γ 0 (R), σ 0 (R), γ(a(R)), and γ(a0 (R)), and we let η(R) be the disc whose boundary is γ(R). For every bad component R ∈ R0 , we let σ 00 (R) be the segment of Ct with endpoints b(R) and b0 (R), that is different from σ 0 (R), so the length of σ 00 (R) is at most ∆/2 + 1. We let γ(R) be the union of γ 0 (R), σ 00 (R), γ(a(R)), and γ(a0 (R)), and we let η(R) be the disc whose boundary is γ(R). Notice that in either case, the length of Sγ(R) is bounded by 2h + ∆/2 + 1. It is immediate to verify that the resulting discs η(R) for all R ∈ rh0 =1 Rh0 have all 21  required properties. Indeed, notice that for all type-1 and type-2 components R ∈ Rh , η 0 (R) ⊆ η(R). The first property then follows from the definition of η 0 (R). For the third property, η(R) ⊆ η(R0 ) for R, R0 ∈ Rh only if η 0 (R) ⊆ η 0 (R0 ), and from the construction of the discs η 0 (R), η 0 (R0 ), this can only happen if σ(R) ⊆ σ(R0 ). If neither of the discs η 0 (R), η 0 (R0 ) is contained in the other, then they are internally disjoint, and our construction of the discs η(R), η(R0 ) ensures that these two discs are also internally disjoint. Finally, consider two components R, R0 ∈ R. Our construction of the disc η(R) ensures that γ(R) is disjoint from V (R0 ), and so either R0 ⊆ η(R), or R0 ∩ η(R) = ∅. This establishes the remaining property.  Zh (t) Zh−1 (t) b(R)  Dt  b� (R) a� (R)  a(R)  R  Figure 2: Building η(R). Curve γ 0 (R) is shown in red, and γ(a(R)), γ(a0 (R)) are shown in blue.  We also need the following observation. Observation 5.6 For all 1 ≤ h ≤ r, if Ũh is the set of vertices of G lying in D(Zh (t)), then G[Ũh ] is connected. Proof: The proof is by induction on h. Recall that V (Dt ) induces a connected sub-graph in G, from the definition of the enclosures. Assume now that G[Ũh ] is connected for some 0 ≤ h < r. From the definition of Zh+1 (t), and from the fact that G is a connected graph, it is immediate to verify that G[Ũh+1 ] is also connected. Finally, we need the following observation about the interactions of different shells. Observation 5.7 Let t, t0 be any pair of terminals, and let r, r0 > 0 be any integers, such that d(t, t0 ) > r + r0 + 1. Let Z r (t) = (Z1 (t), . . . , Zr (t)) be a shell of depth r around t with respect to some face Ft , 0 and let Z r (t0 ) = (Z1 (t0 ) . . . , Zr0 (t0 )) be a shell of depth r0 around t0 with respect to some face Ft0 . Then for all 1 ≤ h ≤ r and 1 ≤ h0 ≤ r0 , Zh (t) ∩ Zh0 (t0 ) = ∅. Proof: Assume otherwise. Then there is some vertex v ∈ Zh (t) ∩ Zh0 (t0 ). From Property (J4), there is a G-normal curve γ(v) of length at most h + 1 ≤ r + 1 connecting v to some vertex of Ct , and similarly there is a G-normal curve γ 0 (v) of length at most h0 + 1 ≤ r0 + 1, connecting v to some vertex of Ct0 . Combining γ(v) with γ 0 (v), we obtain a G-normal curve of length at most r + r0 + 1 < d(t, t0 ), connecting a vertex of Ct to a vertex of Ct0 , a contradiction.  22  5.3  Terminal Subsets  l m  Let ∆0 = 20 log10/9 n + 1 ∆ = Θ(∆ log n). Our next step is to define a family of disjoint subsets of terminals, so that the terminals within each subset are close to each other, while the terminals belonging to different subsets are far enough from each other. We will ensure that almost all terminals of T belong to one of the resulting subsets. Following is the main theorem of this section. Theorem 5.8 There is an efficient algorithm to compute a collection X = {X1 , . . . , Xq } of disjoint subsets of terminals of T , such that: • for each 1 ≤ i ≤ q, for every pair t, t0 ∈ Xi of terminals, d(t, t0 ) ≤ ∆0 ; • for all 1 ≤ i 6= j ≤ q, for every pair t ∈ Xi , t0 ∈ Xj of terminals d(t, t0 ) ≥ 5∆; and Pq • i=1 |Xi | ≥ 0.9|T |. Proof: We start with X = ∅ and T̃ = T , and perform a number of iterations, each of which adds one subset of terminals to X , and removes some terminals from T̃ . The iterations are executed while T̃ 6= ∅, and each iteration is executed as follows. m l Let t∗ be any terminal in T̃ . For all 1 ≤ i ≤ log10/9 n + 1, let Yi contain all terminals t ∈ T̃ with d(t∗ , t) ≤ 8∆i. We use the following simple observation. l m Observation 5.9 There is some 2 ≤ i ≤ log10/9 n + 1, such that |Yi \ Yi−1 | ≤ |Yi−1 |/9. l m Proof: If the claim is false, then for every 2 ≤ i ≤ log10/9 n + 1, |Yi | ≥ 10|Yi−1 |/9, and so Ydlog > n, which is impossible. 10/9 ne+1 l m Fix some 2 ≤ i ≤ log10/9 n + 1, such that |Yi \ Yi−1 | ≤ |Yi−1 |/9. Notice that for every terminal m  l t ∈ Yi−1 , d(t∗ , t) ≤ 8∆ log10/9 n + 1 , and so from Observation 5.4, for any pair t, t0 ∈ Yi−1 of m  l terminals, d(t, t0 ) ≤ 16∆ log10/9 n + 1 + ∆/2 ≤ ∆0 . Moreover, if we consider any pair t ∈ Yi−1 , t0 ∈ T̃ \ Yi of terminals, then d(t, t0 ) ≥ 5∆ must hold, since otherwise, from Observation 5.4, d(t∗ , t0 ) ≤ d(t∗ , t) + d(t, t0 ) + ∆/2 ≤ 8∆(i − 1) + 5∆ + ∆/2 < 8∆i, contradicting the fact that t0 6∈ Yi . We remove all terminals of Yi from T̃ , add the set X = Yi−1 to X , and continue to the next iteration. Notice that in every iteration we discard all terminals in Yi \ Yi−1 , and add a set containing |Yi−1 | P terminals to X , where |Yi \ Yi−1 | ≤ |Yi−1 |/9. Therefore, at the end of the algorithm, X∈X |X| ≥ 0.9|T |. The remaining properties of the partition are now immediate to verify. We use a parameter τ = W 18/19 . We say that a set X ∈ X of terminals is heavy if w∗ |X| ≥ τ , and we say that it is light otherwise. We say that a demand pair (s, t) is heavy iff both s and t belong to heavy subsets of terminals in X . We say that it is light if at least one of the two terminals belongs to a light subset, and the other terminal belongs to some subset inSX . Note that a demand pair (s, t) may be neither heavy nor light, for example, if s or t lie in T \ X∈X X. Let M0 be the set of all demand pairs that are neither heavy nor light. Then |M0 | ≤ 0.2|M|. We say that Case 1 happens if there are at least 0.1|M| light demand pairs, and we say that Case 2 happens otherwise. Notice that in Case 2, at least 0.7|M| of the demand pairs are heavy. In the next two sections we handle Case 1 and Case 2 separately. 23  6  Case 1: Light Demand Pairs  Let ML ⊆ M be the set of all light demand pairs. Recall that |ML | ≥ 0.1|M|. We assume w.l.o.g. that for every pair (s, t) ∈ ML , t belongs to a light set in X . We let S L , T L ⊆ T be the sets of the source and the destination vertices of the demand pairs in ML , respectively. Let L ⊆ X be the set of all light terminal subsets. Recall that we have assumed that every terminal participates in exactly one demand pair. If (s, t) ∈ M, then we say that s is the mate of t, and t is the mate of s. The goal of this section is to prove the following theorem.   |ML | Theorem 6.1 Let p∗ = Θ αWL . There is an efficient algorithm, that computes a routing of at n  oτ log n ∆ least min Ω(p∗ ), Ω p∗ log demand pairs via node-disjoint paths in G. n We first show that Theorem 6.1 concludes the 4.3 for Case 1. Indeed, since  proof  of Theorem   1/19 w∗ |M| αWL |M| L ∗ |M | ≥ 0.1|M|, we get that p = Θ τ log n = Θ W 18/19 log n log k = Θ logWn log k . Notice also    2/19   1/19   W log k ∆ W 1/19 log k . Therefore, the algorithm routes Ω that Ω p∗ log = Ω = Ω W n log n log k W 1/19 demand pairs via node-disjoint paths. The rest of this section is devoted to proving Theorem 6.1. Our first step is to compute a large subset M0 ⊆ ML of light demand pairs, so that, if we denote by S0 and T0 the sets of the source and the destination vertices of the demand pairs in M0 , then there is a set Q of |M0 | node-disjoint paths connecting the vertices of S0 to a subset of vertices of T L , that we denote by T 0 . Additionally, we ensure that every terminal set X ∈ L, |X ∩ T 0 | ≤ 1, and |X ∩ T0 | ≤ 1. We note that the sets S0 and T 0 do not necessarily form demand pairs. We will eventually route a subset of the pairs of M0 .   L Theorem 6.2 There is an efficient algorithm to compute a subset M0 ⊆ ML of κ0 = Θ αWLτ|M | demand pairs, and a subset T 0 ⊆ T L of κ0 terminals, such that, if we denote by S0 and T0 the sets of the source and the destination vertices of the demand pairs in M0 , then: • There is a set Q of κ0 node-disjoint paths connecting the vertices of S0 to the vertices of T 0 ; and • For each set X ∈ L, |X ∩ T 0 | ≤ 1, and |X ∩ T0 | ≤ 1. Proof: Recall that S L and T L are the sets of the source and the destination vertices, respectively, of the demand pairs in ML . We build the following directed flow network N . Start with graph G, and bi-direct all its edges. For every light set X ∈ L, add two vertices: sX , connecting to every vertex s ∈ S L , whose mate t ∈ X, and tX , to which every vertex t ∈ T L ∩ X is connected. Finally, we add a global source vertex s0 , that connects with directed edges to every vertex sX for X ∈ L, and a global destination vertex t0 , to which every vertex tX with X ∈ L connects. The capacities of s0 and t0 are infinite, the capacities of all vertices in {sX , tX | X ∈ L} are τ , and all other vertex capacities are unit. Let |S L | = |T L | = k̃. We claim that there is an s0 –t0 flow of value at least αWL · k̃ in N . Assume otherwise. Then there is a set Y of vertices, whose total capacity is less than αWL · k̃, separating s0 from t0 in N . Let A denote the subset of vertices of {sX | X ∈ L} that lie in Y , and let B = Y ∩ {tX | X ∈ L}. Assume that |A| = a, |B| = b, and assume for simplicity that a ≥ b (the other case is symmetric). We next build a set S̃ ⊆ S L of source vertices as follows: for every set X ∈ L with sX ∈ A, we add all vertices s ∈ S L whose mate belongs to X, to set S̃ (so S̃ contains all vertices s ∈ S L , such that some edge originating at a vertex of A enters s). Let S̃ 0 = S L \ S̃. Since each cluster X ∈ X contains at most τ /w∗ terminals, |S̃ 0 | ≥ k̃ − waτ∗ . 24  Similarly, we let T̃ ⊆ T L contain all terminals t, such that, if t ∈ X for cluster X ∈ L, then tX ∈ B. Let T̃ 0 = T L \ T̃ . Then |T̃ 0 | ≥ k̃ −l wbτ∗ ≥ k̃m− waτ∗ , since we assumed that a ≥ b. We discard terminals from S̃ 0 and T̃ 0 until |S̃ 0 | = |T̃ 0 | = k̃ −  aτ w∗  holds. (We note that k̃ −  of all vertices in A is at most aτ < αWL k̃ < w∗ k̃, as αWL =  aτ w∗  > 0, since the total capacity  w∗  512·αAKR ·log k .)  Let Y 0 = Y \ (A ∪ B). Then Y 0 is a subset of vertices of G, and moreover, G \ Y 0 does not contain any path connecting a vertex of S̃ 0 to a vertex of T̃ 0 . Indeed, if G \ Y 0 contains a path P connecting some vertex s ∈ S̃ 0 to some vertex t0 ∈ T̃ 0 , then it is easy to see that path P can be extended to an s0 –t0 path in N \ Y . Notice that: |Y 0 | < αWL · k̃ − aτ − bτ ≤ αWL · k̃ − aτ. But from the well-linkedness of terminals, there must be a set of at least αWL |S̃ 0 | ≥ αWL (k̃ − aτ /w∗ ) w∗ paths connecting the vertices of S̃ 0 to the vertices of T̃ 0 . Recall that αWL = 512·αAKR ·log k , and so:  aτ aτ  > αWL k̃ − aτ > |Y 0 |, αWL k̃ − ∗ = αWL k̃ − w 512αAKR log k a contradiction. We conclude that there is an s0 –t0 flow F of value at least αWL k̃ in N . Let N 0 be a directed flow network defined exactly like N , except that now we set the capacity of every vertex in {sX , tX | X ∈ L} to 1. By scaling the flow F down by factor τ , we obtain a valid s0 –t0 flow in 0 N therem is an integral s0 –t0 flow in N 0 of value l of value m at least αWL k̃/τ . From the integrality of flow, l αWL k̃/τ . This flow defines a collection Q of κ0 = αWL k̃/τ = Ω(αWL |ML |/τ ) node-disjoint paths in graph G, connecting some vertices of S L to some vertices of T L . We let S0 ⊆ S L and T 0 ⊆ T L be the sets of vertices where the paths of Q0 originate and terminate, respectively, and we let T0 contain all mates of the source vertices in S0 . We then set M0 to be the set of the demand pairs in which the vertices of S0 participate. It is easy to verify that for each set X ∈ L, |T 0 ∩ X|, |T0 ∩ X| ≤ 1 from the definition of the network N 0 . We assume that |M0 | ≥ 1000, as otherwise we can route a single demand pair, and obtain a solution L routing Ω αWLτ|M | demand pairs. Recall that every set X ∈ X contains at most one terminal from T0 . Since |S0 | = |T0 |, there is some set X0 ∈ T0 , that contains exactly one terminal t0 ∈ T0 , and at most one additional terminal from S0 . We will view t0 as our “center” terminal, and we discard from M0 the demand pairs in which t0 and the terminal in S0 ∩ X0 (if it exists) participate. The main tool in our algorithm for Case 1 is a crossbar, that we define below. Let ∆1 = b∆/6c and ∆2 = b∆1 /3c. Given a shell Z(t) = (Z1 (t), . . . , Z∆1 (t)) of depth ∆1 around some terminal t, we will always denote by D∗ (t) = D(Z∆1 (t)), and by D̃(t) = D(Z∆2 (t)). We will view the cycles Z1 (t), . . . , Z∆2 (t) as the “inner” part of the shell Z(t). The crossbar is defined with respect to some large enough subset M∗ ⊆ M0 of demand pairs (see Figure 3). Definition 6.1 Suppose we are given a subset M∗ ⊆ M0 of demand pairs and an integer p ≥ 1. Let S ∗ and T ∗ be the sets of all source and all destination vertices participating in the demand pairs of M∗ , respectively. A p-crossbar for M∗ consists of: • For each terminal t ∈ T ∗ ∪{t0 }, a shell Z(t) of depth ∆1 around t, such that for all t, t0 ∈ T ∗ ∪{t0 }, D∗ (t) ∩ D∗ (t0 ) = ∅, and for all s ∈ S ∗ and t0 ∈ T ∗ ∪ {t0 }, s 6∈ D∗ (t0 ); and 25  • For each v ∈ S ∗ ∪ T ∗ , a collection P(v) of paths, such that: – For each s ∈ S ∗ , P(s) contains exactly one path, connecting s to a vertex of Ct0 ; – For each t ∈ T ∗ , P(t) contains exactly p paths, where each path connects a vertex of Ct to a vertex of Ct0 ; and S – All paths in P = v∈S ∗ ∪T ∗ P(v) are node-disjoint from each other. In order to route a large subset of the demand pairs in M∗ , we need a crossbar with slightly stronger properties, that we call a good crossbar, and define below. Definition 6.2 Given a set M∗ ⊆ M0 of demand pairs, where S ∗ , T ∗ are the sets of the source and the pairs in M∗ respectively, and an integer p ≥ 1, a p-crossbar  destination vertices of the demand  {Z(t)}t∈T ∗ ∪{t0 } , {P(v)}v∈S ∗ ∪T ∗ is a good crossbar, if the following additional properties hold: C1. For all t ∈ T ∗ and all v ∈ (S ∗ ∪ T ∗ ) \ {t}, all paths in P(v) are disjoint from D̃(t). C2. For all t ∈ T ∗ , all paths in P(t) are monotone with respect to (Z1 (t), . . . , Z∆2 (t)). Also, for all v ∈ S ∗ ∪ T ∗ , all paths in P(v) are monotone with respect to (Z1 (t0 ), . . . , Z∆2 (t0 )). C3. We can partition Z∆2 (t0 ) into a collection Σ = {σ(v) | v ∈ S ∗ ∪ T ∗ } of |S ∗ | + |T ∗ | disjoint segments, such that for all v, v 0 ∈ S ∗ ∪ T ∗ with v 6= v 0 , σ(v) ∩ P(v 0 ) = ∅.  Figure 3: A crossbar. The center vertex t0 is shown in blue, the vertices of S ∗ in red, and the vertices of T ∗ in green. The following theorem shows that, given a p-crossbar in G, where p is large enough, we can route many demand pairs in M∗ . Theorem 6.3 Suppose we are given a subset M∗ ⊆ M0 of κ demand pairs, where S ∗ and T ∗ are the sets of all source and all destination vertices of the demand pairs in M∗, respectively. Assume  further that we are given a good p-crossbar {Z(t)}t∈T ∗ ∪{t0 } , {P(v)}v∈S ∗ ∪T ∗ for M∗ , and let q = min {∆2 , b(p − 1)/2c , dκ/2e}. Then there is an efficient algorithm that routes at least q demand pairs in M∗ via node-disjoint paths in G. Proof: We can assume without loss of generality that for every terminal t ∈ T ∗ , for every path P ∈ P(t), and for every 1 ≤ j ≤ ∆2 , P ∩ Zj (t) consists of a single vertex. In order to see this, recall 26  that for each such terminal t, path P and value j, P ∩ Zj (t) is a path, from Property (C2). We contract each such path P ∩ Zj (t) into a single vertex. We still maintain a good p-crossbar for M∗ in the resulting graph, and any routing of a subset of the demand pairs in M∗ in the new graph via node-disjoint paths immediately gives a similar routing of the same subset of the demand pairs in the original S graph. Using a similar reasoning, we assume without loss of generality that for every path P ∈ v∈S ∗ ∪T ∗ P(v), for every 1 ≤ j ≤ ∆2 , P ∩ Zj (t0 ) is a single vertex. Fix an arbitrary source vertex s ∈ S ∗ , and consider the unique path P (s) ∈ P(s). For all 1 ≤ j ≤ ∆2 , let vj be the unique vertex in Zj (t0 ) ∩ P (s), and let ej be the edge of Zj (t0 ) incident to vj , as we traverse Zj (t0 ) starting from vj in the clock-wise direction. Let Rj be the path obtained by deleting ej from Zj (t0 ). We view this path as directed in the counter-clock-wise direction along Zj (t0 ), thinking of this as the left-to-right direction. Once we process every cycle Zj (t0 ) for 1 ≤ j ≤ ∆2 in this fashion, we obtain a collection R1 , . . . , R∆2 of paths. Our routing will in fact only use the paths R1 , . . . , Rq . S Let P = v∈S ∗ ∪T ∗ P(v). For each 1 ≤ j ≤ ∆2 , and for each path P ∈ P, let u(P, j) be the unique vertex in P ∩ Rj . The vertices u(P, ∆2 ) define a natural left-to-right ordering O of the paths in P: for P, P 0 ∈ P, we denote P ≺ P 0 iff u(P, ∆2 ) lies to the left of u(P 0 , ∆2 ) on R∆2 . Notice that, since the paths of P are monotone with respect to Z1 (t0 ), . . . , Z∆2 (t0 ), for every pair P, P 0 ∈ P of paths with P ≺ P 0 , for every 1 ≤ j ≤ ∆2 , u(P, j) lies to the left of u(P 0 , j) on Rj . From Property (C3) of the crossbar, for each terminal v ∈ S ∗ ∪ T ∗ , all paths in P(v) appear consecutively in the ordering O. Therefore, we obtain a natural left-to-right ordering O0 of the terminals: we say that terminal v lies to the left of terminal v 0 iff for all P ∈ P(v), P 0 ∈ P(v 0 ), P ≺ P 0 . We say that a demand pair (s, t) ∈ M∗ is a left-to-right pair, if s appears before t in O0 , and we say that it is a right-to-left pair otherwise. At least d|M∗ |/2e of the pairs belong to one of these two types, and we assume w.l.o.g. that at least d|M∗ |/2e of the pairs are of the left-to-right type (otherwise we 0 ∗ 2 reverse the direction of the paths {Rj }∆ j=1 , and the orderings O, O ). We discard from M all right∗ ∗ to-left demand pairs, and we update the sets S and T accordingly. We discard additional demand pairs from M∗ as needed, until |M∗ | = q holds. Consider the set S ∗ of the source vertices. We assume that S ∗ = (s1 , . . . , sq ), with the sources indexed in the order of their appearance in O0 . We define a set P ∗ = P1∗ , . . . , Pq∗ of node-disjoint paths, where for each 1 ≤ i ≤ q, path Pi∗ connects si to ti . In order to do so, we first construct an initial set of paths, that we later modify. The initial set P ∗ of paths is constructed as follows. Fix some 1 ≤ i ≤ q. The initial path Pi∗ is the concatenation of the segment of the unique path P (si ) ∈ P(si ) from si to u(P, i), and the segment of Ri from u(P, i) to the last (right-most) vertex of Ri (see Figure 4(a)). Clearly, all paths in P ∗ are node-disjoint, and each path Pi∗ originates at si , but it does not terminate at ti . We now modify the paths in P ∗ in order to fix this. We process the terminals ti ∈ T ∗ in their right-to-left order (the reverse order of their appearance in O0 ). When we process terminal ti , we will ensure that path Pi∗ terminates at ti , while all paths in P ∗ remain disjoint. Intuitively, in order to ∗ , . . . , P ∗ “around” the terminal t , using the paths of P(t ) and the q do so, we send the paths Pi+1 i i q innermost cycles of the shell Z(ti ). Formally, throughout the algorithm, we maintain the following invariants:  • The paths in P ∗ = P1∗ , . . . , Pq∗ always remain disjoint. • Once terminal ti is processed, in all subsequent iterations, path Pi∗ connects si to ti . • Let t0 be the last terminal processed, and for each 1 ≤ i ≤ q, let v i be the leftmost vertex of Ri that lies on any path in P(t0 ). Let P (si ) be the unique path in P(si ). Then if si lies to the left 27  of t0 in O0 , the current path Pi∗ contains the segment of Ri between u(P (si ), i) and v i (possibly excluding v i ). We now describe an iteration when the terminal ti is processed. Let {Q1 , . . . , Q2q+1 } be any set of 2q + 1 distinct paths in P(ti ), indexed according to their ordering in O (recall that from our definition ∗ at this step. Path P ∗ is modified of q, |P(ti )| = p ≥ 2q + 1). We do not modify the paths P1∗ , . . . , Pi−1 i ∗ as follows. From our invariants, vertex u(Qq+1 , i) belongs to Pi . We discard the last segment of Pi∗ that starts at u(Qq+1 , i), and then concatenate the remaining path with the segment of Qq+1 from its starting point a ∈ Cti to u(Qq+1 , i). In this way, we obtain a path originating at si and terminating at a. Since the sub-graph of G induced by V (D(ti )) is connected, we can extend this path inside D(ti ), so it now terminates at ti .  (a) The initial paths, together with the inner shells of the terminals in T ∗ . Recall that for all t ∈ T ∗ and v ∈ S ∗ ∪T ∗ with t 6= v, all paths in P(v) are disjoint from the inner shell of t.  (b) Modifying the routing  Figure 4: Constructing the routing For all i0 > i, if si0 lies to the left of ti , then path Pi∗0 is modified to “go around” ti , using the paths Qi0 , Q2q+2−i0 (that is, the i0 th paths from the right and from the left), and the cycle Zi0 (ti ), as follows. Let Q0 be the segment of path Qi0 , starting from the unique vertex of Qi0 ∩ Zi0 (ti ) (that we denote by x), to vertex u(Qi0 , i0 ). Let Q00 be the segment of path Q2q+2−i0 , starting from the unique vertex of Q2q+2−i0 ∩ Zi0 (ti ) (that we denote by y), to vertex u(Q2q+2−i0 , i0 ). Consider now the two segments σ, σ 0 of Zi0 (ti ), whose endpoints are x and y. Exactly one of these segments (say σ) is disjoint from the new path Pi∗ . We remove from Pi∗0 the segment of Ri0 between u(Qi0 , i0 ) and u(Q2q+2−i0 , i0 ), and replace it with the concatenation of Q0 , σ and Q00 (see Figure 4(b)). It is easy to see that all invariants continue to hold. In order to complete the proof of Theorem 6.1, we prove the following theorem that allows us to construct a large enough crossbar. Theorem 6.4 There is an efficient algorithm that either finds a routing of Ω(κ0 ) demand pairs of M0 via node-disjoint paths, or computes a subset M∗ ⊆ M0 of Ω(κ0 / log n) demand pairs, and a good p-crossbar for M∗ , with p = Ω(∆/κ0 ).   αWL |ML | κ0 . Letting p∗ = log = Ω , from Theorem 6.3, we can efficiently n τ log n n  o ∆ find a routing of at least min Ω(p∗ ), Ω p∗ log demand pairs, concluding the proof of Theorem 6.1. n The rest of this section is dedicated to proving Theorem 6.4. We do so in two steps. In the first step, we either find a routing of Ω(κ0 ) demand pairs in M0 , or compute a large subset M3 ⊆ M0 of demand Recall that κ0 = Θ    αWL |ML | τ    28  pairs, and a p-crossbar with respect to M3 (that may not be good). If the outcome of the first step is the former, then we terminate the algorithm and return the resulting routing. Otherwise, in the following step, we modify the set M3 and the crossbar in order to obtain the final set M∗ , and a good crossbar with respect to M∗ .  6.1  Constructing a Basic Crossbar  In this section we prove the following theorem. Theorem 6.5 There is an efficient algorithm that either computes a routing of Ω(κ0 ) demand pairs in M0 via node-disjoint paths, or finds a subset M3 ⊆ M0 of κ3 = Ω(κ0 ) demand pairs, and a p1 -crossbar for M3 , for p1 = Ω(∆/κ0 ). We construct the crossbar in two steps. Let S0 , T0 be the sets of all source and all destination vertices corresponding to the demand pairs in M0 , respectively. In the first step, we construct a shell Z(t) of depth ∆1 around every terminal t ∈ T0 ∪ {t0 }, so that their corresponding discs D∗ (t) are disjoint. We then select a subset M1 ⊆ M0 of demand pairs, so that, if we denote by S1 and T1 the sets of all source and all destination vertices of the pairs in M1 , respectively, then for all s ∈ S1 and t0 ∈ T1 ∪ {t0 }, s 6∈ D∗ (t0 ). In the second step, we select a subset M3 ⊆ M1 of demand pairs, and complete the construction of the crossbar by computing the sets P(v) of paths for all v ∈ T (M3 ). Step 1: the Shells. Consider any terminal t ∈ T0 ∪ {t0 }, and let t0 6= t be any other terminal in T0 ∪ {t0 }. We let Ft be the face of the drawing of G on the sphere containing the image of t0 . Notice that from Theorem 6.2, t and t0 lie in different sets of X , and so, from Theorem 5.8, d(t, t0 ) ≥ 5∆. In particular, for every vertex v on the boundary of Ft , dGNC (v, t) > ∆1 + 1. We can now construct a shell Z(t) of depth ∆1 around t, with respect to Ft . Additionally, for every terminal t ∈ T 0 , we construct a shell Z(t) of depth ∆1 around t similarly, letting Ft be the face incident on any terminal t0 ∈ T 0 \ {t}. This concludes the construction of the shells. We need the following lemma. Lemma 6.6 For all t1 , t2 ∈ T0 ∪ {t0 }, if t1 6= t2 , then D∗ (t1 ) ∩ D∗ (t2 ) = ∅. Moreover, for all s ∈ S0 , s 6∈ D∗ (t0 ). Proof: Let t1 , t2 ∈ T0 ∪ {t0 } be any two distinct terminals, and assume for contradiction that D∗ (t1 ) ∩ D∗ (t2 ) 6= ∅. We need the following observation. Observation 6.7 Either Dt2 ⊆ D∗ (t1 ), or Dt1 ⊆ D∗ (t2 ) must hold. Proof: If D∗ (t2 ) ⊆ D∗ (t1 ), or D∗ (t1 ) ⊆ D∗ (t2 ), then we are done, so assume that neither of these holds. From Observation 5.7, Z∆1 (t1 ) ∩ Z∆1 (t2 ) = ∅. Since D∗ (t1 ) ∩ D∗ (t2 ) 6= ∅, the only other possibility is that the union of the discs D∗ (t1 ), D∗ (t2 ) is the entire sphere, and the boundary of each disc is contained in the other disc. In particular, Z∆1 (t2 ) ⊆ D∗ (t1 ). We claim that all vertices of Ct2 must lie in disc D∗ (t1 ). Indeed, assume for contradiction that some vertex v ∈ V (Ct2 ) does not lie in D∗ (t1 ). Since all vertices of Z∆1 (t2 ) lie in D∗ (t1 ), there is a G-normal curve γ of length at most ∆/2 + ∆1 + 2, connecting v to some vertex of Z∆1 (t2 ), and this curve must contain some vertex v 0 ∈ Z∆1 (t1 ). But then there is a G-normal curve of length at most ∆1 + 1 connecting v 0 to a vertex of Ct1 , so d(t1 , t2 ) ≤ 2∆1 + ∆/2 + 2 < 5∆, a contradiction. Therefore, all vertices of Ct2 appear in D∗ (t1 ). 29  Let t01 be the terminal we have used to define the face Ft1 , so t01 lies outside D∗ (t1 ). From Property (J5) of the shells, it is easy to see that Dt01 is disjoint from D∗ (t1 ). If Dt2 6⊆ D∗ (t1 ), then t01 must lie inside Dt2 . Moreover, since Dt01 ∩ D∗ (t1 ) = ∅, we get that Dt01 ( Dt2 , contradicting the construction of enclosures. We assume w.l.o.g. that Dt2 ⊆ D∗ (t1 ). Since for all 0 ≤ j, j 0 ≤ ∆1 , Zj (t1 ) ∩ Zj 0 (t2 ) = ∅, there must be some index 1 ≤ j ≤ ∆1 , such that Dt2 ⊆ D◦ (Zj (t1 )) \ D(Zj−1 (t1 )). Let Uj be the set of all vertices of G lying in D◦ (Zj (t1 )) \ D(Zj−1 (t1 )), and let Rj be the set of all connected components in G[Uj ]. Since V (Dt2 ) induces a connected graph in G, there is some connected component R ∈ Rj , such that V (Dt2 ) ⊆ V (R). From Theorem 5.5, there is a G-normal curve γ(R) of length at most 2j + ∆/2 + 1 ≤ 2∆1 + ∆/2 + 1 < ∆, such that the disc D(γ(R)) contains R, and D(γ(R)) ⊆ D∗ (t1 ). Let t01 be the terminal we have used to define the face Ft1 , so t01 lies outside D∗ (t1 ) and Dt01 is disjoint from D∗ (t1 ). Curve γ(R) then separates Dt01 from Dt2 , and clearly Dt01 ∩ Dt2 = ∅. But from our construction of enclosures, there is a set of ∆ node-disjoint paths connecting V (Ct2 ) to V (Ct01 ), all of which must intersect γ(R), contradicting the fact that γ(R) contains fewer than ∆ vertices. Assume now for contradiction that some vertex s ∈ S0 lies in D∗ (t0 ). Recall that s must lie in some set of X \{X0 } (where X0 is the set containing t0 ), and so d(s, t0 ) ≥ 5∆. Therefore, for all 1 ≤ j ≤ ∆1 , V (Cs ) ∩ V (Zj (t0 )) = ∅ must hold. Moreover, D∗ (t0 ) 6⊆ Ds , since otherwise, from the definition of enclosures, Dt0 = Ds and d(t0 , s) = 1, a contradiction. Since D∗ (t0 )∩Ds 6= ∅, we get that Ds ⊆ D∗ (t0 ). The rest of the proof follows the same reasoning as before. We say that a demand pair (s, t) ∈ M0 is a type-1 pair if s ∈ D∗ (t), and we say that it is a type-2 demand pair otherwise. Notice that we can route all type-1 demand pairs via node-disjoint paths, where each pair (s, t) is routed in G[V (D∗ (t))] (since from Observation 5.6, this graph is connected). Therefore, if at least half the demand pairs in M0 are type-1 pairs, then we obtain a routing of Ω(κ0 ) demand pairs and terminate the algorithm. We assume from now on that at least κ0 /2 demand pairs in M0 are type-2 demand pairs. We next build a directed conflict graph H, that contains a vertex v(s, t) for each type-2 demand pair (s, t) ∈ M0 . There is a directed edge from v(s, t) to v(s0 , t0 ) iff s ∈ D∗ (t0 ). Since the discs {D∗ (t)}t∈T0 are mutually disjoint, the out-degree of every vertex of H is at most 1, and the total average degree of every vertex in H is at most 2. Since |V (H)| ≥ κ0 /2, using standard techniques, we can find an independent set I of κ1 = Ω(κ0 ) vertices in H. We let M1 = {(s, t) ∈ M0 | v(s, t) ∈ I}. Let S1 and T1 be the sets of source and destination vertices, respectively, of the demand pairs in M1 . Then for all t, t0 ∈ T1 , D∗ (t) ∩ D∗ (t0 ) = ∅, and for all s ∈ S1 , t0 ∈ T1 , s 6∈ D∗ (t0 ).    1/19  Step 2: the Paths. Recall that κ1 = Ω(κ0 ) = Θ αWLτ|M| = Θ Wlog k , while ∆ = Θ(W 2/19 ). We will assume throughout that κ1 < ∆/12, as otherwise κ0 is bounded by some constant, and routing a single demand pair is sufficient. The following lemma will be used in order to compute the set M3 ⊆ M1 of the demand pairs. Lemma 6.8 There is a set P S of of Ct0 .  κ  1  2  − 1 node-disjoint paths, connecting vertices of S1 to vertices  Proof: Assume otherwise. Then there is a set Y of at most no path from a vertex of S1 \ Y to a vertex of V (Ct0 ) \ Y .  κ  1  2  − 2 vertices, such that G \ Y contains  Let Q0 ⊆ Q be a subset of the paths, computed in Theorem 6.2, that connect every terminal s ∈ S1 to some terminal of T 0 , so |Q0 | = κ1 . Let Q00 ⊆ Q0 be the set of paths that contain no vertices of Y , so |Q00 | ≥ κ1 /2 + 2. Recall that the terminals of T 0 all belong to distinct sets of X , and so the discs 30  {Dt0 }t0 ∈T 0 are mutually disjoint. Moreover, there is at most one terminal t00 in T 0 ∩ X0 , where X0 ∈ X is the set containing t0 . Then there must be at least one path Q ∈ Q00 , such that, if we denote by s ∈ S1 , t0 ∈ T 0 its two endpoints, then t0 6∈ X0 , and Dt0 contains no vertex of Y . We now show that there is a path connecting s to a vertex of Ct0 in G \ Y , leading to a contradiction. From the construction of enclosures, there is a set P(t0 , t0 ) of ∆ node-disjoint paths, connecting the vertices of Ct0 to the vertices of Ct0 . Since we have assumed that κ1 < ∆/12, at least one such path, say P , is disjoint from Y . Let v 0 be the endpoint of P lying on Ct0 . Assume first that s 6∈ Dt0 . Then Q must contain a vertex of Ct0 , that we denote by v. Since G[V (Dt0 )] is connected, there is a path P 0 ⊆ G[V (Dt0 )] connecting v to v 0 , and this path is disjoint from Y . The union of Q, P and P 0 then contains a path connecting s to a vertex of V (Ct0 ), which is disjoint from Y , a contradiction. Assume now that s ∈ Dt0 . Then there is a path P 0 ⊆ G[V (Dt0 )], connecting s to v 0 . The union of P and P 0 then contains a path connecting s to a vertex of V (Ct0 ), which is disjoint from Y , a contradiction. Let S2 ⊆ S1 be the set of the source vertices where the paths of P S originate, let T2 ⊆ T1 be the set of their mates, and let M2 ⊆ M1 be the set of the demand pairs in which the vertices of S2 participate. Notice that from our choice of t0 , there is at most one demand pair (s, t) ∈ M1 , where t belongs to the subset X0 ∈ X containing t0 . If such a pair belongs to M1 , then we discard it from M1 , and update S1 and T1 accordingly. Let κ2 = |M2 |, so κ2 ≥ κ1 /2 − 3 ≥ Ω(κ0 ). We now use the following theorem to compute the subset M3 of the demand pairs and construct the corresponding paths for the crossbar. Theorem 6.9 There is an efficient algorithm to compute a subset M3 ⊆ M2 of bκ2 /2c demand pairs, and a p-crossbar for M3 , where p = Ω(∆/κ2 ). Proof: Consider any terminal t ∈ T2 , and let X0 ∈ X be the set containing t0 . Since t 6∈ X0 , d(t, t0 ) ≥ 5∆, and in particular, Dt ∩ Dt0 = ∅. Therefore, there is a set P̃(t) of ∆ node-disjoint paths, connecting the vertices of V (Ct ) to the vertices of V (Ct0 ). We construct a directed flow network N , by starting from G, and bi-directing each of its edges. We then introduce several new vertices: a global source vertex s∗ of infinite capacity; an additional vertex vertex s̃ of capacity bκ2 /2c, and, for each terminal t ∈ T2 a vertex st of capacity b∆/(2κ2 )c. We connect s∗ to s̃, and to every vertex in {st }t∈T2 . Vertex s̃ in turn connects to every vertex s ∈ S2 , and for each t ∈ T2 , vertex st connects to every vertex in V (Ct ). Finally, we introduce a global destination vertex t∗ of infinite capacity, and connect every vertex in V (Ct0 ) to it. All vertices whose capacities have not been set so far have capacity 1. Let B be the total capacity of all vertices in {s̃} ∪ {st }t∈T2 . It is easy to see that there is a flow of value at least B in the resulting network: we send 21 flow unit along each path in set P S (discarding S one path if |S2 | is odd), and 2κ1 2 flow units on each path in t∈T2 P̃(t) (if the flow through some vertex st is too high due to the rounding of the capacities down, we simply lower the flow on one of the corresponding paths in P̃(t)). Since the paths in P S are node-disjoint, the total flow on these paths causes congestion at most 21 on the vertices whose capacity is 1. Since for each t ∈ T2 , the paths S in P̃(t) are node-disjoint, the total congestion caused by the flow on paths in t∈T2 P̃(t) on vertices whose capacity is 1 is at most 1/2. Therefore, we obtain a valid s∗ -t∗ flow of value B. From the integrality of flow, there is an integral flow of the same value. This flow gives a collection P 1 of bκ2 /2c paths connecting j k some vertices of S2 to some vertices of ∆ 0 paths connecting the vertices of V (Ct ) to V (Ct0 ), and, for each t ∈ T2 , a collection P (t) of 2κ 2 the vertices of V (Ct0 ), such that all paths in P 1 ∪ {P 0 (t) | t ∈ T2 } are mutually node-disjoint. We 31  let S3 ⊆ S2 be the set of the source vertices where the paths of P 1 originate. For each s ∈ S3 , let P (s) ∈ P 1 be the unique path originating at s, and let P(s) = {P (s)}. Let M3 ⊆ M2 contain all demand pairs whose source belongs to S3 , and let T3 ⊆ T2 be S the set of the corresponding destination 0 vertices. Then |M3 | = bκ2 /2c, and all paths in set P = v∈S3 ∪T3 P(v) are mutually disjoint. For each terminal t ∈ T3 , set P(t) contains Ω(∆/κ2 ) paths, as required. This concludes the proof of Theorem 6.5. Since p1 = Ω(∆/κ0 ) and κ3 ≤ κ0 , we will assume without loss of generality that p1 · κ3 < ∆2 /24 (otherwise we can lower the value of p1 until the inequality holds and discard the appropriate number of paths from sets P(t) for t ∈ T3 ∪ {t0 }).  6.2  Constructing a Good Crossbar  In this section, we complete the proof of Theorem 6.4, by modifying the basic crossbar constructed in  S S the previous section, in order to turn it into a good crossbar. Let Z(t), P(v) t∈T3 ∪{t0 } v∈S3 ∪T3 be the crossbar constructed in the previous section. For every terminal t ∈ T3 , let At ⊆ V (Ct ), Bt ⊆ V (Ct0 ) be the sets of p1 vertices each, where the paths of P(t) originate and terminate, respectively. For a source vertex s ∈ S3 , we let As contain a singleSvertex s, and Bs contain S the vertex of V (Ct0 ) where the unique path in P(s) terminates. Let A = v∈S3 ∪T3 Av and B = v∈S3 ∪T3 Bv . Then |A| = |B| = |P| = |M3 |(p1 + 1) < ∆2 /6 from our assumption. Definition 6.3 Given two equal-sized disjoint subsets U1 , U2 of vertices of G, a U1 –U2 linkage is a set of |U1 | node-disjoint paths, connecting the vertices of U1 to the vertices of U2 . The following observation is immediate from the definition of a crossbar. S  0 is a p -crossbar for Observation 6.10 Let P 0 be any A–B linkage in G. Then 1 t∈T3 ∪{t0 } Z(t), P M3 . Our algorithm consists of three steps. In the first step, we re-route the paths in P, so that they become disjoint from the relevant inner shells, ensuring Property (C1). In the following step, the paths in P are further re-routed to ensure their monotonicity with respect to the relevant inner shells, obtaining Property (C2). The set M3 of the demand pairs remains unchanged in these two steps. In the last step, we carefully select a final subset M∗ ⊆ M3 of the demand pairs to ensure Property (C3). We discard some paths from set P, but the paths themselves are not modified at this step.  Step 1: Disjointness of Paths from Inner Shells The goal of this step is to modify the paths in set P, in order to ensure Property (C1). In fact, we will ensure a slightly stronger property that we will use in subsequent steps. Suppose we are given any A–B linkage P 0 . For every terminal t ∈ T3 , we let P 0 (t) ⊆ P 0 be the set of paths originating from the vertices of At , and for every source vertex s ∈ S3 , we let P 0 (s) contain the unique path of P 0 originating at s. We will always view the paths in P 0 as directed from A to B. Consider now any path P ∈ P 0 . Clearly, path P has to cross Z∆1 (t0 ). Let vP be the last vertex on P that lies on Z∆1 (t0 ), and let eP be the edge immediately preceding vP on P . Let vP0 be the other endpoint of edge eP . Then P \ {eP } consists of two disjoint paths, that we denote by P1 and P2 , respectively, where P1 starts at a vertex of V (Ct ) and terminates at vP0 , and P2 starts at vP and terminates at a vertex of V (Ct0 ). 32  We then denote A0 = {vP0 | P ∈ P 0 }, B 0 = {vP | P ∈ P 0 }, and Ẽ = {eP | P ∈ P 0 }. We also denote P10 = {P1 | P ∈ P 0 } and P20 = {P2 | P ∈ P 0 }. Notice that P10 is an A–A0 linkage, and P20 is a B 0 – B linkage. Observe that for every terminal t ∈ T3 ∪ {t0 }, all vertices of A0 ∪ B 0 must lie outside D(Z∆1 −1 (t)). Also, from our definitions, every path in P20 is contained in D∗ (t0 ). Remark 6.1 We note that the definitions of the sets A0 , B 0 of vertices and the set Ẽ of edges depend on the A–B linkage P 0 . When we modify the linkage, these sets may change as well. We are now ready to define good A–B linkages. Definition 6.4 We say that an A–B linkage P 0 is a good linkage, iff: • All paths in P10 are disjoint from D̃(t0 ); and • For every t ∈ T3 , if some path P ∈ P10 ∪ P20 intersects D̃(t), then P ∈ P10 , and it originates at a vertex of At . S  0 is a p -crossbar for M that has Notice that if P 0 is a good A–B linkage, then Z(t), P 1 3 t∈T3 ∪{t0 } Property (C1). The goal of this step is to prove the following theorem. Theorem 6.11 There is an efficient algorithm that computes a good A–B linkage P 0 . The remainder of this step focuses on the proof of Theorem 6.11. In order to prove the theorem, we start with the A–B linkage P, given by the basic crossbar that we have computed S in the previous S∆1 section, and iteratively modify it. Let E1 be the set of all edges that belong to cycles t∈T3 ∪{t0 } j=∆2 +1 Zj (t). Given any set Q of node-disjoint paths in G, let P c(Q) be the total number of all edges lying on the paths in Q that do not belong to E1 , so c(Q) = P ∈Q |E(P ) \ E1 |. The following lemma is key to proving Theorem 6.11. Lemma 6.12 Let P be any A–B linkage, and assume that it is not a good linkage. Then there is an efficient algorithm to compute an A–B linkage P 0 with c(P 0 ) < c(P). In order to complete the proof of Theorem 6.11, we start with the original A–B linkage P. While the current linkage P is not a good one, we apply Lemma 6.12 to it, to obtain another A–B linkage P 0 with c(P 0 ) < c(P). The algorithm terminates when we obtain a good A–B linkage. Since the values c(P) are integers bounded by |E(G)|, and they decrease by at least 1 in every iteration, the algorithm is guaranteed to terminate after |E(G)| iterations. It now remains to prove Lemma 6.12. Proof of Lemma 6.12. Let P be any A–B linkage, and assume that it is not a good linkage. Let Q = P1 ∪ P2 , so Q is an (A ∪ B 0 )–(A0 ∪ B) linkage in G \ Ẽ, and |Q| = 2|M3 |(p1 + 1) < 6κ3 p1 < ∆2 /3 from our assumption. We will use the following simple observation. Observation 6.13 Let Q0 be any (A ∪ B 0 )–(A0 ∪ B) linkage in G \ Ẽ, and let G0 be the graph obtained by the union of the paths in Q0 and the edges of Ẽ. Then G0 contains an A–B linkage P 0 . Moreover, if c(Q0 ) < c(Q), then c(P 0 ) < c(P). Proof: We construct the following auxiliary directed graph G̃. The vertices of G̃ are A ∪ A0 ∪ B ∪ B 0 . The edges are defined as follows. First, for every path Q ∈ Q0 , that originates at a vertex v ∈ A ∪ B 0 and terminates at a vertex u ∈ A0 ∪ B, we add a directed edge from v to u. Notice that since Q0 is an (A ∪ B 0 )–(A0 ∪ B) linkage, this gives a directed matching from the vertices of A ∪ B 0 to the vertices of 33  A0 ∪ B. Finally, for every edge eP = (vP0 , vP ) ∈ Ẽ, we add a directed edge from vP0 to vP to G̃. Then in the resulting graph G̃, every vertex of A has in-degree 0 and out-degree 1; every vertex of B has out-degree 0 and in-degree 1, and every vertex of A0 ∪ B 0 has in-degree and out-degree 1. Therefore, graph G̃ is a collection of directed paths and cycles, and it must contain an A–B linkage P̃. By replacing, for every path P ∈ P̃, the edges representing the paths of Q0 on P with the corresponding paths, we obtain an A–B linkage P 0 . Since the edges of Ẽ participate in the paths in P, and the paths of P 0 are contained in graph G0 , it is immediate to verify that c(P 0 ) < c(P). From Observation 6.13, it is now enough to construct an (A ∪ B 0 )–(A0 ∪ B) linkage Q0 in G \ Ẽ, with c(Q0 ) < c(Q). The following technical claim is central to achieving this. Claim 6.14 Let H be any planar graph embedded in the plane, such that H is a union of a set Z = {Z1 , . . . , Zh } of disjoint cycles with D(Z1 ) ( D(Z2 ) ( . . . ( D(Zh ), and a set Q = Q1 ∪ Q2 of r < h node-disjoint paths. Assume that for i ∈ {1, 2}, the paths of Qi originate at a set Ui of vertices, and terminate at a set Ui0 of vertices. Assume further that the vertices of U1 lie in D◦ (Z1 ), while the vertices of U10 ∪ U2 ∪ U20 lie outside D(Zh ). Let H 0 be the graph obtained from H by deleting, for every path Q ∈ Q2 , every edge and vertex of Q contained in D◦ (Z1 ). Then there is a set Q0 of r node-disjoint paths, connecting the vertices of U1 ∪ U2 to the vertices of U10 ∪ U20 in H 0 . Proof: Let U = U1 ∪ U2 and U 0 = U10 ∪ U20 . Assume otherwise. From Menger’s theorem, there is a set Y of at most r − 1 vertices, such that in H 0 \ Y , no path connects a vertex of U \ Y to a vertex of U 0 \ Y . Let |Q1 | = r1 and |Q2 | = r2 . Observe that all paths of Q1 are contained in H 0 , so for each path P ∈ Q1 , there must be a distinct vertex yP ∈ Y lying on P . Let Y1 ⊆ Y be the set of all such vertices, so |Y1 | = r1 . Let Q∗ ⊆ Q2 be the set of all paths that are disjoint from D◦ (Z1 ), and denote |Q∗ | = r∗ . Then every path P ∈ Q∗ is contained in H 0 , and as before, Y must contain a distinct vertex yP lying on P . Let Y2 be the set of all such vertices {yP | P ∈ Q∗ }. Since the paths in Q are disjoint, Y1 ∩ Y2 = ∅, and |Y1 | + |Y2 | = r1 + r∗ . Let Y3 = Y \ (Y1 ∪ Y2 ), and let Q00 = Q2 \ Q∗ . Then |Y3 | ≤ |Q00 | − 1, and due to the disjointness of the paths in Q, every path in Q00 is disjoint from Y1 ∪ Y2 . Therefore, there is some path Q ∈ Q00 , such that Q ∩ Y = ∅. Recall that Q ∩ D◦ (Z1 ) 6= ∅, and so Q must intersect Z1 . Let v 0 , v 00 be the first and the last vertices of Q that lie on Z1 . Recall that the endpoints of Q lie outside D(Zh ). Let Q0 be the segment of Q between its first endpoint and v 0 , and let Q00 be the segment of Q between v 00 and its last endpoint. Then both Q0 and Q00 are contained in H 0 , and each of these paths intersects every cycle in Z. The number of these cycles is h > r from our assumption. Therefore, there is some 1 ≤ j ≤ h, such that Zj is disjoint from Y . By combining Zj with Q0 and Q00 , we obtain a path connecting a vertex of U \ Y to a vertex of U 0 \ Y in H 0 \ Y , a contradiction. We are now ready to complete the proof of Lemma 6.12. Let P be the given A–B linkage, and assume that it is not a good linkage. Assume first that some path P ∈ P1 has a non-empty intersection with D̃(t0 ). We let Q1 = P2 , Q2 = P1 , and Z = (Z∆2 +1 (t0 ), . . . , Z∆1 −2 (t0 )). Observe that |Z| = ∆1 − ∆2 − 2 ≥ ∆2 > 24p1 κ3 > |Q|, the paths in Q1 originate at the vertices of Ct0 , that lie in D◦ (Z∆2 +1 ), and terminate at the vertices of B 0 , that lie outside D(Z∆1 −2 (t0 )) (after we reverse them), while the paths of Q2 originate and terminate outside D(Z∆1 −2 (t0 )) (we also reverse them). From our assumption, at least one path in Q2 intersects D◦ (Z∆2 +1 ). Let H be the graph obtained by the union of the cycles in Z and the paths in Q. Since the edges of Ẽ cannot lie on the cycles of Z, H ⊆ G \ Ẽ. We can now apply Claim 6.14 to obtain a new (A ∪ B 0 )–(A0 ∪ B) linkage Q0 in graph G \ Ẽ. Moreover, since we delete all edges lying on the paths of Q2 that belong to D◦ (Z∆2 +1 (t0 )), it is easy to verify that c(Q0 ) < c(Q). Assume now that there is some path P ∈ Q, and some terminal t ∈ T3 , such that P intersects D̃(t), 34  but it does not originate at a vertex of At . Let Q1 ⊆ P1 be the set of all paths originating from the vertices of At , and let Q2 = Q \ Q1 . It is easy to verify that we can apply Claim 6.14 as before, to obtain a new (A ∪ B 0 )–(A0 ∪ B) linkage Q0 in graph G \ Ẽ, with c(Q0 ) < c(Q). Using Observation 6.13, we can now obtain an A–B linkage P 0 with c(P 0 ) < c(P).    Step 2: Monotonicity with Respect to Inner Shells In this step we further modify the paths in set P, in order to ensure Property (C2). As before, given a good A–B linkage P 0 , for every terminal t ∈ T3 we denote by P 0 (t) ⊆ P 0 the set of paths originating at the vertices of At , and for each s ∈ S3 , we let P 0 (s) ⊆ P 0 contain the unique path originating at s. We define the sets A0 , B 0 of vertices, the set Ẽ of edges, and the sets P10 , P20 of paths with respect to P 0 exactly as before. Definition 6.5 We say that a good A–B linkage P 0 is perfect if all paths in P 0 are monotone with respect to Z1 (t0 ), . . . , Z∆2 (t0 ), and for all t ∈ T3 , all paths in P 0 (t) are monotone with respect to Z1 (t), . . . , Z∆2 (t). In this step we prove the following theorem, that immediately gives a p1 -crossbar for M3 with Properties (C1) and (C2). Theorem 6.15 There is an efficient algorithm, that, given a good A–B linkage P, computes a perfect A–B linkage P 0 . Proof: Our first step is to re-route the paths in P2 , so that they become monotone with respect to Z1 (t0 ), . . . , Z∆2 (t0 ). Recall that from our definition, the paths of P2 originate from the set B 0 ⊆ V (Z∆1 (t0 )) of vertices, terminate at the set B ⊆ V (Ct0 ) of vertices, and they are internally disjoint from V (Z∆1 (t0 )) ∪ V (Ct0 ). Let Z = {Z1 (t0 ), . . . , Z∆2 (t0 )}, C = Ct0 , and Y = Z∆1 (t0 ). Recall that from the construction of the shells, Z is a set of ∆2 tight concentric cycles around C. Let H be the graph obtained by the union of the cycles in Z and the set P2 of paths. We use Theorem 2.5 to obtain a new B 0 –B linkage P20 in H, such that the paths in P20 are monotone with respect to Z1 (t0 ), . . . , Z∆2 (t0 ). Moreover, since the paths in P1 are disjoint from the graph H, the paths in P20 ∪ P1 remain disjoint. Let P̃ be the new A–B linkage, obtained by concatenating the paths in P1 , the edges of Ẽ, and the paths in P20 . Observe that P̃ remains a good linkage. For each terminal t ∈ T3 , let P̃(t) ⊆ P̃ be the set of paths originating from the vertices of At . For every terminal t ∈ T3 , we now re-route the paths in P̃(t), as follows. We let Z = {Z1 (t), . . . , Z∆2 (t)} and C = Ct . As before, Z is a set of ∆2 tight concentric cycles around C. We let Y be the sub-graph of G induced by V (Dt0 ). Let H 0 be the graph obtained by the union of the cycles in Z and the set P̃(t) of paths. Let H be the union of H 0 and G[Y ]. Then the paths in P̃(t) originate at the vertices of At lying on Ct , terminate at the vertices of Y , and are internally disjoint from C ∪ Y . Moreover, since P̃ is a good linkage, all paths in P̃ \ P̃(t) are disjoint from graph H 0 . Using Theorem 2.5, we can find a new set P 0 (t) of p1 disjoint paths in graph H 0 , connecting vertices of V (Ct ) to vertices of V (Ct0 ). The paths in P 0 (t) are guaranteed to be disjoint from all paths in P̃ \ P 0 (t), and they remain monotone with respect to Z1 (t0 ), . . . , Z∆2 (t0 ), since the paths in P̃(t) had this property, and D∗ (t) ∩ D∗ (t0 ) = ∅. They also remain disjoint from all discs D̃(t0 ) for all t0 ∈ T3 distinct from t. We replace the paths of P̃(t) with the paths of P 0 (t) in P̃, obtaining a new good A–B linkage, and continue to the next iteration. The final set P 0 of paths is obtained from P̃ once all terminals of T3 are processed.  35  Step 3: Ensuring Property (C3) So far we have constructed a p1 -crossbar  S   Z(t), P , that has properties (C1) and (C2). t∈T3 ∪{t0 }  In this step we will discard some demand pairs from M3 , and some paths from sets P(t) for terminals t ∈ T3 , so that the resulting set M∗ of the demand pairs, together with the shells around their destination vertices, and the resulting set P ∗ of paths give a good crossbar. We do not alter the paths themselves, so Properties (C1) and (C2) will continue to hold. Consider some path P ∈ P, and recall that P is monotone with respect to Z1 (t0 ), . . . , Z∆2 (t0 ). Let P 0 be the sub-path of P , starting from its first vertex (that lies in A), and terminating at the first vertex of P that lies on Z∆2 (t0 ). Let P 0 = {P 0 | P ∈ P}. As before, for every terminal t ∈ T3 , we denote by P 0 (t) ⊆ P 0 the set of paths originating at the vertices of At , and for each s ∈ S3 , we denote by P 0 (s) ⊆ P 0 the set containing the unique path originating from s. Let e∗ be any edge of Z∆2 (t0 ), and let R∗ be the path Z∆2 (t0 ) \ e∗ . We prove the following theorem. Theorem 6.16 There is an efficient algorithm to compute a subset M4 ⊆ M3 of Ω(κ3 / log n) demand pairs, and to select, for each terminal t ∈ T (M4 ) ∩ T3 a subset P 00 (t) ⊆ P 0 (t) of Ω(p1 ) paths, such that there is a partition Σ = {σ(v) | v ∈ T (M4 )} of R∗ into disjoint segments, where for each t ∈ T (M4 ) ∩ T3 , the paths in P 00 (t) are disjoint from R∗ \ σ(t), while for each s ∈ T (M4 ) ∩ S3 , the unique path in P 0 (s) is disjoint from R∗ \ σ(s). Let S4 andST4 denote the sets source and all destination vertices of the demand pairs in M4 .  S of all 00 (t) ∪ 0 (s) . Let P 00 = P P t∈T4 s∈S4 In other words, Theorem 6.16 ensures that for each terminal t ∈ T4 , the endpoints of the paths in P 00 (t) appear on R∗ consecutively, with respect to the endpoints of all paths in P 00 . It is now immediate to complete the construction of the good crossbar for M4 . For every path P ∈ P(t) for all t ∈ T4 , we include P in set P ∗ only if the corresponding path P 0 ∈ P 0 belongs to P 00 . Since the paths in P are monotone with respect to Z1 (t0 ), . . . , Z∆2 (t0 ), it is easy to see that Property (C3) is satisfied in the resulting crossbar, and we obtain a good p∗ -crossbar for M4 , with p∗ = Ω(p1 ) = Ω(∆/κ0 ), and |M4 | = Ω(κ0 / log n), as required. We now focus on the proof of Theorem 6.16. Proof of Theorem 6.16. Let G0 be the graph obtained from G, after removing all vertices and edges ◦ (t ). Observe that all paths in P 0 are still contained in G0 . We view the face of G0 where lying in D∆ 0 2 t0 used to reside as the outer face. Therefore, for each terminal t ∈ T3 , the paths of P 0 (t) now connect the vertices of V (Ct ) to the vertices lying on the boundary of the outer face. Consider any destination vertex t ∈ T3 , and let Q ⊆ P 0 (t) be any subset of its corresponding paths, with |Q| > 2. Let σ be the shortest sub-path of R∗ , containing all endpoints of the paths in Q. Taking the union of σ, Q and Z∆2 (t), we obtain a new auxiliary graph H(t, Q). Let γ(t, Q) be the closed curve serving as the outer boundary of this graph, and let D(t, Q) be the disc whose boundary is γ(t, Q). Given two destination vertices t, t0 ∈ T3 with t 6= t0 , and any two subsets Q(t) ⊆ P 0 (t) and Q(t0 ) ⊆ P 0 (t0 ) of paths, notice that the discs D(t, Q(t)) and D(t0 , Q(t0 )) are either completely disjoint from each other, or one is contained in the other. We say that there is a conflict between (t, Q(t)) and (t0 , Q(t0 )) in the latter case. We also say that there is a conflict between (t, Q(t)) and a source vertex s ∈ S3 , if s ∈ D(t, Q(t)). Let M̃1 = M3 . Over the course of this step, we will define a series of subsets of demand pairs, M̃3 ⊆ M̃2 ⊆ M̃1 , where |M̃3 | = Ω(|M̃1 |/ log n). For each 1 ≤ i ≤ 3, we will denote by S̃i and T̃i the sets of the source and the destination vertices of the pairs in M̃i , respectively. Our final set of the demand pairs will be M∗ = M̃3 . For every terminal t ∈ T (M∗ ), we will define a series 36  of subsets of paths Q3 (t) ⊆ Q2 (t) ⊆ Q1 (t), where we let Q1 (t) = P 0 (t), and we will ensure that |Q3 (t)| = Ω(|Q1 (t)|) = Ω(p1 ). Moreover, we will ensure that for all t, t0 ∈ T̃3 , there is no conflict between (t, Q3 (t)) and (t0 , Q3 (t0 )), and for all s ∈ S̃3 and t ∈ T̃3 , there is no conflict between (t, Q3 (t)) and s. Our first step is to eliminate all conflicts between the destination vertices in T̃1 . We build a graph F , whose vertex set is T̃1 , and there is a directed edge (t0 , t) iff (i) t 6= t0 ; (ii) D(t0 , Q1 (t0 )) ⊆ D(t, Q1 (t)); and (iii) there is no terminal t00 ∈ T̃1 \ {t, t0 } with D(t0 , Q1 (t0 )) ⊆ D(t00 , Q1 (t00 )) ⊆ D(t, Q1 (t)). It is easy to see that F is a directed forest.  We use Claim 2.2, to obtain a partition R1 , . . . , Rdlog ne of V (F ) into subsets, such that, for each 1 ≤ j ≤ dlog ne, F [Rj ] is a collection Yj of disjoint paths, and if vertices v, v 0 ∈ Rj lie on two distinct paths in Yj , then neither is a descendant of the other in F . Clearly, there is an index 1 ≤ j ≤ dlog ne, with |Rj | ≥ |T̃1 |/ dlog ne. We let M̃2 ⊆ M̃1 be the set of the demand pairs whose destination vertices lie in Rj , and we define the sets S̃2 and T̃2 of source and destination vertices accordingly. For each t ∈ T̃2 , we now define a subset Q2 (t) ⊆ Q1 (t) of paths, to ensure that there are no conflicts between the terminals in T̃2 . Recall that F [Rj ] = Yj is a collection of paths, and for vertices v, v 0 ∈ Rj , if there is a directed path from v to v 0 in F , then v, v 0 lie on the same path in Yj . Therefore, if t, t0 do not lie on the same path in Yj , there is no conflict between (t, Q1 (t)) and (t0 , Q1 (t0 )). So we only need to resolve conflicts between terminals lying on the same path of Yj . Let P = (t1 , t2 , . . . , tr ) be any such directed path. Then D(t1 , Q1 (t1 )) ⊆ D(t2 , Q1 (t2 )) ⊆ · · · ⊆ D(tr , Q1 (tr )). Disc D(tr−1 , Q1 (tr−1 )) partitions the paths in Q1 (tr ) into two subsets, that go on each side of the disc. By discarding the paths in one of these two subsets (the one containing fewer paths), we can eliminate the conflict between tr and the remaining terminals on path P . Therefore, there is a subset Q2 (tr ) ⊆ Q1 (tr ), containing at least |Q1 (tr )|/2 paths, such that (tr , Q2 (tr )) has no conflict with (ti , Q1 (ti )) for any 1 ≤ i < r. We process all other terminals t ∈ P similarly, obtaining a subset Q2 (t) ⊆ Q1 (t) of paths, where |Q2 (t)| ≥ |Q1 (t)|/2, and for all t, t0 ∈ P with t 6= t0 , there is no conflict between (t, Q2 (t)) and (t0 , Q2 (t0 )). This completes the definition of the set M̃2 of demand pairs, and the corresponding sets Q2 (t) of paths for t ∈ T̃2 . Our next step is to eliminate conflicts between pairs (t, Q2 (t)) for t ∈ T̃2 and the sources s ∈ S̃2 . For every demand pair (s, t) ∈ M̃2 , if there is a conflict between (t, Q2 (t)) and s, then we can discard a subset of at most half the paths from Q2 (t) in order to eliminate this conflict. The resulting set of paths is denoted by Q3 (t). Therefore, we will assume from now on that for every demand pair (s, t) ∈ M̃2 , there is no conflict between (t, Q3 (t)) and s. n o Finally, we build a conflict graph H, whose vertex set is vs,t | (s, t) ∈ M̃2 , and there is a directed edge (vs,t , vs0 ,t0 ) iff there is a conflict between s and (t0 , Q3 (t0 )). Since the discs {D(t, Q3 (t))}t∈T̃2 are all disjoint, every vertex vs,t has at most one out-going edge. Therefore, every vertex-induced subgraph of H has at least one vertex whose total degree (counting the incoming and the outgoing edges) is at most 2. Using standard techniques, we can find an independent set I of vertices in H, with |I| = Ω(|V (H)|). Our final set M̃3 of demand pairs contains all pairs (s, t) with vs,t ∈ I. We define the sets S̃3 and T̃3 of the source and the destination vertices accordingly, and the sets Q3 (t) for the destination vertices t ∈ T̃3 remain the same. From the above discussion, for each t, t0 ∈ T̃3 with t 6= t0 , there is no conflict between (t, Q3 (t)) and (t0 , Q3 (t0 )), and for all s ∈ S̃3 , t0 ∈ T̃3 , there is no conflict between (t0 , Q3 (t0 )) and s. For every source vertex s ∈ S̃3 , the set Q3 (s) contains the same path as the original set P 0 (s).   37  7  Case 2: Heavy Demand Pairs.  In this case, we assume that at least 0.7|M| demand pairs are heavy. Let H = {X1 , . . . , Xq } ⊆ X be the collection of all heavy subsets of terminals, so q ≤ 2W/τ , and let Mh be the set of all heavy demand pairs, so for all (s, t) ∈ Mh , both s and t lie in the sets of H. We partition the set Mh of demand pairs into q 2 subsets, where for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ q, set Mi,j contains all demand pairs (s, t) with s ∈ Xi and t ∈ Xj (notice that it is possible that i = j). We then find an approximate solution to each resulting problem separately. The main theorem of this section is the following. Theorem 7.1 There is an efficient algorithm, that for each 1 ≤ i, j ≤ q, computes a subset M0i,j ⊆ Mi,j of at least 5|Mi,j |/6 demand pairs, and a collection n Pi,j of node-disjoint opaths routing a subset  of the demand pairs in M0i,j in G, with |Pi,j | ≥ min constants c1 and c2 .  OPT(G,M0i,j ) αWL ·|M0i,j | , c ∆2 c1 ∆80 log3 n 2 0  , for some universal  Before we prove this theorem, we show that it concludes the proof of Theorem 4.3 for Case S 2. Let set π contain all pairs (i, j) with 1 ≤ i, j ≤ q, such that |Mi,j | ≥ 0.1|M|/q 2 , and let M̃ = (i,j)∈π Mi,j . Since the total number of heavy demand pairs is at least 0.7|M|, it is easy to verify that |M̃| ≥ 0.6|M|. We apply Theorem 7.1, to compute, for each (i, j) ∈ π, the subset M0i,j ⊆ Mi,j of at least 5|Mi,j |/6 demand pairs and the corresponding set Pi,j of paths routing a subset of the demand pairs in M0i,j . S Let M̃0 ⊆ M̃ be the set of all demand pairs in (i,j)∈π M0i,j . Then: |M̃0 | =  X  |M0i,j | ≥  (i,j)∈π  X  5|Mi,j |/6 = 5|M̃|/6 ≥ |M|/2.  (i,j)∈π  W If, for any (i, j) ∈ π, we obtain a solution with |Pi,j | ≥ 213 ·α , then we return the 3 2 8 AKR ·c1 c2 q ∆0 log n·log k set Pi,j as our final solution.   Substituting ∆0 = O(∆ log n), ∆ = W 2/19 , q = O(W/τ ), and τ = W 18/19 , we get that:   |Pi,j | ≥ Ω ≥Ω =Ω  Wτ2 W 2 ∆8 log11 n log k    W 36/19 W · W 16/19 log11 n log k ! W 1/19 . log11 n log k  Otherwise, for all (i, j) ∈ π, the resulting solution |Pi,j | <  !  W . 213 ·αAKR ·c1 c2 q 2 ∆80 log3 n·log k  We then return  the subset M̃0 of demand pairs. As observed above, |M̃0 | ≥ |M|/2, so it is now enough to show that OPT(G, M̃0 ) ≤ w∗ |M̃0 |/8. Assume otherwise, and let P ∗ be a solution to instance (G, M̃0 ), routing a subset M∗ ⊆ M̃0 of at least w∗ |M̃0 |/8 ≥ w∗ |M|/16 demand pairs. Then there is a pair of indexes (i, j) ∈ π, such that ∗ |M| w∗ |M| 0 |M∗ ∩ M0i,j | ≥ w16q 2 . Therefore, OPT(G, Mi,j ) ≥ 16q 2 . From Theorem 7.1, we compute a set Pi,j of paths, routing a subset of demand pairs of M0i,j , with either |Pi,j | ≥ 38  OPT(G,M0i,j ) c1 ∆80  3  log n  , or |Pi,j | ≥  αWL ·|M0i,j | . c2 ∆20  In the former case, |Pi,j | ≥  OPT(G, M0i,j ) c1 ∆80 log3 n  ≥  w∗ |M| W = , 3 8 2 2 16c1 q ∆0 log n 16c1 q ∆80 log3 n  while in the latter case, observe that |M0i,j | ≥ 5|Mi,j |/6 ≥ |M|/(12q 2 ) from the definition of π and M̃ . Therefore, |Pi,j | ≥  αWL · |M0i,j | c2 ∆20  ≥  w∗ · |M| W > 13 , 2 2 12 · 512 · αAKR · c2 q ∆0 log k 2 · αAKR · c1 c2 q 2 ∆80 log2 n log k  a contradiction. From now on we focus on proving Theorem 7.1. We fix a pair of indices 1 ≤ i, j ≤ q. In order to simplify 0 the notation, we denote Mi,j by N , Xi by X and Xj by Y . Our goal is N n tocompute asubset  N ⊆o of at least 5|N |/6 demand pairs, together with a set P of at least min Ω  OPT(G,N 0 ) ∆80 log3 n  ,Ω  αWL |N 0 | ∆20  disjoint paths, routing a subset of the demand pairs in N 0 . Let x ∈ X and y ∈ Y be any pair of terminals. Recall that for every terminal t ∈ T (N ) ∩ X, d(t, x) ≤ ∆0 , and for every terminal t ∈ T (N )∩Y , d(t, y) ≤ ∆0 . We consider two subcases. The first subcase happens when d(x, y) > 5∆0 , and otherwise the second subcase happens. Note that the second subcase includes the case where X =Y.  7.1  Subcase 2a: d(x, y) > 5∆0    ) In this case, we set N 0 = N . We will compute a set P of at least Ω OPT(G,N node-disjoint paths, 6 ∆0 log n routing a subset of the demand pairs in N . We start by defining a simpler special case of the problem, and show that we can find a good approximation algorithm for this special case. The special case is somewhat similar to routing on a cylinder, and we solve it by reducing it to this setting. We then show that the general problem in Case 2a reduces to this special case. A Special Case Suppose we are given a connected planar graph Ĝ embedded on the sphere, and two disjoint simple cycles Z, Z 0 in Ĝ. Suppose also that we are given a set M̂ of demand pairs, where all source vertices lie on Z and all destination vertices lie on Z 0 (we note that the same vertex may participate in a number of demand pairs). Let D(Z), D(Z 0 ) be two discs with boundaries Z and Z 0 , respectively, so that D(Z) ∩ D(Z 0 ) = ∅. Assume additionally that we are given a closed Ĝ-normal curve C of length at most ∆, that is contained in D◦ (Z), so that for every vertex v ∈ Z, there is a Ĝ-normal curve γ(v) of length at most 2∆0 connecting v to a vertex of C, and γ(v) is internally disjoint from Z and C. Similarly, assume that we are given a closed Ĝ-normal curve C 0 of length at most ∆, that is contained in D◦ (Z 0 ), so that for every vertex v 0 ∈ Z 0 there is a Ĝ-normal curve γ(v 0 ) of length at most 2∆0 , connecting v 0 to a vertex of C 0 , and γ(v 0 ) is internally disjoint from Z 0 and C 0 (see Figure 5). This finishes the definition of the special case. The following theorem shows that we can obtain a good approximation for it. Theorem 7.2 There is an efficient algorithm, that,  given any  instance (Ĝ, M̂) of the NDP problem OP T (Ĝ,M̂) as above, computes a solution of value at least Ω . ∆2 log n 0  39  Z�  Z C  C�  Figure 5: The special case, with the terminals shown in red. Proof: The algorithm is very simple: we reduce the problem to routing on a cylinder, by creating two holes in the sphere. The first hole is D(Z): we delete all edges and vertices that appear inside the disc, except for the edges and the vertices of Z. The second hole is D(Z 0 ): we similarly delete all edges and vertices that lie inside the disc, except for those lying on its boundary. Let Ĝ0 be the resulting graph. We then apply the O(log n)-approximation   algorithm for NDP-Cylinder to the resulting problem, to obtain a routing of at least Ω  OPT(Ĝ0 ,M̂) log n  demand pairs. In order to complete the analysis of the   M̂) . algorithm, it is enough to prove that OPT(Ĝ0 , M̂) ≥ Ω OPT(∆Ĝ, 2 0  Notice that we can assume without loss of generality that all curves in set {γ(v) | v ∈ V (Z)} are mutually non-crossing, and moreover, whenever two curves meet, they continue together. In other words, for all v, v 0 ∈ V (Z), γ(v) ∩ γ(v 0 ) is a contiguous curve that has a vertex of C as its endpoint. We make a similar assumption for curves in {γ(v) | v ∈ V (Z 0 )}. Consider the optimal solution to instance (Ĝ, M̂), and let P0 be the set of paths in this solution. We will gradually modify the set P0 of paths, to obtain path sets P1 , P2 , . . ., until we obtain a feasible solution to instance (Ĝ0 , M̂). For every i ≥ 0, we will denote by M̂i the set of the demand pairs routed by Pi , and by κi its cardinality. Recall that κ0 = OPT(Ĝ, M̂). We assume that κ0 ≥ 512∆20 , as otherwise a solution routing a single demand pair gives the desired approximation, and such a solution exists in Ĝ0 , as it must be connected. We delete from P0 all paths that use the vertices of C or C 0 . Since both curves have length at most ∆, we delete at most 2∆ paths in this step. Let P1 be the resulting set of paths, and M̂1 the set of the demand pairs routed by P1 . n o Our next step is to build a conflict graph H. Its set of vertices, V (H) = v(s, t) | (s, t) ∈ M̂1 . There is a directed edge from v(s, t) to v(s0 , t0 ), iff the path P (s, t) ∈ P1 routing the pair (s, t) contains a vertex of V (γ(s0 )) ∪ V (γ(t0 )), and we say that there is a conflict between (s, t) and (s0 , t0 ) in this case. Since we assume that the paths in P1 are node-disjoint, and since |V (γ(s0 ))|, |V (γ(t0 ))| ≤ 2∆0 for all (s0 , t0 ) ∈ M̂1 , the in-degree of every vertex in H is at most 4∆0 . Therefore, the average degree (including the incoming and the outgoing edges) of every induced sub-graph of H is at most 8∆0 , and |P1 | |P0 | there is an independent set I ⊆ V (H) of cardinality at least 8∆ ≥ 16∆ in H. 0 +1 0 Let M̂2 be the set of all demand pairs (s, t) with v(s, t) ∈ I, and let P2 ⊆ P1 be the set of paths routing the demand pairs in M̂2 . Recall that the paths in P2 are disjoint from C ∪ C 0 . Moreover, if P (s, t) ∈ P2 is the path routing the pair (s, t) ∈ M̂2 , then for every demand pair (s0 , t0 ) 6= (s, t) in M̂2 , path P (s, t) is disjoint from both γ(s0 ) and γ(t0 ). It is now easy to verify that the demand pairs in M̂2 are non-crossing, that is, we can find an ordering M̂2 = {(s1 , t1 ), . . . , (sκ2 , tκ2 )} of the demand pairs in M̂2 , so that s1 , . . . , sκ2 appear in this counter-clock-wise order on Z, while t1 , . . . , tκ2 appear in this clock-wise order on Z 0 .  40  Let κ3 =  j  κ2 8∆0  k  − 1, and let M̂3 = {(s8∆0 r , t8∆0 r ) | 1 ≤ r ≤ κ3 }. In other words, we space the demand  pairs in M̂2 out, by adding one in 8∆0 such pairs to M̂3 . Let P3 ⊆ P2 be the set of paths routing |P0 | |P2 | ≥ 512∆ the demand pairs in M3 , so |P3 | ≥ 32∆ 2 . Our final step is to show that all demand pairs 0 0  in M̂3 can be routed in graph Ĝ0 via node-disjoint paths. In order to do so, for each such demand pair (s8∆0 r , t8∆0 r ), we define a segment µr of Z containing s8∆0 r , and a segment µ0r of Z 0 containing t8∆0 r , as follows. For convenience, denote 8∆0 r by `. The first segment, µr , is simply the segment of Z from s`−4∆0 to s`+4∆0 −1 , as we traverse Z in the counter-clock-wise order. The second segment, µ0r , is the segment of Z from t`−4∆0 to t`+4∆0 −1 , as we traverse Z 0 in the clock-wise order. It is immediate to verify that all segments of Z in {µr | 1 ≤ r ≤ κ3 } are mutually disjoint, and the same holds for all segments of Z 0 in {µ0r | 1 ≤ r ≤ κ3 }. The crux of the analysis is the following lemma. Lemma 7.3 Let (s8∆0 r , t8∆0 r ) ∈ M3 be any demand pair, and let P ∈ P3 be the path routing it. Then P ∩ Z ⊆ µr , and P ∩ Z 0 ⊆ µ0r . Before we prove this lemma, we show that we can use it to obtain a routing of the demand pairs in M̂3 in graph Ĝ0 via node-disjoint paths. Let (s` , t` ) ∈ M̂3 be any demand pair (where ` = 8∆0 r for some 1 ≤ r ≤ κ3 ), and let P` be the path routing (s` , t` ) in P3 , that we view as directed from s` towards t` . Clearly, P` intersects both µr and µ0r . Let v` be the last vertex of P` lying on µr . Then there is some other vertex appearing on P` after v` that belongs to µ0r . We let v`0 be the first such vertex on P` , and we let P`0 be the segment of P` between v` and v`0 . Let P`∗ be the path obtained as follows: we start with a segment of µr between s` and v` ; we then follow P`0 to v`0 , and finally we use a segment of µ0r between v`0 and t` . From Lemma 7.3, it is immediate to verify that the resulting paths in set {P`∗ | ` = 8∆0 r; 1 ≤ r ≤ κ3 } are completely disjoint, contained in Ĝ0 , and they route all demand pairs in M̂3 . It now remains to prove Lemma 7.3. Proof: Fix some demand pair (s8∆0 r , t8∆0 r ) ∈ M3 , and let P ∈ P3 be the path routing it. We show that P ∩ Z ⊆ µr . The proof that P ∩ Z 0 ⊆ µ0r is symmetric. For convenience, we denote 8∆0 r by ` from now on. Assume otherwise, and let v be the first vertex on P that belongs to Z \ µr . Let P 0 be the sub-path of P from its first vertex to v. Consider the planar embedding of Ĝ, where we fix any face contained in D(Z 0 ) as the outer face. In this planar embedding, denote by Y the union of D(C), γ(s` ), P 0 , and γ(v), and let R be the outer boundary of Y (notice that P 0 may intersect γ(s` ), and that γ(s` ), γ(v) are not necessarily disjoint).  Z C γ(v) γ(s� ) µr v  s� P�  Figure 6: Constructing the curve R Notice that, since there are no conflicts in P2 , curve R does not cross any curve in C 0 ∪{γ(th ) | 1 ≤ h ≤ κ2 }, and so all destination vertices of the demand pairs in M̂2 lie on the outside of R. Let S1 = 41  {s`−4∆0 , . . . , s`−1 }, and S2 = {s`+1 , . . . , s`+4∆0 −1 }. Denote Γ1 = {γ(si ) | si ∈ S1 } and Γ2 = {γ(si ) | si ∈ S2 }. Since the curves in set {γ(u) | u ∈ V (Z)} are non-crossing, if σ, σ 0 are the two segments of Z whose endpoints are s` and v, then all vertices of S1 \ {v} lie on one of the segments (say σ), while all vertices of S2 \ {v} lie on the other segment. Moreover, since path P 0 cannot cross any curve in Γ1 ∪ Γ2 , either all sources of S1 , or all sources of S2 lie inside the curve R - let us assume that it is the former. All sources of S1 are separated by R from their destinations vertices, and yet all corresponding demand pairs are routed by P2 . Therefore, at least 4∆0 − 2 paths in P2 must cross the curve R. Recall that none of these paths can cross C, P 0 , or γ(s` ). Therefore, all these paths must cross γ(v). But since the length of γ(v) is at most 2∆0 , and the paths are node-disjoint, this is impossible.  Completing the Proof We now complete the proof of Theorem 7.1 for Case 2a, by reducing it to the special case defined above. We assume that OPT(G, N ) > 213 ∆40 , since otherwise we can route a single demand pair and obtain a valid solution. We denote by S and T the sets of all source and all destination vertices of the demand pairs in N , respectively. Our first step is to construct shells Z(x) = (Z1 (x), . . . , Z2∆0 (x)) and Z(y) = (Z1 (y), . . . , Z2∆0 (y)) of depth 2∆0 around x and y, respectively. We would like to ensure that disc D(Z2∆0 (x)) contains all terminals of X and no terminals of Y , and similarly, disc D(Z2∆0 (y)) contains all terminals of Y and no terminals of X. In order to ensure this, when constructing the shell Z(x), we let the face Fx (that is viewed as the outer face in the plane embedding of G when constructing the shell) be the face incident on the terminal y, and similarly we let Fy be the face incident on x (recall that d(x, y) > 5∆0 , so this choice of faces is consistent with the requirement that the shell depth is bounded by min {dGNC (v, Cx )} − 1 over all vertices v lying on the boundary of Fx ). Let Z(x) = (Z1 (x), . . . , Z2∆0 (x)) and Z(y) = (Z1 (y), . . . , Z2∆0 (y)) be the resulting shells. Claim 7.4 Disc D(Z2∆0 (x)) contains all terminals of X and no terminals of Y , and similarly, disc D(Z2∆0 (y)) contains all terminals of Y and no terminals of X. Moreover, D(Z2∆0 (x))∩D(Z2∆0 (y)) = ∅. Proof: Let t ∈ X be any terminal, and assume for contradiction that t 6∈ D(Z2∆0 (x)). Recall that d(x, t) ≤ ∆0 , and so there is a G-normal curve γ of length at most ∆0 , connecting some vertex v ∈ Ct to some vertex u ∈ Cx . Then every vertex v 0 ∈ Ct has a G-normal curve γ(v 0 ) of length at most ∆0 +∆ connecting it to u. Therefore, all vertices of Ct lie in the disc D(Z∆0 +∆ (x)) (if some vertex v 0 ∈ Ct does not lie in this disc, then there are ∆0 + ∆ disjoint cycles separating v 0 from u, a contradiction). We conclude that all vertices of Ct lie in disc D(Z2∆0 (x)), but t does not lie in that disc. This can only happen if the outer face Fx ⊆ Dt , meaning that y lies in Dt . But then, from our definition of enclosures, d(t, y) = 1 must hold. However, t ∈ X, y ∈ Y , and X 6= Y , so d(t, y) ≥ 5∆ from the definition of the family X of sets of terminals, a contradiction. We conclude that all terminals of X lie in disc D(Z2∆0 (x)). Using a similar reasoning, all terminals of Y lie in disc D(Z2∆0 (y)). In order to complete the proof of the theorem it is now enough to show that D(Z2∆0 (x))∩D(Z2∆0 (y)) = ∅. Observe that from Property (J5) of the shells, the vertices of V (Dy ) all lie outside the disc D(Z2∆0 (x)), as all such vertices belong to the connected component Yx . Therefore, y ∈ D(Z2∆0 (y)) \ D(Z2∆0 (x)), and similarly x ∈ D(Z2∆0 (x)) \ D(Z2∆0 (y)), so neither of the two discs is contained in the other. Assume for contradiction that the intersection of the two discs is non-empty. Observe first 42  that the boundaries of the two discs cannot intersect. Indeed, assume otherwise, and let v be any vertex lying in Z2∆0 (x) ∩ Z2∆0 (y). Then there are G-normal curves γ and γ 0 of length at most 2∆0 each, connecting v to a vertex of Cx and a vertex of Cy , respectively, implying that d(x, y) ≤ 4∆0 , a contradiction. Therefore, all vertices of Z2∆0 (y) must lie inside the disc D(Z2∆0 (x)). However, the vertices of Cy lie outside D(Z2∆0 (x)), and at least one such vertex v can be connected to some vertex of Z2∆0 (y) with a G-normal curve of length at most 2∆0 + 1. This curve must intersect Z2∆0 (x) at some vertex that we denote by u, and u can be in turn connected to a vertex of Cx by a G-normal curve of length at most 2∆0 + 1, implying that d(x, y) < 5∆0 , a contradiction. For consistency of notation, we will denote Z0 (x) = Cx and Z0 (y) = Cy , even though both Cx and Cy are G-normal curves and not cycles. S2∆0 S 0 0 Let U = 2∆ h=0 V (Zh (x)), and let U = h0 =0 V (Zh0 (y)). For each 1 ≤ h ≤ 2∆0 , let Uh be the set ◦ of vertices lying in D (Zh (x)) \ D(Zh−1 (x)), and let Rh be the set of all connected components of G[Uh ]. For each 1 ≤ h0 ≤ 2∆0 , we define Uh0 0 and R0h0 with respect to the shell Z(y) similarly. Let S2∆0 0 S 0 0 R = 2∆ h=1 Rh and let R = h0 =1 Rh0 . Our next step is to define a mapping β : S → 2U of all source vertices in S to subsets of vertices of U , 0 and a mapping β 0 : T → 2U of all destination vertices in T to subsets of vertices of U 0 . Every vertex in S ∪ T will be mapped to a subset of at most three vertices. We will then replace each demand pair (s, t) with the set β(s) × β 0 (t) of demand pairs. Eventually, for every pair 0 ≤ h, h0 ≤ 2∆0 of indices, we will define a subset M̃h,h0 of the new demand pairs, containing all pairs whose sources lie on Zh (x) and destinations lie on Zh0 (y), to obtain an instance of the special case, that will then be solved using Theorem 7.2. We start by defining the mapping of the sources. For every source s ∈ S, we will also define a curve Γ(s) that we will use later in our analysis. First, for every source vertex s ∈ S ∩ U , we set β(s) = {s}, and we let Γ(s) contain the vertex s only. Next, fix any vertex v ∗ ∈ Cx . For every source vertex s ∈ V (Dx ) \ V (Cx ), we set β(s) = {v ∗ }, and Γ(s) = Cx . Finally, consider some component R ∈ Rh , for some 1 ≤ h ≤ 2∆0 , and let s ∈ S ∩ V (R) be any source lying in R. If |L(R)| ≤ 2, then we let β(s) = L(R) ∪ {u(R)} if u(R) is defined, and β(s) = L(R) otherwise. If |L(R)| > 2, then we let β(s) = {v}, where v is a leg of R, such that v is not an endpoint of σ(R) (so it is not the first and not the last leg of R). We then let Γ(s) be the outer boundary γ(R) of the disc η(R) given by Theorem 5.5. Recall that the length of Γ(s) is bounded by 4∆0 + ∆/2 + 1 < 5∆0 . Notice that for every source s ∈ S, we now have defined a G-normal curve Γ(s) of length at most 5∆0 . An important property of this curve is that the disc whose boundary is Γ(s) cannot contain any demand pair in N , as the disc itself 0 is contained in D(Z2∆0 (x)). We define the mapping β 0 : T → 2U , and the corresponding curves Γ(t) for the destination vertices t ∈ T similarly. S Let M̃ = (s,t)∈N β(s) × β 0 (t). In the following two theorems, we show that the problems (G, N ) and (G, M̃) are equivalent to within relatively small factors. Theorem 7.5 There is an efficient algorithm, that, given any solution to instance (G, M̃), that routes κ κ demand pairs, finds a solution to instance (G, N ), routing at least 21∆ demand pairs. 0 Proof: Let P0 be any collection of disjoint paths in graph G, routing a subset M̃0 ⊆ M̃ of κ demand pairs. We assume that κ ≥ 21∆0 , as otherwise we can return a routing of a single demand pair in N . For every demand pair (s̃, t̃) ∈ M̃0 , let (s, t) be any corresponding demand pair in N , that is, s̃ ∈ β(s) and t̃ ∈ β 0 (t). n o We build a conflict graph H, whose vertex set is v(s̃, t̃) | (s̃, t̃) ∈ M̃0 , and there is a directed edge from v(s̃1 , t̃1 ) to v(s̃2 , t̃2 ) iff the unique path P (s̃1 , t̃1 ) ∈ P0 routing the pair (s̃1 , t̃1 ) intersects Γ(s2 ) 43  or Γ(t2 ) (in which case we say that there is a conflict between (s̃1 , t̃1 ) and (s̃2 , t̃2 )). Since all paths in P0 are node-disjoint, and all curves Γ(s), Γ(t) have lengths at most 5∆0 , the in-degree of every vertex in H is at most 10∆0 . Therefore, we can efficiently compute an independent set I of size at least κ κ 20∆0 +1 ≥ 21∆0 in H.  Let M̃1 = (s̃, n t̃) | v(s̃, t̃) ∈ I , ando let P1 ⊆ P0 be the set of paths routing the demand pairs in M̃1 . Let M0 = (s, t) | (s̃, t̃) ∈ M̃1 . It is now enough to show that all demand pairs in M0 can be routed in G. Consider any demand pair (s̃, t̃) ∈ M̃1 , and let P ∈ P1 be the path routing (s̃, t̃). We will extend the path P , so it connects s to t. Notice that if s ∈ U , then s = s̃. Assume now that s 6∈ U . If s ∈ V (Dx ) \ V (Cx ), then s̃ ∈ V (Cx ). Since G[V (Dx )] is a connected graph, we can extend path P inside the disc Dx , so it now originates at s. As Γ(s) = Cx , no other source of a demand pair in M̃1 may lie on Cx , and no other path in P1 contains a vertex of Dx . Finally, assume that s ∈ V (R) for some component R ∈ R. Since the disc whose boundary is Γ(s) contains R, all vertices of L(R), and u(R) (if such is defined), no other path in P1 may contain a vertex of L(R) ∪ {u(R)}. Moreover, since no demand pair in M̃ is contained in the disc whose boundary is Γ(s), no other path in P1 may intersect R. We extend the path P inside R, so it now originates at s. We perform the same transformation to path P to ensure that it terminates at t. It is easy to see that the resulting collection of paths is disjoint. Theorem 7.6 OPT(G, M̃) ≥  OPT(G,N ) . 21∆0  Proof: Let P0 be the set of paths in the optimal solution to instance (G, N ), and let M0 be the set of the demand pairs they route. As before, we define a conflict graph H, whose vertex set is {v(s, t) | (s, t) ∈ M0 }, and there is a directed edge from v(s1 , t1 ) to v(s2 , t2 ) iff the unique path P (s1 , t1 ) ∈ P0 routing the pair (s1 , t1 ) intersects Γ(s2 ) or Γ(t2 ) (in which case we say that there is a conflict between (s1 , t1 ) and (s2 , t2 )). Since all paths in P0 are node-disjoint, and all curves Γ(s), Γ(t) have lengths at most 5∆0 , the indegree of every vertex in H is at most 10∆0 . Therefore, there is an independent set I of size at least OPT(G,N ) OPT(G,N ) in H. 20∆0 +1 ≥ 21∆0 Let M1 = {(s, t) | v(s, t) ∈ I}, and let P1 ⊆ P0 be the set of paths routing the demand pairs in M1 . We show that we can route |M1 | demand pairs of M̃ in G via node-disjoint paths. Let S1 and T1 be the sets of all source and all destination vertices of the pairs in M1 , respectively. Consider any source vertex s ∈ S1 . We say that s is a good source vertex if s ∈ U , or s belongs to some component R ∈ R, such that |L(R)| ≤ 2. Otherwise, s is a bad source vertex. Notice that if s is a good source vertex, then the path P ∈ P1 that originates at s must contain a vertex s0 ∈ β(s): if s ∈ U , then β(s) = {s}; otherwise, if s ∈ R for some component R ∈ R with |L(R)| ≤ 2, then β(s) = L(R) ∪ {u(R)} if u(R) is defined, and β(s) = L(R) otherwise. In either case, in order to enter R, path P has to visit a vertex of β(s). Therefore, if s is a good source vertex, then some vertex s0 ∈ P belongs to β(s). Similarly, we say that a destination vertex t ∈ T1 is a good destination vertex if t ∈ U 0 or t belongs to some component R0 ∈ R0 with |L(R0 )| ≤ 2. Otherwise, it is a bad destination vertex. As before, if t is a good destination vertex, then the path P ∈ P1 terminating at t must contain some vertex t0 ∈ β(t). We transform the paths in P1 in two steps, to ensure that they connect demand pairs in M̃. In the first step, for every path P ∈ P1 originating at a good source s ∈ S1 , we truncate P at the first vertex s0 ∈ β(s), so it now originates at s0 . Similarly, if P terminates at a good destination vertex t ∈ T1 , we truncate P at the last vertex t0 ∈ β(t), so it now terminates at t0 . Let P10 be the resulting set of paths. Notice that the paths in P10 remain node-disjoint. 44  In order to complete our transformation, we need to take care of bad source and destination vertices. Let s ∈ S1 be any bad destination vertex. If s ∈ V (Dx ) \ V (Cx ), then let Qs be any path connecting s to the unique vertex s0 ∈ β(s), so that Qs ⊆ Dx . Such a path exists, since G[V (Dx )] is connected. Otherwise, s ∈ R for some component R ∈ R with |L(R)| ≥ 3. Recall that in this case, β(s) contains a unique vertex, that we denote by s0 , which is a leg of R, and it is not one of the endpoints of σ(R). We then let Q(s) be any path connecting s to s0 in the sub-graph of G induced by V (R) ∪ {s0 }. We define paths Q(t) for bad destination vertices t ∈ T1 similarly. By concatenating the paths in {Q(s)} for all bad source vertices s ∈ S1 , P10 , and {Q(t)} for all bad destination vertices t ∈ T1 , we obtain the ) desired collection P̃ of at least OPT(G,N paths, routing demand pairs in M̃. It now only remains to 21∆0 show that the paths in P̃ are disjoint. Recall that the paths in P10 were node-disjoint. Consider some bad source vertex s ∈ S1 , and let P ∈ P10 be the path originating at s. We show that Q(s) is disjoint from all paths in P10 \{P }, and it is disjoint from all other paths Q(s1 ) for s1 ∈ S1 \{s}. Assume first that s ∈ V (Dx ) \ V (Cx ). Then Γ(s) = Cx , and so no other path in P1 (and hence in P10 ) can contain a vertex of Dx . It follows that Q(s) is disjoint from all paths in P10 \ {P }. It is also disjoint from all other paths Q(s1 ) for s1 ∈ S1 \ {s}, since in order for Q(s1 ) to intersect Dx , vertex s1 must lie on Cx , and this is impossible. Assume now that s ∈ V (R) for some R ∈ R. Recall that the disc whose boundary is Γ(s) contains R ∪ L(R). Since no other path in P10 may intersect Γ(s), and no demand pair is contained in the disc whose boundary is Γ(s), no other path in P10 intersects R ∪ L(R), and so all such paths are disjoint from Q(s). Consider now some other bad source vertex s1 ∈ S1 . Note that s1 cannot lie in R, since in this case the path of P10 originating at s1 would have crossed Γ(s). Therefore, s1 must lie in some other component R0 ∈ R. Then the only way for Q(s) and Q(s1 ) to intersect is when s0 = s01 . In particular, R, R0 should both belong to some set Rh for 1 ≤ h ≤ 2∆0 . But since the segments {σ(R) | R ∈ Rh } are nested, due to the way we chose the mappings β(s) and β(s1 ), this is impossible. We can similarly prove that for each bad destination vertex t ∈ T1 , if P 0 ∈ P10 is the path terminating at t, then Q(t) is disjoint from all paths in P10 \ {P 0 }, and from all paths Q(t1 ), where t1 ∈ T1 \ {t} is a bad destination vertex. Altogether, this proves that the paths in P̃ are disjoint. For each 0 ≤ h, h0 ≤ 2∆0 , let M̃h,h0 ⊆ M̃ be the set of all demand pairs (s̃, t̃) with s̃ ∈ Zh (x) and t̃ ∈ Zh0 (y). If h = 0 or h0 = 0, then, since |V (Cx )|, |V (Cy )| ≤ ∆, OPT(G, M̃h,h0 ) ≤ ∆. We route any demand 0 pair in M̃h,h0 to obtain a factor-∆ approximation to the problem  (G, M̃h,h0 ). If both h, h > 0, then we apply Theorem 7.2 to obtain a collection Ph,h0 of at least Ω  OPT(G,M̃h,h0 ) ∆20 log n  disjoint paths, routing  demand pairs in M̃h,h0 . We then take the best among all resulting solutions. n o Notice that M̃h,h0 | 0 ≤ h, h0 ≤ 2∆0 partition the set M̃ of demand pairs, and so there is a pair   M̃) OPT(G,N ) 0 ≤ h, h0 ≤ 2∆0 of indices with OPT(G, M̃h,h0 ) ≥ OPT(G, ≥ Ω . Therefore, we obtain a (2∆0 +1)2 ∆30   ) routing of at least Ω OPT(G,N demand pairs. ∆6 log n 0  7.2  Subcase 2b: d(x, y) ≤ 5∆0  We again start by defining a special case of the problem, which is similar to the problem of routing on a disc. We show an approximation algorithm for this special case that reduces it to the problem of routing on a disc, and we later use this special case in order to handle the general problem in Case 2b.  45  A Special Case Suppose we are given a connected planar graph Ĝ embedded on the sphere, a cycle Z in Ĝ, and a set M̂ of demand pairs, such that each terminal of T (M̂) lies on Z. Assume additionally that we are given a closed Ĝ-normal curve C of length at most ∆, that is disjoint from Z. Let D(Z) be the disc whose boundary is Z, which contains C. Assume further that for every vertex v ∈ Z, there is a Ĝ-normal curve γ(v) of length at most 16∆0 connecting v to a vertex of C, so that γ(v) is contained in D(Z) and it is internally disjoint from C. This finishes the definition of the special case. Next, we reduce this special case to routing on a disc, by creating a hole in the sphere. The hole is D◦ (Z), so we delete all edges and vertices that appear inside D(Z), except for the edges and the vertices of Z. Let Ĝ0 be the resulting graph. We can now apply the O(log  n)-approximation algorithm  for NDP-Disc to the resulting problem, to obtain a routing of at least Ω  OPT(Ĝ0 ,M̂) log n  demand pairs.  Ĝ,M̂) . In order to complete the analysis of the algorithm, we prove that OPT(Ĝ0 , M̂) ≥ Ω OPT( ∆2 log n   0  Theorem 7.7 OPT(Ĝ0 , M̂) ≥ Ω    OPT(Ĝ,M̂) ∆20 log n    .  Proof: As before, we can assume without loss of generality that all curves in set {γ(v) | v ∈ V (Z)} are mutually non-crossing, and for all v, v 0 ∈ V (Z), γ(v) ∩ γ(v 0 ) is a contiguous curve that has a vertex of C as its endpoint. Consider the optimal solution to instance (Ĝ, M̂), and let P0 be the set of paths in this solution. As before, we will gradually modify the set P0 of paths, to obtain path sets P1 , P2 , . . ., until we obtain a feasible solution to instance (Ĝ0 , M̂). For every i ≥ 0, we will denote by M̂i the set of the demand pairs routed by Pi , and by κi its cardinality. Recall that κ0 = OPT(Ĝ, M̂). We assume that κ0 ≥ 213 ∆20 log n, as otherwise a solution routing a single demand pair gives the desired approximation, and such a solution exists in Ĝ0 , as it must be connected. We delete from P0 all paths that use the vertices of C. Since C contains at most ∆ vertices, we delete at most ∆ paths in this step. Let P1 be the resulting set of paths, and M̂1 the set of the demand pairs routed by P1 . Our next step is to build a conflict graph H, almost exactly as before. The set of vertices is V (H) = n o v(s, t) | (s, t) ∈ M̂1 . There is a directed edge from v(s, t) to v(s0 , t0 ), iff the path P (s, t) ∈ P1 routing the pair (s, t) contains a vertex of V (γ(s0 )) ∪ V (γ(t0 )), and we say that there is a conflict between (s, t) and (s0 , t0 ) in this case. Since we assume that the paths in P1 are node-disjoint, and since |V (γ(s0 ))|, |V (γ(t0 ))| ≤ 16∆0 for all (s0 , t0 ) ∈ M̂1 , the in-degree of every vertex in H is at most |P1 | |P0 | 32∆0 . As before, there is an independent set I ⊆ V (H) of cardinality at least 32∆ ≥ 64∆ in H. 0 +1 0 Let M̂2 be the set of all demand pairs (s, t) with v(s, t) ∈ I, and let P2 ⊆ P1 be the set of paths routing the demand pairs in M̂2 . Recall that the paths in P2 are disjoint from C. Moreover, if P (s, t) ∈ P2 is the path routing the pair (s, t) ∈ M̂2 , then for every demand pair (s0 , t0 ) 6= (s, t) in M̂2 , path P (s, t) is disjoint from both γ(s0 ) and γ(t0 ). It is now easy to verify that the demand pairs in M̂2 are non-crossing with respect to the cycle Z. We now depart from the proof of Theorem 7.2. We use Lemma 2.3, in order to compute a partition (N1 , . . . , N4dlog ne ) of the set M̂2 of the demand pairs, so that for all 1 ≤ a ≤ 4 dlog ne, set Na is |M̂2 | ra -split, for some ra ≥ 0. Then there must be an index 1 ≤ a ≤ 4 dlog ne, such that |Na | ≥ 4dlog ne ≥   |P0 | Ω ∆0 log n . We let M̂3 = Na , and P3 ⊆ P2 the set of paths routing the demand pairs in M̂3 .  We then denote ra by ρ, and the partition of M̂3 associated with the definition of the ρ-split set of 46  demand pairs by M1 , . . . , Mρ . We also denote by Σ = (σ1 , . . . , σ2ρ ) the corresponding partition of Z into intervals. We assume without loss of generality that for all 1 ≤ z ≤ ρ, all source vertices of the demand pairs in Mz lie on σ2z−1 , and all corresponding destination vertices lie on σ2z . Let I1 contain all indices 1 ≤ z ≤ ρ, with |Mz | ≤ 128∆0 , and let I2 contain indices. If  all remaining  P |M̂3 | |P0 | z z∈I1 |M | ≥ |M̂3 |/2, then we can obtain a routing of at least 256∆0 ≥ Ω ∆20 log n demand pairs, as z follows: for each z ∈ I1 , we route any demand pair in M of Z. Therefore,  via the  segment σ2z−1 ∪ σ2z P S |M̂3 | |P0 | z we assume from now on that z∈I2 |M | ≥ 2 ≥ Ω ∆0 log n . We denote M̂4 = z∈I2 Mz , and we let P4 ⊆ P3 be the set of paths routing the demand pairs in M̂4 . For all z ∈ I2 , we denote |Mz | by κz4 . The rest of the proof is very similar to the rest of the proof of Theorem 7.2, except that now we z deal with n each subset M foroz ∈ I2 of the demand pairs separately. Fix some z ∈ I2 , and denote Mz = (sz1 , tz1 ), . . . , (szκz , tzκz ) . Since the demand pairs in Mz are non-crossing, and due to the 4 4 definition of the ρ-split instance, we can assume without loss of generality that sz1 , . . . , szκz , tzκz , . . . , tz1 4 4 j z k κ κz4 . appear in this counter-clock-wise order on Z. Let κz5 = 64∆4 0 − 1. Since κz4 ≥ 128∆0 , κz5 ≥ 256∆ 0 S We then let M̂z contain all demand pairs (sz64∆0 r , tz64∆0 r ), for 1 ≤ r ≤ κz5 , and we let M̂5 = z∈I2 M̂z .   P P κz4 κ4 κ0 . We now show that all Notice that κ5 = |M̂5 | = z∈I2 κz5 ≥ z∈I2 256∆ ≥ ≥ Ω 256∆0 ∆2 log n 0 0  demand pairs in M̂5 can be routed in graph Ĝ0 . This is done similarly to the proof of Theorem 7.2.  Fix some z ∈ I2 , and consider the set M̂z = (sz64∆0 r , tz64∆0 r ) | 1 ≤ r ≤ κz5 of demand pairs. For each such demand pair (sz64∆0 r , tz64∆0 r ), we define two segments µzr ⊆ σ2z−1 and µ̃zr ⊆ σ2z of Z, as follows. For brevity of notation, denote 64∆0 r by `. The first segment, µzr , is the segment of Z from sz`−32∆0 to sz`+32∆0 −1 , as we traverse Z in the counter-clock-wise order. The second segment, µ̃zr , is the segment of Z from tz`−32∆0 to tz`+32∆0 −1 , as we traverse Z 0 in the clock-wise order. It is immediate to verify that all segments of Z in {µzr , µ̃zr | z ∈ I2 , 1 ≤ r ≤ κz5 } are mutually disjoint. We use the following analogue of Lemma 7.3. Lemma 7.8 For every z ∈ I2 , for every demand pair (sz64∆0 r , tz64∆0 r ) ∈ M̂z , if P ∈ P5 is the path routing this pair, then P ∩ Z ⊆ µzr ∪ µ̃zr . We can now use this lemma to re-route the paths in P5 , similarly to the proof of Theorem 7.1. Fix some z ∈ I2 , and let (sz64∆0 r , tz64∆0 r ) ∈ M̂z be some demand pair, with 1 ≤ r ≤ κz5 . For simplicity, we denote ` = 64∆0 r. Let P` be the path routing this demand pair in P5 , that we view as directed from s` towards t` . Clearly, P` intersects both µzr and µ̃zr . Let v` be the last vertex of P` lying on µzr . Then there is some other vertex appearing on P` after v` that belongs to µ̃zr . We let v`0 be the first such vertex on P` , and we let P`0 be the segment of P` between v` and v`0 . Let P`∗ be the path obtained as follows: we start with a segment of µzr between sz` and v` ; we then follow P`0 to v`0 , and finally we use a segment of µ̃zr between v`0 and tz` . From Lemma 7.8, it is immediate to verify that we obtain a set of node-disjoint paths routing all demand pairs in M̂5 in graph Ĝ0 . It now remains to prove Lemma 7.8. Proof: Fix some z ∈ I2 , and consider some demand pair (sz64∆0 r , tz64∆0 r ) ∈ M̂z . Let P ∈ P5 be the path routing this pair. We partition the cycle Z into two segments: σ containing σ2z−1 and σ 0 containing σ2z arbitrarily, so σ now contains all source vertices, and σ 0 now contains all destination vertices of the pairs in Mz . It is enough to show that P ∩ σ ⊆ µzr and P ∩ σ 0 ⊆ µ̃zr . We prove that P ∩ σ ⊆ µzr . The proof that P ∩ σ 0 ⊆ µ̃zr is symmetric. Assume for contradiction that P ∩ σ 6⊆ µzr , and let v be the first vertex on P that belongs to σ \ µzr , where we view P as directed from sz` to tz` . Let P 0 be the sub-path of P from its first vertex to v. 47  Consider the planar embedding of Ĝ, where we fix any face lying outside of D(Z) as the outer face. In this planar embedding, denote by Y the union of D(C), γ(sz` ), P 0 , and γ(v), and let R be the outer boundary of Y (see Figure 7). σ�  σ  C  γ(s� )  γ(v)  µr s�  µ̃r t�  v P�  Figure 7: Constructing the curve R. The segments σ and σ 0 of Z are shown in blue and green, respectively. We omit the superscript z for brevity of notation. Notice that, since there areo no conflicts in P4 , curve R does not cross any curve in the set C ∪ n γ(t) | t ∈ T (M̂4 ) \ {sz` , tz` } , and so, since both sz` and v lie on σ, all destination vertices of the  demand pairs in Mz , except for possibly tz` , lie on one side of R. Let S1 = sz`−32∆0 , . . . , sz`−1 , and  S2 = sz`+1 , . . . , sz`+32∆0 −1 . Denote Γ1 = {γ(szi ) | szi ∈ S1 } and Γ2 = {γ(szi ) | szi ∈ S2 }. Since the curves in set {γ(u) | u ∈ V (Z)} are non-crossing, if β, β 0 are the two segments of Z whose endpoints are s` and v, then all vertices of S1 \ {v} lie on one of the segments (say β), while all vertices of S2 \ {v} lie on the other segment. Moreover, since path P 0 cannot cross any curve in Γ1 ∪ Γ2 , the vertices of S1 \ {v} lie on one side of R, and the vertices of S2 \ {v} lie on the other side of R. Therefore, either all vertices of S1 \ {v} are separated by R from all destination vertices of the demand pairs in Mz (except for possibly tz` ), or the same holds for S2 \ {v} - we assume without loss of generality that it is the former. All sources of S1 \{v} are then separated by R from their destinations vertices, and yet all corresponding demand pairs are routed by P2 . Therefore, at least 32∆0 − 2 paths in P2 must cross the curve R. Recall that none of these paths can cross C, P 0 , or γ(sz` ). Therefore, all these paths must cross γ(v). But since the length of γ(v) is at most 16∆0 , and the paths are node-disjoint, this is impossible. The rest of the proof follows the same strategy as the proof for Case 2a, but it is somewhat more involved. We break it into three steps. In the first step, we construct a single shell around the vertex x. In the second step, we map the terminals to the cycles of the shell. In the final step, we reduce the problem to the special case, by constructing a cycle Z and mapping a subset of the terminals to the vertices of Z. We assume that OPT(G, N ) > 213 ∆40 , since otherwise we can route a single demand pair and obtain a valid solution.  Step 1: the Shell In this step we construct a shell Z(x) = (Z1 (x), . . . , Zh (x)) of depth h ≤ 8∆0 around x. We first give a high-level explanation of why the construction of the shell in this case is more challenging than that in Case 2a, and motivate our construction. Recall that given such a shell Z(x), we have defined, for all 1 ≤ h0 ≤ h, a set Uh0 of vertices contained in D◦ (Zh0 (x)) \ D(Zh0 −1 (x)), and a set Rh0 of all connected 48  components of G[Uh0 ]. For all 1 ≤ h0 ≤ h, for every component R ∈ Rh0 , we have defined the disc η(R) (given by Theorem 5.5), whose boundary γ(R) served as the curve Γ(t) for all terminals t lying in R. In Case 2a, discs η(R) had the important property that no demand pair in N is contained in η(R). This ensured that whenever a path routing any demand pair in N intersects R, such a path must also cross γ(R). This latter property was crucial in ensuring that, after we map all terminals to the vertices of the shell, the solution value does not change by much. Unfortunately, in Case 2b this is no longer true, and it is possible that discs η(R), and even the components R themselves, contain many demand pairs from N . We get around this problem as follows. We construct the shell around x carefully, to ensure that the total number of the terminals contained in each such disc η(R) is relatively small. We say that a pair of terminals is bad if there is a path connecting these terminals, which is completely contained in some disc η(R), and it is good otherwise. As long as bad terminal pairs exist in our graph, we iteratively route one such pair inside the corresponding disc η(R), and discard all other terminals lying in this disc. Since the total number of the terminals contained in each disc is relatively small, the number of the terminals we discard at this step is relatively small compared to the number of the demand pairs we route. If we manage to route a large enough number of demand pairs in this step, then we terminate the algorithm and return this solution. Otherwise, we let N 0 be the subset of the demand pairs that have not been routed or discarded yet. Then |N 0 | is sufficiently large relatively to |N |, and we have now achieved the property that for all components R, any path connecting a demand pair in N 0 that intersects R must also cross γ(R). We now proceed to describe the shell construction. Let τ ∗ = 64∆0 /αWL , and let T be the set of all terminals participating in the demand pairs in N . For all integers i > 0, let Si be the set of all vertices v 6∈ Dx , with dGNC (v, V (Cx )) ≥ i. We say that a connected component R of G[Si ] is heavy iff R contains more than τ ∗ terminals of T . Let i∗ be the largest integer, such that G[Si∗ ] contains at least one heavy connected component, and let R∗ be any such component. We need the following easy observation. Observation 7.9 i∗ ≤ 8∆0 − ∆ − 4. Proof: Assume otherwise and let h = 8∆0 − ∆ − 4. Then there is some connected component R of G[Sh ], containing more than τ ∗ terminals of T . Let t ∈ V (R) ∩ T be any such terminal. If t ∈ X, then d(t, x) ≤ ∆0 . If t ∈ Y , then d(t, y) ≤ ∆0 , and d(x, y) ≤ 5∆0 , so from Observation 5.4, d(t, x) ≤ 6∆0 + ∆/2 + 1. Therefore, some vertex v ∈ Ct has a G-normal curve of length at most 6∆0 + ∆/2 + 1 connecting it to a vertex of Cx , and so every vertex in Ct has a G-normal curve of length at most 6∆0 + ∆/2 + 1 + ∆/2 + 1 < 8∆0 − ∆ − 4 connecting it to a vertex of Cx . Therefore, V (Ct ) ⊆ V (G) \ Sh , while t ∈ Sh . Since V (Ct ) separates V (Dt ) from all remaining vertices of G, and R is a connected component of G[Sh ], it follows that R ⊆ V (Dt ). But Dt contains fewer than τ ∗ terminals from the definition of enclosures, a contradiction. Let κ = |T ∩ R∗ |, so κ > τ ∗ . The following observation will be useful in order to bound the number of terminals contained in each disc η(R). The proof follows immediately from the well-linkedness of the terminals. Observation 7.10 Let D be any disc, whose boundary γ is a G-normal curve of length less than 16∆0 . Assume further that at least κ/4 terminals lie outside of D. Then D contains at most τ ∗ terminals of T . We now provide some further intuition. Let h0 = i∗ −1, and consider a shell Z(x) = (Z1 (x), . . . , Zh0 (x)) of depth h0 around x, where we let Fx be any face incident on a vertex of R∗ . We can then define, for each 1 ≤ h00 ≤ h0 , the set Rh00 of connected components of the graph induced by all vertices lying in S 0 D◦ (Zh00 (x)) \ D(Zh00 −1 (x)), set R = hh00 =1 Rh00 , and use Theorem 5.5 in order to compute the discs 49  η(R) for the components R ∈ R. Moreover, since all vertices of R∗ lie outside each such disc η(R), from Observation 7.10, each such disc contains at most τ ∗ terminals. The problem is that R∗ may still contain many terminals, while we need to ensure that most of the terminals lie in the components of R. We get around this problem by extending the shell, and adding two outer cycles to it. First, we consider the outer boundary Γ of the graph R∗ (in the drawing where the face containing x is viewed as the outer face), and carefully select some cycle C ∈ Γ, so that, if we add C as the outer-most cycle to the shell Z(x), by setting Zh0 +1 (x) = C, then for every component R ∈ Rh0 +1 , we still maintain the property that the corresponding disc η(R) contains at most τ ∗ terminals. Finally, we take care of the terminals contained in the disc D(C), that currently do not lie in any component of R. The idea is to carefully select one vertex ũ ∈ V (C), and to attach a new cycle C 0 to ũ, that lies “inside” cycle C, and is then added to the shell as the outermost cycle, so Zh0 +2 (x) = C 0 . We then view the face whose boundary is C 0 as the face Fx in the shell construction. Therefore, once ũ is selected and cycle C 0 is added to the drawing of G, both the construction of the shell, and the construction of the discs η(R) for R ∈ R are fixed. We would like to select ũ in such a way that each resulting disc η(R) for R ∈ Rh0 +2 contains at most τ ∗ terminals. We achieve this by discarding a small number of terminals and their corresponding demand pairs. We now describe the construction more formally. Consider the graph R∗ , and its drawing in the plane, induced by the drawing of G on the sphere, where we view the face where x used to be as the outer face. Let Γ be the boundary of the outer face in this drawing of R∗ , and let C be the set of all simple cycles in Γ. Let H be the block-decomposition of Γ. That is, the set V (H) of vertices consists of two subsets: set V1 of cut vertices of Γ, and set V2 , containing a vertex vB for every block B (a maximal 2-connected component) of Γ. We add an edge (u, vB ) between vertices u ∈ V1 and vB ∈ V2 iff u ∈ V (B). It is easy to see that graph H is a tree, and we root it at any vertex. We next define weights for the vertices of H. In order to do so, every terminal in T ∩ R∗ will contribute a weight of 1 to one of the vertices of V2 , and the weight of every vertex in V2 is then the total weight contributed to it. The weights of all vertices in V1 are 0. Consider some terminal t ∈ T ∩ R∗ . If there is some simple cycle C ⊆ Γ, such that t ∈ D(C), then t contributes the weight of 1 to the vertex vB , where B = C (if t belongs to several such cycles, then we select one of these cycles arbitrarily). Otherwise, t ∈ V (Γ), and there is some vertex vB ∈ V2 , such that block B consists of a single edge e, and t is one of its endpoints. Among all such vertices vB , we choose one arbitrarily, and contribute the weight of t to vB . For every subgraph H 0 ⊆ H, the weight of H 0 is the total weight of all vertices in H 0 . Clearly, the weight of H is κ. We need the following simple claim. Claim 7.11 There is some vertex u∗ ∈ V (H), such that, if we root H at u∗ , then for every child u0 of u∗ , the weight of the sub-tree of H rooted at u0 is at most κ/2. Proof: We root H at any vertex v, and set u = v. We then iterate. If the current vertex u has a child u0 , such that the total weight of all vertices contained in the sub-tree of H rooted at u0 is more than κ/2, then we move u to u0 . It is easy to see that when this procedure terminates, we will find the desired vertex u∗ . Consider the vertex u∗ computed by the above claim. If u∗ ∈ V1 , then let v ∗ = u∗ . Otherwise, u∗ = vB for some vertex vB ∈ V2 , then let v ∗ be any vertex of B. We assume without loss of generality that v ∗ lies on some simple cycle C ⊆ Γ: otherwise, we create an artificial cycle C = (v ∗ , u1 , u2 ), where u1 and u2 are two new vertices. If v ∗ lies on several such cycles, then we let C be any one of them. Notice that every connected component of R∗ \ V (D(C)) contains at most κ/2 terminals, and has exactly one neighbor in V (C). Let ũ be some vertex in V (C) (that we will select later). We then add a new cycle C 0 = (v1 , v2 , v3 ), containing all new vertices, and an edge e = (ũ, v1 ), and draw C 0 inside C (we later specify the precise 50  location of this drawing). Let G0 = G ∪ C 0 ∪ {e}. We let Fx be the face in the drawing of G0 on the sphere, whose boundary is C 0 . Letting h = i∗ , we construct a shell Z(x) = (Z1 (x), . . . , Zh (x)) of depth h = i∗ ≤ 8∆0 − ∆ − 4 around x, with respect to Fx . As before, we use Z0 (x) to denote Cx . Notice that from our construction, Zh (x) = C. We note that the choice of the vertex ũ ∈ V (C) to which the cycle C 0 is attached does not affect the construction of the shell: for any such choice, the shell will be the same. Notice also that the addition of the new cycles does not affect the routings. So abusing the notation we denote G0 by G. For every 1 ≤ h0 ≤ h, we let Uh0 be the set of all vertices in D◦ (Zh0 (x)) \ D(Zh0 −1 (x)), and let Rh0 be the set of all connected components of G[Uh0 ]. We let Uh+1 be the set of all vertices lying outside D(Zh (x)) in the planar embedding of G where Fx is the outer face (equivalently, Uh+1 is the set of all vertices lying in disc D◦ (C) in the planar embedding of G where the face containing x is viewed as the outer face), and denote by Rh+1 the set of all connected components of G[Uh+1 ]. We will view the components in Rh+1 as type-2 components with respect to the shell. For each such component R ∈ Rh+1 , we let L(R) ⊆ V (C) be the set of the neighbors of the vertices of R, and we leave u(R) undefined. We need the following simple observation. Observation 7.12 For each R ∈ Rh+1 , |V (R) ∩ T | ≤ τ ∗ . Proof: Assume otherwise, and let R ∈ Rh+1 be any component with |R ∩ T | > τ ∗ . We claim that all vertices of R lie in Si∗ +1 . Indeed, recall that all vertices of R∗ lie in Si∗ , and C ⊆ R∗ is a cycle separating R from all vertices of V (G) \ Si∗ . Therefore, for every vertex v ∈ V (R), dGNC (v, V (Cx )) ≥ i∗ + 1 and v ∈ Si∗ +1 . But then R is a heavy connected component in G[Si∗ +1 ], contradicting the choice of i∗ . Notice that once ũ and the face Fx are fixed, we can define, for every component R ∈ Rh+1 , the segment σ(R) of Sthe cycle C = Zh (x) exactly as before, and we can define the discs η(R) for all 0 components R ∈ h+1 h0 =1 Rh0 using Theorem 5.5. (It may be convenient to think of C as the outer-most 0 cycle of the shell; that is, we add C to the shell as Zh+1 (x)). The main theorem summarizing the current step is the following. Theorem 7.13 There is an efficient algorithm to compute a vertex ũ ∈ V (C), a drawing of the ∗ terminals, such that, in the resulting shell Z(x) = cycle C 0 , and a subset T 0 ⊆ T of at most 4τ Sh+1 (Z1 (x), . . . , Zh (x)), for each component R ∈ h0 =1 Rh0 , the resulting disc η(R) contains at most τ ∗ terminals of T \ T 0 . We emphasize that the shell Z = (Z1 (x), . . . , Zh (x)) and the sets Rh0 of components, for 1 ≤ h0 ≤ h+1 do not depend on our choice of the vertex ũ or the drawing of C 0 . Similarly, the discs η(R) for components R lying in sets Rh0 , for 1 ≤ h0 ≤ h, given by Theorem 5.5, are also independent of the choice of ũ or the drawing of C 0 inside C. The choice of ũ only influences the discs η(R) for R ∈ Rh+1 , and so our goal is to select ũ and T 0 , and to draw C 0 inside C in a way that ensures that each such disc η(R) contains few terminals of T \ T 0 . Proof: Our first step processes the components of Rh+1 and to select the vertex ũ ∈ V (C). For this step, we will think of G as being embedded on the sphere. Let κ0 be the number of the Sterminals of T 0 ∗ contained in the components of Rh+1 . If κ ≤ 4τ , then we add all terminals of T ∩ R∈Rh+1 V (R) to T 0 , and terminate the algorithm, setting ũ to be any vertex of C, and drawing C 0 anywhere inside C, so the resulting drawing of G is planar. (We show below that this choice satisfies the conditions of the theorem). Therefore, we assume from now on that κ0 ≥ 4τ ∗ , and in particular |Rh+1 | ≥ 1. Throughout the algorithm, we maintain a partition of Rh+1 into two subsets: R0 , containing all components we have processed, and R00 , containing all remaining components. At the beginning, R0 = ∅ and R00 = Rh+1 . 51  Consider any component R ∈ R00 . Recall that all neighbors of the vertices of R must lie on C from our construction, and we denoted the set of these vertices by L(R). We say that R is a good component, iff there is a segment µ(R) of C containing all vertices of L(R), whose endpoints, denoted by a1 (R) and a2 (R) belong to L(R), and there is a G-normal curve γ 0 (R), whose endpoints are a1 (R) and a2 (R), such that γ 0 (R) is internally disjoint from V (G), and the following holds: let η 0 (R) be the disc, whose boundary is µ(R) ∪ γ 0 (R), with R ⊆ η 0 (R). Then for all R0 ∈ R00 with R0 6= R, R0 is disjoint from η 0 (R) (intuitively, these are the components that lie closest to C; see Figure 8).  Figure 8: Good components are shown in red, and their corresponding curves γ 0 (R) in green Claim 7.14 If |R00 | ≥ 2, then there are at least two good components in R00 . Proof: Let µ be the shortest segment of C, such that for some R ∈ R00 , L(R) ⊆ µ. Let R̃ ⊆ R00 be the set of all components R with L(R) ⊆ µ. If, for any component R ∈ R̃, |L(R)| ≥ 3, then from the definition of µ it is easy to see that R is a good component. If any component R ∈ R̃ has |L(R)| = 1, then µ contains a single vertex - the unique vertex of L(R), and it is easy to see that R is a good component. Otherwise, every component in R̃ has |L(R)| = 2. We then let R be the component that lies closest to µ. In other words, we choose the unique component R ∈ R̃, such that for some vertex v ∈ V (R), there is a curve γ connecting v to an inner point of µ, so that γ does not contain any vertices of G except for v, and it does not intersect the edges of G. It is immediate to verify that R is a good component. We conclude that there is at least one good component R ∈ R00 , with L(R) ⊆ µ. Let a, a0 be the endpoints of µ, and let µ0 be the other segment of C whose endpoints are a and a0 . Since |R00 | ≥ 2, there is at least one component R0 6= R in R00 , with L(R0 ) ⊆ µ0 . As before, we let µ00 be the shortest (inclusion-wise) segment of µ0 , such that for some component R00 ∈ R00 , L(R00 ) ⊆ µ00 . Let R̃0 be the set of all components R00 6= R in R00 with L(R00 ) ⊆ µ00 . Using the same arguments as above, we can find a second good component in R00 . We are now ready to describe our algorithm. We start with R00 = Rh+1 and R0 = ∅. Recall that |R00 | ≥ 1 must hold. While |R00 | ≥ 2, let R, R0 ∈ R00 be two distinct good components in R00 . Notice that T ∩ η 0 (R) and T ∩ η 0 (R0 ) are completely disjoint. Therefore, either |T ∩ η 0 (R)| ≤ κ0 /2, or |T ∩ η 0 (R0 )| ≤ κ0 /2. We assume without loss of generality it is the former. We then move R from R00 to R0 , and continue to the next iteration. Notice that in every iteration of the algorithm, |R00 | decreases by 1. The algorithm terminates when |R00 | = 1. Let R be the remaining component in R00 . We set T 0 = T ∩ V (R), and we set ũ to be any vertex of L(R). Recall that from Observation 7.12, |T 0 | ≤ τ ∗ . We then add the cycle C 0 that attaches to ũ with an edge e to G, and we draw C 0 inside C, so it is drawn next to the edge e. We then obtain a drawing of the resulting graph in the plane where the outer face Fx is the face whose boundary is 52  S C 0 . We construct the shells, and discs η(R) for R ∈ h+1 h0 =1 Rh0 as described above. From the choice of ũ, the drawing of C 0 , and the construction of the discs η(R), for every R ∈ R0 , η 0 (R) ⊆ η(R), and η(R) ∩ (D(C 0 ) \ D(C)) = η 0 (R). Therefore, for each R ∈ R0 , at least κ0 /2 terminals of T 0 lie outside η(R). The following claim will finish the proof of the theorem. Claim 7.15 For all 1 ≤ h0 ≤ h + 1, for all R ∈ Rh0 , η(R) contains at most τ ∗ terminals of T \ T 0 . Proof: Fix some 1 ≤ h0 ≤ h + 1 and R ∈ Rh0 . From our construction, the length of the boundary of η(R) is bounded by 2h + 3 + ∆/2 ≤ 2(8∆0 − ∆) + ∆/2 < 16∆0 . Assume first that h0 < h. Then all vertices of T ∩R∗ lie outside D(Zh0 (x)), and since η(R) ⊆ D(Zh0 (x)), they also lie outside η(R). From Observation 7.10, η(R) contains at most τ ∗ terminals of T . Assume now that h0 = h. Notice that for every component R0 ∈ Rh , either R0 is disjoint from R∗ , or R0 ⊆ R∗ . In the latter case, R0 is a type-1 or a type-3 component (see Figure 1(a)), as all type-2 components are disconnected from R∗ in G[Si∗ ]. Recall that R0 ∈ Rh is contained in η(R) only if σ(R0 ) ⊆ σ(R), and this can only happen if R0 is a type-2 component. Let R̃ ⊆ Rh be the set of all components contained in η(R). Then at most one of these components R0 ∈ R̃ may be contained in R∗ - and if such a component exists, then R0 = R. Our construction of the cycle C and the choice of Fx guarantee that R0 contains at most κ/2 + 1 terminals of T ∩ V (R∗ ), and so at least κ/2 − 1 ≥ κ/4 terminals lie outside η(R). Since the length of γ(R) is less than 16∆0 , from Observation 7.10, η(R) contains at most τ ∗ terminals of T . Finally, assume that h0 = h + 1. If κ0 ≤ 4τ ∗ , then V (R) ∩ (T \ T 0 ) = ∅. Therefore, we assume that κ0 > 4τ ∗ . If R ∩ (T \ T 0 ) 6= ∅, then R was added to R0 at some iteration of the algorithm. From the above discussion, at least κ0 /2 ≥ 2τ ∗ terminals of T lie outside of η(R), while the length of the boundary of η(R) is less than 16∆0 . From the well-linkedness of the terminals, η(R) contains at most τ ∗ terminals of T . We partition N into two subsets: set M0 contains all demand pairs in which the terminals of T 0 participate, together with all demand pairs for which either terminal lies in Dx . Then |M0 | ≤ 4τ ∗ + 4∆/αWL ≤ 5τ ∗ (we have used the definition of enclosures to bound the number of the demand pairs of the latter S kind, and the fact that τ ∗ = 64∆0 /αWL ). Let M1 contain the remaining demand pairs, and let R = h+1 h0 =1 Rh0 . As we noted before, we would like to ensure that for every component R ∈ R that contains a terminal of T (M1 ), whenever a path P routing a demand pair in M1 intersects R, it must cross γ(R) - the boundary of η(R). We achieve this property by routing a subset of the demand pairs, and discarding some additional demand pairs, in the following theorem. Theorem 7.16 There is an efficient algorithm to compute a partition (N0 , N1 , N2 ) of M1 , and a collection P ∗ of node-disjoint paths routing at least |N1 |/(h + 1) demand pairs in N1 in graph G, such that: • |N0 | ≤ τ ∗ |N1 |; and • for every component R ∈ R with R ∩ T (N2 ) 6= ∅, for every path P routing a demand pair in N2 , P 6⊆ η ◦ (R). Proof: We start with N0 = N1 = ∅, P = ∅, and N2 = M1 . Throughout the algorithm, we say that a component R ∈ R is a live component iff R ∩ T (N2 ) 6= ∅. While there is any demand pair (s, t) ∈ N2 , and any live component R ∈ R, such that some path P connecting s to t is contained in η ◦ (R), we do the following. We add P to P, and we move (s, t) from N2 to N1 . We say that the 53  component R is responsible for P , and we say that P is a level-h0 path if R ∈ Rh0 . Next, for every live component R0 ∈ Rh0 , such that P intersects η ◦ (R0 ), we move all demand pairs (s0 , t0 ) ∈ N2 with {s0 , t0 } ∩ η ◦ (R0 ) 6= ∅ from N2 to N0 . The crux of the analysis of this algorithm is in the following claim. Claim 7.17 In every iteration of the algorithm, the number of the demand pairs moved to N0 is at most τ ∗ . Proof: Consider some iteration of the algorithm, where a path P that belongs to level h0 was added to P, and let R ∈ Rh0 be the component responsible for it. Recall that P ⊆ η ◦ (R), and recall that Theorem 5.5 guarantees that all discs η(R0 ) for R0 ∈ Rh0 are laminar: that is, for R0 , R00 ∈ Rh0 , either η(R0 ) ⊆ η(R00 ), or η(R00 ) ⊆ η(R0 ), or η ◦ (R0 ) ∩ η ◦ (R00 ) = ∅. Let R0 ⊆ Rh0 be the set of all live components R0 with P ∩ η ◦ (R0 ) 6= ∅. Since P ⊆ η ◦ (R), there is some component R0 ∈ R0 , such that P ⊆ η ◦ (R0 ), and for every component R00 ∈ R0 , η ◦ (R00 ) ⊆ η ◦ (R0 ). Therefore, all demand pairs moved in this step from N2 to N0 have at least one terminal lying in η ◦ (R0 ), and from Theorem 7.13, their number is bounded by τ ∗ . Therefore, once the algorithm terminates, |N0 | ≤ τ ∗ |N1 | must hold. Moreover, for every component R ∈ R with R ∩ T (N2 ) 6= ∅, for every path P routing a demand pair in N2 , P 6⊆ η ◦ (R). Consider now the set P of paths. Each of these paths belongs to one of h + 1 levels, and so there is a subset P ∗ ⊆ P of paths that belong to the same level, say h0 , such that |P ∗ | ≥ |P|/(h + 1). The paths in P ∗ route a subset of the demand pairs in N1 , and it is now enough to show that they are node-disjoint. Assume for contradiction otherwise, and let P, P 0 ∈ P ∗ be two distinct paths that are not disjoint. Assume that P was added to P before P 0 . Let R0 ∈ Rh0 be the component responsible for P 0 , so P 0 ⊆ η ◦ (R0 ), and R0 was live when R was processed. Then path P must intersect η ◦ (R0 ), and so all demand pairs that have a terminal in η ◦ (R0 ), including the demand pair routed by P 0 , should have been removed from N2 during the iteration when P was added to P, a contradiction. Recall that τ ∗ = 64∆0 /αWL . We now consider two cases. First, if |P ∗ | ≥ |N | · N0  P∗  N 0.  αWL , 213 ∆20  then we return  = N and as the set of paths routing a subset of the demand pairs in Therefore, we assume 00 = M0 ∪ N ∪ N , and let N 0 = N \ N 00 = N . Then: from now on that |P ∗ | < |N | · 2α13WL . Let N 0 1 2 ∆2 0  |N 00 | ≤ 5τ ∗ + (τ ∗ + 1)|N1 | ≤ 5τ ∗ + (τ ∗ + 1)(h + 1)|P ∗ | ≤ 16∆0 τ ∗ · |P ∗ | 1024∆20 |N |αWL · 13 2 αWL 2 ∆0 |N | ≤ . 6 ≤  Therefore, |N 0 | ≥ 5|N |/6. From now on, our goal is to find a set P of paths, routing Ω    OPT(G,N 0 ) ∆80 log3 n    demand pairs in N 0 . From the above discussion, the demand pairs in N 0 have the following property. P1. For every component R ∈ R with R ∩ T (N 0 ) 6= ∅, if P is any path routing any demand pair in N 0 , then P 6⊆ η ◦ (R). Step 2: Mapping the Terminals. This step is almost identical to the similar S step in Case 2a, except that now we crucially exploit Property (P1). Let T 0 = T (N 0 ), and let U = hh0 =1 V (Zh0 (x)) be 54  the set of all vertices lying on the cycles of the shell. Our next step is to define a mapping β : T 0 → 2U of the terminals t ∈ T 0 to subsets β(t) of at most three vertices of U . For every terminal t ∈ T 0 , we also define a corresponding G-normal curve Γ(t), as before. The mapping β and the curves Γ(t) are defined as follows. First, for every terminal t ∈ T 0 ∩ U , we set β(t) = {t}, and we let Γ(t) contain the vertex t only. For all remaining terminals t ∈ T 0 , t must lie in some component R ∈ R. If |L(R)| ≤ 2, then we let β(t) = L(R) ∪ {u(R)} if u(R) is defined, and β(t) = L(R) otherwise. If |L(R)| > 2, then we let β(t) = {v}, where v is a leg of R, which is not an endpoint of σ(R) (in other words, v is not the first and not the last leg of R). We then let Γ(t) be the boundary γ(R) of the disc η(R) given by Theorem 7.13. Recall that the length of Γ(t) is bounded by 2h + ∆/2 + 3 < 16∆0 , as h ≤ 8∆0 − ∆ − 4. S Let M̃ = (s,t)∈N 0 β(s) × β(t). In the following two theorems, we relate the values of the solutions to problems (G, N 0 ) and (G, M̃). Theorem 7.18 There is an efficient algorithm, that, given any solution to instance (G, M̃), that  κ 0 routes κ demand pairs, finds a solution to instance (G, N ), routing at least Ω ∆0 demand pairs. Proof: Let P0 be any collection of disjoint paths in graph G, routing a subset M̃0 of κ demand pairs in M̃. We assume that κ ≥ 64∆0 , as otherwise we can return a routing of a single demand pair in N 0 . For every demand pair (s̃, t̃) ∈ M̃0 , let (s, t) be any corresponding demand pair in N 0 , that is, s̃ ∈ β(s) and t̃ ∈ β(t). n o We build a conflict graph H, whose vertex set is v(s̃, t̃) | (s̃, t̃) ∈ M̃0 , and there is a directed edge from v(s̃1 , t̃1 ) to v(s̃2 , t̃2 ) iff the unique path P (s̃1 , t̃1 ) ∈ P0 routing the pair (s̃1 , t̃1 ) intersects Γ(s2 ) or Γ(t2 ) (in which case we say that there is a conflict between (s̃1 , t̃1 ) and (s̃2 , t̃2 )). Since all paths in P0 are node-disjoint, and all curves Γ(s), Γ(t) have lengths at most 16∆0 each, the in-degree of every vertex in H is at most 32∆0 . Therefore, we can efficiently compute an independent set I of size at κ least 32∆κ0 +1 ≥ 64∆ in H. 0  Let M̃1 = n (s̃, t̃) | v(s̃, t̃) ∈ I o , and let P1 ⊆ P0 be the set of paths routing the demand pairs in M̃1 . 0 Let M = (s, t) | (s̃, t̃) ∈ M̃1 . It is now enough to show that all demand pairs in M0 can be routed in G. Consider any demand pair (s̃, t̃) ∈ M̃1 , and let P ∈ P1 be the path routing (s̃, t̃). We will extend the path P , so it connects s to t, by appending two paths: Q(s̃) connecting s̃ to s, and Q(t̃) connecting t̃ to t, to it. If s ∈ U , then s = s̃, and we define Q(s̃) = ∅. Assume now that s 6∈ U , and let R ∈ R be the component in which s lies. Let Q(s̃) be any path that starts from s̃, terminates at ∗ s, and except for its first edge, is contained in R. We define the path Q(t̃) n similarly. Let P be the o set of paths obtained by concatenating the paths in P1 with the paths in Q(s̃), Q(t̃) | (s̃, t̃) ∈ M̃1 . κ Then the paths in P ∗ route all demand pairs in M0 , so |P ∗ | ≥ 64∆ . It is now enough to prove that 0 ∗ the paths in P are node-disjoint. We do so in the following claim.  Claim 7.19 The paths in P ∗ are node-disjoint. Proof: Observe that all endpoints of all paths of P1 are distinct. We first prove that for all terminals t̃, t̃0 ∈ T (M̃1 ), with t̃ 6= t̃0 , paths Q(t̃) and Q(t̃0 ) are node-disjoint. Assume otherwise. Then Q(t̃), Q(t̃0 ) 6= ∅, and t, t0 6∈ U . Let t, t0 ∈ T (M̃0 ) be the terminals corresponding to t̃ and t̃0 , respectively, so Q(t̃) connects t̃ to t, and Q(t̃0 ) connects t̃0 to t0 . Let R, R0 ∈ R be the components to which t and t0 belong, respectively. Recall that except for its first edge, Q(t̃) is contained in R, and the same holds for Q(t̃0 ) and R0 . Since t̃ 6= t̃0 , but Q(t̃) ∩ Q(t̃0 ) 6= ∅, we get that R = R0 . But then t̃0 ∈ L(R) ∪ {u(R)}, 55  and so it lies in η(R). Let P 0 be the path of P1 , such that t̃0 is an endpoint of P 0 , and let s̃0 be its other endpoint. Since Γ(t) = γ(R), and set P1 is conflict-free, path P 0 cannot intersect γ(R). Therefore, s̃0 must belong to η ◦ (R). Let s0 be the terminal in T (M0 ) corresponding to s̃0 , so path Q(s̃0 ) connects s̃0 to s0 . We claim that if Q(s̃0 ) 6= ∅, then Q(s̃0 ) is also contained in η ◦ (R). Indeed, if Q(s̃0 ) 6= ∅, then s0 belongs to some component R00 ∈ R, and s̃0 ∈ L(R00 ) ∪ {u(R00 )}. But since s̃0 ∈ η ◦ (R), and since γ(R) is a G-normal curve disjoint from V (R00 ), R00 ⊆ η ◦ (R) must hold. We conclude that Q(s̃0 ) is contained in η ◦ (R). By concatenating Q(s̃0 ), P 0 and Q(t̃0 ), we obtain a path P , connecting s0 to t0 , where P is contained in η ◦ (R), violating Property (P1). We conclude that paths Q(t̃) and Q(t̃0 ) are node-disjoint. It is now enough to show that for every terminal t̃ ∈ T (M̃1 ), and for every path P ∈ P1 , such that t̃ is not an endpoint of P , Q(t̃) is disjoint from P . Assume otherwise, and let s̃0 , t̃0 be the endpoints of the path P . Since we have assumed that Q(t̃) ∩ P 6= ∅, Q(t̃) 6= ∅, and so the vertex t ∈ T (M0 ) serving as the other endpoint of Q(t̃) must lie in some component R ∈ R. Notice that since the paths in P1 have no conflicts, P is disjoint from γ(R), and so it must be contained in η ◦ (R). Using the same reasoning as above, we conclude that if Q(s̃0 ) 6= ∅, then it is contained in η ◦ (R), and the same holds for Q(t̃0 ). Therefore, there is a path P , obtained by concatenating P 0 , Q(s̃0 ) and Q(t̃0 ), connecting the pair (s0 , t0 ) ∈ N 0 , with P 0 ⊆ η ◦ (R), contradicting Property (P1). Since the paths in P1 are node-disjoint, it is now immediate to see that the paths in P ∗ must also be node-disjoint.  Theorem 7.20 OPT(G, M̃) ≥  OPT(G,N 0 ) . 64∆0  Proof: Let P0 be the set of paths in the optimal solution to instance (G, N 0 ), and let M0 be the set of the demand pairs they route. We can assume that |M0 | ≥ 64∆0 , as otherwise we can route a single demand pair in M̃. As before, we define a conflict graph H, whose vertex set is {v(s, t) | (s, t) ∈ M0 }, and there is a directed edge from v(s1 , t1 ) to v(s2 , t2 ) iff the unique path P (s1 , t1 ) ∈ P0 routing the pair (s1 , t1 ) intersects Γ(s2 ) or Γ(t2 ) (in which case we say that there is a conflict between (s1 , t1 ) and (s2 , t2 )). Since all paths in P0 are node-disjoint, and all curves Γ(s), Γ(t) have lengths at most 16∆0 each, the in-degree of every vertex in H is at most 32∆0 . Therefore, we can efficiently compute an independent 0) OPT(G,N 0 ) set I of size at least OPT(G,N in H. 32∆0 +1 ≥ 64∆0 Let M1 = {(s, t) | v(s, t) ∈ I}, and let P1 ⊆ P0 be the set of paths routing the demand pairs in M1 . We show that we can route |M1 | demand pairs of M̃ in G via node-disjoint paths. Let T1 be the sets of all terminals participating in the pairs in M1 . Consider any terminal t ∈ T1 . We say that t is a good terminal if t ∈ U , or t belongs to some component R ∈ R, such that |L(R)| ≤ 2. Otherwise, t is a bad terminal. Notice that if t is a good terminal, then the path P ∈ P1 that contains t as its endpoint must contain a vertex t0 ∈ β(t): if t ∈ U , then β(t) = {t}; otherwise, if t ∈ R for some component R ∈ R with |L(R)| ≤ 2, then β(t) = L(R) ∪ {u(R)} if u(R) is defined, and β(t) = L(R) otherwise. In either case, in order to enter R, path P has to visit a vertex of β(t) (it is impossible that P ⊆ R due to Property (P1)). Therefore, if t is a good terminal, then some vertex t0 ∈ P belongs to β(t). We transform the paths in P1 in two steps, to ensure that they connect demand pairs in M̃. In the first step, for every path P ∈ P1 originating at a good terminal s ∈ T1 , we truncate P at the first vertex s0 ∈ β(s), so it now originates at s0 . Similarly, if P terminates at a good terminal t ∈ T1 , we truncate P at the last vertex t0 ∈ β(t), so it now terminates at t0 . Let P10 be the resulting set of paths. Notice that the paths in P10 remain node-disjoint. In order to complete our transformation, we need to take care of bad terminals. Let t ∈ T1 be any 56  bad terminal. Then t ∈ R for some component R ∈ R with |L(R)| ≥ 3. Recall that in this case, β(t) contains a unique vertex, that we denote by t0 , which is a leg of R, and it is not one of the endpoints of σ(R). We then let Q(t) be any path connecting t to t0 in the sub-graph of G induced by V (R) ∪ {t0 }. By concatenating the paths in {Q(t)} for all bad terminals t ∈ T1 , and the paths in P10 , we obtain a 0) collection P̃ of at least OPT(G,N paths, routing demand pairs in M̃. It now only remains to show 64∆0 that the paths in P̃ are disjoint. Recall that the paths in P10 were node-disjoint. Claim 7.21 The paths in P̃ are node-disjoint. Proof: Consider first some pair t1 , t2 of bad terminals. We show that the paths Q(t1 ) and Q(t2 ) are disjoint. Let P1 and P2 be the paths in P10 , for which t1 and t2 serve as endpoints, respectively. Let P20 ∈ P1 be the path corresponding to P2 , that is, P2 is a sub-path of P20 . Recall that t1 ∈ R for some R ∈ R, and recall that the disc whose boundary is Γ(t1 ) contains R∪L(R). Path P20 cannot cross γ(R) since the paths in P1 are are conflict-free, and it is not contained in η ◦ (R), since that would violate Property (P1). Therefore, path P20 lies completely outside η(R), and so does path P2 . Let R0 ∈ R be the component to which t2 belongs. Then R0 ∩ η(R) = ∅ must also hold, since γ(R) cannot intersect R0 , from Theorem 5.5. From our definition of β(t) for bad terminals t, β(t1 ) 6= β(t2 ), and each such set contains exactly one vertex. It is now easy to see that Q(t1 ) and Q(t2 ) are disjoint. Consider now some bad terminal t ∈ T1 , and let P ∈ P10 be any path, such that t is not an endpoint of P . We next show that Q(t) is disjoint from P . Let t0 , t00 be the endpoints of path P , and let R ∈ R be the component containing t. Let P 0 ∈ P1 be the path corresponding to P , so P ⊆ P 0 . Path P 0 cannot intersect γ(R) since the paths in P1 are conflict-free, and it is not contained in η ◦ (R) due to Property (P1). Therefore, P 0 , and hence P , lie completely outside η(R). Since Q(t) ⊆ η(R), we get that Q(t) ∩ P = ∅. Since the paths in P10 are node-disjoint, it is now immediate to verify that the paths in P̃ are node-disjoint as well. For all 1 ≤ h0 , h00 ≤ h, we let M̃h0 ,h00 be the set of all demand pairs (s̃, t̃) ∈ M̃ with s̃ ∈ Zh0 (x) and t̃ ∈ Zh00 (x). Since h ≤ 16∆0 , we obtain the following corollary.   0) Corollary 7.22 There are some 1 ≤ h0 , h00 ≤ h, such that OPT(G, M̃h0 ,h00 ) ≥ Ω OPT(G,N , and for 3 ∆ 0  any solution to instance (G, M̃h0 ,h00 ), routing κ demand pairs, we can efficiently obtain a solution to instance (G, N 0 ), routing Ω(κ/∆0 ) demand pairs. It is now enough to prove the following theorem. Theorem 7.23 There isan efficient algorithm, that for all 1 ≤ h0 , h00 ≤ h computes a set Ph0 ,h00 of  OPT(G,M̃h0 ,h00 ) disjoint paths, routing Ω demand pairs of M̃h0 ,h00 in G. ∆4 log3 n 0  Step 3: Reduction to Routing on a Disc. In this step, we complete the proof of Theorem 7.1 by proving Theorem 7.23. We fix some 1 ≤ h0 , h00 ≤ h. If h0 = h00 , then all terminals of T (M̃h0 ,h00 ) lie on Zh0 (x), and we obtain an instance of the special case, with Z = Zh0 (x), C = Cx and M̂ = M̃h0 ,h00 . We let Ĝ0 be the graph obtained from G by deleting all vertices and edges lying in D◦ (Zh0 ), and apply the 0 O(log n)-approximation algorithm for NDP-Disc to the resulting instance  (Ĝ , M̂). From  Theorem 7.7,   OPT(G, M̃ ) 0 00 M̂) h ,h OPT(Ĝ0 , M̂) ≥ Ω OPT(G, , and so overall we obtain a routing of Ω demand pairs ∆2 log n ∆2 log2 n 0  0  of M̃h0 ,h00 . Therefore, we assume that h0 6= h00 from now on. We assume without loss of generality 57  that h0 < h00 , and that all source vertices of M̃h0 ,h00 lie on Zh0 (x) and all destination vertices of M̃h0 ,h00 lie on Zh00 (x). In order to simplify the notation, we denote ρ = h00 −h0 +1, and we denote cycles Zh0 (x), Zh0 +1 (x), . . . , Zh00 (x) by Z̃1 , Z̃2 , . . . , Z̃ρ , respectively. We also denote M̃h0 ,h00 by M̃, and the sets of all source and all destination vertices of the demand pairs in M̃ by S̃ and T̃ , respectively. We assume that OPT(G, M̃) ≥ 500∆40 , since otherwise routing a single demand pair of M̃ is sufficient. We also assume that for all 1 ≤ i < ρ, no edge connects a vertex of Z̃i to a vertex of Z̃i+1 , since we can subdivide each such edge with a vertex. For convenience of notation, for each 1 ≤ i < ρ, we denote the set of vertices of G lying in D◦ (Z̃i+1 ) \ D(Z̃i ) by Ũi , and we denote by R̃i the set of all type-1 connected components of G[Ũi ]. Let R ∈ R̃i be any such connected component. Recall that we have defined a segment σ(R) of Z̃i containing all vertices of L(R). We view σ(R) as directed in the counter-clock-wise direction of Z̃i , and we let u0 (R) ∈ L(R) be the first vertex of σ(R). We then define χ(R) to be any path that connects u0 (R) to u(R), such that all inner vertices of χ(R) belong to R. The idea of the proof is to construct a collection Q of special paths, connecting the vertices of Z̃1 to the vertices of Z̃ρ , that we call staircases. We use the paths in Q, in order to map all the source vertices in S̃ to some vertices of Z̃ρ . We then reduce the problem to routing on a disc, by creating a hole D◦ (Z̃ρ ) in the sphere, so that all terminals participating in the new set M̂ of demand pairs lie on the boundary Z̃ρ of the hole. In order to define the staircases, it will be convenient to work with a directed graph G0 , obtained from a sub-graph of G, as follows. First, we add the cycles Z̃1 , Z̃2 , . . . , Z̃ρ to G0 , and for each such cycle Z̃i , we direct all its edges in the counter-clock-wise direction along Z̃i . Next, for each 1 ≤ i < ρ, for each component R ∈ R̃i , we add the path χ(R) to G0 , and direct all its edges so that the path is directed from u0 (R) to u(R). We are now ready to define a staircase. A staircase is simply a directed path in G0 , connecting some vertex of Z̃1 to some vertex of Z̃ρ , which is internally disjoint from Z̃ρ . Observe that we can decompose any such staircase Q into 2ρ − 2 segments µ1 (Q), χ1 (Q), . . . , µρ−1 (Q), χρ−1 (Q), where for 1 ≤ i < ρ, µi (Q) is a directed sub-path of Z̃i (possibly consisting of a single vertex), and χi (Q) = χ(R) for some R ∈ R̃i . For every vertex v ∈ V (Z̃1 ), we build a special staircase Q(v), as follows. Intuitively, we will try to minimize the lengths of the segments µi (Q(v)). Denote v = v1 . For each 1 ≤ i < ρ, we now define the segments µi (Q(v)) and χi (Q(v)), and the vertex vi+1 ∈ V (Z̃i+1 ), which is the last vertex of χi (Q(v)), assuming that we are given the vertex vi ∈ Z̃i . We let µi (Q(v)) be the shortest directed segment of Z̃i , starting from vi , that terminates at some vertex vi0 , such that for some component R ∈ R̃i , u0 (R) = vi0 . If R ∈ R̃i is a unique component with this property, then we set χi (Q(v)) = χ(R). Otherwise, let R0 ⊆ R̃i be the set of all components R with u0 (R) = vi0 . Intuitively, we would like to set χi = χ(R∗ ), where R∗ is the first component of R0 in the counter-clock-wise order (see Figure 9). In order to define R∗ formally, we need the following observation. Observation 7.24 There is some component R ∈ R̃i , such that R 6∈ R0 . Proof: From our assumption, there is a set P of at least 500∆40 node-disjoint paths, connecting the vertices of S̃ to the vertices of T̃ in G. For every path P ∈ P, let vP be the first vertex of P lying on Z̃i+1 . Since we have assumed that no edge connects a vertex of Z̃i to a vertex of Z̃i+1 , there must be some component R0 ∈ R̃i , such that vP = u(R0 ), and moreover, P must contain some vertex of L(R0 ). We say that R0 is responsible for P . Notice that each component of Ri may be responsible for at most one path in P.  58  Notice that for all components R0 ∈ R0 , except for maybe one, L(R) = {vi0 }, and so the components of R0 may be responsible for at most two paths in P. But |P| ≥ 500∆40 , so R̃i \ R0 6= ∅. 0 0 We draw a closed G-normal curve γ ⊆ D◦ (Z̃i+1 ) \ D(Z̃i ), so that for S each R ∈0 R̃i , γ ∩ V (R ) ∗is a contiguous set of vertices on γ, and all vertices that S lie on γ belong to R0 ∈R̃i V (R ). We then let σ be the shortest segment of γ, containing all vertices of R0 ∈R0 V (R0 ), and no other vertices (in particular, the vertices of all components in Ri \ R0 do not lie on σ ∗ ). Let v ∗ be the first vertex on σ ∗ in the counter-clock-wise direction, and let R∗ ∈ R0 be the unique component containing v ∗ . Finally, we set χi (Q(v)) = χ(R∗ ). The final staircase Q(v) is a concatenation of the paths in {µi (Q(v)), χi (Q(v))}ρ−1 i=1 . Each such staircase Q(v) defines an undirected path in graph G, that we also denote by Q(v), and we do not distinguish between them.  v  Figure 9: A staircase Q(v) in graph G. We will use the following lemma in order to bound the number of paths in the optimal solution intersecting any staircase Q(v). Lemma 7.25 Let P ∗ be any set of node-disjoint paths, connecting a subset of the demand pairs in M̃. Then for each v ∈ V (Z̃1 ), the number of paths in P ∗ that intersect Q(v) is at most O(∆20 ). Proof: For simplicity of notation, denote Q = Q(v). We construct a collection D of at most 3ρ ≤ O(∆0 ) discs, such that for each disc η ∈ D, its boundary is a G-normal curve of length at most O(∆0 ). We ensure that vertex v 0 ∈ V (Q) is contained in some disc η ∈ D, and no terminal S every ◦ of T̃ is contained in η∈D η . It is then easy to see that every path P ∈ P ∗ that intersects Q must also contain at least one vertex on the boundary of some disc in D, and, since the total length of all boundaries of the discs in D is bounded by O(∆20 ), at most O(∆20 ) paths in P ∗ intersect Q. For simplicity of notation, for all 1 ≤ i < ρ, we denote µi (Q) by µi , and χi (Q) by χi . We let vi , vi0 be the first and the last vertex of µi , respectively, and we let Ri ∈ R̃i be the component with χ(Ri ) = χi (Q), so that vi+1 = u(Ri ), and vi0 = u0 (Ri ) (see Figure 10). We start with D = ∅. For each 1 ≤ i < ρ, we add at most three discs to D. Fix some 1 ≤ i < ρ. We first add to D the disc η(Ri ), given by Theorem 5.5. Notice that this disc contains all vertices of χi (Q), and its boundary is a G-normal curve of length O(∆0 ). Let R0 be the set of all type-1 and type-2 components R of G[Ũi ], such that vi is an inner  1vertex ofq σ(R). 0 0 Since the segments in {σR | R ∈ R } form a nested set, we can assume that R = R , . . . , R with σ(R1 ) ⊆ σ(R2 ) ⊆ · · · ⊆ σ(Rq ). Notice that among all components in R0 , only Rq may be a type-1 59  component, and the remaining components are type-2 components. If R0 6= ∅, then we let vi∗ be the last vertex on σ(Rq ) in the counter-clock-wise direction, so vi∗ ∈ µi , and we add the disc η(Rq ) to D. Otherwise, we let vi∗ = vi . Let µ0i ⊆ µi be the segment of µi between vi∗ and vi0 (see Figure 10). Notice that all vertices of µi \ µ0i are contained in the discs we have already added to D. Our final step is to add a disc ηi∗ , containing all vertices of µ0i , that is defined as follows. From our construction of the staircases and the set R0 , if R is a component of G[Ũi ], and some inner vertex of µ0i belongs to L(R), then R is a type-2 component, and σ(R) ⊆ µ0 (R). Therefore, we can draw a G-normal curve γi with endpoints vi0 and vi∗ , so that γi is contained in D◦ (Z̃i+1 ) \ D(Z̃i ), and it is internally disjoint from all vertices of G. From Property (J4) of shells, we can construct curves γ, γ 0 that connect vi0 and vi∗ , respectively, to some vertices a, a0 ∈ Cx , so that γ, γ 0 ⊆ D(Z̃i ), and the length of each curve is bounded by i ≤ 8∆0 . Combining γi , γ, γ 0 , and one of the segments of Cx with endpoints a and a0 , we obtain a closed curve γi∗ of length O(∆0 ), such that the disc ηi∗ , whose boundary is γi∗ , contains all vertices of µ0i . We then add ηi∗ to D. Cx  Z̃i+1  Z̃i vi0  ⌘i⇤  Ri  vi⇤ vi Rq  Figure 10: Constructing the disc ηi∗ . The staircase is shown in red. It is easy to verify that all vertices of µi ∪ χi lie in the discs η(Ri ), η(Rq ), ηi∗ , and for each such disc, its boundary is a G-normal curve of length at most O(∆0 ). Moreover, from our construction, none of these discs contains a vertex of Zρ , except as part of its boundary. We conclude that every vertex of Q belongs to some disc η ∈ D, the boundary of each such disc is a G-normal curve of length at most O(∆0 ). Every path P ∈ P ∗ intersecting Q must intersect the boundary of at least one disc in D, and since |D| = O(∆0 ), the number of such paths is bounded by O(∆20 ). n o Consider now the set Q = Q(v) | v ∈ V (Z̃1 ) of staircases. Notice that once a pair of staircases meet, they always continue together. Therefore, we can partition the set Q of staircases into equivalence classes Q1 , . . . , Qλ , where two staircases belong to the same class iff they terminate at the same vertex. From the above discussion, staircases belonging to distinct equivalence classes must be disjoint. For each such set Qj , let Vj ⊆ V (Z̃1 ) be the set of all vertices where the staircases of Qj originate. We also need the following lemma. Lemma 7.26 Let P ∗ be any set of node-disjoint paths, connecting a subset of the demand pairs in M̃. Then for each 1 ≤ j ≤ λ, the number of paths in P ∗ that originate at the vertices of Vj is at most O(∆20 ). Proof: Fix some 1 ≤ j ≤ λ, and let P 0 ⊆ P ∗ be the set of paths originating at the vertices of Vj . We assume that Qj = {Q1 , . . . , Qr }, and the endpoints of the paths Qi that belong to Vj appear consecutively in this order on Z̃1 . Let v1 , vr ∈ Vj be the vertices where the paths Q1 and Qr originate. From Property (J4) of shells, we can construct G-normal curves γ, γ 0 , connecting v1 and vr , respectively, to some vertices a, a0 of Cx , so that the length of each such curve is bounded by h0 ≤ 8∆0 , and both curves are contained in D(Z̃1 ). We claim that every path in P 0 must contain a vertex of 60  V (γ) ∪ V (γ 0 ) ∪ V (Q1 ) ∪ V (Qr ) ∪ V (Cx ). Indeed, consider the curve γ ∗ obtained by the union of the images of Q1 and Qr , the curves γ and γ 0 , and one of the segments of Cx with endpoints a and a0 . Then for every path of P 0 , its source lies inside or on the curve γ ∗ , and its destination lies either on γ ∗ (when the destination is the common endpoint of all paths in Qj ), or outside the curve γ ∗ . Therefore, every path in P 0 must contain a vertex of V (γ) ∪ V (γ 0 ) ∪ V (Q1 ) ∪ V (Qr ) ∪ V (Cx ). Since γ, γ 0 and Cx contain O(∆0 ) vertices each, and since from Lemma 7.25 at most O(∆20 ) paths in P ∗ may intersect Q1 and Qr , we get that |P 0 | ≤ O(∆0 )2 . We are now ready to complete our reduction. For every source vertex s ∈ S̃, let s0 be the vertex ofnZ̃ρ that serves asothe other endpoint of path Q(s). We define a new set of demand pairs M̂ = (s0 , t) | (s, t) ∈ M̃ . Notice that (G, M̂) is now an instance of the special case, where we use Z = Z̃ρ and C = Cx . We construct a graph Ĝ from G, by creating a hole D◦ (Z̃ρ ) in the sphere, and removing from G all edges and vertices that lie in the interior of D(Z̃ρ ). We then apply the O(log n)-approximation algorithm for NDP-Disc to the resulting problem,    to obtain a routing of at  M̂) , and so we obdemand pairs. From Theorem 7.7, OPT(Ĝ, M̂) ≥ Ω OPT(G, ∆20 log n   M̂) tain a set P of disjoint paths, routing of Ω OPT(G, demand pairs of M̂ in graph Ĝ. Notice that ∆20 log2 n for all 1 ≤ j ≤ λ, if we denote by bj the unique vertex where all staircases of Qj terminate, then at most one demand pair in which bj participates is routed by P. We construct a set Q0 ⊆ Q of staircases as follows. For every demand pair (s0 , t) ∈ M̂ routed by P, we select one source vertex s ∈ S̃ with (s, t) ∈ M̃, such that the staircase Q(s) terminates at s0 , and we add Q(s) to Q0 . Notice that all staircases in Q0 are disjoint from each other, since all of them belong to different sets Qj .  least Ω  OPT(Ĝ,M̂) log n  Since the paths in P do not use anyvertices inthe interior of D(Z̃ρ ), we can combine them with the M̂) demand pairs of M̃ in graph G. In order to complete paths in Q0 , to obtain a routing of Ω OPT(G, ∆20 log2 n   M̃) . We do so in the proof of Theorem 7.23, it is now enough to show that OPT(G, M̂) ≥ Ω OPT(G, ∆20 the following claim.   M̃) . Claim 7.27 OPT(G, M̂) ≥ Ω OPT(G, 2 ∆ 0  Proof: Let P0 be a set of paths routing κ0 = OPT(G, M̃) demand pairs of M̃ in G. We show that we can route Ω(κ0 /∆20 ) demand pairs of M̂ in G. Let M̃0 ⊆ M̃ be the set of the demand pairs routed by set P0 . For each demand pair (s, t) ∈ M̃0 , letnP (s, t) ∈ P0 be the opath routing this demand pair. We build a conflict graph H, whose vertex set is v(s, t) | (s, t) ∈ M̃0 , and there is a directed edge from v(s1 , t1 ) to v(s2 , t2 ) iff one of the following happens: either (i) s1 and s2 both belong to the same set Vj , for 1 ≤ j ≤ λ; or (ii) path P (s2 , t2 ) intersects Q(s1 ). From Lemmas 7.25 and 7.26, the in-degree of every vertex in H is at most O(∆20 ). Therefore, there is an independent set I of Ω(κ0 /∆20 ) vertices in H. We let M̃1 = {(s, t) | v(s, t) ∈ I}, and we let P1 ⊆ P0 be the set of paths routing the demand pairs in M̃1 . Let M̂0 ⊆ M̂ contain, for every demand pair (s, t) ∈ M̃1 , the pair (s0 , t). It is now enough to show that all demand pairs in M̂0 can be routed in G. Let Q0 contain all staircases Q(s), where s participates in some demand pair in M̃1 . Then all staircases in Q0 are disjoint from each other, since they all belong to different sets Qj , for 1 ≤ j ≤ λ. Moreover, for each staircase Q(s) ∈ Q0 , all paths in P1 \ {P (s, t)} are disjoint from Q(s). By concatenating the paths in P1 and the staircases in Q0 , we obtain a collection of node-disjoint paths routing all demand pairs in M̂0  61  8  Proof of Theorem 1.3  We perform a transformation to instance (G, M) as before, to ensure that every terminal participates in at most one demand pair, and the degree of every terminal is 1. The number of vertices in the new instance is bounded by 2n2 , and abusing the notation we denote this number by n. We use the following analogue of Theorem 4.1. Theorem 8.1 There is an efficient algorithm, that,  ∗ 1/19  given any semi-feasible solution to (LP-flow2), (X ) either computes a routing of at least Ω poly log n demand pairs in M via node-disjoint paths, or returns a constraint of type (5), that is violated by the current solution. We show that the above theorem implies Theorem 1.3. The Ellipsoid Algorithm, in every iteration, applies the above theorem  to the current semi-feasible solution (x, f ) to (LP-flow2). If the outcome is a  ∗ 1/19  (X ) solution routing at least Ω poly log n demand pairs, then we obtain the desired routing, assuming that ∗ X = OPT is guessed correctly. Otherwise, we obtain a violated constraint of type (5), and continue to the next iteration of the Ellipsoid Algorithm. The algorithm is guaranteed to terminate with a feasible solution after a number of iterations that is polynomial in the the  number of  LP-variables, (OPT(G,M))1/19 so we obtain an efficient algorithm, that returns a solution routing Ω demand pairs. poly log n We now focus on proving Theorem 8.1.  We again process the fractional solution (x, f ) to obtain a new fractional solution (x0 , f 0 ), where every demand pair sends either 0 or w∗ flow units, in the same way as described in Section 4. We let M0 ⊆ M denote the set of the demand pairs (si , ti ) with non-zero flow value x0i in this new solution. As before, the total flow between the demand pairs in M0 is at least Ω(X ∗ / log k) in the new solution, and, if we find a subset M00 ⊆ M0 of demand pairs with OPT(G, M00 ) ≤ w∗ |M00 |/2, then set M00 defines a violated constraint of type (5) for (LP-flow2). Therefore, we focus on set M0 and for simplicity denote M = M0 .  r We decompose the input instance (G, M) into a collection of well-linked instances (Gj , Mj ) j=1 ∗ j using Theorem 4.2. For each 1 ≤ j ≤ r, let WP j = w |M | be the contribution of the demand pairs in r Mj to the current flow solution and let W = j=1 Wj = Ω(X ∗ / log k). Theorem 4.3 guarantees that for each 1 ≤ j ≤ r, we can obtain one of the following: 1/19  1. Either a collection P j of node-disjoint paths, routing Ω(Wj in Gj ; or  / poly log n) demand pairs of Mj  2. A collection M̃j ⊆ Mj of demand pairs, with |M̃j | ≥ |Mj |/2, such that OPT(Gj , M̃j ) ≤ w∗ |M̃j |/8. We say that instance (Gj , Mj ) is a type-1 instance, outcome happens for it, and we say  if the first j that it instance otherwise. Let I1 = j | (Gj , M ) is a type-1 instance , and similarly,  is a type-2 j IP two cases, where the first case happens when 2 = j | (Gj , M ) is a type-2 instance . We consider P 0 W ≥ W/2, and the second case when W j j ≥ W/2. In the second case, we let M = j∈I2 S j∈I1 j j∈I2 M̃ , and by the same reasoning as in Section 4, the following inequality, that is violated by the current LP-solution, is a valid constraint of (LP-flow2): X  x0i ≤ w∗ |M0 |/2.  (si ,ti )∈M0  62  j We now focus on Case where  1,1/19  the number of paths routed for each instance (Gj , M ) with j ∈ I1 P W is at least |P j | = Ω polyj log n . Since j∈I1 Wj ≥ W/2 = Ω (X ∗ / log k), the total number of paths  routed is: 1/19  X  |P j | ≥  j∈I1  X  ≥  j∈I1  9  Ω  poly log n  j∈I1  X   Ω  !  Wj  Wj 18/19 W · poly log n !  =Ω  W 1/19 poly log n  =Ω  (X ∗ )1/19 poly log n    ! .  Conclusion and Open Problems  In this paper we showed the first approximation algorithm for the NDP-Planar problem, whose approximation factor breaks the Ω(n1/2 ) barrier of the multicommodity flow LP-relaxation. We introduce a number of new techniques, that we hope will be helpful in obtaining better approximation algorithms for this problem. We note that our initial motivation came from the improved approximation algorithm for NDP-Grid of [CK15]. Even though adapting their main idea to the more general setting of planar graphs is technically challenging, we believe that the work of [CK15] on the much simpler and better structured grid graphs helped crystallize the main conceptual idea that eventually lead to this result. Therefore, we believe that studying the NDP-Grid problem can be very helpful in understanding the more general NDP-Planar problem. The best current approximation algorithm for NDP-Grid achieves an Õ(n1/4 )-approximation, and it seems likely that this approximation ratio can be improved. We leave open the question of whether the techniques introduced in this paper can help improve the O(n1/2 )-approximation factor of [CKS06] for EDP on planar graphs. Finally, we remark that the complexity of the NDP-Disc and the NDP-Cylinder problems is still not well-understood: we provide an O(log k)-approximation algorithm for both problems, and we are not aware of any results that prove that the optimization versions of NDP-Disc or NDP-Cylinder are NP-hard. We note that the EDP problem is known to be NP-hard for both these settings [Nav12], but we are not aware of any approximation algorithms for it.  References [ACG+ 10] Matthew Andrews, Julia Chuzhoy, Venkatesan Guruswami, Sanjeev Khanna, Kunal Talwar, and Lisa Zhang. Inapproximability of edge-disjoint paths and low congestion routing on undirected graphs. Combinatorica, 30(5):485–520, 2010. [AKR03]  Eyal Amir, Robert Krauthgamer, and Satish Rao. Constant factor approximation of vertex-cuts in planar graphs. In Proceedings of the thirty-fifth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 90–99. ACM, 2003.  [And10]  Matthew Andrews. Approximation algorithms for the edge-disjoint paths problem via Raecke decompositions. In Proceedings of IEEE FOCS, pages 277–286, 2010. 63  [AR95]  Yonatan Aumann and Yuval Rabani. Improved bounds for all optical routing. In Proceedings of the sixth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, SODA ’95, pages 567–576, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 1995. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.  [AZ05]  Matthew Andrews and Lisa Zhang. Hardness of the undirected edge-disjoint paths problem. In STOC, pages 276–283. ACM, 2005.  [CC]  Chandra Chekuri and Julia Chuzhoy. Half-integral all-or-nothing flow. Unpublished Manuscript.  [CE13]  Chandra Chekuri and Alina Ene. Poly-logarithmic approximation for maximum node disjoint paths with constant congestion. In Proc. of ACM-SIAM SODA, 2013.  [Chu12]  Julia Chuzhoy. Routing in undirected graphs with constant congestion. In Proc. of ACM STOC, pages 855–874, 2012.  [CK15]  Julia Chuzhoy and David H. K. Kim. On approximating node-disjoint paths in grids. In Naveen Garg, Klaus Jansen, Anup Rao, and José D. P. Rolim, editors, Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques, APPROX/RANDOM 2015, August 24-26, 2015, Princeton, NJ, USA, volume 40 of LIPIcs, pages 187–211. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2015.  [CKS04]  Chandra Chekuri, Sanjeev Khanna, and F Bruce Shepherd. Edge-disjoint paths in planar graphs. In Foundations of Computer Science, 2004. Proceedings. 45th Annual IEEE Symposium on, pages 71–80. IEEE, 2004.  [CKS05]  Chandra Chekuri, Sanjeev Khanna, and F. Bruce Shepherd. Multicommodity flow, welllinked terminals, and routing problems. In Proc. of ACM STOC, pages 183–192, 2005. √ Chandra Chekuri, Sanjeev Khanna, and F. Bruce Shepherd. An O( n) approximation and integrality gap for disjoint paths and unsplittable flow. Theory of Computing, 2(1):137– 146, 2006.  [CKS06]  [CL12]  Julia Chuzhoy and Shi Li. A polylogarithimic approximation algorithm for edge-disjoint paths with congestion 2. In Proc. of IEEE FOCS, 2012.  [DH05]  Erik D. Demaine and Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi. Graphs excluding a fixed minor have grids as large as treewidth, with combinatorial and algorithmic applications through bidimensionality. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2005, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, January 23-25, 2005, pages 682–689. SIAM, 2005.  [EIS76]  Shimon Even, Alon Itai, and Adi Shamir. On the complexity of timetable and multicommodity flow problems. SIAM J. Comput., 5(4):691–703, 1976.  [Kar72]  R. Karp. Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In R. Miller and J. Thatcher, editors, Complexity of Computer Computations, pages 85–103. Plenum Press, 1972.  [KK13]  Ken-Ichi Kawarabayashi and Yusuke Kobayashi. An O(log n)-approximation algorithm for the edge-disjoint paths problem in Eulerian planar graphs. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 9(2):16:1–16:13, March 2013.  64  [Kle05]  Jon Kleinberg. An approximation algorithm for the disjoint paths problem in even-degree planar graphs. In Proceedings of the 46th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’05, pages 627–636, Washington, DC, USA, 2005. IEEE Computer Society.  [KS04]  Stavros G. Kolliopoulos and Clifford Stein. Approximating disjoint-path problems using packing integer programs. Mathematical Programming, 99:63–87, 2004.  [KT95]  Jon M. Kleinberg and Éva Tardos. Disjoint paths in densely embedded graphs. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 52–61, 1995.  [KT98]  Jon M. Kleinberg and Éva Tardos. Approximations for the disjoint paths problem in high-diameter planar networks. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 57(1):61–73, 1998.  [KvL84]  MR Kramer and Jan van Leeuwen. The complexity of wire-routing and finding minimum area layouts for arbitrary vlsi circuits. Advances in computing research, 2:129–146, 1984.  [Lyn75]  James F. Lynch. The equivalence of theorem proving and the interconnection problem. SIGDA Newsl., 5(3):31–36, September 1975.  [Nav12]  Guyslain Naves. The hardness of routing two pairs on one face. Mathematical programming, 131(1-2):49–69, 2012.  [Räc02]  Harald Räcke. Minimizing congestion in general networks. In Proc. of IEEE FOCS, pages 43–52, 2002.  [RLWW96] Heike Ripphausen-Lipa, Dorothea Wagner, and Karsten Weihe. Linear-time algorithms for disjoint two-face paths problems in planar graphs. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science, 07(02):95–110, 1996. [RS86]  Neil Robertson and Paul D Seymour. Graph minors. vi. disjoint paths across a disc. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 41(1):115–138, 1986.  [RS90]  N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour. Outline of a disjoint paths algorithm. In Paths, Flows and VLSI-Layout. Springer-Verlag, 1990.  [RS95]  Neil Robertson and Paul D Seymour. Graph minors. XIII. the disjoint paths problem. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 63(1):65–110, 1995.  [RST94]  Neil Robertson, Paul D. Seymour, and Robin Thomas. Quickly excluding a planar graph. J. Comb. Theory, Ser. B, 62(2):323–348, 1994.  [RT87]  Prabhakar Raghavan and Clark D. Tompson. Randomized rounding: a technique for provably good algorithms and algorithmic proofs. Combinatorica, 7:365–374, December 1987.  [RZ10]  Satish Rao and Shuheng Zhou. Edge disjoint paths in moderately connected graphs. SIAM J. Comput., 39(5):1856–1887, 2010.  [SAN90]  Hitoshi Suzuki, Takehiro Akama, and Takao Nishizeki. Finding steiner forests in planar graphs. In Proceedings of the First Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’90, pages 444–453, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 1990. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.  65  [SCS11]  A A.1  Loı̈c Seguin-Charbonneau and F. Bruce Shepherd. Maximum edge-disjoint paths in planar graphs with congestion 2. In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE 52Nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’11, pages 200–209, Washington, DC, USA, 2011. IEEE Computer Society.  Proofs Omitted from Section 2 Proof of Observation 2.1  For every terminal t ∈ T , let vt ∈ V (G) be the unique neighbor of t in G. Let (A, C, B) be the cut |C| computed by algorithm AAKR , whose sparsity β = min{|A∩T |,|B∩T |}+|C∩T | is within factor αAKR of the optimal one. If β > 1, then we replace cut (A, C, B) with the cut (∅, T , V (G) \ T ), obtaining a cut of sparsity 1, and continue with our algorithm, so we assume that β ≤ 1 from now on. While C ∩ T 6= ∅, let t ∈ C ∩ T be any terminal in C. If |A ∩ T | < |B ∩ T |, then we move t from C to A, and if vt 6∈ C, we add vt to C. Let (A0 , C 0 , B 0 ) be the resulting tri-partition of V (G). It is easy to see that (A0 , C 0 , B 0 ) is a valid vertex cut, and |C 0 | ≤ |C|, while min {|A0 ∩ T |, |B 0 ∩ T |} + |C 0 ∩ T | = min {|A ∩ T |, |B ∩ T |} + |C ∩ T |, so the sparsity of the cut does not increase. The case where |B ∩ T | < |A ∩ T | is dealt with similarly. Finally, assume that |A∩T | = |B ∩T |. If vt ∈ A, then we move t from C to A, and otherwise we move t from C to B. Let (A0 , C 0 , B 0 ) be the resulting tri-partition of V (G). It is easy to see that (A0 , C 0 , B 0 ) is a valid vertex cut, and |C 0 | = |C| − 1. It is also easy to verify that min {|A0 ∩ T |, |B 0 ∩ T |} + |C 0 ∩ T | ≥ min {|A ∩ T |, |B ∩ T |} + |C ∩ T | − 1, and min {|A0 ∩ T |, |B 0 ∩ T |} + |C 0 ∩ T | > 0 hold. Since β ≤ 1, the sparsity of the cut does not increase. Once we process all terminals in set C in this fashion, we obtain a final vertex cut (A, C, B) whose sparsity is at most β, and C ∩ T = ∅.  A.2  Proof of Claim 2.2  We compute a partition R(τ ) for every tree τ ∈ F separately. The partition is computed in iterations, where in the jth iteration we compute the set Rj (τ ) ⊆ V (τ ) of vertices, together with the corresponding collection Pj (τ ) of paths. For the first iteration, if τ contains a single vertex v, then we add this vertex to R1 (τ ) and terminate the algorithm. Otherwise, for every leaf v of τ , let P (v) be the longest directed path of τ , starting at v, that only contains degree-1 and degree-2 vertices, and does not contain the root of τ . We then add the vertices of P (v) to R1 (τ ), and the path P (v) to P1 (τ ). Once we process all leaf vertices of τ , the first iteration terminates. It is easy to see that all resulting vertices in R1 (τ ) induce a collection P1 (τ ) of disjoint paths in τ , and moreover if v, v 0 ∈ R1 (τ ), and there is a path from v to v 0 in τ , then v, v 0 lie on the same path in P1 (τ ). We then delete all vertices of R1 (τ ) from τ . The subsequent iterations are executed similarly, except that the tree τ becomes smaller, since we delete all vertices that have been added to the sets Rj (τ ) from the tree. It is now enough to show that this process terminates after dlog ne iterations. In order to do so, we can describe each iteration slightly differently. Before each iteration starts, we contract every edge e of the current tree, such that at least one endpoint of e has degree 2 in the tree, and e is not incident on the root of τ . We then obtain a tree in which every inner vertex (except possibly the root) has degree at least 3, and delete all leaves from this tree. The number of vertices remaining in the contracted tree after each such iteration therefore decreases by at least factor 2. It is easy to see that the number 66  of iteration in this procedure is the same as the numberSof iterations in our algorithm, and is bounded by dlog ne. For each 1 ≤ j ≤ dlog ne, we then let Rj = T ∈F Rj (T ).  A.3  Proof of Lemma 2.3  We denote by T the set of all vertices participating in the demand pairs in M, and we refer to them as terminals. Consider any demand pair (s, t) ∈ M, and let σ(s, t), σ 0 (s, t) be the two segments of C whose endpoints are s and t. We assume without loss of generality that |σ(s, t) ∩ T | ≤ |σ 0 (s, t) ∩ T |, and we denote δ(s, t) = |σ(s, t) ∩ T | − 1. By possibly renaming the terminals s and t, we assume that s appears before t on σ(s, t) as we traverse it in counter-clock-wise direction along C. Our first step is to partition the demand pairs in M into dlog κe subsets N1 , . . . , Ndlog κe , as follows. For each 1 ≤ i ≤ dlog κe, Ni contains all demand pairs (s, t) with 2i−1 ≤ δ(s, t) < 2i . In order to complete the proof of the lemma, it is enough to show that for each 1 ≤ i ≤ dlog κe, we can partition Ni into four sets of demand pairs, each of which is r-split, for some integer r. Fix some 1 ≤ i ≤ dlog κe, and assume that T = {v1 , . . . , v2κ }, where the vertices are indexed in the circular order of their appearance on C. We let A contain all vertices vj , where j = 1 modulo 2i−1 . For convenience, we denote A = {a1 , . . . , az }, and we assume that the vertices of A appear in this circular order on C, with a1 = v1 . If |A| = 1, then |T | ≤ 2i−1 , and so δ(s, t) ≤ 2i−2 for all (s, t) ∈ M, and Ni = ∅. If |A| = 2, then let β, β 0 be the two segments of C between a1 and a2 , where β contains a1 but not a2 , and β 0 contains a2 but not a1 . Then for every pair (s, t) ∈ Ni , one of the two terminals lies on β and the other on β 0 , and so Ni is 1-split. We assume from now on that z ≥ 3. For each 1 ≤ j ≤ z − 1, let βj be the segment of C from aj and aj+1 , as we traverse C in the counterclock-wise order, so that βj includes aj but excludes aj+1 . We let βz be the segment of C from az to a1 , as we traverse C in the counter-clock-wise order, so that βz includes az , but not a1 . Then for every segment βj with 1 ≤ j < z, |βj ∩ T | = 2i−1 , while |βz ∩ T | ≤ 2i−1 . Notice that for every demand pair (s, t) ∈ Ni , one of the following must happen: either (i) s ∈ βj , t ∈ βj+1 for some 1 ≤ j ≤ z, where we treat z + 1 as 1; or (ii) s ∈ βz , t ∈ β2 ; or (iii) s ∈ βz−1 , t ∈ β1 . We are now ready to partition Ni into four subsets. The first subset, Ni1 , contains all pairs (s, t) ∈ Ni with s ∈ βz−1 , t ∈ β1 . The second set, Ni2 , contains all pairs (s, t) ∈ Ni , with s ∈ βz , t ∈ β1 ∪ β2 . It is immediate to verify that each of these two sets is 1-split. The third set, Ni3 , contains all pairs (s, t) ∈ Ni \ (Ni1 ∪ Ni2 ), where s ∈ βj , for an odd index 1 ≤ j < z. This set is bz/2c-split, with the segments β1 , . . . , βz giving the splitting. The last set, Ni4 , contains all pairs (s, t) ∈ Ni \(Ni1 ∪Ni2 ∪Ni3 ). This set is similarly bz/2c-split, since for all (s, t) ∈ Ni4 , s ∈ βj for an even index 1 ≤ j < z. Overall, we obtain a partition of M into 4 dlog κe sets, each of which is r-split for some integer r.  A.4  Proof of Lemma 2.4  Consider any path P ∈ P. A sub-path Q of P is called a bump, if the two endpoints of Q lie on C, and all the intermediate vertices of Q do not lie on C (notice that Q may be simply an edge of C). Since path P is simple, a bump Q cannot contain s. We now define a shadow of a bump Q. If Q is an edge of C, then the shadow of Q is Q itself. Assume now that Q is not an edge of C. Let u, v ∈ V (C) be the two endpoints of Q, and let σ, σ 0 be the two segments of C with endpoints u and v. Let C1 be the union of σ and Q, and C2 the union of σ 0 and Q. Then one of the two corresponding discs, D(C1 ) and D(C2 ) contains s - we assume that it is the latter disc. We then let σ be the shadow of Q on C (see Figure 11). We note that all inner points on the image of Q must lie outside D◦ (C), as otherwise, we can find a cycle 67  C s  t  Q  Figure 11: A bump Q and its shadow C 0 in H with D(C 0 ) containing s and D(C 0 ) ( D(C), contradicting the fact that C = min-cycle(H, s). We obtain the following two simple observations. Observation A.1 Let P ∈ P be any path, and let R be the longest segment of P , starting from s and terminating at a vertex of C, such that R does not contain any vertex of C as an inner vertex. Let v ∈ V (C) be the endpoint of R, and let R0 be the sub-path of P from v to t. Then every point p on the image of R0 lies outside D◦ (C). Proof: If any such point p lies in D◦ (C), then for some bump Q of P , some inner point on the image of Q lies in D◦ (C), and this is impossible, as observed above. Observation A.2 Let P, P 0 ∈ P be two distinct paths, let Q be a bump on P , and let Q0 be a bump on P 0 . Then the shadows of Q and Q0 are node-disjoint. Proof: Let σ be the shadow of Q, and let a, b be its endpoints. Let σ 0 be the shadow of Q0 , and let a0 , b0 be its endpoints. Since the inner points of the images of both Q and Q0 lie outside D◦ (C), and their endpoints are all distinct, if σ and σ 0 are not disjoint, then either σ ( σ 0 , or σ 0 ( σ. Assume without loss of generality that the latter is true. Let A be the disc whose boundary is σ ∪ Q. Then t 6∈ A, but some vertex of P 0 lies in A. Let R0 be the longest sub-path of P 0 starting from s and terminating at a vertex of C, such that R0 is internally disjoint from C. Then there is a vertex v 0 ∈ V (Q0 ), that does not lie on R0 . Let R00 be the sub-path of P 0 from v 0 to t. Then path R00 originates in disc A and terminates outside A. But it can only leave A by traveling inside D◦ (C), which is impossible from Observation A.1. We now re-route each path P ∈ P, as follows. Let u and v be the first and the last vertex of P that belong to C, respectively. Let P̃ be the union of the shadows of all bumps of P . Then P̃ is a path, contained in C, that contains u and v. Let P̃ 0 be a simple sub-path of P̃ connecting u to v, and let P 0 be obtained by concatenating the segment of P from s to u, P̃ 0 , and the segment of P from v to t. Notice that path P 0 is monotone with respect to C, and all paths in the resulting set P 0 = {P 0 | P ∈ P} are internally node-disjoint by Observation A.2.  A.5  Proof of Theorem 2.5  We perform r iterations. At the beginning of the hth iteration, for 1 ≤ h ≤ r, we assume that we are given a set Ph−1 of κ node-disjoint paths in H 0 , connecting the vertices of A to the vertices of B, so that the paths in Ph−1 are internally disjoint from V (C) ∪ V (Y ), and they are monotone with respect to Z1 , . . . , Zh−1 . The output of iteration h is a set Ph of κ node-disjoint paths in H 0 , connecting the vertices of A to the vertices of B, so that the paths in Ph are internally disjoint from V (C) ∪ V (Y ), 68  and they are monotone with respect to Z1 , . . . , Zh . The output of the algorithm is the set Pr of paths computed in the last iteration. For simplicity of notation, we denote Z0 = C, even though C is not a cycle of H. We start with P0 = P. It is immediate to see that this is a valid input to iteration 1. Assume now that we are given a set Ph−1 of paths, which is a valid input to iteration h. S The iteration is then executed as follows. Let H 00 be the graph obtained by starting with H 00 = ( rh=0 V (Zh )) ∪ Ph−1 , and then contracting all vertices lying in D(Zh−1 ) into a source vertex s0 , and all vertices of B into a destination vertex t0 . Since B ⊆ V (Y ), where Y is a connected sub-graph of G, Y ∩ D(Zr ) = ∅, and the paths in Ph−1 are internally disjoint from V (Y ), graph H 00 is a planar graph. Moreover, Zh = min-cycle(H 00 , s0 ) from the definition of tight concentric cycles. We consider the drawing of H 00 in the plane where t0 is incident on the outer face. It is easy to see that Zh = min-cycle(H 00 , s0 ) still holds with respect to this new drawing of H 00 . From Lemma 2.4, there is a set Q of κ internally node-disjoint paths in H 00 , connecting s0 to t0 , that are monotone with respect to Zh . In order to construct the set Ph of paths, let P ∈ Ph−1 be any path, and let vP be the last vertex of P lying on Zh−1 . Let P 0 be the sub-path of P starting from vP and terminating at the endpoint of P lying in B. Notice that from the monotonicity of the paths in Ph−1 with respect to Z1 , . . . , Zh−1 , there are exactly κ edges leaving the vertex s0 in H 00 , each edge lying on a distinct path P ∈ Ph−1 . If edge e is leaving s0 in H 00 , and e lies on P , then it is incident on vP , and so exactly one path of Q originates at vP . We denote this path by QP . For each path P ∈ Ph−1 , we let P ∗ be the path obtained from P by replacing P 0 with QP . Notice that, since the paths in Ph−1 are internally disjoint from B, exactly κ edges are incident on t0 in graph H 0 , each of which is incident on a distinct vertex of B in H. It is now easy to verify that the set Ph contains κ node-disjoint paths, connecting the vertices of A to the vertices of B, and the paths in Ph are internally disjoint from V (C) ∪ V (Y ) and monotone with respect to Z1 , . . . , Zh . We return Pr as the output of the algorithm.  B B.1  Proofs Omitted from Section 3 Proof of Theorem 3.1  The following definition and observation allow us to slightly relax the problem. Definition B.1 Let c ≥ 1 be an integer, and let M0 ⊆ M be a subset of the demand pairs. Given a constraint K = (i, a, b, w) of type 1 or 2, we say that M0 violates K by a factor of at most c, iff the number of the demand pairs (s, t) ∈ M0 with either s or t lying in (a, b) is at most cw. Likewise, given a constraint K = (i, a, b, w) of type 3 or 4, we say that M0 violates K by a factor of at most c iff the number of the demand pairs in M0 crossing K is at most cw. Observation B.1 There is an efficient algorithm, that, given a DPSP instance (σ, σ 0 , M, K) and a non-crossing set M0 ⊆ M of demand pairs that violates every constraint in K by a factor of at most c, for any integer c > 1, computes a subset M00 ⊆ M0 of at least |M0 |/c demand pairs, satisfying all constraints in K. Proof: Assume that M0 = {(sj1 , tj1 ), . . . , (sjz , tjz )}, where sj1 ≺ · · · ≺ sjz and tj1 ≺ · · · ≺ tjz . Let M00 = {(sj` , tj` ) | 1 ≤ ` ≤ z and ` ≡ 1 mod c}. Clearly, M00 ⊆ M0 and |M00 | ≥ |M0 |/c. We now claim that all constraints in K are satisfied by M00 . Indeed, consider any constraint K = (i, a, b, w) ∈ K. Assume first that K is a type-1 constraint. Then at most cw demand pairs in M0 have a source vertex in the interval (a, b). It is easy to see that the 69  number of the demand pairs of M00 that have a source vertex in the interval (a, b) is at most w. If K is a type-2 constraint, the argument is similar. Assume now that K is a type-3 constraint (the case where it is a type-4 constraint is symmetric). Let MK ⊆ M0 be the set of all demand pairs of M0 crossing K. The key observation is that the demand pairs of MK appear consecutively in the ordered set M0 . Since |MK | ≤ cw, it is easy to see that |M00 ∩ MK | ≤ w, and so set M00 satisfies the constraint K. Let r = dlog |M|e, and for 1 ≤ j ≤ r + 1, set Wj = 2j . We partition the constraints of K into r levels, where for 1 ≤ j ≤ r, the jth level contains all constraints (i, a, b, w) with Wj−1 ≤ w < 2 · Wj−1 = Wj . (i) For all 1 ≤ i ≤ 4 and 1 ≤ j ≤ r, we denote by Sj the set of all type-i constraints that belong to level S (i) j. Let Sj = 4i=1 Sj be the set of all level-j constraints. Our algorithm employs dynamic programming. It is convenient to view the algorithm as constructing r dynamic programming tables - one for each level. Consider some level 1 ≤ j ≤ r. Let I = (x, y) ⊆ σ, I 0 = (x0 , y 0 ) ⊆ σ 0 be a pair of intervals. We say that it is a good level-j pair if the following conditions hold for every level-j constraint K = (i, a, b, w) ∈ Sj : C1. if K is a type-1 constraint, then I is not contained in (a, b); C2. if K is a type-2 constraint, then I 0 is not contained in (a, b); C3. if K is a type-3 constraint, then either I is not contained in La , or I 0 is not contained in Rb ; and C4. if K is a type-4 constraint, then either I is not contained in Ra , or I 0 is not contained in Lb . For each 1 ≤ j ≤ r, let Pj denote the set of all good level-j pairs of intervals. The level-j dynamic programming table, Πj contains an entry Πj [I, I 0 ] for every good level-j pair (I, I 0 ) ∈ Pj of intervals. The entry will either remain empty, or it will contain a collection of non-crossing demand pairs from M of cardinality exactly Wj , whose sources lie in I and destinations lie in I 0 . We now describe an efficient algorithm that computes the entries of the dynamic programming tables. We start with j = 1. For every pair (I, I 0 ) ∈ P1 of good level-1 intervals, if there are two distinct non-crossing demand pairs (s, t), (s0 , t0 ) ∈ M with s, s0 ∈ I and t, t0 ∈ I 0 , then we set Π1 [I, I 0 ] = {(s, t), (s0 , t0 )}. Otherwise, we set Π1 [I, I 0 ] = ∅. Assume now that we have constructed the tables for levels 1, . . . , j − 1, and consider the level-j table, for some 1 < j ≤ r, and its entry Πj (I, I 0 ) for some good level-j pair (I, I 0 ) ∈ Pj of intervals, where I = (x, y) and I 0 = (x0 , y 0 ). If there exist two pairs of vertices u, v ∈ I and u0 , v 0 ∈ I 0 such that u ≺ v, u0 ≺ v 0 , and both Πj−1 [(x, u), (x0 , u0 )] and Πj−1 [(v, y), (v 0 , y 0 )] are non-empty, then we set Πj [I, I 0 ] = Πj−1 [(x, u), (x0 , u0 )] ∪ Πj−1 [(v, y), (v 0 , y 0 )]. Otherwise, we set Πj [I, I 0 ] = ∅. This completes the description of the algorithm that computes the entries of the dynamic programming tables. We now proceed to analyze it, starting with the following easy observations. Observation B.2 For all 1 ≤ j ≤ r and (I, I 0 ) ∈ Pj , either |Πj [I, I 0 ]| = 0 or |Πj [I, I 0 ]| = Wj . Proof: The proof is by induction on j. Clearly, the claim holds for j = 1 and all (I, I 0 ) ∈ P1 by our construction. Consider now some j > 1, and assume that the claim holds for all values j 0 < j. Consider some entry Πj (I, I 0 ) of the level-j dynamic programming table. Our algorithm either sets Πj [I, I 0 ] = ∅ or Πj [I, I 0 ] = Πj−1 [(x, u), (x0 , u0 )] ∪ Πj−1 [(v, y), (v 0 , y 0 )]. The latter only happens when both Πj−1 [(x, u), (x0 , u0 )], Πj−1 [(v, y), (v 0 , y 0 )] are non-empty, and so by the induction hypothesis, |Πj−1 [(x, u), (x0 , u0 )]|, |Πj−1 [(v, y), (v 0 , y 0 )]| = Wj−1 , giving us |Πj [I, I 0 ]| = 2 · Wj−1 = Wj .  70  Observation B.3 For all 1 ≤ j ≤ r and (I, I 0 ) ∈ Pj , Πj [I, I 0 ] is a non-crossing subset of the demand pairs in M, where every (s, t) ∈ Tj [I, I 0 ] has s ∈ I and t ∈ I 0 . Proof: The proof is again by induction on j. Clearly, the claim holds for j = 1 and all (I, I 0 ) ∈ P1 from our construction. Consider now some level j > 1 and assume that the claim holds for levels 1, . . . , (j − 1). Let (I, I 0 ) ∈ Pj be a good level-j pair of intervals, with I = (x, y) and I 0 = (x0 , y 0 ). The claim trivially holds when Πj [I, I 0 ] = ∅, so we assume that Πj [I, I 0 ] = Πj−1 [(x, u), (x0 , u0 )] ∪ Πj−1 [(v, y), (v 0 , y 0 )], where x  u ≺ v  y and x0  u0 ≺ v 0  y 0 . From the induction hypothesis, no two demand pairs from Πj−1 [(x, u), (x0 , u0 )] can cross, and the same holds for the demand pairs of Πj−1 [(v, y), (v 0 , y 0 )]. Since every demand pair (s, t) ∈ Πj−1 [(x, u), (x0 , u0 )] has s ∈ (x, u), t ∈ (x0 , u0 ), and every demand pair (s0 , t0 ) ∈ Πj−1 [(v, y), (v 0 , y 0 )] has s0 ∈ (v, y), t0 ∈ (v 0 , y 0 ), it is immediate to verify that no pair of demands (s, t) ∈ Πj−1 [(x, u), (x0 , u0 )] and (s0 , t0 ) ∈ Πj−1 [(v, y), (v 0 , y 0 )] can cross, and for every demand pair (s, t) ∈ Tj [I, I 0 ], s ∈ I and t ∈ I 0 holds. Observation B.4 For all 1 ≤ j ≤ r and (I, I 0 ) ∈ Pj , the set Πj [I, I 0 ] of demand pairs violates every constraint in K by at most factor 4. Proof: Fix some 1 ≤ j ≤ r and (I, I 0 ) ∈ Pj , and consider the corresponding table entry Πj [I, I 0 ]. The claim holds trivially when |Πj [I, I 0 ]| = 0, so we assume that |Πj [I, I 0 ]| = Wj . Consider some (i) constraint K = (i, a, b, w) ∈ Sj 0 , for some level 1 ≤ j 0 ≤ r. if j 0 ≥ j, then w ≥ Wj−1 must hold, while |Πj [I, I 0 ]| = Wj , so the constraint is violated by the factor of at most 4. Consider now the case where j 0 < j. Assume first that i = 1. Note that Πj [I, I 0 ] is the union of exactly 0 2j−j non-empty level-j 0 table entries, each of which contains a set of demand pairs of cardinality exactly Wj 0 . Let R be the set of all these level-j 0 table entries. We claim that there are at most two ˆ Iˆ0 ) ∈ R with Iˆ ∩ (a, b) 6= ∅. Indeed, assume for contradiction that there are 3 such table entries Πj 0 (I, distinct entries in R, say Πj 0 [I1 , I10 ], Πj 0 [I2 , I20 ], and Πj 0 [I3 , I30 ], with I1 ∩ (a, b), I2 ∩ (a, b), I3 ∩ (a, b) 6= ∅. Then at least one of the intervals I1 , I2 , I3 must be contained in (a, b), violating our condition for good level-j 0 pairs of intervals. We conclude that the number of the demand pairs in Πj [I, I 0 ] with a source vertex in (a, b) is bounded by 2 · Wj 0 = 4 · Wj 0 −1 ≤ 4 · w. The proof for the case where i = 2 is analogous. 0  Assume now that K is a type-3 constraint. As before, Πj [I, I 0 ] is the union of exactly 2j−j non-empty level-j 0 table entries, each of which stores a set of demand pairs of cardinality exactly Wj 0 . Let R ˆ Iˆ0 ) ∈ R, be the set of these level-j 0 table entries. We claim that there are at most two entries Πj 0 (I, with Iˆ ∩ La 6= ∅ and Iˆ0 ∩ Rb 6= ∅. Indeed, assume otherwise, and let Πj 0 [I1 , I10 ], Πj 0 [I2 , I20 ], Πj 0 [I3 , I30 ] be three distinct entries in R, such that for each 1 ≤ ` ≤ 3, I` ∩ La 6= ∅ and I`0 ∩ Rb 6= ∅. Assume that I1 , I2 , I3 appear on σ in this order, and recall that from our construction they are disjoint. Then it is easy to see that I2 ⊆ La and I20 ⊆ Rb must hold, contradicting our definition of good level-j 0 pairs of ˆ Iˆ0 ) ∈ R, with Iˆ ∩ La 6= ∅ and Iˆ0 ∩ Rb 6= ∅. terminals. Therefore, there are at most two entries Πj 0 (I, Demand pairs participating in solutions corresponding to other entries in R cannot cross K, and so the number of the demand paris crossing K is at most 2 · Wj 0 = 4 · Wj 0 −1 ≤ 4 · w. The case where K is a type-4 constraint is treated similarly. From the discussion so far, every entry of every dynamic programming table contains a non-crossing set of demand pairs, that violates every constraint of K by at most factor 4. Let M̃ be the largestcardinality set of demand pairs stored in any entry any of the tables, and let OPT be the value of the optimal solution to the DPSP problem instance. The following theorem is central to our analysis. Theorem B.5 If OPT ≥ 2, then |M̃| ≥ OPT/2.  71  We can now apply Observation B.1 to compute a subset M̃0 ⊆ M̃ of at least |M̃|/4 ≥ OPT/8 noncrossing demand pairs satisfying all constraints in K (if |M̃| = 0, then OPT ≤ 1 must hold, and finding an optimal solution is trivial). In order to complete the proof of Theorem 3.1, it now remains to prove Theorem B.5. Proof of Theorem B.5. Denote κ = OPT, and let M∗ = {(s1 , t1 ), . . . , (sκ , tκ )} be the optimal solution to the DPSP instance, where s1 ≺ . . . ≺ sκ and t1 ≺ . . . ≺ tκ . Let r0 be the largest value for which κ/Wr0 ≥ 1 (this is well-defined since we have assumed that OPT ≥ 2). Let M∗∗ ⊆ M∗ contain the first Wr0 demand pairs of M∗ , so |M∗∗ | ≥ |M∗ |/2. We will show that some entry of the level-r0 dynamic programming table stores a solution whose cardinality is at least Wr0 . 0  For every level 1 ≤ j ≤ r0 , we define a partition Sj of M∗∗ into 2r −j subsets, each containing exactly Wj consecutive demand pairs from M∗∗ . For every set S ∈ Sj of the partition, we define a pair (I(S), I 0 (S)) of intervals, with I(S) ⊆ σ and I 0 (S) ⊆ σ 0 , as follows. Let (s, t), (s0 , t0 ) be the first and the last demand pairs of S, respectively (this is well-defined since the demand pairs are non-crossing). 0 Then I(S) = (s, s0 ) and I 0 (S) = (t, t0 ). We denote by Qj the resulting collection of 2r −j pairs of intervals. Note that for every pair (I1 , I10 ), (I2 , I20 ) ∈ Qj , I1 ∩ I2 = ∅ and I10 ∩ I20 = ∅. We need the following claim. Claim B.6 For every 1 ≤ j ≤ r0 , every pair (I, I 0 ) ∈ Qj of intervals is a good level-j pair. Proof: Fix some 1 ≤ j ≤ r0 and some pair (I, I 0 ) ∈ Qj of intervals. From our definition of the pairs of intervals in Qj , there are exactly Wj demand pairs (s, t) in M∗ with s ∈ I and t ∈ I 0 . Consider any level-j constraint K = (i, a, b, w) ∈ Sj , and recall that Wj−1 ≤ w < Wj must hold. Assume first that K is a type-1 constraint. Then I cannot be contained in (a, b), since then M∗ would have Wj > w demand pairs whose sources lie in I, and hence in (a, b). The analysis for type-2 constraints is similar. Assume now that K is a type-3 constraint, and assume for contradiction that I ⊆ La and I 0 ⊆ Rb . Then M∗ has Wj > w demand pairs (s, t) with s ∈ I and t ∈ I 0 , each of which crosses the constraint K, a contradiction. The case where K is a type-4 constraint is proved similarly. From the above claim, for all 1 ≤ j ≤ r0 and (I, I 0 ) ∈ Qj , there is an entry Πj [I, I 0 ] in the level-j dynamic programming table. It is now enough to show that each such entry contains a solution of cardinality Wj . Claim B.7 For each 1 ≤ j ≤ r0 , for every pair (I(S), I 0 (S)) ∈ Qj of intervals, entry Πj [I(S), I 0 (S)] contains a solution of value Wj . Proof: The proof is by induction on j. The claim clearly holds for j = 1, since there are two distinct non-crossing demand pairs (s, t), (s0 , t0 ) with s, s0 ∈ I(S), t, t0 ∈ I 0 (S) - the two demand pair lying in S. Assume now that the claim holds for levels 1, . . . , j − 1, for some 1 < j ≤ r0 , and we would like to prove it for j. Our definition of the partitions S` of M∗∗ ensures that there are exactly two distinct sets S1 , S2 ∈ Sj−1 , with S1 , S2 ⊆ S (and in fact S1 ∪ S2 = S). From the induction hypothesis, the entries of Πj−1 corresponding to pairs (I(S1 ), I 0 (S1 )) and (I(S2 ), I 0 (S2 )) each contain Wj−1 demand pairs, and so Πj [I(S), I 0 (S)] must contain Wj demand pairs. Recall that Sr0 contains a single set of demand pairs - the set M∗∗ . We conclude that the corresponding entry of the level-r0 dynamic programming table contains Wr0 ≥ OPT/2 demand pairs.   72  B.2  Approximation Algorithm for NDP-Disc  In this section we prove Theorem 1.1 for NDP-Disc. The proof builds on the work of Robertson and Seymour [RS86], who gave a precise characterization of the instances NDP-Disc, where all demand pairs can be routed simultaneously. Many of the definitions below are from [RS86]. Let Σ be a disc, whose boundary is denoted by Γ, and let G be any graph drawn on Σ. Suppose we are given a set M = {(s1 , t1 ), . . . , (sk , tk )} of pairs of vertices of G, called demand pairs, and let T be the set of all vertices participating in the demand pairs in M, that we refer to as terminals. We identify the graph G with its drawing. A region of G is a connected component of Σ \ G. We say that the drawing of G is semi-proper if no inner point on an image of an edge of G lies on Γ, and we say that it is proper with respect to M, if additionally V (G) ∩ Γ = T . Suppose we are given a planar graph G, together with a set M of demand pairs, such that G is drawn properly (with respect to M) on Σ. Let W be a set of points on Γ, constructed as follows. First, we add to W all points corresponding to the vertices of T . Next, for every segment β of Γ \ T , we add one arbitrary point p ∈ β to W . A vertex v of G is peripheral if v ∈ Γ, and a region of G is peripheral, if it contains a segment of Γ \ T . Given two points x, y ∈ W , we denote by ∆M (x, y) the total number of the demand pairs (s, t) ∈ M, where either {s, t} ∩ {x, y} = 6 ∅, or s and t belong to different segments of Γ \ {x, y}. We need the following definition. Definition B.2 Given G, M and W as above, for any x, y ∈ W , an (x, y)-chain is a sequence A1 , A2 , . . . , Ar , such that: • for all 1 ≤ i < r, one of Ai , Ai+1 is a vertex of G, the other is a region, and they are incident; • if A1 is a vertex then A1 = x; if A1 is a region then x ∈ A1 ; • similarly, if Ar is a vertex then Ar = y, and if Ar is a region then y ∈ Ar ; and • for all 1 ≤ i ≤ r, Ai is peripheral if and only if i = 1 or i = r. The length of an (x, y)-chain is the number of its terms that are vertices. The redundancy of an (x, y)-chain is its length minus ∆M (x, y). The following theorem, proved by Roberston and Seymour [RS86] characterizes routable sets of demand pairs for the NDP-Disc problem. Theorem B.8 (Theorem 3.6 in [RS86]) Let G be a planar graph properly drawn on a disc Σ, with respect to a set M of demand pairs, and let W be defined as above. Then there is a set of node-disjoint paths, routing all demand pairs in M if and only if: (i) M is a non-crossing set of demand pairs; and (ii) for all x, y ∈ W , every (x, y)-chain has a non-negative redundancy. Moreover, there is an efficient algorithm to determine whether these conditions hold, and if so, to find a routing of the demand pairs in M. Notice that if G is a graph drawn on a disc Σ, such that all terminals appear on the boundary Γ of the disc, then, by slightly altering Γ, we can ensure that the drawing of G is proper with respect to M. Therefore, we assume from now on that we are given a proper drawing ϕ of G on Σ with respect to M. We prove Theorem 1.1 for NDP-Disc in three steps. In the first step, we prove a stronger version of the theorem for the case where G is connected and the set M of terminals is 1-split. In the second step, we prove the theorem for the case where G is 2-connected, and we make no assumptions on the demand pairs. In the third step we prove the theorem without any additional assumptions. 73  B.2.1  Special Case: G is Connected and M is 1-Split  In this section, we prove the following theorem. Theorem B.9 There is an efficient algorithm, that, given a connected planar graph G with a set M of demand pairs, and a proper drawing of G on the disc Σ with respect to M, where M is 1-split with respect to the disc boundary, computes a routing of OPT(G, M)/8 demand pairs of M via node-disjoint paths in G. Recall that if M is 1-split with respect to the boundary Γ of the disc Σ, then we can partition Γ into two disjoint segments, σ and σ 0 , such that for every demand pair (s, t) ∈ M, one of the vertices s, t lies on σ, and the other on σ 0 . We assume without loss of generality that all source vertices of the demand pairs in M lie on σ, and all destination vertices lie on σ 0 . Let T be the set of all vertices participating in the demand pairs in M, that we refer to as terminals. We denote by S and T the sets of the source and the destination vertices of the demand pairs in M, respectively. As before, we construct a set W of points: start with W = T ; then for every segment of Γ \ T , add one arbitrary point of that segment to W . The idea is to reduce this problem to the DPSP problem. We let σ̃ be a directed path, whose vertices correspond to the points of W ∩ σ, ordered in their counter-clock-wise order on Γ. We let σ̃ 0 be a directed path, whose vertices correspond to the points of W ∩ σ 0 , ordered in their clock-wise order on Γ. Therefore, all vertices of S lie on σ̃, and all vertices of T lie on σ̃ 0 . Moreover, M0 is a non-crossing set of demand pairs with respect to σ̃ and σ̃ 0 iff it is non-crossing with respect to Γ. Suppose we are given any pair (x, y) of vertices of W . Let γ(x, y) denote the shortest G-normal curve connecting x to y in the drawing of G on Σ, so that γ(x, y) is contained in the disc Σ. Curve γ(x, y) can be found efficiently by considering the graph G0 dual to G, deleting the vertex corresponding to the outer face of G from it, and computing shortest paths between appropriately chosen vertices of G0 (that correspond to the faces of G incident on x and y). Let `(x, y) be the length of γ(x, y). Notice that, since G is connected, if ∆M (x, y) ≥ 1, then `(x, y) ≥ 1. We now construct a collection K of constraints of the DPSP probem, as follows. For every pair x, y of vertices of W ∩ σ̃, with ∆M (x, y) ≥ 1, we add a type-1 constraint (1, x, y, `(x, y)) to K. Similarly, for every pair x, y of vertices of W ∩ σ̃ 0 , with ∆M (x, y) ≥ 1, we add a type-2 constraint (2, x, y, `(x, y)) to K. For every pair x ∈ W ∩ σ̃, y ∈ W ∩ σ̃ 0 of vertices, with ∆M (x, y) ≥ 1, we add a type-3 constraint (3, x, y, `(x, y)) and a type-4 constraint (4, x, y, `(x, y)) to K. This finishes the definition of the DPSP problem instance. The following observation is immediate. Observation B.10 Let M0 ⊆ M be any set of demand pairs that can be routed via disjoint paths in G. Then M0 is a valid solution to the DPSP problem instance. We apply the 8-approximation algorithm for the DPSP problem, to obtain a set M0 of non-crossing demand pairs (with respect to σ̃ and σ̃ 0 ) satisfying all constraints in K, with |M0 | ≥ |OPT(G, M)|/8. As observed above, the pairs in M0 are non-crossing with respect to Γ. It now only remains to show that all demand pairs in M0 can be routed in G. The algorithm from Theorem B.8 can then be used to find the routing. The following theorem will finish the proof of Theorem B.9. Theorem B.11 Let M0 ⊆ M be a set of non-crossing demand pairs (with respect to σ̃ and σ̃ 0 ), that satisfy all constraints in K. Then all demand pairs in M0 can be routed in G. Proof: Let T 0 = T (M0 ), and let ϕ be the current proper drawing of G with respect to M. Notice that ϕ is not necessarily a proper drawing of G with respect to M0 , since the vertices of T \ T 0 may lie 74  on Γ. We can obtain a proper drawing ϕ0 of G with respect to M0 by moving all such terminals inside the disc, so they no longer lie on Γ. It is immediate to verify that the demand pairs in M0 remain non-crossing with respect to Γ in the new drawing. As before, we construct a set W 0 of points of Γ, by first adding all points corresponding to the terminals of T 0 to W 0 . Additionally, for every segment β of Γ \ T 0 , we add an arbitrary point of β to W 0 . It now remains to show that for every pair x, y of points in W 0 , for every (x, y)-chain in ϕ0 , the redundancy of the chain (with respect to M0 ) is non-negative. Assume otherwise. Let x, y ∈ W 0 be any pair of points, and let A = (A1 , . . . , Ar ) be an x-y chain in the drawing ϕ0 , such that the redundancy of A is negative. We modify the chain A, by replacing A1 and Ar with elements A01 and A0r , as follows. If A1 is a vertex of T 0 , then we let A01 = A1 , and we let x0 = A01 . Otherwise, A1 is a region of G in the drawing ϕ0 . Let v = A2 , so v ∈ V (G). Then v must lie on a boundary of some peripheral region R of G in the drawing ϕ. Let A01 = R, let β(R) be the segment of Γ that serves as part of the boundary of the region R, and let x0 ∈ W be the point lying on the interior of β(R). Similarly, if Ar is a vertex of T 0 , then we let A0r = Ar , and we let y 0 = A0r . Otherwise, Ar is a region of G in the drawing ϕ0 . Let v 0 = Ar−1 , so v 0 ∈ V (G). Then v 0 must lie on a boundary of some peripheral region R0 of G of the drawing ϕ. Let A0r = R0 , let β(R0 ) be the segment of Γ that serves as part of the boundary of the region R0 , and let y 0 ∈ W be the point lying on the interior of β(R). We then obtain a sequence A0 = (A01 , A2 , . . . , Ar−1 , A0r ) (it may not be a valid chain for the drawing ϕ, since some of the elements Ai , for 1 < i < r0 , may be peripheral with respect to ϕ). We can then construct a G-normal curve γ 0 in the original drawing ϕ of G, connecting x0 to y 0 , such that γ 0 ∩ V (G) only contains the vertices that participate in A0 , and γ 0 is contained in Σ. Let ` denote the length of the chain A, and let ∆ = |∆M0 (x, y)|. We can assume that ∆ ≥ 1, since otherwise it is immediate to verify that ∆ ≤ `. Then `(x0 , y 0 ) ≤ `, from the definition of `(x0 , y 0 ). Notice that one of the segments of Γ \ {x, x0 } contains no terminals of T 0 , and the same holds for one of the segments of Γ \ {y, y 0 }. We now consider three cases. Assume first that both x0 and y 0 lie on σ̃. Then pair (s, t) ∈ ∆M0 (x, y) iff s belongs to the sub-path (x0 , y 0 ) of σ̃. Since we assumed that ∆ ≥ 1, we get that ∆M (x0 , y 0 ) ≥ 1, so constraint (1, x0 , y 0 , `(x0 , y 0 )) belongs to K, and we get that ∆ ≤ `(x0 , y 0 ) ≤ `, a contradiction. The case where x0 , y 0 ∈ σ̃ 0 is dealt with similarly. Assume now that x0 ∈ σ̃ and y 0 ∈ σ̃ 0 . As before, since we assumed that ∆ ≥ 1, we get that ∆M (x0 , y 0 ) ≥ 1. Consider the two corresponding type-3 and type-4 constraints K = (3, x0 , y 0 , `(x0 , y 0 )), K 00 = (4, x0 , y 0 , `(x0 , y 0 )) ∈ K. Let Lx0 , Rx0 be the segments of σ̃ from its first endpoint to x0 , and from x0 to its last endpoint, respectively, where both segments include x0 . Define segments Ly0 , Ry0 of σ̃ 0 similarly. Recall that a demand pair (s, t) crosses K iff s ∈ Lx0 and t ∈ Ry0 , and it crosses K 0 iff s ∈ Rx0 and t ∈ Ly0 . Let M1 ⊆ M0 be the set of the demand pairs crossing K, and let M2 ⊆ M0 be the set of the demand pairs crossing K0 . Since M0 is a non-crossing set of demand pairs, it is easy to verify that either M1 \ {(x0 , y 0 )} = ∅, or M2 \ {(x0 , y 0 )} = ∅. We assume without loss of generality that it is the latter. Notice that if (x0 , y 0 ) ∈ M0 , then it belongs to both M1 and M2 . Constraint (3, x0 , y 0 , `(x0 , y 0 )) then ensures that |M1 ∪ M2 | ≤ |M1 | ≤ `(x0 , y 0 ) ≤ `. It is easy to verify that ∆M0 (x, y) ⊆ M1 ∪ M2 , and so ∆ ≤ `, a contradiction. B.2.2  Special Case: G is 2-connected  The goal of this section is to prove the following theorem.  75  Theorem B.12 There is an efficient algorithm, that, given any 2-connected planar graph G, and a set M of k demand pairs for G, such that G is properly drawn on a disc with respect to M, returns an O(log k)-approximate solution to problem (G, M). Proof: Let |M| = k, and let z = 4 dlog ke. We use Lemma 2.3 to compute a partition M1 , . . . , Mz of M into z disjoint subsets, so that for each 1 ≤ i ≤ z, Mi is ri -split for some integer ri . We prove the following lemma. Lemma B.13 There is an efficient algorithm, that, given an index 1 ≤ i ≤ z, computes a solution to instance (G, Mi ) routing Ω(OPT(G, Mi )) demand pairs. Theorem B.12 then easily follows from Lemma B.13, since there is some index 1 ≤ i ≤ z, for which OPT(G, Mi ) = Ω(OPT(G, M)/ log k). In the rest of this section, we focus on proving Lemma B.13. For simplicity, we denote Mi by M and ri by r. We assume that we are given a partition {M1 , . . . , Mr } of M, and a collection σ1 , . . . , σ2r of disjoint segments of Γ, such that for all 1 ≤ j ≤ r, for every demand pair (s, t) ∈ Mj , s ∈ σ2j−1 and t ∈ σ2j . Clearly, for each 1 ≤ j ≤ r, set Mj is 1-split. Therefore, we can use the algorithm from Section B.2.1 in 0 order to compute a set PP of demand pairs, with |M0j | ≥ j of disjoint paths, routing a subset Mj ⊆ Mj P r Ω(OPT(G, Mj )). Since j=1 OPT(G, Mj ) ≥ OPT(G, M), we get that rj=1 |M0j | ≥ Ω(OPT(G, M)). For every 1 ≤ j ≤ r, we compute a subset M00j ⊆ M0j of demand pairs, as follows. If |M0j | ≤ 3, then we   let M00j contain any demand pair from M0j . Otherwise, we assume that M0j = (sj1 , tj1 ), . . . , (sjqj , tjqj ) , where the vertices sj1 , sj2 , . . . , sjqj appear in this counter-clock-wise order on σ2j−1 . We then add to Pr P 0 00 | ≥ M00j all demand pairs (sja , tja ), where a = 1 modulo 3. Notice that rj=1 |M j j=1 Ω(|Mj |) ≥ S r 00 00 Ω(OPT(G, M)). It is now enough to prove that all demand pairs in M = j=1 Mj can be routed in G. It is easy to verify that the demand pairs in M00 are non-crossing, since for each 1 ≤ j ≤ r, the demand pairs in M0j are non-crossing, and pairs that belong to different sets Mj cannot cross. Let T 00 = T (M00 ), and let ϕ00 is a proper drawing of G in Σ with respect to M00 , obtained from the original drawing ϕ by moving all terminals of T \ T 00 to the interior of the disc. We define a set W of points on Γ as before: it contains all terminals of T 00 , and for every segment of Γ \ T 00 , W contains an arbitrary point in the interior of the segment. Let (x, y) ∈ W be any pair of points, and let A = (A1 , A2 , . . . , Ap ) be any (x, y)-chain. Let ` denote the length of A. It is now enough to prove that |∆M00 (x, y)| ≤ `. Assume first that for some 1 ≤ j ≤ z, x, y ∈ σ2j−1 ∪ σ2j . Then ∆M00 (x, y) only contains demand pairs from M00j . Since all demand pairs in M00j can be routed in G via node-disjoint paths, |∆M00 (x, y)| ≤ `. Assume now that x ∈ σ2j−1 ∪ σ2j and y ∈ σ2j 0 −1 ∪ σ2j 0 for some j 6= j 0 . Then ∆M00 (x, y) only contains demand pairs from M00j ∪ M00j 0 . Let N1 = ∆M00 (x, y) ∩ M00j and N2 = ∆M00 (x, y) ∩ M00j 0 . Let N10 = ∆M0 (x, y) ∩ M0j , and let N20 = ∆M0 (x, y) ∩ M0j 0 . Since both M0j and M0j 0 can be routed in G via node-disjoint paths, |N10 |, |N20 | ≤ `. From our selection of the sets M00j , M00j 0 of demand pairs, |N1 | ≤ max {|N10 |/2, 1}, and |N2 | ≤ max {|N20 |/2, 1}. Since graph G is 2-vertex connected, we can assume that either |∆M00 (x, y)| ≤ 1, or ` ≥ 2. In the former case, ` ≥ |∆M00 (x, y)| since the graph is connected. In the latter case, we are now guaranteed that |∆M00 (x, y)| = |N10 | + |N20 | ≤ `. B.2.3  The General Case  In this section, we complete the proof of Theorem 1.1 for NDP-Disc. We assume that the input graph G is connected, since otherwise we can solve the problem separately on each connected component of 76  G. We use a block-decomposition of G. Recall that a block of G is a maximal 2-node-connected component of G. A block-decomposition of G is a tree τ , whose vertex set consists of two subsets, V (τ ) = V1 ∪ V2 , where V1 is the set of all cut-vertices of G, and V2 contains a vertex vB for every block B of G. There is an edge between a vertex u ∈ V1 and vB ∈ V2 iff u ∈ vB . We choose an arbitrary vertex r ∈ V1 as the root of τ . We assume that the value of the optimal solution is at least 10, as otherwise we can route a single demand pair. We then discard from M all demand pairs in which r participates – this changes the value of the optimal solution by at most 1. Over the course of the algorithm, we will gradually change the tree τ , by deleting vertices from it. Given any vertex u in the current tree τ , we let τu denote the subtree of τ rooted at u, and we let Gu be the subgraph of G induced by the union of all blocks B with vB ∈ V (τu ). For every block B, we denote by p(B) the unique vertex of B that serves as the parent of the vertex vB in τ . As the tree τ changes, so do the trees τu and the graphs Gu . If any block B of G contains all the terminals, then we can apply the algorithm from Theorem B.12 to instance (B, M) of NDP-Disc to obtain an O(log k)-approximate solution. Otherwise, for every block B, if we denote by Γ(B) the set of all cut vertices of G that belong to B, and by T (B) the set of all terminals lying in B, then we can draw B inside a disc, so that the vertices of Γ(B) ∪ T (B) lie on its boundary. We gradually construct a solution P to the NDP-Disc instance (G, M), starting from P = ∅. Throughout the algorithm, we ensure that all paths in P are disjoint from the vertices of Gr , where r is the root vertex of τ , and Gr is computed with respect to the current tree τ . Clearly, the invariant holds at the beginning of the algorithm. We maintain a collection B of blocks, that is initialized to B = ∅. For every block B ∈ B, we will define two subsets, MB , M0B ⊆ M of demand pairs, so that eventually, {MB , M0B | B ∈ B} is a partition of M. In every iteration, we consider all vertices vB ∈ V2 that belong to the current tree τ , such that GvB \ p(B) contains at least one demand pair (s, t) ∈ M. Among all such vertices, we choose one that is furthest from the root of the tree, breaking ties arbitrarily. Let vB be the selected vertex. We add B to B, and we define two new subsets of demand pairs MB , M0B , as follows. Set MB contains all demand pairs (s, t) with s, t ∈ GvB \ p(B). Set M0B contains all demand pairs (s, t) with exactly one of s, t lying in GvB \ p(B), while the other terminal must belong to Gr . Notice that any path connecting any demand pair in M0B must use the vertex p(B). Next, we construct a new instance of the NDP-Disc problem, on the graph B. The corresponding set of demand pairs, that we denote by NB , is defined as follows. Consider any demand pair (s, t) ∈ MB . We define a new demand pair (s0 , t0 ) representing (s, t), with s0 , t0 ∈ V (B), and define two paths: Q(s) connecting s to s0 , and Q(t) connecting t to t0 . If s ∈ V (B), then we let s0 = s, and Q(s) = {s}. Otherwise, we let s0 ∈ V1 be the unique child of the vertex vB in τ , such that s ∈ Gs0 . Notice that s0 must be a vertex of B. We then let Q(s) be any simple path connecting s to s0 in graph Gs0 . We define the vertex t0 ∈ B, and a path Q(t) connecting t to t0 similarly. Notice that it is possible that s0 = t0 . Let NB = {(s0 , t0 ) | (s, t) ∈ MB } be the resulting set of demand pairs. All vertices participating in the demand pairs in NB belong to B. Consider the NDP instance (B, N ). It is immediate to verify that we can draw B in a disc, so that all vertices participating in the demand pairs in M(B) lie on the boundary of the disc, and clearly B is 2-connected. We need the following immediate observation. Observation B.14 OPT(B, NB ) ≥ OPT(G, MB ).  77  Proof: Let P̃ be the optimal solution to instance OPT(G, MB ). We can assume that all paths in P̃ are simple. Let P ∈ P̃ be any such path, and assume that P connects some demand pair (s, t) ∈ MB . Then it is easy to see that s0 , t0 ∈ P , and moreover, the segment of P between s0 and t0 is contained in B. By appropriately truncating every path in P̃, we can obtain a solution to instance (B, NB ) of the NDP problem of the same value. Since B is 2-vertex connected, and can be drawn in a disc with all vertices participating in the demand pairs in NB lying on the disc boundary, we can apply the algorithm from Theorem B.12 to instance (B, NB ), to compute a set P(B) of node-disjoint paths, routing a subset of at least Ω(OPT(B, NB )/ log k) demand pairs of MB in B. We can assume that |P(B)| ≥ 1, since otherwise we can route any demand pair in NB . We would like to ensure that all paths in P(B) avoid the vertex p(B). If |P(B)| = 1, then, since B is 2-vertex connected, we can re-route the unique path in P(B) inside B, so that its endpoints remain the same, but it avoids the vertex p(B) (since GvB \ p(B) contains at least one demand pair, we can ensure that the endpoints of the path are distinct from p(B)). Otherwise, we discard from P(B) the path that uses vertex p(B), if such exists. By concatenating the paths in P(B) with the paths in {Q(s), Q(t) | (s, t) ∈ M(B)}, we obtain a collection P 0 (B) of at least Ω(OPT(B, N )/ log k) node-disjoint paths, connecting demand pairs in M(B). We add the paths in P 0 (B) to P, and delete from τ all vertices of τvB . Since we have ensured that the paths in P 0 (B) are disjoint from p(B), the invariant that the paths in P are disjoint from the new graph Gr continues to hold. The algorithm terminates when no demand pair (s, t) ∈ M is contained in Gr . We claim that the resulting collection {M(B), M0 (B) | B ∈ B} of sets of demand pairs partitions M. Indeed, consider any demand pair (s, t) ∈ M, and consider the last iteration i when both s, t ∈ Gr . Let vB be the vertex that was processed in the following iteration. If both s, t ∈ GvB \p(B), then (s, t) was added to MB . Otherwise, exactly one of s, t belongs to GvB \ p(B), while the other belongs to Gr , so (s, t) was added to M0B . We now obtain a set P of disjoint paths, routing a subset of vertices in M. We show that |P| ≥ Ω(OPT(G, M)/ log k). Let P ∗ be the optimal solution to instance OPT(G, M), and let M∗ be the set of the demand pairs routed by P ∗ . For every block B ∈ B, let M̃(B) = M∗ ∩ MB , and let M̃0B = M∗ ∩ M0B . From Observation B.14, set P 0 (B) of paths routes at P least Ω(OPT(B, NB P)/ log k) ≥ Ω(OPT(G, MB )/ log k) ≥ 0 (B)| ≥ Ω(|M̃B |/ log k) demand pairs. Therefore, |P| = |P B∈B B∈B Ω(|M̃B |/ log k). On the 0 other hand, as observed above, for every block B ∈ B, |M̃B | ≤ 1 (since P all paths routing the 0 pairs in M̃0B contain vertex p(B)), while |P 0 (B)| ≥ 1. Therefore, |P| ≥ B∈B |M̃B |. Overall, P |P| ≥ B∈B Ω((|M̃B | + |M̃0B |)/ log k) = Ω(|M∗ |/ log k).  B.3  Approximation Algorithm for NDP-Cylinder  In this section we prove Theorem 1.1 for NDP-Cylinder. Recall that in the NDP-Cylinder problem, we are given a cylinder Σ, obtained from the sphere, by removing two open discs from it. We denote the boundaries of the two discs by Γ1 and Γ2 , respectively. We assume that we are given a graph G, drawn on Σ, and a set M of demand pairs. We denote by S and T the sets of all source and all destination vertices participating in the demand pairs in M. We say that a drawing of G is proper with respect to S and T iff the vertices of S lie on Γ1 , the vertices of T lie on Γ2 , and no other edges or vertices of G intersect Γ1 or Γ2 . We can assume without loss of generality that we are given a proper drawing of the input graph G on Σ with respect to S and T . We also assume that the graph G is connected, as otherwise we can solve the problem for each connected component of G separately. We assume that we know the value OPT of the optimal solution to instance (G, M), and a demand pair (s∗ , t∗ ) ∈ M that is routed by some optimal solution to instance (G, M). We can make these assumptions by solving the problem for every possible value of OPT between 1 and |M|, and every choice of (s∗ , t∗ ) ∈ M. It is enough to show that the algorithm returns the desired solution when the value OPT and the pair 78  (s∗ , t∗ ) are guessed correctly. We can also assume that OPT > 10, since otherwise routing a single demand pair gives a desired solution. We define a set W1 of points on Γ1 , as follows. First, we add to Γ1 all points corresponding to the vertices of S. Next, for every segment of Γ1 \ W1 , we add an arbitrary point on the segment to W1 . We define a set W2 of points on Γ2 similarly, using T instead of S. Our first step is to compute the shortest G-normal curve γ ∗ ⊆ Σ, connecting a point of W1 to a point of W2 . We consider two cases. Assume first that the length of γ ∗ is less than OPT/2. Then we can cut the cylinder Σ along the curve γ ∗ , deleting from G all vertices lying on γ ∗ , to obtain a disc Σ0 , and a drawing of G on Σ0 , where all terminals of S ∪ T lie on the boundary of the disc. It is easy to see that the value of the optimal solution of the resulting problem instance is at least OPT/2. We can now apply the O(log k)approximation algorithm for NDP-Disc from Section B.2 to obtain an O(log k)-approximate solution to the new NDP-Disc instance, which in turn gives an O(log k)-approximate solution to the original instance of NDP-Cylinder. We assume from now on that the length of γ ∗ is at least OPT/2. We reduce the problem to DPSP. Let σ be cycle, whose vertices are W1 , and they are connected in the order of their appearance on Γ1 . We delete the edge of σ incident on s∗ , that appears after s∗ in the counter-clock-wise traversal of Γ1 , and direct all edges of the resulting path away from s∗ . We define a path σ 0 similarly - start with the cycle, whose vertices are W2 , and they are connected in the order of their appearance on Γ2 . Delete the edge incident on t∗ , that appears after t∗ in the counter-clock-wise traversal of Γ2 , and direct all edges of the resulting path away from t∗ . Our next step is to define a set K of constraints for the DPSP problem instance. The instance we construct will only contain type-1 and type-2 constraints. Let a∗ be the last vertex of σ. The first constraint that we add to K is (1, s∗ , a∗ , OPT/2). This constraint ensures that overall we will not attempt to route more than OPT/2 demand pairs. Consider now any pair x, y ∈ W1 of points. Let β1 (x, y) and β2 (x, y) be the two segments of Γ1 whose endpoints are x and y. For i ∈ {1, 2}, we let `i (x, y) be the smallest number of vertices that need to be removed from G, in order to disconnect all vertices of βi (x, y) ∩ S from the vertices of T - this value can be computed efficiently using standard minimum cut algorithms. Let wi = `i (x, y). We assume w.l.o.g. that x lies before y on σ. If s∗ is not an inner vertex on βi (x, y), then we add the constraint (1, x, y, wi ) to K. Otherwise, we add two constraints: (1, s∗ , x, wi ) and (1, y, a∗ , wi ) to K. For every pair of points (x, y) ∈ W1 , we therefore add at most three type-1 constraints to K. We process all pairs of points (x, y) ∈ W2 , and add corresponding type-2 constraints to K similarly, except that we use t∗ instead of s∗ . This finishes the description of the DPSP instance. We start with the following easy observation. Observation B.15 Let P ∗ be the optimal solution to the NDP instance (G, M), such that (s∗ , t∗ ) is routed by P ∗ , and let M∗ be the set of the demand pairs routed by P ∗ . Let M∗∗ ⊆ M∗ be any subset of b|M∗ |/2c demand pairs. Then M∗∗ is a feasible solution to the DPSP instance (σ, σ 0 , M, K). Proof: Since we assume that the demand pair (s∗ , t∗ ) is routed by P ∗ , and since the demand pairs in M∗ must be non-crossing with respect to Γ1 and Γ2 , due to the way in which we have defined the paths σ and σ 0 , set M∗∗ must be non-crossing with respect to σ and σ 0 . Recall that we have added the constraint (1, s∗ , a∗ , |OPT|/2) to K, where s∗ and a∗ are the endpoints of σ. Since |M∗∗ | ≤ |M∗ |/2 = |OPT|/2, set M∗∗ satisfies this constraint. Consider now any pair (x, y) of points in W1 , and fix some i ∈ {1, 2}. Since set M∗ of demand pairs is routable in G, the number of the source vertices of the demand pairs in M∗ that lie on βi (x, y) is at most `i , as the value of the minimum cut separating the vertices of S ∩ βi (x, y) from the vertices 79  of T is `i . It is now easy to verify that all type-1 constraints in K corresponding to the pair (x, y) are satisfied by M∗ , and hence by M∗∗ . Type-2 constraints are dealt with similarly. Our next step is to use the algorithm from Theorem 3.1, in order to compute a set M0 ⊆ M of non-crossing (with respect to σ and σ 0 ) demand pairs, satisfying all constraints in K, with |M0 | ≥ Ω(OPT(G, M)/ log k). We assume that M0 = {(s1 , t1 ), . . . , (sr , tr )}, where s1 , . . . , sr appear in this circular order on Γ1 , and if (s∗ , t∗ ) ∈ M0 , then s1 = s∗ . If |M0 | ≤ 10, then a routing of a single demand pair gives a feasible solution to the NDP problem instance and achieves the desired approximation ratio. Therefore, we assume that |M0 | > 10. We let M00 contain all demand pairs (sj , tj ), where j = 0 modulo 8, and 1 ≤ j ≤ r. Notice that M00 excludes the pair (s∗ , t∗ ). Let S 00 and T 00 be the sets of the source and the destination vertices of the demand pairs in M00 . We need the following theorem. Theorem B.16 There is a set P of |S 00 | node-disjoint paths in G, connecting the vertices of S 00 to the vertices of T 00 . We prove Theorem B.16 below, after we complete the proof of Theorem 1.1 using it. Denote |M00 | = κ∗ , and recall that from our constraints, κ∗ ≤ |OPT|/4. Our first step is to construct a collection Z = (Z1 , . . . , Zκ∗ ) of κ∗ tight concentric cycles around Γ1 , where we consider a planar drawing of G, whose outer face contains Γ2 . In order to do so, we denote Γ1 = Z0 , and perform κ∗ iteration, where in the ith iteration we construct the cycle Zi . In order to execute the ith iteration, for 1 ≤ i ≤ κ∗ , we contract D(Zi−1 ) into a single vertex s, to obtain a new graph Hi . We view the face of Hi containing Γ2 as the outer face in the planar drawing of Hi , and we then let Zi = min-cycle(H, s). Since the length of the shortest G-normal curve connecting a point of Γ1 to a point of Γ2 is at least |OPT|/2 > κ∗ , it is easy to verify that we can successfully complete the construction of the set Z of κ∗ cycles, so that all cycles are disjoint from the vertices lying on Γ2 . Our next step is to re-route the paths in P, so that they become monotone with respect to Z. In order to do so, we construct a graph H, as follows. We start with the union of the paths in P and the cycles in Z. We then add a new cycle Y connecting the vertices of T 00 in the order in which they appear on Γ2 . We can now use Theorem 2.5 to find a collection P 0 of κ∗ node-disjoint paths in H, connecting vertices of S 00 to vertices of T 00 , that are monotone with respect to Z. It is easy to see that the paths of P 0 are contained in G. We assume that P 0 = {P1 , P2 , . . . , Pκ∗ }, and for each 1 ≤ i ≤ κ∗ , we denote by ai ∈ S 00 and bi ∈ T 00 the endpoints of Pi . We assume that a1 , a2 , . . . , aκ∗ appear in this circular order on Γ1 . Consider the source vertex a1 ∈ S 00 , and let (a1 , b1+z ) ∈ M00 be the demand pair in which a1 participates. We can assume without loss of generality that z ≤ κ∗ /2, since if this is not the case, we can re-order the vertices a1 , . . . , aκ∗ in the opposite direction around Γ1 . Observe that for all 1 ≤ j ≤ bκ∗ /2c, pair (aj , bj+z ) ∈ M00 , since the demand pairs in M00 are non-crossing. We now show how to route all demand pairs in {(aj , bj+z )}1≤z≤bκ∗ /2c . Fix some 1 ≤ j ≤ bκ∗ /2c. We view the paths in P 0 as directed from S 00 to T 00 . Let Pj0 be the sub-path of Pj from aj to the first vertex vj of Pj lying on Zκ∗ −j+1 . 00 0 Let Pj+z be the sub-path of Pj+z , from the last vertex vj+z of Pj+z lying on Zκ∗ −j+1 to bj+z . Finally, 0 let Qj be the segment of Zκ∗ −j+1 between vj to vj+z , that intersects the paths Pj , Pj+1 , . . . , Pj+z , but 00 no other paths of P 0 . By combining Pj0 , Pj+z and Qj , we obtain a path Pj∗ , connecting aj to bj+z . n o We then set P ∗ = Pj∗ | 1 ≤ j ≤ z . It is immediate to verify that the paths in P ∗ are node-disjoint. Therefore, we obtain a solution routing Ω(OPT(G, M)) demand pairs in M. It now only remains to prove Theorem B.16. Proof of Theorem B.16. Assume for contradiction that there is no such set of paths. Denote |S 00 | = κ and recall that κ < OPT/2. Then there is a set Y of at most κ − 1 vertices, so that G \ Y contains no path connecting a vertex of S to a vertex of T . Consider the drawing of G on the 80  sphere Σ00 , obtained from the drawing of G on the cylinder Σ, by adding back the two caps with the boundaries Γ1 and Γ2 . We can then construct a simple closed G-normal curve γ of length at most κ − 1 in Σ00 , so that all vertices of S 00 lie in one of the discs of Σ00 with boundary γ, and all vertices of T 00 lie on the other disc (but the vertices of S 00 and T 00 may lie on γ). Notice that γ has to cross Γ1 or Γ2 . Indeed, otherwise, since there are OPT node-disjoint paths connecting the vertices of Γ1 to the vertices of Γ2 , all such paths would have to cross γ, and so the length of γ should be at least OPT > κ, a contradiction. Moreover, since the length of the shortest G-normal curve connecting a point of Γ1 to a point of Γ2 is at least OPT/2 > κ, curve γ may not intersect both Γ1 and Γ2 . We assume without loss of generality that γ crosses Γ1 , and not Γ2 . Let R be the set of segments of γ, obtained by deleting all points of γ that lie outside the cylinder Σ (that is, the points that lie in the interior of the cap whose boundary is Γ1 ). All curves in R are mutually disjoint. For each curve γ 0 ∈ R, S let S(γ 0 ) ⊆ S 00 be the set of the source vertices that γ 0 separates from Γ2 in the cylinder Σ. Then γ 0 ∈R S(γ 0 ) = S 00 must hold, and so there must be some curve γ ∗ ∈ R, such that the length of γ ∗ is less than |S(γ ∗ )|. Let `∗ denote the length of γ ∗ . Let x0 , y 0 be the endpoints of the curve γ ∗ , so x0 , y 0 ∈ Γ1 . If x0 ∈ W1 , then we let x = x0 . Otherwise, we let x be the closest to x0 point of W1 \ S 00 on Γ1 . We define point y 0 for y similarly. Consider the two segments β1 (x, y) and β2 (x, y) of Γ1 , whose endpoints are x and y. One of the segments, say β1 (x, y) must contain all points of S(γ ∗ ). Since the vertices lying on γ ∗ separate all vertices of S(γ ∗ ) from the vertices of T , `1 (x, y) ≤ `∗ . Assume without loss of generality that x lies before y on σ. Assume first that s∗ does not lie on β1 (x, y), and consider the corresponding constraint K = (1, x, y, w1 ) ∈ K. As observed above, w1 ≤ `∗ . Due to the way we have selected the subset M00 ⊆ M0 of the demand pairs, we are guaranteed that |S(γ ∗ )| ≤ w1 /2 ≤ `∗ , a contradiction. Assume now that s∗ lies on β1 (x, y). Using the same reasoning as above, w1 ≤ `∗ . Let β10 , β100 be the segments of β1 (x, y) between x and s∗ , and between s∗ and y, respectively, where the last segment excludes s∗ . Let ∆1 , ∆01 be the number of the source vertices lying on β1 and β100 respectively, that participate in the demand pairs in M0 . Since the constraints (1, s∗ , x, w1 ) and (1, y, a∗ , w1 ) belong to K, ∆1 + ∆01 ≤ 2`∗ . Due to the way we have selected the subset M00 ⊆ M0 of the demand pairs, we are guaranteed that |S(γ ∗ )| ≤ max {w1 , 1} ≤ `∗ , a contradiction.   C C.1  Proofs Omitted from Section 4 Proof of Theorem 4.2 ∗  w Let τ = 512·log k . The algorithm is iterative and maintains a set U of vertices. We start with U = ∅, and in every iteration we add vertices to U . The algorithm terminates when no vertices have been added to U in an iteration. Each iteration is executed as follows:  Let H denote the set of all connected components of G \ U , and for each H ∈ H, let TH ⊆ T (M) denote the set of all terminals contained in V (H). For each H ∈ H with |V (H) ∩ TH | > 3, we use Observation 2.1 to compute a vertex cut (A, C, B) in H whose sparsity ϕ with respect to TH is within a factor αAKR from the value of the sparsest cut, and C ∩ TH = ∅. If ϕ < τ , then we add the vertices of C to U . This finishes the description of the iteration execution. Consider the set {G1 , . . . , Gr } of all components of G \ U once the algorithm For all  terminates. r 1 ≤ j ≤ r, let Mj = {(si , ti ) ∈ M | si , ti ∈ V (Gj )}. The algorithm output is (Gj , Mj ) j=1 . Clearly, the algorithm is efficient and terminates after at most n + 1 iterations, since the size of U  81  increases after each iteration, except for the last one. It is easy to see that no edge connects a vertex of Gj to a vertex of Gj 0 for any 1 ≤ j 6= j 0 ≤ r, from the definition of the graphs Gj . We now verify that for all 1 ≤ j ≤ r, (Gj , Mj ) is a well-linked instance. Fix some 1 ≤ j ≤ r, and let T 0 , T 00 ⊆ T (Mj ) be two disjoint equal-sized subsets of T (Mj ). Assume for contradiction that there are fewer than αWL · |T 0 | node-disjoint paths in Mj connecting the vertices of T 0 to the vertices of T 00 . Then by Menger’s Theorem, there exists a set Z ⊆ V (Gj ) of fewer than αWL · |T 0 | vertices in Gj , such that there is no path from T 0 to T 00 in Gj \ Z. Note that we may assume that Z ∩ T (Mj ) = ∅. Otherwise, since the terminals have degree 1 and form an independent set in G, we may simply replace each terminal in Z with its unique neighbor. Consider a vertex cut (A0 , C 0 , B 0 ) of Gj , defined as follows: C 0 = Z, A0 is the union of the vertices of all components of Gj \ Z intersecting T 0 , and B 0 = V (Gj ) \ (A0 ∪ C 0 ). This is a valid vertex cut, with T 0 ⊆ A0 and T 00 ⊆ B 0 . The sparsity of cut |Z| αWL |T 0 | (A0 , C 0 , B 0 ) with respect to T (Mj ) is at most min{|TH ∩A 0 |,|T ∩B 0 |} < min{|T 0 |,|T 00 |} = αWL . Therefore, H the algorithm from Observation 2.1 should have returned a cut of sparsity less than αAKR · αWL = τ , a contradiction. S  ∗ ·|M| r V (G ) ≤ w 64 We now show that |U | = V (G) \ . Consider a single iteration of the algoj j=1 rithm. Let H be any component of G \ U , and let TH be the set of all terminals contained in V (H). Suppose the algorithm computes a vertex cut (A, C, B) in H with respect to TH of sparsity ϕ < τ , and adds the vertices of C to U . Assume without loss of generality that |A ∩ TH | ≤ |B ∩ TH |. Since we have |C| . Moreover, since ϕ < τ , |C| < τ · |A ∩ TH | assumed that C ∩ TH = ∅, the sparsity of the cut ϕ = |A∩T H| must hold. We charge the value of τ to every terminal in A ∩ TH , so that the total amount charged to the terminals of A∩TH is τ ·|A∩TH | ≥ |C|. This charging scheme is repeated whenever a set of vertices is added to U throughout the different iterations and components considered by the algorithm. Note that a terminal may be charged during multiple iterations, but at most once per iteration. Clearly, the sum of the total charges to all of the terminals is at least |U |. Also, each terminal t ∈ T (M) can be charged at most blog 2kc times, since whenever t is charged and U is updated, the number of terminals in the component containing t in G \ U falls by at least a factor 2. Therefore, the total w∗ ·|M| w∗ charge to all terminals is at most τ · |T (M)| · log 2k ≤ ( 512·log k ) · (log 2k) · |T (M)| ≤ 64 , and |U | is also bounded by this amount. P Finally, we verify that rj=1 |Mj | ≥ 63|M|/64. Recall that for each demand pair (si , ti ) ∈ M, the S  r j . If (s , t ) ∈ M̃, current LP-solution sends w∗ flow units between si and ti . Let M̃ = M \ M i i j=1 then all of the w∗ flow units between si and ti must pass through U . Since |U | ≤ and the theorem follows.  C.2  w∗ ·|M| 64 ,  |M̃| ≤  |M| 64 ,  Proof of Lemma 4.4  We use the notion of treewidth, which is usually defined via tree decompositions. A tree decomposition of a graph H consists of a tree τ and a collection {βv ⊆ V (H)}v∈V (τ ) of vertex subsets, called bags, such that the following two properties are satisfied: (i) for each edge (a, b) ∈ E(H), there is some node v ∈ V (τ ) with both a, b ∈ βv and (ii) for each vertex a ∈ V , the set of all nodes of τ whose bags contain a form a non-empty connected subtree of τ . The width of a given tree decomposition is maxv∈V (τ ) {|βv |} − 1, and the treewidth of a graph H, denoted by tw(H), is the width of a minimumwidth tree decomposition for H. Claim C.1 For each 1 ≤ j ≤ r, tw(Gj ) ≥  Wj . 212 ·αAKR ·log k  82  We first prove the lemma assuming Claim C.1. It is well known that any planar graph of large treewidth contains a large grid as a minor [RST94, DH05]. We use the following theorem. Theorem C.2 (Theorem 1.2 in [DH05]) For any fixed graph H, every H-minor-free graph of treewidth w has an (Ω(w) × Ω(w)) grid as a minor. Therefore, in particular, every planar graph of treewidth w contains an (Ω(w) × Ω(w)) grid as a minor. So Gj must contain a grid minor of size (Ω(Wj / log k) × Ω(Wj / log k)). Since all terminals have degree 1 in G, the number of the non-terminal vertices, Nj ≥ Ω(Wj2 / log2 k). It now remains to prove Claim C.1. Proof of Claim C.1. For convenience, we let κ = |T (Mj )|. Assume for contradiction that tw(Gj ) < Wj Wj and consider a tree decomposition τ of width less than 212 ·αAKR . Note that τ cannot 212 ·αAKR ·log k ·log k W  j be a singleton vertex, as κ > 212 ·αAKR , since Wj = w∗ · κ/2 and w∗ < 1. For any given subtree τ 0 ·log k S of τ , we let β(τ 0 ) = u∈V (τ 0 ) βu . We say that a vertex v ∈ V (τ ) is good iff every component of G \ βv contains at most κ/2 terminals.  Claim C.3 There is a good vertex in τ . Proof: Note that for a vertex v ∈ V (τ ), if τ1 , . . . , τ` are the connected subgraphs of τ \ {v}, then every connected component C of Gj \ βv must have V (C) ⊆ β(τp ) \ βv for some 1 ≤ p ≤ `. Also note that the sets {β(τ1 ) \ βv , . . . , β(τ` ) \ βv } are pairwise vertex disjoint. Root the tree τ at any vertex v0 , and start with v = v0 . While the current vertex v has a child vi , such that the sub-tree τi of τ rooted at vi has |(β(τi ) \ βv ) ∩ T (Mj )| > |T (Mj )|/2, we set v = vi , and continue to the next iteration. It is immediate to verify that when the algorithm terminates, the final vertex v is good. Let v ∈ V (τ ) be a good vertex, and let C1 , . . . , Ca denote the connected components of Gj \ βv . For ∗ ·κ Wj all 1 ≤ p ≤ a, let κp = |T (Mj ) ∩ Cp |. Note that |βv | ≤ 212 ·αAKR = 213 ·αwAKR ≤ κ/4, and hence ·log k ·log k P a 0 j |T (M ) \ βv | = p=1 κp ≥ 3κ/4. We claim that there exist two disjoint subsets T , T 00 ⊆ T (Mj ) \ βv such that |T 0 | = |T 00 | = dκ/8e, while T 0 and T 00 are separated by βv in Gj . Let 1 ≤ b < a be the P P P smallest index for which bp=1 κp ≥ κ/8. Then bp=1 κp ≤ (1/8 + 1/2)κ = 5κ/8, and so ap=b+1 κp ≥ S  S  b a j ) and T 00 ⊆ j) , (3/4 − 5/8)κ = κ/8. We then let T 0 ⊆ C ∩ T (M C ∩ T (M p p p=1 p=b+1 respectively, be subsets of size dκ/8e, so T 0 ∩ T 00 = ∅, and βv separates T 0 from T 00 in Gj . Since the terminals are αWL -well-linked in Gj , there is a set of at least αWL · |T 0 | = w∗ ·κ 212 ·αAKR ·log k  W  w∗ ·|T 0 | 512·αAKR ·log k ≥ 00 are separated  j = 212 ·αAKR node-disjoint paths from T 0 to T 00 in Gj . Since T 0 and T ·log k by βv in G \ βv , each path must intersect at least one distinct vertex of βv . However, we have assumed Wj that |βv | < 212 ·αAKR , a contradiction.  ·log k  83  D  Table of Parameters  αWL  w∗ 512·αAKR ·log k  ∆   2/19  W  Minimum distance between terminals in distinct terminal sets of X .  ∆0  Θ(∆ log n)  Maximum distance between terminals in each terminal set of X .  τ  W 18/19  Threshold for light and heavy clusters in X  ∆1  b∆/6c  Depth of shells in Case 1  ∆2  b∆1 /3c  Depth of inner shells in Case 1  = Θ(w∗ / log k)  well-linkedness parameter, where k is the number of the demand pairs in the original instance.  84

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
