Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_5998

Abstract:
1  A Robust Consensus Algorithm for Current Sharing and Voltage Regulation in DC Microgrids  arXiv:1708.04608v1 [math.OC] 15 Aug 2017  Michele Cucuzzella, Sebastian Trip, Claudio De Persis, Antonella Ferrara, and Arjan van der Schaft  Abstract—In this paper a novel distributed control algorithm for current sharing and voltage regulation in Direct Current (DC) microgrids is proposed. The DC microgrid is composed of several Distributed Generation units (DGus), interfaced with Buck converters, and current loads. The considered model permits an arbitrary network topology and is affected by unknown load demand and modelling uncertainties. The proposed control strategy exploits a communication network to achieve current sharing using a consensus-like algorithm. Voltage regulation is achieved by constraining the system to a suitable manifold. Two robust control strategies of Sliding Mode (SM) type are developed to reach the desired manifold in a finite time. The proposed control scheme is formally analyzed, proving the achievement of current sharing, while guaranteeing that the average voltage of the microgrid is identical to the average of the voltage references. The latter objective is often desired in practical implementations, but difficult to obtain, even with advanced control methodologies, rendering the proposed solution relevant for the further deployment of DC microgrids. Index Terms—DC Microgrids, Sliding mode control, Uncertain systems, Current sharing, Voltage regulation.  I. I NTRODUCTION  I  N the last decades, due to economic, technological and environmental aspects, the main trends in power systems focused on the modification of the traditional power generation and transmission systems towards smaller and Distributed Generation units (DGus). Moreover, the ever-increasing energy demand and the concern about the climate change have encouraged the wide diffusion of Renewable Energy Sources (RES). The so-called microgrids have been proposed as conceptual solutions to integrate different types of RES and to electrify remote areas. Microgrids are low-voltage electrical distribution networks, composed of clusters of DGus, loads and storage systems interconnected through power lines [1]. Due to the widespread use of Alternate Current (AC) electricity in most industrial, commercial and residential applications, the recent literature on this topic mainly focused on AC microgrids [2]–[6]. However, several sources and loads This work is supported by the EU Project ‘ITEAM’ (project reference: 675999). Also, this work is part of the research programme ENBARK+ with project number 408.urs+.16.005, which is (partly) financed by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO). M. Cucuzzella (corresponding author) and A. Ferrara are with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria Industriale e dell’Informazione, University of Pavia, via Ferrata 5, 27100 Pavia, Italy, (e-mail: michele.cucuzzella@gmail.com, antonella.ferrara@unipv.it). S. Trip and C. De Persis are with ENTEG, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, the Netherlands, (email: {s.trip, c.de.persis}@rug.nl). A. van der Schaft is with the Johann Bernoulli Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 9, 9747 AG Groningen, the Netherlands, (email: a.j.van.der.schaft@rug.nl).  (e.g. photovoltaic panels, batteries, electronic appliances and electric vehicles) can be directly connected to DC microgrids by using DC-DC converters. Indeed, several aspects make DC microgrids more efficient and reliable than AC microgrids [7]: i) lossy DC-AC and AC-DC conversion stages are reduced, ii) there is not reactive power, iii) harmonics are not present, iv)frequency synchronization is overcome, v) skin effect is absent. Moreover, a DC microgrid can be connected to an islanded AC microgrid (even to the main grid) by a DC-AC bidirectional converter, forming a so-called hybrid microgrid [6], [8]. Moreover, the growing need of interconnecting distant power networks (e.g. off-shore wind farms) has encouraged the use of High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) technology, which is advantageous not only for long distances, but also for underwater cables, asynchronous networks and grids running at different frequencies [9]. Different control approaches have been investigated in the literature (see for instance [10]–[12] and the references therein). Finally, DC microgrids are widely deployed in e.g. ships, aircrafts and trains, and are recently used for large charging facilities for electric vehicles. For all these reasons, DC microgrids are attracting growing interest and receive much research attention. Two main control objectives in DC microgrids are voltage regulation and current sharing (or, equivalently, load sharing). Regulating the voltages is required to ensure a proper functioning of connected loads [13]–[15], whereas current sharing prevents the overstressing of any source. In order to achieve both objectives, hierarchical control schemes are conventionally adopted [16]. In these hierarchical control schemes, a primary (low level) control, typically based on a droop method, is designed to perform load sharing. However, since traditional droop controllers cannot guarantee to achieve both the aforementioned objectives simultaneously [17], the primary control is usually supplemented with a secondary (high level) control to maintain the voltages in a microgrid close to their desired reference values. In the literature, these control problems in DC microgrids have been addressed by different approaches. To compensate steady state error due to primary droop controller, a distributed secondary controller based on averaging the total current supplied by the sources is proposed in [18], while decentralized and distributed secondary integral control strategy are formally analyzed in [19]. In [20] each power converter is equipped with current and voltage regulators. The latter uses the average voltage estimation made by an observer to perform global voltage regulation. In [21] the authors propose a consensus-based secondary controller for current sharing and voltage balancing even in presence of plugging-in or -out of  2  DGus. An oscillatory current sharing is designed in [22] for DC microgrids where single-phase inverter and/or three-phase unbalanced AC loads are introduced. A consensus algorithm that guarantees power sharing in presence of ‘ZIP’ (constant impedance, constant current, constant power) loads, as well as preservation of the weighted geometric average of the source voltages is designed and formally analyzed in [23]. A. Main contributions This paper proposes a novel robust control algorithm to obtain simultaneously current sharing among the DGus and a form of voltage regulation in the network. In order to achieve current sharing, a communication network is exploited where each DGu communicates in real-time the value of its generated current to its neighbouring DGus. Adding this additional communication layer to achieve current sharing, leading to a distributed controller, has been widely adopted and studied thoroughly. In comparison to the existing results in the literature, we additionally propose the design of a manifold that couples the aforementioned objective of current sharing to the objective of voltage regulation. By doing this, the proposed control algorithm guarantees that the average voltage of the microgrid is equal to the average of the reference voltages, which is commonly called voltage balancing [21]. This is achieved independently of the initial voltage conditions, facilitating plug-and-play capabilities. To constrain the state of the system to the designed manifold in a finite time, we propose robust controllers of Sliding Mode (SM) type [24]–[26]. SM control is appreciated for its robustness property against a wide class of modelling uncertainties and external disturbances, commonly present in DC microgrids. In this paper, we first propose a Second Order Sliding Mode (SOSM) controller that determines the, possibly non-constant, switching frequency of the power converter, which might lead increased the power losses. Then, to overcome this issue, we additionally propose a third order sliding mode controller (3SM) to obtain a continuous control signal that can be used as the duty cycle of the power converter. Furthermore, the proposed control solution is robust with respect to failed communication. In fact, if the communication among the DGus is disabled, then the voltage of each node converges in a finite time to the corresponding reference value. For the considered microgrid model, convergence to the state of current sharing and voltage regulation is theoretically analyzed, and we show that convergence is achieved globally, for any initialization of the microgrid. B. Outline The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II the microgrid model is presented, while in Section III the control problem is formulated. In Section IV the proposed manifold-based consensus algorithm is designed, and in Section V sliding mode control strategies are proposed to reach the desired manifold. In Section VI the stability properties of the controlled system are analyzed, while in Section VII the simulation results are illustrated and discussed. Some conclusions are gathered in Section VIII.  TABLE I D ESCRIPTION OF THE USED SYMBOLS State variables Iti Vi Iij  Generated current Load voltage Exchanged current Parameters  Rti Lti Cti Ri  Filter resistance Filter inductance Shunt capacitor Line resistance Inputs  ui ILi  Control input Unknown current demand  II. DC M ICROGRID M ODEL In this work we consider a typical buck converter-based DC microgrid of which a schematic electrical diagram is provided in Figure 1 for a two DGus network. The energy source of a DGu is represented by a DC voltage source VDC , and it is interfaced with the electric DC network through a DC-DC Buck converter. The local DC load is connected to the socalled Point of Common Coupling (PCC) and it can be treated as a current disturbance IL (see also Remark 2). At the output of the Buck converter a low-pass filter Rt Lt Ct is considered, where Rt represents the filter parasitic resistance. Moreover, the DGui can exchange power with the DGuj through the resistive line Rij . By applying the Kirchhoff’s current (KCL) and voltage (KVL) laws, the governing dynamic equations∗ of the i-th node (DGu) are the following: Lti I˙ti Cti V̇i  = −Rti Iti − Vi + ui X = Iti − ILi − Iij ,  (1)  j∈Ni  where Ni is the set of nodes (i.e., the DGus) connected to the i-th DGu by distribution lines, while the control input ui represents the buck converter output voltage. The current from DGu i to DGu j is denoted by Iij . Exploiting the Quasi Stationary Line (QSL) approximation of power lines [27], for each j ∈ Ni , one has Iij  =  1 Rij (Vi  − Vj ).  (2)  The symbols used in (1) and (2) are described in Table I. The overall network is represented by a connected and undirected graph G = (V, E), where the nodes, V = {1, ..., n}, represent the DGus and the edges, E = {1, ..., m}, represent the distribution lines interconnecting the DGus. The network topology is represented by its corresponding incidence matrix ∗ For notational simplicity, the dependence of the variables on time t is omitted throughout most of the paper.  3  Line ij  DGu i R ti  I ti  Lti  PCCi Vi ILi  VDC i  Buck i  ui  DGu j  Rij  PCCj  Iij  Ltj  Itj  Rtj  Vj ILj C tj  Cti  uj  Buck j  VDC j  Fig. 1. The considered electrical diagram of a (Kron reduced) DC microgrid composed of two DGus.  B ∈ Rn×m . The ends of edge k are arbitrarily labeled with a + and a −, and the entries of B are given by   +1 if i is the positive end of k Bik = −1 if i is the negative end of k   0 otherwise. By substituting (2) in (1), the overall microgrid system can be written compactly for all nodes i ∈ V as Lt I˙t Ct V̇  = −Rt It − V + u = It − BR−1 B T V − IL ,  (3)  where V, It , IL , u ∈ Rn . Moreover, Ct , Lt , Rt ∈ Rn×n and R ∈ Rm×m are positive definite, diagonal matrices, e.g. Rt = diag(Rt1 , . . . , Rtn ). To permit the controller design in the next sections, the following assumption is introduced on the available information of the system: Assumption 1: (Available information) The state variables Iti and Vi are locally available at the i-th DGu. The network parameters Rt , Lt , Ct , R, and the current demand IL are constant and unknown, but with known bounds.  Remark 1: (Varying parameters and current demand) We assume that the parameters and the current demand are constant, to allow for a steady state solution and to theoretically analyze the stability of the microgrid. Yet, the control strategy that we propose in the next sections is applicable even if this assumption is removed.  Remark 2: (Kron reduction) Note that in (1), the load currents are located at the PCC of each DGu (see also Figure 1). This situation is generally obtained by a Kron reduction of the original network, yielding an equivalent representation of the network [19]. It is important to realize that the network (topology) of the Kron reduced network is generally unknown and differs from the original network. It is therefore desirable that a control structure is independent of the underlying distribution network.   u, a steady state solution (I t , V ) to system (3) satisfies† V 0  In this section we make the considered control objectives explicit. First, we note that for a given constant control input  (4)  where 1n ∈ Rn is the vector consisting of all ones. The second equation of (4) implies that, at steady state, the total generated current is equal to the total current demand. To improve the generation efficiency, it is generally desired that the total current demand is shared among the various DGus (current sharing). This leads us to the first objective concerning the desired steady state value of the generated currents I t ‡ . Objective 1: (Current sharing) lim It (t) = I t = 1n i∗t ,  t→∞  with i∗t =  1 T n 1n IL  ∈ R.  (5)   From (3) it then follows that the corresponding steady state voltages V satisfy BR−1 B T V = 1n i∗t −IL , that prescribes the value of the required differences in voltages, B T V , achieving current sharing. This admits the freedom to shift all steady state voltages with the same constant value, since B T V = B T V + a1n , with a ∈ R any scalar. To define the optimal steady state voltages, we assume that for every DGu, there exists a desired reference voltage Vi? . Assumption 2: (Desired voltages) There exists a constant reference voltage Vi? at the PCC, for all i ∈ V.  Generally, the requirement of current sharing does not permit for V = V ∗ , and might cause voltages deviations from the corresponding reference values. Then, a reasonable alternative is to keep the average value of the PCC voltages at the steady state identical to the average value of the desired reference voltages of V ? (voltage balancing) [21]. Therefore, given a V ? , we aim at designing a controller that, in addition to Objective 1, also guarantees voltage balancing, i.e., † The  III. C URRENT S HARING AND VOLTAGE BALANCING  = −Rt I t + u = 1Tn (I t − IL ),  incidence matrix B, satisfies 1T n B = 0. slightly more general objective is to share the currents proportionally to some weighing factor among the various inverters. Although most required modifications are straightforward, adapting the proof of Lemma 6 to that case is nontrivial. Therefore, we leave the case of proportional current sharing to a future work. ‡A  4  Objective 2: (Voltage balancing) 1 1 1 lim 1Tn V (t) = 1Tn V = 1Tn V ? . t→∞ n n n  (6)   that indeed has the form of a consensus protocol, permitting a steady state where I t ∈ im(1n ) (see also Objective 1). We impose the following restrictions on (11):  By substituting (1) and (6), in (4), one can easily verify that achieving Objective 1 and Objective 2 prescribes the steady state output voltages of the buck converters, u.  Assumption 3: (Controller structure) For all i ∈ V, the integrators states θi are initialized to zero, i.e., θ(0) = 0. Furthermore, the graph corresponding to the topology of the communication network is undirected and connected.   Lemma 1: (Optimal feedforward input) If system (3), at steady state, achieves Objective 1 and Objective 2, then the control input u to system (3) is given by  −1   opt −1 T ∗ ū = − BR B − Ψ ΨV + IL , (7)  Whereas connectedness of the communication graph is needed to ensure power sharing among all DGus, the consequence of the required initialization of θ(0) is that the average value of the entries of θ is preserved and identical to zero for all t ≥ 0, as proved in the following lemma:  with  Lemma 2: (Preservation of 1Tn θ) LetPAssumption 3 hold. Given system (11), the average value n1 i∈V θi is preserved, i.e., 1 1 T 1 θ(t) = 1Tn θ(0) for all t ≥ 0. (12) n n n  −1  Ψ=  T  Rt )1n 1Tn  (In + BR B 1Tn Rt 1n  ,  (8)  and In ∈ Rn×n the identity matrix. Proof: When Objective 1 and Objective 2 hold, the steady state of (3) necessarily satisfies  Proof: Pre-multiplying both sides of (11) by 1Tn yields 1Tn θ̇ = −1Tn Lc It = 0,  0 = −Rt 1n i∗t − V + u 0 = 1n i∗t − BR−1 B T V − IL  (13)  (9)  where 1Tn Lc = 0, follows from Lc being the Laplacian matrix associated with an undirected graph.  with i∗t = n1 1Tn IL ∈ R. A tedious, but straightforward, calculation permits to solve (9) for u, yielding (7).  The fact that 1Tn θ(t) = 0, is essential to the second aspect of the proposed solution, the design of a manifold. Bearing in mind Objective 2, aiming at voltage balancing where  0 = 1Tn V − 1Tn V ∗ ,  In order to determine (7), exact knowledge of almost all network parameters, as well as the current demand IL , is required. Since this information is not available (see also Assumption 1), we propose in the next sections distributed controllers that, provably, achieve voltage balancing using only local measurements of Vi , and that achieve current sharing by exchanging information on Iti among neighbours over a communication network. IV. T HE P ROPOSED S OLUTION : A M ANIFOLD -BASED C ONSENSUS A LGORITHM In this section we introduce the key aspects of the proposed solution to achieve Objective 1 and Objective 2, consisting of a consensus algorithm and the design of a manifold to where the solutions to the system should converge. First, we augment system (3) with additional state variables (distributed integrators) θi , i ∈ V, with dynamics given by X θ̇i = − γij (Iti − Itj ), (10) j∈Nic  Nic  where is the set of the DGus that communicate with the i-th DGu, and γij = γji ∈ R>0 are additional gain constants. Let Lc denote the (weighted) Laplacian matrix associated with the communication graph, which can be different from the topology of the (reduced) microgrid. Then, the dynamics in (10) can be expressed compactly for all nodes i ∈ V as θ̇ = −Lc It ,  (11)  1 T 1 1 1 V (t) = 1Tn V = 1Tn V ? , n n n n we propose the following desired manifold: lim  t→∞  {(It , V, θ) : V − V ? − θ = 0}.  (14)  (15)  Indeed, exploiting the preservation of 1Tn θ, we have on the desired manifold (15), 1Tn V = 1Tn (θ + V ? ) = 1Tn V ? . Constraining the solutions to a system to a specific manifold is typical for sliding mode based controllers, and we will discuss some suitable controller designs in the next section. V. S LIDING MODE CONTROLLERS We now propose a Distributed Second Order Sliding Mode (D-SOSM) control law, and a Distributed Third Order Sliding Mode (D-3SM) control law, to steer, in a finite time, the state of system (3), augmented with (11), to the desired manifold (15). As will be discussed in the coming subsections, the choice of the particular control law, D-SOSM or D-3SM, depends on the desired implementation. First, to facilitate the upcoming discussion, we recall the following definitions that are essential to sliding mode control:  Definition 1: (Sliding function) Consider system ẋ = ζ(x, u),  (16)  5  with state x ∈ Rn , and input u ∈ Rm . The sliding function σ(x) : Rn → Rm is a sufficiently smooth output function of system (16).  Definition 2: (r–sliding manifold) The r–sliding manifold§ is given by (r−1)  {x ∈ Rn , u ∈ Rm : σ = Lζ σ = · · · = Lζ  σ = 0}, (17)  with bmaxi , Gmini and Gmaxi being positive constants. According to the theory underlying the so-called Suboptimal SOSM (SSOSM) control algorithm [28], the i-th SOSM control law, that can be used to steer ξ1i and ξ2i , to zero in a finite time, even in presence of uncertainties, is given by  , (23) ui = −µi Umaxi sgn ξ1i − 12 ξ1max i with  (r−1)  where Lζ σ(x) is the (r−1)-th order Lie derivative of σ(x) along the vector field ζ(x, u). With a slight abuse of notation (2) we also write Lζ σ(x) = σ̇(x), and Lζ σ(x) = σ̈(x).  Definition 3: (r–order sliding mode (controller)) A r– order sliding mode is enforced from t = Tr ≥ 0, when, starting from an initial condition, the state of (16) reaches the r–sliding manifold, and remains there for all t ≥ Tr . The order of a sliding mode controller is identical to the order of the sliding mode that it is aimed at enforcing.  Bearing in mind the definitions above and the desired manifold (15), we consider the following sliding function σ ∈ Rn : ?  σ(V, θ) = V − V − θ.  (18)  A. Second order SM control: variable switching frequency Regarding the sliding function (18) as the output function of system (3), (11), it appears that the relative degree¶ is two. This implies that a second order sliding mode (SOSM) controller can be naturally applied in order to make the state of the controlled system reach, in a finite time, the sliding manifold {(It , V, θ) : σ = σ̇ = 0}. According to the SOSM control theory, the auxiliary variables ξ1 = σ and ξ2 = σ̇ have to be defined, resulting in the so-called auxiliary system ξ˙1 = ξ2 (19) ξ˙2 = b(It , V, IL , u) + Gd u. Taking into account the expressions for σ and σ̇, a straightforward calculation shows that, in the auxiliary system (19), the expression for b ∈ Rn is given by  −1 −1 T −1 b = − (Ct−1 +Lc )L−1 B Ct It t Rt + Ct BR  + Ct−1 BR−1 B T Ct−1 BR−1 B T − (Ct−1 +Lc )L−1 V t +Ct−1 BR−1 B T Ct−1 IL − Ga u, (20) where Gd , Ga ∈ Rn×n are Gd = (Ct−1 + Dc )L−1 t , −1 Ga = Ac Lt .  (21)  Here, Dc and Ac are the degree matrix and the adjacency matrix of the communication graph, respectively, i.e. Lc = Dc − Ac . We assume that the entries of b and Gd have known bounds for all i ∈ V: |bi | ≤ bmaxi (22) Gmini ≤ Gdii ≤ Gmaxi , § For the sake of simplicity, the order r of the sliding manifold is omitted in the remainder of this paper. ¶ The relative degree is the minimum order ρ of the time derivative (ρ) σi , i ∈ V, of the sliding variable associated with the i-th node in which the control ui , i ∈ V explicitly appears.    Umaxi  4bmaxi bmaxi > max ; ∗ µi Gmini 3Gmini − µ∗i Gmaxi   3Gmini ∗ µi ∈ (0, 1] ∩ 0, , Gmaxi   ,  (24) (25)  µi switching between µ∗i and 1, according to [28, Algoin (23) can be detected rithm 1]. The extremal value ξ1max i by implementing for instance a peak detector as in [29]. Note that only the value of ξ1i , i.e., Vi − Vi? − θi , is required to generate the control signal ui . Remark 3: (Switching frequency) The discontinuous control signal (23) can be directly used in practice to open and close the switch of the Buck converter. As a result, the Insulated Gate Bipolar Transistors (IGBTs) switching frequency cannot be a-priori fixed and the power losses could be high. Usually, in order to achieve a constant IGBTs switching frequency, Buck converters are controlled by implementing the so-called Pulse Width Modulation (PWM) technique. To do this, a continuous control signal, that represents the socalled duty cycle of the Buck converter, is required. In the next subsection we will clarify how a continuous control input can be obtained.  B. Third Order SM control: duty cycle To ensure a continuous control input (duty cycle), we adopt the procedure suggested in [28] and first integrate the (discontinuous) control signal generated by a sliding mode controller, yielding for system (3) augmented with (11) Lt I˙t = Ct V̇ = θ̇ = u̇ =  −Rt It − V + u It − BR−1 B T V − IL −Lc It v,  (26)  where v is the new (discontinuous) control input. Note that the Rt input signal to the converter, u(t) = 0 v(τ )dτ , is continuous, so that ui can be used as duty cycle for the switch of the i-th Buck converter. A consequence is that the system relative degree (with respect to the new control input v) is now equal to three, so that we need to rely on a third order sliding mode (3SM) control strategy to reach the sliding manifold {(It , V, θ) : σ = σ̇ = σ̈ = 0} in a finite time. To do so, we define the auxiliary variables ξ1 = σ, ξ2 = σ̇ and ξ3 = σ̈, and build the auxiliary system as follows ξ˙1 ξ˙2 ξ˙3 u̇  = = = =  ξ2 ξ3 β(I˙t , V̇ , v) + Gd v v,  (27)  6  where β ∈ Rn , is given by −1 −1 T −1 ˙ (Ct−1 +Lc )L−1 B Ct It t Rt + Ct BR  −1 −1 T −1 −1 T Ct BR B Ct BR B − (Ct−1 +Lc )L−1 V̇ t    β= − + −Ga v,  (28) with Gd and Ga as in (21). Then, we assume that the entries of β can be bounded as |βi (·)| ≤ βmaxi  ∀i ∈ V,  (29)  where βmaxi is a known positive constant. Remark 4: (Uncertainty of b, β and Gd ) The mappings b, β and matrix Gd are uncertain due to the presence of the unmeasurable current demand IL and possible network parameter uncertainties. However, relying on Assumption 1 and observing that b and β depend on the electric signals related to the finite power of the microgrid, b, β and Gd are in practice bounded. Generally, the bounds of the unknown quantities can be determined by data analysis and engineering understanding.  Now, the 3SM control law proposed in [30] can be used to steer ξ1i , ξ2i and ξ3i , i ∈ V, to zero in a finite time. It is given by    v1i = sgn(σ̈  σi ∈ M1i /M0i  i) σ̈i2 v1i vi = −αi σi ∈ M2i /M1i v2i = sgn σ̇i + 2αr i   v3i = sgn(si (σi )) otherwise, (30) where σi = [σi , σ̇i , σ̈i ]T and   3  σ̈i3 1 σ̈i2 2 σ̇i σ̈i si (σi ) = σi + 2 + v2i √ + v2i σ̇i + , 3αri α ri 2αri αri with αri = αi Gmini − βmaxi > 0.  (31)  Then, given the bounds Gmini and βmaxi , the control amplitude αi is chosen such that αri is positive. The manifolds M1i , M2i , M3i in (30) are defined as  M0i = σi ∈ R3 : σi = σ̇i = σ̈i = 0  σ̈ 3 i |σ̈i | =0 M1i = σi ∈ R3 : σi − 6αi2 = 0, σ̇i + σ̈2α ri ri  M2i = σi ∈ R3 : si (σi ) = 0 . From (30), one can observe that the controller of DGui requires not only σi , but also σ̇i and σ̈i . Yet, according to Assumption 1, only Iti and Vi are measurable at the i-th DGu. Then, one can rely on Levant’s second-order differentiator [31] to retrieve σ̇i and σ̈i in a finite time. Consequently, for system (27), the estimators are given by 2   3 ˙ ξˆ1i = −λ0i ξˆ1i − ξ1i sgn ξˆ1i − ξ1i + ξˆ2i 1   ˙ ˙ 2 ˙ (32) ξˆ2i = −λ1i ξˆ2i − ξˆ1i sgn ξˆ2i − ξˆ1i + ξˆ3i   ˙ ˙ ξˆ3i = −λ2i sgn ξˆ3i − ξˆ2i , ¨i are the estimated where ξˆ1i = σ̂i , ξˆ2i = σ̂˙ i and ξˆ3i = σ̂ values of ξ1i = σi , ξ2i = σ̇i and ξ3i = σ̈i , respectively.  The estimates obtained via (32) can be used in (30), replacing the original variables. The other parameters are λ0i = 1/3 1/2 3Λi , λ1i = 1.5Λi , λ2i = 1.1Λi , Λi > 0, as suggested in [31]. Remark 5: (Scalability and distributed control) Since the selected sliding function (18) is designed by using the additional state θ in (11), the overall control scheme is indeed distributed, and only information on generated currents It needs to be shared. More precisely, the controller of the i-th DGu needs information only from the DGus that communicate with it. Note that the design of the local controller for each DGu is not based on the knowledge of the whole microgrid, so that the complexity of the control synthesis does not depend on the microgrid size. Specifically, the synthesis of the ith local controller requires the knowledge of the bounds of Gmini , Gmaxi , bmaxi (SSOSM), βmaxi (3SM), which depend on the parameters of the i-th DGu and of the DGus and lines connected to it. Note that only the estimate of the bounds of these parameters is required, not their exact knowledge.  Remark 6: (Alternative SM controllers) In this work we rely on the SOSM control algorithm proposed in [28] and the on the 3SM control law proposed in [30]. However, the results in this paper are obtained independent of the particular choice of sliding mode controller. In case of the SOSM controller, any other SOSM control algorithm that does not need the measurement of σ̇ can be used (e.g. the super-twisting control [32]), to constrain system (3) augmented with dynamics (11) on the sliding manifold σ = σ̇ = 0, with σ as in (18). Similarly, any other 3SM control law can be used (e.g. the ones proposed in [31] or in [33]), to constrain system (3) augmented with dynamics (27) on the sliding manifold σ = σ̇ = σ̈ = 0, with σ as in (18). An interesting continuation of the presented results is to study the performance of various SM controllers within the setting of current sharing and voltage regulation in DC microgrids.  VI. S TABILITY A NALYSIS In this section we first show that the states of the controlled microgrid are constrained, after a finite time, to the manifold σ = 0, where Objective 2 is achieved. Thereafter, we prove that the solutions to the system, once the sliding manifold is attained, converge exponentially to a constant point, achieving additionally Objective 1. A. Equivalent control and equivalent system As a first step, we study the convergence to the sliding manifold when the SSOSM or the 3SM control law is applied to the system. Lemma 3: (Convergence to the sliding manifold: SSOSM) Let Assumption 1 hold. The solutions to system (3) augmented with (11), controlled via the SSOSM control law (23), converge in a finite time Tr , to the sliding manifold {(It , V, θ) : σ = σ̇ = 0}, with σ given by (18).  7  Proof: Following [28], the application of (23) to each converter guarantees that σ = σ̇ = 0, for all t ≥ Tr . The details are omitted, since they are an immediate consequence of the used SSOSM control algorithm [28]. Lemma 4: (Convergence to the sliding manifold: 3SM) Let Assumption 1 hold. The solutions to system (3) augmented with (11), controlled via 3SM control algorithm (27)(32), converge in a finite time Tr , to the sliding manifold {(It , V, θ) : σ = σ̇ = σ̈ = 0}, with σ given by (18). Proof: By implementing the Levant’s differentiator (32) in each node, the values of ξ1 , ξ2 , ξ3 , are estimated in a finite time TLd ≥ 0. Then, the application of (30) to each converter guarantees that σ = σ̇ = σ̈ = 0, for all t ≥ Tr ≥ TLd . The details are omitted, since they are an immediate consequence of the used Levant’s second order differentiator [31], and the 3SM control algorithm [30].  equivalent version of the control input fed into the plant is given by∗∗  ueq = Rt +Lt (Ct−1 +Lc )−1 Ct−1 BR−1 B T Ct−1 It −1 + In×n − Lt (Ct−1 +Lc )−1  Ct (35) −1 T −1 −1 T · BR B Ct BR B V −1 −1 −1 −1 T −1 −Lt (Ct +Lc ) Ct BR B Ct IL . Once the sliding manifold is attained, the dynamics of system (3), augmented with (11), are described by the so-called equivalent system obtained by substituting ueq for u. The equivalent system of the controlled microgrid is determined in the following lemma: Lemma 5: (Equivalent system) For all t ≥ Tr , the dynamics of the controlled microgrid are given by the equivalent version of system (3) augmented with (11), and are as follows I˙t = −AIt θ̇ = −Lc It ,  As we will show in the proof of Theorem 2 in the next subsection, converging to the sliding manifold where σ = 0, is sufficient to conclude that Objective 2 (voltage balancing) is achieved. We postpone the analysis, in order show additionally convergence to a constant voltage. For the analysis of the system, when the solutions are constrained to the sliding manifold, it is convenient to introduce the so-called equivalent controlk .  (36)  with A = (In×n + Ct Lc )−1 BR−1 B T Lc .  (37)  Proof: After substituting expression (35) for u in (3), the dynamics of the generated current It become I˙t =  (In×n +Ct Lc )−1 BR−1 B T Ct−1 It −(In×n +Ct Lc )−1 BR−1 B T Ct−1 BR−1 B T V −(In×n +Ct Lc )−1 BR−1 B T Ct−1 IL .  (38)  Definition 4: (Equivalent control) Consider system (16) and the sliding function σ. Assume that a r–order sliding mode exists on the manifold (17). Assume also that a solution to (r) system σ (r) = Lζ σ = 0, with respect to the control input u, exists. This solution is called equivalent control and is denoted by ueq [24].   Moreover, the sliding constraint σ̇ = 0, implies that V̇ = θ̇ for all t ≥ Tr . Then, one can straightforwardly obtain the following algebraic relation:  Relying on the proposed sliding function (18), the equivalent control ueq in case of SOSM can be derived from (19) by posing σ̈ = ξ˙2 = 0. More precisely, define b̃ = b + Ga u, then ueq is given by  B. Exponential convergence and objectives attainment  ueq = −(Gd − Ga )−1 b̃  ∀ t ≥ Tr .  ∀ t ≥ Tr .  (34)  ˙ Since v = u̇, and β̃ = b̃, then the equivalent version of the control input actually fed into the plant is equal to (33), even when a third order sliding mode control law is applied. Therefore, exploiting expression (33), for any t ≥ Tr , the k The  (39)  Finally, (36) is obtained by substituting (39) in (38).  In the pervious subsection, we established that after a finite time Tr , the dynamics of the controlled microgrid are described by the equivalent system (36). To the stability analysis, the following properties of matrix A are essential†† :  (33)  Analogously, by defining β̃ = β + Ga v, the equivalent control veq in case of 3SM can be derived from (27) by posing σ (3) = ξ˙3 = 0, i.e., veq = −(Gd − Ga )−1 β̃  BR−1 B T V = (In×n + Ct Lc )It − IL .  equivalent control describes the average effect of the discontinuous control when the controlled system is constrained to the sliding manifold. It is a conventional tool in the analysis of sliding mode control systems. Note that, it is not the control that is directly applied to system since, due to the uncertain terms, it is unknown.  Lemma 6: (Properties of A) Matrix A (i) has nonnegative eigenvalues; (ii) has a zero eigenvalue, with algebraic multiplicity one; (iii) satisfies ker(A) = im(1n ). Proof: Basic algebraic manipulations show that A =P −1 Ct−1 BR−1 B T P − P −1 Ct−1 BR−1 B T Ct−1 ,  (40)  Ct−1  with P = + Lc being a positive definite matrix. After the similarity transformation P , preserving the eigenvalues, we have A v Ct−1 BR−1 B T Ct−1 (Ct + P −1 ) = Ã,  (41)  ∗∗ It can be verified that (35) is equivalent to (7) when current sharing (Objective 1) and voltage balancing (Objective 2) are achieved. †† We thank Xiadong Cheng for his suggestions on the proof.  8  which has the same spectrum as ZCt−1 BR−1 B T Ct−1 Z T ,  DGu 1  z }| { It1 − IL1  V1  L14  R14  It4 − IL4  V4  (42) R12  where Z, obtained e.g. by Cholesky decompostion, is invertible and satisfies Ct + P −1 = ZZ T . Then, by Sylvester’s law of inertia, matrix Ã has the same inertia‡‡ as the weighted Laplacian matrix BR−1 B T , such that indeed properties (i) and (ii) hold. Property (iii) then immediately follows from B T 1n = 0.  L34  γ12  γ34  γ23 L12  It2 − IL2  V2  R34 R23  L23  V3  It3 − IL3  Fig. 2. Scheme of the considered (Kron reduced) microgrid with 4 power converters. The dashed lines represent the communication network.  We can now establish the first main result of this paper.  I˙t = −AIt ,  (43)  with A as in (37). Bearing in mind the properties established in Lemma 6, the matrix −A is semistable [34, Proposition 1] and therefore limt→∞ It (t) exists for all initial conditions It (Tr ). Since (43) is linear and ker(A) = im(1n ), the solution to system (43), with initial condition It (Tr ), converges exponentially to a constant vector, achieving current sharing.  Exploiting Theorem 1, we proceed with establishing the second main result of this paper. Theorem 2: (Achieving voltage balancing) Let Assumptions 1–3 hold. Consider system (3), (11), controlled with the proposed distributed SSOSM (Subsection V-A) or 3SM (Subsection V-B) control scheme. Then, given a desired references vector V ? , the voltages V (t) satisfy n1 1Tn V (t) = n1 1Tn V ? for all t ≥ Tr , with Tr a finite time. Furthermore, from time Tr , the voltages V (t) converges exponentially to a constant vector. Proof: Following Lemma 3 or Lemma 4, for all t ≥ Tr , the equality V (t) = V ? + θ(t) holds. Pre-multiplying both sides by 1Tn yields 1Tn V (t) = 1Tn V ? + 1Tn θ(t). Due to Assumption 3 and by virtue of Lemma 2, one has that 1Tn θ(t) = 1Tn θ(0) = 0. Then, one can conclude that voltage balancing is achieved for all t ≥ Tr . Furthermore, according to Lemma 5, for all t ≥ Tr , the dynamics of the controlled microgrid are given by the autonomous system (36). We established in Theorem 1, that for system (36), It converges exponentially to a constant vector in im(1n ). Consequently, the right hand side of (36) vanishes exponentially, such that θ converges exponentially to a constant vector. Therefore, apart from achieving voltage balancing, from t ≥ Tr , the voltages V converge exponentially to a constant vector as well. ‡‡ The inertia of a matrix is a triple of the number of positive eigenvalues, negative eigenvalues and eigenvalues equal to zero  380.4 V1 V2 V3 V4!  V (V)  380.2 380  1 n  379.8 379.6  0  0.5  i∈V  Vi  1  1.5  time (s) 30  It (A)  Theorem 1: (Achieving current sharing) Let Assumptions 1–3 hold. Consider system (3), (11), controlled with the proposed distributed SSOSM (Subsection V-A) or 3SM (Subsection V-B) control scheme. Then, the generated currents It (t) converge, after a finite time, exponentially to n1 1n 1Tn IL , achieving current sharing. Proof: According to Lemma 5, for all t ≥ Tr , the dynamics of the generated currents It are given by the autonomous system  25 It 1 It 2 It 3 It 4 i∗t  20 15  0  0.5  1  1.5  time (s)  Fig. 3. From the top: voltage at the PCC of each DGu together with its average value (dashed line); generated currents together with the corresponding value (dashed line) that allows to achieve current sharing.  Remark 7: (Robustness to failed communication) The proposed control scheme is distributed and as such requires a communication network to share information on the generated currents. However, note that the integrators θ in (11) are not needed to regulate the voltages in the microgrid to their desired values, but are only required to achieve current sharing and voltage balancing. In fact, by omitting the variable θ in the analysis, the controlled microgrid converges, in a finite time, to the manifold σ = 0, where V = V ? , as shown in [14].  VII. S IMULATION R ESULTS In this section, the proposed manifold-based consensus algorithm is assessed in simulation by implementing the third order sliding mode control strategy discussed in Subsection V-B. We consider a microgrid composed of 4 DGus interconnected as shown in Figure 2, where also the communication network is depicted. The parameters of each DGu, including the current demand, and the line parameters are reported in Tables II and III, respectively. The weights associated with the edges of the communication graph are γ12 = γ23 = γ34 = 1 × 103 . For all the DGus the controller parameter αi in (30) is set to 2.5 × 103 , while the gain Λi of Levant’s differentiator (32) is set to 5.0 × 102 .  9  VIII. C ONCLUSIONS 10  Iij (A)  5 0  I12 I23 I34 I14  -5 -10  0  0.5  1  1.5  time (s)  u (V)  395 390  u1 u2 u3 u4 ūopt i  385 380  0  0.5  1  1.5  time (s)  Fig. 4. From the top: Rcurrents shared among the DGus through the lines; control inputs ui (t) = 0t vi (τ )dτ , vi as in (30), together with the optimal feedforward inputs (7) indicated by the dashed lines.  TABLE II M ICROGRID PARAMETERS AND C URRENT D EMAND DGu Rt i Lti Cti Vi? Vi (0) ILi (0) ∆ILi  (Ω) (mH) (mF) (V) (V) (A) (A)  1  2  3  4  0.2 1.8 2.2 380.0 380.2 25.0 5.0  0.3 2.0 1.9 380.0 380.05 15.0 7.5  0.5 3.0 2.5 380.0 379.95 10.0 12.5  0.1 2.2 1.7 380.0 379.8 30.0 −5.0  TABLE III L INE PARAMETERS Line Rij Lij  (mΩ) (µH)  {1,2}  {2,3}  {3,4}  {1,4}  70 2.1  50 2.3  80 2.0  60 1.8  The system is initially at the steady state. Then, consider a current demand variation ∆ILi at the time instant t = 0.1 s (see Table II). The PCC voltages and the generated currents are illustrated in Figure 3. One can appreciate that the average of the PCC voltages is always equal to the average of the corresponding references (see Objective 2), and the current generated by each DGu converges to the desired value i∗t = 25 A, achieving current sharing as theoretically proved (see Objective 1). Note that, even during the transient phase, current sharing is practically maintained. Moreover, in Figure 4 the currents shared among the DGus are reported together with the control signals generated by the 3SM control algorithm (30). Note that the 3SM controllers, which require only local measurements of Vi and information on Iti from neighbours over the communication network, generate control signals that are equal to the optimal feedforward input (7), without exact knowledge on the network parameters and the current demand IL .  In this paper we have developed a distributed control algorithm, obtaining current sharing and voltage regulation in DC microgrids. Its convergence properties are analytically investigated, and a case study shows the effectiveness of the proposed solution. The proposed control scheme exploits a communication network to achieve current sharing using a consensus-like algorithm. Another useful feature of the proposed control scheme is that the average voltage of the microgrid converges to the average of the voltage references, independently of the initial voltage conditions. The latter is achieved by constraining the system to a suitable manifold. To ensure that the desired manifold is reached in a finite time, even in presence of modelling uncertainties, two sliding mode control strategies are proposed, that provide the switching frequencies or the duty cycle of the power converters. R EFERENCES [1] R. Lasseter and P. Paigi, “Microgrid: a conceptual solution,” in Proc. 35th IEEE Power Electronics Specialists Conf., vol. 6, Aachen, Germany, June 2004, pp. 4285–4290. [2] M. S. Sadabadi, Q. Shafiee, and A. Karimi, “Plug-and-play voltage stabilization in inverter-interfaced microgrids via a robust control strategy,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 781–791, May 2017. [3] S. Trip, M. Bürger, and C. De Persis, “An internal model approach to frequency regulation in inverter-based microgrids with time-varying voltages,” in Proc. of the 53rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), Dec. 2014, pp. 223–228. [4] M. Cucuzzella, G. P. Incremona, and A. Ferrara, “Decentralized sliding mode control of islanded ac microgrids with arbitrary topology,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, Apr. 2017. [5] C. De Persis and N. Monshizadeh, “Bregman storage functions for microgrid control,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2017. [6] J. M. Guerrero, P. C. Loh, T. L. Lee, and M. Chandorkar, “Advanced control architectures for intelligent microgrids - part ii: Power quality, energy storage, and AC/DC microgrids,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1263–1270, Apr. 2013. [7] J. J. Justo, F. Mwasilu, J. Lee, and J.-W. Jung, “AC-microgrids versus DC-microgrids with distributed energy resources: A review,” Renewable Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 24, pp. 387–405, Aug. 2013. [8] X. Liu, P. Wang, and P. C. Loh, “A hybrid AC/DC microgrid and its coordination control,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 278–286, June 2011. [9] N. Flourentzou, V. G. Agelidis, and G. D. Demetriades, “Vsc-based hvdc power transmission systems: An overview,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 592–602, Mar. 2009. [10] E. Benedito, D. del Puerto-Flores, A. Dria-Cerezo, O. van der Feltz, and J. M. A. Scherpen, “Strictly convex loss functions for port-hamiltonian based optimization algorithm for mtdc networks,” in Proc. of the 55th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), Dec 2016, pp. 7483– 7488. [11] M. Andreasson, R. Wiget, D. V. Dimarogonas, K. H. Johansson, and G. Andersson, “Distributed frequency control through mtdc transmission systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 250– 260, 2017. [12] D. Zonetti, R. Ortega, and J. Schiffer, “A tool for stability and power sharing analysis of a generalized class of droop controllers for highvoltage direct-current transmission systems,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, Mar. 2017. [13] M. Tucci, S. Riverso, J. C. Vasquez, J. M. Guerrero, and G. FerrariTrecate, “A decentralized scalable approach to voltage control of dc islanded microgrids,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 1965–1979, Nov 2016. [14] M. Cucuzzella, S. Rosti, A. Cavallo, and A. Ferrara, “Decentralized sliding mode voltage control in DC microgrids,” in Proc. of the American Control Conference (ACC), Seattle, WA, USA, May 2017, pp. 3445– 3450.  10  [15] M. Tucci, S. Riverso, and G. Ferrari-Trecate, “Line-independent plugand-play controllers for voltage stabilization in dc microgrids,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–9, 2017. [16] J. M. Guerrero, J. C. Vasquez, J. Matas, L. G. de Vicuna, and M. Castilla, “Hierarchical control of droop-controlled AC and DC microgrids – a general approach toward standardization,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 158–172, Jan. 2011. [17] X. Lu, J. M. Guerrero, K. Sun, and J. C. Vasquez, “An improved droop control method for dc microgrids based on low bandwidth communication with dc bus voltage restoration and enhanced current sharing accuracy,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 1800–1812, Apr. 2014. [18] S. Anand, B. G. Fernandes, and J. Guerrero, “Distributed control to ensure proportional load sharing and improve voltage regulation in low-voltage DC microgrids,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 1900–1913, Apr. 2013. [19] J. Zhao and F. Dörfler, “Distributed control and optimization in DC microgrids,” Automatica, vol. 61, pp. 18 – 26, Nov. 2015. [20] V. Nasirian, S. Moayedi, A. Davoudi, and F. L. Lewis, “Distributed cooperative control of DC microgrids,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 2288–2303, Apr. 2015. [21] M. Tucci, L. Meng, J. M. Guerrero, and G. Ferrari-Trecate, “Consensus algorithms and plug-and-play control for current sharing in DC microgrids,” arXiv preprint, Mar. 2016. [22] M. Hamzeh, A. Ghazanfari, Y. A. R. I. Mohamed, and Y. Karimi, “Modeling and design of an oscillatory current-sharing control strategy in DC microgrids,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 62, no. 11, pp. 6647–6657, Nov. 2015. [23] C. De Persis, E. Weitenberg, and F. Dörfler, “A power consensus algorithm for DC microgrids,” arXiv preprint, Nov. 2016. [24] V. I. Utkin, Sliding Modes in Control and Optimization. SpringerVerlag, 1992.  [25] V. Utkin, J. Guldner, and J. Shi, Sliding mode control in electromechanical systems. CRC press, 2009, vol. 34. [26] X.-G. Yan, S. K. Spurgeon, and C. Edwards, “Application of decentralised sliding mode control to multimachine power systems,” in Variable Structure Control of Complex Systems. Springer, 2017, pp. 297–313. [27] V. Venkatasubramanian, H. Schattler, and J. Zaborszky, “Fast timevarying phasor analysis in the balanced three-phase large electric power system,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 40, no. 11, pp. 1975–1982, Nov. 1995. [28] G. Bartolini, A. Ferrara, and E. Usai, “Chattering avoidance by secondorder sliding mode control,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 241–246, Feb. 1998. [29] ——, “On boundary layer dimension reduction in sliding mode control of SISO uncertain nonlinear systems,” in Proc. of the IEEE Internation Conference on Control Applications, vol. 1, Trieste, Italy, Sept. 1998, pp. 242 –247. [30] F. Dinuzzo and A. Ferrara, “Higher order sliding mode controllers with optimal reaching,” IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 2126 –2136, Sept. 2009. [31] A. Levant, “Higher-order sliding modes, differentiation and outputfeedback control,” Int. J. Control, vol. 76, no. 9-10, pp. 924–941, Jan. 2003. [32] ——, “Sliding order and sliding accuracy in sliding mode control,” International Journal of Control, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1247–1263, 1993. [33] X. Li, S. Ding, and Y. Wang, “A new method for third-order sliding mode control design with finite-time stability,” in Proceeding of the 11th World Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation, June 2014, pp. 1641–1646. [34] D. Bernstein and S. Bhat, “Lyapunov stability, semistability, and asymptotic stability of matrix second-order systems,” Journal of Vibration and Acoustics, vol. 117, no. B, pp. 145–153, June 1995.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
