Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_5042

Abstract:
CANNON-THURSTON MAPS MAHAN MJ  arXiv:1712.00760v1 [math.GT] 3 Dec 2017  Abstract. We give an overview of the theory of Cannon-Thurston maps which forms one of the links between the complex analytic and hyperbolic geometric study of Kleinian groups. We also briefly sketch connections to hyperbolic subgroups of hyperbolic groups and end with some open questions.  1. Kleinian groups and limit sets The Lie group P SL2 (C) can be viewed from three different points of view: (1) As a Lie group or a matrix group (group-theoretic). (2) As the isometry group of hyperbolic 3-space H3 –the upper half space {(x, y, z) : z > 0} equipped 2 2 +dz 2 with the metric ds2 = dx +dy , or equivalently the open ball {(x, y, z) : (x2 + y 2 + z 2 ) = r2 < z2 1} equipped with the metric ds2 =  4(dx2 +dy 2 +dz 2 ) (1−r 2 )2  (geometric).  (3) As the group of Möbius transformations of the Riemann sphere Ĉ (complex dynamic/analytic). A finitely generated discrete subgroup Γ ⊂ P SL2 (C) is called a Kleinian group. Depending on how we decide to look at P SL2 (C), the group Γ can accordingly be thought of as a discrete subgroup of a Lie group, as the fundamental group of the complete hyperbolic 3-manifold H3 /Γ, or in terms of its action by holomorphic automorphisms of Ĉ. If Γ is not virtually abelian, it is called non-elementary. Henceforth, unless explicitly stated otherwise, we shall assume that all Kleinian groups in this article are non-elementary. If Γ can be conjugated by an element of P SL2 (C) to be contained in P SL2 (R) it is referred to as a Fuchsian group1. If Γ is abstractly isomorphic to π1 (S), the fundamental group of a closed surface S, we shall refer to it as a surface Kleinian group. In the 1960’s Ahlfors and Bers studied deformations of Fuchsian surface groups in P SL2 (C), giving rise to the theory of quasi-Fuchsian groups. Their techniques were largely complex analytic in nature. In the 1970’s and 80’s, the field was revolutionized by Thurston, who brought in a rich and varied set of techniques from three-dimensional hyperbolic geometry. A conjectural picture of the deep relationships between the analytic and geometric points of view was outlined by Thurston in his visionary paper [Thu82]. Perhaps the most well-known problem (predating Thurston) in this line of study was the Ahlfors’ measure zero conjecture, resolved in the last decade by Brock-Canary-Minsky [BCM12]. Another (more topological) well-known problem that also predates Thurston asks if limit sets of Kleinian groups are locally connected. This is the specific problem that will concern us here. We need to fix some terminology and notation first. Identify the Riemann sphere Ĉ with the sphere at infinity S 2 of H3 . Thus, S 2 encodes the ‘ideal’ boundary of H3 , consisting of asymptote classes of geodesics. By adjoining S 2 to H3 , we obtain the closed 3-ball D3 . The topology on S 2 is the usual one induced by the round metric given by the angle subtended at the origin 0 ∈ D3 . The geodesics turn out to be semicircles meeting the boundary S 2 at right angles. Definition 1.1. The limit set ΛΓ of the Kleinian group Γ is the collection of accumulation points of a Γ-orbit Γ · z for some (any) z ∈ Ĉ. The limit set ΛΓ is independent of z and may be regarded as the locus of chaotic dynamics of Γ on Ĉ. For non-elementary Γ and any z ∈ ΛΓ , Γ · z is dense in ΛΓ . Hence ΛΓ is the smallest closed non-empty Date: December 5, 2017. 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 57M50, 30F40 (Primary), 20F65, 20F67 (Secondary). Research partly supported by a DST JC Bose Fellowship. 1Both Fuchsian and Kleinian groups were discovered by Poincaré. 1  2  MAHAN MJ  Γ−invariant subset of Ĉ. If we take z ∈ H3 instead, then the collection of accumulation points of any Γ-orbit Γ · z ⊂ D3 is also ΛΓ . Definition 1.2. The complement of the limit set Ĉ \ ΛΓ is called the domain of discontinuity ΩΓ of Γ. The Kleinian group Γ acts freely and properly discontinuously on ΩΓ and ΩΓ /Γ is a (possibly disconnected) Riemann surface. 1.1. Fuchsian and Quasi-Fuchsian Groups. We first give an explicit example of a Fuchsian group. An example of a Fuchsian group: Consider the standard identification space description of the genus −1 −1 −1 two orientable surface Σ2 as an octagon with edge labels a1 , b1 , a−1 1 , b1 , a2 , b2 , a2 , b2 . A hyperbolic metric on Σ2 is one where each point has a small neighborhood isometric to a small disk in H2 . By the Poincaré polygon theorem, it suffices to find a regular hyperbolic octagon (with all sides equal and all angles equal) with each interior angle equal to 2π 8 . Now, the infinitesimal regular octagon at the tangent 2 space to the origin has interior angles equal to 3π 4 . Also the ideal regular octagon in H has all interior angles zero. See figure below.  By the Intermediate Value Theorem, there exists an intermediate regular octagon with all interior angles equal to π4 . The group G that results from side-pairing transformations corresponds to a Fuchsian group, or equivalently, a discrete faithful representation ρ of π1 (Σ2 ) into P SL2 (R). Equivalently we may regard ρ as a representation of π1 (Σ2 ) into P SL2 (C) with image that can be conjugated to lie in P SL2 (R). Alternately, ρ(π1 (Σ2 )) preserves a totally geodesic plane in H3 . The limit set of G = ρ(π1 (Σ2 )) is then a round circle. Quasi-Fuchsian groups: If we require the limit set to be only topologically a circle, i.e. a Jordan curve, then we obtain a more general class of Kleinian groups: Definition 1.3. Let ρ : π1 (S) → P SL2 (C) be a discrete faithful representation such that the limit set of G = ρ(π1 (S)) is a Jordan curve in S 2 . Then G is said to be quasi-Fuchsian. The collection of conjugacy classes of quasi-Fuchsian with the complex analytic structure inherited from P SL2 (C) is denoted as QF (S). The domain of discontinuity Ω of a quasi-Fuchsian G consists of two open invariant topological disks Ω1 , Ω2 in Ĉ. Hence the quotient Ω/G is the disjoint union Ω1 /G t Ω2 /G and we have a map τ : QF (S) → T eich(S) × T eich(S), where T eich(S) denotes the Teichmüller space of S–the space of marked hyperbolic (or complex) structures on S. The Bers simultaneous Uniformization Theorem asserts: Theorem 1.4. τ : QF (S) → T eich(S) × T eich(S) is bi-holomorphic. Thus, given any two conformal structures T1 , T2 on a surface, there is a unique discrete quasi-Fuchsian G (up to conjugacy) whose limit set ΛG is topologically a circle, and the quotient of whose domain of discontinuity is T1 t T2 . See figure below [Kab16], where the inside and the outside of the Jordan curve correspond to Ω1 , Ω2 .  CANNON-THURSTON MAPS  3  1.2. Degenerate groups and the Ending Lamination Theorem. Quasi-Fuchsian groups were studied by Ahlfors and Bers analytically as deformations of Fuchsian groups. Thurston [Thu80] introduced a new set of geometric techniques in the study. Definition 1.5. The convex hull CHG of ΛG is the smallest non-empty closed convex subset of H3 invariant under G. Let M = H3 /G. The quotient of CHG by G is called the convex core CC(M ) of M . The convex hull CHG can be constructed by joining all distinct pairs of points on ΛG by bi-infinite geodesics, iterating this construction and finally taking the closure. It can also be described as the closure of the union of all ideal tetrahedra, whose vertices lie in ΛG . The convex core CC(M ) is homeomorphic to S × [0, 1]. The distance between the boundary components S × {0} and S × {1} in the convex core CC(M ), measured with respect to the hyperbolic metric, is a crude geometric measure of the complexity of the quasi Fuchsian group G. We shall call it the thickness tG of CC(M ), or of the quasi Fuchsian group G. (We note here parenthetically that the notions of convex hull CHG and convex core CC(M ) go through for any Kleinian group G and the associated complete hyperbolic manifold H3 /G.) For quasi-Fuchsian groups, we ask: Question 1.6. What happens as thickness tends to infinity? To address this question more precisely we need to introduce a topology on the space of representations. Definition 1.7. A sequence of representations ρn : π1 (S) → P SL2 (C) is said to converge algebraically to ρ∞ : π1 (S) → P SL2 (C) if for all g ∈ π1 (S), ρn (g) → ρ∞ (g) in P SL2 (C). The collection of conjugacy classes of discrete faithful representations of π1 (S) into P SL2 (C) equipped with the algebraic topology is denoted as AH(S). It is not even clear a priori that, as tG tends to infinity, limits exist in AH(S). However, Thurston’s Double Limit Theorem [Thu86, Kap01, Ota01] guarantees that if we have a sequence Gn with thickness tGn tending to infinity, subsequential limits (in the space of discrete faithful representations with a suitable topology, see Definition 5.7) do in fact exist. Geodesic Laminations: Definition 1.8. A geodesic lamination on a hyperbolic surface is a foliation of a closed subset with geodesics, i.e. it is a closed set given as a disjoint union of geodesics (closed or bi-infinite). A geodesic lamination on a surface may further be equipped with a transverse (non-negative) measure to obtain a measured lamination. The space of measured (geodesic) laminations on S is then a positive cone in a vector space and is denoted as ML(S). It can be projectivized to obtain the space of projectivized measured laminations PML(S). It was shown by Thurston [FLP79] that PML(S) is homeomorphic to a sphere and can be adjoined to T eich(S) compactifying it to a closed ball.  4  MAHAN MJ  Definition 1.9. [Thu80, Definition 8.8.1] A pleated surface in a hyperbolic three-manifold N is a complete hyperbolic surface S of finite area, together with an isometric map f : S → N such that every x ∈ S is in the interior of some geodesic segment (in S) which is mapped by f to a geodesic segment (in N ). Also, f must take every cusp (corresponding to a maximal parabolic subgroup) of S to a cusp of N The pleating locus of the pleated surface f : S → M is the set γ ⊂ S consisting of those points in the pleated surface which are in the interior of unique geodesic segments mapped to geodesic segments. Proposition 1.10. [Thu80, Proposition 8.8.2] The pleating locus γ is a geodesic lamination on S. The map f is totally geodesic in the complement of γ. Thurston further shows [Thu80, Ch. 8] that the boundary components of the convex core CC(M ) are pleated surfaces. As thickness (Question 1.6) tends to infinity, the convex core may converge (up to extracting subsequences) to one of two kinds of convex manifolds CC(M∞ ) (see schematic diagram below): (1) CC(M∞ ) is homeomorphic to S × [0, ∞). Here S × {0} is the single boundary component of the convex core CC(M∞ ). Such a manifold is called simply degenerate and the corresponding Kleinian group a simply degenerate surface Kleinian group. In this case the limit set ΛG is a dendrite (topologically a tree) and the domain of discontinuity ΩΓ is homeomorphic to an open disk with ΩΓ /G a Riemann surface homeomorphic to S × {0}. The end of M∞ facing ΩΓ /G is called a geometrically finite end. (2) CC(M∞ ) is homeomorphic to S × (−∞, ∞). Such a manifold is called doubly degenerate and the corresponding Kleinian group a doubly degenerate surface Kleinian group. In this case the limit set ΛG is all of S 2 and the domain of discontinuity ΩΓ is empty.  The ends (one for simply degenerate and two for doubly degenerate) of CC(M∞ ) are called the degenerate end(s) of M . Thurston [Thu80] and Bonahon [Bon86] show that any such degenerate end E is geometrically tame, i.e. there is a sequence of simple closed curves {σn } on S such that their geodesic realizations in CC(M∞ ) exit E as n tends to ∞. Further [Thu80, Ch. 9], the limit of any such exiting sequence (in PML(S); the topology on PML(S) is quite close to the Hausdorff topology on S) is a unique lamination λ called the ending lamination of E. Thus a doubly degenerate manifold has two ending laminations, one for each degenerate end, while a simply degenerate manifold has a geometrically finite end corresponding to a Riemann surface ΩΓ /G(∈ T eich(S)) at infinity and a degenerate end corresponding to an ending lamination. These two pieces of information–Riemann surfaces at infinity and ending laminations–give the endinvariants of M . The ending lamination for a geometrically infinite end does not depend on the reference hyperbolic structure on S. It may be regarded as a purely topological piece of data associated to such an end.  CANNON-THURSTON MAPS  5  We may thus think of the ending lamination as the analog, in the case of geometrically infinite ends, of the conformal structure at infinity for a geometrically infinite end. The Ending Lamination Theorem of Brock-Canary-Minsky then takes the place of the Bers’ simultaneous uniformization theorem and asserts: Theorem 1.11. [Min10, BCM12] Let M be a simply or doubly degenerate manifold. Then M is determined up to isometry by its end-invariants. Thus, the Ending Lamination Theorem justifies the following and may be considered an analog of Mostow Rigidity for infinite covolume Kleinian groups. Slogan 1.12. Topology implies Geometry. In order to complete the picture of the Ahlfors-Bers theory to study degenerate surface Kleinian groups G in terms of the dynamics of G on the Riemann sphere Ĉ, the following issue remains to be addressed: Question 1.13. Can the data of the ending lamination(s) be extracted from the dynamics of G on Ĉ? In more informal terms, Question 1.14. Is the geometric object ”at infinity” of the quotient manifold H3 /Γ (i.e. the ending lamination) determined by the dynamics of Γ at infinity (i.e. the action of Γ on S 2 )? We will make these questions precise below. The attempt to make Question 1.13 precise brings us to the following. 2. Cannon-Thurston maps 2.1. The main theorem for closed surface Kleinian groups. In [Thu82, Problem 14], Thurston raised the following question, which is at the heart of the work we discuss here: Question 2.1. Suppose Γ has the property that (H3 ∪ ΩΓ )/Γ is compact. Then is it true that the limit set of any other Kleinian group Γ0 isomorphic to Γ is the continuous image of the limit set of Γ, by a continuous map taking the fixed points of an(y) element γ to the fixed points of the corresponding element γ0? A special case of Question 2.1 was answered affirmatively in seminal work of Cannon and Thurston [CT85, CT07]: Theorem 2.2. [CT07] Let M be a closed hyperbolic 3-manifold fibering over the circle with fiber Σ. Let e and M f denote the universal covers of F and M respectively. After identifying Σ e (resp. M f) with H2 Σ 3 2 2 1 3 3 2 (resp. H ), we obtain the compactification D = H ∪ S (resp. D = H ∪ S ) by attaching the circle e→M f S 1 (resp. the sphere S 2 ) at infinity. Let i : Σ → M denote the inclusion map of the fiber and ei : Σ 2 3 the lift to the universal cover. Then ei extends to a continuous map î : D → D . e is an embedded disk in (the ball model) of H3 such An amazing implication of Theorem 2.2 is that Σ 2 that its boundary on the sphere S is space-filling! See the following diagram by Thurston [Thu82, Figure 10] that illustrates ‘a pattern of identification of a circle, here represented as the equator, whose quotient is topologically a sphere. This defines, topologically a sphere-filling curve.’  6  MAHAN MJ  A version of Question 2.1 was raised by Cannon and Thurston in the context of closed surface Kleinian groups: Question 2.3. [CT07, Section 6] Suppose that a closed surface group π1 (S) acts freely and properly discontinuously on H3 by isometries such that the quotient manifold has no accidental parabolics (here this just means that the image of π1 (S) in P SL2 (C) has no parabolics). Does the inclusion ĩ : Se → H3 extend continuously to the boundary? Continuous boundary extensions as in Question 2.3, if they exist, are called Cannon-Thurston maps. Question 2.3 is intimately related to a much older question c.f. [Abi76] asking if limit sets are locally connected: Question 2.4. Let Γ be a finitely generated Kleinian group such that the limit set ΛΓ is connected. Is ΛΓ locally connected? It is shown in [CT07] that for simply degenerate surface Kleinian groups, Questions 2.3 and 2.4 are equivalent, via the Caratheodory extension Theorem. The following Theorem of [Mj14a] [Mj14b] answers questions 2.3 and 2.4 affirmatively: Theorem 2.5. Let ρ(π1 (S)) = G ⊂ P SL2 (C) be a simply or doubly degenerate (closed) surface Kleinian group. Let M = H3 /G and i : S → M be an embedding inducing a homotopy equivalence. Let ei : Se → H3 denote a lift of i between universal covers. Let D2 , D3 denote the compactifications. Then a CannonThurston map î : D2 → D3 exists. Let ∂i : S 1 → S 2 denote the restriction of î to the ideal boundaries. Then for p 6= q, ∂i(p) = ∂i(q) if and only if p, q are the ideal end-points of a leaf of an ending lamination or ideal end-points of a complementary ideal polygon of an ending lamination. The second part of Theorem 2.5 shows that the data of the ending lamination can be recovered from the Cannon-Thurston map and so we have an affirmative answer to Question 1.13. In conjunction with the Ending Lamination Theorem 1.11, this establishes the slogan: Slogan 2.6. Dynamics on the limit set determines geometry in the interior. A number of authors have contributed to the resolution of the above questions. Initially it was believed [Abi76] that Question 2.4 had a negative answer for simply degenerate Kleinian groups. Floyd [Flo80] proved the corresponding theorem for geometrically finite Kleinian groups. Then in the early 80’s Cannon and Thurston [CT85] proved Theorem 2.2. This was extended by Minsky [Min94], Klarreich [Kla99], Alperin-Dicks-Porti [ADP99], Bowditch [Bow13, Bow07], McMullen [McM01], Miyachi [Miy02] and the author [Mit98b, Mj10, Mj11a, Mj16] for various special cases. The general surface group case was accomplished in [Mj14a] and the general Kleinian group case in [Mj17b]. 2.2. Geometric Group Theory. We now turn to a generalization of Question 2.3 to a far more general context. After the introduction of hyperbolic metric spaces by Gromov [Gro85], Question 2.3 was extended by the author [Mit97b, Bes04, Mit98c] to the context of a hyperbolic group H acting freely and properly discontinuously by isometries on a hyperbolic metric space X. Any hyperbolic X has a (Gromov) boundary ∂X given by asymptote-classes of geodesics. Adjoining ∂X to X we get the Gromov b compactification X. There is a natural map i : ΓH → X, sending vertices of ΓH to the H−orbit of a point x ∈ X, b and connecting images of adjacent vertices by geodesic segments in X. Let Γc H , X denote the Gromov compactification of ΓH , X respectively. The analog of Question 2.3 is the following: b Question 2.7. Does i : ΓH → X extend continuously to a map î : Γc H → X? Continuous extensions as in Question 2.7 are also referred to as Cannon-Thurston maps and make sense when ΓH is replaced by an arbitrary hyperbolic metric space Y . A simple and basic criterion for the existence of Cannon-Thurston maps was established in [Mit98a, Mit98b]:  CANNON-THURSTON MAPS  7  Lemma 2.8. Let i : (Y, y) → (X, x) be a proper map between (based) Gromov-hyperbolic spaces. A b exists if and only if the following continuous extension (also called a Cannon-Thurston map) î : Yb → X holds: There exists a non-negative proper function M : N → N, such that if λ = [a, b]Y is a geodesic lying outside an N -ball around y, then any geodesic segment [i(a), i(b)]X in X joining i(a), i(b) lies outside the M (N )-ball around x = i(y). In the generality above Question 2.7 turns out to have a negative answer. An explicit counterexample to Question 2.7 was recently found by Baker and Riley [BR13] in the context of small cancellation theory. The counterexample uses Lemma 2.8 to rule out the existence of Cannon-Thurston maps. Further, Matsuda and Oguni [MO14] further developed Baker and Riley’s counterexample to show that given a(ny) non-elementary hyperbolic group H, there exists hyperbolic group G such that H ⊂ G and there is no Cannon-Thurston map for the inclusion. We shall furnish positive answers to Question 2.7 in a number of special cases in Section 6. 3. Closed 3-manifolds 3.1. 3-manifolds fibering over the circle. We start by giving a sketch of the proof of Theorem 2.2, The proof is coarse-geometric in nature and follows [Mit98a, Mit98b]. We recall a couple of basic Lemmata we shall be needing from [Mit98b]. The following says that nearest point projection onto a geodesic in a hyperbolic space is coarsely Lipschitz. Lemma 3.1. Let (X, d) be a δ-hyperbolic metric space. Then there exists a constant C ≥ 1 such that the following holds: Let λ ⊂ X be a geodesic segment and let Π : X → λ be a nearest point projection. Then d(Π(x), Π(y)) ≤ Cd(x, y) for all x, y ∈ X. The next Lemma says that nearest point projections and quasi-isometries almost commute. Lemma 3.2. Let (X, d) be a δ-hyperbolic metric space. Given (K, ), there exists C such that the following holds: Let λ = [a, b] be a geodesic segment in X. Let p ∈ X be arbitrary and let q be a nearest point projection of p onto λ. Let φ be a (K, )−quasi-isometry from X to itself and let Φ(λ) = [φ(a), φ(b)] be a geodesic segment in X joining φ(a), φ(b). Let r be a nearest point projection of φ(p) onto Φ(λ). Then d(r, φ(q)) ≤ C. Sketch of Proof: The proof of Lemma 3.2 follows from the fact that a geodesic tripod T (built from [a, b] and [p, q]) is quasiconvex in hyperbolic space and that a quasi-isometric image φ(T ) of T lies close to a geodesic tripod T 0 built from [φ(a), φ(b)] and [φ(p), r]. Hence the image φ(q) of the centroid q of T lies close to the centroid r of T 0 . 2 3.2. The key tool: hyperbolic ladder. The key idea behind the proof of Theorem 2.2 and its genf for any geodesic eralizations in [Mit98a, Mit98b] is the construction of a hyperbolic ladder Lλ ⊂ M e f e in Σ. The universal cover M fibers over R with fibers Σ. Since the context is geometric group theory, e and M f by quasi-isometric models in the form of Cayley graphs we discretize this as follows. Replace Σ f to Γπ1 (Σ) and Γπ1 (M ) respectively. Let us denote Γπ1 (Σ) by Y and Γπ1 (M ) by X. The projection of M the base R is discretized accordingly giving a model that can be thought of as (and is quasi-isometric to) a tree T of spaces, where (1) T is the simplicial tree underlying R with vertices at Z. (2) All the vertex and edge spaces are (intrinsically) isometric to Y . (3) The edge space to vertex space inclusions are qi-embeddings. We summarize this by saying that X is a tree T of spaces satisfying the qi-embedded condition [BF92]. Given a geodesic segment [a, b] = λ = λ0 ⊂ Y , we now sketch the promised construction of the ladder Lλ ⊂ X containing λ. Index the vertices by n ∈ Z. Since the edge-to-vertex space inclusions are quasiisometries, this induces a quasi-isometry φn from the vertex space Yn to the vertex space Yn+1 for n ≥ 0.  8  MAHAN MJ  A similar quasi-isometry φ−n exists from Y−n to the vertex space Y−(n+1) . These quasi-isometries are defined on the vertex sets of Yn , n ∈ Z. The map φn induces a map Φn from geodesic segments in Yn to geodesic segments in Yn+1 for n ≥ 0 by sending a geodesic in Yn joining a, b to a geodesic in Yn+1 joining φn (a), φn (b). Similarly, for n ≤ 0. Inductively define: • λj+1 = Φj (λj ) for j ≥ 0, • λ−j−1S= Φ−j (λ−j ) for j ≥ 0, • Lλ = j λj . LλSturns out to be quasiconvex in X. To prove this, we construct a coarsely Lipschitz retraction Πλ : j Yj → Lλ as follows. On Yj define πj (y) to be a nearest-point projection of y onto λj and define Πλ (y) = πj (y), f or y ∈ Yj . The following theorem asserts that Πλ is coarsely Lipschitz. Theorem 3.3. [Mit98a, Mit98b, Mj10] There exists C ≥ 1 such that for any geodesic λ ⊂ Y , dX (Πλ (x), Πλ (y)) ≤ CdX (x, y) for x, y ∈  S  i  Yi .  Sketch of Proof: The proof requires only the hyperbolicity of Y , but not that of X. It suffices to show that for dX (x, y) = 1, dX (Πλ (x), Πλ (y)) ≤ C. Thus x, y may be thought of as (1) either lying in the same Yj . This case follows directly from Lemma 3.1. (2) or lying vertically one just above the other. Then (up to a bounded amount of error), we can assume without loss of generality, that y = φj (x). This case now follows from Lemma 3.2. 2 Since a coarse Lipschitz retract of a hyperbolic metric space is quasiconvex, we immediately have: Corollary 3.4. If (X, dX ) is hyperbolic, there exists C ≥ 1 such that for any λ, Lλ is C−quasiconvex. Note here that we have not used any feature of Y except its hyperbolicity. In particular, we do not e We are now in a position to prove a generalization of Theorem need the specific condition that Y = Σ. 2.2. Theorem 3.5. [Mj10] Let (X, d) be a hyperbolic tree (T ) of hyperbolic metric spaces satisfying the qiembedded condition, where T is R or [0, ∞) with vertex and edge sets Yj as above, j ∈ Z. Assume (as above) that the edge-to-vertex inclusions are quasi-isometries. For i : Y0 → X there is a Cannon-Thurston c0 → X. b map î : Y Proof. Fix a basepoint y0 ∈ Y0 . By Lemma 2.8 and quasiconvexity of Lλ (Corollary 3.4), it suffices to show that for all M ≥ 0 there exists N ≥ 0 such that if a geodesic segment λ lies outside the N -ball about y0 ∈ Y0 , then Lλ lies outside the M -ball around y0 ∈ X. Equivalently, we need a proper function M (N ) : N → N. Since Y0 is properly embedded in X, there exists a proper function g : N → N such that λ lies outside the g(N )-ball about y0 ∈ X. Let p be any point on Lλ . Then p = pj ∈ Yj for some j. Assume without loss of generality that j ≥ 0. It is not hard to see that there exists C0 , depending only on X, such that for any such pj , there exists pj−1 ∈ Yj−1 with d(pj , pj−1 ) ≤ C0 . It follows inductively that there exists y ∈ λ = λ0 such that dX (y, p) ≤ C0 j. Hence, by the triangle inequality, dX (y0 , p) ≥ g(N ) − C0 j. Next, looking at the ‘vertical direction’, dX (y0 , p) ≥ j and hence dX (y0 , p) ≥ max(g(N ) − C0 j, j) ≥ Defining M (N ) =  g(N ) A+1 ,  g(N ) . A+1  we see that M (N ) is a proper function of N and we are done.    CANNON-THURSTON MAPS  9  3.3. Quasiconvexity. The structure of Cannon-Thurston maps in Section 3.1 can be used to establish quasiconvexity of certain subgroups of π1 (M ). Let H ⊂ π1 (Σ) be a finitely generated infinite index subgroup of the fiber group. Then, due to the LERF property for surface subgroups, a Theorem of Scott [Sco78], there is a finite sheeted cover where H is geometric, i.e. it is carried by a proper embedded subsurface of (a finite sheeted cover of) Σ. But such a proper subsurface cannot carry a leaf of the stable or unstable foliations Fs or Fu . This gives us the following Theorem of Scott and Swarup: Theorem 3.6. [SS90] Let M be a closed hyperbolic 3-manifold fibering over the circle with fiber Σ. Let H ⊂ π1 (Σ) be a finitely generated infinite index subgroup of the fiber group in π1 (M ). Then H is quasiconvex in π1 (M ). Theorem 3.6 has been generalized considerably to the context of convex cocompact subgroups of the mapping class group and Out(Fn ) by a number of authors [DKL14, DKT16, DT17b, DT17a, MR15]. 4. Kleinian surface groups: Model Geometries In this section we shall describe a sequence of models for degenerate ends of 3-manifolds following [Min01, Min94, Mj10, Mj11a, Mj16] and [Min10, BCM12, Mj14a] and indicate how to generalize the ladder construction of Section 3.2 incorporating electric geometry [Far98]. Let X be a hyperbolic metric space, e.g. H3 . Let HX be a collection of disjoint convex subsets. Roughly speaking, electrification equips S each element of HX with the zero metric, while preserving the metric on X \ ( H∈HX H). The resulting electrified space E(X, HX ) is still Gromov hyperbolic under extremely mild conditions and hyperbolic geodesics in X can be recovered from electric geodesics in the electrified space E(X, HX ). This will allow us to establish the existence of Cannon-Thurston maps. We shall focus on closed surfaces and follow the summary in [LM16] for the exposition. The topology of each building block is simple: it is homeomorphic to S × [0, 1], where S is a closed surface of genus greater than one. Geometrically, the top and bottom boundary components in the first three model geometries are uniformly bi-Lipschitz to a fixed hyperbolic structure on S. Assume therefore that S is equipped with such a fixed hyperbolic structure. We do so henceforth. The different types of geometries of the blocks make for different model geometries of ends. Definition 4.1. A model Em is said to be built up of blocks of some prescribed geometries glued end to end, if (1) Em is homeomorphic to S × [0, ∞) (2) There exists L ≥ 1 such that S ×[i, i+1] is L−bi-Lipschitz to a block of one of the three prescribed geometries: bounded, i-bounded or amalgamated (see below). S × [i, i + 1] will be called the (i + 1)th block of the model Em . The thickness of the (i + 1)th block is the length of the shortest path between S × {i} and S × {i + 1} in S × [i, i + 1](⊂ Em ). 4.1. Bounded geometry. Minsky [Min01, Min94] calls an end E of a hyperbolic 3-manifold to be of bounded geometry if there are no arbitrarily short closed geodesics in E. Definition 4.2. Let B0 = S × [0, 1] be given the product metric. If B is L−bi-Lipschitz homeomorphic to B0 , it is called an L−thick block. An end E is said to have a model of bounded geometry if there exists L such that E is bi-Lipschitz homeomorphic to a model manifold Em consisting of gluing L−thick blocks end-to-end. It follows from work of Minsky [Min92] that if E is of bounded geometry, it has a model of bounded geometry. The existence of Cannon-Thurston maps in this setup is then a replica of the proof of Theorem 3.5. 4.2. i-bounded Geometry. Definition 4.3. [Mj11a] An end E of a hyperbolic 3-manifold M has i-bounded geometry if the boundary torus of every Margulis tube in E has bounded diameter.  10  MAHAN MJ  We give an alternate description. Fix a closed hyperbolic surface S. Let C be a finite collection of (not necessarily disjoint) simple closed geodesics on S. Let N (σi ) denote an  neighborhood of σi , σi ∈ C, were  is small enough to ensure that lifts of N (σi ) to Se are disjoint. Definition 4.4. Let I = [0, 3]. Equip S × I with the product metric. Let B c = (S × I − ∪j N (σj ) × [1, 2]), equipped with the induced path-metric. Here {σj } is a subcollection of C consisting of disjoint curves. Perform Dehn filling on some (1, n) curve on each resultant torus component of the boundary of B c (the integers n are quite arbitrary and may vary: we omit subscripts for expository ease). We call n the twist coefficient. Foliate the relevant torus boundary component of B c by translates of (1, n) curves. Glue in a solid torus Θ, which we refer to as a Margulis tube, with a hyperbolic metric foliated by totally geodesic disks bounding the (1, n) curves. The resulting copy of S × I thus obtained, equipped with the above metric is called a thin block. Definition 4.5. A model manifold Em of i-bounded geometry is built out of gluing L−thick and thin blocks end-to-end (for some L) (see schematic diagram below where the black squares indicate Margulis tubes and the horizontal rectangles indicate the blocks).  It follows from work in [Mj11a] that Proposition 4.6. An end E of a hyperbolic 3-manifold M has i-bounded geometry if and only if it is bi-Lipschitz homeomorphic to a model manifold Em of i-bounded geometry. We give a brief indication of the construction of Lλ and the proof of the existence of Cannon-Thurston maps in this case. First electrify all the Margulis tubes, i.e. equip them with a zero metric (see [Far98] for details on relative hyperbolicity and electric geometry). This ensures that in the resulting electric geometry, each block is of bounded geometry. More precisely, there is a (metric) product structure on S × [0, 3] such that each {x} × [0, 3] has uniformly bounded length in the electric metric. Further, since the curves in C are electrified in a block, Dehn twists are isometries from S × {1} to S × {2} in a thin block. This allows the construction of Lλ to go through as before and ensures that it is quasiconvex in the resulting electric metric. Finally given an electric geodesic lying outside large balls modulo Margulis tubes one can recover a genuine hyperbolic geodesic tracking it outside Margulis tubes. A relative version of the criterion of Lemma 2.8 can now be used to prove the existence of Cannon-Thurston maps. 4.3. Amalgamation Geometry. Again, as in Definition 4.4, start with a fixed closed hyperbolic surface S, a collection of simple closed curves C and set I = [0, 3]. Perform Dehn surgeries on the Margulis tubes corresponding to C as before. Let K = S×[1, 2] ⊂ S×[0, 3] and let K c = (S×I −∪i N (σi )×[1, 2]). Instead of fixing the product metric on the complement K c of Margulis tubes in K, allow these complementary components to have arbitrary geometry subject only to the restriction that the geometries of S × {1, 2} are fixed. Equip S × [0, 1] and S × [2, 3] with the product metrics. The resulting block is said to be a block of amalgamation geometry. After lifting to the universal cover, complements of Margulis tubes in the lifts Se × [1, 2] are termed amalgamation components. Definition 4.7. An end E of a hyperbolic 3-manifold M has amalgamated geometry if (1) it is bi-Lipschitz homeomorphic to a model manifold Em consisting of gluing L−thick and amalgamation geometry blocks end-to-end (for some L).  CANNON-THURSTON MAPS  11  em . (2) Amalgamation components are (uniformly) quasiconvex in E To construct the ladder Lλ we electrify amalgamation components as well as Margulis tubes. This ensures that in the electric metric, (1) Each amalgamation block has bounded geometry (2) The mapping class element taking S ×{1} to S ×{2} induces an isometry of the electrified metrics. Quasiconvexity of Lλ in the electric metric now follows as before. To recover the data of hyperbolic geodesics from quasigeodesics lying close to Lλ , we use (uniform) quasiconvexity of amalgamation components and existence of Cannon-Thurston maps follows. 4.4. Split Geometry. We need now to relax the assumption that the boundary components of model blocks are of (uniformly) bounded geometry. Roughly speaking, split geometry is a generalization of amalgamation geometry where (1) A Margulis tube is allowed to travel through a uniformly bounded number of contiguous blocks and split them. (2) The complementary pieces, now called split components, are quasiconvex in a somewhat weaker sense (see Definition 4.8 below). Each split component is allowed to contain Margulis tubes, called hanging tubes that do not go all the way across from the top to the bottom, i.e. they do not split both Σsi , Σsi+1 . A split component B s ⊂ B = S × I is topologically a product S s × I for some, necessarily connected S (⊂ S). However, the upper and lower boundaries of B s need only be split subsurfaces of S s to allow for hanging tubes starting or ending (but not both) within the split block. s  Split Block with hanging tubes An end E of a hyperbolic 3-manifold M has weak split geometry if it is bi-Lipschitz homeomorphic to a model manifold Em consisting of gluing L−thick and split blocks as above end-to-end (for some L). Electrifying split components as in Section 4.3, we obtain a new electric metric called the graph metric dG on E. Definition 4.8. A model of weak split geometry is said to be of split geometry if the convex hull of each split component has uniformly bounded dG −diameter. 5. Cannon-Thurston Maps for Kleinian groups and Applications 5.1. Cannon-Thurston maps for degenerate manifolds. Let M be a hyperbolic 3-manifold homotopy equivalent to a closed hyperbolic surface S. Once we establish that M has split geometry, the proof proceeds as in Section 4.3 by electrifying split components, constructing a hyperbolic ladder Lλ and finally recovering a hyperbolic geodesic from an electric one. We shall therefore dwell in this subsection on showing that any degenerate end has split geometry. We shall do this under two simplifying assumptions, directing the reader to [Mj14a] (especially the Introduction) for a more detailed road-map. We borrow extensively from the hierarchy and model manifold terminology and technology of MasurMinsky [MM00] and Minsky [Min10]. The model manifold of [Min10, BCM12] furnishes a resolution, or equivalently, a sequence {Pm } of pants decompositions of S exiting E and hence a hierarchy path. Let  12  MAHAN MJ  τm denote the simple multicurve on S constituting Pm . The Pm in turn furnish split level surfaces {Sm } exiting E: a split level surface Sm is a collection of (nearly) totally geodesic embeddings of the pairs of pants comprising Pm . Next, corresponding to the hierarchy path {τm }, there is a tight geodesic in the curve complex C(S) of the surface S consisting of the bottom geodesic {ηi } of the hierarchy. We proceed to extract a subsequence of the resolution τm using the bottom geodesic {ηi } under two key simplifying assumptions: (1) For all i, the length of exactly one curve in ηi is sufficiently small, less than the Margulis constant in particular. Call it ηi for convenience. (2) Let Si correspond to the first occurrence of the vertex ηi in the resolution τm . Assume further that the Si ’s are actually split surfaces and not just split level surfaces, i.e. they all have injectivity radius uniformly bounded below, It follows that the Margulis tube ηi splits both Si and Si+1 and that the tube Ti is trapped entirely between Si and Si+1 . The product region Bi between Si and Si+1 is therefore a split block for all i and Ti splits it. The model manifold thus obtained is one of weak split geometry. In a sense, this is a case of ‘pure split geometry’, where all blocks have a split geometry structure (no thick blocks). To prove that the model is indeed of split geometry, it remains to establish the quasiconvexity condition of Definition 4.8. e an elevation to E. e Let v be a boundary short curve for the split Let K be a split component and K component and let Tv be the Margulis tube corresponding to v abutting K. Denote the hyperbolic convex e and pass back to a quotient in M . A crucial observation that is needed here is the fact hull by CH(K) that any pleated surface has bounded dG −diameter. This is because thin parts of pleated surfaces lie inside Margulis tubes that get electrified in the graph metric. It therefore suffices to show that any point in CH(K) lies close to a pleated surface passing near the fixed tube Tv . This last condition follows from the Brock-Bromberg drilling theorem [BB04] and the fact that the convex core of a quasi-Fuchsian group is filled by pleated surfaces [Fan99]. This completes our sketch of a proof of the following main theorem of [Mj14a]: Theorem 2.5: Let ρ : π1 (S) → P SL2 (C) be a simply or doubly degenerate (closed) surface Kleinian group. Then a Cannon-Thurston map exists. It follows that the limit set of ρ(π1 (S)) is a continuous image of S 1 and is therefore locally connected. As a first application of Theorem 2.5, we shall use the following Theorem of Anderson and Maskit [AM96] to prove that connected limit sets of Kleinian groups without parabolics are locally connected. Theorem 5.1. [AM96] Let Γ be an analytically finite Kleinian group with connected limit set. Then the limit set Λ(Γ) is locally connected if and only if every simply degenerate surface subgroup of Γ without accidental parabolics has locally connected limit set. Combining the remark after Theorem 2.5 with Theorem 5.1, we immediately have the following affirmative answer to Question 2.4. Theorem 5.2. Let Γ be a finitely generated Kleinian group without parabolics and with a connected limit set Λ. Then Λ is locally connected. Theorem 2.5 can be extended to punctured surfaces [Mj14a] and this allows Theorem 5.2 to be generalized to arbitrary finitely generated Kleinian groups. 5.2. Finitely generated Kleinian groups. In [Mj14b], we show that the point preimages of the Cannon-Thurston map for a simply or doubly degenerate surface Kleinian group given by Theorem 2.5 corresponds to end-points of leaves of ending laminations. In particular, the ending lamination corresponding to a degenerate end can be recovered from the Cannon-Thurston map. This was extended further in [DM16] and [Mj17b] to obtain the following general version for finitely generated Kleinian groups. Theorem 5.3. [Mj17b] Let G be a finitely generated Kleinian group. Let i : ΓG → H3 be the natural identification of a Cayley graph of G with the orbit of a point in H3 . Further suppose that each degenerate  CANNON-THURSTON MAPS  13  end of H3 /G can be equipped with a Minsky model [Min10].2 Then i extends continuously to a Cannon3 c Thurston map î : Γc G → D , where ΓG denotes the (relative) hyperbolic compactification of ΓG . Let ∂i denote the restriction of î to the boundary ∂ΓG of ΓG . Let E be a degenerate end of N h = H3 /G fh and let Mgf be an augmented Scott core of N h . Then the ending lamination e a lift of E to N and E g e LE for the end E lifts to a lamination on M gf ∩ E. Each such lift L of the ending lamination of g a degenerate end defines a relation RL on the (Gromov) boundary ∂ M gf (or equivalently, the relative hyperbolic boundary ∂r ΓG of ΓG ), given by aRL b iff a, b are end-points of a leaf of L. Let {Ri } be the g entire collection of relations on ∂ M gf obtained this way. Let R be the transitive closure of the union S R . Then ∂i(a) = ∂i(b) iff aRb. i i 5.3. Primitive Stable Representations. In [Min13] Minsky introduced an open subset of the P SL2 (C) character variety for a free group, properly containing the Schottky representations, on which the action of the outer automorphism group is properly discontinuous. He called these primitive stable representations. Let Fn be a free group of rank n. An element of Fn is primitive if it is an element of a free generating set. Let P = · · · www · · · be the set of bi-infinite words with w cyclically reduced primitive. A representation ρ : Fn → P SL2 (C) is primitive stable if all elements of P are mapped to uniform quasigeodesics in H3 . Minsky conjectured that primitive stable representations are characterized by the feature that every component of the ending lamination is blocking. Using Theorem 5.3, Jeon and Kim [JK10], and Jeon, Kim, Ohshika and Lecuire [JKOL14] resolved this conjecture. We briefly sketch their argument for a degenerate free Kleinian group without parabolics. Let {D1 , · · · , Dn } = D be a finite set of essential disks on a handlebody H cutting H into a 3-ball. A free generating set of Fn is dual to D. For a lamination L, the Whitehead graph W h(Λ, D) is defined as follows. Cut ∂H along ∂D to obtain a sphere with 2n holes, labeled by Di± . The vertices of W h(L, D) are the boundary circles of ∂H, with an edge whenever two circles are joined by an arc of L \ D. For the ending lamination LE of a degenerate free group without parabolics, W h(LE , ∆) is connected and has no cutpoints. Let ρE be the associated representation. If ρ is not primitive stable, then there exists a sequence of primitive cyclically reduced elements wn such that ρ(wn∗ ) is not an n− quasi-geodesic. After passing to a subsequence, wn and hence wn∗ converges to a bi-infinite geodesic w∞ in the Cayley graph with two distinct end points w+ , w− in the Gromov boundary of Fn . The Cannon-Thurston map identifies w+ , w− . Hence by Theorem 5.3 they are either the end points of a leaf of LE or ideal end-points of a complementary ideal polygon of LE . It follows therefore that W h(w∞ , D) is connected and has no cutpoints. Since wn ’s converge to w∞ , W h(wn , D) is connected and has no cutpoints for large enough n. A Lemma due to Whitehead says that if W h(wn , D) is connected and has no cutpoints, then wn cannot be primitive, a contradiction. 5.4. Discreteness of Commensurators. In [LLR11] and [Mj11b], Theorems 2.5 and 5.3 are used to prove that commensurators of finitely generated, infinite covolume, Zariski dense Kleinian groups are discrete. The basic fact that goes into the proof is that commensurators preserve the structure of point pre-images of Cannon-Thurston maps. The point pre-image structure is known from Theorem 5.3. 5.5. Radial and horospherical limit sets. Definition 5.4. A point ξ ∈ S 2 is a radial or conical limit point of Kleinian group Γ, if for any base-point f and any geodesic γξ ending at ξ, there exist C ≥ 0 and infinitely many translates g.o ∈ NC (γξ ), o∈M g ∈ Γ. f and any A point ξ ∈ S 2 is a horospherical limit point of Kleinian group Γ, if for any base-point o ∈ M horoball Bξ based at ξ, there exist infinitely many translates g.o ∈ Bξ , g ∈ Γ. 2This hypothesis is satisfied for all ends without parabolics as well as for ends incompressible away from cusps - see [Min10, BCM12] and [Mj17b, Appendix]. That the hypothesis is satisfied in general would follow from unpublished work of Bowditch [Bow16, Bow05].  14  MAHAN MJ  The collection of radial (resp. horospherical) limit points of Γ is called the radial (resp. horospherical) limit set of Γ and is denoted by Λr (resp. Λh ). The multiple limit set Λm consists of those point of S 2 that have more than one pre-image under the Cannon-Thurston map. Several authors [Kap95, Ger12, JKLO16] worked on the relationship between Λm and Λr . They concluded that the conical limit set is strictly contained in the set of injective points of the CannonThurston map, i.e. Λr ⊂ Λcm , but the inclusion is proper. In [LM16], we showed: Theorem 5.5. Λcm = Λh . 5.6. Motions of limit sets. We discuss the following question in this section, which paraphrases the second part of of [Thu82, Problem 14]. A detailed survey appears in [Mj17a]. Question 5.6. Let Gn be a sequence of Kleinian groups converging to a Kleinian group G. Does the corresponding dynamics of Gn on the Riemann sphere S 2 converge to the dynamics of G on S 2 ? To make Question 5.6 precise, we need to make sense of ‘convergence’ both for Kleinian groups and for their dynamics on S 2 . There are three different notions of convergence for Kleinian groups. Definition 5.7. Let ρi : H → P SL2 (C) be a sequence of Kleinian groups. We say that that ρi converges to ρ∞ algebraically if for all h ∈ H, ρi (h) → ρ∞ (h). Let ρj : H → P SL2 (C) be a sequence of discrete, faithful representations of a finitely generated, torsion-free, nonabelian group H. If {ρj (H)} converges as a sequence of closed subsets of P SL2 (C) to a torsion-free, nonabelian Kleinian group Γ, Γ is called the geometric limit of the sequence. Gi (= ρi (H)) converges strongly to G(= ρ∞ (H)) if the convergence is both geometric and algebraic. Question 5.6 then splits into the following three questions. Question 5.8. (1) If Gn → G geometrically, then do the corresponding limit sets converge in the Hausdorff topology on S 2 ? (2) If Gn → G strongly then do the corresponding Cannon-Thurston maps converge uniformly? (3) If Gn → G algebraically then do the corresponding Cannon-Thurston maps converge pointwise? We give the answers straight off and then proceed to elaborate. Answers 5.9. (1) The answer to Question 5.8 (1) is Yes. (2) The answer to Question 5.8 (2) is Yes. (3) The answer to Question 5.8 (3) is No, in general. The most general answer to Question 5.8 (1) is due to Evans [Eva00], [Eva04]: Theorem 5.10. [Eva00], [Eva04] Let ρn : H → Gn be a sequence of weakly type-preserving isomorphisms from a geometrically finite group H to Kleinian groups Gn with limit sets Λn , such that ρn converges algebraically to ρ∞ : H → Ga∞ and geometrically to Gg∞ . Let Λa and Λg denote the limit sets of Ga∞ and Gg∞ . Then Λn → Λg in the Hausdorff metric. Further, the sequence converges strongly if and only Λn → Λa in the Hausdorff metric. The answer to Question 5.8 (2) is due to the author and Series [MS17] in the case that H = π1 (S) for a closed surface S of genus greater than one. This can be generalized to arbitrary finitely generated Kleinian groups as in [Mj17a]: Theorem 5.11. Let H be a fixed group and ρn (H) = Γn be a sequence of geometrically finite Kleinian groups converging strongly to a Kleinian group Γ. Let Mn and M∞ be the corresponding hyperbolic manifolds. Let K be a fixed complex with fundamental group H. Consider embeddings φn : K → Mn , n = 1, · · · , ∞ such that the maps φn are homotopic to each other fn exist by uniformly bounded homotopies (in the geometric limit). Then Cannon-Thurston maps for φ and converge uniformly to the Cannon-Thurston map for φf ∞.  CANNON-THURSTON MAPS  15  Finally we turn to Question 5.8 (3), which turns out to be the subtlest. In [MS13] we showed that the answer to Question 5.8 (3) is ‘Yes’ if the geometric limit is geometrically finite. We illustrate this with a concrete example due to Kerckhoff and Thurston [KT90] Theorem 5.12. Fix a closed hyperbolic surface S and a simple closed geodesic σ on it. Let twi denote the automorphism of S given by an i-fold Dehn twist along σ. Let Gi be the quasi-Fuchsian group given by the simultaneous uniformization of (S, twi (S)). Let G∞ denote the geometric limit of the Gi ’s. Let Si− denote the lower boundary component of the convex core of Gi , i = 1, · · · , ∞ (including ∞). Let φi : S → Si− be such that if 0 ∈ H2 = Se denotes the origin of H2 then φei (0) lies in a uniformly bounded fi . We also assume (using the fact that M∞ is a geometric limit of Mi ’s) neighborhood of 0 ∈ H3 = M that Si− ’s converge geometrically to S∞− . Then the Cannon-Thurston maps for φei converge pointwise, but not uniformly, on ∂H2 to the Cannon-Thurston map for φf ∞. However, if the geometric limit is geometrically infinite, then the answer to Question 5.8 (3) may be negative. We illustrate this with certain examples of geometric limits constructed by Brock in [Bro01]. Theorem 5.13. [MS17] Fix a closed hyperbolic surface S and a separating simple closed geodesic σ on it, cutting S up into two pieces S− and S+ . Let φ denote an automorphism of S such that φ|S− is the identity and φ|S+ = ψ is a pseudo-Anosov of S+ fixing the boundary. Let Gi be the quasi-Fuchsian group given by the simultaneous uniformization of (S, φi (S)). Let G∞ denote the geometric limit of the Gi ’s. Let Si0 denote the lower boundary component of the convex core of Gi , i = 1, · · · , ∞ (including ∞). Let φi : S → Si0 be such that if 0 ∈ H2 = Se denotes the origin of H2 then φei (0) lies in a uniformly bounded fi . We also assume (using the fact that M∞ is a geometric limit of Mi ’s) neighborhood of 0 ∈ H3 = M that Si0 ’s converge geometrically to S∞0 . Let Σ be a complete hyperbolic structure on S+ such that σ is homotopic to a cusp on Σ. Let L consist e of pairs (ξ− , ξ) of ideal endpoints (on S1∞ ) of stable leaves λ of the stable lamination of ψ acting on Σ. e e Also let ∂ H denote the collection of ideal basepoints of horodisks given by lifts (contained in Σ) of the cusp in Σ corresponding to σ. Let e Ξ = {ξ : There exists ξ− such that (ξ− , ξ) ∈ L; ξ− ∈ ∂ H}. Let ∂φi , i = 1 · · · , ∞ denote the Cannon-Thurston maps for φei . Then (1) ∂φi (ξ) does not converge to ∂φ∞ (ξ) for ξ ∈ Ξ. (2) ∂φi (ξ) converges to ∂φ∞ (ξ) for ξ ∈ / Ξ. In [MO17], we identify the exact criteria that lead to the discontinuity phenomenon of Theorem 5.13. 6. Gromov-Hyperbolic groups 6.1. Applications and Generalizations. 6.1.1. Normal subgroups and trees. The ladder construction of Section 3.2 has been generalized considerably. We work in the context of an exact sequence 1 → N → G → Q → 1, with N hyperbolic and G finitely presented. We observe that for the proof of Theorem 3.5 to go through it suffices to have a qi-section of Q into G to provide a ‘coarse transversal’ to flow. Such a qi-section was shown to exist by Mosher [Mos96]. We then obtain the following. Theorem 6.1. [Mit98a] Let G be a hyperbolic group and let H be a hyperbolic normal subgroup that is normal in G. Then the inclusion of Cayley graphs i : ΓH → ΓG gives a Cannon-Thurston map c î : Γc H → ΓG . The ladder construction can also be generalized to the general framework of a tree of hyperbolic metric spaces. Theorem 6.2. [Mit98b] Let (X, d) be a tree (T ) of hyperbolic metric spaces satisfying the qi-embedded condition (i.e. edge space to vertex space inclusions are qi-embeddings). Let v be a vertex of T and  16  MAHAN MJ  (Xv , dv ) be the vertex space corresponding to v. If X is hyperbolic then the inclusion i : Xv → X gives a cv → X. b Cannon-Thurston map î : X Theorem 6.1 was generalized by the author and Sardar to a purely coarse geometric context, where no group action is present. The relevant notion is that of a metric bundle for which we refer the reader to [MS12]. Roughly speaking, the data of a metric bundle consists of vertex and edge spaces as in the case of a tree of spaces, with two notable changes: (1) The base T is replaced by an arbitrary graph B. (2) All edge-space to vertex space maps are quasi-isometries rather than just quasi-isometric embeddings. With these modifications in place we have the following generalizations of Mosher’s qi-section Lemma [Mos96] and Theorem 6.1: Theorem 6.3. [MS12] Suppose p : X → B is a metric graph bundle satisfying the following: (1) B is a Gromov hyperbolic graph. (2) Each fiber Fb , for b a vertex of B is δ-hyperbolic (for some δ > 0) with respect to the path metric induced from X. (3) The barycenter maps ∂ 3 Fb → Fb , b ∈ B, sending a triple of distinct points on the boundary ∂Fb to their centroid, are (uniformly, independent of b) coarsely surjective. (4) X is hyperbolic. Then there is a qi-section B → X. The inclusion map ib : Fb → X gives a Cannon-Thurston map cb → X. b î : F 6.2. Point pre-images: Laminations. In Section 3.1, it was pointed out that the Cannon-Thurston map î identifies p, q ∈ S 1 if and only if p, q are end-points of a leaf or ideal end-points of a complementary ideal polygon of the stable or unstable lamination. In [Mit97a] an algebraic theory of ending laminations was developed based on Thurston’s theory [Thu80]. The theory was developed in the context of a normal hyperbolic subgroup of a hyperbolic group G and used to give an explicit structure for the Cannon-Thurston map in Theorem 6.1. Definition 6.4. [BFH97, CHL07, CHL08a, CHL08b, KL10, KL15, Mit97a] An algebraic lamination for a hyperbolic group H is an H-invariant, flip invariant, closed subset L ⊆ ∂ 2 H = (∂H × ∂H \ ∆)/ ∼, where (x, y) ∼ (y, x) denotes the flip and ∆ the diagonal in ∂H × ∂H. Let 1→H→G→Q→1 be an exact sequence of finitely presented groups with H, G hyperbolic. It follows by work of Mosher [Mos96] that Q is hyperbolic. In [Mit97a], we construct algebraic ending laminations naturally parametrized by points in the boundary ∂Q. We describe the construction now. Every element g ∈ G gives an automorphism of H sending h to g −1 hg for all h ∈ H. Let φg : V(ΓH ) → V(ΓH ) be the resulting bijection of the vertex set V(ΓH ) of ΓH . This induces a map Φg sending an edge [a, b] ⊂ ΓH to a geodesic segment joining φg (a), φg (b). For some (any) z ∈ ∂ΓQ we shall describe an algebraic ending lamination Λz . Fix such a z and let (1) (2) (3) (4)  [1, z) ⊂ ΓQ be a geodesic ray starting at 1 and converging to z ∈ ∂ΓQ . σ : Q → G be a qi section. zn be the vertex on [1, z) such that dQ (1, zn ) = n. gn = σ(zn ).  For h ∈ H, let Snh be the H–invariant collection of all free homotopy representatives (or equivalently, shortest representatives in the same conjugacy class) of φgn−1 (h) in ΓH . Identifying equivalent geodesics 2 in Snh one obtains a subset Shn of unordered pairs of points in Γc H . The intersection with ∂ H of the union h h of all subsequential limits (in the Hausdorff topology) of {Sn } is denoted by Λz .  CANNON-THURSTON MAPS  17  Definition 6.5. The set of algebraic ending laminations corresponding to z ∈ ∂ΓQ is given by [ ΛEL (z) = Λhz . h∈H  Definition 6.6. The set Λ of all algebraic ending laminations is defined by [ ΛEL (z). ΛEL = z∈∂ΓQ  The following was shown in [Mit97a]: Theorem 6.7. The Cannon-Thurston map î of Theorem 6.1 identifies the end-points of leaves of ΛEL . Conversely, if î(p) = î(q) for p 6= q ∈ ∂ΓH , then some bi-infinite geodesic having p, q as its end-points is a leaf of ΛEL . 6.2.1. Finite-to-one. The classical Cannon-Thurston map of Theorem 2.2 is finite-to-one. Swarup asked (cf. Bestvina’s Geometric Group Theory problem list [Bes04, Prolem 1.20]) if the Cannon-Thurston maps of Theorem 6.1 are also finite-to-one. Kapovich and Lustig answered this in the affirmative in the following case. Theorem 6.8. [KL15] Let φ ∈ Out(FN ) be a fully irreducible hyperbolic automorphism. Let Gφ = FN oφ Z be the associated mapping torus group. Let ∂i denote the Cannon-Thurston map of Theorem 6.1 in this case. Then for every z ∈ ∂Gφ , the cardinality of (∂i)−1 (z) is at most 2N . Bestvina-Feighn-Handel [BFH97] define a closely related set ΛBF H of algebraic laminations in the case covered by Theorem 6.8 using train-track representatives of free group automorphisms. Any algebraic lamination L defines a relation RL on ∂FN by aRL b if (a, b) ∈ L. The transitive closure of L will be called its diagonal closure. In [KL15], Kapovich and Lustig further show that in the case covered by Theorem 6.8, ΛEL precisely equals the diagonal closure of ΛBF H . 6.3. Relative hyperbolicity. The notion of a Cannon-Thurston map can be extended to the context of relative hyperbolicity. This was done in [MP11]. Let X and Y be relatively hyperbolic spaces, hyperbolic relative to the collections HX and HY of ‘horosphere-like sets’ respectively. Let us denote the horoballifications of X and Y with respect to HX and HY by G(X, HX ), G(Y, HY ) respectively (see [Bow12] for details). The horoballification of an H in HX or HY is denoted as H h . Note that G(X, HX ), G(Y, HY ) are hyperbolic. The electrifications will be denoted as E(X, HX ), E(Y, HY ). Definition 6.9. A map i : Y → X is strictly type-preserving if (1) for all HY ∈ HY there exists HX ∈ HX such that i(HY ) ⊂ HX , and (2) images of distinct horospheres-like sets in Y lie in distinct horosphere-like sets in X. Let i : Y → X be a strictly type-preserving proper embedding. Then i induces a proper embedding ih : G(Y, HY ) → G(X, HX ). Definition 6.10. A Cannon-Thurston map exists for a strictly type-preserving inclusion i : Y → X of relatively hyperbolic spaces if a Cannon-Thurston map exists for the induced map ih : G(Y, HY ) → G(X, HX ). Lemma 2.8 generalizes to the following. Lemma 6.11. A Cannon-Thurston map for i : Y → X exists if and only if there exists a non-negative proper function M : N → N such that the following holds: Fix a base-point y0 ∈ Y . Let λ̂ in E(Y, HY ) be an electric geodesic segment starting and ending outside S horospheres. If λb = λ̂ \ K∈HY K lies outside BN (y0 ) ⊂ Y , then for any electric quasigeodesic β̂ joining S the end points of î(λ̂) in E(X, HX ), β b = β̂ \ H∈HX H lies outside BM (N ) (i(y0 )) ⊂ X. Theorem 6.2 then generalizes to: Theorem 6.12. [MP11] Let P : X → T be a tree of relatively hyperbolic spaces satisfying the qi-embedded condition. Assume that  18  MAHAN MJ  (1) the inclusion maps of edge-spaces into vertex spaces are strictly type-preserving (2) the induced tree of electrified (coned-off ) spaces continues to satisfy the qi-embedded condition (3) X is strongly hyperbolic relative to the family C of maximal cone-subtrees of horosphere-like sets. Then a Cannon-Thurston map exists for the inclusion of relatively hyperbolic spaces i : Xv → X, where (Xv , dXv ) is the relatively hyperbolic vertex space corresponding to v. 6.4. Problems. The above survey is conditioned and limited by the author’s bias on the one hand and space considerations on the other. In particular we have omitted the important work on quasigeodesic foliations by Calegari, Fenley and Frankel [Cal06, Cal00, Fen12, Fra15] and the topology of ending lamination spaces by Gabai and others [Gab14, Gab09, LMS11, HP11] as this would be beyond the scope of the present article. A more detailed survey appears in [Mj17c]. We end with some open problems. 6.4.1. Higher dimensional Kleinian groups. As a test-case we propose: Question 6.13. Let S be a closed surface of genus greater than one and let Γ = π1 (S) act freely, properly discontinuously by isometries on Hn , n > 3 (or more generally a rank one symmetric space). Does a Cannon-Thurston map exist in general? Can the small cancellation group of Baker-Riley in [BR13] act geometrically on a rank one symmetric space thus giving a negative answer to Question 6.13 with surface group replaced by free group? Work of Wise [Wis12, Wis04] guarantees linearity of such small cancellation groups. The critical problem in trying to answer Question 6.13 is the absence of new examples in higher dimensions. It would be good to find new examples or prove that they do not exist. A version of a question due to Kapovich [Kap08] makes this more precise and indicates our current state of knowledge/ignorance: Question 6.14. Let S be a closed surface of genus greater than one and let Γ be a discrete subgroup of SO(n, 1) (or more generally a rank one Lie group)) abstractly isomorphic to π1 (S)) acting by isometries on Hn , n > 3 (more generally the associated symmetric space) such that (1) orbits are not quasiconvex, (2) no element of Γ is a parabolic. Does ρ factor through a representation to a simply or doubly degenerate (3-dimensional) Kleinian group followed by a deformation of SO(3, 1) in SO(n, 1)? A closely related folklore question asks: Question 6.15. Can a closed higher dimensional n > 3 rank one manifold fiber? In particular over the circle? It is known, from the Chern-Gauss-Bonnet theorem that a 2n dimensional rank one manifold cannot fiber over the circle. Unpublished work of Kapovich [Kap98] shows that a complex hyperbolic 4-manifold cannot fiber over a 2-manifold. 6.4.2. Surface groups in higher rank. A topic of considerable current interest is higher dimensional Teichmüller theory and Anosov representations of surface groups [Lab06, KLP17, GGKW17]. Kapovich, Leeb and Porti give an equivalent definition of Anosov representations in purely coarse geometric terms as representations that are asymptotic embeddings. It will take us too far afield to define these notions precisely here. What we will say however is that if ρ : π1 (S) → G is a discrete faithful representation into a semi-simple Lie group G and G/P = B is the Furstenberg boundary, then the Anosov property implies that an orbit ρ(π1 (S)).o ‘extends’ to a ρ(π1 (S))−equivariant embedding of ∂Γπ1 (S) (= S 1 ) into B. Thus the boundary map ∆ : S 1 → B maybe thought of as a higher rank Cannon-Thurston map. For the representation to be Anosov, ∆ is thus an embedding [KLP17]. Question 6.16. What class of representations do we get if we require only that ∆ is continuous? Question 6.16 is basically asking for a ‘nice’ characterization of representations that admit a higher rank Cannon-Thurston map. The core problem in addressing it again boils down to finding some rich class of examples. Question 6.14 has a natural generalization to this context where we replace SO(n, 1) by G.  CANNON-THURSTON MAPS  19  6.4.3. Geometric group theory. As we have seen in Section 6.1, normal hyperbolic subgroups and trees of spaces provide examples where there is a positive answer to Question 2.7. Some sporadic new examples have also been found, e.g. hydra groups [BR12]. However no systematic theory exists. In the light of the counterexample in [BR13], the general answer to Question 2.7 is negative. Are there necessary and/or sufficient conditions beyond Lemma 2.8 to guarantee existence of Cannon-Thurston maps? As illustrated in [Mit98b] and [BR12], distortion of subgroups [Gro93] is irrelevant. Distortion captures the relationship between dH (1, h) with dG (1, h). On the other hand Cannon-Thurston maps capture the corresponding relationship between dH (1, [h1 , h2 ]H ) with dG (1, [h1 , h2 ]G ), i.e. existence of CannonThurston maps is equivalent to a proper embedding of ‘pairs of points’ (coding geodesic segments). The function associated with such a proper embedding is closely related to the modulus of continuity of the Cannon-Thurston map [BR12]. Acknowledgments I would like to thank Benson Farb and Thomas Koberda for several helpful comments on an earlier draft. References [Abi76] [ADP99] [AM96] [BB04] [BCM12] [Bes04] [BF92] [BFH97] [Bon86] [Bow05] [Bow07] [Bow12] [Bow13] [Bow16] [BR12] [BR13] [Bro01] [Cal00] [Cal06] [CHL07] [CHL08a] [CHL08b] [CT85] [CT07] [DKL14] [DKT16] [DM16]  W. Abikoff. Two theorems on totally degenerate Kleinian groups. Amer. J. Math. 98, pages 109–118, 1976. R. C. Alperin, W. Dicks, and J. Porti. The boundary of the Gieseking tree in hyperbolic three-space. Topology Appl., 93, pages 219–259, (1999). J. Anderson and B. Maskit. On the local connectivity of limit sets of Kleinian groups. Complex Variables Theory Appl. 31, pages 177–183, 1996. J. Brock and K. Bromberg. Density of Geometrically Finite Kleinian Groups. Acta Mathematica 192, pages 33–93, 2004. J. F. Brock, R. D. Canary, and Y. N. Minsky. The Classification of Kleinian surface groups II: The Ending Lamination Conjecture. Ann. of Math. 176 (1), arXiv:math/0412006, pages 1–149, 2012. M. Bestvina. Geometric group theory problem list. M. Bestvina’s home page: http:math.utah.edu bestvina, 2004. M. Bestvina and M. Feighn. A Combination theorem for Negatively Curved Groups. J. Diff. Geom., vol 35, pages 85–101, 1992. M. Bestvina, M. Feighn, and M. Handel. Laminations, trees and irreducible automorphisms of free groups. Geom. Funct. Anal. vol.7 No. 2, pages 215–244, 1997. F. Bonahon. Bouts de varietes hyperboliques de dimension 3. Ann. Math. vol.124, pages 71–158, 1986. B. H. Bowditch. End invariants of hyperbolic manifolds. preprint, Southampton, 2005. B. H. Bowditch. The Cannon-Thurston map for punctured surface groups. Math. Z. 255, pages 35–76, (2007). B. H. Bowditch. Relatively hyperbolic groups. Internat. J. Algebra and Computation. 22, 1250016, 66pp, 2012. B. H. Bowditch. Stacks of hyperbolic spaces and ends of 3 manifolds. Geometry and topology down under, Contemp. Math., 597, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI., pages 65–138, 2013. B. H. Bowditch. Ending lamination theorem. preprint, Warwick, 2016. O. Baker and T. Riley. Cannon-Thurston maps, subgroup distortion, and hyperbolic hydra. preprint, arXiv:1209.0815, 2012. O. Baker and T. Riley. Cannon-Thurston maps do not alway exist. Forum of Mathematics, Sigma, 1, e3, 2013. J. Brock. Iteration of mapping classes and limits of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. Invent. Math. 143 no 3, pages 523–570, 2001. D. Calegari. The geometry of R–covered foliations. Geom. Topol. 4, pages 457–515, 2000. D. Calegari. Universal circles for quasigeodesic flows. Geom. Topol. 10, pages 2271–2298, 2006. T. Coulbois, A. Hilion, and M. Lustig. Non-unique ergodicity, observers’ topology and the dual algebraic lamination for R-trees. Illinois J. Math. 51(3), 2007. T. Coulbois, A. Hilion, and M. Lustig. R-trees and laminations for free groups. I. algebraic laminations. J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2), 78(3), 2008. T. Coulbois, A. Hilion, and M. Lustig. R-trees and laminations for free groups. II. the dual lamination of an R-tree. J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2), 78(3), pages 737–754, 2008. J. Cannon and W. P. Thurston. Group Invariant Peano Curves. preprint, Princeton, 1985. J. Cannon and W. P. Thurston. Group Invariant Peano Curves. Geom. Topol. 11, pages 1315–1355, 2007. S. Dowdall, R. P. Kent, and C. J. Leininger. Pseudo-anosov subgroups of fibered 3-manifold groups. Groups Geom. Dyn. 8, no. 4, pages 1247–1282, 2014. S. Dowdall, I. Kapovich, and S. J. Taylor. Cannon-Thurston maps for hyperbolic free group extensions. Israel J. Math. 216, no. 2, pages 753–797, (2016). S. Das and M. Mj. Semiconjugacies Between Relatively Hyperbolic Boundaries. Groups Geom. Dyn. 10, pages 733–752, 2016.  20  [DT17a]  MAHAN MJ  S. Dowdall and S. J. Taylor. The co-surface graph and the geometry of hyperbolic free group extensions. J. Topol. 10, no. 2, pages 447–482, (2017). [DT17b] S. Dowdall and S. J. Taylor. Hyperbolic extensions of free groups. to appear in Geom. Topol., arXiv:1406.2567, 2017. [Eva00] R. Evans. Deformation spaces of hyperbolic 3-manifolds: strong convergence and tameness. Ph.D. Thesis, Unversity of Michigan, 2000. [Eva04] R. Evans. Weakly Type-Preserving Sequences and Strong Convergence. Geometriae Dedicata, Volume 108, Number 1, pages 71–92, October, 2004. [Fan99] Carol E. Fan. Injectivity radius bounds in hyperbolic convex cores I. preprint, arXiv:math.GT/9907058, 1999. [Far98] B. Farb. Relatively hyperbolic groups. Geom. Funct. Anal. 8, pages 810–840, 1998. [Fen12] S. Fenley. Ideal boundaries of pseudo-Anosov flows and uniform convergence groups, with connections and applications to large scale geometry. Geom. Topol. 16, pages 1–110, 2012. [Flo80] W. J. Floyd. Group Completions and Limit Sets of Kleinian Groups. Invent. Math. vol.57, pages 205–218, 1980. [FLP79] A. Fathi, M. Laudenbach, and V. Poenaru. Travaux de Thurston sur les surfaces. Asterisque 66-67, pages 1–284, 1979. [Fra15] S. Frankel. Quasigeodesic flows and sphere-filling curves. Geom. Topol. 19, pages 1249–1262, 2015. [Gab09] D. Gabai. Almost filling laminations and the connectivity of ending lamination space. Geom. Topol. 13, no. 2, pages 1017–1041, (2009). [Gab14] D. Gabai. On the topology of ending lamination space. Geom. Topol. 18, no. 5, pages 2683–2745, 2014. [Ger12] V. Gerasimov. Floyd maps for relatively hyperbolic groups. Geom. Funct. Anal., 22, no. 5, pages 1361–1399, 2012. [GGKW17] F. Gueritaud, O. Guichard, F. Kassell, and A. Wienhard. Anosov representations and proper actions. Geom. Topol. 21, pages 485–584, (2017). [Gro85] M. Gromov. Hyperbolic Groups. in Essays in Group Theory, ed. Gersten, MSRI Publ.,vol.8, Springer Verlag, pages 75–263, 1985. [Gro93] M. Gromov. Asymptotic Invariants of Infinite Groups. in Geometric Group Theory,vol.2; Lond. Math. Soc. Lecture Notes 182, Cambridge University Press, 1993. [HP11] S. Hensel and P. Przytycki. The ending lamination space of the five-punctured sphere is the Nobeling curve. J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 84 no. 1, pages 103–119, 2011. [JK10] W. Jeon and I. Kim. Primitive stable representations of gemetrically infinite handlebody hyperbolic 3-manifolds. C. R. Math. Acad. Sci. Paris 348, no. 15-16,, 2010. [JKLO16] W. Jeon, I. Kapovich, C. Leininger, and K. Ohshika. Conical limit points and the Cannon-Thurston map. Conform. Geom. Dyn. 20, pages 58–80, 2016. [JKOL14] W. Jeon, I. Kim, K. Ohshika, and C. Lecuire. Primitive stable representations of free Kleinian groups. Israel J. Math. 199, no. 2,, pages 841–866, 2014. [Kab16] Y. Kabaya. Deformation of quasi-Fuchsian groups. https : //www.math.kyoto − u.ac.jp/ ∼ kabaya/galleries/quasif uchsiandef ormation/quasif uchsiandef ormation.html, 2016. [Kap95] M. Kapovich. On absence of Ahlfors’ finiteness theorem for Kleinian groups in dimension 3. Algebra and analysis (Irkutsk, 1989), (L A Bokut, M Hazewinkel, Y G Reshetnyak, editors), Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. Ser. 2 163, 1995. [Kap98] M. Kapovich. On the normal subgroups in the fundamental groups of complex surfaces. Preprint, 1998. [Kap01] M. Kapovich. Hyperbolic manifolds and discrete groups. Progress in Mathematics, 183. Birkhuser Boston, Inc., Boston, MA. xxvi+467 pp., 2001. [Kap08] M. Kapovich. Kleinian groups in higher dimensions. geometry and dynamics of groups and spaces. Progr. Math., 265, Birkhuser, Basel, pages 487–564, 2008. [KL10] I. Kapovich and M. Lustig. Intersection form, laminations and currents on free groups. Geom. Funct. Anal. 19, no. 5, pages 1426–1467, 2010. [KL15] I. Kapovich and M. Lustig. Cannon-Thurston fibers for iwip automorphisms of FN . J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 91, no. 1, pages 203–224, 2015. [Kla99] E. Klarreich. Semiconjugacies between Kleinian group actions on the Riemann sphere. Amer. J. Math 121, pages 1031–1078, 1999. [KLP17] M. Kapovich, B. Leeb, and J. Porti. Anosov subgroups: Dynamical and geometric characterizations. preprint arXiv:1703.01647, (2017). [KT90] S. Kerckhoff and W. Thurston. Non-continuity of the action of the modular group at the Bers’ boundary of Teichmuller Space. Invent. Math. 100, pages 25–48, 1990. [Lab06] F. Labourie. Anosov flows, surface groups and curves in projective space. Invent. Math. Vol. 165, no. 1, pages 51–114, (2006). [LLR11] C. J. Leininger, D. D. Long, and A. W. Reid. Commensurators of non-free finitely generated Kleinian groups. Algebraic and Geometric Topology 11, pages 605–624, 2011. [LM16] C. Lecuire and M. Mj. Horospheres in degenerate 3-manifolds . preprint, arXiv:1606.07185, to appear in Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN, 2016. [LMS11] C. Leininger, M. Mj, and S. Schleimer. The universal cannon-thurston map and the boundary of the curve complex. Comment. Math. Helv. 86 no. 4, pages 769–816, 2011. [McM01] C. T. McMullen. Local connectivity, Kleinian groups and geodesics on the blow-up of the torus. Invent. math., 97:95–127, 2001.  CANNON-THURSTON MAPS  [Min92] [Min94] [Min01] [Min10] [Min13] [Mit97a] [Mit97b] [Mit98a] [Mit98b] [Mit98c] [Miy02] [Mj10]  [Mj11a] [Mj11b] [Mj14a] [Mj14b] [Mj16]  [Mj17a] [Mj17b] [Mj17c] [MM00] [MO14] [MO17] [Mos96] [MP11] [MR15] [MS12] [MS13] [MS17] [Ota01]  [Sco78] [SS90] [Thu80] [Thu82] [Thu86] [Wis04] [Wis12]  21  Y. N. Minsky. Teichmuller Geodesics and Ends of 3-Manifolds. Topology, pages 1–25, 1992. Y. N. Minsky. On Rigidity, Limit Sets, and End Invariants of Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds. J. Amer. Math. Soc., vol.7, pages 539–588, 1994. Y. N. Minsky. Bounded geometry in Kleinian groups. Invent. Math. 146, pages 143–192, 2001. Y. N. Minsky. The Classification of Kleinian surface groups I: Models and Bounds. Ann. of Math. 171(1), math.GT/0302208, pages 1–107, 2010. Y. N. Minsky. On dynamics of Out(Fn ) on P SL2 (C) characterss. Israel J. Math. 193(1), pages 47–70, 2013. M. Mitra. Ending Laminations for Hyperbolic Group Extensions. Geom. Funct. Anal. vol.7 No. 2, pages 379– 402, 1997. M. Mitra. Maps on Boundaries of Hyperbolic Metric Spaces, PhD Thesis. UC Berkeley, 1997. M. Mitra. Cannon-Thurston Maps for Hyperbolic Group Extensions. Topology 37, pages 527–538, 1998. M. Mitra. Cannon-Thurston Maps for Trees of Hyperbolic Metric Spaces. Jour. Diff. Geom.48, pages 135–164, 1998. M. Mitra. Coarse extrinsic geometry: a survey. Geometry and Topology monographs, The Epstein birthday Schrift, paper no. 17, pages 341–364, 1998. H. Miyachi. Semiconjugacies between actions of topologically tame Kleinian groups. preprint, 2002. M. Mj. Cannon-Thurston Maps and Bounded Geometry. Teichmuller theory and moduli problem, Ramanujan Math. Soc. Lect. Notes Ser., 10, Ramanujan Math. Soc., Mysore, arXiv:math.GT/0603729, pages 489–511, 2010. M. Mj. Cannon-Thurston Maps, i-bounded Geometry and a Theorem of McMullen. Actes du séminaire Théorie spectrale et géométrie, Grenoble, vol 28, 2009-10, arXiv:math.GT/0511104, pages 63–108, 2011. M. Mj. On Discreteness of Commensurators. Geom. Topol. 15, pages 331–350, 2011. M. Mj. Cannon-Thurston Maps for Surface Groups. Ann. of Math., 179(1), pages 1–80, 2014. M. Mj. Ending Laminations and Cannon-Thurston Maps, with an appendix by S. Das and M. Mj. Geom. Funct. Anal. 24, pages 297–321, 2014. M. Mj. Cannon-Thurston Maps for Surface Groups: An Exposition of Amalgamation Geometry and Split Geometry. Geometry, Topology, and Dynamics in Negative Curvature, London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series volume 425, arXiv:math.GT/0512539, pages 221–271, 2016. M. Mj. Motions of limit sets: A survey . Proceedings of Workshop on Grothendieck-Teichmuller theories, Chern Institute, Tianjin, July 2016, 2017. M. Mj. Cannon-Thurston Maps for Kleinian Groups. Forum Math. Pi 5, e1, 49 pp., 2017. M. Mj. Cannon-Thurston maps in Kleinian groups and geometric group theory. submitted to Handbook on Teichmuller Theory, ed. A. Papadopoulos, 2017. H. A. Masur and Y. N. Minsky. Geometry of the complex of curves I: Hierarchical structure. Geom. Funct. Anal. 10, pages 902–974, 2000. Y. Matsuda and S. Oguni. On Cannon–Thurston maps for relatively hyperbolic groups. Journal of Group Theory 17(1), pages 41–47, 2014. M. Mj and K. Ohshika. Discontinuous Motions of Limit Sets. preprint, arxiv:1704.00269, 2017. L. Mosher. Hyperbolic Extensions of Groups. J. of Pure and Applied Algebra vol.110 No.3, pages 305–314, 1996. M. Mj and A. Pal. Relative Hyperbolicity, Trees of Spaces and Cannon-Thurston Maps. Geom. Dedicata 151, pages 59–78, 2011. M. Mj and K. Rafi. Algebraic Ending Laminations and Quasiconvexity. preprint, arXiv:1506.08036, 2015. M. Mj and P. Sardar. A combination theorem for metric bundles. Geom. Funct. Anal. 22, no. 6, pages 1636– 1707, 2012. M. Mj and C. Series. Limits of Limit Sets I. Geom. Dedicata 167, pages 35–67, 2013. M. Mj and C. Series. Limits of Limit Sets II: geometrically infinite groups. Geom. Topol. 21, no. 2, pages 647–692, 2017. J. P. Otal. The hyperbolization theorem for fibered 3-manifolds. Translated from the 1996 French original by Leslie D. Kay. SMF/AMS Texts and Monographs, 7. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI; Socit Mathmatique de France, Paris. xiv+126 pp., 2001. P. Scott. Subgroups of surface groups are almost geometric. Journal L.M.S. 17, pages 555–65, 1978. P. Scott and G. Swarup. Geometric Finiteness of Certain Kleinian Groups. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 109, pages 765–768, 1990. W. P. Thurston. The Geometry and Topology of 3-Manifolds. Princeton University Notes, 1980. W. P. Thurston. Three dimensional manifolds, Kleinian groups and hyperbolic geometry. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., pages 357–382, 1982. W. P. Thurston. Hyperbolic Structures on 3-Manifolds,II: Surface Groups and 3-Manifolds which Fiber over the Circle. preprint, arXiv:math.GT/9801045, 1986. D. T. Wise. Cubulating small cancellation groups. Geom. Funct. Anal. 14, no. 1, pages 150–214, (2004). D. T. Wise. The structure of groups with a quasi-convex hierarchy. preprint, page 189, (2012).  22  MAHAN MJ  School of Mathematics, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research. 1, Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai-400005, India E-mail address: mahan@math.tifr.res.in

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
