Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_5401

Abstract:
Motif-based Rule Discovery for Predicting Real-valued Time Series∗†‡ Yuanduo He, Xu Chu, Juguang Peng, Jingyue Gao, Yasha Wang  arXiv:1709.04763v4 [cs.AI] 2 Dec 2017  Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100871, China {ydhe, chu xu, pgj.pku12, gaojingyue1997, yasha.wang}@pku.edu.cn  Abstract Time series prediction is of great significance in many applications and has attracted extensive attention from the data mining community. Existing work suggests that for many problems, the shape in the current time series may correlate an upcoming shape in the same or another series. Therefore, it is a promising strategy to associate two recurring patterns as a rule’s antecedent and consequent: the occurrence of the antecedent can foretell the occurrence of the consequent, and the learned shape of consequent will give accurate predictions. Earlier work employs symbolization methods, but the symbolized representation maintains too little information of the original series to mine valid rules. The state-of-the-art work, though directly manipulating the series, fails to segment the series precisely for seeking antecedents/consequents, resulting in inaccurate rules in common scenarios. In this paper, we propose a novel motifbased rule discovery method, which utilizes motif discovery to accurately extract frequently occurring consecutive subsequences, i.e. motifs, as antecedents/consequents. It then investigates the underlying relationships between motifs by matching motifs as rule candidates and ranking them based on the similarities. Experimental results on real open datasets show that the proposed approach outperforms the baseline method by 23.9%. Furthermore, it extends the applicability from single time series to multiple ones.  Introduction The prediction of real-valued time series is a topic of great significance and colossal enthusiasm in the data mining community, and has been applied extensively in many research areas (Hamilton 1994; Esling and Agon 2012). Most of the work in literature aims at modeling the dependencies among variables, and forecasting the next few values of a series based on the current values (Makridakis, Wheelwright, and Hyndman 2008). However, other work suggests that for many problems it is the shape of the current pattern rather than actual values that makes the prediction (Das et al. 1998). For clarity, we call the latter one, forecasting by ∗ The work remains incomplete and will be further refined. Read it on your own risk :). † We are grateful to Leye Wang, Junyi Ma, Zhu Jin, and Siqi Yang for their invaluable help. ‡ We are also grateful for the reviewers in AAAI18.  shape, rule-based prediction, which is the subject of this paper. Informally1 , a rule A ⇒τ B associates a pattern A as the antecedent with a pattern B as the consequent in an upperbounding time interval τ . The rule-based prediction works as follows: if a shape resembling A is observed in a series, then a shape resembling B is supposed to appear in the same or another series, within the time interval τ . Usually, a rule refers to an “authentic rule”, an underlying relationship between two events implied by the two shapes. In most work, firstly the subsequence clustering method is employed to symbolize/discretize the series, and then the symbolic series rule discovery method is applied to find rules from real-valued series (Das et al. 1998). However, such work has met limited success and ends up discovering spurious rules (e.g. “good” rules discovered from random walk data), because the symbol representation by common symbolization methods is independent with the raw real-valued series (Keogh and Lin 2005). In conclusion, the symbolized time series maintains little information about the original series to mine valid rules. The state-of-the-art work (Shokoohi-Yekta et al. 2015) directly manipulates the series under the assumption that a rule is contained in a subsequence. It first selects a subsequence and then splits it into a rule’s antecedent and consequent. However, usually there is an interval between a rule’s antecedent and consequent. The splitting method will append the extra interval series to the antecedent/consequent, which fails to segment precisely for antecedents/consequents and results in rules with a lower prediction performance. Furthermore, it cannot be applied to find rules from multiple series, i.e. a shape in one series predicting a shape in another series. Only when the observed object presents repeatability, can predictions be valid/reasonable. We believe that a serviceable rule should appear repeatedly in a real-valued time series and therefore its antecedent and consequent must be recurring patterns of the series. Recent studies (Vahdatpour, Amini, and Sarrafzadeh 2009; Brown et al. 2013; Mueen 2014) show that Motifs, frequently occurring patterns in time series (Patel et al. 2002), contain key information about the series. Therefore, we could utilize motif dis1  A formal definition is given in the Preliminaries section.  ries. • We develop a novel heuristic matching algorithm in search of the best combinations of motif instances. To accommodate the heuristic matching result, we modify Yekta’s scoring method leveraging Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle to evaluate each rule (ShokoohiYekta et al. 2015). • We evaluate our work on real open datasets, and the experimental results show that our method outperforms stateof-the-art work by 23.9% on average2 . Moreover, rules in multiple series can also be discovered. Figure 1: The electrical penetration graphs (EPG) data monitoring of the probing behavior of leafhoppers. There are three motifs in the series, motif 1 and motif 2 are overlapped in the green curves.  Figure 2: An underlying rule with respect to motif mA and mB . TA and TB are two series. m˜A (i) and m˜B (j) are motif instances of mA and mB in TA and TB , respectively. m˜A (1) with m˜B (2) or m˜B (4) can form different rule instances, i.e. the two solid lines. covery methods to find all distinct motifs which accurately represent antecedent and consequent candidates of rules. However, three challenges are confronted: (1) there could be quite a few (overlapping) motifs in a single series (see Figure 1), let alone the dataset containing multiple series. How to screen for effective motifs as antecedents and consequents? (2) there could be many instances for two given effective motifs and different combinations of them will lead to different instances of a rule (see Figure 2). How to identify the best combinations for the underlying rule? (3) How to rank different rules given the instances of each rule? In this paper, we present a rule-based prediction method for real-valued time series from the perspective of motifs. For each pair of motifs as a candidate rule, a heuristicmatching-based scoring algorithm is developed to investigate the connection between them. We summarize contributions of this paper as follows: • We propose a novel rule discovery approach from the perspective of motifs. It can find rules with higher prediction performance and can also be applied to multiple time se-  Related Work Early work extracts association rules from frequent patterns in the transactional database (Han, Pei, and Kamber 2011). Das et al. are the first to study the problem of finding rules from real-valued time series in a symbolization-based perspective (Das et al. 1998), followed by a series of work (Sang Hyun, Wesley, and others 2001; Wu, Salzberg, and Zhang 2004). However, it has been widely accepted that few work dealing with real-valued series discovers valid rules for prediction. Because the symbolized series by common symbolization methods, including subsequence clustering and Piecewise Linear Approximation (PLA), cannot effectively represent the original series. (Struzik 2003; Keogh and Lin 2005; Shokoohi-Yekta et al. 2015). Eamonn Keogh et al. (2005) demonstrate that clustering of time series subsequences is meaningless, resulting from the independency between the clustering centers and the input. Shokoohi-Yekta et al. (2015) point out that two time series can be differ only by a small discrepancy, yet have completely different PLA representations. Therefore, the symbolized series is irrelevant with the original real-valued one and the failure of finding valid rules is doomed. The state-of-the-art work (Y15) directly manipulates the real-valued series (Shokoohi-Yekta et al. 2015). Their method is found on the assumption that a rule is contained in a subsequence, which splits a subsequence into the rule’s antecedent and consequent. Usually, there is an interval between a rule’s antecedent/consequent, and the splitting method will append the extra series to the antecedent/consequent. The complicated diversity of the intervals could result in rules with bad prediction performance. Besides, the splitting method cannot be applied to discover rules from two series either, since a motif is a subsequence in a single series. The difference between Y15 with our work can be seen from the perspective of the different usages of motifs. In Y15, it is noted that “In principle we could use a brute force search, testing all subsequences of T”, which means that it can work without motifs; but our method cannot work without motifs, since we are trying to relate pairs of them. Even if Y15 method uses motifs to “provide a tractable search”, it is 2 This experiment is performed on a single dataset, which is inadequate. We will refine it. Please see future work.  still different from ours. As it mentioned, “a good rule candidate must be a time series motif in T”, Y15 treats motifs as rule candidates, while our method takes motifs as candidates of antecedents and consequents, as we noted that “we could utilize motif discovery methods to find all distinct motifs which accurately represent antecedent and consequent candidates of rules”.  Algorithm 1: Find top-K rules. Input: TA and TB are two time series. Output: Res is K best rules. 1 2 3 4  Preliminaries In this paper, we consider the problem of rule discovery from real-valued time series for rule-based prediction. Without loss of generality, the rule discovery problem is exemplified using two time series TA and TB , since finding rules from over two time series can be treated pairwisely. It can also be applied to the situation of only one series by letting TA = TB . We begin with the definition of a rule and its instance. Definition 1 (Rule). A rule r is a 4-tuple (mA , mB , τ, θ). mA , mB are the subsequences of two real-valued time series TA , TB , respectively, and also the antecedent and consequent of the rule r. τ is a non-negative value3 indicating the max length of time interval between the mA and mB . θ is a non-negative value as the trigger threshold for firing the rule. Definition 2 (Instance). A rule r’s instance e is a 3-tuple (m˜A , m˜B , τ̃ ). m˜A is the mA -like subsequence observed in series TA subject to d(m˜A , mA ) < θ. m˜B is the mB -like subsequence observed later than m˜A in series TB . τ̃ is the time interval between m˜A and m˜B . By the definitions, given a rule r = (mA , mB , τ, θ), if a subsequence m˜A of TA is observed and d(m˜A , mA ) < θ, the rule r is fired and a subsequence of m˜B similar with mB is supposed to be observed from TB within the subsequent τ time interval4 . Notice that there are no constraints for τ̃ and d(m˜B , mB ) in Definition 2, since an instance with τ̃ > τ or d(m˜B , mB )  0 can be viewed as a “bad” instance for r. An example is shown in Figure 2. Intuitively, if a rule is good, it must have many supporting instances in the time series, and then m˜A and m˜B will be frequently occurring patterns. By the definition of the motif (Patel et al. 2002), they are actually the motifs of TA and TB , respectively. Inspired by that, we make the following assumption. Assumption 1. If r = (mA , mB , τ, θ) is a rule, then mA ∈ MA , mB ∈ MB , where MA and MB are motif sets of TA and TB . Based on the assumption, the rule discovery problem can be formulated as follows. Given two time series TA , TB with their motif sets MA and MB , find top-K rules r = (ma , mb , τ, θ), where ma ∈ MA , and mb ∈ MB . Efficient algorithms for motif discovery have already been developed, and we could choose the widely-applied MK algorithm (Mueen et al. 2009)5 . 3 In real applications, τ is a predefined value according to the series, which avoids nonsense rules with infinity max time interval. 4 In fact, m˜B is observed after τ̃ time. 5 For concise, the footnotes of all Ks are omitted throughout this paper. In fact, Ks can be different.  5  MA , MB ← motifs(TA ), motifs(TB ) MA , MB ← sortK(MA ), sortK(MB ) forall (mA , mB ) ∈ MA × MB do score(mA , mB , TA , TB ) Res ← topK score rules  Directly, we present the top-level algorithm 1. It first finds the motif set for each series in line 1 by MK algorithm. Line 2 sorts and returns the top K motifs according to the domain knowledge of the series. Then it traverses every pair of motifs, and scores the corresponding rule in line 3 to 4. It finally returns the best K rules.  Methodologies Given a pair of motif ma and mb , the score algorithm aims at evaluating a rule candidate r based on the instances in the training data. We will use the example in Figure 2 to illustrate. The scoring approach consists of three steps: 1. Find out all mA , mB -like patterns in TA , TB . In this step, we use the sliding window method to select similar patterns by setting a threshold. In Figure 2, three mA -like patterns m˜A (i) (i = 1, 2, 3) and four mB -like patterns m˜B (i) (i = 1, .., 4) are discovered; 2. Match mA , mB -like patterns into rule instances, and search for the matching result that can support the rule most. A brutal search is not only intractable but also lack of robustness. Instead, we propose a heuristic matching algorithm according to the belief that a rule is preferred when it has (1) many instances and (2) a short max-length time interval. The lines (both dotted and solid) in Figure 3 are all possible instances and the solid ones {e1,2 , e2,3 } are the best instances, because it has the most number of instances (i.e. 2), and the average length of time intervals is also the smallest. 3. Score each instance with respect to the rule r, and then integrate to the final score. In this step, instead of Euclidean distance, we follow Yekta’s scoring method and further consider the ratio of antecedents being matched, i.e. 2/3. In the example, the two best instances {e1,2 , e2,3 } are evaluated respectively based on MDL principle. The final score for r is the sum of {e1,2 , e2,3 }’s results multiplied by 2/3.  Step 1. Motif-like Pattern Discovery MK algorithm (Mueen et al. 2009) returns pairs of subsequences which are very similar with each other as motifs. In this step, given a motif m (a pair of subsequences) of a time series T , we need to search for all m-like non-overlapped subsequences in T . A direct approach based on sliding window method is as follows: (1) search all subsequences of the same length with  g Figure 3: The graph G for the example in Figure 2. M A = (1) (2) (2) (3) (4) g {m˜A , m˜A }, MB = {m˜B , m˜B , m˜B }, and E = {e1,2 , e1,3 , e1,4 , e2,3 , e2,4 }. The best subset S is {e1,2 , e2,3 }, i.e., the solid edges. The crossed edges e2,3 and e1,4 cannot be chosen for S at the same time, according to the parallel constraint. m and calculate the distance between them and m; (2) set an appropriate threshold θ0 to filter the subsequences with distance smaller than θ0 ; (3) sort the remaining subsequences by distance and remove the overlap ones with larger distances. After that, the motif-like patterns are chosen as the non-overlapped subsequences with small distance. The rule threshold θ is set as the threshold for selecting antecedent-like subsequences. The complexity of sliding window method is determined by the number of windows and the distance computation procedure. In this step, the complexity is O(|m| · |T |).  Step 2. Heuristic Matching The patterns found in step 1 can be combined into pairs as instances of a rule. This step aims at finding the best instance set that support the rule, which should satisfy the following conditions: (1) its cardinality is the largest among all possible sets; (2) the average length of interjacent intervals of instances is the smallest. The two condition come from the belief about what a good rule is. Modeling. To formulate the problem concretely, we introduce the following notations and construct a weighted bipartite graph. (1) g g M ˜A (1) , ..., m˜A (p) }, M , ..., m˜B (q) } A = {m B = {m˜B are the sets containing all subsequences similar with the rule’s antecedent mA and consequent mB , respectively. E = {ei,j = (m˜A (i) , m˜B (j) )|1 ≤ i ≤ p, 1 ≤ j ≤ q, 0 < t(m˜B (j) ) − t(m˜A (i) ) < τ }, where function t(·) returns the occurrence time of the pattern. E is the set of all feasible instances, since the antecedent must appear before the consequent and the interval between them cannot be too large. It imposes a structure on the set E that given m˜A (i) , for ∀j such that τ > t(m˜B (j) ) − t(m˜A (i) ) > 0, then ei,j ∈ E. Besides, let wi,j = t(m˜B (j) ) − t(m˜A (i) ) measure the length of interjacent interval of the instance ei,j . g g M A , MB , E make up a weighted bipartite graph G = g g (M ∪ M A B , E). Figure 3 shows the graph G of the example in Figure 2. Optimization. Using the notation introduced above, we restate the heuristic matching process as : Given a nong g complete weighted graph G(M A ∪ MB , E), find the instance  set S ⊂ E subject to (1) |S| is maximized, and (2) W (S), the total weight of S, is minimized. One cannot simply apply algorithms solving assignment problem due to a parallel constraint. Concretely speaking, for any two instances, if the antecedent-like pattern in one instance appears earlier than the other’s, then its corresponding consequent-like pattern must also come earlier than the other’s. In the graph, this constraint requires no crossed edges in S, as is illustrated in Figure 3. Suppose that the max |S| is known as s somehow, we can solve the following 0-1 integer programming problem: minimize  X  wi,j xi,j  subject to  X  xi,j = s  x  X  xi,j ≤ 1,  i  (1a) (1b) X  xi,j ≤ 1  (1c)  j  xi,j + xk,l ≤ 1, ∀ i > k and l < j xi,j ∈ {0, 1}  (1d) (1e)  The optimization variables xi,j ’s are 0, 1 variables, constrained by (1e), each of which represents the selection of corresponding instance ei,j . (1b) restricts that |S| is maximized as s. (1c) requires that at most one edge can be chosen in the graph G with respect to the same vertex. (1d) refers to the parallel constraint. Now consider how to solve for s. It is not the classical problem of maximum unweighted bipartite matching due to the parallel constraint and therefore it cannot be easily solved by max/min flow algorithms. We formulate it as another optimization problem. maximize  X  subject to  X  x  i  xi,j xi,j ≤ 1,  (2a) X  xi,j ≤ 1  (2b)  j  xi,j + xk,l ≤ 1, ∀ i > k and l < j xi,j ∈ {0, 1}  (2c) (2d)  The optimization problems are both 0-1 integer programming, which are NP-hard generally. Existing solvers (e.g. Matlab Optimization Toolbox) based on cutting plane method can handle these problems within a tolerable time.  Step 3. MDL-based Instance Scoring In this step, given the best instance set S, we first evaluate each instance by the similarity between it and the rule r made up by mA and mB , and then aggregate the results to the score of rule r for further comparison. We first introduce the MDL-based scoring method, which is initially proposed in Shokoohi-Yekta et al. 2015. Intuitively, the more similar the shape in the instance is with respect to the rule’s consequent, the better the instance can support the rule. The Euclidean distance is the most widely accepted measure for similarity. However, the length  of consequent varies in different rules, where Euclidean metric cannot fairly judge the differences between subsequences of different length. Inspired by the Minimum Description Length principle that any regularity in a given set of data can be used to compress the data, i.e. to describe it using fewer symbols than needed to describe the data literally (Grünwald 2007), it is possible to take the rule’s consequent as the regularity and measure how many bits can be saved by compressing the shape in the instances according to the regularity using Huffman coding. A concrete example can be found in ShokoohiYekta et al. 2015. To use MDL principle, the series must be digitized first, and let dl(·) be the coding length. The digitization loses little information of the raw data according. The number of bits saved for instance e by encoding m˜B with respect to r’s consequent mB is as below: bit saved(e, r) = dl(e.m˜B ) − dl(e.m˜B |r.mB )  (3)  The above is the original version of MDL-based scoring method developed by Yekta et al. We further take the ratio of antecedent-like pattern being matched into consideration. Intuitively, when the ratio is too small, indicating the number of matched instances is much less than the times that the antecedent is fired, the rule shouldn’t be considered a good rule. Therefore, the final score for a rule r is: score(r) =  X  s bit saved(e, r) − dl(r.mB ) (4) g |M A| e∈S  Experiment Evaluation We evaluate our method on real open datasets. Top rules discovered by our method and the baseline method from the same training data are compared and analyzed. In addition, we also validate the applicability of our method on multiple series.  Experiment Setup The baseline method (Y15) is the state-of-the-art work by Yekta et al. The experiment is conducted on two open metering datasets. One is Almanac of Minutely Power dataset (AMPds), mainly containing electricity stream data at one minute intervals per meter for 2 years of monitoring in a single house (Makonin et al. 2013; 2016). The other is UK Domestic Appliance-Level Electricity (UK-DALE) dataset, which records both the whole-house mains power demand every six seconds as well as power demand from individual appliances every six seconds from five houses (Kelly and Knottenbelt 2015). Settings. Two groups of experiments are performed to (1) evaluate the prediction performance of our method and (2) validate the applicability of multiple series. • On Single Series. We utilize the aggregate power series of clothes washer and clothes dryer for 1 year from AMPds, which is also used by Y15 as the experiment dataset.  The series of first month is used to discover rules, while the rest is used for testing. We select 5 top rules by each method and evaluate the prediction performance on the test data; • One Multiple Series. We attempt to discover rules from the separated power series of total 52 appliances from the house 1 of UK-DALE dataset, such as boiler, laptop, etc. We run our method on each pair of the series to search for valid rules. Metric. To measure the prediction performance of rules, we adopt the same metric Q proposed by Yekta et al. as: PN d(mB , ui ) Q(r) = Pi=1 , (5) N i=1 d(mB , vi ) where N is the total firing number of the rule r in the test data, and d(mB , x) is Euclidean distance between the consequent mB with the the shape beginning by position x. ui and vi are the i-th firing position and the i-th randomly chosen position, respectively. The denominator is used to normalize Q to a value between 0 and 1. The final Q is averaged after 1000 measurements. A smaller Q indicates a better prediction performance. The Q close to 1 suggests the rule r is no better than random guessing and Q close to 0 indicates that the rule r captures the structure in the data and predicts accurately.  On Single Series To compare Y15 with our method, we select top 5 rules discovered by each method from the training data, and then evaluate them on the test data. Result. The top 5 ranked rules’ Qs are listed in Table 1. The top rules discovered by our methods are better than those by Y15. Specifically, our method outperforms Y15 by 23.9% on average. Comparison. To demonstrate the reason why the rules discovered by our method outperform those by Y15, we take a close look at the 5-th top rule, rY (by Y15) and rO (by this paper), and scrutinize their prediction results on the test data in Figure 4. As is shown in Figure 4a and 4b, the 5-th top rules rY and rO are quite different from each other though they are describing the same thing6 . rY comes from a splitting point at 10%-th of a 120-long subsequence, whose antecedent is 12 in length and consequent is 108 in length, whereas rO takes two motifs as its antecedent and consequent, whose lengths 6  Actually, they both imply the fact that the clothes dryer is often used after the clothes washer.  Y15 MBP  1  2  3  4  5  Mean  0.389 0.340  0.436 0.299  0.398 0.337  0.481 0.310  0.424 0.341  0.426 0.324  Table 1: The prediction performance Q of top 5 rules on the test data.  (a) The 5-th top rule rY by Y15  (b) The 5-th top rule rO by our method  (c) A firing by rY  (d) A firing by rO  Figure 4: The two 5-th top rules with the prediction result around a same position. In (a) and (b), the red patterns are the antecedent of the rule, while the blue ones are the consequent. The rule’s threshold θ is set to 5 and max length time interval τ is set to 300 in both methods. (c) (d) depict the prediction results around the same position by both rules. The black curve is the real time series. The red curve shows the position where the rule is fired, while the blue curve is the best prediction during the max time interval. are 50 and 30 respectively. In contrast, rY has more reasonable antecedent and consequent. To illustrate, consider the case in Figure 4c and 4d. The antecedents of both rules present a good match and trigger both rules around the same position. However, rO gives an accurate prediction,while rY predicts a shape with a clear discrepancy to the real series. The interval before rY ’s consequent is so long that the consequent misses the best matching position. Intuitively, rY ’s consequent can be viewed as rO ’s consequent appended by a piece of noise series, which results in the mismatch of the consequent. The inaccurate prediction has its root in the splitting method of Y15, which inevitably adds some extra noises to the “real” antecedent/consequent, because the splitting method cannot position the boundaries of the antecedent/consequent. Our method, however, directly finds the key part of the series, i.e. motif, as the rule’s antecedent/consequent. Additionally, any rule discovered by Y15 is a split of a motif in this experiment. Since the split parts are also frequent patterns in the series, they can be discovered as motifs, i.e. the elements of MA and MB . Therefore, rules discovered by Y15 can also be found by our method. Discussion. In the electricity datasets, zero series7 is recognized as motif by MK algorithm because it is also a frequent pattern (though meaningless). To avoid such motifs, we sort the discovered motifs by the “roughness” of the shape and choose the top ones. Commonly, the sorting process, mentioned in the line 2 of Algorithm 1, is relevant with 7 The values in the series are almost all 0s, indicating no appliance is being used.  Figure 5: A rule rE discovered in the series of hair dryer and straightener. The red curve is the antecedent, while the blue curve is the consequent. the characteristics of the time series.  On Multiple Series We attempt to discover rules in multiple appliance series from the UK-DALE datasets, which include 52 kinds of appliances. The original data is sampled every six seconds, and we resample it per minute for efficiency consideration. Result. A serviceable rule rE discovered is from the power series of hair dryer and straighteners, the antecedent and consequent of which are shown in Figure 5. The rule rE describes the relationship between the usage of hair dryer and straightener. An interesting fact is that the rule’s antecedents and consequents are interchangeable, coinciding the common sense that the two appliances, hair dryer and straightener, are often used at the same time. To illustrate rE concretely, we list an overview of 4 power series in Figure 6, including hair dryer, straightener, breadmaker and laptop. The series of hair dryer and straightener are well matched, whereas the rest combinations are ranked  References  Figure 6: The overviews of four appliances’ power series.  relatively lower.  Conclusion and Discussion In this paper, we have introduced a novel rule-based prediction method for real-valued time series from the perspective of motifs. We preliminarily explore the possibility of relating two motifs as rule candidate. It first leverages motif discovery to segment the time series precisely for seeking recurring patterns as antecedents/consequents, and then investigates the underlying temporal relationships between motifs by combing motifs as rule candidates and ranking them based on the similarities. However, as is mentioned before, this work itself is incomplete and will be refined. We further consider the following two problems: First, current experiment mainly uses one kind of open dataset, i.e. household electricity usage. We will search for more open datasets to comprehensively evaluate the performance of our method. Second, in this work we evaluate each rule from the perspective of prediction. However, prediction is only a single aspect of a rule. We will try to develop more metrics that can reveal the inner connections within rules.  Acknowlegements This work is supported by the program JS71-16-005.  Brown, A. E.; Yemini, E. I.; Grundy, L. J.; Jucikas, T.; and Schafer, W. R. 2013. A dictionary of behavioral motifs reveals clusters of genes affecting caenorhabditis elegans locomotion. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110(2):791–796. Das, G.; Lin, K.-I.; Mannila, H.; Renganathan, G.; and Smyth, P. 1998. Rule discovery from time series. In KDD, volume 98, 16–22. Esling, P., and Agon, C. 2012. Time-series data mining. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 45(1):12. Grünwald, P. D. 2007. The minimum description length principle. MIT press. Hamilton, J. D. 1994. Time series analysis, volume 2. Princeton university press Princeton. Han, J.; Pei, J.; and Kamber, M. 2011. Data mining: concepts and techniques. Elsevier. Kelly, J., and Knottenbelt, W. 2015. The UK-DALE dataset, domestic appliance-level electricity demand and whole-house demand from five UK homes. 2(150007). Keogh, E., and Lin, J. 2005. Clustering of time-series subsequences is meaningless: implications for previous and future research. Knowledge and information systems 8(2):154– 177. Makonin, S.; Popowich, F.; Bartram, L.; Gill, B.; and Bajic, I. V. 2013. Ampds: A public dataset for load disaggregation and eco-feedback research. In Electrical Power & Energy Conference (EPEC), 2013 IEEE, 1–6. IEEE. Makonin, S.; Ellert, B.; Bajic, I. V.; and Popowich, F. 2016. Electricity, water, and natural gas consumption of a residential house in Canada from 2012 to 2014. Scientific Data 3(160037):1–12. Makridakis, S.; Wheelwright, S. C.; and Hyndman, R. J. 2008. Forecasting methods and applications. John wiley & sons. Mueen, A.; Keogh, E.; Zhu, Q.; Cash, S.; and Westover, B. 2009. Exact discovery of time series motifs. In Proceedings of the 2009 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, 473–484. SIAM. Mueen, A. 2014. Time series motif discovery: dimensions and applications. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 4(2):152–159. Patel, P.; Keogh, E.; Lin, J.; and Lonardi, S. 2002. Mining motifs in massive time series databases. In Data Mining, 2002. ICDM 2003. Proceedings. 2002 IEEE International Conference on, 370–377. IEEE. Sang Hyun, P.; Wesley, W.; et al. 2001. Discovering and matching elastic rules from sequence databases. Fundamenta Informaticae 47(1-2):75–90. Shokoohi-Yekta, M.; Chen, Y.; Campana, B.; Hu, B.; Zakaria, J.; and Keogh, E. 2015. Discovery of meaningful rules in time series. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 1085–1094. ACM.  Struzik, Z. R. 2003. Time series rule discovery: Tough, not meaningless. Lecture notes in computer science 32–39. Vahdatpour, A.; Amini, N.; and Sarrafzadeh, M. 2009. Toward unsupervised activity discovery using multidimensional motif detection in time series. In IJCAI, volume 9, 1261–1266. Wu, H.; Salzberg, B.; and Zhang, D. 2004. Online eventdriven subsequence matching over financial data streams. In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data, 23–34. ACM.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
