Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_6137

Abstract:
O(depth)-Competitive Algorithm for Online Multi-level Aggregation Niv Buchbinder∗  Moran Feldman†  Joseph (Seffi) Naor‡  Ohad Talmon§  arXiv:1701.01936v1 [cs.DS] 8 Jan 2017  January 10, 2017 Abstract We consider a multi-level aggregation problem in a weighted rooted tree, studied recently by Bienkowski et al. [7]. In this problem requests arrive over time at the nodes of the tree, and each request specifies a deadline. A request is served by sending it to the root before its deadline at a cost equal to the weight of the path from the node in which it resides to the root. However, requests from different nodes can be aggregated, and served together, so as to save on cost. The cost of serving an aggregated set of requests is equal to the weight of the subtree spanning the nodes in which the requests reside. Thus, the problem is to find a competitive online aggregation algorithm that minimizes the total cost of the aggregated requests. This problem arises naturally in many scenarios, including multicasting, supplychain management and sensor networks. It is also related to the well studied TCP-acknowledgement problem and the online joint replenishment problem. We present an online O(D)-competitive algorithm for the problem, where D is the depth, or number of levels, of the aggregation tree. This result improves upon the D2 2D competitive algorithm obtained recently by Bienkowski et al. [7]. Keywords: online algorithms, competitive analysis, aggregation of requests  1  Introduction  Aggregation of tasks is a fundamental tool in optimization, utilized in various areas. Suppose that there is a set of requests that need to be served, where serving several requests together costs less than serving each request individually. There are aggregation constraints on the request system that specify which sets of requests can be jointly served, together with a function that determines the cost of serving any aggregated set of requests. For example, serving all requests together ∗ Department of Statistics and Operations Research, School of Mathematical Sciences, Tel Aviv university, Israel. Email: niv.buchbinder@gmail.com. Research is supported by ISF grant 1585/15 and US-Israel BSF grant 2014414. † Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, The Open University of Israel. Email: moranfe@openu.ac.il. Research supported in part by ISF grant 1357/16. ‡ Computer Science Department, Technion, Israel. Email: naor@cs.technion.ac.il. Research is supported by ISF grant 1585/15 and US-Israel BSF grant 2014414. § Computer Science Department, Technion, Israel. Email: ohad@cs.technion.ac.il. Research is supported by ISF grant 1585/15 and US-Israel BSF grant 2014414.  might be impossible or very costly. In general, various cost functions and aggregation constraints give rise to a large family of interesting problems. Scenarios where aggregation is beneficial are common in supply-chain management, in which producing (or delivering) several demands together can be cheaper than producing them separately [15, 20, 1, 27]. Another example is aggregating control packets in communication networks (e.g., sensor networks) [16, 2, 11, 18]. In this setting, transmitting together several packets going to a joint destination is, again, cheaper than transmitting each packet separately. Aggregation problems were studied extensively for many settings, both in the offline case, in which all requests are known a-priori, and in the online case in which requests arrive over time. We study a very general online aggregation setting, considered recently by [7], and known as the Online Multi-level Aggregation Problem with Deadlines. In this problem requests arrive over time, and each request specifies a deadline for serving it. Thus, each request is associated with a time interval in which it needs to be served. At any point of time t, the online algorithm is only aware of requests whose arrival time is no later than t. There is a tree with non-negative edge costs rooted at a node r, and each request is assumed to reside at some tree node. The cost of serving a single request is equal to the cost of the tree path from the node where it resides to the root r. Requests whose intervals intersect in time can be aggregated and served together. The aggregate cost of a set of requests is equal to the cost of the subtree rooted at r and spanning the nodes where these requests reside. The goal is to minimize the total service cost, i.e., the sum of the costs of the subtrees used for serving the requests. The online multi-level aggregation problem with deadlines was studied recently by Bienkowski et al. [7] who designed a D2 2D -competitive algorithm for it, where D denotes the depth of the tree. We note that this bound is quite far from the best known lower bound on the competitive factor for the problem which is only 2 [9] (see Section 1.2 for more details). In the offline case, the problem is known to be NP-hard (and APX-hard)  even when the aggregation tree is of depth 2 [1, 25, 8]. 3-decreasing trees to each tree of the resulting forest. Currently, the best (offline) approximation factor known A very simple argument shows that the algorithm for the problem is 2 [6, 7]. obtained this way has a competitive factor of at most O(D2 ). However, using a more involved analysis we 1.1 Our Results. Our main result is a competitive are able to show that the two above claims hold also algorithm for the Online Multi-level Aggregation Problem for general trees, which give us the promised O(D)with Deadlines. We have already mentioned that there competitiveness guarantee. is a large gap between the lower bound of 2 on the competitive ratio known and the current best upper 1.2 Related Work. Several interesting problems are bound of D2 2D [7], which is exponential in the depth related to the Online Multi-level Aggregation Problem D of the aggregation tree. We obtain a substantial with Deadlines. Suppose that each request accrues a improvement over the upper bound of [7]. waiting cost over time, rather than having a strict deadline. The cost of satisfying a set of requests is Theorem 1.1. There exists an O(D)-competitive algo- then defined to be the sum of both the service cost rithm for the Online Multi-level Aggregation Problem with and the sum of the waiting costs of the requests. For Deadlines. this problem Bienkowski et al. [7] designed an O(D4 2D )competitive algorithm. The best offline approximation Our Techniques. Standard reductions allow us for this variant is 2 + ǫ [26] adapting ideas from [22]. to assume that the costs are associated with the tree We note that a common choice for the waiting cost is nodes rather than with the edges. To simplify the a linear function over time. This model (with slight presentation, we first present our result for a special variations) was considered by Khanna et al. [19] who kind of aggregation tree known as 3-decreasing trees. achieved a competitive factor which is logarithmic in the In a 3-decreasing tree, as we traverse any path from the weight of the aggregation tree. root r to a leaf, the edge costs go down by a factor of One of the earliest problems considered in the genat least 3 at each step of the path. The idea of our eral setting of aggregation is the TCP-Acknowledgment algorithm for 3-decreasing trees is simple and intuitive. Problem. In this problem there is a single link over Suppose there is a request that has reached its deadline which packets need to be acknowledged by control mes(and, thus, must be served). The algorithm recursively sages. Any number of control messages can be aggreaggregates requests into a subtree (which eventually gated into a single packet sent over the single link. The will be served), starting from the root of the tree. aggregation tree, thus, consists of a single edge. The obThe aggregation process has to balance between two jective function is composed of two terms: the number conflicting objectives. On the one hand, it is beneficial of acknowledgments sent over the link and the sum of to aggregate as many requests as possible, especially the waiting times of the control messages. The optimal those approaching their deadline. On the other hand, competitive factors for the TCP-acknowledgment probit is necessary to bound the cost of the aggregate lem are 2 for deterministic algorithms and e/(e − 1) if subtree, so that it can be related to the optimal solution. randomization is allowed [16, 18, 13]. Interestingly, the We balance between the two by recursively providing TCP-acknowledgment problem is equivalent to the clasbudgets to tree nodes that are added to the aggregate sical Lot Sizing Problem [16, 27], which has been studied subtree. A budget provided to node u (that has joined extensively by the operations research community. the subtree) can be used to aggregate an additional (yet The aggregation problem for trees of depth 2 is restricted) set of nodes into the subtree rooted at u. known as the Joint Replenishment Problem in supplyThese nodes are then also given budgets, which can be chain management. The best competitive factor known used to aggregate additional nodes (recursively). for this special case is 3 with general waiting times, and The analysis of the algorithm is performed by first 2 if requests have deadlines [12, 14, 9]. The best lower showing that the total cost of each served subtree is bound for general waiting times is 2.754 [9] improving at most O(D · c(r)), where D is the depth of the tree upon an earlier bound of 2.64 by [14]. For the deadline and c(r) is the cost of the root r. Then, we show case the best lower bound is 2 [9]. The (offline) Joint that the optimal cost of serving the remaining requests Replenishment problem is known to be NP-hard (and (including requests that at this point of time have not APX-hard) [1, 25, 8]. The best approximation ratio arrived yet) decreases by at least c(r). The two claims currently known for it is 1.791 [9], which improves upon together imply the desired bound. previous results of [21, 24, 22, 23]. Extending our result to general trees is done via Finally, when the aggregation tree is an infinite half a reduction that transforms a tree into a forest of 3line, Bienkowski et al. [7] gave a 4-competitive algorithm decreasing trees. Then, we apply the algorithm for  for the deadline version of the problem, and showed that this is the best possible. For the more general problem with waiting costs, Bienkowski et al. [10] showed that the competitive ratio is between 2 + φ ≈ 3.618 and 5, improving on an earlier upper bound of 8 for the problem by Brito et al. [12]. It is also known that the optimal offline solution for this case can be computed efficiently [10]. 2  Problem Definition and Preliminaries  An instance of the Online Multi-level Aggregation Problem with Deadlines (OMAPD) is defined as a tuple (T , I). The first component of the tuple is a tree T rooted at some node r(T ) with non-negative edge costs. We denote by c(e) the cost of an edge e of T , and by D(T ) the depth of T , i.e., the maximum number of edges along any path from the root of T to a leaf. The second component of the tuple (T , I) is a set of time intervals I, where each interval I = [aI , dI ] ∈ I is associated with a node wI ∈ T , an arrival time aI and a deadline dI . A solution for the problem is a sequence of subtrees T1 , T2 , . . . , Tℓ ⊆ T rooted at r(T ) that are transmitted at times t1 , t2 , . . . , tℓ .1 The solution is feasible if, for each interval I ∈ I, there exists a tree Ti with transmission time ti ∈ [aI , dI ] containing the node wI . Moreover, we say that a tree of the solution having these properties services I. P The cost of transmitting a tree T is denoted by c(T ) , e∈E[Ti ] c(e), where E[Ti ] is the set of edges Pℓ of Ti . The cost of the solution is i=1 c(Ti ). In the online setting the tree T is known to the algorithm in advance, but the intervals of I arrive in an online fashion, i.e., each interval I ∈ I is revealed to the online algorithm only upon its arrival time at aI . The online algorithm can decide at every given time to transmit a subtree of T at this time, however, both the decision to transmit the subtree and the choice of the subtree to transmit must be done without any knowledge about future intervals. The algorithm is α-competitive if it produces a feasible solution whose total cost is always at most α times the cost of the optimal solution. In the online setting it is often useful to call intervals that have already been revealed to the algorithm, but were not serviced yet, by the term active. To simplify the presentation of our algorithm, we first modify the problem as described by the following two modifications.  c(T ) =  P  u∈T  c(u).  2. For each node u, we assume c(u) is strictly positive. Proving that these modifications are without loss of generality can be done in a rather standard way. First, we may assume that r(T ) has only a single child. One may observe that the transmission of a subtree T containing multiple children of r(T ) can always be replaced with the transmission of multiple subtrees, each containing r(T ) and the part of T descending from a single child of r(T ). Moreover, this replacement does not change the cost of the transmission. Hence, there is no loss in applying any algorithm independently to every subtree of T (more accurately, every instance of the algorithm faces an instance of OMAPD with a tree containing r(T ) and all the nodes descending in T from a single child of r(T )). Next, we observe that in OMAPD every interval associated with the root r(T ) can always be serviced without any cost. Thus, we may assume that our instance does not contain any such intervals. We now transform T into a node-cost tree by moving the cost of every edge to its end point which is further away from the root, and then removing the root r(T ) itself (which is the only node left with no cost). Finally, if some node u has cost zero, we may merge it with the next node on the path to the root. Thus, each node has strictly positive cost. It is easy to see that any solution for the original edge weighted instance can be transformed to a solution for the resulting node weighted instance with the same cost and vice-versa. Moreover, the depth of the node weighted instance is always smaller than the depth of the original edge weighted instance. From now on we abuse notation and refer to the variant of OMAPD obtained by our modifications simply as OMAPD. Finally, a tree T is called 3-decreasing if, as we go along any path from the root r(T ) to a leaf, the cost of each node is smaller than the cost of the previous node by a factor of at least 3. This definition is used in [7], and it is similar to the weighted version of HSTs defined in [3]. Note, however, that a 3-decreasing tree is not exactly an (un-weighted) 3-HST (as defined by [4, 5, 17]) as the costs of the edges along any root to leaf path of a 3-decreasing tree decrease by factor of at least 3 rather than by exactly 3. Moreover, different root to leaf paths of a 3-decreasing tree might differ in their lengths.  1. We assume the tree T has node costs {c(u) | 3 Algorithm for 3-Decreasing Trees u ∈ T } rather than edge costs. Consequently, the In this section we present and analyze an algorithm transmission cost of a subtree T ⊆ T now becomes for OMAPD on 3-decreasing trees. A generalization of this algorithm for general trees is given in Section 4. 1 Notice that we abuse notation here and treat trees as sets of Throughout the section we consider a fixed instance nodes. This is done occasionally throughout the paper. (T , I) of OMAPD in which the tree T is a 3-decreasing  Algorithm 1: Transmission Tree Section 1 2 3 4 5 6  7 8 9 10  Initiate a transmission tree T ← {r}. Let Q be a queue of tuples to be processed. Initially, Q contains only the tuple (r, ĉ(r) = 2c(r)). while Q 6= ∅ do Dequeue the next tuple (u, ĉ(u)) from Q, and set Au ← ∅. while there are active intervals associated with nodes in Tu \ T and c(Au ) ≤ ĉ(u)/2 do Let I be the interval with the earliest deadline among the active intervals in Tu \ T (breaking ties arbitrarily). Add to Au all nodes on the path from wI to r that are not already in T .   ĉ(u) For every v ∈ Au , enqueue into Q the tuple v, c(v) · c(A . u) Add the nodes of Au to T .  Transmit T .  tree. Since we have fixed the instance of OMAPD, we can use in this section a somewhat simplified notation. More specifically, we drop the parameter from the notations r(T ) and D(T ) and use r and D to denote the root of T and its depth, respectively. We also need to define some new notation. Given a set U of nodes we use c(U ) to denote the total cost of the nodes within it, P i.e., c(U ) = u∈U c(u). Additionally, given a node u we denote by Tu the subtree of T rooted at u. We remind the reader that an interval is said to be active if and only if it has already appeared, but has not been serviced yet. Our algorithm transmits a tree whenever an active interval matures, i.e., reaches its deadline. More specifically, our algorithm invokes Algorithm 1 whenever an active interval matures, and Algorithm 1 then selects a subtree T of T and transmits it. Following the transmission of T , our algorithm returns to its idle state until another active interval matures. We note that there might be multiple active intervals that reach maturity at the same time. When this happens, the transmission of T might not service all of these intervals, which might result in immediate additional invocation of Algorithm 1. In other words, there might be a zero time gap between consecutive executions of Algorithm 1. Informally, Algorithm 1 starts the construction of the tree to be transmitted by assigning a budget of ĉ(r) = 2c(r) to the root of the tree. This budget is then used to recursively add new nodes to the transmission tree (and thus, serve the intervals residing in these nodes). More specifically, each node u that is assigned a budget uses it to add to the transmission tree new nodes belonging to its subtree Tu . The total transmission cost of these newly added nodes is roughly equal to the budget of u; and following the addition of these new nodes u splits its budget proportionally among them so that this process can be repeated recursively. It is  important to note that, when a node u chooses nodes from its subtree Tu to add to the transmission tree, it gives priority to satisfying intervals whose deadline is sooner (and thus are, intuitively, more “urgent”). The following observation shows that each transmission of Algorithm 1 makes progress, and thus, our algorithm, as a whole, terminates. Observation 3.1. Algorithm 1 halts and the transmission tree T contains an active interval. Proof. Observe that Line 6 of Algorithm 1 is guaranteed to be reached at least once in every given execution of Algorithm 1. This line selects an active interval I, and the nodes of the path from r to wI are later added to T. We are now ready to present the two main lemmata necessary for the analysis of the algorithm. The first of these lemmata bounds the cost paid by the algorithm for every single transmission. The proof of this lemma is deferred to Section 3.1. Lemma 3.1. For every subtree T of T transmitted by the algorithm, c(T ) ≤ 2(D + 1) · c(r). The presentation of the other main lemma requires some additional notation. Assume the online algorithm transmits overall ℓ trees T1 , . . . , Tℓ . For every 0 ≤ i ≤ ℓ, let Ii be the set of intervals that were not yet serviced by the algorithm after it has made i transmissions. Note that Ii includes also intervals that arrive after the transmission time of tree Ti , i.e., they were not active yet when Ti was transmitted. By definition, Ti services all the intervals Ii−1 \ Ii . Additionally, we use OP T (I ′ ) to denote an optimal solution for a set of intervals I ′ ⊆ I (more formally, OP T (I ′ ) is an optimal solution for the instance (T , I ′ ) of OMAPD). Our second main lemma can now be stated as follows. We defer its proof to Section 3.2.  Lemma 3.2. OP T (Ii ) ≤ OP T (Ii−1 ) − c(r) for every 1 ≤ i ≤ ℓ. Analyzing our algorithm is now straightforward.  where the first inequality follows from Lemma 3.3, and the second inequality follows from the induction hypothesis applied to u.  Note that for every node u such that Au 6= ∅, by construction,  X X  ĉ(u) c(v) · ĉ(v) = = ĉ(u). Proof. By Lemma 3.1 the total cost suffered by our c(Au ) v∈Au v∈Au algorithm is at most ℓ · [2(D + 1) · c(r)]. On the other hand, Lemma 3.2 shows that the cost of the optimal Hence, the following observation can be proved by solution OP T (I0 ) = OP T (I) is at least ℓ · c(r) + induction. OP T (Iℓ ) = ℓ · c(r). Observation 3.2. In each level of T , the sum of ĉ(u), 3.1 Proof of Lemma 3.1. In this section we prove taken over all nodes u, is at most ĉ(r) = 2c(r). Lemma 3.1. Let us first recall the lemma. We now observe the following. Lemma 3.1. For every subtree T of T transmitted by X X the algorithm, c(T ) ≤ 2(D + 1) · c(r). c(T ) = c(u) ≤ ĉ(u) ≤ 2(D + 1) · c(r) .  Theorem 3.1. There exists an O(D)-competitive algorithm for Online Multi-level Aggregation Problem with Deadlines on 3-decreasing trees.  We begin the proof of the above lemma with the following claim.  u∈T  u∈T  The first inequality follows since Lemma 3.4 guarantees Lemma 3.3. For every node u added to T , c(Au ) ≤ that c(u) ≤ ĉ(u) for every node u ∈ T . The second inequality follows since there are at most D + 1 possible 1 2 (ĉ(u) + c(u)). levels, and Observation 3.2 shows that the sum of ĉ(u) Proof. Each time that Algorithm 1 adds nodes to Au , in each level is at most 2c(r). it adds only nodes belonging to the path from u to wI of a single interval I. Since T is 3-decreasing, the total 3.2 Proof of Lemma 3.2. In this section we prove cost of the nodes on such a path is upper bounded by Lemma 3.2. We begin by recalling the lemma.     ∞ D i i X 1 X 1 c(u)/3 c(u) · c(u) ≤ · c(u) = = . Lemma 3.2. OP T (Ii ) ≤ OP T (Ii−1 ) − c(r) for every 3 3 1 − 1/3 2 1 ≤ i ≤ ℓ. i=1 i=1 On the other hand, Algorithm 1 stops adding nodes to To prove the lemma it suffices to construct a , thus completing the proof. Au once c(Au ) exceeds ĉ(u) solution S servicing all the intervals of Ii whose cost is 2 at most OP T (Ii−1 ) − c(r). The lemma will then follow Next, define inductively the level of nodes in T as since, being an optimal solution, OP T (Ii ) is not more follows. The level of the root r is 0. For node v, suppose expensive then any other feasible solution for (T , Ii ). that node u added it to Au ; then the level of v is defined Let us now construct the above mentioned solution to be the level of u plus 1. Since the nodes of Au are S. Recall that Ti is the subtree of T transmitted by all descendants of u, the level of each node u ∈ T is the algorithm at its i-th transmission, and let us denote guaranteed to be at most D. by ti the time of this transmission. There are a few Lemma 3.4. For every node u ∈ T , c(u) ≤ ĉ(u). assumptions that we can make about OP T (Ii−1 ). First, we may assume that OP T (Ii−1 ) transmits at most Proof. We prove the lemma by induction on the level one subtree at every given time (otherwise, we may of u. For the root r the lemma is immediate since merge subtrees transmitted at the same time without ĉ(u) = 2c(u). Next, let v be a node in Au (added by u). increasing the total cost). Second, we may assume Then, that OP T (Ii−1 ) makes its first transmission at time ti ĉ(u) because that is the time of the earliest deadline among ĉ(v) = c(v) · the deadlines of the intervals of Ii−1 (specifically, the c(Au ) interval whose deadline triggered the i-th transmission ĉ(u) ≥ c(v) · 1 of the algorithm is in Ii−1 and its deadline is ti ). 2 (ĉ(u) + c(u)) Given these assumptions, there must be exactly one ĉ(u) transmission of OP T (Ii−1 ) at time ti . Let us denote = c(v), ≥ c(v) · ĉ(u) the subtree transmitted at this time by T ∗ . i  We obtain the solution S from the optimal solution of any node, which contradicts the definition of u. OP T (Ii−1 ) by applying the following two steps to the Hence, any node u which is reconstructed must belong last solution. to Ti∗ . It remains to prove the second part of the lemma. 1. Remove Ti∗ from the solution. The fact that u was reconstructed when I was processed 2. Reconstruction step: Scan the intervals of Ii in means that prior to I’s processing the interval [ti , dI ] a non-decreasing order of their deadline. For every did not contain any transmission involving u. Since such interval I we do the following to guarantee the reconstruction step scans the intervals in a nondecreasing order of their deadlines, this means that any that it is serviced by S. interval I ′ for which u is on the path from r to wI ′ must • Find the subtree of the current solution trans- have a deadline dI ′ ≥ dI . Hence, when I ′ is processed mitted within the range [ti , dI ] which contains by the reconstruction step, the range [ti , dI ′ ] ⊇ [ti , dI ] the largest fraction of the path from r to wI already includes a subtree containing u, and thus, I ′ (breaking ties arbitrarily), and add to this does not cause another reconstruction of the node u. subtree the remaining part of this path. Note The last lemma shows that only a limited set of that the above tree might contain all the path, in which case there is no need to add anything. nodes (namely, the nodes of Ti∗ ) might be reconstructed. • If the current solution makes no transmissions Lemma 3.7 shows that even within this limited set within the range [ti , dI ], then introduce into it there is a significant subset of nodes that are not a new transmission transmitting the subtree reconstructed. The following lemma proves a few consisting solely of the path from r to w . The technical claims used later in the proof of Lemma 3.7. I  location of this new transmission within the range [ti , dI ] can be chosen arbitrarily. Observation 3.3. The solution S is a feasible solution for (T , Ii ). Proof. The construction of S guarantees that every interval of Ii is serviced by S before its deadline. We are left to prove that the cost of S is at most OP T (Ii ) − c(r). It is clear that Step 1 in the procedure for constructing S decreases the cost by c(Ti∗ ), thus, it suffices to show that the second step increases the cost of S by at most c(Ti∗ ) − c(r). The rest of this section is devoted to proving this claim. We say that a node u is reconstructed whenever it is added to some transmission of the solution during Step 2 of the above procedure. Lemma 3.5. The reconstruction step obeys the following claims. 1. Only nodes of Ti∗ are reconstructed. 2. Each node of Ti∗ is reconstructed at most once.  Lemma 3.6. Let u ∈ Ti be a node that is reconstructed. ∗ Then, c(Au ) > ĉ(u) 2 and Au ⊆ Ti . Proof. Let I be the interval that caused the reconstruction of u. Since I belongs to Ii (intervals outside of Ii are not processed by the reconstruction step), it must be that I is not serviced by Ti . On the other hand, the fact that I caused the reconstruction of nodes means that it is not serviced by any subtree of OP T (Ii−1 ) other than Ti∗ , thus, it must be active at time ti . The above observations imply that when Algorithm 1 constructed Ti it left the inner loop growing Au while there were still active intervals associated with nodes of Tu \ T ; which can only happen when c(Au ) > ĉ(u) 2 . Next, consider any node v ∈ Au . Since Algorithm 1 scans the intervals in a non-decreasing deadline order while growing Au , v must have been added to Au due to being on the path from r to wI ′ of some interval I ′ having a deadline dI ′ ≤ dI . Assume towards a contradiction that Ti∗ does not contain this path. Clearly, this assumption implies that OP T (Ii−1 ) services I ′ by some subtree transmitted during the range (ti , dI ′ ]. Since any subtree servicing I ′ must include u, u is already present within the range (ti , dI ′ ] ⊆ [ti , dI ] when I is processed by the reconstruction step; which contradicts the definition of I as the interval whose processing caused the reconstruction of u.  Proof. Consider a node u which is reconstructed, and let I be the interval whose processing by the reconstruction step caused the first reconstruction of u. Thus, u is on the path from r to wI . If u does not belong to Ti∗ , then OP T (Ii−1 ) must service I by some transmission Lemma 3.7. There exists a set U of nodes obeying the other than Ti∗ within the range (ti , dI ]. Since this following properties. transmission is not removed, the processing of I by the 1. U ⊆ Ti∗ ∩ Ti . reconstruction step could not cause the reconstruction  P  ĉ(u) = ĉ(r) = 2c(r).  an edge to the first node v on the path from u to r(T ) whose cost obeys c(v) ≥ 3c(u). If there is no such v, 3. ĉ(u) ≤ 2c(u) for all u ∈ U . then u becomes the root of a new tree. Each node u in the forest is now associated with a set Bu of all nodes 4. The nodes of U are not reconstructed. on the path from u to v in the original tree T (without v, but including u itself). If v does not exist (i.e., u Proof. We start with a set U obeying all the properties is a root in the new forest), then the associated set Bu other than Property 4, and let it evolve while maintainis defined as the set of nodes on the path from u to ing these properties. The evolution of U ends as soon as the root r(T ) of the original tree (this time, including it obeys also Property 4. More specifically, we initially r(T )). set U = {r}. Observe that this set indeed satisfies all the properties other than Property 4. If U also satisfies Observation 4.1. The forest F consists solely of 3Property 4 then we are done. Otherwise, there must be decreasing trees. a node u in the current set U which is reconstructed. Proof. By definition, if u is a node of F which is not Since we maintain U as a set obeying Property 1, u a root of its tree, then the father v of u in F obeys must belong to Ti . Hence, by Lemma 3.6, it must hold c(v) ≥ 3c(u). that c(Au ) ≥ 12 ĉ(u) and Au ⊆ Ti∗ . Assume that F consists of m trees T 1 , T 2 , . . . , T m . At this point we evolve U by removing u from it and ∗ adding the nodes of Au instead. Since A Pu ⊆ Ti ∩ Ti , Notice that T and F have the same set of nodes, and Property 1 is preserved. Additionally, v∈Au ĉ(v) = thus, each interval is naturally associated with a node h i i P ĉ(u) = ĉ(u), and thus, Property 2 is in one of the trees in the forest. Let Ii be the set of v∈Au c(v) · c(Au ) intervals associated with the nodes of T . preserved as well. Finally, Property 3 also remains valid Our algorithm for general trees runs an independent ĉ(u) since Algorithm 1 sets ĉ(v) = c(v) · c(Au ) ≤ 2c(v) for instance of the algorithm for 3-decreasing trees from each node v ∈ Au (where the inequality holds since Section 3 on each tree T i with its corresponding set of Lemma 3.6 implies c(Au ) ≥ 12 ĉ(u)). intervals I i . For convenience, we denote the algorithm We can now repeat the above evolution step as from Section 3 by ALG from this point on. Whenever an long as Property 4 is violated. However, this evolution instance of ALG chooses to transmit a subtree T ⊆ T i , S cannot continue forever since each step of it replaces a we transmit instead the tree u∈T Bu . It is useful S to call single node with nodes appearing lower than it in T . T the virtual tree transmitted by ALG, and u∈T Bu Hence, the evolution presented is guaranteed to end up the concrete tree transmitted by ALG. Observe that eventually with a set U obeying Property 4 (as well as the concrete tree is always a subtree of the original tree the three other properties). T , and thus, this is a description of a valid algorithm for the original problem (OMAPD on general trees). To conclude the proof of Lemma 3.2 we note that, We next show that the total cost of the optimal by combining all the properties of U in Lemma 3.7, solutions for all the subtrees of the forest F is bounded we get that there must exist a set U of node in Ti∗ by the optimal cost of the original instance. Formally, ′ ′ which are P and have a total cost of let OP T (T , I ) denote the cost of the optimal solution Pnot reconstructed 1 ′ ′ at least u∈U ĉ(u) = c(r). Together for an instance (T , I ) of OMAPD. Then, u∈U c(u) ≥ 2 ∗ with the claim of Lemma 3.5 that only nodes of Ti are Pm i i reconstructed, and even they can only be reconstructed Observation 4.2. OP T (T , I) ≥ i=1 OP T (T , I ). once, we get that the increase in the costPof S during Proof. Consider the optimal solution for the instance the reconstruction step is at most c(Ti∗ ) − u∈U c(u) ≤ (T , I) of OMAPD. Based on this optimal solution we c(Ti∗ ) − c(r). construct a solution for every one of the instances {(T i , I i )}m i=1 as follows. Whenever the optimal solution 4 Algorithm for General Trees for (T , I) transmits a subtree T ∗ , the solution for the In this section we show how the algorithm from Sec- instance (T i , I i ) transmits the subtree T ∗ ∩T i . One can tion 3 can be modified to be O(D(T ))-competitive also verify that T ∗ ∩T i is indeed a tree since the set of nodes for OMAPD on general trees. We begin by describing a on the path connecting every node u ∈ T i to r(T i ) is a reduction, originally showed by [7], transforming a gen- subset of the set of nodes connecting u to r(T ) in T . eral tree into a forest of 3-decreasing trees. We complete the proof by observing that the costs Given a tree T , we construct a forest F of 3- of the above solutions add up to exactly OP T (T , I), decreasing trees as follows. The nodes of F are the and thus, the total cost of the optimal solutions for the same as the nodes of T . We connect each node u with instances {(T i , I i )}m i=1 cannot exceed this value. 2.  u∈U  The above observation implies that in order to analyze our algorithm it is enough to relate the cost of the concrete trees transmitted by each instance of ALG to the cost of the optimal solution for the instance of OMAPD faced by this instance of ALG. Notice that this is slightly different from what we do in Section 3 since in Section 3 we relate the cost of the virtual trees transmitted by an instance of ALG to the cost of the optimal solution for the instance of OMAPD faced by this instance of ALG. Nevertheless, we show in the rest of this section that the arguments from Section 3 can be used, almost without change, to prove also the more ambitious goal we need to prove here. More specifically, we prove the following proposition. Proposition 4.1. For every 1 ≤ i ≤ m, the total cost of the concrete trees transmitted by the instance of ALG assigned to T i is at most O(D(T )) · OP T (T i , I i ). Clearly Theorem 1.1 follows from Observation 4.2 and Proposition 4.1. To prove Proposition 4.1 we need to define some additional notation. Assume ALG transmit ℓi trees when given (T i , I i ). For every 0 ≤ j ≤ ℓi , let Iji be the set of intervals from I i that were not yet serviced by the algorithm after it has made i transmissions. Note that Iji includes also intervals that arrive after the i-th transmission, i.e., they were not active yet when this transmission was made. Using this notation we can state the following lemma, which is a counterpart of Lemma 3.2, and also follows from it.  By Lemma 3.4, c(u) ≤ ĉ(u) for every node u ∈ T . Recall that ĉ(u) is defined by Algorithm 1 only for nodes u ∈ T . We now extend the definition of ĉ to all the nodes of T ′ by setting ĉ(v) = ĉ(u) for every node v ∈ Bu . Since, by definition, the nodes of Bu have costs of at most 3c(u), we get the following corollary. Corollary 4.1. For every node u ∈ T ′ , c(u) ≤ 3ĉ(u). Next, define levels for the nodes of T ′ using the following recursive procedure. The level of the root r(T i ) is 0. Consider now a node u ∈ T which already has a level ℓu . Then, for every node v ∈ Au , the nodes of Bv are assigned the levels ℓu + 1, ℓu + 2, . . . , ℓu + |Bv |; where the last level is assigned to v itself. The definition of Au guarantees that all the nodes of Bv appear on the path from u to v in T , and thus, the difference between the level of u and v is at most the difference between their heights in T . Thus, no node of T ′ is given a level larger than D(T ) by the above procedure.2 Recall that for every node u ∈ T such that Au 6= ∅, by construction,  X X  ĉ(u) = ĉ(u). c(v) · ĉ(v) = c(Au ) v∈Au  v∈Au  Let us now define for a node u ∈ T an additional set Bu = {w ∈ Bv | v ∈ Au , ℓw = ℓu + 1}. In other words, Bu is obtained from Au by replacing every node v ∈ Au with the single node w ∈ Bv whose level is larger by 1 than the level of u. Since ĉ(w) is identical for every i Lemma 4.1. OP T (Iji ) ≤ OP T (Ij−1 ) − c(r(T i )) for node of Bv we immediately get also P v∈Bu ĉ(v) = ĉ(u) every 1 ≤ i ≤ m and 1 ≤ j ≤ ℓi . whenever Bu 6= ∅. For a node u ∈ T ′ \ T we define Bu = {w ∈ Bv | ℓw = ℓu + 1 ∧ ∃v∈T u, w ∈ Bv }. To prove Proposition 4.1 we also need the following Informally, Bu contains the single node that belongs to counterpart of Lemma 3.1. the same set Bv as u and has a level larger by 1 than u. Again, the fact that ĉ(w) is identical for every node Lemma 4.2. If the instance of ALG corresponding to of a single set B guarantees P  S v v∈Bu ĉ(v) = ĉ(u). (T i , I i ) transmits a virtual tree T , then c u∈T Bu ≤ P i u∈T c(Bu ) ≤ 6(D(T ) + 1) · c(r(T )). Lemma 4.3. In each level 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ D(T ), the sum of ĉ(u), taken over all nodes of level ℓ, is at most One can verify that Lemmata 4.1 and 4.2 imply ĉ(r(T i )) = 2c(r(T i )). Proposition 4.1 in the same way that Lemmata 3.1 and 3.2 imply Theorem 3.1. Thus, it remains to prove 2 There is an alternative way to define this level assignment Lemma 4.2. Recall that ALG generates each one of the which might help to understand the intuition behind it. Consider virtual trees it transmits by executing Algorithm 1, and a tree TA defined as follows. The root of TA is r(T i ), and the consider the execution of Algorithm 1 which generated children of every node u ∈ T are the nodes of Au . One can A the virtual tree T . verify that TA has exactly the same set of nodes as T . Moreover, The sets {Bu }u∈T might not be disjoint. However, the height of every node in TA corresponds to its level according for the purposes of the proof it is useful to assume they to the level assignment used in Section 3. If we now replace every are disjoint. In other words, if a node v appears in node u ∈ TA with a path consisting of the nodes of Bu in which u is the lowest node, then we get a new tree TB . This time, this several sets out of {Bu }u∈T , we treat each one of its tree has the same set of nodes as T ′ , and the height of every node appearances as S unique. Additionally, let us use the in TB corresponds to its level according to the level assignment shorthand T ′ = u∈T Bu . used in this section.  P Proof. We have seen that v∈Bu ĉ(v) = ĉ(u) for every node u ∈ T ′ unless Bu = ∅. Additionally, the definition of the sets Bu guarantees that each node v ∈ T ′ belongs to a single set Bu , and this set is associated with a node u of a lower level than v. All this observations, taken together, imply the lemma by a standard induction argument. We now observe the following. X X c(T ′ ) = c(u) ≤ 3 · ĉ(u) u∈T ′  u∈T ′  ≤ 3 · [2(D(T ) + 1) · c(r(T i ))] = 6(D(T ) + 1) · c(r(T i )) . The first inequality follows since Corollary 4.1 guarantees that c(u) ≤ 3ĉ(u) for every node u ∈ T ′ . The second inequality follows since there are at most D(T ) + 1 possible levels, and Lemma 4.3 shows that the sum of ĉ(u) in each level is at most 2c(r(T i )). 5 Conclusions In this paper we have presented an O(D)-competitive algorithm for the Online Multi-level Aggregation Problem with Deadlines. This result represents an exponential improvement over the previously best competitive ratio of D2 2D given by [7]. Nevertheless, the competitive ratio of our algorithm is still quite far from the constant lower bounds proved by [9] and [7]. Narrowing this gap, either by providing an improved algorithm or by proving stronger lower bounds, is an intriguing open problem that we leave open. References [1] Esther Arkin, Dev Joneja, and Robin Roundy. Computational complexity of uncapacitated multi-echelon production planning problems. Operations research letters, 8:63–73, 1989. [2] B. R. Badrinath and Pradeep Sudame. Gathercast: the design and implementation of a programmable aggregation mechanism for the internet. In Proceedings Ninth International Conference on Computer Communications and Networks, ICCCN 2000, 16-18 October 2000, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, pages 206–213, 2000. [3] Nikhil Bansal, Niv Buchbinder, Aleksander Madry, and Joseph Naor. A polylogarithmic-competitive algorithm for the k-server problem. J. ACM, 62(5):40, 2015. [4] Yair Bartal. Probabilistic approximations of metric spaces and its algorithmic applications. In FOCS’96: Proceedings of the 37th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 184–193, 1996.  [5] Yair Bartal. On approximating arbitrary metrices by tree metrics. In STOC’98: Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 161–168, 1998. [6] Luca Becchetti, Alberto Marchetti-Spaccamela, Andrea Vitaletti, Peter Korteweg, Martin Skutella, and Leen Stougie. Latency-constrained aggregation in sensor networks. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 6(1), 2009. [7] Marcin Bienkowski, Martin Böhm, Jaroslaw Byrka, Marek Chrobak, Christoph Dürr, Lukáš Folwarczný, Lukasz Jez, Jirı́ Sgall, Nguyen Kim Thang, and Pavel Veselý. Online algorithms for multi-level aggregation. CoRR, abs/1507.02378, 2015. To appear in ESA 2016. [8] Marcin Bienkowski, Jaroslaw Byrka, Marek Chrobak, Neil B. Dobbs, Tomasz Nowicki, Maxim Sviridenko, Grzegorz Swirszcz, and Neal E. Young. Approximation algorithms for the joint replenishment problem with deadlines. J. Scheduling, 18(6):545–560, 2015. [9] Marcin Bienkowski, Jaroslaw Byrka, Marek Chrobak, Lukasz Jez, Dorian Nogneng, and Jirı́ Sgall. Better approximation bounds for the joint replenishment problem. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2014, Portland, Oregon, USA, January 5-7, 2014, pages 42–54, 2014. [10] Marcin Bienkowski, Jaroslaw Byrka, Marek Chrobak, Lukasz Jez, Jirı́ Sgall, and Grzegorz Stachowiak. Online control message aggregation in chain networks. In Algorithms and Data Structures - 13th International Symposium, WADS 2013, London, ON, Canada, August 12-14, 2013. Proceedings, pages 133–145, 2013. [11] Edward Bortnikov and Reuven Cohen. Schemes for scheduling control messages by hierarchical protocols. Computer Communications, 24(7-8):731–743, 2001. [12] Carlos Fisch Brito, Elias Koutsoupias, and Shailesh Vaya. Competitive analysis of organization networks or multicast acknowledgment: How much to wait? Algorithmica, 64(4):584–605, 2012. [13] Niv Buchbinder, Kamal Jain, and Joseph Naor. Online primal-dual algorithms for maximizing ad-auctions revenue. In Algorithms - ESA 2007, 15th Annual European Symposium, Eilat, Israel, October 8-10, 2007, Proceedings, pages 253–264, 2007. [14] Niv Buchbinder, Tracy Kimbrel, Retsef Levi, Konstantin Makarychev, and Maxim Sviridenko. Online make-to-order joint replenishment model: Primaldual competitive algorithms. Operations Research, 61(4):1014–1029, 2013. [15] W. B. Crowston and M. H. Wagner. Dynamic lot size models for multi-stage assembly systems. Management Science, 20(1):14–21, 1973. [16] Daniel R. Dooly, Sally A. Goldman, and Stephen D. Scott. Tcp dynamic acknowledgment delay (extended abstract): theory and practice. In STOC ’98: Proceedings of the thirtieth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 389–398, 1998. [17] Jittat Fakcharoenphol, Satish Rao, and Kunal Talwar. A tight bound on approximating arbitrary metrics by  [18]  [19]  [20]  [21]  [22]  [23]  [24]  [25]  [26]  [27]  tree metrics. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 69(3):485–497, 2004. Anna R. Karlin, Claire Kenyon, and Dana Randall. Dynamic TCP acknowledgment and other stories about e/(e-1). Algorithmica, 36(3):209–224, 2003. Sanjeev Khanna, Joseph Naor, and Danny Raz. Control message aggregation in group communication protocols. In Automata, Languages and Programming, 29th International Colloquium, ICALP 2002, Malaga, Spain, July 8-13, 2002, Proceedings, pages 135–146, 2002. A. Kimms. Multi-Level Lot Sizing and Scheduling: Methods for Capacitated, Dynamic, and Deterministic Models. Production and Logistics. Physica-Verlag Heidelberg, 1997. Retsef Levi, Robin Roundy, and David B. Shmoys. A constant approximation algorithm for the onewarehouse multi-retailer problem. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2005, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, January 23-25, 2005, pages 365– 374, 2005. Retsef Levi, Robin Roundy, and David B. Shmoys. Primal-dual algorithms for deterministic inventory problems. Math. Oper. Res., 31(2):267–284, 2006. Retsef Levi, Robin Roundy, David B. Shmoys, and Maxim Sviridenko. A constant approximation algorithm for the one-warehouse multiretailer problem. Management Science, 54(4):763–776, 2008. Retsef Levi and Maxim Sviridenko. Improved approximation algorithm for the one-warehouse multi-retailer problem. In Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques, 9th International Workshop on Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization Problems, APPROX 2006 and 10th International Workshop on Randomization and Computation, RANDOM 2006, Barcelona, Spain, August 28-30 2006, Proceedings, pages 188–199, 2006. Tim Nonner and Alexander Souza. Approximating the joint replenishment problem with deadlines. Discrete Math., Alg. and Appl., 1(2):153–174, 2009. L. L. C. Pedrosa, 2013. Private communication reported by Bienkowski et al. in http://arxiv.org/abs/1507.02378. Harvey M. Wagner and Thomson M. Whitin. Dynamic version of the economic lot size model. Management Science, 50(12-Supplement):1770–1774, 2004.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
