Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_6273

Abstract:
1  Using Effective Generator Impedance for Forced Oscillation Source Location  arXiv:1708.01893v1 [cs.SY] 6 Aug 2017  Samuel Chevalier, Student Member, IEEE, Petr Vorobev, Member, IEEE, Konstantin Turitsyn, Member, IEEE  Abstract—Locating the sources of forced low-frequency oscillations in power systems is an important problem. A number of proposed methods demonstrate their practical usefulness, but all of them rely on strong modeling assumptions and provide poor performance in certain cases for reasons still not well understood. This paper proposes a systematic method for locating the source of a forced oscillation by considering a generator response to fluctuations of its terminal voltage and turbine and exciter inputs. It is shown that a generator can be represented as an effective admittance matrix with respect to low-frequency oscillations, and an explicit form for this matrix, for various generator models, is derived. Furthermore, it is shown that a source generator, in addition to its effective admittance, is characterized by the presence of an effective current source thus giving a natural qualitative distinction between source and nonsource generators. Detailed descriptions are given of a source detection procedure based on this developed representation, and the method’s efficiency is confirmed by simulations on the recommended testbeds (eg. WECC 179-bus system). This method is free of strong modeling assumptions and is also shown to be robust in the presence of measurement noise and generator parameter uncertainty. Index Terms—Low frequency oscillations of power systems, forced oscillations, phasor measurement unit (PMU), power system dynamics  I. I NTRODUCTION  W  ITH the recent widescale deployment of Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs) across the US transmission grid [1], system operators are becoming keenly aware of the pervasive presence of low frequency oscillations. Generally, low frequency oscillations are either natural modes, attributed to poorly tuned control settings and large power flows across weak tie lines, or forced oscillations, which are caused by extraneous disturbances. Such extraneous inputs may be related to faulty controllers, turbine vibration, or cyclical loads [2]–[4]. The appearance of forced oscillations reduces the quality of electric power and has potential detrimental effects on various equipment. More importantly, whenever a disturbance occurs at the frequencies close to one of the natural system modes, a resonance condition may lead to significant amplification of amplitude, where a relatively small perturbation on one bus can cause rather large power swings in different locations around the system. An example of this effect is the 2005 WECC disturbance where a reasonably small 20MW oscillation at the Nova Joffre cogeneration power S. Chevalier and K. Turitsyn are with Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. E-mail: schev, turitsyn@mit.edu P. Vorobev is with Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and also with Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology. E-mail: petrvoro@mit.edu  plant in Canada resonated with one of the main inter-area modes resulting in a 200MW power oscillation on the OregonCalifornia intertie [5]. Accordingly, there is a need in the power systems community for the development of methods which are capable of using on-line PMU data to trace the source of a forced oscillation. It is accepted that designing control methods for damping of forced oscillations is impractical [6]; instead, disconnection of the identified source with subsequent investigation of the causes of the disturbance is the main solution. A variety of source identification techniques have been developed with varying levels of success; many are outlined in a recent literature survey [7] where the main requirements for such methods are also stated. A set of test cases for validating different source location methods is presented in [6]. These cases were developed in coordination with IEEE Task Force on Forced Oscillations, and they will allow for a standardized examination of all source detection algorithms. Before applying any source location procedure, the type of observed disturbance has to be identified. To differentiate between forced oscillations and other types of disturbances, a method based on statistical signatures of different types of oscillations was proposed in [7]. Similarly, [8] uses spectral analysis of PMU data to “trigger” a forced oscillation warning. The authors then suggest using statistical tools (pattern mining and maximal variance ratios) from on-line generator SCADA data to determine the oscillation source. If oscillation magnitudes are low and signal noise is high, [9] proposes using the self-coherence spectrum of a PMU signal and its time shifted version to perform forced oscillation detection. In [10], phase coherency is used to identify groups of generators which swing together. The source is identified as the generator in the source group which is providing the smallest contribution to the overall damping. This will correspond to the generator whose rotor oscillation phase is leading all other source group rotor oscillation phases. One of the most promising methods, which has already shown its practical performance, is the Transient Energy Flow (TEF) method, initially developed in [11]. One of the main advanteges of this method is that it tracks the flow of effective transient energy in all lines where PMU data is available, thus being naturally model independant. The authors show that the dissipated energy is equivalent to damping torque. Adaption of the method for use with actual PMU data, as outlined in [12], has been named the Dissipating Energy Flow (DEF). The method was able to successfully locate the source of a forced oscillation in a variety of simulated test cases and in over 50 actual events from both ISONE and WECC.  2  While having the advantage of being model free, this method has certain shortcomings, the most important being its inability to distinguish between a true source bus and a bus having an effective “negative damping” contribution, since both such buses are seen as sources of Transient Energy. A number of rather strong assumptions are also crucial for the method, namely, constant PQ loads and a lossless network. Accordingly, the method performs poorly when constant impedance loads are present. In this situation, the method triggers a “false alarm” [7] by identifying such a load as the disturbance source. This particular shortcoming raises a natural question about the proper definition of oscillation energy. A full discussion of the open questions concerning the DEF/TEF methods can be found in the conclusion of [13]. It is clear that a more systematic approach is needed to study forced oscillations, especially in the development of methods which do not heavily rely on strong model assumptions. In this paper we have developed a systematic procedure to track the sources of forced oscillations. We start by deriving a relation between generator terminal voltage and current fluctuations in the presence of persistent oscillation. We then show with minimal modeling assumptions that, based on this relation, it is possible to effectively distinguish between source and nonsource generators. We also apply our results to perturbations with frequencies close to a natural system mode so that the maximum amplitude is observed on a non-source generator. The specific contributions of this paper are as follows: 1) A systematic model is developed to describe a generator response to arbitrary perturbations of its terminal voltage along with turbine and exciter inputs. 2) A representation of a generator as an equivalent circuit with admittance matrix Y and current injection I in response to forced oscillation is derived. 3) It is shown that the presence of current injection I is an indicator of the source of forced oscillations, while a negative real part of admittance Y signifies an effective negative damping contribution from a generator. The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II we introduce an effective generator admittance matrix Y with respect to terminal voltage perturbations and show that a forced oscillation source may be transformed into an effective current injection I. We show the explicit steps for building the admittance matrix and current injections associated with a classical generator, and we then extend the methods to a 6th order generator with voltage control. In Section III, we present an algorithm for using Y to determine if a generator is the source of an oscillation. Section IV presents test results from a 3 bus system and from the standardized 179-bus test case of [6] in the presence of measurement noise and generator parameter uncertainty. Finally, conclusions and plans for future work are offered in Section V. II. I NTERPRETING G ENERATOR DYNAMICS IN THE P RESENCE OF F ORCED O SCILLATIONS This section introduces the concept of a so-called effective admittance matrix Y of a generator in respect to low frequency oscillations. If the generator is a source, then in addition to  ~ Fig. 1. 2nd order generator voltage E0 ejδ , terminal voltage Vt ejθt , and swing bus voltage Vs ejθs with θs = 0.  Fig. 2. Panel (a) shows the steady state phasor Vt ejθt and phasor deviation ∆Ṽt . Panel (b) expands deviation ∆Ṽt from panel (a) and decomposes the relationship between the rectangular deviations (Re(∆Ṽt ), Im(∆Ṽt )) and the corresponding polar deviations (∆Vt , Vt ∆θt ).  matrix Y, we show that an effective current source I will appear in parallel with admittance Y. We analytically derive these expressions for a classical generator model and then show how the methods extend to higher order models.  A. Classical Generator Tied to a Network We start by considering a 2nd order generator with it internal EMF magnitude fixed. This generator is connected to some terminal bus with positive sequence phasor voltage Vt ejθt at frequency ω0 . Somewhere in this system, there is a swing bus with voltage Vs ejθs . This configuration is shown by Fig. 1.  B. Polar and Rectangular Coordinate Transformation We consider small perturbations of the voltage magnitude ∆Vt and phase ∆θt on the terminal bus Ṽt (these perturbations may be caused by the network or the generator itself). Ṽt + ∆Ṽt =(Vt + ∆Vt )ej(θt +∆θt )  (1)  We linearize (1) to compute first order deviation (∆Ṽt ) terms. ∆Ṽt =Vt ∆θt (j cos(θt ) − sin(θt ))  (2)  + ∆Vt (cos(θt ) + j sin(θt )) The ∆Ṽt components may be separated into their real and imaginary parts, and the polar/rectangular relationships may be expressed by employing transformation matrix T1 ; Fig. 2 graphically portrays these relationships.      Re(∆Ṽt ) cos(θt ) −Vt sin(θt ) ∆Vt = (3) sin(θt ) Vt cos(θt ) ∆θt Im(∆Ṽt )   ∆Vt = T1 ∆θt  3  C. State Space Formulation In order to quantify the admittance matrix (Y) and current injection (I), a linearized state space formulation is used. ∆ẋ = A∆x + B∆u  (4)  ∆y = C∆x + D∆u  (5)  The state variable vector x associated with the 2nd order generator contains the torque angle (δ) and frequency deviation (∆ω) of the generator. The input vector u is defined as containing the mechanical torque variations, two orthogonal terminal bus voltages, and generator EMF. >  x = [δ ∆ω] i> h u = τm Re(Ṽt ) Im(Ṽt ) E0  (6)  We now consider the model output. We define state space output y as the orthogonal real and imaginary current flows into the generator (we call these the negative current injections). h i Re(Ṽt ) + jIm(Ṽt ) − E0 ejδ (14) I= jXd0 I is linearized and split into real and imaginary currents. ∆y =C∆x + DVr ∆uVr + DE ∆uE (15) #  " E0 cos(δ0 )  − X0 0 ∆Re (I) ∆δ d = + (16) E0 sin(δ0 ) ∆Im (I) ∆ω − X0 0 d # "    1 0 1 − sin(δ) ∆Re (Vt ) Xd0 + [∆E0 ] cos(δ) ∆Im (Vt ) − X10 0 Xd0    d  (7) D. Frequency Domain Analysis  The swing equation for the 2nd order generator is formulated with polar variables using a quasi-stationary power flow approximation. We neglect armature resistance Ra since it is typically ∼ 1% of transient reactance Xd0 . δ̇ = ∆ω  (8)  Vt E0 M ∆ω̇ = τm − sin(δ − θt ) − D∆ω Xd0  jΩd x̃ = Ax̃ + BVr ũVr + Bτ ũτ + BE ũE  ∆ẋ =A∆x + BVp ∆uVp + Bτ ∆uτ + BE ∆uE (10) #   " 0 1 ∆δ ∆δ̇ + (11) = Vt E0 D cos(φ) − −M ∆ω ∆ω̇ 0 Xd M " #  0 0 ∆Vt 0 0 + Vt E − MEX 0 sin(φ) M ∆θt Xd0 cos(φ) d " #   h i  0 0 0  ∆τm + ∆E −Vt 1 M X 0 sin (φ) M  ∆ẋ =A∆x + BVr ∆uVr + Bτ ∆uτ + BE ∆uE BVr has the following analytical structure.   E0 0 0 BVr = M Xd0 − sin(δ) cos (δ)  (12)  (18)  The transfer functions, which directly relate the inputs to the outputs, can be solved for, where Θ = (jΩd 1 − A)−1 . x̃ =Θ(BVr ũVr + Bτ ũτ + BE ũE )  (19)  ỹ = [CΘBVr + DVr ] ũVr +  (20)  [CΘBτ ] ũτ + [CΘBE + DE ] ũE In this formulation, we may make the following observations. The transfer function which relates terminal bus voltage differentials to the current flows acts as an admittance matrix. Similarly, the transfer function relating the torque phasor to the currents flows, in conjunction with the torque phasor, acts as one current source, and the transfer function relating the generator EMF phasor to the currents flows, in conjunction with the EMF phasor, acts as a second current source. Y = C(jΩd 1 − A)−1 BVr + DVr   Iτ = C(jΩd 1 − A)−1 Bτ [τ̃m ]   IE = C(jΩd 1 − A)−1 BE + DE [Ẽ0 ]  d  Since we wish to be able to relate the currents of the system generators in global rectangular coordinates (and use the components of 7 as inputs), we use the inverse transformation matrix T−1 from (3) to transform the polar input variables 1 into rectangular input variables. We define ∆uVr as the input vector of rectangular voltage perturbations and corresponding state space matrix BVr , where BVr = BVp T−1 1 . This is used to reformulate the system’s state space representation.  (17)  ỹ = C x̃ + DVr ũVr + DE ũE  (9)  In this expression, we have also assumed Pm = ωτm ≈ τm since the speed deviations are small. We may linearize this expression and express it with state space formulation. ∆uVp is the input vector of polar voltage perturbations, ∆uτ is the input torque perturbation, and ∆uE is the input EMF variation. We define the power angle as φ = δ − θt .    With the state space model formulated, we consider a system in which some generator is experiencing a forced oscillation (such as ∆τm (t) = G sin(Ωd t)). In taking the Fourier transform of the stable state space system, ẋ = jΩd x̃.  (21) (22) (23)  With this observation, we have the following intuitive model formulation, where Y is a 2 × 2 matrix. " # " # Re˜(I) Re ˜(Vt ) =Y + Iτ + IE (24) Im˜(I) Im ˜(Vt ) The structure of Y may be written explicitly.   " 0 sin δ cos δ − cos2 δ Y=Γ + −1 sin2 δ − sin δ cos δ X0  1 Xd0  0  # (25)  d  (13)  Γ=   E02 Xd02 Vt E0 Xd0   cos(φ) − M Ω2d + j (Ωd D)  (26)  4  ~  Fig. 3.  Fig. 4. Circuit diagram interpretation of equation (30), where Iτd = 0 Xd d = Γ Vt sin(φ) Ẽ0 , and I q = 1 Ẽ0 as taken from (32) and −Γ E0 τ̃m , IE E E0 X0  Orientation of the direct (d) and quadrature (q) axes.  The negative current injections Iτ and IE are similar.   Xd0 cos(δ) Iτ = −Γ 0 τ̃m sin(δ) E   " sin(δ) #! − X0 Vt sin (φ) cos(δ) d + Ẽ0 IE = Γ cos(δ) 0 sin(δ) E 0  ~  d  d = I q = 0 and all current flows are (33). At non-source buses, Iτd = IE E caused by terminal voltage deviations.  (27) (28)  which uses orthogonal dq decomposition in order to treat Vq and Vd as real valued signals. We note that the purpose of performing this dq rotation is to build the intuition provided by equations (31-33) and Fig. 4.  Xd  F. Extension to a 6th Order Generator Model with AVR E. Transformation to a Local DQ Reference Frame When considering the structures of (25), (27), and (28), it is clear that significant simplification may occur by passing to a dq reference frame, i.e. rotating all in the direction of the rotor angle δ. We use the convention of dq axes orientation from [14], so the rotational matrix which we define as T2 is:   cos(δ) sin(δ) T2 = (29) − sin(δ) cos(δ) We apply this transformation to the state space current flows Ĩ = Y Ṽ + Iτ + IE of (24). We use the superscript dq to denote if the vector of variables is given in the dq reference frame, while no superscript denotes variables in the real and imaginary reference frame. For instance, X = [Xr Xi ]> is defined in the real and imaginary coordinate system while Xdq = [Xd Xq ]> is defined in the dq coordinate system. Ĩdq = Y dq Ṽdq + Iτdq + IEdq dq  T2 YT−1 2  (30)  dq  where Y = and X̃ = T2 X̃ for any vector X. Fig. 3 provides a visualization of these transformations. In the new coordinate system, the direct (d) axis is in line with δ, and the quadrature (q) axis is perpendicular to the direct axis. We consider the structure of the admittance matrix and the negative current injections once transformed. " # 1 0 Xd0 − Γ dq (31) Y = − X10 0 d   Xd0 −Γ dq 0 E Iτ = τ̃m (32) 0 " # Γ Vt sin(φ) E0 IEdq = Ẽ0 (33) 1 Xd0  It is clear that a torque source will inject no current into the quadrature axis circuit since the untransformed current injection is aligned with the d axis. A conventional orthogonal circuit diagram interpretation of this result is given by Fig. 4. It is important to remember that Ṽd , Ṽq , I˜d , and Ṽq are all complex phasors. This is a deviation from the standard power systems literature related to generator analysis (such as [15])  Although the proposed methods for quantifying the effective admittance and current injections of a generator are developed for a low order model, the same method may be employed for an arbitrarily complex model. We choose to consider the source bus generator model presented in the set of standardized test cases in [6]. The source generator model may be approximated by the 6th order synchronous model presented in [16], where the d and q subscripts denote the Park reference frames. We choose to investigate this particular model since it will be used to collect test results in Section IV. δ̇ = ∆ω M ∆ω̇ = Pm − Pe − D∆ω  (34) (35)  0 0 Td0 ėq = Ef − (Xd − Xd0 − γd ) id − e0q  0 0 Tq0 ėd = Xq − Xq0 − γq iq − e0d  (36)  00 00 Td0 ėq 00 00 Tq0 ėd  = =  e0q e0d  − e00q − e00d  − (Xd0 + Xq0  − Xd00 + γd ) id  − Xq00 + γq iq  (37) (38) (39)  0 00 Xx0 ), x ∈ {d, q}. With where γx = Tx0 Xx00 (Xx − Xx0 ) / (Tx0 stator resistance neglected, the electrical power is Pe = ed id + eq iq , and we write the terminal currents (id , iq ) in terms of the terminal voltages (ed = Vt sin (δ − θt ), eq = Vt cos (δ − θt )) and the subtransient voltages (e00d , e00q ).    −1  00  R −Xq00 ed − Vt sin (δ − θt ) id = e00q − Vt cos (δ − θt ) iq Xd00 R (40) where R = 0. We may define the real and imaginary negative current injections by simply rotating id and iq in rectangular space [15] and negating. Equation (41) is a time domain transformation and should not be confused with the phasor reference frame transformation of (29).      Re (I) sin (δ) cos (δ) id =− (41) Im (I) − cos (δ) sin (δ) iq  The static AC voltage excitation system associated with the source generator in [6] is approximated by the following block diagram (limits excluded). The source of the forced oscillation is given by G sin(Ωd t) with gain G and forcing frequency Ωd . The exciter’s associated differential equation follows.  5  TABLE I C URRENT AND VOLTAGE N OTATION . A LL VECTORS AND VECTOR ELEMENTS ARE COMPLEX . Ṽ = [Ṽr Ṽi ]> Fig. 5.  Voltage excitation system associated with the source bus.  TA Ėf = KA Vi − Ef  Ĩ = [I˜r I˜i ]>  (42)  Now that the full set of differential algebraic equations (DAEs) is specified, the set of differential equations (3439, 42) may be linearized to build state matrix A and input matrices Bux , where x ∈ {Pm , Ef , etc...}. Similarly, the set of algebraic equations (40, 41) may be linearized to build output matrix C and feedthrough matrix DVp . To be clear, DVp is initially written in terms of polar variables Vt , θt since 40 is given in these terms. All matrices relating to Vt and θt (such as DVp and BVp ) must be transformed (into DVr and BVr ) with (3) as shown in (12) above. Finally, the effective generator admittance matrix Y may be computed using equation 21. Current injection Ix may also be computed for any oscillating extraneous system input x. Equations (23) and (22) yield two such examples for a 2nd order system, but many more may be constructed based on where the source is located. III. L EVERAGING Y F OR S OURCE D ETECTION At all non-source generators, the negative injection currents Ĩ will be caused exclusively by terminal voltage oscillations since there will be no internal current source. If a generator’s model parameters are available, then the transformed admittance matrix of (21) can be constructed. PMU measurements from the generator terminal (if available) can then be used to calculate Ĩ and Ṽ. Finally, if Ĩ 6= Y Ṽ, then a source may be present in the generator. Of course, generators are complex machines which may have a variety of controllers (AVR, PSS, etc.), but this process may be generalized for an arbitrarily sized state matrix A which may incorporate a variety of states. In Algorithm (1), we formalize the steps for using generator terminal data to determine whether or not a generator is the source of a forced oscillation, where I is the magnitude and ϑ is the phase of the current flowing into the generator. There are three primary sources of error in this process: nonlinearities, measurement noise and generator parameter uncertainty. The extent of unavoidable nonlinear system behavior depends on the size of the oscillation, but the associated error is typically small enough to be neglected. IEEE Standard C37.242 specifics that PMU magnitude error must be below 0.1%, and timing error must be better than 1 µs (or 0.02◦ ) [17]. Since our method depends on capturing the phase and magnitude of the forced oscillation waves, spectral analysis may be used over many cycles to obtain accurate phase and magnitude data1 . Generator parameters may have a much larger degree of uncertainty, with error ranging up to 1 To quantify phasor magnitude M of a noisy, sinusoidal time series vector √ xt [n], the authors used M = 2max(|fft(xt [n])|), where fft is the fast Fourier transform. To quantify the phase ϕ of xt [n] relative to reference signal xr [n], the authors used ϕ = ∠ccf(hil(xt [n]), hil(xr [n])), where ccf is the correlation coefficient function and hil is the Hilbert transform.  (Y Ṽ)r , (Y Ṽ)i  Measured real (r) and imaginary (i) generator terminal voltage phasors Measured real (r) and imaginary (i) negative generator current injection phasors Calculated real (r) and imaginary (i) negative generator current injection phasors  several percent. Consequently, we propose to define a Total Vector Error (TVE) threshold for interpreting the difference between the measured current Ĩ and the computed currents Y Ṽ. Standard TVE is defined in [18]; we formulate it slightly differently to quantify the aggregate error of both the real and imaginary current phasors. Equation (43) defines the TVE while Table I summarizes the notation. I˜r − (Y Ṽ)r + I˜i − (Y Ṽ)i TVE =  I˜r + I˜i  (43)  In (43), we sum the vector error magnitudes of the measured and calculated generator currents. We then divide this total error by the sum of the measured current magnitudes to computing an effective average TVE. If this average is below over some threshold , then the measurements and calculations are sufficiently different and the generator may be a source. START 1 Use available generator model data (M , X, etc.) to build state space matrices A, BVp , C and DVp . 2 Convert BVr = BVp T1−1 and DVr = DVp T1−1 with 3 to move into rectangular phasor space. 3 Build Y of 21 4 Collect generator terminal PMU data 5 Define voltage, current magnitude and phase deviation phasors ∆Ṽt , ∆Ĩt and ∆θ̃t , ∆ϑ̃t (set t = 0 as 0 phase) 6 Convert magnitude and phase deviation phasors into Ṽr , Ṽi and I˜r , I˜i appropriately with (3) 7 Determine the TVE with (43) if TVE <  then Current source I not present: Generator not a source else Current source I is present: Generator is a source end Algorithm 1: Generator Source Detection Method  IV. T EST R ESULTS In this section, we present two sets of test results. First, we consider a 3 bus system of two 2nd order generators tied to an infinite bus. Second, we test our method on the WECC 179bus system. In this system, the source bus generator is identical to the 6th order generator + AVR presented in Section II. A. Radial Generators Tied to Infinite Bus It is well know in the literature [8], [10] that relying on the location of the largest detected oscillations is an unreliable  6  TABLE III M AGNITUDE OF C URRENT AND VOLTAGE O SCILLATIONS (S CALED BY 4 10 ); Γ FOR B OTH G ENERATORS  ~  ~  Gen 1 Gen 2  Fig. 6. 3 Bus Diagram with Infinite Bus. All generators are 2nd order, and a mechanically forced oscillation τm = τ0 + τ̃ is placed on generator 1.  Gen 1 Gen 2  M 4 1  D 1 0.25  Xd0  E0  0.25 0.2  1.019 1.031  Vt 1 1  φ 0.248 0.117  |θ̃|  |Ĩ|  |ϑ̃|  Γ  1.278 .719  14.193 17.409  2.482 10.962  1.2e−j171 ◦ 30.1e−j37  ◦  #10-5  Voltage Mag: (pu)  TABLE II G ENERATOR PARAMETERS  |Ṽ| 0.388 0.188  5  "V1 "V2  0  -5 35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  Time (s)  way for determining the source of a forced oscillation, and the excitation of local resonances is typically cited as the reason. While local resonances are certainly to blame, we may use our formulation to explain why non-resonant frequencies may still cause large current oscillations on non-source buses. To do so, we consider the structure of eq. (31): #  "   1 0 I˜d Ṽd Xd0 − Γ = (44) − X10 0 I˜q Ṽq d  It is clear that large current will flow, regardless of resonance, if Γ is large and the bus voltage oscillations are primarily in the direction of the q axis (see Fig. 3). We demonstrate this phenomenon on a simple deterministic system (no measurement noise or parameter uncertainty). We consider a 3 bus system of two radial generators tied to an infinite bus as given by Fig. 6. Particularly, we wish to show the situation where terminal voltage oscillations are largest on bus 1 (the source), but generator current oscillations are largest on bus 2. The transmission lines have X = 0.1 and R = 0.01, and other system parameters are summarized in Table II. When tied to an infinite bus, theqclassical generator model has a natural 0 frequency of ωn = VM∞XE cos (φ). When tied into a network though, we must consider the set of DAEs used to model the system in order to find the natural frequency (local mode) associated with any single generator. ẋ = f (x, y)  (45)  0 = g (x, y)  (46)  We linearize this set of differential (f ) and algebraic (g) equations, with state variable vector x and algebraic variable vector y, such that ∆ẋ = fx ∆x + fy ∆y and 0 = gx ∆x + gy ∆y. Next, we perform the necessary manipulations to build the state matrix As = fx −fy gy−1 gx of the system. The imaginary parts of the complex eigenvalues of this matrix yield the set of natural frequencies. The natural modes associated with generators 1 and 2 are Ωd1 = 0.708 rad sec and Ωd2 = 1.915 rad , respectively. We choose to mechanically force the system sec at Ωd = 2.1 since this is between the natural frequency of generator 2 and the frequency which maximizes Γ in generator 2’s admittance matrix. After simulating this system, we measure  Fig. 7. Terminal voltage magnitude oscillations for a mechanical oscillation on generator 1 of Fig. 6. The FO commences at t = 0.  the magnitude of the voltage and current oscillations. These are summarized in Table III, where bold text denotes the largest magnitudes between the generators. Voltage oscillations are largest at generator 1 (the source), but current oscillations are largest at generator 2. Again, this is due to the fact that Γ for generator 2 is much larger, as given in Table III, and because its voltage oscillations are primary in the direction of it own q axis. Magnitude of oscillation cannot consistently be used to locate the source of a forced oscillation since magnitude has a complex relationship with both local resonance and admittance matrix structure. For visualization, Fig. 7 plots the voltage magnitude oscillations associated with generators 1 and 2. In order to use virtually collected PMU data to locate the source of the oscillation, we perform the steps presented in Algorithm (1) in order to determine Ṽ, Ĩ, and Y of both generators. Finally, we choose to rotate the measured (Ĩ) and the calculated (Y Ṽ) currents into the dq reference frame given by Fig. 3, since we are dealing with second order generators. In table IV, we compare these measured and calculated currents in the dq reference frame. Since noise and uncertainty are neglected, we do not bother computing the total vector errors. At generator 2, the d and q axis currents measured from the PMU are equal to the currents computed by Y dq Ṽdq . Therefore, it can be concluded that there is no source present on generator 2. The measured and calculated q axis currents on generator 1 are equal, as expected. There clearly is some sort of source present on the d axis though, since the measurements and the calculations are not equal.  TABLE IV M EASURED AND C ALCULATED C URRENTS Ĩdq (B OTH G ENERATORS ). M AGNITUDES ARE SCALED BY 104 . I˜d1 Meas. Calc.  I˜q1 ◦  14.4ej49 ◦ 6.7e−j157  I˜d2 ◦  0.6e−j83 ◦ 0.6e−j83  I˜q2 ◦  18.7e−j111 ◦ 18.7e−j111  ◦  1.1e−j128 ◦ 1.1e−j128  7  10  1.178 10  2  (a)  10  2  10  1  (b)  Source Gen Non ! Source Gens  1  Source Gen + I= Non ! Source Gens  1.176  1.172 20  34 Detrend(34 ) 22  24  100  26  28  30  32  34  36  TVE  1.174  TVE  Voltage Phase (rad)  1.18  100  10-1  10-1  10-2  10-2  38  Time (s)  0.4  0.2  -3  -2  -1 0 1 Generator Parameter Error (%) 100 (c)  0 -0.1  15  20  0  5  10  15  20  Generator Index  -0.05 0 0.05 PMU Magnitude Error (%)  0.1  3  4  : 2  (a)  50  0 -0.02  -0.01 0 0.01 PMU Phase Error (Degs:)  (b) ~ir9 Meas: ~ir9 Est: ~ii9 Meas: ~ii9 Est:  ~ir36 Meas: ~ir36 Est: ~ii36 Meas: ~ii36 Est:  : 2  : 25  10  2  : 55  (b)  10  Generator Index  r=  20  5  r=  Prob: Density  0 -4  0  Fig. 10. TVE is plotted for all generators with at least 1/10th the magnitude of the peak power flow oscillation. Panel (a) gives the TVE for the source bus when only the admittance matrix is used to calculate the current flows. Panel (b) gives the TVE for the source bus when Iτ is calculated and added.  (a)  Prob: Density  Prob: Density  Fig. 8. The effects of manually detrending a drifting bus voltage angle are shown. This process is repeated for all reported angular data.  0.02  Fig. 9. PDFs related to generator parameter uncertainty (panel (a)), PMU magnitude noise (panel (b)), and PMU phase noise (panel (c)) are plotted. To counteract the effects of the noise, a 3rd order Savitzky-Golay filter is applied to all time series data. No uncertainty is added to generator inertia M since it is a static parameter which is typically known quite accurately.  B. WECC-179 Bus System For further validation, we apply these methods on data collected from the WECC-179 Bus System. As suggested in [6], we downloaded the standardized test case files and simulated the system using Power Systems Analysis Toolbox (PSAT) [16]. We chose to investigate the performance of our methods on test case “F1”. In this system, all loads are constant power while all non-source generators are modeled as 2nd order classical machines with D = 4, Xd0 = 0.25, and various inertias around H = 3 (machine base). The source generator is a high order synchronous machine with an Automatic Voltage Regulator (AVR) modeled by Fig. 5. Since this is a real system with no infinite bus to anchor the phase angles, there can be considerable angular drifting. This is a second order effect which generally will not have a large affect on the linearization analysis which we perform. For this reason, we manually detrend the linear drifting by subtracting off a linear offset. Sample results are given in by Fig. 8. In test case “F1”, a 0.86 Hz sinusoid is added to the reference signal of the AVR attached to the source generator at bus 4 (see [6] for a full system map). We simulated this system and then downsampled the virtual PMU data to 30Hz. We then added white noise to the magnitude and phase time series data according to IEEE Standard C37.242. To account for generator parameter uncertainty, all generator parameters were altered by a percentage chosen from a normal distribution characterized by µ = 0 and σ = 1. These distributions are visualized in Fig. 9; parameter uncertainty includes AVR settings. Following the steps of Algorithm (1), we quantified the  :  0  :  0  Fig. 11. Panel (a) compares the measured and estimated current phasors at bus 9 (TVE = 0.069). Panel (b) compares the measured and estimated current phasors at bus 36 (TVE = 0.032). We note that ĩrx and ĩix denote the real and imaginary current phasors at bus x, respectively.  generator voltage phasors (Ṽr , Ṽi ) and negative current injection phasors (I˜r , I˜i ). The phase of these phasors is quantified relative to a reference signal of xr = cos(Ωd t) (see footnote 1 for remarks on phasor quantification). Using the uncertain generator parameter data, we constructed the admittance matrix Y for each generator to compute current estimate Ĩ = Y Ṽ. Once these estimates were computed, we used equation (43) to quantify the average total vector error (TVE) for all current phasor calculations. TVE is plotted in Fig. 10. In Panel (b), we have added the calculated internal current source which is driven by the oscillating AVR reference signal to the estimation of the source bus current. Of course, knowing the phase and amplitude of such a source is not realistic, but given this information, we use a formulation similar to (23) to quantify the exact current injection Iτ . The TVE associated with the source bus in panel (a) is ∼157 times larger than that of any non source bus. It is clear that the calculated current is drastically different than the measured current, so there must be some sore of internal current source. For further visualization of these results, Fig. 11 presents two sets of measured and calculated phasor currents from generators 9 and 36. The first set of phasor currents (given by the thick lined vectors) represent the current phasors directly measured at the generator terminals. The second set of phasor currents (given by the thin lined vectors) represent the estimated phasor currents when calculated using Ĩ = Y Ṽ. Since at both generators Ĩest ≈ Ĩmeas , current is a strict function of voltage, so neither generator has an internal current source and neither is the source of the oscillation. It is important to consider the maximum allowable level of  8  2  0.04  10  (a)  10  TVE  Prob: Density  Source Gen Non ! Source Gens  1  0.03  0.02  0.01  0 -40  (b)  -20 0 20 40 Generator Parameter Error %  0  10  10  -1  10  -2  0  5  10  15  20  Generator Index  Fig. 12. Panel (a) gives the PDF for a large generator parameter uncertainty (σ = 10). Panel (b) gives the TVE for all generators with at least 1/10th the magnitude of the peak power flow oscillation over 1,000 trials.  generator parameter uncertainty for which this method is still robust. Accordingly, we increased the standard deviation of the generator parameter uncertainty to σ = 10 and quantified the TVE over 1,000 instantiations of generator parameter selection. The uncertainty PDF, and the distributions of the results, are both given in Fig. 12. Even with a high degree of generator parameter uncertainty (up to 30%), the TVE at the source bus is still noticeably larger than the error at nonsource buses. In this example, system operators would be able to identify the source of the oscillation with little uncertainty. V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK We have developed a method for using generator terminal PMU data to determine the source of a forced oscillation. This is accomplished by representing any non-source generator as an effective admittance matrix in respect to low-frequency perturbations and any source generator as admittance plus current injection. Our derivations do not rely on any strong modeling assumptions, so there are no restrictions on their applications; generalization for more complex systems is rather straightforward. Additionally, through the realistic example provided in subsection IV-B, we have shown that the method is robust to parameter uncertainty meaning that very detailed model knowledge is not a binding requirement. In subsequent work, we hope to leverage this technique and the properties of the derived admittance matrices to further characterize how oscillations propagate through the transmission grid. This will lend additional understanding into the mechanisms behind the successful Dissipating Energy Flow method of [12] and provide clarification for it’s current inadequacies. R EFERENCES [1] S. Achanta, M. Danielson, P. Evans, et al., “Time synchronization in the electric power system,” North American synchrophasor Initiative, Tech Report NASPI-2017-TR-001, March 2017. [2] L. Vanfretti, S. Bengtsson, V. S. Peri, and J. O. Gjerde, “Effects of forced oscillations in power system damping estimation,” in 2012 IEEE International Workshop on Applied Measurements for Power Systems (AMPS) Proceedings, pp. 1–6, Sept 2012. [3] N. Rostamkolai, R. J. Piwko, and A. S. Matusik, “Evaluation of the impact of a large cyclic load on the lilco power system using time simulation and frequency domain techniques,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 9, pp. 1411–1416, Aug 1994. [4] W. Xuanyin, L. Xiaoxiao, and L. Fushang, “Analysis on oscillation in electro-hydraulic regulating system of steam turbine and fault diagnosis based on psobp,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 3887 – 3892, 2010.  [5] S. A. N. Sarmadi, V. Venkatasubramanian, and A. Salazar, “Analysis of november 29, 2005 western american oscillation event,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 31, pp. 5210–5211, Nov 2016. [6] S. Maslennikov, B. Wang, et al., “A test cases library for methods locating the sources of sustained oscillations,” in 2016 IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), pp. 1–5, July 2016. [7] B. Wang and K. SUN, “Location methods of oscillation sources in power systems: a survey,” Journal of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy, vol. 5, pp. 151–159, Mar 2017. [8] J. O’Brien, T. Wu, et al., “Source location of forced oscillations using synchrophasor and scada data,” in HICSS, 2017. [9] N. Zhou and J. Dagle, “Initial results in using a self-coherence method for detecting sustained oscillations,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 30, pp. 522–530, Jan 2015. [10] N. Al-Ashwal, D. Wilson, and M. Parashar, “Identifying sources of oscillations using wide area measurements,” in Proceedings of the CIGRE US National Committee 2014 grid of the future symposium, Houston, vol. 19, 2014. [11] L. Chen, Y. Min, and W. Hu, “An energy-based method for location of power system oscillation source,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 28, pp. 828–836, May 2013. [12] S. Maslennikov, B. Wang, and E. Litvinov, “Dissipating energy flow method for locating the source of sustained oscillations,” International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems, pp. 55 – 62, 2017. [13] L. Chen, F. Xu, Y. Min, M. Wang, and W. Hu, “Transient energy dissipation of resistances and its effect on power system damping,” International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems, vol. 91, pp. 201 – 208, 2017. [14] P. Kundur et al., Power system stability and control, vol. 7. McGraw-Hill New York, 1994. [15] P. Sauer and M. Pai, Power System Dynamics and Stability. Stipes Publishing L.L.C., 2006. [16] F. Milano, Power System Analysis Toolbox Reference Manual for PSAT version 2.1.8., 2.1.8 ed., 5 2013. [17] “Ieee guide for synchronization, calibration, testing, and installation of phasor measurement units (pmus) for power system protection and control,” IEEE Std C37.242-2013, pp. 1–107, March 2013. [18] K. Narendra, D. R. Gurusinghe, and A. D. Rajapakse, “Dynamic performance evaluation and testing of phasor measurement unit (pmu) as per ieee c37. 118.1 standard,” in Doble Client Committee Meetings Int. Protect. Testing Users Group, Chicago, IL, USA, 2012.  Samuel C. Chevalier (S‘13) received M.S. (2016) and B.S. (2015) degrees in Electrical Engineering from the University of Vermont, and he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). His research interests include power system stability and renewable energy penetration.  Petr Vorobev (M‘15) received his Ph.D. degree in theoretical physics from Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics, Moscow, in 2010. Currently, he is a Postdoctoral Associate at the Mechanical Engineering Department of Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge. His research interests include a broad range of topics related to power system dynamics and control. This covers low frequency oscillations in power systems, dynamics of power system components, and multi-timescale approaches to power system modeling.  Konstantin Turitsyn (M‘09) received the M.Sc. degree in physics from Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology and the Ph.D. degree in physics from Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics, Moscow, in 2007. Currently, he is an Assistant Professor at the Mechanical Engineering Department of Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge. Before joining MIT, he held the position of Oppenheimer fellow at Los Alamos National Laboratory, and Kadanoff-Rice Postdoctoral Scholar at University of Chicago. His research interests encompass a broad range of problems involving nonlinear and stochastic dynamics of complex systems. Specific interests in energy related fields include stability and security assessment.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
