Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_6651

Abstract:
Three-dimensional nonlinear micro/meso-mechanical response of the fibre-reinforced polymer composites  arXiv:1610.04610v1 [cs.CE] 14 Oct 2016  Z. Ullaha,1 , L. Kaczmarczyka, C. J. Pearcea a School  of Engineering, Rankine Building, The University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8LT, UK  Abstract A three-dimensional multi-scale computational homogenisation framework is developed for the prediction of nonlinear micro/meso-mechanical response of the ﬁbre-reinforced polymer (FRP) composites. Two dominant damage mechanisms, i.e. matrix elasto-plastic response and ﬁbre-matrix decohesion are considered and modelled using a non-associative pressure dependent paraboloidal yield criterion and cohesive interface elements respectively. A linear-elastic transversely isotropic material model is used to model yarns/ﬁbres within the representative volume element (RVE). A uniﬁed approach is used to impose the RVE boundary conditions, which allows convenient switching between linear displacement, uniform traction and periodic boundary conditions. The computational model is implemented within the framework of the hierarchic ﬁnite element, which permits the use of arbitrary orders of approximation. Furthermore, the computational framework is designed to take advantage of distributed memory high-performance computing. The accuracy and performance of the computational framework are demonstrated with a variety of numerical examples, including unidirectional FRP composite, a composite comprising a multi-ﬁbre and multi-layer RVE, with randomly generated ﬁbres, and a single layered plain weave textile composite. Results are validated against the reference experimental/numerical results from the literature. The computational framework is also used to study the eﬀect of matrix and ﬁbre-matrix interfaces properties on the 1 Correspondence  to: Z. Ullah, E-mail: Zahur.Ullah@glasgow.ac.uk  Preprint submitted to Composite Structures  October 18, 2016  homogenised stress-strain responses. Keywords: Finite element analysis, Fibre reinforced polymer, Multi-scale computational homogenisation, Elasto-plasticity, Cohesive interface elements, Transverse isotropy  1. Introduction Compared to conventional materials, ﬁbre-reinforced polymer (FRP) composites can oﬀer exceptional physical and chemical properties (including high strength, low speciﬁc weight, fatigue and corrosion resistance, low thermal expansion and high dimension stability), making them ideal for a variety of engineering applications, including aerospace, marine, automotive industry, civil structures and prosthetics [1, 2, 3]. Phenomenological or macro-level models cannot accurately describe the complex behaviour of FRP composites due to their underlying complicated and heterogeneous microstructure. Furthermore, nonlinearities associated with the matrix elasto-plasticity and ﬁbre-matrix decohesion make the computational modelling even more challenging. Multi-scale computational homogenisation (CH) provides an accurate modelling framework to simulate the behaviour of FRP composites and determine the macro-scale homogenised (or eﬀective) response, based on the physics of an underlying, microscopically heterogeneous, representative volume element (RVE) [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 3]. The homogenised properties calculated from the multi-scale CH are subsequently used in the numerical analysis of the macro-level structures. A variety of numerical techniques have been developed to model the nonlinear micro-mechanical response of unidirectional (UD) FRP composites, mostly based on ﬁnite element analysis. For UD glass/carbon (G/C) FRP composites, a computational model was developed in [10, 11] within the framework of ﬁnite deformation. Both in-plane shear and compressive loading scenarios were considered. The Mohr-Coulomb yield criterion and cohesive interface elements were used to model the response of epoxy matrix and ﬁbre-matrix interfacial decohesion respectively. Fibres were generated randomly within the RVEs using  2  the algorithm presented in [12] and were modelled as a linear-elastic and isotopic material. A parametric study, including the eﬀect of matrix and interface properties on the stress-strain response, was also conducted. The idea of [10] was extended further in [13] by incorporating thermal residual stresses (due to cooling of FRP composites after curing process, caused by the mismatch in thermal expansion coeﬃcients of matrix and ﬁbres) in the simulation, in addition to transverse tensile and cyclic loading for the CFRP composites. The nearest neighbour algorithm (NNA) [14] developed by the same authors, was used to randomly generate the ﬁbres within the RVEs. Using the same constitutive models for matrix, ﬁbres and ﬁbre-matrix decohesion as in [10], a multi-layer multi-ﬁbre (M2 ) RVE was used in [15] for laminates. Each lamina was modelled as a cube with randomly distributed but axially aligned ﬁbres, generated using a ﬁbres randomisation algorithm in DIGIMAT FE [16]. Both cross [0/90]ns and angle [±45]ns (where the subscript ns represents n layers with the same sequence and symmetric about the mid plane) GFRP composites were considered with in-plane shear loading and results of stress-strain behaviour were validated against the experimental results. A combined transverse compression and axial tension loading scenario was considered in [17] for UD GFRP composite. In addition to matrix plasticity and ﬁbre-matrix decohesion, ﬁbre breakage was also included in the FE simulation. The pressure dependent, Drucker-Prager yield criterion was used to model matrix plasticity and both ﬁbre breakage and ﬁbrematrix interfacial decohesion were modelled with cohesive interface elements. A simple periodic, hexagonal ﬁbre arrangement was assumed. In [18], a modiﬁed von Mises yield criterion was used to model the behaviour of the matrix material, while a maximum tensile stress criterion was used to model ﬁbre breakage. Fibre-matrix decohesion was also included in the simulation and was modelled with cohesive interface elements. The random distribution of the ﬁbres was also included within the RVE based on the optical microscopy of real composites. A variety of loading conditions was used subsequently to study the response of the UD FRP composite. The limitations of diﬀerent plasticity models for modelling matrix materials, including Mohr-Coulomb and Drucker-Prager were argued in 3  [19, 20], especially in complex loading scenarios. Instead of the conventional plasticity models, a pressure dependent thermodynamically consistent plasticity model [21] was used. A statistically proven random distribution algorithm proposed by the same authors in [22] was used to randomly generate UD ﬁbres within the RVEs. Similar to previous studies, ﬁbres were modelled as linearelastic and isotropic material and ﬁbre-matrix decohesion was modelled with cohesive interface elements. A variety of RVE loading scenarios was considered including transverse tension and compression, transverse and longitudinal shear and combined transverse compression and transverse shear. A number of numerical modelling approaches have been used to simulate the behaviour of textile composites subjected to diﬀerent loading scenarios. A comprehensive review of these methods can be found in [23]. Continuum damage mechanics (CDM) was used in [24] to model both matrix and yarns for glass and carbon plain weave textile composites. Dissipated energy density was used as damage parameter and both material and geometric nonlinearities were included in the simulation. Further use of CDM in the simulation of textile composites can also be found in [25, 26, 27]. Moreover, a three-dimensional CDM based approach was used to simulate the progressive damage in laminated FRP composites in [28, 29]. A variety of failure mode, including matrix tensile and compressive cracking, ﬁbre tensile and compressive failure, ﬁbre-matrix shearing and delimitation between the layers were included in the simulations. For a twill weave textile CFRP subjected to in-plane loading, a meso-mechanical analysis was performed in [30]. The matrix was modelled as elasto-plastic material with the same plasticity model as in [19, 20, 21], while yarns were modelled as linearelastic and transversely isotropic material. Results of the RVE strain ﬁelds and homogenised stress-strain response were validated against the experimental results and found in a good agreement. These numerical simulations, described above, of FRP composite behaviour are limited to speciﬁc RVE type (2D or 3D, UD or woven/textile) or loading scenarios (normal or shear). In contrast, this paper develops a fully generalised three-dimensional micro/meso-mechanical framework, which is subse4  quently implemented in the authors’ open source FE software, MOFEM [31]. The dominant damage mechanisms (observed experimentally [10]), i.e. matrix elasto-plasticity and ﬁbre-matrix decohesion, are included in the computational framework. Matrix material is modelled using a pressure dependent paraboloidal yield criterion [19, 20, 30, 21] with an exponential hardening law. Fibre-matrix decohesion is modelled with zero thickness cohesive interface elements. Yarns are modelled as linear-elastic and transversely isotropic materials. Rather than simpliﬁed ﬁbre arrangements for UD FRP composites, e.g. in [32, 33, 17, 34], which are not the actual representation of the real FRP composites and can lead to erroneous results. this study adopts a statistically proven random distribution algorithm proposed in [22] to generate ﬁbre arrangements within the RVE. The RVE boundary conditions are imposed in a uniﬁed manner which allows convenient switching between displacement, traction and periodic boundary conditions [35]. Hierarchic ﬁnite elements are adopted, which permits the use of arbitrary order of approximation, leading to accurate results for relatively coarse meshes. The computational framework is designed to take advantage of distributed memory high-performance computing. Moreover, CUBIT [36] and ParaView [37] are used as pre- and post-processor respectively. This paper is organised as follows. The computational framework is fully described in §2. The material models are given in §2.1, consisting of material model for matrix §2.1.1, yarns/ﬁbres 2.1.2 and ﬁbre-matrix interfaces §2.1.3. The nonlinear multi-scale CH with corresponding RVE boundary conditions are explained in §2.2. Calibration and validation of the matrix plasticity model is given in §3. Three numerical examples are given in §4, including UD GFRP composites §4.1, M2 RVE §4.2 and plain weave textile composites §4.3. Finally, the concluding remarks are given in §5.  2. Computational framework The computational framework developed for FRP composites consists of a set of constitutive models for individual components including matrix, yarns/ﬁbres  5  and ﬁbre-matrix interface and implemented within the formulation of ﬁrst-order multi-scale CH. 2.1. Material constitutive models Typical RVEs in the case of UD FRP and textile composites are shown in Figure 1(a) and (b) respectively, consisting of yarns/ﬁbres embedded within a polymer matrix. The constitutive model for FRP composites is a combination of constitutive models for these individual components, together with ﬁbrematrix interface decohesion. In the following, each of these constitutive model is explained in detail.  Full RVE  Full RVE  Matrix  Matrix  Yarns  Fibres (a) Unidirectional RVE  (b) Textile RVE  Figure 1: Typical RVEs for unidirectional FRP and textile composites  6  2.1.1. Matrix The polymer matrix is modelled as an elasto-plastic material using a nonassociative pressure dependent paraboloidal yield criterion [21, 19, 20, 30, 9]. This plasticity model can incorporate diﬀerent yield strengths in tension and compression and is shown Figure 2(a) in the principal stress space. The yield function is written as f (σ, σc , σt ) = 6J2 + 2I1 (σc − σt ) − 2σc σt ,  (1)  where σ is Cauchy stress tensor, I1 = tr(σ) is the ﬁrst invariant of Cauchy stress tensor, J2 = 12 η : η is the second invariant of deviatoric stress η = σ − 31 I1 and σt and σc are yield strengths in tension and compression respectively. A nonassociative ﬂow rule is used, for which the plastic potential function is written as g (σ, σc , σt ) = 6J2 + 2αI1 (σc − σt ) − 2σc σt ,  α=  1 − 2νplas , 1 + νplas  (2)  where νplas is a material parameter and is known as plastic Poisson’s ratio. Furthermore, the Helmholtz free energy in the case of linear isotropic hardening is written as ψ=  1 1 1 λtr[ε]2 + µε : ε + σt0 α0 + Ht α20 + σc0 α1 + Hc α21 , 2 2 2  (3)  where λ and µ are the Lame parameters, ε is the strain tensor, σt0 and σc0 are the initial yield strengths in tension and compression respectively, α0 and α1 are internal kinematic variables and Ht and Hc are hardening parameters in case of tension and compression respectively. Following Equation (3), yield strengths in tension and compression are written as σt =  ∂ψ = σto + α0 Ht , ∂α0  σc =  7  ∂ψ = σco + α1 Hc ∂α1  (4)  A more realistic, exponential hardening law is presented in this paper, due to which Equation (3) is rewritten as ψ=  Hc −nc α1 Ht −nt α0 1 + (σc0 + Hc ) α1 + , e e λtr[ε]2 + µε : ε + (σt0 + Ht ) α0 + 2 nt nc (5)  where Ht , Hc are the diﬀerence between the ultimate and yield strengths, nt and nc are material parameters and determine the rate of convergence between yield and ultimate strengths. Following Equation (5), yield strengths in tension and compression are written as σt =   ∂ψ = σto +Ht 1 − e−nt α0 , ∂α0  σc =   ∂ψ = σco +Hc 1 − e−nc α1 . (6) ∂α1  A similar hardening law as a function of equivalent plastic strain was also used in [30].  Traction  2 Fracture energy  3  1  Separation  (a) Paraboloidal yield surface  (b) Transversely isotropic material  Figure 2: Material models for matrix and fibre-matrix decohesion  8  (c) Traction-separation law  2.1.2. Yarns/fibres In textile composites, as shown in Figure 1(b), yarns are interwoven together to form a textile structure. On the micro-level, yarns are the same as UD FRP composites consisting of bundles of glass/carbon ﬁbres within the polymer matrix. On the meso-level yarns are modelled as homogenous and transversely isotropic material with homogenised or eﬀective properties obtained from the multi-scale CH of the UD FRP composites. Five material parameters are required for transversely isotropic materials, which are Ep , νp , Ez , νpz and Gzp , where z and p are ﬁbres and transverse directions respectively as shown in Figure 2(b). Ep and νp are Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio in the transverse direction respectively, while Ez , νpz and Gzp are the Young’s modulus, Poisson’s ratio and shear modulus in the ﬁbre directions respectively. In order to re-orient the known stiﬀness matrix for the transversely isotropic material from the local coordinates to global coordinates, the yarns directions at each Gauss point need to be determined. To do this it is possible to simply use the cubic splines that were used to construct the yarns. However, this can lead to inaccuracies in the case of yarns with non-uniform cross-sections along their length. An alternative approach is used in this paper, in which the yarns directions are determined by solving the potential ﬂow along these yarns. A detailed description of this approach and how to transfer the stiﬀness matrix from the local to global coordinate axes is given in [6, 3, 7, 8, 9]. On the micro-level in the case of UD FRP composites, ﬁbres are modelled as linear-elastic and isotropic material (a special case of transversely isotropic material model), for which only two material parameters, i.e. Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio (Ef , and νf ) are required. In this case, the following material parameters are used: Ep = Ez = Ef ,  νp = νpz = νf ,  9  Gp =  Ef . 2 (1 + νf )  (7)  2.1.3. Fibres/matrix interfaces Fibre-matrix decohesion is modelled using standard cohesive interface elements with a straightforward material model, i.e. linear traction-separation law (shown in Figure 2(c)). Only three material parameters are required for the material model, including cohesive strength ft , fracture energy Gf (shaded area in Figure 2(c)) and material parameter β, which assign diﬀerent weight to opening and shear displacements. Mathematically the material model for cohesive interface elements is written as    E δ   0 t= (1 − ω) E0 δ     0 where E0 is the initial stiﬀness, δ =  if δ < δ0 , if δ0 ≤ δ < δmax ,  (8)  if δ < δmax ,  p 2 + δ 2 ) is the displacement jump δn2 + β(δs1 s2  with δn and δs as its normal and shear components and ω is damage parameter. κ is a history parameter and is equal to the highest value of displacement jump δ. Furthermore, δ0 and δmax are respectively the displacement jumps at the onset of damage (ω = 0) and when the interface is fully damaged (ω = 1). E0 and δ0 are written as E0 =  Em , h  δ0 =  ft , E0  (9)  where Em is the Young’s modulus of matrix material and h is the interface thickness. Furthermore, from Figure 2(c), the damage parameter ω is written as   2Gf E0 + ft2 κ ω= . 2Gf (ft + κE0 )  (10)  The constitutive matrices for cohesive interface elements in the local and global coordinate systems are written as Dloc = (1 − ω) IE0 ,  Dglob = RT Dloc R,  10  (11)  where I is the unit matrix and R is the transformation matrix [38]. Equations for stiﬀness matrix and corresponding internal forces are written as el  K =  Z  T  Φ D  glob  Fel int  ΦdA,  =  Z  ΦT RT tloc dA,  (12)  A  A  where Φ is a matrix of shape functions and tloc is the traction vector in local coordinates, details of which are given in [38]. 2.2. Multi-scale computational homogenisation In multi-scale CH, a heterogeneous RVE is associated with each Gauss point of the macro-homogeneous structure, the boundary conditions for which are implemented using the generalised procedure proposed in [3, 35]. Small displacement and small strain formulations are used within the framework of ﬁrst order multi-scale CH, the basic concept of which is shown in Figure 3, where Ω ⊂ R3 and Ωµ ⊂ R3 are macro and micro domains respectively. Macro-strain ε = iT h is ﬁrst calculated at each Gauss point ε11 ε22 ε33 2ε12 2ε23 2ε31 iT h of the macro-structure, which is then used to formulate x = x1 x2 x3  the boundary value problem on the micro-level. After solution of the micro-level iT h boundary value problem, homogenised stress σ = σ 11 σ 22 σ 33 σ 12 σ 23 σ 31  and stiﬀness matrix C are calculated.  For a global step n + 1, the discretised system of equations in case of an iteration i of the Newton-Raphson algorithm is written as    Kin+1  C  C  0  T     △ui  n+1  = Fin+1 ,  △λi  n+1  (13)  where K and u are the standard FE tangent stiﬀness matrix and displacement vector respectively and λ is the unknown vector of Lagrange multipliers required to impose the RVE boundary conditions. Matrix C in Equations (13) are calculated over the boundary Γ of the RVE and are constant throughout  11  Integration point Macro strain  Homogenised stress Stiffness matrix  Macro-structure  Traction  Solve boundary value problem  2  3  1  Separation  Micro-structure (RVE)  Figure 3: Multi-scale computational homogenisation  the calculations [3, 35] and are given as C=  Z  HNT Nd∂Ωµ .  (14)  ∂Ωµ  In Equation (14), N is a matrix of shape functions and H is a matrix that is speciﬁc to the type of boundary conditions used, each row of which represents an admissible distribution of nodal traction forces on the RVE boundary [35]. The speciﬁc choice of H in the case of linear displacement, periodic and uniform traction boundary conditions can be found in [35, 3] and is not repeated here. Matrix K comprises contributions of the matrix, yarns and yarn-matrix interface elements. Fin+1 is a vector of residuals and is written as  Fin+1    CT λi − Fint i n+1 n+1 =  C ui − Dε n+1  n+1      ,  D=  Z  HNT Xd∂Ωµ ,  (15)  ∂Ωµ  where X is a matrix of spatial coordinates, evaluated at Gauss points during  12  numerical integration of the surface integrals and is given as  X=    2y1  1   0 2 0  0  0  y2  y3  2y2  0  y1  0  0  2y3  0  y1    0    y3  .  y2  (16)  At Newton-Raphson iteration i, variable ξ = u, λ is calculated using ξin+1 = Pi int i ξn + m=1 ξ m n+1 . In Equation (15), Fn+1 is a vector of internal forces. Further-  more, Cuin+1 and CT λin+1 are associated with the RVE boundary conditions and are written as Cuin+1 =  Z  CT λin+1 =  i HNT uhn+1 dΓ,  Γ  Z  i HNT λhn+1 dΓ,  (17)  Γ  where uh and λh are displacements and Lagrange multipliers calculated at a i , where ξ e is a matrix of displacements Gauss point, i.e. ξ h = uh , λh = Nξen+1  or Lagrange multipliers associated with element e. Finally, the homogenised stress for global increment n + 1 is written as: 1 T D λn+1 , V  σ n+1 =  (18)  To compute the homogenised stiﬀness matrix C at the end of global increment n + 1, the converged matrix K is subjected to six diﬀerent macro-strain perturbations of unit vector leading to six linear system of equations. This will give a set of homogenised stresses, i.e. C=  h  σ1  σ2  σ3  σ4  σ5  σ6  i  ,  (19)  iT  (20)  where for example: σ 1 : for ε = σ 4 : for ε =  h h  1  0 0  0 0  0  0  0 0  1 0  0  13  iT .  In each of the six cases, only the right-hand side of the system of Equations (13) changes, which is solved very eﬃciently as the left-hand side matrix is factorised only once.  3. Calibration and validation of plasticity model Following [30], the plasticity model is ﬁrst calibrated against the experimental results from [39, 19, 30] for epoxy resin subjected to tensile and compressive loading. A list of material parameters used in this case is shown in Table 1, where E, ν, σto , σto and νplas are given in [30, 19]. Moreover, the hardening parameters, i.e. Ht , Hc , nt and nc are determined from the numerical simulation based on the experimental stress-strain curves. The estimated parameters Ht , Hc are the same as given in [30] but in contrast, due to the use of hardening law as a function of internal kinematic variables leads to diﬀerent nt and nc in our case. The geometry considered in this case is a cube of dimension 1mm, which is discretised with 1191 tetrahedral elements and 299 nodes. The cube is ﬁxed at the bottom face and subjected to tension, compression and shear loading on the top face as shown in Figures 4(a), (b) and (c) respectively. A comparison between numerical and experimental stress-strain responses for all the three loading scenarios are shown in Figure 4(d). As expected the numerical and experimental responses in tension and compression are in good agreement, as a result of parameter ﬁtting. The response in shear is not ﬁtted and also shows fairly good agreement. All of the three responses are highly non-linear and it is clear that the plasticity model can capture them well. It must be noted that the plasticity model requires input data for tension and compression and can be used subsequently to simulate more generalised loading scenarios.  4. Numerical Examples Three numerical examples are now given to demonstrate the correct implementation and performance of the developed computational framework. 14  Parameter Young’s modulus (E) Poisson’s ratio (ν) Plastic Poisson’s ratio (νplas ) Initial yield strength in tension (σto ) Initial yield strength in compression (σto ) Ht Hc nt nc  Value 3.76 GPa 0.39 0.3 29 MPa 67 MPa 67 MPa 58 MPa 170 150  Table 1: Material parameters for epoxy resin  (a) Tension  (b) Compression  (c) Shear  (d) Stress-strain response  Figure 4: Comparison of numerical and experimental [39] stress-strain response for an epoxy resin  4.1. Unidirectional GFRP composites The ﬁrst numerical example consists of polymer composites reinforced with unidirectional glass ﬁbres subjected to transverse tension. A similar numerical example is also considered in [20]. Four diﬀerent RVE sizes are considered in this case, consisting of periodic, randomly distributed but axially aligned ﬁbres and are shown in Figure 5. The algorithm proposed in [22] is used to randomly generate the ﬁbres within the RVEs with diameter of 5µm and volume fraction  15  of 60%. The four RVEs are discretised with 1,499, 3,239, 13,023 and 21,140 tetrahedral elements. The detailed geometry for RVE-4, showing the individual matrix, ﬁbres and cohesive interface elements, is presented in Figure 6(a). A list of material properties used for the elasto-plastic matrix materials are the same as given in Table 1, while for the linear-elastic and isotropic glass ﬁbres Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio used are 74 GPa and 0.2 respectively. For the cohesive interface elements, interface strength and fracture energy are 50 MPa and 2 J/m2 respectively. The macro-strain (applied to the RVEs using periodic boundary conditions) versus homogenised stress response for all four RVEs are compared to reference numerical results from [20] and are shown in Figure 6(b). The RVEs are subjected to a transverse strain εxx of 1 percent. It is clear from Figure 6(b) that the developed computational framework accurately predicts the stress-strain behaviour in the pre-peak region (up to εxx = 0.65%) for all of RVEs. The size eﬀect can be clearly seen in the post-peak region (beyond εxx = 0.65%); increasing the size of the RVE leads to a more brittle response. A similar behaviour was also reported in [20, 40]. Issues related with the existence and size of the RVE and pre- and post-peak region behaviour are described in detail in [40, 41, 42, 43], where the ill-posedness of the macro-level BVP and its non-objectivity with respect to the size of the RVE is discussed. A detailed description of dealing with these limitation of the classical CH schemes is given in [43]. These specialised treatments are not considered in this paper. The ﬁnal damaged RVEs with clear localisation zones/debonding are also shown in Figure 6(b). The damaged zones consist of fully damaged cohesive interface elements that are perpendicular to the direction of the applied strain. It is clear that ﬁbre-matrix decohesion interface leads to a reduction in load transfer from the matrix to the ﬁbres, which results in the overall stiﬀness. Furthermore, strain localisation associated with the damaged zones subsequently leads to severe plastic deformation of matrix material. A parametric study is also conducted to investigate the eﬀect of diﬀerent parameters on the macro-strain versus homogenised stress response. The eﬀect of fracture energy on the stress-strain response is shown in Figure 7(a), where 16  fracture energies of 2, 3, 4 and 100 J/m2 are used but all other parameters are kept constant. It is clear from Figure 7(a) that the stress-strain response are the same for all the four cases up to εxx = 0.6%. Furthermore, lower fracture energies leads to clear damaged zone with high strain localisation (severe plastic deformation). The eﬀect of interface strength on the stress-strain response is shown in Figure 7(b), where interface strength of 20, 35 and 50 MPa are used and all other parameters are kept constant. Furthermore, the eﬀect of considering unlimited interface strength, i.e. ft = ∞ in shown in Figure 7(b). A clear localisation can be seen for both ft = 35 and ft = 50 cases as compared to the ft = 20 for the applied strain of 1 %. The eﬀect of a linear elastic material, as opposed to an elasto-plastic material, on the strain-stress response is shown in Figure 7(c). In addition, three cases with diﬀerent interface strengths of cohesive interface elements, i.e. 20, 35 and 50 MPa are considered. It is clear from Figure 7(c) that in the prepeak regions, the use of either linear-elastic or elasto-plastic matrix material leads to almost similar stress-strain response while in the post-peak region the use of linear-elastic matrix material leads to relatively stiﬀ response. The ﬁnal damaged RVEs for both ft = 20 and ft = 35 with both linear-elastic and elasto-plastic matrix materials are also shown in Figure 7(c). The high strain localisation in the damaged zones leads to severe plastic deformations leading to a more brittle stress-strain response. 4.2. Multi-fibres multi-layer RVE A multi-ﬁbre multi-layer RVE subjected to in-plane shear is considered in the second example. A similar example is also analysed experimentally and numerically in [15], the stress-strain response from which is used here as a reference. The UD FRP composite used in this case, consist of E-glass (ER459L) and epoxy matrix (EPOFINE-556) with FINEHARD- 951 hardeners. The RVE geometry is shown in Figure 8(a), consisting of two cubes of dimension 1mm with randomly distributed ﬁbres (generated using the algorithm in [22]) of 24 µm and volume fraction of 28 % and are placed on the top of each other 17  21.4  16.2  11.4  5.7  m  m  m  m  (a) RVE-1  (c) RVE-3  (b) RVE-2  Figure 5: Different RVE sizes for the UD GFRP example  with an angle of 90o . In Figures 8(b) and (c) individual matrix and ﬁbres are shown respectively. The RVE is discretised with 32,818 tetrahedral elements and is shown in Figure 8(d), while ﬁbre-matrix interfaces are discretised with 3,056 cohesive interface elements and are shown in Figure 8(e). Moreover, a perfect bond is assumed between laminae. For the linear-elastic and isotropic glass ﬁbres, Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio are 73 GPa and 0.23 respectively. For the matrix, most of the material parameters used are the same as given in Table 1 with the only exception of Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio, which are 4.7 GPa and 0.3 respectively. For cohesive interface elements, interface strength and fracture energy used are 30 MPa and 100 J/m2 respectively [15]. The RVE in this example is subjected to shear strain γzx = 4%, as shown in Figure 9. The shear stress versus shear  18  (d) RVE-4  Full RVE  Matrix  Fibres  Reference Cohesive elements  (b) Stress - strain curves  (a) RVE  Figure 6: RVE components and comparison of numerical and reference stress-strain curves for different RVE sizes for the UD GFRP example  strain (γzx versus τzx ) response is compared with the experimental and numerical results from [15] and is shown in Figure 9, which are in a very good agreement. Stress-strain response is almost linear up to γzx = 1.5%, beyond which the response is nonlinear due to the decohesion between ﬁbres and matrix. The diﬀerence between the numerical and experimental results (especially between γzx = 1% and 2.5%), might be due to the assumption of perfect bonding between the 0o and 90o laminae. At the end of the simulation, contours of γzx over the deformed RVE are also shown in Figure 9. Strain is very small in the glass ﬁbres as compared to matrix material due to the associated high stiﬀness. Decohesion between matrix and ﬁbres can also be seen Figure 9.  19  (a) Effect of fracture energy  (b) Effect of i     (c) P tic versus elasti ci materials Figure 7: Parametric study for the UD GFRP example  4.3. Plain weave textile composites Finally, a plain weave textile composite subjected to a variety of normal and shear loading conditions is considered, consisting of E-glass ﬁbres and epoxy matrix. A similar numerical example is also considered in [24]. An RVE, consisting of similar yarns in warp and weft directions is used in this example, for  20  0 m m  (a) Full RVE  (b) Matrix  (c) Fibres  (d) M  (e) Cohesive elements  Figure 8: Geometry and mesh for the M2 RVE example  Simulation  Figure 9: Comparison of numerical and reference stress-strain response for the M2 RVE example  21  which the geometry with all of the required dimensions are shown in Figure 10(a). Elliptical cross-sections and cubic splines are used respectively to model the cross sections and paths of the yarns. The volume fraction of ﬁbres within the yarns is 65% while the total volume fraction of ﬁbres within the RVE is 35%. The RVE is discretised with 11,516 tetrahedral elements and is shown in Figure 10(b). For the elasto-plastic matrix material, the same properties are used as given in Table 1, while for the linear-elastic and transversely isotropic yarns, material properties are given in Table 2 [24]. Furthermore, a perfect bond is assumed between yarns and matrix. The yarns direction, calculated from the potential ﬂow analysis, are shown in Figure 11(a). Four loading conditions, including two normal (εxx and εyy ) and two shear (γyz and γzx ) are considered, where the RVE is subjected to a macrostrain of 3%. For the shear case, the stress-strain responses are shown in Figure 11(a). The nonlinear response beyond a strain of 1.5% is due to matrix failure. The stress-strain response in the case of γyz is also compared with numerical results from [24], which are in a very good agreement, especially in the linear region (up to γyz =1.5%). Beyond γyz =1.5%, our simulation result is relatively stiﬀer, which might be due to the use of linear-elastic material for the yarns. A high strain gradient can also be seen in the matrix, especially in regions of the thin matrix layer. The response in the case of γzx involves shearing of yarns leading to stiﬀer behaviour as compared to γyz . Furthermore, response in the case of εxx and εyy are shown in Figure 11(b). For the given range of applied strains, stress-strain responses for both εxx and εyy are linear. Moreover, εxx involves direct tensile load on the yarns and behave stiﬀer as compared to εyy case, where strain is applied directly on the matrix. Parameter Ep νp Ez νpz Gzp  Value 18.06 GPa 0.34 48.47 GPa 0.25 5.58 GPa  Table 2: Yarns material parameters for the plain weave textile composites example  22  Yarns  Matrix  3 Full RVE    !  5  1.7    ( eometry  (b) Mesh  Figure 10: Geometry and mesh for the plain weave textile composites example (dimensions in mm)  5. Concluding remarks A three-dimensional, nonlinear micro/meso-mechanical multi-scale CH framework is developed for FRP composites. The matrix material is modelled as elasto-plastic, using a paraboloidal yield surface. Decohsion of the ﬁbre-matrix interface are modelled using cohesive interface elements. The yarns/ﬁbres are modelled as linear-elastic and transversely isotropic material. It is shown that the two dominant damage mechanisms, i.e. matrix plasticity and ﬁbre-matrix interfacial decohesion control the strength of FRP composites. Experimental stress-strain results for epoxy resin for both tension and compression load cases are used to calibrate the plasticity model and is validated subsequently for the shear loading. Three numerical examples with a variety of RVEs and load-  23  y& Reference  "#$ %ormal  (a) Shear  Figure 11: Stress-strain responses for the plain weave textile composites subjected to different loading conditions  ing conditions are considered to demonstrate the performance of the proposed computational framework. In both UD FRP composite and M2 RVE examples, ﬁbres are randomly generated within the RVEs using a statistically proven random distribution algorithm. In the UD FRP numerical example, the developed computational framework can accurately predict the stress-strain behaviour in the pre-peak region, while in the post-peak region size dependent response is observed, which is natural in the case of ﬁrst-order computational homogenisation. A parametric study is also conducted for the UD FRP numerical example, i.e. the eﬀect of diﬀerent matrix and ﬁbre-matrix interface parameters on the stress-strain behaviour and it is shown that failure starts at ﬁbre-matrix interface followed by formation of a shear band or matrix plasticity. Furthermore, from the M2 RVE and plain weave textile composite numerical examples, it is shown that the computational framework can accurately predict the stressstrain behaviour of RVEs with complicated geometries subjected to diﬀerent loading scenarios. The developed computational framework is implemented in the authors’ open-source FE software MOFEM; this has additional capabilities, including generalised RVE boundary conditions, hierarchic ﬁnite elements and  24  optimisation for high-performance computing. The developed computational framework provides the nonlinear micro/meso-mechanical response at lamina level, which will be used subsequently to simulate FRP composites at both laminate and structure level.  Acknowledgements • The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council through the Providing Conﬁdence in Durable Composites (DURACOMP) project (Grant Ref.: EP/K026925/1). • The ﬁrst author also acknowledges A. R. Melro (University of Bristol, UK) for providing the MATLAB code for generation of randomly distributed ﬁbres within the RVE for the UD FRP composites.  References References [1] L. Tong, A. P. Mouritz, M. K. Bannister, 3D Fibre Reinforced Polymer Composites, Elsevier Science Ltd, The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington Oxford, UK, 2002. [2] A. Mouritz, M. Bannister, P. Falzon, K. Leong, Review of applications for advanced three-dimensional ﬁbre textile composites, Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing 30 (12) (1999) 1445 – 1461. [3] Z. Ullah, L. Kaczmarczyk, S. A. Grammatikos, M. C. Evernden, C. J. Pearce., Multi-scale computational homogenisation to predict the longterm durability of composite structures, Computers and Structures (Under Review). [4] S. Nemat-Nasser, M. Hori, Micromechanics: Overall Properties of Heterogeneous Materials, Elsevier Science Publishers, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1993. 25  [5] M. Geers, V. Kouznetsova, W. Brekelmans, Multi-scale computational homogenization: Trends and challenges, Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 234 (7) (2010) 2175 – 2182. [6] X.-Y. Zhou, P. D. Gosling, C. J. Pearce, Z. Ullah, L. Kaczmarczyk, Perturbation-based stochastic multi-scale computational homogenization method for woven textile composites, International Journal of Solids and Structures 80 (2016) 368 – 380. [7] Z. Ullah, L. Kaczmarczyk, M. Cortis, C. J. Pearce, Multiscale modelling of the textile composite materials, in: 22nd UK Conference of the Association for Computational Mechanics in Engineering (ACME), University of Exeter, Exeter, UK, 2014, pp. 214–217. [8] Z. Ullah, L. Kaczmarczyk, C. J. Pearce, Multiscale computational homogenisation to predict the long-term durability of composite structures, in: 23rd UK Conference of the Association for Computational Mechanics in Engineering (ACME), University of Swansea, Swansea, UK, 2015, pp. 95–98. [9] Z. Ullah, L. Kaczmarczyk, C. J. Pearce, Nonlinear micro-mechanical response of the ﬁbre-reinforced polymer composites including matrix damage and ﬁbre-matrix decohesion, in: 24th UK Conference of the Association for Computational Mechanics in Engineering (ACME), University of Cardiﬀ, Cardiﬀ, UK, 2016, pp. 256–259. [10] C. González, J. LLorca, Mechanical behavior of unidirectional ﬁberreinforced polymers under transverse compression: Microscopic mechanisms and modeling, Composites Science and Technology 67 (13) (2007) 2795–2806. [11] F. Naya, C. Lopes, C. González, J. LLorca, Computational micromechanics strategies for the analysis of failure in unidirectional composites, in: P. P. Camanho, S. R. Hallett (Eds.), Numerical Modelling of Failure in Advanced  26  Composite Materials, Woodhead Publishing Series in Composites Science and Engineering, Woodhead Publishing, 2015, pp. 411 – 433. [12] J. Brockenbrough, S. Suresh, H. Wienecke, Deformation of metal-matrix composites with continuous ﬁbers: geometrical eﬀects of ﬁber distribution and shape, Acta Metallurgica et Materialia 39 (5) (1991) 735 – 752. [13] T. Vaughan, C. McCarthy, Micromechanical modelling of the transverse damage behaviour in ﬁbre reinforced composites, Composites Science and Technology 71 (3) (2011) 388 – 396. [14] T. Vaughan, C. McCarthy, A combined experimental–numerical approach for generating statistically equivalent ﬁbre distributions for high strength laminated composite materials, Composites Science and Technology 70 (2) (2010) 291 – 297. [15] G. Soni, R. Singh, M. Mitra, B. G. Falzon, Modelling matrix damage and ﬁbre-matrix interfacial decohesion in composite laminates via a multi-ﬁbre multi-layer representative volume element (M2 RVE), International Journal of Solids and Structures 51 (2) (2014) 449 – 461. [16] Digimat Users’ Manual, Version 4.2.1 (2011). [17] M. Romanowicz, A numerical approach for predicting the failure locus of ﬁber reinforced composites under combined transverse compression and axial tension, Computational Materials Science 51 (1) (2012) 7 – 12. [18] N. K. Parambil, S. Gururaja, Micromechanical damage analysis in laminated composites with randomly distributed ﬁbers, Journal of Composite Materials - (-) (2015) 1–14. [19] A. R. Melro, P. P. Camanho, F. M. A. Pires, S. T. Pinho, Micromechanical analysis of polymer composites reinforced by unidirectional ﬁbres: Part I – constitutive modelling, International Journal of Solids and Structures 50 (11–12) (2013) 1897 – 1905.  27  [20] A. R. Melro, P. P. Camanho, F. M. A. Pires, S. T. Pinho, Micromechanical analysis of polymer composites reinforced by unidirectional ﬁbres: Part II – micromechanical analyses, International Journal of Solids and Structures 50 (11–12) (2013) 1906 – 1915. [21] N. Tschoegl, Failure surfaces in principal stress space, Journal of polymer science Part C: Polymer symposia 32 (1) (1971) 239–267. [22] A. R. Melro, P. P. Camanho, S. T. Pinho, Generation of random distribution of ﬁbres in long-ﬁbre reinforced composites, Composites Science and Technology 68 (9) (2008) 2092 – 2102. [23] M. Matveev, A. Long, Numerical modelling for predicting failure in textile composites, in: P. P. Camanho, S. R. Hallett (Eds.), Numerical Modelling of Failure in Advanced Composite Materials, Woodhead Publishing Series in Composites Science and Engineering, Woodhead Publishing, 2015, pp. 435 – 455. [24] M. Kollegal, S. Chatterjee, G. Flanagan, Progressive failure analysis of plain weaves using damage mechanics based constitutive laws, International journal of damage mechanics 10 (4) (2001) 301–323. [25] M. Zako, Y. Uetsuji, T. Kurashiki, Finite element analysis of damaged woven fabric composite materials, Composites Science and Technology 63 (3– 4) (2003) 507 – 516. [26] D. Blackketter, D. Walrath, A. Hansen, Modeling damage in a plain weave fabric-reinforced composite material, Journal of Composites, Technology and Research 15 (2) (1993) 136–142. [27] D. S. Ivanov, F. Baudry, B. V. D. Broucke, S. V. Lomov, H. Xie, I. Verpoest, Failure analysis of triaxial braided composite, Composites Science and Technology 69 (9) (2009) 1372 – 1380.  28  [28] B. G. Falzon, P. Apruzzese, Numerical analysis of intralaminar failure mechanisms in composite structures. Part I: FE implementation, Composite Structures 93 (2) (2011) 1039–1046. [29] B. G. Falzon, P. Apruzzese, Numerical analysis of intralaminar failure mechanisms in composite structures. Part II: Applications, Composite Structures 93 (2) (2011) 1047–1053. [30] B. Stier, J. W. Simon, S. Reese, Comparing experimental results to a numerical meso-scale approach for woven ﬁber reinforced plastics, Composite Structures 122 (2015) 553 – 560. [31] Mesh Oriented Finite Element Method (MoFEM) Version 0.3.8, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK, http://mofem.eng.gla.ac.uk/mofem/html/ (2016). [32] J. Whitcomb, X. Tang, Micromechanics of moisture diﬀusion in composites with impermeable ﬁbers, Journal of Composite Materials 36 (9) (2002) 1093–1101. [33] T. Hobbiebrunken, M. Hojo, T. Adachi, C. De Jong, B. Fiedler, Evaluation of interfacial strength in CF/epoxies using FEM and in-situ experiments, Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing 37 (12) (2006) 2248–2256. [34] A. R. Maligno, N. A. Warrior, A. C. Long, Finite element investigations on the microstructure of ﬁbre-reinforced composites, eXPRESS Polymer Letters 2 (9) (2008) 665–676. [35] L. Kaczmarczyk, C. J. Pearce, N. Bićanić, Scale transition and enforcement of RVE boundary conditions in second-order computational homogenization, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 74 (3) (2008) 506–522. [36] CUBIT, The Geometry and Mesh Generation Toolkit, Version 13.0, Sandia National Laboratories, USA, https://cubit.sandia.gov/. 29  [37] ParaView , Open-source, multi-platform data analysis and visualization application, Version 4.4.0, http://www.paraview.org/. [38] J. Segurado, J. LLorca, A new three-dimensional interface ﬁnite element to simulate fracture in composites, International Journal of Solids and Structures 41 (11–12) (2004) 2977 – 2993. [39] B. Fiedler, M. Hojo, S. Ochiai, K. Schulte, M. Ando, Failure behavior of an epoxy matrix under diﬀerent kinds of static loading, Composites Science and Technology 61 (11) (2001) 1615 – 1624. [40] V. P. Nguyen, O. Lloberas-Valls, M. Stroeven, L. J. Sluys, On the existence of representative volumes for softening quasi-brittle materials – a failure zone averaging scheme, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 199 (45–48) (2010) 3028 – 3038. [41] I. Gitman, H. Askes, L. Sluys, Representative volume: Existence and size determination, Engineering Fracture Mechanics 74 (16) (2007) 2518 – 2534. [42] Z. P. Bazant, Can multiscale-multiphysics methods predict softening damage and structural failure?, International Journal for Multiscale Computational Engineering 8 (1) (2010) 61–67. [43] V. P. Nguyen, M. Stroeven, L. J. Sluys, Multiscale continuous and discontinuous modeling of heterogeneous materials: A review on recent developments, Journal of Multiscale Modelling 03 (04) (2011) 229–270.  30

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
