Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_6896

Abstract:
Is prioritized sweeping the better episodic control? Johanni Brea Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne CH-1015 Lausanne johanni.brea@epfl.ch  arXiv:1711.06677v1 [cs.AI] 20 Nov 2017  November 21, 2017 Abstract Episodic control has been proposed as a third approach to reinforcement learning, besides model-free and model-based control, by analogy with the three types of human memory. i.e. episodic, procedural and semantic memory. But the theoretical properties of episodic control are not well investigated. Here I show that in deterministic tree Markov decision processes, episodic control is equivalent to a form of prioritized sweeping in terms of sample efficiency as well as memory and computation demands. For general deterministic and stochastic environments, prioritized sweeping performs better even when memory and computation demands are restricted to be equal to those of episodic control. These results suggest generalizations of prioritized sweeping to partially observable environments, its combined use with function approximation and the search for possible implementations of prioritized sweeping in brains.  1  Introduction  Single experiences can drastically change subsequent decision making. Discovering a new passage in my home town, for example, may immediately affect my policy to navigate and shorten path lengths. A software developer may discover a tool that increases productivity and never go back to the old workflow. And on the level of the policy of a state, Vasco Da Gamma’s discovery of the sea route to India had an almost immediate and long-lasting effect for the Portuguese. Given the importance of such single experiences, it is not surprising that humans and some animal use an episodic(-like) memory system devoted to single experiences [1, 2]. But how exactly should episodic memory influence decision making? Lengyel and Dayan [1] proposed “episodic control”, where [..] each time the subject experiences a reward that is considered large enough (larger than expected a priori) it stores the specific sequence of state-action pairs leading up to this reward, and tries to follow such a sequence whenever it stumbles upon a state included in it. If multiple successful sequences are available for the same state, the one that yielded maximal reward is followed. This form of episodic control was found to be beneficial in the initial phase of learning for stochastic tree Markov Decision Processes (tMDP)[1] and in the domain of simple video games [3]. But it is unclear, if there are conditions under which episodic control converges to a (nearly) optimal solution and how fast it does so. An alternative way to link episodic memory to decision making is to compute Q-values at decision time based on a set of retrieved episodes using a mechanism similar to N-step backups [4]. In fact, if all episodes starting in a given state-action pair are retrieved the result is equivalent to TD-learning with N-step backups and decaying learning rates. More interesting is the case where the retrieved episodes are cleverly selected, but how this selection mechanism should work exactly, remains an open question. While speed of learning in the sense of sample efficiency is one important aspect of a learning algorithm, a second criterion is computational efficiency [1]. Without this second desideratum, the 1  canonical choice would be model-based reinforcement learning, where the agent additionally learns how its perception of the environment changes in response to actions and how reward depends on state-action pairs. Model-based reinforcement learning is well known for high sample efficiency [5]. But it is often considered to be computationally challenging. In fact, one demanding way to use the model is to perform a forward search before every decision, similar to a chess player who plans the next moves. Instead of forward search at decision time, however, one can use backward search whenever an important discovery is made. Prioritized sweeping [6, 7], implements this backward search efficiently, in particular with small backups [8]. In the words of Moore and Atkeson [6]: It is justified to complain about the indiscriminate use of combinatorial search or matrix inversion prior to each supposedly real-time decision. However, models need not be used in such an extravagant fashion. The prioritized sweeping algorithm is just one example of a class of algorithms that can easily operate in real time and also derive great power from a model. Prioritized sweeping converges to the optimal policy for arbitrary Markov Decision Processes (MDP) [8]. Furthermore, for deterministic environments or at the initial phase of learning in stochastic environments, prioritized sweeping relies in a similar way on single experiences as episodic control. In this paper I address the question of whether prioritized sweeping or episodic control are preferable in terms of sample efficiency and computational efficiency. I introduce a variant of prioritized sweeping with model reset at the end of each episode and show that it has the same computational complexity as episodic control, equivalent sample efficiency in deterministic tree Markov Decision Processes and better sample efficiency in general deterministic MDPs or stochastic MDPs. Thus, it appears as a third and promising candidate algorithm to link episodic memory to decision making.  1.1  Review of prioritized sweeping  Prioritized sweeping [6, 7, 8] is an efficient method for doing approximate full backups in reinforcement learning. A typical setting of reinforcement learning consists of an agent who observes state st , performs action at and receives reward rt at each time step t ∈ N. It is assumed that the state transitions and reward emissions are governed by a stationary stochastic process with probabilities P (st+1 = s0 |st = s, at = a) = Tsas0 and E [rt |st = s, at = a] = Rsa . The agent’s ∗ goal is to find a policy for each state s the expected future discounted hPa = π (s) that maximizes i T s reward V (s|π) = E γ rs s0 = s, π , where γ ∈ [0, 1] is a discount factor. With Q-values P∞ t s=0  Q(s, a|π) = E t=0 γ rt s0 = s, a0 = a, π , we see that the optimal policy should satisfy the Bellman equations V (s|π ∗ ) = maxa Q(s, a|π ∗ ). Dropping for notational simplicity the conditioning on the policy and using the definition of the Q-values this can be written as X Tsas0 max Q(s0 , a0 ) . (1) Q(s, a) = Rsa + γ 0 s0  a  From this equation, we see that a change in Q(s0 , a0 ) affects the values Q(s, a) of possible predecessor states s, if and only if Q(s0 , a0 ) = maxa00 Q(s0 , a00 ) before or after the change. In reinforcement learning the agent is assumed not to know the true values of the parameters Rsa and Tsas0 . The idea of prioritized sweeping is to maintain a maximum likelihood estimate of Rsa and Tsas0 and a priority queue of predecessor states to be updated next with priority given by the absolute value of the change in Q-value. The observation below Equation 1 of limited impact of Q-value changes has an important implication in the reinforcement learning setting: if an agent, who acts in a large, familiar environment, discovers a novel value for Rsa or Tsas0 , this may change the Q-values of some predecessor states of s, but generally it does not lead to a change of all Q-values. Hence, a model-based approach that recomputes all Q-values, like value iteration, is computationally inefficient in the reinforcement learning setting. Empirically it is found that a small and constant number of Q-value updates in the order of the priority queue is sufficient to learn considerably faster, i.e. requiring less interactions with the environment, than model-free methods like Q-learning or policy gradient learning, while the memory complexity is only slightly higher 2  (O(AS 2 ) in general) or equal (O(AS) for deterministic environments) [5, 8]. Prioritized sweeping is an instance of the Dyna architecture, where models, i.e. estimates of Rsa and Tsas0 , are explicitly learned through interactions with the environment and then used to update the Q-values offline, i.e. without interaction with the environment (”trying things in your head” [9, 5]). Importantly, at decision time, this form of model-based reinforcement learning has the same complexity as any model-free method that relies on learned Q-values.  2 2.1  Results Episodic control is equivalent to prioritized sweeping for deterministic tree Markov Decision Processes  For deterministic Markov decision processes with s0 = T (s, a) and rewards P (rt |st = s, at = a) = Rsa the Bellman equations reduce to  Q(s, a) = Rsa + γ max Q T (s, a), a0 ) , (2) 0 a  In tree Markov Decision Processes (c.f. Figure 1A, Figure 2A) each state has only one predecessor state and thus prioritized sweeping n o never branches during the backups. After the first episode (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) s1 , a1 , r1 , . . . , sd , ad , rd in a deterministic tMDP of depth d, the Q-values learned by prioritized sweeping are given by d   X (1) (1) (1) γ τ −t rτ(1) , Q st , at = Gt ≡  (3)  τ =t (i)  (i)  if d backup steps are performed. When in episode i at time step t a state action pair (st , at ) is reexperienced, the Q-values are updated according to   n   o (i) (i) (i) (i) (i) Q st , at ← max Q st , at , Gt . (4) This learning rule for the Q-values is identical to the episodic control rule used by Blundell et al. [3] which is a formalization of the proposition by Lengyel and Dayan [1] quoted in the introduction. For deterministic tMDPs an implementation of prioritized sweeping does not need to maintain the reward values Rsa and the transition table T (s, a) beyond the end of an episode. It has thus no influence on the performance, if the likelihood estimates of the model parameters are reset after each episode. I call this algorithm episodic control with model reset. In Figure 1 the performance curves of prioritized sweeping with model reset after each episode (orange curves, see also subsection 2.3) are perfectly covered by the ones of episodic control (red curves). With model reset, the memory requirements are identical to those of episodic control. There is also no additional cost in maintaining a priority queue since the queue will contain only one item at each moment in time: the predecessor of the currently backed up state. To see why prioritized sweeping leads to the update in Equation 4, we note that Q(s, a) will change when a novel action a∗ is chosen in the subsequent state s∗ = T (s, a) with Rs∗ a∗ > Q(s∗ , a0 ) for all a0 6= a∗ and thus maxa0 Q T (s, a), a0 ) = Rs∗ a∗ (c.f. Equation 2). This update propagates backwards along the path the agent took in this episode until the Q-value of a certain state-action pair is larger than the discounted reward. In Figure 1 we see that episodic control (red curves) performs equivalently to prioritized sweeping (solid blue curves, covered by the red curves). We assumed above that the Q-values are initialized in a way such that for all novel actions a0 , i.e. actions that were never chosen before in state s∗ , Q(s∗ , a0 ) < min Rsa . Exploration is not dramatically hampered by this choice, if novel actions are selected whenever possible. If, on the other hand, a maximally exploratory behavior is enforced with the  initialization Q(s, a) ≥ d · max Rsa , where d is the depth of the tree, then maxa0 Q T (s, a), a0 ) may decrease over time and thus prioritized sweeping performs also other updates than the ones in Equation 4. In deterministic tMDPs this leads rapidly to a full exploration of the decision tree at the cost of low rewards in the initial phase of learning (Figure 1 dashed blue curves). Only bootstrapping 3  A s1 a2  a1 s2  s3 a1  s5  s7  s8  s9  s11  0.0 50 75 100 time step ×200  s12  s13  with intermittent rewards normalized reward rate  0.5  Monte Carlo Q - learning P. S. with expl.  s10 C  1.0  25  s4  a2 a3  only terminal rewards normalized reward rate  B  s6  a3  n-step TD Q with expl. P. S. with reset  1.0  0.5  0.0 25  50 75 100 time step ×200  Q-λ Priorit. Sweep. Episodic Control  Figure 1: Deterministic tree Markov Decisions Processes A Example of a deterministic tMDP of depth 2 with 3 actions, initial state s1 and terminal states s5 , . . . , s13 , where an agent starts each episode in state s1 , chooses an action, e.g. a2 and observes a new state, e.g. s3 = T (s1 , a2 ) and potentially reward in [0, 1]. B Episodic control (red) completely covers the curves for prioritized sweeping (blue) and prioritized sweeping with model resets (orange), indicating that they perform equally well on deterministic tMDPs with 4 actions, depth 5 and reward only in terminal states. N-step TD (dark blue) covers the curve for Monte Carlo learning (black), as they are up to the learning rate schedule equivalent in this case; being on-policy methods, they perform slightly worse. Because the Q-learner (green) bootstraps only when re-experiencing a given state-action pair, it learns slower, even with eligibility traces (Q-λ, yellow). Methods with a strong exploration bias caused by large initial Q-values (”optimistic initialization”, dashed curves) sacrifice initial reward for optimal exploitation at a later stage of learning. C With intermittent rewards the differences between the algorithms almost vanish, except for the ones with a strong exploration bias. See subsection 2.3 for details.  4  B normalized reward rate  A s1 a1 s2 a1 s5  a2 s6  s7  a2 s3  s4  .. .  .. .  1.0  0.5  0.0  a Monte Carlo Q - learning P. S. with expl.  n-step TD Q with expl. P. S. with reset  20  40 60 time step  80 100 ×100  Q-λ Priorit. Sweep. Episodic Control  Figure 2: Stochastic tMDPs. A Example of a stochastic tree MDP with depth 2, 2 actions and branching factor 3. The thickness of the arrow indicates the relative probability of transitioning to the subsequent state when choosing a given action, e.g. Ts1 a2 s2 > Ts1 a2 s4 . Rewards are in [0, 1]. B Learning curves for a stochastic tMDP with depth 4, 4 actions and branching factor 2. See subsection 2.3 for details. methods, like Q-learning or prioritized sweeping, can be forced to aggressive exploration with large initial values. Episodic control is not of this type; the max operation in Equation 4 would just keep the Q-values constant at the large initialization value.  2.2  Prioritized sweeping with model reset outperforms episodic control in general environments  For optimal performance in stochastic (t)MDPs or in deterministic MDPs without tree structure, prioritized sweeping needs to store the reward values and the transition table. This means, full prioritized sweeping requires more memory and computation than episodic control. However, an interesting competitor of episodic control in terms of memory and computation requirements is a learner that resets the model after each episode but uses prioritized sweeping for the backups. If the episodes are long enough, such that the learned model for each episode has not just tree structure, this learner may still have an advantage over episodic control. In stochastic environments there needs to be some averaging somewhere, e.g. explicitly averaging over episodes in Monte Carlo control, choosing a small learning rate in Q-learning or maintaining a maximum likelihood estimate of Rsa and Tsas0 in prioritized sweeping. As already observed by Lengyel & Dayan [1], algorithms that do not properly average, like episodic control or prioritized sweeping with model reset, may perform well at the initial phase of learning but they lead quickly to suboptimal performance (c.f. Figure 2B, red and orange curve). While I do not see a clear theoretical advantage of prioritized sweeping with model reset over episodic control in such environments, it still performs slightly better in stochastic tMDPs (see Figure 2B, orange above red curve), but overall clearly worse than normal prioritized sweeping. In deterministic environments without tree structure, states can have multiple predecessor states. In this case, prioritized sweeping also performs backups along ”virtually composed” episodes, i.e. episodes that were in their entirety not yet experienced, but whose possibility is known to the agent from experiencing episodes with shared states. This is similar to crossroad where the origin of some roads is known, or the example with the uncharted passage in the introduction. The deterministic maze environment in Figure 3A is of this type: with prioritized sweeping (blue curves) the agent learns rapidly to navigate from any starting position to the goal (red square), even if the model is reset after each episode (orange curves). Episodic control does not branch during the backups. While it performs well initially (red curves), it even gets quickly outperformed by the model-free Q-learner with exploration bias (dashed green curves). 5  B normalized reward rate  A  1.0  0.5  0.0 20  n-step TD Q with expl. P. S. with reset  Monte Carlo Q - learning P. S. with expl.  40 60 time step  80 100 ×10,000  Q-λ Priorit. Sweep. Episodic Control  Figure 3: Deterministic maze. A Example of a deterministic maze with random initial conditions (blue square) and one goal state (red square). The gray lines indicate walls. The agent moves around by choosing the actions up, down, left and right. If an action would move the agent into a wall, it stays at the current position. There are usually multiple paths that lead from start to goal. The reward is 1 for reaching the goal, 0 otherwise. B Prioritized sweeping with model reset (orange curves) performs nearly optimally, while episodic control is rapidly outperformed even by Q-learning with exploration bias. See subsection 2.3 for details. environment det tMDP Fig. 1 stoch tMDP Fig. 2 maze Fig. 3  γ 1.0 1.0 0.99  shared parameters  T N 0.1 0.1 0.1  200 100 104  100 100 50  M  n-step TD α n  5 50 2  0.08 0.05 0.01  5 5 50  Q-λ α λ 1.0 0.1 0.005  0.2 0.2 0.2  Q - learning α 1.0 0.1 1.0  with expl. QQ QP.S 0 0 5.0 5.0 5.0  5.0 5.0 0.005  Table 1: Simulation parameters. Discount factor γ, probability to choose non-optimal action , duration of window to estimate reward rate T , number of sampled MDPs N , number of trials per P.S MDP M , learning rates α, initial Q-values for Q-learning and prioritized sweeping QQ 0 and Q0 , respectively.  2.3  Simulation details  In all simulations the reward rate is measured as the mean reward obtained with an -greedy policy in adjacent windows of T time steps. The normalized reward rate is obtained by an affine transformation of the reward rate such that 0 corresponds to the value of the uniform random policy and 1 corresponds to the policy with the optimal Q-values (obtained by policy iteration) and the same -greedy action selection. In all figures, the thick curves are obtained by running M simulations with different random seeds on N samples of the MDP in question and averaging the results. The thin curves are 5 random samples of the N · M simulations. The small backups implementation of prioritized sweeping [8] was used with 3 backups per time step. In the variant of prioritized sweeping with model reset (P.S. with reset), no backups were performed until the end of the episode, at which point d backups are performed, where d is the length of the episode. This is the same number of backups as in episodic control (c.f. Equation 4). After the end of each episode all transition counts and observed rewards are reset to the initial value in prioritized sweeping with reset. The parameters of the other algorithms were chosen after a short search in the parameter space and are probably close to but not exactly optimal for Q - learning in stochastic tMDPs, n-step TD and Q - λ in all environments. See Table 1 for the parameter choices. The code is available at http://github.com/jbrea/episodiccontrol.  6  3  Discussion  Prioritized sweeping allows to learn efficiently from a small number of experiences. In deterministic environments the demands on memory and computation are low and they are expected to increase gracefully with increasing stochasticity. Episodic control is equivalent to prioritized sweeping in the case of deterministic tree Markov Decision Processes, because in this case it is not necessary to maintain a model beyond one episode. The observation that episodic control performs surprisingly well in the initial phase of some Atari games [3] may be a hint that these games are close to deterministic tree Markov Decision Processes. I suggested model reset after the end of each episode. While this is a rather ruthless form of forgetting, the observation show that it is still possible to learn fairly well in the maze task. Future work will be needed to explore more elaborate forgetting heuristics that allow to keep the memory load low while preserving high performance. It should be noted that prioritized sweeping with a limited number of backups per time step is not necessarily the most sample efficient way to learn: in large environments with a lot to learn the priority queue may become longer and longer. In this case it may be better to set an upper bound to the length of the priority queue and, whenever the agent has sufficient computational resources, the model can be used to do Monte Carlo tree search to refine action selection at decision time. I think it is an interesting question how to optimally combine such forward and backward search and whether biological agents make use of such a combination. The current formulation of prioritized sweeping requires a tabular environment, i.e. a representation of states by integer numbers, and its superiority to episodic control in deterministic environments becomes only evident in a Markovian setting where states have multiple predecessors. However, tabular environments contrast with the natural continuity of space and sensor values encountered by biological agents and robots. Additionally, the sensory input may contain details that are irrelevant to the task at hand, e.g. the pedestrians I encounter every time I walk by the same place in my home town, which are irrelevant to my task of walking from A to B. Also, in many tasks the state is not fully observable and state aliasing may occur, i.e. different states have the same observation and can only be distinguished by taking the history of the agent into account. This raises the question: how can we find functions that map the sensory input to a representation useful for prioritized sweeping? Unfortunately, prioritized sweeping does not immediately lend itself to function approximation, in contrast to model-free learning methods like episodic control, Q-learning or policy gradient learning [5]. But an interesting approach could be to learn a function that maps the high dimensional sensory input to a discrete representation, either using unsupervised learning, e.g. a variational autoencoder [10], or using also reward information to shape the map in a similar spirit as the neural episodic control model [11]. It remains to be seen, however, if this is more efficient than e.g. prioritized experience replay [12]. How can we generalize prioritized sweeping to partially observable environments? There does not seem to be an obvious answer to this question, but memories of sequences that lead to reward together with a mechanism to attach converging sequences could allow to go beyond updating single sequences as in episodic control but rather make use of branching during backups as in prioritized sweeping. It is an open question whether this can be made to perform better than the average over smartly selected episodes proposed by Gershman and Daw [4]. Prioritized sweeping relies on learning the model of the environment, i.e. the reward table and the transition table. This may look like far from anything we think of episodic memory. But in regions of the transition table with few branching states, but many chains of (s, a, s0 )-triplets that are experienced only once, replaying such chains is like recalling an episode from episodic memory. With increasing experience, it may become impossible to identify all the episodes that contributed to the transition table. This may lead to a gradual shift from episodic memory to semantic memory. Is prioritized sweeping occurring in brains? The reverse replay of navigation episodes observed in the hippocampus of rats [13] can be seen as a signature of both episodic control and prioritized sweeping. But the observation of ”never-experienced novel-path sequences” in hippocampal sharp wave ripples of rats [14] is a feature of prioritized sweeping only. At least on a sufficiently abstract level, many tasks solved by humans seem to be tabular and  7  fairly deterministic and it is in this setting where prioritized sweeping excels. This lead me to the question, if prioritized sweeping is the better episodic control. If the defining characteristics of episodic control is sample efficient learning with moderate memory and computation footprint, I would argue, the answer is yes.  4  Acknowledgements  I thank Vasiliki Liakoni, Marco Lehmann, Dane Corneil and Wulfram Gerstner for helpful discussions and critical feedback on earlier versions of the manuscript. This research was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation, grant 200020 165538.  References [1] Máté Lengyel and Peter Dayan. Hippocampal contributions to control: The third way. In J. C. Platt, D. Koller, Y. Singer, and S. T. Roweis, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 20, pages 889–896. Curran Associates, Inc., 2008. [2] Nicola S. Clayton, Lucie H. Salwiczek, and Anthony Dickinson. Episodic memory. Current Biology, 17(6):R189–R191, Mar 2007. [3] C. Blundell, B. Uria, A. Pritzel, Y. Li, A. Ruderman, J. Z Leibo, J. Rae, D. Wierstra, and D. Hassabis. Model-Free Episodic Control. ArXiv e-prints, June 2016, 1606.04460. [4] Samuel J. Gershman and Nathaniel D. Daw. Reinforcement learning and episodic memory in humans and animals: An integrative framework. Annual Review of Psychology, 68(1):101–128, Jan 2017. [5] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2017. [6] Andrew W. Moore and Christopher G. Atkeson. Prioritized sweeping: Reinforcement learning with less data and less time. Machine Learning, 13(1):103–130, Oct 1993. [7] Jing Peng and R. J. Williams. Efficient learning and planning within the dyna framework. Adaptive Behavior, 1(4):437–454, Mar 1993. [8] Harm Van Seijen and Rich Sutton. Planning by prioritized sweeping with small backups. In Sanjoy Dasgupta and David McAllester, editors, Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 28 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 361–369, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 17–19 Jun 2013. PMLR. [9] Richard S. Sutton. Dyna, an integrated architecture for learning, planning, and reacting. ACM SIGART Bulletin, 2(4):160–163, Jul 1991. [10] C. J. Maddison, A. Mnih, and Y. Whye Teh. The Concrete Distribution: A Continuous Relaxation of Discrete Random Variables. ArXiv e-prints, November 2016, 1611.00712. [11] A. Pritzel, B. Uria, S. Srinivasan, A. Puigdomènech, O. Vinyals, D. Hassabis, D. Wierstra, and C. Blundell. Neural Episodic Control. ArXiv e-prints, March 2017, 1703.01988. [12] T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou, and D. Silver. Prioritized Experience Replay. ArXiv e-prints, November 2015, 1511.05952. [13] David J. Foster and Matthew A. Wilson. Reverse replay of behavioural sequences in hippocampal place cells during the awake state. Nature, 440(7084):680–683, Feb 2006. [14] Anoopum S. Gupta, Matthijs A.A. van der Meer, David S. Touretzky, and A. David Redish. Hippocampal replay is not a simple function of experience. Neuron, 65(5):695–705, Mar 2010.  8

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
