Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_6600

Abstract:
The Dafny Integrated Development Environment K. Rustan M. Leino  Valentin Wüstholz  Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA  ETH Zurich, Department of Computer Science, Switzerland  leino@microsoft.com  valentin.wuestholz@inf.ethz.ch  In recent years, program verifiers and interactive theorem provers have become more powerful and more suitable for verifying large programs or proofs. This has demonstrated the need for improving the user experience of these tools to increase productivity and to make them more accessible to nonexperts. This paper presents an integrated development environment for Dafny—a programming language, verifier, and proof assistant—that addresses issues present in most state-of-the-art verifiers: low responsiveness and lack of support for understanding non-obvious verification failures. The paper demonstrates several new features that move the state-of-the-art closer towards a verification environment that can provide verification feedback as the user types and can present more helpful information about the program or failed verifications in a demand-driven and unobtrusive way.  0  Introduction  Program verifiers and proof assistants integrate three major subsystems. At the foundation of the tool lies the logic it uses, for example a Hoare-style program logic or a logic centered around type theory. On top of the logic sits some mechanism for automation, such as a set of cooperating decision procedures or some proof search strategies (e.g., programmable tactics). The logic and automation subsystems affect how a user interacts with the verification system, as is directly evident in the tool’s input language. The third subsystem is the tool’s integrated development environment (IDE), which in a variety of ways tries to reduce the effort required by the user to understand and make use of the proof system. In this paper, we present the IDE for the program verifier Dafny [15, 13]. The IDE is an extension of Microsoft Visual Studio (VS). It goes beyond what has been done in previous IDEs (for Dafny and other verification systems) in several substantial ways. continuous processing The IDE runs the program verifier in the background, thus providing designtime feedback. The user does not need to reach for a “Verify now” button. Design-time feedback is common in many tools. For example, the spell checker in Microsoft Word is always on in this way. Anyone who remembers from the 1980s having to invoke the spell checker explicitly knows what a difference this can make in how we think about the interaction with the tool; the burden of having to go through separate spelling sessions was transformed into the interaction process that is hardly noticeable. Parsing and type checking in many programming-language IDEs is done this way, enabling completion and other kinds of IntelliSense context-sensitive editing and documentation assistance. The Spec# verifier was the first to integrate design-time feedback for a verifier [0]. The jEdit editor for Isabelle [23] also provides continuous processing in the background by running both a proof search and the Nitpick [2] checker which searches for counterexamples to the proof goal. non-linear editing The text buffer can be edited anywhere, just like in usual programming-language editors. Any change in the buffer will cause the verifier to reconsider proof obligations anywhere Dubois C., Giannakopoulou D., Méry D. (Eds): Formal Integrated Development Environment 2014 (F-IDE 2014) EPTCS 149, 2014, pp. 3–15, doi:10.4204/EPTCS.149.2  c K.R.M. Leino, V. Wüstholz  4  The Dafny IDE in the buffer. (Since the Dafny language is insensitive to the order of declarations, the proof obligations that have to be reconsidered can occur both earlier and later in the buffer.) Although such non-linear editing seems obvious, it is worth noting that it is in stark contrast to common theorem prover IDEs like ProofGeneral 0 and CoqIde 1 , where the user manually moves a high water mark in the buffer—anything preceding this mark in the buffer has already been processed by the system and is locked down to prevent editing, and anything following the mark has not been processed and can be freely edited.  multi-threading The Dafny IDE makes more aggressive and informed use of available multi-threaded hardware. The number of concurrent threads used is adjusted dynamically, depending on what the verification tasks at hand are able to saturate. Although conceptually an obvious thing to do, the Dafny tool chain previously lacked the features to run separate verification tasks in parallel. The use of multiple threads is especially noticeable when a file is just opened in the editor, since caches are cold at that time and everything needs to be verified. The Isabelle/jEdit editor [23, 22] comes with support for multi-threading, which is motivated by the fact that it also supports non-linear editing and therefore offers more opportunities to parallelize verification tasks. The SPARK 2014 toolset [7] also supports multi-threading, both in its translation from SPARK into the intermediate verification language Why3 and in the Why3 processing itself. dependency analysis and caching The Dafny IDE caches verification results along with computed dependencies of what is being verified. Before starting a new verification task, the system first consults the cache. This feature makes the tool more responsive and reduces the user’s wait times. Our users have found this to be the most useful of our features for making the interaction between user and system more effective. It is also what makes continuous processing desirable for large files. When a user gets stuck during a verification attempt, a typical response is to try many little input variations that might explain or remove the obstacle at hand. It is during these times that the user needs the tool the most, so supporting fluid interactions at this time is of utmost importance. There has been a lot of work on caching, modifying, and replaying proofs for interactive proof assistants. For proofs performed by SMT solvers, Grigore and Moskal worked on these things in the context of ESC/Java2 [10]. showing information Commonly, a verification system can supply various associated declarations automatically. For example, common induction schemes may be constructed by default, some types and loop invariants may be inferred, and syntactic shorthands can reduce clutter in the program text. Sometimes, a user may find it necessary to inspect this information. The Dafny IDE attempts to make this information available via hover text—when the user hovers the mouse cursor over a part of the program text, say, an identifier, any additional information about that identifier is displayed. This makes the information easily accessible to users, but is at the same time not cluttering up the view of the program text. Note that in console-based interactive tools, for example like ACL2 [11], the unobtrusive nature of information in hover text is difficult to achieve. Such a tool has to either provide a set of commands that can be used to query information gathered by the tool or optimistically spill out a stream of 0 http://proofgeneral.inf.ed.ac.uk 1 http://coq.inria.fr  K.R.M. Leino, V. Wüstholz  5  information to the console window in the off-chance that a user wants to see some part of that information. An important consequence of making additional information easily accessible to the user is that it gives the verification system greater freedom in what can be computed automatically. Users no longer need to fully understand the creative and elaborate schemes employed to compute this information, because whatever is computed can be viewed by the user, if needed. This feature is also common in programming-language IDEs, where inferred types or fully qualified identifier names are displayed as hover text. The Dafny IDE takes this a step further, showing information such as default termination measures, specifications of implicit methods (such as those generated for iterators), which calls are classified as co-recursive, and code inherited by Dafny’s “. . .” construct from a refined module. integrated debugging Verification error messages can have a lot of associated information, some of which can be useful to users. Previously, the Dafny IDE would highlight, directly in the IDE editor, the error trace leading to a reported error. SPARK 2014 also does this, for example. To get information about the possible values of variables for the reported error, a Dafny user can use the Boogie Verification Debugger (BVD) [9], which presents this information in a format akin to that provided in modern source-level debuggers. We have done a deep integration of BVD into the Dafny IDE. Previously, BVD was accessible for Dafny only as a standalone tool, which meant the user manually had to correlate the source lines reported by BVD with the text buffer containing the program in the IDE. The program verifier VCC [4] integrates BVD into its Visual Studio IDE. The Dafny IDE now goes further, for example letting the user select which program state to inspect by clicking in the program text itself. It also uses hover text to present values of variables in the selected state. OpenJML [5, 6] also presents error information in this way, letting users inspect values of any subexpression and letting the source code location of the expressions hovered over determine which execution state is used to look up the value to be displayed. As an alternative to running Dafny in Visual Studio, Dafny can also be run from within a web browser (http://rise4fun.com/dafny) and from the command line. However, the bulk of the features we mention in this paper are available only in the Visual Studio IDE extension. Dafny, including its IDE, is available as open source from http://dafny.codeplex.com/.  1  Tool Architecture  Before presenting the new tool architecture, we will give an overview of the underlying components and the tool architecture that was used in the past (see Fig. 0); it is similar to the architecture of other verification tools that are built on top of the Boogie verification engine [0], such as Spec# [1] and VCC [4]. As the user is editing the program, the VS extension continuously sends snapshots of the program to the underlying Dafny verifier, which encodes the correctness proof obligations as a translation into Boogie. Boogie is an intermediate language [19] for program verification (similar to Why3 [8]). Boogie programs typically consist of several top-level declarations (e.g., axioms, variables, procedures) that are used to formalize programs in a higher-level language, such as Dafny. For instance, each Dafny method is translated to a Boogie procedure implementation that captures the well-definedness conditions of the method’s specification, a Boogie procedure specification that captures the method specification to be used by callers, and a Boogie procedure implementation that captures the method body and checks that it  6  The Dafny IDE Initial tool architecture  Current tool architecture  VS extension  VS extension  Dafny  Dafny  Boogie  Boogie  Z3  Z3  ...  Z3  BVD  ...  Z3  Figure 0: Comparison of initial and current tool architecture. Arrows indicate data that is passed from one component to another, where dashed arrows indicate that data is transferred asynchronously. Less thick, red arrows indicate error information (including counterexamples for BVD in the current architecture) that is returned. satisfies the method specification [14]. Similarly, each Dafny function is translated to a Boogie function and a Boogie procedure implementation that captures the corresponding well-definedness conditions. The resulting Boogie program is sent to the Boogie verifier, which generates verification conditions for each Boogie implementation to discharge them using an automatic reasoning engine, typically the SMTsolver Z3 [20]. Verification errors that are revealed during this process are propagated up to the VS extension, which displays them to the user. This architecture gives rise to a pleasant and highly responsive user interaction for small programs, but does not scale well to larger programs that consist of many methods and functions. Since the requests to the underlying solver can easily be parallelized, we have extended the Boogie verification engine to make use of separate tasks for verifying Boogie implementations in parallel (using the .N ET Task Parallel Library). Each task may discharge its verification conditions using one or more solver instances that are managed in a dynamically allocated pool of solvers. To take full advantage of this architectural change, we made the propagation of verification errors to the user fully asynchronous (see dashed arrows in Fig. 0). This lets error messages show up as soon as the corresponding verification condition has been processed by the solver. (Previously, Boogie only made use of multi-threading in one place, namely in its mode for verification-condition splitting [18]. We have preserved that functionality and integrated it into the new task-based architecture.) The Visual Studio extension for Dafny gets notified anytime there is a new snapshot, that is, anytime the text buffer changes. Upon each such change, the extension recomputes syntax highlighting, which is done through a simple lexical scan (that is, the parser is not invoked and no abstract syntax tree is built). After 0.5 seconds of inactivity, the Dafny IDE invokes the Dafny parser, resolver, and type checker on the current buffer snapshot. If the snapshot passes these phases without error, the additional information computed during these phases (e.g., which calls are co-recursive) is made available to the user in hover text. Also, the snapshot is then asynchronously sent to the Dafny verifier, unless the verifier is already running on a previous snapshot. As verification errors are reported by the asynchronously running verifier, they are displayed in the IDE. Once a snapshot has been fully processed by the verifier, a new verification task is started for the current snapshot, unless that is the snapshot that was just verified. A constant question that users would have about Dafny’s previous IDE was, “Is the verifier done yet?”. To give the user a sense of the processing that is taking place in the background, the new Dafny  K.R.M. Leino, V. Wüstholz  7  Figure 1: Progress indication via colors in the margins. The three program snapshots of the buffer are shown in chronological order (from left to right). The dark-orange margin in the middle snapshot indicates that changes have not yet been sent to the prover, while the purple margin in the right snapshot indicates that the verifier has started processing this snapshot. IDE uses colors in the margin (see Figure 1). A dark-orange color in the margin shows a line that has been edited in a snapshot that has not yet been sent to the verifier, and a violet color in the margin shows a line that has been edited in a snapshot that is currently being processed by the verifier. We also changed the tool architecture to integrate the Boogie Verification Debugger (BVD) [9] directly. Under this change, which is independent of the parallelization, the solver is asked to include the counterexample information needed by BVD with each verification error.  2  On-demand Re-verification  Caching is a popular technique for improving the responsiveness of systems that would need to repeatedly perform expensive computations whose output is a function of the given input. Since in a modular verification approach different entities of a program (e.g., modules, classes, or—as in Dafny—methods and functions) are verified in isolation, changes to one program entity usually invalidate only a small fraction of the verification results previously obtained for other program entities. More specifically, one can safely avoid re-verification of an entity by caching previously computed verification results, except when the user has changed some other program entity on which it depends. This optimization is crucial in providing rapid feedback when the program is larger than just a handful of entities. Our technique for avoiding re-verification of methods and functions in Dafny deals with two core issues: 0) detecting changes to program entities and 1) tracking dependencies between different program entities to determine what needs to be re-verified. To solve the first issue, we extended Dafny to compute an entity checksum for each function, each method, and the specification (e.g., pre- and postconditions) of each method. This checksum is insensitive to various minor changes of the specific program text, because it is computed based on the Dafny abstract syntax tree. For instance, the checksum of a method does not change if a comment is edited by the user. To deal with the second issue, these entity checksums are used to track dependencies by computing dependency checksums for each program entity (function, method, or method specification) based on its own entity checksum and the dependency checksums of other entities on which it depends directly (e.g., methods it calls). This lets us compare the dependency checksum of a given entity for the current program snapshot with the one stored in our verification result cache to determine if it needs to be re-verified. In our implementation, we chose to compute the dependency checksums at the level of Boogie entities, thus making this feature available to other verifiers that target Boogie. To set an entity checksum, a Boogie client (here, Dafny) tags the entity with a particular custom attribute—a general mechanism supported by Boogie for attaching directives to declarations—and gives the checksum as an integer argument to this attribute.  8  The Dafny IDE Snapshot 1  Snapshot 0 method Foo() ensures P();  method Foo() ensures P();  Snapshot 2 method Foo() ensures P();  { }  { }  { }  method Bar() { }  method Bar() { Foo(); }  method Bar() { Foo(); }  function P(): bool { true }  function P(): bool { true }  function P(): bool { false }  Figure 2: Example of on-demand re-verification. The three program snapshots are ordered chronologically (i.e., snapshot 0 is the initial program and snapshot 2 is the final program) and changes between snapshots are underlined. All entities in snapshot 0 need to be verified, while for snapshot 1 only method Bar needs to be re-verified. Finally, for snapshot 2 all entities need to be re-verified since all of them depend directly or indirectly on the modified function P. Figure 2 illustrates how our technique works on a concrete verification session that consists of three program snapshot, which are sent to the prover in chronological order (i.e., snapshot 0 is the initial program and snapshot 2 is the final program). All entities of the initial program snapshot need to be verified, since nothing has been cached yet. For snapshot 1, only method Bar needs to be re-verified: the corresponding Boogie implementations (for checking the correctness and well-definedness of the method body) are tagged with an entity checksum that is different from the one in the cache, but the entity checksum of the corresponding Boogie procedure (for capturing the method specification) stays the same. For snapshot 2, all entities need to be re-verified: the entity checksum of the Boogie function that corresponds to the Dafny function P changes with respect to the previous snapshot, which affects the dependency checksums of all remaining Boogie implementations. One interesting application of this technique has to do with prioritizing the program entities that are being verified. Ideally, we want to prioritize entities that are more directly affected by the latest change to the program text, because that is where the user is likely to want to see the effect of the re-verification first. To do that, we assign different levels of priority to an entity based on its current checksums and the ones stored in the verification result cache: 0) low (current entity checksum is identical to the one in the cache, but the dependency checksum is different; entity was unchanged, but some dependency was changed), 1) medium (current entity checksum is different from the one in the cache; i.e., entity was changed directly), 2) high (no cache entry found; i.e., entity was added recently), and 3) highest (current dependency checksum of the entity is identical to the one in the cache). This prioritization scheme is motivated by the observation that users usually prefer to get rapid feedback regarding the entities that were recently added or changed directly. Note that we assign the highest priority to entities that were not affected by the change at all, since displaying the corresponding verification results only requires a simple cache lookup and we want to minimize the time during which the corresponding errors are not displayed to the user. This prioritization scheme could be extended easily to support more fine-grained priority levels. Other verification systems have also used forms of checksums and dependencies in order to reduce the need to construct new proofs. In the heterogeneous Why3 system, both the construction and verification of proof obligations can be parameterized by different transformations and different solvers. To maintain proofs as much as possible when any subsystem changes, or if the program under scrutiny changes, Why3 uses a scheme of proof sessions and goal shapes for tracking dependencies [3]. This has  K.R.M. Leino, V. Wüstholz  9  let more than 100 program proofs be automatically maintained over a period of more than two years. For Dafny, we have focused on reducing turnaround time for the user, rather than trying to be robust against changes in components of Dafny itself. Still, perhaps Dafny could benefit from proof sessions and goal shapes as we, in the future, move to tracking finer-grain dependencies. Change management is also important in interactive proof assistants where large parts of proofs are authored by users. Work on such change management has been done, for example, in the context of KIV [21] and KeY [12].  3 3.0  User Interaction Computed Information as Hover Text  A verification system typically computes various properties that determine how verification conditions are formulated. For example, Dafny uses heuristics to determine automatically generated induction hypotheses [16]. Sometimes, it can be unclear to the user which properties were computed. For instance, Dafny uses some rules that determine if a function self-call is recursive or co-recursive; a user who does not know the precise rules may want to find out which calls have been determined to be co-recursive. We devised a simple mechanism by which the Dafny resolver and type checker can associate any information with any AST node. When Dafny is running in the IDE, this information then gets displayed as hover text for the region in the text buffer that corresponds to the respective AST node. We use this mechanism to display the type and kinds of variables (e.g., “(ghost local variable) x: List h int i” or “(destructor) List.head: T”), the default decreases clauses for methods and functions [15], the automatically generated conclusions of forall statements, which methods are tail recursive, which function calls are co-recursive, the expansion of the syntactic sugar for calls to prefix predicates and prefix methods [17], the class expansion of iterators, and code inherited from a refined module through Dafny’s “. . .” construct.  3.1  Error Reporting  When a verification attempt is not going through, a user has to debug the cause. For example, the executable program may be wrong, the specifications may be wrong, the given proof of a lemma may be incorrect, more information may be needed to make the proof go through, or the problem could be caused by some incompleteness of the SMT solver. One way to debug such a situation is to ask the verifier questions like “does the following condition hold here?” (which is done by adding an assert statement in the program text) and “can the proof goal be met under this additional assumption?” (which is done by temporarily adding an assume statement in the program text). This kind of interactive dialog with the verifier is supported well in the Dafny IDE, because the caching (and sometimes parallelization) makes the interaction swift and fluid. It is also possible to obtain more information about the failing situation. This is done by exploring the counterexample produced by the solver. The Boogie Verification Debugger (BVD), via a Dafny plugin, makes this counterexample intelligible at the source context [9]. BVD was previously available for Dafny only as a standalone tool, but we have now integrated it directly in the IDE. Let us describe our interface to BVD. When an attempted verification fails, like the postcondition violation shown in Fig. 3, a red dot (and a red squiggly line) indicate the return path along which the error is reported. The error pane at the bottom of the screen shows the error message, which also appears  10  The Dafny IDE  as hover text for the squiggly line. The error pane also lists source locations related to the error, in this case showing the particular postcondition that could not be verified. By clicking on a red dot, the Dafny IDE will display more information related to that error, resulting in the screen shown in Fig. 4. The blue dots that now appear in the program text trace the control path from the start of the enclosing routine and leading to the error. There is state information associated with each blue dot and the user can click on a blue dot to select a particular state (by default, the last state is selected, which is the state in which the error was detected). In addition to the blue dots, BVD is brought up in a pane to the right. BVD shows the variables in scope, in a familiar debugger-like fashion, but with two conspicuous differences: some of the values shown are underspecified (the names of these values begin with an apostrophe, like ’7 and ’8; distinct names refer to distinct values), and some values are not shown at all, because they are not relevant to the counterexample (like all of the array elements of a, except the one at index 2804). The “Value” column in the BVD pane shows values in the currently selected state, whereas the “Previous” column shows the values in the previously selected state. This gives a simple way to compare the values in two states. In the example in the figure, we had first had the error state selected and then selected the state one line earlier. Finally, the figure illustrates how values for variables of primitive types (in the currently selected state) are also displayed as hover text. What all of this tells us for the example is that the postcondition cannot be verified when the bound variable i in the postcondition is 2804. That index of the array is set by the assignment to a[end], but is then changed (from ’7 to ’8) in the next line where a recursive call to Fill is made. Some thinking then reveals that the cause of the verification error is that the postcondition of Fill is too weak. We can fix the problem by adding a postcondition about the array indices between 0 and start, in particular by saying that Fill leaves those array elements unchanged: ensures  ∀ i • 0 ≤ i < start =⇒ a[i] = old(a[i]);  By simply typing in this extra postcondition and then waiting a split second, the error goes away.  4  Experience  Figure 5 shows some preliminary performance numbers, comparing for some long-running verification tasks the effect of using one solver versus three solvers. Two of the four programs (ParallelBuilds.dfy and LnSystemF.dfy) were developed by users of our tool, whereas the two other programs contain solutions to several verification challenges from two different verification competitions. As a proof that the cache is very important (actually, even more important than parallelization) for enabling a highly responsive user interaction, we measured the performance improvements gained by using the cache. We considered 5 “versions” of two long-running verification tasks. The 5 versions are 5 copies of the same program, but randomly changing one of the checksums, as if a user had edited the program. Figure 6 gives the results, which show that using the cache allows the 5 versions to be verified in a total time that is a small increment over verifying the program once. We did not perform these measurements for the two other programs (VSComp2010.dfy and VSTTE2012.dfy), since they contain collections of independent programs, which might not be a representative use case. The largest single project using Dafny is the Ironclad project in the systems and security research groups at Microsoft Research, which currently comprises about 30,000 lines of Dafny specifications, code, and proofs. The current Dafny IDE has benefited from feedback from the Ironclad team.  K.R.M. Leino, V. Wüstholz  11  Figure 3: A screenshot of the Dafny IDE. The verification error is displayed in the text buffer as a red dot, which can be selected to obtain more information.  Figure 4: A screenshot showing additional information obtained by selecting an error (red dot). The blue dots show the program states along the control path leading to the error, and the BVD pane to the right shows values of variables in the selected state of the selected error.  12  The Dafny IDE Program ParallelBuilds.dfy LnSystemF.dfy VSComp2010.dfy VSTTE2012.dfy  LOC 1 solver instance 3 solver instances 881 572 269 1736 354 109 536 34 26 1063 110 71  Figure 5: Preliminary performance numbers showing the effect of parallelization. Times are in seconds. Program  3 solver instances (5 runs) 3 solver instances (5 snapshots) 510 (5 ∗ 102) 123 ParallelBuilds.dfy 1345 (5 ∗ 269) 311 LnSystemF.dfy  Figure 6: Comparison of verifying five versions of two programs with (third column) and without (second column) using the cache. Times are in seconds.  5  Conclusions and Future Work  The Dafny IDE represents a new generation of interaction between user and verification system. We have built dependency analysis, caching, and concurrent verification into the design-time feedback loop to make re-verification responsive with minimal user effort. We have provided a deeper integration of the Boogie Verification Debugger, whereby it both displays information in the program text and can be controlled directly from within the program text. And using hover text, we have given easy access to computed information without cluttering up the user display. The new IDE provides many significant improvements. It has also let us discover a number of areas where the user interaction can be improved further. We will mention a number of them here. The most pressing problem is what to do with verification tasks that require a long time. At the moment, our IDE performs all verification on a per-method (or per-function) basis. When a method is long and difficult, we often wish for breaking up the verification task into smaller pieces. Boogie has some facilities for verification-condition (VC) splitting [18] and selective checking, but our Dafny IDE is currently not taking advantage of these. We would like to dynamically adjust the parameters of VC splitting and selective checking based on previous verification attempts, and we would like to fit this into a finer granularity of caching. An important special case is where the verifier runs out of time. Subjectively, we find that time-outs occur in some part of any larger proof attempt, especially those that involve large recursive functions or non-linear arithmetic, while the user is working on getting the verification through. That is, timeouts are often a symptom of missing proof ingredients, and good performance tends to be restored once the necessary ingredients have been supplied by the user. Time-outs during this time are bad, since they are on the user’s time. We set the solver time-out to 10 seconds. We do allow this default to be overridden through Dafny custom attributes, but making it longer rarely seems to help in situations where the verification attempt is really missing information. For a user to figure out what information is missing (let alone which proof obligations are taking a long time), the solver must end its proof search and return a counterexample. Currently, the verifier does not produce as much information for verification attempts that time out as it does for attempts that fail. A more ambitious goal would be to try to determine the cause of the time outs, perhaps by automatically trying to analyze the solver logs that the Z3 Axiom Profiler gives access to. The Why3 system guards against time-outs by being able to run several solvers at the same time [8].  K.R.M. Leino, V. Wüstholz  13  There are also a number of places where we would like to improve the Dafny plug-in for BVD. For example, the current version does not let users inspect values of functions in the counterexample. We could also imagine a special BVD mode targeted to illustrate the proof state when Dafny is used to prove theorems (not verify programs). Currently, all additional information that we display is computed during Dafny’s resolution and type checking phases. There is also some information that Dafny computes during the verification phase, but our current machinery has no hooks for displaying this information to the user. While we hope to work on these items to further improve the Dafny IDE, we hope that the current IDE will continue to be useful and that it will inspire the IDEs of other verification systems.  Acknowledgments We are grateful to Nada Amin and Maria Christakis for providing benchmark programs, and to Michał Moskal for helping with the BVD integration. We also thank Maria for helpful comments on a draft of this paper and Nada, Maria, Arjun Narayan, and Bryan Parno for feedback on the tool.  References [0] Mike Barnett, Bor-Yuh Evan Chang, Robert DeLine, Bart Jacobs & K. Rustan M. Leino (2006): Boogie: A Modular Reusable Verifier for Object-Oriented Programs. In Frank S. de Boer, Marcello M. Bonsangue, Susanne Graf & Willem-Paul de Roever, editors: Formal Methods for Components and Objects (FMCO), LNCS 4111, Springer, pp. 364–387. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/11804192_17. [1] Mike Barnett, Manuel Fähndrich, K. Rustan M. Leino, Peter Müller, Wolfram Schulte & Herman Venter (2011): Specification and Verification: The Spec# Experience. Communications of the ACM 54(6), pp. 81–91. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1953122.1953145. [2] Jasmin Christian Blanchette & Tobias Nipkow (2010): Nitpick: A Counterexample Generator for HigherOrder Logic Based on a Relational Model Finder. In Matt Kaufmann & Lawrence C. Paulson, editors: Interactive Theorem Proving (ITP), LNCS 6172, Springer, pp. 131–146. Available at http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1007/978-3-642-14052-5_11. [3] François Bobot, Jean-Christophe Filliâtre, Claude Marché, Guillaume Melquiond & Andrei Paskevich (2013): Preserving User Proofs across Specification Changes. In Ernie Cohen & Andrey Rybalchenko, editors: VSTTE, LNCS 8164, Springer, pp. 191–201. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-642-54108-7_10. [4] Ernie Cohen, Markus Dahlweid, Mark A. Hillebrand, Dirk Leinenbach, Michał Moskal, Thomas Santen, Wolfram Schulte & Stephan Tobies (2009): VCC: A Practical System for Verifying Concurrent C. In Stefan Berghofer, Tobias Nipkow, Christian Urban & Makarius Wenzel, editors: Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics (TPHOLs), LNCS 5674, Springer, pp. 23–42. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-642-03359-9_2. [5] David R. Cok (2010): Improved usability and performance of SMT solvers for debugging specifications. Software Tools for Technology Transfer (STTT) 12(6), pp. 467–481. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10. 1007/s10009-010-0138-x. [6] David R. Cok (2014): OpenJML: Software verification for Java 7 using JML, OpenJDK, and Eclipse. In Catherine Dubois, Dimitra Giannakopoulou & Dominique Méry, editors: 1st Workshop on Formal-IDE. [7] Claire Dross, Pavlos Efstathopoulos, David Lesens, David Mentré & Yannick Moy (2014): Rail, Space, Security: Three Case Studies for SPARK 2014. In: 7th Europen Congress on Embedded Real Time Software and Systems (ERTS2 2014). Available at http://www.spark-2014.org/uploads/erts_2014.pdf.  14  The Dafny IDE  [8] Jean-Christophe Filliâtre & Andrei Paskevich (2013): Why3 — Where Programs Meet Provers. In Matthias Felleisen & Philippa Gardner, editors: European Symposium on Programming (ESOP), LNCS 7792, Springer, pp. 125–128. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-37036-6_8. [9] Claire Le Goues, K. Rustan M. Leino & Michał Moskal (2011): The Boogie Verification Debugger (Tool Paper). In Gilles Barthe, Alberto Pardo & Gerardo Schneider, editors: Software Engineering and Formal Methods (SEFM), LNCS 7041, Springer, pp. 407–414. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-642-24690-6_28. [10] Radu Grigore & Michał Moskal (2007): Edit and Verify. In: Workshop on First-Order Theorem Proving (FTP). Available at http://arxiv.org/abs/0708.0713. [11] Matt Kaufmann, Panagiotis Manolios & J Strother Moore (2000): Computer-Aided Reasoning: An Approach. Kluwer Academic Publishers. [12] Vladimir Klebanov (2009): Extending the Reach and Power of Deductive Program Verification. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computer Science, Universität Koblenz-Landau. Available at http://formal.iti.kit.edu/ ~klebanov/pubs/thesis-klebanov.pdf. [13] Jason Koenig & K. Rustan M. Leino (2012): Getting Started with Dafny: A Guide. In Tobias Nipkow, Orna Grumberg & Benedikt Hauptmann, editors: Software Safety and Security: Tools for Analysis and Verification, NATO Science for Peace and Security Series D: Information and Communication Security 33, IOS Press, pp. 152–181. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-028-4-152. Summer School Marktoberdorf 2011 lecture notes. A version of this tutorial is available online at http://rise4fun. com/dafny. [14] K. Rustan M. Leino (2009): Specification and verification of object-oriented software. In Manfred Broy, Wassiou Sitou & Tony Hoare, editors: Engineering Methods and Tools for Software Safety and Security, NATO Science for Peace and Security Series D: Information and Communication Security 22, IOS Press, pp. 231–266. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/978-1-58603-976-9-231. Summer School Marktoberdorf 2008 lecture notes. [15] K. Rustan M. Leino (2010): Dafny: An Automatic Program Verifier for Functional Correctness. In Edmund M. Clarke & Andrei Voronkov, editors: Logic for Programming Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning (LPAR), LNCS 6355, Springer, pp. 348–370. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-642-17511-4_20. [16] K. Rustan M. Leino (2012): Automating Induction with an SMT Solver. In Viktor Kuncak & Andrey Rybalchenko, editors: Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation (VMCAI), LNCS 7148, Springer, pp. 315–331. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-27940-9_21. [17] K. Rustan M. Leino & Michał Moskal (2013): Co-induction Simply: Automatic Co-inductive Proofs in a Program Verifier. Technical Report MSR-TR-2013-49, Microsoft Research. Available at http://research. microsoft.com/pubs/192276/coinduction.pdf. [18] K. Rustan M. Leino, Michał Moskal & Wolfram Schulte (2008): Verification Condition Splitting. Technical Report, Microsoft Research. Available at http://research.microsoft.com/pubs/77373/ VerificationConditionSplitting(Draft2008).pdf. Manuscript KRML 192. [19] K. Rustan M. Leino & Philipp Rümmer (2010): A Polymorphic Intermediate Verification Language: Design and Logical Encoding. In Javier Esparza & Rupak Majumdar, editors: Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, 16th International Conference, TACAS 2010, LNCS 6015, Springer, pp. 312–327. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-12002-2_26. [20] Leonardo de Moura & Nikolaj Bjørner (2008): Z3: An Efficient SMT Solver. In C. R. Ramakrishnan & Jakob Rehof, editors: Tools and Algorithms for Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS), LNCS 4963, Springer, pp. 337–340. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-78800-3_24. [21] Wolfgang Reif & Kurt Stenzel (1993): Reuse of Proofs in Software Verification. In R. K. Shyamasundar, editor: Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science, LNCS 761, Springer, pp. 284–293. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/3-540-57529-4_61.  K.R.M. Leino, V. Wüstholz  15  [22] Christian Sternagel (2012): Getting Started with Isabelle/jEdit. In: Isabelle Users Workshop (IUW). Available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1208.1368. [23] Makarius Wenzel (2010): Asynchronous Proof Processing with Isabelle/Scala and Isabelle/jEdit. In: 9th International Workshop On User Interfaces for Theorem Provers (UITP 2010), Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, Elsevier. Available at http://www4.in.tum.de/~wenzelm/papers/ async-isabelle-scala.pdf.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
