Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_6414

Abstract:
Foundations of Prescriptive Process Monitoring Irene Teinemaa1 , Niek Tax2 , Massimiliano de Leoni2 , Marlon Dumas1 , and Fabrizio Maria Maggi1  arXiv:1803.08706v1 [cs.LG] 23 Mar 2018  1  2  University of Tartu, Estonia, {irene.teinemaa,marlon.dumas,f.m.maggi}@ut.ee Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands {n.tax,m.d.leoni}@tue.nl  Abstract. Predictive process monitoring is concerned with the analysis of events produced during the execution of a process in order to predict the future state of ongoing cases thereof. Existing techniques in this field are able to predict, at each step of a case, the likelihood that the case will end up in an undesired outcome. These techniques, however, do not take into account what process workers may do with the generated predictions in order to decrease the likelihood of undesired outcomes. This paper proposes a framework for prescriptive process monitoring, which extends predictive monitoring approaches with concepts of alarms, interventions, compensations, and mitigation effects. The framework incorporates a parameterized cost model to assess the cost-benefit tradeoffs of applying prescriptive process monitoring in a given setting. The paper also outlines an approach to optimize the generation of alarms given a dataset and a set of cost model parameters. The proposed approach is empirically evaluated using a range of real-life event logs.  1  Introduction  Predictive process monitoring [1,2] is a family of techniques to predict the future state of ongoing cases of a business process based on event logs recording past executions thereof. A predictive monitoring technique may provide predictions on the remaining execution time of an ongoing case, the next activity to be executed, or the final outcome of the case w.r.t. a set of possible outcomes. This paper is concerned with the latter type of predictive monitoring, which we call outcome-oriented monitoring [3]. For example, in a lead-to-order process, an outcome-oriented predictive monitoring technique may predict whether a case will end up in a purchase order (desired outcome) or not (undesired outcome). Existing outcome-oriented predictive process monitoring techniques are able to train models that predict, after each event of a case, the likelihood that the case will end up in an undesired outcome. These techniques are restricted in scope to predicting. They do not suggest nor prescribe how and when process workers should intervene in order to decrease the likelihood of undesired outcomes. This paper proposes a framework to extend outcome-oriented predictive process monitoring techniques in order to make them prescriptive. Concretely, the proposed framework extends a given outcome-oriented predictive monitoring model with a mechanism for generating alarms that lead to interventions,  which in turn mitigate (or altogether prevent) undesired outcomes. The proposed framework is armed with a parameterized cost model that captures, among others, the tradeoff between the cost of an intervention and the cost of an undesired outcome. Based on this cost model, the paper outlines an approach for return-oninvestment analysis of a prescriptive monitoring system under a configuration of cost parameters and a predictive model trained on a given dataset. Finally, the paper proposes and empirically evaluates an approach to tune the generation of alarms to minimize the expected cost for a given dataset and set of parameters. The paper is structured as follows. Sect. 2 introduces basic concepts and notations. Next, Sect. 3 presents the prescriptive monitoring framework, Sect. 4 outlines the approach to optimize the alarm generation mechanism and Sect. 5 discusses its empirical evaluation. Finally, Sect. 6 discusses related work while Sect. 7 summarizes the contributions and discusses future work avenues.  2  Background: Events, Traces, and Event Logs  For a given set A, A∗ denotes the set of all sequences over A and σ = ha1 , a2 , . . . , an i a sequence of length n; hi is the empty sequence and σ1 · σ2 is the concatenation of sequences σ1 and σ2 . hd k (σ) = ha1 , a2 , . . . , ak i is the prefix of length k (0 < k < n) of sequence σ. For example, hd 2 (ha, b, c, d, ei) = ha, bi. Let E be the event universe, i.e., the set of all possible event identifiers, and T the time domain. We assume that events are characterized by various properties, e.g., an event has a timestamp, corresponds to an activity, is performed by a particular resource, etc. We do not impose a specific set of properties, however, we assume that two of these properties are the timestamp and the activity of an event, i.e., there is a function πT ∈ E → T that assigns timestamps to events, and a function πA ∈ E → A that assigns to each event an activity from a finite set of process activities A. An event log is a set of events, each linked to one trace and globally unique, i.e., the same event cannot occur twice in a log. A trace in a log represents the execution of one case. Definition 1 (Trace, Event Log). A trace is a finite non-empty sequence of events σ ∈ E ∗ such that each event appears only once and time is non-decreasing, i.e., for 1 ≤ i < j ≤ |σ| : σ(i) 6= σ(j) and πT (σ(i)) ≤ πT (σ(j)). An event log is a set of traces L ⊂ E ∗ such that each event appears at most once in the entire log.  3  Prescriptive Process Monitoring Framework  An alarm-based prescriptive process monitoring system, hereafter shortened as alarm system, aims at raising an alarm related to a running case (i.e., not concluded yet) when the case is expected to have deviations or other types of undesired outcomes. These alarms are expected to be processed by process participants, who will intervene with certain recovery actions to mitigate or cancel the negative consequences of the undesired outcome. This system determines the convenience of raising an alarm based on the costs of negative consequences, the likelihood of undesired outcomes, and the costs of intervention.  Section 3.1 introduces the cost model, provides a discussion of these costs, a provides a number of realistic scenarios in which the monitoring system can be beneficial. Section 3.2 formalizes alarm systems and Section 3.3 reflects on the different factors that play a role to determine the worthiness of an investment to deploy an alarm system. 3.1  Concepts and Cost Model  The process monitoring system should not raise an alarm when an undesired outcome is unlikely. This is due to the fact that an intervention generates costs, herein called the cost of intervention. Consider, for instance, the scenario of a municipality that needs to collect the city taxes: due to their characteristics, certain inhabitants may have higher risk to not pay the due taxes and, therefore, to ensure the payment, the intervention may consist in sending a reminder letter. Preparing the reminder letter has some costs, in terms of both hourly employee’s rate and postal costs. Therefore, a company or an institution is willing to incur in costs of intervention when there is a reasonably high probability of an undesired outcome for certain cases. Note that, in certain scenarios, the cost of an intervention may gradually increase as the time passes and this would acknowledge the importance of alarming as early as possible. Generally speaking, an alarm should be raised by comparing the cost of intervention, the probability of the undesired-outcome occurrence and the cost/consequence of obtaining the undesired outcome. If the undesired outcome is not very critical and/or its probability is low, it might be worth not alarming and taking the risk of the undesired outcome to occur, even more remarkably when the cost of an intervention is rather high. If the reminder letter is not sent and the inhabitant does not pay the tax, this will have some consequences: for instance, the tax will be received later by the municipality and it will be necessary to obtain support for a credit collection agency to which municipality needs to pay a fee. This can be classified as the cost of the undesired outcome, e.g., the cost of not receiving the taxes on time. When an alarm is raised, there is a certain probability, but no certainty, that a given case will produce an undesired outcome if no intervention is put forward. If the case actually concluded with no undesired outcome even without intervention, the intervention would cause unnecessary costs, could produce losses of customers and/or opportunities or, also, hamper the reputation of the company or institution that “owns” the process. Costs related to unnecessary interventions are referred to as the cost of compensation. For instance, credit card institutes block credit card payments when they suspect that the card was cloned. However, it may sometimes happen that the payment was legitimate, thus irritating the card owner, who potentially can decide to move to a different institute. Alarming is aimed at avoiding an undesired outcome. However, in several scenarios, it is not possible to completely undo a case execution and, thus, to fully prevent the undesired outcome. Consider, for instance, a scenario in which citizens are obtaining unemployment benefits until they find a job. A certain  percentage of citizens omits to inform to have found a job, thus keeping receiving unentitled benefits. Alarming here is about alerting about citizens that might take benefits to which they were not entitled. Unentitled benefits that have been already given are unlikely to be recollected. Therefore, the mitigation effectiveness of an intervention decreases with time passing. In such scenarios, the effectiveness is modeled as a function that gradually decreases from one to zero with time: the earlier the intervention takes place, the higher the mitigation effectiveness is. A process monitoring system is intended as a continuous system where cases are monitored at all times. However, this is practically impossible. This paper assumes that cases are monitored after the occurrence of any activity and, therefore, alarms can only be raised at those moments. In the remainder, each case is identified by the trace σ that would eventually be recorded in the event log. The following formalizes the costs defined above; note that some costs depend on the index of the event when the alarm is raised and, possibly, on the entire set of cases that are executed. The latter are intended to model those costs that do not only depend on the case itself, but also on the entire context in which it is executed. Box 1 — The Scenario “Unemployment Benefit” UWV is the social security institute of the Netherlands and responsible for the execution of a number of employee related insurances such as the unemployment benefits. When Dutch residents, hereafter customers, become unemployed, they are usually entitled to monetary benefits for a certain period, which are paid monthly. UWV executes a process to determine the amount of these benefits, to manage the interaction with the customers, and to perform the monthly payments. The benefits are stopped before reaching the end when customers report that they have found a new job. Unfortunately, several customers omit to report on new jobs, thus keeping receiving benefits, until eventually UWV finds out the issue. Customers are expected to return the benefit parts that they have unlawfully received; in practice, this rarely happens, causing losses for UWV. In the light of the above, UWV would benefit from an alarm system if this would inform about “risky” customers. Let unt (σ) denote the amount of unentitled benefits received in a case corresponding to trace σ. Based on discussions with the stakeholders of this process at UWV, we designed the following cost model instantiation for such a system. Cost of intervention. Employees are limited and, hence, if an employee takes care of one case, he/she cannot take care of a different one, which can potentially yield unentitled benefits. This analysis is clearly an approximation: the cost can be modeled as the average amount that customers usually receive as unemployment benefits to which they were not entitled: cin (k, σ, L) = avgσ∈L unt (σ). Cost of undesired outcome. It consists in the amount of benefits that the customer obtains without being entitled to, i.e., cout (σ, L) = unt (σ). Cost of compensation. UWV works in a situation of monopoly. This means that the customer cannot be lost because (s)he moves to a competitor: ccom (σ, L) = 0. Mitigation effectiveness. It is the portion of unentitled benefits saved through the mitik  (hd (σ)) gation: eff (k, σ, L) = unt (σ)−unt . Note that this cost function is not employed if unt (σ) there is no undesired outcome (i.e., if unt (σ) = 0).  Definition 2 (Alarm-based Cost Model). An alarm-based prescriptive monitoring cost model is a tuple (cin , cout , ccom , eff ) consisting of: ∗ – function cin ∈ N × E ∗ × 2E → R+ 0 modeling the cost of the intervention: given a trace σ belonging to an event log L, cin (k, σ, L) indicates the cost of an intervention for σ when the intervention takes place after the k-th event; ∗ – function cout ∈ E ∗ × 2E → R+ 0 modeling the cost of the undesired outcome; ∗ – function ccom ∈ E ∗ × 2E → R+ 0 modeling the cost of compensation;  ∗  – function eff ∈ N × E ∗ × 2E → [0, 1] modeling the mitigation effectiveness of the intervention: given a trace σ belonging to an event log L, eff (k, σ, L) indicates the effectiveness of an intervention for σ when the intervention takes place after the k-th event. Box 2 — The Scenario “Banking Institution” Suppose that the customers of a bank institute use their credit card to make payments online. Each credit card transaction, e.g., via a website, is associated with a risk that the transaction is made through a cloned card. Let σ be the trace of credit card transactions for a customer. The alarm system is intended to determine whether the credit card needs to be blocked, with the negative consequence for non-malicious credit card usages that the customer is unable to use the card. Denoting the asset of the customer (the amount of the investment portfolio, the bank-accounts balance, etc.) with asset (σ) and the amount of the transactions in σ with value(σ), the following is a possible cost model instantiation for this scenario. Cost of intervention. The blockage of credit is automatically done by the system and, therefore, causes no costs of intervention: cin (k, σ, L) = 0. Cost of undesired outcome. It consists in the amount of the transactions that the bank would need to reimburse to the customer if the transactions were indeed not made by the legitimate credit card owner: cout (σ, L) = value(σ). Cost of compensation. Blocking the credit card would clearly create discomforts to the owner, who may opt to change the bank institute in case of a false alarm. Supposing that, looking at the historical data, statically a fraction p (i.e., p ∈ [0, 1]) of the customers would change the bank institute, the compensation cost is the loss of the asset, multiplied by p: ccom = p · asset (σ). Mitigation effectiveness. It is the portion of the credit card transaction money that is saved by blocking the credit card transaction(s): eff (k, σ, L) =  value(σ)−value (hd k (σ)) . value(σ)  Box 3 — The Scenario “Railway Maintenance” In the processes of railway maintenance, an alarm should be raised when there is the risk that the railway itself may break down within a short time range. Railway breakdowns can cause severe disruptions of the train transportation and, therefore, trains can be canceled or delayed, thereby causing losses for reimbursing tickets to travelers. We denote with id (σ) and im (σ) the event in σ when, respectively, the disruption took place and was resolved. Let P be the sum of the costs of all tickets sold per time unit for the railway line in question. This sum can be, for instance, computed by looking at the ticket-sell history and by computing the average value per time unit. One could also perform a more fine-grained analysis and vary P depending on the time when the disruption took place; however, we do not consider this possibility to keep the example formulation simpler. Cost of intervention. The intervention to prevent the disruption increases as the time passes because the effort becomes more and more significant to avoid the disruption. We assume here that it is at its minimum m at the beginning of the trace and grows exponentially with time: cin (k, σ, L) = m · β exp(πT (σ(k))) for some β > 0. Cost of undesired outcome. It consists in the amount of the tickets that need to be reimbursed, which is the time frame in which the railway service was disrupted multiplied by P : cout (σ, L) = (πT (im (σ)) − πT (id (σ))) · P . Cost of compensation. No compensation is present: ccom (σ, L) = 0. Mitigation effectiveness. If the alarm is raised, the intervention mitigates in full: eff (k, σ, L) = 1 for any k ∈ [1, |σ|].  To illustrate the versatility of the above cost model, we discuss three use cases of alarm-based prescriptive process monitoring systems and their corresponding cost model parameters. The first scenario in Box 1 refers to the provision of unemployment benefits [4]. The cost model for this scenario is based on several discussions with the stakeholders of UWV. A second scenario in Box 2 refers to the use of credit cards. Compared with the previous, there is a cost of compensation because customers can move to competitor banks and the loss depends on the value of the customer. Conversely, the cost of intervention is zero; this means that the system should alert for customers with a larger asset only if the  Table 1: Cost of a case σ on the basis of the outcome and whether or not the alarm was raised undesired outcome  desired outcome  alarm raised cin (k, σ, L) + (1 − eff (k, σ, L))cout (σ, L) cin (k, σ, L) + ccom (σ, L) alarm not raised cout (σ, L) 0  risk of credit card frauds is very high, considering the risk of losing a customer due to the inconvenience caused by the intervention. Box 3 refers to predictive maintenance when one wants to provide maintenance in advance to prevent an equipment, a machine, a medium, or any of its parts from breaking during usage, thus causing an interruption of a service (in this case the railway service). This scenario is different from the previous one because the cost of intervention increases as time passes. 3.2  Alarm-Based Prescriptive Process Monitoring System  An alarm-based prescriptive process monitoring system (short: alarm system) is driven by the outcome of the cases. Hereon, the outcome of the cases is represented through a function out ∈ E ∗ → {true, false}: given a case identified by a trace σ, if the case has an undesired outcome, out(σ) = true; otherwise, out(σ) = false. In reality, while a case is executed, the outcome is not certain and needs to be estimated on the basis of past executions that are recorded in an event log c L ∈ E ∗ → [0, 1] that, using L ⊂ E ∗ . The outcome estimator is a function out ′ c L, predicts the likelihood outL (σ ) that the outcome of a case that starts with c L for simplicity when it is clear prefix σ ′ is undesired. We omit subscript L in out from context. An alarm system can be abstracted as a function that returns true or false, depending on whether the system raises an alarm. This is determined on the basis of the predicted outcome. Definition 3 (Alarm-Based Prescriptive Process Monitoring System). c L be an outcome estimator built from L. An Given an event log L ⊂ E ∗ , let out alarm-based prescriptive process monitoring system is a function alarm od utL ∈ E ∗ → {true, false}. Given a running case consisting of a sequence σ ′ of events, alarm od utL (σ) returns true, if the alarm is raised based on the predicted outcome c outL (σ ′ ), or false, otherwise.  c L in alarm d when it is clear from context. An alarm We omit subscript out outL system can alarm at most once per case. Indeed, the first alarm is already alerting the proper process stakeholder(s) that the case requires special attention. The purpose of the alarm system is to minimize the cost of executing a case. Table 1 summarizes how the cost of a case is determined, based on a cost model (cf. Definition 2), on the case outcome, and on whether an alarm was raised.  Definition 4 (Cost of Case Execution). Let cm = (cin , cout , ccom , eff ) be an alarm-based cost model. Let out ∈ E ∗ → {true, false} be an outcome function. Let alarm ∈ E ∗ → {true, false} be an alarm-based prescriptive process monitoring system. Let L ⊂ E ∗ be the entire set of complete (i.e., no more running) cases. Let σ ∈ L be a case. Let I(σ, alarm) be the index of the event in σ when the alarm was raised or be zero, if no alarm was raised:  I(σ, alarm) =  0    1   i ∈ [2, |σ|] s.t. alarm(hd i (σ))∧    k ∀k ∈ [1, i − 1]. ¬alarm od utL (hd (σ))  if ∀k ∈ [1, |σ|−1].¬alarm(hd k (σ)), if alarm(hd 1 (σ)), otherwise.  The cost of execution of case σ supported by the alarm system alarm is:  cost (σ, L, cm, alarm) =  cin (I(σ, alarm ), σ) + (1 − eff (I(σ, alarm ), σ)) · cout (σ, L)    c (I(σ, alarm ), σ) + c (σ, L) in  com   cout (σ, L)    0  out (σ) ∧ I(σ, alarm ) > 0, ¬out (σ) ∧ I(σ, alarm ) > 0, out (σ) ∧ I(σ, alarm ) = 0, otherwise.  Section 4 will illustrate how an alarm-based prescriptive process monitoring system can be designed with the aim of minimizing the cost of executing cases, as defined in Definition 4. 3.3  Return on Investment Analysis  In this section, we provide an analysis and guidelines that suggest when it is valuable to invest in developing an alarm-based prescriptive process monitoring system, namely when the return on investment (ROI) is positive. To this aim, we need to compare the case of a business process execution supported by an alarm system with the as-is situation where the business process is executed without this support. For this analysis, we consider the set of cases recorded in an event log L, which are not mitigated and a cost model cm = (cin , cout , ccom , eff ). The as-is situation implies that none of the cases σ ∈ L that lead to an undesired outcome are mitigated, yielding P a cost cout (σ). When applied to the entire log L the cost is cost as-is (L) = (σ∈L s.t. out(σ) cout (σ). The situation of P deploying a certain system alarm is costalarm (L) = σ∈L cost(σ, L, cm, alarm) (cf. Definitions 2, 3). With this setting, the return on investment in system alarm is ROI(L, cm, alarm) = costas-is (L) − costalarm (L), which must be positive to be worthwhile deploying the system. The question that remains is: how does the ROI depend on the cost model and the alarm system? For the sake of simplicity, we assume in this analysis that every component of the cost model is constant, yielding to a case cost:  c + (1 − eff )cout out(σ) ∧ I(σ, alarm ) > 0,  in   c + c ¬out(σ) ∧ I(σ, alarm) > 0, in com cost(σ, L, cm, alarm) =  cout out(σ) ∧ I(σ, alarm ) = 0,    0 otherwise. where cin , cout , ccom , and eff are constants. In order for the ROI to be positive, cost as-is (L) > cost (σ, L, cm, alarm), that is: |Lund | · cout > |Lund&al |(cin + (1 − eff )cout ) + |Ldes&al |(cin + ccom ) + |Lund&nal | · cout  where Lund&al , Ldes&al , Lund&nal respectively consist of the traces of L related to the cases with an undesired outcome that would be alarmed, with a desired outcome that would still be alarmed, with an undesired outcome that would not be alarmed; also, Lund = Lund&al ∪ Lund&nal . After simplification: |Lund&al |(eff cout − cin ) > |Ldes&al |(cin + ccom )  (1)  Because the right-hand side of Eq. 1 is non-negative, it follows as a corollary that eff cout > cin is a necessary condition for return on investment. In other words, it must be possible to avoid a cost that is larger than the cost of doing the intervention. This provides a validation of our framework: it complies with the reasonableness condition in the cost-sensitive learning literature [5], which states that the cost of labeling an example incorrectly should always be greater than the cost of labeling it correctly. Eq. 1 also illustrates that the policy of always alarming does not yield a positive ROI, unless the number of cases with undesirable outcome and the cost of the undesired outcome are sufficiently high. When the number of cases with an undesirable outcome is small (e.g., the scenarios of the unemployment benefit and the bank institute described in Boxes 1 and 2) and at the same time the cost of this undesirable outcome is small, then the left-hand side of Equation 1 is negligible, thus leading to condition cin + ccom < 0, which can never hold. Up to this point, the ROI analysis assumed for the sake of simplicity that costs of the model and effectiveness are constant, similarly to traditional costsensitive learning. The novelty of our formulation lays on the fact that these costs are functions that vary over the time when the decision was made. However, variable costs do not invalidate the ROI analysis. The only additional “ingredient” is that the analysis should consider the time; as a result, the reasonableness of the cost matrix would not be fixed, but potentially change over time. In fact, in order for the ROI to be positive, it is sufficient that the cost model is reasonable for a certain time period; otherwise, the alarm system would never raise alarms because of the cost model. Clearly, the longer the reasonable-cost period, the higher the ROI.  4  Alarming Mechanisms and Empirical Thresholding  An alarm system needs two components to minimize the costs of future cases: (1) a probabilistic classifier od ut L ∈ E ∗ → [0, 1] that estimates the likelihood of an undesired outcome for a partial trace based on some historical observations L, and (2) an alarming mechanism that for a given incomplete case decides whether or not to raise the alarm based on the prediction made by od ut L . We propose to implement the second component using a function agent ∈ [0, 1] → {true, false} that operates on the estimated likelihood of an undesired outcome, where value true represents the decision to raise an alarm. Together, the two components form an alarm system, alarm(hd k (σ)) = agent (od ut L (hd k (σ))), that makes the decision on whether or not to alarm based on the observed k events of trace σ. The first component, function od ut L , can be implemented using any classification algorithm that is naturally probabilistic, i.e., that outputs likelihood  scores on a [0, 1]-interval instead of a binary outcome. Examples of probabilistic classification algorithms include naive Bayes, logistic regression, and random forest. The classifier is trained on a training log Ltrain consisting of traces from historical cases. It is easy to see that the decision on whether or not to raise an alarm should be dependent not only on od ut Ltrain (hd k (σ)), but also on the configuration of cin , cout , ccom , and eff . When cin and ccom are very low compared to cout , it might be beneficial to use a lower threshold for the estimated likelihood od ut Ltrain (hd k (σ)), while one would want to be more certain that the undesired outcome will happen when cin or ccom is high. The second component, agent , allows the outputs of od ut Ltrain to be tweaked with regards to the cost model. We propose to implement the agent as an alarming threshold, i.e. a mechanism that alarms when the estimated likelihood of an undesired outcome is at least τ . We define function alarm τ (hd k (σ)) to be the alarming function that uses the alarming mechanism agent τ (od ut Ltrain (hd k (σ))) = k od ut Ltrain (hd (σ)) ≥ τ . We aim at finding the optimal value τ of the alarming threshold that minimizes the cost on a log Lthres consisting of historical observations such that Lthres ∩ Ltrain = ∅ with respect to a given likelihood estimator od ut Ltrain and cost model cm. The total cost of an alarming mechanism alarm on a log L is defined as cost (L, cm, alarm) = Σσ∈L cost (σ, L, cm, alarm). Using this definition, we define τ = arg minτ ∈[0,1] cost (Lthres , cm, alarm τ ). Optimizing a threshold τ on a separate thresholding set is called empirical thresholding [6] and the search for the optimal threshold τ wrt. a specified cost model and log Lthres can be performed using any hyperparameter optimization technique, such as Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) optimization [7]. The resulting approach can be considered to be a form of cost-sensitive learning, since the value τ depends on how the cost model cm is specified. Note that as alternative to a single global alarming threshold τ it is possible to optimize a separate threshold τk for prefix length k. We experimentally found a single global threshold τ optimized on Lthres to outperform separate prefixlength-dependent thresholds τk optimized on Lthres , therefore we propose to use a single optimized threshold. After creating the fully functional alarm system by training a classifier on Ltrain and optimizing the alarming threshold on Lthres for the given cost model cm, the obtained alarming function alarm can be applied to the continuous stream of incoming events in a business process, thereby reducing the processing costs of running process instances.  5  Evaluation  In this section, we describe the experimental setup and the results for evaluating the proposed framework. We address the following research questions: RQ1 Can empirical thresholding find thresholds that consistently lead to a reduction in average processing cost for different cost model configurations? RQ2 Does the alarm system consistently yield a benefit over different values of the mitigation effectiveness?  RQ3 Does the alarm system consistently yield a benefit over different values of the cost of compensation? 5.1  Approaches and Baselines  We experiment with two different implementations of od ut Ltrain by using different well-known classification algorithms, namely, random forest (RF) and gradient boosted trees (GBT). Both classification algorithms have shown to be amongst the top performing classification algorithms on a variety of classification tasks [8,9]. We employ the single classifier approach where the features for a given prefix are obtained using aggregation encoding [10], which has been shown to perform better than alternative encodings for event logs [3]. We apply the Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) optimization procedure [7] for the alarming mechanism to find the optimal threshold τ . We use several fixed thresholds as baselines. First, we compare with the as-is situation in which alarms are never raised. Secondly, we compare with baseline τ = 0, allowing us to compare with the situation where alarms are always raised directly at the start of a case. Finally, we compare with τ = 0.5 enabling comparison with the cost-insensitive scenario that simply alarms when an undesired outcome is expected. The implementation of the approach and the experimental setup are openly available online. 3 5.2  Datasets  For each event log we use all available data attributes as input to the classifier. Additionally, we extract the event number, i.e. the index of the event in the given case, the hour, weekday, month, time since case start, and time since last event. Infrequent values of categorical attributes (occurring less than 10 times in the log) are replaced with value “other”, to avoid exploding the dimensionality. Missing attributes are imputed with the respective most recent (preceding) value of that attribute in the same trace when available, otherwise with zero. Traces are cut before the labeling of the case becomes trivially known and are truncated to the 90th percentile of all case lengths to avoid bias from very long traces. We use the following datasets to evaluate the alarm system: BPIC2017. 4 This log records execution traces from a loan application process in a Dutch financial institution. We define two labelings referring to an undesired outcome of the case: 1) bpic2017 refused, where we consider the outcome of a case to be undesired when the case ends with the applicant refusing the offer(s) that were made, and 2) bpic2017 cancelled, where the undesired outcome is related to the case ending with the financial institution cancelling the made offer(s). Road traffic fines. 5 This event log originates from the Italian local police. The desired outcome is that a fine is fully paid, while in undesired cases the fine needs to be sent for credit collection. 3 4 5  https://taxxer.github.io/AlarmBasedProcessPrediction/ https://doi.org/10.4121/uuid:5f3067df-f10b-45da-b98b-86ae4c7a310b https://doi.org/10.4121/uuid:270fd440-1057-4fb9-89a9-b699b47990f5  Table 2: Dataset statistics dataset name bpic2017 refused bpic2017 cancelled traffic fines uwv  class min med (trunc.) max # traces ratio length length length # events 31413 0.12 31413 0.47 129615 0.46 34627 0.2  10 10 2 1  35 35 4 21  60 60 5 79  1153398 1153398 445959 1010450  UWV. This event log corresponds to the Unemployment Benefit example (Box 1 in Sect. 3.1). The undesired outcome is that a resident will receive more benefits than entitled, causing the need for a reclamation. This event log cannot be made available publicly. Table 2 describes the characteristics of event logs that are used. The classes are well balanced in bpic2017 cancelled and traffic fines, while the undesired outcome is more rare in case of uwv and bpic2017 refused. In traffic fines, the traces are very short, while in the other datasets the trace length is relatively higher. 5.3  Experimental Setup  We apply a temporal split, i.e. we order the cases by their start time and from the first 80% of the cases randomly select 80% (i.e. 64% of the total) for Ltrain and 20% (i.e. 16% of the total) for Lthres and the remaining 20% as the test set Ltest . The events in cases in Ltrain and Lthres that overlap in time with Ltest are discarded in order to not use any information that would not be available yet in a real setting. We use TPE with 3-fold cross validation on Ltrain to optimize the hyperparameters for RF and GBT. We optimize the alarming threshold τ by building the final classifiers on all the traces in Ltrain and search for τ on Lthres . It is common in cost-sensitive learning to apply calibration techniques to obtained classifier in order to obtain accurate probability estimates and therefore more accurate estimates of the expected cost [11]. However, we found that calibrating the classifier using Platt scaling [12] does consistently improve the estimated likelihood of undesired outcome on the four event logs, and frequently even leads to less accurate likelihood estimates. Therefore, we decided to skip the calibration step. Moreover, since we use empirical thresholding, it is not necessary that the probabilities are well calibrated and it is sufficient that the likelihoods are reasonably ordered. Table 3 shows the configurations of the cost model that we explore in the evaluation. To answer RQ1 we vary the ratio between cout (σ, L) and cin (k, σ, L) (keeping ccom (σ, L) and eff (k, σ, L) unchanged). To answer RQ2 we vary both the eff (k, σ, L) and the ratio between cout (σ, L) and cin (k, σ, L). To answer RQ3 we vary two ratios: 1) between cout (σ, L) and cin (k, σ, L) and 2) between cin (k, σ, L) and ccom (σ, L).  Table 3: Cost model configurations cout (σ, L)  cin (k, σ, L)  RQ1 {1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 20} RQ2 {1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 20} RQ3 {1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 20}  1 1 1  ccom (σ, L)  eff (k, σ, L)  0 1 − k/|σ| 0 {0, 0.1, 0.2, ..., 1} {0, 1/20, 1/10, 1/5, 1/2, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20} 1 − k/|σ|  Avg. cost per case  method always alarm never alarm optimized tau=0.5 bpic2017_cancelled  bpic2017_refused  traffic_fines  uwv  0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 3:1  10:1  20:1 3:1  10:1  20:1 3:1  10:1  20:1 3:1  10:1  20:1  c_out : c_in  Fig. 1: Cost over different ratios of cout (σ, L) and cin (k, σ, L) (GBT)  We measure the average cost per case in Ltest , and aim to minimize this cost. Additionally, we measure the benefit of the alarm system (as introduced in Section 3.3). 5.4  Results  Figure 1 shows the average cost per case when increasing the ratio of cout (σ, L) over cin (k, σ, L) from left to right. We only present the results obtained with GBT as we found it to slightly outperform RF. When the ratio between these two costs is balanced (i.e. 1:1), the minimal cost is obtained by never alarming. This is in agreement with the ROI analysis, where we found eff cout > cin to be a necessary condition for benefit of an alarm system. When cout ≫ cin the best strategy is to always alarm. When cout is slightly larger than cin the best c We found that the optimized τ strategy is to sometimes alarm based on out. always outperforms the baselines. The exception is ratio 2:1 for traffic fines, where never alarming is slightly better. In Fig. 2 the average cost per case is plotted against different (fixed) thresholds, where the optimized threshold is marked with a red cross and each line representing one particular cost ratio. We observe that, while the optimized threshold generally obtains minimal costs, there sometimes exist multiple optimal thresholds for a given cost model configuration. For instance, in case of the 5:1 ratio in bpic2017 cancelled, all thresholds between 0 and 0.4 are cost-wise equivalent. We conclude that the empirical thresholding approach consistently finds a threshold that yields the lowest cost in a given event log and cost model configuration (cf. RQ1).  Avg. cost per case  c_out : c_in 1:1 2:1 5:1 20:1 bpic2017_cancelled  bpic2017_refused  traffic_fines  uwv  0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9  0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9  0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9  0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9  Threshold ( τ )  Fig. 2: Cost over different thresholds, optimized τ is marked with a red cross  c_out : c_in  bpic2017_cancelled  uwv  bpic2017_cancelled  uwv  20:1 10:1 5:1 3:1 2:1 1:1  beneﬁt 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0  0.0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1.0  0.0  0.2  0.4  mitigation eﬀectiveness (eﬀ)  (a) Varying eff (k, σ, L)  0.6  0.8  1.0  1:0 10:1 5:1  2:1  1:1  1:2  1:5 1:10  1:0 10:1 5:1  2:1  1:1  1:2  1:5 1:10  c_in : c_com  (b) Varying ccom (σ, L)  Fig. 3: The benefit over different cost model configurations. (a) shows the benefit for different settings of eff (k, σ, L) and cout (σ, L) : cin (k, σ, L) ratios, and (b) shows the benefit for different cin (k, σ, L) : ccom (σ, L) ratios and cout (σ, L) : cin (k, σ, L) ratios.  Figure 3a shows the benefit of having the alarm system compared to not having it for different (constant) mitigation effectiveness values. As the results are similar for logs with similar class ratios, hereinafter we only show the results for one log from each of the groups: bpic2017 cancelled (balanced classes) and uwv (imbalanced classes). As expected, the benefit increases both with higher eff (k, σ, L) and with higher cout (σ, L) : cin (k, σ, L) ratio. On bpic2017 cancelled, the alarm system yields positive benefit when cout (σ, L) : cin (k, σ, L) is high and eff (k, σ, L) > 0. Also, positive benefit is always obtained when effectiveness is sufficient (eff (k, σ, L) > 0.5) and cout (σ, L) > cin (k, σ, L). In case of uwv, the average benefits are smaller, since there are fewer cases with the undesired outcome, therefore, the number of cases where cout can be prevented by alarming is lower. In this case, benefit is obtained when both eff (k, σ, L) and cout (σ, L) : cin (k, σ, L) are high. We conducted analogous experiments with linear effectiveness decay, varying the maximum possible effectiveness (at the start of the case) and confirmed that the observed patterns remained the same. We have empirically confirmed our theoretical finding in Section 3.3 that eff cout > cin is a necessary condition to obtain benefit of using an alarm system, and have shown that benefit is in practice also obtained under this condition when an optimized alarming threshold is used (cf. RQ2). Similarly, the benefit of the alarm system is plotted in Figure 3b across different ratios of cout (σ, L) : cin (k, σ, L) and cin (k, σ, L) : ccom (σ, L) . We ob-  serve that when ccom (σ, L) is high, the benefit decreases due to the false alarms. On bpic2017 cancelled, positive benefit is received almost always, except when cout (σ, L) : cin (k, σ, L) is low (e.g. 2:1) and ccom (σ, L) is high (i.e. larger than cin (k, σ, L)). For uwv positive benefit is obtained with fewer cost model configurations, e.g. when cout (σ, L) : cin (k, σ, L) = 5 : 1, ccom (σ, L) has to be smaller than cin (k, σ, L). We conducted analogous experiments with linearly increasing cost of intervention, varying the maximum possible cost (at the end of the case) and confirmed that the patterns described above remained the same. To answer RQ3, we have empirically confirmed that the alarm system achieves benefit as discussed in Section 3.3 in case the cost of the undesired outcome is sufficiently larger than the cost of the intervention and/or the cost of the intervention is sufficiently larger than the cost of compensation.  6  Related Work  The problem of cost-sensitive training machine learning models has received significant attention. For example, Elkan [5] analyzes the notion of misclassification cost and defines conditions under which a misclassification cost matrix is reasonable. Turney [13] examines a broader range of costs in the context of inductive concept learning. This latter study introduces the notion of cost of intervention, which we include in our proposed cost model. These approaches, however, do not take into account the specific costs that arise in prescriptive process monitoring. Predictive and prescriptive process monitoring are related to Early Classification of Time Series (ECTS), which aims at classifying a (partial) time series as early as possible, while achieving high classification accuracy [14]. While the aim of ECTS methods is to find a balance between prediction accuracy and earliness, we are only aware of three studies that approach ECTS as an optimization problem based on cost functions that capture tradeoffs between accuracy-related and earliness-related costs [15,16,17]. However, these approaches assume that predicting a positive class early has the same effect on the cost function as predicting a negative class early, which is not the case in typical business process monitoring scenarios, where earliness matters only when an undesired outcome is predicted. We are aware of four previous studies related to alarm-based prescriptive process monitoring [18,19,20,21]. Metzger et al. [18] study the effect of different likelihood scores thresholds on the total intervention cost (which they call adaptation cost) and the misclassification penalties. However, they assume that the alarms can only be generated at one pre-determined point in the process, specifically when the case reaches a given state with respect to a process model. This assumption restricts their approach to scenarios where: (i) there is a process model that perfectly captures all executions of the process; (ii) raising an alarm early in the case does not yield a higher cost or reward than raising it later (when the alarm generation state is reached). Also, their approach relies on a fixedthreshold alarming mechanism (i.e. the user provides a threshold), as opposed to our empirical thresholding approach. The latter remark also applies to [19], which suggests to generate a prediction when the likelihood score returned by a trace prefix classifier first exceeds a given threshold. Also, the latter study is not  cost-sensitive. Gröger et al. [20] present an approach for recommendation-based business process optimization on top of a holistic process warehouse. It prescriptively generates action recommendations during the process execution to avoid a predicted metric deviation. However, in this approach the two core elements of our proposed prescriptive process monitoring framework, i.e., cost models and earliness are not taken into consideration. Krumeich et al. [21] propose a general architecture for prescriptive process monitoring. However, this architecture does not incorporate a cost model nor does it propose a method for cost optimization.  7  Conclusion and Future Work  This paper outlined a prescriptive process monitoring framework that extends existing predictive monitoring approaches with concepts of alarms, interventions, compensations, and mitigation effects. The framework incorporates a cost model that allows one to analyze the tradeoffs between the cost of intervention, the benefit of mitigating or preventing undesired outcomes, and the cost of compensating for unnecessary interventions induced by false alarms. The cost model allows one to estimate the benefits of deploying a prescriptive monitoring system for the purposes of return-on-investment analysis. Additionally, the framework incorporates a technique to optimize the alarm generation mechanism with respect to a given configuration of the cost model and a given event log. An empirical evaluation on real-life logs showed the benefits of applying this optimization versus a baseline where a fixed likelihood score threshold is used to generate alarms, as considered in previous work in the field. While the framework is versatile enough to capture a range of use cases, it relies on assumptions that limit its applicability. First, it assumes that every alarm leads to an intervention. However, process workers might not intervene in some cases, either because they find an alarm to be irrelevant or because only a limited number of interventions are possible due to resource limitations. Second, the framework assumes that an alarm can be raised anytime. However, an intervention might not be applicable too early (or too late) in a case. Finally, the framework assumes that only one type of intervention is possible in a given process. Extending the framework to lift these limitations is left as future work. Another avenue for future work is to extend the framework with an active learning method in order to incrementally tune the alarming mechanism based on feedback about the relevance of the alarms and the effectiveness of interventions.  References 1. Maggi, F.M., Di Francescomarino, C., Dumas, M., Ghidini, C.: Predictive monitoring of business processes. In: Proc. of CAiSE, Springer (2014) 457–472 2. Metzger, A., Leitner, P., Ivanovic, D., Schmieders, E., Franklin, R., Carro, M., Dustdar, S., Pohl, K.: Comparing and combining predictive business process monitoring techniques. IEEE Trans. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems 45(2) (2015) 276–290  3. Teinemaa, I., Dumas, M., La Rosa, M., Maggi, F.M.: Outcome-oriented predictive process monitoring: Review and benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06766 (2017) 4. Dees, M., de Leoni, M., Mannhardt, F.: Enhancing process models to improve business performance: A methodology and case studies. In: Proc. of CoopIS, Springer (2017) 232–251 5. Elkan, C.: The foundations of cost-sensitive learning. In: Proc. of IJCAI. Volume 17., Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Ltd (2001) 973–978 6. Sheng, V.S., Ling, C.X.: Thresholding for making classifiers cost-sensitive. In: AAAI. (2006) 476–481 7. Bergstra, J.S., Bardenet, R., Bengio, Y., Kégl, B.: Algorithms for hyper-parameter optimization. In: Proc. of NIPS. (2011) 2546–2554 8. Fernández-Delgado, M., Cernadas, E., Barro, S., Amorim, D.: Do we need hundreds of classifiers to solve real world classification problems. JMLR 15(1) (2014) 3133– 3181 9. Olson, R.S., La Cava, W., Mustahsan, Z., Varik, A., Moore, J.H.: Data-driven advice for applying machine learning to bioinformatics problems. In: Proc. of Biocomputing, World Scientific (2017) 10. de Leoni, M., van der Aalst, W.M., Dees, M.: A general process mining framework for correlating, predicting and clustering dynamic behavior based on event logs. Information Systems 56 (2016) 235–257 11. Zadrozny, B., Elkan, C.: Learning and making decisions when costs and probabilities are both unknown. In: Proc. of KDD, ACM (2001) 204–213 12. Platt, J., et al.: Probabilistic outputs for support vector machines and comparisons to regularized likelihood methods. Advances in large margin classifiers 10(3) (1999) 61–74 13. Turney, P.D.: Types of cost in inductive concept learning. In: Proc. of the CostSensitive Learning Workshop. (2002) 14. Xing, Z., Pei, J., Philip, S.Y.: Early classification on time series. KAIS 31(1) (2012) 105–127 15. Mori, U., Mendiburu, A., Dasgupta, S., Lozano, J.A.: Early classification of time series by simultaneously optimizing the accuracy and earliness. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. (2017) 16. Dachraoui, A., Bondu, A., Cornuéjols, A.: Early classification of time series as a non myopic sequential decision making problem. In: ECML PKDD, Springer (2015) 433–447 17. Tavenard, R., Malinowski, S.: Cost-aware early classification of time series. In: ECML PKDD, Springer (2016) 632–647 18. Metzger, A., Föcker, F.: Predictive business process monitoring considering reliability estimates. In: Proc. of CAiSE, Springer (2017) 445–460 19. Di Francescomarino, C., Dumas, M., Maggi, F.M., Teinemaa, I.: Clustering-based predictive process monitoring. IEEE Trans. Services Computing (2017) 20. Gröger, C., Schwarz, H., Mitschang, B.: Prescriptive analytics for recommendationbased business process optimization. In: Proc. of BIS, Springer (2014) 25–37 21. Krumeich, J., Werth, D., Loos, P.: Prescriptive control of business processes. BISE 58(4) (2016) 261–280

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
