Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_6888

Abstract:
arXiv:1610.02953v1 [cs.DS] 10 Oct 2016  Comments on Dumitrescu’s “A Selectable Sloppy Heap” Michael L. Fredman Department of Computer Science Rutgers University, New Brunswick Email: fredman@cs.rutgers.edu  October 11, 2016  Abstract Dumitrescu [arXiv:1607.07673] describes a data structure referred to as a Selectable Sloppy Heap. We present a simplified approach, and also point out aspects of Dumitrescu’s exposition that require scrutiny.  Introduction Given a constant k > 1, Dumitrescu [arXiv:1607.07673] defines (modifying his terminology) a k-Selectable Sloppy heap to be a data structure that maintains a dynamic set S of items having keys belonging to an ordered universe, that supports the operations Delete-i (1 ≤ i ≤ k), and insertion. The Delete-i operation returns and deletes from S an item whose key belongs to its i-th quantile: partitioning S into k uniformly sized intervals, the i-th quantile consists of the i-th such interval (from the left). The data structure implementation determines the particular choice of the item selected for removal when performing a Delete-i operation. We see in Dumitrescu’s formulation, which extends a homework problem devised by this author (Fredman), an aesthetically attractive topic. Dumitrescu’s posting concerns the design of a data structure that supports these operations with worst-case O(log k) costs, independently of n. A simple argument, left for the reader, shows that the there is an inherent Ω(log k) amortized cost per operation for worst-case sequences of these operations in the comparison-based model of computation, demonstrated by reduction from sorting. There are issues, however, with the posting which we proceed to describe. First, a brief overview. As described in greater detail below, the data structure design is centered on a balanced binary tree where the intent is to maintain O(k) buckets consisting of item intervals at the leaves; a requested operation accesses, at cost O(log k), the appropriate 1  bucket to insert or delete, as the case may be, an item belonging to the bucket. (No ordering is maintained within single buckets.) Bucket splitting takes place when necessary so that the buckets remain sufficiently small, guaranteeing that at least one falls within any given quantile, thereby correctly supporting deletion requests. To maintain the number of buckets at O(k), merging of small buckets also takes place. The work required of these costly merging and splitting tasks is distributed over operation requests so as to reduce the worst-case costs to same magnitude as that of the attainable amortized costs. Dumitrescu’s method implements a rapidly moving round-robin process among the buckets (transitioning one bucket with every requested operation) for the purpose of detecting buckets in need of splitting. While it would seem natural to detect adjacent small buckets appropriate for merging as they are encountered within the same round-robin processing, this is not done. Instead a secondary structure, a priority queue, is maintained that stores the combined sizes of adjacent bucket pairs, and with each requested operation the smallest such sum in the priority queue is checked for falling below a specified threshold, and if so, the corresponding pair of buckets gets merged. It is in consideration of this priority queue that two errors appear in the posting. First, the posting only requires updates to the priority queue in the context of bucket merges and splits, but updates are necessary with every requested operation, since each changes the size of some bucket. This constant need of updating the priority queue by itself entails as much work as the tree searching costs. A second issue concerns the proof that the number of buckets is O(k). That proof proceeds with an induction step that relies upon just one bucket being split over the course of a single operation request. However, two buckets can potentially get split; both the round-robin bucket and the bucket at which a requested operation takes place (both undergoing processing with each requested operation). Fortunately, there is no need for maintaining the secondary priority queue structure involving bucket sizes. As indicated in Dumitrescu’s posting, this author (Fredman) had in mind a different strategy that performed, in essence, operation-distributed periodic reorganizations of the data structure to restrain the proliferation of small buckets, without utilizing explicit bucket merging. Presented below is a modification of that method that does utilize bucket merging and therefore bears similarity to Dumitrescu’s round-robin, but proceeds at a more leisurely pace. An advantage is that adjacent buckets that can be merged are detected as they are encountered, dispensing with a priority queue. Dumitrescu’s (apparent) purpose in utilizing a priority-queue is to facilitate an argument that bounds the number of buckets. However a simple potential-based argument accomplishes the same without having to complicate the data structure. Our O(log k) worst-case Method So that this description is self-contained we review some basics, also presented in Dumitrescu’s posting [arXiv:1607.07673]. Our data structure stores its items in buckets positioned as the leaves of a balanced binary search tree. The items found in a given bucket are consistent with the path in the tree leading to the bucket, but order is not maintained within the buckets. Each bucket stores 2  at most n/(2k) items, so that for any requested Delete operation there will be at least one bucket suitable for serving the request; any of its items being suitable candidates for deletion. Each node in the binary tree also stores in a size field the number of items in the leaves of the subtree rooted at that node. This field facilitates both insertions and deletions, and also determination of the extent of a merge operation (see below). The buckets are also maintained in a doubly linked list respecting their left-to-right positioning in the tree, so that neighboring buckets with respect to tree order are immediately accessible from oneanother. When a bucket becomes empty its associated leaf is deleted from the tree, and when a bucket splits a new leaf is inserted into the tree. Finally, by making use of merging operations the buckets will be maintained to be O(k) in number, so that the required tree operations are all supported at O(log k) cost. This focus of this discussion centers on the regime in which the number of items n is bounded below by a (sufficiently) large multiple of k. The conditions described above: namely that (a) the maximum number of items in a bucket never exceeds (1/2)n/k, and (b) the maximum number of buckets at any instant is O(k); will be maintained by scheduling supplemental work in the execution of requested operations. This supplemental work may involve a fixed number of operations acting upon the binary tree, including insertion and deletion of leaves (pointers to buckets), and joining and tree-splitting operations. These tree operations require work commensurate with that of a tree search. In addition to the tree operations, the supplemental work includes a constant-bounded amount that acts upon and configures buckets in isolation of the tree; namely splitting of large buckets and merging of small buckets. This latter supplemental work is referred to as bucket work . When a designated amount w of such bucket work is to be performed, we understand that this work is to be scheduled over some number of requested operations. When bounding that number of requested operations we will commonly encounter a term involving a positive multiplicative constant that decreases inversely with the amount of bucket work that gets scheduled per requested operation, and we use notation such as ⌈ǫ · w⌉ in specifying such a term, reflecting the understanding that ǫ can, by design, be made arbitrarily small. (We omit the ceiling operator when the context of discussion clearly justifies doing so.) The required number of requested operations over which a given task gets accomplished is referred to as its requested-operation cost. Upon having derived a bound, e.g. O(ǫw), for requested operation cost, with this interpretation for ǫ we are justified in abusing formalism, restating the bound to be ǫw. We will likewise employ a multiplicative ǫ term when bounding the amounts of other measures that are similarly subject to reduction. Bucket Control Overview: Bucket control is an uninterrupted process that proceeds in rounds, each referred to as a bucket control round . During one such round the buckets are scanned from left to right, while bucket splitting and merging tasks are performed . Other bucket splittings that interrupt the scanning sequence can also take place. The details of bucket control are discussed below. The splitting and merging tasks are considered first.  3  Bucket Splitting: When the size of a bucket reaches a defined threshold, it gets split into two smaller buckets. Depending on circumstances (discussed below) the splitting process is distributed over a mix of some number of requested operations that directly access B, followed by some number of requested operations that don’t necessarily access B. Either number can be zero. The sizes of the two buckets spawned by splitting are close in size. The splitting process is completed with tree operations that replace the leaf pointing to the original bucket by two consecutive leaves pointing to the respective spawned buckets. Assume there are m items in the bucket. A fraction ǫṁ of the items are set aside to serve deletion requests while the splitting takes place. By design the splitting takes place at a sufficiently rapid pace (large enough, but constant-bounded amount of supplemental work per requested operation) so that the set-aside items suffice to supply the deletion requests until the spawned buckets have been deployed. Insertions to the bucket are placed among the set-aside items. A linear-time median selection algorithm is then applied to the remaining (1−ǫ)m items to obtain a pivot value. This pivot is then used to partition the m items, as well as items subsequently inserted as the process proceeds. So long as the rate at which bucket work takes place is sufficiently fast, so that the pivot-based partitioning repositions items faster than the rate at which they enter the bucket (at most one per requested operation), we find that (a) the requested-operation cost for splitting a bucket with m items is bounded by ⌈ǫm⌉; (b) the number of items in either spawned bucket does not exceed ((1/2) + ǫ)m; and (c) prior to completion the number of items in the bucket at no point exceeds (1 + ǫ)m. Bucket Merging: This task combines a collection of consecutive small buckets into a single larger bucket. Generally the run of consecutive buckets being merged begins at some specified bucket C, and extends to the maximum number of consecutive buckets whose combined size does not exceed a defined merging threshold . The first step applies joining and tree-splitting operations to remove the portion of the tree that spans the run of buckets, apart from C. The size fields in the binary tree nodes facilitate the required navigation to implement the fixed number tree-splitting and joining operations. The items belonging to any given bucket are stored in a linked list and C is iteratively grown, appending the constituent item lists of the removed buckets to the item list of C, which completes the merging process. Apart from the fixed number of operations on the binary tree, the additional bucket work to merge j (say) buckets has a requested-operation cost bounded by ⌈ǫj⌉. The growing bucket C serves access requests to the merged bucket while this post-merging bucket work is underway. Bucket Control Round: A bucket control round scans the buckets, splitting those that are too large, and merging consecutive buckets that are too small. The scan proceeds from left to right passing through the existing buckets. The quantity ζ = n′ /(6k), where n′ is the number of items in the structure at the onset of a given round, defines the targeted bucket size and gets used as a parameter in setting the thresholds for splitting and merging buckets. A complete round has a requested operation cost bounded by ǫn′ (demonstrated below), so that when taking the access effects of these requested operations into account, n′ changes by a relatively small amount from one round to the next.  4  At the instant that the size of a bucket B exceeds the splitting threshold (5/3)ζ it is designated for a splitting procedure. Thereafter the bucket work of every requested operation that accesses B is dedicated to its being split. When the scanning sequence of a round advances to a bucket C, then the bucket work available from subsequent requested operations, when not preempted for bucket splitting elsewhere, acts upon C and its neighboring buckets as follows. If C is designated as undergoing splitting, then this work completes the splitting, and the scanning advances to the next bucket of the original list. If starting at C there is a run of consecutive buckets whose combined size is at most the merging threshold (set to ζ), then the maximal such run is merged and replaces C. Scanning then advances to the next bucket that follows the merged run. If neither splitting or merging is indicated, then scanning simply advances to the next bucket beyond C. Analysis Our analysis includes the claim, proven by induction, that at the end of a bucket control round the number of items n in the structure satisfies |n−n′ |/n′ ≤ 1/9. We define a potential P as follows. P = P1 + P2 , where P1 is the sum of the bucket sizes at or to the right of where the next scanning step is positioned to act; and P2 is the sum, over all buckets, of the excesses of the bucket sizes, where the excess size of a bucket B is the positive amount, if any, that the size of B exceeds (5/4)ζ. At the onset of a given round, with n′ items in the structure and the scan positioned at the leftmost bucket, the initial value for P is clearly O(n′ ). We argue first that any completed bucket splitting procedure decreases P by Ω(ζ). This follows by consideration of P2 , which has a term (corresponding to the bucket being split) initially set at ((5/3) − (5/4))ζ immediately before the splitting gets underway (if the splitting was initiated in the current round), that is then replaced by two terms having 0 contribution upon conclusion, since the sizes of the spawned buckets are reduced, relative to the original, essentially by a factor of 2. The access effects of the ǫζ operations whose bucket work facilitates the splitting (reflecting the requested-operation cost of the splitting task) may increase P2 and also cause P1 to increase, but the total amount of increase is bounded by ǫζ. Thus, P decreases by Ω(ζ), as claimed. If the bucket splitting work was initiated (but not completed) in the preceding round then the analysis needs to take into account the splitting threshold applicable for that round. Appealing to the induction hypothesis, the relative change in ζ, in comparison with its value in the preceding round, is bounded by 1/9, so that in terms of its current value the applicable splitting threshold of the preceding round lies in the interval [(3/2)ζ, (15/8)ζ]. This does not alter the conclusion that P decreases by Ω(ζ) when the splitting gets completed in the current round. Now upon considering any pair of consecutive scanning steps we find that P also decreases by Ω(ζ). To see this, observe that at least one of the buckets left in the wake of the two scanning steps has size at least (1/3)ζ; otherwise the items belonging to two of these buckets would have been combined into a single bucket. That particular bucket is responsible for an Ω(ζ) decrease in the P1 term, and as before the access effects of the ǫζ requested operations, whose combined bucket work accomplishes the task required of the two scanning steps, don’t alter this conclusion. As for P2 , with respect to merging buckets the terms in P2 reflecting the 5  directly involved buckets are all zero (before and after the merging), and if neither splitting nor merging take place, P2 remains largely unchanged. In addition to completed bucket splittings and scanning steps there is the preempted bucket work for initiated, but not completed bucket splitting procedures. For each such affected swollen bucket B the requested-operation cost of this preempted bucket work performed on B (each such operation accessing B) is bounded by ǫζ and the contribution of B to P (i.e. P2 ) upon completion of the round is Ω(ζ). Now during a given round, the Ω(ζ) decreases to P observed above for each completed bucket splitting and each pair of scanning steps, and the residual amount Ω(ζ) attributable to each swollen bucket, in conjunction with the O(n′ ) value of P at its onset, imply that the total of three quantities: the number of scanning steps, the number of completed splitting procedures and the residual number of swollen buckets; is O(k). This implies that the number of buckets at the end of the round (and beginning of the next round) is O(k); at most one bucket per scanning step or completed splitting. Moreover, the total requested-operation cost of a given round is ǫn′ (ǫζ per scanning step or completed bucket splitting or swollen bucket). The absolute difference between n, at the end of the round, and n′ can’t exceed this requested-operation cost, which by induction establishes our claim that |n − n′ |/n′ ≤ 1/9. Provided that the initial round begins with O(k) buckets, this assures that at all times the number of buckets is O(k). With the splitting threshold set at (5/3)ζ we can also ensure that the size of a bucket never exceeds 2ζ < n/(2k) (including the case when splitting is initiated in the preceding round); sufficient for valid implementation of deletion operations.  6

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
