Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_6132

Abstract:
STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  arXiv:1711.03491v1 [math.AT] 9 Nov 2017  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA Abstract. In this paper, we show that the category of module spectra over C ∗ (B G, Fp ) is stratified for any p-local compact group G, thereby giving a support-theoretic classification of all localizing subcategories of this category. To this end, we generalize Quillen’s F -isomorphism theorem, Quillen’s stratification theorem, Chouinard’s theorem, and the finite generation of cohomology rings from finite groups to homotopical groups. Moreover, we show that p-compact groups admit a homotopical form of Gorenstein duality.  Contents 1. Introduction 2. Recollections on support theory and stratifications 3. Base-change formulae and descent 4. Homotopical groups 5. Stratification 6. Gorenstein duality for p-compact groups Appendix A. Duality for stably dualizable groups, by Tilman Bauer References  1 5 9 17 25 32 35 37  1. Introduction Let G be a finite group and suppose k is a field whose characteristic p divides the order of G. Modular representation theory studies the k-linear representations of G, or equivalently the abelian category of modules over the group algebra kG. Since classifying these objects up to isomorphism is in general impossible, one may consider two simplifications: Firstly divide out by the projective representations to form the stable module category StModkG of G, and secondly classify objects up to a coarser equivalence relation than isomorphism. This leads to the question of how to classify thick subcategories of compact objects and localizing subcategories of StModkG . The classification of thick subcategories was given in [BCR97] using support theoretic techniques. Building on their work, Benson, Iyengar, and Krause [BIK08, BIK11a] developed the notion of stratification of a triangulated category by a Noetherian commutative ring that captures both the classification of thick and localizing subcategories. Their work then culminated in the statement that the canonical action of H ∗ (BG, k) stratifies StModkG , thus giving a complete classification of all localizing ideals in terms of subsets of the support variety Proj(H ∗ (BG, k)). If G is a p-group, there is a standard way of translating this result into stable homotopy theory, which will turn out to be the correct context for our work. Let C ∗ (BG, k) be the commutative ring spectrum C ∗ (BG, k) of cochains on the stable classifying space Σ∞ + BG with coefficients in Date: November 10, 2017. 1  2  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  k. In this language, when G is a p-group the main theorem of [BIK11b] is equivalent to the following: Theorem (Benson–Iyengar–Krause). If G is a finite p-group, then ModC ∗ (BG,k) is stratified by the canonical action of H ∗ (BG, k). This seminal result may be interpreted as a categorification of Quillen’s stratification theorem for the group cohomology of G [Qui71], and has subsequently been extended in several directions: In [BIK12], they show that ModC ∗ (BG,k) is also costratified, which in particular yields a classification of colocalizing subcategories of ModC ∗ (BG,k) . Using the theory of π-points, both stratification and costratification then hold for finite group schemes as well, see [BIKP17]. Furthermore, Benson and Greenlees demonstrated stratification for compact Lie groups G with π0 G a finite p-group in [BG14]. In [BLO07], Broto, Levi, and Oliver introduced the powerful concept of p-local compact groups as a common generalization of the notions of p-compact group [DW94] as well as fusion systems F on a finite group [BLO03]. A p-local compact group G = (S, F , L) consists of a saturated fusion system on a discrete p-toral group S together with a centric linking system L. Informally speaking, this definition provides a combinatorial model of the p-local structure of a compact Lie group (S, F ) together with the extra structure L to construct a classifying space. Moreover, the latter is uniquely determined which makes it possible to construct a (p-completed) classifying space B G associated to G [Che13, Oli13, LL15], thus making saturated fusion systems amenable to homotopical techniques. Examples are given by compact Lie groups with no restriction on the group of components [BLO07] as well as p-completions of finite loop spaces [BLO14]. The main result of the present paper is: Theorem. If G is a p-local compact group, then the category ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) of module spectra over the cochains C ∗ (B G, Fp ) is canonically stratified and costratified. In particular, this result contains the main theorems of [BIK11b] for p-groups and [BG14] as special cases, but applies to many other examples of homotopical groups as well. In order to prove it, we employ techniques from unstable and stable homotopy theory to establish generalizations of Quillen’s F -isomorphism and Quillen’s stratification theorem, Chouinard’s theorem, and the support theory of Benson, Iyengar, and Krause to the context of homotopical groups. Summary of results and methods. From a formal point of view, the key difference between finite p-groups or connected Lie groups and general homotopical groups is that the canonical morphism induced by a Sylow subgroup inclusion φG : C ∗ (B G, Fp ) → C ∗ (BS, Fp ) is not necessarily finite. In fact, we characterize those p-local compact groups for which φG is finite as the p-compact groups. Therefore, our first goal is to develop an abstract generalization of the methods from [BIK11b] which allows descent along certain nonfinite morphisms. To this end, we prove several general base-change formulae (e.g., Proposition 3.11) for support along morphisms of ring spectra, which extend the theory for finite morphisms developed in [BIK12]. We then isolate sufficient conditions for descent of stratifications and costratifications: a morphism f : R → S is said to satisfy Quillen lifting if certain prime ideals in Spech (π∗ R) can be lifted along f ; for a precise definition, see Definition 3.15. Theorem (Theorem 3.24, Theorem 3.25). Suppose that f : R → S is a morphism of Noetherian ring spectra satisfying Quillen lifting and such that induction and coinduction along f are conservative. If ModS is canonically stratified, then so is ModR . If f additionally admits an R-module retract, then canonical costratification descends along f as well. Checking that the conditions of the theorem are satisfied for φG : C ∗ (B G, Fp ) → C ∗ (BS, Fp ) crucially relies on two ingredients: The existence of approximations of p-local compact groups by  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  3  p-local finite groups due to Gonzalez [Gon16], and the existence of stable transfers for p-local finite groups proven by Ragnarsson [Rag06]. As a first step, in order to construct a general transfer, we have to deal with the problem that the stable transfers constructed in the finite case are not necessarily compatible with the given morphisms in the approximation tower. Overcoming this issue requires the study of phantom maps via Brown–Comenetz duality, and is therefore an intrinsically stable result. Theorem (Theorem 4.17). Any p-local compact group G = (S, F ) admits a stable transfer C ∗ (BS, Fp ) → C ∗ (B G, Fp ) of C ∗ (B G, Fp )-modules. In particular, Chouinard’s theorem holds for G, in the sense that elementary abelian subgroups detect trivial objects. One consequence of this theorem is that the cohomology ring H ∗ (B G, Fp ) = π−∗ C ∗ (B G, Fp ) is Noetherian for any p-local compact group G, generalizing the well-known result for finite groups and compact Lie groups proven in [Eve61, Ven59], and for p-compact groups [DW94]. In a second step, we then use the stable elements formula as well as work of Rector [Rec84] and Broto–Zarati [BZ88] to generalize the F -isomorphism theorem for p-local finite groups proven in [BLO03] to p-local compact groups. This allows us to verify that Rector’s general formalism applies to arbitrary p-local compact groups to deduce a strong form of Quillen stratification from the F -isomorphism theorem, closely following Quillen’s original argument [Qui71]. Theorem (Theorem 5.1, Theorem 5.6). The F -isomorphism theorem holds for any p-local compact group G, i.e., there is an F -isomorphism / lim H ∗ (BE, Fp ), ←− e  H ∗ (B G, Fp )  F  where F e is the full subcategory of F on the elementary abelian subgroups of S. Moreover, the variety of G admits a strong form of Quillen stratification: a V+ VG ∼ = E,G , E∈E(G)  where E(G) denotes a set of representatives of F -isomorphism classes of elementary abelian subgroups of S. The Quillen stratification of this theorem generalizes previous work of Linckelmann [Lin17], and in fact gives an alternative proof that does not rely on the existence of certain bisets for p-local finite groups. Combining the previous three theorems, we thus obtain our main result: Theorem (Theorem 5.12, Theorem 5.14, Theorem 5.16). If G is a p-local compact group, then ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) is canonically stratified and costratified. In particular, there are bijections       Subsets of Colocalizing subcategories Localizing subcategories ∼ / o o ∼ / of ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) of ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) Spech (H ∗ (B G, Fp )) as well as    Thick subcategories o of Modcompact C ∗ (B G,Fp )  ∼  /    Specialization closed subsets of . Spech (H ∗ (B G, Fp ))  Moreover, the telescope conjecture holds in ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) . Finally, we turn to the duality theory for homotopical groups. The proof of Benson’s conjecture by Benson and Greenlees [BG08] reveals that C ∗ (BG, Fp ) is an absolute Gorenstein ring spectrum for any finite group G, i.e., admits an algebraic form of Poincaré duality. We use our general methods from [BHV17] to extend this result to p-compact groups.  4  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  Theorem (Theorem 6.8). Let G be a p-compact group of dimension w, then G is absolute Gorenstein, i.e., for each p ∈ Spech (H ∗ (B G, Fp )) of dimension d, the local cohomology at p is given by H ∗ C ∗ (B G, Fp ) ∼ = Ip [w + d], p  where Ip denotes the injective hull Ip of (H ∗ (B G, Fp ))/p. As an immediate corollary this implies the existence of a local cohomology spectral sequence for p-compact groups, see Corollary 6.9. Outline of the document. After establishing the conventions that will be in place throughout the document, we start in Section 2 by revisiting the relevant aspects of support theory and stratifications. In particular, we state the main consequences of stratification and costratification as proven by [BIK11a]. The next section contains our general base-change formulae for support and cosupport, leading to the proof of our main abstract descent result. Section 4 begins with a review of some background material on p-local compact groups and some of their basic properties. We then establish a general criterion which allows us to produce stable transfers for arbitrary plocal compact groups, thereby proving Chouinard’s theorem in this setting. The main theorems about p-local compact groups are then proven in Section 5, namely the F -isomorphism theorem, Quillen stratification of the cohomology ring, and the stratification of the category ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) . This section also contains a discussion of finiteness properties of homotopical groups, leading to a characterization of p-compact groups among all p-local compact groups. In the final section, we discuss duality properties of homotopical groups and show that p-compact groups satisfy a homotopical version of Gorenstein duality. Conventions. Throughout this paper we mostly work in a good symmetric monoidal point set model of spectra Sp, such as S-algebras [EKMM97] symmetric spectra [HSS00], or the ∞category of spectra [Lur17]; our work is not sensitive to a particular choice of model. Given such a model, we refer to a commutative monoid object as a commutative ring spectrum. For a commutative ring spectrum R we write ModR for the category of R-modules and Modω R for the full subcategory of compact objects. For M, N ∈ ModR we write M ⊗R N for the monoidal product of R, and HomR (M, N ) for the spectrum of R-module morphism between M and N . ∗ Given a space X we write X+ for the suspension spectrum Σ∞ + X and C (X, R) for F (X+ , R), the spectrum of R-valued cochains on X+ . If R is a commutative ring spectrum, then so is C ∗ (X, R). Often R = Hk will be the Eilenberg–MacLane spectrum of a discrete commutative ring k; in this case we simply write C ∗ (X, k) for F (X+ , Hk). Finally, our grading conventions are homological; differentials always decrease degree. Thus, for example, π−i C ∗ (BG, k) ∼ = H i (BG, k), i.e., C ∗ (BG, k) is a coconnective commutative ring spectrum. A subcategory T ⊆ C of a stable ∞-category is called thick if it is closed under finite colimits, retracts, and desuspensions, and T is called localizing (respectively colocalizing) if it is closed under all filtered colimits (respectively all filtered limits) as well. For a collection of objects S ⊆ C, we denote the smallest localizing (respectively colocalizing) subcategory of C containing S by LocC (S) (respectively ColocC (S)). If the ambient category is clear from the context, we will omit the subscript C. All discrete rings R in this paper are assumed to be commutative and graded, and all ringtheoretic notions are implicitly graded. In particular, an R-module M refers to a graded Rmodule and we write ModR for the abelian category of discrete graded R-modules. Prime ideals in R will be denoted by fraktur letters p, q, r and are always homogeneous, so that Spech (R) refers to the Zariski spectrum of homogeneous prime ideals in R.  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  5  The p-completion of a space X, denoted Xp∧ , always refers to Bousfield–Kan p-completion [BK72a]. A space X is called p-complete if the p-completion map X → Xp∧ is a homotopy equivalence, and is called Fp -finite if H ∗ (X, Fp ) is finite. A space is p-good if the natural completion map X → Xp∧ induces an isomorphism on mod p cohomology. Acknowledgments. We would like to thank John Greenlees for helpful conversations and Tilman Bauer for allowing us to include his appendix in this paper. The first-named author was partially supported by the DNRF92, the second-named author was partially supported by FEDER-MEC grant MTM2016-80439-P and acknowledges financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, through the “Marı́a de Maeztu” Programme for Units of Excellence in R&D (MDM-2014-0445), and the third-named author was partially supported by the SPP 1786. 2. Recollections on support theory and stratifications 2.1. Preliminaries on ring spectra and modules. In this short section we recall some basic properties of commutative ring spectra and modules over them, and collect several results that will be used throughout the document. We start by introducing Noetherian ring spectra. By [GY83, Thm. 1.1], for a Z-graded commutative ring A∗ , the following conditions are equivalent: (1) The underlying ungraded ring A is Noetherian. (2) The ring A0 is Noetherian and A is finitely generated as an A0 -algebra. (3) Every homogeneous ideal of A is finitely generated. Therefore, it is not necessary to distinguish between Noetherian and graded Noetherian. Definition 2.1. A commutative ring spectrum R is called Noetherian if π∗ R is Noetherian. A morphism f : R → S of commutative ring spectra induces a triple of adjoints (IndSR , ResSR , CoindSR ) between ModR and ModS , where IndSR : ModR → ModS is induction − ⊗R S, ResSR : ModS → ModR is restriction along f , and CoindSR : ModR → ModS is coinduction, given by HomR (S, −). We often denote these adjoints as follows: Ind = IndSR  Res = ResSR  Coind = CoindSR .  We recall that a functor F : C → D of stable ∞-categories is said to be conservative if it reflects equivalences. By stability, this is equivalent to the statement that, for any X ∈ C, F X ≃ 0 if and only if X ≃ 0. Lemma 2.2 (Projection formula). For any morphism f : R → S of commutative ring spectra there exists a canonical and natural equivalence M ⊗R Res(N )  ∼  / Res(Ind(M ) ⊗S N )  for M ∈ ModR and N ∈ ModS . In particular, Ind(M )⊗S N ≃ 0 if and only if M ⊗R Res(N ) ≃ 0. Proof. The proof is standard, see for example [BDS16, Prop. 2.15]; to wit: The required natural transformation is adjoint to Ind(M ⊗R Res(N )) ≃ Ind(M ) ⊗S Ind Res(N )  / Ind(M ) ⊗S N,  where the first map uses that Ind is symmetric monoidal. This map is an equivalence for M = R and arbitrary N , so for all M because both Ind and Res preserve colimits. The final claim follows because Res is conservative.  The following lemma shows that if f admits an R-module retract, then Ind and Coind are always conservative functors.  6  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  Lemma 2.3. Assume f : R → S is a morphism of commutative ring spectra which admits an R-module retract, i.e., a map g : S → R of R-modules such that g ◦ f ≃ idR . If M ∈ ModR , then M is an R-module retract of Res Ind M and Res Coind M . In particular, Ind and Coind are conservative. Proof. Indeed, Res Coind M ≃ Res HomR (S, M ) admits HomR (R, M ) ≃ M as an R-module retract, so we are done. The claim about induction is proven similarly.  Lemma 2.4. Suppose f : R → S is a map of commutative ring spectra which admits an R-module retract. If S is Noetherian, then R is Noetherian as well. Proof. By definition, the claim reduces to the analogous claim for (discrete) commutative rings, which is well-known, see for example [DW94, Lem. 2.4]. For the convenience of the reader, we give a quick alternative proof. Noetherian rings are characterized by the property that any direct sum of injective modules is injective. Let (Iα )α be aLset of injective R-modules. It follows that Coind Iα is an injectiveLS-module for L all α, hence α Coind Iα is injective because S is ∼ Noetherian. Therefore, Res α Coind I Res Coind I α = α is an injective R-module. Since f α L L Res Coind I admits is split as a map of R-modules, α α Iα as a retract, hence the latter α object is injective as well.  We will also make repeated use of the following standard result. Lemma 2.5. Suppose F : C → D is a functor between presentable stable ∞-categories which preserves colimits or limits, respectively. If X, Y ∈ C are objects such that X ∈ Loc(Y ) or X ∈ Coloc(Y ), then F X ∈ Loc(F Y ) or F X ∈ Coloc(F Y ), respectively. Proof. We will prove the claim about localizing subcategories, the one about colocalizing subcategories being proven similarly. Consider the full subcategory L ⊆ C consisting of all objects U ∈ C such that F U ∈ Loc(F Y ). Since Loc(F Y ) is a localizing subcategory of D and F preserves colimits, L ⊆ C is localizing as well. In more detail, it is clear that L is thick, so consider a collection of L objects Ui ∈ L for some indexing set I. By definition, F Ui ∈ LLoc(F Y ), hence L F ( i∈i Ui ) ≃ i∈I F Ui ∈ Loc(F Y ) as F preserves colimits. It follows that i∈I Ui ∈ L, so L is closed under all colimits. By assumption, Y ∈ L, so X ∈ Loc(Y ) ⊆ L.  2.2. Local cohomology and support. In this section we summarize some of the constructions of [BIK08]; for an alternative approach, one can apply the techniques of [BHV17]. Let R be a Noetherian commutative ring spectrum, and suppose that A is a discrete gradedcommutative Noetherian ring that acts on ModR , in the sense of [BIK08, Sec. 4]. Usually A will be π∗ R itself, acting in the evident way, in which case we say that the action is canonical. Given a specialization closed1 subset V ⊂ Spech (A) we can construct local cohomology and homology V functors, denoted ΓA V and ΛA , with the following properties, see [BIK08, Sec. 4] or [BHV17, Thm. 3.9]. Theorem 2.6. Let V ⊂ Spech (A) be specialization closed. Then there exist two pairs of adjoint V A V functors (ΓA V , ΛA ) and (LV , ∆A ), and cofiber sequences A ΓA V M → M → LV M  and  V ∆V A M → M → ΛA M.  A Moreover, ΓA V is a smashing colocalization functor, LV is a smashing localization functor, and V ΛA is a localization functor. 1A subset of Spech (A) is called specialization closed if it is a union of Zariski closed subsets of Spech (A).  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  7  In case the ring is clear from the context, we will drop the subscript or superscript. The functor ΓV is characterized by the property that M ∈ ΓV ModR = Im(ΓV ) if and only if the algebraic p-localization (π∗ M )p = 0 for all p ∈ Spech (A) \ V [BIK08, Prop. 4.5]. Given p ∈ Spech (A) and M ∈ ModR we can define a Koszul object M//p ∈ ModR as in [BIK08, Sec. 5] or [BHV17, Sec. 3] by modding out p homotopically. If we consider the full −tors subcategory ModV of ModR given by Loc(R//p | p ∈ V), then the functor ΓV is the right R −tors adjoint to the inclusion of ModV in ModR , and the existence of the other functors follows R from a formal argument as in [BHV15, Thm. 2.20]. It follows from [BHV17, Prop. 3.21] that the functors constructed in this way agree with those constructed by Benson, Iyengar, and Krause in [BIK08]. The most important examples of specialization closed subsets we consider are V(p) = {q ∈ Spech (A) | q ⊇ p}  and  Z(p) = {q ∈ Spech (A) | q 6⊆ p}.  The latter gives rise to the localization functor LZ(p) satisfying π∗ LZ(p) M ∼ = (π∗ M )p , see [BIK08, Thm. 4.7]. Definition 2.7. For a homogeneous prime ideal p ∈ Spech (A) we define the local cohomology and homology functors with respect to p to be Γp = ΓV(p) LZ(p)  and  Λp = ΛV(p) ∆Z(p) .  It follows from Theorem 2.6 that Γp is left adjoint to Λp ; in particular, there is an equivalence Λp N ≃ HomR (Γp R, N ) for any N ∈ ModR . Remark 2.8. By [BIK08, Thm. 6.2] one can replace V(p) and Z(p) with any specialization closed subsets V and W such that V \W = {p}. This leads to the definition of the support and cosupport of a module M ∈ ModR . Definition 2.9. The support of an R-module M is defined by suppR (M ) = {p ∈ Spech (A) | Γp M 6≃ 0}. Similarly, the cosupport of M is defined to be  If D ⊆ ModR cosuppR (D).  cosuppR (M ) = {p ∈ Spech (A) | Λp M 6≃ 0}. S is a subcategory, then we set suppR (D) = M∈D suppR (M ), and similarly for  Note that we have suppR (R) = Spech (A). Support and cosupport give useful characterizations of the images of ΓV and ΛV . For the following, see [BIK08, Cor. 5.7] and [BIK12, Cor. 4.8]. Proposition 2.10 (Benson–Iyengar–Krause). Let V ⊆ Spech (A) be specialization closed and M ∈ ModR . Then M is in ΓV ModR if and only suppR (M ) ⊆ V, and M is in ΛV ModR if and only if cosuppR (M ) ⊆ V. The next result shows that support and cosupport detect zero objects, and is proven in [BIK08, Thm. 2] and [BIK12, Thm. 4.5]. Theorem 2.11 (Benson–Iyengar–Krause). For any M ∈ ModR , we have M ≃ 0 if and only if suppR (M ) = ∅ if and only if cosuppR (M ) = ∅.  8  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  2.3. Stratification and costratification. In order to classify the localizing subcategories of the stable module category of a finite group, Benson, Iyengar, and Krause [BIK11a] introduced the notion of stratification for a tensor triangulated category with an action by a graded-commutative Noetherian ring A. Since we will only consider the case when A = π∗ R acts canonically, we specialize their definition to this case. Definition 2.12. For a commutative ring spectrum R, the module category ModR is said to be canonically stratified if it is stratified by the canonical action of π∗ R on ModR , i.e., if the following two conditions are satisfied: (1) The local to global principle for localizing subcategories holds, that is, for each M ∈ ModR there is an equality Loc(M ) = Loc({Γp M | p ∈ Spech (π∗ R)}).  (2.13)  h  (2) For any homogeneous prime ideal p ∈ Spec (π∗ R), the category Γp ModR is minimal as a localizing subcategory of ModR (i.e., it has no proper non-zero localizing subcategories). Remark 2.14. At first this may appear to be different to the definition given in [BIK11a, Sec. 4] for stratification of a triangulated category T by a commutative Noetherian ring R, where they require that Γp T is either zero or minimal, however they are in fact equivalent in our case. Indeed, in the case of a canonical ring action by π∗ R on ModR , one can show that Γp ModR is always non-zero. The first condition holds automatically whenever R is Noetherian, see for example [BIK11a, Thm. 7.2]. In order to classify colocalizing subcategories, we have the dual notation of costratification. Definition 2.15. For a commutative ring spectrum R, the module category ModR is said to be canonically costratified if it is costratified by the canonical action of π∗ R on ModR , i.e., if the following two conditions are satisfied: (1) The local to global principle for colocalizing subcategories holds, that is, for each M ∈ ModR there is an equality Coloc(M ) = Coloc({Λp M | p ∈ Spech (π∗ R)}).  (2.16)  h  (2) For any homogeneous prime ideal p ∈ Spec (π∗ R), the category Λp ModR is minimal as a colocalizing subcategory of ModR . Once again, in this case it is not possible that Λp ModR is zero. Moreover, the local to global principle for costratification always holds for Noetherian ring spectra, see [BIK12, Rem. 8.8]. We have the following consequences of (co)stratifications. For proofs, see [BIK11a, Thm. 4.2] and [BIK12, Cor. 9.2]. Theorem 2.17 (Benson–Iyengar–Krause). Let R be a Noetherian commutative ring spectrum. (1) If ModR is canonically stratified, then there is a bijection between localizing subcategories of ModR and subsets of Spech (π∗ R), which takes a subset U ⊆ Spech (π∗ R) to the full subcategory of R-modules whose support is contained in U. (2) If ModR is canonically costratified, then there is a bijection between colocalizing subcategories of ModR and subsets of Spech (π∗ R), which takes a subset U ⊆ Spech (π∗ R) to the full subcategory of R-modules whose cosupport is contained in U. (3) If ModR is canonically costratified, then the map sending a localizing subcategory L of ModR to its left orthogonal L⊥ = {M ∈ ModR | HomR (L, M ) = 0 for all L ∈ L} induces a bijection between localizing and colocalizing subcategories of ModR . In the last result we have used the fact that if ModR is costratified, then it is also stratified [BIK12, Thm. 9.7].  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  9  2.4. Consequences. Apart from the classification of localizing and colocalizing subcategories, there are further consequences of (co)stratification that have been determined by Benson, Iyengar, and Krause, which we review here. Another application, Proposition 3.13, is obtained as a consequence of both stratification and a base-change formula for support. The first result is the classification of all thick subcategories of compact objects, which follows from the classification of all localizing subcategories [BIK11a, Thm. 6.1]. Theorem 2.18 (Benson–Iyengar–Krause). Suppose ModR is canonically stratified by π∗ R. Then, there is a bijection between thick subcategories of compact R-modules and specialization closed subsets of Spech (π∗ R), which takes a specialization closed subset U to the full-subcategory of compact R-modules whose support is contained in U. The following is the analog of the tensor product theorem in modular representation theory, as well as its Hom version. Note that the inclusions ⊆ in this theorem hold unconditionally. Theorem 2.19 (Benson–Iyengar–Krause). Let R be a Noetherian commutative ring spectrum and let M and N be R-modules. If ModR is canonically stratified, then suppR (M ⊗R N ) = suppR (M ) ∩ suppR (N ) and cosuppR (HomR (M, N )) = suppR (M ) ∩ cosuppR (N ). In particular, M ⊗R N ≃ 0 if and only if suppR (M ) ∩ suppR (N ) = ∅, and similarly for HomR (M, N ). Proof. The first is [BIK11a, Thm. 7.3], while the second is [BIK12, Thm. 9.5]. The final claim is then an immediate consequence of Theorem 2.11.  Finally, by [BIK11a, Thm. 6.3], stratification implies that the telescope conjecture holds for ModR ; see also [BIK11b, Thm. 11.13]. Theorem 2.20 (Benson–Iyengar–Krause). Suppose ModR is canonically stratified by π∗ R. Let U be a localizing subcategory of ModR . Then the following conditions are equivalent. (1) The localizing subcategory U is smashing, i.e., the associated localizing endofunctor on ModR preserves colimits. (2) The localizing subcategory U is generated by compact objects in ModR . (3) The support of U is specialization closed. 3. Base-change formulae and descent In this section we generalize the base-change formulae for support and cosupport given in [BIK12] to not necessarily finite morphisms of ring spectra. 3.1. Base-change for support and cosupport. We start by defining precisely what we mean by a finite morphism of ring spectra. Definition 3.1. Let f : R → S be a morphism of Noetherian commutative ring spectra. We say that f is a finite morphism if S is a compact R-module via f . Note that this implies that π∗ S is finitely generated over π∗ R, but the converse fails in general. Under this finiteness assumption the results of Benson, Iyengar, and Krause [BIK12, Sec. 7] specialize to give base-change results for support and cosupport under induction, coinduction, and restriction. The purpose of this section is to generalize these results to not necessarily finite morphisms of commutative ring spectra, which is crucial for our main theorem. We start with two results of Benson, Iyengar, and Krause, for the first see [BIK12, Prop. 7.5], while the second is a consequence of [BIK08, Thm. 5.6 and Prop. 6.1]  10  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  Lemma 3.2. Let α : A → π∗ S be a ring homomorphism with induced map α∗ : Spech (π∗ S) → Spech (A), so that we may consider the induced A-linear action on ModS . If V ⊆ Spech (A) is specialization closed and W = (α∗ )−1 V, then ΓSV ≃ ΓSW and LSV ≃ LSW . Lemma 3.3. Let V, W ⊆ Spech (π∗ S) be specialization closed and set U = V \W. If q ∈ U, then ΓSq LSW ΓSV ≃ ΓSq , and zero otherwise. In particular, given M ∈ ModS , then suppS (LSW ΓSV M ) = suppS (M ) ∩ U. The ring homomorphism π∗ f : π∗ R → π∗ S induces an action of π∗ R on ModS , so we can form the Koszul object (see Section 2.2) S//p for any p ∈ Spech (π∗ R). Lemma 3.4. With notation as above, there is an equivalence Ind(R//p) ≃ S//p of S-modules. Proof. Because induction is symmetric monoidal, we can reduce to the case that p is principal on an element x ∈ πn R. Let fn (x) = (πn f )(x) ∈ πn S and write y : Σn S → S for the corresponding S-module map. Explicitly, viewing x as a map Σn R → R, the map y is given by S ⊗ R Σn R  1⊗x  / S ⊗R R  1⊗f  / S ⊗R S  µ  / S,  where µ : S ⊗R S → S denotes the multiplication on S. It suffices to show that there is an equivalence Ind(R//(x)) ≃ S ⊗R R//(x) ≃ S//(y) as S-modules. Consider the diagram of Rmodules S ⊗ R Σn R  1⊗x  / S ⊗R R  / S ⊗R R//(x) ✤ ✤φ ✤ / S//(y).  µ◦(1⊗f )  ≃    Σn S  y   /S  Notice that the square on the left commutes by construction of y. Furthermore, both the left and the middle vertical maps in the diagram are equivalences as f is the unit of S. It follows that the induced map φ : S ⊗R R//(x) → S//(y) is an equivalence. To conclude that φ is an equivalence of S-modules, observe that in fact all the maps in the diagram above are S-module maps.  Lemma 3.5. With respect to the induced π∗ R-linear action on ModS , there are equivalences S Ind ΓR V ≃ ΓV Ind  and  S Ind LR V ≃ LV Ind  for any specialization closed subset V ⊆ Spech (π∗ R). Proof. Consider the fiber sequence Ind ΓR V  / Ind  / Ind LR . V  S R S By [BIK08, Sec. 4] it suffices to show that Ind ΓR V M ∈ ΓV ModS and Ind LV M ∈ LV ModS for S R all M ∈ ModR . Recall that ΓV ModR = Loc(R//p | p ∈ V) and similarly for ΓV ModS . By Lemma 3.4 and because Ind preserves colimits, Lemma 2.5 implies that there exists a factorization / ModR ΓR V Mod ✤ R ✤ Ind Ind ✤   / ModS . ΓSV ModS  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  11  S Therefore, Ind ΓR V M ∈ ΓV ModS for any M ∈ ModR . For the second claim, let M ∈ ModR and p ∈ V, then Lemma 3.4 gives R HomS (S//p, Ind LR V M ) ≃ HomS (Ind(R//p), Ind LV M )  ≃ HomR (R//p, Res Ind LR VM) ≃ HomR (R//p, LR V (S ⊗R M )) ≃ 0, S hence HomS (W, Ind LR V M ) ≃ 0 for all W ∈ ΓV ModS by a localizing subcategory argument. This R R means that Ind LV M is V-local, i.e., Ind LV M ∈ LSV ModS , thereby completing the proof.   A morphism f : R → S of commutative ring spectra induces a map resf = f ∗ : Spech (π∗ S) → Spech (π∗ R), which we will often denote simply by res if the map f is clear from context. Proposition 3.6. Suppose f : R → S is a morphism of Noetherian commutative ring spectra. e = res−1 (V) ⊆ Spech (π∗ S), then there are natural equivalences Let V ⊆ Spech (π∗ R) and V S Ind ΓR V ≃ ΓV e Ind  as well as  e  V ΛV R Res ≃ Res ΛS  and  and  S Ind LR V ≃ LV e Ind  e  V ∆V R Res ≃ Res ∆S .  Proof. The first two equivalences follow from Lemma 3.5 together with Lemma 3.2, for instance: S S Ind ΓR V ≃ ΓV Ind ≃ ΓV e Ind .  The second set of equivalences is a consequence of the first one, using the adjunctions (Ind ⊣ Res), (ΓV ⊣ ΛV ), and (LV ⊣ ∆V ), as displayed in the following commutative diagram, Ind / ❴ ❴ Mod Mod O ✤ S O ✤ R o❴ Res ✤ ✤ Ve V ΓV ΓV e ✤ Λ ✤ Λ Ind / ModR o❴ ❴ ❴ ModS Res  Ind  ❴ ❴/ Mod Mod O ✤ S O ✤ R o❴ Res ✤ ✤ Ve V LV LV e ✤ ∆ ✤ ∆ Ind / ModR o❴ ❴ ❴ ModS , Res  in which the dashed arrows indicate the right adjoints.    Corollary 3.7. Let V, W ⊆ Spech (π∗ R) be specialization closed subsets such that V \W = {p}.2 e = res−1 (V) and W f = res−1 (W), then there is an equivalence Ind Γp ≃ L fΓ e Ind. In Let V W V particular, for any N ∈ ModS , we have an equality suppS (Ind(Γp R) ⊗S N ) = suppS (N ) ∩ U, e \W f = res−1 ({p}). where U := V  Proof. For M ∈ ModR , using Remark 2.8 and applying Proposition 3.6 twice shows R R S S Ind ΓR p M ≃ Ind LW ΓV M ≃ LW e Ind M. fΓV  As a consequence, we obtain suppS (Ind(Γp R) ⊗S N ) = suppS ((LW e S) ⊗S N ) = suppS (LW e N ), f ΓV f ΓV because the local cohomology functors LVe and ΓW f are smashing. The second part of the result  thus follows from Lemma 3.3. 2For example, we may take V = V(p) and W = Z(p).  12  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  Corollary 3.8. Let M ∈ ModR and N ∈ ModS . Then, we have res suppS (Ind M ) ⊆ suppR (M )  and  res cosuppS (N ) = cosuppR (Res N ).  Additionally, if Ind is conservative, then the first inclusion is an equality. Proof. This is a formal consequence of Proposition 3.6 and the fact that Res is conservative, following the same argument as in [BIK12, Cor. 7.8]. For the convenience of the reader, we outline the argument. By Corollary 3.7, for any r ∈ Spech (π∗ R) and M ∈ ModR there are equalities suppS (Ind Γr M ) = suppS (Ind(Γr R) ⊗S Ind M ) = suppS (Ind M ) ∩ res−1 ({r}). Let p ∈ res suppS (Ind M ), then there exists q ∈ suppS (Ind M ) with res(q) = p, so suppS (Ind M )∩ res−1 ({p}) is non-empty. Therefore, Ind Γp M 6≃ 0, hence p ∈ suppR (M ), which verifies the first claim. Assume now that Ind is conservative, then p ∈ suppR (M ) implies Ind Γp M 6≃ 0. As before, this is equivalent to the existence of a prime ideal q ∈ suppS (Ind M ) ∩ res−1 ({p}), thus p ∈ res suppS (Ind M ). As in the proof of Corollary 3.7 and with notation as above, Proposition 3.6 gives an equivalence e f Λp Res N ≃ Res ΛV ∆W N e  f  for any p ∈ Spech (π∗ R). Therefore p ∈ cosuppR Res N holds if and only if ΛV ∆W N 6≃ 0 because e \W f = res−1 ({p}), this is equivalent to cosuppS (N )∩res−1 ({p}) 6= ∅, Res is conservative. Since V i.e., p ∈ res cosuppS (N ).  We say that a subset U ⊆ Spech (π∗ S) is discrete if r ⊆ q implies r = q for each pair of primes r, q ∈ U. Corollary 3.9. Suppose π∗ S is a finitely generated π∗ R-module, and let U = res−1 ({p}) for p ∈ Spech (π∗ R). Then, there are equivalences a Y Ind Γp ≃ Γq Ind and Λp Res ≃ Res Λq . q∈U  q∈U  Proof. Given Proposition 3.6, this is the same argument as for [BIK12, Cor. 7.10], where our assumption on π∗ S implies that the subset U ⊆ Spech (π∗ S) is discrete.  Lemma 3.10. For M ∈ ModR , there is an inclusion res cosuppS (Coind M ) = cosuppR (Res Coind M ) ⊆ cosuppR (M ). If the map R → S admits an R-module retract, then this is an equality. Proof. The first equality is Corollary 3.8. By construction, Res Coind M ≃ HomR (S, M ) ∈ Coloc(M ), which yields the inclusion. Assuming R → S is split, the reverse inclusion is a consequence of Lemma 2.3.  We are now ready to prove the key base-change formula. Proposition 3.11 (Base-change formula for support). Suppose f : R → S is a morphism of commutative ring spectra, then suppR (Res N ) = res suppS (N ) for any N ∈ ModS . Proof. By the projection formula Lemma 2.2 and using that Γp is smashing, there are equivalences Γp Res N ≃ Γp R ⊗R Res N ≃ Res(Ind(Γp R) ⊗S N ).  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  13  Therefore, a homogeneous prime ideal p ∈ Spech (π∗ R) is in suppR (Res N ) if and only if 0 6≃ Ind(Γp R) ⊗S N . Corollary 3.7 and Theorem 2.11 show that this is equivalent to ∅ 6= suppS (Ind(Γp R) ⊗S N ) = suppS (N ) ∩ res−1 ({p}), i.e., p ∈ res suppS (N ).    Corollary 3.12. Suppose that S is a Noetherian commutative ring spectrum. For any N ∈ S ModS , we have ΓR p Res N ∈ Loc(Res Γq N | res(q) = p). Proof. We have an inclusion suppR (Γp Res N ) = suppR (Γp R ⊗R Res N ) ⊆ suppR (Γp R) ∩ suppR (Res N ) = {p} ∩ res suppS (N ), where the last equality is a consequence of Proposition 3.11. The local to global principle then yields the claim.  Under the assumption that the base category is canonically stratified, we can use Proposition 3.11 to prove an abstract version of the subgroup theorem: Recall that as a consequence of stratification, for a subgroup H of a finite group G, Benson, Iyengar, and Krause [BIK11b, Thm. 11.2] establish a precise relationship between the support of M ∈ StMod(kG) and the support of the restriction of M in StMod(kH). Similarly, in [BIK12, Thm. 11.11], they proved a cosupport version of this theorem. These results can be generalized in the following way, and will give rise to a version of the subgroup theorem for p-local compact groups. Proposition 3.13. Let f : R → S be a morphism of Noetherian commutative ring spectra and suppose ModR is canonically stratified. If M ∈ ModR , then suppS (Ind M ) = res−1 suppR (M )  and  cosuppS (Coind M ) = res−1 cosuppR (M ).  Proof. Let q ∈ Spech (π∗ S) and p = res(q). By Theorem 2.19, stratification of ModR implies that suppR (Res(Γq S) ⊗R M ) = suppR (Res Γq S) ∩ suppR (M ). Because Proposition 3.11 gives an equality suppR (Res Γq S) = {p}, using the projection formula we see that Res Γq Ind M ≃ Res(Γq S) ⊗R M 6≃ 0 if and only if p ∈ suppR (M ). Since Res is conservative, this is equivalent to q ∈ suppS (Ind M ). For the second claim, let M be an R-module. By adjunction, for any q ∈ Spech (π∗ S) there are equivalences Λq Coind M ≃ HomS (S, Λq Coind M ) ≃ HomS (Γq S, Coind M ) ≃ HomR (Res Γq S, M ). Since ModR is stratified, it thus follows from Theorem 2.19 that q 6∈ cosuppS (Coind M ) if and only if suppR (Res Γq S) ∩ cosuppR (M ) = ∅.  (3.14)  The base-change formula Proposition 3.11 gives suppR (Res Γq S) = {res(q)}, so (3.14) is in turn equivalent to res(q) 6∈ cosuppR (M ).   14  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  3.2. Abstract descent along finite morphisms. As a first application of our methods, in this subsection we will consider the case of descent of stratification along a finite morphism f : R → S. This provides, in essence, an abstract version of the main results of [BIK11b] and [BIK12]. To that end, we will introduce a technical property which is the key ingredient needed in the arguments of [BIK11b] to descend stratifications, as we will see shortly. In all of our examples, this condition follows from a strong form of Quillen stratification for Spech (π∗ R). Definition 3.15. A morphism of Noetherian commutative ring spectra f : R → S is said to satisfy Quillen lifting if for any two modules M, N ∈ ModR such that there is p ∈ res suppS (Ind M ) ∩ res cosuppS (Coind N ), there exists a homogeneous prime ideal q ∈ res−1 ({p}) with q ∈ suppS (Ind M ) ∩ cosuppS (Coind N ). Here is the primordial example of a morphism of ring spectra satisfying Quillen lifting; we will exhibit other examples in Theorem 5.10. Example 3.16. It is a consequence of the strong form of Quillen stratification for group cohomology [Qui71] that the morphism Q / C ∗ (BG, k) C ∗ (BE, k) E∈E(G)  satisfies Quillen lifting, see Theorem 5.10. Here, G is a compact Lie group, k is a field of characteristic p, and E(G) is a set of representatives of conjugacy classes of elementary abelian p-subgroups of G. Suppose that f : R → S is a finite morphism in the sense of Definition 3.1. Using, for example, [BDS16, Thm. 1.7], this is equivalent to the existence of a left adjoint to Ind and a right adjoint to Coind. The proof of [BIK11b, Thm. 9.7] generalizes effortlessly to give the following result. Proposition 3.17. Let f : R → S be a finite morphism of Noetherian commutative ring spectra satisfying Quillen lifting and such that Ind is conservative. If ModS is canonically stratified, then ModR is canonically stratified as well. Turning to costratifications, the next result is an abstract version of [BIK12, Thm. 11.10], whose proof can be significantly simplified by virtue of our Proposition 3.13. Before we can give the proof, we need one more construction. Recall that for any graded injective π∗ R-module I and compact object C ∈ ModR there is an R-module TC (I) with the property that π∗ HomR (−, TC (I)) ∼ = Homπ R (π∗ HomR (C, −), I), ∗  see [HPS97, Sec. 6], [BK02], or [BHV17, Sec. 4.1] for example. For p ∈ Spech (π∗ R), let Ip denote the injective hull of π∗ R/p in Modπ∗ R . For simplicity, let us write Tp Ip for TR//p (Ip ). By [BIK12, Prop. 5.4] this is a perfect cogenerator of Λp ModR . In particular, Coloc(Tp Ip ) = Λp ModR , see [BIK12, Prop. 5.2]. Proposition 3.18. Suppose f : R → S is a finite morphism of Noetherian commutative ring spectra such that Coind is conservative. If ModS is canonically costratified and ModR is canonically stratified, then ModR is canonically costratified. Proof. Let p ∈ Spech (π∗ R), and let M ∈ Λp ModR be non-zero. Note that Proposition 3.13 gives cosuppS (Coind M ) = res−1 cosuppR (M ) = res−1 ({p}), so that Λq (Coind M ) 6≃ 0 for each q ∈ Spech (π∗ S) with res(q) = p. Now, as in [BIK12, Prop. 5.4] we have cosuppS (Tq Iq ) = {q}. It follows from the paragraph above and costratification of ModS that for all q ∈ res−1 ({p}): Tq Iq ∈ Coloc(Λq (Coind M )) ⊆ Coloc(Coind M ).  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  15  Since Res preserves limits, using Lemma 2.5 and Lemma 3.10 we have Res Tq Iq ∈ Coloc(Res Coind M ) ⊆ Coloc(M ). But the collection of objects {Res Tq Iq | res(q) = p} cogenerates the category Λp ModR by [BIK12, Prop. 5.4 and Lem. 7.12], and we are done.  Corollary 3.19. Suppose f : R → S is a finite morphism of Noetherian commutative ring spectra satisfying Quillen lifting and such that Ind and Coind are conservative. If ModS is canonically costratified, then ModR is canonically costratified. Proof. This is an immediate consequence of Proposition 3.17 and Proposition 3.18.    Remark 3.20 (Linearity of Coind). We claim that, if R → S is finite, then Coind is a linear functor (ModR , π∗ R) → (ModS , π∗ S) in the sense of [BIK12, Sec. 7]. As a consequence, the proof of costratification given in [BIK12] also directly generalizes to give Proposition 3.18, where Coind plays the role of their (−) ↓. In order to verify the claim, must show that for any R-module M the diagram ∗ π∗ R ∼ = EndR (R)  Ind  ∗ / π∗ S ∼ = EndS (S) Coind(M)⊗S −  M⊗R −    End∗R (M )  Coind   / End∗S (Coind M )  commutes, or in other words, for a morphism of R-modules α : Σi R → R, we must show that that Coind(M⊗R α) Σi Coind M −−−−−−−−−→ Coind M is equivalent to Coind(M)⊗S Ind(α)  Σi Coind(M ) ⊗S S −−−−−−−−−−−−→ Coind(M ) ⊗S S. Because of the finiteness assumption, we have a natural equivalence Coind(M ⊗R N ) ≃ Coind(M )⊗S Ind(N ), see [BDS16, (3.6)]. It follows that Coind(M ⊗R α) ≃ Coind(M )⊗S Ind(α), as required. If G is a compact Lie group, then one would like to apply our abstract results to the morphism Q ∗ / C (BE, Fp ), f : C ∗ (BG, Fp ) E≤S  where E runs over the collection of elementary abelian p-subgroups of G. Hence, we need to know about stratification and costratification for module spectra over ModC ∗ (BE,Fp ) . This has previously been proved by Benson–Iyengar–Krause. Proposition 3.21 (Benson–Iyengar–Krause). Let E be an elementary abelian group, then ModC ∗ (BE,Fp ) is canonically stratified and costratified. Proof. By [BK08, Thm. 4.2] and [BK08, Thm. 7.8], ModC ∗ (BE,Fp ) is equivalent as a symmetric monoidal stable category to K(Inj Fp E), the category of complexes of injective Fp E-modules with homotopy equivalences as weak equivalences. Moreover, this equivalence is compatible with the canonical actions of H ∗ (BE, Fp ) ∼ = π−∗ C ∗ (BE, Fp ) on both sides. The stratification result then follows from [BIK11b, Thm. 8.1], while the costratification follows from [BIK12, Thm. 11.6].  Remark 3.22. If G is a compact Lie group with π0 G a finite p-group, then the arguments of [BG14] show that the relevant induction and coinduction functors are naturally equivalent up to an invertible twist, so that the proof of costratification given in [BIK12] immediately yields canonical costratification for ModC ∗ (BG,Fp ) as well. However, in general, f : C ∗ (BG, Fp ) → C ∗ (BE, Fp ) is  16  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  not finite, so the methods of this subsection are insufficient to imply stratification for all compact Lie groups. We will return to the general case in Corollary 5.15. 3.3. Descent for stratification. In this section, we give conditions on a morphism f : R → S such that we can descend a canonical stratification from ModS to ModR . Proposition 3.23. Assume that Coind is conservative and let M ∈ Γp ModR be a non-trivial module, then cosuppS (Coind M ) ∩ res−1 ({p}) 6= ∅. Proof. First note that, for any N ∈ ModS , the non-triviality of HomS (Γq S, N ) ≃ Λq N is equivalent to q ∈ cosuppS (N ). Therefore, for M ∈ Γp ModR , it suffices to show that HomS (Γq S, Coind M ) 6≃ 0 for at least one q ∈ res−1 ({p}). On the one hand, by local duality, there are equivalences HomR (Γp Res S, M ) ≃ HomR (Res S, Λp M ) ≃ HomS (S, Coind Λp M ) ≃ Coind Λp M. Because suppR (M ) = {p}, we get p ∈ cosuppR (M ) by [BIK12, Thm. 4.13], so Coind Λp M 6≃ 0 as Coind is conservative. On the other hand, Corollary 3.12 gives that Γp Res S ∈ Loc(Res Γq S | res(q) = p). Since there is an equivalence of R-modules HomS (Γq S, Coind M ) ≃ HomR (Res Γq S, M ), HomS (Γq S, Coind M ) ≃ 0 for all q ∈ res−1 ({p}) would force HomR (Γp Res S, M ) ≃ 0 as well. This contradicts Coind Λp M 6≃ 0 as proven above, hence the result follows.  Theorem 3.24. Suppose that f : R → S is a morphism of Noetherian ring spectra satisfying Quillen lifting and such that Ind and Coind are conservative. If ModS is canonically stratified, then so is ModR . Proof. Since the local to global principle holds for any Noetherian commutative ring spectrum, it remains to verify that Γp ModR is minimal for any homogeneous prime ideal p ⊆ π∗ R. To this end, we will apply the criterion given in [BIK11a, Lem. 4.1]: it thus suffices to show that HomR (M, N ) 6≃ 0 for all non-trivial modules M, N ∈ Γp ModR . By Corollary 3.8 and Proposition 3.23 we have suppS (Ind M ) ∩ res−1 ({p}) 6= ∅ 6= cosuppS (Coind N ) ∩ res−1 ({p}). It follows that p ∈ res(suppS (Ind M )) ∩ res(cosuppS (Coind N )), and so Quillen lifting yields a homogeneous prime ideal q ∈ res−1 ({p}) such that q ∈ suppS (Ind M ) ∩ cosuppS (Coind N ). Since ModS is canonically stratified, Theorem 2.11 and Theorem 2.19 imply that 0 6≃ HomS (Ind M, Coind N ) ≃ HomR (Res Ind M, N ). Because Res Ind M ∈ Loc(M ), it follows that HomR (M, N ) 6≃ 0, as required.    STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  17  3.4. Descent for costratification. Let f : R → S be a morphism of Noetherian commutative ring spectra which admits an R-module retract satisfying Quillen lifting; in particular, Ind and Coind are conservative by Lemma 2.3. Furthermore, we assume that ModS is canonically costratified. For the following, we remind the reader of the R-module Tp Ip from Section 3.2. Theorem 3.25. Suppose that f : R → S is a morphism of Noetherian commutative ring spectra which admits an R-module retract. If ModS is canonically costratified and ModR is canonically stratified, then ModR is also canonically costratified. Proof. Since the local to global principle holds for Noetherian ring spectra, it suffices to show that, given p ∈ Spech (π∗ R), any non-trivial M ∈ Λp ModR satisfies Coloc(M ) = Λp ModR . One inclusion is obvious, so it remains to verify that a cogenerator for Λp ModR is contained in Coloc(M ). To this end, note that Λq Coind M 6≃ 0 for all q ∈ res−1 ({p}) by Proposition 3.13, hence the colocalizing subcategory generated by Λq Coind M coincides with Λq ModS for all q ∈ res−1 ({p}), using that ModS is costratified. By the local to global principle, we thus obtain an inclusion Coloc(Λq S | q ∈ res−1 ({p})) = Coloc(Λq Coind M | q ∈ res−1 ({p})) ⊆ Coloc(Coind M ). Since cosuppR (Tp Ip ) = {p}, Lemma 3.10 shows that cosuppS (Coind Tp Ip ) ⊆ res−1 cosuppR (Tp Ip ) = res−1 ({p}), so Coind Tp Ip ∈ Coloc(Λq S | q ∈ res−1 ({p})) ⊆ Coloc(Coind M ). It thus follows from the fact that Res preserves limits, Lemma 2.5, and Lemma 3.10 that Res Coind Tp Ip ∈ Coloc(Res Coind M ) ⊆ Coloc(M ). The perfect cogenerator Tp Ip of Λp ModR is a retract of Res Coind Tp Ip by assumption on f , so Λp ModR ⊆ Coloc(M ), as desired.  4. Homotopical groups In this section we provide the background material on homotopical groups, introducing the concepts of p-compact groups, p-local finite groups, and p-local compact groups. We then prove a version of Chouinard’s theorem for p-local compact groups by constructing a stable transfer. 4.1. The homotopy theory of compact Lie groups and p-compact groups. In order to study the homotopical properties of compact Lie groups, Rector suggested studying their classifying spaces; however, he observed that there are uncountably many distinct loop space structures on S 3 [Rec71]. It was then shown by Dwyer, Miller, and Wilkerson that this problem ∧ goes away after p-completion: there is a unique loop space structure on (S 3 )p [DMW87]. This example suggests that the right category to isolate the homotopical properties of compact Lie groups is the category of p-complete spaces. Based on this, Dwyer and Wilkerson [DW94] introduced the notion of a p-compact group. Definition 4.1. A p-compact group is a triple (X, BX, e) where X is an Fp -finite space, BX is a p-complete space, and e : X → ΩBX is an equivalence. Remark 4.2. By [DW94, Lem. 2.1], BX is p-complete if and only if X is p-complete and π0 X is a finite p-group. The notion of a p-compact group gives a homotopy theoretic version of connected compact Lie groups. Most of the geometric structure of a connected compact Lie group can be translated into this homotopy theoretic setting. A homomorphism f : X → Y of p-compact groups is a pointed map Bf : BX → BY , and f is said to be a monomorphism if H ∗ (Y /f (X), Fp ) is finite where  18  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  Y /f (X) denotes the homotopy fiber of Bf (equivalently, if H ∗ (BX, Fp ) is finitely generated as a H ∗ (BY, Fp )-module, see [DW94, Prop. 9.11]). In the latter case we say that the pair (X, f ) is a subgroup of Y , and we write X ≤f Y . ∧ ∧ If G is a compact Lie group with π0 G a finite p-group , then (G∧ p , BGp , eG p ) is a p-compact group (see Remark 4.2). A p-compact torus is the p-completion of a torus and a p-compact toral group Sb is a p-compact group that is a finite extension of a p-compact torus by a finite p-group. Specially relevant is the fact that p-compact groups admit a maximal torus, an associated Weyl group, and a maximal p-compact toral subgroup (see [DW94]). However, there are exotic examples of p-compact groups which are not the p-completion of any compact Lie group. Connected p-compact groups were classified in [AG09] and [AGMV08], where a bijective correspondence between connected p-compact groups and reflection data over the p-adic integers was established. As noted, Lie groups in general do not give rise to p-compact groups unless π0 (G) is a p-group. When G is finite, based on the observation that the homotopy type of BG∧ p is strongly determined by the conjugacy data of p-subgroups in G, Broto, Levi, and Oliver [BLO03] introduced the notion of a p-local finite group. Later, Broto, Levi, and Oliver [BLO07] defined the more general notion of a p-local compact group in order to recover the homotopy type of compact Lie groups. To define these, recall that a saturated fusion system F associated to a finite p-group P is a small subcategory of the category of groups which encodes conjugacy data between subgroups of a fixed finite p-group P , as formalized by Puig [Pui06]. The standard example is given by the fusion category of a finite group: Given a finite group G with a fixed Sylow p-subgroup S, let FS (G) be the category with MorFS (G) (P, Q) = HomG (P, Q) for all P, Q ≤ S, where HomG (P, Q) = {ϕ ∈ Hom(P, Q) | ϕ = cg for some g ∈ G} is the set of homomorphisms induced by subconjugation by an element in G. This category FS (G) gives rise to a saturated fusion system, see [BLO03, Proposition 1.3]. Exotic examples (e.g., saturated fusion systems which are not equivalent to FS (G) for any finite group G) are also known, see [BLO03], [DRV07], or [LO02], for example. In [BLO07] Broto, Levi, and Oliver extended the definition of fusion systems over finite pgroups to fusion systems defined over a discrete p-toral group - that is, a discrete group which contains a normal subgroup of the form (Z/p∞ )r of p-power index, for finite r ≥ 0. However, in order to recover the homotopy type of BG∧ p more structure is needed. To do so, Broto, Levi, and Oliver axiomatized a new category L, the centric linking system, containing the information needed to construct the classifying space. Packing all this information together, we arrive at the definition of a p-local compact group. Definition 4.3 (Broto–Levi–Oliver). A p-local compact group is a triple G = (S, F , L) where F is a saturated fusion system over a discrete p-toral group S and L is a centric linking system associated to F . The classifying space B G is defined as |L|∧ p , the p-completion of the nerve of the associated centric linking system. A p-local finite group is then the special case where S is a finite p-group. More recently, Chermak [Che13] proved the existence and uniqueness of centric linking systems associated to saturated fusion systems over a finite p-group (see also [Oli13]) and Levi–Libman [LL15] in general, and therefore there is a unique p-complete classifying space associated to a saturated fusion system over a discrete p-toral group. Hence, we will often denote a p-local compact group either as a pair G = (S, F ), or even just as G. Among all the structure associated to a centric linking system, there is a canonical morphism θ : BS → B G, see the discussion on p. 826 of [BLO03], which can be thought of as the inclusion of a Sylow p-subgroup.  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  19  Example 4.4. For any compact Lie group G, there exists a maximal discrete p-toral subgroup S, ∧ and a p-local compact group G = (S, F S (G), LS (G)) with |LS (G)|∧ p ≃ BGp [BLO07, Thm. 9.10]. We say that the p-local compact group models the compact Lie group G. Example 4.5. A discrete approximation to a p-compact toral group Sb is a pair (S, f ) where S is a discrete p-toral group and Bf : BS → B Sb a morphism which induces an isomorphism in mod p cohomology. Such discrete approximations always exist [DW94, Prop. 6.9]. Conversely, every discrete p-toral group S is a discrete approximation of (Ω(BSp∧ ), BSp∧ , id). Given a p-compact group X, a discrete p-toral subgroup is a pair (S, f ) where S is a discrete p-toral subgroup and f : Sb → X is a monomorphism in the sense of Dwyer–Wilkerson. By [DW94] any p-compact group has a maximal discrete p-toral subgroup. Moreover, there exists a p-local compact group G = (S, F S,f (X), LS,f ) with |LS,f |∧ p ≃ BX [BLO07, Thm. 10.7]. We say that the p-local compact group G models the p-compact group X. More generally, finite loop spaces at a prime p can also be modeled by p-local compact groups [BLO14]. Finally, the following definition will be important in the sequel. Definition 4.6. Given a saturated fusion system (S, F ), we say that two subgroups P, Q 6 S are F -conjugate if they are isomorphic in the category F . In the case that the p-local compact group models a compact Lie group or a p-compact group, the notion of F -conjugacy has a familiar interpretation. Lemma 4.7. (1) If a p-local compact group G = (S, F ) models a compact Lie group G, then two subgroups P, Q 6 S are F -conjugate if and only if they are conjugate as subgroups of G. (2) Fix a p-compact subgroup X and a maximal discrete p-toral subgroup f : S → X. If a plocal compact group G = (S, F ) models X, then two subgroups P, Q 6 S are F -conjugate if and only if there exists a monomorphism φ : P → Q such that Bf |BQ ◦Bφ ≃ Bf |BP . Proof. Both of these simply follow from the definition of the associated fusion system. For example, by [BLO07, Sec. 9] the fusion system F = F S (G) associated to a compact Lie group G has MorF S (G) (P, Q) = HomG (P, Q), the set of homomorphisms induced by subconjugation by elements of G. The fusion system associated to a p-compact group is given in [BLO03, Def. 7.1] and has the claimed form.  4.2. Unitary embeddings. Unitary embeddings are useful tools to reduce questions about compact Lie groups to unitary groups. For compact Lie groups, the existence of unitary embeddings is a consequence of the Peter–Weyl Theorem. For p-compact groups, the statement is in [CC17, Sec. 5]. This relies on the classification of p-compact groups, with the embedding of exotic p-compact groups given in [Cas06, CC17] for p > 2 and [Zie09] for p = 2. In this short subsection, we review this notion for more general spaces and the main property which we will use in the sequel. Since we work extensively with cochains in this section, it is worth pointing out the following. Lemma 4.8. If X is a p-good space, and k is a field of characteristic p > 0, then C ∗ (X, k) ≃ C ∗ (Xp∧ , k) for both the stable and the unstable p-completions of X. Proof. First note that, under the assumptions on X, p-completion coincides with HFp ∧ ∞ localization. The natural localization maps X → Xp∧ and Σ∞ + X → (Σ+ X)p induce maps on cochains ∧ ∧ / C ∗ (Σ∞ / C ∗ ((Σ∞ C ∗ (Σ∞ C ∗ ((Σ∞ + (Xp ), k) + X, k) + X) , k) + X), k). p  20  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  On homotopy groups, both maps induce isomorphisms of the corresponding cohomology groups, so they must be equivalences.  Remark 4.9. Examples of spaces which are p-good are pointed connected space such that π1 (X) is finite [BK72b, Ch. VII.5] and pointed connected nilpotent spaces [BK72b, Ch. VI.5.3]. In particular, if G is a compact Lie group, then BG is a p-good space. Suppose first that G is a p-compact group. Then, one could reasonably define a unitary ∧ embedding to be a monomorphism BG → BU (n)p of p-compact groups. The following more general result implies that, in this case, the induced morphism C ∗ (BU (n), Fp ) → C ∗ (BG, Fp ) is finite (note that Lemma 4.8 implies that we do not need to p-complete BU (n) after taking cochains). Lemma 4.10. Suppose H ≤f G is a subgroup of a p-compact group G, then C ∗ (BG, Fp ) is a finite C ∗ (BH, Fp )-module via the induced morphism (Bf )∗ . Proof. By definition of a subgroup of a p-compact group, the homotopy fiber of (Bf )∗ is Fp -finite. The result then follows from [BGS13, Lem. 3.4].  In general, if G is a finite group, then the constant map ∗ → BG∧ p need not have Fp -finite fiber. Based on this observation, [CC17] suggested the notion of homotopy monomorphism, which only requires the homotopy fiber to be BZ/p-null i.e., the space of based maps map∗ (BZ/p, F ) ≃ ∗ for all base-points in F . Consequently, we have the following notion of unitary embedding. Definition 4.11. A p-complete and path-connected space X is said to have a unitary embedding ∧ if there exists a continuous map f : X → BU (n)p for some n with BZ/p-null homotopy fiber F . The next proposition shows that the finiteness result of Lemma 4.10 still holds with this definition, and in fact characterizes unitary embeddings. Note that the proof also implies that unitary embeddings do in fact have Fp -finite homotopy fibers. Proposition 4.12. Let X be a p-complete and path-connected space with Noetherian cohomology, ∗ ∗ then f : X → BU (n)∧ p is a unitary embedding if and only if the morphism f : C (BU (n), Fp ) → ∗ C (X, Fp ) of commutative ring spectra is finite. Proof. We argue as in the proof of [CC17, Prop. 2.2]. Consider the fiber sequences ΩX  / U (n)∧ p  /F  /X ∧  / BU (n)∧ . p ∧  Since they are loop spaces, both Ω(Xp∧ ) and U (n)p are nilpotent, hence so is F . Since BU (n)p is ∧ 1-connected, F is connected as well and also p-complete. Moreover, using that U (n)p is Fp -finite, the Serre spectral sequence shows that H ∗ (F, Fp ) is a finitely generated H ∗ (X, Fp )-module. Since H ∗ (X, Fp ) is Noetherian, H ∗ (F, Fp ) is Noetherian and thus finitely generated over Fp . By assumption, F is BZ/p-null and also p-complete by construction, so map(BZ/p, F ) ≃ F and map(BZ/p, F ) is p-complete. Since H ∗ (F, Fp ) is a finitely generated Fp -algebra, [Lan92, Cor. 3.4.3] applies to give TZ/p (H ∗ (F, Fp )) ∼ = H ∗ (F, Fp ), = H ∗ (map(BZ/p, F ), Fp ) ∼ where TZ/p is Lannes’s T -functor introduced in [Lan92]. By [Sch94, Thm. 6.2.1], it follows that H ∗ (F, Fp ) is locally finite and, in particular, all of its elements are nilpotent. Because H ∗ (F, Fp ) is finitely generated as an Fp -algebra, it must be finite. Therefore, [BGS13, Lem. 3.4] implies that f ∗ : C ∗ (BU (n), Fp ) → C ∗ (X, Fp ) is finite. ∧ Conversely, let f : X → BU (n)p . If f ∗ : C ∗ (BU (n), Fp ) → C ∗ (X, Fp ) is a finite morphism, ∗ then H (X, Fp ) is a finitely generated H ∗ (BU (n), Fp )-module, so [BGS13, Lem. 3.5] applies to  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  21  conclude that the fiber of f is Fp -finite. Moreover F is connected (since BU (n)∧ p is 1-connected) and nilpotent by [BK72b, Prop. III.5.5]. Therefore, by [Mil84, Thm. C], f is a unitary embedding of X.  Note that we will not need the full strength of this theorem in our paper, since we only require it for p-compact groups, however we include it as it may be of independent interest. 4.3. Finiteness and a stable transfer for C ∗ (B G, Fp ). In order to produce a stable transfer for p-local compact groups, we rely on theorems of Gonzalez and Ragnarsson as well as a general result on limits of retracts whose proof is postponed to the end of this section. In [Gon16] Gonzalez proves that any p-local compact group G = (S, F ) can be approximated by a sequence of p-local finite groups G i = (Si , F i )i≥0 in such a way that the homotopy colimit over the associated sequence of classifying spaces is equivalent to the classifying space of G = (S, F ) after p-completion. Unpacking his construction, the following is [Gon16, Thm. 1]. Theorem 4.13 (Gonzalez). If G = (S, F ) is a p-local compact group, then there is a commutative diagram / BSi+1 / ... / BSi ...  / B Gi  ...   / B G i+1  / ...  of p-local finite groups G i = (Si , F i ) indexed on i ∈ N whose colimits recovers the map BS → B G after p-completion. The next theorem of Ragnarsson shows that at each level of the induced tower of cochain ring spectra there is a transfer C ∗ (BSi , Fp ) → C ∗ (B G i , Fp ); however, note we do not know whether these transfer maps can be constructed in a way that is compatible with the structure maps in the corresponding towers. Recall that the suspension spectrum of an unbased space X will be denoted by X+ = Σ∞ + X. The following is a combination of [Rag06, Thm. D] and [Rag08, Cor. 6.7]. Theorem 4.14 (Ragnarsson). For any p-local finite group G = (S, F ), there is a natural transfer s : B G + → BS+ . In particular, the canonical map f : BS+ → B G + is split, i.e., f ◦ s ≃ idB G + . Moreover, the following diagram commutes up to homotopy B G+  ∆  s   BS+  / B G + ⊗B G + 1⊗s  (f ⊗1)◦∆   / B G + ⊗BS+ .  ∗  In particular, the map C (B G i , Fp ) → C ∗ (BSi , Fp ) is split as a map of C ∗ (B G i , Fp )-modules. Corollary 4.15. For any p-local compact group G = (S, F ), the homotopy groups π∗ C ∗ (B G, Fp ) are degreewise finite. Proof. Let G i = (Si , F i )i≥0 be an approximation to G as in Theorem 4.13. We follow Gonzalez’s proof of [Gon16, Prop. 4.3 and Thm. 4.4]. Since H −∗ (BSi , Fp ) ∼ = π∗ C ∗ (BSi , Fp ) is ∗ degreewise finite for all i, the same is true for π∗ C (B G i , Fp ) by Theorem 4.14. It follows that both (π∗ C ∗ (BSi , Fp ))i and (π∗ C ∗ (B G i , Fp ))i are towers satisfying the Mittag-Leffler condition in each degree, so that the corresponding lim1 -terms vanish. Using the Milnor sequence and Theorem 4.14 again, we see that π∗ C ∗ (B G, Fp ) ∼ = π∗ limi C ∗ (B G i , Fp ) ∼ = limi π∗ C ∗ (B G i , Fp )  22  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  ∼ π∗ C ∗ (BS, Fp ), because lim is left-exact. By [DW94, is a subgroup of limi π∗ C ∗ (BSi , Fp ) = ∗ Thm. 12.1], π∗ C (BS, Fp ) is Noetherian, hence degreewise finite, and the claim follows.  Proposition 4.16. Let G = (S, F ) be a p-local compact group and let θ : BS → B G denote the canonical map. Then θ∗ : C ∗ (B G, Fp ) → C ∗ (BS, Fp ) is split as a map of C ∗ (B G, Fp )-modules. In particular, if M ∈ ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) then M is a retract of Res Ind(M ) and of Res Coind M . Proof. Applying C ∗ (−, Fp ) to Gonzalez’s approximation from Theorem 4.13 yields a map of towers (gi )i : (C ∗ (B G i , Fp ))i → (C ∗ (BSi , Fp ))i with limit g : C ∗ (B G, Fp ) → C ∗ (BS, Fp ). Since the structure maps of both towers as well as all gi are maps of commutative ring spectra, we can work entirely in ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) . Let R = C ∗ (B G, Fp ), then Theorem 4.14 and Corollary 4.15 imply that the conditions of Proposition 4.23 below are satisfied, implying the claim. The second statement follows from applying −⊗C ∗(B G,Fp ) M and HomC ∗ (B G,Fp ) (−, M ) to idC ∗ (B G,Fp ) ≃ t◦θ∗ ,  see Lemma 2.3. As a consequence, we obtain a version of Chouinard’s theorem for ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) . Theorem 4.17. Let G = (S, F ) be a p-local compact group and let θ : BS → B G denote the canonical map. Then, induction and coinduction along the morphism induced by restriction Q ∗ / C (BE, Fp ) f : C ∗ (B G, Fp ) E(S)  are conservative, where E(S) denotes a set of representatives of conjugacy classes of elementary abelian subgroups of S. Proof. The morphism f factors as the composite C ∗ (B G, Fp )  θ∗  / C ∗ (BS, Fp )  ζ  /  Q  C ∗ (BE, Fp ).  E(S)  If suffices to show that induction and coinduction along both θ∗ and ζ are conservative. By Proposition 4.16 this is true for θ∗ , and so we must show it for ζ. For this, the same proof as in [BG14, Thm. 3.1] works by using the fact that any discrete p-toral group S admits a unitary embedding. First consider the monomorphism of (Z/p∞ )r for a finite r ≥ 0 into (S 1 )r ⊆ U (r) by taking the power of p roots of unity, then induce up to S since this is a normal subgroup of finite index in S. We sketch their strategy for completeness. Let S → U (V ) be a unitary embedding, and let A be a maximal elementary abelian p-subgroup inside a maximal torus for U (V ). The homogeneous space U (V )/A has the homotopy type of a finite CW -complex. The S-space F = U (V )/A is then a finite S-space, whose isotropy subgroups are all elementary abelian p-subgroups. Moreover, any elementary abelian p-subgroup in U (V ) is subconjugated to A in U (V ). Applying the Borel construction, C ∗ (FhS , Fp ) is finitely built from C ∗ (BE, Fp ), where E runs over all elementary abelian p-subgroups of S. They show that C ∗ (BS, Fp ) is a retract of C ∗ (FhS , Fp ): the cohomology of F is described by H ∗ (FhS ) ∼ = H ∗ (BA, Fp ) ⊗H ∗ (BU(V ),Fp ) ∗ ∗ ∗ H (BS, Fp ), and it is a free H (BS, Fp )-module since H (BA, Fp ) is a L free H ∗ (BU (V ), Fp )module, finally, by taking generators, one can construct an equivalence Σni C ∗ (BS, Fp ) → ∗ C (FhS , Fp ). Then, C ∗ (BS, Fp ) is in the thick subcategory generated by C ∗ (BE, Fp ) where E runs over all elementary abelian p-subgroups of S. Finally, it then follows that induction and coinduction along the map / Q C ∗ (BE, Fp ) ζ : C ∗ (BS, Fp ) E(S)  are conservative.    STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  23  Furthermore, we can deduce from the existence of a retract that the cohomology ring of any p-local compact group is Noetherian. Corollary 4.18. For any p-local compact group G = (S, F ), the ring spectrum C ∗ (B G, Fp ) is Noetherian. Proof. The ring spectrum C ∗ (BS, Fp ) is Noetherian by [DW94, Thm. 12.1]. Since C ∗ (B G, Fp ) is a module retract of C ∗ (BS, Fp ) by Proposition 4.16, we conclude by Lemma 2.4.  4.4. Phantom maps and limiting retracts. Let R be a (not necessarily Noetherian) commutative ring spectrum and ModR be the associated symmetric monoidal category of R-modules. In this section we always assume that R is p-local for some fixed prime p. Our goal in this subsection is to prove a general result about when a tower of split R-linear maps (gi ) : (Mi ) → (Ni ) gives a splitting on the induced map g : M → N obtained under limits. We begin with a mild generalization of (p-local) Brown–Comenetz duality. Since Q/Z(p) is an injective abelian group, the functor π−∗ (−)∨ = HomZ(p) (π−∗ (−), Q/Z(p) ) : Modop R  / Modgraded Z(p)  is cohomological and hence representable by a spectrum IR ∈ ModR , the (R-linear) Brown– Comenetz dualizing module. By construction, it satisfies the universal property π∗ HomR (M, IR )  ≃  / HomZ (π−∗ (M ), Q/Z(p) ) (p)  for any M ∈ ModR . In particular, this implies that IR ≃ HomS 0 (R, IS 0 ), the coinduction of the usual Brown–Comenetz dual of the sphere spectrum. Definition 4.19. The (R-linear) Brown–Comenetz of an R-module M is defined as the R-module IR M = HomR (M, IR ). By adjunction, the evaluation map M ⊗R IR M = M ⊗R Hom(M, IR )  / IR  2 corresponds to a canonical and natural R-linear duality map φM : M → IR M . The next lemma gives a sufficient criterion for when φM is an equivalence.  Lemma 4.20. Suppose that M ∈ ModR has degreewise finite homotopy groups, then φM : M → 2 IR M is an equivalence. Proof. It suffices to show that π∗ φM is an isomorphism in each degree. Fix a degree d ∈ Z. Because πd M is finite, its double p-local Pontryagin dual πd (M )∨∨ is canonically isomorphic to πd M . By the universal property of IR , it follows that φM is an equivalence.  f  Recall that an R-module map f : M → N is called R-phantom if the composite C → M − →N is null for any R-linear map C → M with C ∈ Modω R . The next lemma is a straightforward generalization of a result due to Margolis [Mar83, Prop. 5.1.2]. Lemma 4.21 (Margolis). For any M ∈ ModR , there are no non-trivial R-phantom maps with target IR M . Proof. For the convenience of the reader, we reproduce Margolis’s argument in the context of R-modules. Any R-module Z can be written canonically as a filtered colimit over all compact Rmodules mapping to Z; more precisely, Z ≃ colimU∈Λ(Z) U , where Λ(Z) is a set of representatives  24  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  for maps U → Z with U ∈ Modω R . By the universal property of IR , we thus obtain a commutative diagram ≃  π∗ HomR (Z, IR M )  / HomZ (π−∗ (Z ⊗R M ), Q/Z(p) ) (p)  α  β   limU∈Λ(Z) π∗ HomR (U, IR M )    ≃  / limU∈Λ(Z) HomZ (π−∗ (U ⊗R M ), Q/Z(p) ). (p)  Since ⊗R and π∗ commute with filtered colimits and HomZ(p) (−, Q/Z(p) ) turns filtered colimits into cofiltered limits, the map β is an isomorphism. It follows that α is an isomorphism as well, so we are done.  Combining the previous two lemmata, we obtain: Lemma 4.22. If M ∈ ModR such that π∗ M is degreewise finite, then there are no non-trivial R-phantom maps with target M . Proof. Indeed, Margolis’s result shows that there are no non-trivial R-phantom maps with target IR (IR M ), which is equivalent to M by Lemma 4.20.  In the next result, note that we do not assume that the splittings are compatible with the structure maps. Proposition 4.23. Suppose that (gi ) : (Mi ) → (Ni ) is an R-linear map of towers of R-modules such that π∗ Mi and limi π∗ Mi are degreewise finite for all i. If gi is split as a map of R-modules for all i, then the induced map g : limi Mi → limi Ni is split in ModR as well. Proof. We fit the map (gi ) into a fiber sequence of towers of R-modules, (Fi )i  (fi )  / (Mi )i  (gi )  / (Ni )i ,  (4.24)  which induces a fiber sequence f /M g /N F by passing to limits. It is easy to see that the map g is split in ModR if and only if f is null-homotopic in ModR , and so we prove the latter. The Milnor sequence shows that π∗ M ∼ = limi π∗ Mi , which is degreewise finite by assumption, so M satisfies the hypothesis of Lemma 4.22, i.e., there can be no non-trivial phantom maps with target M . It therefore suffices to show that f is phantom, for then f = 0. In order to prove the claim, let C → F be an R-linear map with C ∈ Modω R ; we need to prove f  that C → F − → M is null. Using R-linear Spanier–Whitehead duality DR = HomR (−, R), this latter map is adjoint to the R-linear map R  / F ⊗R DR (C)  f ⊗R DR (C)  / M ⊗R DR (C),  so equivalently we have to show that this composite is null. Let us write D = DR (C) for simplicity. Since an R-linear map out of R is just an element in π∗ , it thus suffices to prove that f∗D = π∗ (f ⊗R D) : π∗ (F ⊗R D)  / π∗ (M ⊗R D)  is zero. Consider the tower (π∗ (Mi ⊗R D))i . This is a tower of graded abelian groups, which in each degree is a tower of finite abelian groups. Consequently, the Mittag-Leffler condition is satisfied, giving lim1i π∗ (Mi ⊗R D) = 0. (4.25)  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  25  Smashing the fiber sequence of towers (4.24) with D, the map (fi ) induces a morphism of Milnor sequences associated to the first two towers (omitting the lim1 -terms): π∗ (F ⊗R D) ∼ = π∗ limi (Fi ⊗R D)  / lim0 π∗ (Fi ⊗R D)  /0   / lim0i π∗ (Mi ⊗R D)  / 0.  i  f∗D   π∗ (M ⊗R D) ∼ = π∗ limi (Mi ⊗R D)  ≃  The bottom horizontal map is an isomorphism by (4.25). This diagram implies f∗D = 0 provided we can show that the right vertical map is zero. To this end, for fixed i, consider a segment of the long exact sequence in homotopy: π∗ (Fi ⊗R D)  / π∗ (Mi ⊗R D)  / π∗ (Ni ⊗R D).  (4.26)  By assumption, Mi → Ni is split for all i, so Mi ⊗R D → Ni ⊗R D is split as well, thus the right map in (4.26) is injective, hence π∗ (Fi ⊗R D) → π∗ (Mi ⊗R D) is zero. This finishes the proof.  5. Stratification In this section, we prove our main theorems about p-local compact groups. 5.1. F -isomorphism and Quillen stratification. In order to verify that p-local compact groups satisfy Quillen lifting, we will first establish an F -isomorphism theorem in this context. For a p-local compact group G = (S, F ), we let F e denote the full subcategory of F consisting of elementary abelian p-groups. Theorem 5.1. Let G = (S, F ) be a p-local compact group, then restriction to elementary abelian subgroups of S induces an F -isomorphism in mod p cohomology λF : H ∗ (B G, Fp )  ∼  / lim H ∗ (BE, Fp ). ←− e F  Proof. The proof follows the strategy used for the finite case in [BLO03, Prop. 5.1]. We first prove that the morphism RΛ : H ∗ (BS, Fp )  / lim H ∗ (BE, Fp ) ←− e  (5.2)  F S (S)  is an F -isomorphism for any discrete p-toral group S, where the morphism is induced by restriction to elementary abelian p-subgroups and the inverse limit is taken with respect to subgroups and conjugacy relations. Here, the category F S (S)e is the full subcategory of elementary abelian p-groups in the fusion category F S (S) of S. To prove this we use an abstract form of Quillen stratification due to Rector. Let Ap denote the mod p Steenrod algebra. Given a Noetherian unstable algebra Λ over Ap , let C(Λ) denote the category with objects pairs (E, Φ) where E is a non-trivial elementary abelian p-group and Φ : Λ → H ∗ (BE, Fp ) is a finite algebra homomorphism. A morphism f : (E, Φ) → (E ′ , Φ′ ) in C(Λ) is a Ap -linear map H ∗ (BE, Fp ) → H ∗ (BE ′ , Fp ) making the obvious triangle commute. In this case, Rector [Rec84] for p = 2, and Broto–Zarati [BZ88, Thm. 1.3 and Prop. 3.2] for p odd, prove that / lim H ∗ (BE, Fp ) rΛ : Λ ←− C(Λ)  is an F -isomorphism.  26  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  We wish to apply this result with Λ = H ∗ (BS, Fp ). In [DW94, Prop. 12.1] Dwyer and Wilkerson showed that H ∗ (BS, Fp ) is Noetherian unstable algebra over Ap , and so (5.2) is an F -isomorphism if we can show that Rector’s category C(H ∗ (BS, Fp )) and F S (S)e are equivalent. More precisely, we claim that H ∗ (B−, Fp ) induces an equivalence of categories between (F S (S)e )op and C(H ∗ (BS, Fp )). To this end, let Rep(E, S) denote the set of homomorphisms from E to S, modulo conjugacy in S. Then, there are equivalences Rep(E, S) ∼ = [BE, BS] ∼ = [BE, BSp∧ ] where the first equivalence is just because S and E are discrete groups, and the second follows from the proof of [DZ87, Prop. 3.1]. Lannes’s theory applies to show that Rep(E, S) ∼ (5.3) = [BE, BS ∧ ] ∼ = HomA (H ∗ (BS, Fp ), H ∗ (BE, Fp )), p  p  see [Lan92, Thm. 3.1.1]. In order to see that H ∗ (B−, Fp ) induces a functor as claimed, it remains to show that an algebra morphism Bf ∗ : H ∗ (BS, Fp ) → H ∗ (BE, Fp ) is finite if and only if f : E → S is injective. Both conditions are equivalent to the statement that Bfp∧ is a monomorphism, this is, the homotopy fiber of Bfp∧ is Fp -finite. This together with (5.3) shows that H ∗ (B−, Fp ) : (F S (S)e )op → C(H ∗ (BS, Fp )) is well-defined and essentially surjective. If E, E ′ ⊆ S are elementary abelian, then Lannes’s theory provides isomorphisms ∼ [BE, BE ′ ] = ∼ HomA (H ∗ (BE ′ , Fp ), H ∗ (BE, Fp )), Hom(E, E ′ ) = p  ∗  so H (B−, Fp ) is faithful. This also shows that any map φ : H ∗ (BE ′ , Fp ) → H ∗ (BE, Fp ) in C(H ∗ (BS, Fp )) lifts to a unique map f : E → E ′ with Bf ∗ = φ, and it follows easily from (5.3) that f is given by subconjugation in S. Therefore Rector’s category is equivalent to Fs (S)e , so that Quillen’s F -isomorphism theorem holds for discrete p-toral groups, i.e., that (5.2) is an F -isomorphism. We now show that the F -isomorphism theorem holds for B G itself. The stable elements theorem holds for p-local compact groups by [Gon16, Thm. 2], therefore we have H ∗ (BP, Fp ). H ∗ (B G, Fp ) ∼ = lim ←− P ∈F  In [BLO07, Def. 3.1 and Lem. 3.2(a)] Broto–Levi–Oliver describe a full subcategory F • of F with finitely many isomorphism classes of objects and isomorphic limits over the corresponding orbit categories, see [BLO07, Prop. 5.2]. By [Gon16, Rem. 4.5] we have that H ∗ (B G, Fp ) ∼ H ∗ (BP, Fp ). = lim ←−• P ∈F  •  At this point, after replacing F by F , the proof of [BLO03, Prop. 5.1] applies formally.    We will now deduce the Quillen stratification of the cohomology ring H ∗ (B G, Fp ) for any p-local compact group G, again utilizing the abstract approach developed by Rector [Rec84]. In fact, we will deduce a strong version of stratification analogous to Quillen’s decomposition of the prime ideal spectrum of the variety associated to H ∗ (BG, Fp ) for G a compact Lie group. Let G = (F , S) be a p-local compact group, and denote by V G the homogenous prime ideal spectrum of H ∗ (B G, Fp ). For an elementary abelian subgroup E 6 S, let V E denote the hoS E′ mogeneous prime ideal spectrum of H ∗ (BE, Fp ), and let V + E = V E \ E ′ <E resE V E ′ . Finally, E + we write V + G,E = resG V E , where restriction is taken along the map induced by the composite H ∗ (B G, Fp ) ֒→ H ∗ (BS, Fp ) → H ∗ (BE, Fp ). Definition 5.4. We say that G satisfies strong Quillen stratification if the variety V G is the + disjoint union of the locally closed subvarieties VG,E , where E runs over a set of representatives of F -conjugacy classes of elementary abelian subgroups of S.  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  27  The F -isomorphism theorem is the key tool in [BLO03, Prop. 5.2] used to prove that the inclusion of the Sylow subgroup S into a p-local finite group (S, G) induces a finite algebra morphism, which implies that the induced map H ∗ (B G, Fp ) → H ∗ (BP, Fp ) is a finite morphism for any P ≤ S. The next result generalizes this to p-local compact groups. Proposition 5.5. Let G = (F , S) be a p-local compact group, then the map C ∗ (B G, Fp ) → C ∗ (BS, Fp ) exhibits H ∗ (BS, Fp ) as a finitely generated module over H ∗ (B G, Fp ). Moreover, if E is an elementary abelian subgroup of S, then H ∗ (BE, Fp ) is a finitely generated module over H ∗ (B G, Fp ) via the composite C ∗ (B G, Fp ) → C ∗ (BS, Fp ) → C ∗ (BE, Fp ). Proof. We have seen in Theorem 5.1 that the F -isomorphism theorem holds for p-local compact groups. Furthermore, [DW94, Thm. 12.1] and the remark after Theorem 2.3 in the same paper show that H ∗ (BS, Fp ) is a finitely generated algebra. The argument then proceeds as in the proof of [BLO03, Prop. 5.2]. We sketch the main ideas in the proof. Since H ∗ (BS, Fp ) is a finitely generated H ∗ (B G, Fp )algebra, it is enough to show that θ∗ : H ∗ (B G, Fp ) → H ∗ (BS, Fp ) is integral. Given (S, F ), let Λ(F ) be limE∈F e H ∗ (BE, Fp ). By [Rec84, Prop. 2.5 and Thm. 2.6], Λ(F ) is a reduced Noetherian ←− unstable Ap -algebra. Because of the F -isomorphism Theorem 5.1, it is enough to show that the inclusion Λ(F S (S)) → Λ(F ) is integral. Let V be a maximal rank elementary abelian p-subgroup in S, then the algebra of invariants H ∗ (BV, Fp )GL(V ) is a finitely generated algebra and there is a sequence of inclusions H ∗ (BV, Fp )GL(V ) → Λ(F S ) → Λ(F ) which exhibits both Λ(F S ) and Λ(F ) as finite H ∗ (BV, Fp )GL(V ) -modules. Therefore, Λ(F S ) → Λ(F ) is integral. The final claim then follows from this together with Lemma 4.10.  The next theorem generalizes the strong Quillen stratification for p-local finite groups due to Linckelmann [Lin17], and also provides an alternative argument for his result. Theorem 5.6. A p-local compact group G = (S, F ) satisfies strong Quillen stratification, that is, the variety VG admits a decomposition a + VE,G , VG ∼ = E∈E(G)  where E(G) is a set of representatives of F -conjugacy classes of elementary abelian subgroups of S. Proof. Throughout this proof, we will write C(Λ) for Rector’s category of a Noetherian unstable Ap -algebra Λ and E(Λ) for a set of representatives of isomorphism classes of objects in C(Λ). Some of his results require minor modification for p > 2, which are proven in [BZ88]. Recall that F e is the full subcategory of F on the elementary abelian subgroups of S. We start by checking that the pair ((F e )op , H ∗ (B−, Fp )) satisfies the conditions (1)–(5) listed in [Rec84, Prop. 2.3]. Indeed, it is clear that F e has finite skeleton, so Property (1) holds. The second property is satisfied by construction and the fact that all morphisms in F e are monomorphisms of elementary abelian groups. The fourth property holds for F S (S)e and hence also for F e . The fifth property uses that every morphism in F e can be factored into an isomorphism followed by an inclusion, with the trivial group giving the final object. It remains to show Property (3); by the remark at the end of [Rec84, Sec. 2], it suffices to verify the factorization claim. To this end, let E ′ → E ← E ′′ be a span in F e such that ker(H ∗ (BE, Fp ) → H ∗ (BE ′ , Fp )) ⊆ ker(H ∗ (BE, Fp ) → H ∗ (BE ′′ , Fp )). Without loss of generality, we may assume that the maps E ′ → E and E ′′ → E are inclusions, again by the factorization of morphisms in fusion systems. The assumption on the cohomologies then forces E ′′ ⊆ E ′ , so the claim follows. It thus follows from [Rec84, Prop. 2.5 and Thm. 2.6] that Λ = limF e H ∗ (BE, Fp ) is a re←− duced Noetherian unstable Ap -algebra and that there is a natural equivalence F e ≃ C(Λ).  28  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  As shown in [Rec84, Sec. 2], these properties suffice to establish a Quillen stratification for Λ = limF e H ∗ (BE, Fp ). Furthermore, the F -isomorphism Λ ∼ H ∗ (B G, Fp ) of Theorem 5.1 ←− induces an isomorphism of varieties. We thus obtain strong Quillen stratification a a + + ∼ VE,G , VE,Λ VG ∼ = = = VΛ ∼ E∈E(G)  E∈E (Λ)  + where the last isomorphism uses Proposition 5.5 to identify Rector’s varieties VE,Λ with the + varieties VE,G as constructed above Definition 5.4.   Remark 5.7. Since H ∗ (B G, Fp ) is Noetherian by Corollary 4.18 and the morphisms H ∗ (B G, Fp ) → H ∗ (BE, Fp ) are finite for any E ≤ S by Proposition 5.5, Rector’s theorems [Rec84, Thm. 1.4, Thm. 1.7] provide an alternative proof of Theorem 5.6 under the assumption that Rector’s category E (H ∗ (B G, Fp )) is equivalent to the full subcategory of elementary abelian p-subgroups F e . This equivalence can be obtained by using Lannes’s T -functor theory [Lan92, Thm. 3.1.1] (following the proof of Theorem 5.1) and the identification of homotopy classes of maps [BE, B G] with F -conjugacy classes of elementary abelian p-subgroups [BLO07, Thm. 6.3]. Proposition 5.5 should be contrasted with the next proposition, which characterizes p-compact groups as those p-local compact groups for which this finiteness condition can be lifted to a homotopical statement. We first need an auxiliary result. f  g  Lemma 5.8. Suppose R − →S− → T are maps of commutative ring spectra such that: (1) g is finite, and (2) CoindTS : ModS → ModT is conservative, then f is finite if and only if gf is finite. Proof. The first implication holds because finite morphisms are closed under composition. Indeed, assume that f is finite, then S ∈ Thick(R). Since g is finite, this implies that T ∈ Thick(S) ⊆ Thick(R) as claimed. Conversely, let (Mi )i∈I be a filtered system of R-modules, then we have to prove that the canonical map / HomR (S, colimi∈I Mi ) φ : colimi∈I HomR (S, Mi ) is an equivalence. By Condition (2), it suffices to show CoindTS (φ) is an equivalence; this latter map fits into a commutative diagram: HomS (T, colimi∈I HomR (S, Mi )) O  CoindT S (φ)  / HomS (T, HomR (S, colimi∈I Mi ))  ∼  colimi∈I HomS (T, HomR (S, Mi ))  ∼  ∼   colimi∈I HomR (T, Mi )   / HomR (T, colimi∈I Mi ).  The top left vertical map is an equivalence by Condition (1), while the other two vertical maps are equivalences by the transitivity of coinduction. If gf is finite, then the bottom horizontal map is an equivalence, which shows that CoindTS (φ) is an equivalence as well.  Proposition 5.9. The following statements are equivalent for a p-local compact group G = (S, F ):  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  29  (1) For any elementary abelian p-subgroup E of S, the canonical restriction map C ∗ (B G, Fp ) → C ∗ (BE, Fp ) is finite. (2) The canonical map θ∗ : C ∗ (B G, Fp ) → C ∗ (BS, Fp ) is finite. (3) The space B G is the classifying space of a p-compact group. Proof. The canonical restriction map in (1) factors through θ∗ so that we have the following morphisms of commutative ring spectra: Q g θ∗ / ∗ / C ∗ (BS, Fp ) C ∗ (B G, Fp ) E∈F e C (BE, Fp ),  where E runs through the finite set of elementary abelian subgroups of S. The morphism g is finite and induction along g is conservative by Chouinard’s theorem for discrete p-toral groups (see Theorem 4.17), so Lemma 5.8 applies. This shows the equivalence of (1) and (2); namely, gθ∗ is finite if and only if the composite C ∗ (B G, Fp ) → C ∗ (BS, Fp ) → C ∗ (BE, Fp ) is finite for all E ∈ F e . To prove that (2) is equivalent to (3), we shall use the criterion in [BGS13, Lem. 3.4]: Let f : X → Y be a map between p-complete spaces whose fundamental groups are finite p-groups, then f ∗ : C ∗ (Y, Fp ) → C ∗ (X, Fp ) is finite if and only if the homotopy fiber of f is Fp -finite. In order to apply this statement, note that by [BLO07, Prop. 4.4], the classifying space B G is p-complete and π1 (B G) is a finite p-group. For any discrete p-toral group, the canonical ∗ ∗ ∧ augmentation C ∗ (BS, Fp ) → Fp is induced by ∗ → (BS)∧ p since C (BS, Fp ) ≃ C (BSp , Fp ). It ∧ ∧ is then finite, because Ω(BS)p ≃ Sp is Fp -finite. If C ∗ (B G, Fp ) → C ∗ (BS, Fp ) is finite, then by Lemma 5.8 so is the composite C ∗ (B G, Fp )  / C ∗ (BS, Fp )  / Fp ,  hence Ω(B G) is Fp -finite and therefore B G is equivalent to the classifying space of a p-compact group, by definition. Conversely, suppose B G is the classifying space of a p-compact group. By [DW94, Prop. 9.9] θp∧ : (BS)∧ p → B G is a monomorphism of p-compact groups, that is, the homotopy fiber of θp∧ is Fp -finite and both spaces are p-complete spaces whose fundamental  groups are finite p-groups. Therefore C ∗ (B G, Fp ) → C ∗ (BSp∧ , Fp ) ≃ C ∗ (BS, Fp ) is finite. 5.2. Quillen lifting. In Definition 3.15 we introduced the notion of Quillen lifting for a morphism f : R → S. In this section we show that for Q a saturated fusion system over a discrete p-toral group S, the morphism C ∗ (B G, Fp ) → E∈E(G) C ∗ (BE, Fp ) satisfies Quillen lifting. This uses the strong form of Quillen stratification proven in the previous subsection. It also relies on the proof of stratification and costratification for elementary abelian subgroups, given in Proposition 3.21. In the following we will deal with products of ring spectra. We now briefly explain how the support and cosupport of modules over such product rings decompose. To that end, let S be a Q product of ring spectra S ≃ i∈I Si where Q I is finite. Then, the category of modules are related by a canonical equivalence ModS ≃ i ModSi which we use implicitly in the following. For Q Q any M ∈ ModR there are equivalences of S-modules IndSR M ≃ ( i Si ) ⊗R M ≃ i (Si ⊗R M ). Q Q Similarly, there are equivalences of S-modules CoindSR M ≃ i CoindSRi M ≃ i HomR (Si , M ). By the definition of support and cosupport, this gives rise to decompositions suppS (IndSR M ) = S S Si Si S i suppSi (CoindR M ), where the unions are taken i suppSi (IndR M ) and suppS (CoindR M ) = in Spech (π∗ S). Given a prime ideal p ∈ V G , we say that p originates in E 6 S if p is in the image of resE G ′ ′ but not of resE for E any proper subgroup of E. This terminology was introduced in the G context of finite groups in [BIK11b, Sec. 9]. As in [BIK11b, Thm. 9.1] the strong form of Quillen stratification proven in Theorem 5.6 implies that for each p ∈ VG the pairs (E, q) where p = res(q)  30  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  are all F -conjugate, and there is a bijection between primes in VG and F -isomorphism classes of such pairs (E, q). Theorem 5.10. Let G = (F , S) be a p-local compact group, then the morphism Q / f : C ∗ (B G, Fp ) C ∗ (BE, Fp ) E∈E(G)  satisfies Quillen lifting. Here E(G) denotes a set of representatives of F -isomorphism classes of elementary abelian subgroups of S. Proof. For brevity let us denote suppC ∗ (B G,Fp ) by suppG , suppC ∗ (BE,Fp ) by suppE for any subgroup E 6 S, and suppQE∈E(G) C ∗ (BE,Fp ) by suppE(G) , and similarly for cosupport. We also denote by ModG and ModE(G) the corresponding categories of modules. Let E ≤ S be an elementary abelian subgroup, and denote by ιE : BE → B G the corresponding inclusion. Note that for any morphism f ∈ HomF (P, Q) in the fusion system, we obtain a homotopy ιP ≃ ιQ ◦ Bf . Let M ∈ ModG be non-zero. By the discussion above there is a decomposition [ E(G) suppE IndE suppE(G) (IndG (M )) = G (M ), E∈E(G)  and similarly for cosupport and coinduction. E(G) Let p ∈ res(suppE(G) (IndG M )), then by Theorem 4.17 there exists an elementary abelian e e ≤ S and e e and q ∈ V E be a subgroup E q ∈ suppEe (IndE q) = p. Let E ≤ E F M ) with res(e pair where p originates. By Proposition 3.21 and the subgroup theorem [BG14, Thm. 4.4(ii)] −1 we obtain suppE (IndE (suppEe (L)) for any L ∈ ModEe , hence res(q) = e q and q ∈ e (L)) = res E E suppE (IndF (M )). Let (E ′ , q′ ) be another pair where p originates. By Theorem 5.6, G satisfies strong Quillen stratification, and so any two such pairs are F -conjugate. That is, there is an isomorphism f ∈ HomF (E ′ , E) such that Bf ∗ : C ∗ (BE, Fp ) → C ∗ (BE ′ , Fp ) is a homotopy equivalence with Spech (Bf ∗ )(q) = q′ . Let IndBf ∗ denote the left adjoint to restriction along Bf ∗ . Since E(G) E′ E′ ′ IndBf ∗ ◦ IndE (M )). In other G ≃ IndG , we have that q ∈ suppE ′ (IndG (M )) ⊆ suppE(G) (IndG words, for any pair (E, q) where p originates, we have q ∈ suppE (IndE M ). G The same holds for coinduction, replacing induction by coinduction, support by cosupport, and using the subgroup theorem for cosupport [BIK12, Thm. 11.11]. It follows that for any pair (E, q) where p originates, we have q ∈ cosuppE (CoindE G (N )). Combining this with the previous paragraph, we obtain Quillen lifting along the morphism f .  By arguing along the same lines we can also obtain a stronger version of Chouinard’s theorem than proven previously, cf. Theorem 4.17. Corollary 5.11. Let F be a saturated fusion system over a discrete p-toral group S, then induction and coinduction along the morphism Q / f : C ∗ (B G, Fp ) C ∗ (BE, Fp ) E∈E(G)  are conservative. Proof. Since support detects trivial objects, it suffices to prove that for M ∈ ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) we S have suppG (M ) 6= ∅ if and only if E∈E(G) suppE (IndE G M ) 6= ∅ and similarly for cosupport and coinduction. One direction is clear, so let us assume that there exists a prime ideal p ∈ suppG (M ). As in the proof of Theorem 5.10, we see that all pairs (E, q) in which p originates are F -conjugate,  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  31  S so it follows that E∈E(G) suppE (IndE G M ) 6= ∅, as required. A similar argument works for cosupport and coinduction.  5.3. The proof of (co)stratification and its consequences. Along with our abstract descent statements for stratification and costratification, the results of the previous two subsections now provide the necessary ingredients to prove (co)stratification for p-local compact groups. We will repeatedly use without mention the fact that C ∗ (B G, Fp ) is a Noetherian ring spectrum, which was proved in Corollary 4.18, so that the abstract methods of Section 3 apply. Theorem 5.12. Let G = (S, F ) be a p-local compact group, then ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) is canonically stratified. Proof. Consider the morphism f : C ∗ (B G, Fp ) /  Q  C ∗ (BE, Fp ).  E∈E(G)  By Theorem 5.10 f satisfies Quillen lifting and by Corollary 5.11 induction and coinduction along f are conservative. The result then follows from Proposition 3.21 and Theorem 3.24.  In order to prove costratification for p-local compact groups, we first prove it for discrete p-toral groups. Proposition 5.13. Let S be a discrete p-toral group, then ModC ∗ (BS,Fp) is canonically costratified. Proof. The p-completion of BS is the classifying space of a p-compact toral group. The suspension spectrum BS+ is HFp -equivalent to that of the classifying space of a p-compact group, and so by Lemma 4.8 it suffices to prove the statement for the latter. In this case, the morphism Q / C ∗ (BS, Fp ) C ∗ (BE, Fp ) E∈E(S)  is finite by Proposition 5.9. Combining Propositions 3.18 and 3.21 and Corollary 5.11 gives the desired result.  Theorem 5.14. Let G = (S, F ) be a p-local compact group, then ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) is canonically costratified. Proof. We have shown in Proposition 4.16 that the canonical map C ∗ (B G, Fp ) → C ∗ (BS, Fp ) is split as a map of C ∗ (B G, Fp )-modules, so that induction and coinduction along this map are conservative, see Lemma 2.3. Since ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) is canonically stratified by Theorem 5.12 and ModC ∗ (BS,Fp ) is canonically costratified by Proposition 5.13, the result follows from Theorem 3.25.  The next corollary completes the work of Benson and Greenlees [BG14], who showed stratification in the special case that G is a compact Lie group which has group of components a finite p-group. Corollary 5.15. Let G be a compact Lie group, then ModC ∗ (BG,Fp ) is stratified and costratified by the canonical action of H ∗ (BG, Fp ). Proof. By Lemma 4.8 there is an equivalence of categories ModC ∗ (BG,Fp ) ≃ ModC ∗ (BG∧p ,Fp ) , so it suffices to prove the result for ModC ∗ (BG∧p ,Fp ) . By Example 4.5 there exists a p-local compact group (S, F s (G), Ls (G)) whose associated classifying space is homotopy equivalent to BG∧ p . It follows from Theorems 5.12 and 5.14 that ModC ∗ (BG,Fp) is (co)stratified by the canonical action of H ∗ (BG, Fp ).   32  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  We now list the consequences of (co)stratification for p-local compact groups that were stated abstractly in Section 2 and Proposition 3.13. Theorem 5.16. Let G = (F , S) be a p-local compact group. (1) The map sending a localizing subcategory L of ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) to its left orthogonal L⊥ induces a bijection between localizing and colocalizing subcategories of ModC ∗ (B G) , and these are in bijection with subsets of Spech (H ∗ (B G, Fp )). (2) There is a bijection between thick subcategories of compact C ∗ (B G, Fp )-modules and specialization closed subsets of Spech (H ∗ (B G, Fp )), which takes a specialization closed subset U to the full-subcategory of compact C ∗ (B G, Fp )-modules whose support is contained in U. (3) The telescope conjecture holds in ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) : Let L be a localizing subcategory of ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) , then the following conditions are equivalent: (a) The localizing subcategory L is smashing, i.e., the associated localizing endofunctor LL on ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) preserves colimits. (b) The localizing subcategory L is generated by compact objects in ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) . (c) The support of L is specialization closed. (4) For any M, N ∈ ModC ∗ (B G,Fp ) there are identities: (a) suppG (M ⊗C ∗ (B G,Fp ) N ) = suppG (M ) ∩ suppG (N ), and (b) cosuppG (HomC ∗ (B G,Fp ) (M, N )) = suppG (M ) ∩ cosuppG (N ). (5) Let H = (S ′ , F ′ ) be another p-local compact group with associated classifying space BH. For any morphism f : C ∗ (BH, Fp ) → C ∗ (B G, Fp ) of ring spectra we have suppG (Ind M ) = res−1 suppH (M )  and  cosuppG (Coind M ) = res−1 cosuppH (M )  for any M ∈ ModC ∗ (BH,Fp ) . Remark 5.17. Suppose that G and H are compact Lie groups. As in Corollary 5.15 we may as well assume that BG and BH are p-complete. Then, any morphism H → G of compact Lie groups gives rise to a morphism C ∗ (BG, Fp ) → C ∗ (BH, Fp ) and, using Corollary 5.15 again, we see that the subgroup theorem holds. Note that we need not assume that H is a closed subgroup of G, in contrast to the subgroup theorem given in [BG14, Thm. 5.2]. 6. Gorenstein duality for p-compact groups Let G be a finite group and p be a homogeneous prime ideal of H ∗ (BG, k), where k is a field of characteristic p. In the context of the stable module category of G, Benson conjectured that the object Tk (Ip ) introduced by Benson and Krause in [BK02] is stably equivalent to Γp k up to a shift [Ben01]; here Ip is the injective hull of H ∗ (BG, k)/p, and Tk (Ip ) is constructed in the same way as the objects TC (I) ∈ ModR introduced in Section 3.2. This was proven by Benson and Greenlees in [BG08] by addressing the corresponding statement about C ∗ (BG, k) in ModC ∗ (BG,k) , where G is a compact Lie group satisfying an orientability condition. Later, Benson gave an alternative proof for the stable module category of a finite group [Ben08]. Inspired by the latter, in [BHV17] we studied the analogous conjecture for the category of modules over a commutative ring spectrum. To be specific, we studied the question when R is absolute Gorenstein in the following sense, see [BHV17, Def. 5.6]. Definition 6.1. Let R be a ring spectrum. We say that R is absolute Gorenstein with shift ν if, for each p ∈ Spech (π∗ R) of dimension d = d(p), there is an equivalence Γp R ≃ Σν+d TR (Ip ). More generally, we say that R is absolute Gorenstein with twist J if there exists an invertible R-module J such that there is an equivalence Γp R ⊗R J ≃ Σd TR (Ip )  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  33  for any p ∈ Spech (π∗ R) of dimension d. In what follows, we will show that when R = C ∗ (BG, k) for G a p-compact group, then R is absolute Gorenstein with shift given by the Fp -cohomological dimension of G. 6.1. p-compact groups from the stable perspective. In this section we give an equivalent definition of p-compact group, following Bauer [Bau04] and Rognes [Rog08]. Since any loop space is equivalent to a topological group, we will work with topological groups G instead of loop spaces. This allows us to more easily work with group actions by G. Definition 6.2 (Rognes). A topological group G is HFp -locally stably dualizable if (G+ )∧ p is dualizable in the p-complete stable homotopy category. A p-compact group is an HFp -locally stably dualizable group whose (unstable) classifying space BG is p-complete. By [Rog08, Ex. 2.3.3] G is HFp -locally stably dualizable if and only if G is Fp -finite. Moreover, the notion of p-compact group as defined in Definition 6.2 agrees with that as given in Definition 4.1, see Ex. 2.4.4 of [Rog08]. Whenever equivariance plays a role in this section, we will work in the naive p-complete Gequivariant homotopy category. An object of this category is a p-complete spectrum E together with a G-action on each space En so that the structure maps En → ΩEn+1 are G-equivariant homeomorphisms. We will write S for the unit, which is the p-complete sphere spectrum with trivial G-action. Given objects X, Y in this category, we write X ⊗ Y for the p-complete smash product of X and Y , which is given the diagonal G-action, while the function spectrum F (X, Y ) has the conjugation G-action. 6.2. The relative dualizing complex. The following definition is due to Bauer [Bau04]. Definition 6.3. For a p-compact group G, define the dualizing spectrum SG by SG = (G+ )hG , formed with respect to the standard right G action on G+ (thus we are left with a left G-action on SG ). The dimension of a p-compact group G, dimFp (G), is the Fp -cohomological dimension of G. As shown in Lemma A.2, SG is homotopy equivalent to a HFp -local sphere of dimension dimFp (G). Given a subgroup H ≤f G of a p-compact group, we define the relative dualizing object ωf as the coinduced C ∗ (BH, Fp )-module ωf := HomC ∗ (BG,Fp ) (C ∗ (BH, Fp ), C ∗ (BG, Fp )). Theorem 6.4. Suppose H ≤f G is a subgroup of a p-compact group G of codimension d = dimFp (G) − dimFp (H). Then, we have an equivalence of C ∗ (BH, Fp )-modules ωf ≃ Σd C ∗ (BH, Fp ). Proof. The proof closely follows that of Benson–Greenlees [BG14, Thm. 6.8] . Let h = dimFp (H), and g = dimFp (G). Let b = F (EG+ , HFp ). The quotient G/H is non-equivariantly dualizable and so there is an equivalence F (G/H+ , b) ≃ D(G/H+ ) ⊗ b, which is even G-equivariant. For a monomorphism of connected p-compact groups α : H → G, Bauer showed [Bau04, Thm. 3] that there is a homotopy equivalence G+ ⊗H SH ≃ D(G/H+ ) ⊗ SG . By Proposition A.4 this extends to not-necessarily connected p-compact groups. Combining the facts above, we see that there is a G-equivariant equivalence F (G/H+ , b) ≃ D(G/H+ ) ⊗ b ≃ (G+ ⊗H SH ) ⊗ D(SG ) ⊗ b.  34  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  Taking G-fixed points and using the definition of b, we see that Homb (F (G/H+ , b), b)G ≃ F ((G+ ⊗H SH ) ⊗ D(SG ), b)G ≃ F (EG+ ⊗ (G+ ⊗H SH ) ⊗ D(SG ), HFp )G ≃ C ∗ (((G+ ⊗H SH ) ⊗ D(SG ))hG , Fp ) ≃ C ∗ ((SH ⊗ D(SG ))hH , Fp ). We conclude that Homb (F (G/H+ , b), b)G ≃ C ∗ ((S −d )hH , Fp ). On the other hand, as in [BG14, Thm. 6.8], the natural map Homb (F (G/H+ , b), b)G → HombG (F (G/H+ , b)G , bG ) ≃ HomC ∗ (BG,Fp ) (C ∗ (BH, Fp ), C ∗ (BG, Fp )) is an equivalence. Hence, we get ωf = HomC ∗ (BG,Fp ) (C ∗ (BH, Fp ), C ∗ (BG, Fp )) ≃ C ∗ ((S −d )hH , Fp ). We now claim that C ∗ ((S −d )hH , Fp ) ≃ Σd C ∗ (BH, Fp ), which finishes the proof. Indeed, the action of H on S −d arises from a morphism π0 (H) → Z× p ⊆ π0 S because the connected ∼ Z ⊗ Z/(p − 1), and π0 (H) is a finite p-group, component must act trivially. Since Z× = p p the action is trivial if p is odd. Moreover, if p = 2, then the only possible non-trivial action is the sign action, but because the sign representation is trivial on F2 , we get an equivalence C ∗ ((S −d )hH , F2 ) ≃ Σd C ∗ (BH, F2 ) in this case as well.  6.3. Gorenstein ascent. We recall some basic definitions from [BHV17, Sec. 4]. Definition 6.5. We say that a ring spectrum R with π∗ R local Noetherian of dimension n is algebraically Gorenstein of shift ν if π∗ R is a graded Gorenstein ring; that is, the local cohomology i n Hm (π∗ R) is non-zero only when i = n and (Hm (π∗ R))t ∼ = (Im )t−ν−n . If π∗ R is non-local, then it is algebraically Gorenstein of shift ν if its localization at each maximal ideal is algebraically Gorenstein of shift ν in the above sense. For example, it is a consequence of work of Benson and Greenlees [BG97] that if G is a compact Lie group whose adjoint representation is orientable and H ∗ (BG, Fp ) is a Gorenstein ring, then C ∗ (BG, Fp ) is algebraically Gorenstein with shift the dimension of G, see [BHV17, Exmp. 4.8]. By [BHV17, Prop. 4.7], algebraically Gorenstein ring spectra are always absolute Gorenstein in the sense of Definition 6.1. Definition 6.6. We say that S has a Gorenstein normalization (of shift ν) if there exists a ring spectrum R and a map of ring spectra f : R → S such that (1) R is absolute Gorenstein with shift ν, (2) S is a compact R-module via f , and (3) ωf is an invertible S-module. Our main result on detecting (twisted) absolute Gorenstein ring spectra is the following [BHV17, Thm 4.27]. Theorem 6.7. Suppose S has a Gorenstein normalization f : R → S of shift ν. Then for each p ∈ Spech (π∗ S) of dimension d, there is an equivalence Σ−d Γp S ⊗ ωf ≃ Σν TS (Ip ). In particular, we obtain an isomorphism π∗ (Γp ωf ) ≃ (Ip )∗−d−ν . We can now prove a version of Benson’s conjecture for p-compact groups.  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  Theorem 6.8. Let G be a p-compact group of dimension w. Spech (H ∗ (BG, Fp )) of dimension d, there is an equivalence  35  Then for each p ∈  Σ−d Γp C ∗ (BG, Fp ) ≃ Σw TC ∗ (BG,Fp ) (Ip ). In particular, we obtain an isomorphism π∗ (Γp C ∗ (BG, Fp )) ≃ (Ip )∗−d−w . Proof. As noted previously, for any p-compact group G, there is always a unitary embedding Bι : BG → BSU (n)∧ By Proposition 4.12 we see that C ∗ (BG, Fp ) is a compact p. ∗ ∗ C (BSU (n), Fp )-module via Bι . Moreover, C ∗ (BSU (n), Fp ) is absolute Gorenstein with shift n2 − 1 [BHV17, Ex. 4.8(2)]. Note that f := Bι∗ : C ∗ (BSU (n), Fp ) → C ∗ (BG, Fp ) satisfies the conditions of Definition 6.6. 2 By Theorem 6.4 we have ωf ≃ Σn −1−w C ∗ (BG, Fp ). It then follows from Theorem 6.7 that 2  Σ−d+n  −1−w  2  Γp C ∗ (BG, Fp ) ≃ Σn  −1  TC ∗ (BG,Fp ) (Ip ),  hence the result.    This has the following standard consequences. Corollary 6.9. Let G be a p-compact group of dimension w, and p ∈ Spech (H ∗ (BG, Fp )) a prime of dimension d. (1) There is a spectral sequence E2s,t ∼ = (Hps H ∗ (BG, Fp )p )t =⇒ (Ip )−t−s−w−d . In particular, if H ∗ (BG, Fp ) is Cohen–Macaulay, then it is Gorenstein. (2) H ∗ (BG, Fp ) is generically Gorenstein (i.e., its localization at any minimal prime is Gorenstein). Proof. The first follows from [BHV17, Prop. 3.19(1)], using the previous result to identify the target. The second follows from [GL00, Cor. 7.4] where, in the language of the latter, H ∗ (BG, Fp ) has a local cohomology theorem with shift −w. Alternatively, this can be proven directly using the spectral sequence from (1): if p is minimal, then there is only one nonvanishing column in the spectral sequence, and it follows that H ∗ (BG, Fp )p is Gorenstein.  Appendix A. Duality for stably dualizable groups, by Tilman Bauer The aim of this appendix is to generalize various needed results from [Bau04] to the class of HFp -local Fp -finite groups. In that paper, the author restricted attention to connected pcompact groups. This assumption is never really needed, but we want to give short proofs of the relevant results for the sake of completeness. We work in the category of HFp -local spectra X with a (left) G-action on every space Xn and such that the structure maps are G-equivariant. We will call a G-equivariant map f : X → Y between G-spectra a hG-equivalence if it is a weak equivalence of underlying spectra. Lemma A.1. Let H < G be an inclusion of HFp -local Fp -finite groups, and let X be a nonequivariant spectrum. Then the H op -action on the mapping spectrum map(G+ , X) gives a weak equivalence, natural in H and G: map(G+ , X)hH  op  ≃ map(G/H+ , X).  Proof. There are equivalences map(G+ , X)hH  op  ≃ mapH op (EH+ , map(G+ , X)) ≃ mapH op ((EH × G)+ , X) ≃ map((EH × G)+ /H, X) ≃ map(G/H+ , X).    36  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  Recall the following definition due to Bauer [Bau04]. For a p-compact group G, define the dualizing spectrum SG by SG = (G+ )hG , formed with respect to the standard right G action on G+ (thus we are left with a left G-action on SG ). The dimension of a p-compact group G, dimFp (G), is the Fp -cohomological dimension of G. In [Bau04], it is proven that SG is homotopy equivalent to a HFp -local sphere of dimension dimFp (G) when G is connected. Lemma A.2. Let G be an HFp -local Fp -finite group of dimension d. Then the dualizing spectrum SG is equivalent to an HFp -local sphere of the same dimension d, and the inclusion of the identity component G0 ֒→ G induces a G0 -equivariant equivalence SG0 → SG . Proof. Let π = π0 G be the finite group of components. Then G0 -equivariantly, G ≃ map(π+ , G0 ) and since the suspension functor Σ∞ + − sends coproducts to wedges, hG0 ∞ hG0 ) = map(π+ , SG0 ), = mapG0 ((EG0 )+ , Σ∞ (Σ∞ + G) ≃ map(π+ , Σ+ G0 + G)  which is a finite union of HFp -local spheres by [Bau04, Cor. 23]. Then  hG hG0 hπ Σ∞ = Σ∞ ≃ map(π+ , SG0 )hπ ≃ SG0 +G +G  by Lemma A.1. Moreover, the inclusion of the unit component G0 ֒→ G induces the inclusion of hG0 and hence an equivalence with SG .  the identity factor SG0 ֒→ Σ∞ +G  Lemma A.3. Let H < G be an inclusion of HFp -local Fp -finite groups. Then there is a Gequivariant weak equivalence, natural in G: op  hH G+ ⊗H SH → Σ∞ . +G  Proof. In the case of connected H and G, this is [Bau04, Lem. 19]. In general, the natural map ∞ ∞ G+ ⊗H map(EH+ , Σ∞ + H) → map(EH+ , G+ ⊗H Σ+ H) ≃ map(EH+ , Σ+ G) op  hH induces a G-equivariant map φ : G+ ⊗H SH → Σ∞ by passing to H op -fixed points. +G hH0 ∞ hH0op ) and ≃ map(π0 (G)+ , Σ∞ After taking H0 -fixed points, the right hand side is Σ+ G + G0 the left hand side is equivalent to map(π0 (G)+ , (G0 )+ ⊗H0 SH0 ). Non-equivariantly then, G+ ⊗H SH splits as map((π0 G/π0 H)+ , G0 ⊗H0 SH0 ) and hπ0 H op  hH op hH0op Σ∞ ≃ map(π0 G+ , Σ∞ +G + G0 ) op  hH0 hπ0 H ) ≃ map(π0 G+ , Σ∞ + G0  op  op  hH0 ) ≃ map((π0 G/π0 H)+ , Σ∞ + G0  by Lemma A.1, and φ respects this splitting. By [Bau04, Lem. 19], φ is a weak equivalence on every wedge summand, hence a weak equivalence.  Proposition A.4. Let H < G be a monomorphism of HFp -local Fp -finite groups. Then there is a relative G-equivariant duality weak equivalence  G+ ⊗H SH ≃ D Σ∞ + G/H ⊗ SG .  Moreover, for inclusions K < H < G of HFp -local Fp -finite groups, the following diagram commutes: ∼ / hH op o ∼ G+ ⊗H SH o D(G/H+ ) ⊗ SG Σ∞ +G res   hK op o Σ∞ +G  D(proj)⊗id ∼  G+ ⊗K SK o  ∼    / D(G/K+ ) ⊗ SG  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  37  Proof. In [Bau04, Prop. 22], we constructed a weak equivalence SG ⊗ DG+ → Σ∞ +G for connected p-compact groups G, which is equivariant with respect to two different G-actions. The first is multiplication on DG+ and Σ∞ + G and the standard (conjugation) action on SG , and the second one is right multiplication on DG+ and Σ∞ + G and the trivial action on SG . Rognes [Rog08, Thm. 3.1.4] extended this proof to stably dualizable groups, in particular to HFp -local Fp -finite groups. Taking H-homotopy fixed points with respect to that second action, we obtain hG-equivalences ∼  ∼  ∼  hH → Σ∞ , → (DG+ ⊗ SG )hH − − DGhH D(G/H)+ ⊗ SG ← +G + ⊗ SG −  where the left hand map is the equivalence from Lemma A.1. Composing with the natural equivalence of Lemma A.3 gives the result. For the naturality statement, consider the following diagram: D(G/H+ ) ⊗ SG o  DGhH +  op   D(G/K+ ) ⊗ SG o  DGhK +  op    ⊗ SG  / (DG+ ⊗ SG )hH op  hH op / Σ∞ +G  ⊗ SG   / (DG+ ⊗ SG )hK op   / Σ∞ GhK op +  The left hand square commutes by Lemma A.1, the other two for trivial reasons.    References [AG09]  Kasper K. S. Andersen and Jesper Grodal. The classification of 2-compact groups. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 22(2):387–436, 2009. (cit. on p. 18). [AGMV08] K. K. S. Andersen, J. Grodal, J. M. Møller, and A. Viruel. The classification of p-compact groups for p odd. Ann. of Math. (2), 167(1):95–210, 2008. (cit. on p. 18). [Bau04] Tilman Bauer. p-compact groups as framed manifolds. Topology, 43(3):569–597, 2004. (cit on pp. 33, 35, 36, 37). [BCR97] D. J. Benson, Jon F. Carlson, and Jeremy Rickard. Thick subcategories of the stable module category. Fund. Math., 153(1):59–80, 1997. (cit. on p. 1). [BDS16] Paul Balmer, Ivo Dell’Ambrogio, and Beren Sanders. Grothendieck–Neeman duality and the Wirthmüller isomorphism. Compos. Math., 152(8):1740–1776, 2016. (cit on pp. 5, 14, 15). [Ben01] David Benson. Modules with injective cohomology, and local duality for a finite group. New York J. Math., 7:201–215 (electronic), 2001. (cit. on p. 32). [Ben08] Dave Benson. Idempotent kG-modules with injective cohomology. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 212(7):1744– 1746, 2008. (cit. on p. 32). [BG97] D. J. Benson and J. P. C. Greenlees. Commutative algebra for cohomology rings of classifying spaces of compact Lie groups. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 122(1-2):41–53, 1997. (cit. on p. 34). [BG08] David J. Benson and J. P. C. Greenlees. Localization and duality in topology and modular representation theory. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 212(7):1716–1743, 2008. (cit on pp. 3, 32). [BG14] David Benson and John Greenlees. Stratifying the derived category of cochains on BG for G a compact Lie group. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 218(4):642–650, 2014. (cit on pp. 2, 15, 22, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34). [BGS13] David J. Benson, John P. C. Greenlees, and Shoham Shamir. Complete intersections and mod p cochains. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 13(1):61–114, 2013. (cit on pp. 20, 29). [BHV15] T. Barthel, D. Heard, and G. Valenzuela. Local duality in algebra and topology. arXiv preprint http: // arxiv. org/ abs/ 1511. 03526 , November 2015. (cit. on p. 7). [BHV17] T. Barthel, D. Heard, and G. Valenzuela. Local duality for structured ring spectra. Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra, 2017. (cit on pp. 3, 6, 7, 14, 32, 34, 35). [BIK08] Dave Benson, Srikanth B. Iyengar, and Henning Krause. Local cohomology and support for triangulated categories. Ann. Sci. Éc. Norm. Supér. (4), 41(4):573–619, 2008. (cit on pp. 1, 6, 7, 9, 10). [BIK11a] Dave Benson, Srikanth B. Iyengar, and Henning Krause. Stratifying triangulated categories. J. Topol., 4(3):641–666, 2011. (cit on pp. 1, 4, 8, 9, 16). [BIK11b] David J. Benson, Srikanth B. Iyengar, and Henning Krause. Stratifying modular representations of finite groups. Ann. of Math. (2), 174(3):1643–1684, 2011. (cit on pp. 2, 9, 13, 14, 15, 29).  38  [BIK12]  TOBIAS BARTHEL, NATÀLIA CASTELLANA, DREW HEARD, AND GABRIEL VALENZUELA  David J. Benson, Srikanth B. Iyengar, and Henning Krause. Colocalizing subcategories and cosupport. Journal für die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik. [Crelle’s Journal], 673:161–207, 2012. (cit on pp. 2, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 30). [BIKP17] Dave Benson, Srikanth B. Iyengar, Henning Krause, and Julia Pevtsova. Stratification for module categories of finite group schemes. arXiv preprint https://arxiv.org/abs/1510.06773, to appear in JAMS, 2017. (cit. on p. 2). [BK72a] A. K. Bousfield and D. M. Kan. Homotopy limits, completions and localizations. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 304. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1972. (cit. on p. 5). [BK72b] A. K. Bousfield and D. M. Kan. Homotopy limits, completions and localizations. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 304. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1972. (cit on pp. 20, 21). [BK02] David Benson and Henning Krause. Pure injectives and the spectrum of the cohomology ring of a finite group. J. Reine Angew. Math., 542:23–51, 2002. (cit on pp. 14, 32). [BK08] David John Benson and Henning Krause. Complexes of injective kG-modules. Algebra Number Theory, 2(1):1–30, 2008. (cit. on p. 15). [BLO03] Carles Broto, Ran Levi, and Bob Oliver. The homotopy theory of fusion systems. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 16(4):779–856, 2003. (cit on pp. 2, 3, 18, 19, 25, 26, 27). [BLO07] Carles Broto, Ran Levi, and Bob Oliver. Discrete models for the p-local homotopy theory of compact Lie groups and p-compact groups. Geom. Topol., 11:315–427, 2007. (cit on pp. 2, 18, 19, 26, 28, 29). [BLO14] Carles Broto, Ran Levi, and Bob Oliver. An algebraic model for finite loop spaces. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 14(5):2915–2981, 2014. (cit on pp. 2, 19). [BZ88] C. Broto and S. Zarati. Nil-localization of unstable algebras over the Steenrod algebra. Math. Z., 199(4):525–537, 1988. (cit on pp. 3, 25, 27). [Cas06] Natàlia Castellana. On the p-compact groups corresponding to the p-adic reflection groups G(q, r, n). Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 358(7):2799–2819, 2006. (cit. on p. 19). [CC17] José Cantarero and Natàlia Castellana. Unitary embeddings of finite loop spaces. Forum Math., 29(2):287–311, 2017. (cit on pp. 19, 20). [Che13] Andrew Chermak. Fusion systems and localities. Acta Math., 211(1):47–139, 2013. (cit on pp. 2, 18). [DMW87] William G. Dwyer, Haynes R. Miller, and Clarence W. Wilkerson. The homotopic uniqueness of BS 3 . In Algebraic topology, Barcelona, 1986, volume 1298 of Lecture Notes in Math., pages 90–105. Springer, Berlin, 1987. (cit. on p. 17). [DRV07] Antonio Dı́az, Albert Ruiz, and Antonio Viruel. All p-local finite groups of rank two for odd prime p. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 359(4):1725–1764, 2007. (cit. on p. 18). [DW94] W. G. Dwyer and C. W. Wilkerson. Homotopy fixed-point methods for Lie groups and finite loop spaces. Ann. of Math. (2), 139(2):395–442, 1994. (cit on pp. 2, 3, 6, 17, 18, 19, 22, 23, 26, 27, 29). [DZ87] W. Dwyer and A. Zabrodsky. Maps between classifying spaces. In Algebraic topology, Barcelona, 1986, volume 1298 of Lecture Notes in Math., pages 106–119. Springer, Berlin, 1987. (cit. on p. 26). [EKMM97] A. D. Elmendorf, I. Kriz, M. A. Mandell, and J. P. May. Rings, modules, and algebras in stable homotopy theory, volume 47 of Mathematical Surveys and Monographs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1997. With an appendix by M. Cole. (cit. on p. 4). [Eve61] Leonard Evens. The cohomology ring of a finite group. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 101:224–239, 1961. (cit. on p. 3). [GL00] J. P. C. Greenlees and G. Lyubeznik. Rings with a local cohomology theorem and applications to cohomology rings of groups. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 149(3):267–285, 2000. (cit. on p. 35). [Gon16] Alex Gonzalez. Finite approximations of p-local compact groups. Geom. Topol., 20(5):2923–2995, 2016. (cit on pp. 3, 21, 26). [GY83] Shiro Goto and Kikumichi Yamagishi. Finite generation of Noetherian graded rings. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 89(1):41–44, 1983. (cit. on p. 5). [HPS97] Mark Hovey, John H. Palmieri, and Neil P. Strickland. Axiomatic stable homotopy theory. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 128(610):x+114, 1997. (cit. on p. 14). [HSS00] Mark Hovey, Brooke Shipley, and Jeff Smith. Symmetric spectra. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 13(1):149–208, 2000. (cit. on p. 4). [Lan92] Jean Lannes. Sur les espaces fonctionnels dont la source est le classifiant d’un p-groupe abélien élémentaire. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., (75):135–244, 1992. With an appendix by Michel Zisman. (cit on pp. 20, 26, 28). [Lin17] Markus Linckelmann. Quillen’s stratification for fusion systems. Comm. Algebra, 45(12):5227–5229, 2017. (cit on pp. 3, 27). [LL15] Ran Levi and Assaf Libman. Existence and uniqueness of classifying spaces for fusion systems over discrete p-toral groups. J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2), 91(1):47–70, 2015. (cit on pp. 2, 18).  STRATIFICATION AND DUALITY FOR HOMOTOPICAL GROUPS  [LO02] [Lur17] [Mar83]  [Mil84] [Oli13] [Pui06] [Qui71] [Rag06] [Rag08] [Rec71] [Rec84] [Rog08] [Sch94] [Ven59] [Zie09]  39  Ran Levi and Bob Oliver. Construction of 2-local finite groups of a type studied by Solomon and Benson. Geom. Topol., 6:917–990, 2002. (cit. on p. 18). Jacob Lurie. Higher Algebra. 2017. Draft available from author’s website as http://www.math.harvard.edu/~ lurie/papers/HA.pdf. (cit. on p. 4). H. R. Margolis. Spectra and the Steenrod algebra, volume 29 of North-Holland Mathematical Library. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1983. Modules over the Steenrod algebra and the stable homotopy category. (cit. on p. 23). Haynes Miller. The Sullivan conjecture on maps from classifying spaces. Ann. of Math. (2), 120(1):39– 87, 1984. (cit. on p. 21). Bob Oliver. Existence and uniqueness of linking systems: Chermak’s proof via obstruction theory. Acta Math., 211(1):141–175, 2013. (cit on pp. 2, 18). Lluis Puig. Frobenius categories. J. Algebra, 303(1):309–357, 2006. (cit. on p. 18). Daniel Quillen. The spectrum of an equivariant cohomology ring. I, II. Ann. of Math. (2), 94:549–572; ibid. (2) 94 (1971), 573–602, 1971. (cit on pp. 2, 3, 14). Kári Ragnarsson. Classifying spectra of saturated fusion systems. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 6:195–252, 2006. (cit on pp. 3, 21). Kári Ragnarsson. Retractive transfers and p-local finite groups. Proc. Edinb. Math. Soc. (2), 51(2):465–487, 2008. (cit. on p. 21). David L. Rector. Loop structures on the homotopy type of SΣ∞ 3. pages 99–105. Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 249, 1971. (cit. on p. 17). D. L. Rector. Noetherian cohomology rings and finite loop spaces with torsion. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 32(2):191–217, 1984. (cit on pp. 3, 25, 26, 27, 28). John Rognes. Galois extensions of structured ring spectra. Stably dualizable groups. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 192(898):viii+137, 2008. (cit on pp. 33, 37). Lionel Schwartz. Unstable modules over the Steenrod algebra and Sullivan’s fixed point set conjecture. Chicago Lectures in Mathematics. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1994. (cit. on p. 20). B. B. Venkov. Cohomology algebras for some classifying spaces. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 127:943–944, 1959. (cit. on p. 3). Krzysztof Ziemiański. A faithful unitary representation of the 2-compact group DI(4). J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 213(7):1239–1253, 2009. (cit. on p. 19).  Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 5, 2100 København Ø, Denmark E-mail address: tbarthel@math.ku.dk Departament de Matemàtiques, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain E-mail address: natalia@mat.uab.cat Department of Mathematics, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa, 31905, Israel E-mail address: dheard@campus.haifa.ac.il Department of Mathematics, The Ohio State University, 100 Math Tower, 231 West 18th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210-1174, USA E-mail address: valenzuelavasquez.2@osu.edu

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
