Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 7
ArXiv ID: hf_6552

Abstract:
Minimizing Data Distortion of Periodically Reporting IoT Devices with Energy Harvesting Chiara Pielli∗ , Čedomir Stefanović† , Petar Popovski† and Michele Zorzi∗ of Information Engineering, University of Padova, Padova, Italy † Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark Email: piellich@dei.unipd.it, cs@es.aau.dk, petarp@es.aau.dk, zorzi@dei.unipd.it  arXiv:1706.09943v1 [cs.IT] 29 Jun 2017  ∗ Department  Abstract—Energy harvesting is a promising technology for the Internet of Things (IoT) towards the goal of self-sustainability of the involved devices. However, the intermittent and unreliable nature of the harvested energy demands an intelligent management of devices’ operation in order to ensure a sustained performance of the IoT application. In this work, we address the problem of maximizing the quality of the reported data under the constraints of energy harvesting, energy consumption and communication channel impairments. Specifically, we propose an energy-aware joint source-channel coding scheme that minimizes the expected data distortion, for realistic models of energy generation and of the energy spent by the device to process the data, when the communication is performed over a Rayleigh fading channel. The performance of the scheme is optimized by means of a Markov Decision Process framework.  I. I NTRODUCTION A lion’s share of IoT applications involves scenarios in which a multitude of devices, i.e., sensors, periodically report a small amount of data about some monitored phenomena. A major challenge in this regard is to ensure uninterrupted service with minimal device maintenance. Specifically, a typical IoT device is expected to operate for very long periods without human intervention, achieving a minimum of 10 years of battery (i.e., device) operation in such IoT applications [1]– [3]. Energy Harvesting (EH) is a promising technology that can foster the required self-sustainability of the devices and, thus, of the IoT applications. On the other hand, the EH process is stochastic in nature, requiring rethinking and redesign of the operation with respect to standard approaches employed for battery-operated devices. Specifically, in this work we consider a monitoring application where a sensor node powered by renewable energy sources periodically sends its measurements to a data gathering point. Before transmission, it performs processing operations, e.g., lossy joint source-channel coding that maximizes the reconstruction fidelity at the receiver, under the constraints omposed by the EH process. In particular, the reconstruction fidelity depends on the tradeoff between source compression accuracy and robustness against the channel impairments, and is represented in terms of data distortion. The effect of packet losses on data distortion in standard communication scenarios, where there are no energy constraints, has already been treated, e.g., in [4], where the authors investigate erasure and scalable codes for a Gaussian source. Several works (e.g., [5]) analyze layered transmission  schemes, where the source is coded in superimposed layers, and each layer successively refines the description of the previous one, but is transmitted with a higher coding rate (i.e., subject to larger outage probability). Often, the distortion exponent is adopted as the performance metric for the end-toend distortion [6], [7]. Nevertheless, the distortion exponent is meaningful only for the high SNR regime, which is not dominant in IoT scenarios. A general overview of recent advances in wireless communications with EH is presented in [8]. Further, distortion minimization for EH sensor nodes has been studied in several works. In [9], the tradeoff between quantization and transmission energy in the presence of EH is analyzed, but the effect of packet losses on the received data quality is not taken into account. The problem of energy allocation between processing and transmission is also studied in [10], in a model similar to our own, but where, rather than minimizing the long-term distortion, the authors aim at guaranteeing a minimum average distortion while maintaining the data queue stable. In [11], the authors study the achievable distortion when the energy buffer may have some leakage and the transmitting devices jointly perform source-channel coding in the presence of Gaussian and binary sources. The work closest to ours can be found in [12], where a sensor node employs an on-line transmission policy that maximizes the long-term average quality of the transmitted packets. Specifically, the transmitter can decide the degree of lossy compression and the transmission power, and the optimal transmission strategy is obtained through the use of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). The framework employed in this paper bears similarities to the one from [12], with the following important differences: (i) in addition to source coding, we also consider channel coding, leveraging on the results of finite-length information theory; (ii) we do not perform power control, which requires Channel State Information (CSI) at the transmitter and thus implies an additional cost or overhead, and may be available only with a delay; and (iii) the actual distortion at the receiver is influenced not only by the source processing procedure, but also by the channel outage probability. The problem considered in the paper is solved through decompositon into two nested optimization processes that respectively address the rate-distortion tradeoff and the energy management. A similar approach has been followed in [13], where the goal is to guarantee energy self-sufficiency to a  energy source  sensor node radio  energy bu er  channel processing  sensing  Figure 1: System model.  multi-hop network by adapting the nodes’ duty cycle and the information generation rate. Again, the framework is modeled by means of an MDP; in fact MDPs are widely used to address energy management policies, because they represent an appealing solution to optimize some long-term utilities in the presence of stochastic EH [14]. The nested optimization allows us to determine an online optimal policy: although solving an MDP may require some computational time, the optimal solution can be precomputed and stored, such that during its operation the node decides on its action with a simple table look-up. We also note that the considered framework is based on realistic models of the EH process and of the distortion achievable by compressing environmental signals with practical algorithms, including a thorough energy consumption model. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The system model and the problem formulation are described in Sections II and III, respectively. The rate-distortion tradeoff is analyzed in Section IV, whereas Section V studies the energy management policy. Finally, we provide and discuss some exemplary numerical results in Section VI and draw the conclusions in Section VII. II. S YSTEM MODEL We consider an IoT device that generates packets periodically and communicates wirelessly with a data collector. Time is divided into slots of predefined duration T . Each time the device generates a packet, it has access to a slot reserved for its transmission. In terms of the classification from [8], the considered scenario can be categorized as an on-line energy management with a reward maximization and with a perfect knowledge of the state of the energy buffer, for a single device case. Fig. 1 shows the dynamics of the sensor node: some energyscavenging circuitry allows the device to harvest energy, which is stored in a buffer and used for sensing, processing and transmission operations. In the following, we thoroughly describe all the components of such model.  device decides upon k and thus on the compression ratio k/m ∈ [0, 1]. Lossy compression reduces the volume of bits of information to send, but at the cost of a poorer accuracy in the signal representation, as it introduces a distortion D(k) that depends on the compression ratio. The slot duration T defines the maximum number of bits that can fit into a slot, namely S = T /Tb , where Tb is the (fixed) bit duration. Hence, when deciding upon the degree of source compression k, the device also selects the coding rate R(k) = L(k)/S at the same time. We assume that no CSI is available at the transmitter, which, therefore, does not perform power control and, whenever transmitting, uses a constant transmission power Ptx . Depending on R(k) and on the actual channel conditions, the packet may not be correctly received with an outage probability Pout (k). Since we consider a monitoring scenario where the traffic pattern is reasonably known in advance, we assume that the slot duration is allotted in such a way that the device can send all the gathered information within the slot, thus L0 ≤ S. Both the distortion function and the outage probability will be characterized in Section IV. B. Energy Harvesting Model We assume that the device is capable of collecting energy from the environment, and that this energy supply exhibits time correlation. Our approach follows the works based on realistic data [15], [16] that assess the goodness of Markov Chains (MCs) to model time-dependent sources. The energy source dynamics are modeled by means of a 2-state MC, and the number en of energy quanta harvested in slot n depends on the source state xn ∈ X = {0, 1}. Based on the realistic model of [16], we assume that, when xn = 0, the source is in a “bad” state and en = 0 with probability 1, otherwise, the source is in a “good” state and the energy inflow follows a truncated discrete normal distribution, i.e., en ∼ N (µ, σ 2 ) in the discrete interval {1, . . . E}. We consider a harvest-store-use protocol: the energy scavenged in slot n is first stored in a battery of finite size B and then used from slot n + 1 onwards. In slot n, the battery state is bn ∈ {0, . . . , B}, and evolves as follows: †  bn+1 = min {bn + en − un , B} , (bn + en − un ) ,  (1)  where un ≥ 0 is the energy used in slot n. The energy causality principle entails that: un ≤ bn  (2)  in all slots. We assume that the sensor node can reliably estimate the status of its energy buffer.  A. Data Processing and Transmission Model The sensor node periodically senses the surrounding environment. In each time slot the device collects a constant number of readings for a total data size of L0 bits per slot. In the following, we consider a typical slot when defining quantities of interest; in general, we will introduce subscripts referring to slots only when needed. The sensor node may exploit source coding; in particular, we consider lossy compression algorithms, and the resulting packet size after compression is L(k) = k/m L0 , where m ∈ N, k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , m}. The  C. Energy Consumption Model We consider the following sources of energy consumption. Data processing. To model the energy consumed by compression, we leverage on the results of [17], where the authors map the number of arithmetic operations required to process the original signal into the corresponding energy demand: ( E0 L0 NP (k) if 1 ≤ k ≤ m − 1 EP (k) = (3) 0 if k = 0, m  where E0 models the energy spent by the micro-controller of the node in a clock cycle, and NP (k) is the number of clock cycles required by the compression algorithm per uncompressed bit of the input signal, which depends on the compression ratio. If the packet is not compressed (k = m) or discarded (k = 0), no energy is consumed. Different compression algorithms entail different shapes of NP (k). In particular, there are some techniques for which function NP (k) is increasing and concave in k 1 , e.g., the Lightweight Temporal Compression (LTC) and the Fourierbased Low Pass Filter (DCT-LPF) algorithms. We consider the LTC algorithm, whose corresponding energy consumption turns out to be linear in the compression ratio: NP (k) = k + βP , k ∈ {1, . . . , m − 1}, with αP , βP > 0 [17]. αP m Data transmission. The energy needed to transmit a signal with constant power Ptx for a time window of length T is: ET X (k) =  Ptx T · χ{k>0} , ηA  (4)  where ηA ∈ (0, 1] is a constant term that models the efficiency of the power amplifier of the antenna. The indicator function χ{k>0} , equal to 1 if k > 0 and to zero otherwise, ensures that no energy is consumed if the packet is discarded. Other operations and circuitry costs. We define the circuitry energy consumption in a slot as: EC (k) = βS + βC + (βE + EC T ) · χ{k>0} ,  (5)  where βS and βE , respectively, represent the constant sensing and encoding costs, βC accounts for switching between the node’s operating modes and the maintenance of synchronization with the receiver, and the last term models the additional energy cost incurred by a transmission, where EC is a circuitry energy rate. We highlight that, typically, the energy demanded by the channel encoding procedure is so small as to be negligible. The total energy consumption of the node is given by the sum of the contributions of Eqs. (3)-(5): Eused (k) = EP (k) + ET X (k) + EC (k),  (6)  which depends solely on k. III. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION Our goal is to minimize the long-term average distortion of the data transmitted by the sensor node while guaranteeing the self-sufficiency of the network. The optimal distortion point is selected according to a joint source-channel coding policy: the node has to choose the number of bits per symbol to transmit, which implies to decide both the degree of lossy compression at the source and the error correction coding rate. The identification of such a working point is also driven by the energy dynamics: the node is powered through EH, hence the energy income is intermittent and erratic, and it is crucial to design an intelligent scheme to manage the available energy. To deal with the two aspects of distortion and energy, we split the problem into two intertwined subproblems. 1 Although this may appear as a counterintuitive result, it is due to practical implementation details. We refer the reader to [17] for a detailed explanation.  Rate-Distortion Problem (RDP): it focuses on the ratedistortion issue, and assumes to have a given amount of energy available to accomplish its goal. RDP will be discussed in Section IV. • Energy Management Problem (EMP): this module dynamically decides the energy to use in each slot with the ultimate objective of ensuring long-term, uninterrupted operation. This problem will be formulated and solved in Section V. The two subproblems are tightly coupled: RDP selects the optimal operating point on the rate-distortion curve as a function of the available energy, whereas EMP decides how this energy varies depending on the battery state and the statistical knowledge of the EH process. In this way, the node is assured to be self-sufficient in an energetic sense and, under this operating condition, the long-term average distortion is minimized. The combined problem is solved by means of an MDP, as described in Section V. Notice that the separability of RDP and EMP in the overall optimization process leads to optimality because, once we decide the energy to be spent from the energy buffer, we focus on the QoS and choose the action that minimizes the distortion and the overall optimization is guaranteed by solving the MDP. •  IV. R ATE -D ISTORTION A NALYSIS In this section, we determine the optimal point in the ratedistortion tradeoff when the available energy budget is given. The actual distortion at the receiver is influenced by both the lossy compression performed at the source and the errors introduced by the channel. More specifically, we consider the packet to be completely lost when in outage, which corresponds to the maximum distortion level. We first proceed to characterize the distortion due to source coding and the outage probability as a function of the rate, and then explain how to derive the solution of RDP. A. Distortion due to compression As described in Section II-A, in each slot the device can compress its readings through a lossy compression algorithm, thereby achieving a lower rate R(k), but, at the same time, introducing a certain degree of distortion. In the literature, there exist closed-form expressions for the rate-distortion curves for idealized compression techniques operating on Gaussian information sources, but for practical algorithms such curves are generally obtained experimentally. With the aim of modeling a more realistic scenario, we leveraged on the work in [17] to derive a mathematical fit of rate-distortion curves that were obtained experimentally:  (  −a k −1 if k > 0 b m (7) D(k) = Dfull if k = 0, where b > 0, 0 < a < 1, and Dfull is the maximum distortion, reached when the data is not even transmitted (extreme case of compression ratio equal to 0). Notice that (7) is a convex decreasing function of the compression ratio k/m.  B. Outage probability We consider an erasure channel at the packet level, where the erasure probability depends on the rate R(k) and the actual channel conditions. The communication channel is affected by both fading and Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN). We assume a quasi-static scenario, hence the fading coefficient H remains constant over the packet duration. The device does not perform power control and the transmission power is fixed to Ptx ; the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) γ at the receiver is: γ=  |H|2 Ptx , |H|2 γ̄, (d/d0 )η N  A2  (8)  where N is the noise power, and the term A2 (d/d0 )η accounts for path loss and depends on the path-loss exponent η, the distance between transmitter and receiver d, and a path-loss coefficient A = 4πd0 f0 /c, where f0 is the transmission frequency, c the speed of light, and d0 a reference distance for the antenna far field. When the channel is in a deep fade (i.e., |H| is small), the packet is lost and a packet erasure (i.e., channel outage) occurs. In IoT scenarios where packets are likely to be short, the concepts of capacity and outage capacity of classic information theory are no longer applicable. Recently, Polyansky, Poor and Verdú [18] developed a finite-length information theory that revisits the classical concepts of capacity when packets have short size. In particular, they defined the maximum coding rate R? (S, ε) as the largest coding rate L(k)/S for which there exists an encoder/decoder pair of packet length S whose error probability is not larger than ε. Although the derivation of R? (S, ε) is an NP-hard problem, tight bounds have been derived and, for quasi-static channels, the following approximation holds [19]:   log2 S ? R (S, ε) = Cε + O , (9) S where Cε is the classical outage capacity for an error probability not larger than ε. This is a very useful result, because it legitimates the use of the quantity log2 (1 + γ) even in the finite-length regime [19]. Based on these considerations, we define the outage probability as: Pout (k) = Pr ( log2 (1 + γ) < R(k)) .  (10)  We assume the fading to follow a Rayleigh distribution, i.e., the fading matrix H has i.i.d., zero-mean, unit-variance, complex Gaussian entries, and therefore the outage probability can be expressed as: R(k)  Pout (k) = 1 − e−(2  −1)/γ̄  ,  (11)  The outage probability is non-decreasing in R(k), and thus in k, being initially convex and then concave. Notice that it increases with the distance d from the receiver. C. Optimal rate-distortion point Given the amount of energy available u in the current slot, the device must decide how many bits of information k to transmit within a packet of fixed size S. This corresponds to jointly selecting the source compression ratio and the coding  rate. The degree of compression employed affects the quality of the information by introducing a source distortion that is non-increasing in k, see Eq. (7). On the other hand, the outage probability given in (11) is non-decreasing in k, and thus there is a tradeoff between D(k) and Pout (k). The actual distortion ∆(k) experienced by a packet at the receiver side is equal to D(k) if the packet has been delivered, which happens with probability 1 − Pout (k), and is equal to Dfull otherwise. Based on the definition of ∆(k), we set up RDP as follows: RDP:  k? =  min k∈{0,...,m}  E[∆(k)]  (12a)  subject to: Eused (k) ≤ u  (12b)  where the expected overall distortion at the receiver is: E[∆(k)] = D(k) (1 − Pout (k)) + Dfull Pout (k).  (13)  The discrete nature of k makes it harder to solve RDP. We thus introduce the continuous variable w ∈ [0, m] and then map it into k ∈ {0, . . . , m}. Also, we initially analyze the energy and distortion aspects of the problem separately: we ? that solves the energy constraint (12b) determine a value kE ? and a value kR that solves RDP when Constraint (12b) is neglected, and then we combine them to obtain k ? . We now focus solely on Constraint (12b). When u > 0, since Eused (·) is non-decreasing in w ∈ [0, m−1], there exists ? (u) that minimizes the gap between the consumed a point wE and the allocated energy, which either solves Constraint (12b) ? with equality2 , or is equal to m − 1. Then, we choose kE (u) ? as bwE (u)c. Instead, if no energy is allocated (u = 0), then ? (u) = 0 and the packet is discarded. Finally, notice that kE Eused (m) < Eused (k), k ∈ {1, . . . , m−1} because no energy is spent for the processing operations. We will see later how to include this case in the solution of RDP. ? , and present the We now discuss how to determine kR following key result. Theorem 1. If L0 ≤ S, the expected overall distortion ? in the conE[∆(w)] has exactly one local minimum at wR tinuous interval [0, m]. Proof. See Appendix A. ? There exists no closed-form for wR (see the computation in Appendix A); however, it is easy to numerically determine it by means of dichotomic search over a restricted subinterval of ? [0, m] and then derive its discrete counterpart kR accordingly. We refer the reader to Appendix B for details. Based on these observations, the optimal k ? (u) is given by: ( ? ? ? min{kR , kE (u)} if kR <m (14) k ? (u) = ? m · χ{Eused (m)≤u} if kR = m  Intuitively, the energy constraint (12b) does not allow to ? choose any k > kE (u). On the other hand, it is not efficient 2 If E (w) is not strictly increasing in w, multiple rates may satisfy P Constraint (12b) with equality. In this case, we select the maximum of these values.  ? to use any k > kR even if possible, because it would lead to a worse expected distortion. When the joint source-channel ? coding optimization leads to kR = m, the packet is sent without being compressed, given that there is enough energy to perform the transmission. Notice that, because of how k ? (u) is defined, the expected distortion at the receiver E[∆(k ? (u))] is a non-increasing and convex function of u; see Appendix A for details about convexity.  V. E NERGY M ANAGEMENT Through Eq. (14), RDP dictates the optimal coding rate R? (un ) , L(k ? (un ))/m when the energy un available in slot n is given. The allocation of un is influenced by the dynamics of the energy inflow and by the battery state, which have been characterized in Section II-B. In this section, we formulate the distortion-energy problem as an MDP, which is solved by means of the well-known Value-Iteration Algorithm (VIA) [20]. A. Formulation of the Markov Decision Process We model the problem as an MDP defined by the tuple (S, U, P, c(·)), with the components described as follows. • S , X × B is the system state space, where X = {0, 1} denotes the set of energy source states, and B = {0, . . . , B} represents the set of energy buffer states. • U is the action set. In each slot, the device observes the current system state sn and chooses the amount of energy un ∈ U to use. This decision influences the joint source-channel coding scheme to adopt, as dictated by RDP through Eq. (14). The set of admissible actions in state s ∈ S is Us ⊆ U. According to Eq. (2), the usable energy is constrained by the present charge of the battery, thus Usn = {0, . . . , bn }. • P represents the transition probabilities that govern the system dynamics. In particular, the probability of going from state sn = (xn , bn ) to sn+1 = (xn+1 , bn+1 ) when the action taken is un is given by: Pr(sn+1 |sn , un ) = pe (en |xn ) · px (xn+1 |xn )   (15) † · δ bn+1 − (bn + en − un )  •  where px (xn+1 |xn ) is obtained from the transition probability matrix of the MC that models the source state, pe (en |xn ) is the mass distribution function of the energy inflow in state xn (see Section II-B), and δ(·) is equal to one if the argument is zero, and zero otherwise. This last term is needed to ensure that the transitions between states are consistent with the dynamics of the battery state as determined by both the energy harvesting process and the transmission decisions. Finally, c(·) is the cost function. Because our goal is to minimize the distortion that affects the received packet, the cost in slot n is a positive quantity defined as: c(sn , un ) = E[∆(k ? (un ))],  (16)  where k ? (un ) is the result of the optimization of RDP. Notice that, apparently, the cost depends solely on the  chosen action and not on the current state sn = (xn , bn ). However, the action must be selected in set Usn , which does depend on the present battery status bn . We aim at identifying a policy π, i.e., a sequence of decision rules that map the system state into the action to take. As discussed in Section III, the goal is to minimize the long-term average distortion, i.e., the long-term average cost: "N −1 # X 1 π Es c(sn , un ) , (17) J = lim N →+∞ N n=0 which depends on the chosen admissible policy π (that decides upon the action u). In general, it also depends on the initial state s0 , but the MDP we defined has a unichain structure and bounded costs, thus the asymptotic behavior is independent of the initial state and it is sufficient to consider only Markov policies [21], i.e., those for which the decision rule depends only on the current state sn and not on time n. The goal of EMP is to determine J ? = minπ∈Φ J π and the corresponding optimal policy π ? = argminπ∈Φ J π , where Φ denotes the set of all stationary Markov policies. B. Solution of EMP J ? can be proved to satisfy Bellman’s optimality equation [20], and thus our MDP can be solved, e.g., through the Relative Value-Iteration Algorithm (RVIA), a version of the VIA used for infinite-horizon average cost MDPs [20]. RVIA defines two functions J and Q that are iteratively updated starting from an initial estimate J0 (·), e.g., J0 (s) = 0 ∀s ∈ S. In particular, the i-th iteration determines: X Qi (s, u) = c(s, u) + Pr(s0 |s, u) Ji−1 (s0 ) (18) s0 ∈S  Ji (s) = min Qi (s, u), u∈Us  (19)  In (18), the immediate cost c(s, u) obtained in the current state s is summed with the expected optimal cost obtained from the next slot onwards, weighed according to the system dynamics. The convergence criterion is given by the span seminorm operator sp(j) , max(j) − min(j) computed for j = Ji+1 (s)−Ji (s); the span seminorm guarantees that (19) is a contraction mapping, and thus the RVIA algorithm is assured to converge (for details about convergence, we refer the reader to [20]). We stop the iterative algorithm when sp(·) ≤ ε, for a chosen tolerance threshold ε. The optimal policy π ? is then determined by computing the optimal action to follow in each state s ∈ S, i.e., u? (s) = argminu∈Us Qn (s, u), where n is the last iteration of RVIA, and has the following key property. Theorem 2. The optimal policy is non-decreasing in the energy buffer state b. Proof. See Appendix C. By taking into account the discrete nature of the system state, we have that the optimal policy has a threshold structure, which is an appealing property for storage and implementation on resource constrained nodes.  0.9  0.7  0.8 0.6  0.7 0.5  0.6 0.5  0.4  0.4 0.3  0.3 0.2  0.2 0.1 0  0.1  0.25  0.5  0.75  1  1.25  1.5  0  100  200  300  400  500  Figure 2: Cπ? vs µ for different values of B (d = 100 m).  Figure 3: Cπ? vs d for different values of B (µ = 1).  When the optimal policy is identified, the MDP turns into a MC, and the average long-term cost induced by π ? is: X Cπ? = ρs c(s, u? (s)) (20)  further increase B, because the exceeding energy is not used. Notice that, after a certain value of µ (which depends on the other parameters), the average cost tends to stabilize around a specific configuration-dependent value. The reason behind it ? is never zero, is twofold: (i) the distortion associated to kR unless the outage probability is negligible even for k = m 3 , and (ii) a minimum amount of energy is needed to transmit a packet and therefore, for all system states where the battery is b < emin , the cost is 0, and this has an impact on C ? , see Eq. (20). Fig. 3 evaluates the performance of the optimal policy against the distance from the receiver for different values of the battery size when µ = 1. As d increases, the channel becomes worse and the higher outage probability has a negative impact on the achievable distortion at the receiver. Again, the role of B is less relevant.  s∈S  where ρs is the steady state probability of state s induced by the optimal policy, and c(s, u? (s)) is the immediate cost obtained by following π ? in state s. Note on computational complexity: We highlight that, although the determination of the optimal policy requires to solve the MDP, the RVIA algorithm does not need to be computed at runtime. As discussed, e.g, in [13], [22], the policy can be obtained offline and not necessarily by the sensor nodes, which will just need to store tables containing the association between system state and optimal action. Therefore, the policy execution simply consists in a look-up operation. VI. N UMERICAL EVALUATION To validate the analytical results, we evaluated the performance of the optimal policy by investigating the effect of some parameters and through comparison with two heuristics. Concerning the processing aspects, we set L0 = S, a = 0.69, b = 3.27, and m = 20. The channel gain is computed using the standard path loss model with a path loss exponent equal to 3.5 and a central frequency of 868.3 MHz. The bandwidth is W = 125 kHz, and the overall noise power is −167 dBm/Hz. For the energy aspect, the probability that the source goes from the bad to the good state is 3 times greater than that of the opposite transition. We set the variance of the normal distributed energy arrivals in the “good” state σ 2 = 3, whereas the mean µ will be specified for each result. We introduce the following useful quantities: emax is the maximum energy consumption demanded by the processing and transmission of a packet, µ = µ/emax , and B = B/emax . We remark that, according to (6), a packet cannot be sent if the available energy is below a certain threshold emin . Fig. 2 shows the average long-term cost Cπ? as a function of µ for different values of B, when the distance is fixed to 100 m. Clearly, the more the energy that can be harvested, the better the performance. It is interesting to note that, as long as it is sufficiently large, the battery size has only a minor impact on the average cost: when it is large enough to allow ? that kR is reached in most of the time slots, it is not worth to  A. Comparison with heuristics We also compare the performance of the optimal policy (OP) against that of the two following heuristic policies. • Greedy policy (GP): the future sustainability of the node does not influence the energy to use in each slot, which is chosen as un = min(bn , u? ), with u? being the energy ? . Basically, GP only solves RDP and needed to achieve kR does not optimize the energy utilization. • Dumb processing policy (DP): it does not determine the optimal point in the rate-distortion tradeoff and only considers the distortion introduced at the source, without accounting for the outage probability. EMP is unchanged. Fig. 4 compares the performance of the optimal and heuristic policies against the average energy income during the good state of the energy source. The normalized battery size is B = 1.5 and the distance from the receiver is d = 80 m. As expected, the optimal policy outperforms both heuristic policies. However, DP achieves almost optimal performance with this configuration: this is explained by the fact that the source distortion becomes flat as k increases (see (7)), thus the gain brought by OP for considering the negative impact of the outage probability is less significant than that of the 3 We discarded this scenario, as it is not interesting. For k < m, it is always ∆(·) ≥ D(·) > 0.  1 1  bn /B  0.9 0.8  0.5 OP 0  0.6  1  bn /B  0.7  0.5  GP 0.5  0.4 0  0.3 1  0.1 0  bn /B  0.2  0.25  0.5  0.75  1  1.25  0.5 DP  1.5 0  Figure 4: Performance comparison between policies.  VII. C ONCLUSIONS This work investigates the tradeoff between energy efficiency and signal distortion at the receiver. We decomposed the problem into two nested optimization steps, endowing our framework with more flexibility. The outer problem is structured as an MDP, that allows to derive an optimal energy management policy; the inner problem jointly optimizes the source-channel coding scheme to ensure that the quality of the received information is maximized. The numerical evaluation corroborates the analytical results and shows that our policy outperforms simpler heuristics. Future work includes the use of machine learning techniques in order to more accurately model the EH process and the extension to a sensor network where packet re-transmissions are allowed, thereby introducing a new tradeoff between signal distortion and transmission latency. We also would like to address more general cases, e.g., considering compression algorithms that behave differently from LTC in terms of energy consumption, and including practical sensor limitations, such as imprecisions in the energy buffer readings. 4 Accordingly, if the outage were higher, the gap between DP and OP would increase.  1  xn  intelligent energy management process4 . In fact GP, that makes an aggressive use of the available energy, leads to the worst performance. When the average energy income µ is high, all policies achieve good performance, because there is almost always enough energy to guarantee low distortion. In Fig. 5, we plot a realization of the system temporal evolution during the first 500 time slots, when d = 80 m and starting with full battery (B = 2). The last graph shows the dynamics of the energy source, while the first three plots show the evolution of the energy buffer for OP, GP and DP, respectively. GP drains out the battery too fast, and the battery is often empty when xn = 0, whereas this never happens with OP and DP, which leverage on the knowledge of the EH statistics to use the energy wisely. Interestingly, the excursion experienced by bn is lower with DP than with OP: it neglects the negative impact of the outage probability for large values of k and tends to use energy to send the packet even when OP decides to discard it, and in this way it does not allow the buffer to accumulate energy that may be very useful in the next slots.  0  0  100  200  300  400  500  n (time slots)  Figure 5: Example of battery temporal evolution (B = 2).  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The work of C. Pielli and M. Zorzi was partly supported by Intel’s Corporate Research Council, under the project “EC-CENTRIC: an energy- and context-centric optimization framework for IoT nodes”. The work of Č. Stefanović was supported by the Danish Council for Independent Research under grant no. DFF-4005-00281. A PPENDIX A P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1 By substituting D(·) and Pout (·) in Eq. (12a) as given in Eqs. (7) and (11), respectively, the expected distortion for w ∈ [1, m] is expressed as:    2(wL0 )/(mS) −1 w −a γ E[∆(w)] = b − 1 e− m   (21) (wL0 )/(mS) −1 −2 γ + Dfull 1 − e ≤ Dfull , whereas it is equal to Dfull for w = 0. By introducing the positive coefficients c1 , c2 , c3 , c4 (given in Table I), Eq. (21) can be rewritten as: E[∆(w)] = c1 w−a e−c2 2  w c3  w c3  − c4 e−c2 2  + Dfull ,  (22)  and its derivative with respect to w is:  wc3 ∂ E[∆(w)] = −e−c2 2 d1 w−a−1 +d2 w−a 2wc3 −d3 2wc3 ∂w w c3 , −e−c2 2 f (w), (23) with positive coefficients d1 , d2 , d3 detailed in Table I. The critical points of E[∆(w)] correspond to the zeros of f (w). However, it is not possible to write a closed-form solution for f (w) = 0, but a numerical approach needs to be pursued. Actually, the shape of f (w) highly depends on coefficients d1 , d2 , d3 , and thus on the system parameters. Anyway, we show that, if L0 ≤ S, f (w) has at most one root in the continuous interval [1, m], and thus function E[∆(w)] admits  c1 b ma e1/γ d1 a c1  c2 1/γ  d2 c1 c2 c3 ln(2)  c3 L0 /(m S) d3 c2 c3 c4 ln(2)  c4 e1/γ (b + Dfull ) d4 e1/γ c2 c3 ln(2)  Table I: Coefficients c1 , c2 , c3 , c4 , d1 , d2 , d3 . ? a unique point of minimum wR (which may coincide with one of the extreme values of w). We temporarily focus only on the last two addends of f (w) and define g(w) , (d2 w−a − d3 ) 2w c3 . By expanding coefficients d2 and d3 , we obtain:   m a  g(w) = d4 b (24) − (b + Dfull ) 2w c3 , w with d4 defined in Table I. The derivative is:  ∂ g(w) = d4 2w c3 − a b ma w−a−1 + ∂w  (25)  m a ln(2)c3 − b ln(2)c3 − Dfull ln(2)c3 +b w The last addend of the second factor is certainly negative, and the sum of the first three addends is equal to:   w a   m a  a − + ln(2)c3 1 − ≤ b w w m       m a  a (26) 1 w a ma − + 1− , b a h(w) ≤b w w m m w  where the first inequality comes from the assumption L0 ≤ S, that implies c3 ≤ 1/m. Notice that both h(0) and h(m) are negative, and h0 (w) is positive, i.e., function h(·) is a monotonically increasing negative function of w ∈ [0, 1]. It follows that, for w ≤ m, g(w) is always decreasing in w. Moreover, it is certainly positive for w → 0+ and negative for w = m. This means that g(w) has exactly one point of minimum wg = (b/(b + Dfull ))1/a in the continuous range [0, m]. However, if wg < 1, then g(w) is always negative in the interval we are interested in (i.e., w ∈ [1, m]). Based on these observations and on the fact that d1 w−a−1 is positive, convex and decreasing in w, we obtain that f (w) is decreasing in w. Depending on the values of d1 , d2 , d3 , it is then possible to pinpoint three distinct cases. 1) f (w) is always positive, and thus E[∆(w)] is always ? increasing in w, which entails that choosing wR = 1 is optimal. This happens when coefficient d1 is very high and thus the first addend of f (w) always dominates g(w), i.e., when the outage probability is overwhelming. We deem this case not to be of practical interest. 2) In contrast to the previous case, it may happen that f (w) is always negative, i.e., E[∆(w)] always decreases with w. This situation is met when the distortion function prevails over the outage probability, which remains low even for high rates because the channel is very good on ? average. The solution in this case is wR = m, i.e., the best strategy consists in not compressing at all. 3) Otherwise, f (w) is decreasing in w and has a unique ? zero, which corresponds to a unique value wR . Using ? a source compression ratio lower than wR /m would generate a higher E[∆(·)] because of the larger distortion introduced with the source coding, whereas a  ? compression ratio larger than wR /m would weaken the goodness of the channel coding and lead to a higher outage probability. In practice, under the only assumption of L0 ≤ S, there ? always exists a unique point wR that minimizes the expected ? distortion at the receiver, i.e., E[∆(w)] is decreasing until wR and increasing afterwards. ? A note on convexity. E[∆(w)] is convex for w ≤ wR . In fact, the computation of the second derivative of (21) leads to: w c3 ∂2 E[∆(w)] = c2 c3 ln(2)2wc3 e−c2 2 f (w)+ 2 ∂w (27) −c2 2w c3 ∂ − c2 e f (w) ∂w ? which is always positive for w ≤ wR , since f (w) is positive ∂ −a−2 g(w) is always and its derivative −(a + 1)d1 w + ∂w negative.  A PPENDIX B ? O N THE DETERMINATION OF kR ? cannot be The computation in Appendix A shows that wR expressed with a closed-form. So, in the worst case E[∆(k)] should be calculated for all the m possible values of k. ? However, it is still possible to determine kR with the following procedure, that reduces the computational time. First of all, we compute the value of Eq. (21) for the two extreme values k ∈ {1, m}. If both f (1) and f (m) are positive, then we fall ? in case 1) of Appendix A and kR = 1; similarly, if they are ? both negative, case 2) holds and kR = m. If f (1) > 0 and ? f (m) < 0, case 3) holds and kR can be found by means of binary search over the discrete subinterval [kg , m − 1], where kg is one of the two closest integers to wg , according to which one yields the lowest expected distortion.  A PPENDIX C P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2 Thanks to Topkis’ monotonicity theorem [23], to prove that u? (s) = argminu∈Us Q((x, b), u) is non-decreasing in b, it is sufficient to prove that function Q((x, b), u) is submodular in (b, u), i.e., that the difference Q((x, b), u0 ) − Q((x, b), u) with u0 ≥ u does not increase as b increases: Q((x, b0 ), u0 ) − Q((x, b0 ), u) ≤ Q((x, b), u0 ) − Q((x, b), u) (28) for b0 ≥ b. The submodularity property is preserved under nonnegative linear combination, thus we separately demonstrate the submodularity of c(s, u) and J(s) in the pair (b, u). In fact, Eq. (19), we have that Q((x, b), u) = c((x, b), u) + P from PE 0 0 e=0 px (x |x)pe (e|x) J((x , b + e − u)). x0 ∈X For what concerns the single-stage cost c((x, b), u), we have seen in Section IV-C that it is convex and non-increasing in u, and depends on b only through the set of admissible actions U(x,b) . Since U(x,b) ⊆ U(x,b0 ) if b ≤ b0 , it is c((x, b), u) < c((x, b0 ), u) for b < u ≤ b0 , and c((x, b), u) = c((x, b0 ), u) in all other cases. It follows that the quantity c((x, b0 ), u) − c((x, b), u) does not increase as u increases, i.e., the singlestage cost is submodular in (b, u).  We now proceed with the characterization of the term J((x, b)). We assume it to be convex in the energy buffer state b; the validity of this property is proven in Lemma 1 below. Convexity means that: J((x, b1 )) + J((x, b2 )) ≥ J((x, λb1 + (1 − λ)b2 ))+ + J((x, (1 − λ)b1 + λb2 ))  (29)  for any λ ∈ [0, 1], b1 , b2 , x. By choosing b1 = b + e − u0 , b2 = b0 + e − u, and λ = (u0 − u)/(u0 − u + b0 − b) with b0 ≥ b and u0 ≥ u, and by rearranging the terms, we obtain: J((x, b0 + e−u0 )) − J((x, b0 + e − u)) ≤ J((x, b + e − u0 )) − J((x, b + e − u)),  (30)  which proves the submodularity of J(x, b) in (b, u). Summing up, by exploiting the submodularity of function Q((x, b), u) and the convexity of J((x, b)) with respect to b, we have proved that the optimal policy π ? (s) is non-decreasing in the buffer state b. Lemma 1. J(s) is convex in the energy buffer state b. Proof. We proceed by induction on the i-th iteration of RVIA (see Eq. (19)). The basis is straightforward: since the initial value J0 ((x, b)) does not affect the convergence of the algorithm, we simply choose it convex in b (e.g., J0 ((x, b)) = 0 ∀s ∈ S is a valid choice). For the inductive step, we assume Ji−1 ((x, b)) to be convex in b. In the proof of Theorem 2 we have shown that Q(s, u) is submodular in b if J((x, b)) is convex in b, i.e.: Qi ((x, b), u0 )−Qi ((x, b − c), u0 ) ≤ Qi ((x, b), u) − Qi ((x, b − c), u),  (31)  for b0 ≥ b, u0 ≥ u. Function Qi ((x, b), u) is convex in b, because it is the nonnegative weighted sum of c((x, b), u) and Ji−1 ((x, b)), that are both convex in b. Thus: Qi ((x, b), u)−Qi ((x, b − c), u) ≤ Qi ((x, b + c), u) − Qi ((x, b), u),  (32)  which, combined with (31), gives: Qi ((x, b), u0 )−Qi ((x, b − c), u0 ) ≤ Qi ((x, b + c), u) − Qi ((x, b), u), Qi ((x, b, u)−Qi ((x, b − c), u0 ) ≤ Qi ((x, b + c), u) − Qi ((x, b), u0 ).  (33) (34)  By choosing u = u0 = argminu Qi ((x, b), u), we obtain: Ji ((x, b + c)) − Ji ((x, b)) ≥ Ji ((x, b)) − Ji ((x, b − c)), (35) i.e., Ji (s) is convex in b and the inductive step is proved. R EFERENCES [1] Nokia. (2015) LTE evolution for IoT connectivity. [Online]. Available: http://resources.alcatel-lucent.com/asset/200178 [2] Ericsson. (2015) Ericsson, AT&T and Altair demonstrate over 10 years of battery life on LTE IoT commercial chipset. [Online]. Available: https://www.ericsson.com/news/1962068 [3] Huawei. (2015) NB-IOT - Enabling New Business Opportunities. [Online]. Available: http://www.huawei.com/minisite/4-5g/img/NB-IOT. pdf  [4] K. E. Zachariadis, M. L. Honig, and A. K. Katsaggelos, “Source fidelity over fading channels: performance of erasure and scalable codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1080–1091, July 2008. [5] F. Etemadi and H. Jafarkhani, “A unified framework for layered transmission over fading and packet erasure channels,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 565–573, Apr. 2008. [6] J. N. Laneman, E. Martinian, G. W. Wornell, and J. G. Apostolopoulos, “Source-channel diversity for parallel channels,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 3518–3539, Oct. 2005. [7] I. E. Aguerri and D. Gunduz, “Distortion exponent in fading MIMO channels with time-varying side information,” in 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings, July 2011, pp. 548–552. [8] S. Ulukus, A. Yener, E. Erkip, O. Simeone, M. Zorzi, P. Grover, and K. Huang, “Energy harvesting wireless communications: A review of recent advances,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 360–381, Mar. 2015. [9] R. V. Bhat, M. Motani, and T. J. Lim, “Distortion minimization in energy harvesting sensor nodes with compression power constraints,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), May 2016, pp. 1–6. [10] P. Castiglione, O. Simeone, E. Erkip, and T. Zemen, “Energy management policies for energy-neutral source-channel coding,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2668–2678, Sept. 2012. [11] M. S. Motlagh, M. B. Khuzani, and P. Mitran, “On lossy joint sourcechannel coding in energy harvesting communication systems,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 4433–4447, Nov. 2015. [12] D. Zordan, T. Melodia, and M. Rossi, “On the design of temporal compression strategies for energy harvesting sensor networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1336– 1352, Feb. 2016. [13] N. Bui and M. Rossi, “Staying alive: System design for self-sufficient sensor networks,” ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 40:1–40:42, Feb. 2015. [14] M. L. Ku, W. Li, Y. Chen, and K. J. R. Liu, “Advances in energy harvesting communications: Past, present, and future challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1384–1412, Second Quarter 2016. [15] M. L. Ku, Y. Chen, and K. J. R. Liu, “Data-driven stochastic models and policies for energy harvesting sensor communications,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1505–1520, Aug. 2015. [16] M. Miozzo, D. Zordan, P. Dini, and M. Rossi, “Solarstat: Modeling photovoltaic sources through stochastic markov processes,” in 2014 IEEE International Energy Conference, May 2014, pp. 688–695. [17] D. Zordan, B. Martinez, I. Vilajosana, and M. Rossi, “On the performance of lossy compression schemes for energy constrained sensor networking,” ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 15:1–15:34, Nov. 2014. [18] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdu, “Channel coding rate in the finite blocklength regime,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2307–2359, May 2010. [19] W. Yang, G. Durisi, T. Koch, and Y. Polyanskiy, “Quasi-static multipleantenna fading channels at finite blocklength,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 4232–4265, July 2014. [20] D. Bertsekas, Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control, 4th ed. Belmont, MA,USA: Athena Scientific, 2012, vol. 2. [21] E. Altman, Constrained Markov decision processes. CRC Press, 1999, vol. 7. [22] A. Aprem, C. R. Murthy, and N. B. Mehta, “Transmit power control policies for energy harvesting sensors with retransmissions,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 895– 906, Oct. 2013. [23] D. M. Topkis, Supermodularity and complementarity. Princeton University Press, 1998.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 7. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
