Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_6715

Abstract:
Close Encounters of the Higher Kind  arXiv:1608.03350v1 [cs.PL] 11 Aug 2016  Emulating Constructor Classes in Standard ML Yutaka Nagashima  Liam O’Connor  Data61, CSIRO / NICTA yutaka.nagashima@nicta.com.au  UNSW Australia and Data61, CSIRO / NICTA liamoc@cse.unsw.edu.au  We implement a library for encoding constructor classes in Standard ML, including elaboration from minimal definitions, and automatic instantiation of superclasses.  App Min To Fun Min FUNCTOR MIN  APPLICATIVE MIN  mk Functor  1. Introduction  FUNCTOR  In our recent work [5] on automating Isabelle proofs, we discovered that several proof search problems can be elegantly expressed as a monadic program. Unfortunately, Standard ML does not natively support the kinds of polymorphism required to easily express a Monad abstraction, nor similar abstractions such as Applicative and Functor1 . In this paper, we present a technique for encoding constructor classes such as Monad, which relies only on the Standard ML module system. Several others have attempted to enable constructor classes in Standard ML by changing the language. While it is tempting to customise the language by adding new features, new features tend to cause duplication [2] and inconsistency [3]. Furthermore, avoiding language extensions makes our approach transferable to all other ML dialects with a module system. Our contributions are twofold: we develop a usable library for monads, monad transformers, applicatives, and more in Standard ML, and demonstrate an elegant technique using ML functors to elaborate minimal definitions of each abstraction to avoid code duplication. For example, given a minimal definition of the list monad, e.g. return and bind, our library derives other basic functions, such as >=>, join, and liftM automatically. Moreover, using the hierarchical relationship among constructor classes, our library automatically instantiates list as a member of the parent classes, e.g. applicative and functor. Thus, for each monad, users can derive more than twenty functions from two manually written functions, i.e. return and bind.  MONAD MIN  mk Applicative APPLICATIVE  mk Monad  MONAD  Figure 1. Automatic instantiation and function derivation. type ’a monad; val return:’a -> ’a monad; val bind:’a monad -> (’a -> ’b monad) -> ’b monad; end; signature MONAD = sig include APPLICATIVE MONAD MIN; sharing type monad = applicative; val liftM : (’a -> ’b) -> (’a monad -> ’b monad); val join: ...; val forever: ...; val ... end; Since every monad is applicative, we express this subtyping relation using the ML keyword include. In Haskell, this relation is expressed as class Applicative m => Monad m . In order to create a concrete instance of a constructor class, the user merely supplies its minimal definition. For example, one can instantiate the type constructor list as a member of MONAD by defining the following module. structure ListMonadMin:MONAD MIN = struct type ’a monad = ’a list; fun return x = [x]; fun bind seq func = List.concat (map func seq); end;  2. Constructor Classes in Standard ML Figure 1 shows the structure of the class hierarchy as it is implemented in our library. Each node represents a ML signature. Straight arrows stand for subtyping relations, whereas dashed arrows with labels stand for ML functors and their names. The ML functors expressed as vertical dashed arrows, e.g. mk Monad, produce full definitions of constructor classes from the corresponding minimal definitions; those expressed as horizontal dashed arrows, e.g. Mona Min To App Min, generalise minimal definitions for a class to its superclass. For example, the following code snippets show the specifications of MONAD MIN and MONAD.  Then, passing ListMonadMin to the ML functor mk Monad produces a full-fledged instance of MONAD: structure ListMonad:MONAD = mk Monad(ListMonadMin) A minimal instance of APPLICATIVE can also be produced from our structure by using the appropriate functors: structure ListAppMin:APPLICATIVE_MIN = Mona_Min_To_App_Min(ListMonadMin)  signature MONAD MIN = sig 1 Not  Mona Min To App Min  Note that these ML functors go in the same direction as the subtyping relation, unlike the elaboration functors such as mk Monad. The following shows the definition of the Mona Min To App Min  to be confused with an ML functor  1  2018/3/22  ALTER MIN APPLICATIVE MIN  Our approach offers some benefits over traditional Haskell type classes. In particular, the ML module system allows more flexibility, as more than one instance can be provided for a given type. This flexibility is appreciated in constructor classes, too — for example, there are two perfectly valid Applicative instances for lists, one with a cartesian and one with a pairwise product operation. In Haskell, this necessitates the use of the newtype feature for one of the instances. In ML, both instances are equally natural. Wehr et al. [1] first introduced an approach to translate Haskell type classes in ML modules. They discussed that their scheme is not able to handle constructor classes, nor translate either recursive class constraints or default definitions into ML modules, while we addressed all of these. One example of a recursive class constraint would be:  MONAD MIN ALTER  APPLICATIVE  4. Comparison and Related Work  MONAD0P MIN  MONAD0P MONAD  Figure 2. Diamond case. functor. functor Mona Min To App Min (Min:MONAD MIN) = struct open Min; type ’a applicative = ’a monad; val pure = return; fun <*> (fs, xs) = bind fs (fn fs’ => bind xs (fn xs’ => return (fs’ xs’))); end : APPLICATIVE MIN ;  instance (Monad f, Monad g) => Monad (f :*: g) We express these using ML functors: in this case, we define a functor mk ConsProd, which takes two modules of MONAD MIN and returns a module of MONAD MIN. Even though we can define mk ConsProd parametrically, two concrete type constructors f and g must be supplied in order to instantiate MONAD MIN for f :*: g. Our approach is similar to the library code in Dreyer et al. [2]; however, we additionally support constructor classes, instance elaboration, and automatic instantiation of superclasses. We did not, however, extend the language as they did, as we did not wish to deviate from Standard ML, although we foresee no fundamental problems incorporating their implicit typing scheme into our library. Furthermore, we chose to express class hierarchies with flat module structures, while they did so hierarchically. Our choice allows users to avoid nested qualifiers, e.g. ListMonad.Applicative.Fmap.<$, resulting in less verbose code in the absence of any implicit typing mechanism. Scott [4] seems to have employed a similar approach to ours, but in OCaml, suggesting that our technique is transferable to other ML dialects. There are also attempts to model type and constructor classes using features from the imperative object oriented programming paradigm. We purposefully avoided these deviations from Standard ML.  The ML functor Mona Min To App Min produces instances of APPLICATIVE MIN in terms of MONAD MIN functions. This is in contrast with the constructor classes in Haskell where return is defined as pure. It is this inversion that enables our library to derive superclass instances for a given type constructor. The elaboration functor mk Monad is defined as follows. functor mk Monad (Min : MONAD MIN): MONAD = struct type ’a monad = ’a Min.monad; structure App Min = Mona Min to App Min (Min); structure App = mk Applicative (App Min); open App Min; fun liftM f m = bind m (fn m’ => return (f m’)); fun join n = ...; fun forever a = ...; fun ... end; Apart from producing the various MONAD functions, mk Monad instantiates list as a member of APPLICATIVE by elaborating the result of the functor Mona Min To App Min with mk Applicative, which in turn instantiates the FUNCTOR class similarly. We formalise monad transformers as ML functors, too. For instance, the state monad transformer is a functor that takes two modules, the minimal definition of the base monad and a module containing just the type of the state, and produces a minimal definition of the transformed monad.  5. Current Status and Future Work We previously developed [5] a proof automation tool for Isabelle using this library, and our experience with it was positive. However, every library has room for improvement. We are working to include other constructor classes such as Arrow into this framework. In our approach, our MONAD module could also generate an instance of ARROW, once again eliminating the Haskell use of newtype for Kleisli arrows. Furthermore, we plan to support multiple minimal definitions to instantiate some constructor classes. For example, we presented a minimal definition of MONAD with return and bind above, but we could provide a minimal definition of MONAD with return, fmap, and join instead. It is up to the user’s preference which minimal definition is easier to write. Since they are equivalent, we can write a functor that derives one from the other, providing multiple options to users.  3. Corner Cases Some functions in Haskell involve multiple classes, such as foldM: foldM :: (Foldable t, Monad m) => (b -> a -> m b) -> b -> t a -> m b We formalise these as ML functors that take multiple modules conforming to the appropriate signatures and return a module containing the function. We can easily extend our approach to other constructor classes, even if they involve multiple inheritance. Figure 2 shows an example of such a case. Since our library is based on statically known mathematical properties, we avoid so-called diamond problems. For instance, given a type constructor of MONAD0P in Figure 2, it does not matter semantically from which of ALTER and MONAD this type constructor inherits the methods of APPLICATIVE, as both of them have the same properties.  Acknowledgments We thank Gabriele Keller for stimulating discussions on ways of representing constructor classes with modules. NICTA is funded by the Australian Government through the Department of Communications and the Australian Research Council through the ICT Centre of Excellence Program.  2  2018/3/22  References [1] Stefan Wehr and Manuel M. T. Chakravarty. ML Modules and Haskell Type Classes: A Constructive Comparison (2008) Programming Languages and Systems, 6th Asian Symposium, APLAS [2] Derek Dreyer, Robert Harper, Manuel M. T. Chakravarty, and Gabriele Keller. Modular type classes (2007) Proceedings of the 34th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL [3] Ondrej Kuncar and Andrei Popescu. A Consistent Foundation for Isabelle/HOL (2015) Interactive Theorem Proving - 6th International Conference, ITP [4] Phil Scott. ocaml-monad library. https://github.com/Chattered/ocaml-monad [5] Yutaka Nagashima and Ramana Kumar. A Proof Strategy Language and Proof Script Generation for Isabelle (2016) arXiv.org 1606.02941  3  2018/3/22

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
