Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_6910

Abstract:
Simultaneous Embeddings with Few Bends and Crossings ⋆  arXiv:1508.07921v1 [cs.CG] 31 Aug 2015  Fabrizio Frati1 , Michael Hoffmann2, and Vincent Kusters2 1  2  Dipartimento di Ingegneria, University Roma Tre, Italy frati@dia.uniroma3.it Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland {hoffmann,vincent.kusters}@inf.ethz.ch  Abstract. A simultaneous embedding with fixed edges (S EFE ) of two planar graphs R and B is a pair of plane drawings of R and B that coincide when restricted to the common vertices and edges of R and B. We show that whenever R and B admit a S EFE , they also admit a S EFE in which every edge is a polygonal curve with few bends and every pair of edges has few crossings. Specifically: (1) if R and B are trees then one bend per edge and four crossings per edge pair suffice (and one bend per edge is sometimes necessary), (2) if R is a planar graph and B is a tree then six bends per edge and eight crossings per edge pair suffice, and (3) if R and B are planar graphs then six bends per edge and sixteen crossings per edge pair suffice. Our results improve on a paper by Grilli et al. (GD’14), which proves that nine bends per edge suffice, and on a paper by Chan et al. (GD’14), which proves that twenty-four crossings per edge pair suffice.  1 Introduction Let R = (VR , ER ) and B = (VB , EB ) be two planar graphs sharing a common graph C = (VR ∩ VB , ER ∩ EB ). The vertices and edges of C are common, while the other vertices and edges are exclusive. We refer to the edges of R, B, and C as the red, blue, and black edges, respectively. A simultaneous embedding of R and B is a pair of plane drawings of R and B, respectively, that agree on the common vertices (see Figs. 1a–1c). Simultaneous graph embeddings have been a central topic of investigation for the graph drawing community in the last decade, because of their applicability to the visualization of dynamic graphs and of multiple graphs on the same vertex set [6, 11], and because of the depth and breadth of the theory they have been found to be related to. Brass et al. [6] initiated the research on this topic by investigating simultaneous geometric embeddings (or S GEs), which are simultaneous embeddings where all edges are represented by straight-line segments (see Fig. 1d). This setting proved to be fairly restrictive: there exist two trees [16] and even a tree and a path [2] with no S GE. Furthermore, the problem of deciding whether two graphs admit an S GE is NP-hard [12]. Two relaxations of S GE have been considered in the literature in which edges are not forced to be straight-line segments. In the first setting, we look for a simultaneous ⋆  Research of M. Hoffmann and V. Kusters is partially supported by the ESF EUROCORES programme EuroGIGA, CRP GraDR and the Swiss National Science Foundation, SNF Project 20GG21-134306.  2  Fabrizio Frati, Michael Hoffmann, and Vincent Kusters  a  b c e d h (a)  c b g  a  f  a  d (b)  a  f c  e  e d (c)  f  c  b g  a  f  h  c  b  e g  d (d)  h  b  e g  d  h  (e)  Fig. 1: (a-b) R and B with VC = {a, b, c, d, e} and EC = {(a, b), (b, c), (a, c), (c, d)}. (c) Simultaneous embedding of R and B. (d) S GE of R and B. (e) S EFE of R and B.  embedding of two given planar graphs R and B in which every edge is drawn as a polygonal curve with few bends. Erten and Kobourov [10] proved that three bends per edge always suffice, a bound which has been improved to two bends per edge by Di Giacomo and Liotta [9]. If R and B are trees, then one bend per edge is sufficient [10]. Note that black edges may be represented by different curves in each drawing. The variant in which the edges of R and B might only cross at right angles has also been considered [3]. In the second setting, we look for a simultaneous embedding with fixed edges (or S EFE) of R and B: a simultaneous embedding in which every common edge is represented by the same simple curve in the plane (see Fig. 1e). In other words, a S EFE is a drawing Γ of the union graph (VR ∪ VB , ER ∪ EB ) such that Γ |R is a plane drawing of R and Γ |B is a plane drawing of B. While not every two planar graphs admit a S EFE, this setting is substantially less restrictive than S GE: for example, every tree and every planar graph admit a S EFE [14]. Determining the complexity of deciding whether two given graphs admit a S EFE is a major open problem in the field of graph drawing. Polynomial-time testing algorithms are known in many restricted cases, such as when the common graph C is biconnected [1], when C is a set of disjoint cycles [5], or when R is a planar graph and B is a graph with at most one cycle [13]. We refer to an excellent survey by Bläsius et al. [4] for many other results. In this paper we present algorithms to construct S EFEs in which edges are represented by polygonal curves. For the purpose of guaranteeing the readability of the representation, we aim at minimizing two natural and well-studied aesthetic criteria in the constructed S EFEs: the number of bends per edge and the number of crossings per edge pair. Both criteria have been recently and separately considered in relation to the construction of a S EFE. Namely, Grilli et al. [17] proved that every combinatorial S EFE can be realized as a S EFE with at most nine bends per edge, a bound which improves to three bends per edge when the common graph is biconnected. Further, Chan et al. [7] proved that if R and B admit a S EFE, then they admit a S EFE in which every red-blue edge pair crosses at most twenty-four times. Contribution. In this paper we improve on the results of Grilli et al. [17] and of Chan et al. [7] by proving the following results. 1. If R and B are both trees, then they admit a S EFE with one bend per edge. Consequently, every edge pair crosses at most four times. The number of bends is the best possible, since there exist two trees that do no admit a S EFE with no bends [16].  Simultaneous Embeddings with Few Bends and Crossings  3  2. If R is a planar graph and B is a tree, then they admit a S EFE with six bends per edge in which every two exclusive edges cross at most eight times. 3. If R and B are planar graphs that admit a S EFE, then they admit a S EFE with six bends per edge in which every two exclusive edges cross at most sixteen times. In all cases, the common edges are drawn as straight-line segments. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we establish some preliminaries. In Sections 3, 4, and 5, we present our results on tree–tree pairs, on tree–planar pairs, and on planar–planar pairs, respectively. Finally, in Section 6 we conclude and suggest some open problems.  2 Preliminaries A plane drawing of a (multi)graph G is a mapping of each vertex to a point in the plane, and of each edge to a simple curve connecting its endvertices such that no two edges cross. A plane drawing of G determines a circular ordering of the edges incident to each vertex of G; the set of these orderings is called a rotation system. Two plane drawings of G are equivalent if they have the same rotation system, the same containment relationship between cycles, and the same outer face (the second condition is redundant if G is connected). A planar embedding is an equivalence class of plane drawings. Analogously, a S EFE of two planar graphs R and B determines a circular ordering of the edges incident to each vertex (comprising edges incident to both R and B); the set of these orderings is the rotation system of the S EFE. Two S EFEs of R and B are equivalent if they have the same rotation system and if their restriction to the vertices and edges of R (of B) determines two equivalent plane drawings of R (resp. of B). Finally, a combinatorial S EFE E for two planar graphs R and B is an equivalence class of S EFEs; we denote by E|R (by E|B ) the planar embedding of R (resp. of B) obtained by restricting E to the vertices and edges of R (resp. of B). A subdivision of a multigraph G is a graph G′ obtained by replacing edges of G with paths, whose internal vertices are called subdivision vertices. If G′ is a subdivision of G, the operation of flattening subdivision vertices in G′ returns G. The contraction of an edge (u, v) in a multigraph G leads to a multigraph G′ by replacing (u, v) with a vertex w incident to all the edges u and v are incident to in G; k parallel edges (u, v) in G lead to k − 1 self-loops incident to w in G′ (the contracted edge itself is not in G′ ). If G has a planar embedding EG , then G′ inherits a planar embedding EG′ as follows. Let a1 , . . . , ak , v and b1 , . . . , bℓ , u be the clockwise orders of the neighbors of u and v in EG , respectively. Then the clockwise order of the neighbors of w is a1 , . . . , ak , b1 , . . . , bℓ . The contraction of a connected graph is the contraction of all its edges. The straight-line segment between points p and q is denoted by pq. The angle of pq is the angle between the ray from p in positive x-direction and the ray from p through pq. A polygon P is strictly-convex if, for any two non-consecutive vertices p and q of P , the open segment pq lies in the interior of P ; also, P is star-shaped if a point p∗ exists such that, for any vertex p of P , the open segment pp∗ lies in P ; the kernel of P is the set of all such points p∗ . A 1-page book embedding (1PBE) is a plane drawing where all vertices are placed on an oriented line ℓ called spine and all edges are curves in the halfplane to the left of  4  Fabrizio Frati, Michael Hoffmann, and Vincent Kusters  3 e2 =e3  5 2  4  1 e1 (a)  r(S) b(S) 6  r(v) b(v) v  7 (b)  Fig. 2: (a) A connected component S of C, together with its incident exclusive edges. (b) Vertex v resulting from the contraction of S.  ℓ. A 2-page book embedding (2PBE) is a plane drawing where all vertices are placed on ℓ and each edge is a curve in one of the two halfplanes delimited by ℓ.  3 Two Trees In this section we describe an algorithm that computes a S EFE of any two trees R and B with one bend per edge. Let C be the common graph of R and B. The outline of the algorithm is as follows. In Step 1, we compute a combinatorial S EFE of R and B with the property that at every common vertex v, all the black edges are consecutive in the circular order of edges incident to v. In Step 2, we contract each component of C to a single vertex, obtaining trees R′ from R and B ′ from B. In Step 3, we independently augment R′ and B ′ to Hamiltonian planar graphs, so as to satisfy topological constraints that are necessary for the subsequent drawing algorithms. In Step 4, we use the Hamiltonian augmentations to construct a simultaneous embedding of R′ and B ′ with one bend per edge; this step is reminiscent of an algorithm of Erten and Kobourov [10]. Finally, in Step 5, we expand the components of C. This consists of modifying the simultaneous embedding of R′ and B ′ in a small neighborhood of each vertex to make room for the components of C. We now describe these steps in detail. Step 1: Combinatorial Sefe. Fix the clockwise order of the edges incident to each vertex as follows: all the black edges in any order, then all the red edges in any order, and then all the blue edges in any order (each sequence might be empty). As any rotation system for a tree determines a planar embedding for it, this results in a combinatorial S EFE E of R and B. See Fig. 2a. We may assume that every component S of C is incident to at least one red and one blue edge: If S is not incident to any, say, blue edge, then B=S=C, since B is connected, and any plane straight-line drawing of R is a S EFE of R and B. For every component S of C we pick two incident edges r(S) and b(S) as follows. In any S EFE equivalent to E let γ be a simple closed curve surrounding S and close enough to it so that γ has no crossing in its interior. Note that γ intersects all the exclusive edges incident to S in some clockwise order in which all the exclusive edges incident to a single vertex of S appear consecutively. Let r(S) be any red edge not preceded by a red edge in this order and let b(S) be the first blue edge after r(S). We  Simultaneous Embeddings with Few Bends and Crossings  p  v′ v (a)  p=v ′  5  v (b)  Fig. 3: Embedding the children of v if (a) p 6= v ′ or (b) p = v ′ . Parts of the embedding already constructed are in the shaded regions.  define a total ordering ̺S of the vertices of S, as the order in which their exclusive edges intersect γ (a curve is added incident to every vertex of S with no incident exclusive edge for this purpose), where the first vertex of ̺S is the endvertex of r(S). We have the following. Lemma 1. The straight-line drawing of S obtained by placing its vertices on a strictlyconvex curve λ in the order defined by ̺S is plane. Proof. For every vertex v of S, shrink γ along an exclusive edge incident to v so that γ passes through v and still every edge of S lies in its interior. Eventually γ passes through all the vertices of S in the order ̺S . The planarity of the drawing of S implies that there are no two edges whose endvertices alternate along γ. Then placing the vertices of S on λ in the order ̺S leads to a plane straight-line drawing of S.   Step 2: Contractions. Contract each component S of C to a single vertex v. The ′ ′ resulting trees R′ =(VR′ , ER ) and B ′ =(VB′ , EB ) have planar embeddings ER′ and EB ′ inherited from ER and EB , respectively. Vertex v is common to R′ and B ′ ; let r(v) and b(v) be the edges corresponding to r(S) and b(S) after the contraction. See Fig. 2b. Step 3: Hamiltonian augmentations. We describe this step for R′ only; the treatment of B ′ is analogous and independent. The goal is to find a vertex order corresponding to a 1PBE of R′ . All edges between consecutive vertices along the spine ℓ, as well as the edge between the first and last vertex along ℓ, can be added to a 1PBE while maintaining planarity, hence the 1PBE is essentially a Hamiltonian augmentation of R′ . For Step 5 we need to place r(v), for each common vertex v, as in the following. Lemma 2. There is a 1PBE for R′ equivalent to ER′ such that for every common vertex v, the spine passes through v right before r(v) in clockwise order around v. Proof. We construct the embedding recursively. For each exclusive vertex v, let r(v) be an arbitrary edge incident to v. Arbitrarily choose a vertex s as the root of R′ and place s on ℓ. Place the other endpoint of r(s) after s on ℓ and all remaining neighbors of s, if any, in between in the order given by ER′ . Then process every child v of s (and the subtree below v) recursively as follows (and ensure that all subtrees stay in pairwise disjoint parts of the spine, for instance, by assigning a specific region to each).  6  Fabrizio Frati, Michael Hoffmann, and Vincent Kusters  Note that both v and the parent p of v are already embedded. By symmetry we can assume that p lies before v on the spine. Let v ′ be the endvertex of r(v) different from v. If p 6= v ′ , we place the other endvertex of r(v) right before v. Both if p 6= v ′ (see Fig. 3a) and if p = v ′ (see Fig. 3b), we place the other children of v, if any, according to ER′ , in the parts of the spine between p and v ′ , and after v. If v is not a leaf, then all its children are processed recursively in the same fashion. It is easily checked that the resulting embedding is a 1PBE that satisfies the stated properties.   Step 4: Simultaneous embedding. We now construct a simultaneous embedding of R′ and B ′ . In such an embedding let σv denote the linear order of the edges around each vertex v obtained by sweeping a ray clockwise around v, starting in direction of the negative x-axis. Lemma 3. For every ε > 0, R′ and B ′ admit a simultaneous embedding with one bend per edge in which: – all edges of ER′ (EB ′ ) incident to a vertex v in VR′ (resp. VB′ ) leave v within an angle of [−ε; +ε] with respect to the positive y-direction (resp. x-direction); – the drawing restricted to R′ (to B ′ ) is equivalent to ER′ (resp. to EB ′ ); and – for every common vertex v, the first red (blue) edge in σv is r(v) (resp. b(v)). Proof. Our algorithm is very similar to algorithms due to Brass et al. [6] and Erten and Kobourov [10]. These algorithms, however, do not guarantee the construction of a simultaneous embedding in which the order of the edges incident to each vertex is as stated in the lemma. This order is essential for the upcoming expansion step. We assign the x-coordinates 1, . . . , |VR′ | (y-coordinates |VB ′ |, . . . , 1) to the vertices of R′ (resp. of B ′ ) according to the order in which they occur on the spine in the 1PBE of R′ (resp. of B ′ ) computed in Lemma 2. This determines the placement of every vertex in VR′ ∩ VB ′ . Set any not-yet-assigned coordinate to 0. We explain how to draw the edges of R′ : the construction for B ′ is symmetric. The idea is to realize the 1PBE of R′ with its vertices placed as above and its edges drawn as x-monotone polygonal curves with one bend. We proceed as follows. The 1PBE of R′ defines a partial order of the edges corresponding to the way they nest. For example, denoting the vertices by their order along the spine, edge (3, 4) preceeds (3, 5) and (2, 5), while (1, 2) and (6, 7) are incomparable. We draw the edges of R′ in any linearization of this partial order. Suppose we have drawn some edges and let (u, v) be the next edge to be drawn. Assume w.l.o.g. that the x-coordinate of u is smaller than the one of v. For some εuv > 0, consider the ray ̺u emanating from u with an angle of π/2 − εuv (with respect to the positive x-axis). Similarly, let ̺v be the ray emanating from v with an angle of π/2 + εuv . We choose εuv < ε sufficiently small so that: (1) no vertex in VR′ \ {u} lies in the region to the left of the underlying (oriented) line of ̺u and to the right of the vertical line through u; (2) no vertex in VR′ \ {v} lies in the region to the right of the underlying (oriented) line of ̺v and to the left of the vertical line through v; and (3) neither ̺u nor ̺v intersects any previously drawn edge.  Simultaneous Embeddings with Few Bends and Crossings  7  As no two vertices of R′ have the same x-coordinate, we can choose εuv as claimed. The corresponding rays ̺u and ̺v intersect in some point: this is where we place the bend-point of (u, v). The resulting drawing is equivalent to the 1PBE of R′ and therefore to ER′ . The remaining claimed properties are preserved from the 1PBE.  Step 5: Expansion. We now expand the components of C in the drawing produced by Lemma 3 one by one in any order. Let Γ be the current drawing, v be a vertex corresponding to a not-yet-expanded component S of C, and p be the point on which v is placed in Γ . Note that the red and blue edges incident to v may be incident to different vertices in S. Let σv = (e1 , . . . , eℓ ), where e1 , . . . , ek are red and ek+1 , . . . , eℓ are blue. By Lemma 3, r(v) = e1 and b(v) = ek+1 . Each edge incident to v is drawn as a polygonal curve with one bend. Let bi be the bend-point of ei . The plan is to delete p and segments pbi in Γ to obtain Γ ′ . Then draw S in Γ ′ inside a small disk around p and draw segments from S to b1 , . . . , bℓ . See Fig. 4. For an ε ≥ 0, let Dε be the disk with radius ε centered at p. Let ΓR (ΓR′ ) be the restriction of Γ (resp. Γ ′ ) to the red and black edges. We state the following propositions only for the red graph; the propositions for the blue graph are analogous. By continuity, v can be moved around slightly in ΓR while maintaining a plane drawing for the red graph. This implies the following. e1  ···  ek  e1  p  ..  e.ℓ  ek  ek+1  .. .  ek+1 Dǫ  ···  S  eℓ  Dǫ  Fig. 4: Expanding a component S in a small disk Dε around p.  Proposition 1. There exists a δR > 0 with the following property. For every drawing ΓR∗ obtained from ΓR′ by drawing S in DδR , the red segments from S to b1 , . . . , bk do not cross any segment already present in ΓR′ . The following proposition deals with crossings between red edges incident to S. Proposition 2. There exists an εR > 0 with the following property. Let q1 , . . . , qk be any k (not necessarily distinct) points in this clockwise order on the upper semicircle of DεR . Then the segments q1 b1 , . . . , qk bk do not intersect except at common endpoints. Proof. The angles of pb1 , . . . , pbk are distinct and strictly decreasing, by Lemma 3 and by the way e1 , . . . , ek are labeled. We claim that εR can be chosen sufficiently small so that the angles of q1 b1 , . . . , qk bk are also distinct and strictly decreasing. For a certain ε, let Ii (ε) be the interval of all angles α such that the ray with angle α  8  Fabrizio Frati, Michael Hoffmann, and Vincent Kusters  from bi intersects Dε . Since the angles of pb1 , . . . , pbk are distinct, it follows that the intervals I1 (0), . . . , Ik (0) are disjoint. By continuity, there exists an εR > 0 for which I1 (εR ), . . . , Ik (εR ) are also disjoint, and the claim follows for this εR . Finally, two segments qi bi and qj bj with i < j and qi 6= qj can intersect only if the angle of qi bi is  smaller than the angle of qj bj , which does not happen by the claim. We get the following main lemma. Lemma 4. There exists an ε > 0 with the following property. We can expand S to obtain a simultaneous embedding Γ ∗ from Γ ′ by drawing the vertices of S on the boundary of Dε , the edges of S as straight-line segments, and by connecting S to b1 , . . . , bℓ with straight-line segments. Proof. Let δR , δB , εR , and εB be the constants given by Propositions 1 and 2 and their analogous formulations for B. Let ε := min{δR , δB , εR , εB }. Place the vertices of S as distinct points on the boundary of the upper-right quadrant of Dε in the order ̺S . By Lemma 1, this placement determines a straight-line plane drawing of S. Draw straightline segments from the vertices of S to b1 , . . . , bℓ , thus completing the drawing of the exclusive edges incident to S. We prove that the red segments incident to S do not cross any red or black edge; the proof for the blue segments is analogous. By Proposition 1, the red segments incident to S do not cross the red and black segments not incident to S. Also, they do not cross the edges of S, which are internal to Dε . Further, Proposition 2 ensures that these segments do not cross each other. Namely, the linear order of the vertices of S defined by the sequence of red edges e1 , . . . , ek is a subsequence of ̺S , given that the embedding ER′ of R′ is the one inherited from ER , given that Lemma 3 produces a drawing of R′ respecting ER′ and in which e1 = r(v), and given that the endvertex of r(S) in S is the first vertex of ̺S .  We are now ready to state the main theorem of this section. Theorem 1. Let R and B be two trees. There exists a S EFE of R and B in which every exclusive edge is a polygonal curve with one bend, every common edge is a straight-line segment, and every two exclusive edges cross at most four times. Proof. By Lemma 3, R′ and B ′ admit a simultaneous embedding with one bend per edge. By repeated applications of Lemma 4, the simultaneous embedding of R′ and B ′ can be turned into a S EFE of R and B in which every exclusive edge has one bend and every common edge is a straight-line segment. Finally, any two exclusive edges cross at most four times, given that each of them consists of two straight-line segments.   4 A Planar Graph and a Tree In this section we give an algorithm which computes a S EFE of any planar graph R = (VR , ER ) and any tree B = (VB , EB ) in which every edge of R has at most six bends and every edge of B has one bend. Due to a possible initial augmentation that maintains planarity, we can assume R to be connected. The common graph C of R and B is a forest, as it is a subgraph of B. The algorithm we give has strong similarities with the  Simultaneous Embeddings with Few Bends and Crossings  9  one for trees (Section 3); however, it encounters some of the complications one needs to handle when dealing with pairs of general planar graphs (Section 5). Its outline is as follows. In Step 1 we modify R and B to obtain a planar graph R′ and a tree B ′ with a common graph C ′ by introducing antennas, that are edges of C ′ replacing parts of the exclusive edges of R. While this costs two extra bends per edge of R in the final S EFE of R and B, it establishes the property that, for every exclusive edge e of R′ , every endvertex of e in C ′ is incident to e, to an edge of C ′ , and to no other edge. In Step 2 we construct a combinatorial S EFE of R′ and B ′ such that at every vertex v of C ′ , all the edges of C ′ are consecutive in the circular order of the edges incident to v. While the construction is the same as for tree-tree pairs, it works for the general planar graph R′ only because of the antennas introduced in Step 1. In order to construct a S EFE of R′ and B ′ , in Steps 3, 5, and 6 we perform a contraction – simultaneous embedding – expansion process similar to the one in Section 3. This again relies on an independent Hamiltonian augmentation of the graphs, which is done in Step 4. The augmentation of the tree is done by Lemma 2. However, in order to augment the planar graph we need to subdivide some of its edges. Finally, we obtain a S EFE of R and B by removing the antennas. Next we describe these steps in detail. Step 1: Antennas. We replace every exclusive edge e = (u, v) ∈ ER such that u, v ∈ VR ∩ VB by a path (u, ue , ve , v), with two new common vertices ue and ve , black edges (u, ue ), (ve , v), and a red edge (ue , ve ). Analogously, we replace every exclusive edge e = (u, v) ∈ ER such that u ∈ VR ∩ VB and v ∈ / VR ∩ VB by a path (u, ue , v), with a new common vertex ue , a common edge (u, ue ), and a red edge (ue , v). See Fig. 5. The resulting planar graph R′ and tree B ′ satisfy the following property.  (a)  (b)  Fig. 5: (a) Planar graph R and tree B. (b) Planar graph R′ and tree B ′ .  Property 1. For every exclusive edge e of R′ , every endvertex of e in the common graph C ′ of R′ and B ′ is incident to e, to an edge in C ′ , and to no other edge. We also get the following: Lemma 5. Suppose that a S EFE Γ ′ of R′ and B ′ exists in which: (i) every edge of R′ (of B ′ ) is a polygonal curve with at most x bends (resp. y bends); (ii) every common edge  10  Fabrizio Frati, Michael Hoffmann, and Vincent Kusters  is a straight-line segment; and (iii) any two exclusive edges cross at most z times. Then there exists a S EFE Γ of R and B in which: (i) every edge of R (of B) is a polygonal curve with at most x+2 bends (resp. y bends); (ii) every common edge is a straight-line segment; and (iii) any two exclusive edges cross at most z times. Proof. We obtain S EFE Γ from Γ ′ by removing all edges (u, ue ) and (v, ve ) from the drawing of B, and by interpreting all vertices ue and ve as bend-points in the drawing of R. First, we have that Γ is a S EFE of R and B. In particular, every two edges in B are also edges in B ′ and since they do not cross in Γ ′ , they do not cross in Γ either. Further, each edge in R corresponds to a path in R′ , hence no two edges in R cross in Γ as the corresponding paths do not cross in Γ ′ . Second, every edge in C is also an edge in C ′ , hence it is a straight-line segment in Γ , as it is in Γ ′ . Third, every edge in B is also an edge in B ′ , hence it is a polygonal curve with at most y bends in Γ , as it is in Γ ′ . Fourth, each edge e in R corresponds to a path in R′ composed of at most two edges in C ′ , which are straight-line segments, and of one exclusive edge in R′ , which has at most x bends. Hence, e has at most x + 2 bends in Γ (the two extra bends correspond to the points where ue and ve used to lie). Finally, any exclusive edge in R or B corresponds to at most two edges in C ′ and of one exclusive edge in R′ or B ′ . Since common edges are crossing-free, any two exclusive edges in R and B cross the same number of times as the corresponding exclusive edges in R′ and B ′ , which is z by assumption. This concludes the proof.   Step 2: Combinatorial Sefe. Start with any plane drawing of R′ . This determines the planar embeddings ER′ of R′ and EC ′ of C ′ . The planar embedding EB ′ of B ′ is completed as for tree-tree pairs: For every vertex v in C ′ , pick a common edge ev incident to v, if it exists. Then draw the exclusive vertices of B ′ and the blue edges one by one, so that when an edge (u, v) is drawn, it leaves u right after eu and it enters v right after ev . In the resulting combinatorial S EFE E of R′ and B ′ we have, in clockwise order around each vertex of C ′ , either: (i) a (possibly empty) sequence of black edges followed by a (possibly empty) sequence of blue edges; or (ii) a single black edge followed by a single red edge. This is a consequence of Property 1 and of the embedding choice for B ′ . As in Section 3, we can assume that every connected component of C ′ is incident to at least one red and one blue edge. We choose edges r(S) and b(S) for every component S of C ′ and we define an ordering ̺S of the vertices of S as in Section 3.  Step 3: Contractions. Contract each component of C ′ to a vertex in R′ and in B ′ , ′′ determining graphs R′′ = (VR′′ , ER ) and B ′′ , respectively. Note that R′′ is a planar multigraph, i.e., it might have parallel edges and self-loops, while B ′′ is a tree. In this way R′′ inherits a planar embedding ER′′ from ER′ and B ′′ inherits a planar embedding EB ′′ from EB ′ . Each vertex v resulting from the contraction of a component S of C ′ is common to R′′ and B ′′ . Let r(v) and b(v) be the edges corresponding to r(S) and b(S) after the contraction.  Simultaneous Embeddings with Few Bends and Crossings  r(v)  11  r(v) (b)  r(v)  (a)  (c)  r(v)  (d)  Fig. 6: Illustration for Lemma 6. (a) Graph R′′ with its planar embedding ER′′ has red and black disks as vertices and red curves as edges. Curve γ is orange. Subdivision vertices for the edges of R′′ are white squares, while dummy vertices are black squares. (b)–(c) Modifying γ so that it passes through a vertex v. (d) Graph R′′′ with its planar embedding ER′′′ . Both the red and the orange curves represent edges of R′′′ .  Step 4: Hamiltonian augmentations. A Hamiltonian augmentation of B ′′ is computed by Lemma 2. A Hamiltonian augmentation of R′′ might not exist, thus we subdivide some edges of R′′ before performing the augmentation, as in the following. ′′′ Lemma 6. There exists a simple planar graph R′′′ = (VR′′′ , ER ) such that:  – T WO - SUBDIVISION: R′′′ is obtained by subdividing each edge in R′′ either zero or two times and by adding dummy vertices and edges to the resulting graph; – E MBEDDING: R′′′ has a planar embedding ER′′′ from which ER′′ can be obtained by removing dummy vertices and edges and flattening subdivision vertices; – H AMILTONIAN CYCLE: R′′′ contains a Hamiltonian cycle C, which we orient ′′ ; counter-clockwise in ER′′′ , none of whose edges is (part of) an edge in ER ′′ ′′ – S TARTING EDGE: for every common vertex v of R and B , the edge of C entering v comes right before r(v) in the clockwise order of edges incident to v in ER′′′ ; and ′′′ – S TART TO THE LEFT: all the edges in ER that are incident to a vertex in VR′′ and ′′ that are part of an edge in ER lie to the left of C in ER′′′ . Proof. Let T be a spanning tree of R′′ , which exists since R′′ is connected. Draw a simple closed curve γ in ER′′ containing T in its interior and sufficiently close to T so ′′ that it crosses every edge in ER not in T twice. Insert subdivision vertices for the edges ′′ in ER not in T at these crossings; also, insert a dummy vertex on γ between every two consecutive subdivision vertices of the same edge from R′′ . Orient γ counter-clockwise. See Fig. 6.a. For each vertex v that is not a common vertex of R′′ and B ′′ , define r(v) to be an arbitrary edge incident to v. We now modify γ in a small neighborhood of each vertex v of R′′ , so that γ passes through v. If r(v) is in T , as in Fig. 6.b, then while traversing  12  Fabrizio Frati, Michael Hoffmann, and Vincent Kusters  b(v) r(v)  v  w u (0, 0)  Fig. 7: A simultaneous embedding of a planar graph R′′ and a tree B ′′ . The gray cones indicate the angles within [−ε, +ε] of the positive x- and y-directions. The selfloop at u in R′ , represented as a path of length three in R′′ , crosses the edge (v, w) eight times. Some angles in the drawing were modified slightly to reduce the height of the figure. γ counter-clockwise stop at a point in which γ follows r(v) towards v; insert a dummy vertex at that point, then let γ take a detour from the dummy vertex to v and then back to its previous route, where another dummy vertex is inserted. If r(v) is not in T , as in Fig. 6.c, then while traversing γ counter-clockwise stop right after the crossing between γ and r(v) that is “closer” to v; insert a dummy vertex on γ at that point, then let γ take a detour from the dummy vertex to v and then back to its previous route, where another dummy vertex is inserted. Finally, we consider γ as a cycle, that is, each curve that is part of γ and that connects two consecutive vertices on γ is an edge. Denote by R′′′ the resulting graph and by ER′′′ its planar embedding; see Fig. 6.d. It is easy to verify that R′′′ and ER′′′ satisfy all the required properties. In particular, the Hamiltonian cycle C required by the statement is the cycle corresponding to γ: By construction, C passes through every vertex of R′′′ and it does so right before r(v) in the clockwise order around v. Also, every edge of R′′ has been subdivided twice (if it is not in T ) or never (if it is in T ). Further, all the edges in T lie to the left of γ and hence of C, while all the edges in R′′ not in T start to the left of C, move to its right, and then end again to its left; this implies properties H AMILTONIAN CYCLE and S TART TO THE LEFT . Finally, R′′′ is simple, due to the introduction of dummy vertices along γ.  Step 5: Simultaneous embedding. Ideally, in order to construct a simultaneous embedding of R′′ and B ′′ , we would like to use known algorithms that construct simultaneous embeddings with two bends per edge of every two planar graphs [8, 9, 19]. However, the existence of self-loops in R′′ prevents us from doing that. In the following lemma we show how to modify those algorithms to deal with non-simple graphs. Fig. 7 shows an example of the resulting drawing. Lemma 7. For every ε > 0, R′′ and B ′′ admit a simultaneous embedding in which:  Simultaneous Embeddings with Few Bends and Crossings  13  – every edge of R′′ (of B ′′ ) is a polygonal curve with at most four bends (resp. with one bend); – every two edges cross at most eight times (counting an adjacency as one crossing); – all edges of ER′′ (EB ′′ ) incident to a vertex v in VR′′ (resp. VB′′ ) leave v within an angle of [−ε; +ε] with respect to the positive y-direction (resp. x-direction); – the drawing restricted to R′′ (to B ′′ ) is equivalent to ER′′ (resp. to EB ′′ ); and – for every common vertex v, the first red (blue) edge in σv is r(v) (resp. b(v)). Proof. First, we place the vertices of R′′′ and B ′′ in the plane. Similarly to Lemma 3, we assign x-coordinates 1, . . . , |VR′′′ | to the vertices of R′′′ according to the order in which they occur along the Hamiltonian cycle C defined in Lemma 6, starting at any vertex u∗ . Further, we assign y-coordinates |VB ′′ |, . . . , 1 to the vertices of B ′′ according to the order in which they occur on the spine in the Hamiltonian augmentation of B ′′ that is computed by Lemma 2. This determines the placement of every vertex in VR′′ ∩VB ′′ . We set the x-coordinate of every vertex of B ′′ not in R′′ to 0; also, we set the y-coordinate of every vertex of R′′ not in B ′′ to 0. It remains to assign y-coordinates to the vertices in VR′′′ \ VR′′ (note that none of these vertices belongs to B ′′ ). A subset Vs of the vertices in VR′′′ \ VR′′ consists of subdivision vertices for the edges in ER′′ ; we assign y-coordinates to the vertices in Vs so that they lie on the curve y = −x2 . We set the y-coordinate of every vertex in VR′′′ \ {VR′′ ∪ Vs } to 0. We now draw the edges of R′′ and B ′′ . The edges of B ′′ are drawn exactly as in Lemma 3. We draw the edges of R′′ as follows. Note that the Hamiltonian augmentation of R′′ corresponds to a 2PBE of R′′′ along a spine ℓ, where u∗ can be assumed w.l.o.g. to be the first vertex along ℓ. This 2PBE defines a partition of the edges of R′′′ into those embedded in the half-plane Hl to the left of ℓ and those embedded in the halfplane Hr to the right of ℓ. Each edge of R′′′ in Hr connects two vertices in Vs , which are subdivision vertices for an edge in ER′′ ; thus the edges of R′′′ in Hr form a perfect matching on Vs . We draw these edges as straight-line segments. In order to draw the edges of R′′′ in Hl , we define a partial order ≺l on these edges, corresponding to the way they are nested. We draw these edges one by one, in an order which is given by any linearization of ≺l . The procedure to draw an edge (u, v) as a 1-bend edge is the same as in Lemma 3. That is, assuming w.l.o.g. that u has x-coordinate smaller than v, the bend-point is the intersection point between two rays ̺u and ̺v emanating from u and v with an angle of π/2 − εuv and π/2 + εuv , for some suitably small 0 < εuv < ε. The vertices in VR′′′ \{VR′′ ∪Vs } are removed from the drawing, together with their incident edges, while the vertices in Vs are interpreted as bend-points. This determines a drawing ΓR′′ of R′′ . We prove that ΓR′′ and the constructed drawing ΓB ′′ of B ′′ constitute a simultaneous embedding of R′′ and B ′′ as required by the lemma. Drawing ΓB ′′ satisfies all the required properties, as in Lemma 3. We now argue about ΓR′′ . – Angle at v: All the edges of R′′ incident to a vertex v in VR′′ leave v within an angle of [−ε; +ε] with respect to the positive y-direction, by property S TART TO THE LEFT in Lemma 6, by the fact that edges of R′′′ to the left of C are in Hl in the 2PBE, and by the just described construction for the edges of R′′′ in Hl . – Equivalence to ER′′ : ΓR′′ is equivalent to ER′′ by property E MBEDDING in Lemma 6 and since ER′′′ determines the 2PBE which the construction of the drawing of R′′ relies upon.  14  Fabrizio Frati, Michael Hoffmann, and Vincent Kusters  – First edge in σv : For every common vertex v, the first red edge, if any, in σv is r(v), by property S TARTING EDGE in Lemma 6. – Number of bends: Each edge of R′′ either coincides with an edge of R′′′ or consists of three edges of R′′′ , depending on whether it is subdivided zero or two times in the proof of Lemma 6. If an edge of R′′ coincides with an edge of R′′′ , then it has one bend in ΓR′′ . If it is composed of three edges of R′′′ , then it has four bends in ΓR′′ , namely one, zero, and one bend on the three edges of R′′′ composing it and lying in Hl , Hr , and Hl in the 2PBE, respectively, plus two bends corresponding to its subdivision vertices. – Planarity: The vertices in Vs are placed along the convex curve y = −x2 in ΓR′′ , in the same order as they occur along ℓ. Hence, the edges lying in Hr in the 2PBE do not cross each other in ΓR′′ . That no two edges lying in Hl in the 2PBE cross each other in ΓR′′ can be argued as in Lemma 3. Finally, any edge lying in Hl in the 2PBE has no intersection with the interior of the convex hull of the vertices in Vs (provided that ε is small enough). Hence, it has no intersection in ΓR′′ with any edge lying in Hr in the 2PBE. It remains to argue about the number of crossings between any edges er of R′′ and eb of B ′′ . Note that eb is composed of two straight-line segments in ΓB ′′ . If er is also composed of two straight-line segments, then er and eb cross at most four times. Otherwise, er is composed of five straight-line segments, from which an upper bound of ten on the number of crossings between er and eb directly follows. This bound is improved to eight by observing that the third segment of er (corresponding to the edge of R′′′ lying in Hr ) does not cross the two segments composing eb , as the former lies in the open half-plane y < 0, while the latter lie in the closed half-plane y ≥ 0.  Step 6: Expansion. Next, we expand the components of C ′ in the simultaneous embedding of R′′ and B ′′ obtained in Lemma 7. This expansion is performed exactly as in Section 3. That is, the components of C ′ are expanded one by one; when a component S is expanded, its vertices are placed in the order ̺S on the upper-right quadrant of the boundary of a suitably small disk Dε centered at the vertex S was contracted to. This results in a S EFE of R′ and B ′ . Finally, the vertices and edges not in R and B are removed, in order to get a S EFE of R and B. We have the following. Theorem 2. Let R be a planar graph and let B be a tree. There exists a S EFE of R and B in which every exclusive edge of R is a polygonal curve with at most six bends, every exclusive edge of B is a polygonal curve with one bend, every common edge is a straight-line segment, and every two exclusive edges cross at most eight times. Proof. By Lemma 7, R′′ and B ′′ admit a simultaneous embedding Γ ′′ in which every edge of R′′ (of B ′′ ) is a polygonal curve with at most four bends (resp. with one bend). By repeated application of Lemma 4, Γ ′′ can be turned into a S EFE Γ ′ of R′ and B ′ in which every exclusive edge of R′ (of B ′ ) has at most four bends (resp. one bend) and every common edge is a straight-line segment. By Lemma 5, there exists a S EFE Γ of R and B in which every exclusive edge of R (of B) has at most six bends (resp. one bend) and every common edge is a straight-line segment. Concerning the number of  Simultaneous Embeddings with Few Bends and Crossings  15  crossings, by Lemma 7 every two edges cross at most eight times in Γ ′′ , also counting their adjacencies. While the expansions performed in Lemma 4 in order to construct Γ ′ starting from Γ ′′ might introduce new proper crossings for a pair of exclusive edges of R′ and B ′ , they only do so at the cost of removing the adjacency between the corresponding edges of R′′ and B ′′ . Hence, the maximum number of crossings per pair of edges is eight in Γ ′ and, by Lemma 5, is eight also in Γ .   5 Two Planar Graphs In this section we give an algorithm to compute a S EFE of any two planar graphs R and B in which every edge has at most six bends. Let C be the common graph of R and B. We assume here that a combinatorial S EFE E of R and B is part of the input, since testing the existence of a S EFE of two planar graphs is a problem of unknown complexity [4]. We assume that no exclusive vertex or edge lies in the outer face of C in E, and that R and B are connected. These two conditions are indeed met after the following augmentation. First, introduce a cycle δ ∗ in C and embed it in E so that it surrounds the rest of R and B. Then, introduce a red (blue) vertex inside each face f of R (of B) in E different from the outer face, and connect it to all the vertices incident to f . We outline our algorithm. First, R and B are modified into planar graphs R′ and ′ B with a common graph C ′ by introducing antennas, as in Step 1 of the algorithm in Section 4; however, here the modification is performed for both graphs. Similarly to Sections 3 and 4, we would like to contract each component S of C ′ to a vertex, construct a simultaneous embedding of the resulting graphs, and finally expand the components of C ′ . However, S is here not just a tree, but rather a planar graph containing in its internal faces other components of C ′ (and exclusive vertices and edges of R′ and B ′ ). Hence, the contraction – simultaneous embedding – expansion process does not happen just once, but rather we proceed from the outside to the inside of C ′ iteratively, each time applying that process to draw certain subgraphs of R′ and B ′ , until R′ and B ′ have been entirely drawn. We now describe this algorithm in more detail. First, we introduce antennas in R and B, that is, we replace each exclusive edge e = (u, v) of R (resp. of B) with u and v in C by a path (u, ue , ve , v) such that ue , ve , (u, ue ), and (ve , v) are in C, while (ue , ve ) is exclusive to R (resp. to B). We also replace each exclusive edge e = (u, v) of R (resp. of B) with u is in C and v not in C by a path (u, ue , v) such that ue and (u, ue ) are in C, while (ue , v) is exclusive to R (resp. to B). The resulting planar graphs R′ and B ′ satisfy the following property. Property 2. For every exclusive edge e, every endvertex of e in the common graph C ′ of R′ and B ′ is incident to e, to an edge in C ′ , and to no other edge. We also get the following lemma, whose proof is analogous to the one of Lemma 5 and hence is omitted here. Lemma 8. Suppose that a S EFE Γ ′ of R′ and B ′ exists in which: (i) every edge of R′ (of B ′ ) is a polygonal curve with at most x bends (resp. y bends); (ii) every common edge is a straight-line segment; and (iii) any two exclusive edges cross at most z times.  16  Fabrizio Frati, Michael Hoffmann, and Vincent Kusters  Then there exists a S EFE Γ of R and B in which: (i) every edge of R (of B) is a polygonal curve with at most x + 2 bends (resp. y + 2 bends); (ii) every common edge is a straight-line segment; and (iii) any two exclusive edges cross at most z times. A combinatorial S EFE E ′ of R′ and B ′ is naturally derived from E by drawing the antennas as “very small” curves on top of the edges they partially replace. By Property 2, in E ′ we have, in clockwise order around each vertex of C ′ , either: (i) a sequence of black edges; or (ii) a single black edge followed by a single red edge; or (iii) a single black edge followed by a single blue edge. Let EC ′ be the restriction of E ′ to C ′ . We now construct a S EFE of R′ and B ′ . We start by representing the cycle δ ∗ of C ′ as a strictly-convex polygon ∆∗ . Next, assume that a S EFE Γ ′′ of two subgraphs R′′ of R′ and B ′′ of B ′ has been constructed. Let C ′′ be the common graph of R′′ and B ′′ and let ER′′ , EB ′′ , and EC ′′ be the planar embeddings of R′′ , B ′′ , and C ′′ in E ′ , respectively. Assume that the following properties hold for Γ ′′ . – B ENDS AND CROSSINGS: every edge of R′′ or B ′′ is a polygonal curve with at most four bends, every edge of C ′′ is a straight-line segment, and every exclusive edge of R′′ crosses every exclusive edge of B ′′ at most sixteen times; – E MBEDDING: the restrictions of Γ ′′ to the vertices and edges of R′′ , B ′′ , and C ′′ are equivalent to ER′′ , EB ′′ , and EC ′′ , respectively; and – P OLYGONS: each not-yet-drawn vertex or edge of R′ or B ′ lies in E ′ inside a simple cycle δf in C ′′ which is represented in Γ ′′ by a star-shaped empty polygon ∆f ; further, if an edge exists in C ′ that lies inside δf in E ′ and that belongs to the same 2-connected component of C ′ as δf , then ∆f is a strictly-convex polygon. These properties are initially met with R′′ = B ′′ = C ′′ = δ ∗ and with Γ ′′ = ∆∗ . In particular, all the vertices and edges of R′ and B ′ that are not part of δ ∗ lie inside δ ∗ in E ′ , because of the initial augmentation; further, the interior of ∆∗ in Γ ′′ is empty. It remains to describe how to insert in Γ ′′ some vertices and edges of R′ and B ′ that are not yet in Γ ′′ , while maintaining the above properties. Since R′ and B ′ are finite graphs, this will eventually lead to a SEFE of R′ and B ′ . We distinguish two cases. Case 1: There exists a simple cycle δf in C ′′ whose interior in Γ ′′ is empty, and there exists an edge ef in C ′ that lies inside δf in E ′ and belongs to the same 2-connected component of C ′ as δf . By property P OLYGONS, δf is represented by a strictly-convex polygon ∆f in Γ ′′ , as in Fig. 8a. Consider the maximal 2-connected subgraph Sf of C ′ whose outer face in E ′ is delimited by δf ; note that ef is an edge of Sf . As observed in [18], a straight-line plane drawing Γf of Sf exists in which the outer face of Sf is delimited by ∆f and every internal face is delimited by a star-shaped polygon. Plug Γf in Γ ′′ , so that they coincide along ∆f , obtaining a drawing Γ ′′′ , as in Fig. 8b. Properties B ENDS AND CROSSINGS and E MBEDDING are clearly satisfied by Γ ′′′ . Concerning property P OLYGONS, each vertex or edge of R′ or B ′ that is not in Γ ′′′ and that lies inside δf in E ′ , also lies inside one of the simple cycles δf,1 , . . . , δf,k delimiting internal faces of Sf , given that these faces partition the interior of δf in E ′ . Moreover, cycles δf,1 , . . . , δf,k are represented by star-shaped polygons, by construction, whose interior is empty in Γ ′′′ , as the interior of ∆f is empty in Γ ′′ . Finally, no edge exists in C ′ lying inside δf,i , for some 1 ≤ i ≤ k, and belonging to the same 2-connected component of C ′ as δf,i , as any such edge would belong to Sf .  Simultaneous Embeddings with Few Bends and Crossings  17  ∆f ef  (a)  (b)  (c)  Fig. 8: (a) Strictly-convex polygon ∆f representing δf in Γ ′′ . (b) Plugging Γf in Γ ′′ . The kernels of the star-shaped (non-convex) polygons delimiting internal faces of Sf in Γf are gray. (c) Graphs Cf′ , Rf′ , and Bf′ ; δf is drawn by thick lines and f is shaded. Case 2: If Case 1 does not apply, then every simple cycle δf in C ′′ whose interior in Γ ′′ is empty delimits a face f in its interior in EC ′ ; other vertices and edges of C ′ might be incident to f though. By property P OLYGONS, assuming that Γ ′′ is not yet a S EFE of R′ and B ′ , there exists a simple cycle δf in C ′′ whose interior in Γ ′′ is empty containing a not-yet-drawn vertex or edge of R′ or B ′ in its interior in E ′ , as in Fig. 8c; further, δf is represented by a star-shaped polygon ∆f in Γ ′′ . Let C ′ (f ) be the subgraph of C ′ composed of the vertices and edges incident to f in EC ′ . Also, let R′ (f ) be the subgraph of R′ composed of C ′ (f ) and of the red vertices and edges lying in f in E ′ ; graph B ′ (f ) is defined analogously. Let ER′ (f ) , EB ′ (f ) , and EC ′ (f ) be the restrictions of E ′ to R′ (f ), B ′ (f ), and C ′ (f ), respectively. We have the following main lemma: Lemma 9. There exists a SEFE Γf′ of R′ (f ) and B ′ (f ) with the following properties: – every edge is a polygonal curve with at most four bends, every common edge is a straight-line segment, and every two exclusive edges cross at most sixteen times; – Γf′ restricted to R′ (f ), B ′ (f ), and C ′ (f ) is equivalent to ER′ (f ) , EB ′ (f ) , and EC ′ (f ) , respectively; – cycle δf is represented by ∆f ; and – every simple cycle of C ′ (f ) different from δf is represented by an empty strictlyconvex polygon in Γf′ . In order to prove Lemma 9, we present an algorithm consisting of four steps, that resemble Steps 3–6 of the algorithm in Section 4. Note that R′ (f ) and B ′ (f ) are both connected, since R′ and B ′ are connected. We can hence assume that every component S of C ′ (f ) is incident to at least one red and one blue edge, we can choose edges r(S) and b(S), and we can define an ordering ̺S of the vertices of S as in Section 3. Step 1: Contraction. Contract each component S of C ′ (f ) to a single vertex v. The resulting planar multigraphs R′′ (f ) and B ′′ (f ) have planar embeddings ER′′ (f ) and EB ′′ (f ) inherited from ER′ (f ) and EB ′ (f ) . Vertex v is common to R′′ (f ) and B ′′ (f ). Let  18  Fabrizio Frati, Michael Hoffmann, and Vincent Kusters  r(v) and b(v) be the edges corresponding to r(S) and b(S) after the contraction. We stress the fact that a component S ∗ of C ′ (f ) contains cycle δf . While S ∗ is contracted to a vertex u∗ as every other component of C ′ (f ), it will later play a special role. We also remark that, unlike the other components, the order of the edges incident to S ∗ “changes” after the contraction. That is, consider ER′ (f ) and EB ′ (f ) , draw a simple closed curve γ in the interior of f arbitrarily close to S ∗ , and consider the counterclockwise order in which the edges of R′ (f ) and B ′ (f ) intersect γ; then this is also the clockwise order in which the same edges are incident to u∗ in ER′′ (f ) and EB ′′ (f ) . Step 2: Hamiltonian augmentations. We compute Hamiltonian augmentations R′′′ (f ) of R′′ (f ) and B ′′′ (f ) of B ′′ (f ). This is done independently for R′′ (f ) and B ′′ (f ) by means of the algorithm in the proof of Lemma 6 (with an obvious mapping between the notation of Lemma 6 and the one here). As opposed to Section 4, both graphs might need to be subdivided in order to augment them to Hamiltonian. Step 3: Simultaneous embedding. A simultaneous embedding of R′′ (f ) and B ′′ (f ) is constructed by means of an algorithm very similar to the one in the proof of Lemma 7. Let σv be defined as in Section 3. We have the following. Lemma 10. For every ε > 0, R′′ (f ) and B ′′ (f ) admit a simultaneous embedding Γf′′ in which: – every edge of R′′ (f ) and B ′′ (f ) is a polygonal curve with at most four bends; – every two edges cross at most sixteen times (counting an adjacency as one crossing); – all edges of R′′ (f ) (B ′′ (f )) incident to a vertex v in R′′ (f ) (B ′′ (f )) leave v within an angle of [−ε; +ε] with respect to the positive y-direction (resp. x-direction); – Γf′′ restricted to R′′ (f ) (B ′′ (f )) is equivalent to ER′′ (f ) (resp. EB ′′ (f ) ); – for every common vertex v, the first red (blue) edge in σv is r(v) (resp. b(v)); and – vertex u∗ is at point (1, |V (B ′′′ (f ))|); the straight-line segments incident to u∗ in the drawing of R′′ (f ) (of B ′′ (f )) have their endpoints different from u∗ on the straight line x = 1.5 (resp. y = |V (B ′′′ (f ))| − 0.5); every other vertex or bend of an edge of R′′ (f ) (resp. of B ′′ (f )) is to the right of (resp. below) that line. Proof. The algorithm to draw R′′ (f ) and B ′′ (f ) is similar to one presented in the proof of Lemma 7 to draw R′′ . Assign the vertices of R′′′ (f ) (of B ′′′ (f )) with distinct positive integer x-coordinates (resp. y-coordinates) according to their order in the Hamiltonian cycle of R′′′ (f ) (resp. according to the reverse order in the Hamiltonian cycle of B ′′′ (f )). It is important here that u∗ is the vertex of R′′′ (f ) (of B ′′′ (f )) that gets the smallest x-coordinate (resp. the largest y-coordinate). Place the subdivision vertices for the edges of R′′ (f ) (of B ′′ (f )) on the curve y = −x2 (resp. x = −y 2 ); set any non-assigned coordinate to 0. The edges of R′′′ (f ) and B ′′′ (f ) are drawn as the edges of R′′′ in the proof of Lemma 7, except for the edges incident to u∗ . Namely, the bend-point of an edge (u∗ , v) of R′′′ (f ) (of B ′′′ (f )) is placed at the intersection point between the line x = 1.5 (resp. y = |V (B ′′′ (f ))| − 0.5) and the ray ̺v emanating from v with an angle of π/2 + εu∗ v (resp. εu∗ v ), for some suitably small 0 < εu∗ v < ε.  Simultaneous Embeddings with Few Bends and Crossings  19  ̺∗  u1  uk  P  H∗ u2  ∆f (a)  (b)  (c)  Fig. 9: (a) Geometry inside ∆f : p∗ is purple, H∗ is green, the kernel of ∆f is gray, and points p1 , . . . , pk are empty squares. (b) Drawing Γ ∗ ; vertices of S ∗ not in δf are white disks. (c) Reconnecting Γf′′ to Γ ∗ ; drawing Γf′′ is represented by a red and a blue rectangle. Red and blue squares represent bendpoints of R′′′ (f ) and B ′′′ (f ) adjacent to u∗ .  Remove from the drawing the vertices of R′′′ (f ) and B ′′′ (f ) that are neither vertices of R′′ (f ) or B ′′ (f ), nor subdivision vertices for the edges of R′′ (f ) or B ′′ (f ), and interpret the subdivision vertices for the edges of R′′ (f ) and B ′′ (f ) as bend-points. This results in a S EFE Γf′′ of R′′ (f ) and B ′′ (f ), which can be proved to satisfy the required properties exactly as in the proof of Lemma 7. In particular, if edges er of R′′ (f ) and eb of B ′′ (f ) have four bends each, then they cross at most twenty-five times. This bound can be improved to sixteen, since the third segment of er does not cross any of the five segments composing eb (given that the former lies in the open half-plane y < 0, while the latter lie in the closed half-plane y ≥ 0), and vice versa.   Step 4: Expansion. This step is more involved than in Sections 3 and 4, because when expanding the component S ∗ , we need to ensure that the cycle δf is drawn as ∆f . We first expand the components S 6= S ∗ of C ′ (f ) in Γf′′ . Differently from the previous sections, S is a cactus graph, rather than a tree, which is a graph whose vertices and edges are all incident to a common face, in this case f . However, Lemma 1 holds true (with the same proof) even if S is a cactus graph. Hence, we expand the components S 6= S ∗ one by one in Γf′′ . When a component S is expanded, its vertices are placed in the order ̺S on the upper-right quadrant of the boundary of a suitably small disk Dε centered at the vertex S was contracted to. Denote again by Γf′′ the resulting S EFE in which every component S 6= S ∗ of C ′ (f ) has been expanded. Note that every simple cycle of each component S 6= S ∗ is an empty strictly-convex polygon in Γf′′ , since its incident vertices lie on a strictly-convex curve, namely the boundary of Dε . In order to complete the construction of a S EFE Γf′ of R′ (f ) and B ′ (f ) as requested by Lemma 9, it remains to deal with the cactus graph S ∗ containing δf whose edges are all incident to f . We sketch the plan: define a region H∗ inside ∆f (Fig. 9a); construct a drawing Γ ∗ of S ∗ such that δf is represented as ∆f and all the other vertices and edges  20  Fabrizio Frati, Michael Hoffmann, and Vincent Kusters  of S ∗ are inside ∆f but outside H∗ (Fig. 9b); rotate and scale Γf′′ and place it in H∗ ; finally, connect Γ ∗ with Γf′′ via straight-line segments, thus obtaining Γf′ (Fig. 9c). We begin by defining H∗ . Denote by u1 , . . . , uk the counter-clockwise order of the vertices along δf . Removing the edges of δf disconnects S ∗ into k cactus graphs; w.l.o.g. assume that u1 is in the one of these cactus graphs that is incident to r(S ∗ ). By property P OLYGONS, ∆f is star-shaped, hence it has a non-empty kernel. Let p∗ be any point in this kernel and ̺∗ be a ray emanating from p∗ through u1 . Rotate ̺∗ clockwise around p∗ of a sufficiently small angle so that no vertex of ∆f is encountered during the rotation. For sake of simplicity of description, assume that the origin of the Cartesian axes is at p∗ , with ̺∗ being the positive y-axis. Draw a parabola P with equation y = ax2 − b, with a, b > 0; a is large enough and b is small enough so that P intersects all of p∗ u1 , . . . , p∗ uk at points p1 , . . . , pk , and so that a wedge W ∗ with angle π/2, centered at a point on ̺∗ , and bisected by a ray in the negative y-direction exists containing all of p1 , . . . , pk in its interior and having an intersection H∗ with the region y > ax2 − b entirely lying in the kernel of ∆f . Let be P ∗ the part of P in W ∗ . Next, we construct a drawing Γ ∗ of S ∗ (see Fig. 9b). Lemma 11. There exists a straight-line plane drawing Γ ∗ of S ∗ such that: (i) Γ ∗ is equivalent to the restriction of EC ′ (f ) to S ∗ ; (ii) δf is represented by ∆f ; (iii) every simple cycle of S ∗ different from δf is an empty strictly-convex polygon in Γ ∗ ; (iv) all the vertices of S ∗ incident to exclusive edges of R′ (f ) and B ′ (f ) are on P ∗ and in the interior of W ∗ ; and (v) Γ ∗ has no intersection with H∗ . Proof. We construct Γ ∗ by iteratively drawing 2-connected components of S ∗ ; every such component is either a simple cycle or an edge, since S ∗ is a cactus graph. Recall that, by Property 2, every vertex of S ∗ incident to an exclusive edge of R′ (f ) or B ′ (f ) has degree one in S ∗ . Initialize Γ ∗ by drawing straight-line segments from u1 , . . . , uk to points on P ∗ . For each 1 ≤ i ≤ k, the number of drawn straight-line segments incident to ui is equal to the number of 2-connected components of S ∗ containing ui and different from δf ; by choosing the endpoints of the segments incident to ui sufficiently close to pi on P ∗ , it can be ensured that all these segments do not cross each other and have empty intersection with H∗ . Some drawn segments are “real”, that is, they represent edges of S ∗ . Some other segments are “dummy”, that is, they represent subgraphs of S ∗ that still need to be drawn. Straight-line segments appear around each vertex ui in the order in which the corresponding subgraphs of S ∗ appear around ui according to EC ′ (f ) . Now assume to have a plane straight-line drawing Γ ∗ of a subgraph D∗ of S ∗ such that the following invariant is satisfied (in addition to the properties in the statement of the lemma). Consider the cactus graphs that result from the removal of the edges of D∗ from S ∗ . Each of these graphs that is not a single vertex is represented in Γ ∗ by a dummy straight-line segment from its only vertex in Γ ∗ to a point on P ∗ ; further, all these dummy straight-line segments do not cross each other, do not cross any other segment in Γ ∗ , and have empty intersection with H∗ . Note that the invariant is satisfied by Γ ∗ after the initialization. Then it suffices to show how the invariant is maintained after drawing in Γ ∗ a 2-connected component D  Simultaneous Embeddings with Few Bends and Crossings  P∗ pw  w  (a)  w  w′ P ∗ γw pw  (b)  21  P∗ w  (c)  Fig. 10: (a) A dummy straight-line segment wpw representing a component D in Γ ∗ . (b) Point w′ and curve γw . (c) Drawing component D in Γ ∗ .  of S ∗ , where just one vertex w of D is already in Γ ∗ , and where a dummy straightline segment wpw with pw ∈ P ∗ represents D in Γ ∗ , as in Fig. 10.a. Observe that D is a simple cycle, as if it were an edge, it would be represented by a real straight-line segment and not a dummy straight-line segment. Consider a point w′ arbitrarily close to the midpoint of wpw . Draw a strictly-convex curve γw inside triangle ∆w = (w, w′ , pw ) connecting w and w′ , as in Fig. 10.b. Place the vertices of D on γw , in the order they occur along D according to EC ′ (f ) ; also, draw the edges of D as straight-line segments, as in Fig. 10.c. Remove wpw from Γ ∗ . The polygon representing D is empty, provided that w′ is sufficiently close to wpw , and strictly-convex, since its incident vertices lie on a strictly-convex curve. Further, the straight-line segments from the vertices of D to pw do not cross each other, do not cross any other segment in Γ ∗ , and have empty intersection with H∗ , provided that w′ is sufficiently close to wpw . Hence, a suitable number of points on P ∗ can be chosen, all sufficiently close to pw so that the straightline segments between these points and the vertices of D do not cross each other, do not cross any other segment in Γ ∗ , and have empty intersection with H∗ ; thus, the invariant is satisfied by the new Γ ∗ , which concludes the proof.  The construction of Γf′ is completed as follows (see Fig. 9c). First, we delete u∗ and its incident straight-line segments from Γf′′ . Second, we rotate Γf′′ counter-clockwise by an angle of 3π/4. Third, we scale Γf′′ down so that it fits inside a disk Dε with a suitably small radius ε > 0. Fourth, we place Γf′′ in Γ ∗ so that Dε is inside H∗ and is tangent to the half-lines delimiting W ∗ . Finally, we complete the drawing of the exclusive edges of R′ (f ) and B ′ (f ) by drawing straight-line segments from their bend-points previously adjacent to u∗ to the suitable vertices of S ∗ on P ∗ . We have the following. Lemma 12. Γf′ is a S EFE of R′ (f ) and B ′ (f ) with the properties required by Lemma 9, provided that ε is sufficiently small. Proof. We first prove that Γf′ is a S EFE of R′ (f ) and B ′ (f ). In particular, vertices and edges of C ′ (f ) have a unique representation in Γf′ , hence it suffices to prove that the drawings of R′ (f ) and Bf′ in Γf′ are planar; we will argue about the planarity of the drawing of R′ (f ), as the one of Bf′ can be proved analogously. By Lemma 10, the drawing of R′′ (f ) in Γf′′ is plane. By Lemma 1, Γf′′ stays plane after all the components different from S ∗ have been expanded. By Lemma 11, the drawing Γ ∗ of S ∗ is plane, as well. Further, Γf′′ and Γ ∗ do not cross each other, as the  22  Fabrizio Frati, Michael Hoffmann, and Vincent Kusters  former lies in a disk Dε which is inside H∗ , provided that ε is sufficiently small, while the latter does not intersect H∗ , by Lemma 11. It remains to argue that the straight-line segments drawn to restore the exclusive edges of R′ (f ) do not cause crossings. – First, these segments lie in H∗ if ε is small enough, hence they do not intersect Γ ∗ . – Second, they do not intersect red edges in Γf′′ ; namely, by Lemma 10 and assuming that the components of C ′ (f ) different from S ∗ have been expanded in sufficiently small disks, we have that all the red edges in Γf′′ lie to the right of the line ℓv with equation x = 1.5. After the rotation of Γf′′ by 3π/4 counter-clockwise, Γf′′ is above the rotated line ℓv . Thus, it suffices to prove that all the straight-line segments drawn to reconnect the exclusive edges of R′ (f ) are below or on ℓv . Indeed, by Lemmata 10 and 11 each of these segments has one endpoint on ℓv and the other endpoint in the interior of W ∗ ; further, ℓv is arbitrarily close, depending on the value of ε, to the line delimiting W ∗ with slope 5π/4. Hence, each straight-line segment drawn to reconnect an exclusive edge of R′ (f ) has one end-point on ℓv and one end-point below it, provided that ε is sufficiently small. – Third, the straight-line segments drawn to reconnect the exclusive edges of R′ (f ) do not cross each other, since the clockwise order in which the edges of R′ (f ) are incident to u∗ (which by Lemma 10 is also the left-to-right order in which the endpoints of the deleted red straight-line segments appear on ℓv after the rotation) coincides with the counter-clockwise order in which they are incident to vertices in S ∗ (which is also the left-to-right order in which these vertices appear along P ∗ ). The bound on the number of bends in Γf′ follows from the corresponding bound for Γf′′ in Lemma 10 and from the fact that, when a component of C ′ (f ) is expanded, no new bends are introduced on the exclusive edges. In particular, the exclusive edges incident to one or two vertices in S ∗ have respectively one or two straight-line segments in Γf′ they did not have in Γf′′ ; however, in turn they lost respectively one or two straightline segments in Γf′ they used to have in Γf′′ , namely those incident to u∗ . The bound on the number of crossings is established as in Theorem 2. Consider any two exclusive edges e′r of R′ (f ) and e′b of B ′ (f ). By Lemma 10, the corresponding edges e′′r in R′′ (f ) and e′′b in B ′′ (f ) cross at most sixteen times in Γf′′ , also counting adjacencies. While the expansions might introduce proper crossings between e′r and e′b , they only do so in correspondence of an adjacency between e′′r and e′′b ; hence e′r and e′b cross at most sixteen times in Γf′ . Finally, the properties that the edges of C ′ (f ) are straight, that Γf′ restricted to ′ R (f ), B ′ (f ), and C ′ (f ) is equivalent to ER′ (f ) , EB ′ (f ) , and EC ′ (f ) , respectively, that δf is represented by ∆f , and that every simple cycle of C ′ (f ) different from δf is represented in Γf′ by an empty strictly-convex polygon have been explicitly ensured while performing the construction.  Lemma 12 concludes the proof of Lemma 9. Next, plug Γf′ in Γ ′′ , so that they coincide along ∆f , obtaining a drawing Γ ′′′ . As in Case 1 and relying on Lemma 9, it is easily shown that Properties B ENDS AND CROSSINGS, E MBEDDING, and P OLYGONS are satisfied by Γ ′′′ , thus completing the discussion of Case 2. We get the following. Theorem 3. Let R and B be two planar graphs. If there exists a S EFE of R and B, then there also exists a S EFE in which every edge is a polygonal curve with at most six  Simultaneous Embeddings with Few Bends and Crossings  23  bends, every common edge is a straight-line segment, and every two exclusive edges cross at most sixteen times. Proof. By property B ENDS AND CROSSINGS, every drawing Γ ′′ constructed by initializing R′′ = B ′′ = C ′′ = δ ∗ and Γ ′′ = ∆∗ , and by then repeatedly applying Case 1 or Case 2 described above is such that every exclusive edge is a polygonal curve with at most four bends, every common edge is a straight-line segment, and every two exclusive edges cross at most sixteen times. Eventually Γ ′′ = Γ ′ is a S EFE of R′ and B ′ . By Lemma 8, the drawing obtained from Γ ′ by removing vertices and edges not in R and B is a S EFE of R and B satisfying the required properties.   6 Conclusions In this paper we proved upper bounds for the number of bends per edge and the number of crossings required to realize a S EFE with polygonal curves as edges. While the bound on the number of bends per edge we presented for tree-tree pairs is tight, there is room for improvement for pairs of planar graphs, as the best known lower bound [6] only states that one bend per edge might be needed. We suspect that our upper bound could be improved by designing an algorithm that constructs a simultaneous embedding of two planar multigraphs with less than four bends per edge. A related interesting problem is to determine how many bends per edge are needed to construct a simultaneous embedding (without fixed edges) of pairs of (simple) planar graphs. The best known upper bound is two [8, 9, 19] and the best known lower bound is one [15]. As a final research direction, we mention the problem of constructing S EFEs of pairs of planar graphs in polynomial area, while matching our bounds for the number of bends and crossings. Acknowledgments This research initiated at the Workshop on Geometry and Graphs, held at the Bellairs Research Institute in Barbados in March 2015. The authors thank the other participants for a stimulating atmosphere. Frati also wishes to thank Anna Lubiw and Marcus Schaefer for insightful ideas they shared during the research for [7].  References 1. P. Angelini, G. Di Battista, F. Frati, M. Patrignani, and I. Rutter. Testing the simultaneous embeddability of two graphs whose intersection is a biconnected or a connected graph. J. Discr. Algorithms, 14:150–172, 2012. 2. P. Angelini, M. Geyer, M. Kaufmann, and D. Neuwirth. On a tree and a path with no geometric simultaneous embedding. J. Graph Algorithms Appl., 16(1):37–83, 2012. 3. M. A. Bekos, T. C. van Dijk, P. Kindermann, and A. Wolff. Simultaneous drawing of planar graphs with right-angle crossings and few bends. In M. S. Rahman and E. Tomita, editors, WALCOM ’15, volume 8973 of LNCS, pages 222–233. Springer, 2015. 4. T. Bläsius, S. G. Kobourov, and I. Rutter. Simultaneous embeddings of planar graphs. In R. Tamassia, editor, Handbook of Graph Drawing and Visualization, Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications, chapter 11, pages 349–382. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2013.  24  Fabrizio Frati, Michael Hoffmann, and Vincent Kusters  5. T. Bläsius and I. Rutter. Disconnectivity and relative positions in simultaneous embeddings. Comp. Geom., 48(6):459–478, 2015. 6. P. Brass, E. Cenek, C. A. Duncan, A. Efrat, C. Erten, D. P. Ismailescu, S. G. Kobourov, A. Lubiw, and J. S. Mitchell. On simultaneous planar graph embeddings. Comput. Geom. Theory Appl., 36(2):117–130, 2007. 7. T. M. Chan, F. Frati, C. Gutwenger, A. Lubiw, P. Mutzel, and M. Schaefer. Drawing partially embedded and simultaneously planar graphs. In C. A. Duncan and A. Symvonis, editors, GD ’14, volume 8871 of LNCS, pages 25–39. Springer, 2014. 8. E. Di Giacomo, W. Didimo, G. Liotta, and S. K. Wismath. Curve-constrained drawings of planar graphs. Comput. Geom. Theory Appl., 30(1):1–23, 2005. 9. E. Di Giacomo and G. Liotta. Simultaneous embedding of outerplanar graphs, paths, and cycles. Int. J. Comput. Geometry Appl., 17(2):139–160, 2007. 10. C. Erten and S. G. Kobourov. Simultaneous embedding of planar graphs with few bends. J. Graph Algorithms Appl., 9(3):347–364, 2005. 11. C. Erten, S. G. Kobourov, V. Le, and A. Navabi. Simultaneous graph drawing: Layout algorithms and visualization schemes. J. Graph Algorithms Appl., 9(1):165–182, 2005. 12. A. Estrella-Balderrama, E. Gassner, M. Jünger, M. Percan, M. Schaefer, and M. Schulz. Simultaneous geometric graph embeddings. In S. Hong, T. Nishizeki, and W. Quan, editors, GD ’08, volume 4875 of LNCS, pages 280–290. Springer, 2008. 13. J. J. Fowler, C. Gutwenger, M. Jünger, P. Mutzel, and M. Schulz. An SPQR-tree approach to decide special cases of simultaneous embedding with fixed edges. In I. G. Tollis and M. Patrignani, editors, GD ’08, volume 5417 of LNCS, pages 157–168. Springer, 2009. 14. F. Frati. Embedding graphs simultaneously with fixed edges. In M. Kaufmann and D. Wagner, editors, GD ’06, volume 4372 of LNCS, pages 108–113. Springer, 2007. 15. F. Frati, M. Kaufmann, and S. G. Kobourov. Constrained simultaneous and near-simultaneous embeddings. J. Graph Algorithms Appl., 13(3):447–465, 2009. 16. M. Geyer, M. Kaufmann, and I. Vrt’o. Two trees which are self-intersecting when drawn simultaneously. Discrete Mathematics, 309(7):1909–1916, 2009. 17. L. Grilli, S.-H. Hong, J. Kratochvı́l, and I. Rutter. Drawing simultaneously embedded graphs with few bends. In GD ’14, volume 8871 of LNCS, pages 40–51. Springer, 2014. 18. S. Hong and H. Nagamochi. An algorithm for constructing star-shaped drawings of plane graphs. Comput. Geom. Theory Appl., 43(2):191–206, 2010. 19. F. Kammer. Simultaneous embedding with two bends per edge in polynomial area. In L. Arge and R. Freivalds, editors, SWAT ’06, volume 4059 of LNCS, pages 255–267. Springer, 2006.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
