Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_6418

Abstract:
Nonmalleable Information Flow Control: Technical Report  arXiv:1708.08596v2 [cs.CR] 31 Aug 2017  Ethan Cecchetti Department of Computer Science Cornell University ethan@cs.cornell.edu  Andrey C. Myers Department of Computer Science Cornell University andru@cs.cornell.edu  Owen Arden Department of Computer Science University of California, Santa Cruz∗ owen@soe.ucsc.edu  Abstract Noninterference is a popular semantic security condition because it offers strong end-to-end guarantees, it is inherently compositional, and it can be enforced using a simple security type system. Unfortunately, it is too restrictive for real systems. Mechanisms for downgrading information are needed to capture real-world security requirements, but downgrading eliminates the strong compositional security guarantees of noninterference. We introduce nonmalleable information flow, a new formal security condition that generalizes noninterference to permit controlled downgrading of both confidentiality and integrity. While previous work on robust declassification prevents adversaries from exploiting the downgrading of confidentiality, our key insight is transparent endorsement, a mechanism for downgrading integrity while defending against adversarial exploitation. Robust declassification appeared to break the duality of confidentiality and integrity by making confidentiality depend on integrity, but transparent endorsement makes integrity depend on confidentiality, restoring this duality. We show how to extend a security-typed programming language with transparent endorsement and prove that this static type system enforces nonmalleable information flow, a new security property that subsumes robust declassification and transparent endorsement. Finally, we describe an implementation of this type system in the context of Flame, a flow-limited authorization plugin for the Glasgow Haskell Compiler.  1  Introduction  An ongoing foundational challenge for computer security is to discover rigorous—yet sufficiently flexible— ways to specify what it means for a computing system to be secure. Such security conditions should be extensional, meaning that they are based on the externally observable behavior of the system rather than on unobservable details of its implementation. To allow security enforcement mechanisms to scale to large systems, a security condition should also be compositional, so that secure subsystems remain secure when combined into a larger system. Noninterference, along with many variants [18, 34], has been a popular security condition precisely because it is both extensional and compositional. Noninterference forbids all flows of information from “high” to “low”, or more generally, flows of information that violate a lattice policy [13]. ∗  Work done while at Harvard University  1  Unfortunately, noninterference is also known to be too restrictive for most real systems, which need fine-grained control over when and how information flows. Consequently, most implementations of information flow control introduce downgrading mechanisms to allow information to flow contrary to the lattice policy. Downgrading confidentiality is called declassification, and downgrading integrity—that is, treating information as more trustworthy than information that has influenced it—is known as endorsement [46]. Once downgrading is permitted, noninterference is lost. The natural question is whether downgrading can nevertheless be constrained to guarantee that systems still satisfy some meaningful, extensional, and compositional security conditions. This paper shows how to constrain the use of both declassification and endorsement in a way that ensures such a security condition holds. Starting with the work of Biba [7], integrity has often been viewed as dual to confidentiality. Over time, that simple duality has eroded. In particular, work on robust declassification [6, 10, 26, 45, 46] has shown that in the presence of declassification, confidentiality depends on integrity. It is dangerous to give the adversary the ability to influence declassification, either by affecting the data that is declassified or by affecting the decision to perform declassification. By preventing such influence, robust declassification stops the adversary from laundering confidential data through existing declassification operations. Operationally, languages prevent laundering by restricting declassification to high integrity program points. Robust declassification can be enforced using a modular type system and is therefore compositional. This paper introduces a new security condition, transparent endorsement, which is dual to robust declassification: it controls endorsement by using confidentiality to limit the possible relaxations of integrity. Transparent endorsement prevents an agent from endorsing information that the provider of the information could not have seen. Such endorsement is dangerous because it permits the provider to affect flows from the endorser’s own secret information into trusted information. This restriction on endorsement enforces an often-implicit justification for endorsing untrusted inputs in high-integrity, confidential computation (e.g., a password checker): low-integrity inputs chosen by an attacker should be chosen without knowledge of secret information. A similar connection between the confidentiality and integrity of information arises in cryptographic settings. A malleable encryption scheme is one where a ciphertext encrypting one value can be transformed into a ciphertext encrypting a related value. While sometimes malleability is intentional (e.g., homomorphic encryption), an attacker’s ability to generate ciphertexts makes malleable encryption insufficient to authenticate messages or validate integrity. Nonmalleable encryption schemes [14] prevent such attacks. In this paper, we combine robust declassification and transparent endorsement into a new security condition, nonmalleable information flow, which prevents analogous attacks in an information flow control setting. The contributions of this paper are as follows: • We give example programs showing the need for a security condition that controls endorsement of secret information. • We generalize robust declassification to programs including complex data structures with heterogeneously labeled data. • We identify transparent endorsement and nonmalleable information flow, new extensional security conditions for programs including declassification and endorsement. • We present a core language, NMIFC, which provably enforces robust declassification, transparent endorsement, and nonmalleable information flow. • We present the first formulation of robust declassification as a 4-safety hyperproperty, and define two 2  new 4-safety hyperproperties for transparent endorsement and nonmalleable information flow, the first time information security conditions have been characterized as k-safety hyperproperties with k ą 2. • We describe our implementation of NMIFC using Flame, a flow-limited authorization library for Haskell and adapt an example of the Servant web application framework, accessible online at http: //memo.flow.limited. We organize the paper as follows. Section 2 provides examples of vulnerabilities in prior work. Section 3 reviews relevant background. Section 4 introduces our approach for controlling dangerous endorsements, and Section 5 presents a syntax, semantics, and type system for NMIFC. Section 6 formalizes our security conditions and Section 7 restates them as hyperproperties. Section 8 discusses our Haskell implementation, Section 9 compares our approach to related work, and Section 10 concludes.  2  Motivation  To motivate the need for an additional security condition and give some intuition about transparent endorsement, we give three short examples. Each example shows code that type-checks under existing informationflow type systems even though it contains insecure information flows, which we are able to characterize in a new way. These examples use the notation of the flow-limited authorization model (FLAM) [4], which offers an expressive way to state both information flow restrictions and authorization policies. However, the problems observed in these examples are not specific to FLAM; they arise in all previous information-flow models that support downgrading (e.g., [8, 15, 21, 25, 32, 42, 47]). The approach in this paper can be applied straightforwardly to the decentralized label model (DLM) [25], and with more effort, to DIFC models that are less similar to FLAM. While some previous models lack a notion of integrity, from our perspective they are even worse off, because they effectively allow unrestricted endorsement. In FLAM, principals and information flow labels occupy the same space. Given a principal (or label) p, the notation pÑ denotes the confidentiality projection of p, whereas the notation pÐ denotes its integrity projection. Intuitively, pÑ represents the authority to decide where p’s secrets may flow to, whereas pÐ represents the authority to decide where information trusted by p may flow from. Robust declassification ensures that the label pÑ can be removed via declassification only in code that is trusted by p; that is, with integrity pÐ . Information flow policies provide a means to specify security requirements for a program, but not an enforcement mechanism. For example, confidentiality policies might be implemented using encryption and integrity policies using digital signatures. Alternatively, hardware security mechanisms such as memory protection might be used to prevent untrusted processes from reading confidential data. The following examples illustrate issues that would arise in many information flow control systems, regardless of the enforcement mechanism.  2.1  Fooling a password checker  Password checkers are frequently used as an example of necessary and justifiable downgrading. However, incorrect downgrading can allow an attacker who does not know the password to authenticate anyway. Suppose there are two principals, a fully trusted principal T and an untrusted principal U . The following information flows are then secure: U Ñ Ď T Ñ and T Ð Ď U Ð . Figure 1 shows in pseudo-code how we  3  1 2  StringT password;  3 4 5 6 7  booleanT Ð check_password(StringT Ñ guess) { booleanT endorsed_guess = endorse(guess, T ); booleanT result = (endorsed_guess == password); return declassify(result, T Ð ); } Figure 1: A password checker with malleable information flow  A a_bid  A Ð ^ pA  T  B  ^ BqÑ  pA ^ B q  a_bid  pA ^ B q  B pA ^ B q  b_bid  Ð  ^ pA ^ B  qÑ  a_bid b_bid  pA ^ B q  b_bid open b_bid pA ^ BqÐ ^ pA _ BqÑ  b_bid  open a_bid pA ^ BqÐ ^ pA _ BqÑ  Bids  a_bid  Figure 2: Cheating in a sealed-bid auction. Without knowing Alice’s bid, Bob can always win by setting b bid := a bid + 1  might erroneously implement a password checker in a security-typed language like Jif [24]. Because this pseudo-code would satisfy the type system, it might appear to be secure. The argument guess has no integrity because it is supplied by an untrusted, possibly adversarial source. It is necessary to declassify the result of the function (at line 6) because the result indeed leaks a little information about the password. Robust declassification, as enforced in Jif, demands that the untrusted guess be endorsed before it can influence information released by declassification. Unfortunately, the check_password policy does not prevent faulty or malicious (but well-typed) code from supplying password directly as the argument, thereby allowing an attacker with no knowledge of the correct password to “authenticate.” Because guess is labeled as secret (T Ñ ), a flow of information from password to guess looks secure to the type system, so this severe vulnerability could remain undetected. To fix this we would need to make guess less secret, but no prior work has defined rules that would require this change. The true insecurity, however, lies on line 4, which erroneously treats sensitive information as if the attacker had constructed it. We can prevent this insecurity by outlawing such endorsements.  2.2  Cheating in a sealed-bid auction  Imagine that two principals A and B (Alice and Bob) are engaging in a two-party sealed-bid auction administered by an auctioneer T whom they both trust. Such an auction might be implemented using cryptographic commitments and may even simulate T without need of an actual third party. However, we abstractly specify the information security requirements that such a scheme would aim to satisfy. Consider the following sketch of an auction protocol, illustrated in Figure 2: 1. A sends her bid a_bid to T with label AÐ ^ pA ^ BqÑ . This label means a_bid is trusted only by those who trust A and can be viewed only if both A and B agree to release it.  4  2. T accepts a_bid from A and uses his authority to endorse the bid to label pA ^ BqÐ ^ pA ^ BqÑ (identically, A ^ B). The endorsement prevents any further unilateral modification to the bid by A. T then broadcasts this endorsed a_bid to A and B. This broadcast corresponds to an assumption that network messages can be seen by all parties. 3. B constructs b_bid with label B Ð ^ pA ^ BqÑ and sends it to T . 4. T endorses b_bid to A ^ B and broadcasts the result. 5. T now uses its authority to declassify both bids and send them to all parties. Since both bids have high integrity, this declassification is legal according to existing typing rules introduced to enforce (qualified) robust declassification [4, 10, 26]. Unfortunately, this protocol is subject to attacks analogous to mauling in malleable cryptographic schemes [14]: B can always win the auction with the minimal winning bid. In Step 3 nothing prevents B from constructing b_bid by adding 1 to a_bid, yielding a new bid with label B Ð ^ pA ^ BqÑ (to modify the value, B must lower the value’s integrity as A did not authorize the modification). Again an insecurity stems from erroneously endorsing overly secret information. In step 4, T should not endorse b_bid since it could be based on confidential information inaccessible to B—in particular, a_bid. The problem can be fixed by giving A’s bid the label AÑ ^AÐ (identically, just A), but existing information flow systems impose no such requirement.  2.3  Laundering secrets  Wittbold and Johnson [43] present an interesting but insecure program: while (true) do { x = 0 rs x = 1; // generate secret probabilistically output x to H; input y from H; // implicit endorsement 5 output x ‘ (y mod 2) to L 6 }  1 2 3 4  In this code, there are two external agents, H and L. Agent H is intended to have access to secret information, whereas L is not. The code generates a secret by assigning to the variable x a nondeterministic, secret value that is either 0 or 1. The choice of x is assumed not to be affected by the adversary. Its value is used as a one-time pad to conceal the secret low bit of variable y. Wittbold and Johnson observe that this code permits an adversary to launder one bit of another secret variable z by sending z‘x as the value read into y. The low bit of z is then the output to L. Let us consider this classic example from the viewpoint of a modern information-flow type system that enforces robust declassification. In order for this code to type-check, it must declassify the value x‘(y mod 2). Since the attack depends on y being affected by adversarial input from H, secret input from H must be low-integrity (that is, its label must be H Ñ ). But if it is low-integrity, this input (or the variable y) must be endorsed to allow the declassification it influences. As in the previous two examples, the endorsement of high-confidentiality information enables exploits.  5  3  Background  We explore nonmalleable information flow in the context of a simplified version of FLAM [4], so we first present some background. FLAM provides a unified model for reasoning about both information flow and authorization. Unlike in previous models, principals and information flow labels in FLAM are drawn from the same set L. The interpretation of a label as a principal is the least powerful principal trusted to enforce that label. The interpretation of a principal as a label is the strongest information security policy that principal is trusted to enforce. We refer to elements of L as principals or labels depending on whether we are talking about authorization or information flow. Labels (and principals) have both confidentiality and integrity aspects. A label (or principal) ` can be projected to capture just its confidentiality (`Ñ ) and integrity (`Ð ) aspects. The information flow ordering Ď on labels (and principals) describes information flows that are secure, in the direction of increasing confidentiality and decreasing integrity. The orthogonal trust ordering ě on principals (and labels) corresponds to increasing trustedness and privilege: toward increasing confidentiality and increasing integrity. We read ` Ď `1 as “` flows to `1 ”, meaning `1 specifies a policy at least as restrictive as ` does. We read p ě q as “p acts for q”, meaning that q delegates to p. The information flow and the trust orderings each define a lattice over L, and these lattices lie intuitively at right angles to one another. The least trusted and least powerful principal is K, (that is, p ě K for all principals p), and the most trusted and powerful principal is J (where J ě p for all p). We also assume there is a set of atomic principals like alice and bob that define their own delegations. Since the trust ordering defines a lattice, it has meet and join operations. Principal p ^ q is the least powerful principal that can act for both p and q; conversely, p _ q can act for all principals that both p and q can act for. The least element in the information flow ordering is JÐ , representing maximal integrity and minimal confidentiality, whereas the greatest element is JÑ , representing minimal integrity and maximal confidentiality. The join and meet operators in the information flow lattice are the usual \ and [, respectively. Any principal (label) can be expressed in a normal form pÑ ^ q Ð where p and q are CNF formulas over atomic principals [4]. This normal form allows us to decompose decisions about lattice ordering (in either lattice) into separate questions regarding the integrity component (p) and the confidentiality component (q). Lattice operations can be similarly decomposed. FLAM also introduces the concept of the voice of a label (principal) `, written ∇p`q. Formally, for a normal-form label ` “ pÑ ^ q Ð , we define voice as follows: ∇ppÑ ^ q Ð q fi pÐ .1 A label’s voice represents the minimum integrity needed to securely declassify data constrained by that label, a restriction designed to enforce robust declassification. The Flow-Limited Authorization Calculus (FLAC) [5] previously embedded a simplified version of the FLAM proof system into a core language for enforcing secure authorization and information flow. FLAC is an extension of the Dependency Core Calculus (DCC) [1, 3] whose types contain FLAM labels. A computation is additionally associated with a program-counter label pc which tracks the influences on the control flow and values that are not explicitly labeled. In this paper we take a similar approach: NMIFC enforces security policies by performing computation in a monadic context. As in FLAC, NMIFC includes a pc label. For an ordinary value v, the monadic term pη` vq signifies that value with the information flow label `. If value v has type τ , the term pη` vq has type ` says τ , capturing the confidentiality and integrity of the information. 1  FLAM defines ∇ppÑ ^ q Ð q “ pÐ ^ q Ð , but our simplified definition is sufficient for NMIFC. For clarity, the operator ∇ is always applied to a projected principal.  6  Unlike FLAC, NMIFC has no special support for dynamic delegation of authority. Atomic principals define L by statically delegating their authority to arbitrary conjunctions and disjunctions of other principals, and we include traditional declassification and endorsement operations, decl and endorse. We leave to future work the integration of nonmalleable information flow with secure dynamic delegation.  4  Enforcing nonmalleability  Multiple prior security-typed languages—both functional [5] and imperative [6, 10, 26]—aim to allow some form of secure downgrading. These languages place no restriction whatsoever on the confidentiality of endorsed data or the context in which an endorsement occurs. Because of this permissiveness, all three insecure examples from Section 2 type-check in these languages.  4.1  Robust declassification  Robust declassification prevents adversaries from using declassifications in the program to release information that was not intended to be released. The adversary is assumed to be able to observe some state of the system, whose confidentiality label is sufficiently low, and to modify some state of the system, whose integrity label is sufficiently low. Semantically, robust declassification says that if the attacker is unable to learn a secret with one attack, no other attack will cause it to be revealed [26, 45]. The attacker has no control over information release because all attacks are equally good. When applied to a decentralized system, robust declassification means that for any principal p, other principals that p does not trust cannot influence declassification of p’s secrets [10]. To enforce robust declassification, prior security-typed languages place integrity constraints on declassification. The original work on FLAM enforces robust declassification using the voice operator ∇. However, when declassification is expressed as a programming-language operation, as is more typical, it is convenient to define a new operator on labels, one that maps in the other direction, from integrity to confidentiality. We define the view of a principal as the upper bound on the confidentiality a label or context can enforce to securely endorse that label: Definition 1 (Principal view). Let ` “ pÑ ^ q Ð be a FLAM label (principal) expressed in normal form. The view of `, written ∆p`q, is defined as ∆ppÑ ^ q Ð q fi q Ñ . When the confidentiality of a label ` lies above the view of its own integrity, a declassification of that label may give adversaries the opportunity to subvert the declassification to release information. Without enough integrity, an adversary might, for example, replace the information that is intended to be released via declassification with some other secret. Figure 3 illustrates this idea graphically. It depicts the lattice of FLAM labels, which is a product lattice with two axes, confidentiality and integrity. A given label ` is a point in this diagram, whereas the set of labels sharing the same confidentiality `Ñ or integrity `Ð correspond to lines on the diagram. Given the integrity `Ð of the label `, the view of that integrity, ∆p`Ð q, defines a region of information (shaded) that is too confidential to be declassified. The view operator directly corresponds to the writers-to-readers operator that Chong and Myers [10] use to enforce robust declassification in the DLM. We generalize the same idea here to the more expressive labels of FLAM.  7  ⊤→  Δ(ℓ←) C nonrobust  ⊥  ⊤  robust  I ℓ←  ⊤← Figure 3: Robust declassification says information at level ` can be declassified only if it has enough integrity. The gray shaded region represents information that ∆p`Ð q cannot read, so it is unsafe to declassify with `’s integrity.  4.2  Transparent endorsement  The key insight of this work is that endorsement should be restricted in a manner dual to robust declassification; declassification (reducing confidentiality) requires a minimum integrity, so endorsement (raising integrity) should require a maximum confidentiality. Intuitively, if a principal could have written data it cannot read, which we call an “opaque write,” it is unsafe to endorse that data. An endorsement is transparent if it endorses only information its authors could read. The voice operator suffices to express this new restriction conveniently, as depicted in Figure 4. In the figure, we consider endorsing information with confidentiality `Ñ . This confidentiality is mapped to a corresponding integrity level ∇p`Ñ q, defining a minimal integrity level that ` must have in order to be endorsed. If ` lies below this boundary, its endorsement is considered transparent; if it lies above the boundary, endorsement is opaque and hence insecure. The duality with robust declassification is clear.  5  A core language: NMIFC  We now describe the NonMalleable Information Flow Calculus (NMIFC), a new core language, modeled on DCC and FLAC, that allows downgrading, but in a more constrained manner than FLAC so as to provide stronger semantic guarantees. NMIFC incorporates the program-counter label pc of FLAC, but eschews the more powerful assume mechanism of FLAC in favor of more traditional declassify and endorse operations. The full NMIFC is a small extension of Polymorphic DCC [1]. In Figure 5 we present the core syntax, leaving other features such as sums, pairs, and polymorphism to Appendix A. Unlike DCC, NMIFC supports downgrading and models it as an effect. It is necessary to track what information influences control flow so that these downgrading effects may be appropriately constrained. Therefore, like FLAC, NMIFC adds pc labels to lambda terms and types. Similarly to DCC, protected values have type ` says τ where ` is the confidentiality and integrity of a  8  ⊤→  → l  C  ℓ→  opaque  ⊥  transparent  I  ⊤  ∇(ℓ→)  ⊤← Figure 4: Transparent endorsement in NMIFC. The gray shaded region represents information that ∇p`Ñ q does not trust and may have been created by an opaque write. It is thus unsafe to endorse with `’s confidentiality. nPN xPV π P tÑ, Ðu  (atomic principals) (variable names) (security aspects)  ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ n ˇ J ˇ K ˇ pπ ˇ p ^ p ˇ p _ p ˇ p \ p ˇ p [ p ˇ ˇ pc ::“ unit ˇ τ ÝÑ τ ˇ ` says τ ˇ ˇ ::“ pq ˇ λpx : τ qrpcs. e ˇ pη ` vq ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ ::“ x ˇ v ˇ e e ˇ pη` eq ˇ bind x “ e in e ˇ ˇ ˇ decl e to ` ˇ endorse e to `  p, `, pc ::“ τ v e  Figure 5: Core NMIFC syntax.  value of type τ . All computation on these values occurs in the says monad; protected values must be bound using the bind term before performing operations on them (e.g., applying them as functions). Results of such computations are protected with the monadic unit operator pη` eq, which protects the result of e with label `.  5.1  NMIFC operational semantics  The core semantics of NMIFC are mostly standard, but to obtain our theoretical results we need additional information about evaluation. This information is necessary because we want to identify, for instance, whether information is ever available to an attacker during evaluation, even if it is discarded and does not influence the final result. This approach gives an attacker more power; an attacker can see information at its level even if it is not output by the program. The NMIFC semantics, presented in Figure 6, maintain a trace t of events. An event is emitted into the trace whenever a new protected value is created and whenever a declassification or endorsement occurs. 9  e ÝÑ e1 rE-A PPs  pλpx : τ qrpcs. eq v ÝÑ erx ÞÑ vs  rE-B IND Ms  bind x “ pη ` vq in e ÝÑ erx ÞÑ vs  ˇ ˇ (event) c ::“ ‚ ˇ pη ` vq ˇ pÓπ`1 , η ` vq ˇ ˇ (trace) t ::“ ε ˇ c ˇ t; t D @ xe, ty ÝÑ Ñ e1 , t 1  rE-S TEPs  e ÝÑ e1 @ D xe, ty ÝÑ Ñ e1 , t; ‚  rE-U NIT Ms  xpη` vq, ty ÝÑ Ñ xpη ` vq, t; pη ` vqy  xdecl pη `1 vq to `, ty ÝÑ Ñ xpη ` vq, t; pÓÑ `1 , η ` vqy  rE-D ECLs  Ñ xpη ` vq, rE-E NDORSEs xendorse pη `1 vq to `, ty ÝÑ  t; pÓÐ `1 ,  η ` vqy  @ D xe, ty ÝÑ Ñ e1 , t 1 @ D rE-E VALs xEres, ty ÝÑ Ñ Ere1 s, t1  Evaluation context E  ::“ ˇ ˇ  ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ r¨s ˇ E e ˇ v E ˇ pη` Eq ˇ bind x “ E in e ˇ decl E to ` ˇ endorse E to `  Figure 6: Core NMIFC operational semantics.  These events track the observations or influence an attacker may have during a run of an NMIFC program. Formally, a trace can be an empty trace ε, a single event c, or the concatenation of two traces with the associative operator “;” with identity ε. When a source-level unit term pη` vq is evaluated (rule E-U NIT M), an event pη ` vq is added to the trace indicating that the value v became protected at `. When a protected value is declassified, a declassification 1 event pÓÑ `1 , η ` vq is emitted, indicating that v was declassified from ` to `. Likewise, an endorsement event Ð pÓ`1 , η ` vq is emitted for an endorsement. Other evaluation steps (rule E-S TEP) emit ‚, for “no event.” Rule E-E VAL steps under the evaluation contexts [44] defined at the bottom of Figure 6. Rather than being literal side effects of the program, these events track how observable information is as it is accessed, processed, and protected by the program. Because our semantics emits an event whenever information is protected (by evaluating an η term) or downgraded (by a decl or endorse term), our traces capture all information processed by a program, indexed by the policy protecting that information. By analogy, these events are similar to the typed and labeled mutable reference cells of languages like FlowCaml [30] and DynSec [48]. An event pη ` vq is analogous to allocating a reference cell protected at `, and pÓπ`1 , η ` vq is analogous to copying the contents of a cell at `1 to a new cell at `. It is important for the semantics to keep track of these events so that our security conditions hold for programs containing data structures and higher-order functions. Previous language-based definitions of robust declassification have only applied to simple while-languages [6, 10, 26] or to primitive types [5].  10  $`Ďτ rP-U NITs  $ ` Ď unit  `1 Ď ` $ `1 Ď ` says τ  rP-L BLs Figure 7: Type protection levels.  Γ; pc $ e : τ rVARs Γ, x : τ, Γ1 ; pc $ x : τ  rU NITs Γ; pc $ pq : unit  Γ, x : τ1 ; pc1 $ e : τ2  rL AMs  pc1  Γ; pc $ λpx : τ1 qrpc1 s. e : τ1 ÝÑ τ2 pc1  Γ; pc $ e1 : τ 1 ÝÑ τ Γ; pc $ e2 : τ 1 pc Ď pc1 Γ; pc $ e1 e2 : τ  rA PPs  rVU NIT Ms  Γ; pc $ v : τ Γ; pc $ pη ` vq : ` says τ  rD ECLs  rE NDORSEs  Γ; pc $ e : τ pc Ď ` Γ; pc $ pη` eq : ` says τ  rU NIT Ms  rB IND Ms  Γ; pc $ e : ` says τ 1 $`Ďτ Γ, x : τ 1 ; pc \ ` $ e1 : τ Γ; pc $ bind x “ e in e1 : τ  Γ; pc $ e : `1 says τ `1Ð “ `Ð pc Ď ` 1Ñ Ñ ` Ď ` \ ∆pp`1 \ pcqÐ q Γ; pc $ decl e to ` : ` says τ Γ; pc $ e : `1 says τ `1Ñ “ `Ñ pc Ď ` 1Ð Ð ` Ď ` \ ∇pp`1 \ pcqÑ q Γ; pc $ endorse e to ` : ` says τ Figure 8: Typing rules for core NMIFC.  5.2  NMIFC type system  The NMIFC protection relation, presented in Figure 7, defines how types relate to information flow policies. A type τ protects the confidentiality and integrity of ` if $ ` Ď τ . Unlike in DCC and FLAC, a label is protected by a type only if it flows to the outermost says principal. In FLAC and DCC, the types `1 says ` says τ and ` says `1 says τ protect the same set of principals; in other words, says is commutative. By distinguishing between these types, NMIFC does not provide the same commutativity. The commutativity of says is a design decision, offering a more permissive programming model at the cost of less precise tracking of dependencies. NMIFC takes advantage of this extra precision in the U NIT M typing rule so the label on every η term protects the information it contains, even if nested within other η terms. Abadi [2] similarly modifies DCC’s protection relation to distinguish the protection level of terms with nested says types. The core type system presented in Figure 8 enforces nonmalleable information flow for NMIFC programs. Most of the typing rules are standard, and differ only superficially from DCC and FLAC. Like in FLAC, NMIFC typing judgments include a program counter label, pc, that represents an upper bound on the confidentiality and integrity of bound information that any computation may depend upon. For instance, rule B IND M requires the type of the body of a bind term to protect the unlabeled information of type τ 1  11  with at least `, and to type-check under a raised program counter label pc \ `. Rule L AM ensures that function bodies type-check with respect to the function’s pc annotation, and rule A PP ensures functions are only applied in contexts that flow to these annotations. The NMIFC rule for U NIT M differs from FLAC and DCC in requiring the premise pc Ď ` for welltyped η terms. This premise ensures a more precise relationship between the pc and η terms. Intuitively this restriction makes sense. The pc is a bound on all unlabeled information in the context. Since an expression e protected with pη` eq may depend on any of this information, it makes sense to require that pc flow to `.2 By itself, this restrictive premise would prevent public data from flowing through secret contexts and trusted data from flowing through untrusted contexts. To allow such flows, we distinguish source-level pη` eq terms from run-time values pη ` vq, which have been fully evaluated. These terms are only created by the operational semantics during evaluation and no longer depend on the context in which they appear; they are closed terms. Thus it is appropriate to omit the new premise in VU NIT M. This approach allows us to require more precise flow tracking for the explicit dependencies of protected expressions without restricting where these values flow once they are fully evaluated. Rule D ECL ensures a declassification from label `1 to ` is robust. We first require `1Ð “ `Ð to ensure that this does not perform endorsement. A more permissive premise `1Ð Ď `Ð is admissible, but requiring equality simplifies our proofs and does not reduce expressiveness since the declassification can be followed by a subsequent relabeling. The premise pc Ď ` requires that declassifications occur in high-integrity contexts, and prevents declassification events from creating implicit flows. The premise `1Ñ Ď `Ñ \ ∆pp`1 \ pcqÐ q ensures that the confidentiality of the information declassified does not exceed the view of the integrity of the principals that may have influenced it. These influences can be either explicit (`1Ð ) or implicit (pcÐ ), so we compare against the join of the two.3 This last premise effectively combines the two conditions identified by Chong and Myers [10] for enforcing robust declassification in an imperative while-language. Rule E NDORSE enforces transparent endorsement. All but the last premise are straightforward: the expression does not declassify and pc Ď ` requires a high-integrity context to endorse and prevents implicit flows. Interestingly, the last premise is dual to that in D ECL. An endorsement cannot raise integrity above the voice of the confidentiality of the data being endorsed (`1Ñ ) or the context performing the endorsement (pcÑ ). For the same reasons as in D ECL, we compare against their join.  5.3  Examples revisited  We now reexamine the examples presented in Section 2 to see that the NMIFC type system prevents the vulnerabilities seen above. 5.3.1  Password checker  We saw above that when the password checker labels guess at T Ñ , well-typed code can improperly set guess to the actual password. We noted that the endorsement enabled an insecure flow of information. Looking at E NDORSE in NMIFC, we can attempt to type the equivalent expression: endorse guess to T . However, if guess has type T Ñ says bool, the endorse does not type-check; it fails to satisfy the final premise of E NDORSE: KÐ “ pT Ñ qÐ ­Ď T Ð \ ∇pT Ñ q “ T Ð . 2 The premise is not required in FLAC because protection is commutative. For example, in a FLAC term such as bind x “ v in pη`1 pη` xqq, x may be protected by ` or `1 . 3 The first two premises—`1Ð “ `Ð and pc Ď `—make this join redundant. It would, however, be necessary if we replaced the equality premise with the more permissive `1Ð Ď `Ð version, so we include it for clarity.  12  checkpwd “ λpg : U Ð says String, p : T says StringqrT Ð s. bind guess “ pendorse g to T Ð q in decl pbind pwd “ p in pηT pwd ““ guessqq to T Ð Figure 9: A secure version of a password checker.  If we instead give guess the label U Ð , the endorsement type-checks, assuming a sufficiently trusted pc. This is as it should be. With the label U Ð , the guesser must be able to read their own guess, guaranteeing that they cannot guess the correct password unless they in fact know the correct password. Figure 9 shows this secure version of the password checker. 5.3.2  Sealed-bid auction  In the insecure auction described in Section 2.2, we argued that an insecure flow was created when T endorsed b_bid from B Ð ^pA^BqÑ to A^B. This endorsement requires a term of the form endorse v to A ^ B where v types to B Ð ^ pA ^ BqÑ says int. Despite the trusted context, the last premise of E NDORSE again fails: B Ð ­Ď pA ^ BqÐ \ ∇ppA ^ BqÑ q “ pA ^ BqÐ . If we instead label a bid : A says int and b bid : B says int, then the corresponding endorse statements type-check, assuming that T is trusted: T Ď pA ^ BqÐ . 5.3.3  Laundering secrets  For the secret-laundering example in Section 2.3, we assume that neither H nor L is trusted, but the output from the program is. This forces an implicit endorsement of y, the input received from H. But the condition needed to endorse from H Ñ ^ KÐ to H Ñ ^ JÐ is false: KÐ Ď JÐ \ ∇pH Ñ q “ ∇pH Ñ q We have ∇pLÑ q Ď ­ ∇pH Ñ q and all integrity flows to KÐ , so by transitivity the above condition cannot hold.  6  Security conditions  The NMIFC typing rules enforce several strong security conditions: multiple forms of conditional noninterference, robust declassification, and our new transparent endorsement and nonmalleable information flow conditions. We define these conditions formally but relegate proof details to Appendix D.  6.1  Attackers  Noninterference is frequently stated with respect to a specific but arbitrary label. Anything below that label in the lattice is “low” (public or trusted) and everything else is “high”. We broaden this definition slightly and designate high information using a set of labels H that is upward closed. That is, if ` P H and ` Ď `1 , then `1 P H. We refer to such upward closed sets as high sets.  13  c «W c 1 v «W v 1 These equivalence relations are the smallest congruences over c and over v extended with ‚, containing the equivalences defined by these rules: `RW pη ` vq «W ‚  rE Q -U NIT Ms  rE Q -D OWNs  pÓπ`1 ,  `RW η ` vq «W ‚  t «‹W t1 The equivalence relation t «‹W t1 is the smallest congruence over t containing the equivalences defined by these rules: rT-L IFTs  c «W c1 c «‹W c1  t; ‚ «‹W t  rT-B ULLET Rs  rT-B ULLET Ls  ‚; t «‹W t  Figure 10: Low equivalence and low trace equivalence.  We say that a type τ is a high type, written “$ τ prot H”, if all of the information in a value of type τ is above some label in the high set H. The following rule defines high types: rP-S ETs  HPH  $HĎτ  $ τ prot H  H is upward closed  This formulation of adversarial power is adequate to express noninterference, in which confidentiality and integrity do not interact. However, our more complex conditions relate confidentiality to integrity and therefore require a way to relate the attacker’s power in the two domains. Intuitively, an attacker is an arbitrary set of colluding atomic principals. Specifically, if n1 , . . . , nk P N are those atomic principals, then the set A “ t` P L | n1 ^ ¨ ¨ ¨ ^ nk ě `u represents this attacker’s power. These principals may include principals mentioned in the program, and there may be delegations between attacker principals and program principals. While this definition of an attacker is intuitive, the results in this paper actually hold for a more general notion of attacker defined in Appendix B. Attackers correspond to two high sets: an untrusted high set U “ t` P L | `Ð P Au and a secret high set S “ t` P L | `Ñ R Au. We say that A induces U and S.  6.2  Equivalences  All of our security conditions involve relations on traces. As is typically the case for information-flow security conditions, we define a notion of “low equivalence” on traces, which ignores effects with high labels. We proceed by defining low-equivalent expressions and then extending low-equivalence to traces. For expression equivalence, we examine precisely the values which are visible to a low observer defined by a set of labels W: pη ` vq and pÓπ`1 , η ` vq where ` P W. We formalize this idea in Figure 10, using ‚ to represent values that are not visible. Beyond ignoring values unable to affect the output, we use a standard structural congruence (i.e., syntactic equivalence). This strict notion of equivalence is not entirely necessary; observational equivalence or any refinement thereof would be sufficient if augmented with the ‚-equivalences in Figure 10. Figure 10 also extends the equivalence on emitted values to equivalence on entire traces of emitted values. Essentially, two traces are equivalent if there is a way to match up equivalent events in each trace, while ignoring high events equivalent to ‚. 14  6.3  Noninterference and downgrading  An immediate consideration when formalizing information flow is how to express interactions between an adversary and the system. One possibility is to limit interaction to inputs and outputs of the program. This is a common approach for functional languages. We take a stronger approach in which security is expressed in terms of execution traces. Note that traces contain all information necessary to ensure the security of input and output values. We begin with a statement of noninterference in the presence of downgrading. Theorem 1 states that, given two high inputs, a well-typed program produces two traces that are either low-equivalent or contain a downgrade event that distinguishes them. This implies that differences in traces distinguishable by an attacker are all attributable to downgrades of information derived from the high inputs. Furthermore, any program that performs no downgrades on secret or untrusted values (i.e., contain no decl or endorse terms on H data) must be noninterfering. Theorem 1 (Noninterference modulo downgrading). Let H be a high set and let W “ LzH. Given an expression e such that Γ, x : τ1 ; pc $ e : τ2 where $ τ1 prot H, for all v1 , v2 with Γ; pc $ vi : τ1 , if @ D xerx ÞÑ vi s, vi y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ vi1 , ti then either there is some event pÓπ`1 , η ` wq P ti where `1 P H and ` R H, or t1 «‹W t2 . The restrictions placed on downgrading operations mean that we can characterize the conditions under which no downgrading can occur. We add two further noninterference theorems that restrict downgrading in different ways. Theorem 2 states that if a program types without a public–trusted pc it must be noninterfering (with respect to that definition of “public–trusted”). Theorem 2 (Noninterference of high-pc programs). Let A be an attacker inducing high sets U and S. Let H be one of those high sets and W “ LzH. Given some e such that Γ, x : τ1 ; pc $ e : τ2 where $ τ1 prot H, for all v1 , v2 with Γ; pc $ vi : τ1 , if xerx ÞÑ vi s, vi y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ xvi1 , ti y and pc P U Y S, then t1 «‹W t2 . Rather than restrict the pc, Theorem 3 states that secret–untrusted information is always noninterfering. Previous work (e.g., [6, 26]) does not restrict endorsement of confidential information, allowing any label to be downgraded to public–trusted (given a public–trusted pc). In NMIFC, however, secret–untrusted data must remain secret and untrusted. Theorem 3 (Noninterference of secret–untrusted data). Let A be an attacker inducing high sets U and S. Let H “ U X S and W “ LzH. Given some e such that Γ, x : τ1 ; pc $ e : τ2 where $ τ1 prot H, for all v1 , v2 with Γ; pc $ vi : τ1 , if xerx ÞÑ vi s, vi y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ xvi1 , ti y then t1 «‹W t2 .  6.4  Robust declassification and irrelevant inputs  We now move to security conditions for programs that do not satisfy noninterference. Recall that robust declassification informally means the attacker has no influence on what information is released by declassification. Traditionally, it is stated in terms of attacker-provided code that is inserted into low-integrity holes in programs which differ only in their secret inputs. In NMIFC, the same attacker power can be obtained by substituting exactly two input values into the program, one secret and one untrusted. This simplification is possible because NMIFC has first-class functions that can model the substitution of low-integrity code. Appendix C shows that this simpler two-input definition is equivalent to the traditional hole-based approach in the full version of NMIFC (Appendix A). 15  `  λpx : pP Ñ ^ U Ð says τ q ˆ pP Ñ ^ U Ð says τ qqrP Ñ ^ T Ð s. ` decl bind b “ pηS Ñ ^T Ð secq in case b of inj1 . pηS Ñ ^T Ð pproj1 xqq ˘ | inj2 . pηS Ñ ^T Ð pproj2 xqq ˘@ D to P Ñ ^ T Ð atk 1 , atk 2  Figure 11: A program that admits inept attacks. Here P Ď S and T Ď U , but not vice versa, so sec is a secret boolean and xatk 1 , atk 2 y form an untrusted pair of values. If atk 1 ‰ atk 2 , then the attacker will learn the value of sec. If atk 1 “ atk 2 , however, then the attacker learns nothing due to its own ineptness.  Prior work on while-based languages [10, 26] define robust declassification in terms of four traces generated by the combination of two variations: a secret input and some attacker-supplied code. For terminating traces, these definitions require any pair of secrets to produce public-equivalent traces under all attacks or otherwise to produce distinguishable traces regardless of the attacks chosen. This implies that an attacker cannot control the disclosure of secrets. We can attempt to capture this notion of robust declassifcation using the notation of NMIFC. For a program e with a secret input x and untrusted input y, we wish to say e robustly declassifies if, for all secret values v1 , v2 and for all untrusted values w1 , w2 , where @ D xerx ÞÑ vi sry ÞÑ wj s, vi ; wj y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ vij , tij , then t11 «‹P t21 ðñ t12 «‹P t22 . This condition is intuitive but, unfortunately, overly restrictive. It does not account for the possibility of an inept attack, in which an attacker causes a program to reveal less information than intended. Inept attacks are harder to characterize than in previous work because, unlike the previously used whilelanguages, NMIFC supports data structures with heterogeneous labels. Using such data structures, we can build a program that implicitly declassifies data by using a secret to influence the selection of an attackerprovided value and then declassifying that selection. Figure 11 provides an example of such a program, which uses sums and products from the full NMIFC language. While this program appears secure—the attacker has no control over what information is declassified or when a declassification occurs—it violates the above condition. One attack can contain the same value twice—causing any two secrets to produce indistinguishable traces—while the other can contain different values. Intuitively, no vulnerability in the program is thereby revealed; the program was intended to release information, but the attacker failed to infer it due to a poor choice of attack. Such inputs result in less information leakage entirely due to the attacker’s ineptness, not an insecurity of the program. As a result, we consider inputs from inept attackers to be irrelevant to our security conditions. Dually to inept attackers, we can define uninteresting secret inputs. For example, if a program endorses an attacker’s selection of a secret value, an input where all secret options contain the same data is uninteresting, so we also consider it irrelevant. Which inputs are irrelevant is specific to the program and to the choice of attacker. In Figure 11, if both execution paths used pproj1 xq, there would be no way for an attacker to learn any information, so all attacks are equally relevant. Similarly, if S Ñ is already considered public, then there is no secret information in the first place, so again, all attacks are equally relevant. For an input to be irrelevant, it must have no influence over the outermost layer of the data structure— the label that is explicitly downgraded. If the input could influence that outer layer in any way, the internal data could be an integral part of an insecure execution. Conversely, when the selection of nested values 16  is independent of any untrusted/secret information (though the content of the values may not be), it is reasonable to assume that the inputs will be selected so that different choices yield different results. An input which does not is either an inept attack—an attacker gaining less information than it could have—or an uninteresting secret—a choice between secrets that are actually the same. In either case, the input is irrelevant. To ensure that we only consider data structures with nested values that were selected independently of the values themselves, we leverage the noninterference theorems in Section 6.3. In particular, if the outermost label is trusted before a declassification (or public prior to an endorsement), then any influence from untrusted (secret) data must be the result of a prior explicit downgrade. Thus we can identify irrelevant inputs by finding inputs that result in traces that are public-trusted equivalent, but can be made both public (trusted) equivalent and non-equivalent at the point of declassification (endorsement). To define this formally, we begin by partitioning the principal lattice into four quadrants using the definition of an attacker from Section 6.1. We consider only flows between quadrants and, as with noninterference, downgrades must result in public or trusted values. We additionally need to refer to individual elements and prefixes of traces. For a trace t, let tn denote the nth element of t, and let t..n denote the prefix of t containing its first n elements. Definition 2 (Irrelevant inputs). Consider attacker A inducing high sets HÐ and HÑ . Let Wπ “ LzHπ and W “ WÐ X WÑ . Given opposite projections π and π 1 a program e, and types τx and τy such that $ τx prot Hπ and $ τy prot Hπ1 , we say an input v1 is an irrelevant π 1 -input with respect to A and e if Γ; pc $ v1 : τx and there exist values v2 , w1 , and w2 and four trace indices nij (for i, j P t1, 2u) such that the following conditions hold: 1. Γ; pc $ v2 : τx , Γ; pc $ w1 : τy , and Γ; pc $ w2 : τy 2. xerx ÞÑ vi sry ÞÑ wj s, vi ; wj y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ xvij , tij y 3. tij nij ffW ‚ for all i, j P t1, 2u ‹ kl 4. tij ..nij «W t..nkl for all i, j, k, l P t1, 2u ‹ 12 5. t11 ..n11 «Wπ t..n12 ‹ 22 6. t21 ..n21 ffWπ t..n22 1  Otherwise we say v1 is a relevant π 1 -input with respect to A and e, denoted relπA,e pv1 q. Note that the four indices nij identify corresponding prefixes of the four traces. As mentioned above, prior downgrades can allow secret/untrusted information to directly influence the outer later of the data structure, but Condition 4 requires that all four trace prefixes be public-trusted equivalent, so any such downgrades must have the same influence across all executions. Condition 5 requires that some inputs result in prefixes that are public equivalent (or trusted equivalent for endorsement), while Condition 6 requires that other inputs result in prefixes that are distinguishable. Since all prefixes are public-trusted equivalent, this means there is an implicit downgrade inside a data structure, so the equivalent prefixes form an irrelevant input. We can now relax our definition of robust declassification to only restrict the behavior of relevant inputs.  17  Definition 3 (Robust declassification). Let e be a program and let x and y be variables representing secret and untrusted inputs, respectively. We say that e robustly declassifies if, for all attackers A inducing high sets U and S (and P “ LzS) and all values v1 , v2 , w1 , w2 , if @ D xerx ÞÑ vi sry ÞÑ wj s, vi ; wj y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ vij , tij , ` ˘ 11 «‹ t21 then relÐ ùñ t12 «‹P t22 . A,e pw1 q and t P As NMIFC only restricts declassification of low-integrity data, endorsed data is free to influence future declassifications. As a result, we can only guarantee robust declassification in the absence of endorsements. Theorem 4 (Robust declassification). Given a program e, if Γ, x : τx , y : τy ; pc $ e : τ and e contains no endorse expressions, then e robustly declassifies as defined in Definition 3. Note that prior definitions of robust declassification [10, 26] similarly prohibit endorsement and ignore pathological inputs, specifically nonterminating traces. Our irrelevant inputs are very different since NMIFC is strongly normalizing but admits complex data structures, but the need for some restriction is not new.  6.5  Transparent endorsement  We described in Section 2 how endorsing opaque writes can create security vulnerabilities. To formalize this intuition, we present transparent endorsement, a security condition that is dual to robust declassification. Instead of ensuring that untrusted information cannot meaningfully influence declassification, transparent endorsement guarantees that secret information cannot meaningfully influence endorsement. This guarantee ensures that secrets cannot influence the endorsement of an attacker’s value—neither the value endorsed nor the existence of the endorsement itself. As it is completely dual to robust declassification, we again appeal to the notion of irrelevant inputs, this time to rule out uninteresting secrets. The condition looks nearly identical, merely switching the roles of confidentiality and integrity. It therefore ensures that any choice of interesting secret provides an attacker with the maximum possible ability to influence endorsed values; no interesting secrets provide more power to attackers than others. Definition 4 (Transparent endorsement). Let e be a program and let x and y be variables representing secret and untrusted inputs, respectively. We say that e transparently endorses if, for all attackers A inducing high sets U and S (and T “ LzU) and all values v1 , v2 , w1 , w2 , if @ D xerx ÞÑ vi sry ÞÑ wj s, vi ; wj y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ vij , tij , ` ˘ 11 «‹ t12 then relÑ ùñ t21 «‹T t22 . A,e pv1 q and t T As in robust declassification, we can only guarantee transparent endorsement in the absence of declassification. Theorem 5 (Transparent endorsement). Given a program e, if Γ, x : τx , y : τy ; pc $ e : τ and e contains no decl expressions, then e transparently endorses.  18  6.6  Nonmalleable information flow  Robust declassification and transparent endorsement each restrict one type of downgrading, but as structured above, cannot be enforced in the presence of both declassification and endorsement. The key difficulty stems from the fact that previously declassified and endorsed data should be able to influence future declassifications and endorsements. However, any endorsement allows an attack to influence declassification, so varying the secret input can cause the traces to deviate for one attack and not another. Similarly, once a declassification has occurred, we can say little about the relation between trace pairs that fix a secret and vary an attack. There is one condition that allows us to safely relate trace pairs even after a downgrade event: if the downgraded values are identical in both trace pairs. Even if a declassify or endorse could have caused the traces to deviate, if it did not, then this program is essentially the same as one that started with that value already downgraded and performed no downgrade. To capture this intuition, we define nonmalleable information flow in terms of trace prefixes that either do not deviate in public values when varying only the secret input or do not deviate in trusted values when varying only the untrusted input. This assumption may seem strong at first, but it exactly captures the intuition that downgraded data—but not secret/untrusted data—should be able to influence future downgrades. While two different endorsed attacks could influence a future declassification, if the attacks are similar enough to result in the same value being endorsed, they must influence the declassification in the same way. Definition 5 (Nonmalleable information flow). Let e be a program and let x and y be variables representing secret and untrusted inputs, respectively. We say that e enforces nonmalleable information flow (NMIF) if the following holds for all attackers A inducing high sets U and S. Let T “ LzU, P “ LzS and W “ T X S. For all values v1 , v2 , w1 , and w2 , let @ D xerx ÞÑ vi sry ÞÑ wj s, vi ; wj y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ vij , tij . For all indices nij such that tij nij ffW ‚ ‹ i2 1. If ti1 ..ni1 ´1 «T t..ni2 ´1 for i “ 1, 2, then  `  11 ‹ 21 relÐ A,e pw1 q and t..n11 «P t..n21  ˘  ‹ 22 ùñ t12 ..n12 «P t..n22 .  ‹ 2j 2. Similarly, if t1j ..n1j ´1 «P t..n2j ´1 for j “ 1, 2, then  ` Ñ ˘ ‹ 12 ‹ 22 relA,e pv1 q and t11 ùñ t21 ..n11 «T t..n12 ..n21 «T t..n22 . Unlike the previous conditions, NMIFC enforces NMIF with no syntactic restrictions. Theorem 6 (Nonmalleable information flow). For any program e such that Γ, x : τx , y : τy ; pc $ e : τ , e enforces NMIF. We note that both Theorems 4 and 5 are directly implied by Theorem 6. For robust declassification, the syntactic prohibition on endorse directly enforces ti1 «‹T ti2 (for the entire trace), and the rest of case 1 is exactly that of Theorem 4. Similarly, the syntactic prohibition on decl enforces t1j «‹P t2j , while the rest of case 2 is exactly Theorem 5.  19  7  NMIF as 4-safety  Clarkson and Schneider [12] define a hyperproperty as “a set of sets of infinite traces,” and hypersafety to be a hyperproperty that can be characterized by a finite set of finite trace prefixes defining some “bad thing.” That is, given any of these finite sets of trace prefixes it is impossible to extend those traces to satisfy the hyperproperty. It is therefore possible to show that a program satisfies a hypersafety property by proving that no set of finite trace prefixes emitted by the program fall into this set of “bad things.” They further define a k-safety hyperproperty (or k-safety) as a hypersafety property that limits the set of traces needed to identify a violation to size k. Clarkson and Schneider note that noninterference provides an example of 2-safety. We demonstrate here that robust declassification, transparent endorsement, and nonmalleable information flow are all 4-safety properties.4 For a condition to be 2-safety, it must be possible to demonstrate a violation using only two finite traces. With noninterference, this demonstration is simple: if two traces with low-equivalent inputs are distinguishable by a low observer, the program is interfering. Robust declassification, however, cannot be represented this way. It says that the program’s confidentiality release events cannot be influence by untrusted inputs. If we could precisely identify the release events, this would allow us to specify robust declassification as a 2-safety property on those release events. If every pair of untrusted inputs results in the same trace of confidentiality release events, the program satisfies robust declassification. However, to identify confidentiality release events requires comparing traces with different secret inputs. A trace consists of a set of observable states, not a set of release events. Release events are identified by varying secrets; the robustness of releases is identified by varying untrusted input. Thus we need 4 traces to properly characterize robust declassification. Both prior work [10] and our definition in Section 6.4 state robust declassification in terms of four traces, making it easy to convert to a 4-hyperproperty. That formulation cannot, however, be directly translated to 4-safety. It instead requires a statement about trace prefixes, which cannot be invalidated by extending traces. Instead of simply reformulating Definition 3 with trace prefixes, we modify it using insights gained from the definition of NMIF. In particular, instead of a strict requirement that if a relevant attack results in publicequivalent trace prefixes then other attacks must as well, we relax this requirement to apply only when the trace prefixes are trusted-equivalent. As noted in Section 6.6, if we syntactically prohibit endorse—the only case in which we could enforce the previous definition—this trivially reduces to that definition. Without the syntactic restriction, however, the new condition is still enforceable. For a given attacker A we can define a 4-safety property with respect to A (let U, S, T , P, and W be as in Definition 5). RDA fi  ! ( T Ď T | T “ t11 , t12 , t21 , t22 2j ij 1j i1 i2 ^ tij 1 ‰ ‚ ^ t2 ‰ ‚ ^ t1 “ t1 ^ t2 “ t2 ´ ` i1 ‹ i2 ùñ @tnij u Ď N : tij nij ffW ‚ ^ t..ni1 ´1 «T t..ni2 ´1 ˘ ‹ 21 12 ‹ 22 ^ t11 ..n11 «P t..n21 ^ t..n12 ffP t..n22 ¯) 22 ùñ t12 ..n12 «W t..n22  We then define robustness against all attackers as the intersection over all attackers: RD “ 4  Ş  A RDA .  While NMIFC produces finite traces and hyperproperties are defined for infinite traces, we can easily extend NMIFC traces by stuttering ‚ infinitely after termination.  20  RD  NMIF NI  TE  Figure 12: Relating 4-safety hyperproperties and noninterference.  The above definition structurally combines Definition 2 with the first clause of Definition 5 to capture both the equivalence and the relevant-input statements of the original theorem. In the nested implication, if i1 ‹ i2 the first two clauses hold (tij nij ffW ‚ and t..ni1 ´1 «T t..ni2 ´1 ), then one of three things must happen when fixing the attack and varying the secret: both trace pairs are equivalent, both trace pairs are non-equivalent, 22 or the postcondition of the implication holds (t12 ..n12 «W t..n22 ). The first two satisfy the equivalency implication in Definition 5 while the third is exactly a demonstration that the first input is irrelevant. Next we note that, while this does not strictly conform to the definition of robust declassification in Definition 3 which cannot be stated as a hypersafety property, RD is equivalent to Definition 3 for programs ‹ that do not perform endorsement. This endorse-free condition means that the equivalence clause ti1 ..ni1 ´1 «T i2 t..ni2 ´1 will be true whenever the trace prefixes refer to the same point in execution. In particular, they can refer to the end of execution, which gives exactly the condition specified in the theorem. As with every other result so far, the dual construction results in a 4-safety property TE representing transparent endorsement. Since RD captures the first clause of Definition 5, TE thus captures the second. This allows us to represent nonmalleable information flow as a 4-safety property very simply: NMIF “ RD X TE. Figure 12 illustrates the relation between these hyperproperty definitions. Observe that the 2-safety hyperproperty NI for noninterference is contained in all three 4-safety hyperproperties. The insecure example programs of Section 2 are found in the left crescent, satisfying RD but not NMIF.  8  Implementing NMIF  We have implemented the rules for nonmalleable information flow in context of Flame, a Haskell library and GHC [40] plugin. Flame provides data structures and compile-time checking of type-level acts-for constraints that are checked using a custom type-checker plugin. These constraints are used as the basis for encoding NMIFC as a shallowly-embedded domain-specific language (DSL). We have demonstrated that programs enforcing nonmalleable information flow can be built using this new DSL.  8.1  Information-flow monads in Flame  The DSL works by wrapping sensitive information in an abstract data type—a monad—that includes a principal type parameter representing the confidentiality and integrity of the information. The Flame library tracks computation on protected information as a monadic effect and provides operations that constrain such computations to enforce information security. This effect is modeled using the IFC type class defined in Figure 13. The type class IFC is parameterized by two additional types, n in the Labeled type class and e in Monad. Instances of the Labeled type class enforce noninterference on pure computation—no downgrading or effects. The e parameter represents an effect we want to control. For 21  class (Monad e, Labeled n) => IFC m e n where protect :: (pc Ď l) => a -> m e n pc l a use :: (l Ď l’, pc Ď pc’, l Ď pc’, pc Ď pc’’) => m e n pc l a -> (a -> m e n pc’ l’ b) -> m e n pc’’ l’ b runIFC :: m e n pc l a -> e (n l a) Figure 13: Core information flow control operations in Flame. class IFC m e n => NMIF m e n where declassify :: ( (C pc) Ď (C l) , (C l’) Ď (C l) \ ∆(I (l’ \ pc)) , (I l’) === (I l)) => m e n pc l’ a -> m e n pc l a endorse :: ( (I pc) , (I l’) , (C l’) m e n pc l’  Ď (I l) Ď (I l) \ ∇(C (l’ \ pc)) === (C l)) => a -> m e n pc l a  Figure 14: Nonmalleable information flow control in Flame.  instance, many Flame libraries control effects in the IO monad, which is used for input, output, and mutable references. The type m e n pc l a in Figure 13 associates a label l with the result of a computation of type a, as well as a program counter label pc that bounds the confidentiality and integrity of side effects for some effect e. Confidentiality and integrity projections are represented by type constructors C and I. The protect operator corresponds to monadic unit η (rule U NIT M). Given any term, protect labels the term and lifts it into an IFC type where pc Ď l. The use operation corresponds to a bind term in NMIFC. Its constraints implement the B IND M typing rule. Given a protected value of type m e n pc l a and a function on a value of type a with return type m e n pc’ l’ b, use returns the result of applying the function, provided that l Ď l’ and (pc \ l) Ď pc’. Finally, runIFC executes a protected computation, which results in a labeled value of type (n l a) in the desired effect e. We provide NMIF, which extends the IFC type class with endorse and declassify operations. The constraints on these operations implement the typing rules E NDORSE and D ECL respectively. We implemented the secure and insecure sealed-bid auction examples from Section 2.2 using NMIF operations, shown in Figure 15. As expected, the insecure badrecv is rejected by the compiler while the secure recv type checks.  8.2  Nonmalleable HTTP Basic Authentication  To show the utility of NMIFC, we adapt a simple existing Haskell web application [20] based on the Servant [36] framework to run in Flame. The application allows users to create, fetch, and delete shared memos. Our version uses HTTP Basic Authentication and Flame’s security mechanisms to restrict access to authorized users. We have deployed this application online at http://memo.flow.limited. Figure 16 contains the function authCheck, which checks passwords in this application using the NM data type, which is an instance of the NMIF type class. The function takes a value containing the username  22  recv :: (NMIF m e n, (I p) Ď ∇(C p)) => n p a -> m e n (I (p ^ q)) (p ^ (I q)) a recv v = endorse $ lift v badrecv :: (NMIF m e n, (I p) Ď ∇(C p)) => n (p ^ C q) a -> m e n (I (p ^ q)) (p ^ q) a badrecv v = endorse $ lift v {-REJECTED-} Figure 15: Receive operations in NMIF. The secure recv is accepted, but the insecure badrecv is rejected. authCheck :: Lbl MemoClient BasicAuthData -> NM IO (I MemoServer) (I MemoServer) (BasicAuthResult Prin) authCheck lauth = let lauth’ = endorse $ lift lauth res = use lauth’ $ \(BasicAuthData user guess) -> ebind user_db $ \db -> case Map.lookup user db of Nothing -> protect Unauthorized Just pwd -> if guess == pwd then protect $ Authorized (Name user) else protect Unauthorized in declassify res Figure 16: A nonmalleable password checker in Servant.  and password guess of the authentication attempt, labeled with the confidentiality and integrity of an unauthenticated client, MemoClient. This value is endorsed to have the integrity of the server, MemoServer. This operation is safe since it only endorses information visible to the client. Next, the username is used to look up the correct password and compare it to the client’s guess. If they match, then the user is authorized. The result of this comparison is secret, so before returning the result, it must be declassified. Enforcing any form of information flow control on authentication mechanisms like authCheck provides more information security guarantees than traditional approaches. Unlike other approaches, nonmalleable information flow offers strong guarantees even when a computation endorses untrusted information. This example shows it is possible to construct applications that offer these guarantees.  9  Related work  Our efforts belong both within a significant body of work attempting to develop semantic security conditions that are more nuanced than noninterference, and within an overlapping body of work aiming to create expressive practical enforcement mechanisms for information flow control. Most prior work focuses on relaxing confidentiality restrictions; work permitting downgrading of integrity imposes relatively simple controls and lacks semantic security conditions that capture the concerns exemplified in Section 2. Intransitive noninterference [28, 31, 33, 41] is an information flow condition that permits information to flow only between security levels (or domains) according to some (possibly intransitive) relation. It does not address the concerns of nonmalleability. Decentralized information flow control (DIFC) [25] introduces the idea of mediating downgrading using 23  access control [29]. However, the lack of robustness and transparency means downgrading can still be exploited in these systems (e.g., [15, 21, 24, 47]). Robust declassification and qualified robustness have been explored in DIFC systems as a way to constrain the adversary’s influence on declassification [4–6, 11, 26, 45, 46]. While transparent endorsement can be viewed as an integrity counterpart to robust declassification, this idea is not present in prior work. Sabelfeld and Sands provide a clarifying taxonomy for much prior work on declassification [35], introducing various dimensions along which declassification mechanisms operate. They categorize robust declassification as lying on the “who” dimension. However, they do not explicitly consider endorsement mechanisms. Regardless of the taxonomic category, transparent endorsement and nonmalleable information flow also seem to lie on the same dimension as robust declassification, since they take into account influences on the information that is downgraded. Label algebras [23] provide an abstract characterization of several DIFC systems. However, they do not address the restrictions on downgrading imposed by nonmalleable information flow. The Aura language [19] uses information flow policies to constrain authorization and endorsement. However, it does not address the malleability of endorsement. Rx [39] represents information flow control policies in terms of dynamic roles [17]. Adding new principals to these roles corresponds to declassification and endorsement since new flows may occur. Rx constrains updates to roles similarly to previous type systems that enforce robust declassification and qualified robustness but does not prevent opaque endorsements. Relational Hoare Type Theory [27] (RHTT) offers a powerful and precise way to specify security conditions that are 2-hyperproperties, such as noninterference. Cartesian Hoare logic [37] (CHL) extends standard Hoare logic to reason about k-safety properties of relational traces (the input/output pairs of a program). Since nonmalleable information flow, robust declassification, and transparent endorsement are all 4-safety properties that cannot be fully expressed with relational traces, neither RHTT nor CHL can characterize them properly. Haskell’s type system has been attractive target for embedding information flow checking [9, 22, 38]. Much prior work has focused on dynamic information flow control. LIO [38] requires computation on protected information to occur in the LIO monad, which tracks the confidentiality and integrity of information accessed (“unlabeled”) by the computation. HLIO [9] explores hybrid static and dynamic enforcement. Flame enforces information flow control statically, and the NMIF type class enforces nonmalleable IFC statically as well. The static component of HLIO enforces solely via the Haskell type system (and existing general-purpose extensions), but Flame—and by extension, NMIF—uses custom constraints based on the FLAM algebra which are processed by a GHC type checker plugin. Extending the type checker to reason about FLAM constraints significantly improves programmability over pure-Haskell approaches like HLIO.  10  Conclusion  Downgrading mechanisms like declassification and endorsement make information flow mechanisms sufficiently flexible and expressive for real programs. However, we have shown that previous notions of information-flow security missed the dangers endorsing confidential information. We therefore introduced transparent endorsement as a security property that rules out such influences and showed that it is dual to robust declassification. Robust declassification and transparent endorsement are both consequences of a stronger property, nonmalleable information flow, and we have formulated all three as 4-safety properties. We have shown how to provably enforce these security properties in an efficient, compositional way using a security type system. Based on our Haskell implementation, these security conditions and enforcement mechanism appear to be practical, supporting the secure construction of programs with complex security 24  requirements. While security-typed languages are not yet mainstream, information flow control, sometimes in the guise of taint tracking, has become popular as a way to detect and control real-world vulnerabilities (e.g., [16]). Just as the program analyses used are approximations of previous security type systems targeting noninterference, it is reasonable to expect the NMIFC type system to be a useful guide for other analyses and enforcement mechanisms.  Acknowledgments Many people helped us with this work. Martı́n Abadi posed a provocative question about dualities. Pablo Buiras helped develop the memo example. David Naumann pointed out work on k-safety. Tom Magrino, Yizhou Zhang, and the anonymous reviewers gave us useful feedback on the paper. Funding for this work was provided by NSF grants 1513797 and 1524052, and by a gift from Google. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed here are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect those of these sponsors.  References [1] Martı́n Abadi. 2006. Access Control in a Core Calculus of Dependency. In 11th ACM SIGPLAN Int’l Conf. on Functional Programming. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 263–273. [2] Martı́n Abadi. 2008. Variations in Access Control Logic. In Deontic Logic in Computer Science, Ron van der Meyden and Leendert van der Torre (Eds.). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 5076. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 96–109. [3] Martı́n Abadi, Anindya Banerjee, Nevin Heintze, and Jon Riecke. 1999. A Core Calculus of Dependency. In 26th ACM Symp. on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL). 147–160. [4] Owen Arden, Jed Liu, and Andrew C. Myers. 2015. Flow-Limited Authorization. In 28th IEEE Symp. on Computer Security Foundations (CSF). 569–583. [5] Owen Arden and Andrew C. Myers. 2016. A Calculus for Flow-Limited Authorization. In 29th IEEE Symp. on Computer Security Foundations (CSF). 135–147. [6] Aslan Askarov and Andrew C. Myers. 2011. Attacker Control and Impact for Confidentiality and Integrity. Logical Methods in Computer Science 7, 3 (Sept. 2011). [7] K. J. Biba. 1977. Integrity Considerations for Secure Computer Systems. Technical Report ESD-TR76-372. USAF Electronic Systems Division, Bedford, MA. (Also available through National Technical Information Service, Springfield Va., NTIS AD-A039324.). [8] Niklas Broberg and David Sands. 2010. Paralocks—Role-Based Information Flow Control and Beyond. In 37th ACM Symp. on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL). [9] Pablo Buiras, Dimitrios Vytiniotis, and Alejandro Russo. 2015. HLIO: Mixing Static and Dynamic Typing for Information-Flow Control in Haskell. In 20th ACM SIGPLAN Int’l Conf. on Functional Programming. ACM, 289–301.  25  [10] Stephen Chong and Andrew C. Myers. 2006. Decentralized Robustness. In 19th IEEE Computer Security Foundations Workshop (CSFW). 242–253. [11] Stephen Chong and Andrew C. Myers. 2008. End-to-End Enforcement of Erasure and Declassification. In IEEE Symp. on Computer Security Foundations (CSF). 98–111. [12] Michael R. Clarkson and Fred B. Schneider. 2008. Hyperproperties. In IEEE Symp. on Computer Security Foundations (CSF). 51–65. [13] Dorothy E. Denning. 1976. A Lattice Model of Secure Information Flow. Comm. of the ACM 19, 5 (1976), 236–243. [14] Danny Dolev, Cynthia Dwork, and Moni Naor. 2003. Nonmalleable Cryptography. SIAM Rev. 45, 4 (2003), 727–784. [15] Petros Efstathopoulos, Maxwell Krohn, Steve VanDeBogart, Cliff Frey, David Ziegler, Eddie Kohler, David Mazières, Frans Kaashoek, and Robert Morris. 2005. Labels and Event Processes in the Asbestos Operating System. In 20th ACM Symp. on Operating System Principles (SOSP). [16] Michael D. Ernst, René Just, Suzanne Millstein, Werner Dietl, Stuart Pernsteiner, Franziska Roesner, Karl Koscher, Paulo Barros, Ravi Bhoraskar, Seungyeop Han, Paul Vines, and Edward X. Wu. 2014. Collaborative Verification of Information Flow for a High-Assurance App Store. In 21st ACM Conf. on Computer and Communications Security (CCS). 1092–1104. [17] David Ferraiolo and Richard Kuhn. 1992. Role-Based Access Controls. In 15th National Computer Security Conference. [18] Joseph A. Goguen and Jose Meseguer. 1982. Security Policies and Security Models. In IEEE Symp. on Security and Privacy. 11–20. [19] Limin Jia, Jeffrey A. Vaughan, Karl Mazurak, Jianzhou Zhao, Luke Zarko, Joseph Schorr, and Steve Zdancewic. 2008. Aura: A Programming Language for Authorization and Audit. In 13th ACM SIGPLAN Int’l Conf. on Functional Programming. [20] krdlab. 2014. Haskell Servant Example. https://github.com/krdlab/examples. (Dec. 2014). [21] Maxwell Krohn, Alexander Yip, Micah Brodsky, Natan Cliffer, M. Frans Kaashoek, Eddie Kohler, and Robert Morris. 2007. Information Flow Control for Standard OS Abstractions. In 21st ACM Symp. on Operating System Principles (SOSP). [22] Peng Li and Steve Zdancewic. 2006. Encoding information flow in Haskell. In 19th IEEE Computer Security Foundations Workshop (CSFW). [23] Benoı̂t Montagu, Benjamin C. Pierce, and Randy Pollack. 2013. A Theory of Information-Flow Labels. In 26th IEEE Symp. on Computer Security Foundations (CSF). 3–17. [24] Andrew C. Myers. 1999. JFlow: Practical Mostly-Static Information Flow Control. In 26th ACM Symp. on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL). 228–241. [25] Andrew C. Myers and Barbara Liskov. 2000. Protecting Privacy using the Decentralized Label Model. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 9, 4 (Oct. 2000), 410–442. 26  [26] Andrew C. Myers, Andrei Sabelfeld, and Steve Zdancewic. 2006. Enforcing Robust Declassification and Qualified Robustness. Journal of Computer Security 14, 2 (2006), 157–196. [27] Aleksandar Nanevski, Anindya Banerjee, and Deepak Garg. 2011. Verification of Information Flow and Access Control Policies with Dependent Types. In IEEE Symp. on Security and Privacy. 165–179. [28] Sylvan Pinsky. 1995. Absorbing Covers and Intransitive Non-Interference. In IEEE Symp. on Security and Privacy. 102–113. [29] François Pottier and Sylvain Conchon. 2000. Information Flow Inference for Free. In 5th ACM SIGPLAN Int’l Conf. on Functional Programming (ICFP ’00). 46–57. [30] François Pottier and Vincent Simonet. 2003. Information Flow Inference for ML. ACM Trans. on Programming Languages and Systems 25, 1 (Jan. 2003). [31] A. W. Roscoe and M. H. Goldsmith. 1999. What is Intransitive Noninterference?. In 12th IEEE Computer Security Foundations Workshop (CSFW). 228–238. [32] Indrajit Roy, Donald E. Porter, Michael D. Bond, Kathryn S. McKinley, and Emmett Witchel. 2009. Laminar: Practical Fine-Grained Decentralized Information Flow Control. In ACM SIGPLAN Conf. on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI). [33] John Rushby. 1992. Noninterference, transitivity and channel-control security policies. Technical Report CSL-92-02. SRI. [34] Andrei Sabelfeld and Andrew C. Myers. 2003. Language-Based Information-Flow Security. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 21, 1 (Jan. 2003), 5–19. [35] Andrei Sabelfeld and David Sands. 2005. Dimensions and Principles of Declassification. In 18th IEEE Computer Security Foundations Workshop (CSFW). 255–269. [36] Servant Contributors. 2016. readthedocs.io/. (2016).  Servant – A Type-Level Web DSL.  http://haskell-servant.  [37] Marcelo Sousa and Isil Dillig. 2016. Cartesian Hoare logic for verifying k-safety properties. In SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 51. ACM, 57–69. [38] Deian Stefan, Amit Levy, Alejandro Russo, and David Mazières. 2014. Building Secure Systems with LIO. In Haskell Symposium. ACM SIGPLAN. [39] Nikhil Swamy, Michael Hicks, Stephen Tse, and Steve Zdancewic. 2006. Managing Policy Updates in Security-Typed Languages. In 19th IEEE Computer Security Foundations Workshop (CSFW). 202– 216. [40] The Glasgow Haskell Compiler 2016. The Glasgow Haskell Compiler. (2016). haskell.org/ghc/.  https://www.  [41] Ron van der Meyden. 2007. What, Indeed, Is Intransitive Noninterference?. In 12th European Symposium on Research in Computer Security (ESORICS). 235–250.  27  n P N (atomic principals) x P V (variable names) p, `, pc ::“ τ  ::“ ˇ ˇ  v  ::“ ˇ ˇ  e  ::“ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ  ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ n ˇ J ˇ K ˇ pπ ˇ p ^ p ˇ p _ p ˇ p \ p ˇ p [ p ˇ ˇ ˇ unit ˇ X ˇ pτ ` τ q ˇ pτ ˆ τ q ˇ ˇ pc τ ÝÑ τ ˇ @Xrpcs. τ ˇ ` says τ ˇ ˇ ˇ pq ˇ inji v ˇ xv, vy ˇ pη ` vq ˇ λpx : τ qrpcs. e ˇ ΛXrpcs. e ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ x ˇ v ˇ e e ˇ e τ ˇ xe, ey ˇ pη` eq ˇ ˇ proji e ˇ inji e ˇ bind x “ e in e case e of inj1 pxq.e | inj2 pxq.e ˇ decl e to ` ˇ endorse e to ` Figure 17: Full NMIFC syntax.  [42] Lucas Waye, Pablo Buiras, Dan King, Stephen Chong, and Alejandro Russo. 2015. It’s My Privilege: Controlling Downgrading in DC-Labels. In Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Security and Trust Management. [43] J. Todd Wittbold and Dale M. Johnson. 1990. Information Flow in Nondeterministic Systems. In IEEE Symp. on Security and Privacy. 144–161. [44] Andrew K. Wright and Matthias Felleisen. 1994. A Syntactic Approach to Type Soundness. Information and Computation 115, 1 (1994), 38–94. [45] Steve Zdancewic and Andrew C. Myers. 2001. Robust Declassification. In 14th IEEE Computer Security Foundations Workshop (CSFW). 15–23. [46] Steve Zdancewic, Lantian Zheng, Nathaniel Nystrom, and Andrew C. Myers. 2002. Secure Program Partitioning. ACM Trans. on Computer Systems 20, 3 (Aug. 2002), 283–328. [47] Nickolai Zeldovich, Silas Boyd-Wickizer, Eddie Kohler, and David Mazières. 2006. Making Information Flow Explicit in HiStar. In 7th USENIX Symp. on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI). 263–278. [48] Lantian Zheng and Andrew C. Myers. 2007. Dynamic Security Labels and Static Information Flow Control. International Journal of Information Security 6, 2–3 (March 2007).  A  Full NMIFC  We present the full syntax, semantics, and typing rules for NMIFC in Figures 17, 18, and 20, respectively. This is a straightforward extension of the core language presented in Section 5. We note that polymorphic terms specify a pc just as λ terms. This is because they contain arbitrary expressions which could produce arbitrary effects, so we must constrain the context that can execute those effects. Figure 21 presents the full set of derivation rules for the acts-for (delegation) relation p ě q. 28  e ÝÑ e1 rE-A PPs  pλpx : τ qrpcs. eq v ÝÑ erx ÞÑ vs  rE-U N PAIRs proji xv1 , v2 y ÝÑ vi  rE-TA PPs  pΛXrpcs. eq τ ÝÑ erX ÞÑ τ s  rE-C ASEs pcase pinji vq of inj1 pxq.e1 | inj2 pxq.e2 q ÝÑ ei rx ÞÑ vs bind x “ pη ` vq in e ÝÑ erx ÞÑ vs  rE-B IND Ms D @ xe, ty ÝÑ Ñ e1 , t 1  rE-S TEPs  e ÝÑ e1 @ D xe, ty ÝÑ Ñ e1 , t; ‚  rE-U NIT Ms  xpη` vq, ty ÝÑ Ñ xpη ` vq, t; pη ` vqy  xdecl pη `1 vq to `, ty ÝÑ Ñ xpη ` vq, t; pÓÑ `1 , η ` vqy  rE-D ECLs  Ñ xpη ` vq, rE-E NDORSEs xendorse pη `1 vq to `, ty ÝÑ  t; pÓÐ `1 ,  η ` vqy  @ D xe, ty ÝÑ Ñ e1 , t 1 @ D rE-E VALs xEres, ty ÝÑ Ñ Ere1 s, t1  Evaluation context E  ::“ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ  ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ r¨s ˇ E e ˇ v E ˇ E τ ˇ xE, ey ˇ xv, Ey ˇ pη` Eq ˇ ˇ proji E ˇ inji E ˇ bind x “ E in e case E of inj1 pxq.e | inj2 pxq.e ˇ decl E to ` ˇ endorse E to `  Figure 18: Full NMIFC operational semantics.  A.1  Label tracking with brackets  In order to simply proofs of hyperproperties requiring 2 and 4 traces, we introduce a new bracket syntax to track secret and untrusted data. These brackets are inspired by those used by Pottier and Simonet [30] to prove their FlowCaml type system enforced noninterference. Their brackets served two purposes simultaneously. First they allow a single execution of a bracketed program to faithfully model two executions of a non-bracketed program. Second, the brackets track secret/untrusted information through execution of the program, thereby making it easy to verify that it did not interfere with public/trusted information simply by proving that brackets could not be syntactically present in such values. Since noninterference only requires examining pairs of traces, these purposes complement each other well; if the two executions vary only on high inputs, then low outputs cannot contain brackets. While this technique is very effective to prove noninterference, nonmalleable information flow provides security guarantees even in the presence of both declassification and endorsement. As a result, we need to track secret/untrusted information even through downgrading events that can cause traces to differ arbitrarily. To accomplish this goal, we use brackets that serve only the second purpose: they track restricted information but not multiple executions. As in previous formalizations, NMIFC’s brackets are defined with respect to a notion of “high” labels, in this case a high set. The high set restricts the type of the expression inside the bracket as well as the pc at which it must type, thereby restricting the effects it can create. For the more complex theorems we 29  $`Ďτ rP-U NITs  $ ` Ď unit  rP-L BLs  `1 Ď ` $ `1 Ď ` says τ  rP-PAIRs  $ ` Ď τ1 $ ` Ď τ2 $ ` Ď pτ1 ˆ τ2 q  $τ ĎH rP-S ETs  HPH $HĎτ H is upward closed $ τ prot H Figure 19: Type protection levels.  must track data with multiple different high labels within the same program execution, so we parameterize the brackets themselves with the high set. We present the extended syntax, semantics, and typing rules in Figure 22.  B  Attacker properties  Recall that we defined an attacker as a set of principals A “ t` P L | n1 ^ ¨ ¨ ¨ ^ nk ě `u for some non-empty finite set of atomic principals tn1 , . . . , nk u Ď N . 1  Definition 6 (Attacker properties). Let A be an attacker and let Aπ “ tp P L | Dq P L such that pπ ^ q π P Au. The following properties hold: 1. for all a1 , a2 P Aπ , a1 ^ a2 P Aπ (Attacking principals may collude) 2. for all a P Aπ and b P L, a _ b P Aπ (Attackers may attenuate their power) 3. for all b1 , b2 R Aπ , b1 _ b2 R Aπ (Combining public information in a public context yields public information and combining trusted information in a trusted context yields trusted information) 4. for all a P L and b R Aπ , a ^ b R Aπ (Attackers cannot compromise policies requiring permission from non-attacking principals) 5. for all a P A, ∇paÑ q ^ ∆paÐ q P A. (Attackers have the same power in confidentiality and integrity) The theorems proved in this paper hold for any attacker satisfying these properties, so for generality we can take the properties in Definition 6 as defining an attacker. We now prove that our original definition of an attacker satisfies Definition 6. Proof. Conditions 1 and 2 of Definition 6 follow directly from the definition of A and C ONJ R and D IS R, respectively. Condition 5 holds by the symmetry of the lattice. Since we are only examining one of confidentiality and integrity at a time, for the following conditions we assume without loss of generality that all principals in each expression have only the π projection and the other component is K. In particular, this means we can assume P ROJ and P ROJ R are not used in any derivation, and any application of the conjunction or disjunction derivation rules split in a meaningful way with respect to the π projection (i.e., neither principal in the side being divided is J or K). We now show Condition 4 holds by contradiction. Assume a P L and b R Aπ , but a ^ b P Aπ . This means pn1 ^ ¨ ¨ ¨ ^ nk qπ ě a ^ b. We prove by induction on k that a, b P Aπ . If k “ 1, then the 30  Γ; pc $ e : τ  rVARs Γ, x : τ, Γ1 ; pc $ x : τ  rU NITs Γ; pc $ pq : unit  Γ, x : τ1 ; pc1 $ e : τ2  rL AMs  pc1  Γ; pc $ λpx : τ1 qrpc1 s. e : τ1 ÝÑ τ2 pc1  Γ; pc $ e1 : τ 1 ÝÑ τ Γ; pc $ e2 : τ 1 pc Ď pc1 Γ; pc $ e1 e2 : τ  rA PPs  rTA PPs  rTL AMs  Γ; pc $ e : @Xrpc1 s. τ pc Ď pc1 τ 1 is well-formed in Γ Γ; pc $ pe τ 1 q : τ rX ÞÑ τ 1 s  rU N PAIRs  rC ASEs  rVU NIT Ms  rD ECLs  rE NDORSEs  Γ; pc $ e : pτ1 ˆ τ2 q Γ; pc $ proji e : τi  rPAIRs  rI NJs  Γ; pc $ e : pτ1 ` τ2 q $ pc Ď τ Γ, x : τ1 ; pc $ e1 : τ Γ, x : τ2 ; pc $ e2 : τ Γ; pc $ case e of inj1 pxq.e1 | inj2 pxq.e2 : τ  Γ; pc $ v : τ Γ; pc $ pη ` vq : ` says τ  Γ, X; pc1 $ e : τ Γ; pc $ ΛXrpc1 s. e : @Xrpc1 s. τ  rB IND Ms  Γ; pc $ e1 : τ1 Γ; pc $ e2 : τ2 Γ; pc $ xe1 , e2 y : pτ1 ˆ τ2 q Γ; pc $ e : τi Γ; pc $ inji e : pτ1 ` τ2 q  rU NIT Ms  Γ; pc $ e : τ pc Ď ` Γ; pc $ pη` eq : ` says τ  Γ; pc $ e : ` says τ 1 $`Ďτ Γ, x : τ 1 ; pc \ ` $ e1 : τ Γ; pc $ bind x “ e in e1 : τ  Γ; pc $ e : `1 says τ `1Ð “ `Ð pc Ď ` 1Ñ Ñ ` Ď ` \ ∆pp`1 \ pcqÐ q Γ; pc $ decl e to ` : ` says τ Γ; pc $ e : `1 says τ `1Ñ “ `Ñ pc Ď ` 1Ð Ð ` Ď ` \ ∇pp`1 \ pcqÑ q Γ; pc $ endorse e to ` : ` says τ Figure 20: Typing rules for full NMIFC language.  only possible rule to derive this result is C ONJ L and we are finished. If k ą 1, then the derivation of this relation must be due to either C ONJ L or C ONJ R. If it is due to C ONJ R, then this again achieves the desired contradiction. If it is due to C ONJ L, then the same statement holds for a subset of the atomic principals n11 , . . . , n1k1 , where k 1 ă k, so by induction, pn11 ^ ¨ ¨ ¨ ^ n1k1 qπ ě bπ , and by T RANS, pn1 ^ . . . ^ nk qπ ě bπ which also contradicts our assumption. Finally, we also show Condition 3 holds by contradiction. We assume b1 , b2 R Aπ but b1 _ b2 P Aπ and again prove a contradiction by induction on k. If k “ 1, then the derivation showing nπ1 ě pb1 _ b2 qπ must end with D IS R which contradicts the assumption that b1 , b2 R Aπ . If k ą 1, the derivation either ends with D IS R, resulting in the same contradiction, or with C ONJ L. In this second case, the same argument as above holds: there is a strict subset of the principals n1 , . . . , nk that act for either b1 or b2 and thus by T RANS we acquire the desired contradiction.  31  pěq  rB OTs p ě K  rT OPs J ě p  pi ě q i P t1, 2u rC ONJ Ls p1 ^ p2 ě q  rR EFLs p ě p  p ě q1 p ě q2 rC ONJ Rs p ě q1 ^ q2  rP ROJs  pěq pπ ě q π  p1 ě q p2 ě q rD IS Ls p1 _ p2 ě q  rP ROJ Rs p ě pπ p ě qi i P t1, 2u rD IS Rs p ě q1 _ q2  pěq qěr pěr  rT RANSs  Figure 21: Principal lattice rules  C  Generalization  Definition 5 (and correspondingly Theorem 6) might appear relatively narrow; they only speak directly to programs with a single untrusted value and a single secret value. However, because the language has firstclass functions and pair types, the theorem as stated is equivalent to one that allows insertion of secret and untrusted code into multiple points in the program, as long as that code types in an appropriately restrictive pc. To define this formally, we first need a means to allow for insertion of arbitrary code. We follow previous work [26] by extending the language to include holes. A program expression may contain an ordered set of holes. These holes may be replaced with arbitrary expressions, under restrictions requiring that the holes be treated as sufficiently secret or untrusted. Specifically, the type system is extended with the following rule:  pc P H $ τ prot H H is a high set Γ; pc $ r‚sH : τ  rH OLEs  Using this definition, we can state NMIF in a more traditional form. Definition 7 (General NMIF). We say that a program er~‚sH enforces general NMIF if the following holds for all attackers A inducing high sets U and S. Let T “ LzU, P “ LzS and W “ T X S. If H Ď U, then for all values v1 , v2 and all attacks ~a1 and ~a2 , let @ D xer~ai sH r~x ÞÑ ~vi s, ~vi y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ vij , tij . For all indices nij such that tij nij ffW ‚ ‹ i2 1. If ti1 ..ni1 ´1 «T t..ni2 ´1 for i “ 1, 2, then  `  11 ‹ 21 relÐ A,e pw1 q and t..n11 «P t..n21  ˘  ‹ 22 ùñ t12 ..n12 «P t..n22 .  ˘  ‹ 22 ùñ t21 ..n21 «T t..n22 .  ‹ 2j 2. Similarly, if t1j ..n1j ´1 «P t..n2j ´1 for j “ 1, 2, then  `  11 ‹ 12 relÑ A,e pv1 q and t..n11 «T t..n12  32  Syntax extensions v  ::“  e  ::“  ˇ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˇ L v MH ˇ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˇ L e MH  New contexts E  ::“  B  ::“  ˇ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˇ L E MH ˇ proji r¨s ˇ bind x “ r¨s in e  Evaluation extensions rB-E XPANDs  BrL v MH s ÝÑ L Brvs MH  rB-D ECL Ls  `RH decl L v MH to ` ÝÑ decl v to `  rB-D ECL Hs  `PH decl L v MH to ` ÝÑ L decl v to ` MH  rB-E NDORSE Ls  `RH endorse L v MH to ` ÝÑ endorse v to `  rB-E NDORSE Hs  `PH endorse L v MH to ` ÝÑ L endorse v to ` MH  Typing extensions Γ; pc1 $ e : τ pc Ď pc1 1 pc P H $ τ prot H H is upward closed Γ; pc $ L e MH : τ  rB RACKETs Bracket projection # teu “  te1 u if e “ L e1 MH recursively project all sub-expressions otherwise Figure 22: NMIFC language extensions.  For NMIFC, this definition is equivalent to Definition 5. We prove this fact to prove the following theorem. Theorem 7 (General NMIF). Given a program er~‚sH such that Γ, ~x :~τ ; pc $ er~‚sH : τ 1 , then er~‚sH enforces general NMIF. Proof. We prove this by reducing Definition 7 to Definition 5 in two steps. We assume that no two variables in the original expression er~‚sH have the same name as this can be enforced by α-renaming. The first step handles expressions that only substitute values (and have no holes), but allow any number of both secret and untrusted values. An expression of the form in this corollary is easily rewritten as such a substitution as follows. For each hole r‚sH , we note that Γ1 ; pc1 $ r‚sH : τ 2 where Γ, ~x : ~τ Ď Γ1 and pc1 P H. We replace the hole with a function application inside a bind. Specifically, the hole becomes ` ˘ bind y 1 “ y in y 1 z1 ¨ ¨ ¨ zk 33  where y and y 1 are fresh variables and the zi s are every variable in Γ1 zΓ (including every element of ~x). Let ˆ ˙ pc1 pc1 pc1 1 2 τy “ pc says τz1 ÝÑ ¨ ¨ ¨ ÝÑ τzk ÝÑ τ and include y : τy as the type of an untrusted value to substitute in. Instead of inserting the expression a into that hole, we substitute in for y the value ˘ ` w “ η pc1 λpz1 : τz1 qrpc1 s. ¨ ¨ ¨ λpzk : τzk qrpc1 s. a . By H OLE we know that pc1 P H and $ τ 2 prot H, so the type has the proper protection, and by construction Γ; pc $ w : τy . Moreover, while it has an extra value at the beginning of the trace (the function), the rest of the traces are necessarily the same. As a second step, we reduce the rest of the way to the expressions used in Definition 5. To get from our intermediate step to these single-value expressions, if we wish to substitute ks secret values and ku untrusted values, we instead substitute a single list of ks secret values and a single list of ku untrusted values. These lists are constructed in the usual way out of pairs, meaning the protection relations continue to hold as required. Finally, whenever a variable is referenced in the unsubstituted expression, we instead select the appropriate element out of the substituted list using nested projections. We also note that the same result holds if we allow for insertion of secret code and untrusted values, as the argument is exactly dual. Such a situation, however, makes less sense, so we do not present it explicitly.  D  Proofs  We now prove a variety of properties about NMIFC.  D.1  Language results  We begin with the core results about the language itself. Lemma 1 (Values). For any value v such that Γ; pc $ v : τ , Γ; pc1 $ v : τ for any pc1 . Proof. This follows by induction on the typing derivation for values. Lemma 2 (Substitution). If Γ, x : τ 1 ; pc $ e : τ and Γ; pc $ v : τ 1 , then Γ; pc $ erx ÞÑ vs : τ . Proof. By induction on the derivation of Γ, x : τ 1 ; pc $ e : τ using Lemma 1. Lemma 3 (pc reduction). If Γ; pc $ e : τ and pc1 Ď pc, then Γ; pc1 $ e : τ . Proof. By induction on the derivation of Γ; pc $ e : τ . Theorem 8 (Subject reduction). If Γ; pc $ e : τ and xe, ty ÝÑ Ñ xe1 , t1 y then Γ; pc $ e1 : τ . Proof. This proof follows by an inductive case analysis on the operational semantics in Figures 18 and 22. There are a few interesting cases. Case B-E XPAND: This case handles a context (B), we will do a sub-case analysis on each such expression type. 34  • e “ pproji L v MH q: U N PAIR allows the expression to type-check in any pc in which its argument typechecks. Since B RACKET says Γ; pc1 $ v : pτ1 ˆ τ2 q for some pc1 P H, we get that Γ; pc1 $ proji v : τi . Moreover B RACKET and P-S ET also require $ H Ď pτ1 ˆ τ2 q which, by P-PAIR can only happen if $ H Ď τi for i “ 1, 2. Together these satisfy the requirements for B RACKET and give us Γ; pc1 $ L proji v MH : τi . • e “ pbind x “ L v MH in e1 q: By B IND M, Γ; pc $ L v MH : ` says τ 1 and by B RACKET and inversion on the protection rules, H Ď ` for some H P H and thus ` P H. Let pc1 “ pc2 [ ppc \ `q where pc2 is the higher pc used in B RACKET. Since H is upward closed and pc2 , ` P H, ppc \ `q P H and thus pc1 P H. Moreover, pc1 \ ` ” pc \ `, so by B IND M Γ, x : τ 1 ; pc1 \ ` $ e1 : τ and by Lemma 1 Γ; pc1 $ v : ` says τ 1 . This means that Γ; pc1 $ bind x “ v in e1 : τ . Also by B IND M we have $ ` Ď τ so since ` P H we have now satisfied the conditions on B RACKET and Γ; pc $ L bind x “ v in e1 MH : τ . Case B-D ECL H: By D ECL Γ; pc $ L v MH : `1 says τ 1 and by inspection on the protection rules and B RACKET, it must be the case that H Ď `1 for some H P H and thus `1 P H. By assumption ` P H, so the final protection requirement of B RACKET on the stepped expression is satisfied. We now claim that if pc1 “ pc \ ` then Γ; pc1 $ decl v to ` : τ . D ECL gives us that pc Ď `, so clearly pc1 “ pc \ ` Ď `. D ECL also gives us `1Ñ Ď `Ñ \ ∆pp`1 \ pcqÐ q. Since `1Ð “ `Ð , we note that p`1 \ pcqÐ “ p` \ pcqÐ “ pc1Ð . Therefore p`1 \ pc1 qÐ “ p`1 \ pcqÐ and the premise still holds. Since the other premises D ECL are trivially still satisfied in a higher pc (using Lemma 1 for v to type), we see that Γ; pc1 $ decl v to ` : τ . Thus since pc1 P H and ` P H, we get Γ; pc $ L decl v to ` MH : τ .  Case B-E NDORSE H: We omit the details of this case as they are identical to the previous case, but with projection arrows reversed and ∆ replaced by ∇. All other cases follow trivially from inspection on the typing derivations in Figure 8 and applications of Lemmas 2 and 3. Rule E-E VAL also requires an inductive application. Lemma 4 (Bracket Soundness). If xe, y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ xe1 , ty then xteu, y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ xte1 u, ttuy. Proof. This result follows by inspection on the operational semantics in Figures 18 and 22. Note that every step the non-projected expression takes is mirrored exactly by a step the projected value takes except applications of B-E XPAND, B-D ECL L, B-D ECL H, B-E NDORSE L, and B-E NDORSE H. Those applications are simply dropped and since they emit no values to the trace, the traces remain the same. Lemma 5 (Bracket Completeness). If xteu, y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ xe1 , ty and Γ; pc $ e : τ , then there is some e2 , t1 such ˚ 2 1 that xe, y ÝÑ Ñ xe , t y. Proof. Assume xteu, y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ xe1 , ty and consider the operational semantics in Figures 18 and 22. We consider a single step in the projected expression which gives us two cases. If the step happens either entirely within a bracket or entirely outside brackets, then the same step must be possible in the original expression. If the step in the original expression is not possible because of brackets, then there must be brackets around a term other than an arbitrary expression or value in the semantic rule employed. Since the expression type-checks and by Theorem 8, each intermediate expression also type-checks, the protection clause on B RACKET and inversion on the protection rules in Figure 7 give us 35  four possible options for the semantic rule employed: E-U N PAIR, E-B IND M, E-D ECL, and E-E NDORSE. For the first two, we can first step using B-E XPAND one or more times before applying the original rule. For the second two, we can apply B-D ECL L, B-D ECL H, B-E NDORSE L, or B-E NDORSE H one or more times again before applying the original rule. In all cases we see that if the projected term steps and equivalent step is possible in the original expression, though possibly after applying one or more other steps first. This proves the desired result.  D.2  Security results  We now prove the various security results stated throughout the paper. Lemma 6 (Release on downgrade). Let H be a high set and W “ LzH. Given a program e such that Γ, x : τ1 ; pc $ e : τ2 with $ τ1 prot H, for all v1 , v2 with Γ; pc $ vi : τ1 , let @ D xerx ÞÑ L vi MH s, vi y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ vi1 , ti . If n1 and n2 are such that tini ffW ‚ and t1..n1 ´1 «‹W t2..n2 ´1 , then either tini “ pÓπ`1 , η ` wi q with `1 P H and ` R H for both i “ 1, 2, or t1n1 «W t2n2 . Proof. We refer to elements of the form pÓπ`1 , η ` wq with `1 P H and ` R H as relevant downgrade elements. This is a proof by induction on the number of relevant downgrade elements in t1..n1 ´1 and t2..n2 ´1 . Note that while the prefixes can contain any number of relevant downgrade elements, the prefixes are W-equivalent, so the downgraded values must also be W-equivalent. In particular, there must be the same number in each trace prefix. As the base case, assume there are no such values in the trace prefixes. We first claim that there can be no application of B-D ECL L or B-E NDORSE L prior to the current step. By the typing rules D ECL and E NDORSE, that would require the value inside the bracket to have type `1 says τ for some type τ . The protection clause on B RACKET and the protection rules in Figure 19 would thus require there to be some H P H such that H Ď `1 , which in turn means `1 P H. However, application of B-D ECL L or B-E NDORSE L requires ` R H. Therefore if either rule is applied, the next value emitted to the trace must be pÓπ`1 , η ` wq where `1 P H and ` R H. While tini may be of that form, we assumed that no prior values are. Next we claim that any differences between the two prefixes must be emitted from within brackets. The initial expression in each case differs only in the substituted value, which is inside brackets. If we syntactically examine the expression at every step of evaluation, we notice that no semantic rules allow anything inside brackets to affect anything outside brackets except through the B-D ECL L and B-E NDORSE L rules, which remove brackets. Since those rules are never applied, all differences must be contained within brackets. This means that all differences within the prefixes must have been emitted from inside brackets. Finally, we claim that if a trace element c is emitted from within a bracket, then c «W ‚. The only three rules that emit trace elements are E-U NIT M, E-D ECL, and E-E NDORSE. By Theorem 8, the expression stepping must type check, and each of the corresponding typing rules (U NIT M, D ECL, and E NDORSE) contain the condition pc Ď `. By B RACKET, if the expression is inside a bracket then pc P H and since H is upward closed, this means ` P H. Thus by E Q -U NIT M or E Q -D OWN, c «W ‚. Coupled with the above logic about applications of B-D ECL L and B-E NDORSE L and the fact that i tni ffW ‚, either t1n1 «W t2n2 , or both are the result of downgrades that resulted in applications of either B-D ECL L or B-E NDORSE L. In the latter case both are of the form pÓπ`1 , η ` wq where `1 P H and ` R H, as desired. 36  Now we assume that there is at least one such expression in the trace prefixes, but those prefixes are still W-equivalent. Take the first such trace element. This element must appear in both trace prefixes. Let e1 and e2 be the top-level expressions that stepped in each trace to emit the downgrade element. The two expressions can differ inside brackets, and can differ inside the downgraded value (that was previously inside brackets). Because the downgraded values are W-equivalent, any such differences must be contained inside terms of the form pη ` wq where ` P H. We can replace any such terms by L η ` w MH in the expression and it will still type-check since ` P H and w type-checks in any pc. This results in a new pair of expressions that are W-equivalent except inside brackets. By Lemmas 4 and 5 these expression generate traces that are equivalent to the original up to brackets and bullets. By construction, these new expressions generate trace prefixes with one less pÓπ`1 , η ` wq element than the original expressions, so by the inductive hypothesis, the result holds. Since the same brackets were necessarily added in both expressions, the new expressions will thus generate equivalent traces if and only if the old expressions did. Since the trace prefixes prior to this modification were equivalent, if the new expressions generate equivalent traces, the original expressions must also generate equivalent traces. Thus the result holds for the original traces as well. Theorem 1 (Noninterference of non-downgrading programs). Let H be a high set and let W “ LzH. Given an expression e such that Γ, x : τ1 ; pc $ e : τ2 where $ τ1 prot H, for all v1 , v2 with Γ; pc $ vi : τ1 , if @ D xerx ÞÑ vi s, vi y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ vi1 , ti then either there is some pÓπ`1 , η ` wq P ti where `1 P H and ` R H, or t1 «‹W t2 . Proof. Since Γ; pc $ vi : τ1 and $ τ1 prot H, B RACKET says Γ; pc $ L vi MH : τ1 . Lemmas 4 and 5 tell us that the result holds as stated above if and only if it holds when substituting L vi MH instead of vi . From there we can apply Lemma 6. If there are no pÓπ`1 , η ` wq events in either trace with `1 P H and ` R H, then each W-visible term in each trace must be equivalent to each other by induction on the number of elements (empty traces are equivalent). Theorem 2 (Noninterference of high-pc programs). Let A be an attacker inducing high sets U and S. Let H be one of those high sets and W “ LzH. Given an expression e such that Γ, x : τ1 ; pc $ e : τ2 where $ τ1 prot H, for all v1 , v2 with Γ; pc $ vi : τ1 , if xerx ÞÑ vi s, vi y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ xvi1 , ti y and pc P U Y S, then t1 «‹W t2 . Proof. We claim that neither trace contains any pÓπ`1 , η ` wq elements where `1 P H and ` R H, thus reducing this to Theorem 1. There are three cases to consider here: pc P H, pc P U and H “ S, and pc P S and H “ U. Case pc P H: Both D ECL and E NDORSE require pc Ď `, so by upward-closure of H, ` P H. Case pc P U and H “ S: D ECL contains the condition `1Ñ Ď `Ñ \ ∆pp`1 \ pcqÐ q. Converting into the authority lattice, this gives us `Ñ ^ ∆pp`1 _ pcqÐ q ě `1Ñ . Since U “ AÐ , Condition 2 of Definition 6 means p`1 _ pcqÐ P AÐ and thus Condition 5 means that ∆pp`1 _ pcqÐ q P AÑ , so by Condition 1 of Definition 6, if `Ñ P AÑ , then by transitivity `1Ñ P AÑ . Since H “ S “ LzpAÑ q, this means ` R H only if `1 R H. Case pc P S and H “ U: This argument is nearly identical to the previous case. E NDORSE means `1Ð Ď `Ð \ ∇pp`1 \ pcqÑ q which, in the authority lattice, means `1Ð ě `Ð _ ∇pp`1 ^ pcqÑ q. Since pc P S “ LzpAÑ q, Condition 4 of Definition 6 ensures p`1 ^ pcqÑ P S. Thus Condition 5 means ∇pp`1 ^ pcqÑ q R AÐ “ H, so Condition 3 and transitivity mean that `Ð R H only if `1Ð R H. 37  Theorem 3 (Noninterference of secret–untrusted data). Let A be an attacker inducing high sets U and S. Let H “ U X S and W “ LzH. Given an expression e such that Γ, x : τ1 ; pc $ e : τ2 where $ τ1 prot H, for all v1 , v2 with Γ; pc $ vi : τ1 , if xerx ÞÑ vi s, vi y ÝÑ Ñ ˚ xvi1 , ti y then t1 «‹W t2 . Proof. First we note that H is a high set as the intersection of two upward closed sets is also upward closed. We claim that neither trace contains any pÓπ`1 , η ` wq elements where `1 P H and ` R H, thus reducing this to Theorem 1. We will cover the two cases of π separately despite their similarities. Case π “ Ñ: The only way to emit pÓÑ `1 , η ` wq is through E-D ECL . By Theorem 8, each intermediate expression type-checks under the same initial context. This is a sub-expression, meaning there is some Γ1 , pc1 , and τ such that Γ1 ; pc1 $ decl pη `1 vq to ` : ` says τ . Therefore D ECL tells us that `1Ñ Ď `Ñ \ ∆pp`1 \ pc1 qÐ q. Every typing rule either moves pc up the lattice (by joining it with another label) or leaves it unchanged, so pc Ď pc1 and therefore ∆ppc1Ð q Ď ∆ppcÐ q, meaning `1Ñ Ď `Ñ \ ∆pp`1 \ pcqÐ q. Converting to the authority lattice gives us `Ñ ^ ∆pp`1 _ pcqÐ q ě `1Ñ . If `1 P H, then `1Ð P U “ AÐ , so by the same argument as in the proof of Theorem 2, Definition 6 gives us that ∆pp`1 _ pcqÐ q P AÑ . Thus by Condition 1 of Definition 6 and transitivity, if `Ñ P AÑ it must also be the case that `1Ñ P AÑ . However, `1 P H, so `1Ñ P S “ LzpAÑ q. Therefore `Ñ P S. Since `1 P H and `1Ð “ `Ð , this means ` P H. Case π “ Ð: Dual to the above case, pÓÐ `1 , η ` wq must be emitted from E-E NDORSE , so Theorem 8 now implies that there is some Γ1 , pc1 , and τ such that Γ1 ; pc1 $ endorse pη `1 vq to ` : τ. Since pc Ď pc1 by the same logic as above, E NDORSE tells us `1Ð Ď `Ð \ ∇pp`1 \ pcqÑ q. If `1 P H, then `Ð \ ∇pp`1 \ pcqÑ q P H. Since `1Ñ P HÑ “ LzpAÑ q, we know that ∇pp`1 \ pcqÑ q R AÐ by the same argument as in the proof of Theorem 2. Since `Ð \ ∇pp`1 \ pcqÑ q “ `Ð _ ∇pp`1 ^ pcqÑ q, Condition 3 of Definition 6 requires that `Ð P AÐ “ U. Since `Ñ “ `1Ñ P S, we see that ` P H. Thus we see that for any trace element pÓπ`1 , η ` wq, if `1 P H, then ` P H, so by Theorem 1 the result holds. Theorem 6 (Nonmalleable information flow). For any program e such that Γ, x : τx , y : τy ; pc $ e : τ , e enforces NMIF. Proof. We provide here only a proof of case 1 of Definition 5. All statements in case 2 are exactly dual so a precisely dual argument holds. Let A be an attacker inducing high sets U and S and let T “ LzU, P “ LzS, and W “ T XP. To prove Ð ‹ 22 case 1 we prove a contrapositive of the stated implication. Specifically, if t12 ..n12 ffP t..n22 but relA,e pw1 q, 11 ‹ 21 then t..n11 ffP t..n21 . First we note that the theorem is uninteresting unless $ τx prot S and $ τy prot U. Since vi and wj are both present in trace tij , if v1 ffP v2 or w1 ffT w2 , the theorem is trivially true. In the former case, varying the first input clearly results in non-equivalent traces for both attacks. In the latter case, the result holds for nij “ 1 and the precondition is clearly false otherwise. Now consider the case where v1 «P v2 and w1 «T w2 . If $ τx prot S and $ τy prot U, then these are trivially true—the interesting case we will handle below. Otherwise the equivalences require the contents of the value to be identical (except for nested secret/untrusted values). Any identical values clearly cannot result in distinguishable traces. We can handle 38  nested secret/untrusted values by fixing the public/trusted parts of the inputs and viewing those values as the inputs instead, thus reducing to the case where $ τx prot S and $ τy prot U.5 The rest of the proof assumes we are in this case. ‹ 22 By assumption t12 ..n12 ffP t..n22 , there is some point at which the traces become distinguishable. This can happen for one of two reasons: one trace is a prefix of the other (up to extra ‚-equivalent terms), or there are two non-‚ terms that are non-equivalent. 22 11 In the first case, without loss of generality assume t12 ..n12 is a prefix of t..n22 . We claim that t..n11 is a prefix 21 of t..n21 . Lemma 6 ensures that any difference must come from a downgrade, which must be a declassification because E NDORSE prohibits changing the confidentiality and P allows labels of any integrity. By the argument in Theorem 3 this declassification event must be on trusted data, thus producing a public–trusted ‹ i2 21 output. Thus the condition that ti1 ..ni1 ´1 «T t..ni2 ´1 ensures that any declassifications appearing in t..n21 ´1 ij 22 12 appear identically in t11 ..n11 ´1 , and similarly for t..n22 ´1 and t..n12 ´1 . Since tnij ffW ‚, any public–untrusted 1j 11 21 events appearing in t2j ..n2j must also appear in t..n1j , and thus t..n11 must be a prefix of t..n21 . 1 For the second case—two non-‚ terms are non-equivalent—let ni2 be the indices of the first such terms 12 22 12 ‹ 22 in each trace. That is, ti2 n1i2 ffP ‚ and tn112 ffP tn122 , but t..n112 ´1 «P t..n122 ´1 . Again Lemma 6 ensures that the first non-equivalence must be the result of a declassification that exists in both traces. 1 i1 ‹ ‹ 22 By construction n1ij ď nij and we have that t12 ..n1 ´1 «P t..n1 ´1 by the definition of nij and t..ni1 ´1 «T 22  12  ti2 ..ni2 ´1 by assumption. Consequently, for all i, j, k, l P t1, 2u, we have tij ..n1  ij ´1  «‹W tkl ..n1  kl ´1  .  “ pÓÑ In particular, this is true for t11 and t21 . We also know that for all i, j P t1, 2u tij `1 , η ` wij q for some n1ij value wij . We know that w12 ffP w22 , and we now claim that w11 ffP w21 . To emit this value, E-D ECL must have been applied, meaning there must have been a term pη `1 wij q in the preceding expression. Since such expressions are not in the source language—they can only be created by applications of E-U NIT M, ED ECL, and E-E NDORSE—this expression must appear previously in each trace. We know that ` P P X T and D ECL requires that `1Ð “ `Ð , so therefore `1 P T . Since the prefixes prior to this event are trustedequivalent when varying only attacks, wi1 «T wi2 for i “ 1, 2. By assumption w12 ffP w22 and this is the first difference in those traces. This means that if w11 «P w21 then w12 and w22 must have differed only in untrusted public values nested inside the original declassification (i.e., w12 «‚Ñ A w22 ). Therefore if w11 «P w21 , then v1 , v2 , and w2 are exactly the inputs needed in Definition 2 to demonstrate that w1 is an 11 ‹ 21 irrelevant attack. We assumed that relÐ A,e pw1 q, so w11 ffP w21 and therefore t..n11 ffP t..n21 , proving our desired result.  5  This technically reduces to the many-input version of the theorem that we prove is equivalent in Appendix C.  39

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
