Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_6874

Abstract:
On the Total Number of Bends for Planar Octilinear Drawings Michael A. Bekos1 , Michael Kaufmann1 , and Robert Krug1  arXiv:1512.04866v1 [cs.CG] 15 Dec 2015  1  Wilhelm-Schickhard-Institut für Informatik, Universität Tübingen, Germany, {bekos,mk,krug}@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de  Abstract An octilinear drawing of a planar graph is one in which each edge is drawn as a sequence of horizontal, vertical and diagonal at 45◦ line-segments. For such drawings to be readable, special care is needed in order to keep the number of bends small. As the problem of finding planar octilinear drawings of minimum number of bends is NP-hard [16], in this paper we focus on upper and lower bounds. From a recent result of Keszegh et al. [14] on the slope number of planar graphs, we can derive an upper bound of 4n − 10 bends for 8-planar graphs with n vertices. We considerably improve this general bound and corresponding previous ones for triconnected 4-, 5- and 6-planar graphs. We also derive non-trivial lower bounds for these three classes of graphs by a technique inspired by the network flow formulation of Tamassia [19].  1  Motivation and Background  Octilinear drawings of graphs have a long history of research, which dates back to the early thirteenth century, when an English technical draftsman, Henry Charles Beck (also known as Harry Beck), designed the first schematic map of London Underground. His map, the so-called Tube map, looked more like an electrical circuit diagram (consisting of horizontal, vertical and diagonal line segments) rather than a true map, as the underlying geographic accuracy was neglected. Laying out networks in such a way is called octilinear graph drawing and plays an important role in map-schematization and the design of metro-maps. In particular, an octilinear drawing Γ(G) of a graph G = (V, E) is one in which each vertex occupies a point on an integer grid and each edge is drawn as a sequence of horizontal, vertical and diagonal at 45◦ line segments. When G is planar, usually it is required Γ(G) to be planar as well. In planar octilinear graph drawing, an important goal is to keep the number of bends small, so that the produced drawings can be understood easily. However, the problem of determining whether a given embedded planar graph of maximum degree eight admits a bend-less planar octilinear drawing is NP-complete [16]. This motivated us to neglect optimality and study upper and lower bounds on the total number of bends of such drawings. Surprisingly enough, very few results were known, even if the octilinear model has been extensively studied in the areas of metro-map visualization and map schematization. One can derive the first (non-trivial) upper bound on the required number of bends from a result on the planar slope number of graphs by Keszegh et al. [14], who proved that every k-planar graph (that is, planar of maximum degree k) has a planar drawing with at most d k2 e different slopes in which each edge has at most two bends. For 3 ≤ k ≤ 8, the drawings are octilinear, which yields an upper bound of 6n − 12, where n is the number of vertices of the graph. The bound can be reduced to 4n − 10 with some effort; see our subsection on related work. On the other hand, it is known that every 3-planar graph with five or more vertices admits a planar octilinear drawing in which all edges are bend-less [13, 7]. Also, for 4 ≤ k ≤ 5, it was 1  Table 1: A short summary of our results.  Upper bounds Graph class 3-con. 4-planar 3-con. 5-planar 3-con. 6-planar  Lower bound  Ref.  Previous  Ref.  New  Ref.  n/3 − 1 2n/3 − 2 4n/3 − 6  Thm. 4 Thm. 4 Thm. 4  2n 5n/2 4n − 10  [2] [2] [14]  n+5 2n − 2 3n − 8  Thm. 1 Thm. 2 Thm. 3  recently proved that 4- and 5-planar graphs admit planar octilinear drawings with at most one bend per edge [2], which implies that the total number of bends for 4- and 5-planar graphs can be upper bounded by 2n and 5n/2, respectively. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we considerably improve all aforementioned bounds for the classes of triconnected 4-, 5- and 6-planar graphs. In Section 3, we present corresponding lower bounds for these three classes of planar graphs. We conclude in Section 4 with open problems and future work. For a summary of our results also refer to Table 1.  1.1  Related work.  As already stated, Keszegh et al. [14] have proved that every k-planar graph admits a planar drawing with at most d k2 e different slopes in which each edge has at most two bends. If one appropriately adjusts the slopes of all edge segments incident to a vertex, then one can show that any k-planar graph, with 3 ≤ k ≤ 8, admits a planar octilinear drawing in which each edge has at most two bends. This implies that any k-planar graph on n vertices can have at most 6n − 12 bends, where 3 ≤ k ≤ 8. One can easily improve this bound to 4n − 10 as follows. The edge that “enters” a vertex from its south port and the edge that “leaves” each vertex from its top port in the s-t ordering of the algorithm of Keszegh et al. can both be drawn with only one bend each. Since each vertex is incident to exactly two such edges (except for the first and last ones in the s-t ordering which are only incident to one such edge each), it follows that 2n − 2 edges can be drawn with at most one bend. Hence, the bound of 4n − 10 follows. Octilinear drawings form a natural extension of the so-called orthogonal drawings, which allow for horizontal and vertical edge segments only. For such drawings, the bend minimization problem can be solved efficiently, assuming that the input is an embedded graph [19]. However, the corresponding minimization problem over all embeddings of the input graph is NP-hard [10]. Note that in [19] the author describes how one can extend his approach, so to compute a bend-optimal octilinear representation1 of any given embedded 8-planar graph. However, such a representation may not be realizable by a corresponding planar octilinear drawing [5]. For orthogonal drawings, several bounds on the total number of bends are known. Biedl [3] presents lower bounds for graphs of maximum degree 4 based on their connectivity (simply connected, biconnected or triconnected), planarity (planar or not) and simplicity (simple or non-simple with multiedges or selfloops). It is also known that any 4-planar graph (except for the octahedron graph) admits a planar orthogonal drawing with at most two bends per edge [4, 15]. Trivially, this yields an upper bound of 4n bends, which can be improved to 2n + 2 [4]. Note that the best known lower bound is due to Tamassia et al. [20], who presented 4-planar graphs requiring 2n − 2 bends. Finally, in metro-map visualization many approaches have been proposed that result in octilinear or nearly-octilinear drawings (see, e.g., [11, 16, 17, 18]). However, most of them are heuristics and therefore do not focus on the bend-minimization problem explicitly. 1 Recall that a representation of a graph describes the angles and the bends of a drawing, neglecting its exact geometry [19].  2  1.2  Preliminaries.  Central in our approach is the canonical order [6, 12] of triconnected planar graphs: Let G = (V, E) be a triconnected planar graph and let Π = (P0 , . . . , Pm ) be a partition of V into paths, such that P0 = {v1 , v2 }, Pm = {vn } and v2 → v1 → vn is a path on the outerface of G. For k = 0, 1, . . . , m, let Gk be the subgraph induced by ∪ki=0 Pi . Path Pk is called singleton if |Pk | = 1 and chain otherwise; Partition Π is a canonical order [6, 12] of G if for each k = 1, . . . , m − 1 the following hold (see also Figure 1): (i) Gk is biconnected, (ii) all neighbors of Pk in Gk−1 are on the outer face of Gk−1 and (iii) all vertices of Pk have at least one neighbor in Pj for some j > k. To simplify the description of our algorithms, we direct and color the edges of G based on partition Π (similar to Schnyder colorings [8]) as follows. The first partition P0 of Π defines exclusively one edge (that is, edge (v1 , v2 )), which we color blue and direct towards vertex v1 . For each partition Pk = {vi , . . . , vi+j } ∈ Π later in the order, let v` and vr be the leftmost and rightmost neighbors of Pk in Gk−1 , respectively. In the case where Pk is a chain (that is, j > 0), we color edge (vi , v` ) and all edges between vertices of Pk blue and direct them towards v` . The edge (vi+j , vr ) is colored green and is directed towards vr (see Figure 2a). In the case where Pk is a singleton (that is, j = 0), we color the edges (vi , v` ) and (vi , vr ) blue and green, respectively and we direct them towards v` and vr . We color the remaining edges incident to Pk towards Gk−1 (if any) red and we direct them towards vi (see Figure 2e). Given a vertex v ∈ V of G, we denote by indegx (v) (outdegx (v), respectively) the in-degree (out-degree, respectively) of vertex v in color x ∈ {r, b, g}. Then, it is not difficult to see that for a vertex v ∈ V \ {v1 }, outdegb (v) = 1, which implies that the blue subgraph is a spanning tree of G. Similarly, 0 ≤ outdegg (v), outdegr (v) ≤ 1. Hence, the green and the red subgraphs form two forests of G. It also holds that 0 ≤ outdegr (v) ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ indegb (v), indegg (v), indegr (v) ≤ d(G) − 1, where d(G) is the degree of G. For an example refer to Figure 1a.  2  Upper Bounds  In this section, we present upper bounds on the total number of bends for the classes of triconnected 4-planar (Section 2.1), 5-planar (Section 2.2) and 6-planar (Section 2.3) graphs.  2.1  Triconnected 4-Planar Graphs.  Let G = (V, E) be a triconnected 4-planar graph. Before we proceed with the description of our approach, we need to define two useful notions. First, a vertical cut is a y-monotone continuous curve that crosses only horizontal segments and divides a drawing into a left and a right part; see e.g. [9]. Such a cut makes a drawing horizontally stretchable in the following sense: One can shift the right part of the drawing that is defined by the vertical cut further to the right while keeping the left part of the drawing in place and the result is a valid octilinear drawing. Similarly, one can define a horizontal cut. Since G has at most 2n edges, by Euler’s formula, it follows that G has at most n + 2 faces. In order to construct a drawing Γ(G) of G, which has roughly at most n + 2 bends, we also need to associate to each face of G a so-called reference edge. This is done as follows. Let Π = {P0 , . . . , Pm } be a canonical order of G and assume that Γ(G) is constructed incrementally by placing a new partition of Π each time, so that the boundary of the drawing constructed so far is a 3  v6  v6  v4  v5  v4  v5 v4  v1  v2  v3  v1  v2  v3  (a)  v1  (b)  v3  v2  v1  (c)  v3  v2  (d) v6  v6  v6 v5  v5 v4 v1  v4 v3  (e)  v5  v5 v2  v1  v4  v3  v2  v1  (f)  v4  v3  (g)  v2  v1  v3  v2  (h)  Figure 1: An illustration of our algorithm for triconnected 4-planar graphs by an example: the octahedron graph. The underlying canonical order consists of the following partitions: P0 = {v1 , v2 }, P1 = {v3 }, P2 = {v4 }, P3 = {v5 } and P4 = {v6 }. (a) The direction and the coloring of the edges. (b) The corresponding reference edges (bold drawn); the edge (v1 , v2 ) of the first partition and the edge (v1 , v6 ) incident to the last (degree 4) partition are ignored. (c) The placement of the first two partitions. (d) The placement of a singleton of degree 2 incident to reference edge (v4 , v3 ) that is drawn bent. (e) The placement of a singleton of degree 3 incident to reference edges (v5 , v4 ) and (v5 , v2 ) that are drawn bent. (f) The last singleton v6 is not incident to reference edges. So, (v6 , v4 ), (v5 , v6 ) and (v6 , v2 ) must be drawn bend-less, which is not possible. (g) Vertex v5 is translated upwards in the direction implied by the edge (v3 , v5 ) until one of the horizontal segments incident to v5 is eliminated, which makes the placement of v6 posible. (h) The final layout containing (v2 , v1 ) and (v6 , v1 ); the dotted edge can be drawn with a single bend.  x-monotone path. When placing a new partition Pk ∈ Π, k = 1, . . . , m − 1, one or two bounded faces of G are formed (note that we treat the last partition Pm of Π separately). More precisely, if Pk is a chain or a singleton of degree 3 in Gk , then only one bounded face is formed. Otherwise (that is, Pk is a singleton of degree 4 in Gk ), two new bounded faces are formed. In both cases, each newly-formed bounded face consists of at least two edges incident to vertices of Pk and at least one edge of Gk−1 . In the former case, the reference edge of the newly-formed bounded face, say f , is defined as follows. If f contains at least one green edge that belongs to Gk−1 , then the reference edge of f is the leftmost such edge (see Figure 2a and 2c). Otherwise, the reference edge of f is the leftmost blue edge of f that belongs to Gk−1 (see Figure 2b and 2d). In the case where Pk is a singleton of degree 4 in Gk , the reference edge of each of the newly formed faces is the edge of Gk−1 that is incident to the endpoint of the red edge involved. Observe that by definition a red edge cannot be a reference edge. For an example see Figure 1b. As already stated, we will construct Γ(G) in an incremental manner by placing one partition of Π at a time. For the base, we momentarily neglect the edge (v1 , v2 ) of the first partition P0 of Π and we start by placing the second partition, say a chain P1 = {v3 , . . . , v|P1 |+2 }, on a horizontal line from left to right. Since by definition of Π, v3 and v|P1 |+2 are adjacent to the two vertices, v1 and v2 , of the first partition P0 , we place v1 to the left of v3 and v2 to the right of v|P1 |+2 . So, they form a single chain where all edges are drawn using horizontal line-segments that are attached to the east and west port at their endpoints. The case where P1 is a singleton is analogous (assuming that P1 is a chain of unit length). Assume now that we have already constructed a drawing for Gk−1 which has the following invariant properties:  4  f  f  f  vr  v` Gk−1  (a)  vr v` v`  f1  f vr  Gk−1  Gk−1  (b)  (c)  f2  vr  vr v`  Gk−1  (d)  v`  Gk−1  (e)  Figure 2: Illustration of the reference edge (bold drawn) in the case of: (a-b) a chain, (c-d) a singleton of degree 2 in Gk and (e) a singleton of degree 3 in Gk .  IP-1: The number of edges of Gk−1 with a bend is at most equal to the number of reference edges in Gk−1 . IP-2: The north-west, north and north-east (south-west, south and south-east) ports of each vertex are occupied by incoming (outgoing) blue and green edges and by outgoing (incoming) red edges2 . IP-3: If a horizontal port of a vertex is occupied, then it is occupied either by an edge with a bend (to support vertical cuts) or by an edge of a chain. IP-4: A red edge is not on the outerface of Gk−1 . IP-5: A blue (green, respectively) edge of Gk−1 is never incident to the north-west (north-east, respectively) port of a vertex of Gk−1 . IP-6: From each reference edge on the outerface of Gk−1 one can devise a vertical cut through the drawing of Gk−1 . The base of our algorithm conforms with the aforementioned invariant properties. In the following, we will show how to add the next partition Pk with k < m, so that all invariant properties are fulfilled. In our description, we will mainly describe the port assignment at each vertex that will always conform to IP-2–5, which fully specifies how each edge must be drawn (in other words, we describe the relative coordinates of the vertices). The exact coordinates can then be computed by adopting an approach similar to the one of Bekos et al. [2], since the base of each newly formed face is horizontally stretchable (follows from IP-6). Next, we consider the three main cases; see also Figure 1 for an example. C.1: Pk = {vi } is a singleton of degree 2 in Gk ; see Figure 3a, 3b. Let v` and vr be the leftmost and rightmost neighbors of vi in Gk−1 (note that v` and vr are not necessarily neighboring). We claim that the north-east port of v` and the north-west port of vr cannot be simultaneously occupied. For a proof by contradiction, assume that the claim does not hold. Denote by v` vr the path from v` to vr at the outerface of Gk−1 (neglecting the direction of the edges). By IP-5, v` vr starts as blue from the north-east port of v` and ends as green at the north-west port of vr . So, inbetween there is a vertex of the path v` vr which has a neighbor in Pj for some j ≥ k; a contradiction to the degree of vi . Without loss of generality assume that the north-east port of v` is unoccupied. To draw the edge (vi , v` ), we distinguish two cases. If (vi , v` ) is the reference edge of a face, then we draw (vi , v` ) as a horizontal-diagonal combination from the west port of vi towards the north-east port of v` . Otherwise, (vi , v` ) is drawn bend-less from the south-west port of vi towards the north-east port of v` . To draw the edge (vi , vr ), again we distinguish two cases. If the north-west port at vr is unoccupied, then (vi , vr ) will use this port at vr . Otherwise, (vi , vr ) will use the north port at vr . In addition, 2  Note, however, that not all of them can be simultaneously be occupied due to the degree restriction.  5  vi  vi  vi vr  v`  v`  v`  Gk−1  Gk−1  (a)  vr  v`  vr  Gk−1  (f)  v`  Gk−1  (g)  vi vr vm  vm  v`  (d)  vr  v`  Gk−1  (h)  vr  vm Gk−1  v`  (i)  vr  vr  vm vr  Gk−1  (e) vi  vi  vi vm  vm vr  Gk−1  (c) vi  vi  vi v`  Gk−1  (b)  vm  vi+j  Gk−1  v`  (j)  Figure 3: Illustration of: (a-b) the case of a degree-2 singleton in Gk , (c) the case of a chain, (d-j) the case of a singleton of degree 3 in Gk (dotted segments can have zero length).  if (vi , vr ) is the reference edge of a face, then (vi , vr ) will use the east port at vi . Otherwise, the south-east port at vi . The port assignment described above conforms to IP-2–5. Clearly, IP-1 also holds. IP-6 holds because the newly introduced edges that are reference edges have a horizontal segment, which inductively implies that vertical cuts through them are possible. C.2: Pk = {vi , . . . vi+j } with j ≥ 1 is a chain. This case is similar to case C.1, as Pk has also exactly two neighbors in Gk−1 (which we again denote by v` and vr ). The edges between vi , . . . , vi+j will be drawn as horizontal segments connecting the west and east ports of the respective vertices; see Figure 3c. The edges (vi , v` ) and (vi+j , vr ) are drawn based on the rules of the case C.1 (e.g., in Figure 3c edge (vi , v` ) is a reference edge, while the edge (vi+j , vr ) is not). Hence, the port assignment still conforms to IP-2–IP-5. In addition, IP-1 and IP-6 hold, since all edges of the chain are horizontal. C.3: Pk = {vi } is a singleton of degree 3 in Gk . This is the most involved case. Let v` and vr be the leftmost and rightmost neighbors of vi in Gk−1 and let vm be the third neighbor of vi in Gk−1 . By IP-2 and the degree restriction, the north port of vm is unoccupied. If the north-east port of v` and the north-west port of vr are simultaneously unoccupied, we proceed analogously to case C.1; see Figure 3d. Clearly, IP-1 and IP-6 hold. Consider now the more involved case, where the north-east port of v` is occupied and simultaneously (vi , v` ) is not a reference edge. Hence, by IP-6 (vi , v` ) must be drawn bend-less. Since the north-east port at v` is occupied, by IP-4 it follows that the edge at the north-east port of v` is not red. Therefore, by IP-2 and IP-5, the edge at the north-east port of v` is blue. This implies that the path v` vm at the outerface of Gk−1 consists of exclusively blue edges pointing towards v` . Hence, by IP-5 the north-east port at vm is unoccupied. Edge (vi , v` ) can be drawn bend-less if the edge (vi , vr ) is a reference edge (that is, by IP-6 (vi , vr ) has a bend); see Figure 3e. In the case where the edge (vi , vr ) is not a reference edge (that is, none of (vi , v` ) and (vi , vr ) is a reference edge), we need a different argument. We further distinguish two sub-cases. C.3.1: The edge incident to vm on the path vm vr on the outerface of Gk−1 is green (we cope with the case where this edge is blue later). By definition, the blue (green) edge of v` vm (vm vr ) incident to vm is a reference edge and by IP-6 has a bend. Our aim is to “eliminate” one of these bends and draw one of the edges (vi , v` ) or (vi , vr ) with a bend and the other one bend-less. So, IP-1 still holds. In this case, vm may or may not be incident to another red edge in Gk−1 (equivalently, vm is either of degree 4 or 3, respectively). Without 6  0 ), in G loss of generality we assume that vm is incident to another red edge, say (vm , vm k−1 , that is, vm is of degree 4. In this case, we translate vm upwards in the direction implied by 0 ), until one of the horizontal segments of the edges incident to the slope of the edge (vm , vm vm on the outerface of Gk−1 is completely eliminated; see Figure 3f. The only case, where 0 ) is vertical and the the aforementioned segment elimination is not possible, is when (vm , vm edges incident to vm at the outerface of Gk−1 are both horizontal-vertical combinations; see Figure 3g. In this particular case, however, by IP-2 it follows that either the north-west or 0 is free. Since both edges incident to v at the outerface of G the north-east port at vm m k−1 0 , v ) so to be diagonal and then we proceed similarly are bent, by IP-3 we can redraw (vm m to the previous case; see Figure 3h. Also, observe that the port assignment still conforms to IP-2–IP-5.  C.3.2: The edge incident to vm on the path vm vr on the outerface of Gk−1 is blue. In this case, vm cannot be incident to another red edge. In the case where vm is of degree 3, we proceed similar to the case C.3.1, where vm was of degree 3. So, we now focus on the case where vm is of degree 4. In this case, the fourth edge attached to vm can be either (outgoing) green or (incoming) blue. In the former case, this edge is a reference edge. In the latter case, it is part of a chain. In both cases, however, this edge has a horizontal segment; see Figure 3i. Hence, we can translate vm horizontally to the left so to eliminate the bend of the edge incident to vm on the path v` vm ; see Figure 3j. Note that all invariant properties are fulfilled once vi is drawn. Note that the coordinates of the newly introduced vertices are determined by the shape of the edges connecting them to Gk−1 . If there is not enough space between v` and vr to accommodate the new vertices, IP-6 allows us to stretch the drawing horizontally using the reference edge of the newly formed face. To complete the description of our algorithm, it remains to cope with the last partition Pm = {vn } and describe how to draw the edge (v1 , v2 ) of the first partition P0 of Π. If vn is of degree 3, we cope with Pm as being an ordinary singleton. However, if vn is of degree 4, then we momentarily ignore the edge (vn , v1 ) of Pm and proceed to draw the remaining edges incident to vn , assuming that Pm is again an ordinary singleton. The edge (vn , v1 ) can be drawn afterwards using two bends in total. Finally, since by construction v1 and v2 are horizontally aligned, we can draw the edge (v1 , v2 ) with a single bend, emanating from the south-east port of v1 towards the south-west port of v2 . Theorem 1. Let G be a triconnected 4-planar graph with n vertices. A planar octilinear drawing Γ(G) of G with at most n + 5 bends can be computed in O(n) time. Proof. By IP-1, all bends of Γ(G) are in correspondence with the reference edges of G, except for the bends of the edges (v1 , v2 ) and (vn , v1 ). Since the number of reference edges is at most n + 2 and the edges (v1 , v2 ) and (vn , v1 ) require 3 additional bends, the total number of bends of Γ(G) does not exceed n + 5. The linear running time follows from the observation that we can use the shifting method of Kant [13] to compute the actual coordinates of the vertices of G, since in the canonical order the y-coordinates of the vertices that have been placed at some particular step do not change in subsequent steps (following a similar approach as in [2]).  2.2  Triconnected 5-Planar Graphs.  Our algorithm for triconnected 5-planar graphs is an extension of the corresponding algorithm of Bekos et al. [2], which computes for a given triconnected 5-planar graph G on n vertices a planar octilinear drawing Γ(G) of G with at most one bend per edge. Since G cannot have more than 7  vi  vi  vj 0  vj 0 Gk−1  Gk−1  (a)  (b)  Figure 4: (a) e0 = (vj 0 , vi ) cannot be drawn bend-less. (b) Shifting vj 0 up resolves the problem.  5n/2 edges, it follows that the total number of bends of Γ(G) is at most 5n/2. However, before we proceed with the description of our extension, we first provide some insights into this algorithm, which is based on a canonical order Π of G. Central are IP-2 and IP-4 of the previous section and the so-called stretchability invariant, according to which all edges on the outerface of the drawing constructed at some step of the canonical order have a horizontal segment and therefore one can devise corresponding vertical cuts to horizontally stretch the drawing. We claim that we can appropriately modify this algorithm, so that all red edges of Π are bend-less. Since we seek to draw all red edges of Π bend-less, our modification is limited to singletons. So, let Pk = {vi } be a singleton of Π. The degree restriction implies that vi has at most two incoming red edges (we also assume that Pk is not the last partition of Π, that is k 6= m). We first consider the case where vi has exactly one incoming red edge, say e = (vj , vi ), with j < i. By construction, e must be attached to one of the northern ports of vj (that is, north-west, north or north-east). On the other hand, e can be attached to any of the southern ports of vi , as e is its only incoming red edge. This guarantees that e can be drawn bend-less. Consider now the more involved case, where vi has exactly two incoming red edges, say e = (vj , vi ) and e0 = (vj 0 , vi ) and assume without loss of generality that vj is to the left of vj 0 in the drawing of Gk−1 . We distinguish three cases based on the available ports of vj : C.1: The north-east port of vj is unoccupied: In this case, e emanates from the north-east port of vj and leads to the south-west port of vi (recall that all southern ports of singleton vi are dedicated for incoming red edges; in this case e and e0 ). If the north-west or the north port of vj 0 is unoccupied, then e0 can be easily drawn bend-less. In the former case, e0 emanates from the north-west port of vj 0 and leads to the south-east port of vi . In the latter case, e0 emanates from the north port of vj 0 and leads to the south port of vi . Hence, the aforementioned port assignment fully specifies the position of vi . It remains to consider the case, where neither the north-west nor the north port of vj 0 is unoccupied, that is, the north-east port of vj 0 is unoccupied. By our coloring scheme and IP-2, vj 0 has already two incoming green edges, say eg and e0g , and e0 is the last edge to be attached at vj 0 ; see Figure 4a. Therefore, there is no other (bend-less) red edge involved. We proceed by shifting vj 0 up in a way that makes all northern ports of vj 0 unoccupied; see Figure 4b. Note that we may have to use a second bend on the outgoing blue edge of vj 0 (in order to maintain the stretchability invariant), but on the other hand we can eliminate one bend from the second green edge e0g ; see Figure 4b. So, the total number of bends remains unchanged. In addition, the endpoints of both eg and e0g that are opposite to vj 0 may have to be moved horizontally to allow eg and e0g to be drawn planar, but by the stretchability invariant we are guaranteed that this is always possible. Finally, the stretchability invariant is maintained, since each edge besides the red ones contains a horizontal segment. C.2: The north-east port of vj is occupied, while its north port is unoccupied: In this case, e emanates from the north port of vj and leads to the south port of vi (that is, vi and vj are vertically aligned). We now claim that the north-west port of vj 0 is unoccupied. For the sake 8  of contradiction, assume that the claim is not true. By our coloring scheme, the edge attached at the north-west port of vj 0 is green, which implies that there must exist a path vj vj 0 at the outerface face of Gk−1 whose first edge is blue at the north-east port of vj and its last edge is green at the north-west port of vj 0 . So, path vj vj 0 has a vertex which has a neighbor in Pκ for some κ ≥ k. Since vi is the only such candidate, the contradiction follows from the degree of vi . Hence, the north-west port of vj 0 is unoccupied and therefore we can draw e0 without bends by using the south-east port of vi and the north-west port of vj 0 , as desired. C.3: Only the north-west port of vj is unoccupied: We can reduce this case to case C.1 by applying an operation symmetric to the one of Figure 4a on vertex vj . This will result in a configuration where all northern ports of vj (including the north-east) are unoccupied. Theorem 2. Let G be a triconnected 5-planar graph with n vertices. A planar octilinear drawing Γ(G) of G with at most 2n − 2 bends can be computed in O(n) time. Proof. From our extension, it follows that the only edges of Γ(G) that have a bend are the blue and the green ones and possibly the third incoming red edge of vertex vn of the last partition Pm of Π. Now, recall that the blue subgraph is a spanning tree of G, while the green one is a forest on the vertices of G. So, in the worst case the green subgraph is a tree on n − 1 vertices of G (by construction the green subgraph cannot be incident to the first vertex v1 of Π). Therefore, at most 2n − 2 edges of Γ(G) have a bend. In addition, the running time remains linear since the shifting technique can still be applied. This is because once a vertex has been placed its y-coordinate does not change anymore, except for the special case of two red edges (cases C.1 and C.3), which does not influence the overall running time, since it can occur at most once per vertex.  2.3  Triconnected 6-Planar Graphs.  In this section, we present an algorithm that based on a canonical order Π = {P0 , P1 , . . . , Pm } of a given triconnected 6-planar graph G = (V, E) results in a drawing Γ(G) of G, in which each edge has at most two bends. Hence, in total Γ(G) has 6n − 12 bends. Then, we show how one can appropriately adjust the produced drawing to reduce the total number of bends. Algorithm 1 describes rules R1 - R6 to assign the edges to the ports of the corresponding vertices. It is not difficult to see that all port combinations implied by these rules can be realized with at most two bends, so that all edges have a horizontal segment (which makes the drawing horizontally stretchable): (i) a blue edge emanates from the west or south-west port of a vertex (by rule R4) and leads to one of the south-east, east, north-east, north or north-west ports of its other endvertex (by rule R1); see Figure 5g and 5h, (ii) a green edge emanates from the east or south-east  7 (a)  (g)  (b)  (c)  (h)  (d)  (i)  (e)  (j)  (f)  (k)  Figure 5: (a)-(f) Illustration of the port assignment computed by Algorithm 1. (g)-(k) Different segment combinations with at most two bends (horizontal segments are drawn dotted)  9  Algorithm 1: PortAssignment(v) input : A vertex v of a triconnected 6-planar graph. output: The port assignment of the edges around v, according to the following rules. R1: The incoming blue edges of v occupy consecutive ports in counterclockwise order around v starting from: a. the south-east port of v, if indegb (v) + outdegr (v) = 5; see Figure 5a. b. the east port of v, if indegb (v) + outdegr (v) = 4; see Figure 5b. c. the east port of v, if outdegg (v) = 0 and (a),(b) do not hold; see Figure 5c. d. the north-east port of v, otherwise; see Figure 5d. R2: The outgoing red edge occupies the counterclockwise next unoccupied port, if v has at least one incoming blue edge. Otherwise, the north-east port of v. R3: The incoming green edges of v occupy consecutive ports in clockwise order around v starting from: a. the west port of v, if indegg (v) + outdegr (v) + indegb (v) ≥ 4; see Figure 5e.  b. the north-west port of v, otherwise; see Figure 5f.  R4: The outgoing blue edge of v occupies the west port of v, if it is unoccupied; otherwise, the south-west port of v. R5: The outgoing green edge of v occupies the east port of v, if it is unoccupied; otherwise, the south-east port of v. R6: The incoming red edges of v occupy consecutively in counterclockwise direction the south-west, south and south-east ports of v starting from the first available.  port of a vertex (by rule R5) and leads to one of the west, north-west, north or north-east ports of its other endvertex (by rule R3); see Figure 5i and 5j, (iii) a red edge emanates from one of the north-west, north, north-east ports of a vertex (by rule R2) and leads to one of the south-west, south, south-east ports of its other endvertex (by rule R6); see Figure 5k. Hence, the shape of each edge is completely determined. To compute the actual drawing Γ(G) of G, we follow an incremental approach according to which one partition (that is, a singleton or a chain) of Π is placed at a time, similar to Kant’s approach [12] and the 4- or 5-planar case. Each edge is drawn based on its shape, while the horizontal stretchability ensures that potential crossings can always be eliminated. Note additionally that we adopt the leftist canonical order [1], according to which the leftmost partition is chosen to be placed, when there exist two or more candidates. Since each edge has at most two bends, Γ(G) has at most 6n − 12 bends in total.  In the following, we reduce the total number of bends. This is done in two steps. In the first step, we show that all red edges can be drawn with at most one bend each. Recall that a red edge emanates from one of the north-west, north, north-east ports of a vertex and leads to one of the south-west, south, south-east ports of its other-endvertex. So, in order to prove that all red 10  target source  south west  south  south east  north west north north east  Figure 6: Red edges can be redrawn with one bend (in gray boxes we show their initial 2-bends shapes)  edges can be drawn with at most one bend each, we have to consider in total nine cases, which are illustrated in Figure 6. It is not difficult to see that in each of these cases, the red edge can be drawn with at most one bend. Note that the absence of horizontal segments at the red edges does not affect the stretchability of Γ(G), since each face of Γ(G) has at most two such edges (which both “point upward” at a common vertex). Since a red edge cannot be incident to the outerface of any intermediate drawing constructed during the incremental construction of Γ(G), it follows that it is always possible to use only horizontal segments (of blue and green edges) to define vertical cuts, thus, avoiding all red edges. The second step of our bend reduction is more involved. Our claim is that we can “save” two bends per vertex3 , which yields a reduction by roughly 2n bends in total. To prove the claim, consider an arbitrary vertex u ∈ V of G. Our goal is to prove that there always exist two edges incident to u, which can be drawn with only one bend each. By rules R3 and R4, it follows that the west port of vertex u is always occupied, either by an incoming green edge (by rule R3) or by a blue outgoing edge (by rule R4; u 6= v1 ∈ P0 ). Analogously, the east port of vertex u is always occupied, either by a blue incoming edge (by rules R1 and R2) or by an outgoing green edge (by rule R5). Let (u, v) ∈ E be the edge attached at the west port of u (symmetrically we cope with the edge that is attached at the east port of u). If edge (u, v) is attached to a non-horizontal port at v, then (u, v) is by construction drawn with one bend (regardless of its color; see Figure 5g and 5i) and our claim follows. It remains to consider the case where edge (u, v) is attached to a horizontal port at v. Assume first that edge (u, v) is blue (we will discuss the case where edge (u, v) is green later). By Algorithm 1, it follows that edge (u, v) is either the first blue incoming edge attached at v (by rules R1b and R1c) or the second one (by rule R1a). We consider each of these cases separately. In rule R1c, observe that edge (u, v) is part of a chain (because outdegg (u) = 0). Hence, when placing this chain in the canonical order, we will place u directly to the right of v. This implies that (u, v) will be drawn as a horizontal line segment (that is, bend-less). Similarly, we cope with rule R1b, when additionally outdegg (u) = 0. So, there are still two cases to consider: rule R1a and rule R1b, when additionally outdegg (u) = 1; see the left part of Figure 7. In both cases, the current degree of vertex u is 3 and vertex v (and other vertices that are potentially horizontally-aligned with v) must be shifted diagonally up, when u is placed based on the canonical order, such that (u, v) is drawn as a horizontal line segment (that is, bend-less; see the right part of Figure 7). Note that when v is shifted up, vertex v and all vertices that are potentially horizontally-aligned with v are also of degree 3, since otherwise one of these vertices would not have a neighbor in some later partition of Π, which contradicts the definition of Π. We complete our case analysis with the case where edge (u, v) is green. By rule R3a, it follows that (u, v) is the first green incoming edge attached at u. In addition, when (u, v) is placed based on the canonical order, there is no red outgoing edge attached at u (otherwise u would not be at the 3  Except for vertex v1 of the first partition P0 of Π, which has no outgoing blue edge.  11  u  v  u  v Figure 7: Aligning vertices u and v.  outerface of the drawing constructed so far). The leftist canonical order also ensures that there is no blue incoming edge at u drawn before (u, v). Hence, vertex u is of degree two, when edge (u, v) is placed. Hence, it can be shifted up (potentially with other vertices that are horizontally-aligned with u), such that (u, v) is drawn as a horizontal line segment (that is, bend-less). We summarize our approach in the following theorem. Theorem 3. Let G be a triconnected 6-planar graph with n vertices. A planar octilinear drawing Γ(G) of G with at most 3n − 8 bends can be computed in O(n2 ) time. Proof. Before the two bend-reduction steps, Γ(G) contains at most 6n − 12 bends. In the first reduction step, all red edges are drawn with one bend. Hence, Γ(G) contains at most 5n − 9 bends. In the second reduction step, we “save” two bends per vertex (except for v1 ∈ P0 , which has no outgoing blue edge), which yields a reduction by 2n − 1 bends. Therefore, Γ(G) contains at most 3n − 8 bends in total. On the negative side, we cannot keep the running time of our algorithm linear. The reason is the second reduction step, which yields changes in the y-coordinates of the vertices. In the worst case, however, quadratic time suffices. Note that there exist 6-planar graphs that do not admit planar octilinear drawings with at most one bend per edge [2]. Theorem 3 implies that on average one bend per edge suffices.  3  Lower Bounds  In this section, we present lower bounds on the total number of bends for the classes of triconected 4-, 5- and 6-planar graphs.  3.1  4-Planar Graphs.  We start our study with the case of 4-planar graphs. Our main observation is that if a 3-cycle C3 of a graph has at least two vertices, with at least one neighbor in the interior of C3 each, then at least one edge of C3 must contain a bend, since the sum of the interior angles at the corners of C3 exceeds 180◦ . In fact, elementary geometry implies that a k-cycle, say Ck with k ≥ 3, whose vertices have σ ≥ 0 neighbors in the interior of Ck requires (at least) max{0, d(σ − 3k + 8)/3e} bends. Therefore, a bend is necessary. Now, refer to the 4-planar graph of Figure 8a, which contains n/3 nested triangles, where n is the number of its vertices. It follows that this particular graph requires at least n/3 − 1 bends in total.  3.2  5- and 6-Planar Graphs.  For 5- and 6-planar graphs, our proof becomes more complex. For these classes of graphs, we follow an approach inspired by Tamassia’s min-cost flow formulation [19] for computing bendminimum representations of embedded planar graphs of bounded degree. Since it is rather difficult to implement this algorithm in the case where the underlying drawing model is not the orthogonal model, we developed an ILP instead. Recall that a representation describes the “shape” of a drawing without specifying its exact geometry. This is enough to determine a lower bound on the number 12  (a) A 4-planar graph  (b) A 5-planar graph  (c) A 6-planar graph  Figure 8: Planar graphs of different degrees that require (a) n/3 − 1, (b) 2n/3 − 2 and (c) 4n/3 − 6 bends.  of bends, even if a bend-optimal octilinear representation may not be realizable by a corresponding (planar) octilinear drawing. In our formulation, variable α(u, v) · 45◦ corresponds to the angle formed at vertex u by edge (u, v) and its cyclic predecessor around vertex P u. Hence, 1 ≤ α(u, v) ≤ 8. Since the sum of the ◦ angles around a vertex is 360 , it follows that v∈N (u) a(u, v) = 8. Given an edge e = (u, v), variables `45 (u, v), `90 (u, v) and `135 (u, v) correspond to the number of left turns at 45◦ , 90◦ and 135◦ when moving along (u, v) from vertex u towards vertex v. Similarly, variables r45 (u, v), r90 (u, v) and r135 (u, v) are defined for right turns. All aforementioned variables are integer lowerbounded by zero. For a face f , we assume that its edges are directed according to the clockwise traversal of f . This implies that each (undirected) edge of the graph appears twice in our formulation. For reasons of symmetry, we require `45 (u, v) = r45 (v, u), `90 (u, v) = r90 (v, u) and `135 (u, v) = r135 (v, u). Since the sum of the angles formed at the vertices and at the bends of a bounded facePf equals to 180◦ · (p(f ) − 2), where p(f ) denotes the total number of such angles, it follows that (u,v)∈E(f ) α(u, v) + (`45 (u, v) + `90 (u, v) + `135 (u, v)) − (r45 (u, v) + r90 (u, v) + r135 (u, v)) = 4a(f ) − 8, where a(f ) denotes the total number of vertex angles in f , and, E(f ) the directed arcs of f in its clockwise traversal. If f is unbounded, the respective sum is increased by 16. Of Pcourse, the objective is to minimize the total number of bends over all edges, or, equivalently min (u,v)∈E `45 (u, v) + `90 (u, v) + `135 (u, v) + r45 (u, v) + r90 (u, v) + r135 (u, v). Now, consider the 5-planar graph of Figure 8b and observe that each “layer” of this graph consist of six vertices that form an octahedron (solid-drawn), while octahedrons of consecutive layers are connected with three edges (dotted-drawn). Using our ILP formulation, we prove that each octahedron subgraph requires at least 4 bends, when drawn in the octilinear model (except for the innermost one for which we can guarantee only two bends). This implies that 2n/3 − 2 bends are required in total to draw the graph of Figure 8b. For the 6-planar case, we apply our ILP approach to a similar graph consisting of nested octahedrons that are connected by six edges each; see Figure 8c. This leads to a better lower bound of 4n/3 − 6 bends, as each octahedron except for the innermost one requires 8 bends. Summarizing we have: Theorem 4. There exists a class Gn,k of triconnected embedded k-planar graphs, with 4 ≤ k ≤ 6, whose octilinear drawings require at least: (i) n/3 − 1 bends, if k = 4, (ii) 2n/3 − 2 bends, if k = 5 and (iii) 4n/3 − 6 bends, if k = 6.  4  Conclusions  In this paper, we studied bounds on the total number of bends of octilinear drawings of triconnected planar graphs. We showed how one can adjust an algorithm of Keszegh et al. [14] to derive an upper bound of 4n − 10 bends for general 8-planar graphs. Then, we improved this general bound and 13  previously-known ones for the classes of triconnected 4-, 5- and 6-planar graphs. For these classes of graphs, we also presented corresponding lower bounds. We mention two major open problems in this context. The first one is to extend our results to biconnected and simply connected graphs and to further tighten the bounds. Since our drawing algorithms might require super-polynomial area (cf. arguments from [2]), the second problem is to study trade-offs between the total number of bends and the required area.  References [1] M. Badent, U. Brandes, and S. Cornelsen. More canonical ordering. Journal of Graph Algorithms and Applications, 15(1):97–126, 2011. [2] M. A. Bekos, M. Gronemann, M. Kaufmann, and R. Krug. Planar octilinear drawings with one bend per edge. Journal of Graph Algorithms and Applications, 19(2):657–680, 2015. [3] T. C. Biedl. New lower bounds for orthogonal graph drawings. In F. J. Brandenburg, editor, Graph Drawing, volume 1027 of LNCS, pages 28–39. Springer, 1996. [4] T. C. Biedl and G. Kant. A better heuristic for orthogonal graph drawings. Computational Geometry, 9(3):159–180, 1998. [5] H. L. Bodlaender and G. Tel. A note on rectilinearity and angular resolution. Journal of Graph Algorithms and Applications, 8(1):89–94, 2004. [6] H. De Fraysseix, J. Pach, and R. Pollack. How to draw a planar graph on a grid. Combinatorica, 10(1):41–51, 1990. [7] E. Di Giacomo, G. Liotta, and F. Montecchiani. The planar slope number of subcubic graphs. In A. Pardo and A. Viola, editors, LATIN, volume 8392 of LNCS, pages 132–143. Springer, 2014. [8] S. Felsner. Schnyder woods or how to draw a planar graph? In Geometric Graphs and Arrangements, Advanced Lectures in Mathematics, pages 17–42. Vieweg/Teubner Verlag, 2004. [9] U. Fössmeier, C. Hess, and M. Kaufmann. On improving orthogonal drawings: The 4Malgorithm. In S. Whitesides, editor, Graph Drawing, volume 1547 of LNCS, pages 125–137. Springer, 1998. [10] A. Garg and R. Tamassia. On the computational complexity of upward and rectilinear planarity testing. SIAM Journal on Computing, 31(2):601–625, 2001. [11] S.-H. Hong, D. Merrick, and H. A. D. do Nascimento. Automatic visualisation of metro maps. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 17(3):203–224, 2006. [12] G. Kant. Drawing planar graphs using the lmc-ordering. In FOCS, pages 101–110. IEEE, 1992. [13] G. Kant. Hexagonal grid drawings. In E. W. Mayr, editor, WG, volume 657 of LNCS, pages 263–276. Springer, 1992. [14] B. Keszegh, J. Pach, and D. Pálvölgyi. Drawing planar graphs of bounded degree with few slopes. SIAM Journal of Discrete Mathematics, 27(2):1171–1183, 2013. [15] Y. Liu, A. Morgana, and B. Simeone. A linear algorithm for 2-bend embeddings of planar graphs in the two-dimensional grid. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 81(1-3):69–91, 1998. 14  [16] M. Nöllenburg. Automated drawings of metro maps. Technical Report 2005-25, Fakultät für Informatik, Universität Karlsruhe, 2005. [17] M. Nöllenburg and A. Wolff. Drawing and labeling high-quality metro maps by mixed-integer programming. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17(5):626–641, 2011. [18] J. M. Stott, P. Rodgers, J. C. Martinez-Ovando, and S. G. Walker. Automatic metro map layout using multicriteria optimization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17(1):101–114, 2011. [19] R. Tamassia. On embedding a graph in the grid with the minimum number of bends. SIAM Journal of Computing, 16(3):421–444, 1987. [20] R. Tamassia, I. G. Tollis, and J. S. Vitter. Lower bounds for planar orthogonal drawings of graphs. Information Processing Letters, 39(1):35–40, 1991.  15

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
