Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_6269

Abstract:
What is Wrong with Topic Modeling? (and How to Fix it Using Search-based Software Engineering) Amritanshu Agrawal∗, Wei Fu∗, Tim Menzies∗ Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA  arXiv:1608.08176v4 [cs.SE] 20 Feb 2018  Abstract Context: Topic modeling finds human-readable structures in unstructured textual data. A widely used topic modeling technique is Latent Dirichlet allocation. When running on different datasets, LDA suffers from “order effects”, i.e., different topics are generated if the order of training data is shuffled. Such order effects introduce a systematic error for any study. This error can relate to misleading results; specifically, inaccurate topic descriptions and a reduction in the efficacy of text mining classification results. Objective: To provide a method in which distributions generated by LDA are more stable and can be used for further analysis. Method: We use LDADE, a search-based software engineering tool which uses Differential Evolution (DE) to tune the LDA’s parameters. LDADE is evaluated on data from a programmer information exchange site (Stackoverflow), title and abstract text of thousands of Software Engineering (SE) papers, and software defect reports from NASA. Results were collected across different implementations of LDA (Python+Scikit-Learn, Scala+Spark) across Linux platform and for different kinds of LDAs (VEM, Gibbs sampling). Results were scored via topic stability and text mining classification accuracy. Results: In all treatments: (i) standard LDA exhibits very large topic instability; (ii) LDADE’s tunings dramatically reduce cluster instability; (iii) LDADE also leads to improved performances for supervised as well as unsupervised learning. Conclusion: Due to topic instability, using standard LDA with its “off-the-shelf” settings should now be depreciated. Also, in future, we should require SE papers that use LDA to test and (if needed) mitigate LDA topic instability. Finally, LDADE is a candidate technology for effectively and efficiently reducing that instability. Keywords: Topic modeling, Stability, LDA, tuning, differential evolution.  1. Introduction The current great challenge in software analytics is understanding unstructured data. As shown in Figure 1, most of the planet’s 1600 Exabytes of data does not appear in structured sources (databases, etc) [1]. Mostly the data is of unstructured form, often in free text, and found in word processing files, slide presentations, comments, etc. Such unstructured data does not have a pre-defined data model and is typically text-heavy. Finding insights among unstructured text is difficult unless we can search, characterize, and classify the textual data in a meaningful way. One of the common techniques for finding related topics within unstructured text (an area called topic modeling) is Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) [2]. This paper explores systematic errors in LDA analysis. LDA is a non-deterministic algorithm since its internal weights are updated via a stochastic sampling process (described later in this paper). We show in this paper that this non-determinism  means that the topics generated by LDA on SE data are subject to order effects, i.e., different input orderings can lead to different topics. Such instability can: • Confuse users when they see different topics each time the algorithm is re-run. • Reduce the efficacy of text mining classifiers that rely on LDA to generate their input training data. To fix this problem, we propose LDADE: a combination of  ∗ Corresponding  author: Tel: +1-919-637-0412 (Amritanshu) Email addresses: aagrawa8@ncsu.edu (Amritanshu Agrawal), wfu@ncsu.edu (Wei Fu), tim.menzies@gmail.com (Tim Menzies) URL: https://amritag.wixsite.com/amrit (Amritanshu Agrawal) Preprint submitted to Elsevier  Figure 1: Data Growth 2005-2015. From [1]. February 21, 2018  LDA and a search-based optimizer (differential evolution, or DE) [3]) that automatically tunes LDA’s < k, α, β > parameters. We prefer LDADE to other methods for two reasons, 1) LDADE is orders of magnitude faster and 2) other methods do not address the problem of order effects (for evidence on this second point, see our comparison against the LDA-GA method used by Panichella et al. [4], in the results section). This paper tests LDADE by applying text mining to three data sets: (a) Data from a programmer information exchange site (Stackoverflow), (b) Title and abstract text of 15121 SE papers (Citemap) and (c) Software defect reports from NASA (Pits). Using these datasets, we explore these research questions: • RQ1: Are the default settings of LDA incorrect? We will show that using the default settings of LDA for SE data can lead to systematic errors since stability scores start to drop after n = 5 terms per topic. • RQ2: Does LDADE improve the stability scores? LDADE dramatically improves stability scores using the parameters found automatically by DE. • RQ3: Does LDADE improve text mining classification accuracy? Our experiments shows that LDADE also improves classification accuracy. • RQ4: Do different data sets need different configurations to make LDA stable? LDADE finds different “best” parameter settings for different data sets. Hence reusing tunings suggested by any other previous study for any dataset is not recommended. Instead, it is better to use automatic tuning methods to find the best tuning parameters for the current data set. • RQ5: Are our findings consistent when using different kinds of LDA or with different implementations? Results were collected across different implementations of LDA across Linux platform and for different kinds of LDAs. Across all these implementations, the same effect holds: (a) standard LDA suffers from order effect and topic instability and (b) LDADE can reduce that instability. • RQ6: Is tuning easy? We show that, measured in the terms of the internal search space of the optimizer, tuning LDA is much simpler than standard optimization methods. • RQ7: Is tuning extremely slow? The advantages of LDADE come at some cost: tuning with DE makes LDA three to five times slower. While this is definitely more than not using LDA, this may not be an arduous increase given modern cloud computing environments. • RQ8: How better LDADE is compared against other methods for tuning LDA? Our analysis confirms that LDADE is better for LDA tuning than (a) random search and (b) the genetic algorithm approach used in prior work [4]. • RQ9: Should topic modeling be used “off-the-shelf” with their default tunings? Based on these findings, our answer to this question is an emphatic “no”. We can see little reason to use “off-the-shelf” LDA for any kind of SE data mining applications. The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 ar-  gues that stabilizing the topics generated by LDA is important for several reasons. Related work is reviewed in Section 3 and the methods of this paper are discussed in Section 4. We have answered above research questions in Section 5. This is followed by a discussion on the validity of our results and a section describing our conclusions. Note that the main conclusion of this paper is that, henceforth, we should require SE papers that use LDA to test and (if needed) mitigate LDA topic instability.  2. Motivation 2.1. LDA is Widely Used We study LDA since this algorithm is a widely-used technique in recent research papers appearing in prominent SE venues. Tables 1 [28] and 2 show top SE venues that published SE results and a sample of those papers respectively. For details on how Table 2 is generated, see Section 3.4. As to how LDA is used, it is important to understand the distinction between supervised and unsupervised data mining algorithms. In the general sense, most data mining is “supervised” when you have data samples associated with labels and then use machine learning tools to make predictions. For example, in the case of [16, 26], the authors used LDA as a feature extractor to build feature vectors which, subsequently, were passed to a learner to predict for a target class. Note that such supervised LDA processes can be fully automated and do not require human-in-the-loop insight to generate their final conclusions. However, in case of, “unsupervised learning”, the final conclusions are generated via a manual analysis and reflection over, e.g., the topics generated by LDA. Such cases represent [7, 21] who used a manual analysis of the topics generated from some SE tasks textual data by LDA as part of the reasoning within Table 1: Top SE venues that published on Topic Modeling from 2009 to 2016. Venue ICSE CSMRWCRE / SANER ICSM / ICSME ICPC ASE ISSRE MSR OOPSLA FSE/ESEC TSE IST SCP ESE  2  Full Name International Conference on Software Engineering International Conference on Software Maintenance, Reengineering, and Reverse Engineering / International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and Reengineering International Conference on Software Maintenance / International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution International Conference on Program Comprehension International Conference on Automated Software Engineering International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering International Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories International Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications International Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering / European Software Engineering Conference IEEE Transaction on Software Engineering Information and Software Technology Science of Computer Programming Empirical Software Engineering  Count 4 3  3 4 3 2 8 1 1 1 3 2 4  Table 2: A sample of the recent literature on using topic modeling in SE. Sorted by number of citations (in column3). For details on how this table was generated, see Section 3.4.  REF  Year  Citations  Venues  [5]  2011  112  WCRE  Mentions instability in LDA? Y  Uses Default Parameters Y  Does tuning?  Conclusion  N  Explored Configurations without any explanation. Explored Configurations without any explanation. Reported their results using multiple experiments. Explored Configurations without any explanation. Choosing right set of parameters is a difficult task. Uses GA to tune parameters. They determine the near-optimal configuration for LDA in the context of only some important SE tasks.  [6]  2010  108  MSR  Y  Y  N  [7]  2014  96  ESE  Y  Y  N  [4]  2013  75  ICSE  Y  Y  Y  [8]  2013  61  ICSE  Y  Y  N  [9]  2011  52  MSR  Y  Y  N  [10]  2014  44  RE  Y  Y  N  They validated the topic labelling techniques using multiple experiments. Explored Configurations without any explanation.  [11]  2011  44  ICSE  Y  Y  N  Open issue to choose optimal parameters.  [12]  2014  35  SCP  Y  Y  N  [13]  2012  35  MSR  Y  Y  N  [14]  2014  31  ESE  Y  Y  N  Tasks / Use cases  Unsupervised or Supervised  Bug Localisation  Unsupervised  Traceability Link recovery  Unsupervised  Stackoverflow Q&A data analysis  Unsupervised  Finding near-optimal configurations  Semi-Supervised  Software Requirements Analysis  Unsupervised  Software Artifacts Analysis  Unsupervised  Requirements Engineering  Unsupervised Unsupervised  Explored Configurations without any explanation.  A review on LDA Mining software repositories using topic models Software Artifacts Analysis  Choosing the optimal number of topics is difficult.  Software Defects Prediction  Unsupervised  Choosing right set of parameters is a difficult task.  Software Testing  Unsupervised  Software History Comprehension  Unsupervised  Explored Configurations without any explanation.  Unsupervised  [15]  2009  29  MSR  Y  Y  N  [16]  2013  27  ESEC/FSE  Y  Y  Y  Explored Configurations without any explanation and accepted to the fact their results were better because of the corpus they used. Explored Configurations using LDA-GA.  [17]  2014  20  ICPC  Y  Y  N  Use heuristics to find right set of parameters.  [18]  2013  20  MSR  Y  Y  N  In Future, they planned to use LDA-GA.  [19]  2014  15  WebSci  Y  Y  N  Explored Configurations without any explanation.  N  Their work focused on optimizing LDAs topic count parameter.  Source Code Comprehension  Unsupervised  N  Explored Configurations without any explanation.  Software Requirements Analysis  Unsupervised  Software re-factoring  [20] [21]  2013 2012  13 13  SCP ICSM  Y Y  Y Y  [22]  2015  6  IST  Y  Y  N  Explored Configurations without any explanation. Choosing right set of parameters is a difficult task.  [23]  2016  5  CS Review  Y  Y  N  Explored Configurations without any explanation.  [24]  2014  5  ISSRE  N  Y  N  Explored Configurations without any explanation.  [25]  2015  3  JIS  Y  Y  N  [26]  2015  2  IST  Y  Y  Y  [27]  2016  0  JSS  N  Y  N  They improvised LDA into ISLDA which gave stability across different runs. Explored Configurations using LDA-GA. Explored Configurations without any explanation. Choosing right set of parameters is a difficult task.  the text of that paper. It is possible to combine manual and automatic methods, please see the “Semi-supervised” LDA paper of Le et al. [24].  Traceability Link recovery Source Code Comprehension Stackoverflow Q&A data analysis Social Software Engineering  Bibliometrics and citations analysis Bug Localisation  Supervised Unsupervised Unsupervised Unsupervised  Supervised Unsupervised Semi-Supervised  Social Software Engineering  Unsupervised  Software Artifacts Analysis  Supervised  Software Defects Prediction  Unsupervised  ters of LDA. Yet as reported in Section 3.4, a repeated pattern in the literature is that, despite these stated concerns, researchers rarely take the next step to find ways to find better control tunings.  However, as shown in our sample, one observation could be made that out of the 28 studies in Table 2, 23 of them make extensive use of LDA for the purposes of unsupervised exploration. At some point these papers, browsed the LDA topics to guide their subsequent analysis. For example: 1) Barua et al. [7] used the LDA topics to summarize the topics and trends in Stackoverflow, 2) Galvis et al. [8] used LDA to gain an understanding of the nature of user statements in requirements documents, and many more.  2.2. Standard LDA Can Make Misleading Conclusions Standard practice in papers that use LDA is to present a table showing the top, say, 40 topics [7]. This section shows one example where, due to LDA instability, the contents of such tables can only be described as mostly illusionary. Later in this paper (in Section 5.1) we show that this example is actually representative of a general problem: changing the input ordering dramatically changes the topics reported by LDA. Barua et al. [7] analysed the topics and trends in Stackoverflow in which they reported the top 40 topics found at Stackoverflow. Table 3 shows our attempt to reproduce their results.  As witnessed by the central columns of Table 2, many prior papers [4, 16, 26] have commented that the results of a topic modeling analysis can be affected by tuning the control parame3  Table 3: LDA topic instability. Shows results from two runs. Column1 reports the percent of words from a topic seen in its nearest match in the second run. % overlap with closest topic in run2 100 100 100 88 88 77 77 77 77 77 77 66 66 66 66 66 66 66 66 55 55 55 55 55 55 44 44 44 44 44 44 33 33 33 33 33 33 22 22 22  Topic name Xaml Binding Ruby on Rails MVC Objective C Function Return Types Testing Socket Communications Q and A OO Programming HTML Links Display Windows/VS Tips Website Design Web Development Java Programming Date/Time Format Database Android User View .NET Framework iOS App Development MySQL HTML Form Git Operations Email Message Eclipse iOS App Development Regular Expressions Media Player Float number Manipulation Compiling .NET Framework Ruby Version Manager Scripting Language NodeJS C# Programming Python Programming Android Debugging Visual Studio Information Systems Flex4 Development  top 9 words in topic grid window bind valu wpf silverlight control xaml properti rubi rail gem lib user end rvm app requir http com java apach bean org springframework sun servlet self cell nsstring iphon nil object anim alloc view function const char void includ amp return int std chang tri work use problem like set code test Main send socket connect run Android Activity thread start task process time know need want way use question time like make instanc void type new method class return object public com http www url html site content page link height jpg imag png src size img color width studio net dll web use mvc control asp visual left span style text class div color css width script jqueri function form input type ajax var javascript java void new privat return null int public string select day valu option year format month time date column order group select join tabl row queri null height content textview parent wrap android width view layout net form text checkbox control click label asp button applic user need iphon develop want app use like connect sql databas tabl row queri data mysql server form login user usernam password page XML control action session folder upload open git use path read file directori address form send field email messag error valid contact maven jar target build eclips version depend plugin project applic user need iphon develop want app use like function array replac regex match echo php post string object video play game player obj use data audio doubl valu count rang number data length float point librari compil lib includ usr command file error test net form text checkbox control click label asp button end lib user rvm rubi rail app gem requir def line self modul print import templat django python tag function node express parent use list like variabl net web asp servic mvc use control applic wcf line python file print command script curl output run com java lang debug method info android error androidruntim window project file error librari compil visual build dll messag email log address contact send mail phone locat flash function new var list click sub event item  Note that we could not produce a verbatim reproduction since they used the data of Stackoverflow dumped on 2012 while we used the current dump of 2016. The analysis in Table 3 is generated by running LDA twice with different randomly generated input orderings (keeping all other parameter settings intact). After that, the topics generated from the first run where scored according to the overlap of their words from the second run. We observed that while a very few topics appear verbatim in the two runs (see the top three lines of Table 3), but most do not. In fact, 25 of the 40 topics in that figure show instability (have an overlap of 55% or less). In Table 3, we only examine the top n = 9 words in each topic of run1 and run2. We selected n = 9 since, later in this paper, we find that an analysis of n > 9 words per topics leads to near zero percent overlap of the topics generated in different runs (see Section 5.1). That is, the instabilities of Table 3 get even worse if we use more of the LDA output.  shown later in this paper, we can use LDADE to increase the similarities of the LDA topics generated by LDA (see Section 5.2). As to the effects on classification accuracy, one way to score a classifier is via the Fβ score that combines precision p and recall r as follows: pr Fβ = (1 + β 2 ) 2 (1) pβ + r We compared the analysis with F1 (β = 1) and F2 (β = 2) metrics seen in text mining classification using standard and stable topics generated by LDADE. The F2 score is useful when reporting classification results since it favors classifiers that do not waste the time on false positives. In Section 5.3, we report significant and large improvements in both the evaluation metrics. That is, LDADE not only improves topic stability, but also the efficacy of the inference that subsequently uses those topics. 3. Related Work  2.3. LDA Stabilization Means Better Inference Inference with LDA can be assessed via topic similarities (as done in Table 3) and via the classification performance if the LDA topics are used as features to be fed into a classifier. As  3.1. Topic Modeling LDA is a generative statistical model that allows sets of observations to be explained by unobserved groups that explain 4  Table 4: Example (from [7]) of generating topics from Stackoverflow. For each topic, we show just the five most heavily weighted words. Topic: String Manipulation string charact encod format convert  Topic: Function function paramet pass return argument  Topic: OO Programming class method object call interfac  Topic: UI Development control view event button click  algorithms survey the space of possible models across numerous random divisions of the data (e.g., Random Forests [30]). From the description offered above in Section 3.1, we can see how topic modeling might be susceptible to order effects and how such order effects might be tamed: 1) In the above description, k, α and β are initialized at random then updated via an incremental re-sampling process. Such incremental updates are prone to order effects, and 2) other way is to initialize, k, α and β to some useful value. As shown in Section 5.4, the key to applying this technique is that different data sets will require different initializations, i.e., the tuning process will have to be repeated for each new data set.  Topic: File Operation file directori path folder creat  why some parts of the data are similar. It learns the various distributions (the set of topics, their associated word probabilities, the topic of each word, and the particular topic mixture of each document). What makes topic modeling interesting is that these algorithms scale to very large text corpuses. For example, in this paper, we apply LDA to whole of Stackoverflow, as well as to two other large text corpuses in SE. Table 4 illustrates topic generation from Stackoverflow. To find these topics, LDA explores two probability distributions: • α = P(k|d), probability of topic k in document d; • β = P(w|k), probability of word w in topic k. Initially, α and β may be set randomly as follows: each word in a document was generated by first randomly picking a topic (from the documents distribution of topics) and then randomly picking a word (from the topics distribution of words). Successive iterations of the algorithm count the implications of prior sampling which, in turn, incrementally updates α and β . Binkley et al. [17] performed an extensive study and found that apart from α and β , the other parameters that define LDA are: • k = number of topics • b = number of burn-in iterations; • si = the sampling interval. Binkley et al.’s study of the LDA settings was a mostly manual process guided by their considerable background knowledge and expertise and program comprehension. In the field of program comprehension, the Binkley article is the state of the art in applications of LDA to software engineering. To that work, this paper adds a few extra conclusions. Firstly, we explore LDA in fields other than program comprehension. Secondly, we ask the question “what if the analysts lacks extensive background knowledge of the domain?”. In that circumstance, some automatic method is needed to support an informed selection of the LDA parameters.  3.3. Tuning: Important and (Mostly) Ignored The impact of tuning is well understood in the theoretical machine learning literature [31]. When we tune a data miner, what we are really doing is changing how a learner applies its heuristics. This means tuned data miners use different heuristics, which means they ignore different possible models, which means they return different models, i.e., how we learn changes what we learn. Yet issues relating to tuning are poorly addressed in the software analytics literature. Fu et al. [32] surveyed hundreds of recent SE papers in the area of software defect prediction from static code attributes. They found that most SE authors do not take steps to explore tunings (rare exception: [33]). For example, Elish et al [34] compared support vector machines to other data miners for the purposes of defect prediction. That paper tested different “off-the-shelf” data miners on the same data set, without adjusting the parameters of each individual learner. Similar comparisons of data miners in SE, with no or minimal pre-tuning study, can be found in the work on Lessmann et al. [35] and, most recently, in Yang et al [36]. In summary, all our literature reviews of the general (nonLDA) software analytics literature show that the importance of tuning is often mentioned, but never directly addressed. 3.4. LDA, Instability and Tuning Within the LDA literature, some researchers have explored LDA instability. We searched scholar.google.com for papers published before August 2016, for the conjunction of “lda” and “topics” or “stable” or “unstable” or “coherence”. Since 2012, there are 189 such papers, 57 of which are related to software engineering results. Table 2 gives a broad discussion on these papers. In short, of those papers: • 28/57 mention instability in LDA. • Of those 28, despite mentioning stability problems, 10 papers still used LDA’s “off-the-shelf” parameters; • The other 28-10=18 papers used some combination of manual adjustment or some under-explained limited exploration of tunings based on “engineering judgment” (i.e., some settings guided by the insights of the researchers). • Only 4 of the authors acknowledge that tuning might have a large impact on the results. Apart from tuning, there are several other workarounds explored in the literature in order to handle LDA instability. Overall, there was little systematic exploration of tuning and LDA in  3.2. About Order Effects This paper uses tuning to fix “order effects” in topic modeling. Langley [29] defines such effects as follows: A learner L exhibits an order effect on a training set T if there exist two or more orders of T for which L produces different knowledge structures. Many learners exhibit order effects, e.g., certain incremental clustering algorithms generate different clusters, depending on the order with which they explore the data [29]. Hence, some 5  Table 5: Statistics on our datasets. PitsA, PitsB, etc refer to the issues from six different NASA projects.  the SE literature. Instead, researchers relied on other methods that are less suited to automatic reproduction of prior results. In the literature, researchers [10, 37, 38] manually accessed the topics and then used for further experiments. Some made use of Amazon Mechanical Turk to create gold-standard coherence judgements [39]. All these solutions are related to results stability rather than model stability. Note that this workaround takes extensive manual effort and time. Another approach to tame LDA instability is to incorporate user knowledge into the corpus. For example, SC-LDA [40] can handle different kinds of knowledge such as word correlation, document correlation, document label and so on. Using such user knowledge, while certainly valuable, is somewhat subjective. Hence, for reasons of reproducibility, we prefer fully automated methods. Some researchers used genetic algorithms to learn better settings for LDA [4, 16, 26]. Genetic algorithms are themselves a stochastic search process. That is, the changes to input orderings explored in this paper would introduce further conclusion instability from the genetic algorithms. In principle, that instability could be removed via extra runs of genetic algorithms over multiple sub-samples of that, where the GA goals are augmented to include “similar topics should be found in different runs”. That said: • None of the prior work using GAs to improve LDA have applied those sub-sampling stability test; • If done naively, adding further goals and data subsampling to a GA runs the risk of dramatically increasing the runtimes. One reason to prefer LDADE is that it terminates very quickly. Finally, other researchers explore some limited manual parameter tuning for LDA (e.g., experiment with one parameter: cluster size) [8, 41] to achieve higher stability by just increasing the number of cluster size. Note that the automatic tuning methods explored by this paper can explore multiple parameters. Further, our analysis is repeatable.  Size Data set PitsA PitsB PitsC PitsD PitsE PitsF Citemap Stackoverflow  Before Preprocessing 1.2 MB 704 KB 143 KB 107 KB 650 KB 549 KB 8.6 MB 7 GB  After Preprocessing 292 KB 188 KB 37 KB 26 KB 216 KB 217 KB 3.7 MB 589 MB  review patches. Such issues are used to manage quality assurance, to support communication between developers. Topic modeling in PITS can be used to identify the top topics which can identify each severity separately. The dataset can be downloaded from the PROMISE repository [44]. Note that, this data comes from six different NASA projects, which we label as PitsA, PitsB, etc. Stackoverflow is the flagship site of the Stack Exchange Network which features questions and answers on a wide range of topics in computer programming. There has been various studies done to find good topics on Stackoverflow for SE [7, 18, 45, 46]. Topic modeling on Stackoverflow is useful for finding patterns in programmer knowledge. This data can be downloaded online2 . Citemap contains titles and abstracts of 15121 papers from a database of 11 senior software engineering conferences from 1992-2016. Most of this data was obtained in the form of an SQL dump from the work of Vasilescu et al. [47] and some are collected by Mathew et al [48]. People have studied healthiness of software engineering conferences [49]. This dataset is available online3 . For this study, all datasets were preprocessed using the usual text mining filters [50]: • Stop words removal using NLTK toolkit4 [51] : ignore very common short words such as “and” or “the”. • Porter’s stemming filter [52]: delete uninformative word endings, e.g., after performing stemming, all the following words would be rewritten to “connect”: “connection”, “connections”, “connective”, “connected”, “connecting”. • Tf-idf feature selection: focus on the 5% of words that occur frequently, but only in small numbers of documents. If a word occurs w times and is found in d documents and there are W, D total number of words and documents respectively, then tf-idf is scored as follows:  4. Methods This section describes our evaluation methods for measuring instability as well as the optimization methods used to reduce that instability. All our code scripts, methods and results can be found online1 . 4.1. Data Sets To answer our research questions, and to enable reproducibility of our results, we use three open source datasets summarized in Table 5 and described below. These 3 datasets are unrelated which solve different SE tasks. We wanted to make sure our LDADE is useful for these 3 tasks. This puts emphasis on the importance of stability in LDA. PITS is a text mining data set generated from NASA software project and issue tracking system (PITS) reports [42, 43]. This text discusses bugs and changes found in big reports and  tfidf (w, d) =  D w ∗ log W d  Table 5 shows the sizes of our data before and after preprocessing. These datasets are of different sizes and so are 2 http://tiny.cc/SOProcess 3 https://github.com/ai-se/Pits  1 https://github.com/ai-se/Pits  lda/blob/master/dataset/citemap.csv  4 http://www.nltk.org/book/ch02.html  lda/  6  Figure 2: Example of topics overlap off size n = 5 across multiple runs.  of n ≤ 9 (we use 9 as our maximum size since the cognitive science literature tells us that 7 ± 2 is a useful upper size for artifacts to be browsed by humans [56]). Next, for 1 ≤ n ≤ 9, we will calculate the median size of the overlap, computed as follows: • Let one run of our rig shuffle the order of the training data, then build topic models using the data; • m runs of our rig execute m copies of one run, each time using a different random number seed, • Topics are said to be stable, when there are x occurrences of n terms appearing in all the topics seen in the m runs. For example, consider the topics shown in Figure 2. These are generated via four runs of our system. In this hypothetical example, we will assume that the runs of Figure 2 were generated by an LDA suffering from topic instability. For n = 5, we note that Topic 0 of run1 scores 42 = 0.5 since it shares 5 words with topics in only two out of four runs. Repeating that calculation for the other run1 topics shows that: • Topic 1 of run1 scores 34 = 0.75; • Topic 2 or run1 scores 41 = 0.25; • Topic 3 of run1 scores 44 = 1. From this information, we can calculate ℜ5 (the median number overlaps of size n = 5 words) as:  processed using different tools: 1) PITS and Citemap is small enough to process on a single (four core) desktop machine using Scikit-Learn [53] and Python, and 2) Stackoverflow is so large (7GB) that its processing requires extra hardware support. This study used Spark and Mllib on a cluster of 45 nodes to reduce the runtime. 4.2. Similarity Scoring To evaluate topics coherence in LDA, there is a direct approach, by asking people about topics, and an indirect approach by evaluating pointwise mutual information (PMI) [39, 54] between the topic words. We could not use any of these criteria, as it requires experts to have domain knowledge. Perplexity is the inverse of the geometric mean per-word likelihood. The smaller the perplexity, the better (less uniform) is the LDA model. The usual trend is that as the value of perplexity drops, the number of topics should grow [19]. Researchers caution that the value of perplexity does not remain constant with different topic and corpus sizes [55]. Perplexity depend on its code implementation and the type of datasets used. Since we are using different implementations of LDA across different platforms on various datasets, we are not using perplexity as evaluation measure. There is well known measure, called Jaccard Similarity [8, 54], for measuring similarity. But we modified the measure to do a cross-run similarity of topics. For this work, we assess topic model stability via the median number overlaps of size n words (size of topic), which is denoted as ℜn . For this measurement, we first determine the maximum size of topics we will study. For that purpose, we will study the case  median(0.5, 0.75, 0.25, 1) = 0.625 Figure 3 shows the ℜn scores of Figure 2 for 1 ≤ n ≤ 9. From this figure, we can see LDA topic instability since any report of the contents of a topic that uses more than three words per topic would be unreliable. 7  We choose to use DE after a literature search on search-based SE methods. The literature mentions many optimizers: simulated annealing [57, 58]; various genetic algorithms [59] augmented by techniques such as DE (differential evolution [3]), tabu search and scatter search [60–63]; particle swarm optimization [64]; numerous decomposition approaches that use heuristics to decompose the total space into small problems, then apply a response surface methods [65, 66]. Of these, we use DE for two reasons. Firstly, it has been proven useful in prior SE tuning studies [32]. Secondly, our reading of the current literature is that there are many advocates for differential evolution like Vesterstrom et al. [67] showed DE to be competitive with particle swarm optimization and other GAs. LDADE adjusts the parameters of Table 6. Most of these parameters were explained above. Apart from them, there are 2 different kinds of LDA implementations as well and they are: 1) VEM is the deterministic variational EM method that computes α and β via expectation maximization [68], and 2) Gibbs sampling [69, 70] is a Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithm, which is an approximate stochastic process for computing and updating α and β . Topic modeling researchers in SE have argued that Gibbs leads to stabler models [71, 72] (a claim which we test, below). We manually run these other inference techniques according to different implementations. We need to make sure that these instabilities do not hold for just 1 inference technique, or 1 implementation.  Figure 3: ℜn scores of Figure 2 for 1 ≤ n ≤ 9  For the following analysis, we distinguish between the Raw score and the Delta score: • The two Raw scores are the ℜn median similarity scores seen before and after tuning LDA; • The Delta score is the difference between the two Raw scores (after tuning - before tuning). The pseudocode for these calculations is shown in Figure 4 (Algorithm 1) with the default set of parameters. In the following description, superscript numbers denote lines in the pseudocode. The data ordering is shuffled every time LDA is ran7 . Data is in the form of tfidf scores of each word per document. Shuffling is done in order to induce maximum variance among the ordering of data with different runs of LDA. Function lda8 returns k topics. Topics8 are a list of lists which contains topics from all the different runs. A stability score is evaluated on every 10 runs (Fixed) of LDA, and this process is continued 10 (Fixed) times to avoid any sampling bias. At the end, the median score is selected as the untuned raw score (ℜn ) 4−12 . Hence, the runtimes comes from 10 evaluations of untuned experiment. # Algorithm 1  def LDASCORE(n, k, α , β , Data): Score = emptySet for j = 0 to 10 do Topics = emptySet for i = 0 to 10 do data = shuffle(Data) Topics.add(lda(k, α, β , data)) end for Score.add(Overlap(Topics, n, k)) end for Raw Score = median(Score) return Raw Score  Table 6: List of parameters tuned by this paper Parameters k α  Defaults 10 None  Tuning Range [10,100] [0,1]  β  None  [0,1]  Description Number of topics or cluster size Prior of document topic distribution. This is called alpha Prior of topic word distribution. This is called beta  Figure 5 (Algorithm 2) shows the pseudocode of LDADE. DE evolves from the NewGen of candidates from a current Pop. Each candidate solution in the Pop10 is a set of parameters (Tunings). The values of this set is selected randomly from Table 6 in the InitializePopulation10 function. Pop variable is now a matrix of 10 × 3 since np = 10. Cur gen9 and NewGen16 variables are the list of Tunings, and ℜn score which comes similarly from Algorithm 14−12 (Figure 4). But for LDADE, everytime Algorithm 1 uses different values of parameters found by DE. The runtimes comes from 1 DE run which does about iter ∗ np evaluations of tuned experiment. DE is driven by a goal (called quality/fitness funtion), which in this case is maximizing the ℜn (raw) score calculated using ldascore19 function. The main loop of DE15 runs over the Pop, replacing old items with new Candidates (if new candidate is better). DE generates new Candidates via Extrapolate18 function between current solutions of the Cur gen variable. Three solutions a, b and c 32 are selected at random from the pop. Each of these solution is nothing but a set of (k, α and β ). For each tuning parameter i34 , at some crossover probability (cr 35 ), we replace the  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13  Figure 4: Pseudocode for untuned LDA with Default Parameters  4.3. Tuning Topic Modeling with LDADE LDADE is a combination of topic modeling (with LDA) and an optimizer (differential evolution, or DE) that adjusts the parameters of LDA in order to optimize (i.e., maximize) similarity scores. 8  # Algorithm 2  def LDADE(np = 10, # size of frontier f = 0.7, # differential weight cr = 0.3, # crossover probability iter = 3, # number of generations n, # words per topic Data, # tf∗idf scores Goal ∈ Maximizing ℜn (Raw) score) Cur Gen = emptySet Pop = InitializePopulation(np) # A matrix of 10 by 3 for i = 0 to np − 1 do temp = ldascore(n, Pop[i], Data) Cur Gen.add([Pop[i], temp]) end for for i = 0 to iter do NewGen = emptySet for j = 0 to np − 1 do Si = Extrapolate(Pop[j], Pop, n, cr, f, np) temp = ldascore(n, Si , Data) if temp ≥ Cur Gen[j][1] then NewGen.add([Si , temp]) else NewGen.add([Cur Gen[j][0], Cur Gen[j][1]]) end if end for Cur Gen = NewGen end for Raw Score, best set = GetBestSolution(Cur Gen) return Raw Score, best set def Extrapolate(old, pop, cr, f , np) a, b, c = threeOthers(pop) # select any 3 items new f = emptySet for i = 0 to np − 1 do if cr ≤ random() then new f .add(old[i]) else new f .add(trim(i, (a[i]+ f ∗(b[i] − c[i])))) end if end for return new f  Table 7: Overview of Algorithm LDADE  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41  Keywords Differential weight ( f = 0.7) Crossover probability (cr = 0.3) Population Size (np = 10) No. of Generations (iter = 3) Fitness Function (ldascore) GetBestSolution Function Extrapolate Function Output  Description Extent of mutation to be performed on the candidates Representation of the survival of the candidate in the next generation Frontier size in a generation How many generations need to be performed Driving factor of DE Returns optimal configuration and it’s corresponding ℜn score Selects between the current candidate and next candidate Optimal Configurations to use with LDA for further SE Task  5. Results In this section, any result from the smaller data sets (Pits and Citemap) come from Python implementation based on ScikitLearn running on a 4 GB ram machine (Linux). Also, any results from the larger data (Stackoverflow) comes from a Scala implementation based on Mllib [75] running on a 45 node Spark system (8 cores per node). Note that, for the RQ3, there are some intricate details with classification results. After tuning (Goal is still to maximize the ℜn score) and finding the optimal “k”, we trained a Linear Kernel SVM classifier using document topic distributions as features just like used by Blei et al [2]. 5.1. RQ1: Are the default settings of LDA incorrect? This research question checks the core premise of this work, that changes in the order of training data dramatically affects the topics learned via LDA. Note that if this is not true, then there would be no value added to this paper. Figure 6 plots n vs ℜn for untuned LDA. Note that the stability collapses the most after n = 5 words. This means that any report of LDA topics that uses more than five words per topic will be changed, just by changing the order of the inputs. This is a significant result since the standard advice in the LDA papers [4, 76] is to report the top 10 words per topic. As shown in  Figure 5: Pseudocode for DE with a constant number of iterations  old tuning with newf . We mutate a solution with the equation yi = ai + f × (bi − ci ) where f is a parameter controlling crossover. The trim function38 limits the new value to the legal range min..max of that parameter. The loop invariant of DE is that, after the zero-th iteration15 , the Pop contains examples that are better than at least one other candidate20 . As the looping progresses, the Pop is full of increasingly more valuable solutions which, in turn, also improve the candidates, which are Extrapolated from the Population. LDADE finds the optimal configuration and the ℜn (Raw) score28 using GetBestSolution function for a particular dataset to be used with LDA for further SE task. One may argue why we have been encoding ℜn score in the solution. This is shown in pseudocode just to keep track of the values but it is not used to drive our quality/fitness (ldascore) function. Table 7 provides an overview of LDADE algorithm. Also, note that DEs have been applied before for parameter tuning (e.g., see [32, 73, 74] ) but this is the first time they have been applied to tune LDA to increase stability.  Figure 6: Before tuning: uses LDA’s default parameters  9  Table 8: LDADE finds 27 stable topics which were unstable with the use of LDA shown in Table 3. Column1 reports the percent of words from a topic seen in its nearest match in the second run. % overlap with closest topic in run2 100 100 100 100 100 88 88 88 88 88 88 88 77 77 77 77 77 77 77 66 66 66 66 66 66 55 55  Topic name C Programming Visual Studio Xaml Binding HTML Form Objective C iOS Software Testing Date/Time Format Socket Communications Ruby on Rails .NET Framework OO Programming Android User View Java Envrionment Display CSS Email Message Web Development Git Operations Java Programming MySQL Regular Expressions Eclipse Database iOS App Development HTML Links Compiling  top 9 words in topic function return const char void includ amp int std studio net visual dll web use window control asp grid window bind xaml valu data silverlight control properti form page user usernam password XML action session control login alloc nsock nsstring view iphon cell nil object anim applic user need iphon develop want app use like code suite chang work use problem software set test month time date select day valu option year format network protocol send socket connect run address thread start gem rail lib user rubi end mvc app requir asp net form text checkbox control click label button class instanc void public type interface method return object android view layout height content textview parent wrap width http java apach bean org spring framework sun servlet png src size height jpg imag img color width color css width left span style text class div messag error address form email send field valid contact ajax var javascript script jqueri function form input type git use path read folder directori upload open file java privat return null void new int public string tabl row queri data mysql connect sql databas server regex match echo php post function array replac string eclips version depend plugin maven jar target build project group join tabl row column order select queri null app iphon applic user need develop want ios like url html com http www content page site link compil lib includ usr librari command file error test  Figure 7a, it would be rare that any such 10 word topic would be found across multiple runs. Result 1 Using the default settings of LDA for these SE data can lead to systematic errors due to topic modeling instability.  5.2. RQ2: Does LDADE improve the stability scores? Figure 7a and Figure 7b show the stability improvement generated by tuning. Tuning never has any negative effect (reduces stability) and often has a large positive effect, particular after 5 terms overlap. The largest improvement we saw in PitsD dataset which for up to 8 terms overlap was 100% (i.e., was always found in all runs). Overall, after reporting topics of up to 7 words, in the majority case (66%), those topics can be found in models generated using different input orderings. Continuing on the result of PitsD which achieves the highest improvement. We observed that about 92% of the data in that sample has the severity of level 3. All the other Pits Datasets have mixed samples of severity level. When data is less skewed LDADE achieves the highest improvement which was not achieved when just LDA was being used. So, this makes it highly unimaginable to use just LDA for highly skewed data. This also emphasizes the use of LDADE more. Since it is observed that LDADE achieves better stability, it gives us a chance to verify where the LDADE’s recommended tunings can be most beneficial in SE task. For example, we performed the same analysis as we did in Table 3 but this time using LDADE’s recommended configurations. This leads to the  Figure 7a: After tuning: uses parameters learned by DE.  Figure 7b: Delta = After - Before.  Figure 7: RQ1, RQ2 stability results over ten repeated runs. In these figures, larger numbers are better.  27 topics shown in Table 8. Note that the topics found by our methods are far more stable than before: 10  • The usual topic stability from LDADE is nearly 88% (or more). • At worst, the topic stability found by LDADE (55%) is equal to the median instability of Table 3. • The worst stability of standard LDA in Table 3 is over twice as bad as anything from Table 8. Accordingly, our answer to RQ2 is: Result 2 For stable clusters, tuning is strongly recommended for future LDA studies. α and β matter the most for getting good clusters.  5.3. RQ3: Does LDADE improve text mining classification accuracy? We studied some other StackExchange websites data dump for classification results which were generated by Krishna et al [77]. These datasets are categorized into binary labels indicating which documents are relevant and non relevant. The goal of our DE was still to maximize the ℜn score. We did not change the goal of our DE based on classification task. After finding the optimal k, α and β , we trained a Linear Kernel SVM classifier using document topic distributions just like used by Blei et al [2]. We used a 5-fold stratified cross validation to remove any sampling bias from the data. 80% was used as training and 20% as testing, and for the tuning phase, out of 80%, 65% was used for training and 15% as validation set. In Figures 8 and 9, the x-axis represents different datasets as generated. Y-axis represents the F1 score in Figure 8 and in Figure 9, Y-axis represents F2 score (from Equation 1) which weights recall higher than precision [78]. In the figures, “untuned 10” indicates LDA used with default parameters of k = 10, “tuned k” represents tuning of parameters selected from Table 6 with value of k written beside it, and “tuned 10” shows k = 10 with α and β tuned by our LDADE method. At the bottom of the figure, we show the variance which is inter-quartile (75th-25th percentile, i.e., IQR) range.  Figure 9: Tuning and Untuned F2 results for Classification SE Task. The numbers in black show the k values learned by LDADE.  Just for completeness, we ran the Scott-Knot [79] procedure for statistical differences using the A12 effect size [80] test and bootstrapping [81] test which agreed that the division between tuned and untuned results were statistically significant (99% confidence) and not a “small” effect (A12 ≥ 0.6). Hence, we say: Result 3 For any SE classification task, tuning is again highly recommended. And k matters the most for a good classification accuracy.  5.4. RQ4: Do different data sets need different configurations to make LDA stable? Figures 10, 11, and 12 show the results of tuning for word overlap of n = 5. Median values across 10 tunings and IQR (a non-parametric measure of variation around the median value) are shown in these plots. Note that in Figure 10, IQR=0 for PitsB dataset which shows tuning always converged on the same final value. These figures show that the IQR ranges are being varied over median by about 50% in most cases of datasets. . Some of the above numbers are far from the standard values, e.g., Garousi et al. [23] recommend using k = 67 topics yet in our data sets, best results were seen using k ≤ 24. These results suggest that how tuning selects the different ranges of parameters. Clearly: Result 4 Do not reuse tunings suggested by other researchers from other data sets. Instead, always re-tune for all new data.  5.5. RQ5: Are our findings consistent when using different kinds of LDA or with different implementations?  Figure 8: Tuning and Untuned F1 results for Classification SE Task. The numbers in black show the k values learned by LDADE.  To validate this research question, it was insightful to compare our results with: the Pits and Citemap results, executed in 11  Figure 10: Datasets vs Parameter (k) variation  Figure 11 Datasets vs Parameter (α) variation  Scikit-Learn and Python running on a desktop machine as well as the Stackoverflow data set executed in Scala using Mllib running on a Spark cluster. Figure 13 shows tuning results for Stackoverflow, Citemap, and PitsA using Scala/Spark cluster (for results on other data sets, see https://goo.gl/UVaql1). Another useful comparison is to change the internal of the LDA, sometimes using VEM sampling and other times using Gibbs sampling. Figure 14 compares the VEM vs Gibbs sampling (for results on other datasets, see https://goo.gl/faYAcg). When compared with the Python/desktop results of Figure 7 we see the same patterns that tuning never makes stability worse and sometimes, tuning dramatically improves it (in particular, see the Citemap  Figure 12 Datasets vs Parameter (β ) variation  results of Figure 13). That said, there are some deltas between VEM and Gibbs where it seems tuning is more important for VEM than Gibbs (evidence: the improvements seen after tuning are largest for the VEM results of Figure 14 and at https://goo.gl/faYAcg). The reason being, VEM only gets to a local optimum that depends on initialization and other factors in the optimization problem [82]. On the other hand a good sampling algorithm like Gibbs sampling can achieve the global optimum. In practice because of finite number of samples that are used, sampling can give a sub-optimal solution. LDADE works as another kind of sampler which selects good priors at the initialization and can achieve better sub-optimal solutions, which is why LDADE has better benefits on VEM. Result 5 Instability is not due to any quirk in the implementation of LDA. Instability is consistent and LDADE can stabilize.  5.6. RQ6: Is tuning easy? The DE literature recommends using a population size np that is ten times larger than the number of parameters being optimized [3]. For example, when tuning k, α and β , the DE literature is recommending np = 30. Figure 17 explores np = 30 vs the np = 10 we use in Algorithm 2 (Figure 5) (as well as some other variants of DE’s F and CR parameters). The figure shows results just for Citemap and, for space reasons, results relating to other data sets are shown at https://goo.gl/HQNASF. After reviewing the results from all the datasets, we can say that there is not much of an improvement by using different F, CR, and Population size. So our all other experiments used F = 0.7, CR = 0.3 and np = 10. Also:  Figure 13: Spark Results  Result 6 Finding stable parameters for topic models is easier than standard optimization tasks.  5.7. RQ7: Is tuning extremely slow? Search-based SE methods can be very slow. Wang et al. [83] once needed 15 years of CPU time to find and verify the tunings required for software clone detectors. Sayyad et al. [84]  Figure 14: GIBBS vs VEM  12  Figure 15 VEM: Datasets vs Runtimes  Figure 16: Gibbs: Datasets vs Runtimes  5.8. RQ8: How better LDADE is compared against other methods for tuning LDA? In this section, we perform two comparisons of LDADE against prior work LDA-GA [4] and random search. In the first comparison against LDA-GA, we argue that Panichella et al. [4] did not consider order effects, which could result in instability of LDA when they proposed their method of LDA-GA. Another issue could be with their use of Genetic Algorithms to find optimal configurations. Such GAs can be very time consuming to run. Fu et al. [85] argues for faster software analytics, saying that the saved CPU time could be put to better uses. We ran LDA-GA with their same settings but on our datasets and report the delta of ℜn of LDADE against ℜn of LDA-GA. In Figure 18, the positive value shows LDADE performed better than LDA-GA and negative shows LDA-GA performed better. In only about 2 cases (PitsB, PitsC), it is seen that LDA-GA performed better. The reason being, LDA-GA takes a larger number of evaluations which was able to find a better sub-optimal configuration, but it took somewhere between 24-70 times more time than LDADE (See Figure 19). In Figure 19, we are seeing variations in the difference between the runtimes of LDADE and LDA-GA in these datasets. This is due to the settings of GA. LDA-GA has early termination criteria which depends on the quality of dataset. LDA-GA should take somewhere from 1000 to 10,000 evaluations where as our DE would take about 30 evaluations. If a particular dataset is less skewed, it will be terminated early in LDA-GA. These results verify that our initial assumptions hold true, i.e., we can get much faster and more stabler results with LDADE than LDA-GA. We further extend our comparison of LDADE against LDAGA for the classification task and details are the same as described in Section 5.3. From Figure 20, we see that in 7/10 of our datasets, LDADE performs somewhat bigger. That said, the overall trend is that these two methods have similar F1 performances on different datasets (the reason being that k value found by both methods is very similar). Overall, we recommend LDADE since: • Figure 20 tell us that the median classification performance of LDADE is slightly better than LDA-GA.  Figure 17: Terms vs Delta Improvement using fifferent settings of DE. The legends represent different values of f , cr and np. So if legend says F3CR7P30, this shows f = 0.3, CR = 0.7 and np = 30. Similarly for other legends  routinely used 106 evaluations (or more) of their models in order to extract products from highly constrained product lines. Hence, before recommending any search-based method, it is wise to consider the runtime cost of that recommendation. To understand our timing results, recall that untuned and LDADE use Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 respectively. Based on the psuedocode shown above, our pre-experimental theory is that tuning will be three times slower than not tuning (since DE is taking 3 generations to terminate). Figures 15 and 16 check if this theory holds true in practice. Shown in blue and red are the runtimes required to run LDA untuned and LDADE (respectively). The longer runtimes (in red) include the times required for DE to find the tunings. Overall, tuning slows down LDA by a factor of up to five (which is very close to our theoretical prediction). Hence, we say: Result 7 Theoretically and empirically, LDADE costs three to five times more runtime as much as using untuned LDA.  While this is definitely more than not using DE, but this may not be an arduous increase given modern cloud computing environments. 13  Figure 18 Terms vs Delta comparison of LDADE against LDA-GA  Figure 19: Gibbs: Runtime comparisons between LDADE and LDA-GA  Figure 20 Comparison of LDADE and LDA-GA for Classification SE Task. The numbers in black show the k values learned by individual methods.  Figure 21: Terms vs Delta comparison of LDADE against Random Search. Higher the improvement, better is LDADE.  • Figure 19 tells us that LDADE runs 24-70 times faster. • And Figure 18 tells us that LDADE produces stabler topics. Secondly, we performed the comparison of LDADE against random search procedure. We performed random search with 30 evaluations to find different configurations of LDA (since DE took 30 evaluations mentioned in Section 4.3) and observed that the improvement achieved with LDADE outperforms the improvement achieved with random search (Figure 21). DE is smarter than random search because of 2 reasons: • It samples from a space that is continuously improving. In every generation, after item i the frontier contains items better than at least one thing seen in the last generation (as do items 1..i). During the next generation, mutation happens between 3 better candidates and, even after being 50% through one generation, odds are that the 3 candidates have all passed the “better” test. So DE builds better solutions from a space of candidates that it is continually refining and improving • GAs, SA and others mutate all their attributes independently. But DE supports vector-level mutation that retain the association between variables in the space [86].  Result 8 LDA-GA is afflicted by order effects and it is slower than LDADE. LDADE also achieves stabler results than LDA-GA and random search.  5.9. RQ9: Should topic modeling be used “off-the-shelf” with their default tunings? Figure 7 shows that there is much benefit in tuning. Figures 10, 11, and 12 show that the range of “best” tunings is very dataset specific. Based on the above, we assert that for a new dataset, the off-the-shelf tunings may often fall far from the useful range. Figures 15 and 16 show that tuning is definitely slower than otherwise, but the overall cost is not prohibitive. Hence: Result 9 Whatever the goal is, whether using the learned topics, or cluster distribution for classification we cannot recommend using “off-the-shelf” LDA.  14  Table 9: Evaluations vs Stability Scores  6. Threats to Validity As with any empirical study, biases can affect the final results. Therefore, any conclusions made from this work must be considered with the following issues in mind: Sampling bias threatens any experiment, i.e., what matters there may not be true here. For example, the data sets used here come after various pre-processing steps and could change if pre-processed differently. And that is why, all our datasets can be downloaded from the footnotes of this paper and researchers can explore further. Even though we used so many data sets, there could be other datasets for which our results could be wrong or have lesser improvement. Learner bias: For running LDA, we selected other parameters as default which are of not much importance. But there could be some datasets where by tuning them there could be much larger improvement. And for RQ2, we only experimented with linear kernel SVM. There could be other classifiers which can change our conclusions. Data Mining is a large and active field and any single study can only use a small subset of the known data miners. Evaluation bias: This paper uses topic similarity (ℜn ) and F2 measures of evaluation but there are other measures which are used in software engineering which includes perplexity, performance, accuracy, etc. Assessing the performance of stable LDA is a clear direction for future work. Order bias: With each dataset, how data samples are picked and put into LDA is completely random. Since this paper also consider input order effects, though there could be times when the input order could be with lesser variance. To mitigate this order bias, we ran the experiment 10 times by randomly changing the order of the data samples each time. Another threat to validity of this work is that it is a quirk of the control parameters used within our DE optimizer. We have some evidence that this is not the case. Figure 17 and other results5 explored a range of DE tunings and found little difference across that range. Also, Table V explores another choice within DE – how many evaluations to execute before terminating DEs. All the results in this paper use an evaluation budget of 30 evaluations. Table V compares results across different numbers of evaluations. While clearly, the more evaluations the better, there is little improvement after the 30 evaluations used in this paper. We also acknowledge that for now we validated the improvement of LDADE over LDA in an unsupervised task (see Table 3 and 8) and in one case study of supervised task. The gains shown in this study may not be prominent when tested on any other unsupervised or supervised task. In future work, we need to assess the advantage of LDADE for other SE tasks. The conclusions of this paper are based on a finite number of data sets and it is possible that other data might invalidate our conclusions. As with all analytics papers, any researcher can do is to make their conclusions and materials public, then encourage other researchers to repeat/refute/improve their conclusions.  Datasets\Evaluations  10  20  30  50  PitsA PitsB PitsC PitsD PitsE PitsF Citemap Stackoverflow  0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.67 0.6  0.9 0.9 1.0 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.67 0.7  1.0 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.9 0.77 0.8  1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.9 0.77 0.8  7. Conclusion Based on the above, we offer some general recommendations. Any study that shows the topics learned from LDA, and uses them to make a particular conclusion, needs to first tune LDA. We say this since the topics learned from untuned LDA are unstable, i.e., different input orderings will lead to different conclusions. However, after tuning, stability can be greatly increased. Unlike the advise of Lukins et al. [76], LDA topics should not be reported as the top ten words. Due to order effects, such a report can be highly incorrect. Our results show that up to eight words can be reliably reported, but only after tuning for stability using tools like LDADE. Any other studies which are making use of these topic distributions need to be tuned first before using them in their further tasks. We do not recommend to use someone else’s pre-tuned LDA since, as shown in this study, the best LDA tunings vary from data set to data set. These results also ask us to revisit the previous case studies which have used LDA using “off-theshelf” parameters to rerun by tuning these parameters using automated tools like LDADE. Our experience is that this recommendation is not an arduous demand since tuning adds less than a factor of five to the total run times of an LDA study. More generally, we comment that the field of software analytics needs to make far more use of search-based software engineering in order to tune their learners. In other work, Fu et al. have shown that tuning significantly helps defect prediction [32] and an improvement also shown for LDA [4]. In this work, we have shown that tuning significantly helps topic modeling by mitigating a systematic error in LDA (order effects that lead to unstable topics). The implication of this study for other software analytics tasks is now an open and pressing issue. In how many domains can search-based SE dramatically improve software analytics? Acknowledgements The work is partially funded by NSF award #1506586.  References [1] A. Nadkarni, N. Yezhkova, Structured versus unstructured data: The balance of power continues to shift, IDC (Industry Development and Models) Mar.  5 https://goo.gl/HQNASF  15  [2] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, M. I. Jordan, Latent dirichlet allocation, in: the Journal of machine Learning research, Vol. 3, JMLR. org, 2003, pp. 993– 1022. [3] R. Storn, K. Price, Differential evolution–a simple and efficient heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces, Journal of global optimization 11 (4) (1997) 341–359. [4] A. Panichella, B. Dit, R. Oliveto, M. Di Penta, D. Poshyvanyk, A. De Lucia, How to effectively use topic models for software engineering tasks? an approach based on genetic algorithms, in: Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Software Engineering, IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 522–531. [5] S. Rao, A. Kak, Retrieval from software libraries for bug localization: a comparative study of generic and composite text models, in: Proceedings of the 8th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, ACM, 2011, pp. 43–52. [6] R. Oliveto, M. Gethers, D. Poshyvanyk, A. De Lucia, On the equivalence of information retrieval methods for automated traceability link recovery, in: Program Comprehension (ICPC), 2010 IEEE 18th International Conference on, IEEE, 2010, pp. 68–71. [7] A. Barua, S. W. Thomas, A. E. Hassan, What are developers talking about? an analysis of topics and trends in stack overflow, Empirical Software Engineering 19 (3) (2014) 619–654. [8] L. V. Galvis Carreño, K. Winbladh, Analysis of user comments: an approach for software requirements evolution, in: Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Software Engineering, IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 582–591. [9] A. Hindle, N. A. Ernst, M. W. Godfrey, J. Mylopoulos, Automated topic naming to support cross-project analysis of software maintenance activities, in: Proceedings of the 8th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, ACM, 2011, pp. 163–172. [10] E. Guzman, W. Maalej, How do users like this feature? a fine grained sentiment analysis of app reviews, in: Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), 2014 IEEE 22nd International, IEEE, 2014, pp. 153–162. [11] S. W. Thomas, Mining software repositories using topic models, in: Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Software Engineering, ACM, 2011, pp. 1138–1139. [12] S. W. Thomas, B. Adams, A. E. Hassan, D. Blostein, Studying software evolution using topic models, Science of Computer Programming 80 (2014) 457–479. [13] T.-H. Chen, S. W. Thomas, M. Nagappan, A. E. Hassan, Explaining software defects using topic models, in: Mining Software Repositories (MSR), 2012 9th IEEE Working Conference on, IEEE, 2012, pp. 189– 198. [14] S. W. Thomas, H. Hemmati, A. E. Hassan, D. Blostein, Static test case prioritization using topic models, Empirical Software Engineering 19 (1) (2014) 182–212. [15] S. K. Bajracharya, C. V. Lopes, Mining search topics from a code search engine usage log., in: MSR, Citeseer, 2009, pp. 111–120. [16] S. Lohar, S. Amornborvornwong, A. Zisman, J. Cleland-Huang, Improving trace accuracy through data-driven configuration and composition of tracing features, in: Proceedings of the 2013 9th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering, ACM, 2013, pp. 378–388. [17] D. Binkley, D. Heinz, D. Lawrie, J. Overfelt, Understanding lda in source code analysis, in: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Program Comprehension, ACM, 2014, pp. 26–36. [18] M. Linares-Vásquez, B. Dit, D. Poshyvanyk, An exploratory analysis of mobile development issues using stack overflow, in: Proceedings of the 10th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 93–96. [19] S. Koltcov, O. Koltsova, S. Nikolenko, Latent dirichlet allocation: stability and applications to studies of user-generated content, in: Proceedings of the 2014 ACM conference on Web science, ACM, 2014, pp. 161–165. [20] S. Grant, J. R. Cordy, D. B. Skillicorn, Using heuristics to estimate an appropriate number of latent topics in source code analysis, Science of Computer Programming 78 (9) (2013) 1663–1678. [21] A. Hindle, C. Bird, T. Zimmermann, N. Nagappan, Relating requirements to implementation via topic analysis: Do topics extracted from requirements make sense to managers and developers?, in: Software Maintenance (ICSM), 2012 28th IEEE International Conference on, IEEE, 2012, pp. 243–252. [22] Y. Fu, M. Yan, X. Zhang, L. Xu, D. Yang, J. D. Kymer, Automated classification of software change messages by semi-supervised latent dirichlet  allocation, Information and Software Technology 57 (2015) 369–377. [23] V. Garousi, M. V. Mäntylä, Citations, research topics and active countries in software engineering: A bibliometrics study, Computer Science Review 19 (2016) 56–77. [24] T.-D. B. Le, F. Thung, D. Lo, Predicting effectiveness of ir-based bug localization techniques, in: 2014 IEEE 25th International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering, IEEE, 2014, pp. 335–345. [25] S. I. Nikolenko, S. Koltcov, O. Koltsova, Topic modelling for qualitative studies, Journal of Information Science (2015) 0165551515617393. [26] X. Sun, B. Li, H. Leung, B. Li, Y. Li, Msr4sm: Using topic models to effectively mining software repositories for software maintenance tasks, Information and Software Technology 66 (2015) 1–12. [27] T.-H. Chen, W. Shang, M. Nagappan, A. E. Hassan, S. W. Thomas, Topicbased software defect explanation, Journal of Systems and Software. [28] X. Sun, X. Liu, B. Li, Y. Duan, H. Yang, J. Hu, Exploring topic models in software engineering data analysis: A survey, in: 2016 17th IEEE/ACIS International Conference on Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, Networking and Parallel/Distributed Computing (SNPD), IEEE, 2016, pp. 357–362. [29] J. H. Gennari, P. Langley, D. Fisher, Models of incremental concept formation, Artificial intelligence 40 (1-3) (1989) 11–61. [30] L. Breiman, Random forests, Machine learning 45 (1) (2001) 5–32. [31] J. Bergstra, Y. Bengio, Random search for hyper-parameter optimization, Journal of Machine Learning Research 13 (Feb) (2012) 281–305. [32] W. Fu, T. Menzies, X. Shen, Tuning for software analytics: Is it really necessary?, Information and Software Technology 76 (2016) 135–146. [33] C. Tantithamthavorn, S. McIntosh, A. E. Hassan, K. Matsumoto, Automated Parameter Optimization of Classification techniques for Defect Prediction Models, in: Proc. of the International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2016, pp. 321–332. [34] K. O. Elish, M. O. Elish, Predicting defect-prone software modules using support vector machines, Journal of Systems and Software 81 (5) (2008) 649–660. [35] S. Lessmann, B. Baesens, C. Mues, S. Pietsch, Benchmarking classification models for software defect prediction: A proposed framework and novel findings, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 34 (4) (2008) 485–496. [36] Y. Yang, Y. Zhou, J. Liu, Y. Zhao, H. Lu, L. Xu, B. Xu, H. Leung, Effortaware just-in-time defect prediction: simple unsupervised models could be better than supervised models, in: Proceedings of the 2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering, ACM, 2016, pp. 157–168. [37] G. Maskeri, S. Sarkar, K. Heafield, Mining business topics in source code using latent dirichlet allocation, in: Proceedings of the 1st India software engineering conference, ACM, 2008, pp. 113–120. [38] W. Martin, M. Harman, Y. Jia, F. Sarro, Y. Zhang, The app sampling problem for app store mining, in: Mining Software Repositories (MSR), 2015 IEEE/ACM 12th Working Conference on, IEEE, 2015, pp. 123–133. [39] J. H. Lau, D. Newman, T. Baldwin, Machine reading tea leaves: Automatically evaluating topic coherence and topic model quality., in: EACL, 2014, pp. 530–539. [40] Y. Yang, Improving the usability of topic models, Ph.D. thesis, NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY (2015). [41] K. Tian, M. Revelle, D. Poshyvanyk, Using latent dirichlet allocation for automatic categorization of software, in: Mining Software Repositories, 2009. MSR’09. 6th IEEE International Working Conference on, IEEE, 2009, pp. 163–166. [42] T. Menzies, Improving iv&v techniques through the analysis of project anomalies: Text mining pits issue reports-final report, Citeseer. [43] T. Menzies, A. Marcus, Automated severity assessment of software defect reports, in: Software Maintenance, 2008. ICSM 2008. IEEE International Conference on, IEEE, 2008, pp. 346–355. [44] T. Menzies, R. Krishna, D. Pryor, The Promise Repository of Empirical Software Engineering Data, http://openscience.us/repo (2015). [45] M. Allamanis, C. Sutton, Why, when, and what: analyzing stack overflow questions by topic, type, and code, in: Proceedings of the 10th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 53– 56. [46] C. Rosen, E. Shihab, What are mobile developers asking about? a large scale study using stack overflow, Empirical Software Engineering 21 (3)  16  (2016) 1192–1223. [47] B. Vasilescu, A. Serebrenik, T. Mens, A historical dataset of software engineering conferences, in: Proceedings of the 10th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 373–376. [48] G. Mathew, A. Agrawal, T. Menzies, Trends in topics at se conferences (1993–2013), in: Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Software Engineering Companion, IEEE Press, 2017, pp. 397–398. [49] B. Vasilescu, A. Serebrenik, T. Mens, M. G. van den Brand, E. Pek, How healthy are software engineering conferences?, Science of Computer Programming 89 (2014) 251–272. [50] R.-S. Feldman, J, The Text Mining Handbook, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006. [51] S. Bird, Nltk: the natural language toolkit, in: Proceedings of the COLING/ACL on Interactive presentation sessions, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2006, pp. 69–72. [52] M. Porter, The Porter Stemming Algorithm (1980). URL http://tartarus.org/martin/PorterStemmer/ [53] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, et al., Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python, Journal of Machine Learning Research 12 (Oct) (2011) 2825–2830. [54] D. OCallaghan, D. Greene, J. Carthy, P. Cunningham, An analysis of the coherence of descriptors in topic modeling, Expert Systems with Applications 42 (13) (2015) 5645–5657. [55] W. Zhao, J. J. Chen, R. Perkins, Z. Liu, W. Ge, Y. Ding, W. Zou, A heuristic approach to determine an appropriate number of topics in topic modeling, BMC bioinformatics 16 (13) (2015) 1. [56] G. A. Miller, The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing information., Psychological review 63 (2) (1956) 81. [57] M. S. Feather, T. Menzies, Converging on the optimal attainment of requirements, in: Requirements Engineering, 2002. Proceedings. IEEE Joint International Conference on, IEEE, 2002, pp. 263–270. [58] T. Menzies, O. Elrawas, J. Hihn, M. Feather, R. Madachy, B. Boehm, The business case for automated software engineering, in: Proceedings of the twenty-second IEEE/ACM international conference on Automated software engineering, ACM, 2007, pp. 303–312. [59] A. T. Goldberg, On the complexity of the satisfiability problem, Ph.D. thesis, New York University (1979). [60] F. Glover, C. McMillan, The general employee scheduling problem. an integration of ms and ai, Computers & operations research 13 (5) (1986) 563–573. [61] R. P. Beausoleil, MOSS multiobjective scatter search applied to nonlinear multiple criteria optimization, European Journal of Operational Research 169 (2) (2006) 426–449. [62] J. Molina, M. Laguna, R. Martı́, R. Caballero, Sspmo: A scatter tabu search procedure for non-linear multiobjective optimization, INFORMS Journal on Computing 19 (1) (2007) 91–100. [63] A. J. Nebro, F. Luna, E. Alba, B. Dorronsoro, J. J. Durillo, A. Beham, Abyss: Adapting scatter search to multiobjective optimization, Evolutionary Computation, IEEE Transactions on 12 (4) (2008) 439–457. [64] H. Pan, M. Zheng, X. Han, Particle swarm-simulated annealing fusion algorithm and its application in function optimization, in: Computer Science and Software Engineering, 2008 International Conference on, Vol. 1, IEEE, 2008, pp. 78–81. [65] J. Krall, T. Menzies, M. Davies, Gale: Geometric active learning for search-based software engineering, Software Engineering, IEEE Transactions on 41 (10) (2015) 1001–1018. [66] M. Zuluaga, G. Sergent, A. Krause, M. Püschel, Active learning for multiobjective optimization, in: Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2013, pp. 462–470.  [67] J. Vesterstrøm, R. Thomsen, A comparative study of differential evolution, particle swarm optimization, and evolutionary algorithms on numerical benchmark problems, in: Evolutionary Computation, 2004. CEC2004. Congress on, Vol. 2, IEEE, 2004, pp. 1980–1987. [68] T. Minka, J. Lafferty, Expectation-propagation for the generative aspect model, in: Proceedings of the Eighteenth conference on Uncertainty in artificial intelligence, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2002, pp. 352– 359. [69] X. Wei, W. B. Croft, Lda-based document models for ad-hoc retrieval, in: Proceedings of the 29th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval, ACM, 2006, pp. 178–185. [70] T. L. Griffiths, M. Steyvers, Finding scientific topics, Proceedings of the National academy of Sciences 101 (suppl 1) (2004) 5228–5235. [71] L. Layman, Personnel communication (2016). [72] L. Layman, A. P. Nikora, J. Meek, T. Menzies, Topic modeling of nasa space system problem reports: research in practice, in: Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Mining Software Repositories, ACM, 2016, pp. 303–314. [73] M. G. Omran, A. P. Engelbrecht, A. Salman, Differential evolution methods for unsupervised image classification, in: Evolutionary Computation, 2005. The 2005 IEEE Congress on, Vol. 2, IEEE, 2005, pp. 966–973. [74] I. Chiha, J. Ghabi, N. Liouane, Tuning pid controller with multi-objective differential evolution, in: Communications Control and Signal Processing (ISCCSP), 2012 5th International Symposium on, IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–4. [75] X. Meng, J. Bradley, B. Yuvaz, E. Sparks, S. Venkataraman, D. Liu, J. Freeman, D. Tsai, M. Amde, S. Owen, et al., Mllib: Machine learning in apache spark, JMLR 17 (34) (2016) 1–7. [76] S. K. Lukins, N. A. Kraft, L. H. Etzkorn, Bug localization using latent dirichlet allocation, Information and Software Technology 52 (9) (2010) 972–990. [77] R. Krishna, Z. Yu, A. Agrawal, M. Dominguez, D. Wolf, The bigse project: lessons learned from validating industrial text mining, in: Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on BIG Data Software Engineering, ACM, 2016, pp. 65–71. [78] D. M. Powers, Evaluation: from precision, recall and f-measure to roc, informedness, markedness and correlation. [79] E. G. Jelihovschi, J. C. Faria, I. B. Allaman, Scottknott: a package for performing the scott-knott clustering algorithm in r, TEMA (São Carlos) 15 (1) (2014) 3–17. [80] A. Vargha, H. D. Delaney, A critique and improvement of the cl common language effect size statistics of mcgraw and wong, Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics 25 (2) (2000) 101–132. [81] B. Efron, R. J. Tibshirani, An introduction to the bootstrap, CRC press, 1994. [82] A. Asuncion, M. Welling, P. Smyth, Y. W. Teh, On smoothing and inference for topic models, in: Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, AUAI Press, 2009, pp. 27–34. [83] T. Wang, M. Harman, Y. Jia, J. Krinke, Searching for better configurations: a rigorous approach to clone evaluation, in: Proceedings of the 2013 9th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering, ACM, 2013, pp. 455–465. [84] A. S. Sayyad, J. Ingram, T. Menzies, H. Ammar, Scalable product line configuration: A straw to break the camel’s back, in: Automated Software Engineering (ASE), 2013 IEEE/ACM 28th International Conference on, IEEE, 2013, pp. 465–474. [85] W. Fu, T. Menzies, Easy over hard: A case study on deep learning, arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.00133. [86] S. Das, P. N. Suganthan, Differential evolution: A survey of the stateof-the-art, IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation 15 (1) (2011) 4–31.  17

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
