Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 10
ArXiv ID: hf_6090

Abstract:
arXiv:1801.04369v1 [math.ST] 13 Jan 2018  Is profile likelihood a true likelihood? An argument in favor O.J. Maclaren Department of Engineering Science, University of Auckland January 16, 2018  Abstract Profile likelihood is the key tool for dealing with nuisance parameters in likelihood theory. It is often asserted, however, that profile likelihood is not a true likelihood. One implication is that likelihood theory lacks the generality of e.g. Bayesian inference, wherein marginalization is the universal tool for dealing with nuisance parameters. Here we argue that profile likelihood has as much claim to being a true likelihood as a marginal probability has to being a true probability distribution. The crucial point we argue is that a likelihood function is naturally interpreted as a maxitive possibility measure: given this, the associated theory of integration with respect to maxitive measures delivers profile likelihood as the direct analogue of marginal probability in additive measure theory. Thus, given a background likelihood function, we argue that profiling over the likelihood function is as natural (or as unnatural, as the case may be) as marginalizing over a background probability measure.  Keywords: Estimation; Inference; Profile Likelihood; Marginalization; Nuisance Parameters; Idempotent Integration; Maxitive Measure Theory  1  1  Introduction  Consider the opening sentence from the entry on profile likelihood in the Encyclopedia of Biostatistics (Aitkin 2005): The profile likelihood is not a likelihood, but a likelihood maximized over nuisance parameters given the values of the parameters of interest. Numerous similar assertions that profile likelihood is not a ‘true’ likelihood may be found throughout the literature and various textbooks, and is apparently the accepted viewpoint of the statistical community. Importantly, this includes the ‘pure’ likelihood literature, which generally accepts a lack of systematic methods for dealing with nuisance parameters, while still recommending profile likelihood as the most general, albeit ‘ad-hoc’, solution (see e.g. Royall 1997, Rohde 2014, Edwards 1992, Pawitan 2001). Similarly, recent monographs on characterizing statistical evidence presents favorable opinions of the likelihood approach but criticize the lack of general methods for dealing with nuisance parameters (Aitkin 2010, Evans 2015). The various justifications given, however, appear to the present author to rather vague and unconvincing. For example, suppose we modified the above quotation to refer to marginal probability instead of profile likelihood: A marginal probability is not a probability, but a probability distribution integrated over nuisance variables given the values of the variables of interest. The above would be a perfectly fine characterization of a marginal probability if the “not a probability, but” part was dropped, i.e. A marginal probability is a probability distribution integrated over nuisance variables given the values of the variables of interest. Simply put: the fact that a marginal probability is obtained by integrating over a ‘background’ probability distribution does not prevent the marginal probability from being a true probability. The crucial observation in the case of marginal probability is that integration over variables takes probability distributions to probability distributions.  2  The purpose of the present article is to point out that there is an appropriate notion of integration over variables that takes likelihood functions to likelihood functions via maximization. This notion of integration is based on the idea of idempotent analysis, wherein one replaces a standard algebraic operation such as addition in a given mathematical theory with another basic algebraic operation, defining a form of ‘idempotent addition’, to obtain a new analogous, self-consistent theory (Maslov 1992, Kolokoltsov & Maslov 1997). In this case one simply replaces the usual ‘addition’ operations, including the usual (Lebesgue) integration, with ‘maximization’ operations, including taking supremums, to obtain a new, ‘idempotent probability theory’. Maximization in this context is understood algebraically as an idempotent addition operation, hence the terminology. While perhaps somewhat exotic at first sight, this idea finds direct applications in e.g. large deviation theory (Puhalskii 2001) and, most relevantly, possibility theory, fuzzy set theory and pure-likelihood-based decision theory (Dubois et al. 1997, Cattaneo 2013, 2017).  2  Likelihood as a possibility measure  Though apparently not well known in the statistical literature, likelihood theory is known in the wider literature on uncertainty quantification to have a natural correspondence to possibility theory rather than to probability theory (Dubois et al. 1997, Cattaneo 2013, 2017). This has perhaps been obscured by the usefulness of likelihood methods as tools in probabilistic statistical inference. It is not our intention to review this wider literature in detail here (see e.g. Dubois et al. 1997, Cattaneo 2013, 2017, Augustin et al. 2014, Halpern 2017, for more), but to simply point out the implications of this correspondence. In particular, likelihood theory interpreted as a possibilistic, rather than probabilistic theory can be summarized as: Probability theory with addition replaced by maximization. As indicated above, this is sometimes known as, for example, ‘idempotent measure theory’, ‘maxitive measure theory or ‘possibility’ theory, among other names (see e.g. Dubois et al. 1997, Cattaneo 2013, 2017, Augustin et al. 2014, Halpern 2017, Maslov 1992,  3  Kolokoltsov & Maslov 1997, Puhalskii 2001, for more). This correspondence perhaps explains the preponderance of maximization methods in likelihood theory, including the methods of maximum likelihood and profile likelihood. The most important consequence of this perspective is that the usual Lebesgue integration with respect to an additive measure, as in probability theory, becomes, in likelihood/possibility theory, a different type of integration, defined with respect to a maxitive measure. Again, the key point is simply that addition operations (including summation and integration) are replaced by maximization operations (or taking supremums in general). For completeness, we contrast the key axioms of possibility theory with those of probability theory. Given a set of possibilities of Ω, assumed to be discrete for the moment for simplicity, and for two discrete sets of possibilities A, B ⊆ Ω the key axioms of elementary possibility theory are (Halpern 2017): poss(∅) = 0 (1)  poss(Ω) = 1 poss(A ∪ B) = max{poss(A), poss(B)} which can be contrasted with those of elementary probability theory: prob(∅) = 0  (2)  prob(Ω) = 1 prob(A ∪ B) = sum{prob(A), prob(B)}  where A and B are required to be disjoint in the probabilistic case, but this is not strictly required in the possibilistic case. Given a ‘background’ or ‘starting’ likelihood measure, likelihood theory can be developed as a self-contained theory of possibility, where derived distributions are manipulated according to the first set of axioms above. This is entirely analogous to developing probability theory from a background measure, with derived distributions manipulated according to the second set of axioms. As our intention is to consider methods for obtaining derived distributions by ‘eliminating’ nuisance parameters, we need not consider here where the starting measure comes from (but see the Discussion).  4  To make the correspondences of interest clear in what follows, we first present probabilistic marginalization as a special case of a pushforward measure or, equivalently, as a special case of a general (not necessarily 1-1) change of variables. We then consider the possibilistic analogues.  3  Pushforward probability measures and the delta function method for general changes of variable  Given a probability measure µ over a random variable x ∈ Rn with associated density ρ, define the new random variable t = T (x) where T : Rn → Rm . This variable is distributed according to the pushforward measure T ⋆ µ, i.e. t ∼ T ⋆ µ. The density of t, here denoted by q = T ⋆ ρ, is conveniently calculated via the delta function method which is valid for arbitrary changes of variables (not necessarily 1-1):  q(t) = [T ⋆ ρ](t) =  Z  δ(t − T (x))ρ(x)dx  (3)  As a side point, we note that this method of carrying out arbitrary transformations of variables is standard in statistical physics (see e.g. Van Kampen 1992), but is apparently less common in statistics (see the articles Au & Tam 1999, Khuri 2004, aimed at highlighting this method to the statistical community).  3.1  Marginalization via the delta function method  The above means that we can interpret marginalization to a component x1 , say, as a special case of a (non-1-1) deterministic change of variables via:  ρ(x1 ) =  Z  δ(x1 − projX1 (x))ρ(x)dx  (4)  where projX1 (x) is simply the projection of x to its first coordinate. Thus marginalization can be thought of as the pushforward under the projection operator and as a special case of a general (not necessarily 1-1) change of variables t = T (x).  5  4  Profile likelihood as marginal possibility and an extension to general changes of variable  As we have repeatedly stressed above, likelihood theory interpreted as a possibilistic, and hence maxitive, measure theory simply means that addition operations such as the usual Lebesgue integration are replaced by maximization operations such as taking the supremum. Consider first then the analogue of a marginal probability density, which we will call a marginal possibility distribution and denote by Lp . Starting from a ‘background’ likelihood measure L(x) we ‘marginalize’ in the analogous manner to before: Lp (x1 ) = sup{δ(x1 − projX1 (x))L(x)} = sup{x|projX  1  (x)=x1 } {L(x)}  (5)  This is again simply the pushforward under the projection operator, but here under a different type of ‘integration’ - i.e. the operation of taking a supremum. Of course, this is just the usual profile likelihood for x1 . As above, we need not be restricted to marginal possibility distributions: we can consider arbitrary functions of the parameter t = T (x). This leads to an analogous pushforward operation of L(x) to Lp (t) that we denote by ⋆p : Lp (t) = [T ⋆p L](t) = sup{δ(t − T (x))L(x)} = sup{x|T (x)=t} {L(x)}  (6)  which again corresponds to the usual definition of profile likelihood.  5 5.1  Discussion Objections to profile likelihood  As discussed, it is frequently asserted that profile likelihood is not a true likelihood (Aitkin 2005, Royall 1997, Pawitan 2001, Rohde 2014, Evans 2015). Common reasons include: that it is obtained from a likelihood via maximization (Aitkin 2005), that it is not based directly on observable quantities (Royall 1997, Pawitan 2001, Rohde 2014) and that it lacks particular repeated sampling properties (Royall 1997, Cox & Barndorff-Nielsen 1994). 6  None of the above objections appear to the present author to apply to the following: given a starting or ‘background’ likelihood function, profile likelihood satisfies the axioms of possibility theory, in which the basic additivity axiom of probability theory is replaced by a maxitivity axiom. Profile likelihood is simply the natural possibilistic counterpart to marginal probability, where additive integration is replaced by a maxitive analogue. We thus argue that, if marginal probability is a ‘true’ probability, then profile likelihood should likewise be considered a ‘true’ likelihood, at least when likelihood theory is interpreted in a possibilistic manner.  5.2  Fixed data  Regarding the second two objections mentioned above: observable quantities and repeated sampling properties, it is important to note that the given data must be held fixed to give a consistent background likelihood over which to profile. Given fixed data one has a fixed possibility measure and thus can consider ‘marginal’ - i.e. profile - likelihoods. In contrast, repeated sampling will produce a distribution of such possibility measures, and these may or may not have good frequentist properties. None of this is in contrast to marginal probability: changing the distribution over which we marginalize changes the resulting marginal probability. Of course, despite this caveat, profile likelihood often does have good repeated sampling properties (Royall 1997, Cox & Barndorff-Nielsen 1994) and also plays a key role in frequentist theory, though we do not discuss this further here.  5.3  Why?  A natural question, perhaps, is why worry about whether profile likelihood is a true likelihood? One answer is that profile likelihood is a widely used tool but is often dismissed as ‘ad-hoc’ or lacking proper justification. This gives the impression that, for example, likelihood theory is lacking in comparison with e.g. Bayesian theory in terms of systematic methods for dealing with nuisance parameters. By understanding that profile likelihood does in fact have a systematic basis in terms of possibility theory practitioners and students can better understand and reason about a widely popular and useful tool. Understanding the connection to possibilistic as opposed to probabilistic reasoning may also help explain 7  why profile likelihood has emerged as a particularly promising method of identifiability analysis (Raue et al. 2009), where identifiability is traditionally a prerequisite for probabilistic analysis.  5.4  Ignorance  The possibilistic interpretation of likelihood also helps understand the representation of ignorance. While probabilistic ignorance is not preserved under arbitrary changes of variables (e.g. non-1-1 transformations), even in the discrete case, possibilistic ignorance is in the following sense: if we take the maximum likelihood over a set of possibilities, such as {x | T (x) = t} for each t, rather than summing them, a flat ‘prior likelihood’ (Edwards 1969, 1992) over x becomes a flat prior likelihood over t. On the other hand, a flat prior probability over x in general becomes non-flat over t under non-1-1 changes of variable. Thus a profile prior likelihood has what, in many cases, may be desirable properties as a representation of prior ignorance (see the discussion in Edwards 1969, 1992, for more on likelihood and the representation of ignorance).  6  Conclusions  We have argued that profile likelihood has as much claim to being a true likelihood as a marginal probability has to being a true probability distribution. In the case of marginal probability, integration over variables takes probability distributions to probability distributions, while in the case of likelihood, maximization takes likelihood functions to likelihood functions. Maximization can be considered in this context as an alternative (idempotent) notion of integration, and a likelihood function as a maxitive possibility measure. This gives a self-consistent theory of possibilistic statistical analysis with a well-defined method of treating nuisance parameters.  8  References Aitkin, M. (2005), Profile likelihood, in ‘Encyclopedia of Biostatistics’, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Aitkin, M. (2010), Statistical Inference: An Integrated Bayesian/Likelihood Approach, Chapman & Hall/CRC Monographs on Statistics & Applied Probability, CRC Press. Au, C. & Tam, J. (1999), ‘Transforming variables using the dirac generalized function’, Am. Stat. 53(3), 270–272. Augustin, T., Coolen, F. P. A., de Cooman, G. & Troffaes, M. C. M. (2014), Introduction to imprecise probabilities, John Wiley & Sons. Cattaneo, M. E. G. (2013), ‘Likelihood decision functions’, Electron. J. Stat. 7, 2924–2946. Cattaneo, M. E. G. V. (2017), ‘The likelihood interpretation as the foundation of fuzzy set theory’, Int. J. Approx. Reason. . Cox, D. R. & Barndorff-Nielsen, O. E. (1994), Inference and asymptotics, Chapman and Hall, London. Dubois, D., Moral, S. & Prade, H. (1997), ‘A semantics for possibility theory based on likelihoods’, J. Math. Anal. Appl. 205(2), 359–380. Edwards, A. W. F. (1969), ‘Statistical methods in scientific inference’, Nature 222(5200), 1233–1237. Edwards, A. W. F. (1992), ‘Likelihood, expanded ed’, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore . Evans, M. (2015), Measuring Statistical Evidence Using Relative Belief, Chapman & Hall/CRC Monographs on Statistics & Applied Probability, CRC Press. Halpern, J. Y. (2017), Reasoning about Uncertainty, MIT Press. Khuri, A. I. (2004), ‘Applications of dirac’s delta function in statistics’, Internat. J. Math. Ed. Sci. Tech. 35(2), 185–195. 9  Kolokoltsov, V. & Maslov, V. P. (1997), Idempotent Analysis and Its Applications, Springer Science & Business Media. Maslov, V. P. (1992), Idempotent Analysis, American Mathematical Soc. Pawitan, Y. (2001), In All Likelihood: Statistical Modelling and Inference Using Likelihood, Oxford science publications, OUP Oxford. Puhalskii, A. (2001), Large Deviations and Idempotent Probability, CRC Press. Raue, A., Kreutz, C., Maiwald, T., Bachmann, J., Schilling, M., Klingmüller, U. & Timmer, J. (2009), ‘Structural and practical identifiability analysis of partially observed dynamical models by exploiting the profile likelihood’, Bioinformatics 25(15), 1923–1929. Rohde, C. A. (2014), Introductory Statistical Inference with the Likelihood Function:, Springer International Publishing. Royall, R. (1997), Statistical Evidence: A Likelihood Paradigm, CRC Press. Van Kampen, N. G. (1992), Stochastic processes in physics and chemistry, Vol. 1, Elsevier.  10

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 10. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
