Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_6069

Abstract:
Quantum Spectral Clustering through a Biased Phase Estimation Algorithm  arXiv:1703.05568v2 [quant-ph] 21 Jul 2017  Ammar Daskin Abstract—In this brief paper, we go through the theoretical steps of the spectral clustering on quantum computers by employing the phase estimation and the amplitude amplification algorithms. We discuss circuit designs for each step and show how to obtain the clustering solution from the output state. In addition, we introduce a biased version of the phase estimation algorithm which significantly speeds up the amplitude amplification process. The complexity of the whole process is analyzed: it is shown that when the circuit representation of a data matrix of order N is produced through an ancilla based circuit in which the matrix is written as a sum of L number of Householder matrices; the computational complexity is bounded by O(2m LN ) number of quantum gates. Here, m represents the number of qubits (e.g., 6) involved in the phase register of the phase estimation algorithm. Index Terms—Quantum Cybernetics, Spectral Clustering, Quantum Algorithms.  I. I NTRODUCTION In recent years, the research in quantum algorithms for machine learning problems has gained substantial momentum. Some of these algorithms include the application of quantum random walk [1] to the community detection in quantum networks[2], quantum nearest neighbor methods [3] for clustering problems, the deep learning in the context of quantum computing [4], and an accelerated unsupervised learning algorithm with the help of quantum based subroutines [5]. Furthermore, quantum algorithms for topological and geometric analysis of data [6] and quantum principal component analysis [7] are introduced. The computational complexities of these algorithms are exponentially less than the classical algorithms when the data is accessible on a quantum RAM. For a broader review of the area we recommend the recent review articles and introductory papers such as Ref.[8], [9] and Ref.[10]. Cluster analysis [11] is dividing a given data points, objects, into clusters in a way that similarities among cluster-members are maximized while inter-cluster similarities are minimized. Clustering in machine learning and other fields are done through different approaches. One of the best known approach is the centroid based clustering which is also part of spectral clustering algorithms. The spectral clustering algorithms define how to obtain a solution for the clustering by using the principal eigenvectors of a provided data matrix or a Laplacian matrix. Quantum phase estimation is an efficient algorithm to solve eigen-value related problems on quantum computers. In earlier two works [12], [13], we have showed respectively how to use quantum phase estimation algorithm to do principal component analysis of a classical data and  how this approach can be employed for neural networks using Widrow-Hoff Learning rule. In this paper, we employ the same algorithm with slight modifications for clustering. The particular contributions are as follows: • for the first time, the spectral clustering is formulated on quantum computers by introducing a biased quantum phase estimation depicted as a circuit in Fig.1. • The computational complexities of the constituents of the circuit is analyzed individually. Then, the complexity bounds are derived for different cases of the data matrix. The found quantum complexities are discussed and compared with the classical ones. The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows: in the following subsections; for unfamiliar readers, the k-means clustering and the spectral clustering on classical computers are briefly reviewed. Then, in the next section, the principal component analysis introduced in Ref.[12] are described, and it is shown how this method can be used to do spectral clustering on quantum computers. In the last part, a biased phase estimation algorithm is introduced to decrease the number of iterations in the amplitude amplification process. Finally, the complexity of the whole process is analyzed and the results are discussed. A. k-means Clustering and Algorithm Spectral clustering algorithms are generally based on obtaining a clustering solution from the eigenvectors of a matrix which represents some form of a given data. Since some of the spectral algorithms also involves the k-means algorithm, here we first give the description of this algorithm and then describe the spectral clustering. Given a set of n data vectors, v1 , v2 , . . . , vn , k-means clustering[14] tries to find best k centroids for assumed k number of clusters, S1 . . . Sk , by minimizing the following objective function [15]: k X X min( ||vi − mc ||2 ),  (1)  c=1 vi ∈Sc  where mc represents the center of the cluster Sc . And ||vi − mc ||2 is the Euclidean distance measure between the data point vi and the center mc . The optimization problem defined by the above objective function is an NP-hard problem; nonetheless, it can be approximately minimized by using kmeans algorithm, also known as Lloyd’s algorithm (which does not necessarily find an optimal solution)[16]. The steps of this algorithm are as follows: 1) Initialize centroids for the clusters.  2) Assign each data point to the cluster with the closest centroid. 3) Assign theP means of data in clusters as the new means: i.e., mc = vi ∈Sc |Svic | . 4) Repeat step 2 and 3 until there is no change in the means. The quantum version of this algorithm also has been introduced in Ref.[3] and used for the nearest-neighbor classification. Moreover, in a prior work [17], quantum subroutines based on Grover’s algorithm [18] are presented to speed-up the classical clustering algorithm.  to 0. The smallest eigenvalues of both matrices are 0 and the elements of the associated eigenvector are equal to one. For undirected graphs with non-negative weights, the multiplicity k of eigenvalue 0 gives the number of connected components in the graph. Clustering is generally done through the first k-eigenvectors associated to the smallest eigenvalues of the Laplacian matrix. Here, k represents the number of clusters to be constructed from the graph. This number describes the smallest eigenvalues λ1 . . . λk such that γk = |λk − λk+1 | gives the largest eigengap among all possible eigengaps. The clusters are obtained by applying k-means algorithm to the rows of the matrix V formed by using k column eigenvectors [20]. The same clustering methodology can also be used after the rows of V are normalized into unit vectors[21]. k-means clustering can also be done in the subspace of principal components of XX T , where X is the centered data matrix[22], [23]. Furthermore, for a given kernel matrix K and a diagonal weight matrix W with K = W AW , where A is the adjacency (or similarity) matrix and W is the diagonal weight matrix; the leading k eigenvectors of W 1/2 KW 1/2 can be used for graph partitioning (clustering) by minimizing ||V V T − Y Y T || = 2k − 2trace(Y T V V T Y ) or maximizing trace(Y T V V T Y ). Here, V represents the k eigenvectors and Y is the orthonormal indicator matrix representing clusters: Y = [y1 , y2 , . . . , yk ] with  B. Spectral Clustering In this subsection, we mainly follow the related sections of Ref.[19] and try to briefly summarize the concept of the spectral clustering. Similarities between data points are most commonly represented by similarity graphs: i.e., undirected weighted graphs in which the vertices vi and vj are connected if the data points, xi and xj represented by these vertices are similar. And the weights on the edges wij indicates the amount of the similarity, sij between xi and xj . The construction of graph G(V, E) from a given data set {x1 . . . xN } with pairwise similarities sij or distances dij can be done in many different ways. Three of the famous ones are: The undirected ǫ-neighborhood graph: The vertices vi and vj are connected if the pairwise distance dij for xi and xj is greater than some threshold ǫ. The k-nearest neighborhood graph: The vertices vi and vj are connected if vertex vi is one of the k-nearest neighbor of vj and vice versa. Note that there are some other definitions in the literature even though this is the most commonly used criteria to construct the k-nearest neighborhood graph as an undirected graph. The fully connected graph: This describes a fully connected weighted graph where the weights, wij s, are determined from a similarity function sij : e.g., Gaussian similarity function ||x −x || sij = exp(− i2σ2 j ), where σ is a control parameter. The clustering problem can be described as finding a partition of the graph such that the sum of the weights on the edges from one group to another is very small. And the weights on the edges between vertices inside the same group is very high. 1) Similarity Matrix and Its Laplacian: Let W be the adjacency matrix with the matrix elements, wij representing the weight on the edge between vertex vi and vertex vj . The eigenvectors of a Laplacian matrix generated from W is the main instrument for the spectral clustering. The unnormalized Laplacian for the graph given by W is defined as: L = D − W,  1 yj = p [0, . . . , 0, 1, . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0]T | {z } Nj  Therefore, the clustering problem turns into the maximization of the following: trace(Y T V V T Y ) =  k X  yj T V V T yj .  (5)  j=1  After finding the k eigenvectors, the maximization is done by running the weighted k means on the rows of W 1/2 V [24], [15]. II. Q UANTUM S PECTRAL C LUSTERING In the quantum version of the spectral clustering, we will use hy| V V T |yi as the similarity measure for the clustering. This gives a similar measure to the one in Eq.(5). Here V represents the eiegenvectors associated with the non-zero eigenvalues of either a Laplacian L, or a data matrix XX T , or a weighted kernel matrix W 1/2 KW 1/2 ; and |yi represents a basis vector chosen from some arbitrary indicator matrix. In the following section, we first describe how to obtain V V T |yi through the phase estimation algorithm then measure the output in the basis Y consisting of |yi.  (2)  where D the diagonal degree matrix with diagonal elements Pis N dii = j=1 wij . The matrix L is a symmetric matrix and generally normalized as: e = D− 12 LD− 12 = I − D− 21 W D− 12 , L  (4)  Nj  A. Principal Component Analysis through Phase Estimation Algorithm The phase estimation algorithm [25], [26] finds the phase of the eigenvalue of a unitary matrix. If the unitary matrix corresponds to the exponential, U = eiH , of a matrix H ∈ R⊗n which is either a Laplacian matrix or equal to XX T , then the  (3)  e and L are semi-positive which preserves the symmetry. L definite matrices: i.e., their eigenvalues are greater or equal  2  The Probabilities of the States in the First Register  Probability  1  Fig. 1: Biased Phase Estimation Algorithm  0.5  0 0  2  4  6  8  10  12  14  16  18  Iteration The Total Probability and the Fidelity  obtained phase represents the eigenvalue of H. Furthermore, while the phase register in the algorithm holds the phase value, the system register holds the associated eigenvector in the output. When given an arbitrary input, the phase estimation algorithm yields an output state which represents a superposition of the eigenvalues with the probabilities determined from the overlaps of the input and the eigenvectors. In Ref.[12], we have introduced a quantum version of the principal component analysis and showed that one can obtain the eigenvalues in certain desired region and the associated eigenvectors by applying amplitude amplification algorithm [27], [28], [26] to the end of the phase estimation algorithm. As done in Ref.[13] for Widrow-Hoff learning rule, one can eliminate the extra dimensions (zero eigenvalues and eigenvectors) and generate the output state equivalent to V V T |yi for some input vector |yi by using the following amplification iteration: Q = UP EA Us UP EA Uf2 .  1110111 1100011 1001111 0111011 0100111 0010011  Probability  1 0.8  Probability Fidelity  0.6 0.4 0  5  10  15  Iteration  Fig. 2: The iterations of the amplitude amplification with the standard phase estimation algorithm for a random 16 × 16 matrix with six non-zero eigenvalues.  where hf1 | = 1/µ[κ, 1, . . . , 1] with κ being a coefficient and µ being a normalization constant. The number of iterations can be minimized by engineering the value of κ. Using Uf1 in lieu of the quantum Fourier transform leads the algorithm drawn in Fig.1, which produces a biased superposition of the eigenpairs in the output which speedsup the amplitude amplification: The amplification is done by inversing the marked item about the mean amplitude. As the amplitude of the marked item becomes closer to the mean amplitude, the amplification process gets slower √ (i.e., it requires more p p iterations). In fact, when κ = M , κ/µ ≈ ( P|0i + 1 − P|0i )/2.: i.e. the mean amplitude. In this case, no increment or decrement will be seen in the amplitude amplification. Therefore, making the initial probability further away from the mean probability, we can speed-up the amplitude amplification. As an example, we show the iterations of the amplitude amplification with the standard phase estimation in Fig.2 and with the biased phase estimation using Uf1 with κ = 1, and κ = 20, respectively in Fig.3 and Fig.4: As seen from Fig.2, the probability and the fidelity in PEA with QFT are maximized after 12 iterations. Here, the fidelity is defined as the overlap of the expected output V V T |yi with the actual output. However, the maximum probability and the fidelity can be observed after 6 iterations when we use Uf1 with κ = 1, which generates a very low initial success probability but approaches to the maximum faster. Using Uf1 with κ = 20 to increase the initial success probability also decreases the required number of iterations upto 2 iterations. At the end of the phase estimation algorithm either the biased or the standard, we have V V T |yi, where a column of V represents a principal eigenvector (eigenvector corresponding to a non-zero eigenvalue). hy| V V T |yi provides a similarity measure for the data point y to the XX T . hy| V V T |yi can be obtained either measuring the final state in a such basis in which |yi is the first basis vector. Or one can apply a  (6)  Here, UP EA represents the phase estimation algorithm applied to H and Uf2 and Us are the marking and the amplification operators described below:  (7) Uf2 = I ⊗m − 2 |f2 i hf2 | ⊗ I ⊗n  with hf2 | = √N1−1 [0, 1, . . . , 1] and m represents the number of qubits in the phase register. And,  Us = I ⊗m+n − 2 |0i h0| . (8) In the output of the amplitude amplification process, when the first register is in the equal superposition state, the second register holds V V T |yi. 1) With a Biased Phased Estimation Algorithm: In the output of the phase estimation, the probability values for different eigenpairs are determined from the overlaps of the eigenvectors with the initial vector |yi: i.e. the inner product of the eigenvector and the initial vector. Our aim in the amplitude amplification is to eliminate eigenvectors corresponding to the zero eigenvalues. The probability of the chosen states (the eigenvectors corresponding to the non-zero eigenvalues) during the amplitude amplification process oscillates: i.e., when the iteration operator is applied many times, depending on the iterations, the probabilities goes up and down with some frequency. To speed up the amplitude amplification, to decrease the frequency, we will use a biased phase estimation algorithm which generates the same output but requires less number of iterations: In place of the quantum Fourier transform which creates an equal superposition of the states in the first register, we use the following operator:  (9) Uf1 = I ⊗m − 2 |f1 i hf1 | ⊗ I ⊗n , 3  The Probabilities of the States in the First Register  of unitary matrices. 2) Then, prepare the input state |0i |0i, where |0i represents the first vector in the standard basis. The phase estimation uses two registers: the phase and the system register. In our case, the final state of the system register becomes equivalent to the state obtained from V V T |yi. 3) To prepare |yi on the system register, apply an input preparation gate, Uinput , to the system register. 4) Then, apply Uf1 = I − 2 |f1 i hf1 | ⊗ I ⊗n to put the phase register into a biased superposition. j 5) Then, apply controlled U 2 s to the system register. 6) Finally, apply Uf†1 to get the eigenpairs on the output with some probability.  Probability  1 1110111 1100011 1001111 0111011 0100111 0010011  0.5  0 0  2  4  6  8  10  12  14  16  18  Iteration The Total Probability and the Fidelity  Probability  1 Probability Fidelity 0.5  0 0  5  10  15  Iteration  Fig. 3: The iterations of the amplitude amplification with the biased phase estimation algorithm for the same matrix as in Fig.2: in the construction of Uf1 , the value of κ = 1 and the initial success probability is around 0.028.  The steps of the amplitude amplification process are as follows: 1) After applying UBP EA to the initial state |0i |0i, apply the following iteration operator:  The Probabilities of the States in the First Register  Probability  1 1110111 1100011 1001111 0111011 0100111 0010011  0.5  0 0  2  4  6  8  10  12  14  16  Q = UBP EA Us UBP EA Uf2 .  2) Measure one of the qubits in the phase register: • if it is close to the equal superposition state, then stop the algorithm. • if it is not in the superposition state, then apply the iteration operator given above again. • Repeat this step until one of the qubits in the phase register is in the equal superposition state (Individual qubits present the same behavior as the whole state of the register. If one of the qubits approaches to the equal superposition state, it generally indicates all qubit approaches to the equal superposition state.). 3) Measure the second register in the basis in which |yi is a basis vector.  18  Iteration The Total Probability and the Fidelity  Probability  1 Probability Fidelity 0.5  0 0  5  10  (10)  15  Iteration  Fig. 4: The iterations of the amplitude amplification with the biased phase estimation algorithm for the same matrix as in Fig.2: in the construction of Uf1 , the value of κ = 20 and the initial success probability is around 0.43. Householder transformation I − 2 |yi hy| to the final state and then measure this state in the standard basis. In that case, the probability for measuring |0i yields the nearness (similarity) measure. Below, we summarize the steps of the biased phase estimation and then the amplitude amplification algorithms:  III. C IRCUIT I MPLEMENTATION AND C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY A. Circuit for XX T and Complexity Analysis Most of the Laplace matrices used in the clustering algorithm are generally very large but sparse. The sparse matrices can be simulated in polynomial time (polynomial in the number of qubits) on quantum computers(see e.g. Ref.[29], [30]). When the matrix H is dense (from now on we will use H to represent XX T or L), the phase estimation algorithm requires eiH . This exponential is generally approximated through the Trotter-Suzuki decomposition. However, the order of the decomposition increases the complexity dramatically. Recently in Ref.[31], we have showed that one can use a  As shown in Fig.1, the steps of the biased phase estimation, UBP EA , are as follows: 1) First, assume we have a mechanism to produce j U 2 used in the phase estimation algorithm. Here, U represents the circuit design for the data matrix. In the next section, we will discuss how to find this circuit by writing the data matrix as a sum  4  matrix directly in the phase estimation by converting the matrix into the following form: e = I − iH , H k  C. Measurement of the Output If only tensor product of the eigenvectors of Pauli operators {I, σx , σy , σz } are used, the number of nonzero elements can be either one of the followings: N, N/2, . . . 1 to produce a disentangled quantum state |yi, which can be efficiently implemented. We can also use an operator similar to Y = P i i σx , where i indicates a σx gate on the ith qubit of the system, to approximate the best clustering (This operator is also used in Ref.[32] in the description of a quantum optimization algorithm). In this case, the initial state is taken as an equal superposition state, then multiplied with eiY . In the end, the operator eiY is applied again. The measurement outcome yields the index of the column of Y which can be considered as an approximate clustering solution. Since the circuit implementation of eiY requires only n single σx -gates and the solution is obtained only from one trial, the total complexity becomes O(2m LN ). As mentioned before, the other measurements can be approximated through the mapping to the standard basis by applying the Householder transformation I − 2 |yi hy| to the system register. In that case, the probability to see the system register in |0i represents the similarity measure.  (11)  where k is a coefficient equal to ||H||1 × 10, which guarantees e represents the that the imaginary parts of the eigenvalues of H eigenvalues of H/k and are less than 0.1 so that sin(λj /k) ≈ λj /k. Here, λj is an eigenvalue of H. When phase estimation e the obtained phase gives the value algorithm is applied to H, of λj /k. e can be achieved by writing The circuit implementation of H e H as a sum of unitary matrices which can be directly mapped to quantum circuits. This sum can be produced through the Householder transformation matrices formed by the data vectors. For the matrix H = XX T , this can be done as follows: [31]: L 1X H=− [(I − 2 |xj i hxj |) − I] (12) 2 j=1 In the above, H consists of (L + 1) number of Householder matrices each of which can be implemented by using O(N ) number of quantum gates. H can be generated in an ancilla based circuit combining the circuits for each Householder matrix. The resulting circuit will require O(LN ) quantum operations. In the phase estimation, if we use m number of qubits in the first register, the complexity of the whole process becomes O(2m LN ). In the case of H written as a some of simple unitaries which can be represented by O(logN ) quantum gates, the complexity can be further reduced to O(2m Llog(N )) number of quantum gates.  IV. C ONCLUSION Here, we have described how to do spectral clustering on quantum computers by employing the famous quantum phase estimation and amplitude amplification algorithms. We have shown the implementation steps and analyzed the complexity of the whole process. In addition, we have shown that the required number of iterations in the amplitude amplification process can be dramatically decreased by using a biased operator instead of the quantum Fourier transform in the phase estimation algorithm.  B. Comparison to Classical Computers  R EFERENCES  Spectral clustering on classical computers requires some form of the eigendecomposition of the matrix H or at least the singular value decomposition of the matrix X. The classical complexity in general form can be bounded by O(L3 + LN ), where O(L3 ) is considered complexity for the eigendecomposition of the matrix and LN for processing the matrix X at least once. As a result, if H can be written in terms of simple unitaries, then quantum computers is likely to provide a dramatic improvement in the computational complexity of spectral clustering. However, on the other cases, the complexity of the clustering is not much different than the classical complexity even though improvements specific to some applications are still possible. Note that since the amplitude amplification is run only a few times, it does not change the bound of the complexity. However, we need to run the whole process a few times with different |yi indicator vectors so as to find the maximum similarity and determine the right clustering. Therefore, there is an additional coefficient c indicating the number of trials in the complexity: i.e. O(c2m LN ). Since the coefficient c also exists in the classical complexity, it does not change the argument in the comparison of the complexities.  [1] J. Kempe, “Quantum random walks: An introductory overview,” Contemporary Physics, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 307–327, 2003. [2] M. Faccin, P. Migdał, T. H. Johnson, V. Bergholm, and J. D. Biamonte, “Community detection in quantum complex networks,” Physical Review X, vol. 4, no. 4, p. 041012, 2014. [3] N. Wiebe, A. Kapoor, and K. M. Svore, “Quantum algorithms for nearest-neighbor methods for supervised and unsupervised learning,” Quantum Information & Computation, vol. 15, no. 3-4, pp. 316–356, MAR 2015. [4] N. Wiebe, A. Kapoor, and K. M. Svore, “Quantum deep learning,” Quantum Information & Computation, vol. 16, no. 7-8, pp. 541–587, MAY 2016. [5] E. Aı̈meur, G. Brassard, and S. Gambs, “Quantum speed-up for unsupervised learning,” Machine Learning, vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 261–287, 2013. [6] S. Lloyd, S. Garnerone, and P. Zanardi, “Quantum algorithms for topological and geometric analysis of data,” Nature communications, vol. 7, 2016. [7] S. Lloyd, M. Mohseni, and P. Rebentrost, “Quantum principal component analysis,” Nature Physics, vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 631–633, 2014. [8] J. Biamonte, P. Wittek, N. Pancotti, P. Rebentrost, N. Wiebe, and S. Lloyd, “Quantum machine learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09347, 2016. [9] S. Arunachalam and R. de Wolf, “A survey of quantum learning theory,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06806, 2017. [10] M. Schuld, I. Sinayskiy, and F. Petruccione, “An introduction to quantum machine learning,” Contemporary Physics, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 172–185, 2015.  5  [11] L. Kaufman and P. J. Rousseeuw, Finding groups in data: an introduction to cluster analysis. John Wiley & Sons, 2009, vol. 344. [12] A. Daskin, “Obtaining a linear combination of the principal components of a matrix on quantum computers,” Quantum Information Processing, vol. 15, no. 10, pp. 4013–4027, 2016. [13] A. Daskin, “A quantum implementation model for artificial neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.05884, 2016. [14] J. MacQueen et al., “Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate observations,” in Proceedings of the fifth Berkeley symposium on mathematical statistics and probability, vol. 1, no. 14. Oakland, CA, USA., 1967, pp. 281–297. [15] I. S. Dhillon, Y. Guan, and B. Kulis, A unified view of kernel k-means, spectral clustering and graph cuts. Citeseer, 2004. [16] S. Lloyd, “Least squares quantization in pcm,” IEEE transactions on information theory, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 129–137, 1982. [17] E. Aı̈meur, G. Brassard, and S. Gambs, “Quantum clustering algorithms,” in Proceedings of the 24th international conference on machine learning. ACM, 2007, pp. 1–8. [18] L. K. Grover, “A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search,” in Proceedings of the twenty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing. ACM, 1996, pp. 212–219. [19] U. Von Luxburg, “A tutorial on spectral clustering,” Statistics and computing, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 395–416, 2007. [20] J. Shi and J. Malik, “Normalized cuts and image segmentation,” IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 888–905, 2000. [21] A. Y. Ng, M. I. Jordan, Y. Weiss et al., “On spectral clustering: Analysis and an algorithm,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 2, pp. 849–856, 2002. [22] H. Zha, X. He, C. Ding, M. Gu, and H. D. Simon, “Spectral relaxation for k-means clustering,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2001, pp. 1057–1064. [23] C. Ding and X. He, “K-means clustering via principal component analysis,” in Proceedings of the twenty-first international conference on Machine learning. ACM, 2004, p. 29. [24] F. Jordan and F. Bach, “Learning spectral clustering,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst, vol. 16, pp. 305–312, 2004. [25] A. Kitaev, “Quantum measurements and the abelian stabilizer problem,” Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC), vol. 3, no. 3, 1996. [26] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum computation and quantum information. Cambridge university press, 2010. [27] M. Mosca et al., “Quantum searching, counting and amplitude amplification by eigenvector analysis,” in MFCS98 workshop on Randomized Algorithms, 1998, pp. 90–100. [28] G. Brassard, P. Hoyer, M. Mosca, and A. Tapp, “Quantum amplitude amplification and estimation,” Contemporary Mathematics, vol. 305, pp. 53–74, 2002. [29] D. Berry, G. Ahokas, R. Cleve, and B. Sanders, “Efficient quantum algorithms for simulating sparse hamiltonians,” Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 270, no. 2, pp. 359–371, 2007. [30] A. M. Childs and R. Kothari, “Simulating sparse hamiltonians with star decompositions,” in Theory of Quantum Computation, Communication, and Cryptography, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, vol. 6519, pp. 94–103. [31] A. Daskin, “Direct application of the phase estimation algorithm to find the eigenvalues of the hamiltonians,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03597, 2017. [32] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, and S. Gutmann, “A quantum approximate optimization algorithm,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.4028, 2014.  6

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
