Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_6296

Abstract:
Evolved Policy Gradients  arXiv:1802.04821v1 [cs.LG] 13 Feb 2018  Rein Houthooft 1  Richard Y. Chen 1 Phillip Isola 1 Bradly C. Stadie 2 1 Jonathan Ho Pieter Abbeel 2  Filip Wolski 1  Abstract We propose a meta-learning approach for learning gradient-based reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. The idea is to evolve a differentiable loss function, such that an agent, which optimizes its policy to minimize this loss, will achieve high rewards. The loss is parametrized via temporal convolutions over the agent’s experience. Because this loss is highly flexible in its ability to take into account the agent’s history, it enables fast task learning and eliminates the need for reward shaping at test time. Empirical results show that our evolved policy gradient algorithm achieves faster learning on several randomized environments compared to an off-the-shelf policy gradient method. Moreover, at test time, our learner optimizes only its learned loss function, and requires no explicit reward signal. In effect, the agent internalizes the reward structure, suggesting a direction toward agents that learn to solve new tasks simply from intrinsic motivation.  1. Introduction Human behavior is motivated by a complex interplay of internal rewards – hunger and thirst, curiosity and amusement (24; 34). This is in stark contrast with how current reinforcement learning (RL) agents are trained. In general, RL agents have no explicit internal rewards. Instead, they are simply given positive and negative feedback from an external teacher. But in many real world scenarios, no such teacher exists. For example, when a human learns to solve a new control task, such as playing the violin, they don’t require external rewards to start learning. They immediately have a feel for what to try, and for whether or not they are making progress towards the goal. Effectively, humans have access to very well shaped internal reward functions, derived from prior experience on other motor tasks, or perhaps from listening to and playing other musical instruments. Our aim in this paper is to devise agents that similarly have a prior notion of what constitutes making progress on a 1 OpenAI 2 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Rein Houthooft <rein.houthooft@openai.com>.  Figure 1: High-level overview of our approach. The method consists of an inner and outer optimization loop. The inner loop (boxed) optimizes the agent’s policy against a loss provided by the outer loop, using gradient descent. The outer loop optimizes the parameters of the loss function, such that the learned policy from the inner loop achieves high performance on an arbitrary outer objective, such as solving a control task of interest. The evolved loss L can be understood as a parametrization of policy gradients ∂L ∂π , lending the name “evolved policy gradients".  novel task. Rather than encoding this knowledge explicitly through memorized behaviors, we encode it implicitly through a learned loss function. This approach can be seen as a form of meta-learning, in which we learn a learning algorithm. Rather than mining rules that generalize across data points, as in traditional machine learning, meta-learning concerns itself with devising algorithms that generalize across tasks, by infusing prior knowledge of the task distribution. The final result is a method that, via the learned loss, enables quick learning on new tasks drawn from a particular distribution. Our method consists of two optimization loops. In the inner loop, an agent learns to solve a task, sampled from the task distribution, by minimizing a loss function provided by the outer loop. In the outer loop, the parameters of the loss function are adjusted so as to maximize the final returns achieved after inner loop learning. Figure 1 provides a high-level overview of this approach. Although the inner loop can be optimized with stochastic gradient descent (SGD), optimizing the outer loop presents substantial difficulty. Each evaluation of the outer objective requires training a complete inner loop agent, and this objective cannot be written as an explicit function of the  Evolved Policy Gradients  loss parameters we are optimizing over. Due to the lack of easily exploitable structure in this optimization problem, we turn to evolution strategies (ES) (23; 31; 10; 25) as a blackbox optimizer. The evolved loss L can be viewed as a parametrization of policy gradients ∂L ∂π , lending the name “evolved policy gradients". In addition to encoding prior knowledge, the learned loss offers several advantages compared to current RL methods. Since RL methods optimize for short-term returns instead of accounting for the complete learning process, they may get stuck in local minima and fail to explore the full search space. Prior works add auxiliary reward terms that emphasize exploration (4; 12; 21; 40; 2; 22) and entropy loss terms (20; 29; 9; 15). These terms are often traded off using a separate hyperparameter that is not only task-dependent, but also dependent on which part of the state space the agent is visiting. As such, it is unclear how to include these terms into the RL algorithm in a principled way. Using ES to evolve the loss function allows us to optimize the true objective rather than short-term returns, namely the final trained policy performance. Our learned loss function improves on standard RL algorithms by allowing the loss function to be adaptive to the environment and agent history, leading to faster learning and learning without reward shaping. Our contributions include the following: • Formulating a meta-learning approach that learns a differentiable loss function for RL agents. • Optimizing the parameters of this loss function via ES, overcoming the challenge that final returns are not explicit functions of the loss parameters. • Designing a loss architecture that takes into account agent history via temporal convolutions. • Demonstrating that the learned loss function can train agents that achieve higher returns than agents trained via an off-the-shelf policy gradient method.  current state st and the action at . R : S × A 7→ R is the reward function and γ ∈ (0, 1] is a discount factor. p0 is the distribution of the initial state s0 . An agent’s policy π : S 7→ A generates an action after observing a state. An episode τ ∼ M with horizon H is a sequence (s0 , a0 , r0 , . . . , sH , aH , rH ) of state, action, and reward at each timestep t. The discounted episodic return of τ is PH defined as Rτ = t=0 γ t rt , which depends on the initial state distribution p0 , the agent’s policy π, and the transition distribution T . The expected episodic return given agent’s policy π is Eπ [Rτ ]. The optimal policy π ∗ maximizes the expected episodic return π ∗ = arg max Eτ ∼M,π [Rτ ]. π  In high-dimensional reinforcement learning settings, the policy π is often parametrized using a deep neural network πθ with parameters θ. The goal is to solve for θ ∗ that attains the highest expected episodic return θ ∗ = arg max Eτ ∼M,πθ [Rτ ]. θ  This objective can be optimized via policy gradient methods (44; 39) by stepping in the direction of E[Rτ ∇ log π(τ )]. This gradient can be transformed into a surrogate loss function " # H X Lpg = E[Rτ log π(τ )] = E Rτ log π(at |st ) , (1) t=0  such that the gradient of Lpg equals the policy gradient. Through variance-reduction techniques including actorcritic algorithms (13), the loss function Lpg is often changed into X  H Lac = E A(st ) log π(at |st ) , t=0  that is, the log-probability of taking action at at state st is multiplied by an advantage function A(st ).  We set forth the notation in Section 2. Section 3 explains the main algorithm and Section 4 shows its results on several randomized continuous control environments. In Section 5, we compare our methods with the most related ideas in literature. We conclude this paper with a discussion in Section 6.  However, this procedure remains limited since it relies on a particular form of discounting the returns, and taking a fixed gradient step with respect to the policy. Our approach learns a loss rather than using a hand-defined function such as Lac . Thus, it may be able to discover more effective surrogates for making fast progress toward the ultimate objective of maximizing final returns.  2. Notation and Background  3. Methodology  We model reinforcement learning (38) as a Markov decision process (MDP), defined as the tuple M = (S, A, T, R, p0 , γ), where S and A are the state and action space. The transition dynamic T : S × A × S 7→ R+ determines the distribution of the next state st+1 given the  Our meta-learning approach aims to learn a loss function Lφ that outperforms the usual policy gradient loss by taking into account the agent’s history. This loss function consists of temporal convolutions over the agent’s recent history. In addition to internalizing environment rewards, this loss  Evolved Policy Gradients  could, in principle, have several other positive effects. For example, by examining the agent’s history, the loss could incentivize desirable extended behaviors, such as exploration. Further, the loss could perform a form of system identification, inferring environment parameters and adapting how it guides the agent as a function of these parameters (e.g., by adjusting the effective learning rate of the agent). The loss function parameters φ are evolved through ES and trains agent’s policy π(θ) in an on-policy fashion via gradient descent.  1  2 3 4  5  6 7 8  3.1. Meta-learning Objective  9  In our meta-learning setup, we assume access to a distribution p(M) over MDPs. Given a sampled MDP M, the inner loop optimization problem is to minimize the loss Lφ with respect to the agent’s policy πθ : θ ∗ = arg min Eτ ∼M,πθ [Lφ (πθ , τ )].  Algorithm 1: Evolved Policy Gradients (EPG)  (2)  10  11  12  θ  Note that this is the same as the usual RL objective (Equation (2)), except that we are optimizing a learned loss Lφ rather than directly optimizing R. The outer loop objective is to learn Lφ such that an agent policy πθ∗ trained with the loss function actually does achieve high expected returns, R, in the MDP distribution: φ∗ = arg max EM∼p(M) Eτ ∼M,πθ∗ [Rτ ].  (3)  φ  3.2. Algorithm The final episodic return Rτ at evaluation cannot be represented as an explicit function of the loss function Lφ , and thus we cannot use gradient-based methods to directly solve Equation (3). Our approach, summarized in Algorithm 1, relies on evolutionary strategies to optimize the loss function in the outer loop. As described by Salimans et al. (25), ES computes the gradient of a function F (φ) according to 1 E∼N (0,I) F (φ + σ). σ Similar formulations also appear in prior works including (36; 32; 16). In our case, F (φ) = EM∼p(M) Eτ ∼M,πθ∗ [Rτ ] (Equation (3)),. Note that the dependence on φ comes through θ ∗ (Equation (2)).  Input: Learning rates δ and α, noise standard deviation σ, random environment distribution p(M) [Outer Loop] for epoch e = 1, . . . , E do [Inner Loop] for each worker i = 1, . . . , n do Sample random vector i ∼ N (0, I) and calculate the loss function parameter φ + σi Generate a random environment Mi according to p(M) for trajectory j = 1, . . . , K do Sample initial state s0 for timestep t = 0, . . . , M do Sample action at from πθ (at |st ) Take action at , observe reward rt and next state st+1 from Mi If termination signal is reached, reset environment, resampling initial state s0 Update policy parameter θ based on the loss function Lφ+σi according to Eq. (4) Compute the final return Ri  13  Update the parameter φ for the loss function Lφ according to Eq. (5)  14  with perturbed parameters φ + σ ∗ i where σ is the standard deviation. Given a loss functions Li , i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, from the outer loop, each inner loop worker i samples a random MDP from the task distribution, Mi ∼ p(M). The worker then trains a policy πθ in Mi over K trajectories {τj }K j=1 of M timesteps of experience. Each trajectory may consist of multiple episodes: whenever a termination signal is reached, the environment resets with state s0 sampled from the initial state distribution p0 (Mi ). After each trajectory, the policy takes a gradient step with respect to minimizing the loss function Li :  θ ← θ − δ · ∇θ Li πθ , τj .  ∇φ E∼N (0,I) F (φ + σ) =  Step by step, the algorithm works as follows. At the start of each iteration in the outer loop, we generate a standard multivariate normal vector i ∈ N (0, I) with the same dimension as the loss function parameter φ for each worker i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. The outer loop gives each inner-loop worker a perturbed loss function Li = Lφ+σ∗i .  (4)  At the end of the inner-loop training, each worker returns the final return Ri 1 to the outer loop. The outer-loop aggregates the final returns {Ri }ni=1 from all workers and updates the loss function parameter φ as follows: φ←φ+α·  1 Xn Ri i , i=1 nσ  (5)  where α is the outer-loop learning rate. 1  Ri,t  PK (t+1) 1 More specifically, Ri = Ri,K + K t=0 K Ri,t with the undiscounted return of episode t in worker i.  Evolved Policy Gradients  memory output mem, a context vector fcontext generated from the temporal convolutional layers, and the policy distribution πθ (·|si ). In continuous action space, πθ is a Gaussian policy, i.e. πθ (·|si ) = N (µ(si ; θ), Σ(si ; θ)). In discrete action space, πθ represents a multinomial distribution over the discrete actions. To generate the context vector, we first augment each transition in the buffer with the output of the memory unit and the policy distribution to obtain {si , ai , di , mem, πθ (·|si )}ti=t−N . The temporal convolutional layers take them as input and output the context vector fcontext . Note that both the temporal convolution layers and the dense layers do not observe the environment rewards directly. However, in special cases, where the reward cannot be fully inferred from the environment, such as the forwardbackward random Hopper environment we will examine in Section 4.5, we augment the inputs to the loss function with reward.  Figure 2: Architecture of a loss computed for timestep t within a batch of M sequential samples (from t − M to t), using temporal convolutions over a buffer of size N (from t − N to t), with M ≤ N : dense net on the bottom is the policy π(s), taking as input the observations (orange), while outputting action probabilities (green). The green block on the top represents the loss output. Gray blocks are evolved, yellow blocks are updated through SGD. 3.3. Architecture The agent is parametrized using an MLP policy. The agent has a memory unit to assist learning in the inner loop. This memory unit has one layer with constant inputs and the memory parameters are updated during training via SGD in the inner loop but does not directly impact the agent’s policy output. Instead, the memory is fed as an input to the loss, which can thereby modulate the learning process. An experience buffer stores the agent’s N most recent timesteps of experience, in the form of a tuple (st , at , rt , dt ) for each transition. The loss function L(φ) consists of temporal convolutional layers which generate a context vector fcontext , and dense layers, which output the loss. The architecture is depicted in Figure 2. At step t, the dense layers outputs the loss Lt by taking a batch of M sequential samples {si , ai , di , mem, fcontext , πθ (·|si )}ti=t−M , where M < N and we augment each transition with the  During the inner loop training, the parameters for the memory unit is also updated together with the policy. In practice to bootstrap the learning process, we initially add to L(φ) a guidance policy gradient surrogate loss signal, such as the REINFORCE (44) or PPO (30) surrogate loss function Lpg , making the total loss L̂φ = (1 − α)Lφ + αLpg ,  (6)  with α annealed from 1 to 0 after a finite number of epochs. As such, learning is first derived mostly from the wellstructured Lpg , while over time Lφ takes over and drives learning completely after alpha is annealed to 0.  4. Experiments We apply our method to two randomized continuous control MuJoCo environments, namely Hopper (with randomized gravity, friction, body mass, and link thickness) and Reacher (with randomized link lengths). An example of random Hopper and random Reacher is shown in Figure 3. 4.1. Implemention details In our experiments, the temporal convolutional layers of the loss function has 3 layers. The first layer has a kernel size of 8, stride of 7, and outputs 8 channels. The second layer has a kernel of 4, stride of 2, and outputs 8 channels. The third layer is fully-connected with 32 output units. Leaky ReLu activation is applied to each convolutional layer. The fully connected component takes the trajectory features from the convolutional component concatenated with state, action, reward, termination signal, and policy output as input. It has 1 hidden layer with 16 hidden units and leaky ReLu  Evolved Policy Gradients  trained in simulation but deployed in the real world where reward signals are hard to measure. 4.3. What is the relationship between the learned loss and PPO? The correlation between the gradients of our learned loss and the PPO objective is around ρ = 0.5 (Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient) for both Hopper and Reacher. This indicates that the gradients produced by the learned loss differs sufficiently from the PPO objective. Figure 3: Examples of randomized MuJoCo environments. Top: Hopper with random limb thicknesses. Bottom: Reacher with random limb lengths. activation, followed by an output layer. The agent’s MLP policy has 2 hidden layers of with 64 units with tanh activation. The memory unit is a 32-unit signal layer with tanh activation. For both the PPO as our evolved policy gradient experiments, (inner loop) gradient were performed every 128 sampled time steps, running for 128 updates total for random Hopper and 512 updates for random Reacher. We use n = 32 inner-loop workers for both random Hopper and random Reacher in Algorithm 1. PPO was slightly tuned to perform well on these tasks, however, it is important to keep in mind that PPO inherently has trouble optimizing when the number of samples drawn for each batch is low. The buffer size over which the temporal convolutions act in our evolved policy gradient method are the same as the PPO batch size, namely 128. Normalization according to a running mean and standard deviation were applied to all input data (observations, actions, rewards, etc.). 4.2. Is the learned loss effective? We compare learning performance using learned loss functions against performance using an off-the-shelf policy gradient method, PPO (30). Figure 4 and 5 show learning curves for these two methods on the random Hopper and random Reacher environments respectively. In both cases, the PPO agent observes reward signals whereas the agent optimizing our learned loss does not observe rewards (note that by test time, α in Eqn. (6) equals 0). Nonetheless, the latter agent learns more quickly and obtains higher returns compared to the PPO agent. This indicates that our method generates an objective that is more effective at training agents, within these task distributions, than off-the-shelf PPO. This is true even though the learned loss does not observe rewards at test time. This demonstrates the potential to use our method when rewards are only available at training time, for example, if a system were  4.4. Does the loss encourage smooth learning? Figure 6 shows the KL-divergence between policies from one update to the next during the course of training a Hopper, using a randomly initialized loss (left) versus a learned loss (right). After evolution, the policy updates tend to shift the distribution less on each step, but sometimes produce sudden changes, indicated by the spikes. 4.5. Does the loss encourage exploration? To understand whether the evolved policy gradient algorithm is able to train agents that explore, we test our method and PPO on a specialized forward-backward random Hopper environment: in addition to randomized physics, each sampled Hopper environment either rewards the agent for forward or backward hopping. Note that without observing the reward, the agent cannot infer whether the Hopper environment desires forward or backward hopping. Thus we augment the environment reward to the input batches of the loss function in this setting. Figure 7 shows learning curves of both PPO agents and agents trained with the learned loss in forward-backward Hopper environment. The learning curves give indication that the learned loss is able to train agents that exhibit exploratory behavior. We see that in most instances, PPO agents stagnate in learning, while agents trained with our learned loss manage to explore both forward and backward hopping and eventually hop in the correct direction. Figure 8 demonstrates the qualitative behavior of our agent during learning. 4.6. How sensitive is the loss to different kinds of inputs? Our reward-free loss function takes four kinds of inputs: observations, actions, termination signals, and policy outputs, and evaluates entire length N buffers of experience. Which types of input and which time points in the buffer matter the most? In Figure 9, we plot the sensitivity of the learned loss function to each of these kinds of inputs by computing t=25 || ∂L∂x ||2 for different kinds of input xt at different time t  Evolved Policy Gradients  Figure 4: Random Hopper environment learning over 128 (policy updates) ×128 (timesteps per update) = 16384 total timesteps: PPO (black) vs no-reward evolved policy gradient algorithm (red). Each subplot column corresponds to a different randomization of the Random Hopper environment. These plots show test time policy learning, after the learned loss was trained for 3000 epochs on Random Hopper, with α in Eq. (6) annealed from 1 to 0 in the first 500 epochs.  Figure 6: Evolving learning behavior in Random Hopper: the KL-divergence between adjacent policy updates in outerloop iteration 1 (left) vs the last outer-loop iteration of metalearning (without PPO guidance signal) (right). Figure 5: Random Reacher environment learning over 512 (policy updates) ×128 (timesteps per update) = 65536 total timesteps: PPO (black) vs no reward evolved policy gradient algorithm (red). The two subplots correspond to two a different randomizations of the Random Reacher environment. These plots show test time policy learning, after the learned loss was trained for 3000 epochs on Random Reacher, with α in Eq. (6) annealed from 1 to 0 in the first 500 epochs.  points t in the input buffer. This analysis demonstrates that the loss is especially sensitive to experience at the current time step where it is being evaluated, but also depends on the entire temporal context in the input buffer. This suggests that the temporal convolutions are indeed making use of the agent’s history (and future experience) to score the behavior.  5. Relation to Existing Literature The concept of learning an algorithm for learning is quite general, and hence there exists a large body of somewhat disconnected literature on the topic. To begin with, there exist several relevant and recent publications in the meta-learning literature (6; 5; 43). In (6), an algorithm named MAML is introduced. MAML treats the meta-learning problem as in initialization problem. More specifically, MAML attempts to find a policy initialization from which only a minimal number of policy gradient steps are required to solve new tasks. This is accomplished by performing gradient descent on the original policy parameters with respect to the post policy update rewards. While this idea of learning a more universal loss function through meta-learning is similar to ours, their formulation is ultimately much more restrictive and requires differentiability with respect to the objective function.  Another recent metalearning algorithm is RL2 (3) (which itself is similar to (24)). RL2 is essentially a GRU policy  Our reward-free loss function takes four kinds of inputs: observations, actions, termination signals, and policy outputs, and evaluates entire length N buffers of experience. Which types of input and which time points in the buffer matter the most? In Figure 9, we plot the sensitivity of the learned loss function to each of these kinds of inputs by computing t=25 || @L@x ||2 for different kinds of input xt at different time t points t in the input buffer. This analysis demonstrates that the loss is especially sensitive to experience at the current time step where it is being evaluated, but also depends on the entire temporal context in the input buffer. This suggests that the temporal convolutions are indeed making use of the agent’s history (and future experience) to score the behavior.  In a work concurrent with ours, Yu et al. (25) extended the model from (5) to incorporate a more elaborate learned loss function. The proposed loss function involves temporal convolutions over trajectories of experience, similar to the method proposed in this work. However, unlike our work, (25) primarily considers the problem of behavioral cloning. Typically, this means their method will require demonstrations, in contrast to our method which does not. Further, their outer objective does not require sequential reasoning and must be differentiable and their inner loop is a single SGD step. We have no such restrictions. Our outer objective is long horizon and non-differentiable and consequently our inner loop can run over tens of thousands of timesteps. How sensitive is the loss to different kinds of inputs?  the distribution less on each step, but sometimes produce sudden changes, indicated by the spikes.  Figure 8: Evolving learning behavior in Hopper: the KLdivergence between adjacent policy updates in outer-loop iteration 1 (left) vs the last outer-loop iteration of metalearning  To begin with, there exist several relevant and recent publications in the metalearning literature (4; 3; 24). In (4), an algorithm named MAML is introduced. MAML treats the metalearning problem as in initialization problem. More specifically, MAML attempts to find a policy initialization from which only a minimal number of policy gradient steps are required to solve new tasks. This is accomplished by performing gradient descent on the original policy parameters with respect to the post policy update rewards. While this idea of learning a more universal loss function through metalearning is similar to ours, their formulation is ultimately much more restrictive and requires differentiability with respect to the objective function.  The concept of learning an algorithm for learning is quite general, and hence there exists a large body of somewhat disconnected literature on the topic. This section will survey the prior art and elucidate its connection to the ideas in this paper.  5. Relation to Existing Literature  284 285 286 287 288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 302 303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311 312 313 314 315 316 317 318 319 320 321 322 323 324 325 326 327 328 329  Figure 7: Random Hopper forward/backwards: exploratory behavior in figuring out the physics settings, (left) going backwards for a while, then going forward and exploiting, or (right) vice-versa. Inlays indicate qualitative behavior observed in these two phases.  to? Here we plot the magnitude of the gradient of Lt=25 w.r.t. different kinds of inputs to the loss function at different time points within the input buffer. Notice that the loss depends highly on the data for the current time point (t = 25) but also depends on the length 128 contextual window.  280 280 229 (a) Random forward environment. (b) Random backwards environment. 281 281 230 282 282 Figure 4: Forward-backwards environment: the agent needs to identify whether to jump forward or backwards: PP 231 + PPO (↵ = 0.5 in Eq. (3.3)) (red). Here we can clearly see exploratory behavior, indicated by the 283 283 232 vs evolved RL Which inputs is the learned Figure loss function 9: Whichsei reward curve, the loss forces the policy Figure to try out9:backwards behavior. 233 spikes in the284 284 to? Here we plot the magnitude ofto? theHere gradient we plot of 234 285 285 235 w.r.t. different kinds of inputs to the w.r.t. loss function different at kin di 286 286 236 time points within the input buffer. timeNotice pointsthat withi th 287 Figure 7: Random 287 Hopper forward/backwards: Figure 7: Random exploratory Hopper forward/backwards: exploratory 237 depends highly on the data for the depends current time highly poin o 288 behavior in238 288 figuring out the physics behavior settings, in (left) figuring going out the physics settings, (left) going 25) but also depends on the length 128 25) but contextual also depen wi Evolved239 Policy Gradients 289 backwards for a while, then289 going backwards forward andfor exploiting, a while, then going forward and exploiting, 240 290 or (right) vice-versa. Inlays290 indicate or (right) qualitative vice-versa. behaviorInlays indicate qualitative behavior 291 observed in241 291 observed in these two phases. these two phases. 242 5. Relation to Existing Literature 5. Relation to 292 292 243 293 293 244 The concept of learning an algorithm Thefor concept learning of le is 294 294 245 general, and hence there exists a large general, bodyand of henc som 246 295 295 247 disconnected literature on the topic. disconnected This section will liter 296 296 248 the prior art and elucidate its connection the prior to the art ideas and e 297 297 249 paper. 298 298 Figure 5: Randomized Hopper environment learning paper. over 128 (policy updates) ⇥128 (timesteps per update) = 16 250 timesteps: PPO 299 299(black) vs no-reward evolved RL algorithm (red) 251 To begin with, there exist several relevant To begin and with, recent the 300 300 252 Evolving Reinforcement Lea cations in the metalearning literature cations (4; 3; in 24). the In me ( 253 301 301 4.1. What did the loss learn? algorithm named MAML is introduced. algorithm MAML named trea 254 275 302 302 255 276 Hoppermetalearning as in initialization metalearning problem. pro Does problem the loss encourage exploration? (a) Random forward Hopper environment. (b) Random backward environment. 303 303 256 277 specifically, MAML attempts to find specifically, a policy initiali MAM learning behavior Figure in Hopper: 8: Evolving the KLlearning behavior in Hopper: the KL304 Figure 8: Evolving 304 257 Figure indication thatfrom the evolved RL alga 278 which only7 agives number of policy which gradien only between adjacent policy divergence updates between outer-loop adjacentfrom policy updates inminimal outer-loop 305 divergence 305 Figure 7: Forward-backward Hopper environment: besides randomized physics, each in Hopper environment randomly decides 258 able to learn exploratory behavior. 279 are required to solve new tasks. This are is accomplished required to sol iteration 1 (left) vs the last outer-loop iteration iteration 1 (left) of metalearnvs the last outer-loop iteration of metalearn306 306 259 needs to identify whether to whether to reward forward or backward hopping. The agent 280jump forward or backwards: PPO forming gradient descent on the original forming policy param What is the relationship between thegradient learned ing in Eq.260 307= 0.5 307 weing 281 (black) vs evolved policy gradient + PPO (α (6)) (red). Here can clearly see exploratory behavior, PPO? with respect to the indicated post policy update withrewards. respect to Whi th 261 308 308 282 by the negative spikes in the reward curve, the loss forces behavior. subplot column 262 the policy to try out backwards ideaEach of learning a more universal loss idea function of learning throug a 283 309 309 The correlation between the gradients of our lea Fi 263 corresponds to a different randomization of alearningand is similar toobjective ours, their formulation alearning isfor issimil ultim 284 310the environment. 310 the PPO is around ⇢ = 0.5 both 264 to 285 much more and requires much differentiability more restr and restrictive Reacher. This indicates that the gradients pro 311 311 265 w. 286 the distribution less on each step, but the distribution sometimes produce less on each respect step, but to the sometimes objective produce function. respect to the obje the learned loss differs sufficiently from the PPO 312 312 266 tim 287indicated Figure 7: Random Hopper forward/backwards: exploratory Figure 6: Randomized Reacher environment learning over by the spikes. sudden changes, by the spikes. 267 indicated 313 sudden changes, 313 de 288 Does the loss encourage smooth learning? behavior in figuring out the physics settings, (left) going 512 (policy updates) ⇥128 (timesteps per update) = 65536 In a work concurrent with ours, Yu In aetwork al. (25) concu ext 268 25 314 314PPO (black) vs no reward 289 total timesteps: evolved RL algofor a while, then forward and exploiting, How sensitive How kinds sensitive of inputs? is thebackwards loss to the different model kinds from (5) ofgoing inputs? to incorporate athe more model elaborate from (5 le 269 is the loss to different Figure 8 shows the KL-divergence between polic 315 315 290 or (right) vice-versa. Inlays indicate qualitative behavior 270 rithm (red) loss function. The proposed function loss function. involves The tem one update to the next loss during the course of training 316 Our reward-free 316 291 in thesefour twokinds phases. 271 loss function takes Our four reward-free kinds of inputs: loss observed function obtakes oftrajectories inputs: ob-of experience, convolutions convolutions similar over usingover a randomly initialized loss (left) versus an 5. 292 317 servations, 272 317signals, actions, termination servations, and policy actions, outputs, termination signals, and policy outputs, loss (right). After evolution, the policyunlike updates ten method proposed in this work. However, method proposed our 293 318 and evaluates 318 273 entire length N buffers andofevaluates experience. entire Which length N(25) buffers of experience. primarily considersWhich the problem (25) of primarily behavioralcon cl Th 294 274 319 types of input 319points and which time types in of theinput buffer and matter which time points this in the buffer matter ge Typically, means their method Typically, will require this demo me 295 320 the most? In Figure 9, we plot 320the sensitivity the most? of In the Figure 9, we plot the sensitivity 296learned tions, in contrastoftothe ourlearned method which tions,does in contrast not. dis F 321 loss function to each of these321 the kindsloss of inputs function by computing to each of thesetheir kinds of inputs by computing 297 outer objective does not require their sequential outer object reas 322 || @Lt=25 || for different kinds 322of input t=25 || @L@x xtt at||2different for298 different time kinds inputbe xtdifferentiable at different time 2 andofmust and their and inner mustloop be diffe is pa a @xt 323 points 323 analysis t in the input buffer. This points demonstrates t in the299 input that buffer. This SGDanalysis step. Wedemonstrates have no suchthat restrictions. SGDOur step.outer We hav ob To 324 the loss is especiallyFigure 324 300 sensitive experience the loss is at especially the to experience at the current 9:toWhich inputs is current the sensitive learned loss function sensitive is long horizon and non-differentiable is long and consequen horizon ca an 301 325 time step where it is being evaluated, 325 timebut step also where depends it is on being of evaluated, but also depends on inner loop can run over tens of thousands inner loop of timestep can run to? Here we plot the magnitude the gradient of L alg t=25 302 326 the entire temporal context in326 the input thekinds buffer. entire temporal This suggests context the input buffer. at This suggests m 303 w.r.t. different of inputs to thein loss function different 327 that the temporal convolutions 327 2 are indeed that themaking temporal useconvolutions of Figure the 8:Another are indeed recent making metalearning use of the algorithm Another is KLRL recent (3)sp m( Evolving learning behavior in Hopper: the 304 time experience) points within the input buffer. Notice that the loss 328 agent’s history (and future 328 agent’s 2 fro to score history the305 (and behavior. future experience) itself is similar toadjacent score to the (24)). behavior. RL is essentially is similar a GRU to divergence between policy updates initself outer-loop 329 329 depends highly on the 306 data for the1current time point (titeration = of metalearn- are iteration (left) vs the last outer-loop  25) but also depends on307 the length 128 contextual window. ing  Figure 8: Forward-backward Hopper environment: exploratory behavior of evolved policy gradient algorithm (red) in figuring out the physics settings in comparison to PPO (black). The agent goes backwards for a while, then going forward and exploiting. Inlays indicate qualitative behavior observed in these two phases. We train the evolved policy gradient algorithm for 3000 epochs In a work concurrent with ours, Yu et al. (46) extended the model from (7) to incorporate a more elaborate learned loss function. The proposed loss function involves temporal convolutions over trajectories of experience, similar to the method proposed in this work. However, unlike our work, (46) primarily considers the problem of behavioral cloning. Typically, this means their method will require demonstrations, in contrast to our method which does not. Further, their outer objective does not require sequential reasoning and must be differentiable and their inner loop is a single SGD step. We have no such restrictions. Our outer objective is long horizon and non-differentiable and consequently our  308 309 310 inner loop can run over311 tens of thousands of timesteps. 312 the distribution less on each step, but sometimes produce 313 sudden changes, indicated by the spikes. Another recent meta-learning algorithm is RL2 (5) (which 314 How 2 sensitive is the loss to different kinds of inputs? 315 itself is similar to (43)). RL is essentially a GRU policy 316 Our reward-free loss function takes four kinds of inputs: oblearning over a task distribution. The GRU receives flags 317 servations, actions, termination signals, and policy outputs, from the environment marking the end of episodes. Using 318 and evaluates entire length N buffers of experience. Which 319 types ingesting these flags and simultaneously data time for several of input and which points in the buffer matter thetomost? In Figuregradient 9, we plot the sensitivity of the learned different tasks, it learns320 how compute updates 321 loss function to each of these kinds of inputs by computing 2 through its internal logic. is limited by its decision 322 RL @Lt=25 || @xt ||2 for different kinds of input xt at different time 323learning to couple the policy and (using GRUdemonstrates that points t algorithm in the input buffer. Thisaanalysis 324 the loss is especially sensitive to experience at the current for both), whereas we decouple these components. Due to 325 time step where it is being evaluated, but also depends on RL2 ’s policy-gradient-based optimization procedure, we see 326 the entire temporal context in the input buffer. This suggests that it does not directly327 optimize policy performance that the final temporal convolutions are indeed making use of the 328 agent’sextensions history (and future to score the behavior. nor exhibit exploration. Hence, haveexperience) been pro329 2  posed such as E-RL (37) in which the rewards of episodes sampled early in the learning process are deliberately set to zero to drive exploratory behavior.  Further research on meta reinforcement learning comprises a vast selection. The literature’s vastness is further compli-  fo wi ide ale m res  In the los co m (2 Ty tio the an SG is inn  An its  Evolved Policy Gradients  cated by the fact that the research appears under many different headings. Specifically, there exist relevant literature on: life-long learning, learning to learn, continual learning, and multi-task learning. For example, (27; 26) consider self modifying learning machines (genetic programs). If we consider a genetic program that itself modifies the learned genetic program, we can subsequently derive a meta-GP approach (See (37), for further discussion on how this method relates to the more recent meta learning literature discussed above). The method described above is sufficiently general that it encompass most modern meta-learning approaches. For a further review of other meta learning approaches, see the review articles (33; 41; 42) and citation graph they generate. Finally, there are several other avenues of related work that tackle slightly different problems. For instance, several methods that attempt to learn a reward function to drive learning. See (3) (which suggests learning from human feedback) and the field of Inverse Reinforcement Learning (17) (which recovers the reward from demonstrations). Both of these fields relate to our ideas on loss function learning. Similarly, (18; 19) apply population-based evolutionary algorithms to reward function learning in gridworld environments. This algorithm is encompass by the algorithms we present in this paper. However, it is typically much easier since learning just the reward function is in many cases a trivial task (e.g., in learning to walk, mapping the observation of distance to a reward function). See also (35) for a different take on evolutionary perspectives of reward learning. Other reward learning methods include the work of Guo et al. (8; 34), which focus on learning reward bonuses. These bonuses are typically designed to augment but not replace the learned reward and have not easily shown to generalize across broad task distributions. Reward bonuses are closely linked to the idea of curiosity, in which an agent attempts to learn an internal reward signal to drive future exploration. Schmidhuber (28) was perhaps the first to examine the problem of intrinsic motivation in a meta-learning context. The proposed algorithms make use of dynamic programming to explicitly partition experience into checkpoints. Further, there is usually little focus on meta-learning the curiosity signal across several different tasks. Finally, the work of (11; 45; 1; 14) studies meta-learning over the optimization process in which meta-learner makes explicit updates to a parametrized model in supervised settings.  6. Discussion In this paper, we introduced a new meta-learning approach capable of learning a differentiable loss function over thousands of sequential environmental actions. Crucially, this learned loss is both highly adaptive (allowing for quicker learning of new tasks) and highly instructive (sometimes eliminating the need for environmental rewards at test time).  In certain cases, the adaptability of our learned loss is appreciated. For example, consider the forward-backward hopper experiments from Section 4.5. Here, the rewards at test time are impossible to infer from observations of the environment alone. Therefore, they cannot be completely internalized. However, if we do get to observe a reward signal on these environments, then we have shown that our algorithm does improve learning speed. Meanwhile, in most other cases, our loss’ instructive nature – which allows it to operate at test time without environmental rewards– is interesting and desirable. This instructive nature can be understood as the loss function’s internalization of the reward structures it has previously encountered under the training task distribution. We see this internalization as a step toward learning intrinsic motivation. A good intrinsically motivated agent would successfully infer useful actions in new situations by using heuristics it developed over its entire lifetime. This ability is likely required to achieve truly intelligent agents (28). There exist many interesting directions for future work. Our method demands sequential learning. That is to say, one must first perform outer loop update i before learning about update i + 1. This can bottleneck the meta-learning cycle and create large computational demands. Indeed, the number of sequential steps for each inner-loop worker in our algorithm is E × K × M , using notation from Algorithm 1. In practice, this value may be very high, for example, each inner-loop worker takes approximately 196 million steps to train the loss function used in Figure 5 experiments. Finding ways to parallelize parts of this process, or increase sample efficiency, could greatly improve the practical applicability of our algorithm. Improvements in computational efficiency would also allow the investigation of more challenging tasks. Nevertheless, we feel the success on the environments we tested is non-trivial and provides a proof of concept of our method’s power. It is our hope that perhaps one day, reinforcement learning agents will live spectacularly long lives with highly refined internal rewards.  Acknowledgments We thank Igor Mordatch, Ilya Sutskever, and Karthik Narasimhan for helpful comments and conversations. We thank Maruan Al-Shedivat for assisting with the random MuJoCo environments.  References [1] Marcin Andrychowicz, Misha Denil, Sergio Gomez, Matthew W Hoffman, David Pfau, Tom Schaul, and Nando de Freitas. Learning to learn by gradient descent by gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04474, 2016.  Evolved Policy Gradients  [2] Richard Y Chen, John Schulman, Pieter Abbeel, and Szymon Sidor. UCB exploration via Q-ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.01502, 2017. [3] Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 4302– 4310, 2017. [4] Richard Dearden, Nir Friedman, and David Andre. Model based bayesian exploration. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth conference on Uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pages 150–159. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1999.  [15] Ofir Nachum, Mohammad Norouzi, Kelvin Xu, and Dale Schuurmans. Bridging the gap between value and policy based reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2772– 2782, 2017. [16] Yurii Nesterov and Vladimir Spokoiny. Random gradient-free minimization of convex functions. Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 17(2):527– 566, 2017. [17] Andrew Y Ng and Stuart Russell. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In in Proc. 17th International Conf. on Machine Learning. Citeseer, 2000.  [5] Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. RL2 : Fast reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02779, 2016.  [18] Scott Niekum, Andrew G Barto, and Lee Spector. Genetic programming for reward function search. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, 2(2):83–90, 2010.  [6] Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03400, 2017.  [19] Scott Niekum, Lee Spector, and Andrew Barto. Evolution of reward functions for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 13th annual conference companion on Genetic and evolutionary computation, pages 177–178. ACM, 2011.  [7] Chelsea Finn, Tianhe Yu, Tianhao Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. One-shot visual imitation learning via meta-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.04905, 2017. [8] Xiaoxiao Guo, Satinder Singh, Richard Lewis, and Honglak Lee. Deep learning for reward design to improve monte carlo tree search in atari games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07095, 2016. [9] Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with deep energy-based policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08165, 2017. [10] Nikolaus Hansen and Andreas Ostermeier. Completely derandomized self-adaptation in evolution strategies. Evolutionary computation, 9(2):159–195, 2001. [11] Sepp Hochreiter, A Steven Younger, and Peter R Conwell. Learning to learn using gradient descent. In International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, pages 87–94. Springer, 2001. [12] J Zico Kolter and Andrew Y Ng. Near-bayesian exploration in polynomial time. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 513–520. ACM, 2009. [13] Vijay R Konda and John N Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1008–1014, 2000. [14] Ke Li and Jitendra Malik. Learning to optimize. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01885, 2016.  [20] Brendan O’Donoghue, Remi Munos, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Volodymyr Mnih. Pgq: Combining policy gradient and q-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01626, 2016. [21] Georg Ostrovski, Marc G Bellemare, Aaron van den Oord, and Rémi Munos. Count-based exploration with neural density models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01310, 2017. [22] Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration by selfsupervised prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 2017, 2017. [23] I. Rechenberg and M. Eigen. Evolutionsstrategie: Optimierung Technischer Systeme nach Prinzipien der Biologischen Evolution. 1973. [24] Richard M Ryan and Edward L Deci. Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions and new directions. Contemporary educational psychology, 25(1):54–67, 2000. [25] Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Evolution strategies as a scalable alternative to reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864, 2017. [26] Schmidhuber. Evolutionary principles in selfreferential learning, or on learning how to learn: The meta-meta-... hook. Diploma thesis, TUM, 1987.  Evolved Policy Gradients  [27] Schmidhuber. Gödel machines: Fully self-referential optimal universal self-improvers. Artificial General Intelligence, 2006. [28] Juergen Schmidhuber. Exploring the predictable. In Advances in evolutionary computing, pages 579–612. Springer, 2003. [29] John Schulman, Pieter Abbeel, and Xi Chen. Equivalence between policy gradients and soft q-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.06440, 2017. [30] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017. [31] Hans-Paul Schwefel. Numerische Optimierung von Computer-Modellen mittels der Evolutionsstrategie: mit einer vergleichenden Einführung in die HillClimbing-und Zufallsstrategie. Birkhäuser, 1977. [32] Frank Sehnke, Christian Osendorfer, Thomas Rückstieß, Alex Graves, Jan Peters, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Parameter-exploring policy gradients. Neural Networks, 23(4):551–559, 2010. [33] Silver, Yand, and Li. Lifelong machine learning systems: Beyond learning algorithms. DAAAI Spring Symposium-Technical Report, 2013., 2013. [34] Satinder Singh, Richard L Lewis, and Andrew G Barto. Where do rewards come from. [35] Satinder Singh, Richard L Lewis, Andrew G Barto, and Jonathan Sorg. Intrinsically motivated reinforcement learning: An evolutionary perspective. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, 2(2):70–82, 2010. [36] James C Spall. Multivariate stochastic approximation using a simultaneous perturbation gradient approximation. IEEE transactions on automatic control, 37(3):332–341, 1992. [37] B. C. Stadie, G. Yang, R. Houthooft, X. Chen, Y. Duan, W. Yuhuai, P. Abbeel, and I. Sutskever. Some considerations on learning to explore via meta-reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), Workshop Track, 2018. [38] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction, volume 1. MIT press Cambridge, 1998. [39] Richard S Sutton, David A McAllester, Satinder P Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1057–1063, 2000.  [40] Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman, Filip De Turck, and Pieter Abbeel. #Exploration: A study of count-based exploration for deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2017. [41] Taylor and Stone. Transfer learning for reinforcement learning domains: A survey. DAAAI Spring Symposium-Technical Report, 2013., 2009. [42] Thrun. Is learning the n-th thing any easier than learning the first? NIPS, 1996. [43] Jane X Wang, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Dhruva Tirumala, Hubert Soyer, Joel Z Leibo, Remi Munos, Charles Blundell, Dharshan Kumaran, and Matt Botvinick. Learning to reinforcement learn. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05763, 2016. [44] Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradientfollowing algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. In Reinforcement Learning, pages 5–32. Springer, 1992. [45] A Steven Younger, Sepp Hochreiter, and Peter R Conwell. Meta-learning with backpropagation. In Neural Networks, 2001. Proceedings. IJCNN’01. International Joint Conference on, volume 3. IEEE, 2001. [46] Tianhe Yu, Chelsea Finn, Annie Xie, Sudeep Dasari, Tianhao Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. One-shot imitation from observing humans via domain-adaptive meta-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.01557, 2018.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
