Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_6419

Abstract:
Perfusion Linearity and Its Applications Oleg Pianykh, PhD  Abstract Perfusion analysis computes blood flow parameters (blood volume, blood flow, mean transit time) from the observed flow of contrast agent, passing through the patient’s vascular system. Perfusion deconvolution has been widely accepted as the principal numerical tool for perfusion analysis, and is used routinely in clinical applications. This extensive use of perfusion in clinical decision-making makes numerical stability and robustness of perfusion computations vital for accurate diagnostics and patient safety. The main goal of this paper is to propose a novel approach for validating numerical properties of perfusion algorithms. The approach is based on Perfusion Linearity Property (PLP), which we find in perfusion deconvolution, as well as in many other perfusion techniques. PLP allows one to study perfusion values as weighted averages of the original imaging data. This, in turn, uncovers hidden problems with the existing deconvolution techniques, and may be used to suggest more reliable computational approaches and methodology. Keywords: Perfusion, Deconvolution, TSVD, Regularization, Computed Tomography.  1. Introduction Deconvolution attempts to recover the original convolved function R(x) from the following equation: t  C (t ) = ∫ K (t − x) R( x)dx = K ⊗ R,  (Eq1)  0  where C(t) is a known (observed) output, and K(x) is a known convolution kernel. In natural phenomena (such as blood flow), all functions in Eq1 are assumed finite and continuous over a finite observation time t, 0 ≤ t ≤ T < ∞ . If C(t) is observed only at N discrete time intervals 0 = t0 < t1 <…< tj <…< tN = T, and inter-image time di = ti - ti-1 is small enough to assume R(t) and K(t) constant over each [ti-1,ti], one can numerically approximate Eq1 with a discrete sum in Eq2, based on rectangular integration quadrature 1 [Bronstein]: j  C j = C (t j ) = ∑ K (t j − ti ) R(ti )d i , i =1  j = 1...N , d i = ti − ti −1.  (Eq2)  This can be rewritten in matrix format as  1  It is implied that the error of any discrete approximation depends on the step size di, choice of sampling points ti, and numerical properties (such as degree of smoothness) of R(t) and K(t). Also, higher order quadratures (trapezoidal, Simpson’s) may generally provide more accurate approximations.  Oleg Pianykh  Page 1 of 21  01.06.2010   K (t j − ti )d i , 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ N , C = A K R, matrix A k (i, j ) =  0, i > j ≥1   C (t1 )   C1   R(t1 )   R1          vectors C =  ...  =  ... , R =  ...  =  ...   C (t )   C   R(t )   R   N   N  N   N  (Eq3)  leading to a formal solution for the vector R: R = A K−1C = BC, B = A K−1  (Eq4)  In reality, matrix AK can be nearly or truly singular, and cannot be inverted directly in Eq4. However, the inverse B of matrix AK can be approximated in numerically-stable manner with various regularization techniques—Truncated Singular Value Decomposition (TSVD) and Tikhonov being the most popular [Tikhonov], [Bronstein], [Hansen]. Nonetheless, regularization of AK, as complex and non-linear as it might be, does not change the linear nature of Eq4: R remains a linear function of C. Consequently, any linear function of R will be a linear function of C as well. Perfusion analysis quantifies a subject’s blood flow through the deconvolution of CT or MR temporal image sequences obtained after a contrast agent injection in the subject’s vascular system. The contrast agent (injected into an artery) passes through tissues and organs of interest and changes the observed pixel intensity on the temporal images acquired at ti time points. As a result, for any given pixel (x,y) (due to the physical thickness of CT/MR image slice, representative of a voxel in the 3D tissue volume) one can define a pixel intensity change curve C(x,y)(t) = C(t), as pixel intensity changes at time t from the pre-contrast baseline intensity at t0 = 0. It is generally assumed that the blood flow model follows Eq1 [Ostergaard], where function K(t) represents the arterial input function AIF 1, C(t) – observed contrast change (enhancement) at given pixel (x,y), and R(t) – residual function (amount of contrast still present at the (x,y) voxel at time t); we also assume that the contrast agent is confined to the intravascular space. Then, according to the perfusion deconvolution model (omitting constant scaling coefficients and measurement units), in its discrete form following from Eq2, one computes perfusion blood volume Vb and blood flow Fb as 2: N  Vb = ∑ R i d i , Fb = R1  (Eq5)  i =1  1  When venous output function (VOF) Cv(t) needs to be taken into account, it is included into K(t). Inter-image delay time di is often the same for all ti, and therefore can be taken outside of summation, as a constant factor di = d.  2  Oleg Pianykh  Page 2 of 21  01.06.2010  For any given voxel, Vb determines the volume of blood, and Fb corresponds to the speed of the blood flow. The third essential perfusion parameter, mean transit time Tmtt reflects the average amount of time it takes a particle of contrast agent to pass through the voxel vasculature. According to the central volume principle [Stewart], accepted for perfusion models, Fb × Tmtt = Vb, so only two of the three values need to be determined at each pixel, and the third will follow. However, as one can see from Eq5, both Vb and Fb linearly depend on R, and therefore should linearly depend on the original contrast enhancement vector C. Indeed, once true or regularized inverse B = A K−1 is found in Eq4, one can express N  N  Vb = ∑ wiV Ci d i ,  Fb = ∑ wiF Ci  i =1  (Eq6)  i =1  where weights N  wiV = wV (ti ) = ∑ B( j , i ),  wiF = w F (ti ) = B(1, i )  j =1  (Eq7)  In other words, weights wiV are column sums of the inverse B = A K−1 , and weights wiF are the first row of B. This leads us to what we call Perfusion Linearity Property (PLP): Assuming perfusion convolution model ((Eq4), (Eq5)), Fb and Vb are linear combinations of the original values Ci. Note that PLP follows only from the equations Eq4 and Eq5, and does not assume any particular method of defining or inverting AK. Therefore, PLP permits one to view any perfusion deconvolution algorithm as a weighted contrast averaging applied to the original contrast enhancement vector C = {C1,…CN}T. The weighting vectors WV = { w1V ,…, wVN }T and WF = { w1F ,…, wNF }T are location-independent (do not depend on the (x,y) voxel location), are derived from the AIF data only, and for each particular perfusion technique are chosen to satisfy the specific algorithm criteria 1. Therefore, we N  will define a perfusion-quantifying parameter P as PLP-compliant if P = ∑ wiP Ci and i =1  P  P 1  P N  T  weights W = { w ,…, w } do not depend on the voxel position. We will define a perfusion-quantifying parameter P as PLP-norm-compliant if normalized weighting vector WP/|| WP|| does not depend on the voxel position. Consequently, we will define a perfusion algorithm as PLP-(norm-)compliant if any two of its three principal parameters {Fb, Vb ,Tmtt} are PLP-(norm-)compliant. Norm-compliant weights WP may have norms, depending on voxel coordinates, so normcompliant definition is more relaxed compared to compliant. However, our analysis will  1  Note an interesting similarity with 3D-rendering techniques, using weighted transfer functions. Perfusion analysis is essentially a transfer function in time.  Oleg Pianykh  Page 3 of 21  01.06.2010  be mainly concerned with relative changes in weighting coordinates wiP . In this respect norm-compliant and compliant definitions will be identical. To eliminate any scaling factor irrelevant for our discussion, we will assume all weighting vectors scaled to Euclidean norm: ||W||2 = 1 unless stated otherwise. Although we derived PLP from the deconvolution approach, it can be found in many other popular perfusion algorithms.  2. Perfusion Linearity Property in Perfusion Algorithms A brief review of most popular perfusion analysis methods demonstrates that many of them conform to PLP. Historically, well before perfusion deconvolution was brought into existence, perfusion values were usually computed as [Axel]: T  T  Vb = kV ∫ C (t )dt , Tmtt = kT ∫ tC (t )dt , Fb = Vb / Tmtt 0  (Eq8)  0  or, in discrete time-sampled format, N  N  i =1  i =1  Vb = kV ∑ Ci d i , Tmtt = kT ∑ ti Ci d i , Fb = Vb /Tmtt  (Eq8b)  where kv and kT are scale-correcting constants (and kT does depend on the Vb). In this case, Vb is PLP-compliant, and Tmtt is PLP-norm-compliant, with weights wiV = d i and wiT = d i ti respectively (up to scaling factors kV and kT). This choice of weights had several important advantages: 1. Computational simplicity. 2. Independence on AIF K(t). AIF was used for scaling only (to determine kV and kT). 3. Uniform weighting for Vb, when di is constant (the most popular practical choice), and therefore di = d can be included into kV. Then an equal weight wiV = 1 is the only case when the perfusion algorithm does not favor particular time points ti. 4. Independence on time sampling. With wiV = 1 and wiT = ti , changes in image timing would have minimal effect on the perfusion values 1. This becomes essential in any radiation dose-reduction method when one wants to reduce the number of perfusion images and maintain the same consistent computational approach: Axle’s approach is very convenient for this purpose.  1  Assuming di = d is still small enough for the discrete summation to be an accurate approximation of the continuous integrals.  Oleg Pianykh  Page 4 of 21  01.06.2010  After Axel, several variations of slope methods—Patlak perfusion included—were derived from the differential view of the contrast flow [Lee]: dC (t ) = Fb × (Ca (t ) − Cv (t )) dt  (Eq9)  where the difference between the AIF Ca(t) and VOF Cv(t) is analogous to K(t). Because in the discrete case dC(t)/dt is computed with finite linear differences, equation Eq9 leads to a linear system where Fb and Vb once again are found as linear combinations of Ci = C(ti), thus conforming to PLP. The well-known Patlak equation [Lee] [Patlak] [Miles]: N  C (t k ) = Vr + Pperm Ca (t k )  ∑C  a  (ti )d i  1  (Eq10)  Ca (t k )  where Vr is the relative blood volume and Pperm is permeability coefficient also leads to a linear solution, where both Vr and Pperm are computed as weighted sums of Ci, and the weights depend on Ca(t) only. Thus, Patlak’s Vr and Pperm are PLP-compliant as well. Finally, various parametric (curve-fitting) approaches were proposed to find perfusion solutions with certain analytical properties (such as smoothness or exponential decay) 1 [Graz], [Rost]. A smooth curve basis H = {Hj(t)}, j = 1,…, Nb < N, can be fit in the original Ci = C(ti) sequence with linear regression: Nb  C (t ) = ∑ h j H j (t ) + e(t )  (Eq11)  j =1  Nb  If one considers fit error e(t) as irrelevant noise, then “denoised” C (t ) = ∑ h j H j (t ) can j =1  be substituted into Axel equation (Eq8) yielding: T T T  Nb Nb Nb  Vb = kV ∫  ∑ h j H j (t ) dt = ∑ h j ∫ kV H j (t )dt = ∑ h j H Vj , H Vj = kV ∫ H j (t )dt.   j =1 j =1 0  j =1 0 0  T T Nb Nb  Nb  = kT ∫ t  ∑ h j H j (t ) dt = ∑ h j ∫ kT tH j (t )dt = ∑ h j H Tj , H Tj = kT ∫ tH j (t )dt.   j =1 j =1 0  j =1 0 0   (Eq12)  T  Tmtt  The constant coefficient vector h = {h1 , …, hNb}T can be found with linear regression from Eq11 as h = BH × C, where matrix BH is derived from the Hj(ti) values only (does 1  In essence, this is equivalent to regularization, as one assumes additional analytical properties of the solution to make the solution more stable.  Oleg Pianykh  Page 5 of 21  01.06.2010  not depend on the contrast C(t)). This means that h linearly depends on C. Because Vb and Tmtt in Eq12 linearly depend on h, Vb and Tmtt linearly depend on C. In other words, even when computed through any basis H = {Hj(t)}, Axel’s Vb and Tmtt still conform to PLP 1. Parametric approach was later revived with deconvolution methods, now applied to R(t) instead of C(t) (see excellent analysis in [Graz] and [Rost]): Nb  R(t ) = ∑ h j H j (t ), j =1  i  Nb  j =1  j =1  [  ]  C (ti ) = Ci = ∑ Ca (ti − t j ) R(t j ) = ∑ h j Ca ⊗ H j (t ) = Nb  = ∑ h j G j (t ), where j =1  (Eq13)  G j (t ) = Ca ⊗ H j (t ).  But this is an obvious case of Eq11 using Gj(t) instead of Hj(t) and therefore conforming to deconvolution PLP in Eq4 and Eq6. Overall, the only benefit of parametric curve fitting was in proposing yet another way of defining the weighting coefficients wi in Eq6, approaching the problem from the deconvolution basis angle. However, the entire question of finding the optimal deconvolution basis {Hj(t)} has become an art in itself [Graz], significantly contributing to the subjectivity and variability of the perfusion methods, and to the disconnect between the computational and clinical aspects of the analysis. As a result, all popular perfusion techniques reviewed above are PLP-compliant: Vb and Fb (or Vb and Tmtt with Axel-derived methods) are always found as linear combinations of the original contrast values Ci. This is expected: PLP holds true for perfusion models because all these models were derived from linear flow equations (differential, integral, convolutional, or matrix-based) where equation coefficients were functions of AIF/VOF values only. Therefore, for PLP-compliant methods, the entire question of optimal perfusion algorithm becomes the question of selecting optimal weights wi. This generalization opens new possibilities for perfusion algorithm analysis and validation.  1  It is easy to show that the linear choice of H(t) leads to “smoothed” formulas for Ak suggested in [Ostergaard] and [Ostergaard2].  Oleg Pianykh  Page 6 of 21  01.06.2010  3. PLP in Perfusion Deconvolution 3.1. PLP in TSVD Deconvolution PLP can be used to uncover hidden problems in several widely-accepted perfusion algorithms, such as Truncated Singular Value Decomposition (TSVD), which can be formally suggested to inverse singular 1 AK in Eq4 by factoring AK=U × S × V  (Eq14)  where matrices U and V are unitary (UTU = VTV = I), and matrix S is diagonal, S = diag(λ1, λ2, ..., λN}, λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ ... ≥ λN ≥ 0. The columns in U and rows in V are formed by the eigenvectors ui of A TK A K . Ill-conditioning in AK implies that after some threshold index r < N, and eigenvalues λi, i > r vanish in absolute value. Therefore, they are considered “noise” and diagonal S is inverted as S −r 1 = diag(1/λ1, 1/λ2, ..., 1/λr , 0, …, 0}. Then matrix B = V T × S r−1 × U T  (Eq15)  in the least-square sense becomes a very close and well-conditioned approximation to A K−1 . To determine the threshold index r, 20% of the maximum eigenvalue λ1 is widely accepted as a good “generic” cut-off value [Wirestam]. Despite this conceptual clarity, problems with TSVD perfusion deconvolution were empirically observed in many instances, manifesting themselves in poor interimplementation correlation [Goh], R(t) oscillations [Calamante2], and inconsistent perfusion maps (from our own experience)[Angelos]. Fixing these problems with more elaborate TSVD thresholding (using L-curves [Koh2] , block-circulant matrices [Wu2], and regression analysis [Koh]) does not change the essence of the method, but adds computational complexity with no new insights in the original contrast flow process. PLP offers a straightforward and intuitive way of perfusion algorithm validation. From the PLP point of view, TSVD simply proposes yet another approach for computing the weights WV, WF for Vb and Fb ((Eq6), (Eq7)). But because WV and WF directly relate perfusion measurement to the input C(t) data, they show how each image in a temporal perfusion sequence contributes to the Vb and Fb values. Consider the graphs on Figure 1, computed from a real CT brain perfusion case (N = 60, T = 60 sec, di = 1 sec). We intentionally selected a very clear, motion-free, high-contrast temporal image sequence, resulting in a well-defined gamma-like AIF curve K(t) with no substantial noise in the contrast enhancement phase. We computed WV and WF for the original sequence of N = 60 time points (resulting in r = 10 eigenvalue threshold), as well as for the shorter sequence up to the recirculation point (N = 14, r = 3):  1  Despite the popular belief, AK singularity has much more to do with the shape of the AIF function K(t), than with any noise, as we will see later. In fact, noise is likely to make AK less singular.  Oleg Pianykh  Page 7 of 21  01.06.2010  Contrast change from baseline, HU  AIF  Recirculation  Time ti=i sec  Weights with AIF recirculation truncation  Weights without AIF recirculation truncation  WF  WF W  WV  V  ti  ti  Figure 1: Original AIF curve K(t) from CT brain perfusion sequence, ti = 1...60 sec, and TSVDderived weighting sequences WV and WF- according to equations Eq4 and Eq5. The first set of WV and WF was obtained from recirculation-truncated AIF. We used standard 20% TSVD eigenvalue cut-off threshold.  As one can see in Figure 1, TSVD weights WV and WF, found with or without recirculation correction, do not make any practical sense: 1. They oscillate severely, making approximately r sign changes, where r is the TSVD eigenvalue truncation threshold. 2. They diverge towards the end. As a result, the most important time points (contrast peak during the first 10 seconds) receive minimal weights (play minimal roles in the Vb and Fb maps), and the least important points towards the end are disproportionally emphasized. 3. They can take negative values—meaning that even the images corresponding to the high-contrast agent intake can have negative contribution to the Vb and Fb values (hard to justify practically, especially for Vb). 4. They are completely uncorrelated with the AIF shape. 5. They are severely affected by recirculation truncation, or by any truncation in general (choice of N time points or choice of total scan time T): WV and WF for the full AIF (N = 60) have nothing in common with WV and WF for the recirculation-truncated AIF (N = 14). This makes the choice of N and T—often performed manually and another source of numerical instability—capable of completely changing the TSVD perfusion outcomes. These observations mean that TSVD-based perfusion analysis has serious flows, which cannot be fixed by more intricate approaches to the eigenvalue thresholding. Moreover, as our numerical experiments indicate, oscillating and diverging patterns in PLP weights are very common for TSVD deconvolution. In other words, TSVD perfusion solutions  Oleg Pianykh  Page 8 of 21  01.06.2010  can be very unstable and divergent even without substantial noise or artifacts in the original data. What causes these problems? TSVD itself. TSVD eigenvectors uk are known to oscillate as k increases, approximately with k sign changes in uk [Hansen]. These oscillations inevitably propagate into the B matrix (Eq15), and then into the PLP weights WV and WF. One can take an “ideal” noise-artifactrecirculation-free AIF curve, such as K(t) = γ(t) = t3e-t/1.5 (often used in numerical perfusion simulations [Ostergaard]) and observe the same oscillation phenomenon, as shown on Figure 2. W V for different TSVD thresholds r  r=12  r=6  r=1 Time ti=i sec  Figure 2: Left: Vb weights WV computed after keeping first r = 1, r = 6, and r = 12 eigenvalues λi in TSVD deconvolution based on AIF K(t) = t3e-t/1.5 (sampled at N = 60 time points ti = 1...60). Note that the number of sign changes in each WV is roughly equal to the number r of preserved eigenvalues. Note also the diverging of weights for large ti when more eigenvalues are preserved. Right: More complete image of WV as a function of preserved eigenvalues and time (now sampled at N = 20 time points ti = 1...20). The case of 100% preserved eigenvalues corresponds to all r = 20 all eigenvalues kept, and no regularization applied. Note the high oscillation even for low eigenvalue thresholds r (high regularization), and diverging pattern for late time points ti. Using longer sampling sequence of ti = 1...60 would only worsen this pattern.  One can see that the local extrema in TSVD-derived WV change their count and locations depending on the cutoff threshold r, randomly favoring different images in the original C(ti) sequence. The same problem can be shown for Fb weights WF. As a result, the quality of TSVD perfusion analysis is severely affected by the number r of preserved SVD eigenvalues (eigenvectors) and depends on r more than on anything else. Theoretically, one wants to preserve as much data (eigenvalues) as possible, but practically, keeping more eigenvalues with TSVD means introducing more oscillations in the WV and WF weighting sequences, making the values of Vb, Fb, and Tmtt = Vb/Fb more and more meaningless. Moreover, increasing the total number of perfusion time points N plays the same role: it means increasing the total number of eigenvalues, and likely increasing the number of preserved eigenvalues, which can lead to very unstable solutions. Ironically, to make TSVD numerically-stable, one needs to keep the size of  Oleg Pianykh  Page 9 of 21  01.06.2010  perfusion series N as low as possible, which generally leads to less accurate measurements. Finally, weighting sequences obtained for different eigenvalue thresholds r appear to be completely uncorrelated with each other (Figure 2), which means that different thresholding strategies in TSVD perfusion algorithms will lead to completely different perfusion values of Vb, Fb and Tmtt. This explains the well-known disaccord between perfusion values measured in different commercial software: although they claim to use the same TSVD algorithm, their outcomes depend on the eigenvalue thresholding more than on the original data.  3.2. PLP in Tikhonov Deconvolution As we already mentioned, TSVD is not the only regularization technique that can be applied to solving Eq4. Let’s use PLP to consider another popular (and less computationally-expensive) method—Tikhonov regularization [Tikhonov], [Koh2], [Calamante2]—where the original matrix AK is conditioned with linear constraint L to compute B as: B = (A TK A K + αLT L) −1 A TK  (Eq16)  The most common choices for the matrix L are either identity matrix I or first-order derivative matrix 1 D—although others have been suggested [Koh2]. Regularization parameter α ≥ 0 plays the same role as TSVD truncation threshold r: higher α corresponds to more regularized solutions (similarly to lower r, or higher λr). The general theory behind the optimal α selection (L-curves in particular) can be applied, but as we already mentioned, it optimizes α with respect to the residual norms and not the expected properties of the contrast flow.  α=λN α=λ1  Figure 3: Comparing Vb weights WV computed with Tikhonov regularization for AIF K(t) = t3e-t/1.5 (sampled at N = 20 time points ti = 1...20), using L = I (left) and L = D (right). Parameter α was set to 1  D(i,i) = 1, D(i,i + 1) = -1, 0 otherwise.  Oleg Pianykh  Page 10 of 21  01.06.2010  the SVD eigenvalues λr, r = 1...N. Note that despite the change in the regularization matrix L, both methods behave very similarly—including severe divergence at the end (high ti).  The graphs on Figure 3 show Vb weighting coefficients WV found for different degrees of regularization α = λr (r = 1…20). Compare it to the Figure 2, right. As we already know, TSVD exhibits extremely unstable behavior (with respect to the regularization threshold). On the other hand, Vb weights WV obtained from Tikhonov regularization are more oscillation-free [Calamante2]—yet they have problems of their own. Divergence in Tikhonov’s WV towards the higher ti exceeds that of TSVD, manifesting itself even for very regularized (high α) solutions. At the same time, the main part of WV(ti) remains nearly flat (with an absolute value close to 0), which means that the bulk of the C(t) data—contrast peak included—is essentially ignored. The change in the regularization matrix L seems to make no improvement. As a result, Vb values obtained from such lessoscillating Tokhonov WV make little sense, reflecting more of regularization method artifacts than the true blood volume. The same can be shown for the flow Fb (weights WF) and therefore will follow for Tmtt. To conclude, as we have discovered with Eq6, what really matters in perfusion deconvolution are the PLP weights: only the weight values are needed to compute blood volume Vb and flow Fb from the original data C(t). This makes PLP analysis instrumental in perfusion algorithm selection and validation. Regardless of deconvolution regularization techniques, we expect the weighting coefficients W to be smooth and nonoscillating, corresponding to a generally smooth and monotone contrast flow. Any oscillations, high slopes, or negative values in weighting coefficients are hard to justify clinically and pragmatically. But TSVD and Tikhonov regularization methods fail to satisfy these criteria. As a result, smooth weights wi are obtained from the smooth original AIF data K(t) via numerically-unstable deconvolution algorithms.  3.3. AK Singularity and AIF Shape The main justification behind all perfusion regularization approaches was dealing with AK singularities (Eq4). These singularities were commonly attributed to measurement noise; and regularization techniques were meant to help with denoising. However, AK singularity and deconvolution instability may have nothing to do with noise or artifacts (see Figure 2). In fact, even smooth gamma-shaped functions K(t) can produce ill-conditioned AK in Eq3. The relationship between K(t) and singularity of AK can be demonstrated in many ways. First, if K(0) vanishes to 0 (which is often the case), then so do the diagonal elements in AK (see Eq3), already making AK singular 1. More intricate observations can be derived from Figure 4, demonstrating how the shape of an ideal, noise-free AIF K(t) can affect the stability of its perfusion deconvolution.  1  Ironically, this is the case when noise in K(t) can prevent AK from having 0 on the diagonal, making it less singular!  Oleg Pianykh  Page 11 of 21  01.06.2010  Figure 4: Left: Plot for log10(λN/λ1) = log10(λmin/λmax) for SVD eigenvalues of matrix AK. Matrix AK corresponds to Ka,b(t) = tae-bt AIF, sampled for ti = 1...60 (N = 60), for different values of a and b. Right: Plot for the 20% cutoff index r(a,b), such that λr >= 0.2 × λmax > λr+1.  As one can see from Figure 4 (left), even the shape of K(t) can substantially affect numerical stability of perfusion deconvolution. For example, large b can considerably limit the numerical rank of AK, creating λN closer to 0. Large values of b in Ka,b(t )= tae-bt correspond to fast-decaying AIF curves (or long scan times T), which lead to fasterdecaying SVD eigenvalues. However, fast decay in eigenvalues means lower cutoff index r (if r corresponds to 0.2λ1 for instance), fewer preserved eigenvalues, and fewer oscillations in weights W. In other words, “good” non-oscillating W are likely to correspond to intrinsically ill-conditioned AK when ill-conditioning is rooted in the shape of K(t) rather than in measurement noise or artifacts. This conclusion is also supported by Figure 4 (right), showing how the “20% cutoff” index r changes with different choices of the AIF shaping parameters a and b. The surface on this plot consists of two major areas: a large flat “plateau” (where 20% cutoff does not eliminate any of the N = 60 SVD eigenvalues) and a rather steep “wall” corresponding to eigenvalue truncation. For the “plateau” area, all eigenvalues are preserved, which means that matrix AK is wellconditioned to be inversed “as is.” In other words, TSVD is not needed and is not effectively applied. For the “wall” area, TSVD is used to keep only the first r < N eigenvalues, but please note how steep the wall is—especially for small values of b (slow decay in AIF). Essentially, very subtle changes in the AIF shape variables (a,b) can lead to a substantial change in the TSVD truncation threshold r: changing the number of oscillating eigenvectors and seriously affecting the outcomes of the perfusion deconvolution. Note that for any constant c, Ka,b(ct) ~ Ka,cb(t) and changing the total scan time T (set to N = 60 seconds in our case) will simply mean using another value of b on the same plot. Thus, Figure 4 (right) can be used to judge the stability of any TSVD deconvolution where the AIF curve can be closely approximated by gamma-like Ka,b(t)=tae-bt regardless of the total scan time. To conclude, matrix-regularization approach to solving Eq2 has problems of its own, creating numerically-unstable results even for smooth, noise- and artifact-free input functions. Moreover, the entire concept of regularization contradicts the original  Oleg Pianykh  Page 12 of 21  01.06.2010  convolution model of perfusion flow in Eq3. Matrix AK, regularized with TSVD or Tikhonov methods, loses its original Toeplitz convolution-specific form in Eq3—that is, the regularized matrix generally does not correspond to any flow deconvolution equation or kernel K(t). When we diverge from the original K(t), we diverge from the physical convolving nature of perfusion flow, and we inevitably arrive at diverging—and therefore meaningless—weighting sequences. One may wonder why deconvolution, so long popular in perfusion applications, was producing reasonable perfusion maps. In our opinion, this became possible mainly because the original C(t) data had enough contrast to tolerate suboptimal and even erroneous choice of W. As many radiologists know, good perfusion maps were always attributed to good perfusion algorithms, and bad perfusion maps were always blamed on “noise,” “low contrast,” and “artifacts.” High doses of contrast and radiation (for CT scans) cushion these maps from diverging and oscillating weights. But high contrast and exposure in perfusion images may be very costly for the patients, and should never be used to compensate for the inherent perfusion algorithm deficiencies. Deconvolution regularization deficiencies can be observed in many current perfusion software packages where AIF selection can be done in the most anatomically-incorrect locations (on bones for instance) and still result in visibly sound perfusion maps. A cleaner approach to perfusion visualization is imperative.  4. Enhancing Perfusion Analysis with PLP 4.1. Principal Component Perfusion The PLP view of perfusion computations can lead us to the new approaches for perfusion measurements. Fundamentally, perfusion analysis is meant to qualify the passing of the contrast agent through the tissues of interest. Consequently, optimal perfusion analysis method has to do this in the most visible and numerically-stable way. But according to PLP, the only constant assumption we seem to make is that perfusion values are weighted sums of the original contrast enhancement values Ci. Therefore, for optimized perfusion analysis, one needs to select the weights W from Eq6 in such a way that the perfusion map would show as much contrast variance as possible. This means that the vector W should be chosen as the first principal component of the perfusion image sequence. Therefore, we define the First Principal Component (FPC) parameter PFPC as: N  PFPC = ∑ wiFPC Ci  (Eq17)  i =1  where weights wiFPC are the coordinates of the first principal component. This choice of WFPC = { w1FPC ,… , wNFPC }T guarantees the optimal (in least-square sense) representation of contrast-related variance in a single parameter PFPC. One can arrive at Principal Component Analysis (PCA) in Eq17 from a few different angles as well. Consider Eq11 and Eq13. They were derived from different assumptions (Axel model in Eq11 and convolution in Eq13), but they all agree in representing C(t) as Oleg Pianykh  Page 13 of 21  01.06.2010  a linear combination of Nb basis functions where Nb is expected to be substantially lower than the total perfusion image count N. The least-square optimal choice of the basis is given by PCA. In many ways, PCA (similar to PLP) directly follows from the original linearity of perfusion modeling, regardless of the underlying model assumptions. Unlike “volume,” “flow,” and “MTT” the value of PFPC is not related to any pharmokinetic model. However, it only seems to be an advantage. First of all, PFPC depends only on the perfusion data with no models attached, which makes it universal and independent from often subjective model assumptions. This, for example, explains increasing applications of PCA in perfusion CAD (such as 3TP method [3TP] and its derivatives). Second, with a variety of current perfusion algorithms (poorly correlated with each other, as we have demonstrated above), “volume,” “flow,” or “MTT” interpretations have become highly inconsistent and model-specific. In fact, they are nothing but the names for specific model parameters, and “blood volume” from one model may have nothing to do with the “blood volume” from another. We should be much more concerned with our ability to optimally see the effects of the contrast perfusion, and this is exactly what the value of PFPC provides. The other advantages of using PFPC map follow from the PCA properties: 1. One does not have to define AIF/VOF points. Not only does this eliminate the subjectivity of AIF/VOF point definition, it also totally automates computation of PFPC. 2. Consequently, FPC analysis can be done specifically for a selected region of interest and not for the entire image. Because the analysis does not depend on the AIF/VOF points, we can limit our maps to the areas we are interested in—such as tumors. AIF/VOF points do not have to be in the field of view; moreover, FPC can process cases where AIF/VOF points were not originally scanned or are generally missing in the image data. Local/regional FPC analysis can also be beneficial when one wants to exclude certain structures—for instance, large blood vessels. 3. PCA is extremely insensitive to noise and is often used as a robust noise-removal technique. Because PFPC will underline as many changes in contrast flow as computationally possible, one can use smaller amounts of contrast and less radiation exposure. 4. For the same reason, FPC can be done without any initial image smoothing or noise filtering. Combined with PLP’s “weighted” view of perfusion analysis, it produces a really fast computational method. 5. PCA has already been applied to certain problems of perfusion imaging such as minimization of recirculation artifacts [Wu]. Now it can be done in a single method. If one compares FPC weights to those from perfusion deconvolution, it is easy to see that FPC weights follow a much more stable pattern. This can be seen with our previous example of CT brain perfusion from Figure 5 (we used only WV, but WF will show similar patterns):  Oleg Pianykh  Page 14 of 21  01.06.2010  TSVD FPC  Time ti=i sec  Tikhonov  Figure 5: Weighting series for CT brain perfusion case: PCA-derived FPC series WFPC, TSVDderived WV, and Tikhonov-derived WV. Note that while the FPC series favors the first temporal images (when most of contrast agent is passing through the tissue), TSVD and Tikhonov WV oscillate inconsistently and diverge at the end, favoring the last and the least important images.  Consequently, WFPC coefficients produce very clear PFPC image (Figure 6):  Figure 6: Original image, TSVD Vb map and PCA first principal component PFPC map. Note the missing vascular structure on the TSVD map: it received low weights and was essentially suppressed. This is one of the cases when TSVD problems become very visible.  As a result, the FPC map provides a much better qualitative view of perfusion compared to the less-stable deconvolution. Therefore, in our opinion, it is essential to include FPC maps in any visual perfusion analysis. Considering the principal component above first may be beneficial as well, but we will leave it for a separate discussion.  4.2. Perfusion Value Orthogonality and Consistency The use of weighting sequences W for all PLP-compliant perfusion parameters brings up the subject of perfusion parameter independence. How many perfusion parameters (maps) does one need to access perfusion phenomena? The answer for PLP-conforming parameters (algorithms) is straightforward: perfusion parameters are linearly independent only if their PLP weights are orthogonal. Perfusion parameters with highly-correlated weights are redundant. Undoubtedly, parameter orthogonality should be present in any sound PLP-compliant algorithm.  Oleg Pianykh  Page 15 of 21  01.06.2010  Axel’s choice of wiV = 1 and wiT = ti (in Eq8b, assuming equidistant timing) gives a good example of perfusion orthogonality: regardless of sampling, correlation between the discreet weighting vectors WV and WT is zero, which means that Axel’s Vb and Tmtt maps will indeed provide different (linearly independent, orthogonal) views of the perfusion phenomena. Using W from PCA components will produce orthogonal parameters as well by PCA definition. TSVD and Tikhonov’s weighting sequences, as our earlier studies indicate, are clearly not orthogonal.  4.3. Continuous View of PLP Weighting and Parameter Consistency It’s time to recall that contrast flow is a continuous phenomenon; and even though all our measurements remain discrete, we should keep the continuity in mind. The definition of PLP weighting naturally extends to the continuous case: we can define the perfusion parameter P as PLP-compliant in a continuous sense if there exists a continuous ∞  weighting function W(t) defined on [0,∞), ∫ W 2 (t )dt < ∞ , such that for any pixel location 0  (x,y), T  (Eq17)  P = ∫ W (t )C (t )dt 0  In other words, W(t) (identically to weighting vector W in the discrete case) defines how a contrast change C(t) at each time t contributes to the value of P. Does W(t) always exist? The answer entirely depends on the perfusion analysis method. For example, for Axel’s approach (Eq8), it exists and defines as Wb(t) = 1 for Vb, and Wmtt(t) = t for Tmtt. Moreover, the existence of W(t) is an extremely important prerequisite for any sound perfusion analysis method. In essence, it means that all discrete PLP weighting vectors Wσ obtained for different choices of time sampling sequences σ = {t0, t1, ..., tN } are nothing more than sampled W(t) to which they converge as the sampling step d = max | ti − ti −1 | vanishes to 0. Consequently, this means that discrete i  computation of P will be stable and error-tolerant with respect to the choice of time sampling sequence σ, because with sufficiently small choices of d discrete estimates of P, regardless of σ, can be made arbitrarily close to the “true” continuous value of P in Eq17. Therefore, for any given perfusion parameter P, we would like to define the uniform convergence of discrete W to a continuous W(t) as a parameter consistency property. By definition, only consistent parameters can tolerate changes in time sampling sequences. This is extremely important for practical applications. With any general theory on perfusion time sampling lacking, different institutions apply different time-sampling strategies. Also, only consistent parameters can be used for perfusion experiment design, as we will soon see. From our previous analysis, we can conclude that Axel’s parameters are consistent. The PCA parameter consistency can be also demonstrated under some reasonable conditions on C(t). Just think about d being small enough so that for any t in (ti-1,ti) its C(t) can be accurately linearly-interpolated from C(ti-1) and C(ti); then, principal components of the  Oleg Pianykh  Page 16 of 21  01.06.2010  image set won’t change at all. However, as we have seen, TSVD and Tikhonov’s approaches to perfusion analysis produce inconsistent parameters. With the number of perfusion parameters increasing over the past few years, their orthogonality and consistency should become one of the main requirements for their use in clinical applications.  4.4. Optimal Scheduling and Dose Reduction The science of optimal experiment planning attempts to build an ideal experiment design that will produce the most reliable measurements [Fedorov]. In the case of perfusion, we are interested in selecting the optimal temporal sequence ti, 0 = t0 < t1 <... <tj <…< tN = T so that: 1. N is minimal. This means taking as few images as possible to shorten the total scan time and to reduce patient radiation exposure in CT perfusion. 2. ti are distributed in the most optimal way, which guarantees the most accurate measurement (perfusion values). However, even simple dose-reduction methods such as uniform image subsampling (increasing sampling time interval di = ti - ti-1 to reduce total image count N) can be greatly affected by the choice of the perfusion algorithm [Rost]. This is directly related to our definition of parameter consistency. Algorithms with low consistency (such as TSVD) tend to produce high random peaks in their weighting sequences W. Therefore, if we use them with optimal experiment design—to reduce the number of temporal images—the outcome will entirely depend on how the image-removal pattern interacts with the random weight oscillations. In short, weight-inconsistent algorithms make optimal perfusion scheduling impossible (image-reduction strategies included). Figure 7 and Figure 8 illustrate this for Tikhonov and TSVD deconvolution. For each algorithm, we used our initial 60-timepoint CT perfusion sequence to compute blood volume weights WV (the results for WF look similar). Then we analyzed three image-reduction strategies; uniformly removing three of every four images, truncating the whole image sequence to the first 14 images (up to the AIF recirculation point), and replacing the images with the highest contrast content (ti = 5 and ti = 6 sec, corresponding to AIF peak) by their linear interpolations from the neighboring images (ti = 4 and ti = 7 sec). This time, Tikhonov deconvolution regularization (α was set to the 20% TSVD cutoff eigenvalue, L = I) produced the most incoherent WV, as can be seen on Figure 7. The weighting sequences came out to be completely uncorrelated and diverging towards the end.  Oleg Pianykh  Page 17 of 21  01.06.2010  Time ti=i sec  Figure 7: Experiment planning with Tikhonov deconvolution (α is set to the 20% cutoff eigenvalue L = I). Series “Tikhonov” is the WV series for a brain CT sequence; “Tikhonov4” was obtained after keeping only each 4-th image, “TikhonovInt”—after replacing AIF peak images 4 and 5 by their linear interpolation, and “TikhonovRec”—after considering only the first 14 images for recirculation correction.  TSVD deconvolution regularization (same 20% eigenvalue cutoff) produced smoother WV (Figure 8) yet oscillating, diverging, and completely uncorrelated to be used for any image-reduction strategies. The only close match was observed between the original (TSVD) and interpolated (TSVDInt) sequences, but in fact this is the case when we would like to see some difference in the weights. The interpolation changed the most contrast-reach images, and we would expect WV to reflect this change at the time points where it occurred (ti = 5 and ti = 6 sec).  Time ti=i sec  Figure 8: Experiment planning with TSVD deconvolution (20% cutoff eigenvalue). Series “TSVD” is the WV series for a brain CT sequence; “TSVD4” was obtained after keeping only each 4-th image, “TSVDInt”—after replacing AIF peak images 4 and 5 by their linear interpolation, and “TSVDRec”—after considering the first 14 images only, for recirculation correction.  PCA-derived weights WFPC, contrary to TSVD and Tikhonov deconvolution, demonstrated consistency and proper response to the scheduling changes. First of all, they remained very similar after removing three of every four images (“PCA4”) and after recirculation correction of AIF (“PCARec”). As for the AIF contrast peak interpolation (“PCAInt”), it affected WFPC exactly where it happened (ti = 5 and ti = 6 sec) and nowhere else. Thus, PCA weight distribution WFPC is consistent and can be used for image-reduction strategies.  Oleg Pianykh  Page 18 of 21  01.06.2010  Also, note the similarity between the WFPC data and the original AIF shape (Figure 1, top). High contrast images (around AIF peak) naturally correspond to large contrast variance and higher WFPC values.  Time ti=i sec  Figure 9: Experiment planning with FPC map. Series “PCA” is the WFPC series for a brain CT sequence; “PCA4” was obtained after keeping only each 4-th image, “PCAInt” – after replacing AIF peak images 4 and 5 by their linear interpolation, and “PCARec” – after considering the first 14 images only, for recirculation correction.  As one can conclude, PCA weights WFPC, used to build the proposed optimal FPC map, behave in much more stable and meaningful way compared to regularization-based deconvolution weighting.  4.5. Future Research: PCA Eigenvalues Eigenvalues Λ = {λ1, λ2, ..., λN}, produced by PCA, lead to another interesting direction in perfusion analysis. Consider the following reasoning. In a normal region of interest, contrast enhancement will be mainly produced by the large vessels (such as arteries) roughly corresponding to the same time T0 after the contrast injection. Peaking around a single time point makes C(t) = {C1,…, CN}T vectors essentially one-dimensional—one coordinate at t = T0 dominates the others. This means that λ1 will have a large relative value EΛ =  λ1  (Eq18)  N  ∑λ i =1  i  which in our experiments was as high as 0.5 for normal brain images. On the other hand, in the presence of an abnormally-perfusing organ (such as a tumor), C(t) should exhibit another noticeable contrast enhancement at some different, more delayed time T1. This will increase the intrinsic dimensionality of the C(t) vector space, reducing the relative value of λ1 and possibly contributing to a higher value of another λK. In PCA terms, λi reflects true data dimensionality, and abnormal tissues may add other dimensions Oleg Pianykh  Page 19 of 21  01.06.2010  compared to the normal. As a result, the distribution of eigenvalues {λ1, λ2, ..., λN} can be used to analyze the uniformity and normality of perfusion flow, extending what we used to expect from Tmtt. We leave this topic for further investigation.  5. Conclusion In this paper, we introduced Perfusion Linearity Property (PLP), which naturally follows from the linearity of many well-known perfusion flow models. For PLP-compliant perfusion parameters (such as Vb and Fb in deconvolution methods), perfusion parameter selection is nothing but the selection of PLP weights wi. This generalization permits to analyze, validate, and compare numerical properties of different perfusion methods via their PLP weighting sequences. This also introduces the concepts of perfusion parameter orthogonality and consistency, which should be used for optimal perfusion algorithm selection. Finally, PLP can be used to develop new perfusion visualization approaches (such as PCA maps), study dose reduction problems, and can potentially lead to more insightful perfusion quantification.  6. References [Bronstein] Bronshtein I.N., Semendyayev K.A., Musiol G., Muehlig H., Handbook of Mathematics, Springer Verlag, 2004 [Tikhonov] Tikhonov A.N., “On the stability of inverse problems,” Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 1943, 39, No. 5, 195-198 [Stewart] Stewart G.N. “Researches on the circulation time in organs and on the influences which affect it (Parts I–III),” J Physiol 1894;15:1. [Wu] Yang Wu, Hongyu An, Hamid Krim and Weili Lin, “An independent component analysis approach for minimizing effects of recirculation in dynamic susceptibility contrast magnetic resonance imaging,” Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 2007 Mar;27(3):632-45. Epub 2006 Jul 19. [Angelos] Angelos A. Konstas and Michael H. Lev, “CT Perfusion Imaging of Acute Stroke: The Need for Arrival Time, Delay Insensitive, and Standardized Postprocessing Algorithms?”, Radiology, January 2010 254:22-25. [Wu2] Wu O., Østergaard L.,Weisskoff R.M., Benner T., Rosen B.R., Sorensen A.G., “Tracer Arrival Timing-Insensitive Technique for Estimating Flow in MR PerfusionWeighted Imaging Using Singular Value Decomposition With a Block-Circulant Deconvolution Matrix,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine vol. 50:164–174 (2003) [Calamante] Calamante F, Mørup M, Hansen LK., “Defining a local arterial input function for perfusion MRI using independent component analysis,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 2004 Oct;52(4):789-97 [Axel] Axel L. “Cerebral blood flow determination by rapid-sequence computed tomography. A theoretical analysis.” Radiology 137(1980): 679–686. [Lee] Ting-Yim Lee, “Functional CT: physiological models,” Trends in Biotechnology 20.8 (Suppl.) (2002): S3–S10  Oleg Pianykh  Page 20 of 21  01.06.2010  [Patlak] Patlak, C.S. et al., “Graphical evaluation of blood-to-brain transfer constants from multiple-time uptake data,” Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism. 3, 1– 7 [Miles] Miles K.A., Leggett D.A., Bennett G.A.J., “CT derived Patlak images of the human kidney,” The British Journal of Radiology 72 (1999): 153–158 [Wirestam] Wirestam R, Andersson L, Østergaard L, Bolling M, Aunola JP, Lindgren A, Geijer B, Holtås S, Ståhlberg F. “Assessment of regional cerebral blood flow by dynamic susceptibility contrast MRI using different deconvolution techniques,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 43 (2000):691–700 [Ostergaard] L. Ostergaard, R.M. Weiskoff, D.A. Chesler, C. Gyldensten, B.R. Rosen, “High Resolution Measurement of Cerebral Blood Flow using Intravascular Tracer Bolus Passages. Part I: Mathematical Approach and Statistical Analysis,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 36:5 (1996): 715–725 [Ostergaard2] Ona Wu, Leif Østergaard, Robert M. Weisskoff, Thomas Benner, Bruce R. Rosen, A. Gregory Sorensen, “Tracer Arrival Timing-Insensitive Technique for Estimating Flow in MR Perfusion-Weighted Imaging Using Singular Value Decomposition With a Block-Circulant Deconvolution Matrix,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 50 (2003):164–174 [Hansen] P.C. Hansen, “Deconvolution and regularization with Toeplitz matrices,” Numerical Algorithms 29 (2002): 323–378. [Goh] V. Goh, S. Halligan, C. I. Bartram, “Quantitative Tumor Perfusion Assessment with Multidetector CT: Are Measurements from Two Commercial Software Packages Interchangeable?” Radiology 242 (2007): 777–782. [Calamante2] Calamante F., Gadian D.G., Connelly A., “Quantification of bolus-tracking MRI: Improved characterization of the tissue residue function using Tikhonov Regularization”, Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 50 (2003): 1237–1247 [Koh] T.S. Koh, X.Y. Wu, L.H. Cheong, C.C.T. Lim, “Assessment of Perfusion by Dynamic Contrast-Enhanced Imaging Using a Deconvolution Approach on Regression and Singular Value Decomposition,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 23:12 (2004) 1532–1542 [Koh2] Koh T.S., Hou Z., “A Numerican Method for Estimating Blood Flow by Dynamic Functional Imaging,” Medical Engineering and Physics 24 (2002): 151–158. [Graz] Keeling, S.L., Bammer, R., Kogler, T., Stollberger, R., “On the Convolution Model of Dynamic Contrast Enhanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Nonparametric Deconvolution Approaches,” SFB Report No. 298, Karl-Franzens University of Graz, Graz, Austria, April, 2004. Web. Available online at http://www.kfunigraz.ac.at/imawww/invcon/medimage/kernel.pdf [3TP] Degani H, Gusis V, Weinstein D, Fields S, Strano S., “Mapping pathophysiological features of breast tumors by MRI at high spatial resolution,” Nature Medicine 3 (1997):780–782 [Fedorov] Fedorov V.V., Hackl P., “Model-Oriented Design Of Experiments”, Springer, 1997 [Rost] E. Rost, R. Geske, M. Baake, “Signal analysis of impulse response functions in MR and CT measurements of cerebral blood flow”, Journal of Theoretical Biology, Volume 240, Issue 3, 7 June 2006, Pages 451-458  Oleg Pianykh  Page 21 of 21  01.06.2010

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
