Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_6858

Abstract:
A Model for Learned Bloom Filters and Related Structures Michael Mitzenmacher1  arXiv:1802.00884v1 [cs.DS] 3 Feb 2018  Abstract— Recent work has suggested enhancing Bloom filters by using a pre-filter, based on applying machine learning to model the data set the Bloom filter is meant to represent. Here we model such learned Bloom filters, clarifying what guarantees can and cannot be associated with such a structure.  I. I NTRODUCTION An interesting paper, “The Case for Learned Index Structures” [5], recently appeared, suggesting that standard index structures and related structures, such as Bloom filters, could be improved by using machine learning to develop what they authors dub learned index structures. Here we aim to provide a more formal model for their variation of a Bloom filter, which they call a learned Bloom filter, and clarify what features it does and does not have. A key issue is that, unlike standard Bloom filters, the performance of learned Bloom filters depends on both the data set the Bloom filter represents and the set membership queries made. Because of this, the types of guarantees offered by learned Bloom filters differ significantly from those of standard Bloom filters. We formalize this issue below. The performance of learned Bloom filters will therefore necessarily be application dependent. Indeed, there may be applications where they offer significant advantages over standard Bloom filters. We view this work as a beginning step in laying out a theoretical framework to understand learned Bloom filters and related structures, with a particular goal of pointing out issues that may affect their suitability for real-world applications. In what follows, we start by reviewing standard Bloom filters and variants, following the framework provided by the reference [2]. We then describe learned Bloom filters, and attempt to provide a model which highlights both their potential benefits and their limitations. In particular, we find learned Bloom filters appear most useful when the query stream can be modelled as coming from a fixed distribution, which can be sampled during the construction. II. R EVIEW: B LOOM F ILTERS A. Definition of the Data Structure A Bloom filter for representing a set S = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } of n elements corresponds to an array of m bits, and uses k independent hash functions h1 , . . . , hk with range {0, . . . , m − 1}. Typically we assume that these hash functions are perfect; that is, each hash function maps each item in the universe to independently and uniformly to a number 1 School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University. Supported in part by NSF grants CCF-1563710, CCF-1535795, and CCF1320231. This work was done while visiting Microsoft Research.  in {0, . . . , m − 1}. Initially all array bits are 0. For each element x ∈ S, the array bits hi (x) are set to 1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ k; it does not matter if some bit is set to 1 multiple times. To check if an item y is in S, we check whether all hi (y) are set to 1. If not, then clearly y is not a member of S. If all hi (y) are set to 1, we conclude that y is in S, although this may be a false positive. A Bloom filter does not produce false negatives. There are various theoretical guarantees one can associate with a Bloom filter. The simplest is the following. Let y be an element of the universe such that y ∈ / S, where y is chosen independently of the hash functions used to create the filter. A useful way to think of this is that an adversary can choose any element y before the Bloom filter is constructed; the adversary has no knowledge of the hash functions used, but may know the set S. Let ρ be the fraction of bits set to 1 after the elements are hashed. Then Pr(y yields a false positive) = ρk . Further, probabilistic analysis shows both that kn  1 ≈ 1 − e−kn/m , E[ρ] = 1 − 1 − m and that Pr(|ρ − E[ρ]| ≥ γ) ≤ e−Θ(γ  2  m)  in the typical regime where m/n and k are constant. That is, ρ is, with high probability, very close to its easily calculable expectation, and thus we know (up to very small random deviations, and with high probability over instantiations of the Bloom filter) what the probability is than an element y will be a false positive. Because of this, it is usual to talk about the false positive probability of a Bloom filter; in particular, it is generally referred to as though it is a constant depending on the filter parameters, although it is a random variable, because it is tightly concentrated around its expectation. Moreover, given a set of distinct query elements Q = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yq } with Q ∩ S = ∅ chosen a priori before the Bloom filter is instantiated, the fraction of false positives over these queries will similarly be concentrated near ρk . Hence we may talk about the false positive rate of a Bloom filter, which (when the query elements are distinct) is essentially the same as the false positive probability. (When the query elements are not distinct, the false positive rate may vary significantly, depending on on the distribution of the number of appearances of elements and which ones yield false positives; we focus on the distinct item setting here.) In particular, the false positive rate is a priori the same for any  possible query set Q. Hence one approach to finding the false positive rate of a Bloom filter empirically is simply to test a random set of query elements (that does not intersect S) and find the fraction of false positives. Indeed, it does not matter what set Q is chosen, as long as it is chosen independently of the hash functions. We emphasize that, as we discuss further below, the term false positive rate often has a different meaning in the context of learning theory applications. This difference of terminology is a possible point of confusion in [5], and care must be taken in understanding how the term is being used. B. Additional Bloom Filter Benefits and Limitations For completeness, we relate some of the other benefits and limitations of Bloom filters. More details can be found in [2]. We have assumed in the above analysis that the hash functions are fully random. As fully random hash functions are not practically implementable, there are often questions relating to how well the idealization above matches the real world for specific hash functions. In practice, however, the model of fully random hash functions appears reasonable in many cases; see [3] for further discussion on this point. If an adversary has access to the hash functions used, or to the final Bloom filter, it can find elements that lead to false positives. One must therefore find other structures for adversarial situations. A theoretical framework for such settings is developed in [8]. Variations of Bloom filters, which adapt to false positives and prevent them in the future, are described in [1], [7]; while not meant for adversarial situations, they prevent repeated false positives with the same element. One of the key advantages of a standard Bloom filter is that it is easy to insert an element (possibly slightly changing the false positive probability), although one cannot delete an element without using a more complex structure, such as a counting Bloom filter. However, there are more recent alternatives to the standard Bloom filter, such as the cuckoo filter [4], which can achieve the same or better space performance as a standard Bloom filter while allowing insertions and deletions. If the Bloom filter does not need to insert or delete elements, a well-known alternative is to develop a perfect hash function for the data set, and store a fingerprint of each element in each corresponding hash location (see, e.g., [2] for further explanation); this approach reduces the space required by approximately 30%. III. L EARNED B LOOM F ILTERS A. Definition of the Data Structure We now consider the learned Bloom filter construction offered in [5]. We are given a set of positive keys K that correspond to set to be held in the Bloom filter – that is, K corresponds to the set S in the previous section. We are also given a set of negative keys U for training. We then train a neural network with D = {(xi , yi = 1) | xi ∈ K} ∪ {(xi , yi = 0) | xi ∈ U}; that is, they suggest using a  neural network on this binary classification task to produce a probability, based on minimizing the log loss function X L= y log f (x) + (1 − y) log(1 − f (x)), (x,y)∈D  where f is the learned model from the neural network. Then f (x) can be interpreted as a probability that x is a key from the set. Their suggested approach is to choose a threshold τ so that if f (x) ≥ τ then the algorithm returns that x is in the set, and no otherwise. Since such a process may provide false negatives for some keys in K that have f (x) < τ , a secondary structure – such as a smaller standard Bloom filter for such keys – can be used to ensure there are no false negatives, thereby matching this important characteristic of the standard Bloom filter. In essence, [5] suggests using a pre-filter ahead of the Bloom filter, where the pre-filter comes from a neural network and estimates the probability an element is in the set, allowing the use of a smaller Bloom filter. Performance improves if the size to represent the learned function f and the size of the smaller backup filter for false negatives is smaller than the size of a corresponding Bloom filter with the same false positive rate. While the idea of layering multiple filters has appeared in previous work, this approach appears novel. Indeed, the more typical setting is for the Bloom filter itself to be used as a pre-filter for some other, more expensive filtering process. Of course the pre-filter here need not come from a neural network; any approach that would estimate the probability an input element is in the set could be used. B. Defining the False Positive Probability: High Level Issues The question remains how to determine or derive the false positive probability for such a structure, and how to choose an appropriate threshold τ . One approach would be to empirically find the false positive rate over a test set, and this appears to be what has been done in [5]. This approach is, as we have stated, suitable for a standard Bloom filter, where the false positive rate is guaranteed to be close to its expected value for any test set, with high probability. But as we explain in the next subsection, this methodology requires significant additional assumptions in the learned Bloom filter setting. Before formalizing appropriate definitions, to frame the issue it is helpful to think of an adversarial situation, although as we discuss below an adversary is not strictly necessary. An adversary might naturally be able to find items for which Pr(f (y) ≥ τ ) is surprisingly large based on their own analysis of the data, even without access to the structure f that is finally determined. That is, consider the following intuition. The function f is designed to to take advantage of structure in the set K, as well as the information in the collection of non-set elements U. An adversary, knowing K and/or U themselves, might be able to design elements that are similar to the elements of K. An element similar to the elements of K should have a large f (y) value, and hence be more likely to yield a false positive.  More formally, let us assume the adversary knows K and/or U, and chooses an element y ∈ / K to test. In the standard Bloom filter setting, the array of bits that constitutes the filter is generated from random hash values, and so knowing the set S tells the adversary nothing about what y value might be most likely to yield a false positive. All y values are equivalent (as long as y ∈ / S). In the learned Bloom filter setting, knowing K and U may give the adversary information about the resulting index function f , even if this knowledge is just that f is designed to give higher values to elements similar to K and lower values to elements in U. The adversary need not even know the specific method used to determine f ; the knowledge of the data alone may allow the adversary to choose a y value with a large expected f (y) value, so that Pr(f (y) ≥ τ ) > ; that is the probability of a false positive is larger than expected. While we have stated this problem in terms of an adversary, one does not need to posit an adversary to see that this situation might arise naturally in standard data scenarios. All we need to suppose is that the query set Q of elements that one uses to query the Bloom filter are similar to the set K in some manner that might be captured by f , so that the expected value of f (y) for y ∈ Q skews large. (Here we assume Q is disjoint from K, as we are interested in the rate of false positives, not true positives.) An example based on ranges may be helpful. Suppose the universe of elements is the range [0, 1000000), and the set K of elements to store in our Bloom filter consists of a random subset of elements from the range [1000, 2000], say half of them, and 500 other random elements from outside this range. Our learning algorithm might determine that a suitable function f is f (y) is large (say f (y) ≈ 1/2) for elements in the range [1000, 2000] and close to zero elsewhere, and then a suitable threshold might be τ = 0.4. The resulting false positive rate will depend substantially on what elements are queried. If Q consists of elements primarily in the range [1000, 2000], the false positive rate will be quite high, while if Q is chosen uniformly at random over the whole range, the false positive rate will be quite low. The main point is that the false positive rate, unlike in the setting of a standard Bloom filter, is highly dependent on the query set, and as such is not well-defined independently of the queries, as it is for a standard Bloom filter. Indeed, it seems plausible that in many situations, the query set Q might indeed be similar to the set of elements K, so that f (y) for y ∈ Q might often be above naturally chosen thresholds. For example, in security settings, one might expect that queries for objects under consideration (URLs, network flow features) would be similar to the set of elements stored in the filter. The key here is that, unlike in the Bloom filter setting, the false positive probability for a query y can depend on y, even before the “data structure”, which in this case corresponds to the function f , is instantiated. It is worth noting, however, that the problem we point out here can possibly be a positive feature in other settings; it might be that the false positive rate is remarkably low if the query set is suitable. Again, one can consider the range  example above where queries are uniform over the entire space; the query set is very unlikely to hit the range where the learned function f yields an above threshold value in that setting for an element outside of K. More generally, one may have query sets Q where the values f (y) for y ∈ Q are smaller than one might expect. The key point again remains that the false positive probability is dependent on the data and the query in what may not be predictable ways, in sharp contrast to standard Bloom filters. C. Defining the False Positive Probability, and Analysis from Empirical Data We can formalize (at least partially) settings where we can obtain good performance from a learned Bloom filter, given enough data. The framework below follows standard lines, but provides definitions to capture the high level ideas given above. We first formalize the construction of [5]. Definition 1: A learned Bloom filter on a set of positive keys K and negative keys U is a function f : U → [0, 1] and threshold τ , where U is the universe possible query keys, and an associated standard Bloom filter B, referred to as a backup filter. The backup filter is set to hold the set of keys {z : z ∈ K, f (z) < τ }. For a query y, the learned Bloom filter returns that y ∈ K if f (y) ≥ τ , or if f (y) < τ and the backup filter returns that y ∈ K. The learned Bloom filter returns y ∈ / K otherwise. Note that the size of a learned Bloom filter corresponds to size used to represent the function f and the size of the backup filter B, which we denote by |f |+|B|. In cases where the learned Bloom filter is effective, one expects f to have a small representation, and the number of false negatives from K in the backup filter to be a reasonably small fraction of K. The learned Bloom filter as defined has no false negatives, due to the backup filter. We can define the false positive rate of a learned Bloom filter with respect to a given query distribution. Definition 2: A false positive rate on a query distribution D over U − K for a learned Bloom filter (f, τ, B) is given by Pr (f (y) ≥ τ ) + (1 − Pr (f (y) ≥ τ ))F (B),  y∼D  y∼D  where F (B) is the false positive rate of the backup filter B. While technically F (B) is itself a random variable, as discussed previously, the false positive rate is well concentrated around its expectations, which depends only on the size of the filter |B| and the number of false negatives from K that must be stored in the filter, which depends on f . Hence we may naturally refer to the false positive rate of the learned Bloom filter as being determined by f , τ , and |B| rather than on B itself. That is, where the meaning is clear, we may consider the false positive rate on a query distribution for a learned Bloom filter with associated (f, τ ) to be Pr (f (y) ≥ τ ) + (1 − Pr (f (y) ≥ τ ))E[F (B)],  y∼D  y∼D  where the expectation E[F (B)] is meant to over instantiations of the Bloom filter with given size |B|.  Given sufficient data, we can determine an empirical false positive rate on a test set, and use that to predict future behavior. Under the assumption that the test set has the same distribution as future queries, standard Chernoff bounds provide that the empirical false positive rate will be close to the false positive rate on future queries, as both will be concentrated around the expectation. In many learning theory settings, this empirical false positive rate appears to be referred to as simply the false positive rate; we emphasize that false positive rate, as we have explained above, typically means something different in the Bloom filter literature. Definition 3: The empirical false positive rate on a set T , where T ∩ K = ∅, for a learned Bloom filter (f, τ, B) is the number of false positives from T divided by |T |. Theorem 4: Consider a learned Bloom filter (f, τ, B), a test set T , and a query set Q, where T and Q are both determined from samples according to a distribution D. Let X be the empirical false positive rate on |T |, and Y be the empirical false positive rate on Q. Then 2  Pr(|X − Y | ≥ ) ≤ e−Ω(  min(|T |,|Q|))  .  Proof: Let α = Pry∼D (f (y) ≥ τ ), and β be false positive rate for the backup filter. We first show that for T and X that 2  Pr(|X − (α + (1 − α)β)| ≥ ) ≤ 2e−  |T |  .  This follows from a direct Chernoff bound (e.g., [6][Exercise 4.13]), since each sample chosen according to D is a false positive with probability α+(1−α)β. A similar bound holds for Q and Y . We can therefore conclude Pr(|X − Y | ≥ ) ≤ Pr(|X − (α + (1 − α)β)| ≥ /2) + Pr(|Y − (α + (1 − α)β)| ≥ /2) ≤ 2e−  2  |T |/4  2  + 2e−  |Q|/4  ,  giving the desired result. Theorem 4 also informs us that it is reasonable to find a suitable parameter τ , given f , by trying a suitable finite discrete set of values for τ , and choosing the best sizeaccuracy tradeoff for the application. By a union bound, all choices of τ will perform close to their expectation with high probability. We note that while Theorem 4 requires the test set and query set to come from the same distribution D, the negative examples U do not have to come from that distribution. Of course, if negative examples U are drawn from D, it may yield a better learning outcome f . If the test set and query set distribution do not match, because for example the types of queries change after the original gathering of test data T , Theorem 4 offers limited guidance. Suppose T is derived from samples from distribution D and Q from another distribution D0 . If the two distributions are close (say in L1 distance), or, more specifically, if the changes do not significantly change the probability that a query y has f (y) ≥ τ , then the empirical  false positive rate on the test set may still be useful. However, in practice it may be hard to provide such guarantees on the nature of future queries. This explains our previous statement that learned Bloom filters appear most useful when the query stream can be modelled as coming from a fixed distribution, which can be sampled during the construction. We can return to our previous example to understand these effects. Recall our set of elements is a random subset of half the elements from the range [1000, 2000] and 500 other random elements from the range [0, 1000000). Our learned Bloom filter has f (y) ≥ τ for all y in [1000, 2000] and f (y) < τ . Our back filter will therefore store 500 elements. If our test set is uniform over [0, 1000000) (excluding elements stored in the Bloom filter), our false positive rate from elements with too large an f value would be approximately 0.0002; one could choose a back filter with roughly the same false positive probability for a total empirical false positive probability of 0.0004. The size of the backup filter would need to be slightly larger than half the size of a standard Bloom filter achieving a false positive probability of 0.0004; although it holds half the elements, it must achieve half the positive rate, adding almost 1.5 extra bits per element stored. If, however, our queries are uniform over a restricted range [0, 100000), then the false positive probability would jump to 0.0022 for the learned Bloom filter. D. Additional Learned Bloom Filter Benefits and Limitations Learned Bloom filters can easily handle insertions into K by adding the element, if is does not already yield a (false) positive, to the backup filter. Such changes have a larger effect on the false positive probability than for a standard Bloom filter, since the backup filter is smaller. Elements cannot be deleted naturally from a learned Bloom filter. A deleted element would simply become a false positive, which (if needed) could possibly be handled by an additional structure. As noted in [5], it may be possible to re-learn a new function f if the data set changes substantially via insertions and deletion of elements from K. Of course, besides the time needed to re-learn a new function f , this requires storing the original set somewhere, which may not be necessary for alternative schemes. Similarly, if the false positive probability proves higher than desired, one can re-learn a new function f ; again, doing so will require access to K, and maintaining a (larger) set U of negative examples. IV. C ONCLUSION The recent work on learned index structures [5], including the learned Bloom filter, appears to be generating interest, and is well worthy of further attention. However, in order to properly compare the learned index approach against other approaches, it will prove useful to develop a suitable theoretical foundation for understanding their performance, in order to better recognize where the approach can provide gains and to avoid possible pitfalls. Here we have attempted to clarify a particular issue in the Bloom filter setting, namely the dependence of what is referred to as the false positive  rate in [5] on the query set, and how it might affect the applications this approach is suited for. This discussion is meant to encourage users to take care to make sure they realize all of the implications of the new approach before adopting it. In particular, we point out that one should also consider variations on Bloom filters for comparison; the cuckoo filter, in particular, already uses less space than standard Bloom filters (for reasonable false positive rates), has similar theoretical guarantees, and allows for insertions and deletions. We hope richer theoretical foundations may follow. Future work may consider relaxing requirements on the relationship between the test set and the query set while achieving some form of guarantee, or, for specific settings, trying to formally prove the behavior of the learned function f . Known approaches, based on for example VC dimension or Rademacher complexity, may apply, although the setting is slightly different than many learning applications in that there is a “fixed” set of positive instances that are initially given in the Bloom filter setting. V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author thanks Suresh Venkatasubramanian for suggesting a closer look at [5], and thanks the authors of [5] for helpful discussions involving their work. R EFERENCES [1] M. Bender, M. Farach-Colton, M. Goswami, R. Johnson, S. McCauley, and S. Singh. Bloom Filters, Adaptivity, and the Dictionary Problem. https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.01616, 2017. [2] A. Broder and M. Mitzenmacher. Network applications of bloom filters: A survey. Internet Mathematics, 1(4):485-509, 2004. [3] K. Chung, M. Mitzenmacher, and S. Vadhan. Why Simple Hash Functions Work: Exploiting the Entropy in a Data Stream. Theory of Computing, 9(30):897-945, 2013. [4] B. Fan, D. Andersen, M. Kaminsky, and M. Mitzenmacher. Cuckoo filter: Practically better than bloom. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM International on Conference on Emerging Networking Experiments and Technologies, pp. 75-88, 2014. [5] T. Kraska, A. Beutel, E. H. Chi, J. Dean, and N. Polyzotis. The Case for Learned Index Structures. https://arxiv.org/abs/1712. 01208, 2017. [6] M. Mitzenmacher and E. Upfal. Probability and Computing: Randomized Algorithms and Probabilistic Analysis. Cambridge University Press. 2005. [7] M. Mitzenmacher, S. Pontarelli, and P. Reviriego. Adaptive Cuckoo Filters. In Proceedings of the Twentieth Workshop on Algorithm Engineering and Experiments (ALENEX), pp. 36-47, 2018. [8] M. Naor and E. Yogev. Bloom filters in adversarial environments. In CRYPTO 2015, pp. 565-584.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
