Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_6149

Abstract:
Modeling Aspect Mechanisms: A Top-Down Approach∗ †  Sergei Kojarski  David H. Lorenz  Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia Charlottesville, Virginia 22904-4740, USA  arXiv:cs/0606003v1 [cs.SE] 1 Jun 2006  {kojarski,lorenz}@cs.virginia.edu  ABSTRACT  1. INTRODUCTION  A plethora of diverse aspect mechanisms exist today, all of which integrate concerns into artifacts that exhibit crosscutting structure. What we lack and need is a characterization of the design space that these aspect mechanisms inhabit and a model description of their weaving processes. A good design space representation provides a common framework for understanding and evaluating existing mechanisms. A well-understood model of the weaving process can guide the implementor of new aspect mechanisms. It can guide the designer when mechanisms implementing new kinds of weaving are needed. It can also help teach aspect-oriented programming (AOP). In this paper we present and evaluate such a model of the design space for aspect mechanisms and their weaving processes. We model weaving, at an abstract level, as a concern integration process. We derive a weaving process model (WPM) top-down, differentiating a reactive from a nonreactive process. The model provides an in-depth explanation of the key subprocesses used by existing aspect mechanisms.  Concern integration is an essential process in aspect-oriented programming (AOP). Kiczales et al. [6] explicitly express the goal of AOP in terms of combining separate crosscutting concerns:  Categories and Subject Descriptors  A model primarily reflects understanding. We identify the following evolutionary stages in the common understanding of AOP:  D.2.10 [Software Engineering]: Design; D.1.5 [Programming Techniques]: Aspect-oriented Programming; D.3.2 [Programming Languages]: Language Classifications  General Terms Design, Languages  Keywords  “The goal of Aspect-Oriented Programming is to make it possible to deal with cross-cutting aspects of a system’s behavior as separately as possible. We want to allow programmers to first express each of a system’s aspects of concern in a separate and natural form, and then automatically combine those separate descriptions into a final executable form using a tool called an Aspect Weaver.” The process of concern integration is called weaving, and the implementation of an “aspect weaver”—an aspect mechanism. This paper presents a top-down model of an aspect mechanism and its internal weaving process.  1.1 Evolution of AOP Models  1. (A × B → B) In early AOP models, an aspect mechanism was explained in terms of compilation semantics. This led to thinking about AOP in terms of code instrumentation, where an aspect program (pA ∈ A) is woven into a base program (pB , p′B ∈ B). We refer to this initial understanding of AOP as the ABB model (Figure 1). pB , p′B  pA  AOP, AspectJ, DFD, Hyper/J, Open Classes, aspect mechanism, crosscutting concerns, definition, nonreactive, reactive, taxonomy, top-down classification, weaving process model (WPM). ∗This research was supported in part by NSF’s Science of Design program under Grants Number CCF-0438971 and CCF-0609612. †Sergei Kojarski is a PhD candidate at Northeastern University and a visiting graduate student at University of Virginia.  Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. ICSE’06, May 20–28, 2006, Shanghai, China. Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-085-X/06/0005 ...$5.00.  aspect element base element  Figure 1: The ABB Model 2. (A × B → X) Later, code instrumentation was found to be misleading and confusing in explaining the essence of AOP. When AOP was better understood, the compilation semantics was replaced with dynamic weaving semantics. The main insight was that crosscutting is an emerging property found in  the composed program (pX ∈ X) rather than a pre-existing property in either pA ∈ A or pB ∈ B. We refer to this observation as the ABX model (Figure 2), named to correspond with Masuhara and Kiczales’ ABX model of crosscutting [14].1 pX pA  pB  aspect element base element  composed element  Figure 2: The ABX Model 3. (C × R → X) More recently, the syntactical distinction between aspect (A) and base (B) has begun to diminish. In modern AOP languages, such as AspectWerkz [1] and Classpects [17], there is no essential distinction between aspects and classes (as presumably will also be the case in AspectJ 5). The traditional, syntactical dichotomy into pA ∈ A and pB ∈ B is being slowly replaced with a semantical distinction between concerns pC ∈ C = A ∪ B \ R, expressed in either A or B, and integration rules pR ∈ R, expressed in code, annotations, XML, or some other form. We introduce and refer to this model as CRX (Figure 3). pC  Integration Rules  pR  pX  is useful precisely because it does some crosscutting thing very different, abstracting over several aspect mechanisms is difficult and often results in a fine-grained model which would likely need to be further extended to fit future aspect mechanisms.2 We distinguish between two general approaches to modeling aspect mechanisms, namely, semantical and conceptual (Table 1, two left columns). Existing semantical models either explain a specific AspectJ-like Pointcut and Advice (PA) mechanism or generalize a PA model. Lämmel [8] explains a join-point-and-advice mechanism named Method-Call Interception (MCI). Wand et al. [22, 15] explain an aspect mechanism for AspectJ. Walker et al. [21] define aspects through explicitly labeled program points and first-class dynamic advice. Jagadeesan et al. [5] use PA to define AOP functionality. Although very precise, all of these semantical models do not generalize over non-PA aspect mechanisms. An example of a conceptual model is presented by the work of Masuhara and Kiczales [14] on modeling crosscutting in aspectoriented mechanisms. Their aspect sand-box (ASB) [14, 20] framework generalizes over four mechanisms: Pointcut and Advice (PA), Open Classes (OC), Traversal (TRV), and Compositor (CMP). PA and OC are implemented by AspectJ; TRV is found in Demeter; and CMP is realized by Hyper/J. ASB belongs to the category of ABX models. Generally, ASB represents each aspect mechanism as a weaver that combines an aspect program and a base program into a result computation (or program) X. In ASB, a mechanism realizes a function with the signature: A × B × META → X where META stands for composition rules existing only in CMP.3 The weaver is said to model a weaving process, which is defined informally as [14]: “taking two programs and coordinating their coming together into a single combined computation.” The weaver’s semantics is presented by an 11-tuple structure: hX, XJP , A, AID , AEFF , AMOD , B, BID , BEFF , BMOD , METAi  concern element  composed element  Figure 3: The CRX Model Interestingly, the CRX model is very close to the original Hyper/J model [16], taking this evolutionary path a full circle. The introduction of the CRX model as a general AOP model that explains both Hyper/J-like and AspectJ-like aspect mechanisms is a contribution of this paper and a direct result of a top-down approach.  1.2 Problems with Current Models  where A and B denote the languages of the input programs, X is the result domain of the weaving process, and XJP are join points in X. The elements AID , AEFF of A and BID , BEFF of B provide a common frame of reference. Programs in A and B refer to XJP using AID and BID and contribute their AEFF and BEFF effects, respectively, to the semantics of the corresponding X computations (program declarations). The remaining two elements, AMOD and BMOD , refer to structures of modularity in the input languages. The introduction of a result domain X (that also coincides with our CRX model) is the main contribution of ASB. In ASB, join points exist only in X. An aspect mechanism combines semantics contributed by A and B at join points in X using the common frame of reference. A and B do not crosscut each other directly, but only with respect to X. The essential shortcomings of ASB are:  Models of aspect mechanisms have focused either on a selected mechanism, or on a bottom-up generalization of several mechanisms. In a bottom-up abstraction, a model is built by identifying and generalizing common patterns. Since each aspect mechanism  • Syntactical dichotomy. ASB defines aspect mechanisms over an AOP language of a fixed syntactical form. Specifically, an AOP program is required to consist of an aspect program pA ∈ A and base program pB ∈ B, both specifying concerns. When the syntax of the AOP language is  1 For consistency with the other models and to avoid confusion we use A to denote the aspect language and B to denote the base language, whereas Masuhara and Kiczales originally used A for the base language and B for the aspect language.  2 This is a criticism of the term aspect-oriented being used today to describe a broad array of diverse programming mechanisms, rather than a criticism of bottom-up generalization per se. 3 For all of the other mechanisms, META is left out of the model.  Approach Design level Generalization method Representative example Mechanisms modeled Unifying concept Dichotomy Organizational structure Resolution Abstract Precise Uniform  Other Models Semantical Conceptual Implementation Analysis Bottom-Up MCI [8] ASB [14, 20] PA PAAJ , OC, CMP, TRV Join points, JPM Semantical Syntactical Flat Fine-grained Coarse-grained No Yes Yes No No  Our Model Software Engineering Analysis and Design Top-Down CRX PA, OC, CMP Integration rules, WPM Semantical Hierarchical Adjustable Yes Yes Yes  Table 1: Comparison of approaches to modeling aspect mechanisms different, the model includes it as a special case. Most noticeable, the META component was added so that ASB can also model Hyper/J. The definition of an aspect mechanism in ASB does not generalize neatly over languages with similar semantics but a different syntactical structure. For example, Classpects [17] has no aspects, just classes. AspectWerkz [1] has no advice, just methods. In AspectWerkz, a method annotated as advice can be invoked explicitly as a method or implicitly as advice. This duality is difficult to explain in an ABX model due to its firm syntactical distinction between aspect (pA ∈ A) and base (pB ∈ B) programs. Furthermore, the annotations in AspectWerkz can be extracted and placed in a separate XML file. These XML integration rules are not in A, B, or X. • AspectJ-based abstraction. ASB selects XJP as the central abstraction found in all aspect mechanisms. In ASB terms, the common frame of reference is XJP and the programs connect at the join points. While the concept of a join point is essential in PA, it is found in only a subset of existing aspect mechanisms. Specifically, OC may be explained with or without join points (Section 5); it is unclear that join points are the right abstraction for TRV [9]; and CMP does not involve join points in X at all [14, 20]. • Coarse-grained process. In ASB, a join point in XJP describes a computation in X, and the computation in X is constructed using the join point in XJP . Obviously, an aspect mechanism must construct the join point prior to the construction of the corresponding computation it describes. ASB does not explain how this cyclic dependency is resolved, and generally lacks an explicit weaving process model. • Over generalization. ASB takes upon itself to abstract over four mechanisms that do not necessarily share properties that can be reasonably generalized. PA and CMP are oblivious [4] and provide integration mechanisms. TRV, on the other hand, is not oblivious and provides an adaptation mechanism [9]. Yet, ASB generalizes over all of them [20]. To reconcile the difference between these four mechanisms, ASB provides a fine-enough grained structure. ASB’s bottom-up generalization underscores the similarities between various aspect mechanisms. What is lost in the generalization, however, is the ability to also understand their differences.  1.3 Contribution This paper presents an abstraction in the opposite direction. Using a top-down approach, we derive an abstract, yet precise, architectural model of the design space for aspect mechanisms. The model is build through analysis and design. The analysis phase characterizes the external behavior of an aspect mechanism. The design phase models the mechanism’s internal behavior. The novelty of our model lies in its semantical rather than syntactical generalization. We define the aspect mechanism’s domains over a semantical representation of an AOP program, which can be constructed from various syntactical forms. Our model explains the essential differences between various aspect mechanisms. It categorizes aspect mechanisms according to semantical operations. Our CRX model emphasizes integration. The integration logic is defined by integration rules, separate from concern code defined by aspect or base programs. The CRX model provides a natural abstraction for integration-based weaving processes. It captures the similarities as well as the differences between aspect mechanisms on various levels of abstraction. The top-down specialization respects individual features of different aspect mechanisms. For example, at the top level, the Hyper/J and AspectJ mechanisms are similar; and a deeper level reveals how different they are.  1.4 Outline In Section 2 we analyze the weaving problem and present a general CRX weaving process model (WPM). The problem and the model are defined in abstract terms. They are constructed topdown, independent from any particular aspect mechanism. The top-down construction introduces different categories of a weaving process. In Sections 3 and 4 we design a nonreactive and a reactive specialization of CRX, respectively. We use concrete aspect mechanisms to exemplify each category. In Section 5 we explain the duality of AspectJ’s OC with respect to these categories. In Section 6 we compare the CRX model to the ABX model, in terms of providing a deeper explanation of AOP. Section 7 discusses how our classification of weaving processes is different from existing categorizations of AOP languages. Finally, Section 8 discusses how the model can help in constructing new aspect mechanisms.  2. ANALYSIS This section explains the fundamentals of the concern integration process at an abstract level. We begin by articulating what a weaving problem is, and what is a solution, termed a weaving plan, to a weaving problem. We then present a high-level model of a weaving process that explains the external behavior of an aspect mechanism.  weave  P  ℘  ̺⊆R  mixi M1  xi  M2  P⊆C  matchi  CRX Aspect Mechanism  ℘⊆X  M3 concern element  composed element  Figure 4: The Weaving Problem  2.1 Weaving Problem An aspect mechanism implements a solution to a problem of concern integration. Intuitively, before separate concern elements can be “computed” they need to be woven together to produce a “computable” composed element. That is the job of an aspect mechanism. Per program, the problem of concern integration is to map the modularized program P, in which concerns are separated, to a composed program ℘, in which the concerns are woven (Figure 4). We denote the mapping by: weave  P 7−→ ℘ Abstractly, a program is either code or computation. A concern program, P = {c1 , . . . , cn } is a set of n program elements, cj ∈ C, j = 1, . . . , n, where C is a domain of concern elements. A modularized concern program P is partitioned into pairwise-disjointed concern modules. For example, in Figure 4, P = M1 ∪ M2 ∪ M3 . A composed program, ℘ = {x1 , . . . , xm } is a set of m program elements, xi ∈ X, i = 1, . . . , m, where X is a domain of composed elements and where the crosscutting occurs.  2.2 Weaving Plan A solution to a concern integration problem is a weaving plan. A weaving plan establishes a mapping between elements of the concern program P and elements of the composed program ℘. A weaving plan is specified by a set of integration rules, ̺ = {r1 , . . . , rk } where R is a domain of integration rules, and ri ∈ R, i = 1, . . . , k. The meaning of a weaving plan is a set of pairs, [̺ ℄  = {hmatchi , mixi i : xi ∈ ℘}  where for every element xi in ℘, matchi ∈ 2P is a subset of program elements, mixi : 2P ֒→ ℘ is a constructor, and the weaving plan satisfies the condition that xi ∈ ℘ is constructed by applying mixi to matchi . We denote this mapping by: mix  matchi 7−→i xi  Figure 5: CRX Weaving Process a plan ̺. In our model, the aspect mechanism implements a CRX weaving process (Figure 5). At each step of the process, the mechanism accesses elements of P (the C-register), elements of ̺ (the R-register), and elements of the about-to-be-composed program ℘ (the X-register). The mechanism produces new elements of the composed program ℘, and writes them to the X-register. A weaving process is said to be nonreactive (Section 3) if does not depend on the state of the X-register. A weaving process is said to be reactive (Section 4) if it requires read-access to the X-register in order to produce the composed elements. The top level CRX process is the most general model of an aspect mechanism. In the next two sections we describe two specializations of weaving process. We explain the semantics of these models by mapping them to well known aspect mechanisms.  2.4 Notation We describe the weaving process using a sequence of data flow diagrams (DFDs) [24, 18, 23]. A DFD is a graph that models the data flow communication among processes and data stores. Circles represent transformations. Pairs of parallel lines represent data stores. Arrows represent data. Collectively, a sequence of DFDs specifies the behavior of an aspect mechanism in terms of its internal processes that transform data and the type of data being transformed. At the top level, a context diagram describes the overall system and its data flow interfaces with its environment. The context diagram is then decomposed into level-1 processes, which are then decomposed into level-2 processes, and so on. We use the standard DFD convention for labeling processes. A context level DFD is numbered n.0. Level-1 processes are labeled n.1, n.2, etc. Successive nested levels follow a similar numbering convention. This convention provides for easy tractability. We use the leading number n to relate a sequence of diagrams to the section where they are discussed. The first time a process is mentioned in the text, we indicate its label in parentheses. Note that a DFD does not specify when communications take place. In particular the labels are just identification tags and do not imply any specific processing order.  3. DESIGN OF A NONREACTIVE WPM At each step of the weaving process, a nonreactive aspect mechanism computes an element (or several elements) of the composed program ℘ only from elements of P and ̺. In other words, the weaving plan of a nonreactive aspect mechanism does not consult the state of the X-register in order to specify composed elements. In this section we informally introduce the inner working of a nonreactive aspect mechanism through an overview of the weaving process in Hyper/J.  2.3 Weaving Process  3.1 A Nonreactive Aspect Mechanism  We model weaving as a concern integration process. An aspect mechanism constructs ℘ by integrating concerns in P according to  The CMP mechanism [16] of Hyper/J [19] is essentially a Java program transformer. In Hyper/J’s terms, the input program P is  CMP Mechanism  ̺ Composition rules  P  Listing 3: Hyperspace Specification  3.0  -hyperspace hyperspace Person composable class personal.*; composable class taxes.*; -concerns package personal: PersonalView package taxes: TaxView  ℘ Hypermodule units  C OMPOSE Hyperspace units  Figure 6: Nonreactive CMP mechanism Listing 4: Composition Rules  P  ̺  hypermodule Result hyperslices: PersonalView, TaxView; relationships: mergeByName; end hypermodule;  Hyperspace units  Composition rules  DFD 3.0: C OMPOSE  3.1 E XPAND  3.2 Composition clauses  W EAVE  ℘ Hypermodule units  Figure 7: DFD 3.0: C OMPOSE  Listing 1: Personal View package personal; public class Person { protected String name; protected String dob; public String getName(){return name;} public void setName(String name){this.name=name;} public String getDoB(){return dob;} public void setDOB(String dob){this.dob=dob;} }  Listing 2: Tax View package taxes; public class Person { protected String name; protected String ssn; public String getName(){return name;} public void setName(String name){this.name=name;} public String getSSN(){return ssn;} public void setSSN(String ssn){this.ssn=ssn;} }  called a hyperspace, the concerns are called hyperslices (a hyperspace is a set of hyperslices corresponding to, e.g., M1 , M2 , M3 in Figure 4), and the composed program ℘ is called a hypermodule. The composition logic, called composition rules, is the weaving plan ̺ (Figure 6). P keeps the concerns separate, but does not specify a coherent behavior. CMP generates ℘ with the desired behavior by integrating the concerns together according to the composition rules ̺. The composition rules are specified in terms of unit trees. A unit tree is an abstraction of a program’s abstract syntax tree (AST), where units represent nodes. In general, the rules define each hypermodule unit as a composition of multiple hyperspace units. We explain the C OMPOSE (3.0) process through a coding example. Consider two classes describing a person, one from a personal  Listing 5: Composition Clauses hypermodule Result operations getName: equivalent(signatures(<PersonalView.getName, TaxView.getName>)) getDoB: identity(signatures(<PersonalView.getDoB>)) getSSN: identity(signatures(<TaxView.getSSN>)) //the remainder of the operations code is omitted classes class Person instance variables: name: equivalent(types(<PersonalView.Person.name, TaxView.Person.name>)) dob: identity(types(<PersonalView.Person.dob>)) ssn: identity(types(<TaxView.Person.ssn>)) mapping getName: class Person CallAction: Sequence PersonalView.getName.Person TaxView.getName.Person getDoB: class Person CallAction: Simple PersonalView.getDoB.Person getSSN: class Person CallAction: Simple TaxView.getSSN.Person //the remainder of the mapping code is omitted  perspective (Listing 1); another from a tax perspective (Listing 2). We can use Hyper/J to produce an integrated view. We start by specifying a hyperspace and a mapping of the classes to hyperslices (hyperspace concerns, Listing 3). The Person hyperspace defines two hyperslices, namely, PersonalView and TaxView. The former consists of units found in the personal Java package, and the latter comprises units of the taxes package. The composition rules (Listing 4) define the Result hypermodule as a composition of the PersonalView and TaxView hyperslices under the mergeByName composition strategy. The strategy specifies that same-name-same-type hyperspace units (e.g., the class units PersonalView.Person and TaxView.Person; or the method units PersonalView.Person.getName and TaxView.Person.getName) should be merged in the hypermodule. Generally, the meaning of a composition rule depends on the structure of the input hyperspace. In our example, the result of the composition rules depends entirely on the hyperspace structure. The semantics for Hyper/J’s composition rules [16] define a two-  step composition process. The DFD in Figure 7 is an explosion of C OMPOSE (3.0). The first step is realized by the E XPAND (3.1) process, which expands the composition rules against the hyperspace unit tree into composition clauses (Listing 5).4 The composition clauses specify a hypermodule as a composition of specific hyperspace units. At the second step, the composition clauses and the hyperspace units are passed to the W EAVE (3.2) process, which composes the result hypermodule. In Listing 5, the operations section specifies how to compose the hypermodule operations (method signatures) from signatures of the hyperspace methods. The classes section defines a hypermodule’s class-graph (classes and their instance variables) as a composition of hyperspace class-graph nodes. The mapping section introduces methods into the hypermodule classes by associating a hypermodule operation with a set of hyperspace realizations (method-body expressions) and a class. Thus, a composition clause defines a hypermodule unit as a combination of specific hyperspace units. The weaving process is driven by the composition clauses. At each step (i), W EAVE (3.2) selects and applies a clause. The composition clause specifies what hyperspace units to combine (matchi ) and how to combine them (mixi ). The process completes the step by composing a new hypermodule unit (composed element xi ) and committing it to the composed program. The process terminates after all clauses were applied.  4.  PA Mechanism  ̺ jp→advice advice→type  4.0  ℘ Computation trace  W EAVE  P Methods and advice  Figure 8: Reactive PA Mechanism DFD 4.0: W EAVE  ̺ jp→advice advice→type  4.1  advice  A DVISE  P  ℘  Methods and advice  desc jp  Computation trace  xjp  4.2 method  E VALUATE  DESIGN OF A REACTIVE WPM Figure 9: DFD 4.0: W EAVE  In this section we model a reactive CRX process. We present the model through an explanation of AspectJ’s PA mechanism.  4.1 A Reactive Aspect Mechanism The context level DFD in Figure 8 depicts a reactive weaving process of a PA mechanism. PA realizes a program execution process. Given a concern program P, a weaving plan ̺, and a computation trace ℘, W EAVE (4.0) executes the program by constructing, transforming, and running computations. P and ̺ are constructed from an input program string. P consists of all the methods and advice-body expressions found in either the base (e.g., Java classes) or the aspect (e.g., AspectJ aspects) parts of the input program. ̺ is constructed from three sources: (1) pointcut designators;  ̺  DFD 4.1: A DVISE jp→advice advice→type advice  4.1.1  ∗ xadv  M ATCH  4.1.2 M IX  P  ℘  Methods and advice  method  desc jp  Computation trace  xjp  4.2.1  4.2.2  C OMPUTE  C ONTROL instr  (2) pointcut-to-advice mapping; and  DFD 4.2: E VALUATE  (3) advice-to-type mapping. The first two elements provide collaboratively a mapping from join points to advice-body expressions. The last element provides a mapping from an advice-body expression to its advice type (before, after, or around), which is necessary for a proper weaving. ℘ is a vector of computations that constitutes the composed program. W EAVE executes the program ℘ by constructing computations and running them. At each step of the process, W EAVE reads in the most recent computation in the trace, and executes it. The execution produces either a null-computation that wraps around a value or a set of sub-computations that extend ℘. Figure 9 is an explosion of W EAVE (4.0). A DVISE (4.1) and E VALUATE (4.2) are level-1 subprocesses. E VALUATE realizes an expression evaluator (a Java interpreter). This process executes the most recent ℘ computation, and generally produces one or more join point computations xjp . The A DVISE process intercepts a join point computation xjp , and transforms it by wrapping it with advice 4 For readability, the actual composition clauses produced by the Hyper/J compiler were amended to resemble the notation in [16].  Figure 10: DFD 4.1: A DVISE and DFD 4.2: E VALUATE  computations. The computation produced by the A DVISE process replaces xjp in the program execution. The PA mechanism represents a join point computation xjp as a join point description desc jp . The description provides the type of the join point computation (e.g., method call, method execution, constructor execution), values drawn from its evaluation context, and related static and lexical data. The join point description is a means by which E VALUATE passes information about the program state to A DVISE . The A DVISE process then uses this information for selecting the appropriate advice. A further breakdown of the PA’s weaving process is depicted in Figure 10. Four subprocesses constitute a reactive weaving process. M ATCH (4.1.1) and M IX (4.1.2) realize advice selection and advice weaving, respectively. M ATCH selects pieces of advice by applying the jp→advice mapping to desc jp . The process returns  ∗ the selected advice-body expressions as advice computations xadv . M IX combines the advice computations with respect to their types with a join point computation xjp obtained from C OMPUTE (4.2.1). The computation composed by M IX extends the execution trace ℘. The C ONTROL (4.2.2) process runs the most recent computation in ℘. In general, the computation is built from a complex expression. Running the computation requires evaluation of the expression’s subterms. C ONTROL represents subterms as instructions, and delegates their evaluation to C OMPUTE . Since the process runs M IX-computations, the instruction set may include both base language (Java) instructions (e.g., method invocation instruction), and aspect-specific (AspectJ) instructions (e.g., advice execution instruction). The C OMPUTE process takes an instruction instr and produces a join point computation xjp . The process also constructs a join point desc jp that describes the computation.  Root ...  Type1  ...  Declaration  Members  Members  Figure 12: A simplified representation of a Java program’s AST  THE DUALITY OF OPEN CLASSES  Open Classes (OC) is an aspect mechanism found in AspectJ that allows aspects to change the structure of a concern program. The mechanism realizes the semantics of inter-type declarations. An inter-type declaration construct associates a target Java type (what to change) with an OC effect (how to change it). There are two kinds of OC declaration effects: member and super type. A member declaration effect introduces a new member into the target Java type. For example, the following inter-type declaration introduces an observers field into the Point class:  Name  Declaration  ̺ 5.  Typen  Name  Reactive OC Mechanism  types→effects  effect  child ∗ A  5.2 M ATCH  5.3 M IX  P  ℘  Java AST and OC effects  parent  child ∗ B  Java AST  5.4 node  S ELECT  public Vector Point.observers;  A super type declaration effect transforms the inheritance relationship of the target type. It is specified by a declare parents construct. For example, the following declaration resets Point’s superclass to be Observable: declare parents: Point extends Observable;  5.1 A Nonreactive OC Mechanism We can explain the OC mechanism in terms of a nonreactive CRX weaving process (Figure 11). The concern program P contains OC effects and base program types (including aspect classes); the weaving plan ̺ maps target types to the effects; and ℘ is a Java program where the types and the effects are combined. OC Mechanism  ̺ types→effects  5.1 W EAVE  P  ℘ Java types  Java types and OC effects  Figure 11: Nonreactive OC Mechanism The W EAVE (5.1) process iterates over P types. For each type, W EAVE selects the relevant OC effects using the ̺ mappings. Then it transforms the type by applying the effects; and finally it commits the transformation result to the composed program.  5.2 A Reactive OC Mechanism Interestingly, the OC mechanism can also be explained in terms of a static reactive CRX weaving process. A reactive OC mechanism iteratively constructs an AST of a composed program. For  Figure 13: Reactive OC Mechanism  clarity, we focus on a simplified representation of an AST that has four types of nodes, namely (from parent to children), root, type name, type declaration, and type member (Figure 12). The DFD diagram in Figure 13 depicts an (alternative) reactive model for OC. The model combines three processes: M ATCH (5.2), M IX (5.3), and S ELECT (5.4). Initially, the composed program ℘ contains only a single root node marked as open. At each step, the mechanism selects an open parent node in ℘, populating its children with AST nodes drawn from P. That is, S ELECT selects the parent from ℘ and the parent ’s “base” child nodes child ∗B from the AST of the concern program P. M ATCH selects OC effects associated with parent , and translates them to child ∗A nodes.5 The M IX process integrates the base and the “advice” children together, and commits the result to the composed program. The child nodes are marked open, with the exception of type member nodes, which are marked closed. Weaving continues until all ℘ nodes are closed. A reactive OC resembles PA. An open node parent corresponds to a join point desc jp , child ∗B correspond to a join point computa∗ tion xjp , and child ∗A correspond to advice computations xadv . The nonreactive and reactive alternative OC models illustrate different understandings of this mechanism. OC neither changes type names nor adds or removes types. The concern program types always end up in the composed program under the same name. This allows one to interpret the OC weaving plan mappings in two ways: as a mapping between concern types and effects, or as a mapping between composed types and effects. The first interpretation implies a nonreactive weaving process; the second, a reactive one. 5  child ∗A are parent ’s children defined by inter-type declarations. For example, Vector Point.observers defines the observers field as a child of the Point class declaration.  6.  BEYOND CONCEPTUAL MODELS  The CRX model affords deeper understanding of an aspect mechanism and its internal weaving process.  6.1 Abstract Domains In CRX, the abstract AOP language representation overcomes the syntax dependency problem found in ABX. CRX defines the mechanism in terms of concern elements (domain C) and integration rules (domain R). These domains abstract away from any concrete representation. A program in a concrete AOP language syntax, e.g., in AspectJ, can be preprocessed, e.g., by a R EAD (6.0) process (Figure 14) that reads pA and pB in and writes P and ̺ out, which in turn can be used by W EAVE (4.0, Figure 8). Consequently, the CRX weaving process model generalizes over asymmetric (e.g., AspectJ) and symmetric (e.g., Hyper/J, AspectWerkz, and Classpects) AOP languages uniformly.  is produced by the evaluator’s C OMPUTE process as a result of running ℘ computations. Since ℘ generally contains previously woven advice computations, the join point computation might be an advice execution computation. Thus, the CRX weaving process model also explains how advice executions are advised.  6.5 Untangling Evaluate and Advise The reactive CRX model of PA explicitly separates E VALUATE (interpreting process) from A DVISE (advising process). E VALU ATE selects and computes the meaning of advised elements (e.g., methods). A DVISE selects advice, computes their meaning, and weaves them. In contrast, ASB modifies the interpreter to include aspectual operations. For example, in ASB’s PA mechanism, calls to lookup-advice are scattered throughout the interpreter and tangled with calls to lookup-method.  7. TOP-DOWN CLASSIFICATION pA  PA Parser  pB  6.0 R EAD  ̺ jp→advice advice→type  P Methods and advice  Figure 14: Syntactical versus semantical  6.2 WPM as a Unifying Concept The CRX process model reveals that join points are only used in reactive mechanisms. Nonreactive mechanisms do not use join points because they do not read from the composed program register X. In other words, the existence of a join point abstraction can be used to distinguish rather than unify various aspect mechanisms, e.g., PA is a join point-based mechanism, CMP is not. A CRX weaving process model was constructed top-down using abstract terms. The abstract terminology is useful for comparing different weaving processes. Zooming out highlights the similarities. Zooming in exposes differences. For example, at the top level both CMP and PA realize the same CRX weaving process. However, they fall into two different categories. CMP is a nonreactive, whereas PA is a reactive mechanism.  6.3 Cyclic Dependency in AspectJ AspectJ has a cyclic dependency between a computation in X and the join point in XJ P that describes that computation. The CRX weaving model (recall Figure 10) explains how the cyclic dependency is resolved in the PA weaving process. Specifically, the join point desc jp describes the join point computation xjp rather than the composed program computation. Thus, the join point is created before the composed computation is constructed.  6.4 Advising Advice Execution ASB’s view that PA selects and merges base and aspect program elements at each join point does not explain weaving at advice execution join points. Clearly, at advice execution join points, no base element should be selected. The role of base is played by a piece of advised advice. ASB does not generalize over advice execution join points because it explains advised elements strictly as base. In contrast, the CRX weaving model of PA (Figure 10) distinguishes between a join point computation (an advised computation), and an advice computation. The join point computation (xjp )  Our top-down analysis yields a process-oriented classification of aspect mechanisms. At the top level, we distinguish between a reactive and a nonreactive mechanism. In this section we compare our classification to existing categorizations of AOP languages. We show that our classification is different, and explain its usefulness.  7.1 Symmetric versus Asymmetric Languages Today, existing AOP languages are sometimes categorized using the syntactic property of symmetry. Under this view, AspectJ is asymmetric—an AspectJ program consists of a base Java program and a set of aspect definitions. Hyper/J is said to be symmetric—all concerns are written in Java. Unfortunately, this view does not provide much insight into the essential difference between AOP languages. It fails to explain how Hyper/J differs from AspectJ on a semantical level. Worse yet, under the symmetry-based view, “symmetrical” AspectJ-like languages (e.g., AspectWerkz and Classpects [17]) fall into the category of Hyper/J, instead of sharing a category with AspectJ. Our approach abstracts away from the syntax of a language, and focuses instead on the weaving process that realizes its semantics. We represent an input AOP program in a syntax-independent manner, through sets of concern elements and integration rules. We explain the working of an aspect mechanism according to its semantical operation. The reactive PA weaving process (Figure 10) explains AspectWerkz and Classpects in exactly the same manner as it explains AspectJ. Our classification identifies that AspectWerkz, Classpects, and AspectJ are all reactive aspect mechanisms, and contrasts them with the nonreactive Hyper/J CMP.  7.2 Static versus Dynamic Languages Another classification approach categorizes AOP languages as static or dynamic. A static language expresses a weaving process over an abstract syntax tree (AST). For example, Hyper/J dictates the construction of a hypermodule unit tree from a hyperspace unit tree, where units represent AST nodes. Hyper/J is often referred to as a static AOP language. A dynamic AOP language allows the expression of concern integration logic over computations, using run-time abstractions. For example, advice weaving in AspectJ is defined in terms of join points in the program execution. AspectJ is often said to be a dynamic AOP language. In our approach the weaving problem and the general CRX weaving process model are abstracted in terms of concern and composed elements. Identifying the composed and concern elements as AST nodes yields a weaving model for static languages. Defining the elements to be computations yields a weaving model for dynamic languages. Although it is tempting to think that nonreactive aspect  mechanisms are always static, and reactive aspect mechanisms are always dynamic, it is not so. Specifically, the static OC mechanism can realize a reactive weaving process. A reactive–nonreactive classification is, therefore, fundamentally different than a static– dynamic one.  7.3 Static versus Dynamic Semantics Aside from the static–dynamic classification of AOP languages, there is an analogous classification of AOP language semantics. Semantics for dynamic AOP language can be specified in terms of code transformation. It is also possible for static languages or mechanisms to be given dynamic semantics. In our approach, a weaving process always maps to a specific semantics, either static or dynamic. Alternative semantics for the same AOP language are normally realized by different weaving processes. For example, compilation semantics for AspectJ can be realized by a static nonreactive mechanism; dynamic semantics for AspectJ can be realized by a dynamic reactive mechanism.  8.  TOP-DOWN CONSTRUCTION  A property of our top-down approach for modeling a weaving process is the ability to systematically construct new aspect mechanisms. The mechanisms can be derived in a step-wise refinement of the general CRX weaving process model (Figure 5). For example, the reactive PA mechanism model (Figure 10), which refines the general CRX weaving process model, can be further specialized to produce a concrete weaving process specification.  8.1 Component-Based Design In our approach an aspect mechanism is modeled by a set of collaborating subprocesses. A component-based design [12] for an aspect mechanism would support a decomposition of an aspect mechanisms into distinct processes. In such a component-based design, it would be possible to replace and reuse subprocesses, thus facilitating aspect mechanism evolution. For example, the reactive PA weaving process model decouples the interpreter functionality from the aspectual advice selection and weaving processes [13]. The interpreter operations are realized by C ONTROL (4.2.2) and C OM PUTE (4.2.1). M ATCH (4.1.1) and M IX (4.1.2) realize the match and mix aspectual functionality. Decomposing the aspect mechanism into subcomponents affords replacement of one component at a time. Consider two reasonable enhancements to AspectJ: extending the pointcut designators with new regular expressions, and adding new types of advice. Each enhancement requires replacement of exactly one component. Extending the original M ATCH component to handle new regular expressions would enable the pointcut designators enhancement. To extend the advice type set, the M IX component should be upgraded.  8.2 New AOP Functionality Most (if not all) the weaving processes that exist to date construct the composed program by extending it with new elements. For example, the advice weaving process in PA simply extends, at each step, the composed program’s computation trace with new computations. AspectJ never transforms computations within the composed program (i.e., an already executed or currently active computations). Similarly, the weaving processes of CMP and OC never change elements of the composed program. The general CRX weaving process model (Figure 5) lends itself toward inventing novel weaving functionality beyond current practices. The model defines an aspect mechanism as a composed program transformer. At each step of the weaving process, the mechanism transforms the composed program ℘. Under this view, the  process may include steps that actually modify or replace elements in ℘. For example, one can imagine a dynamic reactive process that would update currently active computations (e.g., transform the current continuation). Another example would be a static reactive process that can extend ℘ with new AST nodes, and transform previously composed AST nodes.  9. CONCLUSION This paper characterizes the design space for aspect mechanisms. An aspect mechanism is an implementation of an aspect weaver. We model weaving as the process of concern integration, and define the weaving process in an abstract way, independent of any specific aspect mechanism. The abstract model describes the design space, and concrete aspect mechanisms are derived top-down from the abstract model. We distinguish between reactive and nonreactive mechanisms. This taxonomy provides a common framework for comparing and contrasting different aspect mechanisms. We offer a new CRX model as the next evolutionary step in modeling aspect mechanisms. In CRX, integration rules in R govern the process of integrating concerns in C into crosscutting structures in X. We formalize the CRX model as a weaving problem over corresponding abstract domains R, C, and X. A CRX weaving process executes a solution to a weaving problem. The weaving processes are classified as either reactive or nonreactive, instead of the more classic static–dynamic or symmetric– asymmetric classifications of AOP languages. We design a nonreactive CRX process for the static CMP aspect mechanism of the symmetric Hyper/J language. We design a reactive CRX process for the dynamic PA aspect mechanism of the asymmetric AspectJ language. We also design both a nonreactive and a reactive CRX processes for the static OC aspect mechanism of AspectJ. Our top-down model overcomes many limitations in other models in terms of abstraction, precision, and uniformity. The model was not generalized from a particular set of aspect mechanisms, yet existing mechanisms can be mapped, analyzed, and explained in terms of this model. In contrast, other models are generally constructed bottom-up by analyzing existing aspect mechanisms. The generality of these bottom-up models is illustrated by expressing in terms of the model only the mechanisms used to derive them. The design space for CRX aspect mechanisms can help not only classify existing mechanisms but also develop new ones. It can guide the implementor of new aspect mechanisms in existing classes. It can also guide the designer when mechanisms implementing new kinds of weaving are needed. We have used the CRX model in researching third-party composition of aspect mechanisms. The model was particularly useful in resolving sequential black-box composition of heterogeneous aspect mechanisms [7] and parallel glass-box composition of homogeneous aspect mechanisms [11]. Future work may include extending the CRX model to also describe a multi-mechanism weaving process. We believe that the CRX model is a good way to explain and teach AOP [10]. Data flow analysis is effective for conceptual level modeling, and a DFD provides an easy to understand graphical representation of a system [24]. Of course, a data flow description of the weaving process is just a step toward a complete definition or a blueprint of an aspect mechanism. Documenting the weaving process also in terms of state transitions is another logical follow-up to this work.  Acknowledgment We are grateful to Kevin Sullivan for his helpful suggestions on this paper. We also thank Gene Cooperman, Westley Weimer, and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments.  10. REFERENCES [1] J. Bonér. What are the key issues for commercial AOP use: how does AspectWerkz address them? In K. Lieberherr, editor, Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Aspect-Oriented Software Development, pages 5–6, Mancaster, UK, 2004. AOSD 2004, ACM Press. [2] L. Cardelli, editor. Proceedings of the 17th European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, number 2743 in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Darmstadt, Germany, July 21-25 2003. ECOOP 2003, Springer Verlag. [3] R. E. Filman, T. Elrad, S. Clarke, and M. Akşit, editors. Aspect-Oriented Software Development. Addison-Wesley, Boston, 2005. [4] R. E. Filman and D. P. Friedman. Aspect-oriented programming is quantification and obliviousness. In P. Tarr, L. Bergmans, M. Griss, and H. Ossher, editors, Workshop on Advanced Separation of Concerns, OOPSLA’00. Department of Computer Science, University of Twente, The Netherlands, 2000. [5] R. Jagadeesan, A. Jeffrey, and J. Riely. An untyped calculus for aspect oriented programs. In Cardelli [2], pages 54–73. [6] G. Kiczales, J. Irwin, J. Lamping, , J.-M. Loingtier, C. V. Lopes, C. Maeda, and A. Mendhekar. Aspect-oriented programming. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 28(4es):154, Dec. 1996. Special issue: position statements on strategic directions in computing research. [7] S. Kojarski and D. H. Lorenz. Pluggable AOP: Designing aspect mechanisms for third-party composition. In R. Johnson and R. P. Gabriel, editors, Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference on Object-Oriented Programming Systems, Languages, and Applications, pages 247–263, San Diego, CA, USA, Oct. 16–20 2005. OOPSLA’05, ACM Press. [8] R. Lämmel. A semantical approach to method-call interception. In G. Kiczales, editor, Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Aspect-Oriented Software Development, pages 41–55, Enschede, The Netherlands, Apr. 2002. AOSD 2002, ACM Press. [9] K. Lieberherr and D. H. Lorenz. Coupling Aspect-Oriented and Adaptive Programming. In Filman et al. [3], pages 145–164. [10] D. H. Lorenz and S. Kojarski. Evolution of AOP mental models. In G. Kiczales and O. de Moor, editors, AOSD 2006 Workshop on Aspects in Teaching (AIT), Bonn, Germany, Mar. 20 2006. [11] D. H. Lorenz and S. Kojarski. Parallel composition of aspect mechanisms: Design and evaluation. In J. Brichau, S. Chiba, K. D. Volder, M. Haupt, R. Hirschfeld, D. H. Lorenz, H. Masuhara, and E. Tanter, editors, AOSD 2006 Workshop on Open and Dynamic Aspect Languages (ODAL), Bonn, Germany, Mar. 20 2006. [12] D. H. Lorenz and J. Vlissides. Designing components versus objects: A transformational approach. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Software Engineering, pages 253–262, Toronto, Canada, May 12-19 2001. ICSE 2001, IEEE Computer Society.  [13] D. H. Lorenz and J. Vlissides. Pluggable reflection: Decoupling meta-interface and implementation. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Software Engineering, pages 3–13, Portland, Oregon, May 1-10 2003. ICSE 2003, IEEE Computer Society. [14] H. Masuhara and G. Kiczales. Modeling crosscutting in aspect-oriented mechanisms. In Cardelli [2], pages 2–28. [15] H. Masuharaa, G. Kiczales, and C. Dutchyn. Compilation semantics of aspect-oriented programs, 2002. In AOSD 2002 FOAL Workshop. [16] H. Ossher, M. Kaplan, W. Harrison, A. Katz, and V. Kruskal. Subject-oriented composition rules. In Proceedings of the 10th Annual Conference on Object-Oriented Programming Systems, Languages, and Applications, pages 235–250, Austin, Texas, USA, Oct. 15-19 1995. OOPSLA’95, ACM SIGPLAN Notices 30(10) Oct. 1995. [17] H. Rajan and K. Sullivan. Classpects: Unifying aspect- and object-oriented program design. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Software Engineering, St. Louis, Missouri, USA, May 15-21 2005. ICSE 2005, ACM Press. [18] D. T. Ross. Structured analysis (SA): A language for communicating ideas. IEEE Trans. Software Eng., 3(1):16–34, Jan. 1977. [19] P. Tarr, H. Ossher, W. Harrison, and S. M. Sutton. N degrees of separation: Multi-dimensional separation of concerns. In D. Garland and J. Kramer, editors, Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Software Engineering, pages 107–119, Los Angeles, California, May 16-22 1999. ICSE 1999, IEEE Computer Society. [20] N. Ubayashi, G. Moriyama, H. Masuhara, and T. Tamai. A parameterized interpreter for modeling different AOP mechanisms. In ASE ’05: Proceedings of the 20th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, pages 194–203, New York, NY, USA, Nov. 7-11 2005. ACM Press. [21] D. Walker, S. Zdancewic, and J. Ligatti. A theory of aspects. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming, pages 127–139, Uppsala, Sweden, Aug. 2003. ACM Press. [22] M. Wand, G. Kiczales, and C. Dutchyn. A semantics for advice and dynamic join points in aspect-oriented programming. ACM Trans. Prog. Lang. Syst., 26(5):890—910, Sept. 2004. [23] R. J. Wieringa. Design Methods for Reactive Systems: Yourdon, Statemate, and the UML. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Mateo California, 2003. [24] E. Yourdon. Modern Structured Analysis. Yourdon Press computing series. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1989.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
