Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_6305

Abstract:
Minimising virtual machine support for concurrency Simon Dobson  Alan Dearle  Barry Porter  School of Computer Science, University of St Andrews UK simon.dobson@st-andrews.ac.uk  Co-operative and pre-emptive scheduling are usually considered to be complementary models of threading. In the case of virtual machines, we show that they can be unified using a single concept, the bounded execution of a thread of control, essentially providing a first-class representation of a computation as it is reduced. Furthermore this technique can be used to surface the thread scheduler of a language into the language itself, allowing programs to provide their own schedulers without any additional support in the virtual machine, and allowing the same virtual machine to support different thread models simultaneously and without re-compilation.  1  Introduction  Multiple threads of control can make programs easier to write, by allowing logically concurrent activities to be coded independently, regardless of the availability of true concurrency. These benefits accrue equally to all levels of the software stack: applications, operating systems and virtual machines. In multicore environments there can also be performance benefits, and there are almost always extra complexities due to the need to control simultaneous or interleaved access to resources – but improved expressiveness alone makes multiple threads attractive even for single-cored systems Virtual machines (VMs) can further improve expressiveness, by providing a base level of abstraction targeted to the needs of the higher-level languages being written and hiding the underlying complexities of different machine architectures. A typical virtual machine embodies a particular model of threading and hard-codes a particular model of thread scheduling, prioritisation and so on. This choice will almost always be sub-optimal for some class of applications, especially in the case of resource-constrained embedded systems and sensor networks where it may be desirable for applications to exert close control over all aspects of the system’s operation. Equally, we want to keep the VM well-defined and not shuffle important features into platform-dependent libraries. In this paper we observe that it is possible to construct a virtual machine that makes no a priori choices about thread scheduling and concurrency control, yet without relegating these vital functions to external libraries. Put another way, we allow the same VM to support different concurrency models. We do this by simplifying the VM’s support for threading to a single function offering bounded execution of the virtual instruction stream. This approach allows us to surface all other aspects of concurrency out of the VM and into the language.  2  Virtual machines and concurrency  Several modern programming language implementations adopt a virtual machine approach. The most notable are Java (the Java Virtual Machine or JVM); C♯ and F♯ (the Common Language Infrastructure [5]); GNU and Squeak Smalltalk; Lua; and Python. These VMs all adopt the bytecode style, in which the N. Yoshida, W. Vanderbauwhede (Eds.): Programming Language Approaches to Concurrency- and Communication-cEntric Software 2013 (PLACES’13) EPTCS 137, 2013, pp. 135–141, doi:10.4204/EPTCS.137.11  c Dobson, Dearle, and Porter  136  Minimising VM support for concurrency  VM defines the instruction set of a processor that is “ideal” in some sense for the language being defined. This focus allows the language and VM designers to collaborate to define an instruction set that exactly matches the needs of the language, and so minimise space, time and compilation overheads, and the trade-offs between them. Some VMs are general enough to be targeted by several languages: by design in the case of CLI, or through ingenuity in the case of the JVM targeted by Java and Scala. It also allows different implementations of the same instruction set, targeted at different classes of machine (for example for Java standard [7], bare-metal [6] and just-in-time [2] VMs, and Smalltalk’s highly portable and long-lived object engine and associated VM [4]). The core of a virtual machine is an inner interpreter that identifies and interprets virtual in/* VM */ structions. For a bytecode VM the inner inter- void b y t e c o d e _ i n n e r _ i n t e r p r e t e r () { preter uses a virtual instruction pointer (IP) to read while ( TRUE ) { an instruction and select an appropriate behaviour b y t e c o d e = * ip ++; opcode = u n p a c k _ o p c o d e ( b y t e c o d e ); to execute. The bytecode may be “packed” to switch ( opcode ) { include (for example) a small integer literal or a case O P _ N O O P: jump offset to allow common instructons to take break ; up less space, and so may require some decod... ing to extract the opcode specifying the instruccase O P _ J U M P: tion’s implementation (a primitive) before execuip += u n p a c k _ o f f s e t ( b y t e c o d e ); tion (figure 1)1 . break ; ... In a multithreaded architecture, each thread } must give up the processor after some time (re} ferred to as its time quantum) to allow another } thread to execute. In a co-operative (or coroutine) scheduler the programmer embeds explicit Figure 1: Interpreting bytecode instructions that yield control at programmerselected execution points. This slightly complicates programming and means that poorly-written code may not yield often enough (or at all) to avoid starving other threads of processor time, but has the advantage of requiring little or no concurrency control on data structures, since a thread may manipulate shared data without fear of interference from another thread. (In single-core systems, at least: multi-core requires slightly more care, for example separate control structures for each core.) By contrast, a pre-emptive scheduler forcibly interrupts the executing thread, suspending it and allowing another thread to be selected. This gives more power to the scheduler and prevents starvation, but requires concurrency control over all shared data. Typically each thread maintains its own stack space and instruction pointer cache. Changing threads (a context switch) saves the VM’s stack and instruction pointers and replaces them with those of the newly-scheduled thread. Implementing co-operative scheduling on a VM is conceptually straightforward, with a yield() primitive invoking a context switch. Pre-emptive scheduling often leads VM designers to use OS-level threads, swapping between several different VM-level instruction streams. Context switches also need to be triggered when a thread blocks on some event, such as a semaphore or a file read. This reduces the control the VM can offer to the language level, and often makes its behaviour platform-specific. (Java, for example, has primitives to block on object semaphores, but none for thread creation or scheduling [7].) 1 In the code fragments included in this paper, we use C syntax both for the code implementing the VM and the target language code implemented using the VM. We differentiate between the two using a leading comment.  Dobson, Dearle, and Porter  137  2.1 Approaches to VM concurrency Despite being such an important feature of a programming language, many VMs – perhaps surprisingly – leave their concurrency model under-specified. The JVM, for example, includes bytecodes for concurrency control, manipulating the locks associated with objects, but none for concurrency creation. This has the advantage of leaving a particular JVM implementation free to make use of native libraries to implement threads, but simultaneously removes the issue from the VM’s design. Most JVMs run concurrent instances of themselves in different OS-defined threads, accepting the overhead in terms of concurrency control within the VM that this imposes. Smalltalk’s VM similarly omits instructions for concurrency control. Some implementations of Scheme have adopted the “engines” construct [3], which re-defines the lambda binder to maintain a timer (essentially counting the number of function calls made) that is then used to interrupt a thread when a certain number of reductions have occurred. It is possible to implement engines inside Scheme, on top of a standard implementation (whether using a VM or otherwise), by making use of continuation capture [1]. Care needs to be taken to ensure that such an implementation is loaded first so as to capture all lambdas, and there is also the risk that such an approach will conflict with other uses of continuation capturing.  3  Bounded concurrency control  We assume a single core and therefore no “true” concurrency. Similar techniques can be used in multicore environments. The core problem in context switching is to take control away from a running language-level thread (either voluntarily or forcibly) and give it to another. We propose to accomplish this by changing the inner interpreter so that – instead of running an unbounded loop over a single virtual instruction stream which must be interrupted to regain control – it runs a bounded loop to context-switch into a given thread and execute a certain maximum number of virtual instructions before returning (figure 2). Here activate() context-switches the VM’s instruction pointer and other registers to those of a given thread. If we assume that all primitives are non-blocking, then the such a bounded inner interpreter will always return to its caller in a finite time. Non-blocking primitives are a strong assumption, but multithreading actually simplifies the creation of blocking structures on a non-blocking substrate by allowing condition checking to be made independent of the main program flow (exactly as an operating system does). We could simply use this construction to avoid the need for interruption and to re-factor /* VM */ the scheduler into another primitive that uses the void b o u n d e d( bound , thread ) { bounded inner interpreter. However, the cono l d t h r e a d = a c t i v a t e( thread ); struction facilitates a more interesting approach n = bound ; while (n - -) { whereby we remove the entire scheduling and b y t e c o d e = * ip ++; concurrency control regime from the VM and suropcode = u n p a c k _ o p c o d e ( b y t e c o d e ); face it to the language level. switch ( opcode ) { Having bounded the inner interpreter, we may ... now treat it as a virtual instruction in its own right } (since it is non-blocking). This means that we may } use it in defining new behaviours, and specifically a c t i v a t e( o l d t h r e a d ); we may use it in thread scheduling and concur- } rency control. The significance of this change is Figure 2: Bounded interpretation  138  Minimising VM support for concurrency  two-fold. Firstly, it blurs the distinction between co-operative and pre-emptive thread scheduling. Suppose we provide language-level threads, each of which is represented as a VM-level thread. At the VM level, thread scheduling is essentially co-operative: the bounded inner interpreter runs the thread for a time quantum specified in terms of virtual instructions and performs a voluntary context switch. At the language level, however, threads are pre-empted arbitrarily (from their perspective), since they have no control over when the underlying VM will switch them out. Secondly, bounded execution means that thread scheduling can itself be provided by a thread, rather than as a primitive. The scheduling thread chooses a worker thread, boundedly executes it for its time quantum, receives control back and selects another (or the same) thread for execution. Thread scheduling therefore need not be considered as a primitive function of the VM, and may instead happen at language level: one language-level thread can use bounded execution to run another for a given period, without losing overall control of the program’s execution.  3.1 Thread creation and scheduling A thread is created by allocating memory for its stacks and essential registers – tasks that can /* Target l a n g u a g e */ be performed without primitive support – before while ( TRUE ) { scheduling the thread by adding it to the schedtask = d e q u e u e( r u n q u e u e ); uler’s run queue. We might encode the simplest b o u n d e d( quantum , task ); e n q u e u e( task , r u n q u e u e ); round-robin scheduler as shown in figure 3. The point is that this is program code and not VM } code: it need not be primitive, and so may be reFigure 3: Language-level scheduling defined independently of the VM. Within this style more complex schedulers are clearly possible. A scheduler might maintain multiple run queues of differing priorities and select the next thread from the highest-priority queue having runnable threads. The quantum parameter determines the latency of context switches in terms of virtual instructions: one might reduce this number to regain control into the scheduler more frequently, and consult a timer to determine whether to perform a context switch, leading to language-level threads that effectively have time quanta specified in wallclock times (at some granularity) rather than in virtual instructions.  3.2 Program-level concurrent objects A small modification of the bounded inner interpreter allows us to migrate semphores and control of other program-level concurrent objects to the language level alongside the scheduler. If we ignore the possibility that the thread may be pre-empted, implementing semaphores at language level is straightforward. A semaphore consists of a counter and a thread queue. The wait (P) function decrements the counter and, if it is less than zero, enqueues the thread onto the thread queue and deschedules it as far as the thread scheduler is concerned. The signal (V) operation increments the counter and, if it remains less than zero, dequeues a thread from the semaphore’s thread queue and adds it to the scheduler’s run queue. None of these functions require explicit VM support. Dealing with pre-emption requires that we change the bounded inner interpreter in three ways. Firstly, we add a state flag to each thread which by default is RUNNABLE indicating that the thread may continue to execute. Secondly, we introduce two other states: BLOCKED for a thread that is blocked on a  Dobson, Dearle, and Porter  139  thread queue and so cannot be scheduled; and PRIORITISED for a thread that should not be pre-empted. Setting a thread’s state to PRIORITISED forces the bounded inner interpreter to keep executing virtual instructions in this thread, even if it comes to the end of its allocated quantum. Finally, we return the thread state from the bounded inner interpreter. This new scheme is shown in figure 4a, and is VM-level code: set thread state() is another primitive that sets the running thread’s state. We modify the scheduler (at language level) so that it runs prioritised and, after receiving control back from bounded(), it only enqueues the thread back onto the run queue if it is RUNNABLE (figure 4b). (Note that the scheduler is target language, non-primitive code.) /* VM */ int b o u n d e d( bound , thread ) { o l d t h r e a d = a c t i v a t e( thread ); n = bound ; s e t _ t h r e a d _ s t a t e ( R U N N A B L E ); while (( state = t h r e a d _ s t a t e ()) , ( state == P R I O R I T I S E D ) || (( state != B L O C K E D) && (n - -))) { opcode = u n p a c k _ o p c o d e ( b y t e c o d e ); switch ( opcode ) { ... } } a c t i v a t e( o l d t h r e a d ); return state ; } (a) Inner interpreter  /* Target l a n g u a g e */ s e t _ t h r e a d _ s t a t e ( P R I O R I T I S E D ); while ( TRUE ) { task = d e q u e u e( r u n q u e u e ); state = b o u n d e d( quantum , task ); if ( state == R U N N A B L E) e n q u e u e( task , r u n q u e u e ); } (b) Round-robin scheduler  Figure 4: Language-level concurrency control We can now write a wait() primitive (for example) at language level rather than as a VM primitive. We first set the thread’s state to PRIORITISED. The thread can then manipulate the semaphore’s counter and thread queue safely using the full features of the language, since it will not be pre-empted. At the end of the definition we set the thread’s state to RUNNABLE if we pass the semaphore or BLOCKED if the thread has been enqueued on the semaphore’s thread queue. A RUNNABLE thread will keep running or, if it has reached its quantum, will be de-scheduled and enqueued on the run queue; a BLOCKED thread will not be enqueued. The complementary implmentation of signal() will prioritise the thread, dequeue a  Minimising VM support for concurrency  140  blocked thread (if any) from the sempahore, enqueue it on the run queue, and then make itself RUNNABLE again to restore normal scheduling. What this shows is that the bounded inner interpreter with simple atomic thread state-setting offers sufficient VM-level support to allow concurrency primitives to be lifted to language level, and so allow a program to take complete control of its own concurrency control regime. These operations then have access to the full scope of the language: they are not restricted to the functions available primitively within the VM. Clearly there is scope for errors in this scheme if program code is allowed to arbitrarily make itself PRIORITISED, which essentially turns the pre-emptive scheme into a co-operative scheme again. However, this is a problem for the language level that may be addressed using permissions, encapsulation or whatever mechanisms (if any) the designer chooses: it is not an issue for the VM, which can support any scheme chosen.  3.3 Considerations of VM design At the design level, the VM does not need to have visibility of either the scheduling policy or the mechanisms (queues, semaphores, etc) used to implement it: all such considerations can be raised into the target language, to be re-implemented as required. This is in contrast to the more standard approaches to VM implementation (section 2.1) in which the same structures are submerged into the run-time system that underlies the VM. This places far more control in the hands of the language designer and implementer. This approach to concurrency is orthogonal to any other mechanisms provided within the VM, with the single proviso that all primitives be non-blocking so as to be properly schedulable. The scheduling mechanism is applied “below” the target language rather than “within” it, even while the scheduling policy is provided within the target: it does not re-use a language-level feature (such as continuation capture) that might also be used in other ways that interfere with the scheduling mechanism. It is interesting to note the way in which bounded concurrency highlights the closeness of the two concepts of thread and continuation, with a continuation capturing the future of a computation compared to a thread capturing the on-going reduction of that computation.  4  Conclusion  We have briefly presented an approach to opening-up the concurrency mechanisms in a virtual machine, allowing the VM to provide minimal support (two primitive operations) and building the rest of the concurrency regime at the language level. We have shown that this supports a number of different approaches to concurrency, including allowing the definition of new thread schedulers within a language so that they can be changed and specialised at run-time. One may also choose between traditional and speculative concurrency, blocking and non-blocking data structures and the like, entirely on top of the VM and therefore completely portably. This scheme allows us to further enrich the program-level handling of concurrency on top of a minimal virtual machine. It is possible, for example, to unify the treatment of threads and delimited continuations, making these powerful features available on-demand with little or no VM support – and therefore no overhead where they are not required. This is potentially of great significance for sensor networks and other systems with severely limited resources, and we are currently exploring what place such advanced language features have in such environments.  Dobson, Dearle, and Porter  141  References [1] R. Kent Dybvig & Robert Hieb (1989): Engines from continuations. Computer Languages 14(2), pp. 109–123. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0096-0551(89)90018-0. [2] Joshua Ellul & Kirk Martinez (2010): Run-time Compilation of Bytecode in Sensor Networks. In: Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SENSORCOMM.2010.28. [3] Christopher Hayes & Daniel Friedman (1987): Abstracting timing preemption with engines. Computer Languages 12(2), pp. 109–121. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0096-0551(87)90003-8. [4] Dan Ingalls, Ted Kaehler, John Maloney, Scott Wallace & Alan Kay (1997): Back to the future: The story of Squeak, a practical Smalltalk written in itself. In: Proceedings ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented Programming Systems, Languages, and Applications, ACM Press. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/263698.263754. [5] ECMA International (2012): Common Language Infrastructure (CLI). Technical Report ECMA-335, ECMA International. [6] Doug Simon & Cristina Cifuentes (2005): The Squawk Virtual Machine: Java on the bare metal. In: Proceedings ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented Programming Systems, Languages, and Applications, ACM Press. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1134760.1134773. [7] Bill Venners (2000): Inside the Java Virtual Machine. McGraw Hill Osbourne Media.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
