Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 0
ArXiv ID: hf_606

Abstract:
EXISTENCE OF SLICES ON A TAME CONTEXT SOPHIE MARQUES  arXiv:1401.1409v1 [math.AG] 7 Jan 2014  Contents Keywords Acknowledgment Introduction Hypotheses, basic concepts and notation 1. Definition of slices 2. Slice theorem for actions by finite étale (smooth) group scheme 3. Unramified case 3.1. Definitions 3.2. Global slice theorem 3.3. Local slice theorem 4. Linearly reductive group scheme 4.1. Definition 4.2. Cohomological properties 4.3. Liftings of linearly reductive group schemes 5. Tame quotient stack 5.1. Coarse moduli spaces 5.2. On the exactness of the functor of invariants 5.3. Definition of tame quotient stack 5.4. Local definition of tameness 5.5. Existence of a torsor 5.6. Slice theorem for tame quotient stacks 6. Tame action by affine group scheme vs Tame quotient stack 6.1. Algebraic interlude 6.2. Tame actions 6.3. Exactness of the functor of the invariants for tame actions 6.4. Relationship between the two notions of tameness References Abstract. We study the ramification theory for actions involving group schemes, focusing on the tame ramification. We consider the notion of tame quotient stack introduced in [AOV] and the one of tame action introduced in [CEPT]. We establish a local Slice theorem for unramified actions and after proving some interesting lifting properties for linearly reductive group schemes, we establish a Slice theorem for actions by commutative group schemes inducing tame quotient stacks. Roughly speaking, we show that these actions are induced from an action of an extension of the inertia group on a finitely presented flat neighborhood. We finally consider the notion of tame action and determine how this notion is related to the one of tame quotient stack previously considered.  Date: 28 février 2018. 1. SUBMITTED IN CEJM 1  2 2 2 3 6 7 8 8 9 9 10 10 10 11 12 12 13 14 15 17 18 18 18 19 20 22 23  Keywords. Group schemes, Ramification, Unramified, Freeness, Tameness, Slice theorem, Linearly reductive group schemes, Lifting, Actions, Quotient stack, Trivial cohomology. Acknowledgment. I would like to thanks my supervisors Boas Erez and Marco Garuti but also Angelo Vistoli and Yuri Tschinkel for their help and advise.  Introduction It is well-known that locally, for the étale topology, actions of constant group schemes (and slightly more generally etale group schemes) are induced from actions of their inertia groups: one can reconstruct the original action from the action of an inertia group at a point (Theorem 2.1) (this is a direct extension of the classic result of decomposition of finite extensions of valuation field after moving to the completion [Ser68, II, §3, Théorème 1, Corollaire 4 and Proposition 4]). This statement is an instance of a slice theorem (see Theorem 2.2). In this paper, we establish a more general slice theorem, under a tameness hypothesis. One motivation for studying slices in this generality is the theory of tame covers, in the sense of Grothendieck and Murre: these admit étales slices (see Abhyankar’s lemma in [GM71], [CE92]). Another motivation is the fundamental theorem of Luna, which states that actions of linearly reductive algebraic groups on an affine varieties are tame (see [Lun73]) and admit slices. In the simple case when the action has trivial inertia groups our slice theorem is simply the statement that freeness is local (Proposition 3.3). More general tame quotient stacks were introduced by Abramovich, Olsson and Vistoli in [AOV08, §3] in their study of certain ramification issues arising in moduli theory. Here, we characterize tameness for quotient stacks for actions of finite commutative group schemes via the existence of finitely presented flat slices with linearly reductive slice groups (Theorem 5.16). Roughly speaking, we show that these actions are induced from an action of an extension of the inertia group on a finitely presented flat neighborhood. Furthermore, this lifting of the inertia group can be constructed also in the non-commutative case, as a subgroup of the initial group and as a flat and linearly reductive group scheme (Theorem 4.4). Moreover, [AOV08, Theorem 3.2] shows that tameness is characterized by the property that all inertia groups at topological points are linearly reductive (it suffices to require this only at the geometric points). This is what one could have expected as a definition of tameness. In fact, let us consider a Γ-extension of Dedekind rings B{BΓ , where Γ is an abstract finite group and BΓ is the invariant ring for the action of Γ on B. For any prime ideal p of B we write kppq; then, it is well known, that B{BΓ is tame if and only if for all prime p of B, the inertia group Γ0 ppq has order prime to the characteristic of kppq. This last condition is equivalent to requiring that the group algebra kppqrΓ0 ppqs be semisimple, i.e., that the constant group scheme Γ0 ppq attached to Γ0 ppq is linearly reductive. 2  But as kppq-group, Γ0 ppq is exactly the inertia group of the action of the constant group scheme attached to Γ on X “ SpecpBq (cf [DG70, III, §2, n˚2, Example 2.4]). Independently, in [CEPT96, §2], Chinburg, Pappas, Erez and Taylor introduced the notion of tame actions. Thus it is natural to anticipate a relationship between these two notions of tameness. We prove that under quite general hypotheses, tame actions define tame quotient stacks (Theorem 6.8). In fact, under additional hypotheses such as finiteness, the two notions are equivalent (Theorem 6.9). Thus, the previous results apply to this notion of tameness and we can answer more precisely [CEPT96, §4, Question 2 and 3].  Hypotheses, basic concepts and notation We write fppf for faithfully flat and finitely presented. Throughout, we fix the following notation. Let R be a commutative, noetherian, unitary base ring: all modules and algebras are over R and all algebras are commutative. Let S :“ SpecpRq be the corresponding affine base scheme: all schemes are S-schemes. For V a scheme over S and S1 an Sscheme, let VS1 (resp. S1 V) be the base change V ˆS S1 (resp. S1 ˆS V). In particular, for V a scheme over S and R1 an R-algebra, we write VR1 (resp. R1 V) instead of VSpecpR1 q (resp. SpecpR1 q V) for the base change V ˆS SpecpR1 q (resp. SpecpR1 q ˆS V). Given S-morphisms of schemes V Ñ W and Z Ñ W, we have the fiber product V ˆW Z  pr2  /  Z  pr1    /  V    W  together with the natural projections. Let A “ pA, δ, ǫ, sq be a flat, finitely presented commutative Hopf algebra over R where δ denotes the comultiplicaton, ǫ the unit map and s the antipode, G the affine flat group scheme associated to A over S and X :“ SpecpBq an affine scheme over S.  Remark. For simplicity, we only consider actions involving affine schemes even though most of the following results are true for actions involving general schemes by glueing. Only the definition of tameness by [CEPT96] cannot be always generalized for actions involving the non-affine schemes (see [CEPT96, §7]). An action of G on X over S is denoted by pX, Gq; we write µX : X ˆS G Ñ X for its structure map, (we write x ¨ g :“ µX px, gq, for any x P X and g P G) and 3  ρB : B Ñ B bR A for the structure map giving the A-comodule structure on B (see [CEPT96, §1.b]). We will use the sigma notation, well-established in the Hopf algebra literature. ř Specifically, for a P A, we write δpaq “ paq a1 b a2 . This presentation itself is purely symbolic; the terms a1 and a2 do not stand for particular elements of A. The comultiplication δ takes values in A bR A, and we know that: δpaq “ pa1,1 b a1,2 q ` pa2,1 b a2,2 q ` pa3,1 b a3,2 q ` . . . ` pan,1 b an,2 q, for some elements ai, j of A and some integer n. The Sigma notation is a way to separate the ai,1 from the a j,2 . In other words, the notation a1 stands for the generic ai,1 and the notation a2 stands for the generic a j,2 . Similarly, for any right comodule ř (respectively left comodule) M, any m P M, we write ρM pmq “ mp0q b mp1q (reř spectively M ρpmq “ mp´1q b mp0q ). For p P X, we denote IG ppq the inertia group at p to be the fiber product: IG ppq  pr2  /  Specpkppqq  pr1  ∆˝ξ    X ˆS G  pµX ,pr1 q  /    X ˆS X  where kppq is the residue field at p, ξ : Specpkppqq Ñ X is the morphism induced by the canonical morphism B Ñ kppq and pµX , pr1q : X ˆS G Ñ X ˆS X is the Galois map sending px, gq to px ¨ g, xq. Let C :“ BA “ tb P B|ρB pbq “ b b 1u be the ring of invariants for this action, Y :“ SpecpCq and π : X Ñ Y the morphism induced by the inclusion C Ď B.  Remark. We can also then consider X as a scheme over Y. Then the data of the S-scheme morphism µX : X ˆS G Ñ X defining an action pX, Gq over S is equivalent to the data of the Y-scheme morphism µX : X ˆY GY Ñ X defining an action pX, GY q 1 over Y. For Y1 a Y-scheme, we denote XYY the base change to Y1 for X considered as a Y-scheme. In the following, we will say that a U-scheme Z together with a G-action over S where U is a S-scheme is a G-torsor over U if Z Ñ U is fppf and the Galois map pµZ , pr1q : Z ˆS G » Z ˆU Z is an isomorphism. (Here, we choose to work with the 4  fppf topology which is the more reasonable topology to work under our assumptions). We write rX{Gs for the quotient stack associated to this action. Recall, that it is defined on the T-points, where T is a S-scheme as: rX{GspTq “ tP is G-torsor over T together with a G-equivariant morphism P Ñ Xu We get a canonical S-morphism p : X Ñ rX{Gs by sending a T-point T Ñ X to trivial G-torsor T ˆS G over T together with the G-equivariant morphism T ˆS G Ñ X. Under the present hypothesis, p is fppf and by the Artin criterium (see [LMB00, Théorème 10.1]), rX{Gs is an Artin stack. We denote BS G the classifying stack that is the quotient stack associated to the trivial action of G on S. Moreover, X{G stands for the categorical quotient in the category of algebraic spaces, that is X{G is an algebraic space, there is a morphism φ : X Ñ X{G such that φ ˝ µX “ φ ˝ pr1 and for any algebraic space Z and any morphism ψ : X Ñ Z such that ψ ˝ µX “ ψ ˝ pr1, ψ factorizes via φ, e.g. there is a morphism X{G Ñ Z making the following diagram commute: X φ    ψ  / = Z ⑤ ⑤⑤ ⑤⑤ ⑤ ⑤⑤  X{G  If G is finite, flat over S then X{G “ Y, by [Con05, Theorem 3.1]. Remark. The quotient stack rX{Gs can always be defined, as soon as G is a flat group scheme, instead X{G does not exist necessarily. Even if X{G does exist, the quotient stack rX{Gs gives more information about the action than the categorical quotient X{G. More precisely, the only difference between the two holds in the existence of automorphisms of points for the stack rX{Gs, but these automorphisms correspond to the inertia groups for the action pX, Gq. A slice theorem reducing, fppf locally, the action pX, Gq to an action by a lifting of an inertia group would imply that the data of the quotient stack associated to X and G is enough to rebuild locally the action pX, Gq. This is the case for action of finite and étale group scheme (see Theorem 2.1). We denote by MA (resp. A M) the category of the right (resp. left) A-comodules and by (MR (resp. R M) the category of right (resp. left) R-modules). Let pM, ρM q and pN, ρN q be two right A-comodules. Denote by ComA pM, Nq the R-module of the A-comodule morphisms from M to N. We recall that a R-linear map g : M Ñ N is called A-comodule morphism if ρN ˝ g “ pg b IdA q ˝ ρM . 5  We denote by B MA the category of (B,A)-modules. The objects are R-modules N which are also right A-comodules and left B-modules such that the structural map of comodules is B-linear, i.e., ÿ ρN pbnq “ ρB pbqρN pnq “ bp0q np0q b bp1q np1q , for all n P N, b P B. The morphisms of B MA are morphisms that are simultaneously B-linear and Acomodule morphisms. For any M, N P B MA , we write B BimA pM, Nq for the set of such morphisms from M to N. For a pB, Aq-module M, its submodule of invariants pMqA is defined by the exact sequence 0 Ñ pMqA Ñ M  ρM / Mb1  /  MbA  This defines the functor of invariants p´qA : B MA Ñ C M which is left exact, by definition. We denote QcohG pXq the G-equivariant quasicoherent sheaves over X (see [AOV08, 2.1]). We have that QcohG pXq » B MA . For X an Artin stack, we denote by QcohpXq the quasi-coherent sheaves over X. We have QcohprX{Gsq » QcohG pXq (see [AOV08, 2.1] or [Mar, Chapter IV, §9]). 1. Definition of slices Here we recall the notion of slices introduced in [CEPT96, Definition 3.1]: Definition 1.1. We say that the action pX, Gq over S admits étale (respectively finitely presented flat) slices if: (1) There is a categorical quotient Q :“ X{G, in the category of algebraic spaces. (2) For any q P Q, there exist: (a) a S-scheme Q1 and an étale (resp. finitely presented flat) S-morphism Q1 Ñ Q such that there is q1 P Q1 which maps to q via this morphism. (b) a closed subgroup Gq of GQ1 over Q1 which stabilizes some point p1 of X ˆQ Q1 above q1 , i.e., Gq kpp1 q » IGQ1 pp1 q, (c) a Q1 -scheme Z with a Gq -action such that Q1 “ Z{Gq and the action pX ˆQ Q1 , GQ1 q is induced by pZ, Gq q. The subgroup Gq is called a slice group. Remark 1.2. (1) Roughly speaking, for the étale (respectively fppf ) topology, an action which admits slices can be described by the action of a lifting of an inertia group of a point. (2) The action pXQ1 , GQ1 q should be thought of as a G-stable neighborhood of an orbit. Such a neighborhood induced from an action pZ, Hq, where H is a lifting of an inertia group of a point, is called a “tubular neighborhood”. 6  2. Slice theorem for actions by finite étale (smooth) group scheme Since a finite and smooth group scheme is étale, and an étale group scheme is locally constant for the étale topology, it is enough to consider an action by a constant group scheme. Let Γ be an abstract finite group. Denote by Γ the constant group scheme associated to Γ over S. The associated Hopf algebra is then of the form MappΓ, Rq. We recall first some important facts: (1) The data of an action of G on X is equivalent to the data of an action of Γ on B, C “ BΓ “ tγ P Γ|γb “ bu (see [CEPT96, §1.d]) and X{Γ “ Y (see [Con05, Theorem 3.1]). This particular case also permits to make the transition from algebra and classic number theory to the algebraic geometry context and to understand later definitions. (2) For q P Y, Γ operates transitively on the prime ideals above q (see [Bou81, Chap. V, §2, Theorem 2]). (3) The inertia group scheme at a point p P X is the constant group scheme associated to the algebraic inertia group Γ0 ppq “ tγ P Γ|γp “ p and γ.x “ x, @x P kppqu for the action Γ on B induced by pX, Gq at the ideal p (see [DG70, III, §2, n˚ 2, Example 2.4]). In order to alleviate writing, we use that the morphism B Ñ C is integral (see [Bou81, Chap. V, §1, n˚9, Proposition 22]).Let q be a prime ideal on C, if we write Csh q for sh sh the strict henselization of C at q, then the base change BbC Cq Ñ Cq is also integral and since we want a result locally for the étale topology, without loss of generality, we suppose in the following that the base is local strictly henselian with maximal ideal q and that B is semi-local over C that is, the product of its local component pBm q where m are runs though the set of the prime (maximal) ideals of B over the maximal ideal q of C. Let p be a prime ideal over q. We define MapΓ0 ppq pΓ, Bp q to be the set of maps u : Γ Ñ Bp such that upγiq “ i´1upγq, for any γ P Γ and i P Γ0 pPq; it carries a Γ-action via λ.upγq “ upλ´1 γq,  for any  λ, γ P Γ.  With these notations, we obtain easily the following Γ-equivariant isomorphism: pMappΓ, Cq bC Bp qΓ0 ppq » MapΓ0 ppq pΓ, Bp q With all the previous notations, one obtains that the action of Γ on B can be rebuilt locally at q thanks to the action of an inertia group at p on Bp : 7  Lemma 2.1. [Ray70, Chapitre X] We have a canonical isomorphism φ, compatible with the actions of Γ defined by φ : B Ñ MapΓ0 ppq pΓ, Bp q b ÞÑ u : γ ÞÑ pγ´1 bqp Γ ppq  Moreover, C » Bp0 . Proof. Since Bp » iBp , for any i P Γ0 ppq, φ is well-defined. Let p1 , ....,ps be the prime ideals over q, we put p1 :“ p. Since the action of Γ is transitive on the pi ’s, for any i ‰ 1, we have a γi P Γ, such that pi “ γi p. Moreover, Bp j » γ j Bp . Since we suppose C strictly henselian and B is integral over C, then we know that B “ ‘si“1 Bpi » ‘si“1 γi Bp . As a consequence, any b P B can be written uniquely as pγ1 b1 , γ2 b2 , ..., γsbs q in ‘si“1 γi Bp with bi P Bp . Each γi acts on this representation, by left translation and permuting the term on the direct sum. In particular, we obtain pγ´1 bqP “ γ´1 γ j b j “ b j , and this proves that φ is an isomorphism. Finally, the j j composite map B »φ MapΓ0 ppq pΓ, Bp q Ñ Bp u ÞÑ up1Γ q Γ ppq  induces an isomorphism between C and Bp0 .    Rewriting the previous theorem in algebro-geometric terms gives us exactly étales slices for any action by a finite étale group scheme. Theorem 2.2. An action of a finite étale group scheme G on X over S admits étale slices. Proof. First, Y “ X{G is a categorical quotient in the category of algebraic space (see [Con05, Theorem 3.1]). The rest of the proof is a direct consequence of the previous theorem since as we already mentioned we can assume without loss of generality that G is constant of the form Γ using the previous notation: take q P Y and p P X over q. Write Chs q for the strict Henselization of C at q. In Definition 1.1, since X Ñ Y is finite, we can take Y1 “ SpecpC1 q as an étale subextension of SpecpChs q q over Y 1 containing q in its image with C a local ring, the slice group Gq to be the constant group scheme associated to Γ0 ppq over Y1 and Z :“ SpecppB bC C1 qm q, where m is a prime ideal above the maximal ideal of the local ring C1 corresponding to q.  3. Unramified case 3.1. Definitions. Definition 3.1. We say that the action pX, Gq is unramified at p P X if the inertia group IG ppq is trivial. We say that the action pX, Gq is unramified if pX, Gq is unramified at any p. We say the action is free if the Galois morphism pµX , pr1q : X ˆS G Ñ X ˆS X is a closed immersion. 8  Lemma 3.2. [DG70, III, §2, n˚ 2, 2.2] The following assertions are equivalent: (1) pX, Gq is free. (2) pX, Gq is unramified. 3.2. Global slice theorem. We already have the following theorem. Theorem 3.3. [DG70, III, §2, n˚2 & n˚3] Suppose that G is finite, flat over S. The following assertions are equivalent: (1) pX, Gq is unramified. (2) X is a G-torsor over Y. 3.3. Local slice theorem. Lemma 3.4. Suppose that S “ Y is local, with maximal ideal q. The following assertions are equivalent: (1) pX, Gq is a free action. (2) IG ppq is trivial for some p over q. Proof. The first implication follows from the definition. Let us prove that p2q ñ p1q. Let kpqq “ R{q be the residue field of R at q and f : X Ñ S be the quotient morphism: since G is finite, f is finite. Set S0 :“ Specpkpqqq and X0 :“ f ´1 pqq “ tp1 , .., pr u “ X ˆS S0 where for any i P 1, ..., r, pi are the primes above q. Since the inertia is trivial at some prime over q, it is trivial at any prime over q since all the prime ideals over q are conjugate up to a finitely presented flat finite base change. Then, up to this finitely presented flat finite base change, the action pXS0 , GS0 q is free, in other words X0 ˆS0 GS0 Ñ X0 ˆS0 X0 is a closed immersion (see [DG70, III, §2, n˚2, Proposition 2.2]). That is, we have the surjection pB bR Bq bR R{q Ñ pB bR Aq bR R{q. Since BbR B and BbR A are finite R-algebras, by Nakayama’s lemma, BbR B Ñ BbR A is a surjection, hence the action is free.  From this lemma, we can deduce easily the following theorem which is a local slice theorem for free action: Theorem 3.5. Suppose that G is finite and flat over S. Let p P X and q P Y its image via the morphism π : X Ñ Y. The following assertions are equivalent: (1) The inertia group scheme is trivial at p, up to a finite base change. (2) There is an finite, flat morphism Y1 Ñ Y containing q in its image such that the action pXYY1 , GY1 q over Y1 is free. In other words, pXYY1 ˆY XYY1 , GXY1 q is induced by the action pXYY1 ˆY1 XYY1 , eXY1 q, where eXY1 denotes the trivial group Y  scheme over XYY1 . 9  Y  Proof. p1q ñ p2q From the previous lemma, there is an finite, flat morphism Y1 Ñ Y containing q in its image such that pXYY1 , GY1 q is free, and since GY1 is finite over Y1 , XY1 is a GY1 -torsor over Y1 (see Theorem 3.3) hence XYY1 is an fppf morphism over Y1 , there is a GY1 -equivariant isomorphism pµXY1 , pr1q : pXYY1 ˆY1 GY1 q{eXY1 » XYY1 ˆY1 XYY1 Y  Y  where on the left hand side GY1 acts only on the factor GY1 by translation and on the right hand side GY1 acts on the first factor only. p2q ñ p1q Trivial.  4. Linearly reductive group scheme 4.1. Definition. From the notion of tameness, we can define a class of group schemes with nice properties, which will be very important for the following. Definition 4.1. We say that G is linearly reductive group scheme, if p´qA : A R M Ñ R M is exact. 4.2. Cohomological properties. The cohomology of linearly reductive group schemes has some very interesting cohomological vanishing properties that are useful for deformation involving such group schemes. We can even characterize linearly reductivity by the vanishing of the cohomology: Lemma 4.2. (see [Kem00, Proposition 1]) Suppose that G is flat, finite over S, that X finitely presented over S and S “ Specpkq where k is a field. The following assertion are equivalent: (1) G is linearly reductive over S. (2) H1 pG, Mq “ 0 for any M P MA . The following lemma is part of the proof of [AOV08, Lemma 2.13]: Lemma 4.3. If G is linearly reductive over S, then (1) Exti pLBk G{k , F q “ 0, f or i ‰ ´1, 0. for any coherent sheaf F on Bk G. (2) If we suppose that G is also smooth, Exti pLBk G{k , F q “ 0, f or i ‰ ´1 for any coherent sheaf F on Bk G. Proof. By [AOV08, Lemma 2.15], the cotangent complex LBk G{k of the structural r´1,0s morphism Bk G Ñ k (where k is a field) belongs to Dcoh pOBk G q. Since k is a field, any coherent sheaf on Bk G is locally free, and therefore for any coherent sheaf F on Bk G, we have: r´1,0s RHompLBk G{k , F q P Dcoh pOBk G q. 10  (1) Since the global section functor is exact on the category CohpOBk G q (since G is linearly reductive), we obtain that then Exti pLBk G{k , F q “ 0, f or i ‰ ´1, 0. for any F is a coherent sheaf on Bk G. r0s  (2) When G is smooth, then LBk G{k P Dcoh pOBk G q and Exti pLBk G{k , F q “ 0, f or i ‰ ´1 for any F is a coherent sheaf on Bk G.  4.3. Liftings of linearly reductive group schemes. By [AOV08, Proposition 2.18], we know that a linearly reductive group scheme over some point can be lifted as linearly reductive group to an étale neighborhood. Thanks to this result, we were able to prove that we can lift this group fppf locally as a subgroup in the following sense. Theorem 4.4. Let p be a point of S, G be a finite, flat group scheme over S and H0 be a finite, linearly reductive closed subgroup scheme of Gkppq over Specpkppqq. Then, there exists a flat, finitely presented morphism U Ñ S, a point q P U mapping to p and a flat linearly reductive closed subgroup scheme H of GU over U whose pullback Hkpqq is isomorphic to the pullback of H0 kpqq . Proof. Let p P S. By [AOV08, Proposition 2.18], there exists an étale morphism U Ñ S, a point q P U mapping to p and a linearly reductive group scheme H over U such that Hkpqq » H0 kpqq . Set Un :“ SpecpR{qn`1 q. One has that H0 is a subgroup scheme of Gkppq , and this defines a representable morphism of algebraic stacks x0 : Bkpqq H0 Ñ Bkpqq Gkpqq over kpqq. We want to prove the existence a representable morphism of algebraic stacks x : BU H Ñ BU GU filling in the following 2-commutative diagram /  Bkpqq H0 ✷✷ ❑❑❑ ✷✷ ❑❑x❑ ❑❑❑ ✷✷ ❑% ✷✷ ✷✷ Bkpqq Gkpqq ✷✷ ✷✷ ✷✷ ✷✷ g ✷✷ ✷✷ ✷✷    U0  BU H  ✴✴ x1 ✴✴ ✴✴ # ✴✴ ✴✴ / BU GU ✴✴ ✴✴ ✴✴ ✴✴ ✴✴ ✴✴ ✴  / U  We can prove, thanks to Grothendieck ’s Existence theorem for algebraic stacks (see [Ols07, Theorem 11.1]) and Artin’s approximation theorem (see [Art69, Théorème 11  1.12]), that the existence of such x only depends on the existence of a formal deformation, that is morphisms xn : BUn HUn Ñ BUn GUn filling in the following 2-commutative diagram: Bkpqq H0  in  ✸✸ ▲▲▲ x ✸✸ ▲▲▲1 ▲▲▲ ✸✸ ▲& ✸✸ ✸✸ B kpqq Gkpqq ✸✸ ✸✸ ✸✸ ✸✸ ✸✸ ✸✸ ✸✸    Specpkpqqq  /  /  BUn´1 HUn´1 jn  ✻✻ ◆◆◆ xn´1 ◆◆◆ ✻✻ ◆◆◆ ✻✻ ◆◆' ✻✻ / B ✻✻ Un´1 GUn´1 ✻✻ ✻✻ ✻✻ ✻✻ ✻✻ ✻✻ ✻✻ ✻  / U n´1  BU n H U n  ✶✶ xn ✶✶ ✶✶ % ✶✶ / B G ✶✶ Un Un ✶✶ ✶✶ ✶✶ ✶✶ ✶✶ ✶✶ ✶✶   / U n  By [Ols06, Theorem 1.5], the obstruction to extend the morphism xn´1 to xn lies in Ext1 pLx˚ LBkpqq Gkpqq {kpqq , mn {mn`1 bkpqq OBkpqq Gkpqq q, which is trivial for any n P N by Lemma 4.3. It follows that there exists an arrow xn filling the previous diagram. This leads to the existence of a representable morphism of stacks F : BU HU Ñ BU GU . Let Q Ñ U be the GU -torsor which is the image via F of the trivial HU -torsor HU Ñ U. Furthermore, the functor F induces a homomorphism from AutS pHQ Ñ Qq “ HQ to the automorphism group scheme of the image of the HQ -torsor HQ Ñ Q in BQ GQ . Since this image is the pullback of Q to Q over BQ GQ , which is canonically a trivial torsor, its automorphism group is GQ . This defines a group morphism HQ Ñ GQ , with Q Ñ U an fppf morphism as GU -torsor. Since F is representable, this morphism is injective. Finally, since H is proper and G is separated, HV is closed in GV .  5. Tame quotient stack 5.1. Coarse moduli spaces. Abramovich, Olsson and Vistoli introduced in [AOV08] the notion of tame stack. Before recalling their definition, we need some additional terminology. Definition 5.1. A coarse moduli space for the quotient stack rX{Gs is a couple pM, φq where M is a algebraic space and φ : rX{Gs Ñ M a morphism of stacks such that any morphism from rX{Gs to an algebraic space factor through φ and such that for any algebraically closed field Ω, |rX{GspΩq| » MpΩq where |rX{GspΩq| is the set of isomorphism classes of the geometric points of rX{Gs taking value on Ω. Remark 5.2. (1) The notion of coarse moduli spaces can be generalized for general Artin stack. Coarse moduli space for quotient stack are in particular a categorical quotient in the category of algebraic spaces for the action pX, Gq. More precisely, 12  (a) Let M be an algebraic space. The datum of a morphism φ : rX{Gs Ñ M is equivalent to the datum of a morphism of S-algebraic spaces f : X Ñ M such that f ˝ pr1 “ f ˝ µX . In particular, the canonical map π : X Ñ Y induces a map ρ : rX{Gs Ñ Y. (b) If f : X Ñ M is a geometric quotient which is categorical in the category of algebraic spaces, then rX{Gs Ñ M is a coarse moduli space. For more details, see [Mar, 10.4]. (2) If G is finite, flat over S then ρ : rX{Gs Ñ Y is a coarse moduli space for rX{Gs (see [Con05, §3]). Theorem 5.3. Suppose that the group scheme G and the scheme X are finitely presented over S and that all the inertia group schemes are finite. The quotient stack rX{Gs admits a coarse moduli space φ : rX{Gs Ñ M such that φ is proper. Moreover, φ induces a functor φ˚ : QcohprX{Gsq Ñ QcohpMq. Proof. Since G is finitely presented over S, so is X Ñ rX{Gs (X is a G-torsor over rX{Gs). Since X Ñ rX{Gs is surjective, flat of finite presentation and X Ñ S is also of finite presentation, rX{Gs Ñ S is of finite presentation. By [Con05, Theorem 1.1], the hypotheses insure that the quotient stack admits a coarse moduli space that we denote φ : rX{Gs Ñ M such that φ is proper. In particular, φ is quasi-compact and quasi-separated, thus by [Ols07, Lem. 6.5(i)], the induced morphism on the quasi-coherent sheaves φ˚ : QcohprX{Gsq Ñ QcohpMq is well defined.  5.2. On the exactness of the functor of invariants. Lemma 5.4. The map ρ : rX{Gs Ñ Y (defined in Remark 5.2) induces a functor ρ˚ : QcohprX{Gsq Ñ QcohpYq. Then, the functor ρ˚ is exact if and only if the functor of invariants p´qA : B MA Ñ C M is exact. Proof. By [Mar, Lemma IV.10], we know that the map ρ is quasi-compact and quasiseparated, thus by [Ols07, Lem. 6.5(i)], the induced morphism on the quasi-coherent sheaves ρ˚ : QcohprX{Gsq Ñ QcohpMq is well defined. ρ is defined as making the diagram bellow commute: ρ  rX{Gs  b❊❊ ❊❊ ❊ p ❊❊❊  / @  Y  π  X Thus, it induces the following commutating diagram of functors: QcohprX{Gsq  ρ˚  /  QcohpYq  q8 qqq q q q qqq π˚  g❖❖❖ ❖❖❖ ❖❖ p˚ ❖❖❖  QcohG pXq 13  The functor p˚ is an equivalence of categories (see [Mar, Proposition IV.24]). Moreover, by [Har77, §5], we have the following commutative diagram: QcohG pXq  π˚  /  QcohpYq  ΓpX, q  ΓpY, q    A BM  p qA  /    CM  where the functors of global section ΓpX, q and ΓpY, q are equivalences of categories. This proves the lemma.  Theorem 5.5. Suppose that X is noetherian, finitely presented over S, that G is finitely presented over S and that all the inertia groups are finite. If the functor of invariants p´qA is exact, then the map ρ : rX{Gs Ñ Y is a coarse moduli space of rX{Gs and ρ is proper. Proof. , By [Alp08, Theorem 6.6], the quotient π : X Ñ Y is categorical in the category of algebraic spaces. [Con05, Theorem 1.1] insures that the quotient stack admits a coarse moduli space that we denote ρ : rX{Gs Ñ M such that ρ is proper. But, since ρ ˝ p : X Ñ rX{Gs Ñ M and π : X Ñ Y are categorical quotients in the category of algebraic spaces, we obtain by unicity that M » Y and that ρ : rX{Gs Ñ Y is a coarse moduli space.  5.3. Definition of tame quotient stack. Finally, we can define a tame quotient stack. Since we need the existence of a coarse moduli space. Until the end of section 5, we suppose that G is flat, finitely presented over S, that X is finitely presented over S and that all the inertia groups at the geometric points for the action pX, Gq are finite. Moreover, we denote M the coarse moduli space and φ : rX{Gs Ñ M the proper map (see Theorem 5.3). Definition 5.6. We say that the quotient stack rX{Gs is tame if the functor φ˚ : QcohrX{Gs Ñ QcohpMq is exact. Remark 5.7. (1) The notion of tameness can be defined similarly for general stacks (see [AOV08, Definition 3.1]). (2) When G is finite flat over S, rX{Gs is tame if and only if the functor of invariants p´qA is exact. (It is a consequence of Lemma 5.4 since Y is a coarse moduli space for G finite flat over S, by [Con05, §3]). (3) When G is finite flat over S, G is linearly reductive if and only if the classifying stack BS G is tame. Tameness is local. In fact, 14  Lemma 5.8. [Alp08, Proposition 3.10] For any morphism of S-schemes g : M1 Ñ M, we consider the following 2-cartesian diagram: g1  rX{GsM1  /  rX{Gs  φ1  φ    M1  g  /    M  Suppose that φ (resp. φ1 ) is the coarse moduli space for rX{Gs (resp. rX{GsM1 ). (1) If g is faithfully flat and the quotient stack rX{GsM1 is tame then the quotient stack rX{Gs is tame. (2) If the quotient stack rX{Gs is tame then the quotient stack rX{GsM1 is also tame. Proof.  (1) From the 2-cartesian diagram we deduce that the functors g˚ φ˚ and φ1˚ g1˚ are isomorphic. Since g is flat, g1 is flat as well and g1˚ is exact; also φ1˚ is exact by assumption, so the composite φ1˚ g1˚ is exact, hence so is g˚ φ˚ . But, since g is faithfully flat, we have that φ˚ is also exact as required.  (2) First suppose that g is an open, quasi-compact immersion. Let 0 Ñ F11 Ñ F21 Ñ F31 Ñ 0 be an exact sequence of OrX{GsM1 -modules. Set F3 :“ g1˚ F2 {g1˚ F1 . Then 0 Ñ g1˚ F11 Ñ g1˚ F21 Ñ F3 Ñ 0 is exact. Moreover, g1˚ F3 » F31 since the adjunction morphism g1˚ g1˚ Ñ id is an isomorphism. Since φ˚ is exact by assumption, φ˚ g1˚ F21 Ñ φ˚ F3 is also surjective, but then g˚ φ1˚ F21 Ñ φ˚ F3 is surjective as well. Since g is an open immersion, φ1˚ F21 Ñ g˚ φ˚ F3 is surjective. Finally, since g˚ φ˚ and φ1˚ g1˚ are isomorphic functors, φ1˚ F21 Ñ φ1˚ F31 is surjective. We consider now any morphism of schemes g : M1 Ñ M. Since the tameness property on a stack is Zariski local, we can assume M1 and M affine. Then g1 is also affine, so the functor g1˚ is exact. By assumption φ˚ is exact, therefore φ˚ g1˚ “ g˚ φ1˚ is exact. But the functor g˚ has the property that a sequence F1 Ñ F2 Ñ F3 is exact if and only if g˚ F1 Ñ g˚ F2 Ñ g˚ F3 is exact. It follows that φ1˚ is exact as required.  5.4. Local definition of tameness. Theorem 5.9. [AOV08, Theorem 3.2] The following assertions are equivalent: (1) The quotient stack rX{Gs is tame. (2) The inertia groups IG pξq Ñ Specpkq are linearly reductive groups, for any ξ : Specpkq Ñ X, where k is a field. 15  (3) The inertia groups IG pξq Ñ Specpkq are linearly reductive groups, for any geometric point ξ : Specpkq Ñ X, where k is an algebraically closed field. (4) The inertia groups IG ppq Ñ Specpkppqq are linearly reductive groups, for any p P X. (5) For any point p P X, denote q its image via the morphism X Ñ M there exist an fppf (also can be chosen étale surjective) morphism M1 Ñ M containing q in its image, a linearly reductive group scheme H Ñ M1 , such that Hkpqq » IG ppq, acting on a finite and finitely presented scheme P Ñ M1 and an isomorphism of algebraic stacks over M1 rX{Gs ˆM M1 » rP{Hs. Proof. p1q ñ p2q Let ξ : Specpkq Ñ X be a k-point, where k is a field, and IG pξq is the inertia group in ξ. The quotient stack rGk {IG pξqs is a scheme, denote it Gk {IG pξq. Since the square Gk {IG pξq /    Bk IG pξq /  X ˆS Specpkq   rX{Gs ˆS Specpkq  is 2-cartesian, Bk IG pξq Ñ rX{Gs ˆS Specpkq is affine since Gk {IG pξq Ñ X ˆS Specpkq is affine. Now, let us consider the following commutative diagram: Bk IG pξq  g  /  rX{Gs p‹q  p´qIG pξq  φ    Specpkpqqq  f  /    M  Since we have seen that g is affine, g˚ : QcohpBkIG pξqq Ñ QcohprX{Gsq is an exact functor and φ˚ : QcohprX{Gsq Ñ QcohpYq is exact by definition of tameness. Since f˚ φ1˚ “ φ˚ g˚ , if 0 Ñ V1 Ñ V2 Ñ V3 Ñ 0 is an exact sequence of G-representations, considered as exact sequence of quasi coherent sheaves over Bk IG pξq, we have the following exact sequence: 0 Ñ f˚ pV1 qIG pξq Ñ f˚ pV2 qIG pξq Ñ f˚pV3 qIG pξq Ñ 0. Moreover, p´qIG pξq is left exact and this implies that 0 Ñ pV1 qIG pξq Ñ pV2 qIG pξq Ñ pV3 qIG pξq Ñ 0 is exact. So, IG pξq is linearly reductive. p2q ñ p3q Immediate. p3q ñ p4q By [AOV08, Theorem 2.16], it is enough to prove that IG ppqΩ is trivial, 16  for any Ω algebraically closed field. Denoting by pΩ the composite SpecpΩq Ñ Specpkppqq Ñ X. But, IG ppqΩ is a subgroup of IG ppΩ q which is trivial by assumption. Thus, IG ppqΩ is trivial. p4q ñ p5q See [AOV08, Theorem 3.2] p5q ñ p1q See Lemma 5.8.  We obtain the following corollary. Corollary 5.10. [AOV08, Corollary 3.5] The stack rX{Gs Ñ S is tame if and only if for any morphism Specpkq Ñ S, where k is an algebraically closed field, the geometric fiber rX{Gs ˆS Specpkq Ñ Specpkq is tame. Definition 5.11. We say that rX{Gs is tame at p if the inertia group IG ppq is linearly reductive. Remark 5.12. By the previous theorem, rX{Gs is tame if and only if rX{Gs is tame at p, for any p P X. 5.5. Existence of a torsor. We state now an interesting consequence of the previous theorem which permits to define a torsor for a tame quotient stack for actions of finite commutative group schemes. Proposition 5.13. Suppose that G is finite, commutative flat over S. If the quotient stack rX{Gs is tame, then for any point p P X, denoting by q P Y its image by the morphism X Ñ Y, there exist a finitely presented flat morphism Y1 Ñ Y containing q in its image and a subgroup H of GY1 over Y1 lifting the inertia group at p such that XYY1 {H is a GY1 {H-torsor over Y1 . Proof. Notice first that under the assumption of the theorem, GY1 {H is a finite affine group scheme. By the previous theorem, we know that the inertia at p is linearly reductive. So, by Lemma 4.4, there are a finitely presented flat morphism Y1 Ñ Y containing q in its image and a linearly reductive group H Ñ Y1 lifting this inertia group as a subgroup of GY1 . Moreover, the inertia group at p, image of p by the quotient morphism XYY1 Ñ XYY1 {H for the action pXYY1 {H, GY1 {Hq, is equal to IGY1 {H ppq “ IG ppq{pIG ppq X Hkppq q “ teu By Theorem 3.3, up to passing to a finitely presented flat neighborhood of q, the action pXYY1 {H, GY1 {Hq is free, thus XYY1 {H is a GY1 {H-torsor over Y1 since GY1 {H is finite (see Theorem 3.3).  Remark 5.14. It would be useful to establish the previous proposition in general if G is not commutative. But, in this case G{H is not necessarily a group scheme and we cannot even define the notion of action or of torsor. But, taking the normal closure of H in GY1 instead of H, we can establish the same result. 17  5.6. Slice theorem for tame quotient stacks. We manage to prove a slice theorem for actions by a finite commutative group scheme, using the following lemma. Lemma 5.15. [CEPT96, Proposition 6.5] Let H be a subgroup of G such that the quotient for the natural translation action exists and is universal. Let ψ : X Ñ G{H be a morphism of schemes preserving the G-actions. Let Z “ X ˆG{H e be defined as the fibered product of the two maps ψ and the inclusion e “ H{H Ñ G{H. Assume that the balanced product Z ˆH G exists and is a universal quotient. Then we have an isomorphism of G-actions pX, Gq » pZ ˆH G, Gq. Finally, we get the following slice theorem which extends [CEPT96, Theorem 6.4] as we will see above: Theorem 5.16. Suppose that G is commutative and finite over S. The quotient stack rX{Gs is tame if and only if the action pX, Gq admits finitely presented flat slices such that the slice group at p P X are linearly reductive. Proof. When G is commutative, since by proposition 5.13, up to passing to a finite finitely presented flat neighborhood of q, there is a subgroup H of G such that pX{H, G{Hq defines a torsor over Y, then X{H ˆY X{H » X{H ˆY G{H. This gives us a G-equivariant morphism ψ : X Ñ G{H after the fppf base change X{H Ñ Y. So, pX, Gq is induced by the action pZ, Hq using the notation of the previous lemma. The converse is due to Theorem 5.9 since if the action pX, Gq admits finitely presented flat slices such that the slice group at p P X are linearly reductive, then for any p P X, IG ppq is linearly reductive.  6. Tame action by affine group scheme vs Tame quotient stack 6.1. Algebraic interlude. The following lemma is quite important in the sense that it relates the functor of invariants to the functor ComA p´, Bq. As a consequence, it relates in particular the exactness of this functors which will be important in order to compare the two notions of tameness (see Lemma 6.7). Lemma 6.1. Suppose that the Hopf algebra A is flat over R. Let B P MA and M P R M be finitely presented as R-modules. There is a natural (functorial on M) isomorphism: pB bR M˚ qA » ComA pM, Bq 18  Proof. The commutativity of the right square of the diagram below insures the existence of λ which is an isomorphism and so α and γ as well. /  0  pB bR M˚ qA /  B bR M˚  0  /  ComA pM, Bq  /  pB bR M˚ q bR A γ  α  λ    φ  /    HomR pM, Bq  ψ  /    HomR pM, B bR Aq  where φ :“ ρBbR M˚ ´ IdB b IdM˚ b 1, ψ :“ pρB ˝ ´q ´ ρM˚ and for any b b f b a P ř B bR M˚ bR A and m P M, γpb b f b aqpmq “ b. f pmp0q q b a.mp´1q Indeed, the map γ is an isomorphism as composite of the isomorphism γ1 : B bR M˚ bR A Ñ B bR A bR M˚ defined for any b b f b a P B bR M˚ bR A by γ1 pb b f b aq “ b b a.mp´1q b f pmp0q q (Its inverse map is defined for any b b a b f P B bR A bR M˚ ř by γ´1 pb b a b f q “ b b f pmp0q q b a.Spmp´1q q) with the canonical isomorphism 1 γ2 : B bR A bR M˚ Ñ HomR pM, B bR Aq. For any b b f P B bR M˚ , we have ř ψ ˝ αpb b f q “ ψprm ÞÑ b f pmqsq “ rm ÞÑ ρB pbq f pmq ´ b f pmp0q q b mp´1q s and γ ˝ φpb b f q “ “ “ “  ř γprm ÞÑ bp0q b f pmp0q q b bp1q Spmp´1q q ´ b b f pmq b 1sq ř rm ÞÑ pbp0q b bp1q Spmp1 q qpmp0q qp´1q q f ppmp0q qp0q ´ b f pmp0q b mp´1q s ř ř rm ÞÑ pbp0q b bp1q ǫpmp´1q qq f pmp0q q ´ b f pmp0q q b mp´1q s ř rm ÞÑ ρB pbq f pmq ´ b f pmp0q q b mp´1q s.   6.2. Tame actions. Chinburg, Erez, Pappas and Taylor defined in their article [CEPT96] the notion of tame action. We recall here this definition and some useful properties. Definition 6.2. We say that an action pX, Gq is tame if there is a unitary (that is αp1A q “ 1B ) morphism of A-comodules α : A Ñ B, which means that α is a R-linear map such that ρB ˝ α “ pα b IdA q ˝ δ, such a morphism is called a total integral. Tame actions are stable under base change. Lemma 6.3. If the action pX, Gq is tame, then after an affine base change R1 Ñ R the action pXR1 , GR1 q is also tame. Proof. Since the action pX, Gq is tame, there is a AC -comodule map A Ñ B, which  induces naturally a comodule map AR1 Ñ BR1 . The next lemma will allow us to assume that the base is equal to the quotient, if the structural map X Ñ S has the same properties as the quotient morphism X Ñ Y. Lemma 6.4. The following assertions are equivalent: 19  (1) The action pX, CGq over C is tame . (2) The action pX, Gq over S is tame. (3) The action pC X, C Gq over C is tame. Proof. p1q ñ p2q Let α : C A Ñ B be a total integral for the tame action pX, CGq. Since B is a C A-comodule via ρB : B Ñ B bR A » B bC C A, the composite α1 :“ α ˝ iA : A Ñ B, where iA : A Ñ C bR A maps a to 1 b a, is a unitary A-comodule map so a total integral for the action pX, Gq. p2q ñ p3q Follows from base change, by Lemma 6.3. p3q ñ p1q Denote by β : C A Ñ C B the total integral for the action pC X, CGq. Recall that IdC bR A is a C A-comodule via IdC bδ and C B is a C A-comodule map via IdC bρB . Consider the composite β1 :“ µC ˝ β : C bR A Ñ B where µC : C bR B Ñ B comes from the algebra multiplication of B. For any b P B and c P C, ř pµC b IdA qppIdC b ρB qpc b bqq “ pµC b IdA qp c b bp0q b bp1q q ř “ cbp0q b bp1q “ ρB pcqρB pbq (since C “ BA ) “ ρB pµC pb b cqq (since B is an A-comodule algebra). Thus, µC is an AC -comodule map and β1 also being compositions of AC -comodule maps.  6.3. Exactness of the functor of the invariants for tame actions. In the case of a constant group scheme, by [CEPT96, Lemma 2.2], the tameness of an action is equivalent to the surjectivity of the trace map, which generalizes a characterization of tameness in number theory (see [Cas67, Chapter I, §5, Theorem 2]) and justifies the choice of the terminology. In the general case, we can define a projector which plays the role of the trace map in the case of an action by a constant group scheme (see [Doi90, section 1]). Lemma 6.5. [Doi90, §1] From a total integral map α : A Ñ B and M P B MA , we can define a R-linear projector called Reynold operator prM : M Ñ MA ř m ÞÑ prM pmq :“ prM,αpmq “ pmq αpSpmp1q qqmp0q . Proof. For any m P M and a P A, we have ρM pαpaqq “ pα b Aqδpaq “ pα b Aqp  ÿ  a1 b a2 q “  ÿ  Thus, ρM pm.αpaqq “  ÿ  mp0q αpa1 q b mp1q a2 p˝q. 20  αpa1 q b a2 .  We obtain: ř ρM p mp0q αpSpmp1q qq ř pm q αpSpmp1q q1 b pmp0q q1 Spmp1q q1 q pby p˝qq ř p0q p0q pm q αpSppmp1q q2 q b pmp0q q1 Sppmp1q q1 q (since S is an antimorphism) ř p0q p0q ř mp0q αpSpmp3q qq b mp1q Spmp2q q “ mp0q αpSpmp2q qq b pmp1q q1 Spmp1q q2 ř m Spmp2q q b ǫpmp1q q1 (by the definition of an antipodeq ř p0q ř mp0q Spmp1q ǫpmp1q qq b 1 “ mp0q Sppmp1q q1 ǫpmp1q q1 q b 1 ř mp0q Spmp1q q b 1(by the properties of the counity). prM pmq b 1  ρM pprM pmqq “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “  So, prM pmq P pMqA and prM 2 “ prM . Moreover, for any m P pMqA , ρM pmq “ m b 1, Hence, prM pmq “ mαpsp1qq “ mαp1q “ m since αp1q “ 1. This proves that prM is a Reynold operator.  The existence of this projector insures that the functor of invariants in exact, for tame actions. The following lemma will permit to relate the previous two notions of tameness. Lemma 6.6. [CEPT96, Lemma 2.3] If the action pX, Gq is tame then the functor of invariants p´qA : B MA Ñ C M is exact. Proof. Let 0 Ñ M1 Ñ M2 Ñ M3 Ñ 0 be an exact sequence of BMA . Using the notation of the previous lemma, we have the following commutative diagram: 0 prM1  |  pM1 qA “ prM1 pM1 q /  0  φ1 |pM  1q  A  A  M1 φ1    pM2 q “ prM2 pM2 q /  0  φ2 |pM  2q  A    0  /  prM2  |    /  |  /  M2 φ2  prM3  pM3 qA “ prM3 pM3 q  ρM1   /    M3  M1 b1  //  M1 b A  //  M2 b A  //  M3 b A  ρM2 M2 b1  ρM3 M3 b1        0 Left exactness is automatic, right exactness follows from the previous diagram.    Adding finite hypothesis, we are able to prove that the exactness of the functor of invariant is equivalent to tameness of the action. Proposition 6.7. Suppose that C is locally noetherian, that B is flat over C and that A is finite, locally free over R. Then, the following assertions are equivalent: (1) The action pX, Gq is tame. 21  (2) The functor p´qA : B MA Ñ C M, N ÞÑ pNqA is exact. (1’) The action pX, CGq is tame. (2’) The functor p´qC A : B MC A Ñ C M, N ÞÑ pNqCA is exact. Proof. p1q ô p11 q follows from lemma 6.4. p2q ô p21 q follows from B MA “ B MAC . p1q ñ p2q follows from lemma 6.5 p21 q ñ p11 q Suppose that p´qA is exact. Since C A is finite over C (base change of A which is finite over R) and B is finite over C, B bC C A is finite over C. Moreover, as C is locally noetherian, B and B bR A are also of finite presentation as algebras over C so, in particular, as C-modules. By lemma 6.1 since we suppose B flat over C, we have the following isomorphism pB bR B˚ qC A » ComC A pB, Bq and pB bR pB bR Aq˚ qC A » ComC A pB bC C A, Bq Since pB b ǫq is a C-linear section of ρB : B Ñ B bR A, pB bC C Aq˚ Ñ B˚ is surjective. Thus, from the exactness of p´qC A , we obtain the surjectivity of pB bR pB bR Aq˚ qC A Ñ pB bR B˚ qC A Finally, the isomorphisms above imply the surjectivity of the natural map ComC A pB bC C A, Bq Ñ ComC A pB, Bq This insures the existence of a C A-comodule map λB : B bC C A Ñ B such that λB ˝ ρB “ B. The previous lemma permits to conclude the proof.  6.4. Relationship between the two notions of tameness. First, we also can prove easily that the tame actions defines always tame quotient stacks. Theorem 6.8. Suppose that X is noetherian, finitely presented over S, that G is finitely presented over S and and that all the inertia groups are finite. If the action pX, Gq is tame then the quotient stack rX{Gs is tame. Proof. This follows directly from Lemma 6.6 and Corollary 5.5.  We manage to prove the equivalence of these two notions of tameness defined in this paper for actions involving finite group schemes such that the B is flat over C: Theorem 6.9. Suppose that G is finite and locally free over S. The action pX, Gq is tame if and only if the quotient stack rX{Gs is tame. If moreover, C is noetherian and B flat over C, the converse is true. Proof. By [Con05, §3], we know that ρ : rX{Gs Ñ Y is a coarse moduli space. Moreover, ρ˚ : QcohprX{Gsq Ñ QcohpYq is exact by Lemma 6.6, thus rX{Gs is tame. The converse follows from Proposition 6.7..  22  Remark 6.10. We can replace the hypothesis Y noetherian by X of finite type over S. In fact, by [Con05, Theorem 3.1, (2)], Y is of finite type over S so also noetherian since S is supposed noetherian. We obtain easily the following corollary. Corollary 6.11. Suppose that S is noetherian and G is finite and flat over S. Then, G is linearly reductive over S if and only if the trivial action pS, Gq is tame over S. Remark 6.12. We say that a Hopf algebra A is relatively cosemisimple if for all M P MA the submodules which are direct summands in MR are also direct summands in MA . The Hopf algebra A is relatively cosemisimple if and only if the trivial action pSpecpRq, Gq is tame (see [BW03, 16.10]). In particular, when G is finite, flat over S, this is also equivalent to G being linearly reductive. The following result can be seen as an analogue of the trace surjectivity that we have proved in the constant case. Corollary 6.13. Suppose that G is finite, locally free over S, C is locally noetherian and B flat over C. The following assertions are equivalent: (1) The action pX, Gq is tame. (2) The quotient stack rX{Gs is tame. (3) The functor p´qA : B MA Ñ C M, N ÞÑ pNqA is exact. (4) There is a Reynold operator prM : M Ñ MA for any M P B MA . Proof. p1q ô p2q ô p3q Follows from the previous theorem. p1q ñ p4q follows from Lemma 6.5. p4q ñ p2q As the functor p´qA is left exact, it is enough to prove exactness on the right. So, let ξ : M Ñ N P B BimA pM, Nq be an epimorphism. It induces a morphism ξA : MA Ñ N A . For n P N A , by the surjectivity of ξ, there is m P M such that ξpmq “ n. Moreover, prM pmq P MA , so ξpprM pmqq “ prN pξpmqq “ n. Therefore ξ is surjective.  References [Alp08]  Jarod Alper : Good moduli spaces for Artin stacks. ProQuest LLC, Ann Arbor, MI, 2008. Thesis (Ph.D.)–Stanford University.  [AOV08]  D. Abramovich, M. Olsson et A. Vistoli : Tame stacks in positive characteristic. Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble), 58(4):1057–1091, 2008.  [Art69]  M. Artin : Algebraic approximation of structures over complete local rings. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., (36):23–58, 1969.  [Bou81]  N. Bourbaki : Éléments de mathématique. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 305. Masson, Paris, 1981. Algèbre. Chapitres 4 à 7. [Algebra. Chapters 4–7].  [BW03]  T. Brzezinski et R. Wisbauer : Corings and comodules, volume 309 de London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003. 23  [Cas67]  Algebraic number theory. Proceedings of an instructional conference organized by the London Mathematical Society (a NATO Advanced Study Institute) with the support of the Inter national Mathematical Union. Edited by J. W. S. Cassels and A. Fröhlich. Academic Press, London, 1967.  [CE92]  T. Chinburg et B. Erez : Equivariant Euler-Poincaré characteristics and tameness. Astérisque, (209):13, 179–194, 1992. Journées Arithmétiques, 1991 (Geneva).  [CEPT96] T. Chinburg, B. Erez, G. Pappas et M. J. Taylor : Tame actions of group schemes: integrals and slices. Duke Math. J., 82(2):269–308, 1996. [Con05]  B. Conrad : The Keel-Mori theorem via stacks. Preprint from the University of Stanford available at http://math.stanford.edu/˜conrad/papers/coarsespace.pdf, 2005.  [DG70]  M. Demazure et P. Gabriel : Groupes algébriques. Tome I: Géométrie algébrique, généralités, groupes commutatifs. Masson & Cie, Éditeur, Paris, 1970. Avec un appendice Corps de classes local par Michiel Hazewinkel.  [Doi90]  Y. Doi : Hopf extensions of algebras and Maschke type theorems. Israel J. Math., 72(1-2):99– 108, 1990. Hopf algebras.  [GM71]  A. Grothendieck et J. P. Murre : The tame fundamental group of a formal neighbourhood of a divisor with normal crossings on a scheme. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 208. SpringerVerlag, Berlin, 1971.  [Har77]  R. Hartshorne : Algebraic geometry. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1977. Graduate Texts in Mathematics, No. 52.  [Kem00]  G. Kemper : A characterization of linearly reductive groups by their invariants. Transform. Groups, 5:85–92, 2000.  [LMB00]  G. Laumon et L. Moret-Bailly : Champs algébriques, volume 39 de Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete. 3. Folge. A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas. 3rd Series. A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2000.  [Lun73]  D. Luna : Slices étales. In Sur les groupes algébriques, pages 81–105. Bull. Soc. Math. France, Paris, Mémoire 33. Soc. Math. France, Paris, 1973.  [Mar]  Sophie Marques : Tameness for actions of affine group schemes and quotient stacks. Preprint available at https://files.nyu.edu/sm5439/public/memoire/these.pdf.  [Ols06]  M. C. Olsson : Deformation theory of representable morphisms of algebraic stacks. Math. Z., 253(1):25–62, 2006.  [Ols07]  M. C. Olsson : Sheaves on Artin stacks. J. Reine Angew. Math., 603:55–112, 2007.  [Ray70]  M. Raynaud : Anneaux locaux henséliens. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 169. SpringerVerlag, Berlin, 1970.  [Ser68]  J.-P. Serre : Corps locaux. Hermann, Paris, 1968. Deuxième édition, Publications de l’Université de Nancago, No. VIII.  (MARQUES Sophie) Visiting assistant professor at New York University, Courant institute of mathematical sciences, 251 Mercer St, New York, NY 10012, USA E-mail address: marques@cims.nyu.edu  24

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 0. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
