Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_6541

Abstract:
arXiv:0911.3753v1 [cs.NE] 19 Nov 2009  Evolutionary Estimation of a Coupled Markov Chain Credit Risk Model∗ Ronald Hochreiter†  David Wozabal‡  February 10, 2018  Abstract There exists a range of different models for estimating and simulating credit risk transitions to optimally manage credit risk portfolios and products. In this chapter we present a Coupled Markov Chain approach to model rating transitions and thereby default probabilities of companies. As the likelihood of the model turns out to be a non-convex function of the parameters to be estimated, we apply heuristics to find the ML estimators. To this extent, we outline the model and its likelihood function, and present both a Particle Swarm Optimization algorithm, as well as an Evolutionary Optimization algorithm to maximize the likelihood function. Numerical results are shown which suggest a further application of evolutionary optimization techniques for credit risk management.  1  Introduction  Credit risk is one of the most important risk categories managed by banks. Since the seminal work of [13] a lot of research efforts have been put into the development of both sophisticated and applicable models. Furthermore, de facto standards like CreditMetrics and CreditRisk+ exist. Numerous textbooks provide an overview of the set of available methods, see e.g. [4], [12], and [14]. Evolutionary techniques have not yet been applied extensively in the area of credit risk management - see e.g. [5] for credit portfolio dependence structure derivations or [15] for optimization of transition probability matrices. In this chapter, we apply the Coupled Markov Chain approach introduced by [9] and provide extensions to the methods presented in [8]. Section 2 briefly describes the Coupled Markov Chain model and its properties, and outlines the data we used for subsequent sampling. The likelihood function, which is to be maximized is ∗ This research was partly supported by the Austrian National Bank Jubiläumsfond Project 12306. † Department of Statistics and Mathematics, WU Vienna University of Economics and Business, Augasse 2-6, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. ronald.hochreiter@wu.ac.at ‡ Department of Business Administration, University of Vienna, Brünner Straße 72, A-1210 Vienna, Austria. david.wozabal@univie.ac.at  1  discussed in Section 3. A non-trivial method to sample from the space of feasible points for the parameters is outlined in Section 4. Two different evolutionary approaches to optimize the maximum likelihood function are presented: in Section 5 a Particle Swarm Algorithm is shown, and Section 6 introduces an Evolutionary Optimization approach. Section 7 provides numerical results for both algorithmic approaches, while Section 8 concludes the chapter.  2  Coupled Markov Chain Model  2.1  Model Description  In the Coupled Markov Chain model proposed in [9] company defaults are modeled directly as Bernoulli events. This is in contrast to standard models used in the literature where indirect reasoning via asset prices is used to model default events of companies. The advantage of the proposed approach is that there are no heavy model assumptions necessary (normality of asset returns, no transaction costs, complete markets, continuous trading . . . ). Portfolio effects in structured credit products are captured via correlations in default events. Companies are characterized by their current rating class and a second characteristic which can be freely chosen (industry sector, geographic area, . . . ). This classification scheme is subsequently used to model joint rating transitions of companies. We keep the basic idea of the standard Gaussian Copula model X = ρτ + (1 − ρ)φ, where τ is the idiosyncratic part and φ is the systematic part determining the rating transition, while 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1 is a relative weighting factor. More specifically the Coupled Markov Chain model can be described as follows: A company n belongs to a sector s(n) and is assigned to a rating class Xnt at time t with Xnt ∈ {0, . . . , M + 1} and t : 1 ≤ t ≤ T , with the credit quality decreasing with rating classes, i.e. (M + 1) being the default class, while 1 is the rating class corresponding to the best credit quality. The ratings of company n are modeled as Markov Chains Xnt . The rating process of company n is determined by • an idiosyncratic Markov Chain ξnt . • a component ηnt which links n to other companies of the same rating class. • Bernoulli switching variables δnt which decide which of the two factors determines the rating, with P(δnt+1 = 1) = qs(n),Xnt , i.e. the probability of success depends on sector and rating. All the ξnt and δnt are independent of everything else, while the ηnt have a non-trivial joint distribution modeled by common Bernoulli tendency variables χi , i : 1 ≤ i ≤ M , such that P(ηnt ≤ Xnt ) = P(χXnt−1 = 1) and P(ηnt > Xnt ) = P(χXnt−1 = 0),  2       P =     0.9191 0.0335 0.0080 0.0039 0.0023 0  0.0753 0.8958 0.0674 0.0092 0.0034 0  0.0044 0.0657 0.8554 0.0794 0.0045 0  0.0009 0.0036 0.0665 0.8678 0.1759 0  0.0001 0.0006 0.0011 0.0244 0.6009 0  0.0001 0.0009 0.0016 0.0153 0.2131 1           Table 1: Estimated rating transition probabilities i.e. the variables χi are indicators for a (common) non-deteriorating move of all the companies in rating class i. The rating changes of companies in different rating classes are made dependent by the non-trivial probability mass function Pχ : {0, 1}M → R of the vector χ = (χ1 , . . . , χM ). The Coupled Markov Chain model is of the form: Xnt = δnt ξnt + (1 − δnt )ηnt . and exhibits properties, which are interesting for practical application. It takes a transition matrix P = (pi,j ) as input which governs the probability of transitions for ξnt and ηit , i.e. P(ξnt = j) = pm(n),j and P(ηit = j) = pi,j . The model is capable of capturing different default correlations for different sectors and rating classes, and is able to give a more accurate picture of closeness to default than the standard model by including more than two states. The overall transition probabilities of Xn again follow P , i.e. P(Xn = j) = pm(n),j .  2.2  Data  Rating data from Standard & Poors has been used, whereby 10166 companies from all over the world have been considered. The data consists of yearly rating changes of these companies over a time horizon of 23 years up to the end of 2007. In total a number of 87.296 data points was used. The second characteristic is the SIC industry classification code. Sectoral information has been condensed to six categories: Mining and Construction (1), Manufacturing (2), Transportation, Technology and Utility (3), Trade (4), Finance (5), Services (6). Likewise, rating classes are merged in the following way: AAA, AA → 1, A → 2, BBB → 3, BB, B → 4, CCC, CC, C → 5, D → 6. These clusters allow for a more tractable model by preserving a high degree of detail. The estimated rating transition probabilities from the data are shown in Tab. 1.  3  3  Maximum Likelihood Function  The approach proposed by [9] takes a Markov transition matrix P = (pm1 ,m2 )1≤m1 ,m2 ≤(M +1) as an input, i.e. M +1 X  pi,m =  M +1 X  pm,i = 1,  ∀m : 1 ≤ m ≤ (M + 1).  i=1  i=1  For (M + 1) rating classes, N companies and S industry sectors the parameters of the model are a matrix Q = (qm,s )1≤s≤S, 1≤m≤M and a probability measure Pχ on {0, 1}M satisfying some constraints dependent on P (see problem (1)). Given rating transition data X ranging over T time periods we maximize the following monotone transformation of the likelihood function of the model 1 0 T Y X X f (xt−1 , s, m1 , m2 , ; Q, Pχ )A Pχ (χt = χ̄) log @ L(X; Q, Pχ ) = t=2  s,m1 ,m2  χ̄∈{0,1}M  with  8„ «I t > qm1 ,s (p+ m1 −1)+1 > > , > > p+ m1 < t « „ I f (xt−1 , s, m1 , m2 , ; Q, Pχ ) = qm1 ,s (p− m1 −1)+1 > , > − > pm 1 > > : It qm1 ,s ,  m1 ≥ m2 , χ̄m1 = 1 m1 < m2 , χ̄m1 = 0 otherwise.  where I t ≡ I t (m1 , m2 , s) a function dependent on the data X which Pis m − + takes values in N, p+ m = i=1 pm,i and pm = 1 − pm . The above function is clearly non-convex and since it consists of a mix of sums and products this problem can also not be overcome by a logarithmic transform. Maximizing the above likelihood for given data X in the parameters Pχ and Q amounts to solving the following constrained optimization problem maxQ,Pχ s.t.  4  L(X; Q, Pχ ) qP m,s P (χ̄) Pχ̄:χ̄i =1 χ χ̄:χ̄1 =0 Pχ (χ̄)  ∈ [0, 1] = p+ mi , = 1 − p+ i .  ∀i : 1 ≤ i ≤ M  (1)  Sampling Feasible Points  To sample from the space of feasible joint distributions for χ (i.e. the distributions whose marginals meet the requirements in (1)), first note that the distributions Pχ of the random variable χ are distributions on M the space {0, 1}M and therefore can be modeled as vectors in R2 . To obtain samples we proceed as follows.  4  1. To get a central point in the feasible region, we solve the following M problem in dependence of a linear functional Ψ : R2 → R. maxPχ s.t.  Ψ(Pχ ) qm,s P  Pχ (χ̄) χ̄:χ̄1 =0 Pχ (χ̄)  Pχ̄:χ̄i =1  ∈ [0, 1] = p+ mi , = 1 − p+ i .  ∀i : 1 ≤ i ≤ M  (2)  and call the solution set S(Ψ). By generating linear Ψ functionals with random coefficients and picking x+ ∈ S(Ψ) and x− ∈ S(−Ψ) we get vertices of the feasible set of distributions for χ modeled as M a polyhedron in R2 . In this way we generate a set of vertices V for the feasible region Ω of the above problem. Note that to enforce all the constraints in (2) we need M + 1 linear equality constraints M which describe a 2M − (M + 1) dimensional affine subspace in R2 . 2. Get a central point in c ∈ Ω by defining c=  1 X v. |V | v∈V  3. Sample K ∈ N directions of unit length from a spherical distribution (like the multivariate standard normal with independent comM ponents) in R2 −M −1 to get uniformly distributed directions. Map M these directions to R2 using an orthogonal basis of the affine subM space A of R2 described by the last set of constraints in (2) to obtain a set of directions D in A. 4. For every d ∈ D determine where the line c + λd meets the boundary of the feasible set of (2). Call the length of the found line segment ld . 5. Fix a number L ∈ N and sample & ld P  d∈D l̄d  ’  L  points on the line ld . In this way we get approximately KL samples for Pχ .  Contrary to obtaining samples from Pχ , getting suitable samples for Q is fairly easy, since all the components are in [0, 1] and independent of each other. Note that both the set of feasible matrices Q as well as the set of feasible measures Pχ are convex sets in the respective spaces.  5  Particle Swarm Algorithm  In the following we give a brief description of the Particle Swarm Algorithm (PSA), which follows the ideas in [10]. 1. Choose δ > 0 and S ∈ N.  5  2. Generate S permissible random samples xk = (Qk , Pχk ) for k = k 1, . . . , S as described above, i.e. qs,m ∈ [0, 1] and Pχ is consistent with the constraints in (2). Each sample is a particle in the algorithm. Set x̂k = xk and vk = 0 for all k = 1, . . . , S. 3. Set ĝ ← arg mink L(xk ). 4. For all particles xk (a) Let the particles fly by first computing a velocity for the k-th particle vk ← c0 vk + c1 r1 ◦ (x̂k − xk ) + c2 r2 ◦ (ĝ − xk )  (3)  where c0 , c1 , c2 are fixed constants, r1 and r2 are random matrices (component-wise uniform) of the appropriate dimension and ◦ is the Hadamard matrix multiplication. Then a new position for the particle is found by the following assignment xk ← xk + vk . (b) If L(xk ) > L(x̂k ) then x̂k ← xk . 5. L(xk ) > L(ĝ) for some xk , then ĝ ← xk . 6. If var(L(xk )) < δ terminate the algorithm, otherwise go to step 3. The main idea is that each particle k knows its best position x̂k as of yet (in terms of the likelihood function) and every particle knows the best position ever seen by any particle ĝ. The velocity of the particle changes in such a way that it is drawn to these positions (to a random degree). Eventually all the particles will end up close to one another and near to a (local) optimum. Note that in step 4(a) of the above algorithm, a particle may leave the feasible region either by violating the constraints on Pχ or Q. In this case the particle bounces of the border and completes it’s move in the modified direction. To be more precise: the particles can only leave the feasible region, by violating the constraints that either elements of Q or probabilities assigned by Pχ are no longer in [0, 1] (the last two constraints in (2) can not be violated since the particles only move in the M affine subspace of R2 where these constraints are fulfilled). M If xik + vki > 1 for some 1 ≤ i ≤ 22 + M S (the case where xik + vki < 0 works analogously), determine the maximum distance λ that the particle can fly without constraint violation, i.e. set λ=  (1 − xik ) vki  and set xk ← xk + λv k . Now set v̄k such that the new velocity makes the particle bounce off the constraint as would be expected and make the rest of the move, i.e. set xk ← xk + (1 − λ)v̄ k . In the case that the violation concerns an element of Q the modification only concerns a change of sign, i.e. v̄ki ← −vki and v̄kj ← vkj for all j 6= i.  6  In the following we describe how to find a bounce off direction, if a constraint on an element of Pχ is violated: first determine n the hyperplane H in o M  M  R2 that represents the constraint. Notice that H = x ∈ R2 : xi = 1 for some i. We use the following Lemma to get a representation of the hyperplane H in the affine subspace A. Lemma Let A be an affine subspace of RD with orthonormal basis e1 , . . . , ed with D < d and H a hyperplane with normal vector n. The normal vector of the hyperplane A ∩ H in A is n̄ =  d X  hei , niei .  i=1  ˘ ¯ Proof Let H = x ∈ RD : hx, ni = c for some c ∈ R, then + * d d X X hy, ei ihei , ni hy, ei iei , n = c = hy, ni = i=1  i=1  =  *  d X y, hei , niei i=1  +  = hy, n̄i.  This implies that the point y ∈ A ∩ H, iff hy, n̄i = c. Using the above Lemma we identify the normal vector n̄ ∈ A of the hyperplane H̄ = H ∩ A in A. Without loss of generality we assume that ||n̄|| = 1. Now use Gram-Schmidt to identify a orthonormal system n̄, y2 , . . . , y22M −(M +1) in A and represent vk as vk = hn̄, vk in̄ +  X  hyi , vk iyi .  i≥2  The transformed velocity can now be found as X hyi , vk iyi . v̄k = −hn̄, vk in̄ + i≥2  Obviously an implementation of the algorithm has to be able to handle multiple such bounces in one move (i.e. situation where the new direction v̄k again leads to a constraint violation). Since the details are straightforward and to avoid too complicated notation, we omit them here for the sake of brevity.  6  Evolutionary Algorithm  Evolutionary algorithms are well suited to handle many financial and econometric applications, see especially [2], [3], and [1] for a plethora of examples. Each chromosome consists of a matrix Q and a vector Pχ . While the parameters in Q can be varied freely between 0 and 1, and the parameters Pχ do need to fulfill constraints (see above), the genetic operators involving randomness are mainly focused around the matrix Q. Therefore, four different genetic operators are used:  7  • Elitist selection. A number e of the best chromosomes are added to the new population. • Intermediate crossover. c intermediate crossovers (linear interpolation) between the matrix Q1 and Q2 of two randomly selected parents are created using a random parameter λ between 0 and 1, i.e. two children Q3 , Pχ,3 and Q4 , Pχ,4 are calculated as follows: Q3 = λQ1 + (1 − λ)Q2 , Pχ,3 = Pχ,1 , Q4 = (1 − λ)Q1 + λQ2 , Pχ,4 = Pχ,2 . • Mutation. m new chromosomes are added by mutating a randomly selected chromosome from the parent population, and adding a factor φ in the range [−0.5, 0.5] to the matrix Q. The values are truncated to values between 0 and 1 after the mutation. • Random additions. r random chromosomes are added with a random matrix Q and a randomly selected vector Pχ from the parent population.  7  Numerical Results  Both algorithms were developed in MatLab R2007a, while the linear problems (2) were solved using MOSEK 5. A stability test has been conducted to validate the results of both optimization algorithms: the maximum (pointwise) differences of parameter estimates Pχ and Q between the different optimization runs is used to verify that these important parameters, which are e.g. used for a credit portfolio optimization procedure, do not differ significantly.  7.1  Particle Swarm Algorithm  The parameters in (3) were set to c0 = 0.5, c1 = 1.5 and c2 = 1.5. The algorithm was made to complete 150 iterations with around 200 initial samples (where the χ are simulated on 40 lines with approximately 5 samples each). To test the stability of the algorithm 50 runs of the algorithm were performed. As can be clearly observed in Fig. 1 the likelihood of the best particle as well as the mean likelihood of the swarm converges nicely and stabilizes around iteration 25. Each run took around 1 hour to complete 150 iterations. Stability results are shown in Fig. 3. The variances of the populations in every iterations are plotted in Figure 5. Since the variances sharply increase from very high initial values and in most cases drop to rather low values quickly the plot depicts the variance after applying a logarithmic transformation (base 10) as well as the mean variance over all the runs. While in most runs the variances decreases from values of the magnitude 105 to the range of 103 , some of the runs end up with significantly lower and higher variances. The latter being a sign that the PSA sometimes fails to converge, i.e. the particles do not concentrate at one point after the performed number of iterations. However, this is not problematic since we are only interested  8  Figure 1: Objective function of the PSA algorithm: maximum per iteration.  Figure 2: Objective function of the PSA algorithm: population mean.  9  Figure 3: Maximum (pointwise) differences of parameter estimates Pχ for different runs for the PSA.  Figure 4: Maximum (pointwise) differences of parameter estimates Q for different runs for the PSA.  10  Figure 5: Variances of the objective values of the swarm (variances are transformed with x 7→ log10 (x) for better interpretability of the results. The mean (logarithmic) variance is depicted by the bold line.  in the likelihood of the best particle which seems to be pretty stable at around 400. The results depicted in Figure 3 confirm, that despite the high variance in some of the runs the likelihood of the best particle remains stable for all the runs.  7.2  Evolutionary Algorithm  The following parameters have been used to calculate results: The number of maximum iterations has been set to 150. Each new population consists of e = 30 elitist chromosomes, c = 50 intermediate crossovers, m = 100 mutations, and r = 50 random additions. 50 runs have been calculated, and 10 tries out of these are shown in Fig. 6 - both the maximum objective value per iteration (left) as well as the population mean (right). Due to the high number of random additions, mutations and crossovers, the mean is relatively low and does not significantly change over the iterations, which does not influence the results. The initial population size were 750 randomly sampled chromosomes, independently sampled for each try. It can be clearly seen, that due to the different algorithmic approach, the convergence is different from the PSA. Each run took approximately 70 minutes to complete the 150 iterations. Stability results are shown in Fig. 7.2. The population variance is shown in Fig. 10, and clearly exhibits a different behavior than the PSA algorithm as expected.  11  Figure 6: Objective function of the EA: maximum per iteration.  Figure 7: Objective function of the EA: population mean.  12  Figure 8: Maximum (pointwise) differences of parameter estimates Pχ for different runs for the EA.  Figure 9: Maximum (pointwise) differences of parameter estimates Q for different runs for the EA.  13  Figure 10: Population variance of the EA.  7.3  Comparison of Methods  Comparing the results of the current implementations of the two optimization heuristics the results found by the PSA consistently yield a higher objective value than the solutions obtained with the EA (for the best particle/chromosome as well as for the mean). The computing time for the two methods is similar and is mainly used for the expensive objective function evaluations. Furthermore the presented computational evidence shows the typical behavior of the variance given the two heuristic optimization techniques. While the PSA generally performs slightly better than the EA, it might well be that it gets stuck in a local optimum, which might be avoided using the EA. One can see from the figures that the maximum difference between the estimated parameters for different runs are smaller on average for the PSA. However, the analysis of the distribution of these differences reveals the interesting fact, that while for the EA the differences are more uniform in magnitude and the highest as well as the lowest deviations can be observed for the PSA. With the realistically sized data set both methodologies are well suited and the final choice is up to the bank or company which implements and extends the presented method, i.e. has to be based on the expertise available.  7.4  Application of the Model  Once the Coupled Markov Chain model has been estimated using evolutionary techniques shown above, it can be used to simulate rating transition scenarios for different sets of companies, which allows for pricing and optimization of various structured credit contracts like specific CDX tranches, e.g. a Mean-Risk optimization approach in the sense of [11] can be conducted for which evolutionary techniques can be used again as  14  shown by e.g. [6] and [7], such that a whole credit risk management framework based on evolutionary techniques can be successfully implemented.  8  Conclusion  In this Chapter, we presented the likelihood function for a Coupled Markov Chain model for contemporary credit portfolio risk management. We presented two different heuristic approaches for estimating the parameter of the likelihood function. Both are structurally different, i.e. the population mean of each method differs significantly. However, both are valid approaches to estimate parameters. Once the parameters are estimated, many applications are possible. One prominent example is to generate scenarios for future payment streams implied by an existing portfolio of Credit Default Swap Indices (CDX) by Monte Carlo simulation. This allows for assessing the risk of the current position and price products which might be added to the portfolio in the future and thereby determine their impact on the overall exposure.  References [1] Anthony Brabazon and Michael O’Neill. Biologically inspired algorithms for financial modelling. Natural Computing Series. SpringerVerlag, Berlin, 2006. [2] Anthony Brabazon and Michael O’Neill, editors. Natural Computing in Computational Finance, volume 100 of Studies in Computational Intelligence. Springer, 2008. [3] Anthony Brabazon and Michael O’Neill, editors. Natural Computing in Computational Finance, Volume 2, volume 185 of Studies in Computational Intelligence. Springer, 2009. [4] Darrell Duffie and Kenneth J. Singleton. Credit Risk: Pricing, Measurement, and Management. Princeton University Press, 2003. [5] S. Hager and R. Schöbel. Deriving the dependence structure of portfolio credit derivatives using evolutionary algorithms. In International Conference on Computational Science (4), volume 3994 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 340–347. Springer, 2006. [6] R. Hochreiter. An evolutionary computation approach to scenariobased risk-return portfolio optimization for general risk measures. In EvoWorkshops 2007, volume 4448 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 199–207. Springer, 2007. [7] R. Hochreiter. Evolutionary stochastic portfolio optimization. In Anthony Brabazon and Michael O’Neill, editors, Natural Computing in Computational Finance, volume 100 of Studies in Computational Intelligence, pages 67–87. Springer, 2008. [8] R. Hochreiter and D. Wozabal. Evolutionary approaches for estimating a coupled markov chain model for credit portfolio risk management. In EvoWorkshops 2009, volume 5484 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 193–202. Springer, 2009.  15  [9] Y. M. Kaniovski and G. Ch. Pflug. Risk assessment for credit portfolios: A coupled markov chain model. Journal of Banking and Finance, 31(8):2303–2323, 2007. [10] J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart. Particle swarm optimization. In IEEE International Conference on Neural Networks, volume 4, pages 1942– 1948. IEEE Computer Society, 1995. [11] H. M. Markowitz. Mean-variance analysis in portfolio choice and capital markets. Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1987. [12] A. J. McNeil, R. Frey, and P. Embrechts. Quantitative risk management. Princeton University Press, 2005. [13] Robert Merton. On the pricing of corporate debt: the risk structure of interest rates. Journal of Finance, 29:449–470, 1974. [14] Philipp J. Schönbucher. Credit Derivatives Pricing Models: Models, Pricing, Implementation. Wiley Finance, 2003. [15] J. Zhang, V. Avasarala, and R. Subbu. Evolutionary optimization of transition probability matrices for credit decision-making. European Journal of Operational Research, 200(2):557–567, 2010.  16

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
