Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_6085

Abstract:
Identifiability of Nonparametric Mixture Models and Bayes Optimal Clustering Bryon Aragam  Chen Dan  Pradeep Ravikumar  Eric Xing  arXiv:1802.04397v1 [math.ST] 12 Feb 2018  February 14, 2018 Abstract Motivated by problems in data clustering, we establish general conditions under which families of nonparametric mixture models are identifiable by introducing a novel framework for clustering overfitted parametric (i.e. misspecified) mixture models. These conditions generalize existing conditions in the literature, and are flexible enough to include for example mixtures of Gaussian mixtures. In contrast to the recent literature on estimating nonparametric mixtures, we allow for general nonparametric mixture components, and instead impose regularity assumptions on the underlying mixing measure. As our primary application, we apply these results to partition-based clustering, generalizing the well-known notion of a Bayes optimal partition from classical model-based clustering to nonparametric settings. Furthermore, this framework is constructive in that it yields a practical algorithm for learning identified mixtures, which is illustrated through several examples. The key conceptual device in the analysis is the convex, metric geometry of probability distributions on metric spaces and its connection to optimal transport and the Wasserstein convergence of mixing measures. The result is a flexible framework for nonparametric clustering with formal consistency guarantees.  1  Introduction  In data clustering, a central problem is to define a proper notion of a “cluster” or equivalently, a partition of the input space [29]. Given such a target partition, it becomes possible to evaluate clustering algorithms in a consistent manner. Modern approaches include mode clustering [20], density clustering [43, 46–48], stochastic blockmodels [2, 24, 32, 45], and hierarchical clustering [19, 30, 54]. The most classical approach to this problem, however, is arguably Gaussian model-based clustering, in which points are partitioned according to a generative Gaussian mixture model [8, 22]. When this model is appropriate, it provides a simple, well-defined partition by which clustering algorithms can be evaluated and compared. This model has been extended to various parametric and semiparametric models [12, 25, 57], however, the extension of this methodology to general nonparametric settings has remained elusive. This is largely due to the extreme nonidentifiability of nonparametric mixture models, a problem which is well-studied but for which existing results require strong structural assumptions [15, 34, 35, 53]. Thus, it is a significant open problem to generalize these assumptions to a more flexible class of nonparametric mixture models. Let us set the stage for this problem in some generality. Suppose Γ is a probability measure over some metric space X, and that Γ can be written as a finite mixture model Γ=  K X  λk γk ,  λk > 0 and  k=1  K X  λk = 1,  (1)  k=1  where γk are also probability measures over X. The γk represent distinct subpopulations belonging to the overall heterogeneous population Γ. Given observations from Γ, we are interested in classifying each observation into one of these K subpopulations without labels. When the mixture components γk and their weights λk are identified, we can expect to learn the model (1) from this unlabeled data, and then use Bayes’ rule to classify each observation (e.g. the Bayes optimal classifier). This defines a target partition of X that we call the Bayes optimal partition (see Section 7 for formal details).  1  Thus, in studying these partitions, a key question is when is the mixture model (1) identifiable? Motivated by the aforementioned applications to clustering, this question is the focus of this paper. For example, under parametric assumptions such as Gaussianity of the γk , it is possible to guarantee that the representation (1) is unique, and hence identifiable [9, 33, 52]. These results mostly follow from an early line of work on the general identification problem [1, 51, 52, 58]. Such parametric assumptions rarely hold in practice, however, and thus it is of interest to study nonparametric mixture models of the form (1), i.e. for which each γk comes from a flexible, nonparametric family of probability measures. A common assumption is that the component measures γk are multivariate with independent marginals [23, 27, 28, 36, 53], and is particularly useful for statistical problems involving repeated measurements [13, 31]. This model also has deep connections to the algebraic properties of latent structure models [3, 14]. Various other structural assumptions have been considered, including symmetry [15, 34], tail conditions [35], and translation invariance [26]. The identification problem in discrete mixture models is also a central problem in topic models which are popular in machine learning [6, 7, 50]. Most notably, this existing literature imposes structural assumptions on the components γk (e.g. independence, symmetry), which are difficult to satisfy in clustering problems. Are there are reasonable constraints that ensure the uniqueness of (1), while avoiding restrictive modeling assumptions on the γk ? In this paper, we establish a series of positive results in this direction while providing a practical algorithm for nonparametric clustering. In contrast to the existing literature, we allow γk to be an arbitrary probability measure over X by instead imposing assumptions on the mixing measure Λ. We propose a novel framework for reconstructing nonparametric mixing measures by leveraging overfitted parametric mixtures as mixture density estimators, and then using clustering algorithms to partition the resulting estimators. This construction implies a set of regularity conditions on Λ that suffice to ensure that a mixture model is identifiable. As our main application of interest, we apply this construction to problems in nonparametric clustering. We note also that our work falls under the category of node-model based clusterings, where it is assumed that the data points are drawn i.i.d. from some distribution. This is in contrast to considerable recent work on edge-model based clusterings based on the stochastic block model [2, 4, 5, 11, 24, 32, 45, 59], which have arguably received much greater attention than node-model based clusterings. In the remainder of this section, we outline our major contributions. Then in Section 2 we cover some preliminary material and background in order to lay the groundwork for our abstract framework. We then present a high-level geometric overview of our method in Section 3 before proceeding to the main results of the paper in Sections 4-7. In Section 4, we present a detailed construction that takes a mixture distribution Γ and outputs its mixing measure Λ, culminating in our main theorem on identifiability. In Section 5 we discuss how to leverage this construction to define a consistent estimator of the parameter Λ, and then in Section 6 we provide explicit examples of mixture models that satisfy our assumptions. In Section 7 we apply these results to the problem of clustering and prove a consistency theorem for this problem. Section 8 contains an empirical evaluation of the method, and Section 9 concludes the paper with some discussion and extensions. Contributions. At a high-level, our contributions are the following: • A new identification criterion for nonparametric mixture models based on the notion of clusterability; • Extending partition-based clustering to nonparametric settings; • A practical algorithm for nonparametric clustering and density estimation. As each of these contributions builds on the previous one, this creates a compelling narrative that strengthens the well-known connections between identifiability in mixture models, cluster analysis, and nonparametric density estimation. Our main results can be divided into three main theorems: 1. Nonparametric identifiability (Section 4). We formulate a general set of assumptions that guarantee a family of nonparametric mixtures will be identifiable (Theorem 4.1). Informally, we show that as long as there exists an overfitted mixture model that simultaneously approximates Γ globally and each γk “locally” (Definition 4.1), then a simple clustering procedure will correctly identify the mixing measure that generates Γ as long as the γk are sufficiently well-separated in Hellinger distance.  2  2. Estimation (Section 5). We show that this same procedure will consistently recover the nonparametric clusters given i.i.d. observations from Γ (Theorem 5.4). We also discuss conditions for both Hellinger and uniform convergence of the mixture densities. 3. Clustering (Section 7). We make connections with the so-called Bayes optimal partition (Definition 7.1), and extend this notion to general nonparametric settings by leveraging our results on nonparametric mixtures (Theorem 7.2). The reader interested in an explicit example of a nonparametric mixture model that satisfies our assumptions is directed to Section 6, and in particular Theorem 6.2.  2  Preliminaries  Our approach is general, built on the theory of abstract measures on metric spaces [42]. In this section we introduce this abstract setting, outline our notation, and discuss the general problem of identifiability in mixture models. We deliberately include plenty of examples in order to help acquaint the reader with our particular notation and problem setting. For a more thorough introduction to the general topic of mixture models in statistics, see Lindsay [37], Ritter [44], Titterington et al. [55].  2.1  Nonparametric mixture models  Let (X, d) be a metric space and P(X) denote the space of regular Borel probability measures on X with finite rth moments (r ≥ 1). Denote P 2 (X) = P(P(X)), the space of (possibly infinite) mixing measures over P(X). Given Λ ∈ P 2 (X), define a new probability measure m( · ; Λ) ∈ P(X) by ż m(A; Λ) = γ(A) dΛ(γ). (2) Formally, for ş any Borel set ş A ⊂ X we have a function hA : P(X) → R defined by hA (γ) = γ(A), and m(A; Λ) = γ(A) dΛ(γ) = hA dΛ. This uniquely defines a measure called a mixture distribution over X. In a slight abuse of notation, we will write m(Λ) as shorthand for m( · ; Λ) when there is no confusion between the arguments. Given a Borel set L ⊂ P 2 (X), define M(L) := {m(Λ) : Λ ∈ L}  (3)  and let M(X) = M(P 2 (X)). M(L) represents a family of mixture distributions over X, which can be regarded as a formal representation of a statistical mixture model. Remark 2.1. This abstract presentation of mixture models is needed for two reasons: (i) To emphasize that Λ is the statistical parameter of interest, in contrast to the usual parametrization in terms of atoms and weights; and (ii) To emphasize that our approach works for general measures on metric spaces. This will have benefits in the sequel, albeit at the cost of some extra abstraction here at the onset. We will be particularly interested in finite mixture models, i.e. mixtures with a finite number of atoms. To this end, define Pk2 (X) := {Λ ∈ P 2 (X) : | supp(Λ)| ≤ k},  P02 (X) :=  ∞ [  Pk2 (X),  k=0  P02 (X) is then the space of finite mixing measures, and Mk (X) = M(Pk2 (X)) denote the spaces of finite mixtures over X. For any L ⊂ P 2 (X) and k ≥ 0, define Lk = L ∩ Pk2 (X). Note that for any Γ ∈ MK (X), using (2) we may derive the more familiar expression of a finite mixture model, Γ = m(Λ) =  K X  λ k γk ,  k=1  3  2 Λ ∈ PK (X),  as in (1), where γ1 , . . . , γK is a particular enumeration of supp(Λ) and λ1 , . . . , λK are the corresponding weights. Finally, we consider P(X) and P 2 (X) as metric spaces by endowing P(X) with the Hellinger metric ρ 2 2 and P 2 (X) with the Lr -Wasserstein metric %. When Λ ∈ PK (X) and Λ0 ∈ PK 0 (X), the Lr -Wasserstein 0 distance between Λ and Λ is given by the optimal value of the transport problem ( X %(Λ, Λ0 ) = inf σij ρr (γi , γj0 ) : i,j  ) 0 ≤ σij ≤ 1,  X  σij = 1,  i,j  X  σij = λ0j ,  i  X  (4)  σij = λi .  j  where the infimum is taken over all couplings σ, i.e. probability measures on P(X) × P(X) with marginals Λ1 and Λ2 . For more on Wasserstein distances and their importance in mixture models, see Nguyen [39]. Remark 2.2. The Hellinger distance ρ can be replaced by any metric on P(X). Our particular use of the Hellinger distance here is purely for conceptual clarity. Remark 2.3. As a convention, we will use upper case letters for mixture distributions (e.g. Γ, Q) and mixing measures (e.g. Λ, Ω), and lower case letters for mixture components (e.g. γk , qk ) and weights (e.g. λk , ωk ). Example 1 (Gaussian mixtures). Consider the family of Gaussian mixtures M(G). In this case, G ⊂ P 2 (Rp ) corresponds to the subset of mixing measures whose support is contained in the family of p-dimensional Gaussian measures. Example 2 (Subgaussian mixtures). Let K be the collection subgaussian measures on R, i.e. 2  K = {Γ ∈ P(R) : Γ({x : |x| > t}) ≤ e1−t  /c2  for some c > 0 and all t > 0},  and K ⊂ P 2 (R) be the subset of mixing measures whose support is a subset of K. Then M(K) is the set of subgaussian mixture models, and illustrates an example of a nonparametric mixture model. Extensions to subgaussian measures on Rp are natural. Obviously, these examples can be extended to arbitrary parametric and nonparametric families. Our definition of mixtures over subsets of mixing measures—as opposed to over families of component distributions— makes it easy to encode additional constraints, as in the following example. Example 3 (Constrained mixtures). Continuing Example 1, suppose we wish to impose additional constraints on the family of mixture distributions. For example, we might be interested in Gaussian mixtures with at most L components, whose means are contained within some compact set M ⊂ Rp , and whose covariance matrices are contained within another compact set V ⊂ PD(p), where PD(p) is the set of p × p positive-definite matrices. Define GM,V := {g ∼ N (a, v) : a ∈ M, v ∈ V }, and GL,M,V := {Λ ∈ P 2 (X) : | supp(Λ)| ≤ L, supp(Λ) ⊂ GM,V }.  (5)  Then M(GL,M,V ) is the desired family of mixture models. ş Example 4 (Mixture of regressions). Suppose P(Y | Z) = γ(Z) dΛ(γ) is a mixture model depending on some covariates Z. We assume here that (Z, Y ) ∈ W × X where (W, dW ) and (X, dX ) are metric spaces. This is a nonparametric extension of the usual mixed regression model. To recover the mixed regression model, assume Λ has at most K atoms and γk (Z) ∼ N (hθk , Zi, ωk2 ), so that ż P(Y | Z) =  γ(Z) dΛ(γ) =  K X  λk N (hθk , Zi, ωk2 ).  k=1  By further allowing the mixing measure Λ = Λ(Z) to depend on the covariates, we obtain a nonparametric generalization of a mixture of experts model. 4  a1  a2  a3  a1  a2  a3  a1  a2  a3  a1  a2  a3  Figure 1: (top) Mixture of three Gaussians. (bottom) Different representations of a mixture of Gaussians as a mixture of two subgaussians. Different colours represent different assignments of mixture components.  2.2  Identifiability in mixture models  Recall that a mixture model M(L) is identifiable if the map m : L → M(L) that sends Λ 7→ m(Λ) via (2) is injective. For a good overview of this problem from a more classical perspective, see Hunter et al. [34] and Allman et al. [3]. The main purpose of this section is to highlight some of the known subtleties in identifying nonparametric mixture models. Unsurprisingly, whether or not a specific mixture m(Λ) is identified depends on the choice of L. If we allow L to be all of P 2 (X), then it is easy to see that M(L) is not identifiable, and this continues to be true even if the number of components K is known in advance. Indeed, for any partition {Ak }K k=1 of X and any Borel set B ⊂ X, we can write K X  K Γ(B ∩ Ak ) X e Γ(Ak ) · λk γ ek (B), Γ(B) = = Γ(Ak ) k=1 | {z } | {z } k=1  (6)  γ ek  ek λ  and thus there cannot be a unique decomposition of the measure Γ into the sum (1). Although this example allows for arbitrary, pathological decompositions of Γ into conditional measures, the following concrete example shows that solving the nonidentifiability issue is more complicated than simply avoiding certain pathological partitions of the input space. Example 5. Consider the mixture of three Gaussians m(Λ) = λ1 N (a1 , 1) + λ2 N (a2 , 1) + λ3 N (a3 , 1) in Figure 1. We can write m(Λ) as a mixture in four ways: In the top panel, m(Λ) is represented uniquely as a mixture of three Gaussians. If we allow subgaussian components, however, then the bottom panel shows three equally valid representations of m(Λ) as a mixture of two subgaussians. Recalling Examples 1 and 2, it follows that m(Λ) is identified with respect to G, but not with respect to K. A valid objection to the previous example is that the number of components seems to be misspecified. The following example shows that this is not the salient issue, and moreover that separation of the component means is still not enough to ensure identifiability. Example 6. Even if we assume the number of components K is known and the component means are well-separated, nonparametric mixtures can still be nonidentifiable. For example, suppose |a1 − a2 | > 0 and consider moving a3 arbitrarily far to the right. In each of the three examples in the bottom panel of Figure 1, the mixture model has K = 2 components and the means of each component can be made arbitrarily far apart, but the mixture model is still nonidentifiable. Much of the existing literature makes assumptions on the structure of the allowed γk , which is evidently equivalent to restricting the supports of the measures in L (e.g. Example 1). Our focus, by contrast, will be to allow the components to take on essentially any shape while imposing regularity assumptions on the mixing measures Λ ∈ L. In this sense, we shift the focus from the properties of the “local” components to the “global” properties of the mixture itself.  5  .1  .2  .3  (a) Original mixture Γ = m(Λ) =  Q$1 (,)  Q$2 (,)  P  k  ∗ (b) Approximate P ∗ ∗ mixture of Gaussians Q ∗ m(Ω ) = ` ω` q` .  λk γk .  =  Q$3 (,)  (c) Components q`∗ grouped by clustering.  (d) Final approximate nonparametric mixing measure Ω(α).  Figure 2: Overview of the method.  3  Overview  Before outlining the formal details, we present an intuitive geometric picture of the clustering procedure in Figure 2. In the previous section we defined the canonical embedding m : L → M(L). We’d like to find a way to invert this embedding, i.e. to define a function h : M(L) → L such that h(m(Λ)) = Λ. Since m is in general not one-to-one, this can’t be done for arbitrary L; thus we also seek regularity conditions that ensure this map is indeed invertible. For simplicity here, we will use mixtures of Gaussians to approximate Γ, however, our main results will apply to any properly chosen family of base measures. At a high-level, our strategy is the following: 1. Approximate Γ with an overfitted mixture of L  K Gaussians (Figure 2b); 2. Cluster these L Gaussian components into K groups such that each group roughly approximates some γk (Figure 2c); 3. Use this clustering to define a new mixing measure whose atoms are close to some γk for each k (Figure 2d); 4. Show that this new mixing measure converges to Λ as L → ∞. While this procedure makes intuitive sense, one of the main thrusts of this paper is outlining a way to make this procedure well-defined in the sense that it will always return the same mixing measure. This is a surprisingly subtle problem and requires careful consideration of the various spaces involved, so the formal details of this analysis are postponed until Section 4. Furthermore, it should be evident that this construction is not guaranteed to succeed for arbitrary mixing measures Λ, as illustrated by the examples in Section 2.2. Thus, a key aspect of our analysis will be to provide assumptions that ensure the success of this construction. Intuitively, it should be clear that as long 6  as the γk are well-separated, the corresponding mixture approximation will consist of Gaussian components that are also well-separated. Unfortunately, this is not quite enough as illustrated by Example 6, which highlights some of the subtleties inherent in this construction. In the next section, we formalize these ideas and introduce the concepts of regularity (Section 4.3) and clusterability (Section 4.4), which axiomatize the conditions needed in order for Λ to be reconstructed—and hence identified—from Γ. Then in Sections 5 and 6, we discuss the existence of nontrivial mixture distributions that satisfy these conditions as well as how to learn such mixtures from data.  4  Nonparametric identifiability  2 Fix an integer K and let L ⊂ PK (X) be a family of mixing measures. In this section we study conditions that guarantee the injectivity of the canonical embedding m : L → M(L) using the procedure described in the previous section. Throughout this section, it will be helpful to keep Figure 2 in mind for intuition.  4.1  Projections  In order to ensure that the overfitted mixture approximation is unique, we will be interested in the Hellinger projection of Γ = m(Λ) onto “well-behaved” families of mixture distributions. Specifically, we will assume in the sequel that {QL }∞ L=1 is an indexed collection of families of mixing measures that satisfies the following: (A1) QL ⊂ PL2 (X) for each L; (A2) {QL } is monotonic, i.e. QL ⊂ QL+1 ; (A3) The collection of mixture distributions M(QL ) is identifiable for each L. The purpose of {QL } is to approximate Γ with a sequence of mixing measures of increasing complexity, as quantified by the maximum number of atoms L, which will be taken to be much larger than K in practice. Conditions (A1)-(A3) allow for substantial generality; for example, any family Q ⊂ P 2 (X) such that M(Q) is identifiable satisfies (A1)-(A3) with QL := Q ∩ PL2 (X). In practice, however, it is often enough to take QL = GL , i.e. the set of Gaussian mixing measures with at most L atoms (or some subset thereof). Note that in this special case, for any Γ ∈ P(X) there exist mixtures ΩL ∈ GL such that ρ(m(ΩL ), Γ) → 0 as L → ∞. Let us make these notions more precise. Define the usual ρ-projection by  TL Γ = Q ∈ M(QL ) : ρ(Q, Γ) ≤ ρ(P, Γ) ∀P ∈ M(QL ) . TL Γ may be empty, set-valued, or unique depending on Γ [16]. In the sequel, we will assume L is such that TL Γ is unique and well-defined for every Γ ∈ M(L), so that the projection map TL : M(L) → M(QL ) is well-defined. Furthermore, Condition (A3) implies that there exists a well-defined map ML : M(QL ) → QL that sends a mixture distribution to its mixing measure. Thus we can unambiguously write Q∗ := TL Γ and Ω∗ = ML (Q∗ ), and further define TL (L) = {TL [m(Λ)] : Λ ∈ L} ⊂ M(QL ), ML (L) = ML (TL (L)) ⊂ QL . An example of the measure Q∗ and its mixing measure Ω∗ are depicted in Figure 2b. Remark 4.1. The number of overfitted mixture components L will play an important but largely unheralded role in the sequel. For the most part, we will suppress the dependence of various quantities (e.g. Q∗ , Ω∗ ) on L for notational simplicity. We always assume that L  K, and in the statement of our theorems we typically assume that L is sufficiently large in the sense that L ≥ L0 for some fixed L0  K. Example 7 (Gaussian mixtures). An obvious choice for QL is GL , the set of Gaussian mixtures with at most L atoms. This has the appealing property of universal approximation for any Γ ∈ P(X). In fact, we can limit this family much further while still retaining universal approximation using known results for approximating densities with radial basis functions [17, 40, 41]. 7  Example 8 (Gamma mixtures). Suppose X = [0, ∞) and let QL be the family of mixing measures over Gamma distributions with at most L atoms. Then any measure Γ ∈ P(X) can be approximated by a mixture of Gamma distributions. This provides a rich model for censored data on the real line. Example 9 (Exponential family mixtures). Generalizing Examples 7 and 8, we can take QL to be mixtures over an exponential family [9]. In this case, the expressivity of QL will depend on the choice of exponential family.  4.2  Assignment functions  PL The projection Q∗ = m(Ω∗ ) = `=1 ω`∗ q`∗ is the best approximation to Γ from M(QL ), however, it contains many more components L than the true number of nonparametric components K. The next step is to find a way to “cluster” the components of Q∗ into K subgroups in such a way that each subgroup approximates some γk . To formalize this, we introduce the notion of assignment functions. Denote the set of all maps α : [L] → [K] by AL→K —a function α ∈ AL→K represents a particular assignment of L mixture components into K subgroups. Thus, we will call α an assignment function in PL the sequel. For any Ω ∈ QL , write Q = m(Ω) = `=1 ω` q` . Given some α ∈ AL→K , define normalizing constants by X ψk (α) := ω` , k = 1, . . . , K. (7) `∈α−1 (k)  Now define Ωk (α) :=  1 ψk (α)  X  ω` δq` ,  Qk (α) := m(Ωk (α)) =  `∈α−1 (k)  1 ψk (α)  X  ω` q` .  (8)  `∈α−1 (k)  Note the normalizing constant ψk (α), which is needed to ensure that Qk (α) is indeed a probability measure. These quantities define a single, aggregate K-mixture by Ω(α) :=  K X  ψk (α)δQk (α) ,  Q(α) := m(Ω(α)) =  K X  ψk (α)Qk (α).  (9)  k=1  k=1  Note that as measures, Q(α) = m(Ω(α)) = Q for any assignment α and any mixture Q. The difference lies in how we organize the components into K groups: Different choices of α lead to different groupings of the L overfitted components q` (Figure 2c). Finally, for any L ≥ 1, define QL→K := {Ω(α) : Ω ∈ QL , α ∈ AL→K }, i.e. QL→K is the collection of all mixing measures formed by clustering together the L atoms of some Ω ∈ QL into K groups. Since Qk (α) ∈ M(QL ), Ω(α) is an atomic mixing measure whose atoms come from M(QL ). Informally, we hope that Qk (α) is able to approximate γk , in a sense that will be made precise in the next section.  4.3  Regular mixtures  PL ∗ ∗ ∗ Given a nonparametric mixture m(Λ) and its ρ-projection Q∗ = `=1 ω` q` , define ψk (α) as in (7) and ∗ ∗ ∗ Qk (α) and Ωk (α) as in (8). We’d like Qk (α) to approximate γk , but this is certainly not guaranteed for any α. The following notion of regularity encodes the kind of behaviour we seek in an assignment: 2 Definition 4.1 (Regularity). Suppose Λ ∈ PK (X) and Γ = m(Λ) ∈ MK (X). The mixing measure Λ is called QL -regular if:  (a) The ρ-projection Q∗ = TL Γ exists and is unique for each L and limL→∞ TL Γ = Γ;  8  .1  .2  g!  g+  G  Figure 3: Example of a nonregular mixture from Example 10. (b) There exists a sequence of assignment functions α = αL ∈ AL→K such that lim Q∗k (α) = γk  L→∞  and  lim ψk∗ (α) = λk  L→∞  ∀ k = 1, . . . , K.  When Λ is QL -regular, we will also call m(Λ) QL -regular. Any assignment function α such that (b) holds will be called a regular assignment, or Λ-regular when we wish to emphasize the underlying mixing measure. Let us pause to review what we have developed so far. If a mixing measure Λ is QL -regular, then the ρ-projections of m(Λ) can always be grouped in such a way that each group approximates the nonparametric component γk and its mixing weight λk . Note that we have not said anything yet about how one might find such an assignment, but only that it exists. The problem of identifying α will be discussed in Section 4.4. For now, all we need is that QL is regular in the sense that m(Λ) can be globally approximated with some mixture in M(QL ) (Definition 4.1(a)) and that the parameters of Λ can be locally approximated via the assignment map α (Definition 4.1(b)). PL Remark 4.2. There is always a mixture distribution Q0 = `=1 ω`0 q`0 and an assignment function α such that limL→∞ Q0k (α) = γk and limL→∞ ψk0 (α) = λk . It suffices to approximate each γk independently via PK mixtures of Gaussians Q0k , k = 1, . . . , K and let Q0 = k=1 λk Q0k . What the definition of regularity (namely, Definition 4.1(b)) requires, however, is that not just that such an approximation exists, but that this local approximation is achieved specifically by the ρ-projection Q∗ . Although this is not always guaranteed, regularity simply asks that Q∗ —the closest mixture to Γ—is no worse than Q0 , which suggests that this condition is fairly weak. Remark 4.3. If L is a QL -regular family, then Definition 4.1(a) implies M(L) ⊂  ∞ [  M(QL ).  L=1  Thus, the expressivity of the collection {QL } constrains how large a regular family can be. Fortunately, for many families including Gaussian mixtures, it is possible to approximate arbitrary measures; i.e. ∪∞ L=1 M(QL ) = P(X). Thus in practice this is not much of a constraint. In Section 6, we will provide some concrete examples of regular families. For now, we conclude this section with the following (somewhat pathological) example of where regularity fails. Example 10. Let g± ∼ N (±a, 1) and G ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) where σ 2 > 0, and define for some 0 < β1 < β2 < 1, Γ = (1 − β1 − β2 )g+ + β2 g− + β1 G = γ1 ∝ (1 − β1 − β2 )g+ + γ2 ∝ β2 g− +  β1 G, 2  β1 G. 2 9  1 1 γ1 + γ2 , 2 2  See Figure 3. In this example, K = 2. If QL = GL , then for any L > 3, Q∗ = Γ, and there is no way to cluster the 3 components into 2 mixtures of Gaussians that approximate the γk . The problem here is that γ1 and γ2 “share” the same Gaussian component G, which evidently cannot be assigned to both γ1 and γ2 .  4.4  Clusterable families  The concept of regularity is a weak condition that summarizes the most basic behaviour that we seek in a mixture distribution Γ = m(Λ). To exploit this behaviour in order to identify Λ from Γ, we need to impose a slightly stronger assumption. Definition 4.2 (Clusterable family). A family of mixing measures L ⊂ P 2 (X) is called a QL -clusterable family, or just a clusterable family, if (a) Λ is QL -regular for all Λ ∈ L; (b) For all large enough L, there exists a function χL : ML (L) → AL→K such that χL (Ω∗ ) is a regular assignment for every Λ ∈ L. The resulting mixture model M(L) is called a clusterable mixture model. More precisely, Definition 4.2(b) means that for every Λ ∈ L, if we let Ω∗ = ML (TL (m(Λ))), then α = χL (Ω∗ ) is a regular assignment for Λ in the sense that it satisfies Definition 4.1(b). In contrast to regularity—which merely asserts the existence of a regular assignment for Λ—clusterability takes this requirement one step further by requiring that a regular assignment can in fact be determined from the projection Q∗ (via Ω∗ ) alone. The terminology “clusterable” is intended to provoke the reader into imagining χL as a cluster function that “clusters” the L components and L weights of Q∗ together in such a way that Ω∗ (α) approximates Λ. The problem of constructing a cluster function χL is a fascinating one, and will be taken up in Section 5. There, we will show that under a separation condition on the γk , regular assignments can be recovered by single-linkage clustering, so this assumption is not vacuous. For the remainder of this section, however, we take this assumption on faith in order to complete our journey and identify Λ from Γ alone.  4.5  Main result  The rationale for introducing the concept of clusterability in the previous section is that this is precisely the condition on L that guarantees that the mixture model M(L) is identifiable: Theorem 4.1. If L is a QL -clusterable family, then there exists a function h : M(L) → L such that h(m(Λ)) = Λ, where m : L → M(L) is the canonical embedding. In particular, m is a bijection and the mixture model M(L) is identifiable. As illustrated by the cautionary tales from Examples 6 and 10, identification in nonparametric mixtures is a subtle problem, and this theorem thus provides a powerful general condition for identifiability in nonparametric problems. In fact, we will show in Section 6 (Lemma 6.1) that any distribution can be approximated arbitrarily well by a regular mixture. The idea behind the proof is to invoke clusterability to obtain a cluster function χL which—when combined with the machinery previously introduced—yields a complete roadmap that takes us from a mixture distribution m(Λ) to a mixing measure Ω(α) over K atoms. The following diagram summarizes this roadmap: T  χL  M  α  L L L M(L) −→ TL (L) −→ ML (L) −→ AL→K −→ QL→K .  (10)  From this roadmap, we can invoke regularity to show that Ω(α) will be close to Λ in Wasserstein distance as L gets large. Remark 4.4. Let us pause to unpack the sequence of maps given by (10). The functions ML and ΛL are needed for technical reasons to properly identify a mixing measure of interest. TL is a well-known projection operator, and is needed to ensure that h is well-defined. What’s novel is the cluster function χL , which can be interpreted as a cluster function that takes in L “points” and returns an assignment of these L points into K clusters. This cluster assignment is represented by the assignment map χL (Ω∗ ) ∈ AL→K . 10  5  Estimation  Now that we have identified a rich family of identifiable mixture models, we turn our attention to the question of learning the mixing measure Λ from data. This will be broken down into two steps: 1) We first show that under a natural separation condition on the γk , regular assignments can be recovered at the population-level (Section 5.1), and 2) We extend these results to the case where we have i.i.d. samples from m(Λ) (Section 5.2). Most importantly, the results of this section indicate that there exist nontrivial families of clusterable mixtures, and moreover these families can in fact be learned from data.  5.1  Separation and clusterability  Theorem 4.1 is fairly abstract, and relies on the existence of a cluster function that can reconstruct regular assignments from just the overfitted mixing measure Ω∗ . In this section, we make these concepts much more concrete by constructing an explicit cluster function via a simple distance-based thresholding rule. This rule will turn out to be equivalent to performing single-linkage clustering, and hence can be recovered in practice without knowing the optimal threshold in advance. Given a mixing measure Ω ∈ P 2 (X), define the Hellinger diameter of Ω to be ∆(Ω) := sup{ρ(q, q 0 ) : q, q 0 ∈ conv(supp(Ω))}. We will be interested in the special case Ω = Ω∗k (α): ∆(Ω∗k (α)) quantifies how “compact” the mixture component Q∗k (α) is. 2 Definition 5.1 (Separation). Suppose K is fixed and Λ ∈ PK (X). The mixing measure Λ is called δseparated if inf i6=j ρ(γi , γj ) > δ for some δ > 0.  Given Ω ∈ QL , define the Hellinger distance matrix by D(Ω) = (ρ(qi , qj ))L i,j=1 .  (11)  Our goal is to show that if Λ is sufficiently separated, then the cluster assignment α can be reconstructed by clustering the distance matrix D∗ = D(Ω∗ ) = (ρ(qi∗ , qj∗ ))L i,j=1 (hence the choice of terminology clusterable). For any α ∈ AL→K , define η(α) := sup ∆(Ω∗k (α)) + sup ρ(γk , Q∗k (α)). k  (12)  k  Proposition 5.1. Suppose that Λ is a regular mixing measure and let α be a regular assignment. If Λ is 4η(α)-separated, then α(i) = α(j) ⇐⇒ ρ(qi∗ , qj∗ ) ≤ η(α), α(i) 6= α(j) ⇐⇒  ρ(qi∗ , qj∗ )  ≥ 2η(α).  (13) (14)  Moreover, α can be recovered by single-linkage clustering on D∗ . Thus, the abstract regular assignment α can be recovered by single-linkage clustering of D∗ without knowing the optimal threshold η(α). Crucially, this implies that α depends only on Ω∗ , and hence defines a cluster function χL over the subset ML (L) of QL . As a result, we have the following important corollary: 2 Corollary 5.2. Suppose L ⊂ PK (X) is a family of regular mixing measures such that for every Λ ∈ L there exists a regular assignment α such that Λ is 4η(α)-separated. Then L is clusterable and hence identifiable.  This follows from Theorem 4.1 and Proposition 5.1. Thus, we have a practical sufficient condition under which a nonparametric mixture model becomes identifiable. Clusterability (Definition 4.2) thus boils down to regularity + the following separation condition: n o inf ρ(γi , γj ) > 4η(α) = 4 sup ∆(Ω∗k (α)) + sup ρ(γk , Q∗k (α)) . (15) i6=j  k  k  11  The nonparametric components γk must be separated by a gap proportional to the Hellinger diameter of the approximating mixture Q∗k (α). This highlights the issue in Example 6—although the means can be arbitrarily separated, as we increase the separation, the diameter of the components continues to increase as well. Thus, the γk cannot be chosen in a haphazard way (see also Example 10). The separation condition (15) is quite weak, but no attempt has been made to optimize this lower bound. For example, a minor tweak to the proof can reduce the constant of 4 to any constant b > 2. Although we expect that a more careful analysis can weaken this condition, our main focus here is to present the main idea behind identifiability and its connection to clusterability and separation, so we save such optimizations for future work. Proposition 5.1 justifies the use of single-linkage clustering in order to group the components {q`∗ }, however, one can easily imagine more complicated clustering schemes. Indeed, since the distance matrix D∗ is always well-defined, we could have applied other clustering algorithms such as K-means or spectral clustering to D∗ to produce an assignment α and ask whether or not the resulting clustering produces a regular assignment. Any condition on D∗ that ensures a clustering algorithm will correctly reconstruct a regular assignment then yields an identification condition in the spirit of Proposition 5.1. This highlights the advantage of our abstract viewpoint, in which the specific form of both the assignment α and the cluster function χL is left unspecified.  5.2  Estimation of clusterable mixtures  Our results so far provide a framework for learning nonparametric mixture measures in principle, however, our discussion has so far been restricted to population-level properties of such measures. To complete this circle of ideas, it remains to discuss how to estimate Λ from data. iid b = Assume throughout this section that L  K is fixed. Suppose Z (1) , . . . , Z (n) ∼ Γ and that Ω (1) (n) ∗ ∗ b b Ω(Z , . . . , Z ) is a %-consistent estimator of Ω for each L—that is, %(Ω, Ω ) → 0 as n → ∞. For b could be the minimum Hellinger distance estimator from Beran [10]. For brevity we will suppress example, Ω the dependence on L and n in the sequel. Write b := m(Ω) b = Q  L X  ω b` qb` ,  `=1 ∗ b Ω∗ ) → 0 implies there is a permutation σ : [L] → [L] such that sup` ρ(b and note that %(Ω, q` , qσ(`) ) → 0. ∗ Without loss of generality, assume that the atoms are re-arranged so that sup` ρ(b q` , q` ) → 0. Define  ε := sup ρ(b q` , q`∗ ), `  δ := sup ρ(Q∗k (α), γk ).  (16)  k  The quantity ε represents the estimation error, which vanishes as n increases, and the quantity δ represents the approximation error, which also vanishes as L increases. In particular, ε = εL,n → 0 as n → ∞ and δ = δL → 0 as L → ∞. Proposition 5.3. Let α be a regular assignment and suppose that Λ is 4η(α)-separated. Suppose that L and n satisfy 3ε − 2δ < sup ∆(Ω∗k (α)) k  and define ηb := 2ε + sup ∆(Ω∗k (α)). k  Then ρ(b qi , qbj ) ≤ ηb if and only if α(i) = α(j), and the regular assignment α can be recovered by single-linkage b = D(Ω). b clustering on D  12  For each L and n, let α b=α bL,n ∈ AL→K denote the assignment map induced by Proposition 5.3. With this notation, another way to phrase this result is that for sufficiently large L and n, we have α b = α. In other b yields the same clusters as the regular assignment α. words, single-linkage clustering of D Proposition 5.3 is a finite sample result that holds for all sufficiently large L and n. By taking the limit as L, n → ∞, we can show that Λ is asymptotically learnable. Theorem 5.4. Under the conditions of Proposition 5.3, we have b αL,n ), Ω∗ (αL )) = 0, lim %(Ω(b  (17)  b k (b lim ρ(Q αL,n ), Q∗k (αL )) = 0.  (18)  b αL,n ), Λ) = 0, lim lim %(Ω(b  (19)  b k (b lim lim ρ(Q αL,n ), γk ) = 0.  (20)  n→∞ n→∞  Hence L→∞ n→∞ L→∞ n→∞  Thus, we have a Wasserstein consistent estimate of Λ and Hellinger consistent estimates of the component measures γk . In applications, it will often be useful to strengthen the latter to uniform convergence of the densities. When the families QL are equicontinuous, this is guaranteed by Theorem 1 of Sweeting [49]. We store this corollary away here for future use: b k (b Corollary 5.5. Let gbk be the density of Q αL,n ) and fk be the density of γk . If the families QL are equicontinuous for all L, then gbk → fk pointwise and uniformly over compact subsets of X as L, n → ∞. In fact, even weaker assumptions than equicontinuity are possible; see for example Cuevas and GonzalezManteiga [21].  6  Examples  In Sections 4 and 5 we outlined two key assumptions necessary to identify a mixture model via Theorem 4.1: Regularity and separation. As Example 10 indicates, these conditions are nontrivial and can fail to hold in practice. Fortunately, it is easy to construct a rich collection of mixture models that are both regular and well-separated, which we present here. Fix a Borel set Q ⊂ P 2 (X) satisfying Conditions (A1)-(A3) and an integer K. For any L0 ≥ K, define ( K ) K X X F(Q; K, L0 ) = λk Λk : supp(Λk ) ∩ supp(Λk0 ) = ∅, | supp(Λk )| ≤ L0 (21) k=1  k=1  Then F(Q; K, L0 ) ⊂ P 2 (X) is the collection of all mixing measures whose atoms consist of finite mixture distributions from M0 (Q). Note that these atoms may have overlapping supports, but we do require that no two Λk share the same atoms. This assumption precludes the pathology from Example 10. Lemma 6.1. For any Q ⊂ P 2 (X) satisfying Conditions (A1)-(A3) and any integers L0 ≥ K ≥ 1, the family F(Q; K, L0 ) is QL -regular. Proof. Note that for any L ≥ L0 , the ρ-projection of Γ onto M(QL ) is Q∗ = Γ since Γ ∈ M(QL ). This verifies part (a) of Definition 4.1. To verify part (b), first write Γ = Q∗ =  L0 X  ω`∗ q`∗ ,  `=1  γk =  X  ω`∗ q`∗ .  `∈Bk  The set Bk ⊂ [L0 ] indexes all of the components of Γ that contribute to γk , i.e. Bk = {` ∈ [L0 ] : q`∗ ∈ supp(Λk )}. Now define α(`) = k ⇐⇒ ` ∈ Bk . Then clearly Q∗k (α) = γk and ψk∗ (α) = λk , which establishes (b). Thus L is QL -regular, as claimed. 13  Example 11. By choosing Q = G in (21), we obtain the family F(G; K) of mixtures of Gaussian mixtures, i.e. a mixture model whose atoms are themselves Gaussian mixtures. In particular, the atoms γk can approximate any distribution on X. It follows that any Γ ∈ P(X) can be approximated by mixture distribution from M(F(G; K)), as long as L0 is sufficiently large. Combining Lemma 6.1 with Corollary 5.2, we have the following: Theorem 6.2. Fix Q ⊂ P 2 (X) satisfying Conditions (A1)-(A3) and integers L0 ≥ K ≥ 1. Suppose L ⊂ F(Q; K, L0 ) satisfies X inf ρ(γi , γj ) > 4η(α), ∀ Λ = λk γk ∈ L, i6=j  k  where α is any regular assignment of Λ. Then L is identifiable. Thus, for example, a sufficiently well-separated mixture of Gaussian mixtures is identifiable, and in fact learnable by Theorem 5.4.  7  Bayes optimal clustering  In data clustering, one is interested in learning a partition of the input space X, which can be formalized as a function c : X → [K], where K is the number of partitions or “clusters”. In contrast to mixture modeling, the goal is not to estimate the data-generating distribution but merely to find a useful partition of the space into meaningful clusters. One way to evaluate the quality of a clustering, however, is to assume a generative model such as (1), and use this to define an optimal partition of the space using Bayes’ rule. This partition is known as the Bayes optimal partition. It is then of interest to establish conditions under which the Bayes optimal partition can be learned from data. As an application of the theory developed in Sections 4 and 5, we consider this problem in a nonparametric setting. First, let us recall the classical framework of model-based clustering and discriminant analysis [12, 25] in order to motivate these concepts in more detail. Arguably the most classical such model is the Gaussian mixture model (GMM): If f1 (·; a1 ,P v1 ), . . . , fK (·; aK , vK ) is a collection of Gaussian density functions, then for any choice of λk ≥ 0 such that k λk = 1 the combination F (z) =  K X  λk fk (z; ak , vk );  z ∈ Rd  (22)  k=1  is a GMM. Intuitively, the density F has K distinct clusters given by the K Gaussian densities fk . The model (22) is of course equivalent to the integral (2) (see also Example 1). Obviously, the Gaussian densities fk (z; ak , vk ) can be replaced with any family of parametric densities fk (z; φk ). iid  Given samples Z (1) , . . . , Z (n) ∼ F , we’d like to learn the Bayes optimal partition by first estimating the mixture model (22) and then applying Bayes’ rule to classify each sample. It should be obvious that as long as a mixture model M(L) is identifiable, the Bayes optimal partition will be well-defined and has a unique interpretation in terms of distinct clusters of the input space X. Thus, for example, the GMM (22) defines a unique partition of Euclidean space, and so do many other classes of parametric mixture models. Since the clustering literature is full of examples of datasets that are not well-approximated by parametric mixtures [e.g. 38, 56], however, there is significant interest in extending the concept of the Bayes optimal partition to the nonparametric setting where there is once again an identifiability issue. Theorem 4.1, of course, offers one solution to the identifiability problem. In the remainder of this section, we will apply our abstract framework to this problem. First, we discuss identifiability issues with the concept of a Bayes optimal partition (Section 7.1). Then, we provide conditions under which a Bayes optimal partition can be learned from data (Section 7.2).  7.1  Bayes optimal partitions  Throughout the rest of this section, we assume that X is compact and all probability measures are absolutely continuous with respect to some base measure ζ, and hence have density functions. Assume Γ is fixed and 14  write F = FΓ for the density of Γ and fk for the density of γk . Thus whenever Γ ∈ M0 (X) is a finite mixture we can also write ż F =  fγ dΛ(γ) =  K X  λk fk .  (23)  k=1 2 For any Λ ∈ PK (X), define the partition map  cΛ (x) := arg max λk fk (x).  (24)  k∈[K]  Note that cΛ is not well-defined whenever λi fi (x) = λj fj (x) for i 6= j. To account for this, define an exceptional set [ E0 := {x ∈ X : λi fi (x) = λj fj (x)}, (25) i6=j  In principle, E0 should be small—in fact it will typically have measure zero—hence we will be content to partition X0 = X − E0 . Recall that a partition of a space X is a family of subsets Ak ⊂ X such that Ak ∩ Ak0 = ∅ for all k 6= k 0 and ∪k Ak = X. We denote the space of all partitions of X by Π(X). Definition 7.1 (Bayes optimal partition). Define an equivalence relation on X0 by declaring x ∼ y ⇐⇒ cΛ (x) = cΛ (y).  (26)  This relation induces a partition on X0 which we denote by πΛ or π(Λ). This partition is known as the Bayes optimal partition. Note that various guises of this concept have appeared in the literature, e.g. Chacón et al. [18], Fraley and Raftery [25]. Remark 7.1. Although the function cΛ is only unique up to a permutation, the partition defined by (26) is always well-defined and independent of the permutation used to label the γk . It is easy to check that cΛ : X0 → [K] simply uses Bayes’ rule to assign a point x ∈ X0 to the cluster k ∈ [K] that maximizes its posterior probability. Given samples from the mixture distribution Γ = m(Λ), we wish to learn the Bayes optimal partition πΛ . Unfortunately, there is—yet again—an identifiability issue: If there is more than one mixture measure Λ that represents Γ, the Bayes optimal partition is not well-defined. Example 12. In Example 6 and Figure 1, we have four valid representations of Γ as a mixture of subgaussians. In all four cases, each representation leads to a different Bayes optimal partition, even though they each represent the same mixture distribution. Clearly, if Λ is identifiable, then the Bayes optimal partition is automatically well-defined. Thus the theory from Section 4 immediately implies the following: Proposition 7.1. If M(L) is a clusterable mixture model, then there is a well-defined Bayes optimal partition πΓ for any Γ ∈ M(L). This provides a useful framework for discussing and analyzing partition-based clustering in a nonparametric setting. As discussed previously, a K-clustering of X is equivalent to a function that assigns each x ∈ X an integer from 1 to K, where K is the number of clusters. Clearly, up to the exceptional set E0 , (24) is one such function. Thus, the Bayes optimal partition πΓ can be interpreted as a K-clustering. For classical model-based clustering (e.g. GMMs), this notion has always been implicit, however, it has not been extended to the nonparametric setting.  15  7.2  Learning partitions from data iid  We now suppose we are given i.i.d. samples Z (1) , . . . , Z (n) ∼ Γ = m(Λ) and that we seek the Bayes optimal partition πΓ . Our strategy will be the following: b to learn Ω∗ for some L  K; 1. Use a consistent estimator Ω b αL,n ) consistently 2. Theorem 5.4 guarantees that we can learn a cluster assignment α bL,n such that Ω(b estimates Λ; b αL,n )) to approximate πΛ = πΓ . 3. Use π(Ω(b b αL,n )) → πΓ . Now, although Proposition 7.1 implies that πΓ is well-defined The hope, of course, is that π(Ω(b whenever Λ is clusterable, this may not be enough to learn the mixing measure Λ in practice. As we saw in Section 5, one sufficient condition for Λ to be learnable is separation (Definition 5.1). There are, however, b αL,n )) even converge? additional complications. What do we mean by convergence of partitions? Does π(Ω(b b Instead of working directly with the partitions π(Ω(b αL,n )), we will work with the partition map (24). b for the densities of qb` and Q, b respectively, and Write gb` and G X X b k (x) := 1 ω b` gb` (x), ψbk := ω b` . (27) G ψbk −1 −1 `∈b αL,n (k)  `∈b αL,n (k)  b k is the density of Q b k (b Then G αL,n ), where here and above we have suppressed the dependence on α bL,n . Now define the estimated partition map (cf. (24)) b b b cL,n (x) := cΩ(b b αL,n ) (x) = arg max ψk Gk (x).  (28)  k∈[K]  By considering the partition maps as opposed to the partitions themselves, we may consider ordinary convergence of the function b cL,n to cΓ , which gives us a convenient notion of consistency for this problem. Moreover, up to re-labeling, the equivalence classes of the relation ∼ (cf. (26)) are given by Ak := c−1 (k) = bL,n,k := b {x ∈ X : c(x) = k} for k = 1, . . . , K. Thus, we can also compare the sets A c−1 L,n (k) to the Bayes b optimal sets Ak . In particular, we’d like to show that Ak 4AL,n,k is small, where F 4G = (F − G) ∪ (G − F ) is the usual symmetric difference of two sets. To this end, define a fattening of E0 by [ E0 (t) := {x ∈ X : |λi fi (x) − λj fj (x)| ≤ t}, t > 0. (29) i6=j  Then of course E0 = E0 (0). The purpose of E0 (t) is to account for sampling error in the estimated partition. b k → γk uniformly on X as L, n → ∞ and υ is any measure on X. Fix t > 0. Theorem 7.2. Assume that G Then b cL,n → cΛ uniformly on X − E0 (t) and ! K [ b υ Ak 4AL,n,k ≤ υ(E0 (t)). (30) k=1  for all sufficiently large L and n. The uniform convergence assumption in Theorem 7.2 may seem strong, however, recall Corollary 5.5, which guarantees uniform convergence whenever QL is equicontinuous. Thus, for example, if QL is the family of Gaussians in Example 1—which is equicontinuous—it is straightforward to show the following: Corollary 7.3. Suppose X ⊂ Rd , QL = GL,M,V as in (5), υ is any measure on X, and t > 0. Then b cL,n → cΛ uniformly on X − E0 (t) and ! K [ bL,n,k ≤ υ(E0 (t)). υ Ak 4A (31) k=1  for all sufficiently large L and n. 16  0.4 0.35 0.3 0.25 0.2 0.15 0.1 0.05 0 -6  (a) GaussGamma dataset.  (b) Gumbel dataset.  -5  -4  -3  -2  -1  0  1  2  3  (c) Poly dataset.  Figure 4: Examples (i)-(iii), in order from left to right. The original mixture density is depicted as a solid black line, with the overfitted Gaussian mixture components as a dotted blue line. Individual component centers are marked with ×’s, coloured according to the resulting Bayes optimal partition.  Figure 5: Moons dataset. (Left) Contour plot of overfitted Gaussian mixture approximation, centers marked with ◦’s. (Right) Original data colour coded by the approximate Bayes optimal partition. We can interpret Theorem 7.2 as follows: As long as we take L and n large enough, the difference between the true Bayes optimal partition and the estimated partition becomes negligible. In fact, we can strengthen this conclusion to uniform convergence of the clusterings b cL,n → cΛ . Thus, Theorem 7.2 gives rigourous justification to the approximation heuristic outlined above, and establishes precise conditions under which nonparametric clusterings can be learned from data.  8  Experiments  The theory developed so far suggests an intuitive meta-algorithm for nonparametric clustering. As in Seciid tion 7, we assume we have i.i.d. samples Z (1) , . . . , Z (n) ∼ Γ = m(Λ). Given these samples, we propose to do the following: b with L  K components; 1. Estimate an overfitted GMM Q 2. Define an estimated assignment function α b by using single-linkage clustering to group the components b together; of Q b k (b 3. Use this clustering to define K mixture components Q α); 4. Define a partition on X by using Bayes’ rule, e.g. (27-28). To assess the effectiveness of this meta-algorithm in practice, we evaluate its performance on simulated data. In our implemention we used the EM algorithm with regularization and weight clipping to learn the GMM b in step 1. Q 17  Figure 6: Target dataset. (Top) Original mixture density. (Left) Contour plot of overfitted Gaussian mixture approximation, centers marked with ◦’s. (Right) Original data colour coded by the approximate Bayes optimal partition. As a benchmark, we ran experiments on the following five simulated datasets: (i) GaussGamma (K = 4): A mixture of three Gaussian distributions and one gamma distribution. (ii) Gumbel (K = 3): A GMM with three components that has been contaminated with non-Gaussian, Gumbel noise. (iii) Poly (K = 2): A mixture of two polynomials with non-overlapping supports. (iv) Moons (K = 2): A version of the classical moons dataset in two-dimensions with unbalanced clusters. This was chosen as it is a classical failure case of spectral clustering, which is known to have difficulties with unbalanced data. (v) Target (K = 6): A GMM derived from the target dataset (Figure 6). The GMM has 143 components that are clustered into 6 groups based on the original Target dataset from [56]. The results are shown in Figures 4, 5, and 6. In all cases, by choosing to cut the cluster tree to produce K components, the induced partitions provided sensible and meaningful clusterings of the original data which are close to the true Bayes optimal partition. 18  9  Discussion  We have proposed a novel identifiability criterion for nonparametric mixture models based on the notions of regularity and clusterability. Instead of making assumptions about the mixture components γk , our assumptions enforce a separation criterion regarding how the components are mixed. We have discussed how to estimate identifiable mixtures, and applied this framework to model-based clustering by generalizing the notion of the Bayes optimal partition to nonparametric settings.  References [1] K. E. Ahmad and E. K. Al-Hussaini. Remarks on the non-identifiability of mixtures of distributions. Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 34(1):543–544, 1982. [2] E. M. Airoldi, T. B. Costa, and S. H. Chan. Stochastic blockmodel approximation of a graphon: Theory and consistent estimation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 692–700, 2013. [3] E. S. Allman, C. Matias, and J. A. Rhodes. Identifiability of parameters in latent structure models with many observed variables. Annals of Statistics, pages 3099–3132, 2009. [4] A. A. Amini and E. Levina. arXiv:1406.5647, 2014.  On semidefinite relaxations for the block model.  arXiv preprint  [5] A. A. Amini, A. Chen, P. J. Bickel, E. Levina, et al. Pseudo-likelihood methods for community detection in large sparse networks. The Annals of Statistics, 41(4):2097–2122, 2013. [6] A. Anandkumar, D. Hsu, A. Javanmard, and S. Kakade. Learning linear Bayesian networks with latent variables. In Proceedings of The 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 249–257, 2013. [7] A. Anandkumar, D. Hsu, M. Janzamin, and S. Kakade. When are overcomplete topic models identifiable? uniqueness of tensor tucker decompositions with structured sparsity. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16:2643–2694, 2015. [8] S. Arora and R. Kannan. Learning mixtures of separated nonspherical gaussians. Annals of Applied Probability, pages 69–92, 2005. [9] O. Barndorff-Nielsen. Identifiability of mixtures of exponential families. Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 12(1):115–121, 1965. [10] R. Beran. Minimum hellinger distance estimates for parametric models. The Annals of Statistics, pages 445–463, 1977. [11] P. J. Bickel and A. Chen. A nonparametric view of network models and newman–girvan and other modularities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(50):21068–21073, 2009. [12] H. H. Bock. Probabilistic models in cluster analysis. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, 23(1): 5–28, 1996. [13] S. Bonhomme, K. Jochmans, and J.-M. Robin. Non-parametric estimation of finite mixtures from repeated measurements. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 78 (1):211–229, 2016. [14] S. Bonhomme, K. Jochmans, J.-M. Robin, et al. Estimating multivariate latent-structure models. The Annals of Statistics, 44(2):540–563, 2016. [15] L. Bordes, S. Mottelet, P. Vandekerkhove, et al. Semiparametric estimation of a two-component mixture model. The Annals of Statistics, 34(3):1204–1232, 2006. [16] M. Broniatowski and A. Keziou. Minimization of φ-divergences on sets of signed measures. Studia Scientiarum Mathematicarum Hungarica, 43(4):403–442, 2006. [17] C. Calcaterra and A. Boldt. Approximating with gaussians. arXiv preprint arXiv:0805.3795, 2008.  19  [18] J. E. Chacón et al. A population background for nonparametric density-based clustering. Statistical Science, 30(4):518–532, 2015. [19] K. Chaudhuri and S. Dasgupta. Rates of convergence for the cluster tree. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 343–351, 2010. [20] Y.-C. Chen, C. R. Genovese, L. Wasserman, et al. A comprehensive approach to mode clustering. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 10(1):210–241, 2016. [21] A. Cuevas and W. Gonzalez-Manteiga. Data-driven smoothing based on convexity properties. In Nonparametric Functional Estimation and Related Topics, pages 225–240. Springer, 1991. [22] S. Dasgupta. Learning mixtures of gaussians. In Foundations of Computer Science, 1999. 40th Annual Symposium on, pages 634–644. IEEE, 1999. [23] X. D’Haultfœuille and P. Février. Identification of mixture models using support variations. Journal of Econometrics, 189(1):70–82, 2015. [24] J. Eldridge, M. Belkin, and Y. Wang. Graphons, mergeons, and so on! In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2307–2315, 2016. [25] C. Fraley and A. E. Raftery. Model-based clustering, discriminant analysis, and density estimation. Journal of the American statistical Association, 97(458):611–631, 2002. [26] E. Gassiat and J. Rousseau. Non parametric finite translation mixtures with dependent regime. arXiv preprint arXiv:1302.2345, 2013. [27] P. Hall and X.-H. Zhou. Nonparametric estimation of component distributions in a multivariate mixture. Annals of Statistics, pages 201–224, 2003. [28] P. Hall, A. Neeman, R. Pakyari, and R. Elmore. Nonparametric inference in multivariate mixtures. Biometrika, 92(3):667–678, 2005. [29] J. A. Hartigan. Clustering algorithms, volume 209. Wiley New York, 1975. [30] J. A. Hartigan. Consistency of single linkage for high-density clusters. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 76(374):388–394, 1981. [31] T. Hettmansperger and H. Thomas. Almost nonparametric inference for repeated measures in mixture models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 62(4):811–825, 2000. [32] P. W. Holland, K. B. Laskey, and S. Leinhardt. Stochastic blockmodels: First steps. Social networks, 5(2):109–137, 1983. [33] H. Holzmann, A. Munk, and T. Gneiting. Identifiability of finite mixtures of elliptical distributions. Scandinavian journal of statistics, 33(4):753–763, 2006. [34] D. R. Hunter, S. Wang, and T. P. Hettmansperger. Inference for mixtures of symmetric distributions. The Annals of Statistics, pages 224–251, 2007. [35] K. Jochmans, M. Henry, and B. Salanié. Inference on two-component mixtures under tail restrictions. Econometric Theory, 33(3):610–635, 2017. [36] M. Levine, D. R. Hunter, and D. Chauveau. Maximum smoothed likelihood for multivariate mixtures. Biometrika, pages 403–416, 2011. [37] B. G. Lindsay. Mixture models: theory, geometry and applications. In NSF-CBMS regional conference series in probability and statistics, pages i–163. JSTOR, 1995. [38] A. Y. Ng, M. I. Jordan, Y. Weiss, et al. On spectral clustering: Analysis and an algorithm. In NIPS, volume 14, pages 849–856, 2001. [39] X. Nguyen. Convergence of latent mixing measures in finite and infinite mixture models. The Annals of Statistics, 41(1):370–400, 2013. [40] J. Park and I. W. Sandberg. Universal approximation using radial-basis-function networks. Neural 20  computation, 3(2):246–257, 1991. [41] J. Park and I. W. Sandberg. Approximation and radial-basis-function networks. Neural computation, 5 (2):305–316, 1993. [42] K. R. Parthasarathy. Probability measures on metric spaces, volume 352. American Mathematical Soc., 1967. [43] A. Rinaldo and L. Wasserman. Generalized density clustering. Annals of Statistics, pages 2678–2722, 2010. [44] G. Ritter. Robust cluster analysis and variable selection. CRC Press, 2014. [45] K. Rohe, S. Chatterjee, and B. Yu. Spectral clustering and the high-dimensional stochastic blockmodel. The Annals of Statistics, 39(4):1878–1915, 2011. [46] B. Sriperumbudur and I. Steinwart. Consistency and rates for clustering with dbscan. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 1090–1098, 2012. [47] I. Steinwart. Adaptive density level set clustering. In COLT, pages 703–738, 2011. [48] I. Steinwart. Fully adaptive density-based clustering. Annals of Statistics, 43(5):2132–2167, 2015. [49] T. Sweeting. On a converse to scheffé’s theorem. The Annals of Statistics, 14(3):1252–1256, 1986. [50] J. Tang, Z. Meng, X. Nguyen, Q. Mei, and M. Zhang. Understanding the limiting factors of topic modeling via posterior contraction analysis. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 190–198, 2014. [51] H. Teicher. Identifiability of mixtures. The annals of Mathematical statistics, 32(1):244–248, 1961. [52] H. Teicher. Identifiability of finite mixtures. The annals of Mathematical statistics, pages 1265–1269, 1963. [53] H. Teicher. Identifiability of mixtures of product measures. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 38 (4):1300–1302, 1967. [54] P. Thomann, I. Steinwart, and N. Schmid. Towards an axiomatic approach to hierarchical clustering of measures. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16:1949–2002, 2015. [55] D. M. Titterington, A. F. Smith, and U. E. Makov. Statistical analysis of finite mixture distributions. Wiley,, 1985. [56] A. Ultsch. Clustering with SOM: U*C. In Proc. Workshop on Self-Organizing Maps, Paris, France, pages 75–82, 2005. URL https://www.uni-marburg.de/fb12/arbeitsgruppen/datenbionik/data. [57] J. H. Wolfe. Pattern clustering by multivariate mixture analysis. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 5 (3):329–350, 1970. [58] S. J. Yakowitz and J. D. Spragins. On the identifiability of finite mixtures. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, pages 209–214, 1968. [59] S.-Y. Yun and A. Proutiere. Optimal cluster recovery in the labeled stochastic block model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 965–973, 2016.  21

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
