Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_6616

Abstract:
Tight Running Time Lower Bounds for Vertex Deletion Problems∗  arXiv:1511.05449v2 [cs.DS] 17 May 2016  Christian Komusiewicz Institut für Informatik, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena Ernst-Abbe-Platz 2, D-07743 Jena christian.komusiewicz@uni-jena.de May 18, 2016  Abstract For a graph class Π, the Π-Vertex Deletion problem has as input an undirected graph G = (V, E) and an integer k and asks whether there is a set of at most k vertices that can be deleted from G such that the resulting graph is a member of Π. By a classic result of Lewis and Yannakakis [J. Comput. Syst. Sci. ’80], Π-Vertex Deletion is NP-hard for all hereditary properties Π. We adapt the original NP-hardness construction to show that under the Exponential Time Hypothesis (ETH) tight complexity results can be obtained. We show that Π-Vertex Deletion does not admit a 2o(n) -time algorithm where n is the number of vertices in G. We also obtain a dichotomy for running time bounds that include the number m of edges in the input graph: On the one hand, if Π contains all independent sets, then there is no 2o(n+m) -time algorithm for Π-Vertex Deletion. On the other hand, if there is a fixed independent set O(n) that is not contained in Π and containment in Π time or 2o(m) time, √ can determined in 2 o(m) O( m) + O(n) or 2 + O(n) time, respectively. then Π-Vertex Deletion can be solved in 2 We also consider restrictions on the domain of √ the input graph G. For example, we obtain that Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o( n) time if G is planar and Π is hereditary and contains and excludes infinitely many planar graphs. Finally, we provide similar results for the problem variant where the deleted vertex set has to induce a connected graph.  1  Introduction  In graph modification problems, the aim is to modify a given graph such that it fulfills a certain property Π, for example being acyclic, bipartite, having bounded diameter, or being an independent set (that is, an edgeless graph). Formally, a graph property is simply a set of graphs. The focus is usually on nontrivial graph properties, that is, properties such that the set of graphs fulfilling the property and the set of graphs not fulfilling the property are infinite. Throughout this work, we consider only nontrivial graph properties. The most common operations to modify the graph are vertex deletion, edge deletion and edge addition. Graph modification problems have many applications, for example in data anonymization [21], data clustering [3], data visualization [4], in the modeling of complex networks via differential equations [8], and in social network analysis [2]. ∗  Supported by the DFG, project KO 3669/4-1.  1  In this work, we consider graph modification problems where only vertex deletions are allowed. Formally, we study the following problem: Π-Vertex Deletion Input: An undirected graph G = (V, E) and an integer k. Question: Is there a set S ⊆ V such that |S| ≤ k and G[V \ S] is contained in Π? A natural class of graph properties occurring in many applications are the hereditary graph properties: A graph property is hereditary if it is closed under vertex deletion. Equivalently, if a graph G fulfills a hereditary property Π, then every induced subgraph of G fulfills Π. The family of hereditary graph properties includes all monotone graph properties (which are the properties closed under vertex and edge deletions) and all minor-closed graph properties (which are the properties closed under vertex and edge deletions and edge contractions). Hereditary graph properties can be characterized by forbidden induced subgraphs. That is, there is a (possibly infinite) set of graphs F such that G has property Π if and only if it does not contain a graph from F as an induced subgraph. For example, a graph is a forest if and only if it does not contain any cycle as induced subgraph. For these graph properties, there is the following classic hardness result due to Lewis and Yannakakis [16]. Theorem 1 ([16]). Let Π be a hereditary nontrivial graph property. Then Π-Vertex Deletion is NP-hard. While this result rules out the possibility of polynomial-time algorithms, it leaves open the existence of subexponential-time algorithms for these problems. Our aim is to rule out the existence of subexponential-time algorithms for these problems by assuming the Exponential Time Hypothesis (ETH) [14]. To this end, let us inspect the reduction by Yannakakis1 more closely. The source problem in this reduction is Vertex Cover. Vertex Cover Input: An undirected graph G = (V, E) and an integer k. Question: Is there a set S ⊆ V such that |S| ≤ k and G[V \ S] is an independent set? Assuming ETH, Vertex Cover does not admit a 2o(n+m) -time algorithm where n is the number of vertices in the input graph and m is the number of edges. Hence, Vertex Cover is a suitable source problem for a reduction in the ETH-framework. The construction of Yannakakis, however, reduces n-vertex instances of Vertex Cover to Θ(n2 )-vertex instances of Π-Vertex √ Deletion. This blowup in the vertex number only yields a running time lower bound of 2o( n) . Thus, to obtain a better lower bound, we need to “re-engineer” the original construction. We adapt the hardness construction of Yannakakis in two ways: We take a slightly more finegrained approach for choosing the graphs which are used as basis for the gadgets in the reduction from the Vertex Cover instance and we reduce from a more restricted variant of Vertex Cover. These two modifications of the reduction allow us to obtain our main result. Here, n denotes the number of vertices in the input graph and m denotes its number of edges. Theorem 2. Let Π be a hereditary nontrivial graph property, then: 1 The article by Lewis and Yannakakis explicitly attributes the construction which will form the basis of our reduction to Yannakakis [16].  2  1. If the ETH is true, then Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o(n+  √  m)  time,  2. If the ETH is true, then Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o(n+m) time if Π contains all independent sets. √  3. If Π excludes some independent set, then Π-Vertex Deletion can be solved in 2O( time if and only if membership in Π can be recognized in 2O(n) time.  m) +O(n)  4. If Π excludes some independent set, then Π-Vertex Deletion can be solved in 2o(m) + O(n) time if and only if membership in Π can be recognized in 2o(m) time. The first and second statement of the theorem follow from our adaption of Yannakakis’ construction, described in Section 3. The third and fourth statement follow from a simple combinatorial algorithm, described in Section 4. In addition to our main theorem, we observe that the reduction yields a similarly tight lower bound for vertex deletion problems in planar graphs. More √ precisely, we show that any nontrivial variant of Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o( n) time on n-vertex planar graphs. This result aligns nicely with the so-called √ square root phenomenon [19] that many NP-hard problems on O( n) time but not faster. Moreover, we also obtain tight running planar graphs can be solved in 2 time lower bounds for input graphs with bounded degree and bounded degeneracy (both depending on Π) and for input graphs containing a dominating vertex. Finally, we consider Connected ΠVertex Deletion, where the vertex set that is deleted has to induce a connected graph. We show that the bounds of Theorem 2 also hold for this problem variant. Related Work. Fellows et al. [7] adapted the reduction of Yannakakis to provide NP-hardness results for the variant of Π-Vertex Deletion where one aims to find a solution that is disjoint from and smaller than a given solution. The study considers the case that Π is closed under taking disjoint unions of graphs. These are exactly the graph properties that have only connected minimal forbidden induced subgraphs. As an introduction to their result, they describe a modified version of the original reduction which already implies Theorem 2 for this case. In subsequent work, Guo and Shrestha [13] investigated the complexity of the remaining case when the forbidden subgraphs have disconnected forbidden subgraphs, showing NP-hardness for most cases. When edge deletions or additions are the allowed operations, there is no hardness result as general as the one of Lewis and Yannakakis [16]. Nevertheless, many variants of Π-Edge Deletion are NP-hard [22]. If Π has exactly one forbidden induced subgraph, then a complexity dichotomy and tight ETH-based running time lower bounds can be achieved for edge deletion problems [1]. In similar spirit, tight running time lower bounds have been obtained for some Π-Completion problems, where one may only add edges to obtain the graph property Π [6].  2  Preliminaries  Unless stated otherwise, we consider undirected simple graphs G = (V, E) where V is the vertex set and E ⊆ {{u, v} | u, v ∈ V ∧ u 6= v} is the edge set of the graph. We denote the vertex and edge set of a graph G also by V (G) and E(G), respectively. The (open) neighborhood of a vertex v is denoted by N (v) := {u | {u, v} ∈ E} and the closed neighborhood by N [v] := N (v) ∪ {v}. For a vertex set S ⊆ V , let G[S] := (S, {{u, v} ∈ E | u, v ∈ S}) denote the subgraph of G induced by S. For a vertex set S ⊆ V , let G−S := G[V \S] denote the induced subgraph of G obtained by deleting 3  the vertices of S and their incident edges. Similarly, for a vertex v ∈ V let G − v := G − {v} denote the graph obtained by deleting this vertex and all its incident edges. A vertex v in a graph is a cutvertex if G − v has more connected components than G. A graph is d-degenerate if every induced subgraph contains a vertex of degree at most d. Let A = (a1 , a2 , . . . , an ) and B = (b1 , b2 , . . . , bm ) be two sequences where i is the smallest index such that ai 6= bi . Then, A is lexicographically smaller than B if ai < bi . We say that a parameterized problem (I, k) has a subexponential-time algorithm if it can be solved in 2o(k) · nO(1) time. In this work, the parameters under consideration are n, the number of vertices in the input graph, and m, the number of edges in the input graph. The Exponential Time Hypothesis (ETH) states essentially that the 3-SAT problem, which is given a boolean formula in 3-conjunctive normal form and asks whether this formula can be satisfied by assigning truth values to the variables, cannot be solved in 2o(n) time where n is the number of variables in the input formula [14]. For a survey on lower bounds based on the Exponential Time Hypothesis, refer to [18]. We now show that, assuming the ETH, the following special case of Vertex Cover does not admit a subexponential-time algorithm. This problem variant will be used as source problem in our reduction; here, a subcubic graph is one with maximum degree at most three. Subcubic Girth-d Vertex Cover Input: An undirected subcubic 2-degenerate graph G = (V, E) such that every cycle in G has length at least d and an integer k. Question: Does G have a vertex cover of size at most k? We show the running time lower bound by devising a simple reduction from Vertex Cover that replaces edges by long paths on an even number of vertices. Theorem 3. If the ETH is true, then Subcubic Girth-d Vertex Cover cannot be solved in 2o(n+m) time. Proof. We reduce from Vertex Cover in subcubic graphs, which is known to admit no 2o(n) -time algorithm (assuming ETH) [15]. Assume that d is even; otherwise, increase d by one. Given a vertex cover instance (G = (V, E), k) the reduction is simply to replace each edge {u, v} of G by a path on d vertices and to make one endpoint of this path adjacent to u and the other one adjacent to v. Equivalently, subdivide each edge d times. Let G′ denote the resulting graph, and call the paths that are added during the construction the d-paths of G′ . To complete the construction, set k′ := k + (d/2) · |E(G)|. As we will show, the two instances are equivalent. Assume for now that equivalence holds. The shortest cycle in G′ clearly contains more than d vertices (in fact it contains more than 3d vertices). Moreover, the construction does not increase the maximum degree of G, hence G′ has maximum degree three, and each original edge was replaced by a path, hence G is 2-degenerate. Finally, G′ has O(|V (G)|) many vertices and edges. Thus, any algorithm that ′ ′ solves (G′ , k′ ) in 2o(|V (G )|+|E(G )|) time can be used to obtain an algorithm that solves Vertex Cover on subcubic n-vertex graphs in 2o(n+m) time which contradicts the ETH. Thus to complete the proof it remains to show equivalence of the instances. (G, k) is a yes-instance ⇔ (G′ , k′ ) is yes-instance. ⇒: Let S be size-k vertex cover of G. Consider the graph G′ −S. By construction, all remaining edges are incident with vertices in d-paths. Moreover, for each d-path, the nonpath neighbor of 4  d c  Figure 1: A graph H with α-sequence (3, 2, 1). Deleting any non-cut-vertex v gives α(H, v) = (6). Deleting the cut-vertex c or d gives α(H, c) = (3, 2, 1) and α(H, d) = (5, 1), respectively. The graph J(H) is highlighted by a gray background. at least one of its endpoints is contained in S since S is a vertex cover. Thus, deleting the other endpoint of the path and then every other vertex of the path gives a set of d/2 vertex deletions that together destroy all edges that are incident with vertices of this path. This can be done for all |E(G)| many d-paths, resulting in (d/2)·|E(G)| vertex deletions. Consequently, (d/2)·|E(G)|+k vertex deletions suffice to destroy all edges in G′ . ⇐: Observe that any vertex cover contains at least (d/2) · |E(G)| vertices that are on d-paths. Moreover, there is a minimum-cardinality vertex cover such that no two neighbors u and v in a d-path are deleted: Deleting u makes v a degree-one vertex which means that deleting the other neighbor of v instead of v gives a vertex cover which is at most as large as one that deletes u and v. Thus, there is a minimum-cardinality vertex cover S ′ that contains for each d-path exactly one of its two endpoints. Moreover, the neighbor of the other endpoint that is not in the d-path is contained in S ′ . Let S := S ′ ∩ V denote the vertices from V that are contained in S. For each edge {u, v} ∈ E, there is a d-path connecting u and v in E. By the discussion above, either u or v is in S. Thus, S is a vertex cover. Since S ′ contains at least (d/2) · |E(G)| vertices from d-paths, we have |S| ≤ k.  3  Hardness for Graph Properties Containing all Independent Sets  The main idea of the reduction of Yannakakis is the following. Reduce from Vertex Cover by replacing edges of the Vertex Cover instance by some graph H that is not contained arbitrarily often in any graph fulfilling Π (and thus needs to be destroyed by a vertex deletion). Then, deleting edges in the Vertex Cover instance corresponds to destroying forbidden induced subgraphs in the Π-Vertex Deletion instance. The main technical difficulty arises when the forbidden subgraphs for graph property Π have cut-vertices as in this case, two graphs that are used to replace two edges incident with the same vertex may form another forbidden subgraph of Π. Thus, the graph H which is used in the construction must be chosen carefully. To this end, Yannakakis introduces the notion of α-sequence for connected graphs. Definition 1. Let H be a connected graph, let c be a vertex in H, and let H1 , . . . , Hℓ denote the connected components of H − c such that |V (H1 )| ≥ |V (H2 )| ≥ . . . |V (Hℓ )|. Then, α(H, c) := (|V (H1 )|, |V (H2 )|, . . . , |V (Hℓ )|). The α-sequence of H, denoted α(H), is the lexicographically smallest sequence such that α(H) = α(H, c) for some c ∈ V (H). An example of a graph H with its α-sequence is presented in Figure 1. The idea in the reduction of Yannakakis is to choose a forbidden subgraph that has a connected component with 5  Figure 2: The two minimal forbidden subgraphs co-diamond (left) and co-claw (right) for Π being the complement graphs of line graphs of triangle-free graphs (see http://www.graphclasses.org/). Here, HΠ is the co-diamond since the lexicographically largest α-sequence of any component of the co-diamond is (1) and the co-claw has a component with α-sequence (2). a lexicographically smallest α-sequence as basis for the gadget. More precisely, the edges of the vertex cover instance are replaced by the largest connected component remaining after deletion of a vertex c which produces the smallest α-sequence of H. To this end, let c ∈ V (H) be a fixed vertex such that α(H) = α(H, c), and let J ′ be a fixed largest connected component of H − c. Then, let J(H) := H[V (J ′ ) ∪ {c}] denote the subgraph of H consisting of this component plus c. Since H has an edge, J(H) has at least two vertices. The graph J(H) will be used to replace the edges of the Vertex Cover instance. This terminology is sufficient to deal with the case that all forbidden subgraphs are connected. To deal with disconnected forbidden induced subgraphs, we introduce the notion of Γ-sequence.2 Observe that the α-sequences imply a partial ordering on all graphs, but there maybe nonisomorphic graphs that have the same α-sequence. We want to avoid this, and thus the first step is to refine this partial ordering to a total ordering by breaking ties arbitrarily. Definition 2. A function from the set of all connected graphs to N is a γ-ordering if γ(Gi ) ≥ γ(Gj ) implies α(Gi ) ≥ α(Gj ) and γ(Gi ) = γ(Gj ) if and only if Gi and Gj are isomorphic. In the following, fix an arbitrary γ-ordering of all graphs. To obtain the Γ-sequence we consider the sequence of γ-values created by the connected components of a graph H. Definition 3. Let H be a graph with connected components H1 , . . . , Hℓ such that γ(H1 ) ≥ γ(H2 ) ≥ · · · ≥ γ(Hℓ ). Then, the Γ-sequence of H is Γ(H) := (γ(H1 ), γ(H2 ), . . . , γ(Hℓ )). Now, the basis for our construction will be the minimal forbidden induced subgraph of Π that has the lexicographically smallest Γ-sequence. For a graph property Π, denote this graph by HΠ , an example is given in Figure 2. We are now ready to prove the second statement of Theorem 2. We reduce from Subcubic Girth-3d Vertex Cover. The construction of the Π-Vertex Deletion instance uses gadgets based on the graph HΠ , an example is presented in Figure 3. Construction 4. Let (G = (V, E), k) be the given instance of Subcubic Girth-3d Vertex Cover. We build an instance of Π-Vertex Deletion as follows. Let H1 be the connected component of HΠ with maximum γ-value and let d denote the number of connected components of HΠ that are isomorphic to H1 . Moreover, let c denote a vertex of H1 such that α(H1 , c) = α(H1 ), that is, c is a vertex whose deletion produces a lexicographically smallest sequence of connected component sizes. Assume without loss of generality that |V | > |V (HΠ )| (otherwise, we can solve the Subcubic Girth-3d Vertex Cover instance in constant time). 2 Yannakakis uses the related notion of β-sequence which does not break ties between nonisomorphic graphs that have the same α-sequence [16]. This tie-breaking, however, is necessary for our reduction. Guo and Shrestha [13] use Ω-sequences which also do not break ties between nonisomorphic graphs.  6  c  Figure 3: An example of the reduction (in this case from Vertex Cover instead of Subcubic Girth-d Vertex Cover). Top left: the forbidden subgraph HΠ with the vertex c of H1 ; top right: the graph G of the Vertex Cover instance; bottom: the constructed graph G′ of the Π-Vertex Deletion instance. Vertices of G and their corresponding vertices in G′ are shown in gray. Starting from an empty graph G′ , construct the instance of Π-Vertex Deletion as follows. For each connected component Hi of HΠ that is not isomorphic to H1 , add 2 · |V | disjoint copies of Hi to G′ .3 Then, add d − 1 disjoint copies of H1 to G′ . Call the graph constructed so far the base graph of the construction. Now, add the graph G to G′ and replace each edge {u, v} of G by the graph J := J(H1 ) in the following way.4 Let c′ be a vertex from J that is different from c. Remove the edge {u, v} from G′ , add a copy of J to G′ and identify u with c and v with c′ . Now, let D := H1 − (V (J) \ {c}). For each vertex v ∈ V , add a disjoint copy of D to G′ and identify the vertex c of this copy with v. Call the part of G′ that is obtained from G the vc-extension of the construction. Complete the construction of the Π-Vertex Deletion instance by setting k′ := k. Using this construction, we can show our main running time lower bound. Lemma 1. Let Π be a hereditary graph property such that all independent sets are in Π. Then, if the ETH is true, Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o(n+m) time. Proof. Let (G, k) be an instance of Subcubic Girth-3d Vertex Cover and let (G′ , k) be the ΠVertex Deletion instance obtained from Construction 4. We first show the equivalence of the two instances, that is,  3  G has a vertex cover of size at most k ⇔ G′ has a Π-vertex deletion set of size at most k.  This is the part of the construction, where tie-breaking is necessary, as these graphs might have the same αsequence as H1 . 4 This part of the construction follows the construction of Yannakakis [16].  7  ⇒: Let S be a size-k vertex cover of G. Then, S is a Π-vertex deletion set in G′ , that is, G′ − S fulfills Π. To see this, first observe that each connected component C of the vc-extension of G′ − S has γ-value lower than γ(H1 ): If C does not contain a vertex from V , then it is either a proper induced subgraph of D or of J. In both cases, C has a lexicographically lower α-sequence than H1 and thus lower γ-value. If C contains a vertex v from V , then v is a cut-vertex in C, as deleting it disconnects the remainder of the copy of D containing v. Now, observe that the other connected components of C − v have size at most |V (J)| − 2: These components are subgraphs of copies of J corresponding to an edge {u, v} of G. Since S is a vertex cover, u is deleted from G, cutting the rest of the graph from this copy of J and leaving only |V (J) − 2| vertices in the component. Consequently, the α-sequence of C is lexicographically smaller than the α-sequence of H1 . This implies that the γ-value of the connected component C is smaller than γ(H1 ). Moreover, the base part contains exactly d − 1 connected components with γ-value γ(H1 ). Hence, G′ − S fulfills Π: Any induced subgraph of G′ − S has at most d − 1 connected components with γ-value γ(H1 ). By the assumption that HΠ • has exactly d connected components with γ-value γ(H1 ) and no connected components with larger γ-value, and • HΠ has the lexicographically smallest Γ-sequence among all forbidden induced subgraphs of Π, G′ − S cannot contain any forbidden induced subgraph of Π as induced subgraph. ⇐: Let S ′ be a size-k Π-vertex deletion set in G′ . Since k < 2n, we have that the number of copies of all connected components of HΠ with γ-value smaller than γ(H1 ) is at least as large in G′ − S ′ as it is in HΠ . Hence, G′ − S ′ contains at most d − 1 vertex-disjoint copies of H1 as otherwise, G′ − S ′ contains HΠ as induced subgraph. Then, create a set SA ⊆ V as follows: • For each vertex v ∈ V ∩ S ′ , add v to SA ,  • for each copy D ∗ of D in G′ such that S ′ contains a vertex from V (D ∗ )\V , add the vertex v ∈ V (D ∗ ) ∩ V to SA , • for each copy J ∗ of J such that S ′ \ V contains a vertex from V (J ∗ ) \ V add an arbitrary vertex of V (J ∗ ) ∩ V to SA . Observe that the set SA has size at most k. If G − SA is an independent set, then G has a vertex cover of size at most k. Otherwise, consider the graph G − SA and observe that every edge {u, v} in G−SA directly corresponds to an induced copy of H1 in G′ −S ′ : Since {u, v} is present in G−SA , we have that S ′ does not contain u or v, does not contain vertices from the copies of D that are attached to u or v, and does not contain a vertex from the copy of J attached to u and v. Now let q denote the size of a maximum matching in G − SA and observe that this implies that the vc-extension of G′ − S ′ has q vertex-disjoint copies of H1 . Since G′ − S ′ contains at most d − 1 vertex-disjoint copies of H1 , this implies that q ≤ d − 1 and that S ′ contains at least q vertex deletions in the base graph (it needs to destroy at least q of the vertex-disjoint copies of H1 in the base graph). Thus, |SA | ≤ k − q. Finally, observe that since G − SA has a maximum matching of size q ≤ d − 1 it cannot contain a cycle as all cycles in G have length at least 3d. Thus, G − SA has a vertex cover SB of size at most q which together with SA is a size-k vertex cover of G. Since the two instances are equivalent, any algorithm deciding (G′ , k′ ) decides (G, k). Since HΠ has constant size for each fixed graph property Π, the base graph contains O(|V (G)|) vertices 8  and edges. Similarly, the vc-extension of G has O(|V (G)|) copies of J (since G has O(|V (G)|) edges) and O(|V (G)|) copies of D and no further vertices. Consequently, G′ has O(|V (G)|) edges ′ ′ and O(|V (G)|) edges. Any algorithm deciding (G′ , k) in 2o(|V (G )|+|E(G )|) time thus decides Subcubic Girth-3d Vertex Cover in 2o(|V (G)|) time, contradicting the ETH by Theorem 3. Let us briefly discuss why we need to assume large girth for the Vertex Cover instance. If Π is for example the property of being 2K2 -free, that is, not containing an induced matching of size two, then given a Vertex Cover instance (G, k), the reduction would simply add an edge to G. Now, if G is a triangle and k = 1, then we have a no-instance but the resulting Π-Vertex Deletion instance is a yes-instance: deleting the isolated edge is sufficient to destroy all 2K2 s. Since the maximum degree is three in Subcubic Girth-d Vertex Cover, we obtain the following corollary on the hardness of Π-Vertex Deletion in bounded-degree graphs. Corollary 1. Let Π be a hereditary nontrivial graph property such that all independent sets are in Π. Let ∆ be the smallest number such that there exists a γ-ordering of the forbidden subgraphs of Π such that a forbidden subgraph with lexicographically smallest Γ-sequence has maximum degree ∆. Then, Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o(n+m) time even if G has maximum degree 3∆. So, for example if Π is the property of being acyclic, then Π-Vertex Deletion (this special case is known as Feedback Vertex Set) does not admit a 2o(n+m) -time algorithm even if G has maximum degree six. We can directly use Lemma 1 to obtain a lower bound for all other nontrivial graph properties. First observe that, by Ramsey’s theorem, every nontrivial graph property Π contains either all independent sets or all cliques: Since Π is nontrivial, the order of the graphs in Π is unbounded. Thus, for every number n, Π contains a graph which has Rn,n many nodes and therefore contains either an n-vertex clique or an n-vertex independent set. Thus, if Π does not contain all independent sets, then it contains all cliques. In this case, however, Lemma 1 implies a running time lower bound for Π̄-Vertex Deletion, where Π̄ is the graph property containing exactly the graphs that are complement graphs of a graph in Π. Now Π̄-Vertex Deletion problem can be easily reduced to Π-Vertex Deletion by complementing the input graph. This reduction does not change the number of vertices n in the graph and the number of edges m is O(n2 ), thus leading to the following lower bound for all hereditary graph properties. Corollary 2. Let Π be a hereditary graph property. Then, if the ETH is true, Π-Vertex Deletion √ m) o(n+ time. cannot be solved in 2  4  Subexponential-Time Algorithms for Graph Properties Excluding Some Independent Set  The hardness results from the previous section leave open the possibility of algorithms that have subexponential running time with respect to the number of edges m of G for graph properties Π that do not contain all independent sets. We now show that Π-Vertex Deletion can be solved in 2o(m) + O(n) time if Π can be recognized sufficiently fast and does not contain all independent sets. Intuitively, the algorithm exploits the following observations: First, the number of vertices that have a high degree in G is sublinear in m. Second, the subgraph induced by the low-degree vertices in the solution has a small dominating set. 9  Lemma 2. Let Π be a hereditary graph property such that for some fixed d, Π does not contain the d-vertex independent set, then √  • Π-Vertex Deletion can be solved in 2O( can be verified in 2O(n) time, and  m)  + O(n) time if and only if membership in Π  • Π-Vertex Deletion can be solved in 2o(m) + O(n) time if and only if membership in Π can be verified in 2o(m) time. Proof. We first show an algorithm with the claimed running time for the case that membership in Π can be verified in 2O(n) time. Given an input (G, k), the first step of the algorithm is to delete all except at most d − 1 singletons of the input graph and to decrease the size bound accordingly. These deletions are necessary by the assumption that Π does not contain the d-vertex independent set. Afterwards, the graph has O(m) vertices. Now, let A denote an arbitrary but fixed maximum-cardinality set such that G[A] ∈ Π. Let Vh √ √ denote the vertices in G that have degree at least 2 m and observe that |Vh | ≤ m. For each Ah ⊆ Vh , branch into a case that assumes Ah = A ∩ Vh . In one of these branches, the assumption is correct. √ Now consider the vertices in Vℓ := V \Vh that have degree at most 2 m in G. Since G[A∩Vℓ ] ∈ Π it has no independent set on d vertices. Thus, for each independent set Iℓ ⊆ Vℓ of G[Vℓ ] such that |Iℓ | < d we branch into a case that assumes that Iℓ ⊆ A ∩ Vℓ is a maximal independent set of G[A ∩ Vℓ ]. In one of these branches, the assumption is correct. Now observe that since Iℓ is a maximal independent set in G[A∩Vℓ ] it is also a dominating set in G[A∩Vℓ ]. That is, A∩Vℓ ⊆ N [Iℓ ]. Thus, by branching for each Aℓ ⊆ N (Iℓ ) into the case that Aℓ = (A ∩ Vℓ ) \ Iℓ we obtain one case where A = Ah ∪ Iℓ ∪ Aℓ . In each branch, we check whether G[Ah ∪ Iℓ ∪ Aℓ ] ∈ Π and whether |Ah ∪ Iℓ ∪ Aℓ | ≥ n − k. √ The running time bound can be obtained as follows: The number of subsets of Vh is 2O( m) . The number of subsets Iℓ √of size at most d of Vℓ is O(nd−1 ) = nO(1) , and for each Iℓ the number of subsets √ √ of N (Iℓ ) is O(2(d−1)2 m ) = 2O( m) . Thus, the recognition algorithm for Π has to be invoked 2O( m) √ √ times. Each time, it is invoked on a graph with O( m) vertices since |A√h | ≤ m, |Iℓ | < d = O(1), √ √ and |Aℓ | < d m = O( m). By the premise, this algorithm takes 2O( m) time, resulting in the claimed overall running time. √ For the only if part of the first claim, we observe the following. Since m = O(n2 ), any 2O( m) time algorithm for Π-Vertex Deletion directly gives a 2O(n) -time algorithm for the recognition problem, since the special case k = 0 is the recognition problem for Π. If membership in Π can be verified in 2o(m) time, then the algorithm only differs in the invoked √ m) O( = 2o(m) times, each time on recognition algorithm. This algorithm for Π has to be invoked 2 a graph with at most m edges. By the premise, this algorithm takes 2o(m) time, resulting in the claimed overall running time. The only if part of the statement follows directly from the fact that solving the special case k = 0 gives an algorithm for the recognition problem. Since the time complexity of Π-Vertex Deletion for the nontrivial graph properties excluding √ a fixed independent is settled to be 2O( m) or more, it is now motivated to decrease the constants in the exponents of the running time bound. In the following, we consider the important special case of graph properties where membership can be decided √ in polynomial time. The generic algorithm √ described above has running time 2 m · nd−1 · 2(d−1)2 m · nO(1) for these problems. By p setting the degree threshold for including a vertex in the first or in the second branching to 2m/(d − 1), 10  √ this can be improved to a running time of 22 2(d−1)m nd+O(1) . It is more interesting to determine whether the factor d before m can be removed. For a subclass of the polynomial-time decidable graph properties excluding an independent set of size d, we obtain such a running time bound. The √ m) O( -time algorithm for algorithm achieving the running time follows the same idea as a known 2 Clique [9]. Theorem 5. Let Π be a graph property such that • all n-vertex graphs G with property Π have minimum degree n − d for some constant d, and • for an n-vertex graph, membership in Π can be verified in nO(1) time. √  Then, Π-Vertex Deletion can be solved in 2  2m  · nd+O(1) time.  Proof. Let A denote an arbitrary but fixed maximum-cardinality set such√that G[A] ∈ Π. First, consider the case that A contains a vertex v that has degree at most 2m in G. Then, for each A′ ⊆ N (v) branch into a case assuming that A′ = A ∩ N (v). In each of these cases, branch for each subset Ad of size at most d of V \ N [v] into a case assuming Ad = A \ N [v]. Now if |A′ ∪ Ad ∪ {v}| ≥ n − k, then check whether G[A′ ∪ Ad ∪ {v}] fulfills Π using the algorithm promised by the√ premise of the lemma. If this is the case, √ then return “yes”. The overall number 2m d · n , resulting in a running time of 2 2m · nd+O(1) for this part of the algorithm. of branches is 2 If A contains v, then in one of the created branches both assumptions are correct. Hence, if all √ of the branches√for all v with degree at most 2m return “no”, then A contains only vertices of degree at least 2m + 1. Thus, all other vertices may be removed from the graph while decreasing the size bound k accordingly. √ In the remaining graph, n < 2m, thus a brute-force algorithm √ testing for each vertex subset A of size at least n − k whether G[A] fulfills Π has running time 2 2m · nO(1) .  5  Consequences for Some Restricted Domains of Input Graphs  We now present running time lower bounds for Π-Vertex Deletion when the input graph is restricted to belong to a certain graph class. Such restrictions are motivated by at least two aspects: From an application viewpoint, one should provide hardness results for realistic types of input instances, for example for sparse graphs. From a complexity-theoretic viewpoint, hardness results for restricted inputs may facilitate further reductions.  5.1  Planar Graphs Planar Π-Vertex Deletion Input: An undirected planar graph G = (V, E) and an integer k. Question: Is there a set S ⊆ V such that |S| ≤ k and G[V \ S] is contained in Π?  In Planar Π-Vertex Deletion, we are only interested in properties Π that contain all independent sets: Otherwise, for some fixed d ≥ 5 (depending on Π), the property Π cannot contain planar graphs of order at least Rd,d since these graphs cannot contain an independent set of size d and thus contain a K5 . For graph properties Π containing all independent sets and excluding at least one planar graph, we can apply our modification of Yannakakis’ reduction when we reduce from Planar Vertex 11  Cover instead: First, as noted for √ example in [5, Theorem 14.9] it is known that Planar Vero( tex Cover cannot be solved in 2 n) time (assuming the ETH).5 Second, the reduction behind Theorem 3 produces a planar graph if it has a planar graph as input. Third, if Π is hereditary and excludes some planar graph, then it has a nonempty family of planar forbidden induced subgraphs F. Finally, in a reduction producing a planar graph, we may ignore all nonplanar forbidden induced subgraphs. Thus, we can simply carry out the reduction behind Lemma 1 starting from Planar Vertex Cover and picking the gadget graph HΠ only among the planar forbidden induced subgraphs of Π. The replacement of edges of the Planar Vertex Cover instance by planar graphs and the attachment of planar graphs to single vertices clearly yields a planar graph, as noted by Yannakakis [16]. Moreover, if the Planar Vertex Cover instance has O(n) vertices, then so has the Planar Π-Vertex Deletion instance. Altogether, we arrive at the following. Theorem 6. Let Π be a hereditary graph property containing all independent sets and excluding at least one √ planar graph. Then, if the ETH is true, Planar Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved o( in 2 n) time.  5.2  Bounded-Degeneracy Graphs  For the bounded-degeneracy case, we first observe that Corollary 1 already implies that for Π containing all independent sets, Π-Vertex Deletion deletion cannot be solved in subexponential time even on graphs with bounded degree and thus not on graphs with bounded degeneracy. Here, we improve the bound on the degeneracy. Theorem 7. Let Π be a hereditary graph property such that all independent sets are in Π. Let δ be the smallest number such that there exists a γ-ordering of the forbidden subgraphs of Π such that a forbidden subgraph with lexicographically smallest Γ-sequence is δ-degenerate. Then, Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o(n+m) time even if G is (δ + 1)-degenerate. Proof. We modify Construction 4 as follows. Let HΠ denote the δ-degenerate forbidden subgraph of Π that has the lexicographically smallest Γ-sequence among all forbidden induced subgraphs of Π. As before, let H1 denote the connected component of HΠ that has the highest γ-value and fix c again to be a vertex such that α(H, c) = γ(H) and let J denote the induced subgraph containing c and an arbitrary but fixed largest connected component of H1 − c. Let nJ denote the order of J and fix a degeneracy-ordering of J, that is, a sequence (j1 , . . . , jnJ ) such that ji has degree at most δ in J[{ji , ji+1 , . . . , jnJ }]. Now let c′ denote the vertex with the highest index that is different from c. More precisely, if c 6= jnJ , then c′ = jnJ ; otherwise c′ = jnJ −1 . Now perform the construction as before using the new choice of c and c′ when replacing an edge of the vertex cover instance by a copy of J. All other parts of the construction remain the same. Observe that in this modified construction we only make the choice of c′ specific where it was arbitrary before. This implies that the modified construction is correct and that any algorithm solving Π-Vertex Deletion on the constructed instances (G′ , k) implies a 2o(n+m) -time algorithm for Subcubic Girth-d Vertex Cover, violating ETH. It remains to show that the constructed instance is (δ + 1)-degenerate. The base graph of the construction is clearly δ-degenerate as each connected component is a subgraph of HΠ . 5  The result follows essentially from a classic reduction [10] of Vertex Cover to Planar Vertex Cover that uses constant-size uncrossing gadgets.  12  We now describe a sequence of vertex deletions for the vc-extension such that each deleted vertex has degree at most δ + 1 when it is deleted. First, observe that the graph D := H1 − (V (J) \ {c}) which is added for each vertex v of the original instance is δ-degenerate. In every copy D ∗ of D, all vertices except v (which is the vertex identified with the cut-vertex c) have no neighbors outside of this copy. Since D−c is δ-degenerate, every induced subgraph of D ∗ that contains v plus some other vertex u 6= v, thus contains a vertex different from v that has degree at most δ + 1. Consequently, this vertex can be deleted first. This vertex deletion can be performed as long as any copy D ∗ of D still contains a vertex different from the vertex that was identified with c. The remaining graph consists of copies J ∗ of J that have two vertices which are identified with vertices V , the vertex set of the Subcubic Girth-3d Vertex Cover instance. Consider a such a copy J ∗ replacing an edge {u, v}, that is, the vertices c and c′ are identified with u and v. By the modification of the construction, either c or c′ equals jnJ . As a consequence, deleting all vertices of J ∗ that are different from u and v in the same order as before, gives a deletion sequence in which each deleted vertex has degree at most δ + 1. After deleting all these vertices in each copy of J, what remains is either an independent set (if c and c′ are not adjacent in J) or exactly the graph G of the original Subcubic Girth-3d Vertex Cover instance. This graph is 2-degenerate. Since Π contains all independent sets, HΠ is not 0-degenerate and thus 2 ≤ (δ + 1). An example application of Theorem 7 is the following. If all forbidden subgraphs of Π are acyclic, then Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o(n+m) time even if G is 2-degenerate.  5.3  Graphs with a Dominating Vertex  Next, we consider instances which have a dominating vertex and thus diameter two. Proposition 8. Let Π be a hereditary graph property. If Π contains all independent sets, then Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o(n+m) time even if G has a dominating vertex. Proof. We extend Construction 4. Recall that (G, k) is the Subcubic Girth-3d Vertex Cover instance and that (G′ , k) is the instance of Π-Vertex Deletion obtained by Construction 4. Let HΠ denote again the forbidden induced subgraph of Π that has the lexicographically smallest Γsequence, let H1 denote the connected component of HΠ that has maximum γ-value and assume that d connected components of HΠ are isomorphic to H1 . Finally, let H< denote the set of graphs whose γ-value is smaller than H1 . Now distinguish two cases. Case 1: There is a graph I whose connected components I1 , . . . , Iq are all from H< such that the graph obtained by • taking the disjoint union of I and d − 1 copies of H1 , and then • adding a further vertex v and making v adjacent to all vertices of the graph is not contained in Π. Observe that by the choice of HΠ and H< , I is contained in Π. Perform the construction as previously, let (G′ , k) denote the graph as previously constructed. Now take the disjoint union of I and G′ . Then, add a vertex v ∗ and make it adjacent to all vertices of this graph and call the resulting graph G∗ . We show that (G∗ , k + 1) and (G′ , k) are equivalent instances. First, assume that G′ has a Π-vertex deletion set S ′ of size at most k. The proof of Lemma 1 shows that G has a vertex cover of size k which then implies that we can assume without loss of generality that S ′ does not contain vertices of the base graph. Thus, S ′ contains d − 1 connected 13  components that are isomorphic to H1 and all other connected components of G′ −S ′ have smaller γvalue than H1 . By the choice of HΠ and by the fact that all connected components of I are from H< , we have that the disjoint union of G−S and I is contained in Π. Thus, G∗ −(S ′ ∪{v ∗ }) is contained in Π and G∗ has a Π-vertex deletion set of size at most k + 1. Now assume that (G′ , k) is a no-instance, that is, G′ has no Π-vertex deletion set of size at most k. Let S ′ be a minimum-cardinality Π-vertex deletion set of G′ . If |S ′ | ≥ k + 2, then any Π-vertex deletion set of G∗ has size at least k + 2 and the instances are equivalent. Hence, assume |S| = k + 1. We first show that S of G leaves exactly d − 1 disjoint copies of H1 in G′ − S. Assume towards a contradiction that there is a minimum-cardinality Π-vertex deletion set S such that d′ < d − 1 disjoint copies of H1 remain in G − S. Thus, at least d∗ = (d − 1) − d′ copies of H1 in the base graph are destroyed which means that S ′ contains at most k + 1 − d∗ vertices of the vc-extension. Furthermore, observe that the vc-extension of G′ − S ′ contains at most d∗ − 1 disjoint copies of H1 by the assumption on S ′ . We show that G has a vertex cover of size at most k − 1. To this end, create a set SA ⊆ V as follows: • For each vertex v ∈ V ∩ S ′ , add v to SA , • for each copy D ∗ of D in G′ such that S ′ contains a vertex from V (D ∗ )\V , add the vertex v ∈ V (D ∗ ) ∩ V to SA , • for each copy J ∗ of J such that S ′ \ V contains a vertex from V (J ∗ ) \ V add an arbitrary vertex of V (J ∗ ) ∩ V to SA . The set SA has size at most k + 1 − d∗ . Now, consider the graph G − SA and observe that every edge {u, v} in G − SA directly corresponds to an induced copy of H1 in G′ − S ′ : Since {u, v} is present in G − SA , we have that S ′ does not contain u or v, does not contain vertices from the copies of D that are attached to u or v, and does not contain a vertex from the copy of J attached to u and v. Now let q denote the size of a maximum matching in G − SA and observe that this implies that the vc-extension of G′ − S ′ has q vertex-disjoint copies of H1 . Hence, q < d∗ < d. Thus, G − SA has a maximum matching of size less than d and thus (since G has girth 3d) a vertex cover of size q < d∗ . Thus, G has a vertex cover of size k + 1 − d∗ + q ≤ k. This implies that G′ has a Π-vertex deletion set of size at most k, contradicting our assumption on S. Thus, if S has minimum-cardinality, then G∗ − S contains exactly d − 1 disjoint copies of H1 . Now G∗ − S contains a disjoint union of I and d − 1 connected components isomorphic to H1 and a vertex v ∗ that is adjacent to all vertices in G∗ − S. Hence, any Π-vertex deletion set of G∗ has size at least k + 2. Case 2: otherwise. Add a vertex v to the graph G′ obtained by the original construction and make v ∗ adjacent to all vertices in G, call the resulting graph G∗ . We show that (G∗ , k) and (G′ , k) are equivalent. First, if G∗ has a Π-vertex deletion set of size at most k, then so does G′ since G′ is an induced subgraph of G∗ . Second, let S ′ denote a Π-vertex deletion set of size at most k. As discussed in the proof of Case 1, we can assume without loss of generality that S ′ does not contain vertices of the base graph. Consequently, G′ − S ′ contains a disjoint union of d − 1 copies of H1 and further graphs H ′ with γ(H ′ ) < γ(H1 ). Thus, with the exception of the copies of H1 , every other connected component of G′ − S ′ is a graph from H− . By the case assumption, adding a vertex to G′ − S ′ and making it adjacent to all vertices of G′ − S ′ gives a graph in Π. Hence, the isomorphic graph G∗ − S ′ is also contained in Π. 14  Summarizing, in both cases we can modify the construction such that the resulting graph has one dominating vertex. Observe that this increases the number of edges by at most |V (G′ ) + O(1)|. Thus, the resulting graph has O(|V (G)|) edges and vertices, the running time bound follows. Now for √ graph properties excluding some fixed independent set, all we can hope for is excluding 2o(n+ m) -time algorithms (since the general case can be solved in 2o(m) time). Proposition 9. Let Π be a hereditary graph property such that √ Π does not contain all independent sets, then Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o(n+ m) time even if G has a dominating vertex. Proof. Let Π̄ denote the graph property that contains all graphs that are complement graphs of graphs in Π. Consider Construction 4 when applied to show that Π̄ cannot be solved in 2o(n) time. Let G′ denote the graph obtained by this construction. Since H1 contains at least one edge, one may safely add an isolated vertex at the end of the construction and obtain a graph G∗ that has a Π̄-vertex deletion set of size at least k if and only if G′ does. Hence, Π̄-vertex cannot be solved in 2o(n+m) time assuming the ETH, also if the input graph G∗ has an isolated vertex. Now the claimed hardness result follows from the fact that the complement graph Ḡ∗ has a dominating vertex and the same number of overall vertices and every induced subgraph Ḡ∗ [X] of Ḡ∗ is in Π if and only if G∗ [X] is in Π̄.  6  Connected Π-Vertex Deletion  Finally, we consider a popular variant of Π-Vertex Deletion where the set of deleted vertices has to be connected. Special cases of this problem that have been studied include Connected Vertex Cover [12], Connected Feedback Vertex Set [11, 20], and Minimum k-Path Connected Vertex Cover [17]. Connected Π-Vertex Deletion Input: An undirected graph G = (V, E) and an integer k. Question: Is there a set S ⊆ V such that G[S] is connected, |S| ≤ k, and G[V \ S] is contained in Π? For this problem, we obtain the same running time bounds as for Π-Vertex Deletion. Theorem 10. Let Π be a hereditary nontrivial graph property, then: 1. If the ETH is true, then Connected Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o(n+ time,  √  m)  2. If the ETH is true, then Connected Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o(n+m) time if Π contains all independent sets. 3. If Π excludes some independent set, then Connected Π-Vertex Deletion can be solved √ in 2O( m) + O(n) time if and only if membership in Π can be recognized in 2O(n) time. 4. If Π excludes some independent set, then Connected Π-Vertex Deletion can be solved in 2o(m) + O(n) time if and only if membership in Π can be recognized in 2o(m) time. 15  The two positive results for Π excluding some independent set can be easily obtained by adapting the algorithm described in Lemma 2 in such a way that solutions (vertex sets to delete) are only accepted if they induce a connected subgraph. Also, the only if part of the last two statements follows directly since it is obtained by considering the special case k = 0, where the solution is empty and thus trivially connected. To prove the running time lower bounds given in Theorem 10, we extend Construction 4. One approach could be to add a universal vertex that needs to be deleted. To obtain hardness also in the case of bounded-degree graphs (if Π contains all independent sets), we instead modify the construction by adding a set of vertices that is part of every connected minimum-cardinality Π-vertex deletion set and connects the solution vertices of the original instance by forming a binary tree. Lemma 3. Let Π be a hereditary nontrivial graph property containing all independent sets. If the ETH is true, then Connected Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o(n+m) time. Proof. We reduce from Subcubic Girth-3d Vertex Cover by adapting Construction 4. Let (G = (V, E), k) denote the instance of Subcubic Girth-d Vertex Cover. To simplify the construction somewhat, assume without loss of generality that V = {1, . . . , n} and that the number n of vertices in G is a power of 2, that is, n = 2µ for some µ ∈ N. First, perform Construction 4. Then, set i := µ − 1 and add a set Vi := {vi1 , . . . , v2i } of 2i vertices, and make each vij adjacent to j and j + 2i (recall that the output graph of Construction 4 has V as a vertex subset). Now, for each vertex vij of Vi , add a copy of H1 and identify c (a fixed vertex of H1 such that α(H1 , c) = α(H1 )) with vij . Continue the construction for decreasing i, that is, until i = 0, do the following. Set i ← i − 1, i j j+2i and vi+1 and add a vertex set Vi := {vi1 , . . . , vi2 }. Then, for each vij , make vij adjacent to vi+1 , S j and add a copy of H1 and identify c with vi . Let VT := i∈[µ] Vi and call the copies of H1 that are added in this step the VT -attachments. Let G′ := (V ′ , E ′ ) denote the graph obtained this way. Conclude the reduction by setting k′ := k + |VT |. Observe that |V ′ | = O(n) and |E ′ | = O(n). Thus, to show the lemma, it remains to show the equivalence of the Subcubic Girth-3d Vertex Cover instance (G, k) and of the Connected Π-Vertex Deletion instance (G′ , k′ ). If (G, k) is a yes-instance with a size-k vertex cover S, then S ′ := VT ∪ S is a size-k Π-vertex deletion set: the graph G′ − S ′ has at most d − 1 connected components with γ-value γ(H1 ) and all other connected components have γ-value less than γ(H1 ) (recall that d is the number of connected components of HΠ that are isomorphic to H1 ). Then, by the definition of HΠ , G′ − S ′ fulfills Π. Moreover, G′ [S ′ ] is connected: G[S ′ \ S] is a binary tree and every vertex of V has one neighbor in S ′ \ S. For the converse, observe that every connected Π-vertex deletion set S ′ deletes at least one vertex in the vc-extension. Thus, it may only delete vertices of the vc-extension and of VT -attachments. Consequently, only the base graph may contain induced subgraphs that are isomorphic to H1 . Note that each VT -attachment is isomorphic to H1 . Since, there are |VT | vertex-disjoint VT -attachments, at least |VT | vertices of S ′ are not from the vc-extension. This implies that there is a set S ∗ of at most k′ − |VT | = k vertices in the vc-extension whose deletion destroys all induced subgraphs of the vc-extension that are isomorphic to H1 . As in the the proof of Lemma 1, this implies that G has a vertex cover of size at most k. The reduction behind Lemma 3 is an extension of Construction 4 which increases the vertex degree of every vertex by at most one and additionally adds vertices whose degree is at most ∆(HΠ )+3, where ∆(HΠ ) is the maximum degree in HΠ . 16  Corollary 3. Let Π be a hereditary nontrivial graph property such that all independent sets are in Π. Let ∆ be the smallest number such that there exists a γ-ordering of the forbidden subgraphs of Π such that a forbidden subgraph with lexicographically smallest Γ-sequence has maximum degree ∆. Then, Connected Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o(n+m) time even if G has maximum degree 3∆ + 1. For properties Π that do not include all independent sets, we also obtain a tight result. Lemma 4. Let Π be a hereditary nontrivial graph property excluding some independent set. If the √ ETH is true, then Connected Π-Vertex Deletion cannot be solved in 2o(n+ m) time. Proof. Let Π̄ denote the property that contains all graphs that are complement graphs of a graph in Π. Reduce from Subcubic Girth-3d Vertex Cover by first performing Construction 4 with one difference: add d (instead of d − 1) copies of H1 to the base graph. Let G′ denote the graph obtained by this construction. Observe that at least one vertex of one of these d copies of H1 is contained in any Π̄-vertex deletion set of the resulting graph. Moreover, it is sufficient to delete only one vertex v in this copy of H1 . Thus, G′ has a Π̄-vertex deletion set of size at most k + 1 if and only if G has a vertex cover of size at most k. Now, let Ḡ′ denote the complement graph of the graph obtained by the modified Construction 4. There is a minimum-cardinality Π-vertex deletion set that contains v and no further vertex from the copy of H1 that contains v. Hence, v is in Ḡ′ adjacent to all other vertices of this minimum-cardinality Π-vertex deletion set, which makes the subgraph induced by this vertex deletion set connected. Therefore, Ḡ′ has a connected Π-vertex deletion set of size at most k if and only if G has a vertex cover of size at most k. The running time bound follows from observing that Ḡ′ has O(|V |2 ) edges and O(|V |) vertices where V is the vertex set of the Subcubic Girth-3d Vertex Cover instance. Finally, let Connected Planar Π-Vertex Deletion denote the variant of Connected Π-Vertex Deletion where the input graph is restricted to be planar. We can show the same running time lower bound as for the unconstrained vertex deletion problem on planar graphs. Theorem 11. Let Π be a hereditary graph property containing all independent sets and excluding at least one planar graph. Then, if the ETH is true, Connected Planar Π-Vertex Deletion √ cannot be solved in 2o( n) time. Proof. Reduce from Planar Vertex Cover. Given an instance (G, k) of Planar Vertex Cover, fix an arbitrary embedding of G. Now add one vertex into every face and make this vertex adjacent to all vertices on the boundary of the face. Call the additional vertex set VF and let EF denote set of edges incident with vertices of VF . Now, perform Construction 4 on G as before, that is, add a base graph, replace each edge of G by a copy of J and add for each vertex v of G a copy of H1 − (V (J) \ {c}) and identify c with v. Now, for each vertex v ∈ VF add a copy of H1 and identify c with v. Call the resulting graph G′ and set k′ := k+|VF |. Observe that |VF | = O(|V |) and that |EF | = |VF | (we may assume without loss of generality that G is connected). Moreover, G′ is planar, it is obtained from a planar graph by replacing edges and vertices by planar graphs. √ o( n) -time algorithm for Connected Planar Thus, if the two instances are equivalent, then any 2 √ Π-Vertex Deletion implies a 2o( n) for Planar Vertex Cover. To complete the proof, we thus need to show that G has a vertex cover of size k if and only if G′ has a connected Π-vertex deletion set of size k′ .  17  ⇒: If S is a size-k vertex cover of G, then S ∪VF is a connected size-k Π-vertex deletion set of G′ : After the deletion of S ∪ VF all connected components of G′ have γ-value lower than H1 and thus, by the definition of HΠ and the construction of the base graph, the remaining graph is contained in Π. It remains to show that G′ [S ∪ VF ] is connected. Every vertex in S has a neighbor in VF . Moreover, every pair of vertices u, v ∈ VF that were placed into faces of G whose boundaries share an edge are connected in G′ [S ∪ VF ] because one of the two endpoints of this edge is contained in S and both endpoints are neighbors of u and v. Thus, all vertices of VF are connected in G′ [S ∪ VF ] since the dual graph of the planar graph G is connected. ⇐: Let S ′ denote a connected Π-vertex deletion set of size at most k′ in G′ . Since G′ [S ′ ] is connected, S ′ cannot contain any vertices of the base graph. Consequently, by the construction of the base graph and the choice of Π, all induced subgraphs isomorphic to H1 must be destroyed in the connected component containing the vc-extension. Thus, for each copy of H1 that was attached to a vertex of VF at least one vertex must be deleted. This implies that S ′ contains at most k vertices of the vc-extension. Observe that for each subgraph isomorphic to H1 in the vc-extension, there are two vertices {u, v} that are from V and deleting these two vertices cuts the other vertices from the rest of the graph. Thus, since G′ [S ′ ] is connected at least one of these two vertices is contained in S ′ . Let S denote the set of these at most k vertices. Since for each edge {u, v} of G, the graph G′ contains a such subgraph isomorphic to H1 having u and v as cut-vertices, S is a vertex cover in G.  References [1] N. R. Aravind, R. B. Sandeep, and N. Sivadasan. Parameterized lower bounds and dichotomy results for the NP-completeness of H-free edge modification problems. In Proceedings of the 12th Latin American Theoretical Informatics Symposium (LATIN ’16), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2016. To appear. [2] B. Balasundaram, S. Butenko, and I. V. Hicks. Clique relaxations in social network analysis: The maximum k -plex problem. Operations Research, 59(1):133–142, 2011. [3] S. Böcker and J. Baumbach. Cluster Editing. In Proceedings of the 9th Conference on Computability in Europe (CIE ’13), volume 7921 of LNCS, pages 33–44. Springer, 2013. [4] K. Buchin, M. Buchin, J. Byrka, M. Nöllenburg, Y. Okamoto, R. I. Silveira, and A. Wolff. Drawing (complete) binary tanglegrams - hardness, approximation, fixed-parameter tractability. Algorithmica, 62(1-2):309–332, 2012. [5] M. Cygan, F. V. Fomin, L. Kowalik, D. Lokshtanov, D. Marx, M. Pilipczuk, M. Pilipczuk, and S. Saurabh. Parameterized Algorithms. Springer, 2015. [6] P. G. Drange, F. V. Fomin, M. Pilipczuk, and Y. Villanger. Exploring the subexponential complexity of completion problems. ACM Transactions on Computation Theory, 7(4):14, 2015. [7] M. R. Fellows, J. Guo, H. Moser, and R. Niedermeier. A complexity dichotomy for finding disjoint solutions of vertex deletion problems. ACM Transactions on Computation Theory, 2(2):5, 2011. 18  [8] B. Fiedler, A. Mochizuki, G. Kurosawa, and D. Saito. Dynamics and control at feedback vertex sets. I: Informative and determining nodes in regulatory networks. Journal of Dynamics and Differential Equations, 25(3), 2013. [9] F. V. Fomin and D. Kratsch. Exact Exponential Algorithms. Springer, 2010. [10] M. R. Garey, D. S. Johnson, and L. J. Stockmeyer. Some simplified NP-complete graph problems. Theoretical Computer Science, 1(3):237–267, 1976. [11] A. Grigoriev and R. Sitters. Connected feedback vertex set in planar graphs. In Proceedings of the 35th International Workshop on Graph-Theoretic Concepts in Computer Science (WG ’09), volume 5911 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 143–153, 2010. [12] J. Guo, R. Niedermeier, and S. Wernicke. Parameterized complexity of Vertex Cover variants. Theory of Computing Systems, 41(3):501–520, 2007. [13] J. Guo and Y. R. Shrestha. Complexity of disjoint Π-vertex deletion for disconnected forbidden subgraphs. Journal of Graph Algorithms and Applications, 18(4):603–631, 2014. [14] R. Impagliazzo, R. Paturi, and F. Zane. Which problems have strongly exponential complexity? Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 63(4):512–530, 2001. [15] D. S. Johnson and M. Szegedy. What are the least tractable instances of max independent set? In Proceedings of the 10th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA ’99), pages 927–928, 1999. [16] J. M. Lewis and M. Yannakakis. The node-deletion problem for hereditary properties is NPcomplete. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 20(2):219–230, 1980. [17] X. Liu, H. Lu, W. Wang, and W. Wu. PTAS for the minimum k-path connected vertex cover problem in unit disk graphs. Journal of Global Optimization, 56(2):449–458, 2013. [18] D. Lokshtanov, D. Marx, and S. Saurabh. Lower bounds based on the exponential time hypothesis. Bulletin of the EATCS, 105:41–72, 2011. [19] D. Marx. The square root phenomenon in planar graphs. In Proceedings of the 40th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP ’13), volume 7966 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, page 28. Springer, 2013. [20] N. Misra, G. Philip, V. Raman, S. Saurabh, and S. Sikdar. FPT algorithms for connected feedback vertex set. Journal of Combinatorial Optimization, 24(2):131–146, 2012. [21] A. Nichterlein. Degree-Constrained Editing of Small-Degree Graphs. Phd thesis, TU Berlin, December 2014. [22] M. Yannakakis. Edge-deletion problems. SIAM Journal on Computing, 10(2):297–309, 1981.  19

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
