Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_6875

Abstract:
Comparison-Based Choices  arXiv:1705.05735v1 [cs.DS] 16 May 2017  Jon Kleinberg ∗  Sendhil Mullainathan †  Johan Ugander ‡  Abstract A broad range of on-line behaviors are mediated by interfaces in which people make choices among sets of options. A rich and growing line of work in the behavioral sciences indicate that human choices follow not only from the utility of alternatives, but also from the choice set in which alternatives are presented. In this work we study comparison-based choice functions, a simple but surprisingly rich class of functions capable of exhibiting so-called choice-set effects. Motivated by the challenge of predicting complex choices, we study the query complexity of these functions in a variety of settings. We consider settings that allow for active queries or passive observation of a stream of queries, and give analyses both at the granularity of individuals or populations that might exhibit heterogeneous choice behavior. Our main result is that any comparison-based choice function in one dimension can be inferred as efficiently as a basic maximum or minimum choice function across many query contexts, suggesting that choice-set effects need not entail any fundamental algorithmic barriers to inference. We also introduce a class of choice functions we call distance-comparison-based functions, and briefly discuss the analysis of such functions. The framework we outline provides intriguing connections between human choice behavior and a range of questions in the theory of sorting.  1  Introduction  Modern information systems across a broad range of domains wrestle with increasingly expansive and heterogeneous corpora of data describing human decisions — from online marketplaces such as Amazon and AirBnB recording diverse purchasing behavior to search engines and recommendation systems that process continuous clickstreams, where clicks reflect choices. Many of the decisions made in these on-line environments have a consistent structure: users are presented with a set of options — a list of recommended books, search results, flight options, or users to follow — and they select one or more items from the set. The ubiquity of this framework has led to an active line of research on the problem of learning ranking functions [1]. There are many formulations in the literature, but the essential core is to assume that a user has a ranking over alternatives that is hidden from us, and by observing their choices we would like to infer this ranking. This question can be asked at the level of individuals or at the level of populations containing heterogeneous but related rankings. Choice-set effects. A central assumption in the work on rankings is that individuals start from an underlying total order on the possible alternatives. Roughly speaking, consider an inventory Z = {z1 , z2 , . . . , zn } of possible choices, globally ordered so that a particular user prefers zi to zj for i < j. When the user is ∗  Department of Computer Science, Cornell University. Email: kleinber@cs.cornell.edu Department of Economics, Harvard University. Email: mullain@fas.harvard.edu ‡ Department of Management Science & Engineering, Stanford University. Email: jugander@stanford.edu. This work is supported in part by a Simons Investigator Award, an ARO MURI grant, a Google Research Grant, Facebook Faculty Research Grants, and a David Morgenthaler II Faculty Fellowship. †  1  presented with a set of choices S ⊆ Z, they select the item in S that is ranked first according to this global order. There are many variations on this basic pattern — there may be noise in the selection, or options may be unobserved — but the total ordering is a crucial part of the structure. A long line of work in behavioral science [25, 22, 15, 9, 28], however, indicates that people’s empirical choices tend to deviate in significant ways from this picture. A person’s choice will in fact typically depend not just on the total ordering on the full set of alternatives Z, which is often enormous and implicit, but also on the choice set S they are shown as part of the specific decision at hand. Notable examples of such choice-set effects include the compromise effect, similarity aversion, and the decoy effect (also known as asymmetric dominance), and have been observed in diverse contexts both offline and online; recent work in machine learning has highlighted the prevalence of choice-set effects [23, 4, 33, 19] and non-transitive comparisons [7, 8], particularly in online search, online ads, and online games. A canonical example of a choice-set effect is the so-called compromise effect [24]: faced with the choice between a mediocre option for $10, a good option for $15, and an excellent option for $20, people will tend to choose the good option for $15; but faced instead with a choice between the same good option for $15, the excellent option for $20, and an outstanding option for $25, people will be more likely to choose the excellent option for $20. In other words, there is a tendency to favor the option that compromises between the two extremes in the set that is presented. More generally, suppose that a set of products exhibit a trade-off between two factors — for example, price vs. quality, power vs. reliability, or aesthetics vs. fuel efficiency. There is a naturally defined onedimensional set of products that are on the Pareto frontier: they are the options for which no other product is more desirable in both factors. Consider four products A, B, C, and D that are arranged in this order along the one-dimensional frontier (A is the least powerful but most reliable, and D as the most powerful but least reliable). In a wide variety of settings, B will be empirically chosen more often when it is presented as one of the three choices S = {A, B, C} than when it is one of the three choices S 0 = {B, C, D} — in other words, when it is the compromise option rather than an extreme option. By the same reasoning, C will be chosen more often when it is presented as part of S 0 than as part of S. One can ask whether this is simply a representational issue, but in fact it is much deeper. The point is that in any model based on a total ordering on the alternatives Z, a user would prefer either B or C, and this would hold in any choice set S that contains both of them. But B and C are options in both the sets S = {A, B, C} and S 0 = {B, C, D}, and the aggregate distribution of choices in favor of B versus C changes across these two sets. This suggests that the relative ordering of B and C in fact is not well-defined in isolation, but must be evaluated in the context of the choice set (S or S 0 ). It matters what else is on offer. Comparison-based choice functions. In this paper, we consider a set of basic algorithmic questions that arise when we seek to infer models of user choice in the presence of comparison-based choice-set effects. We focus on a basic formulation in which these effects arise, and show how our framework makes it possible to derive asymptotic bounds on query complexity and sample complexity in performing these types of inference. We set up the problem as follows. (1) Embedding of alternatives. The full collection of alternatives is a set U = {u1 , . . . , un }, and there is an embedding of U into a space of attributes X via a function h : U → X. For most of our discussion we will take X to be the real line R1 , so that h(ui ) is a real number; thus most of the time we can think of the embedded points {h(u1 ), . . . , h(un )} as representing a one-dimensional trade-off continuum as in the discussion above. We will assume that the embedding h is not known to us. Indeed, while we sometimes might know the crucial one-dimensional attribute of an item, such as a price, the important attributes in many settings will not be explicitly presented to us: a user might have a mental ordering of clothing styles on a spectrum from “too dull” to “too ostentatious,” or restaurants on a spectrum from “too bland” to “too 2  exotic,” or book or movie recommendations on a spectrum from “too much what I’m already reading” to “too far from my interests.” (2) Choice functions. We focus on an individual who is presented with a subset S ⊆ U of a fixed size k and chooses one element from S. Throughout this discussion we will refer to subsets of U of size k as k-sets of U . We study k-sets, rather than subsets of arbitrary/varying size, both for conceptual clarity and also with the motivation that many of our motivating applications — online recommendations and search results — often present choices between a fixed number of options. An individual’s selections are represented using a choice function f : for each k-set S ⊆ U , we define f (S) ∈ S as the individual’s selection when presented with S. We say that f exhibits choice-set effects if the identity of the set S affects the relative choice between two elements: specifically, f exhibits choice-set effects if there exist k-sets S and T , and elements ui and uj , such that ui , uj ∈ S ∩ T , and f (S) = ui while f (T ) = uj . If such choices can occur then a choice between ui and uj depends on whether they are presented in the context of S or T ; one can view such a contextual effect as a violation of the independence of irrelevant alternatives (“IIA”) [21]. We define choice functions here as deterministic for a given individual. Later in this work we study populations composed of a mixture of different choice functions, and our results there can be interpreted equivalently as applying to the choices of an individual making probabilistic decisions corresponding to a randomization over different choice functions. We can contrast such probabilistic choices (those expressible as mixtures), with random utility models (RUMs) [3, 17]: they lack some of the flexibility of RUMs; but discrete choice models such as RUMs on the other hand typically entail other restrictions, including assuming the independence of irrelevant alternatives. Identifying the expressive limits of random mixtures of choice functions for modeling probabilistic choice is an intriguing open challenge. (3) Comparison-based functions. We focus here on comparison-based choice functions, which incorporate the ordinal structure inherent in preference learning, but which are still rich enough to exhibit choice-set effects. A choice function f on k-sets is comparison-based if the value f (S) can be computed purely using comparisons on the ordering of the numbers {h(ui ) : ui ∈ S}. It is not hard to see that for any comparisonbased choice function f on k-sets, there is a number ` between 1 and k so that for all k-sets S, the value f (S) is equal to the `th ranked element in S according to the embedding h(·). We can therefore characterize any comparison-based choice functions in one dimension as a position-selecting choice function for some position ` of k. Thus, comparison-based choice functions represent different versions of the compromise effects discussed earlier: faced with a set S of k options ranked along a one-dimensional spectrum, an individual would choose the `th ranked option. For example, when k = 3 and ` = 2, the individual always chooses the middle of three options, much like the sample instance with choices A, B, C, D discussed earlier. It is not hard to verify, using examples such as this one, that a comparison-based choice function exhibits choice-set effects if and only if 2 ≤ ` ≤ k − 1. Choice functions over k-sets as we define them here are very general mathematical functions, capable of encoding an arbitrary choice for every k-set. Comparison-based functions in one dimension, however, are a structured subset of choice functions that provide a useful abstraction of many decision contexts. We are not aware of any prior inference work on general comparison-based functions, which is surprising given the central role of binary comparison in the fundamental problem of sorting. We focus on comparisons in one dimension. Comparison functions in higher dimensions can have a significantly more complex structure; extending our results to higher dimensions is beyond the scope of the present work. A short-coming of comparison-based functions is that they lack the ability to grasp “similarity,” an impor3  tant aspect of choice-set effects such as similarity aversion and the decoy effect, and one that requires a notion of distance beyond ordinal comparison. As a step towards extending our framework to model such effects, we also study distance-comparison-based choice functions that model choices according to distance comparisons, possibly in high-dimensional latent spaces. The present work: Asymptotic complexity of inference. There are many questions that one can consider for models of comparison-based choice functions; here we study a basic family of problems that are inherent in any inference procedure, and which form an interesting connection to fundamental questions in sorting. The basic problem we study has the following structure: we observe a sequence of choices of the form (S, f (S)), and at the end of this sequence we must correctly report the value of f (S) for all (or almost all) k-sets S. The question is how few observations (S, f (S)) we need in order to achieve various measures of success. We ask this question for different models of how the observations are generated. We first consider active queries, in which we can choose S and receive the value of f (S); we investigate the potential for efficient inference both when a single individual is making choices with a fixed function f , and for population mixtures of different choice functions. As a second model we consider passive queries, a model whereby a stream of pairs (S, f (S)) is generated uniformly at random over possible k-sets S, without the control over S offered by the active query model. For active queries, a natural baseline for understanding the problem formulation is the problem of sorting, which precisely consists of the case k = 2 and ` = 1. A comparison-based sorting algorithm asks about a sequence of pairs S = {ui , uj }, and for each such pair it is told the identity of the preferred element. An efficient sorting algorithm given O(n log n) such queries can learn the sorted order of the elements, and thus can answer queries of the form f (S) for arbitrary pairs after learning the sorted order. We show that all comparison-based choice functions in one dimension exhibit the same O(n log n) active query complexity: for every ` and k, there is an algorithm that can ask about a sequence of O(n log n) k-sets S as queries, and from the values of f (S) it is then prepared to correctly report f (S) for all k-sets S. Roughly speaking, the algorithm works by first identifying a small set of elements that cannot be the answer to any query, and then it uses these elements as “anchors” on which to build sets that can simulate comparisons of pairs. Note that as the set size k grows, the O(n log n) queries form a smaller and smaller fraction of the set of all nk possible k-sets. We then consider active queries for population mixtures, in which different people use different comparisonbased choice functions on k-sets, and when we pose a query S, we get back the answer f (S) for an individual selected uniformly at random from the population. We show that for a fixed but unknown vector of probabilities for each choice function under some natural non-degeneracy conditions we can determine f (S) for each segment of the population after O(n log n) active queries. The algorithm here uses random sampling ideas combined with techniques for sorting using noisy comparators [10]. For passive queries, where an algorithm is presented with a stream of values (f (S), S) for randomly selected sets S, the question is how long we need to observe values from the stream before being able to compute f (S) for all (or almost all) k-sets S. We show that for comparison-based choice functions f that exhibit choice-set effects (with ` between 2 and k − 1), we can do this after observing o(nk ) values from the stream with high probability; for an arbitrary ε > 0 and δ > 0, we can, with probability at least 1 − δ, determine f (S) for at least a 1 − ε fraction of all k-sets S. Our analysis here builds on a sequence of combinatorial results on sorting in one round, culminating in an asymptotically tight analysis of that problem by Alon and Azar [5, 2]. Finally, we consider how our results for comparison-based functions apply to distance-comparison-based choice functions in which the geometry of the alternatives’ embedding plays a consequential role. A range 4  of earlier work have made use of the ambient space in different ways, including methods such as conjoint analysis [3, 12]. Here, we consider the effect of performing comparisons among the pairwise distances between alternatives. This consideration enables us to reason about elements that are either central or outliers in a comparison-based fashion, providing a plausible model for the choice-set effect commonly known as similarity aversion. This line of inquiry into metric embeddings also connects our results with recent research in the learning and crowdsourcing literature on learning stochastic triplet embeddings [30] and inferences using the crowd median algorithm [13].  2  Active query complexity  We will first focus on active query algorithms that may choose queries sequentially based on the results of previous queries, and our goal here is to develop algorithms that after performing a small number of queries can take an arbitrary k-set S ⊆ U from a universe of n alternatives and correctly output f (S). We have previously noted that every comparison-based choice function over a one-dimensional ordering takes the form of a position-selecting choice function choosing the `th alternative of k for some ordering; we will denote this function by qk,` . Our results in this section show that for any fixed k ≥ 2 and any fixed but unknown ` ∈ {1, ..., k}, we can in fact learn the output for any input using an efficient twophase algorithm that performs only O(n log n) queries. This algorithm determines ` (up to a reflection we discuss below) by the time it terminates, but we also give a simple algorithm that recovers ` (up to the same reflection) more directly in just O(1) queries (without learning the output for all inputs). Thus, we establish that learning the position ` of a comparison-based choice function does not require running a comprehensive recovery algorithm. For recovering the choice function, we note that the orientation of the embedding is inconsequential. This symmetry is clear when considering the simplest example of k = 2, where f is either a max selector q2,1 or a min selector q2,2 . In order to deduce f (S) for every S we needn’t know whether f is choosing the max or min, as we will simply learn an embedding aligned with our selector. More generally, we have no way or need to distinguish between qk,` over a given embedding and qk,k−`+1 over the same embedding reversed, as they result in the exact same choices. Recovering choice functions. The algorithm we propose consists of two phases. In the first phase, we use O(n) queries to identify a set of “ineligible” alternatives. In the second phase, we use those ineligible alternatives to “anchor” the choice set down to a binary comparison between two eligible alternatives, allowing us to determine the ordering of the eligible alternatives in O(n log n) queries using comparison-based sorting. Theorem 2.1. Given a choice function f over k-sets S in a universe of n alternatives, there is an algorithm that recovers f after O(n log n) queries, meaning that after this set of queries it can output f (S) for any S. We prove this theorem by describing the algorithm together with its analysis, divided into its two phases of operation. For the first phase, we identify the ineligible elements. In the second phase, we simulate pairwise comparisons. Proof. We begin the first phase by observing that for a position selector qk,` making comparison-based choices over k-sets S ⊆ U with |U | = n, there are k − 1 alternatives that will never be chosen. For maxselectors qk,k these are the k − 1 minimal alternatives, for min-selectors qk,1 these are the k − 1 maximal alternatives, and for general qk,` these are the ` − 1 maximal and k − ` minimal alternatives from the embedded order.  5  a  c b  f (S) = b d = ineligible alternatives S⇤ = { S 2= {  k  ` item(s)  } `  a  c  b  }  1 item(s) d  Figure 1: For a given comparison-based choice function f over an unknown embedding, there are ineligible alternatives that will never be chosen, illustrated here for k = 4 and ` = 3. The elements are embedded in a 1-dimensional space, where the ` − 1 maximal and k − ` minimal elements can never be chosen. To find these elements, we run a simple discard algorithm. Commencing with k arbitrary initial alternatives in a choice set S1 , we query the choice function f and learn the choice f (S1 ). We then construct our next choice set by discarding the previous choice and selecting a new arbitrary alternative u ∈ U \ S1 to form S2 = (S1 \ f (S1 )) ∪ u. We query for f (S2 ), and repeat this discard procedure for n − k + 1 queries. After the last query we will have exhausted U and learned that S ∗ = Sn−k+1 \ f (Sn−k+1 ) are precisely the k − 1 alternatives in U that can never be selected by f . Having found the k − 1 ineligible alternatives S ∗ , we arbitrarily select k − 2 alternatives from S ∗ to form a set S −2 . See Figure 1 for an illustration of this procedure. In the second phase of the algorithm we use the set S −2 constructed above as padding for a choice set construction with two open positions: notice that for any two alternatives ui and uj , a query for f ({ui , uj }∪ S −2 ) will amount to binary comparison between ui and uj . If ` = 1 or ` = k, we know that this will be a max or a min selection, respectively. However, for intermediate values of ` we do not yet know whether such binary comparisons will be a max or a min selection, as it depends on what k − 2 elements from S ∗ were chosen to construct S −2 . There exists no basis for choosing S −2 from S ∗ in a non-arbitrary way, as we have no way of ever choosing any of the alternatives in S −2 . However, as noted earlier in the case of recovering choice functions for k = 2, we can simply assume that the comparator we have constructed is selecting the max of ui and uj , and then learn the order of the eligible alternatives from binary comparisons as oriented by that comparator. After O(n log n) padded comparison queries, we obtain a sorted order of the eligible alternatives. To conclude this second phase, we perform a single additional query to determine `, the position being selected, which is as yet unknown and unused. By querying for what we’ve come to suppose are the first k eligible elements, the chosen alternative will identify the `th position in the recovered embedding of the eligible alternatives. We again emphasize that we have no way of distinguishing between qk,` over a given embedding and qk,k−`+1 over the same embedding reversed, but the direction of the ordering is nonessential, as the choices are identical for all choice sets. Having learned the embedded order of the eligible alternatives in U as well as the position ` being selected, we can now discern the choice f (S) for any k-set S ⊆ U . As a further point, it is notable that no part of this algorithm depends on `, as it is only learned at the end of the final query, meaning that the entire algorithm is in fact indifferent to whether an individual is selecting minima, maxima, or intermediate positions. Lastly, we observe that the classic lower bound on sorting applies as a lower bound here as well, for fixed ` and k: there are (n − k + 1)!/2 possible permutations of how the eligible alternatives can be embedded (ignoring the k − 1 ineligible alternatives). Each query cements at most k − 1 relative orderings, at most 6  reducing the number of feasible orderings by a factor of k − 1. We thus require at least logk ((n − k)!/2) queries to learn a choice function, yielding a lower bound of Ω(n log n), as for sorting. Type classification. It can be valuable to learn how a choice function makes comparisons without necessarily learning the ordering implicated in the comparisons. Here we establish that we can learn `, up to the noted reflection equivalence, using O(k) queries without learning the order of the alternatives. Proposition 2.2. By querying for all k-set subsets of an arbitrary (k + 1)-set, we can determine `, up to reflection. Proof. The algorithm performs k + 1 queries for all the subsets of size k, where each of these subsets can be defined by what element is excluded. The k + 1 alternatives have an unknown internal ordering, and we let ui denote the ith alternative in order. From these queries, there can be only two possible elements selected as the output across the k different subsets: either the chosen alternative in the (` + 1)th ordered position (when the excluded element is one of u1 , . . . , u` ) or the chosen alternative in the `th ordered (when the excluded element is one of u`+1 , . . . , uk+1 ). Of these k + 1 k-sets, the (` + 1)th element will be chosen ` times, and the `th element will be chosen k − ` + 1 times. Thus, for any k, in order to determine the position ` of a position-selecting choice function, one can simply take an arbitrary set of k+1 elements and query for all subsets of k. Then ` (up to reflection) is the frequency of the less frequent of the two response elements.  3  Population mixtures  The results in the previous section assumed that all queries were evaluated by the same deterministic choice function f , where f (S) was consistently selecting the `th ordered alternative from within each k-set S. In this section, we show that we can recover choice functions in a more general setting, where the position ` chosen by f is drawn from a distribution over possible positions. This setting covers two generalizations of our active query results. First, it describes situations where a single individual is being repeatedly queried, and may exhibit compromise effects for some queries, independently at random. Second, it describes situations where the queries are handled by a population of individuals that all base their choices on the same ordered embedding, but differ in what position within an ordering that their choice functions select for. We show that we can still recover choice functions in this setting using O(n log n) queries, almost surely. Recalling one of our motivating examples from the introduction, this is a plausible reality: faced with a choice of restaurants ranging from “too bland” to “too exotic,” some individuals will compromise, while some will optimize for one of the extremes. In online settings the choices being made often come from heterogeneous populations, and we wish to develop an algorithm that can still recover choices in these settings. We define a mixed choice function as a comparison-based choice function on k-sets S ⊂ U where the `th ordered element in S is selected independently at random with probability π` . A mixed choice function is then completely defined by an P ordering of U and a probability distribution (π1 , ..., πk ) over positionselecting choice functions with ki=1 πi = 1. To avoid degeneracies, we require that π` > 0, ∀`, and also require constant separation between the probabilities, |π` − π`0 | > γ, ∀`, `0 with ` 6= `0 , for some constant γ > 0.  7  In its most basic instance, a mixed choice function over 2-sets is simply a noisy binary comparator over an ordering, with (π1 , π2 ) = (p, 1 − p) for some probability p. In this case, results from the sorting literature contribute that as long as p is bounded away from 1/2, the order can be recovered in O(n log n) queries almost surely [10]. Our contribution in this section is to generalize this result to arbitrary mixtures of comparison-based choice functions. We begin by showing that for any  > 0, we can recover the mixture probabilities (π1 , ..., πk ) of a mixed choice function with probability at least 1− in a number of queries that is O(1) in n, the size of U . We then show that we can indeed recover any mixed choice function f using O(n log n) queries with probability at least 1 − . Recovering mixture probabilities. We begin by showing that we can recover the mixture probabilities using a modified version of the algorithm we presented for recovering ` in an active query framework. Theorem 3.1. Let f be a mixed comparison-based choice function over k-sets in a universe of n alternatives. Let π = (π1 , ..., πk ) be the mixture distribution of f , and let π` > 0, ∀`, and |π` − π`0 | > γ, ∀`, `0 with `0 6= `, for some constant γ > 0. For any  > 0 and δ ∈ (0, γ/2) there exists a constant C > 0 such that an algorithm using C queries can recover π, meaning that it outputs a probability vector p for which P r(max` |π̂` − π` | ≤ δ) ≥ 1 −  holds for either π̂ = (p1 , ..., pk ) or π̂ = (pk , ..., p1 ). Proof. Our strategy is to study a single (k + 1)-set S + closely, and by querying each k-set within S + sufficiently many times we can recover the mixture distribution with the required precision. We index the k + 1 k-sets within S + as S1 , ..., Sk+1 . We define the random variables u Xi,j  ( 1 if query i of subset Sj returns u ∈ Sj = 0 otherwise,  (1)  u ] = π j for a vector of probabilities π j = (π j , ..., π j ) that is an unknown permutation of where E[Xi,j u 1 k (π1 , ..., πk ).  We first show that for each subset we can recover the complete set of probabilities with the specified precision and correctly ordered by their relative frequency. In a second stage we will then align the permuted π j vectors and thereby recover π itself (or π’s reflection). P u For each Sj , we consider the estimates π̂uj = C1 C i=1 Xi,j , and we show that this is correct to within the requested error tolerance if we choose C large enough. Recalling that δ < γ/2, a two-sided Chernoff bound tells us that: ! ! C j 2 1 X u (δ ) u Xi,j − πuj ≥ δuj πuj ≤ 2 exp − Pr Cπuj , C 2 + δuj i=1  for which we can set δuj = δ/πuj and use πuj ≤ 1, ∀j, u to obtain    δ2 j j Pr |π̂u − πu | ≥ δ ≤ 2 exp − C . 2+δ 8  a  b  c  d  ⇡1  ⇡2  ⇡3  S1 S2  a  b  c  a  b  d  S3  a  c  d  S4  b  c  d  Figure 2: A graphical sketch of the population alignment algorithm in Theorem 2, shown for k = 3. Left: a 4-set contains four 3-sets, S1 , S2 , S3 , S4 . Right: by querying for each 3-set sufficiently often, we can identify the frequencies π1 , π2 , π3 with which each element occurs and then identify π1 and π3 by the fact that their frequencies corresponds to the same element in all but one of the 3-sets. Let us define the bad events Ej,u = {|π̂uj − πuj | ≥ δ}, when we failed to recover πuj (the probability of selecting u from subset Sj ) within the specified precision. By taking the Union Bound across the sets Sj  and their alternatives u, we can set C > 2+δ ) to obtain log( 2k(k+1) δ2   k+1 X k X  j j Pr π̂uj − πuj ≥ δ > 1 − . Pr max π̂u − πu ≤ δ ≥ 1 − u,j  j=1 u=1  The remaining challenge is to determine what probability corresponds to what choice position, and we will show that recovering this correspondence is guaranteed if the bad events did not occur. We recover the correspondence using an alignment procedure: since δ < γ/2, inside each Sj we can order the elements from most frequently selected to least frequently selected. In this order the ith most frequent choice inside each vector π̂ j will correspond to the same underlying position selection for each Sj . The most frequently selected element from each Sj will have been selected by the `-selector with the largest π` in π, and so on, for each selection frequency. To discern what frequency corresponds to what `, we look across the subsets S1 , . . . , Sk+1 and identify the two probabilities π1 and πk by the fact that they will be the only two frequencies that have selected some element u only once at that frequency, and another element v the remaining k times at that frequency. In other words, the alternatives selected at those frequencies will have the structure {u, v, ...., v} for some u and v, and these must be the frequencies π1 and πk . See Figure S1 for an illustration in the case of k = 3. We arbitrarily assign the more frequent of these two frequencies to be π1 , recalling that we’re only looking to recover π up to reflection. The other frequency is assigned to be πk . Lastly, for each of these two end frequencies π1 and πk we take the “other” element v (that made up k − 1 of the k choices at that frequency), and find what frequency corresponds to when each v was selected exactly twice, identifying the probabilities π2 and πk−1 . Since π` > 0 for all `, we can continue this overlap procedure for all the frequencies, allowing us to identify the probability π` corresponding to each position `. This alignment procedure fails only if one of the earlier bad events failed, and so we can return any one of the π̂ j , which all had the necessary precision, and reorder it by our alignment procedure to produce our output p. A recovery algorithm for mixtures. We now show that in this setting where queries are handled by a mixed choice function—either representing a random individual or a random mixture of individuals—we can recover the choice function in O(n log n) queries with high probability, matching the asymptotic query complexity of the non-population case for any fixed error probability. We run our recovery algorithm against the mixture population, but for the purposes of recovering f (S) for every S we assume that ` is then known. 9  Theorem 3.2. Let f be a mixed comparison-based choice function over k-sets in a universe of n alternatives. Let π = (π1 , ..., πk ) be the unknown mixture distribution of f , and let π` > 0, ∀`, and |π` − π`0 | > γ, ∀`, `0 with ` 6= `0 , for some constant γ > 0. Let f1 , ..., fk be pure versions of f , where π` = 1 for f` , over the same ordered embedding. For any  > 0 there exists an algorithm using O(n log n) queries to f that with probability at least 1 −  can recover f` (S) for all `, all S. Our proof is constructive. The strategy for this algorithm is to first run our procedure from Theorem 2 for recovering π using a constant number of queries. We then focus on max-selectors, and run a modified discard algorithm (from Theorem 1) to identify the alternatives that are ineligible to the subpopulation of max-selectors. We use these ineligible alternatives for the max-selectors to create an anchored k-set that can furnish a noisy binary comparator. By employing results for sorting under noisy comparisons [10], we obtain the order over the alternatives that are eligible to a max-selector. If we only needed to recover fk (S) for every S, where fk is the max-selector, we would be done. In order to also learn the order of the maxineligible alternatives, we run a second sort using a query anchored with min-ineligible alternatives, thereby also recovering the order of the max-ineligible alternatives. Proof. We begin by running the algorithm from Theorem 2 with a sufficiently large number of queries C1 to obtain an estimate π̂ of π, such that Pr(max` |π̂` − π` | ≤ γ/2) > 1 − /5 where C1 is a constant in n for every  and γ. The usual caveats for reflection of the mixture vector apply, and we learn π for one of the orientations, arbitrarily chosen. We focus on our estimate of πk , the probability that a query is answered by a max-selector. We now initiate our standard discard algorithm, which we will use to find max-ineligible alternatives, starting with an arbitrary k-set S ⊂ U . In each discard step, we plan to identify the max element by posing enough queries to the population that the frequency with which we observe the maximum element is close enough to πk . Let Ei be the bad event that discard round i incorrectly identified the max element in the set (πk was not recovered with sufficient precision), and let D be the success event whereby no bad events occur and the discard algorithm terminates with the alternatives that are ineligible for the max-selectors. Using C2 queries in each round i of the discard algorithm we can bound Pr[Ei ] using two-sided Chernoff bounds, followed by the Union Bound across the n − 2 rounds of our discard algorithm to obtain: Pr[D] ≥ 1 −  n−2 X i=1   Pr[Ei ] ≥ 1 − 2(n − 2) exp −   γ2 C2 . 8 + 2γ  0 0 Selecting C2 > 8+2γ log( 10  ) log(n) = C2 log(n), we obtain that Pr[D] > 1 − /5 with C2 n log n queries γ2 0 across all the rounds of this discard algorithm, where C2 is constant in n.  Conditional on succeeding thus far, we can now create a padded k-set from the max-ineligible alternatives ∗ Smax that were never selected during our discard algorithm, forming a binary comparator for any u and v −2 for any (k − 2)-set S −2 ⊂ S ∗ . The max alternative will be selected from a k-set of the form {u, v} ∪ Smax max max with probability πk , and the second most maximal alternative will be selected with probability πk−1 . Our goal is to hand this comparator off to the Feige et al. comparison-based query algorithm [10], but we note that the Feige et al. algorithm requires a binary comparator that returns each element with probabilities {p, 1−p} for some p > 1/2. Our comparator, meanwhile, will “fail” with constant probability ∆ = 1 − πk − πk−1 , −2 will be selected that is not one of the elements u or v being in the sense that some alternative u∗ ∈ Smax subjected to the noisy binary comparison. If one of πk or πk−1 exceed 1/2 then we can apply the Feige et −2 as a choice of the less frequent of the two al. procedure as-is, as we can simply bundle any choice u∗ ∈ Smax 10  positions, producing the necessary binary comparator. If the selection probabilities πk and πk−1 are both less than 1/2, we can modify our comparator as follows. For each step s that the Feige et al. algorithm performs a query, we repeat the query until we first see one of k or k − 1. This means that the outcome space is not {k, k − 1, fail}, but just {k, k − 1}, one of which will have a fixed probability p > 1/2. Let Cs be a random variable that takes a value equal to the number of queries needed before first seeing k or k − 1. Seeing as Cs is geometrically distributed, we have E[Cs ] = 1/∆, the inverse of the failure probability. But now the total number of queries being run P log n throughout the Feige et al. algorithm is Dn Cs , for a constant D large enough to control the Feige s=1 P log n et al. error to at most /5, and so in expectation it takes E[ Dn Cs ] = (1/∆)Dn log n queries. By s=1 Markov’s inequality the probability that the number of queries exceeds its expectation by a multiplicative P log n 5D factor of 5/ is Pr( Dn C ≥ n log n) ≤ /5. s s=1 ∆ This modification of Feige et al. will then still only take C3 n log n queries, for C3 = 5D/(∆), to succeed in sorting the max-eligible alternatives, with two possible bad events: the failure of the Feige et al. algorithm, with probability at most /5, and the number of queries exceeding the query budget, with probability at most /5. This latter event is only a concern when both πk and πk−1 are less than 1/2. If we only needed to recover the choices of a max-selector, we would be done. In order to recover all queries for any positions `, however, we also need to know the order of the max-ineligible alternatives. To recover such choices, we switch our focus from the max-selector subpopulation to the min-selector subpopulation. ∗ that contains the k − 2 maximum As a final step we repeat the above procedure using an anchoring set Smin alternatives of the ordering we just recovered. We then run the Feige et al. procedure to order the alternatives ∗ . Here u in Uscrap = un−k−2 ∪ Smax n−k−2 is the last element of the order recovered above, included to orient ∗ was the set of max-ineligible alternatives the sort order with regard to the overall sorted order, and Smax that we are trying to order. Since |Uscrap | = k − 1, we can drive this error probability below 1 − /5 with a large constant C4 that does not depend on n, thereby also recovering the order over the max-ineligible alternatives. We have outlined five separate bad events that would make the algorithm fail. By taking the Union Bound over the five bad event probabilities, each controlled to have an error ≤ /5, the overall algorithm performs four sets of queries (where there are two bad events associated with the third set of queries) and succeeds with probability at least 1 −  after C1 + C20 n log n + C3 n log n + C4 queries, asymptotically O(n log n) as specified.  4  Passive query complexity  We now shift our attention to passive query algorithms, algorithms that pose all their queries at once without the sequential benefit of previous responses. This framework is motivated by a common scenario in the study of large datasets of recorded choices from online marketplaces, ranking algorithms, and recommendation systems. These systems are teeming with choices being made over sets of alternatives, but often one cannot adaptively guide the queries towards our goal of recovering choice functions. What if we simply had a large corpus of choices by an individual over random subsets? Could we still recover the choice function? If so, how few queries would we need? In this section we analyze a model for this process, in which we are not able to select queries but instead have to watch them passively. We focus on the output of a single f ; handling population mixtures in a passive query model is an interesting open question.  11  Model of passive choice streams. We analyze the following process for generating and analyzing a stream of random queries that arrive over time. For each possible k-set S, we define a Poisson process of rate α: we draw a length of time t from an exponentially distributed random variable of rate α (with density αe−αx ), and after this time t elapses, we put the set S into the stream. We iterate this, repeatedly drawing a random length of time t and putting S into the stream when t is reached. We run the process for each k-set S simultaneously, creating a merged stream of k-sets as they are selected and put into the stream. Now, suppose we observe the merged stream over the interval [0, T ]. For any fixed k-set S, the probability that it appears in the interval is 1 − e−αT , a quantity that we’ll refer to as pT . An algorithm is provided with the value f (S) for each k-set that appears in the stream during [0, T ]. After seeing these values it must correctly report the value of f (S) for almost every k-set. We want an algorithm that can achieve this goal while keeping T as small as possible. Our streaming model is arguably the simplest plausible model for generating collections of (choice set, choice) decisions that are independently drawn with replacement. Other seemingly simple models that query for a random set of k-sets without replacement exhibit an implausible slight dependence between decisions in the decision collection. A recovery algorithm for passive streams. Our main result for this streaming model of passive queries is that for 2 ≤ ` ≤ k − 1 there is an algorithm able to provide the desired performance guarantee for a choice of T with pT → 0, which is to say that the probability of seeing any fixed k-set S even once goes to zero. Equivalently, this result implies that we can recover f (S) for almost every k-set after only seeing a tiny fraction of all possible k-sets. Theorem 4.1. Let f be a choice function over k-sets in a universe of n alternatives that selects the `th ordered position, with k ≥ 3 and 2 ≤ ` ≤ k − 1 known. For every ε > 0 and δ > 0, there is a constant ξ > 0 and an algorithm that takes the stream over the interval [0, T ] with pT = ξ log n log log n/n and with probability at least 1 − δ will recover the correct value of f (S) for at least a 1 − ε fraction of all k-sets. Proof. The algorithm operates in two phases similarly to the algorithm for active queries, in that it first identifies the set S ∗ of k − 1 ineligible alternatives that cannot be selected in any query. Then it selects k − 2 of these arbitrarily to form a set S −2 and analyzes sets of the form {ui , uj } ∪ S −2 to decide the relative ordering of pairs (ui , uj ). The key difference from the case of active queries is that the algorithm needs to operate using only the k-sets that were handed to it initially at random, so it can’t steer the queries to seek out the set S ∗ , or run an adaptive sorting algorithm on arbitrary pairs (ui , uj ). Because the algorithm has two phases, we split the time interval [0, T ] into two intervals [0, T1 ] and (T1 , T1 + T2 ]. Note that for a given k-set S, the Union Bound implies that pT1 + pT2 is an upper bound on the probability seeing S during [0, T ], and hence pT1 + pT2 ≥ pT . Given a time interval [0, T ] for generating the stream, for a sufficiently large constant b to be specified below, we choose T so that pT ≥ b log n/n + b log n log log n/n. We split [0, T ] into [0, T1 ] and (T1 , T1 + T2 ] so that pT1 ≥ b log n/n and pT2 ≥ b log n log log n/n. Let D[a, b] denote the k-sets observed in the stream during the interval [a, b]. We will use D1 = D[0, T1 ] for the first phase, and D2 = D(T1 , T1 + T2 ] for the second phase. Note that the contents of D1 and D2 are independent of each other, an important facet of the streaming model. Phase 1: Finding ineligible elements. In the first phase, the algorithm will look at D1 and identify the set S ∗∗ of elements v ∈ U for which v is not the output f (S) for any S ∈ D1 . Clearly S ∗ ⊆ S ∗∗ , since no element of S ∗ can be the answer to any f (S). Now fix v 6∈ S ∗ ; what is the probability that it belongs to S ∗∗ ?  12  Every eligible alternative v will be the output f (S) for some S ∈ D1 as long as there’s a k-set in D1 containing exactly ` − 1 elements above v and exactly k − ` element below v. Note that since 2 ≤ ` ≤ k − 1, this means that there are a non-zero number  of elements above and below v in this case. Let’s call such a query a “revealing query” for v. Out of nk possible queries there are at least n−2 such revealing queries for v, since in the worst case there’s only one way to choose k − 2 alternatives above and n − 2 ways to choose one alternatives below, or vice versa. Each revealing query for v is chosen with probability p ≥ b log n/n. The probability that none of these n − 2 revealing queries is chosen is then (1 − p)n−2 ≤ (1 − b(log n)/n)n−2 ≤ (1 − b(log n)/n)n/2 ≤ e−(b/2) log n = n−b/2 . Now taking the Union Bound over all n−k eligible alternatives v says that the probability there exists a v for which no revealing query is chosen is bounded by n · n−b/2 ≤ n−(b/2)+1 . Let E1 denote the “bad event” that S ∗ 6= S ∗∗ , and let δ0 ≤ δ/4 be a constant. By choosing b large enough, we have Pr [E1 ] ≤ n−(b/2)+1 ≤ δ0 . Phase 2: Simulating pairwise comparisons. In phase 2 we now use k − 2 of the ineligible elements as anchors for performing pairwise comparisons. Recall that because we have split the stream over two disjoint time intervals, the algorithm’s behavior now is independent of its success or failure at finding S ∗ in phase 1, so in our analysis we’ll assume it has succeeded in finding S ∗ . For this phase, we use p to denote pT2 , where T2 was chosen such that p ≥ b log n log log n/n. To begin, we fix an arbitrary set S −2 of k − 2 elements from S ∗ , and let U 0 = U \ S −2 . Let G be the undirected graph on U 0 in which (ui , uj ) is an edge if and only if {ui , uj } ∪ S −2 is a k-set in D1 . Note that G is a uniform sample from the distribution Gn−k+2,p , the Erdős-Rényi random graph distribution. By a theorem of Alon and Azar [2], it follows that if we compare the pairs of elements (ui , uj ) defined by the edges of G, then with probability at least 1 − δ1 we will be able to infer the relative order of at least a 1 − γ fraction of pairs of elements of U 0 , where γ and δ1 depend on b. The remaining γ fraction of pairs are simply left with their choice uninferred. Let E2 denote the “bad event” that the Alon-Azar algorithm does not succeed, with Pr [E2 ] ≤ δ1 . We choose b large enough that γ ≤ ε/2k 2 and δ1 ≤ δ/4. Let H be a directed acyclic graph on U 0 in which ui points to uj if the Alon-Azar procedure has inferred that ui is ranked ahead of uj , and there is no edge between ui and uj otherwise. Now we use the following procedure to answer queries of the form f (S). If S 6⊆ U 0 then S contains an ineligible element and we answer arbitrarily. Otherwise, if S ⊆ U 0 , we look at all the pairwise comparisons of elements in S according to H. If these pairwise comparisons form a complete acyclic digraph then we choose the `th element in order; otherwise we answer arbitrarily. For how many k-sets do we get the correct answer? Let P denote the set of node pairs in U 0 × U 0 for which there is no edge in H. If E2 does not happen, then |P | ≤ γ n−k+2 . The number of k-sets that involve a pair 2 from P is thus at most X (ui ,uj )∈P         n−k n−k+2 n−k n ≤γ ≤ γk 2 . k−2 2 k−2 k  Meanwhile, the number of k-sets that involve an element outside U 0 is at most  (k − 2)        n−1 k n n ≤ (k − 2) ≤γ , k−1 n k k  provided that n is large enough relative to k that k(k − 2)/n ≤ γ. But if a k-set S satisfies S ⊆ U 0 , and S × S contains no pair of P , then all pairwise comparisons inside S have been determined and thus we can report the correct value   of f (S). Hence if E2 does not occur, we report the correct value on all but at most n n 2 γ(1 + k ) k ≤ ε k k-sets, as desired. 13  The full algorithm and its analysis. Now let’s consider the full algorithm. It starts by identifying a set S ∗∗ of ineligible elements in phase 1. If S ∗∗ does not have k − 1 elements, it terminates with no answer. Otherwise, it runs the second phase on the assumption that S ∗ = S ∗∗ . If the event E1 ∪ E2 does not occur, then S ∗ = S ∗∗ and the output of phase 2 satisfies the performance guarantee of Theorem 4.1. With probability at least 1 − (δ1 + δ2 ) ≥ 1 − δ/2, this union E1 ∪ E2 does not occur, in which case the full algorithm satisfies the performance guarantee. The above proof holds for all values of ` except for the two extremes of ` = 1 and ` = k, as stated. This distinction is intriguing since the two extreme values are the ones that don’t exhibit choice-set effects: the individual making decisions is then selecting elements according to a fixed total ordering of U . The challenge with ` = 1 and ` = k is actually that the notion of “ineligible” elements becomes more subtle: there are elements whose relative position in the embedding can be resolved, but only with a very large number of passive queries. Finding the right performance guarantee for this case is an interesting open question.  5  Distance comparison  All of our results thus far focus on recovering choice functions that are comparison-based functions over ordered alternatives. As noted in the introduction, this class of functions is surprisingly rich, with the ability to capture compromise effects in choices along any one-dimensional frontier, a choice-set effect that cannot be exhibited by functions that merely maximize over an ordering. The preceding sections develop a theory of inference for such comparison-based functions. In this section we shift our focus to recovering choice functions defined by a different structural relationship, namely distance comparisons in a metric embedding. A choice function f on k-sets is distance-comparisonbased if the value f (S) can be computed purely using comparisons on the pairwise distances in a embedding h with metric d(·, ·), i.e. based on comparisons on the set of pairwise distances {d(h(ui ), h(uj )) : ui , uj ∈ S}. Distance comparisons form the basis of an additional important family of choice scenarios, namely choice queries answered with the “most medial” or the “most distinctive” alternative in a set, and in particular they model an important choice-set effect called similarity aversion [28]: given a choice between two dissimilar alternatives A and B and one of two alternatives A0 and B 0 that are similar to A and B respectively, similarity aversion arises when f ({A, B, B 0 }) = A but f ({A, B, A0 }) = B. Essentially: given two similar alternatives and one dissimilar alternative, the dissimilar option is chosen. It is important to note that similarity aversion cannot be modeled by a choice function that is strictly comparison-based: such a function can only evaluate ordinal comparisons, and when considering two elements A and B embedded in one dimension, a comparison-based function cannot resolve whether a third element A0 positioned between A and B is closer to A or closer to B. The remainder of the section has the following format. First we show how similarity aversion can be modeled using distance-comparison-based choice functions. Next, we present two observations that suggest some of the difficulties that must be overcome to learn such functions, a seemingly more difficult inference context than comparison-based functions. We then connect our observations to a broader literature on learning metric embeddings, albeit without resolving our inference questions.  14  b a c  Figure 3: A k-set S = {a, b, c} of k = 3 alternatives embedded in 2 dimensions. In this setting we can think of distance comparison as a comparison-based choice between three pairwise distances {d(a, b), d(b, c), d(a, c)}. When a distance-comparison-based choice function f selects the outlier a, this choice is effectively a comparison-based choice of the shortest distance, d(b, c). When f selects the median element b, this choice is effectively a comparison-based choice of the longest distance, d(a, c). Similarity aversion from distance comparisons. We now describe two choice functions of principle importance, and their capacity for being formulated as distance-comparison-based functions: the median choice function and the outlier choice function. We restrict our definitions to choices over k-sets where k is odd. The outlier choice function for triplets (k = 3) will serve as our model of similarity aversion. The median choice function selects the element of a k-set S in Rm with metric d(·, ·) that minimizes the sum of distances to all other elements. In m = 1 dimension this choice is the traditional median element, and it can be selected according to the following distance-comparison procedure: repeatedly find the pair of alternatives x, y ∈ S that are furthest apart and remove them from S. Since k is odd, after (k − 1)/2 rounds there will be a single remaining element; return that element as the choice. Thus we see that the median choice function can be formulated as both a comparison-based function—in the earlier sections, q(k−1)/2,k —or as a distance-comparison-based function. For m > 1 dimensions and sets of size k = 3 it is easy to verify that the above distance-comparison procedure will still return the element that minimizes the sum of distances. For m > 1 and k > 3, however, it is an open question whether a distance-comparison-based function can return the element that minimizes the sum of distances. Observe that this question amounts to solving a version of the Fermat-Weber problem [32] with a very restricted functional toolkit, and may be quite difficult. We are not aware of any prior work on the capabilities of distance-comparison-based functions. Here we are principally interested in the special case of k = 3, allowing us to skirt this difficulty. Building on the median choice function, the outlier choice function selects the element of a k-set S that is farthest (in Rm using d(·, ·)) from the median element (the median element being the element that minimizes the sum of distances to all elements). The outlier choice function can clearly be written as a distancecomparison-based function whenever the median choice function can. For k = 3 elements it is precisely a model of similarity aversion on triplets. As a general comment on the capabilities of distance-comparison-based functions, it is clear that they can make choices that ordinary comparison-based functions cannot, but it is important to highlight that the reverse is also true: the median choice function is the only position-selection function (in one dimension) that can be formulated as a distance-comparison-based function. A distance-comparison-based function cannot select a maximal or minimal element (or any off-center position), since it has no way of orienting a choice with regard to the direction of “more” (in any dimension). The sets of comparison-based functions and distance-comparison-based functions are therefore not neatly nested. Distance comparison for triplets. In the particular case of k = 3, where choices are made over triplets S = {u, v, w}, we can think of a choice for an alternative u ∈ S implicitly as a choice for the distance 15  d(v, w) between the two remaining alternatives in S. For a triplet {u, v, w}, the effective comparison-based query is over the set of distances {d(u, v), d(u, w), d(v, w)}, where a choice of a pairwise distance  maps to a choice of the complementary alternative. See Figure 3 for an illustration. There are N = n2 distances, and so it may seem as though it would be possible to learn the ordering in O(N log N ) queries in the active query framework, with similar results carried over for other query frameworks. Reality is more complicated. We now give two observations on the difficulties of carrying over comparison-based results to distance comparisons. The first observation asks: when are there enough queries to learn the relative ordering of all the distances? The second observation pertains to the restricted nature of the distance triplets that can be queried.  n First, notice that each query for a 3-set furnishes 2 inequalities between distances. There are 3 triplet  queries for n elements, which means that querying for every possible 3-set would produce 2 n3 inequalities.   Meanwhile there are n2 pairwise distances, meaning that there are n2 ! possible permutations of the distances, only one of which is the sorted order. A sufficient condition for inferring all choices is to know the sorted order of all the distances. Focusing on the outlier choice function (selecting the minimum distance that effectively returns the outlier element) in onedoes not need to know the relative order of the two largest distances. This tells us that it would take log2 ( n2 !) − 1 bisections of the set of permutations to identify the sorted order of all but the two largest distances.   We observe that 2 n3 < log2 ( n2 !) − 1 for n ≤ 5, which tells us that for n ≤ 5 elements we will learn the choice for every query before we can possibly know the sorted order of the relevant pairwise distances. This tells us that a generic procedure that seeks to learn all the pairwise distances will not always succeed. While our earlier query complexity results focus on asymptotic complexity, the correctness of these algorithms holds for all n. The limiting observation presented here is specific to distance comparisons  and does n not apply to ordinary comparisons: in that context there are only n! permutations rather than 2 !. Second, observe that we cannot query for general triplets of distances {d(u, v), d(w, x), d(y, z)}, but are in fact restricted to queries in the special case of w = u, y = x, and z = v. It is unclear for what n it is possible to learn the relative ordering of all the distances from such restricted distance comparisons. While both of these initial observations are discouraging, an efficient inference algorithm for distance-comparisonbased functions would contribute a useful tool for learning in the presence of similarity aversion and other choice-set effects, and we deem it important to present distance-comparison-based functions as significant objects of study. As an additional open direction for future work, we briefly mention the choice-set effect known as the decoy effect (or asymmetric dominance). The decoy effect describes when the presence of a similar but inferior alternative increases the desirability of an option. The difference between similarity aversion and the decoy effect is that the former hinges on similarity while the latter incorporates both similarity and inferiority. As such, modeling the decoy effect requires a composition of both comparison and distance-comparison. We leave the study of this alluring general class of choice functions, which contains comparison-based and distance-comparison-based choice functions as special cases, as future work. Relationship to metric embeddings. Beyond providing a model for similarity avoidance in the behavioral sciences, the ability to recover distance-comparison-based choice functions also speaks to a broad literature on learning metric embeddings of data from distance-comparison-based queries [20]. In that literature, the stochastic triplet embedding technique [30] has recently been introduced as a way to embed a generic dataset of elements through answers to choices of the form “Is A more similar to B or to C?”. This question is effectively a comparison-based query requesting a choice from the set {d(A, B), d(A, C)}. As an extension of that work, the crowd median algorithm [13] tries to learn embeddings from triplet queries with the request 16  “Out of three shown items pick one that appears to be different from the two others.” The crowd median algorithm is employing precisely the outlier choice function for k = 3 described in this section. Known work on the crowd median algorithm, however, leaves open the question of what embeddings it can learn. We observe that outside the behavioral modeling that drove our work, a slight modification of the crowd median algorithm to align with our results gives a method that can in fact learn embeddings efficiently. We define the generalized crowd median algorithm, which instead asks questions of the form “of these k pairs, which pair is least similar?”. Under this more flexible query framework, the ordering on the distance could then be inferred by the algorithms developed in this work: for n elements, it would then be possible in an active query framework to learn the ordering of the N = n2 distances in O(N log N ) queries, for large n. Our treatment of distance-comparison-based queries also speaks to a broad line or research in psychology on pair selection queries used to infer cognitive embeddings [26, 14, 27]. In these settings, sets of k elements (where k is often large) are presented to subjects with the question “which two elements are most similar?”. Such queries generalize the crowd-median algorithm. Lastly, very recent work has developed learning results for binary clustering (a simple form of embedding) using so-called triangle queries of the form “which of these birds belong to the same species?” [31], with possible relevance to learning from distancecomparison-based choices.  6  Discussion  The prevalence of choice-set effects in human decision-making highlights a need for a principled inference model that can support learning such effects. In this work we’ve proposed a framework aimed at helping with such an integration, focussing on comparison-based choices. A natural line of inquiry extending from choice-set effects quickly leads to rich issues related to the theory of sorting, including passive sorting (“sorting in one round”) and sorting with noisy information. There are clearly many directions for further work. We begin by mentioning a very concrete problem: while we studied passive queries and population mixtures, we did not attempt to combine these two aspects to infer a mixed collection of choice functions from a stream of passively observed queries. A challenge in trying to achieve such a combination can be seen in the technical ingredients that would need to be brought together; the mechanics of the Feige et al. procedure [10] and Alon-Azar procedure [2] are not obviously compatible. Even the basic question of binary sorting with passive queries in the presence of noisy information appears to be fairly open. Many questions remain regarding how to capture relevant population-level heterogeneities in large-scale choice corpora. Our framework for comparisons generally assumed a universally agreed upon ordered embedding, and it is very reasonable to suggest generalizations to a dispersed distribution over possible embeddings. A long line of work has brought distributions over rankings into the literature on learning preferences [18, 11, 6], including through comparisons [16], and it would be natural to explore analogous distributional modeling for the embedding that underlies comparison-based choice functions. Analyzing mixtures of comparison-based choice functions as a model of probabilistic discrete choice [3] is another closely related open research direction. One can also consider generalizing the embedding that defines the structure of the alternatives and the choice sets. For example, we could think about the alternatives as being embedded not just in one dimension (or a one-dimensional Pareto frontier) but in multiple dimensions, and an individual could execute a sequence of comparison-based rules to select an item from a choice set. Such a generalization could provide a way to 17  incorporate a number of other well-documented choice-set effects [28], and could form intriguing potential connections to the elimination by aspects [29] model of discrete choice. We find it encouraging that in the face of choice behavior much more complex than ordered preferences, we are able to fully match most of the known query complexity results from the theory of sorting from binary comparisons. Continued work to develop a more complete theory of inference for other increasingly rich classes of choice functions has the potential to lay a foundation for a much needed unified theory for learning choice-set effects.  References [1] Shivani Agarwal, Corinna Cortes, and Ralf Herbrich. Learning to Rank (NIPS workshop). MIT Press, 2005. [2] Noga Alon and Yossi Azar. Sorting, approximate sorting, and searching in rounds. SIAM J Discrete Math, 1(3):269–280, 1988. [3] George Baltas and Peter Doyle. Random utility models in marketing research: a survey. J Bus Res, 51(2):115–125, 2001. [4] Austin Benson, Ravi Kumar, and Andrew Tomkins. On the relevance of irrelevant alternatives. In WWW, pages 963–973, 2016. [5] Béla Bollobás and Moshe Rosenfeld. Sorting in one round. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 38(12):154–160, 1981. [6] Mark Braverman and Elchanan Mossel. arXiv:0910.1191, 2009.  Sorting from noisy information.  arXiv preprint  [7] Shuo Chen and Thorsten Joachims. Modeling intransitivity in matchup and comparison data. In Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pages 227– 236. ACM, 2016. [8] Shuo Chen and Thorsten Joachims. Predicting matchups and preferences in context. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 775–784. ACM, 2016. [9] Federico Echenique, Sangmok Lee, and Matthew Shum. The money pump as a measure of revealed preference violations. Journal of Political Economy, 119(6):1201–1223, 2011. [10] Uriel Feige, Prabhakar Raghavan, David Peleg, and Eli Upfal. Computing with noisy information. SIAM J. Computing, 23(5):1001–1018, 1994. [11] Michael A Fligner and Joseph S Verducci. Distance based ranking models. J Roy Statist Soc Ser B, pages 359–369, 1986. [12] Paul E. Green, Abba M. Krieger, and Yoram Wind. Thirty years of conjoint analysis: Reflections and prospects. Interface, 31, 2001. [13] Hannes Heikinheimo and Antti Ukkonen. The crowd-median algorithm. In HCOMP, 2013.  18  [14] Li-Jun Ji, Zhiyong Zhang, and Richard E Nisbett. Is it culture or is it language? examination of language effects in cross-cultural research on categorization. Journal of personality and social psychology, 87(1):57, 2004. [15] Emir Kamenica. Contextual inference in markets: On the informational content of product lines. American Economic Review, 98(5):2127–2149, 2008. [16] Tyler Lu and Craig Boutilier. Learning mallows models with pairwise preferences. In ICML, pages 145–152, 2011. [17] R Duncan Luce. The choice axiom after twenty years. 15(3):215–233, 1977.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology,  [18] Colin L Mallows. Non-null ranking models. i. Biometrika, pages 114–130, 1957. [19] Stephen Ragain and Johan Ugander. Pairwise choice markov chains. In NIPS, pages 3198–3206, 2016. [20] Matthew Schultz and Thorsten Joachims. Learning a distance metric from relative comparisons. NIPS, page 41, 2004. [21] Amartya Sen and Prasanta K Pattanaik. Necessary and sufficient conditions for rational choice under majority decision. Journal of Economic Theory, 1(2):178–202, 1969. [22] Eldar Shafir, Itamar Simonson, and Amos Tversky. Reason-based choice. Cognition, 49:11–36, 1993. [23] Or Sheffet, Nina Mishra, and Samuel Ieong. Predicting consumer behavior in commerce search. In ICML, 2012. [24] Itamar Simonson. Choice based on reasons: The case of attraction and compromise effects. Journal of Consumer Research, 16:158–174, 1989. [25] Itamar Simonson and Amos Tversky. Choice in context: Tradeoff contrast and extremeness aversion. Journal of Marketing Research, 29(3):281–295, 1992. [26] Sandra S Smiley and Ann L Brown. Conceptual preference for thematic or taxonomic relations: A nonmonotonic age trend from preschool to old age. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 28(2):249–257, 1979. [27] Thomas Talhelm, Jonathan Haidt, Shigehiro Oishi, Xuemin Zhang, Felicity F Miao, and Shimin Chen. Liberals think more analytically (more “weird”) than conservatives. Pers Soc Psychol Bull, 41(2):250– 267, 2015. [28] Jennifer S Trueblood, Scott D Brown, Andrew Heathcote, and Jerome R Busemeyer. Not just for consumers context effects are fundamental to decision making. Psychological science, 24(6):901– 908, 2013. [29] Amos Tversky. Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice. Psychological Review, 79(4):281–299, 1972. [30] Laurens Van Der Maaten and Kilian Weinberger. Stochastic triplet embedding. In MLSP, pages 1–6, 2012. [31] Ramya Korlakai Vinayak and Babak Hassibi. Crowdsourced clustering: Querying edges vs triangles. In NIPS, pages 1316–1324, 2016. [32] George O Wesolowsky. The Weber problem: History and perspectives. Computers & Operations Research, 1993. 19  [33] Dawei Yin, Bin Cao, Jian-Tao Sun, and Brian D. Davison. Estimating ad group performance in sponsored search. In WSDM, pages 143–152, 2014.  20

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
