Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_6986

Abstract:
Invariant random subgroups of groups acting on rooted trees Ferenc Bencs∗ and László Márton Tóth†  arXiv:1801.05801v1 [math.GR] 17 Jan 2018  Abstract We investigate invariant random subgroups in groups acting on rooted trees. Let Altf (T ) be the group of finitary even automorphisms of the dary rooted tree T . We prove that a nontrivial ergodic IRS of Altf (T ) that acts without fixed points on the boundary of T contains a level stabilizer, in particular it is the random conjugate of a finite index subgroup. Applying the technique to branch groups we prove that an ergodic IRS in a finitary regular branch group contains the derived subgroup of a generalized rigid level stabilizer. We also prove that every weakly branch group has continuum many distinct atomless ergodic IRS’s. This extends a result of Benli, Grigorchuk and Nagnibeda who show that there exists a group of intermediate growth with this property.  1  Introduction  For a countable discrete group Γ let SubΓ denote the compact space of subgroups H ≤ Γ, with the topology induced by the product topology on {0, 1}Γ . The group Γ acts on SubΓ by conjugation. An invariant random subgroup (IRS) of Γ is a Borel probability measure on SubΓ that is invariant with respect to the action of Γ. Examples include Dirac measures on normal subgroups and uniform random conjugates of finite index subgroups. More generally, for any p.m.p. action Γ y (X, µ) on a Borel probability space (X, µ), the stabilizer StabΓ (x) of a µ-random point x defines an IRS of Γ. Abért, Glasner and Virág [AGV14] proved that all IRS’s of Γ can be realized this way. A number of recent papers have been studying the IRS’s of certain countable discrete groups. Vershik [Ver12] characterized the ergodic IRS’s of the group FSym(N) of finitary permutations of a countable set. In [ABB+ 12] the authors investigate IRS’s in lattices of Lie groups. Bowen [Bow12] and Bowen-Grigorchuk-Shavchenko [BGK15] showed that there exists a large “zoo” of IRS’s of non-abelian free groups and the lamplighter groups (Z/pZ)n o Z respectively. Thomas and Tucker-Drob [TTD14, TTD16] classified the ergodic IRS’s of strictly diagonal limits of finite symmetric groups and inductive limits of finite alternating groups. Dudko and Medynets [DM17] extend this in certain cases to blockdiagonal limits of finite symmetric groups. ∗  †  partially supported by the MTA Rényi Institute Lendület Limits of Structures Research Group. supported by the ERC Consolidator Grant 648017.  1  In this paper we study the IRS’s of groups of automorphisms of rooted trees. Let T be the infinite d-ary rooted tree, and let Aut(T ) denote the group of automorphisms of T . An elementary automorphism applies a permutation to the children of a given vertex, and moves the underlying subtrees accordingly. The group of finitary automorphisms Autf (T ) is generated by the elementary automorphisms. The finitary alternating automorphism group Altf (T ) is the one generated by even elementary automorphisms. The group Aut(T ) comes together with a natural measure preserving action. The boundary of T – denoted ∂T – is the space of infinite rays of T . It is a compact metric space with a continuous Aut(T ) action and an ergodic invariant measure µ∂T . For some natural classes of groups IRS’s tend to behave like normal subgroups. In [ABB+ 12] the Margulis Normal Subgroup Theorem is extended to IRS’s, it is shown that every nontrivial ergodic IRS of a lattice in a higher rank simple Lie group is a random conjugate of a finite index subgroup. On the other hand, the finitary alternating permutation group FAlt(N) is simple, in particular it has no finite index subgroups, but as Vershik shows in [Ver12] it admits continuum many ergodic IRS’s. The group Altf (T ) is an interesting mixture of these two worlds. It is both locally finite and residually finite, and all its nontrivial normal subgroups are level stabilizers. The Margulis Normal Subgroup Theorem does not extend to IRS’s, as the stabilizer of a random boundary point gives an infinite index ergodic IRS. However, once we restrict our attention to IRS’s without fixed points, the picture changes. Theorem 1. Let H be a fixed point free ergodic IRS of Altf (T ), with d ≥ 5. Then H is the uniform random conjugate of a finite index subgroup. In other words H contains a level stabilizer. Note, that an IRS H is fixed point free if it has no fixed points on ∂T almost surely. In general let Fix(H) denote the closed subset of fixed points of H on ∂T . When we do not assume fixed point freeness IRS’s of Altf (T ) start to behave like the ones in FAlt(N). In the case of FAlt(N), any nontrivial ergodic IRS contains a specific (random) subgroup that arises by partitioning the base space in an invariant random way and then taking the direct sum of deterministic subgroups on the parts. We proceed to define a (random) subgroup of Altf (T ) which highly resembles these subgroups. Every closed subset C ⊆ ∂T corresponds to a rooted subtree TC with no leaves. The complement of TC in T is a union of subtrees T0 , T1 , . . . as in Figure 1. Choose an integer mi for each Ti , and let Lmi (Ti ) stand for the mth i level of the tree Ti . We define L C, (mi ) to be the direct sum of level stabilizers in the Ti :  M  L C, (mi ) = StabAltf (T ) Lmi (Ti ) . i∈N    It is easy to see that Fix L C, (mi ) = C. We call such an L C, (mi ) a generalized congruence subgroup with respect to the fixed point set C. e be the translate of C with a Haar-random element from the compact group Let C 2  T  TC  T0 T1  T2 T3  T4  T5  Figure 1: Decomposition of T with respect to C  e (mi ) becomes an ergodic IRS of Altf (T ) with fixed Alt(T ) = Altf (T ). Then L C, e point set C.  Theorem 2. Let H be an ergodic IRS of Altf (T ), with d ≥ 5. Then Fix(H) is the Haar-random translate of a fixed closed subset C. Moreover, there exists (mi ) such  that the generalized congruence subgroup L Fix(H), (mi ) is contained in H almost surely. We can exploit our methods to prove new results on branch groups as well. We postpone the formal definition of branch groups to Section 2. The examples to keep in mind are the groups Autf (T ), Altf (T ) and groups defined by finite automata, such as the first Grigorchuk group G. In [BGN15] Benli, Grigorchuk and Nagnibeda exhibit a group of intermediate growth with continuum many distinct atomless (continuous) ergodic IRS’s. In the ergodic case being atomless means that the measure is not supported on a finite set. We extend this result to weakly branch groups in general. Theorem 3. Every weakly branch group admits continuum many distinct atomless ergodic IRS’s. A key ingredient in Theorems 1 and 2 is to analyze the orbit-closures of IRS’s on ∂T . For any subgroup L ≤ Aut(T ) taking the closures of orbits of L gives an equivalence relation on ∂T , that is L acts minimally on each class. It turns out that nontrivial orbit-closures of IRS’s are necessarily clopen. Theorem 4. Let H be an ergodic IRS of a countable regular branch group Γ. Then almost surely all orbit-closures of H on ∂T that are not fixed points are clopen. In particular if H is fixed point free, then H has finitely many orbit-closures on ∂T almost surely. In a group Γ the rigid stabilizer of a vertex v ∈ V (T ) is the set RstΓ (v) ⊆ Γ of automorphisms that fix all vertices except the descendants of v. The rigid stabilizer of the level Ln is Y RstΓ (Ln ) = RstΓ (v). v∈Ln  3  In [Gri00, Theorem 4] Grigorchuk showed that nontrivial  normal subgroups in 0 branch groups contain the derived subgroup RstΓ Lm (T ) for some m ∈ N. Our next theorem can be thought of as a generalization of this statement for finitary regular branch groups. Using the decomposition of T with respect to C above we can define a generalized rigid level stabilizer L(C, mi ) by taking the direct sum of the rigid level stabilizers   RstΓ Lmi (Ti ) instead of the StabΓ Lmi (Ti ) we used before. The next theorem generalizes Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 for finitary regular branch groups. Theorem 5. Let Γ be a finitary regular branch group, and let H be a nontrivial ergodic IRS of Γ. Then Fix(H) is the Haar-random translate of a closed subset C with an element from Γ. Also there  exists (mi ) such that H almost surely contains the derived subgroup L0 Fix(H), (mi ) of a generalized rigid level stabilizer. In particular  0 if H is fixed point free, then H almost surely contains RstΓ Lm (T ) for some m ∈ N.  Already in the case of Autf (T ) with d = 2 the abelianization of Autf (T ) equals (Z/2Z)N . This itself gives rise to a lot of IRS’s, which makes the following consequence of Theorem 5 somewhat surprising. Theorem 6. All ergodic fixed point free IRS’s in finitary regular branch groups are supported on finitely many subgroups, and therefore are the uniform random conjugates of a subgroup with finite index normalizer. One can think of Theorem 6 as a dual of Theorem 3. Also note that merely  containing Rst0Γ Lm (T ) does not imply finite index normalizer. In the Grigorchuk group G the elements are not finitary. In this case our methods yield a weaker result on the closures of IRS’s.  Theorem 7. Let Γ be a countable regular branch group, and let H be a nontrivial ergodic IRS of Γ.  Then there exists (mi ) such that H contains the derived subgroup 0 L Fix(H), (mi ) of a generalized rigid level stabilizer almost surely, where the el ements of the rigid stabilizers in L Fix(H), (mi ) can be chosen from Γ instead of Γ. However, classifying IRS’s of the discrete Grigorchuk group G is still open. Problem 8. What are the (fixed point free) ergodic IRS’s of the first Grigorchuk group G? Is it true, that a fixed point free ergodic IRS of G contains a congruence subgroup almost surely? The structure of the paper is as follows. We introduce the basic notions of the paper in Section 2 and state some lemmas leading towards Theorem 4. In Section 3 we investigate the actions of IRS’s on the boundary and prove Theorems 3 and 4. Section 4 is dedicated to understanding the structure of IRS’s in finitary regular branch groups and proving Theorem 5. We show how Theorems 6 and 7 follow from our earlier results in Section 5. In the Appendix we prove a few technical details that we postpone during the exposition. Acknowledgement. The authors would like to thank Miklós Abért for introducing them to some of these questions and for helpful remarks along the way. 4  2  Preliminaries  In this section we introduce the basic notions discussed in the paper. Notation mostly follows [BGŠ03], which we recommend as an introduction to automorphisms of rooted trees and branch groups.  2.1  Automorphisms of rooted trees  Let T be a locally finite tree rooted at o, and let dT denote the graph distance on T . For any vertex v the parent of v is the unique neighbor u of v with dT (u, o) = dT (v, o)−1. Accordingly, the children of u are all the neighbors v of u with dT (v, o) = dT (u, o). Similarly we use the phrases ancestors and descendants of a vertex v to refer to vertices that can be reached from v by taking some number of steps towards or away from the root respectively. The nth level of T is the set of vertices Ln = {v ∈ V (T ) | dT (v, o) = n}. To effectively talk about automorphisms of a rooted tree T one has to distinguish the vertices. For any vertex v we fix an ordering of the children of v. In the case of the d-ary tree this corresponds to thinking of T as the set of finite length words Y ∗ over the alphabet Y with d letters. The empty word represents the root, and the parent of any word w1 w2 . . . wn is w1 w2 . . . wn−1 . Being an ancestor of v corresponds to being a prefix of the word corresponding to v. An automorphism of T (which preserves the root) corresponds to a permutation of the words which preserves the prefix relation. For an element γ ∈ Aut(T ) and a word w ∈ Y ∗ we denote by wγ the image of w under γ. For a letter y ∈ Y we have (wy)γ = wγ y 0 where y 0 is a uniquely determined letter in Y . The map y 7→ y 0 is a permutation of Y , we refer to it as the vertex permutation of γ at w and denote it (w)γ.  Considering all the vertex permutations (w)γ w∈Y ∗ gives us the portrait of γ, which is a decoration of the vertices of T with elements from the symmetric group Sd . In turn any assignment of these vertex permutations – that is, every possible portrait – gives an automorphism of T . Note that one has to perform these vertex permutations “from bottom to top”. An automorphism γ is finitary, if it has finitely many nontrivial vertex permutations. It is alternating, if all are from the alternating group Ad . wr(n) Let Sd denote the n-times iterated permutational wreath product of the symmetric group Sd . That is, let [d] = {1, . . . , d} and set wr(n)  Sd  = ((Sd o[d] . . .) o[d] Sd ) o[d] Sd . {z } | n  wr(n)  Then Sd is isomorphic to the automorphism group of the d-ary rooted tree of depth n. These groups can be embedded in Aut(T ) as acting on the first n levels. The group Autf is the union of these embedded finite groups. The full wr(n) automorphism group Aut(T ) however is isomorphic to the projective limit lim Sd ←− with the projections being the natural restrictions of the permutations. The groups Altf (T ) and Alt(T ) are in a similar relationship with the finite groups wr(n) Ad . 5  2.2  The boundary of T  The boundary of T is the set of infinite paths starting from o, and is denoted ∂T . For two distinct paths p1 = (u0 , u1 , . . .) and p2 = (v0 , v1 , . . .) with un , vn ∈ Ln their distance is defined to be d∂T (p1 , p2 ) =  1 , where k = max{n | un = vn }. 2k  Two infinite paths are close it they have a long common initial segment. This distance turns ∂T into a compact, totally disconnected metric space. The shadow of v on ∂T , denoted by Sh(v) is the set of paths passing through v. Similarly the shadow of v on Ln is the set ShLn (v) of descendants of v in Ln . The sets Sh(v) form a basis for the topology of ∂T . Define the probability measure µ∂T by setting its value on this basis:  1 µ∂T Sh(v) = n for every v ∈ Ln . d  A µ∂T -random point of ∂T is a random infinite word (w1 w2 . . .) with each letter chosen uniformly from the set Y . As γ ∈ Aut(T ) permutes the vertices, it induces a bijection on ∂T , so we have an action of Aut(T ) on ∂T . This action is by isometries and preserves the measure µ∂T . The objects in relation of the tree considered in this paper include vertices v ∈ V (T ), points x ∈ ∂T , closed subsets C ⊆ ∂T and later 3-colorings of the vertices ϕ : V (T ) → {r, g, b}. For any such object z let z γ denote its translate by γ.  2.3  Topology on Aut(T )  We equip Aut(T ) with the topology of pointwise convergence. This can be metrized by the following distance: 1 , where k = max{n | γ1 |Ln = γ2 |Ln }. 2k Two automorphisms are close if they act the same way on a deep level of T . This metric turns Aut(T ) into a compact, totally disconnected group. The action Aut(T ) y ∂T is continuous in the first coordinate as well. For any subgroup H ≤ Aut(T ) the set Fix(H) is closed in ∂T , and similarly for any set C ⊆ ∂T its pointwise stabilizer StabΓ (C) is closed in Aut(T ). For a subgroup Γ ≤ Aut(T ) its closure Γ is a closed subgroup of Aut(T ), and therefore it is compact. We note that Autf (T ) = Aut(T ) and Altf (T ) = Alt(T ). Even though the groups Γ we are considering are discrete, their closures in Aut(T ) always carry a unique Haar probability measure. For any object z in relation to the tree we write ze for its Haar random translate, that is z γ where γ ∈ Γ is chosen randomly according to the Haar measure. dAut(T ) (γ1 , γ2 ) =  2.4  Fixed points and orbit-closures in ∂T  We aim to understand the IRS’s of Γ through their actions on ∂T . The first step is to look at the set of fixed points. The boundary (∂T, d∂T ) is a compact metric space, 6  so let (C, dH ) denote the compact space of closed subsets of ∂T with the Hausdorff metric. Lemma 2.1. The map H 7→ Fix(H) is a measurable and Γ-equivariant map from SubΓ to (C, dH ). Equivariance is trivial, while the proof of the measurability is a standard argument. We postpone it to the Appendix. Lemma 2.1 implies that the fixed points of the IRS constitute a Γ-invariant random closed subset of ∂T . We will also consider the orbit-closures of the subgroup on ∂T . For a subgroup H ≤ Aut(T ) let OH denote the set of orbit-closures of the action H y ∂T . It is easy to see that OH is a partition of ∂T into closed subsets. Note that all fixed points are orbit-closures. Denote by O the space of all possible orbit-closure partitions on ∂T , i.e. O = {OH | H ≤ Aut(T )}. This O is a subset of all the possible partitions of ∂T . As earlier, we would like to argue that the map H 7→ OH is a measurable map, with respect to the appropriate measurable structure on O. This allows us to associate to our IRS a Γ-invariant random partition (into closed subsets) of ∂T . We will then analyze these invariant random objects on the boundary. To this end we introduce a metric on the space O. Denote by OH,Ln the partition of Ln into H-orbits. As Ln is finite, there is no need to take closure here. Definition. Let P = OH ∈ O be the orbit-closure partition of H and n ∈ N. Then let Pn be the orbit-structure of H on Ln , i.e. Pn = OH,Ln . For P 6= Q ∈ O let dO (P, Q) = min n∈N    1 2n    Pn = Q n .  Observe that if Pn = Qn , then Pn−1 = Qn−1 , so the above distance measures how deep one has to go in the tree to see that two partitions are distinct. This definition turns (O, dO ) into a metric space. To check that distinct points cannot have zero distance we argue that if x = (v0 , v1 , . . .) and y = (u0 , u1 , . . .) are two rays such that vn and un are in the same orbit in Ln for all n, then y is indeed in the closure of the orbit of x. The group Aut(T ) acts on O in a natural way by shifting the sets of the partition. The resulting partition is again in O because (OH )γ = OH γ for γ ∈ Aut(T ). Lemma 2.2. The map H 7→ OH is measurable and Γ-equivariant. Again, equivariance is obvious, and measurability is proved in the Appendix.  2.5  Invariant random objects on ∂T  Now we study invariant random closed subsets and partitions on the boundary. We show that the invariance can be extended to Γ, which carries a Haar measure. Ergodic objects turn out to be random translates according to this Haar measure. 7  Lemma 2.3. Every Γ-invariant random closed subset of ∂T is in fact Γ-invariant. Similarly a Γ-invariant random P ⊆ O is Γ-invariant. Proof. Let P (C) denote the set of probability measures on C. The action of Γ on ∂T gives rise to a translation action on (C, dH ), which in turn gives rise to an action on P (C). We claim that this action Γ × P (C) → P (C) is continuous in both coordinates with respect to the pointwise convergence topology on Γ and the weak star topology on P (C). The weak topology on P (C) is metrizable by the Lévy - Prokhorov metric, which is defined as follows: π(µ, ν) = inf{ε > 0 | µ(A) ≤ ν(Aε ) + ε, and ν(A) ≤ µ(Aε ) + ε for all A ⊆ C Borel}. Here Aε denotes the set elements of C with dH distance at most ε from A. If γ1 and γ2 agree on the first n levels of T , then for every x ∈ ∂T we have d(γ1 x, γ2 x) ≤ 1/2n . This implies, that for a compact set C ∈ C we have dH (γ1 C, γ2 C) ≤ 1/2n . n  This in turn implies that for all we have γ1 A ⊆ γ2 A1/2 and vice versa.  A ⊆ C Borel n n −1 This means, that (γ1 )∗ µ (A) = µ(γ1 A) ≤ µ(γ2−1 A1/2 ) = (γ2 )∗ µ (A1/2 ), so as a consequence π (γ1 )∗ µ, (γ2 )∗ µ ≤ 1/2n . That is, the action is continuous in the first coordinate. Continuity in the second coordinate is an easy exercise, as it turns out that the  elements of Γ act by isometries on (∂T, d∂T ), (C, dH ) and P (C), π respectively. As Γ is a dense subset of Γ, by continuity we can say that if some µ ∈ P (C) is Γ-invariant then it is also Γ-invariant, thus proving the statement for invariant random closed subsets. The proof for invariant random partitions follows the exact same steps after substituting (C, dH ) with (O, dO ) everywhere. Remark. The fact that the same lemma holds with the same proof for closed subsets and partitions is not a coincidence. A closed subset C can be thought of as a partition into the two sets C and C c (the complement might not be closed). While it is not generally true that this partition is in O – it might not arise as an orbit-closure partition of some H ⊆ Aut(T ) – but it still can be approximated on the finite levels. Indeed define Cn to be the set of vertices v on Ln with Sh(v) ∩ C 6= ∅. The Cn correspond to the (1/2n )-neighborhoods of C in ∂T , and so the Hausdorff distance of closed subsets coincides with the distance dO we could define using these Cn . Lemma 2.4. Any ergodic Γ-invariant random closed subset of ∂T is the γ translate of a fixed closed subset C, where γ ∈ Γ is a uniform random element chosen according to the Haar measure. Similarly an ergodic Γ-invariant partition from O is the Haarrandom translate of some fixed P ∈ O. Proof. We introduce an equivalence relation on closed subsets of ∂T : we say that C1 ∼ C2 if and only if there is an automorphism γ ∈ Γ such that C1γ = C2 . Let [C] denote the equivalence class of C. 8  Define the following metric on equivalence classes that measures how well one can overlap two arbitrary sets from the classes: d([C1 ], [C2 ]) = min{dH (C1γ , C2 )}. γ∈Γ  The minimum exists by compactness of Γ, and standard arguments using the fact that Γ acts by isometries on (C, dH ) show that this is well defined and indeed a metric. The function C → [C] is measurable (in fact continuous) and Γ-invariant, hence it is almost surely a constant by the ergodicity of the measure. In other words the measure is concentrated on one equivalence class, say [C]. However [C] is a homogeneous space of Γ, i.e. the action of Γ on [C] is the same as Γ y Γ/StabΓ (C). StabΓ (C) is a closed and therefore compact subgroup of Γ, and as such Γ/StabΓ (C) carries a unique invariant measure. Of course picking a random translate of C is an invariant measure, so the two must coincide. The result for partitions again follows word for word, by writing P for C and (O, dO ) for (C, dH ) everywhere. Remark. A way to put the previous lemmas into a general framework is the following: let G be a metrizable compact group acting continuously on a compact metric space (X, d) and let Γ ≤ G be a dense subgroup. Then any Γ-invariant measure on X is also G-invariant. Moreover if the metric d is G-compatible, then any ergodic Γ-invariant measure on X has the distribution of a random G-translate of a fix element in X. If the IRS H ≤ Γ is ergodic, then so is the associated invariant random closed subset. This means that Fix(H) is the random translate of a fixed closed subset C. Similarly OH is the random translate of some partition P .  2.6  Branch Groups  For a vertex v of T let Tv denote the induced subtree of T on v and its descendants. We denote by StabΓ (v) the stabilizer of v in Γ. Every γ ∈ StabΓ (v) acts on Tv by an automorphism, which we denote γv . Then Uv = {γv | γ ∈ StabΓ (v)} is a subgroup of Aut(Tv ). Uv is the group of automorphisms of Tv that are realized by some element of Γ. The trees we are considering are regular, so Tv is canonically isomorphic to T . (The isomorphism preserves the ordering of the vertices on each level. If we think of the vertices as finite words over a fixed alphabet, then this isomorphism just deletes the initial segment of each word in Tv .) This identification of the trees allows us to compare the action of G on T to the action of Uv on Tv . In particular we say that Γ is a fractal group, if Uv is equal to G for all v ∈ V (T ) (under the above identification of the trees they act on). For a vertex v ∈ V (T ) let RstΓ (v) denote the rigid stabilizer of v, that is the subgroup of elements of Γ that fix every vertex except the descendants of v. Clearly RstΓ (v) ≤ Stab QΓ (v). For a subset of vertices V ⊆ Ln the rigid stabilizer of the set is RstΓ (V ) = v∈V RstΓ (v). Throughout the paper we will be able to prove statements in varying levels of generality, so we introduce several notions of branching. In all cases we assume Γ 9  to be transitive on all levels. We say that Γ is weakly branch, if all rigid vertex stabilizers RstΓ (v) are nontrivial. We say that the group Γ is branch, if for all n the rigid level stabilizer RstΓ (Ln ) is a finite index subgroup of Γ. Finally we define regular branch groups. Definition. Suppose the fractal group Γ has a finite index subgroup K. The group K d is a subgroup of Aut(T ), each component acting independently on Tvi where {v1 , . . . , vd } are the vertices on L1 . We say that Γ is a regular branch group over K, if K contains K d as a finite index subgroup. In fractal groups the action on any subtree Tv is the same as on T , however for some v1 , v2 ∈ Ln we might not be able to move Tv1 and Tv2 independently. This independence (up to finite index) is what we required in the definition above. The following lemma is straightforward and we leave the proof to the reader. Lemma 2.5. Having finite index and being a direct product remains to be true after taking closures: 1. Let K ⊆ Γ be a subgroup of finite index. Then K is a finite index subgroup of Γ; 2. K · · × K} = |K × ·{z · · × K}. | × ·{z d  3  d  Fixed points and orbit-closures of IRS’s  In this section we prove Theorems 3 and 4. To a closed subset C on the boundary one can associate two natural subgroup of Γ, the pointwise stabilizer of C and the setwise stabilizer of C. The pointwise stabilizer gives us a big “zoo” of IRS’s when we choose C as a Γ-invariant closed subset, proving Theorem 3. The setwise stabilizer will play a key role in the proof of Theorem 4. In order to investigate these stabilizers we introduce a coloring to encode C on e the tree T . The coloring will help analyzing the Haar random translate C.  3.1  Closed subsets of the boundary  To every closed subset of the boundary C ⊆ ∂T we associate a vertex coloring ϕ : V (T ) → {r, g, b} with 3 colors: red, green and blue. If a vertex has its shadow completely in C, then color it red. If it has its entire shadow in the complement of C, then color it blue. Otherwise color it green.   r, if Sh(v) ⊆ C; b, if Sh(v) ∩ C = ∅; ϕ(v) =  g, otherwise.  All descendants of a red vertex are red, and similarly all descendants of blue vertices are blue. On the other hand all ancestors of a green vertex are green. C being clopen is equivalent to saying that after some level all vertices are either red or blue. So if C is not clopen, then there are green vertices on all the levels. Using König’s lemma we see that there is an infinite ray with vertices colored green. 10  This ray corresponds to a boundary point of C. As the complement of C is open, we get that every vertex on this infinite ray has a blue descendant. Lemma 3.1. Let Γ ⊆ Aut(T ) be a group of automorphisms that is transitive on every level. Let ϕ : V (T ) → {r, g, b} be a vertex coloring with the colors red, green and blue, and suppose it satisfies the above properties, namely: 1. descendants of red and blue vertices are red and blue respectively; 2. ancestors of green vertices are green; (This formally follows from 1.) 3. there is an infinite ray (u0 , u1 , . . .) of green vertices such that for each ui there exists some descendant of ui which is blue. Then ϕ has infinitely many Γ-translates. Proof. The root u0 is colored green. It has a blue descendant, say on the level n1 . We denote this blue descendant wn1 . By the transitivity assumption there is some γ1 ∈ Γ, such that γ1 (wn1 ) = un1 . Furthermore, un1 has a blue descendant, on some level n2 , we denote it wn2 . We choose γ2 ∈ Γ such that γ1 (wn1 ) = un1 , and so on. One can easily check, that moving ϕ with the different γi yields different colorings. Indeed ϕγi (unj ) = g for all j < i, and ϕγi (uni ) = b, and this shows that the ϕγi are pairwise distinct. See Figure 2. u0  u0 γ1  ϕ  ϕ  un1  un2  un3  w n1  ϕ  ϕ  un1  un2  un2  wn3  u0 γ3  un1  un1  wn2  u0 γ2  un3  Figure 2: Distinct colorings Corollary 3.2. Let Γ and ϕ be as in Lemma 3.1. Then the uniform (Haar) random Γ-translate of ϕ is an atomless measure on the space of all 3-vertex-colorings. Proof. If there was some translate ϕg , g ∈ Γ which occurred with positive probability, then all its Γ-translates would occur with the same positive probability. Furthermore ϕg would also satisfy the assumptions of Lemma 3.1, which then implies that it has infinitely many Γ-translates, and they would have infinite total measure, which is a contradiction. e is an atomless Corollary 3.3. If C is not clopen, then its random Γ-translate C measure on (C, dH ). 11  3.2  Continuum many distinct atomless ergodic IRS’s in weakly branch groups  Proof of Theorem 3. We argue that for any closed subset C ⊆ ∂T the random e is an ergodic IRS. This follows from C e being an ergodic invariant subgroup StabΓ (C) random closed subset. We also claim that if [C1 ] 6= [C2 ], then the corresponding IRS’s are distinct. To prove this we first observe that in weakly branch groups taking the stabilizer StabΓ (C) of a closed subset C, and then looking at the fixed points of that subset we get back C.  Lemma 3.4. For any C ⊆ ∂T closed we have Fix StabΓ (C) = C. Proof. The key idea – present in [BGN15, Proposition 8] and earlier works credited there – is to show, that for any x ∈ / C, with x = (u0 , u1 , . . .) we can find some n large enough such that Sh(un ) ∩ C = ∅, and some γ ∈ RstΓ (un ) with xγ 6= x. Indeed such an n exists as the complement of C is open. By weak branching there exists some γ0 ∈ RstΓ (un ) moving some descendant of u denoted v to v 0 6= v on Lm , m ≥ n. By transitivity we can find some η ∈ StabΓ (un ) with v = uηm . Now −1 −1 0η = (v 0 )η 6= um , so γ = ηγ0 η −1 ∈ RstΓ (un ), and xγ 6= x as witnessed on Lm . uηγ m As Sh(un ) ∩ C = ∅ we have RstΓ (un ) ⊆ StabΓ (C).  The existence of γ shows that x ∈ / Fix StabΓ (C) , which implies Fix StabΓ (C) ⊆ C, which is the nontrivial inclusion. f1 ) and StabΓ (C f2 ) distinct simply To show that [C1 ] 6= [C2 ] implies that StabΓ (C consider the function H 7→ [Fix(H)] on ergodic IRS’s. Using Lemma 3.4 we have    f1 ) = [C f1 ] = [C1 ]. Fix StabΓ (C  This implies that the constructed IRS are distinct. By Corollary 3.3 we know e is atomless. Then Lemma 3.4 implies that StabΓ C e is that if C is not clopen then C an atomless IRS. There are continuum many non-Γ-equivalent closed (but not clopen) subsets of ∂T , as one can construct a closed subset Cr with µ∂T (Cr ) = r for any r ∈ [0, 1], and if r is irrational then C is not clopen.  3.3  Random colorings in regular branch groups  We proceed to prove a stronger versions of Corollary 3.2 for the case when the group is regular branch. Let Γ be a regular branch group over K. Consider the finite index subgroup n d K ≤ StabΓ (Ln ) = ∩v∈Ln StabΓ (v), and let {t1 , . . . , tl } be a transversal to K dn in Γ. We can think of a random element γ of Γ as γ = γ0 · k, where γ0 is chosen uniformly from the transversal and k is chosen according to the Haar measure on K dn . Take ϕ to be a 3-vertex-coloring as in Lemma 3.1. Let ϕ e = ϕγ denote the translate of ϕ by the Haar random group element γ. Conditioning on γ0 = ti we get a conditional distribution (ϕ|γ e 0 = ti ). Note that this random coloring is always the th same up to the n level, and ti already determines where the random translate of the infinite green ray (u0 , u1 , . . . ) intersects Ln , namely at v = utni . 12  Lemma 3.5. The restriction of the random coloring (ϕ|γ e 0 = ti ) to Tv is atomless.  Proof. The coloring ϕti restricted to Tv satisfies the assumptions of Lemma 3.1. Hence its Γ-orbit is infinite. As K is finite index in Γ, its K orbit is also infinite. Hence when it is randomly translated with an element from K (corresponding to v dn in K ) the resulting random coloring is atomless. Lemma 3.6. Fix any isomorphism f : V (Tv ) → V (Tv0 ) between Tv and Tv0 for some v 0 ∈ Ln . Then the probability that f respects the colorings we get by restricting (ϕ|γ e 0 = ti ) to Tv and Tv0 respectively is 0. h i f P (ϕ|γ e 0 = ti )|Tv = (ϕ|γ e 0 = ti )|Tv0 = 0.  Proof. The restricted colorings ϕti |Tv and ϕti |Tv0 are translated by the random elements k1 , k2 ∈ K respectively. These k1 and k2 are independent since they are dn two coordinates of a Haar random element from K . Furthermore we know from  ti k1 f ti k1 is also atomless. This Lemma 3.5 that (ϕ |Tv ) is atomless, and hence (ϕ |Tv ) together with the independence of k1 and k2 implies that h i  ti k1 f k2 ti P (ϕ |Tv ) = (ϕ |Tv0 ) = 0.  3.4  Proof of Theorem 4  The idea of the proof is to show that taking the setwise stabilizer of a Haar random e of a closed but not clopen subset C has a fixed point in C. e With translate C some considerations one can apply this to the orbit-closures of H, which are setwise stabilized by H. Proposition 3.7. Let Γ be a countable regular branch group over K. Suppose C is a closed subset of ∂T . Consider the IRS L ≤ Γ obtained by taking the setwise e which is the uniform Γ-translate of C. If C is not clopen, then L stabilizer of C, e almost surely. has a fixed point in C  Proof. Associate the coloring ϕ : V (T ) → {r, g, b} to C as before: vertices with shadows contained in C are colored red, vertices with shadows in the complement are colored blue, everything else is colored green. As automorphisms move the set C the coloring moves with it. Choose a point x0 ∈ ∂T which is on the boundary of C, that is x0 ∈ C \ int(C). Being a boundary point means that every vertex on the path (u0 , u1 , . . .) corresponding to x0 is green, and we can find a blue vertex among the descendants of ui for all i. e ϕ Let C, e and x e0 denote the uniform random translates of C, ϕ and x0 respectively. e and does Fix an element η ∈ Γ. We will study the probability that η stabilizes C e then it preserves ϕ. not fix x e0 , and conclude that it is 0. If η stabilizes C e First assume η is finitary, that is we can find a level n with vertices Ln = {v1 , . . . , vdn } such that η moves the subtrees Tvi hanging off the nth level rigidly. 13  The condition that x e0 is moved has to be witnessed on Ln . Assume v1 , . . . , vl are moved by η and vl+1 , . . . , vdn are fixed. Let us assume that ϕ e is preserved by η, and the ray corresponding to x e0 is moved by η. Then x e0 ∩ Ln = vi for some i ≤ l with vj = ηvi 6= vi . Conditioning on this vi we are looking for the probability that (ϕ| e Tvi )η = ϕ| e Tvj . However, as the colorings are uniform random translates on Tvi and Tvj respectively, the probability of the coloring appearing in the exact same way under two points is 0. In the case of Γ = Altf (T ) this is an easy consequence of Corollary 3.2. There are finitely many e is 0. choices of vi , so the probability of moving x e0 while stabilizing C As Γ is countable this means that with probability 1 the whole setwise stabilizer e of C fixes x e0 . In the general case when Γ is a regular branch group we condition on γ0 = ti as in Lemma 3.6, and with f the canonical isomorphism between Tvi and Tvj we conclude that the conditional probability of η preserving (ϕ|γ e 0 = ti ) is 0. There are finitely many choices for ti , so again we conclude that the probability of moving x e0 e while stabilizing C is 0. When η is not finitary there are two points where the above argument fails: i) the trees Tvi are not moved rigidly;  ii) the nth level might not witness that x e0 is moved by η.  Notice however that i) is not a real problem as we have fixed η and this fixes an isomorphism between Tvi and Tvj . The full generality of Lemma 3.6 (with f = η|Tvi →Tvj ) ensures that the probability of randomizing η-compatible colorings for Tvi and Tvj is 0 even if γ is not finitary. To work our way around ii) we notice that the probability of x e0 being moved by η but this not being witnessed on Ln tends to 0 as n → ∞. The set of fixed points of η is the decreasing intersection of the shadows of its fixed points on the finite levels. So the probability of x e0 being in the shadow of the fixed points of Ln but outside Fix(η) converges to 0. This means that repeating the argument for all n ∈ N we get P[η moves x e0 , but preserves ϕ] e = 0.  Proof of Theorem 4. By ergodicity and Lemma 2.4 we know that there exists a P ∈ O, such that Pe has the same distribution as OH . Let us choose a closed set C which is not a single point from the partition P . We aim to use Proposition 3.7 to e such that H ≤ L holds conclude that C is clopen. For that we will couple H and C e Then H moving all points almost surely, where L is the setwise stabilizer IRS of C. of C implies the same for L, which then through Proposition 3.7 implies that C is clopen. e be Let X = (P, C) ∈ O × C. Consider the diagonal action of Γ on O × C. Let X the Haar random translate of X. This way we obtained that the first coordinate of e has the same distribution as OH , the second coordinate has the same distribution X e and the second coordinate is always a closed subset in the partition given by as C, the first coordinate. Now we use the transfer theorem (see Theorem 6.10. of [Kal02]) to obtain a d e e random element CH of C, such that (OH , CH ) = X. The first coordinate of X d e always contains the second, therefore CH ∈ OH and clearly CH = C. Choosing L to be the setwise stabilizer of CH concludes the proof. 14  4  IRS’s in regular branch groups  e = Fix(H). Lemmas 2.3 and 2.4 Our goal is to understand all IRS’s H of Γ. Let C e is the γ translate of a fixed closed subset C ⊆ ∂T , where γ ∈ Γ is tell us that C Haar random. First we exhibit some concrete examples which are worth to keep in mind and to motivate the decomposition of the tree in Subsection 4.2. We study the action of H on the parts in Subsection 4.3. The last two subsections contain the proof of the main theorem of the paper.  4.1  Examples  We show a few examples to keep in mind. For simplicity let d = 5, and Γ = Altf (T ). Recall that in this group the normal subgroups are the level stabilizers StabΓ (Ln ), wr(n) and the quotients are the finite groups Ad . wr(n) e be the uniform Example 4.1. Pick n ∈ N, and a finite subgroup L ≤ Ad . Let L wr(n) e under the quotient random conjugate of L in Ad , and H be the preimage of L e · StabΓ (Ln ). Then H is an ergodic fixed point free IRS of Γ. map, that is H = L Note that this construction also works if G is only eventually d-ary, i.e. vertices on the first few levels might have different number of children.  Theorem 1 states that all ergodic fixed point free IRS of Altf (T ) are listed in Example 4.1. We give a very broad outline of the proof for this case in the hope that it makes the subsequent proof of the stronger Theorem 5 more transparent and motivates Proposition 4.6 that we state beforehand. Outline of proof of Theorem 1. By Theorem 4 we know that an ergodic fixed point free IRS H has finitely many clopen orbit-closures on the boundary. A deep enough level Lk0 witnesses this partition into clopen sets, and H acts transitively on the different parts on each Ln with n ≥ k0 . This means that we can find fixed elements supported above some level Lk (k ≥ k0 ) generating the orbits on Lk0 that are in H with positive probability. In the finite wr(n) groups Ad (with n ≥ k ) this property translates to having a fixed subgroup L containing many conjugates of fixed elements. One can show that if n is sufficiently large this implies L containing a whole level stabilizer StabAwr(n) (Lm ) for some m ≥ k d which does not depend on the choice of n. wr(n) Using that Altf (T ) is the union of the Ad with some additional analysis of ergodic components one can show that actually H contains StabAltf (T ) (Lm ) almost surely. Example 4.2. Pick a random point x ∈ ∂T , this will be the single fixed point of the IRS H. Deleting the edges of the ray (u0 , u1 , . . .) corresponding to x from T we get infinitely many disjoint trees, where the roots un have degree 4, while the rest of the vertices have 5 children. Pick any fixed point free IRS for each of these trees as in example 4.1, randomize them independently and take their direct sum to be H. This construction works with other random fixed point sets instead of a single point as well.  15  Example 4.3. A modification of the previous example is the following. Let x ∈ ∂T be random as before, and do the exact same thing for all the trees hanging of the ray (u0 , u1 , . . .) except for the first two, T1 and T2 rooted at u0 and u1 respectively. The finitary alternating automorphism groups of these trees are Altf (T ) o A4 . Now pick an (ergodic) fixed point free IRS of the finitary alternating and bi-root-preserving automorphism group of T1 ∪ T2 , which is (Altf (T ) o A4 ) × (Altf (T ) o A4 ), and use this to randomize H on T1 ∪ T2 . We will show that this is different from the previous examples. When we pick an IRS of (Altf (T ) o A4 ) × (Altf (T ) o A4 ) we pick some n ∈ N, assume that the stabilizers of the nth levels in T1 and T2 are in the IRS, and pick a random conjugate of some L ≤ (Altf (T ) o A4 ) × (Altf (T ) o A4 ) to extend the stabilizer. If we pick for example L = (γ, γ) | γ ∈ (Altf (T ) o A4 )}, then the IRS we construct will not be the direct product of IRS’s on the two components, because the “top” parts of the subgroups are coupled together. Taking a random conjugate of L makes the coupling random as well, but nonetheless in every realization of H there is some nontrivial dependence between the actions of H on T1 and T2 .  4.2  Decomposition of T  e corresponds to a subtree T e , which is the union of all the The set of fixed points C C e All elements of H fix all vertices of the tree rays corresponding to the points of C. TCe , so understanding H requires us to focus on the rest of T . We will decompose T according to the subtree TCe . Note that the following decomposition is slightly different to the one in the introduction as it is easier to work with. On Ln denote the set of fixed vertices Fn = V (TCe ) ∩ Ln . Remove all edges E(TCe ) from T , the remaining graph T 0 is a union of trees. T  TCe  Te0  Te1  e Figure 3: Decomposition of T with respect to C  Te2  Let Te0 be the connected component of T 0 containing the root of T . In other words it is the tree starting at the root in T 0 . In general let Ten be constructed as follows. The first n levels on Ten will be the same as the first n levels of TCe , and beyond that select the connected components of T 0 containing the vertices of Fn . The vertices of Ten are exactly the vertices of T that can be reached from the root by taking n steps in TCe and then some number of steps in T 0 . See Figure 3. 16  e and The boundary ∂T decomposes as well. Clearly ∂TCe = C, e ∪ ∂ Te0 ∪ ∂ Te1 ∪ . . . ∂T = C  Each ∂ Tei is H-invariant, and a clopen and therefore compact subset of ∂T . It is the union of clopen orbit-closures from OH because of Theorem 4, so it is the union of fintely many. In the remaining part of this section we will prove that for any C ∈ OH there exists some number m∗ ∈ N and a subset Cm∗ ⊆ Lm∗ with Sh(Cm∗ ) = C such that Rst0Γ (Cm∗ ) ≤ H. This m∗ does not depend on the realization of OH , only on the equivalence class [C]. Using this for the finitely many orbit-closures that constitute ∂ Tei and taking a  0 e maximum yields that for some mi ≥ i we have RstΓ Lmi (Ti ) ⊆ H. Knowing this for all i yields M  Rst0Γ Lmi (Tei ) ⊆ H, i∈N  which is equivalent to the statement of Theorem 5.  4.3  The action of H on the Tei  Before we turn to proving Theorem 5 we argue that all IRS’s resemble the previous examples in the sense that their projections on the Ten are fixed point free IRS’s in StabΓ (Ten ). While the Ten are random, the isomorphism type of each Ten is always the same because of ergodicity, and Ten can appear in finitely many Γ-equivalent ways in T . l(n) Let Tn1 , Tn2 , . . . Tn denote the possible realizations of Ten , and note that P[Ten = Tni ] is the same for all i ∈ {1, . . . , l(n)}. Let ϕn : H → StabΓ (Ten ) denote the restriction function: ϕn (h) = h|Ten .  The function ϕn is also random, but it only depends on Ten , so once we condition H on Ten the function ϕn is well defined.  Proposition 4.4. The random subgroup ϕn (H | Ten = Tni ) is a fixed point free IRS in StabΓ (Tni ).  Proof. For a fixed subgroup L ≤ Γ let Tn (L) denote the deterministic subtree defined the same way as Ten was for H. The set {L ≤ Γ | Tn (L) = Tni } is invariant under the conjugation action of StabΓ (Tni ) ≤ Γ, so the invariance of the random subgroup H implies the invariance of the conditioned subgroup (H | Ten = Tni ). This IRS is fixed point free because all fixed points of H are in TCe . Remark. One might be tempted to prove the more general Theorem 5 by first proving the more transparent fixed point free case and then using Proposition 4.4 on the individual subtrees, where H acts fixed point freely. However, we do not see this approach to work. Instead with some mild additional technical difficulties we present the proof for the more general case. 17  4.4  IRS’s in finite subgroups of Γ  Let Γn stand for the elements of Γ that only have nontrivial vertex permutations above Ln . Lemma 4.5. For n large enough we have [Γn : (K ∩ Γn )] ≤ [Γ : K]. Proof. Fix a transversal for K. All elements in the transversal are finitary, so choose n such that all are supported above Ln . Then the translates of (K ∩ Γn ) with this transversal cover Γn . Let γ ∈ Γ, and v ∈ Lk . The section of γ at v is the automorphism [γ]v we get by restricting the portrait of γ to the rooted subtree Tv consisting of v and its descendants. That is, the vertex permutations of [γ]v are (u)γ for every u ∈ Tv and the identity permutation otherwise. We think of [γ]v as the automorphism on Tv carried out by γ before all the vertex permutations above the level Lk take place. e denote the uniform random Suppose s ∈ Γk , and let L ⊆ Γn where k < n. Let L e ≥c> Γn -conjugate of L, which is an IRS of Γn . Furthermore, assume that P[s ∈ L] 0, which is equivalent to {γ ∈ Γn | sγ ∈ L} ≥ c. |Γn | Let R ⊆ Γn be a transversal for the subgroup RstΓn (Lk ). By choosing the optimal one, we can find γ̄ ∈ R such that   (σv1 , . . . , σvdk ) ∈ RstΓn (Lk ) s  γ̄(σv1 ,...,σv  |RstΓn (Lk )|  dk  )  ∈L  ≥ c.  (1)  Here (σv1 , . . . , σvdk ) stands for the element of RstΓn (Lk ) that pointwise fixes Lk , and has sections σvi ∈ RstΓn (vi ) at the vertices vi ∈ Lk . Let s̄ = sγ̄ , and let the cycles of s̄ on Lk be C1 , . . . Cr , and let Ci = (ui1 ui2 . . . uil(i) ), l(i) denotes the length of the cycle Ci , and s̄(uij ) = uij+1 . We use the convention that uil(i)+1 = ui1 . Assume that l(1) ≥ l(2) ≥ . . . ≥ l(r) and let t be the largest index for which l(t) ≥ 3. Then C = C1 ∪ . . . ∪ Ct ⊆ Lk is the union of s̄-orbits of length at least 3 on Lk . The next proposition shows that if n is large enough, then L has to contain the double commutator of some rigid level stabilizer under C, where the depth of this level does not depend on n. Proposition 4.6. Let k, s and c be fixed. Then there exists some m > k and n0 > m such that for any n ≥ n0 , L and corresponding γ̄ satisfying (1) above we have Rst00Γn ShLm (C) ⊆ L.  Proof. Let σ = (σv1 , . . . , σvdk ). Fix σvi for all vi ∈ / C, and let the rest of the coordinates σuij vary over RstΓn (uij ). Choosing a maximum over all choices of the fixed σvi we can assume that   r,l(i)  (σuij )i,j=1 ∈ RstΓn (C) s̄σ ∈ L |RstΓn (C)| 18  ≥ c.  Consider the conjugates s̄σ , more precisely what their sections are at the vertices uij : h  s̄  (σv1 ,...,σv  dk  )  i  = σuij · (σuij+1 )−1 .  uij  (2)  Fix one η = (ηv1 , . . . , ηvdn−1 ) ∈ RstΓn (Lk ) with ηvi = σvi for all vi ∈ / C and σ η −1 i s̄ ∈ L. Let σuij run through RstΓn (uj ), and consider s̄ · (s̄ ) . All these elements fix Lk pointwise, and their sections are η  −1  σ  s̄ · (s̄η )−1 ui = σuij · (σuij+1 )−1 · ηuij · (ηuij+1 )−1 . j  Observe that the sections are trivial over vi ∈ / C. We will discard one vertex from each Ci , and focus on the sections we see on the rest. Let Di = Ci \ {ui1 }. Consider the sections of s̄σ at the vertices in Di as the sections (σui1 , . . . , σuil(i) )   run through RstΓn (Ci ). We claim that the sections [s̄σ ]ui2 , . . . , [s̄σ ]uil(i) run through RstΓn (Di ).  l(i) , and any choice of σui2 we can sequentially Indeed, given any sections [s̄σ ]uij j=2  choose the σuij+1 according to (2) to get the given sections at j = 2, 3, . . . , l(i). The last choice is σui1 , which ensures [s̄σ ]uil(i) is correct. The last remaining section [s̄σ ]ui1 is already determined at this point, so we cannot hope to surject onto the whole RstΓn (Ci ). We can do this independently for each Di . Let [ D= Di . i  The sections of s̄σ over the index set D give RstΓn (D) as the sections (σuij ) run through RstΓn (C). The fact that a fixed positive proportion of these conjugates are in L ensures that when we consider s̄σ · (s̄η )−1 we get that a fixed proportion of the elements of RstΓn (D) are seen in L0 , where L0 ⊆ StabL (Lk ) is the set of elements with trivial sections outside C. Let πD : StabL (Lk ) → ΓD n−k denote the projection to the coordinates in D. Formally we get πD (L0 ) ≥ c · |RstΓn (D)|. We have πD (L0 ) ≤ (Γn−k )|D| . Since (K ∩ Γn−k )|D| ≤ RstΓn (D), using Lemma 4.5 |D| we get that the index of πD (L0 ) in Γn−k is bounded:     1 |D| (Γn−k ) : πD (L0 ) ≤ · [Γ : K]|D| . c  This means we can find some N C (Γn−k )|D| such that N ≤ πD (L0 ) and      1 |D| |D| (Γn−k ) : N ≤ · [Γ : K] ! c 19  The bound on the index of N does not depend on n, only on k, s and c. The bounded index ensures, that we can find some m0 such that for each  index u ∈ D we can find an element ϕ ∈ N such that πu (ϕ) ∈ / StabΓnk Lm0 (Tu ) . Let m = k + m0 . Choose n0 > m such that Γn0 −k acts transitively on Lm0 (Tu ). Using Grigorchuk’s standard argument from [BGŠ03, Lemma 5.3] and [Gri00, Theorem 4] we pick some w ∈ Lm0 (Tu ) not fixed by ϕ, elements f and g from RstΓn (uw) and argue that the commutator [[ϕ, f ], g] = [f, g] is in N . This shows Rst0Γn (uw) ⊆ N . If n ≥ n0 then Gn−k is transitive on Lm0 (Tu ), so we get  Rst0Γn Lm0 (Tu ) ⊆ N. Repeating the argument of the previous paragraph for all u ∈ D we get  Rst0Γn ShLm (D) ⊆ N ⊆ πD (L0 ).  We now repeat this discussion, but we discard different points from the orbits: S i let Ei = (Ci ) \ {u2 } and E = i Ei . We have   Rst0Γn ShLm (E) ⊆ πE (L0 ).  We claim that Rst00Γn ShLm (D ∩ E) ⊆ L. Indeed, let uij ∈ Ci , j 6= 1, 2. By  the above we see that for any ϕ ∈ Rst0Γn ShLm (uij ) we have h1 ∈ L0 such that πD (h1 )uij = ϕ and all other coordinates of πD (h1 ) are the identity. Similarly we have h2 ∈ L0 such that πE (h2 )uij = ψ and all other coordinates of πE (h1 ) are the identity. Since Lk \ D and Lk \ E are disjoint the commutator [h1 , h2 ] ∈ L0 has all identity coordinates except for the one corresponding to uij which is [ϕ, ψ]. We have managed to take care of the points uij where j 6= 1, 2. To cover the remaining points as well we need one more way to discard points from the orbits. Namely F , where we discard the third vertex ui3 from every Ci. Using the fact that (D ∩ E) ∪ (E ∩ F ) ∪ (D ∩ F ) = C we get that Rst00Γn ShLm (C) ⊆ L, which finishes the proof.  4.5  Proof of the main result  Proof of Theorem 5. During the proof we will have to choose deeper and deeper levels in T . For the convenience of the reader we summarized these choices in Figure 4. Let Γn ⊆ Γ denote the elements of Γ that are supported on the first n levels. Suppose that H is an ergodic IRS of Γ. By Theorem 4 we know that the all nontrivial orbit-closures of H on ∂T are clopen. For every clopen set C there exists a smallest integer kC such that C is the union of shadows of points on LkC . Clearly kC does not change when C is translated by some automorphism. For the random subgroup H and a fixed k0 ∈ N we can collect the clopen sets C from OH with kC < k0 , let CH,k0 be the union of these. This set moves together with H when conjugating by some γ ∈ Γ: CH γ ,k0 = (CH,k0 )γ .  20  For n ≥ k0 let Vn ⊂ Ln be the set of points whose shadow make up CH,k0 . As CH,k0 moves with H, so does Vn . Vk0 is a union of orbits of H, let those orbits be denoted Vki0 , where i ∈ {1, . . . , j} and Vk0 =  j [  Vki0 .  i=1  ShLn (Vki0 ).  Vni  The fact that H acts minimally on the components of = Let CH,k0 translates to saying that H acts transitively on each Vni . Notice that since we collected clopen sets C with kC strictly less then k0 we ensured that Vki0 contains at least d points for all i. For every realization of H we can choose finitely many elements of H that already show that H acts transitively on the Vki0 . These finitely many elements are all finitary, so there is some nH , which might depend on the realization of H, such that all those finitely many elements are in ΓnH . This function nH is not necessarily conjugation-invariant, so it need not be constant merely by ergodicity. However one can find some k ≥ k0 such that the Vki0 are distinct orbits of Hk = H ∩Γk on Lk0 with probability 1−ε. This k is a deterministic number, it does not depend on the realization of H. Enlist all the possible subsets S1 , . . . , SN of Γk that generate a realization of the Vki0 as orbits on Lk0 . Clearly there are finitely many. The probability that Si ⊆ H cannot always be 0, otherwise we would contradict the previous paragraph. So we can find some finite set S of elements of Γk and some sets Uki0 ⊆ Lk0 such that the Uki0 are a realization of the Vki0 , S is in H with probability p > 0 and the Uki0 are orbits of S. By replacing S with hSi we may assume that S is a subgroup of Γk , as S ⊆ H and hSi ⊆ H are the same events. Vk 0  k0 1)  S 3,4)  1)  k0  2)  Hk  sees  CH,k0  k 2)  3)  S ≤ Γk  4) Vki0  Vki0  acts transitively on  with prob.  1−ε  and  ∈ OS,k0  H y Vki0  P[S ⊆ H] = p > 0 and  S  has long  Appendix Lemma 6.3.  cycles  m5) 5)  m∗6)  m  given for  0 6) RstΓ (Lm∗ )  transitive  S, k, γ  ⊆  and  c = p/2  Proposition 4.6.  00 RstΓ (Lm )  [BG03,  Lemma 5.3.]  Proposition 4.6.  P[Rst00Γn (Vm ) ⊆ Hn ] ≥  p 2  ergodicity  P[Rst00Γ (Vm ) ⊆ H] = 1  6)  0  RstΓ (Vm )  ⊆H  a.s.  Figure 4: Choice of levels As |Uki0 | ≥ d, we know that all vertices of Uk0 are moved by some s ∈ S. As a consequence the same holds for Uk : for every vertex v ∈ Uk there is some s ∈ S such 21  that v 6= v s . However, we will need a stronger technical assumption on S to make our argument work. We will assume that for every v ∈ Uk we can find some s ∈ S 2 such that v, v s and v s are distinct, that is v is part of a cycle of length at least 3 in the cycle decomposition of s. In Lemma 6.3 in the Appendix we show that one can indeed find such a k and S. Let Hn = H ∩ Γn , for n ≥ k. The random subgroup Hn is clearly an IRS of Γn , however it need not be ergodic, i.e. the uniform random conjugate of a fixed subgroup in Γn . As S ≤ Γk ≤ Γn we have P[S ≤ Hn ] = p. Lemma 4.7. In the ergodic decomposition of Hn the measure of components that contain S with probability at least p/2 is at least p/2. Proof. Denote the ergodic components of Hn by Hn1 , . . . , Hnr . Assume Hni has weight qi in the decomposition, and contains S with probability pi . By ordering appropriately we can also assume p1 , . . . , pl ≤ p/2 and pl+1 , . . . pr < p/2. ! ! ! l r l r X X X X p p qi + , p= qi pi = qi · 1 + qi · ≤ 2 2 i=1 i=1 i=1 i=l+1 l  p X ≤ qi . 2 i=1  So the weight of components containing S with probability at least p/2 is at least p/2. Choose an ergodic component of Hn which contains S with probability at least p/2. This ergodic component is the uniform random conjugate of a fixed subgroup L ≤ Γn . e ≥ p > 0. In other words L contains at least a p/2 proportion We have P[S ∈ L] 2 of the Γn -conjugates of S. By a ”maximum is at least as large as the average” argument we can find some γ̄ from the transversal of RstΓn (Lk ) such that   (σv1 , . . . , σvdk ) ∈ RstΓn (Lk ) S  γ̄(σv1 ,...,σv  dk  |RstΓn (Lk )|  )  ∈L  p ≥ . 2  We now use Proposition 4.6 for all s ∈ S with k, γ̄ defined above and c = p2 . As the cycles of length at least 3 of elements of S γ̄ cover (Uk )γ̄ we get that for some fixed m and large enough n we have  Rst00Γn (Um )γ̄ ⊆ L.  It is clear that (Uk0 )γ is the realization of Vk0 corresponding to the realization L of e By Lemma 4.7 this means that Hn , so we (almost surely) have Rst00Γn (Vm ) ⊆ L.   p P Rst00Γn (Vm ) ⊆ Hn ≥ . 2   As Rst00Γn (Vm ) ⊆ Hn ⇔ Rst00Γn (Vm ) ⊆ H we have   p P Rst00Γn (Vm ) ⊆ H ≥ . 2 22  We get this for all n large enough. Since Rst00Γn (Vm ) ⊆ Rst00Γn+1 (Vm ) the events in question form a decreasing chain, and for the intersection we get   p P Rst00Γ (Vm ) ⊆ H ≥ . 2 As H is ergodic the above implies   P Rst00Γ (Vm ) ⊆ H = 1.  Clearly Rst00Γ (Lm ) C Γ, so using [BGŠ03, Lemma 5.3] we can find some m∗ ≥ m such that Rst0Γ (Lm∗ ) ⊆ Rst00Γ (Lm ). This also means that Rst0Γ (Vm∗ ) ⊆ Rst00Γ (Vm ), so   P Rst0Γ (Vm∗ ) ⊆ H = 1.  The number m∗ only depended on the IRS H and the choice of k0 . Repeating this argument for all k0 ∈ N covers all clopen sets from OH , which as discussed in part 4.2 proves Theorem 5.  5  Corollaries of Theorem 5  In this section we prove Theorem 6 and sketch the proof of Theorem 7.  5.1  Fixed point free IRS’s  To motivate the following result let us recall Theorem 1, which states that any ergodic IRS of Altf (T ) with d ≥ 5 contains a whole level stabilizer, in particular H is a random conjugate of a finite indexed subgroup. In other words the measure defining the IRS is atomic. As it turns out the fixed point free case of Theorem 5 implies this for fixed point free ergodic IRS’s of countable, finitary regular branch groups as well. Proof of Theorem 6. By Theorem 5 we know that an ergodic almost surely fixed point free IRS H contains Rst0Γ (Lm ) for some m ∈ N. IRS’s of Γ containing the normal subgroup Rst0Γ (Lm ) are in one-to-one correspondence with IRS’s of the quotient G = Γ/Rst0Γ (Lm ), which in this case is of the form A o F where A is the abelian group RstΓ (Lm )/Rst0Γ (Lm ), and F is the finite group Γ/RstΓ (Lm ). As Γ is assumed to finitary both Γ and G are countable. b = H/Rst0Γ (Lm ) ≤ G be the image of H in G. It is an ergodic IRS of G. Let H b0 = H b ∩ A, which is also an ergodic IRS of G. We see that H b 0 ⊆ A is an Let H ergodic random subgroup with distribution invariant under conjugation by elements of G. As A is abelian and F finite, it is clearly the uniform random F -conjugate of b 0 can only obtain finitely many possible some subgroup L0 ≤ A. This shows that H values. b 0 is fixed, there are only countably many possible choices We claim that once H b Indeed we have to choose a coset of H b 0 in G for all f ∈ F , which can do in for H. only countably many different ways. b is countable, but there is no ergodic invariant This shows that the support of H measure on a countably infinite set, so the support is finite. 23  5.2  IRS’s in non-finitary branch groups  In this subsection we will sketch the proof of Theorem 7. This theorem is not a direct consequence (as far as we see) of Theorem 5, but one can alter the proof wr(n) to obtain the desired theorem. First of all let us fix πn : Γ → Sd to be the projection from Γ to the automorphism group of the d-ary tree of depth n, which is the restriction of elements to the first n levels. The main conceptional difference is that we are trying to understand the group Γ through the groups πn (Γ) instead of Γn . The statement that we conclude in this case is weaker. Our aim is to present only the spine of the proof, as the reasoning is very similar to the proof of Theorem 5 and we leave the details to the reader. In fact some technical details such as the ergodicity of Hn and the fact that Hn already acts transitively on the Vni makes this proof easier. Proof of Theorem 7. Let Gn = πn (Γ), fix k ∈ N and let CH,k be the union of clopen orbit-closures C from OH in ∂T with kC < k. For any n ≥ k let Vn ⊆ Ln be the set of points whose shadow make up CH,k . We can decompose Vk into H-orbits, denoted by Vk = ∪ji=1 Vki .  Observe that for any realization of H one can find at most |Vk | many elements in H that already show that H acts transitively on each Vki . This means that we can find an S ⊂ Γ of size at most |Vk |, such that S generates a realization of Vk on Lk and P[S ⊆ H] = p > 0.  Denote by Uki the realization of Vki generated by S. As before we can ensure that 2 for any v ∈ Uk there is an s ∈ S, such that v, v s and v s are distinct by replacing k and S if necessary. (See the Remark after the proof of Lemma 6.3 in the Appendix.) For every n let Hn = πn (H) ≤ Gn . The random subgroup Hn is an ergodic IRS of Gn , therefore there exists an Ln ≤ Gn such that Hn is an uniform random conjugate of Ln . Since fn ] = P[πn (S) ⊆ Hn ] ≥ p, P[πn (S) ⊆ L  we have an element γ from the transversal of RstGn (Lk ) in Gn such that   γ̄(σv1 ,...,σv  (σv1 , . . . , σvdk ) ∈ RstGn (Lk ) πn (S) |RstGn (Lk )|  dk  )  ∈ Ln  ≥ p.  By following the argument in Proposition 4.6 but replacing Γn by Gn one can prove that there exists some m such that for any n large enough Rst00Gn ((Um )γ̄ ) ⊆ Ln . Therefore P[Rst00Gn (Vm ) ⊆ Hn ] ≥ p > 0, which by ergodicity implies P[Rst00Gn (Vm ) ⊆ Hn ] = 1. 24  Again we can find an m∗ ≥ m, such that Rst0Γ (Vm∗ ) ⊆ Rst00Γ (Vm ), therefore P[πn (Rst0Γ (Vm∗ )) ⊆ πn (H)] = 1. This means that for any g ∈ Rst0Γ (Vm∗ ) there exists a sequence hn ∈ H, such that πn (hn ) = πn (g), which implies that Rst0Γ (Vm∗ ) ⊆ H with probability 1. 0 On the other hand Rst0Γ (Vm∗ ) ⊇ RstΓ (Vm∗ ) . We claim that RstΓ (Vm∗ ) = RstΓ (Vm∗ ). Indeed, RstΓ (Lm∗ ) is finite index in Γ which implies that it is open. Using this one can show that RstΓ (Lm∗ ) = RstΓ (Lm∗ ), which implies the same for Vm∗ ⊆ Lm∗ . Putting this together we get RstΓ0 (Vm∗ ) ⊆ H with probability 1. Note that this result on closures is possibly weaker than our earlier results. It is not clear even in the fixed point free case in Altf (T ) if for some L ≤ Altf (T ) the closure L containing a level stabilizer implies the same for L. wr(n)  Problem 9. Let L ≤ Altf (T ) be a subgroup such that πn (L) = Ad Does it follow that L = Altf (T )?  for all n.  In other words: is there a subgroup L 6= Altf (T ) which is dense in Alt(T )? We saw that this cannot happen with positive probability when L is invariant random. The answer to Problem 9 is negative in the case of Aut(T ). In the case of the binary tree let L be the subgroup of elements with an even number of nontrivial vertex permutations. Generally for arbitrary d let L be the subgroup of elements whose vertex permutations multiply up to an alternating element. This L is not the whole group, yet dense in Aut(T ). Of course the really relevant question in this case would involve the containment of derived subgroups of level stabilizers.  6  Appendix  In this section we prove the technical statements that we postponed during the rest of the paper.  6.1  Measurability of maps  Proof of Lemma 2.1. A closed subset C can be approximated on the finite levels. Define Cn to be the set of vertices v on Ln with Sh(v) ∩ C 6= ∅. The Cn correspond to the (1/2n )neighborhoods of C in ∂T . We show that any preimage of a ball in (C, dH ) is measurable in SubΓ . Let C ∈ C and n ∈ N be fixed. Then the ball B1/2n (C) = {C 0 ∈ C | Cn = Cn0 }, therefore its preimage is X = {H ∈ SubΓ | Fix(H)n = Cn }. 25  We say that a finite subset S ⊆ Γ witnesses Cn , if the subgroup they generate has no fixed points in Ln \ Cn . Clearly every Cn has a witness of cardinality at most |Ln \ Cn |. Let WCn be the set of possible witnesses of Cn of size at most |Ln \ Cn |:  WCn = S ⊆ Γ |S| ≤ |Ln \ Cn | and S has no fixed points in Ln \ Cn . Let us define FCn ⊆ Γ to be the set of forbidden group elements, which do not fix Cn . These are the elements that cannot be in any H ∈ X. Observe that both WCn and FCn are countable, since Γ is countable, and X can be obtained as [ \ X= {H ∈ SubΓ | S ⊆ H, g ∈ / H}. S∈WCn g∈FCn  The sets {H ∈ SubΓ | S ⊆ H, g ∈ / H} are cylinder sets in the topology of SubΓ , so the above expression shows that X is measurable. Proof of Lemma 2.2. To prove that the map is measurable, it is enough to show that any preimage of a ball is measurable in SubΓ . So let P ∈ O and n ∈ N be fixed. Then the ball B1/2n (P ) = {Q ∈ O | Qn = Pn }, therefore its preimage is X = {H ∈ SubΓ | (OH )n = Pn }. We say that a finite subset S ⊆ Γ witnesses Pn , if the subgroup they generate induces the same orbits on Ln , that is OhSi,Ln = Pn . Clearly every Pn has a witness of cardinality at most |Ln |. Let WPn be the set of possible witnesses of Pn of size at most |Ln |:  WPn = S ⊆ Γ |S| ≤ |Ln | and OhSi,Ln = Pn . Let us define FPn ⊆ Γ to be the set of forbidden group elements, which do not preserve Pn . In other words these are the elements that cannot be in any H ∈ X. Observe that both WPn and FPn are countable, since Γ is countable, and X can be obtained as [ \ X= {H ∈ SubΓ | S ⊆ H, g ∈ / H}. S∈WPn g∈FPn  The sets {H ∈ SubΓ | S ⊆ H, g ∈ / H} are cylinder sets in the topology of SubΓ , so the above expression shows that X is measurable.  6.2  Technical assumption in Theorem 5  First we prove a lemma on intersection probabilities. Lemma 6.1. Let B1 , . . . Br be measurablelsubsets of the standard probability space m 2 (X, µ) with µ(Bj ) = p for all j, and r = p . Then there is some pair (j, l) such  that µ(Bj ∩ Bl ) ≥  p3 . 6  26  Proof. Let χB denote the characteristic function of the measurable set B. Let Dl denote the set of points in X that are covered by at least l sets from B1 , . . . Br . Then r X  r X  χBj =  j=1  Z X r  l=1  χBj dµ =  X j=1  rp =  χDl ,  r X  µ(Bj ) = rp,  j=1  Z X r  χDl dµ =  X l=1  r X  µ(Dl ).  l=1  We have D1 ⊇ D2 . . . ⊇ Dr , so 1 ≥ µ(D1 ) ≥ µ(D2 ) . . . ≥ µ(Dr ). rp =  r X l=1  µ(Dl ) ≤ 1 + (r − 1)µ(D2 ). µ(D2 ) ≥  The set D2 is covered by the Bj ∩ Bl , so µ(D2 ) max µ(Bj ∩ Bl ) ≥ r ≥ j,l  2  rp − 1 . r−1  p3 rp − 1 p3 1    ≥   ≥ 2(p + 2) ≥ 6 . r (r − 1) ( p2 +1)( p2 ) 2 2 2  p  We also prove that one can find a lot of elements of order at least 3 in weakly branch groups. Lemma 6.2. Let G be a weakly branch group. Then for any v ∈ T there is a g ∈ RstG (v) of order at least 3. Proof. As G is weakly branch, RstG (v) is not the trivial group. By contradiction let us assume that any nontrivial element of RstG (v) has order 2. Let a nontrivial element g ∈ RstG (v) be fixed. We can find descendants u1 6= u2 of v, such that ug1 = u2 . Let us choose a nontrivial element h ∈ RstG (u1 ). As h ∈ RstG (v), by our assumption it has order 2. We claim that hg ∈ RstG (v) has order at least three. To prove this we will find a vertex which has an orbit of size at least 3. Let w1 6= w2 descendants of u1 , such that w1h = w2 . Since g maps descendants of u1 to descendants of u2 , we have (hg)2 g hg w1hg = w2g = t2 6= w1 , w2 . Then w1 = thg 2 = t2 = w2 6= w1 . We see that w1 , w1 (hg)2 and w1 are pairwise distinct, therefore the order of hg is at least 3. Now we will prove that the technical assumption we assumed in the proof of Theorem 5 can be satisfied. We remind the reader that in the setting of Theorem 5 the following were established: 27  (1) The random sets (V1k0 , . . . Vjk0 ) are orbits of H on Lk0 ; (2) Sh(V1k0 ), . . . , Sh(Vjk0 ) are orbit-closures of H on ∂T and their union is CH,k0 almost surely; (3) S ≤ Γk is a finite subgroups with p = P[S ⊆ H] positive; (4) (U1k0 , . . . Ujk0 ) are a realization of (V1k0 , . . . Vjk0 ), and S acts transitively on the Uik0 . (5) Vin = ShLn (Vik0 ) and Uin = ShLn (Uik0 ). Lemma 6.3. By possibly replacing k, S and p we can assume that for every u ∈ Uik 2 we can find some s ∈ S such that u, us and us are distinct. Remark. In the case when d is not a power of 2 it can be shown that Lemma 6.3 is implied by the earlier properties, simply because a transitive permutation group with all nontrivial elements being fixed point free and of order 2 can only exist on 2k points. For the case when d is a power of 2 however we can only show Lemma 6.3 by a probabilistic argument and by increasing k and S if necessary. Proof. Assume that there is an s ∈ S which admits a long cycle – that is a cycle of length at least 3 – on Uik for some i. In this first case we define k 0 such that Hk0 acts transitively on all the Vik with probability 1 − p2 . Then p > 0. 2 If S ⊆ Hk0 then the Vik are realized as the Uik . Now we enlist all subsets Sl0 in Γk0 that contain S and act transitively on the Uik . There are finitely many, so we can find some S 0 with P[S ⊆ Hk0 and Hk0 is transitive on the Vik ] ≥  P[S 0 ⊆ Hk0 ] ≥ p0 > 0.  We can assume S 0 to be a subgroup, and by having s ∈ S 0 we will show that long cycles of S 0 cover Uik . Indeed, by conjugating s one can move the cycle around in Uik , and by the transitivity of S 0 we get that the whole of Uik is covered. This in 0 turn implies that long cycles of S 0 cover Uik as well. If on the other hand S acts on Uik by involutions, we will increase k and S while keeping p positive l m such that the first case holds. Let r = p2 . Furthermore let k 0 > k such that the shadow of a vertex v ∈ Uik on 0  Lk0 contains at least r vertices, namely {v1 , v2 , . . . , vr , . . .} ⊆ Uik . Let γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γr ∈ Γk0 +t such that γi ∈ RstΓk0 +t (vi ) and γi has order at least 3 by Lemma 6.2, i.e. γi has a long cycle on Lk0 +t . As H is an IRS we have P[S γj ⊆ H] = P[S ⊆ H] = p. By Lemma 6.1 we can find some j, l such that   p3 P (S γj ∪ S γl ) ⊆ H ≥ . 6 28  Set S 0 = hS γj ∪ S γl i. Pick some s ∈ S which moves v ∈ Lk . It is easy to check that sγj · (sγl )−1 ∈ S 0 ∩ RstΓk0 +t (Lk ) has nontrivial sections only at vj , vl , vjs and vls , and these sections are some conjugates of γj and γl , and therefore sγj · (sγl )−1 has a 3 long cycle on Lk0 +t . So replacing S by S 0 , k by k 0 + t and p by p6 we get to the first case. Repeating the argument for the first case at most j times we make sure that all Uki are covered by long cycles, which finishes the proof. Remark. For the proof of Theorem 7 one can modify this proof such that instead of Γn , Hk = Γn ∩ H and S ⊆ Γn we use Gn = πn (Γ), Hn = πn (H) and πn (S) ⊆ Gn . Another difference is that Hn automatically acts transitively on all the Vin , so there is no need to distinguish between k0 and k.  References [ABB+ 12] Miklos Abert, Nicolas Bergeron, Ian Biringer, Tsachik Gelander, Nikolay Nikolov, Jean Raimbault, and Iddo Samet. On the growth of l2 -invariants for sequences of lattices in lie groups. arXiv preprint arXiv:1210.2961, to apperar in Annals of Mathematics, 2012. [AGV14] Miklós Abért, Yair Glasner, and Bálint Virág. Kesten’s theorem for invariant random subgroups. Duke Mathematical Journal, 163(3):465– 488, 2014. [BGK15] Lewis Bowen, Rostislav Grigorchuk, and Rostyslav Kravchenko. Invariant random subgroups of lamplighter groups. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 207(2):763–782, 2015. [BGN15]  Mustafa Gökhan Benli, Rostislav Grigorchuk, and Tatiana Nagnibeda. Universal groups of intermediate growth and their invariant random subgroups. Functional Analysis and Its Applications, 49(3):159–174, 2015.  [BGŠ03]  Laurent Bartholdi, Rostislav I Grigorchuk, and Zoran Šuni. Branch groups. Handbook of algebra, 3:989–1112, 2003.  [Bow12]  Lewis Bowen. Invariant random subgroups of the free group. arXiv preprint arXiv:1204.5939, 2012.  [DM17]  Artem Dudko and Kostya Medynets. On invariant random subgroups of block-diagonal limits of symmetric groups. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.01653, 2017.  [Gri00]  Rostislav I Grigorchuk. Just infinite branch groups. In New horizons in pro-p groups, pages 121–179. Springer, 2000.  [Kal02]  O. Kallenberg. Foundations of Modern Probability. Probability and Its Applications. Springer New York, 2002.  [TTD14]  Simon Thomas and Robin Tucker-Drob. Invariant random subgroups of strictly diagonal limits of finite symmetric groups. Bulletin of the London Mathematical Society, 46(5):1007–1020, 2014. 29  [TTD16]  Simon Thomas and Robin Tucker-Drob. Invariant random subgroups of inductive limits of finite alternating groups. preprint, 2016.  [Ver12]  Anatolii Moiseevich Vershik. Totally nonfree actions and the infinite symmetric group. Moscow Mathematical Journal, 12(1):193–212, 2012.  Ferenc Bencs, Central European University and MTA Alfréd Rényi Institute of Mathematics, Budapest, Hungary E-mail : bencs.ferenc@renyi.mta.hu László Márton Tóth, Central European University and MTA Alfréd Rényi Institute of Mathematics, Budapest, Hungary E-mail : toth.laszlo.marton@renyi.mta.hu  30

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
