Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_6216

Abstract:
arXiv:1104.5510v1 [q-bio.QM] 28 Apr 2011  Mining Temporal Patterns from iTRAQ Mass Spectrometry(LC-MS/MS) Data Fahad Saeed∗∗ Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory National Institutes of Health (NIH) Bethesda, Maryland 20892  Trairak Pisitkun Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory National Institutes of Health (NIH) Bethesda, Maryland 20892  Mark A Knepper Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory National Institutes of Health (NIH) Bethesda, Maryland 20892  Jason D Hoffert Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory National Institutes of Health (NIH) Bethesda, Maryland 20892  Abstract Large-scale proteomic analysis is emerging as a powerful technique in biology and relies heavily on data acquired by state-of-the-art mass spectrometers. As with any other field in Systems Biology, computational tools are required to deal with this ocean of data. iTRAQ (isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute quantification) is a technique that allows simultaneous quantification of proteins from multiple samples. Although iTRAQ data gives useful insights to the biologist, it is more complex to perform analysis and draw biological conclusions because of its multi-plexed design. One such problem is to find proteins that behave in a similar way (i.e. change in abundance) among various time points since the temporal variations in the proteomics data reveal important biological information. Distance based methods such as Euclidian distance or Pearson coefficient, and clustering techniques such as k-mean etc, are not able to take into account the temporal information of the series. In this paper, we present an linear-time algorithm for clustering similar patterns among various iTRAQ time course data irrespective of their absolute values. The algorithm, referred to as Temporal Pattern Mining(TPM), maps the data from a Cartesian plane to a discrete binary plane. After the mapping a dynamic programming technique allows mining of similar data elements that are temporally closer to each other. The proposed algorithm accurately clusters iTRAQ data that are temporally closer to each other with more than 99% accuracy. Experimental results for different problem sizes are analyzed in terms of quality of clusters, execution time and scalability for large data sets. An example from our proteomics data is provided at the end to demonstrate the performance of the algorithm and its abil∗ * Corresponding author: National Institutes of Health, Building 10, Room 6N312, 10 Center Drive, MSC 1603, Bethesda, MD 208921603. E-mail address: fahad.saeed@nih.gov  ity to cluster temporal series irrespective of their distance from each other.  1  Introduction  Mass spectrometry is a fundamental part of any modern proteomics research platform for accurate protein identification and quantification [1] [2] [3]. Mass spectrometers measure the mass-to-charge ratio(m/z) of ionized particles [4]. In the case of a typical LC-MS/MS proteomic experiment, the ionized particles (i.e. peptides) are introduced into a mass spectrometer at the ion source in the form of liquid solutions, then desolvated and transferred into the gas phase as gas phase ions. A variety of search algorithms are then used to match the peptide spectra to sequences in online databases in order to identify the proteins in the mixture [5] [6]. iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification) is a technique used to identify and quantify proteins from different sources in one single experiment. It uses isotope coded covalent tags and is used to study quantitative changes in the proteome [7, 8]. The method is based on covalent labeling of the N-terminus and lysine side chains from protein digestions with tags of various masses for distinction. Up to 8 different tagging reagents (8-plex kit) are used to label peptides from different samples. The samples are then pooled together as a single sample and analyzed by mass spectrometer. The fragmentation of the attached tag generates a low molecular mass reporter ion which is useful in quantifying relative peptide abundance between the different iTRAQ channels. The iTRAQ technique allows analysis of samples in a more sophisticated and accurate manner in turn giving more relevant biological information such as phosphorylation of peptides or the effect of vasopressin at different time points in the mass spec. Although the technique allows greater accuracy in quantitation, it raises many com-  putational problems. One such problem is to identify the peptides that behave similarly for a given external agent e.g. dDAVP over the time course study. Time course measurements from iTRAQ data are becoming a common procedure in many systems biology experiments [9] [10] [11]. If the experiment is subject to variations in time, the conventional methods to cluster and analyze the similarity such as Euclidean distance, Hamming distance have significant limitations. Likewise the clustering mechanisms that use distance based measures such as k-means [12], or hierarchical clustering [13] do not always succeed when responses are highly variable in magnitude. Other methods such as fuzzy clustering of short time-series [14] are not computationally efficient after a certain number of time courses due to the combinatorial explosion in possibilities. A facilitating characteristic of successful scalable clustering is still to find a linear algorithm that involves a small number of passes over the database [15]. In this paper we present a near-linear time clustering algorithm that finds temporal patterns in a given large iTRAQ labeled dataset using one or small number of passes over the data and without compromising the quality of the clusters. Our algorithm draws its motivation from mapping problems in the parallel processing community [16] [17] and quantization in information theory [18] [19]. The proposed algorithm allows us to map the time points of a Cartesian plane into a discrete plane. The mapping then produces a predictable number of clustering possibilities that are then binned using a efficient dynamic programming technique to extract the patterns. The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we provide the biological experimental details and the associated computational problem. Section 3 discusses the proposed clustering algorithm and complexity analysis. Section 4 discusses the experimental results and illustrative examples for our clusters. Finally, conclusions are presented in section 5 of the paper.  kidney collecting duct (IMCD)  phosphopeptide quantification and clustering  dDAVP treatment (0.5, 2, 5, 15 min)  phosphorylation site assignment  typsin digestion  phosphopeptide identification database searching  iTRAQ labeling tim e (m in)  0.5  vehicle  LC-MS/MS  dD A V P  iTRAQ-113 iTRAQ-115  2 iTRAQ-114 iTRAQ-116 5 iTRAQ-117 iTRAQ-119 15 iTRAQ-118 iTRAQ-121  Figure 1: The Flow diagram for the experiment  the time course. An example of such is shown in the figure 2. 0.6  VYEPLK  0.5 0.4  Pep$de T1  T2  T3  T4  0.2 0.1  . . .  0 t1  ‐0.1  t2  t3  t4  ‐0.2  VYEPLK  0.2  0.3  ‐0.1  0.5  IHIDPE  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.6  LEVAK  0.5  0.7  0.1  0.3  . . .  0.3  0.7 0.6  IHIDPE  0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 0.8 0.7  t1  t2  t3  t4  t2  t3  t4  LEVAK  0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 t1  Figure 2: The peptides with corresponding time scales and their values. The first and third peptides belong to the same cluster  2  Problem Statement  The objective of the study was to perform a quantitative comparison of protein phosphorylation under vasopressin(dDAVP) treatment using iTRAQ labels for different time points. LC-MS/MS [20] phosphoproteomics analysis was performed and the time course clusters that would be obtained from the study provides the basis for modeling the signaling network involved. The flow diagram for the experiment is shown in Fig.1. In computational terms, the problem that we wish to solve is as follows. We are given a set of peptides with time points(t1 , t2 · · · etc) with each time point having a certain real value which in our case is the iTRAQ ratio. Given the peptides with time points and real values, we want to be able to cluster the peptides that give a similar pattern over  The first column in figure 2 shows peptide sequences followed by 4 columns of iTRAQ ratios corresponding to the change in peptide abundance between the vasopressin and vehicle control samples (”dDAVP/vehicle”), each corresponding to a different time point. Of course the number of columns would be dependent on the time courses that are considered and can increase or decrease depending on the particular experiment. Our objective is to determine the data points that have similar temporal patterns. It can be seen in the figure that peptide V Y EP LK and LEV AK have similar patterns over the time course because both increase from point t1 to t2 , decrease from t2 to t3 and increase from t3 to t4 . The peptide IHIDP E on the other hand increases for all the time points. Hence, the peptides V Y EP LK and LEV AK must be clustered together.  Now let us formally define the problem. Let there be N data points with each data point having K time course values and X represents the peptide name. Then, let U present the set such that Ui = {Xi , (t1 , · · · , tK )} where 1 ≤ i ≤ N . Also, let the number of clusters be Q. Then, cluster set C = {c1 , c2 , · · · , cQ } where each cj ∈ Ui such that 1 ≤ i ≤ N and 1 ≤ j ≤ Q. Then each of the cluster cj has the set of data points that have the same temporal pattern with time. The temporal similarity is defined as follows. Let cpq represent q th data point in cluster p where 1 ≤ p ≤ Q and 1 ≤ q ≤ N . Now let cpq (x) represent the mapped data point at point x. Let there be another mapped data point cpq (y) at point y and ∀x < y. Now define an array rh where 1 ≤ h ≤ K. Each point in array rh = cpq (y) − cpq (x)  (1)  Then, the data points that have strictly equal rh would be considered temporally similar.  3  Proposed Mining Algorithm  In this section, we present details of the proposed mining strategy, referred to as Temporal Pattern Mining (TPM). We also analyze the computational complexities of the proposed algorithm. The proposed algorithm TPM draws its motivation from the mapping problem in parallel and distributed computing [16] [21] [17] and information theory [18, 19]. The mapping problem in parallel computing and mapping for our mining algorithm share a similar characteristic. In mapping for parallel processing, two sets of nodes are considered: problem modules and processor modules. The objective is to map the problem modules on to processor modules in an efficient manner. In mapping for the mining algorithm we are seeking a mapping such that the Cartesian plane of the data points are mapped onto a discrete plane(e.g. binary plane) of finite possibilities. The discrete plane is defined by using the Nyquist sampling technique that allows conservation of the information from a continuous signal (or a data set with real numbers). These finite possibilities, which can grow exponentially with increasing time courses, are then mined using our efficient dynamic programming technique. Algorithm1 gives an intuitive description of the strategy.  3.1  Mapping from Cartesian to discrete plane  The proposed algorithm TPM can be classified as a feature extraction algorithm [22]. As defined in the problem statement in the section above we have a number of peptides with associated iTRAQ ratio values and we are inter-  Data: A set Ui = {Xi , (t1 , · · · , tK )} of peptides and their time courses Result: Compute the cluster set C = {c1 , c2 , · · · , cQ } such that the clusters have temporal similarity within the distinct clusters for i = 1 to K do Compute A[i] := mapping(Ui ) from Cartesian to discrete plane end while there are values in A that are not null do pick a random value from A call it AR count++ for j = 0 to N do distance = EditDistance(AR , A[j]) if distance == 0 then ccount ← A[j] /* This is to eliminate values from A that have already been assigned to a cluster */ A[j] ← N U LL end end end Algorithm 1: Mapping based temporal pattern mining algorithm  Data: A data point in the Cartesian plane Result: Return the discrete plane representation of the data point mapping(datapoint Uw ) Vector Vw ← ∅ for w = 0 to Uw .length() do if w=0 then /* save as name of the peptide */ else if Uw+1 − Uw ≥ 0 then Vw = a end else Vw = b end end end end return V Algorithm 2: Mapping function  Data: Two strings of length m and n Result: LevenshteinDistance between the two string is returned /* d is a table with m+1 rows and n+1 columns */ EditDistance(char s[1..m], char t[1..n]) int d[0..m, 0..n] ← ∅ for i from 0 to m do d[i, 0] := i /* deletion */ end for j from 0 to n do /* insertion */ d[0, j] := j end for j from 1 to n do for i from 1 to m do if s[i] = t[j] then d[i, j] := d[i-1, j-1] end else d[i, j] := minimum( d[i-1, j] + 1, d[i, j-1] + 1, d[i-1, j-1] + 1) end end end return d[m,n] Algorithm 3: Dynamic programming cluster extraction subroutine  ested in extracting clusters of the peptides that give similar expression levels(falling or rising) at different time points. However, k-means or hierarchical clustering cannot be used because the time points may be closer to each other in Euclidean distance, but may not be close in temporal changes over the time course. Clustering using the real values from the Cartesian plane however, is not feasible because of its continuous nature (infinite values). Therefore, with Cartesian coordinates the number of possible cluster combinations will be infinite in nature and clustering for all possible combinations is not computationally feasible. Thus, a Cartesian plane co-ordinates has to be mapped to a more discrete plane co-ordinates to restrict the number of combinations. The mapping function should be such that it would allow us to quantify the variations in the data with respect to time and also make the values discrete enough such that the number of combinations that are possible would decrease drastically. To address these challenges, the mapping function that is presented allows us to make the values more discrete and also conserves the important information of expression levels between the time periods. Using the same notation that we presented in the previous section. Let U present the set of values such that Ui = {Xi , (t1 , · · · , tK )} where 1 ≤ i ≤ N . Xi represents the peptides and t1 , · · · , tK represents that values of the expression level from 1 to K. The mapping from the Cartesian plane would be accomplished as follows:   if (tx < ty )and(x < y)and(y − x = 1); ] o.w. (2) The assumption in the mapping function is that the first value is zero. However, this is an assumption that is appropriate for our data but is a not a generalized rule and can be changed accordingly. The mapping function in its functionality is simple and does the following. It looks for the data points at the next time point. If the current data point is below the previous value it is assigned ’a’. Otherwise it is assigned a ’b’. Therefore, after the mapping has been completed, each of the time series would be a sequence of a’s and b’s with each of the characters representing the rise or fall in the expression level. The number of discrete levels can change according to the biological system under consideration. The mapping function has been defined in a way that makes a clear distinction between the data points that have similar temporal patterns and the ones that don’t. Figure 3 shows that data points A(red) and B(black) are very close to each other in distance. However, in our mining scenario we are more interested in the pattern of the expression levels over time and in consideration of our criterion, the data point C( blue) is closer to B(black). If a naive k-means [M (x, y) =  a b  a  t2  t3  t4  Time  Mapped Plane  Discrete values  Real Values  C  Cartesian Plane  A  t1  B  t2  b  a  t1  t3  t4  t3  t4  t2  t3  t4  Time  Time  Discrete values  Mapped Plane b  a  t1  t2  Time  Figure 3: The mapping of a Cartesian plane to a discrete mapped  c11  plane c12  clustering would be executed, data points A and B would be clustered together. Using our mapping function however, we are able to make a clear distinction irrespective of the Euclidean distance of the data points with respect to each other. Observe that the mapping of co-ordinates that is produced by our algorithm is same for the data points that have similar temporal behaviors (i.e. B and C). Therefore, once the mapping has been accomplished, the data points that have the same mapping belong to a single cluster. The psuedocode for the mapping function is given in Algorithm 2.  3.2  Efficient Extraction of Clusters  Once the mapping is complete, the next step is to mine the clusters that are present in the data set. An efficient way is needed to extract the clusters from the mapped data because the number of clusters can increase exponentially with increase in the time points as well as the number of discrete levels desired. Consider, for example, two discrete levels are considered as in our case. The number of clusters would be upper bounded by the order of Z N (for Z states or 2N for two states), but may or may not be present in the data [23]. Even for a moderately large N the number of combinations are huge and for each data point going through all of the possible combinations is waste of precious computing resources. For TPM we developed an efficient technique that allows us to keep the search space confined to the clusters that are present in the dataset. Therefore, using our technique the exponential search space of possible clusters is minimized to the set of clusters that are present in the data set, saving valuable computing resources. The procedure to mine the relevant clusters shown in  c13  c14  c15  abababababababababababababb babababbabaaaabbbbaaaababaa abbabababababababababbababa baababababababababababaabab abababababababababababababb babababbabaaaabbbbaaaababaa abbabababababababababbababa baababababababababababaabab abababababababababababababb babababbabaaaabbbbaaaababaa abbabababababababababbababa baababababababababababaabab abababababababababababababb babababbabaaaabbbbaaaababaa abbabababababababababbababa baababababababababababaabab abababababababababababababb babababbabaaaabbbbaaaababaa abbabababababababababbababa baababababababababababaabab abababababababababababababb babababbabaaaabbbbaaaababaa abbabababababababababbababa  c1={1,5,9,13,17,21} c2={2,6,10,14,18,22}  c1={1,5,9,13,17,21}  babababbabaaaabbbbaaaababaa abbabababababababababbababa baababababababababababaabab babababbabaaaabbbbaaaababaa abbabababababababababbababa c22 baababababababababababaabab babababbabaaaabbbbaaaababaa c23 abbabababababababababbababa baababababababababababaabab babababbabaaaabbbbaaaababaa c24 abbabababababababababbababa baababababababababababaabab babababbabaaaabbbbaaaababaa c25 abbabababababababababbababa baababababababababababaabab babababbabaaaabbbbaaaababaa abbabababababababababbababa  c21  pass 1  c1={1,5,9,13,17,21} c2={2,6,10,14,18,22} c3={3,7,11,15,19,24}  abbabababababababababbababa baababababababababababaabab abbabababababababababbababa baababababababababababaabab abbabababababababababbababa c33 baababababababababababaabab abbabababababababababbababa c34 baababababababababababaabab abbabababababababababbababa c35 baababababababababababaabab abbabababababababababbababa  c31  c32  3  t1  Algorithm 3. The crux of the technique is based on a dynamic programming edit distance algorithm that allow us to calculate the ’distance’ of a particular data point from another. We randomly pick a data point from the mapped data values. The randomly mapped data point is then used to calculate the levenstein distance with other data points. The data values that have zero distance with one another belong to the same cluster, because they would have the same pattern. The technique is very efficient in practice because for large number of time points, the number of clusters that are actually present in the data is far less than the possible number of clusters. Thus, the computational complexity is greatly decreased and makes the system more efficient.  s2  pas  pa ss  Discrete values  Mapped Plane b  c41 baababababababababababaabab c42 baababababababababababaabab c43 baababababababababababaabab c44 baababababababababababaabab c45 baababababababababababaabab  Clusters with indexes c1={1,5,9,13,17,21} c2={2,6,10,14,18,22} c3={3,7,11,15,19,23} c4={4,8,12,16,20,24}  Figure 4: Extraction of clusters after mapping is complete  Figure 4 shows the clusters are extracted from the set in only small finite operations as compared to large number of operations that would be required if all the possible combinations would be considered. The figure shows 27 time points for each data set that has been mapped using our mapping strategy. The total number of possible combinations are 227 for each of the data points making total operations equal to 23 × 227 i.e. O(N 2N ). However, considering our strategy, we pick one of the data points randomly. In the figure, data points (time courses) in black font are picked and the edit distance is calculated for each of the data points. These data points would get a zero distance and would be accumulated in a single cluster c1 . After, adding them to the cluster set these black data points are excluded from the search and the process is repeated until only one kind of data points is present. The total number of operations is equal to 23 × 4 i.e. O(QN ) where Q is the number of clusters and N is the number of elements present. It is very apparent in fig 4 that only 3 passes are needed to extract all the clusters from the data set. The extraction of the clusters works very well in practice for  Complexity Analysis  The time complexity of the algorithm can be broken down into two parts. The first part is for the mapping and the second part for the extraction of the clusters. The mapping part has complexity of O(KN ) since there are N data elements and each is of length K. The second part of the algorithm is for the extraction of the clusters. This part run Q times where Q is the number of clusters present in the data. For each run, dynamic programming algorithm is executed, which runs in O(K 2 ) time; assumption is that both of the data points that are being compared are equal in length. This procedure runs for Q times giving the complexity of O(QK 2 ). Thus the total time complexity of the algorithm is T (.) = O(QK 2 ) + O(KN ).  4  4  3  2 Q=5 Q = 10 Q = 15 Q = 20 Q = 30  1  0 0  2  4  6  N UMBER OF DATAPOINTS (N)  8 ·104  Figure 5: Timing with increasing number of data points  Performance Evaluation  Performance evaluation was done for the quality of the clusters that were extracted as well as the efficiency of the technique. We tested the algorithm with data from a large-scale quantitative phosphoproteomics experiments done as follows: Inner medullary collecting duct (IMCD) samples were incubated in the presence or absence of 1nM dDAVP (vasopressin) for 0.5, 2, 5, and 15 minutes (N=3) followed by LC-MS/MS-based phosphoproteomic analysis. Quantification used 8-plex iTRAQ and commercially available software. These phosphopeptides were analyzed with our algorithm in order to identify groups that changed in abundance with similar temporal responses after exposure to vasopressin. The algorithm identified 16 clusters of phosphopeptides with distinct temporal profiles. These time-course clusters provide a starting point for modeling of the signaling network involved. The algorithm1 has been implemented in Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build1.6.0). The experiments were conducted on a Dell server consisting of 2 Intel Xeon(R) Processors, each running 2.40 GHz, with 12000 KB cache and 64GB DRAM memory. The operating system on the server is Linux RedHat enterprise version with kernel 2.6.9-89.ELlargesmip. For the timing experiments we used the same data that we got from our biological experiments. In order to access the timing for the algorithm, we generated the data as follows. The complexity analysis suggested that the algorithm must exhibit a linear time with increasing data points. Therefore, we wanted to access the timing by keeping other variables relatively constant i.e. 1 An executable can be obtained by requesting the author; A webservice will also be available at authors’ page.  Q=5 Q = 10 Q = 15 Q = 20 Q = 30  600 Time in seconds  3.3  the number of clusters(Q) and the length of the time points(K). We generated our data set for timing evaluation by replicating the data that we got from our biological experiment. The ratio of the number of clusters and the length of the time points remained constant whenever we replicated our data by a real positive whole factor. We tested the timings for data points from 3500 to 80, 000 elements.  Time in seconds  a two-state dataset. However, it can be further improved by using kd-tree data structure for extraction of clusters for higher dimensional states [24] [25] [26]. The k-d tree is a multidimensional binary search mechanism that represents a recursive subdivision of the data space into disjoint subspaces by means of d-dimensional hyper planes. The root of the tree then represents all the patterns, while the children of the root represents subsets of patterns in the subspaces. Searching for the clusters for the algorithm can then be performed in O(QN (1−1/N o.of states) ). Note that as the number of states increase, the searching time would reduce correspondingly because of the division of subspaces using the hyper planes.  400  200  0 0  20  40  60  80  100  L ENGTH OF TIMEPOINTS (K) Figure 6: Timing with increasing number of time points  The timings for the algorithm with increasing number of data points is shown in Fig. 5 for up to 80000. The timings observed have a linear trend with increasing number of data points as predicted by our complexity analysis. Even for up to 80000 elements the timings observed are no more than 3 seconds. Observe, as the number of clusters decrease, the times observed for the same number of data points have a decreasing trend. The rea-  Time in seconds  103  102  101  N = 3500 N = 7000 N = 20000 N = 40000  100 0  20  40  60  80  ters that were identified varied according to the algorithm used because of the high variability in the data. For the cluster that were identified, above mentioned criteria was used to distinguish the correct clusters from the incorrect one. The results obtained matched well with the previous studies e.g. In [11] the authors using self organizing maps(SOM) were only able to use 9 clusters that were sufficiently accurate to be used for quantification studies thus limiting the biological meaningful data analysis. Using our algorithm, it can be seen that the number of clusters observed were in agreement with our theoretical analysis. All of the data points that were included in the clusters didn’t had a variation more than 1% making it a highly accurate clustering algorithm for iTRAQ labeled protein quantification analysis.  0  100  L ENGTH OF TIMEPOINTS (K)  Table 1: Number of correct clusters with different algorithms Algorithm Clusters Identified Correct Clusters K-means 16 3 Hierarchical 18 6 SOM 20 10 TPM 16 16  iTRAQ ratios  −0.5 Figure 7: Timing with increasing number of time points  −1 −1.5 −2 0  2  4  6  8  10  12  14  16  14  16  T IME IN MINUTES Figure 8: Example of clustered data points  0 −0.5 iTRAQ ratios  son is that for fewer clusters, the number of passes that have to be made to extract cluster pattern is smaller further decreasing the computation time. It is also useful to know the behavior of the algorithm with increasing number of time points(K) in the data. Fig. 6 shows the timings of the algorithm with increasing number of time points(K) for up to 100 for variable number of clusters. The timings observed are in accordance with our complexity analysis that suggested a O(K 2 ) behavior and time remains under 500 seconds for clustering data sets that have 100 time points. Figure 7 also shows the timings with increasing number of time points while varying the number of data points. As can be seen the algorithm exhibits a very consistent behavior with increasing number of time points as well as increasing number of data points. The constants used during these experiments are K = 4, Q = 30 and N = 3500 wherever appropriate. The quality of the clustering was then compared with other algorithms such as kmeans [10] [12], Self organizing maps [11] [27], and Hierarchical clustering [9] [28] [29]. A brief summary of the results from these experiments are in table 1. The assessment of the quality was done as follows. The standard algorithms used as described in [10] [11] [9] on our dataset which are the same iTRAQ labeled data that has been described in the literature. For the clusters that were identified by these algorithms, if there were more than 1% of data points that were incorrect it is labeled as incorrect cluster. Although there are many data points in the cluster that are similar to one another; data points that are incorrectly clustered can have a serious impact on the quantification of the proteins. As shown in the table, the number of clus-  −1 −1.5 −2 −2.5 0  2  4  6  8  10  12  T IME IN MINUTES Figure 9: Example 2 of clustered data points We were able to identify 16 distinct clusters for phosphopeptides with distinct temporal profiles. We also performed sub-  significantly better accuracy (at least 99% of clusters were assigned correctly) with the ability to handle large data sets. These time-course clusters provide a starting point for modeling of the signaling network. We believe that the proposed algorithm will prove useful to the computational biology and mass spectrometry community.  iTRAQ ratios  0.4  0.2  Acknowledgements 0  Mass spectrometry was conducted in the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute Proteomics Core Facility (director, Marjan Gucek). This work was funded by the operating budget of Division of Intramural Research, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Insitutes of Health (NIH), Project ZO1HL001285.  −0.2  0  2  4  6  8  10  12  14  16  T IME IN MINUTES Figure 10: Example 3 of clustered data points  clustering of the data purely for biological analysis i.e. for quantification we wanted separate clusters for the ratios that are negative all over the time course, the ones that were positive and the ones that crossed from positive to negative or negative or positive over the length of the experiment. Some examples of the clusters are shown in Figs. 8, 9 and 10,each line presenting a peptide. As shown in Fig. 8, even though the data points have high variability in terms of distance of the points, the points have been clustered accurately with respect to the pattern of the response. For all of the data points that were clustered in Fig.8, the ratios first decreased then increased and decreased further in the last time point. Same can be observed for Fig. 9 and 10 that even though the points have a lot of variability in terms of distance of the points, they are clustered correctly in terms of patterns over the time.  5  Conclusion  We developed a new algorithm called TPM for clustering timecourse patterns following step-inputs in biological systems for iTRAQ labeled phosphopeptides. We tested the algorithm with data from large-scale quantitative phosphoproteomics experiments for up to 80, 000 data points and up to 100 time point intervals. Quantification used 8-plex iTRAQ and commercially available software. These phosphopeptides were analyzed with our algorithm in order to identify groups that changed in abundance with similar temporal responses after vasopressin addition. The algorithm maps the data from a Cartesian plane to a discrete binary plane and uses an efficient dynamic programming technique to mine similar patterns after mapping. The mapping allows clustering of similar time courses that are temporally closer to each other. The algorithm identified 16 clusters of phosphopeptides with distinct temporal profiles in response to vasopressin. The algorithm was also compared for quality to other standard clustering techniques that have been used for similar experiments in the literature. It was shown that the proposed algorithm performed with  References [1] J. Hoffert, T. Pisitkun, G. Wang, R. Shen, and M. Knepper, “Quantitative phosphoproteomics of vasopressin-sensitive renal cells: Regulation of aquaporin-2 phosphorylation at two sites.,” Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2006. [2] X. Li, S. A. Gerber, A. D. Rudner, S. A. Beausoleil, W. Haas, J. E. Elias, and S. P. Gygi, “Large-scale phosphorylation analysis of alpha-factor-arrested saccharomyces cerevisiae.,” J Proteome Res, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 1190–7, 2007. [3] A. Gruhler, J. V. Olsen, S. Mohammed, P. Mortensen, N. J. F, M. Mann, and O. N. Jensen, “Quantitative phosphoproteomics applied to the yeast pheromone signaling pathway,” Molecular and Cellular Proteomics, vol. 4, pp. 310–327, March 2005. [4] J. P. Whitelegge, “Hplc and mass spectrometry of intrinsic membrane proteins,” vol. 251, December 2003. [5] S. Tanner, H. Shu, A. Frank, L. C. Wang, E. Zandi, M. Mumby, P. A. Pevzner, and V. Bafna, “Inspect: identification of post translationally modified peptides from tandem mass spectra,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 77, pp. 4626– 4639, July 2005. [6] J. K. Eng, B. Fischer, J. Grossmann, and M. J. Maccoss, “A Fast SEQUEST Cross Correlation Algorithm,” J. Proteome Res., September 2008. [7] P. L. Ross, Y. N. Huang, J. N. Marchese, B. Williamson, K. Parker, S. Hattan, N. Khainovski, S. Pillai, S. Dey, S. Daniels, S. Purkayastha, P. Juhasz, S. Martin, M. BartletJones, F. He, A. Jacobson, and D. J. Pappin, “Multiplexed Protein Quantitation in ,” Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, vol. 3, no. 12, pp. 1154–1169, 2004. [8] L. R. Zieske, “A perspective on the use of iTRAQ reagent technology for protein complex and profiling studies,” Journal of Experimental Botany, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1501–1508, 2006. [9] J. V. Olsen, M. Vermeulen, A. Santamaria, C. Kumar, M. L. Miller, L. J. Jensen, F. Gnad, J. Cox, T. S. Jensen, E. A. Nigg, S. Brunak, and M. Mann, “Quantitative Phosphoproteomics Reveals Widespread Full Phosphorylation Site Occupancy During Mitosis,” Sci. Signal., vol. 3, no. 104, pp. ra3–, 2010.  [10] A. L. Stevens, J. S. Wishnok, F. M. White, A. J. Grodzinsky, and S. R. Tannenbaum, “Mechanical Injury and Cytokines Cause Loss of Cartilage Integrity and Upregulate Proteins Associated with Catabolism, Immunity, Inflammation, and Repair,” Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 1475–1489, 2009. [11] Y. Zhang, A. Wolf-Yadlin, P. L. Ross, D. J. Pappin, J. Rush, D. A. Lauffenburger, and F. M. White, “Time-resolved Mass Spectrometry of Tyrosine Phosphorylation Sites in the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Signaling Network Reveals Dynamic Modules,” Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, vol. 4, no. 9, pp. 1240–1250, 2005. [12] T. Kanungo, D. M. Mount, N. S. Netanyahu, C. D. Piatko, R. Silverman, and A. Y. Wu, “An efficient k-means clustering algorithm: Analysis and implementation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 24, pp. 881–892, July 2002. [13] J. Ward, Joe H., “Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 58, no. 301, pp. pp. 236–244, 1963. [14] C. S. Mller-Levet, F. Klawonn, K. Cho, and O. Wolkenhauer, “Fuzzy clustering of short Time-Series and unevenly distributed sampling points,” in Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis V (M. Berthold, ed.), vol. 2810 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS), pp. 330–340, Springer Verlag, 2003. [15] J. Ghosh, “Scalable clustering methods for data mining,” Handbook of Data Mining, pp. 247–277, 2003. [16] S. H. Bokhari, “On the mapping problem,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 30, pp. 207–214, March 1981. [17] M. Ahmed and S. Bokhari, “Mapping with space filling surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 18, pp. 1258–1269, September 2007. [18] C. E. Shannon, “Communication in the Presence of Noise,” Proceedings of the IRE, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 10–21, 1949. [19] H. Nyquist, “Certain topics in telegraph transmission theory,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 280–305, 2002. [20] M. T. Davis, J. Beierle, E. T. Bures, M. D. McGinley, J. Mort, J. H. Robinson, C. S. Spahr, W. Yu, R. Luethy, and S. D. Patterson, “Automated lc-lc-ms-ms platform using binary ion-exchange and gradient reversed-phase chromatography for improved proteomic analyses,” Journal of Chromatography B: Biomedical Sciences and Applications, vol. 752, no. 2, pp. 281 – 291, 2001. [21] A. Khokhar and V. Prasanna, “Mapping stereo and image matching algorithms onto parallel architectures,” Sadhana, vol. 18, pp. 209–221, 1993. 10.1007/BF02742658. [22] T. Warren Liao, “Clustering of time series data - a survey,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 1857–1874, 2005. Cited By (since 1996): 104. [23] R. Kothari and D. Pitts, “On finding the number of clusters,” Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 405 – 416, 1999. [24] J. L. Bentley, “Multidimensional binary search trees used for associative searching,” Commun. ACM, vol. 18, pp. 509– 517, September 1975.  [25] D. T. Lee and C. K. Wong, “Worst-case analysis for region and partial region searches in multidimensional binary search trees and balanced quad trees,” Acta Informatica, vol. 9, pp. 23–29, 1977. 10.1007/BF00263763. [26] S. Maneewongvatana and D. M. Mount, “Its okay to be skinny, if your friends are fat,” in Center for Geometric Computing 4th Annual Workshop on Computational Geometry, 1999. [27] H. Ritter, “Self-organizing maps on non-euclidean spaces,” in Kohonen Maps, pp. 97–108, Elsevier, 1999. [28] A. Fernndez and S. Gmez, “Solving non-uniqueness in agglomerative hierarchical clustering using multidendrograms,” Journal of Classification, vol. 25, pp. 43–65, 2008. 10.1007/s00357-008-9004-x. [29] J. Ward, “Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function.,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 58, pp. 236–244, 1963.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
