Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_6789

Abstract:
Armstrong’s Axioms and Navigation Strategies Kaya Deuser and Pavel Naumov  arXiv:1707.04106v2 [cs.AI] 13 Nov 2017  Vassar College 124 Raymond Avenue Poughkeepsie, NY 12604 {kdeuser, pnaumov}@vassar.edu  Abstract The paper investigates navigability with imperfect information. It shows that the properties of navigability with perfect recall are exactly those captured by Armstrong’s axioms from database theory. If the assumption of perfect recall is omitted, then Armstrong’s transitivity axiom is not valid, but it can be replaced by a weaker principle. The main technical results are soundness and completeness theorems for the logical systems describing properties of navigability with and without perfect recall.  Introduction Navigation is a commonly encountered task by autonomous agents that need to reach a destination or, more generally, to find a solution to a problem, where the solution is a sequence of instructions that transition a system from one state to another. This task is often performed when the agent does not have precise information about her current location. Examples of such agents are self-navigating missiles, self-driving cars, and robotic vacuum cleaners. Figure 1 depicts an example T0 of a transition system. This system consists of eight states a, . . . , h represented by the vertices of the graph. The agent cannot distinguish state a from state b and state c from state d, which is denoted by dashed lines connecting the indistinguishable states. The directed edges of the graph represent transitions that the system can make and the labels on these edges represent the instructions that the agent must give to do this. For example, if in state a the agent executes instruction 0, then the system transitions into state g, if, instead, the agent executes instruction 1, the system transitions into state e. Although in this paper we consider non-deterministic transition systems where the execution of the same instruction can transition the system into one of the several states, for the sake of simplicity the transition system T0 is deterministic. Note that, in system T0 the agent can navigate from state a to state c by using instruction 1 in state a and the same instruction 1 again in state e. However, a different sequence of instructions is required to reach state c from state b. As the agent cannot distinguish state a from state b, in state a she does not know which instructions to use to accomplish her Copyright c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.  0 a  1 e  c 1  1  0  0  1  g  h  0,1  0 0  0 b 1  1  0 f  d 1  Figure 1: Transition System T0 .  goal. Moreover, if the agent does reach state c, she cannot verify that the task is completed, because she cannot distinguish state c from state d. For this reason, in this paper instead of navigation between states, we consider navigation between equivalence classes of states with respect to the indistinguishability relation. For example, the agent can navigate from class ras “ ta, bu to class rcs “ tc, du by using instruction 1 in each state she passes. Perfect Recall In order to achieve a goal, the agent would need to follow a certain strategy that must be stored in her memory. We assume that the strategy is permanently stored (“hardwired”) in the memory and cannot be changed during the navigation. For example, a robotic vacuum cleaner might be programmed to change direction when it encounters a wall, to make a circle when the dirt sensor is triggered, and to follow a straight path otherwise. A crucial question for us is if the vacuum cleaner can remember the walls and the dirty spots it has previously encountered. In other words, we distinguish an agent that can keep track of the classes of states she visited and the instructions she used from an agent who only knows her current state. We say that in the former case the agent has perfect recall and in the later she does not. A strategy of an agent without perfect recall can only use information available to her about the current state to decide which instruction to use. In other words, a strategy of such an agent is a function that maps classes of indistinguishable states into instructions. A strategy of an agent with perfect recall can use information about the history of previous tran-  sitions to decide which instruction to use. In other words, a strategy of such an agent is a function that maps classes of indistinguishable histories into instructions. We call the former memoryless strategies and the later recall strategies. In theory, a robotic vacuum cleaner without perfect recall is only equipped with read-only memory to store the strategy. A theoretical robotic vacuum with perfect recall in addition to read-only memory that contains the strategy also has an unlimited read-write memory that contains logs of all previous transitions. In practice, the most popular brand of robotic vacuum cleaners, Roomba, is only using read-write memory to store information, such as a cleaning schedule, that is not used for navigation. This means that Roomba is using a memoryless strategy. The other popular robotic vacuum cleaner, Neato, is scanning the room before cleaning to use this information for navigation purposes. Although, of course, Neato only has a read-write memory of a limited size, the navigation strategy used by Neato is an example of a recall strategy. Examples Transition system T0 has a recall strategy to navigate from class ras to class res. This might be surprising, because the same strategy must work to navigate from both state a and state b of class ras to the only state e of class res. Yet, one would expect to use instruction 1 in state a and instruction 0 in state b to get to e. The recall strategy to navigate from class ras to class res consists in first using instruction 0 once no matter what the starting state is, and then using instruction 1 until state e is reached. When this strategy is used starting from a state in class ras, the system first transitions into state g, then into state a, and then finally into state e. This is a recall strategy because it uses a different instruction in state a depending if the system has already visited a state in class rgs or not. To show that there is no memoryless strategy to navigate from class ras to class res note that any such strategy will have to use the same instruction i0 at every visit to states a and b. If i0 “ 0, then when the navigation starts in state b, the system stays “locked” in set of states ta, g, bu and never reaches state e. Similarly, if i0 “ 1, then when the navigation starts in state b, the system stays “locked” in set of states tb, f, d, hu and never reaches state e. Thus, there is no memoryless strategy to navigate from class ras to class res. In some situation, even when there is a path between appropriate states, there might be no memoryless strategy and no recall strategy. For example, transition system T0 has no recall strategy to navigate from class rcs to class rgs. Indeed, if such a recall strategy exists, it would have to use the same instruction i0 when the system starts in either state c or state d. Suppose i0 “ 0. Thus, if the system starts in state c it is “locked” in state h. Assume now that i0 “ 1. Hence, if the system starts in state d it is “locked” in state h. Therefore, there is no recall strategy from class rcs to class rgs. Table 1 shows when memoryless strategies and recall strategies between classes of states of transition system T0 exist. In this table, letter “m” at the intersection of row x and column y denotes the existence of a memoryless strategy from class x to class y. Letter “r” denotes the existence of a recall strategy, but no memoryless strategy, and dash “-”  ta, bu tc, du teu tf u tgu thu  ta, bu m m m m -  tc, du m m m m m -  teu r m r: m -  tf u r r: m m -  tgu m m m m -  thu r: r: m m m: m  Table 1: Navigability between classes in system T0 . denotes that neither memoryless strategy nor recall strategy exist. Symbol : marks the cases that we have found to be interesting to think about. Navigability between Sets As we have seen, there is a recall strategy, but no memoryless strategy, to navigate from class ras to class res. One can similarly show that there is no memoryless strategy to navigate from class ras to class rf s. However, if the goal is to navigate from class ras to either class res or to class rf s, then there is a memoryless strategy to do this. Indeed, consider a memoryless strategy that uses instruction 1 in every state. This strategy can transition the system from a state of class ras to a state of a class in set tres, rf su. Thus, navigability between sets of classes can not be reduced to navigability between classes. For this reason, in this paper we study properties of navigability between sets of classes. If there is a strategy to navigate from a set of classes A to a set of classes B, then we write A B B. It will be clear from the context if we refer to the existence of a memoryless strategy or a recall strategy. Universal Properties of Navigability In the examples above we talked about properties of navigability for the transition system T0 . In the rest of this paper we study universal properties of navigability between sets of classes that are true in all transition systems. An example of such a property is reflexivity: A B B, where A Ď B. This property is true for both memoryless and recall strategies because absolutely any strategy can be used to navigate from a subset to the whole set. In fact, in this case the goal is achieved before the navigation even starts. Another example of a property of navigation which is universally true for both memoryless and recall strategies is augmentation: A B B Ñ pA Y Cq B pB Y Cq. It says that if there is a strategy to navigate from set A to set B, then there is a strategy to navigate from set A Y C to set B Y C. An example of a property which is universally true for recall strategies, but is not universally true for memoryless strategies is transitivity: A B B Ñ pB B C Ñ A B Cq. It states that if there is a strategy to navigate from set A to set B and a strategy to navigate from set B to set C, then there is a strategy to navigate from set A to set C. To see that this property is not universally true for memoryless strategies, note that, in transition system T0 , memoryless strategy that always uses instruction 0 can be used to navigate from set trasu to set trgsu and memoryless strategy that always uses instruction 1 can be used to navigate from set trgsu to set tresu. At the same time, as we have shown earlier, there is no  memoryless strategy to navigate from set trasu to set tresu. In this paper we show that reflexivity, augmentation, and transitivity principles form a sound and complete logical system that describes all universal properties of navigability by recall strategies. These are the three principles known in database theory as Armstrong’s axioms (GarciaMolina, Ullman, and Widom 2009, p. 81), where they give a sound and complete axiomatization of functional dependency (Armstrong 1974). We also give a sound and complete axiomatization of universal properties of navigability by memoryless strategies. It consists of the reflexivity and augmentation principles mentioned above as well as the monotonicity principle pA Y Cq B B Ñ A B B. The latter principle is true for the recall strategies as well, but it is provable from Armstrong’s axioms. Literature Review Most of the existing literature on logical systems for reasoning about strategies is focused on modal logics. Logics of coalition power were developed by (Pauly 2001; Pauly 2002), who also proved the completeness of the basic logic of coalition power. Pauly’s approach has been widely studied in literature (Goranko 2001; van der Hoek and Wooldridge 2005; Borgo 2007; Sauro et al. 2006; Ågotnes et al. 2010; Ågotnes, van der Hoek, and Wooldridge 2009; Belardinelli 2014). Alternative logical system were proposed by (More and Naumov 2012), (Wang 2015; Wang 2016), and (Li and Wang 2017). (Alur, Henzinger, and Kupferman 2002) introduced AlternatingTime Temporal Logic (ATL) that combines temporal and coalition modalities. (van der Hoek and Wooldridge 2003) proposed to combine ATL with epistemic modality to form Alternating-Time Temporal Epistemic Logic. A completeness theorem for a logical system that combines coalition power and epistemic modalities was proven by (Ågotnes and Alechina 2012). The notion of a strategy that we consider in this paper is much more restrictive than the notion of strategy in the works mentioned above. Namely, we assume that the strategy must be based only on the information available to the agent. This is captured in our setting by requiring the strategy to be the same in all indistinguishable states or histories. This restriction on strategies has been studied before under different names. (Jamroga and Ågotnes 2007) talk about “knowledge to identify and execute a strategy”, (Jamroga and van der Hoek 2004) discuss “difference between an agent knowing that he has a suitable strategy and knowing the strategy itself”. (van Benthem 2001) calls such strategies “uniform”. (Naumov and Tao 2017a) use the term “executable strategy”. (Naumov and Tao 2017b) proposed a complete trimodal logical system describing an interplay between distributed knowledge, uniform strategic power modality, and standard strategic power modality for achieving a goal by a coalition in one step. (Fervari et al. 2017) developed a complete logical system in a single-agent setting for uniform strategies to achieve a goal in multiple steps. (Naumov and Tao 2017a) developed a similar system for maintaining a goal in multi-agent setting. Our contribution is different from all of the above papers by being the first to propose complete logical systems for recall strategies and  memoryless strategies. Paper Outline In the next section we define transition systems and the syntax of our logical systems. This section applies equally to recall and memoryless strategies. The rest of the paper is split into two independent sections. The first of them proves the soundness and the completeness of Armstrong’s axioms for navigability under recall strategies and the second gives an axiomatization for memoryless strategies.  Syntax and Semantics In this section we formally define the language of our logical system, the notion of a transition system, and the related terminology. In the introduction, relation B was viewed as a relation between equivalence classes of a given transition system. Thus, our language depends on these classes and changes from transition system to transition system. In order to have a single language for all transition systems we introduce a fixed finite set of “views” V , whose elements act as names of the equivalence classes in any given transition system. Definition 1 Φ is the minimal set of formulae such that 1. A B B P Φ for all nonempty1 sets A, B Ď V , 2. ϕ, ϕ Ñ ψ P Φ for all formulae ϕ, ψ P Φ. Each transition system specifies a mapping ˚ of views into equivalence classes of states. Transitions between states under an instruction i are captured by a transition function ∆i . Definition 2 pS, „, ˚, I, t∆i uiPI q is a transition system, if 1. S is a set of states, 2. „ is an equivalence (indistinguishability) relation on S, 3. ˚ is a function from V to S{ „, 4. I is an arbitrary nonempty set of “instructions”, 5. ∆i maps set S into nonempty subsets of S for each i P I. We write a˚ instead of ˚paq, where a P V . An example of a transition system is system T0 depicted in Figure 1. Definition 3 A finite sequence w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . , in , wn , where n ě 0, is called a history if 1. wk P S for each k such that 0 ď k ď n, 2. ik P I, for each k such that 1 ď k ď n, 3. wk P ∆ik pwk´1 q, for each k such that 1 ď k ď n. For example, sequence g, 1, a, 1, e, 1, c, 0, h is a history for system T0 . The set of all histories is denoted by H. Definition 4 History h “ w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . , in , wn is indistinguishable from history h1 “ w01 , i1 , w11 , . . . , in , wn1 if wk „ wk1 for each k such that 0 ď k ď n. For example, histories a, 0, g and b, 0, g are indistinguishable in transition system T0 . Indistinguishability of histories of h and h1 is denoted by h « h1 . The equivalence class of history h with respect to this equivalence relation is denoted by vhw. Equivalence class of a state w with respect to equivalence relation „ is denoted by rws. 1  If one allows sets A and B to be empty, most of the proofs in this paper will remain unchanged, but both logical systems will need an additional axiom pA B ∅q for each nonempty set A.  Lemma 1 If w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . , wn « w01 , i1 , w11 , . . . , wn1 , then rwk s “ rwk1 s for each k ď n. b Definition 5 A memoryless strategy is a function from set S{ „ to set I. A recall strategy maps set H{ « to set I. We write srws and svhw instead of sprwsq and spvhwq. Definition 6 An infinite sequence w0 , i1 , w1 , i2 , w2 . . . is called a path under a memoryless strategy s if for each kě1 1. w0 , i1 , w1 , i2 , w2 . . . , wk´1 P H, 2. ik “ srwk´1 s. Lemma 2 For any history w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . , in , wn and any memoryless strategy s, if ik “ srwk´1 s for each k such that 1 ď k ď n, then there are states wn`1 , wn`2 , . . . and instructions in`1 , in`2 , . . . such that sequence w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . , in , wn , in`1 , wn`1 , in`2 , wn`2 , . . . is a path under strategy s. Proof. Elements in`1 , wn`1 , in`2 , wn`2 , . . . can be constructed recursively because (a) there is a state wk`1 P ∆ik`1 pwk q for any state wk and any ik`1 P I by item 5 of Definition 2; (b) I ‰ ∅ by item 4 of Definition 2. b Definition 7 An infinite sequence w0 , i1 , w1 , i2 , w2 . . . is called a path under a recall strategy s if for each k ě 1 1. w0 , i1 , w1 , i2 , w2 . . . , wk´1 P H, 2. ik “ svw0 , i1 , w1 , i2 , w2 . . . , wk´1 w. Definition 8 A˚ “ ta˚ | a P Au, for all sets A Ď V . Definition 9 For a given memoryless strategy or recall strategy s, let P aths pAq be the set of all paths w0 , i1 , w1 , i2 , w2 . . . under s such that rw0 s P A˚ . Definition 10 Let set V isits pBq be the set of all paths w0 , i1 , w1 , i2 , w2 . . . under s such that rwk s P B ˚ for some k ě 0. We write V isitpBq instead of V isits pBq when value of s is clear from the context.  Navigation with Recall Strategies In this section we show that Armstrong’s axioms give a complete axiomatization of navigability between sets of classes with recall strategies. We start with a formal semantics of navigability relation B under recall strategies. Definition 11 T ( A B B if P aths pAq Ď V isitpBq for some recall strategy s of transition system T . Axioms The axioms of the logical system that we consider in this section are the tautologies in language Φ and the following additional principles known as Armstrong’s axioms (Garcia-Molina, Ullman, and Widom 2009, p. 81): 1. Reflexivity: A B B, where A Ď B, 2. Augmentation: A B B Ñ pA Y Cq B pB Y Cq, 3. Transitivity: A B B Ñ pB B C Ñ A B Cq. We write $ ϕ if formula ϕ is provable from these axioms using the Modus Ponens inference rule. We write X $ ϕ if ϕ is provable using a set of additional axioms X.  Soundness In this section we prove soundness of the above axioms with respect to perfect recall semantics. Theorem 1 If $ ϕ, then T ( ϕ for every system T . The soundness of Armstrong’s axioms with respect to perfect recall semantics is established in Lemma 10, Lemma 11, and Lemma 12 below. We start with technical notions that we need to prove Lemma 12. Definition 12 For any history w0 , i1 , . . . , in , wn and any set B Ď V , let truncation pw0 , i1 , . . . , in , wn q|B be 1. w0 , i1 , . . . , in , wn , if n “ 0 or rw0 s P B ˚ , 2. pw1 , i2 , . . . , in , wn q|B , otherwise. For transition system T0 , if B “ tbu and b˚ “ res, then truncation pg, 1, a, 1, e, 1, c, 0, hq|B is history pe, 1, c, 0, hq. Lemma 3 If h1 « h2 , then h1 |B « h2 |B .  b  Definition 13 For any recall strategies s1 and s2 , any set B Ď V , and any history h “ w0 , i1 , . . . , wn , let " s vhw, if @k ď n prwk s R B ˚ q, ps1 ˝B s2 qvhw “ 1 s2 vh|B w, otherwise. In other words, “composition” strategy s1 ˝B s2 follows strategy s1 until a state w is reached such that rws P B ˚ . Once this happens, the memory of all prior states and instructions is erased and strategy s2 is executed as if navigation started from state w. Lemma 4 Operation s1 ˝B s2 is well-defined. Proof. See Definition 12, Lemma 1, and Lemma 3.  b  Definition 14 For any path w0 , i1 , w1 , i2 , . . . and any set B Ď V , let truncation pw0 , i1 , w1 , i2 , . . . q|B be 1. path w0 , i1 , w1 , i2 , . . . , if rw0 s P B ˚ , 2. path pw1 , i2 , w2 , i3 . . . q|B , otherwise. Lemma 5 For any recall strategies s1 , s2 and any sets A, B Ď V , if path π P P aths1 ˝B s2 pAq X V isitpBq, then π|B P P aths2 pBq. b Lemma 6 P aths1 ˝B s2 pAq Ď V isitpBq if P aths1 pAq Ď V isitpBq, for any recall strategies s1 , s2 and A, B Ď V . Proof. Assume that there is a path w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . in P aths1 ˝B s2 pAq such that w0 , i1 , w1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ R V isitpBq. Thus, ik “ ps1 ˝B s2 qvw0 , i1 , w1 , . . . , wk´1 w for each k ě 1 and rw0 s P A˚ by Definition 9 and Definition 7. Also, rwk s R B ˚ for each k ě 0 by Definition 10. Hence, by Definition 13, we have ik “ s1 vw0 , i1 , w1 , . . . , wk´1 w for each k ě 1. Thus, w0 , i1 , w1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ P P aths1 pAq by Definition 7 and Definition 7. Therefore, w0 , i1 , w1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ P V isitpBq by the assumption P aths1 pAq Ď V isitpBq of the lemma. b Lemma 7 For any recall strategies s1 , s2 and A, B Ď V , if P aths1 ˝B s2 pAq Ď V isitpBq, then pP aths1 ˝B s2 pAqq|B Ď P aths2 pBq. Proof. Consider any path π P P aths1 ˝B s2 pAq. Then, π P V isitpBq because P aths1 ˝B s2 pAq Ď V isitpBq. Hence, π|B P P aths2 pBq by Lemma 5. b  Lemma 8 P aths pAq Ď V isitpCq, if pP aths pAqq|B Ď V isitpCq, for any s and any A, B, C Ď V . b Lemma 9 For any recall strategy s and any A, B, C Ď V , 1. 2. 3. 4.  P aths pAq Ď P aths pBq if A Ď B, P aths pAq Ď V isitpAq, P aths pA Y Cq “ P aths pAq Y P aths pCq, V isitpBq Y V isitpCq “ V isitpB Y Cq.  Proof. See Definition 7 and Definition 10. b The next three lemmas prove soundness of Armstrong’s axioms with respect to the perfect recall semantics. Lemma 10 T ( A B B, where A Ď B. Proof. By Definition 2, set I is nonempty, and thus it contains at least one instruction i0 . Let s be a recall strategy such that svhw “ i0 for each history h. By item 1 and item 2 of Lemma 9, P aths pAq Ď P aths pBq Ď V isitpBq. Therefore, T ( A B B by Definition 11. b Lemma 11 If T ( A B B, then T ( pA Y Cq B pB Y Cq. Proof. By Definition 11, the assumption T ( ABB implies that there exists a recall strategy s such that P aths pAq Ď V isitpBq. Thus, by item 3, item 2, and item 4 of Lemma 9, P aths pA Y Cq  “ Ď Ď Ď  P aths pAq Y P aths pCq V isitpBq Y P aths pCq V isitpBq Y V isitpCq V isitpB Y Cq.  Therefore, T ( pA Y Cq B pB Y Cq by Definition 11. b Lemma 12 If T ( ABB and T ( B BC, then T ( ABC. Proof. By the assumption T ( A B B and Definition 11, we have P aths1 pAq Ď V isitpBq for some recall strategy s1 . Similarly, the assumption T ( B B C implies that there exists a recall strategy s2 such that P aths2 pBq Ď V isitpCq. By Lemma 6, statement P aths1 pAq Ď V isitpBq implies P aths1 ˝B s2 pAq Ď V isitpBq. Thus, by Lemma 7, pP aths1 ˝B s2 pAqq|B Ď P aths2 pBq. Hence, we have pP aths1 ˝B s2 pAqq|B Ď V isitpCq because of P aths2 pBq Ď V isitpCq. Thus, by Lemma 8, P aths1 ˝B s2 pAq Ď V isitpCq. Therefore, T ( A B C by Definition 11. b Completeness In the rest of this section we prove the completeness of Armstrong’s axioms with respect to the perfect recall semantics. We start by defining a canonical transition system T pXq “ pV Y töu, “, ˚, I, t∆i uiPI q for an arbitrary maximal consistent set of formulae X Ď Φ. The set of states of this transition system consists of a single state for each view, plus one additional state that we denote by symbol ö. Informally, the additional state is a sink or a “black hole” state from which there is no way out. State h in transition system T0 depicted in Figure 1 is an example of a black hole state. Note that the indistinguishability relation  on the states of the canonical transition system is equality relation “. That is, the agent has an ability to distinguish any two different states in the system. The fact that equality is suitable as an indistinguishability relation for the canonical transition system with perfect recall is surprising. The indistinguishability relation for the canonical transition system for memoryless strategies, discussed in the next section, is different from equality. Each view v P V is also a state in the canonical transition system. The equivalence class of state v consists of the state itself: rvs “ tvu. We define v ˚ to be class rvs. Lemma 13 u P A iff rus P A˚ for each view u P V and each set A Ď V . b Informally, if set X contains formula ABB, then we want the canonical transition system T pXq to have a recall strategy to navigate from set A˚ “ tras | a P Au “ ttau | a P Au to set B ˚ “ trbs | b P Bu “ ttbu | b P Bu. It turns out that it is sufficient to have just a single instruction that transitions the system from any state in set A to a state in set B. We denote this instruction by pair pA, Bq. Definition 15 I “ tpA, Bq | A B B P Xu. Recall that assumption A B B P X requires sets A and B to be nonempty due to Definition 1. As discussed above, for any instruction pA, Bq we define the nondeterministic transition function ∆pA,Bq to transition the system from a state in A to a state in B. If used outside of set of states A, instruction pA, Bq transitions the system into black hole state ö: Definition 16 " B, ∆pA,Bq pwq “ töu,  if w P A, otherwise.  This concludes the definition of the transition system T pXq. Next, for any recall strategy s and any set of states G Ď V , we define a family of sets of states tGsn uně0 . Informally, set Gsn is the set of all states from which strategy s “draws” the system into set G after at most n transitions. For any history h “ w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . , in , wn , by hdphq we mean the state wn . Definition 17 For any recall strategy s and any nonempty set G Ď V , let chain of Gs0 Ď Gs1 Ď ¨ ¨ ¨ Ď V Y töu be defined as 1. Gs0 “ G, ˇ ( 2. Gsn`1 “ Gsn Y hdphq ˇ h P H and ∆svhw phdphqq Ď Gsn for all n ě 0. Note that this definition, in essence, has an existential quantifier over history h. Thus, informally, strategy s is allowed to “manipulate” the history in order to “draw” the system into set G. Lemma 14 ö R Gsn for each n ě 0. Proof. We prove this statement by contradiction. Let n be the smallest non-negative integer number such that ö P Gsn . Note that n ‰ 0 because Gs0 “ G Ď V by Definition 17. Thus, n ą 0. Hence, by Definition 17, there exists a history h such that hdphq “ ö and ∆svhw pöq Ď Gsn´1 . Note that  ∆svhw pöq “ töu by Definition 16. Therefore, ö P Gsn´1 , which contradicts the choice of integer n. b Definition 18 Gs8 “  Ť kě0  Gsk .  We now prove properties of the family of sets tGsn uně0 that are needed to finish the proof of the completeness. Lemma 15 X $ tgu B Gsn´1 for each integer n ě 1 and each state g P Gsn . Proof. By Definition 17, assumptions n ě 1 and g P Gsn imply that there is a history h such that hdphq “ g and ∆svhw pgq Ď Gsn´1 .  Lemma 16 For any n ě 1 and any views a1 , . . . , an P V , if X $ tak uBB for each k ď n, then X $ ta1 , . . . , an uBB. Proof. We prove this statement by induction on n. In the base case, X $ ta1 u B B due to the assumption of the lemma. By the induction hypothesis, X $ ta1 , . . . , an´1 u B B. Thus, by the Augmentation axiom, (2)  At the same time, X $ tan u B B by the assumption of the lemma. Hence, by the Augmentation axiom X $ BYtan uB B. Thus, X $ ta1 , . . . , an´1 , an u B B by statement (2) and the Transitivity axiom. b Lemma 17 X $ Gsn B Gsn´1 for each n ě 1. Proof. The statement of the lemma follows from Lemma 15 and Lemma 16. b Lemma 18 X $ Gsn B G for each n ě 0. Proof. We prove this statement by induction on integer n. In the base case, due to Definition 17, it suffices to show that $ G B G, which is an instance of the Reflexivity axiom. For the induction step, note that X $ Gsn B Gsn´1 by Lemma 17. At the same time, X $ Gsn´1 B G by the induction hypothesis. Hence, X $ Gsn B G by the Transitivity axiom. b Lemma 19 There is n ě 0, such that Gs8 “ Gsn .  Lemma 20 Set p∆svhw phdphqqqzGs8 is non-empty for each history h such that hdphq R Gs8 . Proof. Suppose ∆svhw phdphqq Ď Gs8 for some history h. It suffices to show that hdphq P Gs8 . Indeed, by Lemma 19 there is n such that Gs8 “ Gsn . Thus, ∆svhw phdphqq Ď Gsn . Hence, hdphq P Gsn`1 by Definition 17. Then, hdphq P Gs8 by Definition 18. b  (1)  Furthermore, by Definition 15, there are nonempty sets A, B Ď V such that svhw “ pA, Bq. Case I: g R A. Then, ∆svhw pgq “ töu by Definition 16. Hence, töu Ď Gsn´1 by equation (1), which contradicts Lemma 14. Case II: g P A. Then, $ tgu B A by the Reflexivity axiom. At the same time, X $ A B B by Definition 15. Thus, by the Transitivity axiom, X $ tgu B B. Assumption g P A implies ∆svhw pgq “ B, by Definition 16. Thus, B Ď Gsn´1 due to equation (1). Hence, $ B B Gsn´1 by the Reflexivity axiom. Finally, statements X $ tgu B B and $ B B Gsn´1 by the Transitivity axiom imply, using Modus Ponens inference rule twice, that X $ tgu B Gsn´1 . b  X $ ta1 , . . . , an´1 , an u B B Y tan u.  Proof. Since Gs0 Ď Gs1 Ď Gs2 Ď ¨ ¨ ¨ Ď V Y töu and set V is finite, there must exist an integer n such that Gsn “ Ť s s s b kě0 Gk . Therefore, Gn “ G8 by Definition 18.  Lemma 21 For any positive integer k and any history w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . , wk´1 , if wk´1 R Gs8 , then there is a state wk R Gs8 such that w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . , wk´1 , ik , wk is a history, where ik “ svw0 , i1 , w1 , . . . , wk´1 w. Proof. By Lemma 20, set p∆ik pwk´1 qqzGs8 is not empty. Let wk be any state such that wk P ∆ik pwk´1 q and wk R Gs8 . Then, w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . , wk´1 , ik , wk is a history by Definition 3. b Lemma 22 For each state w0 R Gs8 there exists a path w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . under recall strategy s such that wk R Gs8 for each k ě 0. Proof. Note that single-element sequence w0 is a history by Definition 3. Due to Lemma 21, there is an infinite sequence w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . such that for each integer k ě 1, 1. w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . , wk´1 is a history, 2. ik “ svw0 , i1 , w1 , . . . , wk´1 w, 3. wk R Gs8 . By Definition 7, sequence w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . is a path under recall strategy s. b Lemma 23 If X $ A B B, then T pXq ( A B B. Proof. Assumption X $ A B B implies pA, Bq P I by Definition 15. Consider recall strategy s such that svhw “ pA, Bq for each class of histories vhw. Consider any path w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . under recall strategy s where rw0 s P A˚ . Then, w0 P A by Lemma 13. By Definition 11 and Definition 10 it suffices to show that rw1 s P B ˚ . Indeed, i1 “ pA, Bq by choice of recall strategy s. Thus, ∆i1 pw0 q “ ∆pA,Bq pw0 q “ B by Definition 16 and due to the assumption w0 P A. By Definition 7, sequence w0 , i1 , w1 is a history. Hence, w1 P ∆i1 pw0 q by Definition 3. Thus, w1 P ∆i1 pw0 q “ B. Then, rw1 s P B ˚ by Lemma 13. b Lemma 24 If T pXq ( E B G, then X $ E B G. Proof. By Definition 11, assumption T pXq ( EBG implies P aths pEq Ď V isitpGq for some recall strategy s. Case I: E Ď Gs8 . By Lemma 19 there exists an integer n ě 0, such that E Ď Gsn . Thus, $ E B Gsn by the Reflexivity axiom. At the same time, X $ Gsn B G by Lemma 18. Therefore, X $ E B G by the Transitivity axiom.  Case II: E Ę Gs8 . Then, there is an element w0 P E such that w0 R Gs8 . Thus, by Lemma 22 there is a path π “ w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . under recall strategy s such that wk R Gs8 for all k ě 0. Hence, wk R G for all k ě 0 because G “ Gs0 Ď Gs8 by Definition 17 and Definition 18. Thus, rw0 s P E ˚ and rwk s R G˚ for all k ě 0 by Lemma 13. Then, states in path π P P aths pEq by Definition 9 and π R V isitpGq by Definition 10. Therefore, P aths pEq Ę V isitpGq, which contradicts the choice of strategy s. b  state wpA, Bq that can be used to travel one-way from set A to set B. Then, S “ V Y töu Y twpA, Bq | A, B Ď V u. The agent can distinguish any two different nonwormhole states, but she can not distinguish wormholes. In other words, each non-wormhole state v P V Y töu forms its own indistinguishability class rvs “ tvu, while all wormholes belong to the same single indistinguishability class of wormholes. Like in the perfect recall case, for each v P V , we define v ˚ to be class rvs.  Lemma 25 X $ ϕ iff T pXq ( ϕ for each ϕ P Φ.  Lemma 26 u P A iff rus P A˚ for each view u P V and each set A Ď V . b  Proof. We prove this lemma by induction on the structural complexity of ϕ. The base case follows from Lemma 23 and Lemma 24. The induction case follows from the maximality and the consistency of set X in the standard way. b We are now ready to state and prove the completeness theorem for the recall strategies.  Like in the canonical model for the perfect recall case, for sets A, B Ď V such that X $ A B B, we introduce an instruction pA, Bq that can be used to navigate from set A to set B. Unlike the perfect recall case, we introduce such an instruction only if sets A and B are disjoint. This is an insignificant technical restriction that we use to simplify the proof of Lemma 29.  Theorem 2 If T ( ϕ for every system T , then $ ϕ.  Definition 20  Proof. Suppose & ϕ. Let X be a maximal consistent set containing formula ϕ. Thus, T pXq ( ϕ by Lemma 25. Therefore, T pXq * ϕ. b  Navigation with Memoryless Strategies In this section we give a sound and complete axiomatization of navigability under memoryless strategies. We start by modifying Definition 11 to refer to memoryless strategies instead of recall strategies: Definition 19 T ( A B B if P aths pAq Ď V isitpBq for some memoryless strategy s of a transition system T . Axioms The logical system for memoryless strategies is the same as for recall strategies with the exception that the Transitivity axiom is replaced by the following principle: 3. Monotonicity: A1 B B Ñ A B B, where A Ď A1 . This principle can be derived from Armstrong’s axioms. Theorem 3 If $ ϕ, then T ( ϕ for every system T . Proof. Soundness of the Reflexivity axiom and the Augmentation axiom is similar to the case of perfect recall, see Theorem 1. Soundness of the Monotonicity axiom follows from P aths pAq Ď P aths pA1 q, where A Ď A1 . b Completeness In the rest of this section we prove completeness of our logical system with respect to the memoryless semantics. First, we define a canonical transition system T pXq “ pS, „, ˚, I, t∆i uiPI q for an arbitrary maximal consistent set of formulae X Ď Φ. Like in the perfect recall case, the canonical system has one state for each view and an additional “black hole” state ö. Unlike the previous construction, the new canonical transition system has more additional states besides state ö. Drawing on our original intuition of a transition system as a maze, we think about these new states as “wormholes”. For any sets of states A and B in the maze there is a wormhole  I “ tpA, Bq | X $ A B B and A X B “ ∅u. Recall that assumption X ( A B B implies that sets A and B are nonempty due to Definition 1. In the perfect recall case, instruction pA, Bq can be used to transition the system directly from a state in set A to a state in set B. In our case, this transition happens via the wormhole state wpA, Bq. In other words, when instruction pA, Bq is invoked in a state from set A, the system transitions into state wpA, Bq. When the same instruction is invoked in wpA, Bq, the system transitions into a state in B. Definition 21 $ &twpA, Bqu, if u P A, ∆pA,Bq puq “ B, if u “ wpA, Bq, % töu, otherwise. Lemma 27 If X $ A B B and sets A and B are disjoint, then T pXq ( A B B. Proof. Assumptions X $ A B B and A X B “ ∅ imply that pA, Bq P I, by Definition 20. Consider a memoryless strategy s such that spxq “ pA, Bq for each class x. By Definition 19, it suffices to show that P aths pAq Ď V isitpBq. Consider any w0 , i1 , w1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ P P aths pAq. Then, by Definition 9, sequence w0 , i1 , w1 , . . . is a path under strategy s such that rw0 s P A˚ . Hence, w0 P A by Lemma 26. Thus, ∆pA,Bq pw0 q “ twpA, Bqu  (3)  by Definition 21. At the same time, w1 P ∆i1 pw0 q by Definition 3. Hence, w1 P ∆srw0 s pw0 q by Definition 6. Thus, w1 P ∆pA,Bq pw0 q by the choice of strategy s. Then, w1 “ wpA, Bq by equation (3). Hence, ∆pA,Bq pw1 q “ B (4) by Definition 21. Similarly, w2 P ∆i2 pw1 q by Definition 3. Hence, w2 P ∆srw1 s pw1 q by Definition 6. Thus, w2 P ∆pA,Bq pw1 q  by the choice of strategy s. Then, w2 P B by equation (4). Hence, rw2 s P B ˚ by Lemma 26. Therefore, w0 , i1 , w1 , i2 , w2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ P V isitpBq by Definition 10. b Lemma 28 If X $ A B B, then T pXq ( A B B. Proof. Suppose that X $ A B B. If AzB ‰ ∅. Thus, X $ AzB B B by the Monotonicity Axiom. Hence, T pXq ( AzBBB by Lemma 27. Therefore, T pXq ( A B B due to the soundness of the Augmentation axiom, see Theorem 3. If AzB “ ∅, then A Ď B. Therefore, T pXq ( A B B due to the soundness of the Reflexivity axiom. b Recall that all wormhole states belong to a single indistinguishability class of wormholes. For any memoryless strategy s, let pAs , Bs q be the instruction assigned by strategy s to the class of wormholes. Once strategy s is fixed, the states of the canonical transition system can be partitioned into five groups: set As , set V zAs , the single element set töu containing the black hole state, the single element set twpAs , Bs qu containing the wormhole state wpAs , Bs q, and the set twpC, Dq | pC, Dq ‰ pAs , Bs qu of all other wormholes. Definition 21 restricts transitions under strategy s that are possible between these five groups of states. For example, from set V zAs one can transition either into set töu or into set twpC, Dq | pC, Dq ‰ pAs , Bs qu. The arrows in Figure 2 show all possible transitions between these five groups of states allowed under Definition 21. These five groups of states can be further classified into “above the line” and “below the line” states, as shown. Notice that once the system transitions into one of the “below the line” states, it is trapped there and it will never be able to transition under the memoryless strategy s into an “above the line” state.  First, we show that EzG Ď As . Suppose there is a view e1 P E such that e1 R G and e1 R As . By Definition 3, single-element sequence e1 is a history. Thus, by Lemma 2, there is a path π P P aths pEq that starts with state e1 . Since path π starts in a state from set V zAs , all non-initial states of this path are “below the line”, see Figure 2. Hence, neither of the states in path π belong to set G, because e1 R G and none of the states “below the line” are in set G either. Thus, π P P aths pEq and π R V isitpGq, which contradicts the choice of strategy s. Therefore, EzG Ď As . In particular e 0 P As . Second, we show that sre0 s “ pAs , Bs q. Suppose that sre0 s “ pC, Dq, where pC, Dq ‰ pAs , Bs q. If e0 R C, then π “ e0 , pC, Dq, ö, srös, ö, srös, . . . is a path under strategy s by Definition 6 and Definition 21. Note that π R V isitpGq because e0 R G and π P P aths pEq. This contradicts P aths pEq Ď V isitpGq. Similarly, if e0 P C, then sequence π “ e0 , pC, Dq, wpC, Dq, pAs , Bs q, ö, srös, . . . is a path such that π R V isitpGq and π P P aths pEq, which again contradicts P aths pEq Ď V isitpGq. Third, we prove that Bs Ď G. Suppose that there is a state b0 P Bs zG. By Definition 3, Definition 21, and the choice of instruction pAs , Bs q, sequence e0 , pAs , Bs q, wpAs , Bs q, pAs , Bs q, b0 is a history. Thus, by Lemma 2, there is a path π P P aths pEq that starts as e0 , pAs , Bs q, wpAs , Bs q, pAs , Bs q, b0 . Assumption b0 P Bs zG implies that b0 P V zAs because sets As and Bs are disjoint by Definition 20. Thus, path π after state b0 contains only states “below the line”, see Figure 2, none of which are in set G Ď V . Recall also that e0 , b0 R G by the choice of states e0 and b0 . Thus, π P P aths pEq and π R V isitpGq, which again contradicts P aths pEq Ď V isitpGq. Note that X $ As B Bs by Definition 20. Hence, X $ pAs Y Gq B pBs Y Gq by the Augmentation axiom. Thus, X $ pAs Y Gq B G because Bs Ď G. At the same time, EzG Ď As implies that E Ď As YG. Therefore, X $ EBG by the Monotonicity axiom. b Lemma 30 X $ ϕ iff T pXq ( ϕ for each ϕ P Φ.  below the line above the line  Proof. We prove this lemma by induction on the structural complexity of ϕ. The base case follows from Lemma 28 and Lemma 29. The induction case follows from the maximality and the consistency of set X in the standard way. b We are now ready to state and prove the completeness theorem for memoryless strategies. Theorem 4 If T ( ϕ for every system T , then $ ϕ.  Figure 2: Transitions under memoryless strategy s.  Proof. Suppose & ϕ. Let X be a maximal consistent set containing formula ϕ. Thus, T pXq ( ϕ by Lemma 30. Therefore, T pXq * ϕ. b  Lemma 29 If T pXq ( E B G, then X $ E B G. Proof. If E Ď G, then $ E B G by the Reflexivity axiom. In the rest of the proof we suppose that there is e0 P EzG. By Definition 19, assumption T pXq ( E B G implies that there exists a memoryless strategy s such that P aths pEq Ď V isitpGq.  Conclusion In this paper we have shown that the properties of navigability under perfect recall strategies are exactly those described by Armstrong’s axioms for functional dependency  in database theory. In the absence of perfect recall, the Transitivity axiom is no longer valid, but it could be replaced by the Monotonicity axiom.  References [Ågotnes and Alechina 2012] Ågotnes, T., and Alechina, N. 2012. Epistemic coalition logic: completeness and complexity. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems-Volume 2 (AAMAS), 1099–1106. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. [Ågotnes et al. 2010] Ågotnes, T.; Balbiani, P.; van Ditmarsch, H.; and Seban, P. 2010. Group announcement logic. Journal of Applied Logic 8(1):62 – 81. [Ågotnes, van der Hoek, and Wooldridge 2009] Ågotnes, T.; van der Hoek, W.; and Wooldridge, M. 2009. Reasoning about coalitional games. Artificial Intelligence 173(1):45 – 79. [Alur, Henzinger, and Kupferman 2002] Alur, R.; Henzinger, T. A.; and Kupferman, O. 2002. Alternating-time temporal logic. Journal of the ACM 49(5):672–713. [Armstrong 1974] Armstrong, W. W. 1974. Dependency structures of data base relationships. In Information Processing 74 (Proc. IFIP Congress, Stockholm, 1974). Amsterdam: North-Holland. 580–583. [Belardinelli 2014] Belardinelli, F. 2014. Reasoning about knowledge and strategies: Epistemic strategy logic. In Proceedings 2nd International Workshop on Strategic Reasoning, SR 2014, Grenoble, France, April 5-6, 2014, volume 146 of EPTCS, 27–33. [Borgo 2007] Borgo, S. 2007. Coalitions in action logic. In 20th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 1822–1827. [Fervari et al. 2017] Fervari, R.; Herzig, A.; Li, Y.; and Wang, Y. 2017. Strategically knowing how. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-17, 1031–1038. [Garcia-Molina, Ullman, and Widom 2009] Garcia-Molina, H.; Ullman, J.; and Widom, J. 2009. Database Systems: The Complete Book. Prentice-Hall, second edition. [Goranko 2001] Goranko, V. 2001. Coalition games and alternating temporal logics. In Proceedings of the 8th conference on Theoretical aspects of rationality and knowledge, 259–272. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. [Jamroga and Ågotnes 2007] Jamroga, W., and Ågotnes, T. 2007. Constructive knowledge: what agents can achieve under imperfect information. Journal of Applied NonClassical Logics 17(4):423–475. [Jamroga and van der Hoek 2004] Jamroga, W., and van der Hoek, W. 2004. Agents that know how to play. Fundamenta Informaticae 63(2-3):185–219. [Li and Wang 2017] Li, Y., and Wang, Y. 2017. Achieving while maintaining: A logic of knowing how with intermediate constraints. In Logic and Its Applications: Proceedings of 7th Indian Conference, ICLA 2017, Kanpur, India, January 5-7, 2017, 154–167. Springer.  [More and Naumov 2012] More, S. M., and Naumov, P. 2012. Calculus of cooperation and game-based reasoning about protocol privacy. ACM Trans. Comput. Logic 13(3):22:1–22:21. [Naumov and Tao 2017a] Naumov, P., and Tao, J. 2017a. Coalition power in epistemic transition systems. In Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), 723–731. [Naumov and Tao 2017b] Naumov, P., and Tao, J. 2017b. Together we know how to achieve: An epistemic logic of know-how. In 16th conference on Theoretical Aspects of Rationality and Knowledge (TARK), July 24-26, 2017, EPTCS 251, 441–453. [Pauly 2001] Pauly, M. 2001. Logic for Social Software. Ph.D. Dissertation, Institute for Logic, Language, and Computation. [Pauly 2002] Pauly, M. 2002. A modal logic for coalitional power in games. Journal of Logic and Computation 12(1):149–166. [Sauro et al. 2006] Sauro, L.; Gerbrandy, J.; van der Hoek, W.; and Wooldridge, M. 2006. Reasoning about action and cooperation. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS ’06, 185–192. New York, NY, USA: ACM. [van Benthem 2001] van Benthem, J. 2001. Games in dynamic-epistemic logic. Bulletin of Economic Research 53(4):219–248. [van der Hoek and Wooldridge 2003] van der Hoek, W., and Wooldridge, M. 2003. Cooperation, knowledge, and time: Alternating-time temporal epistemic logic and its applications. Studia Logica 75(1):125–157. [van der Hoek and Wooldridge 2005] van der Hoek, W., and Wooldridge, M. 2005. On the logic of cooperation and propositional control. Artificial Intelligence 164(1):81 – 119. [Wang 2015] Wang, Y. 2015. A logic of knowing how. In Logic, Rationality, and Interaction. Springer. 392–405. [Wang 2016] Wang, Y. 2016. A logic of goal-directed knowing how. Synthese.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
