Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_6799

Abstract:
Subclassing errors, OOP, and practically checkable rules to prevent them  arXiv:cs/0301032v1 [cs.PL] 28 Jan 2003  Oleg Kiselyov Software Engineering, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA 93943 oleg@pobox.com, oleg@acm.org Abstract This paper considers an example of Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) leading to subtle errors that break separation of interface and implementations. A comprehensive principle that guards against such errors is undecidable. The paper introduces a set of mechanically verifiable rules that prevent these insidious problems. Although the rules seem restrictive, they are powerful and expressive, as we show on several familiar examples. The rules contradict both the spirit and the letter of the OOP. The present examples as well as available theoretical and experimental results pose a question if OOP is conducive to software development at all. Keywords: object-oriented programming, subtyping, subclassing, implementation inheritance, C++, functional programming  1 Introduction Decoupling of abstraction from implementation is one of the holy grails of good design. Object-oriented programming is claimed to be conducive to such a separation, and therefore to more reliable code. In the end, productivity and quality are the only true merits a programming methodology is to be judged upon. This article will discuss a simple example that questions if Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) indeed helps separate interface from implementation. First we demonstrate how easily subclassing errors arise and how difficult (in general, undecidable) it is to prevent them. We later introduce a set of expressive rules that preclude the subclassing errors, and can be mechanically verified. Incidentally the rules run contrary to the OOP precepts. We take a rather familiar example that illustrates the difference between subclassing and subtyping: the example of Sets and Bags. The example is isomorphic to that of circles vs. ellipses or squares vs. rectangles. Section 2 introduces the example and carries it one step further, to a rather unsettling result: a "transparent" change in an implementation suddenly breaks client code that was written according to public interfaces. We set out to follow good software engineering practices; this makes the resulting failure even more ominous. Section 3 brings up a subclassing vs. subtyping dichotomy and the Liskov principle of behavioral substitutability. We show that Sets and Bags viewed as mutable or immutable objects are not subtypes of each other. The indiscriminate use of implementation inheritance indeed prevents separation of interface and implementation. In Section 4 we take a contrary point of view, of bags and sets as values without a hidden state and whose responses to external messages cannot be overridden. We prove that a set truly is-a bag; a set is substitutable for a bag, a set can always be manipulated as a bag, a set maintains every invariant of a bag – and it is still a set. The section also shows that if we abide by practically checkable rules we obtain a guarantee that the subtle subclassing errors cannot occur in principle. We will also show that the rules do not diminish the power of a language. Inheritance and encapsulation, two staples of OOP, make checking of the Liskov Substitution Principle (LSP) for derived objects generally undecidable. On the other hand, the proposed rules, which can be checked at compile time, make derived values satisfy LSP. The article aims to give a more-or-less "real" example, which we can run and see the result for ourselves. By necessity the example had to be implemented in some language. The present article uses C++. It appears however that similar code and similar conclusions can be carried on in many other object-oriented languages (e.g., Java, Python, etc).  1  2 Coupling of interface and implementation Suppose I was given a task to implement a Bag – an unordered collection of possibly duplicate items (integers in this example). I chose the following interface: typedef int const * CollIterator; class CBag { public: int size(void) const; int count(const int elem) const; virtual void put(const int elem); virtual bool del(const int elem); CollIterator begin(void) const; CollIterator end(void) const;  // Primitive but will do  CBag(void); virtual CBag * clone(void) const; private: ... // implementation details elided };  The class CBag defines usual methods to determine the number of all elements in a bag, to count the number of occurrences of a specific element, to put a new element into a bag and to remove one. The latter function returns false if the element to delete did not exist. We also define the standard enumerator interface [11] – methods begin() and end() – and a method to make a copy of the bag. Other operations of the CBag package are implemented without the knowledge of CBag’s internals: the print-on operator < <, the union (merge) operator +=, and operators to compare CBags and to determine their structural equivalence. These functions use only the public interface of the CBag class: void operator += (CBag& bool operator <= (const inline bool operator >= { return b <= a; } inline bool operator == { return a <= b && a >=  to, const CBag& from); CBag& a, const CBag& b); (const CBag& a, const CBag& b) (const CBag& a, const CBag& b) b; }  The complete code of the whole example is available in [7]. It has to be stressed that the package was designed to minimize the number of functions that need to know details of CBag’s implementation. Following good practice, I wrote validation code (file vCBag.cc [7]) that tests all the functions and methods of the CBag package and verifies common invariants. Suppose you are tasked with implementing a Set package. Your boss defined a set as an unordered collection where each element has a single occurrence. In fact, your boss even said that a set is a bag with no duplicates. You have found my CBag package and realized that it can be used with few additional changes. The definition of a Set as a Bag, with some constraints, made the decision to reuse the CBag code even easier. class CSet : public CBag { public: bool memberof(const int elem) const { return count(elem) > 0; } // Overriding of CBag::put void put(const int elem) { if(!memberof(elem)) CBag::put(elem); } CSet * clone(void) const { CSet * new_set = new CSet(); *new_set += *this; return new_set; } CSet(void) {} };  The definition of a CSet makes it possible to mix CSets and CBags, as in set += bag; or bag += set; These operations are well-defined, keeping in mind that a set is a bag that happens to have the count of all members exactly one. For example, set += bag; adds all elements from a bag to a set, unless they are already present. On the other hand, bag += set; is no different than merging a bag with any other bag. You too wrote a validation suite to test all CSet methods (newly defined as well as inherited from a bag) and to verify common expected properties, e.g., a+=a ≡ a.  In my package, I have defined and implemented a function that, given three bags a, b, and c, decides if a+b is a subbag of c: bool foo(const CBag& a, const CBag& b, const CBag& c) { // Clone a to avoid clobbering it CBag & ab = *(a.clone()); ab += b; // ab is now the union of a and b bool result = ab <= c; delete &ab; return result; }  It was verified in the test suite. You have tried this function on sets, and found it satisfactory. Later on, I revisited my code and found my implementation of foo() inefficient. Memory for the ab object is unnecessarily allocated on heap. I rewrote the function as bool foo(const CBag& a, const CBag& b, const CBag& c) { CBag ab; ab += a; // Clone a to avoid clobbering it ab += b; // ab is now the union of a and b bool result = ab <= c; return result; }  It has exactly the same interface as the original foo(). The code hardly changed. The behavior of the new implementation is also the same – as far as I and the package CBag are concerned. Remember, I have no idea that you are re-using my package. I re-ran the validation test suite with the new foo(): everything tested fine. However, when you run your code with the new implementation of foo(), you notice that something has changed! The complete source code [7] contains tests that make this point obvious: Commands make vCBag1 and make vCBag2 run validation tests with the first and the second implementations of foo(). Both tests complete successfully, with the identical results. Commands make vCSet1 and make vCSet2 test the CSet package. The tests – other than those of foo() – all succeed. Function foo() however yields markedly different results. It is debatable which implementation of foo() gives truer results for CSets. In any case, changing internal algorithms of a pure function foo() while keeping the same interfaces is not supposed to break your code. What happened? What makes this problem more unsettling is that both you and I tried to do everything by the book. We wrote a safe, typechecked code. We eschewed casts. g++ (2.95.2) compiler with flags -W and -Wall issued not a single warning. Normally these flags cause g++ to become very annoying. You did not try to override methods of CBag to deliberately break the CBag package. You attempted to preserve CBag’s invariants (weakening a few as needed). Real-life classes usually have far more obscure algebraic properties. We both wrote validation tests for our implementations of a CBag and a CSet, and they passed. And yet, despite all my efforts to separate interface and implementation, I failed. Should a programming language or the methodology take at least a part of the blame? [10, 4, 1]  3 Subtyping vs. Subclassing The breach of separation between CBag’s implementation and interface is caused by CSet design’s violating the Liskov Substitution Principle (LSP) [9]. CSet has been declared a subclass of CBag. Therefore, C++ compiler’s typechecker permits passing a CSet object or a CSet reference to a function that expects a CBag object or reference. However, it is well known [3] that a CSet is not a subtype of a CBag. The next few paragraphs give a simple proof of this fact, for the sake of reference. The previous section considered bags and sets from the OOP perspective – as objects that encapsulate state and behavior. Behavior means an object can accept a message, send a reply and possibly change its state. From this point of view, bags and sets are not subtypes of each other. Indeed, let us define a Bag as an object that accepts two messages: (send a-Bag ’put x) puts an element x into the Bag, and (send a-Bag ’count x) gives the occurrence count for x in the Bag (without changing a-Bag’s state). Likewise, a Set is defined as an object that accepts two messages: (send a-Set ’put x) puts an element x into a-Set unless it was already there, (send a-Set ’count x) gives the count of occurrences of x in a-Set (which is always either 0 or 1). Throughout this section we use a different, concise notation to emphasize the general nature of the argument.  Let us consider a function (define (fnb bag) (send bag ’put 5) (send bag ’put 5) (send bag ’count 5))  The behavior of this function, its contract, can be summed as follows: given a Bag, the function adds two elements into it and returns (+ 2 (send orig-bag ’count 5)). Technically you can pass to fnb a Set object as well. Just as a Bag, a Set object accepts messages ’put and ’count. However applying fnb to a Set object will break the function’s post-condition stated above. Therefore, passing a set object where a bag was expected changes the behavior of a program. According to the LSP, a Set is not substitutable for a Bag – a Set cannot be a subtype of a Bag. Let us consider another function (define (fns set) (send set ’put 5) (send set ’count 5))  The behavior of this function is: given a Set, the function adds an element into it and returns 1. If you pass to this function a bag (which – just as a set – replies to messages ’put and ’count), the function fns may return a number greater than 1. This will break fns’s contract, which promised always to return 1. One may claim that "A Set is not a Bag, but an ImmutableSet is an ImmutableBag." This is not correct either. An immutability per se does not confer subtyping to "derived" classes of data, as a variation of the previous argument shows [8]. C++ objects are record-based. Subclassing is a way of extending records, with possibly altering some slots in the parent record. Those slots must be designated as modifiable by a keyword virtual. In this context, prohibiting mutation and overriding makes subclassing imply subtyping. This is the reasoning behind BRules introduced below. However merely declaring the state of an object immutable is not enough to guarantee that derivation leads to subtyping: An object can override parent’s behavior without altering the parent. This is easy to do when an object is implemented as a functional closure, when a handler for an incoming message is located with the help of some kind of reflexive facilities, or in prototype-based OO systems [8]. Incidently, if we do permit a derived object to alter its base object, we implicitly allow behavior overriding. For example, an object A can react to a message M by forwarding the message to an object B stored in A’s slot. If an object C derived from A alters that slot it hence overrides A’s behavior with respect to M. The OOP point of view thus leads to a conclusion that neither a Bag nor a Set are subtypes of the other. The interface or an implementation of a Bag and a Set appear to invite subclassing of a Set from a Bag, or vice versa. Doing so however will violate the LSP – and we have to brace for strikingly subtle errors. The previous section intentionally broke the LSP to demonstrate how insidious the errors are and how difficult it may be to find them. Sets and Bags are very simple types, far simpler than the ones that typically appear in a production code. Since LSP when considered from an OOP point of view is undecidable, we cannot count on a compiler for help in pointing out an error. As Section 2 showed, we cannot rely on validation tests either. We have to see the problem [4, 10, 1].  4 Mechanically preventing subclassing errors Bags and sets – as objects – indeed are not subtypes. Subclassing them violates LSP, which leads to insidious errors. Bags and sets however do not have to be viewed as objects. We can take them as pure values, without any state or intrinsic behavior – just like the numbers are. In Section 2, CBag and CSet objects encapsulated a hidden state – a collection of integers. The objects had an ability to react to messages, e.g., put and del, by altering their state. In this section we re-do the example of Section 2 using a different approach. Bags and sets no longer have a state that is distinct from their identity and that can be altered. Equally important we do not allow any changes to the behavior of bags and sets with respect to applicable operations, by overriding or otherwise. In other words, every post-condition of a bag or a set constructor holds throughout the lifespan of the constructed values. This approach makes the subclassing problems and breach of encapsulation disappear. It turns out that a set truly is-a bag; a set is substitutable for a bag, a set can always be manipulated as a bag, a set maintains every invariant of a bag – and it is still a set. The LSP says, “If for each object o1 of type S there is another object o2 of type T such that for all programs P defined in terms of T, the behavior of P is unchanged when o1 is substituted for o2, then S is a subtype of T.” If type T denotes a set of values that carry their own behavior, and if values of type S can override some of T values behavior, the LSP is undecidable. Indeed, a mechanical application of LSP must at least be able to verify that all methods overridden in S terminate whenever the corresponding methods in T terminate. This is generally impossible. On the other hand, if T denotes a set of (structured) data values, and S is a subset of these values – e.g., restricted by range, parity, etc. – the LSP is trivially satisfied. This section also shows that if one abides by mechanically verifiable rules he obtains a guarantee that the subtle subclassing errors cannot occur in principle. The rules do not reduce the power of a language.  4.1 BRules Suppose I was given a task to implement a Bag – an unordered collection of possibly duplicate items (integers in this example). This time my boss laid out the rules, which we will refer to as BRules: • no virtual methods or virtual inheritance • no visible members or methods in any public data structure (that is, in any class declared in an .h file) • no mutations to public data structures – a strict form: no assignments or mutations whatsoever – a less strict form: no function may alter, directly or indirectly, any data it receives as arguments The rules break the major tenets of OOP: for example, values no longer have a state that is separate from their identity. Prohibitions on virtual methods and on modifications of public objects are severe. It appears that not much of C++ is left. Surprisingly I still can implement my assignment without losing expressiveness – and perhaps even gaining some. The exercise will also illustrate that C++ does indeed have a pure functional subset [12], and that you can program in C++ without assignments.  4.2 Interface and implementation of a FBag class FBag { public: FBag(void); FBag(const FBag& another); ~FBag(void);  // Copy-constructor  private: class Cell; // Opaque type const Cell * const head; FBag(const Cell * const cell); // Private constructor // Declaration of three friends elided };  Indeed, there are no virtual functions, no methods or public members. We also declare functions that take a FBag as (one of the) arguments and return the count of all elements or a specific element in the bag, print the bag, f old [5] over the bag, compare two bags for structural equivalence, verify bag’s invariants, merge two bags, add or delete an element. The latter three functions do not modify their arguments; they return a new FBag as their result. It must be stressed that the functions that operate on a FBag are not FBag’s methods; in particular, they are not a part of the class FBag, they are not inherited and they cannot be overridden. The implementation is also written in a functional style. FBag’s elements are held in a linked list of cells, which are allocated from a pre-defined pool. The pool implements a mark-and-sweep garbage collection, in C++. Forgoing assignments does not reduce expressiveness as the following snippet from the FBag code shows; the snippet implements the union of two FBags: struct union_f { FBag operator() (const int elem, const FBag seed) const { return put(seed,elem); } }; FBag operator + (const FBag& bag1, const FBag& bag2) { return fold(bag1,union_f(),bag2); }  Following good practice, I wrote a validation code (file vFBag.cc [7]) that tests all the functions of the FBag package and verifies common invariants.  4.3 Implementation of a FSet. FSet is a subtype of a FBag Suppose you are tasked with implementing a Set package. Your boss defined a set as an unordered collection where each element has a single occurrence. In fact, your boss even said that a set is a bag with no duplicates. You have found my FBag package and realized that it can be used with few additional changes. The definition of a Set as a Bag (with some constraints) made the decision to reuse the FBag code even easier.  class FSet : public FBag { public: FSet(void) {} FSet(const FBag& bag) : FBag(remove_duplicates(bag)) {} }; bool memberof(const FSet& set, const int elem) { return count(set,elem) > 0; }  Surprisingly, this is the whole implementation of a FSet. A set is fully a bag. Because FSet constructors eventually call FBag constructors and do no alter the latter’s result, every post-condition of a FSet constructor implies a post-condition of a FBag constructor. Since FBag and FSet values are immutable, the post-conditions that hold at their birth remain true through their lifespan. Because all FSet values are created by an FBag constructor, all FBag operations automatically apply to an FSet value. This concludes the proof that an FSet is a subtype of a FBag. The FBag.cc package [7] has a function verify(const FBag&) that checks to make sure its argument is indeed a bag. The function tests FBag’s invariants, for example: const FBag bagnew = put(put(bag,5),5); assert( count(bagnew,5) == 2 + count(bag,5) && size(bagnew) == 2 + size(bag) ); assert( count(del(bagnew,5),5) == 1 + count(bag,5) );  Your validation code passes a non-empty set to this function to verify the set is indeed a bag. You can run the validation code vFSet.cc [7] to see for yourself that the test passes. On the other hand, FSets do behave like Sets: const FSet a112 = put(put(put(FSet(),1),1),2); assert( count(a112,1) == 1 ); const FSet donce = FSet() + a112; const FSet dtwice = donce + a112; assert( dtwice == a112 );  where a112 is a non-empty set. The validation code vFSet.cc you wrote contains many more tests like the above. The code shows that a FSet is able to pass all of FBag’s tests as well as its own. The implementation of FSets makes it possible to take a union of a set and a bag; the result is always a bag, which can be made a set if desired. There are corresponding test cases as well. To clarify how an FSet may be an FBag at the same time, let us consider one example in more detail: // An illustration that an FSet is an FBag int cntb(const FBag v) { FBag b1 = put(v, 5); FBag b2 = put(b1, 5); FBag b3 = del(b2, 5); return count(b3, 5); } const int cb1 = cntb(FBag()); // cb1 has the value of 1 const int cb2 = cntb(FSet()); // cb2 has the value of 1 // An illustration that an FSet does act as a set int cnts(const FSet v) { FSet s1 = put(v, 5); FSet s2 = put(s1, 5); FSet s3 = del(s2, 5); return count(s3, 5); } const int cs = cnts(FSet()); // cs has the value of 0  This example is one of the test cases in vFSet.cc [7]. You can run it and check the results for yourself. Yet it is puzzling: how come cs has the value different from that of cb1 if there is no custom del() function for FSets? The statement FSet s2 = put(s1, 5); is the most illuminating. On the right-hand side is an expression: putting an element 5 to a FBag/FSet that already has this element in it. The result of that expression is a FBag {5,5}, with two instances of element 5. The statement then constructs a FSet s2 from that bag. A FSet constructor is invoked. The constructor takes the bag {5,5}, removes the duplicate element 5 from it, and "blesses" the resulting FBag to be a FSet as well. Thus s2 will be a FBag and a FSet, with one instance of element 5. In fact, s1 and s2 are identical. A FSet constructor guarantees that a FBag it constructs contains no duplicates. As objects are immutable, this invariant holds forever.  4.4 Discussion Surprising as it may be, assertions "a Set is a Bag with no duplicates" and "a Set always acts as a Bag" do not contradict each other, as the following two examples illustrate: Let {value ...} be an unordered collection of values: a Bag. Let us consider the following values: vA : 42, vB : {42}, vC : {43}, vD : {42 43}, vE : {42 43 42} vA is not a collection; vB, vC, vD, and vE are bags. vB, vC, and vD are also Sets: unordered collections without duplicates. vE is not a Set. Every Set is a Bag but not every Bag is a Set. We introduce operations merge (infix +) and subtract (infix -). Both operations take two Bags and return a Bag. Either of the operands, or both, may also be a Set. The result, a Bag, may or may not be a Set. For example, vB + vC ⇒ vD Both of the operands and the result are also Sets vB + vD ⇒ vE The argument Bags are also Sets, but the resulting Bag is not a Set vE + vE ⇒ {42 43 42 42 43 42} None of the Bags here are Sets vD − vC ⇒ vB The argument Bags are also Sets, so is the result. vE − vC ⇒ {42 42} One of the arguments is a Set, the resulting Bag is not a Set. vE − vE ⇒ {} The argument Bags are not Sets, but the resulting Bag is.  Let uf-integer denote a natural number whose prime factors are unique. Let us consider the following values: vA : 45 , vB : 42, vC : 43, vD : 1806, vE : 75852 vA is not an integer; vB, vC, vD, and vE are integers. vB, vC, and vD are also uf-integers. vE is not a ufinteger as it is a product 2 ∗ 2 ∗ 3 ∗ 3 ∗ 7 ∗ 7 ∗ 43 with factors 2, 3, and 7 occurring several times. Every ufinteger is an integer but not every integer is a uf-integer. We introduce operations multiply (infix *) and reduce (infix %): a%b = a/gcd(a, b). Both operations take two integers and return an integer. Either of the operands, or both, may also be a uf-integer. The result, an integer, may or may not be a uf-integer. For example, vB ∗ vC ⇒ vD Both of the operands and the result are also uf-integers vB ∗ vD ⇒ vE The argument integers are also ufintegers, but the resulting integer is not a ufinteger vE ∗ vE ⇒ 5753525904 None of the integers here are uf-integers vD%vC ⇒ vB The argument integers are also ufintegers, so is the result vE%vC ⇒ 1764 One of the arguments is a uf-integer, the resulting integer is not a uf-integer vE%vE ⇒ 1 The argument integers are not ufintegers, but the resulting integer is.  Bags are closed under operation merge but subsets of Bags – Sets – are not not closed under merge. On the other hand, both Bags and Sets are closed under subtract. We may wish for a merge-like operation that, being applied to Sets, always yields a Set. We can introduce a new operation: merge − if − not − there. We can define it specifically for Sets. Alternatively, the operation can be defined on Bags; it would apply to Sets by the virtue of inclusion polymorphism as every Set is a Bag. Sets are closed with respect to merge−if −not−there. On the other hand, to achieve closure of Sets under merge we can project – coerce – the result of merging of two Sets back into Sets, a subset of Bags. The FBag/FSet package took this approach. If we merge two FSets and want to get an FSet in result we have to specifically say so, by applying a projection (coercion) operator: FSet::FSet(const FBag& bag). That operator creates a new FBag without duplicates. This fact makes the latter a FSet. Thus F Set(vB + vD) ⇒ vD, an FSet.  Integers are closed under operation multiply but subsets of integers – uf-integers – are not closed under multiply. On the other hand, both integers and ufintegers are closed under reduce. We may wish for a multiply-like operation that, being applied to uf-integers, always yields a uf-integer. We can introduce a new operation: lcm, the least common multiple. This operation is well-defined on integers; it would apply to uf-integers by the virtue of inclusion polymorphism as every uf-integer is an integer. uf-integers are closed with respect to the lcm operation. On the other hand, to achieve closure of uf-integers under multiply we can project – coerce – the product of two uf-integers back into uf-integers, a subset of integers. If we multiply two uf-integers and want to get a uf-integer in result we have to specifically say so, by applying a projection (coercion) operator: remove − duplicate − f actors. That operator creates a new integer without duplicate factors. This fact makes the resulting integer a uf-integer. Thus uf −integer(vB ∗vD) ⇒ vD, a uf-integer  It has to be stressed that the two columns of the above table are not merely similar: they are isomorphic. Indeed, the right column is derived from the left column by the following substitution of words that preserves meaning: Bag ↔ integer, Set ↔ uf-integer, merge ↔ multiply, subtract ↔ reduce. The right column sounds more "natural" – so should the left column as integers and uf-integers are representations for resp. FBags and FSets. From an extensional point of view [2], a type denotes a set of values. By definition of a FSet, it is a particular kind of FBag. Therefore, a set of all FSets is a subset of all FBags: FSet is a subtype of FBag. A FBag or a FSet do not have any "embedded" behavior – just as integers do not have an embedded behavior. Behavior of numbers is defined by operations, mapping from numbers to numbers. Any function that claims to accept every member of a set of values identified by a type T will also accept any value in a subset of T. Frequently a value can participate in several sets of operations: a value can have several types at the same time. For example, a collection { 42 } is both a Bag and a Set. This fact should not be surprising. In C++, a value typically denoted by a numeral 0 can be considered to have a character type, an integer type, a float type, a complex number type, or a pointer type, for any declared or yet to be declared pointer type. This lack of behavior is what puts FBag and FSet apart from CBag and CSet discussed in the previous article. FSet is indeed a subtype of FBag, while CSet is not a subtype of a CBag as CSet has a different behavior. Incidentally LSP is trivially satisfied for values that do not carry their own behavior. FBags and FSets are close to so-called predicate classes. Since instances of FSets are immutable, the predicate needs to be checked only at a value construction time.  4.5 Polymorphic programming with BRules The FSet/FBag example above showed BRules in the context of subtypes formed by a restriction on a base type. As it turns out, BRules work equally well with existential (abstract) types. To illustrate this point, the source code accompanying this article [7] contains three implementations of a collection of polymorphic values. The collection is populated by Rectangles and Ellipses, which are instances of concrete classes implementing a common abstract base class Shape. A Shape is an existential type that knows how to draw, move and resize itself. A file Shapes-oop.cc gives the conventional, OOP-like implementation, with virtual functions and such. A file Shapes-no-oop.cc is another implementation, also in C++. The latter follows BRules, has no assignments or virtual functions. Any particular Shape value is created by a Shape constructor and is not altered after that. Shapes-no-oop.cc achieves polymorphic programming with the full separation of interface and implementation: If an implementation of a concrete Shape is changed, the code that constructs and uses Shapes does not even have to be recompiled! The file defines two concrete instances of the Shape: a Square and a Rectangle. The absence of mutations and virtual functions guarantees that any post-condition of a Square or a Rectangle constructor implies the post-condition of a Shape. Both particular  shapes can be passed to a function set_dim(const Shape& shape, const float width, const float height); Depending on the new dimensions, a square can become a rectangle or a rectangle square. You can compile Shapes-no-oop.cc and run it to see that fact for yourself. It is instructive to compare Shapes-no-oop.cc with Shapes-h.hs, which implements the same problem in a purely functional, strongly-typed language Haskell. All three code files in the Shapes directory solve the same problem the same way. Two C++ code files – Shapes-oop.cc and Shapes-no-oop.cc – look rather different. On the other hand, the purely functional Shapes-nooop.cc and the Haskell code Shapes-h.hs are uncanny similar – in some places, frighteningly similar. This exercise shows that BRules do not constrain the power of a language even when abstract data types are involved.  5 Conclusions It is known, albeit not so well, that following the OOP letter and practice may lead to insidious errors [10, 1]. Section 2 of this article showed how subtle the errors can be even in simple cases. In theory, there are rules – LSP – that could prevent the errors. Alas, the rules are in general undecidable and not practically reinforceable. In contrast, BRules introduced in this article can be statically checked at compile time. The rules outlaw certain syntactic constructions (for example, assignments in some contexts, and non-private methods) and keywords (e.g., virtual). It is quite straightforward to write a lint-like application that scans source code files and reports if they conform to the rules. When BRules are in effect, subtle subclassing errors like the ones shown in Section 2 become impossible. To be more precise, with BRules, subclassing implies subtyping. Subclassing by definition is a way of creating (derived) values by extending, restricting, or otherwise specializing other, parent values. A derived value constructor must invoke a parent value constructor to produce the parent value. The former constructor often has a chance to alter the parent constructor’s result before it is cast or incorporated into the derived value. If this chance is taken away, the post-condition of a derived value constructor implies the post-condition of the parent value. Disallowing any further mutations guarantees the behavioral substitutability of derived values for parent values at all times. As the examples in this article showed, following BRules does not diminish the power of the language. We can still benefit from polymorphism, we can still develop practically relevant code. Yet BRules blur the distinction between the identity and the state, a characteristic of objects. BRules are at odds with the practice if not the very mentality of OOP. This begs the question: Is OOP indeed conducive to software development? One can argue that OOP – as every powerful technique – requires extreme care: knives are sharp. Likewise, goto is expressive, and assembler- or microcode-level programming are very efficient. All of them can lead to bugs that are very difficult, statically impossible, to find. On the other hand, if you program, for example, in Scheme, you never have to deal with an "invalid opcode" exception. That error becomes simply impossible. Furthermore, “while opinions concerning the benefits of OOSD [Object-Oriented Software Development] abound in OO literature, there is little empirical proof of its superiority” [6]. Acknowledgments I am grateful to Valdis Berzins for valuable discussions and suggestions on improving the presentation. This work has been supported in part by the National Research Council Research Associateship Program, Naval Postgraduate School, and the Army Research Office under contracts 38690-MA and 40473-MA-SP.  References [1] Cardelli, L. Bad Engineering Properties of Object-Oriented Languages. ACM Comp. Surveys 28(4es), 1996, article 150. [2] Cardelli, L., Wegner, P. On Understanding Types, Data Abstraction, and Polymorphism. ACM Comp. Surveys, 17(4): December 1985, pp. 471-522. [3] Cook, W.R., Hill, W.L., Canning, P.S. Inheritance Is Not Subtyping. In: Carl A. Gunter and John C. Mitchell. Theoretical Aspects of Object- Oriented Programming. MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-07155-X. [4] Hatton, L. Does OO sync with how we think? IEEE Software 15(3) , May-June 1998, pp. 46 -54.  [5] Hutton, G. A tutorial on the universality and expressiveness of fold. Journal of Functional Programming, 9(4):355-372, July 1999. [6] Johnson, R.A. The Ups and Downs of Object-Oriented Systems Development. Comm. ACM 43(10), October 2000, pp. 69-73. [7] Kiselyov, O. Complete code that accompanies the article. <http://pobox.com/~oleg/ftp/packages/subclassing– problem.tar.gz>, August 4, 2000. [8] Kiselyov, O. Subtyping, Subclassing, and Trouble with OOP. <http://pobox.com/~oleg/ftp/Computation/Subtyping/index.html>, August 4, 2000. [9] Liskov, B., Wing, J. M. A Behavioral Notion of Subtyping. ACM Trans. Programming Languages and Systems, 16(6), November 1994, pp. 1811-1841. [10] Ousterhout, J.K. Scripting: Higher-Level Programming for the 21st Century. IEEE Computer, March 1998, pp. 23-30. [11] Standard Template Library Programmer’s Guide. SGI Inc, 1996-1999. <http://www.sgi.com/tech/stl/>. [12] Stroustrup, B. The Real Stroustrup Interview. IEEE Computer 31(6), June 1998, pp. 110-114.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
