Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_6993

Abstract:
arXiv:cs/0312023v1 [cs.PL] 12 Dec 2003  Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming  1  Inferring Termination Conditions for Logic Programs using Backwards Analysis SAMIR GENAIM Dipartimento di Informatica Università degli Studi di Verona  MICHAEL CODISH Department of Computer Science Ben-Gurion University submitted 24 July 2003; revised ; accepted 13 October 2003  Abstract This paper focuses on the inference of modes for which a logic program is guaranteed to terminate. This generalises traditional termination analysis where an analyser tries to verify termination for a specified mode. Our contribution is a methodology in which components of traditional termination analysis are combined with backwards analysis to obtain an analyser for termination inference. We identify a condition on the components of the analyser which guarantees that termination inference will infer all modes which can be checked to terminate. The application of this methodology to enhance a traditional termination analyser to perform also termination inference is demonstrated.  1 Introduction This paper focuses on the inference of modes for which a logic program is guaranteed to terminate. This generalises traditional termination analysis where an analyser tries to verify termination for a specified mode. For example, for the classic append/3 relation, a standard analyser will determine that a query of the form append(x, y, z) with x bound to a closed list terminates and likewise for the query in which z is bound to a closed list. In contrast, termination inference provides the result append(x, y, z) ← x ∨ z with the interpretation that the query append(x, y, z) terminates if x or z are bound to closed lists. We refer to the first type of analysis as performing termination checking and to the second as termination inference. We consider universal termination using Prolog’s leftmost selection rule and we assume that unifications do not violate the occurs check. Several analysers for termination checking are described in the literature. We note the TermiLog system described in (Lindenstrauss and Sagiv 1997) and the system based on the binary clause semantics described in (Codish and Taboch 1999). Termination inference is considered previously by Mesnard and coauthors in (Mesnard 1996; Mesnard and Neumerkel 2001; Mesnard and Ruggieri 2001). Here, we make the observation that the missing link which relates termination checking and termination inference is backwards analysis. Backwards analysis is concerned with the following  2  SAMIR GENAIM and MICHAEL CODISH  type of question: Given a program and an assertion at a given program point, what are the weakest requirements on the inputs to the program which guarantee that the assertion will hold whenever execution reaches that point. In a recent paper, King and Lu (King and Lu 2002) describe a framework for backwards analysis for logic programs in the context of abstract interpretation. In their approach, the underlying abstract domain is required to be condensing or equivalently, a complete Heyting algebra. This property ensures the existence of a weakest requirement on calls to the program which guarantees that the assertions will hold. To demonstrate this link between termination checking and termination inference, we apply the framework for backwards analysis described by King and Lu (King and Lu 2002) to enhance the termination (checking) analyser described in (Codish and Taboch 1999) to perform also termination inference. We use the condensing domain Pos, of positive Boolean formula, to express the conditions on the instantiation of arguments which guarantee the termination of the program. The use of a standard framework for backwards analysis provides a formal justification for termination inference and leads to a simple and efficient implementation similar in power to that described in (Mesnard and Neumerkel 2001). It also facilitates a formal comparison of termination checking and inference. In particular, we provide a condition on the components of the analyser which guarantee that termination inference will infer all modes which termination checking can prove to be terminating. In the rest of the paper, Section 2 provides some background and a motivating example. Section 3 reviews the idea of backwards analysis. Section 4 illustrates how to combine termination analysis with backwards analysis in order to obtain termination inference and investigates their relative precision. Section 5 presents an experimental evaluation. Finally, Section 6 reviews related work and Section 7 concludes. A preliminary version of this paper appeared as Ref. (Genaim and Codish 2001). Our implementation (Codish et al. 2002) can be accessed on the web. It supports termination checking as described in (Codish and Taboch 1999) and termination inference as described in this paper. 2 Preliminaries and Motivating Example We assume a familiarity with the standard definitions for logic programs (Lloyd 1987; Apt 1990) as well as with the basics of abstract interpretation (Cousot and Cousot 1977; Cousot and Cousot 1992). This section describes the standard program analyses upon which we build in the rest of the paper. For notation, in brief: variables in logic programs are denoted as in Prolog (using the upper case) while in relations, Boolean formula, and other mathematical context we use the lower case. We let x̄ denote a tuple of distinct variables x1 , . . . , xn . To highlight a specific point in a program we use labels of the form a . Size relations and instantiation dependencies rest at the heart of termination analysis: size information to infer that some measure on program states decreases as computation progresses; and instantiation information, to infer that the underlying  Inferring Termination Conditions  3  domain is well founded. Consider the recursive clause of the append/3 relation: append([X|Xs], Y s, [X|Zs]) ← append(Xs, Y s, Zs). It does not suffice to observe that the size of the first and third arguments decrease in the recursive call. To guarantee termination one must also ensure that at least one of these arguments is sufficiently instantiated in order to argue that this recursion can be activated only a finite number of times. Instantiation information is traditionally obtained through abstract interpretation over the domain Pos which consists of the positive Boolean functions augmented with a bottom element (representing the formula f alse). The elements of the domain are ordered by implication and represent equivalence classes of propositional formula. This domain is usually associated with its application to infer groundness dependencies where a formula of the form x ∧ (y → z) is interpreted to describe a program state in which x is definitely bound to a ground term and there exists an instantiation dependency such that whenever y becomes bound to a ground term then so does z. Similar analyses can be applied to infer dependencies with respect to other notions of instantiation. Boolean functions are used to describe the groundness dependencies in the success set of a program P as well as in the set of calls which arise in the computations for an initial call pattern G. We denote G calls these approximations by [[P ]]suc pos and [[P ]]pos respectively. The elements are of the form p(x̄) ← ϕ where p/n is a predicate defined in P and ϕ is a positive Boolean function on x̄. For details on Pos see (Marriott and Søndergaard 1993). Size relations express linear information about the sizes of terms (with respect to a given norm function) (De Schreye and Verschaetse 1995; Karr 1976). For example, the relation x ≤ z ∧ y ≤ z describes a program state in which the sizes of the terms associated with x and y are less or equal to the size of the term associated with z. Similarly, a relation of the form z = x + y describes a state in which the sum of the sizes of the terms associated with x and y is equal to the size of the term associated with z. Here the variables represent sizes and hence are implicitly constrained to be non-negative. Several methods for inferring size relations are described in the literature (Benoy and King 1996; Brodsky and Sagiv 1989; Cousot and Halbwachs 1978; De Schreye and Verschaetse 1995). They differ primarily in their approach to obtaining a finite analysis as the abstract domain of size relations contains infinite chains. For a survey on termination analysis of logic programs see (De Schreye and Decorte 1994). Throughout this paper we will use the so-called term-size norm for size relations for which the corresponding notion of instantiation is groundness. We base our presentation on the termination (checking) analyser described in (Codish and Taboch 1999) although we could use as well almost any of the alternatives described in the literature. This analyser is based on a bottom-up TP like semantics which makes loops observable in the form of binary clauses. This provides a convenient starting point for termination inference as derived in this paper. We denote the abstraction of this semantics for a program P over the domain of size relations as [[P ]]bin size . Each element of [[P ]]bin represents a loop and is of the form p(x̄) ← π, p(ȳ) where π is a size conjunction of linear constraints. In the examples these are represented as lists of constraints. We proceed to demonstrate our approach by example in four steps:  4  SAMIR GENAIM and MICHAEL CODISH  The first step: Consider the append/3 relation. append([X|Xs],Ys,[X|Zs]) :- append(Xs,Ys,Zs). append([],Ys,Ys).  Termination checking reports a single abstract binary clause: append(A,B,C) :- [D<A, F<C, B=E], append(D,E,F).  indicating that subsequent calls append(A, B, C) and append(D, E, F ) in a computation, involve a decrease in size for the first and third arguments (D < A and F < C) and maintain the size of the second argument (B = E). To guarantee that this loop may be traversed only a finite number of times, it is sufficient to require that either A or C be sufficiently instantiated. This can be expressed as a Boolean condition: append(x, y, z) ← (x ∨ z). Backwards analysis is now applied to infer the weakest conditions on the program’s predicates which guarantee this condition. For this example the inference is complete and we have derived the result: append(x, y, z) ← x ∨ z interpreted as specifying that append(x, y, z) terminates if x or z are bound to ground terms. The second step: Consider the use of append/3 to define list membership. Adding the following clause to the program introduces no additional loops: member(X,Xs) :- append(A,[X|B],Xs).  Backwards analysis should specify the weakest condition on member(X, Xs) which guarantees the termination condition A ∨ Xs for append(A, [X|B], Xs). This is obtained through projection which for backwards analysis is defined in terms of universal quantification as ∀A .(A ∨ Xs). The resulting Boolean precondition is: member(x, y) ← y indicating that member(x, y) terminates if y is ground. The third step: We now add to the program a definition for the subset/2 relation: subset([X|Xs],Ys) :- member(X,Ys), subset(Xs,Ys). subset([],Ys).  Termination checking reports an additional loop: subset(A,B) :- [B=D,C<A], subset(C,D).  which will be traversed a finite number of times if A is sufficiently instantiated. For the first clause to terminate both loops must terminate: for append/3 in the call to member(X, Y s) and for subset/2 in the call to subset(Xs, Y s). So both Xs and Y s must be instantiated which implies that both arguments of subset/2 should be ground inputs. Namely, subset(x, y) ← x ∧ y. The fourth step: This step demonstrates that the precondition on a call in a clause body may be (partially) satisfied by answers to calls which precede it. Consider adding to the program a clause: s(X,Y,Z) :- a append(X,Y,T), b subset(T,Z).  Inferring Termination Conditions  5  which defines a relation s(x, y, z) such that the set z contains the union of sets x and y. The preconditions for termination derived in the previous steps specify the conditions x∨t and t∧z at points a and b respectively. In addition, from a standard groundness analysis we know that on success append(x, y, t) satisfies (x∧y) ↔ t. So, instead of imposing on the clause head both conditions from the calls in its body, as we did in the previous step, we may weaken the second condition in view of the results from the first call. Namely (((x ∧ y) ↔ t) → t ∧ z). Now the termination condition inferred for s(x, y, z) is ∀t .((x ∨ t) ∧ (((x ∧ y) ↔ t) → t ∧ z)) ≡ x ∧ y ∧ z. In general, the steps illustrated above, though sufficient for these simple examples, do need to be applied in iteration. In the next section we describe more formally the steps required for backwards analysis. 3 Backward Analysis This section presents an abstract interpretation for backwards analysis using the domain Pos distilled from the general presentation given in (King and Lu 2002). Clauses are assumed to be normalised and contain assertions so that they are of the form h(x̄) ← µ ⋄ b1, . . . , bn where µ is a Pos formula, interpreted as an instantiation condition that must hold when the clause is invoked, and bi is either an atom, or a unification operation. The analysis associates preconditions, specified in Pos, with the predicates of the program. Initialised to true (the top element in P os) these preconditions become more restrictive (move down in Pos) through iteration until they stabilise. At each iteration, clauses are processed from right to left using the current approximations for preconditions on the calls together with the results of a standard groundness analysis to infer new approximations for these preconditions. For the basic step, consider a clause of the form: p ← . . . a , q, b . . . and assume that the current approximation for the precondition for a predicate q is ϕq , the success of q is approximated by ψq , and that processing the clause from right to left has already propagated a condition eb at the point b . Then, to insure that eb will hold after the success of q, it suffices to require at a the conjunction of ψq with the weakest condition σ such that (σ ∧ ψq ) → eb . This σ is precisely the pseudocomplement (Giacobazzi and Scozzari 1998) of ψq with respect to eb , obtained as ψq → eb . So propagating one step to the left gives the condition ea = ϕq ∧(ψq → eb ). Now consider a clause h(x̄) ← µ ⋄ b1 , . . . , bn with an assertion µ ∈ Pos. Assume that the current approximation for the precondition of h(x̄) is ϕ and let ψi and ϕi denote respectively the approximation of the success set of bi (obtained through standard groundness analysis) and the current precondition for bi (1 ≤ i ≤ n). Backwards analysis infers a new approximation ϕ′ of the precondition for h(x̄) by consecutive application of the basic step described above. We start with en+1 = true and through n steps (with i going from n to 1) compute a condition ei = ϕi ∧(ψi → ei+1 ) which should hold just before the call to bi . After computing e1 we take e0 = µ ∧ e1 and project e0 on the variables x̄ of the head by means of universal quantification. The new condition is finally obtained through conjunction with the ¯ e0 . previous condition ϕ. Namely, ϕ′ = ϕ ∧ ∀x̄.  6  SAMIR GENAIM and MICHAEL CODISH  There is one subtlety in that Pos is not closed under universal quantification. To be precise, elimination of x from σ ∈ Pos is defined as the largest element in Pos which implies ∀x .σ. When ∀x .σ is not positive then the projection gives f alse which is the bottom element in Pos. Example 3.1 Consider the clause subset(A,B) :- e0 A ⋄ e1 A=[X|Xs], e2 B=Ys, e3 member(X,Ys), e4 subset(Xs,Ys) e5 .  where the assertion A states that the first argument must be ground and the success patterns (derived by a standard groundness analysis) and the current approximation of the preconditions are (respectively):     member(x, y) ← y member(x, y) ← (y → x) . Φ= Ψ= subset(x, y) ← x subset(x, y) ← (y → x) Starting from e5 = true, the conditions e4 , . . . , e1 are obtained by substituting in ei = ϕi ∧ (ψi → ei+1 ) as illustrated in the following table: i  ϕi  ψi  4 3 2 1  Xs Ys true true  Y s → Xs X → Xs B ↔Ys A ↔ (X ∧ Xs)  ei = ϕi ∧ (ψi → ei+1 ) true Y s ∧ (X → Xs) (B ↔ Y s) → (Y s ∧ (X → Xs)) (A ↔ (X ∧ Xs)) → (B ↔ Y s) → (Y s ∧ (X → Xs))  We now obtain e0 as A ∧ e1 and projecting e0 to the variables in the head gives ∀Xs,Y s,X .(e0 ) = A ∧ B. Which leads to the new precondition subset(x, y) ← x ∧ y. In (King and Lu 2002), the authors formalise backwards analysis as the greatest fixed point of an operator over Pos. In our implementation (Codish et al. 2002) backwards analysis is realised as a simple Prolog interpreter which manipulates Boolean formula using a package for binary decision diagrams written by Armstrong and Schachte (used in (Armstrong et al. 1998) and described in (Schachte 1999)).  4 From termination checking to termination Inference Termination checking aims to determine if a program is guaranteed to terminate for a specified mode. Termination inference aims to infer a set of modes for which the program is guaranteed to terminate. To be precise, we introduce the following definition and terminology. Definition 4.1 (Mode) A mode is a tuple of the form p(m1 , . . . , mn ) where mi (1 ≤ i ≤ n) is either b (“bound”) or f (“free”). We can view a mode as a call pattern p(x̄) ← ϕ where  ϕ = ∧ xi xi = b ∧ (1 ≤ i ≤ n) .  Inferring Termination Conditions  7  Given a norm function, we say that a program terminates for a mode p(m1 , . . . , mn ) if it terminates for all initial queries p(t1 , . . . , tn ) such that for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, mi = b implies that ti is rigid with respect to the given norm. This section describes how an analyser for termination inference can be derived from an analyser for termination checking together with a component for backwards analysis. We first describe in Section 4.1 the activities performed by an analyser for termination checking. Then, in Section 4.2 we explain how some of these activities are combined with a backwards analysis component to obtain an analyser for termination inference. Finally, in Section 4.3, we compare the precision of termination checking and inference. 4.1 Termination Checking Termination checking involves two activities: first, the loops in the program are identified and characterised with respect to size information; and second, given the mode of an initial query, it is determined if for each call pattern in a computation and for each loop, some measure on the sizes of some of the sufficiently instantiated arguments in the call decrease as the loop progresses. In the analyser described in (Codish and Taboch 1999) these activities are performed in two phases. The first (goal independent) phase computes a set of abstract binary clauses [[P ]]bin size which describe, in terms of size information, the loops in the program P . The second (goal dependent) phase determines a set of call patterns G calls [[P G ]]calls pos for a initial mode G and checks that for each call in [[P ]]pos and each bin corresponding loop in [[P ]]size there exists a suitable well-founded decreasing measure. The next definitions provide the notions required to state the theorem which follows (reformulating Proposition 6.5 in (Codish and Taboch 1999)) to provide a sufficient termination (checking) condition. Definition 4.2 (Decreasing arguments set ) A set of arguments I = {xi1 , . . . , xik } ⊆ x̄ is decreasing for an abstract binary clause β = p(x̄) ← π, p(ȳ) if there exist coefficients a1 , . . . , ak such that π |= a1 xi1 + · · · + ak xik > a1 yi1 + · · · + ak yik . The set of all decreasing sets of arguments for β is denoted by D(β). Note that by definition D(β) is closed under extension. Namely, if I ∈ D(β) and I ′ ⊇ I then I ′ ∈ D(β) (simply map coefficients for the arguments in I ′ \ I to 0). Definition 4.3 (Instantiated arguments set ) We say that  a set of arguments I ⊆ x̄ is instantiated in a call pattern κ = p(x̄) ← ϕ if ϕ |= ∧ x x ∈ I . We denote by Iϕ the set of all arguments instantiated in κ. Theorem 4.1 (Termination Condition) Let P be a logic program and G an initial call pattern. If for each call pattern κ = p(x̄) ← ϕ ∈ [[P G ]]calls pos and corresponding binary clause β = p(x̄) ← π, p(ȳ) ∈ bin [[P ]]size there exists a set of arguments I ⊆ x̄ which is instantiated in κ and decreasing for β then P terminates for G.  8  SAMIR GENAIM and MICHAEL CODISH  Example 4.1 The analysis of the append/3 relation (detailed in Section 2) for the initial mode G ≡ append(b, b, f ) gives:  [[P ]]bin append(A, B, C) ← [D < A, F < C, B = E], append(D, E, F) size =  G calls [[P ]]pos = append(A, B, C) ← A ∧ B  The termination condition holds for this single binary clause and call pattern with I = {A} as well as with I = {A, B}. We now focus in on that component of the termination checker that checks if the termination condition is satisfied for a call pattern p(x̄) ← ϕ and a corresponding binary clause β. We denote by CHK(I, β) the decision procedure which is at the heart of this component and determines if some subset of I is decreasing for β. Since any decreasing and instantiated enough set of arguments is a subset of Iϕ , the analyser will typically invoke CHK(Iϕ , β). For the correctness of termination checking, CHK(I, β) must be sound but need not be complete. Namely if CHK(I, β) reports “yes” then I must be a decreasing set of arguments for β. The termination analyser described in (Codish and Taboch 1999) applies a simple (and fast) decision procedure which is not complete but works well in practise. For a call p(x̄) ← ϕ with instantiated variables Iϕ = {xi1 , . . . , xik } and a matching binary clause p(x̄) ← π, p(ȳ) the system checks if π |= yi1 + · · · + yik ≥ xi1 + · · · + xik (recall that all of the variables are non-negative). If not, then it reports “yes” because it must be the case that for some 1 ≤ j ≤ k, yij < xij and hence the singleton {xij } is a decreasing argument set. A complete procedure for CHK (denoted SVG) is described in (Sohn and van Gelder 1991) and discussed also in (Mesnard and Neumerkel 2001). There the authors observe that checking the satisfiability of the non-linear constraint system π∧∃a1 , . . . , ak .(a1 xi1 + · · · + ak xik > a1 yi1 + · · · + ak yik ), for coefficients a1 , . . . , ak , is equivalent to checking that of the dual constraint system which is linear. See the references above for details. The TerminWeb analyser (Codish et al. 2002) offers the optional use of this procedure. 4.2 Termination Inference Our approach to termination inference proceeds as follows: (1) The first phase of the termination checker is applied to approximate the loops in the program as bibin nary clauses with size information ([[P ]]bin size ); (2) Each loop in [[P ]]size is examined to extract an initial (Boolean) termination assertion on the instantiation of arguments of the corresponding predicate which guarantee that the loop can be executed only a finite number of times; and (3) Backwards analysis is applied to infer the weakest constraints on the instantiation of the initial queries to guarantee that these assertions will be satisfied by all calls. Intuitively, an initial termination assertion for a predicate p(x̄) is a Boolean formula constructed so as to guarantee that each binary clause has at least one set of arguments which is instantiated enough and decreasing. To this end, the best we  9  Inferring Termination Conditions  can do for a given binary clause β is to require the instantiation of the variables in (at least) one of of the decreasing sets of arguments in D(β) (a disjunction). This gives the most general initial termination assertion for β. For a predicate in the program, the assertions for all of its binary clauses must hold (a conjunction). In practise, an analyser for termination inference involves a component INF(β) which approximates D(β) (from below) for an abstract binary clause β. For the correctness of termination inference, INF(β) must be sound but need not be complete. Namely it may return a subset of D(β). Of course if it is complete (i.e. computes D(β)) then the inference will be more precise. Given such a procedure INF(β), the initial termination assertions are specified as follows: Definition 4.4 (Initial Termination Assertion) Let P be a logic program. The initial termination assertions for a binary clause β ∈ [[P ]]bin size , and a predicate p/n ∈ P are given as:  ^ _  ∧x µ(p(x̄)) = µ(β) µ(β) = I∈INF(β)  x∈I  β∈B  bin where B ⊆ [[P ]]bin size is the set of binary clauses for p(x̄) in [[P ]]size .  Note that we can assume without loss of generality that INF is closed under extension as the assertions µ(β) are invariant to the addition of extending sets of arguments. Example 4.2 Consider as P the split/3 relation (from merge sort): split([],[],[]). split([X|Xs],[X|Ys],Zs) :- split(Xs,Zs,Ys).  The binary clauses obtained by the analyser of (Codish and Taboch 1999) are: β1 = split(x1 , x2 , x3 ) ← [y1 < x1 , y3 < x2 , x3 = y2 ], split(y1 , y2 , y3 ). β2 = split(x1 , x2 , x3 ) ← [y1 < x1 , y2 < x2 , y3 < x3 ], split(y1 , y2 , y3 ). β3 = split(x1 , x2 , x3 ) ← [y1 < x1 , y3 < x2 , y2 < x3 ], split(y1 , y2 , y3 ). Here, β1 represents the size information corresponding to passing one time through the loop defined by the second clause; β2 the information corresponding to any even number of times through the loop; and β3 any odd number of times (greater than 1). Let S↑ denote the closure of a set S under extension with respect to the variables of interest. Assuming that INF(β1 ) = INF(β3 ) = {{x1 }, {x2 , x3 }}↑ (note that y1 < x1 and y2 + y3 < x2 + x3 ) and INF(β2 ) = {{x1 }, {x2 }, {x3 }}↑ (note that y1 < x1 , y2 < x2 , y3 < x3 ), we have µ(β1 ) = µ(β3 ) = x1 ∨ (x2 ∧ x3 ); and µ(β2 ) = x1 ∨ x2 ∨ x3 . The assertion for split/3 is: µ(split(x1 , x2 , x3 )) = µ(β1 ) ∧ µ(β2 ) ∧ µ(β3 ) = x1 ∨ (x2 ∧ x3 ). Backwards analysis starting from this assertion infers the termination condition x1 ∨ (x2 ∧ x3 ) for split(x1 , x2 , x3 ). The result of backwards analysis is a positive Boolean formula for each predicate describing the conditions under which a corresponding initial query terminates. The following definition specifies how the initial modes for terminating queries are derived from this formula.  10  SAMIR GENAIM and MICHAEL CODISH  Definition 4.5 (Terminating mode) Let P be a logic program. We say that p(m1 , . . . , mn ) is terminating for p(x1 , . . . , xn ) defined in P if the conjunction ∧{xi | mi = b} implies the condition inferred by termination inference for p(x̄). Example 4.3 Consider again the split/3 relation given in Example 4.2 for which we inferred µ(split(x1 , x2 , x3 )) = x1 ∨ (x2 ∧ x3 ). Both split(b, f, f ) and split(f, b, b) are terminating modes because x1 and (x2 ∧ x3 ) imply x1 ∨ (x2 ∧ x3 ). The correctness of the method described follows from the results of (Codish and Taboch 1999) and (King and Lu 2002). Theorem 4.2 Let INF be a sound procedure, P a logic program and p(m̄) a terminating mode for p(x̄) inferred by termination inference. Then P terminates for p(m̄). Proof Let G = p(t̄) be an initial query described by the inferred terminating mode p(m̄). The correctness of backwards analysis garantees that when executing G, any call to a predicate q/n satisfies the assertions inferred for q/n. From the specification of the initial termination assertion (Definition 4.4) we know that µ(q(x̄)) |= µ(β) for each β = q(x̄) ← π, q(ȳ) ∈ [[P ]]bin size . Hence, at least one set of arguments for β is decreasing and sufficiently instantiated. This means that the termination condition of Theorem 4.1 holds. In the analyzer for termination inference implemented in the context of this work (Codish et al. 2002) we adopt for INF a fast though incomplete procedure. Given a binary clause β = p(x̄) ← π, p(ȳ) the procedure works as follows where we denote the arguments of p(x̄) as I = {1, . . . , n}: First, it computes the set I ′ = {i | π |= xi > yi } which includes all argument positions that are decreasing. Each singleton subset of I ′ is reported by the procedure to be a decreasing set of arguments; Second, it checks if the sum of the non-decreasing arguments is decreasing. Namely, if π |= Σ  i∈I\I ′  ′  xi > Σ yi ′ i∈I\I  If so, then it reports that I \ I is a decreasing set of arguments. Performing step 2 does appear to make a difference. This simplistic approach works well in practice for the standard benchmarks and guarantees scalability of the analysis. For example consider the binary clause β1 from Example 4.2. The only decreasing singleton is {x1 } and the set of all non-decreasing arguments  is also decreasing, this enables the detection of the terminating mode x2 , x3 split(x1 , x2 , x3 ) ← x2 ∧ x3 . In (Mesnard and Neumerkel 2001), the authors adopt a complete algorithm for INF which they call Extended SVG. Similar to SVG the authors consider the dual (linear) constraint system of the form π ∧ (a1 xk1 + · · · + ak xki > a1 yk1 + · · · + ak yki ). But instead of checking for satisfiability, they look for the smallest subsets  Inferring Termination Conditions  11    ⊆ x̄ for which the constraint system is satisfiable. This is done by xk1 , · · · xki projecting the system π ∧ (a1 x1 + · · · + an xn > a1 y1 + · · · + an yn ) on the variables a1 , . . . , an and systematically trying to bind some of the ai ’s to zero. In general this can require an exponential number of steps. However, the author’s experimentation indicates that the algorithm works well in practise. See the reference above for details.  4.3 Precision of Termination Checking vs. Inference To compare the precision of an analyser for termination checking with one for termination inference the relevant question is: Is there some mode which can be checked to be terminating which is not inferred to be terminating (or vice versa)? In particular we would like to compare the precision of our own two analysers for checking and inferring termination as well as with the cTI analyser for termination inference. In the next section we provide an experimental comparison for both efficiency and precision. Here we are concerned with a theoretical comparison. To keep all else the same, we will assume that the analysers being compared obtain the same approximations of a program’s loops ([[P ]]bin size in our terminology) and use the P os domain to approximate instantiation information. For our two analysers these assumptions are of course true as we use the same component to compute [[P ]]bin size . Given that all other parameters in the analysers are the same, it is the relation between the precision of the specific choices for the procedures CHK and INF which determine the relevant precision of termination checking and termination inference. The comparison for a given choice of CHK andINF is done by considering for each abstract binary clause β the sets INF(β) and I CHK(I, β) = “yes” . If these sets are equal for all β then we say that CHK and INF are of the same accuracy. In particular if both CHK and INF are complete then they are of the same accuracy, As we have already noted, cTI employs an INF procedure which is complete and TerminWeb applies CHK and INF procedures which are sound but not complete. The following theorem states that if CHK and INF are of the same accuracy then termination checking and inference report equivalent results. Theorem 4.3 Let Atc and Ati be analysers for checking and inferring termination based on procedures CHK and INF of the same accuracy and assume that these analysers approximate loops and instantiation information in the same way. Assume also that Ati is based on backwards analysis. Then, Atc reports that P terminates for a mode p(m̄) if and only if p(m̄) is inferred by Ati . Proof Let us first make two simple observations concerning backwards analysis: - (BA  1 ): Let P be a logic′ program, G = q(m̄) an initial call pattern, ψq = and P a logic program with assertions defined by intro∧ xi mi = b  12  SAMIR GENAIM and MICHAEL CODISH ducing to the clauses in P the call patterns from [[P G ]]calls pos as initial assertions:   h(x̄) ← body ∈ P, P ′ = h(x̄) ← ϕ ⋄ body . h(x̄) ← ϕ ∈ [[P G ]]calls pos Then, if q(x̄) ← ϕq is the result of backwards analysis of P ′ for q(x̄), then ψq |= ϕq . - (BA2 ): Let P1 be a logic program with assertions and let q(x̄) ← ϕ1 be the result of backwards analysis of P1 for q/n. Let P2 be a program obtained by replacing an assertion µ1 in P1 by an assertion µ2 such that µ1 |= µ2 and let q(x̄) ← ϕ2 be the result of backwards analysis of P2 for q/n. Then ϕ1 |= ϕ2 .  ⇒ Let G = q(m̄) be a mode forwhich Atc proves termination, we show that G is and let p(x̄) ← ϕ ∈ [[P G ]]calls inferred by Ati . Denote ψq = ∧ xi mi = b pos and bin β ≡ p(x̄) ← π, p(ȳ) ∈ [[P ]]size . Consider the set Iϕ of variables instantiated in ϕ. CHK(Iϕ , β) answers “yes” because Atc proves termination and by the assumption that CHK and INF are of the same accuracy, Iϕ ∈ INF(β). Hence, by Definition 4.4, ∧Iϕ |= µ(p(x̄)). By Definition 4.3 ϕ |= ∧Iϕ , so we have ϕ |= µ(p(x̄)) (*). Let q(x̄) ← ϕq be the result of backwards analysis for P with call patterns from [[P G ]]calls pos as initial assertions. By observation (BA1 ) q(x̄) ← ϕq is the call pattern from q/n and hence ψq |= ϕq (because G is one of the call patterns for q/n). Now by (*), the termination assertions (µ(p(x̄))) are more general than the call patterns (ϕ) and hence by observation (BA2 ) ψq implies the result of backwards analysis with termination assertions replacing call patterns. In particular this is the case for q(x̄) and so G is inferred by Ati to be a terminating mode for P . ⇐ Let G be a terminating mode inferred by Ati , we show that Atc proves termination of G. For this we show that for any p(x̄) ← ϕ ∈ [[P G ]]calls pos and β ≡ p(x̄) ← π, p(ȳ) ∈ [[P ]]bin size there exists a decreasing set of arguments which is also instantiated enough: From the correctness of backwards analysis we know that ϕ |= µ(p(x̄)) |= µ(β), and since µ(β) was constructed in order to guarantee that at least one decreasing arguments set for β is instantiated enough, so there exists I ′ ∈ INF(β) such that I ′ ⊆ Iµ(β) ⊆ Iϕ . Since INF(β) can be assumed without loss of generality to be extensive Iϕ ∈ INF(β) and according to the accuracy requirements CHK(Iϕ , β) answers “yes”. So the termination condition holds and Atc proves termination for G. In the case of our analysers, using the fast versions of CHK and INF, checking is always as precise as inference. This follows as a simple result from the definitions of CHK and INF. However, inference may be weaker than checking. The benchmark program rev_interleave in Table 1 demonstrates this case. Enhancing our analysers with SVG and Extended SVG for CHK and INF respectively, would result in analysers which infer and check the same sets of modes. This because both SVG and Extended SVG are complete and hence of the same accuracy. Note that we cannot make such a comparison for termination inference as implemented in cTI because it is based on a different technique for inferring termination conditions. While this  Inferring Termination Conditions  13  technique seems equivalent to backwards analysis, to make a formal comparison we would need to prove that it supports the two claims (BA1 ) and (BA2 ). 5 Experimental Results This section describes an evaluation comparing our termination inference and termination checking analysers. We also compare our analyser for termination inference with the cTI (Mesnard and Neumerkel 2001) analyzer. For the experiments described, our analyser runs SICStus 3.7.1 on a Pentium III 500MHZ machine with 128MB RAM under Linux RedHat 7.1 (kernel 2.4.2-2). The cTI analyser runs SICStus 3.8.4 on an Athlon 750MHz machine with 256MB RAM. The timings for cTI are taken from (Mesnard and Neumerkel 2001). Table 1 indicates analysis times in seconds for three blocks of programs. The first two blocks correspond respectively to the programs from Tables 2 and 5 in (Mesnard and Neumerkel 2001). The third block contains two programs included to make a point detailed below. The analysis parameters are the same as those reported in (Mesnard and Neumerkel 2001) — term-size norm with widening applied every third iteration, except for the programs marked by a ⋆ for which the list-length norm is applied and widening is performed every fourth iteration. The columns in the table indicate the cost for: - Joint: The activities common to termination checking and inference: preprocessing (reading, abstraction, computing sccs, printing results), size analysis (to approximate binary clauses) and groundness analysis (to approximate answers). Note that in TerminWeb, the checking component uses groundness analysis as described in (Codish and Demoen 1995) while the inference component uses a faster BDD based analyser. For the sake of comparison we consider the timing of the BDD based analyser for both checking and inference. - Inf: The activities specific to termination inference: computing initial instantiation assertions as specified in Definition 4.4 (about 90%) and performing backwards analysis (about 10%). - Check: The additional activities specific to termination checking for a single one of the top-level modes inferred to terminate. - Total Inf: The total analysis time for inference using our analyser (Joint + Inf). - cTI: The total analysis time for inference using cTI (timings as reported in (Mesnard and Neumerkel 2001)).  Regarding precision For the first block of programs we infer exactly the same termination conditions as cTI. For the second block (of larger programs), we infer the same number of terminating predicates as does cTI, except for the last three programs where a “⊕” indicates that we infer termination for more predicates than does cTI and a “⊖” viceversa. These differences stem from the fact that the two analysers are based on slightly different components for approximating loops. For all programs, in the first two blocks, our termination checker verifies termination for the same set of modes as our termination inference infers. Note that for the second block of programs we count only the number of terminating predicates in order to be consistent with the experiments reported for cTI in (Mesnard and Neumerkel 2001). The two programs in the third block demonstrate how the precision of the CHK and INF affect the precision of the analysis. Here ⊙ indicates that inference with Extended SVG is more precise than inference with our simplified INF procedure, and ⊗ indicates that our termination checking gives a more precise result than our termination inference – this is due to the fact that our choice of CHK and INF are not complete (as described in Section 4.3).  Regarding timings The comparison of the columns Total Inf and cTI indicate that TerminWeb and cTI are comparable for termination inference. We note that the published  14  SAMIR GENAIM and MICHAEL CODISH Program  Joint  Inf  Check  Total Inf  cTI  permute duplicate sum1 merge dis-con reverse append list fold lte map member mergesort mergesort⋆ mergesort ap mergesort ap⋆ naive rev ordered overlap permutation quicksort select subset sum2  0.13 0.03 0.05 0.19 0.09 0.07 0.06 0.03 0.05 0.07 0.05 0.05 0.44 1.00 0.63 1.32 0.10 0.03 0.06 0.12 0.39 0.10 0.11 0.08  0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.01  0.04 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.04 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.00 0.06 0.10 0.30 0.30 0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.12 0.01 0.02 0.02  0.14 0.03 0.06 0.21 0.10 0.08 0.06 0.03 0.06 0.07 0.05 0.05 0.46 1.02 0.67 1.35 0.10 0.03 0.06 0.13 0.43 0.10 0.11 0.09  0.15 0.05 0.18 0.26 0.24 0.08 0.09 0.01 0.10 0.13 0.09 0.03 0.43 0.57 0.79 0.92 0.12 0.04 0.05 0.15 0.39 0.08 0.09 0.12  ann bid boyer browse credit peephole plan qplan rdtok⊕ read⊖ warplan⊕  4.69 0.68 2.70 1.01 0.49 4.59 1.08 11.04 2.93 4.55 2.66  0.33 0.06 0.05 0.15 0.05 0.09 0.04 0.54 0.17 0.07 0.17  0.60 0.18 0.14 0.37 0.15 0.58 0.20 3.43 0.40 0.17 0.26  5.02 0.74 2.75 1.16 0.54 4.68 1.12 11.58 3.10 4.62 2.83  5.01 0.79 3.53 1.81 0.61 12.08 0.71 7.30 2.92 6.87 3.18  loop⊙ rev interleave⊙⊗  0.04 0.21  0.00 0.02  0.03 0.03  0.04 0.23  -  Table 1. Experimental Results results for cTI are obtained on a different machine, the two analyzers are implemented using different versions of Sicstus Prolog and they use different libraries for manipulating constraints. For arithmetic constraints, TerminWeb uses the clp(R) library while cTI uses the clp(Q) library. The prior is more efficient but may loose precision. For Boolean constraints, TerminWeb uses the BDD library described in (Schachte 1999), while cTI uses the Sicstus clp(B) library. The prior is considerably faster. More interesting is to notice  Inferring Termination Conditions  15  the comparison of columns Inf and Check which indicates that the cost of inferring all terminating modes at once (computing assertions and apply backards analysis) is typically faster than performing a termination check for a single mode.  6 Related Work This paper draws on results from two areas: termination (checking) analysis and backwards analysis. It shows how to combine components implementing these so as to obtain an analyser for termination inference. Termination checking for logic programs has been studied extensively (see for example the survey (De Schreye and Decorte 1994)). Backwards reasoning for imperative programs dates back to the early days of static analysis and has been applied extensively in functional programming. Applications of backwards analysis in the context of logic programming are few. For details concerning other applications of backwards analysis, see (King and Lu 2002). The only other work on termination inference that we are aware of is that of Mesnard and coauthors. The implementation of Mesnard’s cTI analyser is described in (Mesnard and Neumerkel 2001) and its formal justification is given in (Mesnard and Ruggieri 2001). The two techniques (cTI and ours) appear to be equivalent. The real difference is in the approach. Our analyser combines termination checking and backwards analysis to perform termination inference. This is a “black-box” approach which simplifies design, implementation and formal justification. The implementation reuses the TerminWeb code and an implementation of the backwards analysis algorithm described and formally justified in (King and Lu 2002). Both systems compute the greatest fixed point of a system of recursive equations. In our case the implementation is based on a simple meta-interpreter written in Prolog. In cTI, the implementation is based on a µ-calculus interpreter. In our case this system of equations is set up as an instance of backwards analysis hence providing a clear motivation and justification (Mesnard and Ruggieri 2001).  7 Conclusion We have demonstrated that backwards analysis provides a useful link relating termination checking and termination inference. This leads to a better understanding of termination inference and simplifies the formal justification and the implementation of termination inference. We demonstrate this by enhancing the analyser for termination checking described in (Codish and Taboch 1999) to perform also termination inference. We also identify a simple condition which guarantees that termination inference can infer all provably terminating modes when the corresponding analysers make use of the same underlying analyses for size relations and instantiation dependencies.  Acknowledgement We thank Andy King, Fred Mesnard and Cohavit Taboch for the useful discussions, as well as the exchange of code and benchmarks.  References Apt, K. R. 1990. Introduction to logic programming. In Handbook of Theoretical Computer Science, J. van Leeuwen, Ed. Vol. B: Formal Models and Semantics. Elsevier, Amsterdam and The MIT Press, Cambridge, 495–574. Armstrong, T., Marriott, K., Schachte, P., and Søndergaard, H. 1998. Two classes of Boolean functions for dependency analysis. Science of Computer Programming 31, 1, 3–45.  16  SAMIR GENAIM and MICHAEL CODISH  Benoy, F. and King, A. 1996. Inferring argument size relationships with CLP(R). In Sixth International Workshop on Logic Program Synthesis and Transformation (LOPSTR’96). 204–223. Brodsky, A. and Sagiv, Y. 1989. Inference of monotonicity constraints in Datalog programs. In Proceedings of the Eighth ACM SIGACT-SIGART-SIGMOD Symposium on Principles of Database Systems. 190–199. Codish, M. and Demoen, B. 1995. Analysing logic programs using “prop”-ositional logic programs and a magic wand. J. Logic Program. 25, 3 (December), 249–274. Codish, M., Genaim, S., and Taboch, C. 2002. TerminWeb: A Termination Analyzer for Logic Programs. http://www.cs.bgu.ac.il/~mcodish/TerminWeb. Codish, M. and Taboch, C. 1999. A semantic basis for the termination analysis of logic programs. The Journal of Logic Programming 41, 1, 103–123. Cousot, P. and Cousot, R. 1977. Abstract interpretation: A unified lattice model for static analysis of programs by construction or approximation of fixpoints. In Proc. 4th ACM Symp. Principles of Programming Languages. ACM Press, New York, 238–252. Cousot, P. and Cousot, R. 1992. Abstract interpretation and application to logic programs. The Journal of Logic Programming 13, 2–3, 103–179. Cousot, P. and Halbwachs, N. 1978. Automatic discovery of linear restraints among variables of a program. In Proceedings of the Fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages. 84–96. De Schreye, D. and Decorte, S. 1994. Termination of logic programs: the never-ending story. The Journal of Logic Programming 19 & 20, 199–260. De Schreye, D. and Verschaetse, K. 1995. Deriving linear size relations for logic programs by abstract interpretation. New Generation Computing 13, 02, 117–154. Genaim, S. and Codish, M. 2001. Inferring termination conditions for logic programs using backwards analysis. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning, R. Nieuwenhuis and A. Voronkov, Eds. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, vol. 2250. Springer-Verlag, 681–690. Giacobazzi, R. and Scozzari, F. 1998. A logical model for relational abstract domains. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 20, 5, 1067–1109. Karr, M. 1976. Affine relationships among variables of a program. Acta Informatica 6, 133–151. King, A. and Lu, L. 2002. A Backward Analysis for Constraint Logic Programs. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming 2, 4-5 (July), 517–547. Lindenstrauss, N. and Sagiv, Y. 1997. Automatic termination analysis of logic programs. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Logic Programming, L. Naish, Ed. The MIT Press, Leuven, Belgium, 63–77. Lloyd, J. W. 1987. Foundations of Logic Programming, second ed. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. Marriott, K. and Søndergaard, H. 1993. Precise and efficient groundness analysis for logic programs. ACM Letters on Programming Languages and Systems 2, 1–4, 181–196. Mesnard, F. 1996. Inferring left-terminating classes of queries for constraint logic programs. Proc. of JICSLP’96 , 7–21. Mesnard, F. and Neumerkel, U. 2001. Applying static analysis techniques for inferring termination conditions of logic programs. In Static Program Analysis Symposium, P. Cousot, Ed. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2126. Springer, 93–110. Mesnard, F. and Ruggieri, S. 2001. On proving left termination of constraint logic programs. Tech. rep., Universite de La Reunion.  Inferring Termination Conditions  17  Schachte, P. 1999. Precise and efficient static analysis of logic programs. Ph.D. thesis, The University of Melbourne, Australia. Sohn, K. and van Gelder, A. 1991. Termination detection in logic programs using argument sizes. In Intl. Symp. on Principles of Database Systems. ACM Press, 216– 226.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
