Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_6183

Abstract:
arXiv:1603.03271v1 [math.GR] 10 Mar 2016  ON ABSTRACT REPRESENTATIONS OF THE GROUPS OF RATIONAL POINTS OF ALGEBRAIC GROUPS IN POSITIVE CHARACTERISTIC MITYA BOYARCHENKO AND IGOR A. RAPINCHUK Abstract. We analyze the structure of a large class of connected algebraic rings over an algebraically closed field of positive characteristic using Greenberg’s perfectization functor. We then give applications to rigidity problems for representations of Chevalley groups, recovering, in particular, a rigidity theorem of Seitz [9].  1. Introduction Our focus in this paper will be on two topics. First, we investigate the structure of a large class of connected algebraic rings over algebraically closed fields of positive characteristic. Second, we apply our structural results to obtain some new rigidity statements for abstract linear representations of elementary subgroups of Chevalley groups over commutative rings, building on the work of the second author in [8]. Algebraic rings were first formally introduced by M. Greenberg in [5] in connection with his analysis of reduction properties of schemes over discrete valuation rings. Subsequently, he studied them systematically in [3], where a number of foundational results were established. Fix an algebraically closed field K, and denote by Sch/K the category of all K-schemes and by V ar/K the full subcategory of reduced schemes of finite type over K. We define an algebraic ring over K to be a ring object A in the category V ar/K whose underlying scheme is affine 1. In other words, A is an affine algebraic variety over K equipped with the structure of an associative ring that is defined by morphisms α : A × A → A (“addition”) and µ : A × A → A (“multiplication”). Note that for any finite-dimensional associative K-algebra B, the addition and multiplication operations endow the underlying K-vector space with the structure of an algebraic ring, which we will denote by B̃. By construction, the set of K-rational points B̃(K) is simply B. The correspondence B 7→ B̃ gives rise to a functor F : C → D, where C is the category of associative finite-dimensional K-algebras and D is the category of connected algebraic rings over K. If K is a field of characteristic 0, then Greenberg showed that F is an equivalence of categories (see [3, Proposition 5.1] as well as [8, Proposition 2.14]; for a topological proof in the case where K = C, the reader can consult [6, Lemma 5]). On the other hand, it is easy to see that F is no longer essentially surjective if char K = p > 0. For example, let A be the algebraic ring over K whose underlying additive group is Ga ⊕ Ga with the componentwise operation and whose multiplication operation is given by (x1 , y1 ) · (x2 , y2 ) = (x1 x2 , xp1 y2 + xp2 y1 ). It is straightforward to check that A is not of the form B̃ for any finite-dimensional K-algebra B (see [8, Example 2.17]). Next, let B = K[ε], with ε2 = 0, be the K-algebra of dual numbers and 1This definition coincides with the one used by Greenberg [3], except that we do not require the underlying variety of A to be irreducible. Furthermore, using Chevalley’s structure theorem for algebraic groups, one shows that if A is an irreducible ring variety over K, then A is automatically affine ([3, Proposition 4.3] or [8, Theorem 2.21]); thus, the affiness assumption in the definition can, strictly speaking, be omitted, but we will include it for clarity. 1  2  M. BOYARCHENKO AND I.A. RAPINCHUK  B̃ the corresponding algebraic ring over K. Clearly, the underlying additive group of B̃ is again Ga ⊕ Ga and the multiplication operation is (x1 , y1 ) · (x2 , y2 ) = (x1 x2 , x1 y2 + x2 y1 ). Notice that the map (x, y) 7→ (x, y p ) defines a morphism of algebraic rings ϕ : B̃ → A that induces an isomorphism of abstract rings ϕK : B̃(K) = B → A(K) on the K-rational points. Thus, we see that while A is not isomorphic to an object in the image of F, it is still closely related to a finite-dimensional K-algebra, up to an inseparable isogeny. Our first main result (and its proof) shows that the same holds true in the general case for connected algebraic rings A over K satisfying pA = 0. Theorem 1.1. Let A be a connected algebraic ring over an algebraically closed field K of characteristic p > 0 such that pA = 0 and the ring A(K) of K-points has an infinite center. Then there exist a finite-dimensional K-algebra B and a homomorphism of algebraic rings ψ : B̃ → A that induces an isomorphism ψK : B = B̃(K) → A(K) of abstract rings. The proof of this result is based on the analysis of so-called perfect algebraic rings and will be given in §3. The rest of the paper is devoted to an application of Theorem 1.1 to rigidity questions for representations of Chevalley groups over rings. Before formulating our second result, we briefly recall the set-up developed in [8] for the analysis of finite-dimensional representations of Chevalley groups. Suppose Φ is a reduced irreducible root system of rank ≥ 2 and let G = G(Φ) be the corresponding universal Chevalley-Demazure group scheme over Z. Given a commutative ring R, we say that (Φ, R) is a nice pair if 2 ∈ R× if Φ contains a subsystem of type B2 , and 2, 3 ∈ R× if Φ is of type G2 . Furthermore, we denote by E(Φ, R) the elementary subgroup of G(R), i.e. the subgroup generated by the R-points of the canonical one-parameter root subgroups. In [8], we analyzed abstract finite-dimensional representations ρ : E(Φ, R) → GLn (K) when K is an algebraically closed field of characteristic 0 and proved that in many situations, such representations admit a standard description, i.e., after possibly passing to a finite-index subgroup, ρ can be factored as a group homomorphism arising from a ring homomorphism, followed by a morphism of algebraic groups — see [8, Main Theorem] for the precise formulation. In particular, this confirmed a conjecture of Borel and Tits [1] for split groups. One of the principal ingredients of the proof was the construction of an algebraic ring A over K naturally associated to the representation ρ — see [8, Theorem 3.1] for the full details as well as §4 below for a brief reminder. While this part can be carried out over any algebraically closed field, the remainder of the argument in loc. cit exploited the equivalence of categories given by F discussed earlier. The structural result of Theorem 1.1 allows one to extend this approach to positive characteristic. In the following statement, we use the notations G = G(Φ) and E(Φ, R) introduced above. Theorem 1.2. Let K be an algebraically closed field of characteristic p > 0, Φ a reduced irreducible root system of rank ≥ 2, and R a commutative semilocal noetherian ring satisfying pR = 0 such that (Φ, R) is a nice pair. Suppose ρ : E(Φ, R) → GLn (K) is a representation and set H = ρ(E(Φ, R)) (Zariski closure). Then there exists a commutative finite-dimensional K-algebra B, a ring homomorphism f : R → B with Zariski-dense image, and a morphism of algebraic groups σ : G(B) → H such that for a suitable finite-index subgroup Γ ⊂ E(Φ, R), we have ρ|Γ = (σ ◦ F )|Γ ,  REPRESENTATIONS OF ALGEBRAIC GROUPS IN CHARACTERISTIC p  3  where F : E(Φ, R) → G(B) is the group homomorphism induced by f. (Here, we view the group G(B) as an algebraic group over K using the functor of restriction of scalars.) One noteworthy application of this result, which will be discussed in Proposition 4.3, is that it allows us to recover a rigidity theorem of Seitz [9], which was originally proved using techniques similar to those of Borel and Tits [1]. The paper is organized as follows. In §2 we discuss perfect algebraic rings and establish several results that are then used in §3 to complete the proof of Theorem 1.1. We then prove Theorem 1.2 in §4 and discuss some applications. Acknowledgments. The idea to pursue this project originated after the second-named author gave a talk based on [8] at the University of Michigan. He would like to thank Mitya Boyarchenko and Gopal Prasad for their hospitality. I.R. was supported by an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship at Harvard University during the preparation of this paper. 2. Preliminaries on perfect algebraic rings In this section, we review several facts about perfect algebraic rings that will be needed for the proof of Theorem 1.1. Throughout this section, K will denote a fixed algebraically closed field of characteristic p > 0. Recall that for a scheme X ∈ Sch/K, the absolute Frobenius is the morphism of schemes Φ: X → X which is the identity on the underlying topological space and the map f 7→ f p on the sections of the structure sheaf OX (note that Φ is not a morphism of K-schemes). In analogy with the case of fields, one says that X is perfect if Φ is an isomorphism of schemes. For example, if R is a commutative K-algebra, then the affine scheme Spec(R) is perfect if and only if R is a perfect ring (i.e., the Frobenius map ϕ : R → R, a 7→ ap , is bijective). We refer the reader to [4], [10], and [2, Appendix A] for further details on perfect schemes. Let us denote by P erf /K the full subcategory of Sch/K consisting of perfect schemes. In [4], Greenberg showed that the inclusion functor P erf /K ֒→ Sch/K admits a left adjoint Sch/K → P erf /K,  X 7→ X perf ,  which, following [2], we will refer to as the perfectization functor (Greenberg used the term perfect closure for X perf ). For the sake of completeness, as well as to introduce notations that will be needed later, we briefly recall the main points of the construction, which proceeds in two steps: first one defines the perfectization functor for commutative K-algebras and then one “globalizes” it to the case of K-schemes. More precisely, if R is a commutative K-algebra, then its perfectization Rperf is defined as the direct limit of the sequence ϕ  ϕ  ϕ  R −→ R −→ R −→ . . . , where ϕ(x) = xp . One easily shows that Rperf is a perfect ring equipped with a K-algebra structure coming from the structure homomorphism of K into the first term of the above sequence. Moreover, there is a canonical ring homomorphism σ : R → Rperf , and the pair (Rperf , σ) is determined uniquely up to (unique) isomorphism by the following universal property. For any perfect ring B and any ring homomorphism ψ : R → B, there exists a unique homomorphism ψ ∗ : Rperf → B satisfying ψ ∗ ◦ σ = ψ. Next, given X ∈ Sch/K with structure sheaf OX , one shows that there exists a perfect scheme X perf whose underlying topological space is X and whose structure sheaf is given by U 7→ OX (U )perf  for any open U ⊂ X.  4  M. BOYARCHENKO AND I.A. RAPINCHUK  The scheme X perf can be described more explicitly using the absolute Frobenius as follows. If π : X → Spec K is the structure morphism, then π ◦ Φ = Φ ◦ π is another morphism from X to Spec K, which defines an object of Sch/K that we will denote by X (1/p) . By construction, it is equipped with a natural morhpism X (1/p) → X of K-schemes given by Φ. Applying the 2 same construction to X (1/p) , we obtain another K-scheme, denoted by X (1/p ) , together with a 2 K-morphism X (1/p ) → X (1/p) . Then, in view of the above description of the perfectization of a K-algebra, we see that X perf is the inverse limit of the sequence · · · → X (1/p  2)  → X (1/p) → X.  The natural map τ : X perf → X is a homeomorphism on the underlying topological spaces, and ≃ it induces a bijection X perf (R) −→ X(R) for any perfect K-algebra R. Moreover, as above, the pair (X perf , τ ) is universal with respect to morphisms of perfect schemes into X. In particular, any morphism g : X → Y of schemes induces a morphism g perf : X perf → Y perf between the corresponding perfectizations. Remark 2.1. Suppose X, Y ∈ V ar/K are affine K-varieties and let f : X perf → Y perf be a K-morphism. Then, an argument similar to the one used in the proof of [10, Proposition 2] shows n g that there exists a K-morphism X 1/p −→ Y such that the composition X (1/p  n ),perf  f  → X perf −→ Y perf  is equal to g perf (where the first arrow is induced by the n-fold composition Φn : X 1/p → X). n  Next, notice that the perfectization functor preserves products since it has a left adjoint. In particular, the perfectization of a group or ring object in Sch/K possesses the same structure. We define a perfect algebraic ring to be a ring object in P erf /K that is isomorphic to Aperf for some algebraic ring A over K. Similarly, a perfect unipotent group is a group object in P erf /K that is isomorphic to Gperf for some unipotent affine algebraic group G over K. Serre [10] showed that the category of commutative perfect unipotent groups over K is an abelian category. The following lemma describes a useful property of morphisms in this category. Lemma 2.2. A morphism f : G → H of commutative perfect unipotent groups over K is an isomorphism (resp. a monomorphism, an epimorphism) if and only if the induced map on Krational points fK : G(K) → H(K) is bijective (resp. injective, surjective). Proof. Though this result is well-known, we were unable to find a direct reference, so we sketch the argument for completeness. Suppose first that fK : G(K) → H(K) is injective and let C be the kernel of f . We need to show that C = 0. Our assumptions imply that C is zero-dimensional and that C(K) has only one point. Therefore, our claim is reduced to the following statement: if A is a perfect commutative finite-dimensional algebra over K such that there is only one K-algebra homomorphism A → K, then A ≃ K. Indeed, since A is perfect, it is reduced, so its Jacobson radical is zero. Since K is algebraically closed, it follows that A ≃ K × · · · × K; but, by our assumption, there is a unique morphism A → K, so A ≃ K, as required. In the case that fK is surjective, one uses the same argument with C = coker f.  3. Proof of Theorem 1.1 We now turn to the proof of Theorem 1.1. As before, K will denote an algebraically closed field of characteristic p > 0. The key step in the argument is to show that perfect algebraic rings of characteristic p arise from finite-dimensional K-algebras. The precise statement is as follows.  REPRESENTATIONS OF ALGEBRAIC GROUPS IN CHARACTERISTIC p  5  Proposition 3.1. Let A be a connected perfect algebraic ring over K. Assume that pA = 0 and the ring A(K) of K-points has an infinite center. Then there exists a finite-dimensional K-algebra B such that A ≃ B̃ perf as perfect algebraic rings over K. We will deduce this statement from the next two lemmas. The first gives some information on the structure of commutative perfect algebraic rings of characteristic p. Lemma 3.2. Let C be a nontrivial connected commutative perfect algebraic ring over K such that pC = 0. Then there exists a morphism K̃ perf → C of perfect algebraic rings over K. Proof. First, without loss of generality, we may assume that C is indecomposable, since if the statement is true for rings C1 and C2 , then it is also true for their product. Using [3, Proposition 8.1] or [8, Proposition 2.20], we can then write C = C0perf , where C0 is a local connected algebraic ring. Consequently, there exists a surjective morphism f0 : C0 → K̃ whose kernel J0 is a nilpotent ideal of C0 (see [3, Proposition 7.1] or [8, Proposition 2.19]). Now, since the underlying additive group of an algebraic ring is unipotent (see [3, Proposition 4.3]), Lemma 2.2 implies that on passing to perfectizations, we obtain a surjective morphism f = f0perf : C → K̃ perf whose kernel J = J0perf n n is a nilpotent ideal of C. Take n sufficiently large so that J p = 0. Then the map C → C, x 7→ xp , is a morphism of perfect algebraic rings, which, by construction, factors through K̃ perf → C, yielding the required morphism.  For the second lemma, we recall that a perfect unipotent group V over K is said to be a K̃ perf module if there exists a morphism K̃ perf × V → V satisfying the usual module axioms. Lemma 3.3. Suppose V is a perfect unipotent group over K equipped with the structure of a K̃ perf ≃ module. Then there exists an isomorphism Gda −→ V of perfect unipotent groups that intertwines the natural action of K̃ perf on Gda by scaling and the given action of K̃ perf on V . Proof. By construction, we have K̃ perf (K) = K, so V (K) is naturally a K-vector space. Let v1 , . . . , vn ∈ V (K) be any finite linearly independent subset. Using the K̃ perf -action on V , we obtain f  a morphism Gna −→ V of K̃ perf -modules, where the action of K̃ perf on Gna is given simply by scaling. Moreover, the map K n → V (K) induced by f is injective, so f is a monomorphism by Lemma 2.2, and hence n ≤ d := dim V. Thus, V (K) must be finite-dimensional over K. Furthermore, if in the above construction the set v1 , . . . , vn is a K-basis of V (K), then by the same argument, f is an isomorphism of perfect unipotent groups over K, which completes the proof.  Proof of Proposition 3.1. Let C be the connected component of the additive identity of the center of A. By our assumption, C is nontrivial, so by Lemma 3.2, there exists a morphism K̃ perf → C of perfect algebraic rings over K, which gives A the structure of a K̃ perf -algebra object in the category P erf /K. By Lemma 3.3, we may assume that the underlying additive group of A comes from a finite-dimensional K-vector space. Since the multiplication in A must be given by a Kbilinear map, we conclude that there exists a finite-dimensional K-algebra B such that A ≃ B̃ perf , as needed.  We can now complete Proof of Theorem 1.1. Suppose A is a connected algebraic ring over K such that pA = 0 and the ring A(K) has infinite center. Then, according to Proposition 3.1, we can find a finite-dimensional ≃ K-algebra B and an isomorphism B̃ perf −→ Aperf of perfect algebraic rings over K. By Remark n g 2.1, this isomorphism comes from a morphism B̃ (1/p ) −→ A of algebraic rings over K for some sufficiently large n. It follows from our construction and Lemma 2.2 that g induces an isomorphism n on the rings of K-points. It remains to check that B̃ (1/p ) also comes from a finite-dimensional  6  M. BOYARCHENKO AND I.A. RAPINCHUK  K-algebra. For this, pick a basis of B as a K-vector space and use it to identify B̃ with Gda as an additive group for some d ∈ N. The algebra structure on B is then defined by means of certain n structure constants. We can also identify B̃ (1/p ) with Gda in a natural way, so that the canonical n map B̃ (1/p ) → B̃ gets identified with the map Gda → Gda that raises all coordinates to the power pn . Then, taking the the pn -th roots of the structure constants for B, we obtain structure constants n for an algebra that defines B̃ (1/p ) .  4. Proof of Theorem 1.2 and applications In this section, we will apply Theorem 1.1 to rigidity questions and, in particular, use it to establish Theorem 1.2. As a consequence, in Proposition 4.3, we will give a new proof of a rigidity statement due originally to Seitz [9]. We begin with the following proposition, which is an adaptation of [8, Theorem 3.1] to our current setting. Proposition 4.1. Let K be an algebraically closed field of characteristic p > 0, Φ a reduced irreducible root system of rank ≥ 2, and R a commutative noetherian ring satisfying pR = 0 such that (Φ, R) is a nice pair. Denote by G the universal Chevalley-Demazure group scheme over Z of type Φ and consider a linear representation of the elementary subgroup ρ : E(Φ, R) → GLn (K). Then there exists a finite-dimensional commutative K-algebra B and a finite ring C, together with a ring homomorphism f˜: R → B ′ := B ⊕ C having Zariski-dense image such that for each root α ∈ Φ, there is an injective regular map ϕα : B ′ → H into H := ρ(E(Φ, R)) satisfying (1)  ρ(eα (t)) = ϕα (f˜(t))  for all t ∈ R. Proof. First, since (Φ, R) is assumed to be a nice pair, it follows from [8, Theorem 3.1] that there exists a commutative algebraic ring A, together with a ring homomorphism f : R → A(K) having Zariski-dense image such that for every root α ∈ Φ, there is an injective regular map ψα : A(K) → H satisfying ρ(eα (t)) = ψα (f (t)) for all t ∈ R. Next, our assumption that R is noetherian implies that we can write A(K) = A′ (K) ⊕ C, where A′ is a connected algebraic ring and C is a finite ring (see [8, Proposition 2.11 and Lemma 2.13]). Let π : A(K) → A′ (K) be the natural projection and set f ′ = π ◦ f. Since R has characteristic p, it follows that pA′ = 0. Therefore, by Theorem 1.1, there exists a finite-dimensional commutative K-algebra B and a morphism of algebraic rings ϕ : B̃ → A′ that induces a ring isomorphism ϕK : B = B̃(K) → A′ (K) on the rings of K-points. Let ψK : A′ (K) → B be the inverse homomorphism (of abstract rings) and define f˜0 : R → B by f˜0 = ψK ◦ f ′ . By dimension considerations, it is easy to see that f˜0 (R) is Zariski-dense in B. Now set B ′ := B ⊕ C and define ϕ′K : B ′ → A(K) by ϕ′K |B = ϕK and ϕ′K |C = idC . Also, for any root α ∈ Φ, let ϕα : B ′ → H be the composition ϕα = ψα ◦ ϕ′K . Finally, let πC : A(K) → C be the natural projection and define f˜: R → B ′ by f˜ = f˜0 ⊕ (πC ◦ f ). Then f˜ has Zariski-dense image, and from the construction, it is clear that condition (1) is satisfied.  Using Proposition 4.1, the proof of Theorem 1.2 can now be carried out following the strategy developed in [8], to which we refer the reader for full details. We sketch the main points of the argument here for completeness.  REPRESENTATIONS OF ALGEBRAIC GROUPS IN CHARACTERISTIC p  7  Proof of Theorem 1.2. Let K, Φ, and R be as in the statement of the theorem, and consider a representation ρ : E(Φ, R) → GLn (K). By Proposition 4.1, we can associate to ρ a ring homomorphism f˜: R → B ′ = B ⊕ C with Zariskidense image, where B is a finite-dimensional commutative K-algebra, together with regular maps ϕα : B ′ → H (for α ∈ Φ) satisfying (1). Using this, as well as [8, Proposition 4.2], we lift ρ to a representation τ̃ : St(Φ, B ′ ) → GLn (K) of the corresponding Steinberg group. The fact that R is semilocal then implies that σ̃ := τ̃ |St(Φ,B) descends to a representation σ : G(B) → GLn (K) such that ρ|Γ = (σ ◦ F )|Γ on a suitable finite-index subgroup Γ ⊂ E(Φ, R), where F is the group homomorphism induced by π ◦ f˜ with π : B ′ → B being the natural projection. Finally, we view G(B) as an algebraic group over K using the functor of restriction of scalars and conclude from [8, Proposition 6.3] that σ is in fact a morphism of algebraic groups over K.  We note that other results from [8] can also be developed in the present setting in a similar fashion. Remark 4.2. We should point out since results in the spirit of the conjecture of Borel-Tits [1] deal with algebras, the use of Theorem 1.1 in positive characteristic cannot in general be avoided. Namely, let us again consider the algebraic ring A whose underlying additive group is Ga ⊕ Ga and whose multiplication operation is given by (x1 , y1 ) · (x2 , y2 ) = (x1 x2 , xp1 y2 + xp2 y1 ). Notice that the map     xp 0 y (x, y) 7→  0 x 0  . 0 0 xp ι  defines an embedding A(K) ֒→ M3 (K). Let now B = K[ε] be the K-algebra of dual numbers and B̃ be the corresponding algebraic ring. Recall that we have a morphism ϕ : B̃ → A  (x, y) 7→ (x, y p )  that induces an isomorphism ϕK : B → A(K) on the rings of K-points. Next, set R = K[X] and consider the surjective homomorphism χ : R → B,  g(X) 7→ g(0) + g ′ (0)ε,  where g′ (X) is the (formal) derivative of g(X). Then the ring homomorphism f = ϕK ◦ χ : R → A(K) yields, via the embedding ι, a representation ρ : SL3 (R) → GL9 (K). Since the algebraic ring Aρ associated to ρ is constructed as the Zariski-closure of the image of a root subgroup (see [8, Theorem 3.1]), it follows that Aρ = A. In particular, Aρ does not arise from a K-algebra. To conclude this section, we will now give an alternative proof (for Chevalley groups of rank ≥ 2) of a result of Seitz [9] on abstract homomorphisms of the groups of rational points of algebraic groups. Let k be an infinite perfect field of characteristic p > 0 and let K be an algebraically closed field of the same characteristic. Denote by G the universal Chevalley group associated to a reduced  8  M. BOYARCHENKO AND I.A. RAPINCHUK  irreducible root system Φ, and suppose that Y is an algebraic group over K. Seitz showed that any (nontrivial) abstract homomorphism G(k) → Y (K) can be factored as (2)  ϕ  σ  G(k) −→ G(K) × · · · × G(K) −→ Y (K),  where σ is a morphism of algebraic groups and each component G(k) → G(K) of ϕ arises from a field homomorphism k → K (see [9, Theorem 1]). On the other hand, our Theorem 1.2 gives a description of abstract homomorphisms over arbitrary (i.e. also imperfect) fields of characteristic p > 0, and enables us to recover the result of Seitz (see Proposition 4.3 below) by observing that a perfect field of positive characteristic does not have nontrivial derivations. This approach also explains why Seitz’s result is no longer true over imperfect fields: the nontrivial derivations can be used to produce abstract homomorphisms of a different nature from the ones in (2) — see the construction of Borel and Tits in [1, 8.18]. In the statement below, we are implicitly using the well-known equality E(Φ, k) = G(k). Proposition 4.3. Let k be an infinite perfect field of characteristic p > 0, K an algebraically closed field of the same characteristic, and Φ a reduced irreducible root system of rank ≥ 2 such that (Φ, k) is a nice pair. Let G be the universal Chevalley-Demazure group scheme of type Φ, and consider a representation ρ : G(k) → GLn (K). Then there exist (i) a finite-dimensional K-algebra B ≃ K (1) × · · · × K (r) with K (i) ≃ K for all i; (ii) an embedding f : k ֒→ B with Zariski-dense image; and (iii) a morphism of algebraic groups σ : G(B) → GLn (K) such that ρ = σ ◦ F, where F : G(k) → G(B) is the group homomorphism induced by f. Before turning to the proof, we need to introduce the following notation. Let R be a commutative ring, K a field, and g : R → K a ring homomorphism. We will denote by Derg (R, K) the space of K-valued derivations of R with respect to g, i.e. an element δ ∈ Derg (R, K) is a map δ : R → K such that for any r1 , r2 , ∈ R, δ(r1 + r2 ) = δ(r1 ) + δ(r2 ) and δ(r1 r2 ) = δ(r1 )g(r2 ) + δ(r2 )g(r1 ). Proof of Proposition 4.3. By Theorem 1.2, there exists a finite-dimensional commutative K-algebra B and an embedding f : k ֒→ B with Zariski-dense image, together with the required morphism of algebraic groups σ : G(B) → GLn (K). Moreover, since k is an infinite field, it is well-known that E(Φ, k) = G(k) contains no proper noncentral normal subgroups (see [11]), so Γ = E(Φ, k). Thus, it remains to show that B is isomorphic to a product of copies of K. For this, let J be the Jacobson radical of B. Since K is perfect, by the Wedderburn-Malcev Theorem, we can find a semisimple subalgebra B ′ ⊂ B such that B = B ′ ⊕ J as K-vector spaces and B ′ ≃ B/J ≃ K · · × K} | × ·{z r copies  B′  as K-algebras (cf. [7, Corollary 11.6]). Let ei ∈ be the ith standard basis vector. Since e1 , . . . , er are idempotent, and we have e1 + · · · + er = 1 and ei ej = 0 for i 6= j, it follows that we can write B = ⊕ri=1 Bi , where Bi = ei B. Clearly, Bi = Bi′ ⊕ Ji , with Bi′ = ei B ′ ≃ K and Ji = ei J; in particular, Bi is a local K-algebra with maximal ideal Ji . To complete the proof, it suffices to show that Ji = {0} for all i, so, we may now assume that B is a commutative finite-dimensional local  REPRESENTATIONS OF ALGEBRAIC GROUPS IN CHARACTERISTIC p  9  algebra of the form B = K ⊕ J. Let B ′′ = B/J 2 , and fix a K-basis {ε1 , . . . , εs } of J/J 2 . Denote by g : k → B ′′ the composition of f with the canonical map B → B ′′ Then for any x ∈ k, we have g(x) = f0 (x) + δ1 (x)ε1 + · · · + δs (x)εs , where f0 : k → K is a field homomorphism and δ1 , . . . , δs ∈ Derf0 (k, K). But since k is perfect (i.e. any element is a pth power), all K-valued derivations on k are trivial, so J/J 2 = 0 as g has Zariski-dense image. Hence J = J 2 , and consequently J = {0} by Nakayama’s Lemma. This completes the proof.  References 1. A. Borel, J. Tits, Homomorphismes “abstraits” de groupes algébriques simples, Ann. of Math. 97 (1973), no. 3, 499-571 2. M. Boyarchenko, Characters of unipotent groups over finite fields, Selecta Math. (N.S.) 16 (2010), no. 4, 857933 3. M. Greenberg, Algebraic rings, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 111 (1964), 472481 4. M. Greenberg, Perfect closures of rings and schemes, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 16 (1965), 313317 5. M. Greenberg, Schemata over local rings, Ann. of Math. (2) 73 (1961), 624-648 6. M. Kassabov, M. Sapir, Nonlinearity of matrix groups, J. Topol. Anal. 1 (2009), no. 3, 251-260 7. R.S. Pierce, Associative Algebras, GTM 88, Springer (1982) 8. I.A. Rapinchuk, On linear representations of Chevalley groups over commutative rings, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 102, no. 5 (2011) 951-983 9. G. Seitz, Abstract homomomorphisms of algebraic groups, J. London Math. Soc. (2) 56 (1997), 104-124 10. J-P. Serre, Groupes proalgébriques, Publ. Math. IHES 7 (1960), 5-67 11. J. Tits, Algebraic and abstract simple groups, Ann. of Math 80 (1964), 313-329 E-mail address: dmitriy.boyarchenko@gmail.com Department of Mathematics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 E-mail address: rapinch@math.harvard.edu

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
