Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 0
ArXiv ID: hf_6607

Abstract:
THE GORENSTEIN DEFECT CATEGORY  arXiv:1202.2876v2 [math.CT] 4 Jun 2014  PETTER ANDREAS BERGH, DAVID A. JORGENSEN & STEFFEN OPPERMANN Abstract. We consider the homotopy category of complexes of projective modules over a Noetherian ring. Truncation at degree zero induces a fully faithful triangle functor from the totally acyclic complexes to the singularity category. We show that if the ring is either Artin or commutative Noetherian local, then the functor is dense if and only if the ring is Gorenstein. Motivated by this, we define the Gorenstein defect category of the ring, a category which in some sense measures how far the ring is from being Gorenstein.  1. Introduction Given a ring, one can associate to it certain triangulated categories: derived categories, homotopy categories, and various triangulated subcategories of these, such as bounded derived categories or homotopy categories of acyclic complexes. When the ring is Gorenstein, classical results by Buchweitz (cf. [Buc]) show that some of these triangulated categories are equivalent: the stable category of maximal Cohen-Macaulay modules, the singularity category of finitely generated modules, and the homotopy category of totally acyclic complexes of finitely generated projective modules. Thus, for Gorenstein rings, these triangulated categories (together with their respective cohomology theories) virtually coincide. In this paper, we provide a categorical characterization of Gorenstein rings. Let A be a left Noetherian ring, and proj A the category of finitely generated projective left A-modules. Brutal truncation at degree zero induces a map from the homotopy category Ktac (proj A) of totally acyclic complexes to the homotopy category K−,b (proj A) of right bounded eventually acyclic complexes. However, this map is not a functor. We therefore consider instead the singularity category def  Dbsg (A) = K−,b (proj A)/Kb (proj A) of A, where Kb (proj A) is the homotopy category of bounded complexes. Brutal truncation now induces a triangle functor βproj A : Ktac (proj A)  Dbsg (A),  and we show that this functor is always full and faithful. The main result of section 3, Theorem 3.6, shows that the properties of this functor actually characterize Gorenstein rings. Namely, if A is either an Artin ring or a commutative Noetherian local ring, then the functor βproj A is dense if and only if A is Gorenstein. The “if” part here is classical: it is part of [Buc, Theorem 4.4.1]. What is new is the “only if” part, which may be considered as a triangulated category reformulation of Auslander and Bridger [AusBri, Theorem (4.20)], stating that rings over which every finitely generated module has finite Gorenstein dimension are precisely the Gorenstein rings. Motivated by the discussion above, in Section 4 we define various triangulated defect categories as follows. Let C be a thick subcategory of Ktac (proj A) and βC 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 13H10, 16E65, 18E30. Key words and phrases. Triangulated categories, Gorenstein rings. 1  2  PETTER ANDREAS BERGH, DAVID A. JORGENSEN & STEFFEN OPPERMANN  the restriction of βproj A to C. We define the C defect category DbC (A) of A as the Verdier quotient def  DbC (A) = Dbsg (A)/hIm βC i, where hIm βC i is the isomorphism closure of the image of βC in Dbsg (A): this is a thick subcategory. Then Theorem 3.6 translates to the following: if A is either an Artin ring or a commutative Noetherian local ring, then DbC (A) = 0 for C = Ktac (proj A) if and only if A is Gorenstein; in this case we refer to DbC (A) as the Gorenstein defect category. When A is commutative local and C is the thick subcategory of Ktac (proj A) consisting of complexes of finite complexity, we show that DbC (A) = 0 if and only if A is a complete intersection. The dimension of the Gorenstein defect category, in the sense of Roquier, is therefore in some sense a measure of “how far” the ring is from being Gorenstein. We note that the construction in [IyeKra] yields an interesting alternate defect category characterizing Gorenstein rings, namely the Verdier quotient formed by the acyclic complexes of projective modules modulo the totally acyclic complexes. We end the paper with an example consisting of the ‘smallest’ ring for which the Gorenstein defect category is interesting, and show that the dimension of this category is at most one. 2. Preliminaries Let P be an additive category, and KP the homotopy category of complexes KP given by in P. This is a triangulated category, with suspension Σ : KP shifting a complex one degree to the left, and changing the sign of its differential. That is, for a complex C ∈ KP with differential d, the complex Σ C has Cn−1 in degree n, and −d as differential. The (distinguished) triangles in KP are the sequences of objects and maps that are isomorphic to sequences of the form f  C− → C′  C(f )  ΣC  for some map f and its mapping cone C(f ). We say that a complex C in P is acyclic if the complex HomP (P, C) of abelian groups is acyclic for all objects P ∈ P. If in addition HomP (C, P ) is acyclic for all P ∈ P, then C is totally acyclic. Moreover, C is eventually acyclic if for all objects P ∈ P, the complex HomP (P, C) is eventually acyclic, i.e. Hn (HomP (P, C)) = 0 for |n| ≫ 0. Note that we cannot define acyclicity directly for complexes in P, since the category is only assumed to be additive. We shall be working with the following full subcategories of KP (the definitions are up to isomorphism in KP): Ktac P = {C ∈ KP | C is totally acyclic} K−,b P = {C ∈ KP | Cn = 0 for n ≪ 0 and C is eventually acyclic} Kb P = {C ∈ KP | Cn = 0 for |n| ≫ 0}. These are all triangulated subcategories of KP. For example, when P is the category of finitely generated left projective modules over a left Noetherian ring A, then Kb P is by definition the category of perfect complexes. Moreover, in this setting it is well known that the triangulated categories K−,b P and Db (mod A) are equivalent, where mod A is the category of finitely generated left A-modules. The category Kb P is a thick subcategory of K−,b P, that is, a triangulated subcategory closed under direct summands. The Verdier quotient K−,b P/Kb P is therefore a well defined triangulated category. Recall that the objects in this quotient are the same as the objects in K−,b P. A morphism C C ′ in the quotient is an equivalence class of diagrams of the form  THE GORENSTEIN DEFECT CATEGORY  3  D f  g  C′  C  where f and g are morphisms in K−,b P, and g has the property that its mapping cone C(g) belongs to Kb P. Two such morphisms (g, D, f ) and (g ′ , D′ , f ′ ) are equivalent if there exists a third such morphism (g ′′ , D′′ , f ′′ ), and two morphisms D and h′ : D′′ D′ in K−,b P, such that the diagram h : D′′ D g  C  f  h  g′′  D′′  f ′′  h′  g′  D  C′  f′  ′  is commutative. For further details, we refer to [Nee, Chapter 2]. The natural triangle functor K−,b P K−,b P/Kb P maps an object to itself, and a morphism C ′ to the equivalence class of the diagram f: C C f  1  C′  C  In Theorem 3.1, we establish a fully faithful triangle functor from Ktac P to the quotient K−,b P/Kb P. To avoid too many technicalities in the proof, we first prove the following lemma. It allows us to complete certain morphisms and homotopies of truncated complexes. Given an integer n and a complex C:  dn+1  dn+2  dn+3  dn−2  dn−1  d  n Cn−1 −−−→ Cn−2 −−−→ · · · · · · −−−→ Cn+2 −−−→ Cn+1 −−−→ Cn −→  in P, we denote its brutal truncation at degree n by β≥n (C) :  dn+1  dn+2  dn+3  →0− →0− → ··· · · · −−−→ Cn+2 −−−→ Cn+1 −−−→ Cn −  Note that when C ∈ Ktac P, then β≥n (C) ∈ K−,b P. Lemma 2.1. Let P be an a additive category, and C, D two complexes in P with β≥n (D) a C totally acyclic. Furthermore, let n be an integer, and f : β≥n (C) chain map. (a) The map f can be extended to a chain map fb: C D (with fbi = fi for all i ≥ n). (b) Let π : C β≥n (C) be the natural chain map, and consider the composite β≥n (D). If f ◦π is nullhomotopic through a homotopy chain map f ◦π : C h, then h can be extended to a homotopy b h making fb nullhomotopic.  Proof. (a) The chain map f is given by the solid part of the commutative diagram ···  dC n+3  Cn+2  dC n+2  fn+2  ···  dD n+3  Dn+2  Cn+1  dC n+1  fn+1 dD n+2  Dn+1  Cn  dC n  Dn  dC n−1  Cn−2  dC n−2  ···  fn−1  fn dD n+1  Cn−1  dD n  Dn−1  dD n−1  Dn−2  dD n−2  ···  4  PETTER ANDREAS BERGH, DAVID A. JORGENSEN & STEFFEN OPPERMANN  and it suffices to find a map fn−1 as indicated, making the square to its left comC mutative. The composition dD n ◦ fn ◦ dn+1 is zero, and by assumption the sequence ∗ (dC n+1 )  (dC )∗  n HomP (Cn−1 , Dn−1 ) −−− −→ HomP (Cn , Dn−1 ) −−−−−→ HomP (Cn+1 , Dn−1 )  is exact. Therefore, there exists a map fn−1 : Cn−1 Dn−1 such that fn−1 ◦ dC n = D dn ◦ fn . (b) The homotopy h is given by maps hn−1 , hn , hn+1 , . . . as in the diagram ···  dC n+3  hn+2  ···  dD n+3  dC n+2  Cn+2 fn+2  Dn+2  hn+1 dD n+2  dC n+1  Cn+1 fn+1  Dn+1  hn dD n+1  dC n  Cn  hn−1  fn  Dn  Cn−1  dD n  dC n−1  fn−1  Dn−1  hn−2  dD n−1  dC n−2  Cn−2  fn−2  hn−3  dD n−2  Dn−2  ···  ···  C with fi = dD i+1 ◦ hn + hi−1 ◦ di for all i ≥ n. We must find maps hn−2 , hn−3 , . . . completing the homotopy. To find the map hn−2 , consider the map fn−1 −dD n ◦hn−1 in HomP (Cn−1 , Dn−1 ), for which we obtain C D D D (fn−1 − dD n ◦ hn−1 ) ◦ dn = dn ◦ fn − dn ◦ (fn − dn+1 ◦ hn ) = 0.  Since the sequence ∗ (dC n−1 )  (dC )∗  n HomP (Cn−2 , Dn−1 ) −−−−−→ HomP (Cn−1 , Dn−1 ) −−− −→ HomP (Cn , Dn−1 )  is exact, there exists a map hn−2 : Cn−2  Dn−1 such that  C fn−1 − dD n ◦ hn−1 = hn−2 ◦ dn−1 .  Iterating this procedure, we obtain the maps hn−3 , hn−4 , . . . giving b h.    3. Properties of the functor We are now ready to prove Theorem 3.1. It establishes a fully faithful triangle functor from Ktac P to the quotient K−,b P/Kb P, mapping a complex C to its brutal truncation β≥0 (C) at degree zero. Note that brutal truncation does not define a functor between homotopy categories. Theorem 3.1. For an additive category P, brutal truncation at degree zero induces a fully faithful triangle functor K−,b P/Kb P.  βP : Ktac P  Proof. To simplify notation, we denote βP by just β. The first issue to address is D be a map of complexes in Ktac P, as indicated in well-definedness. Let f : C the following diagram: ···  dC 3  h2  ···  dD 3  C2 f2  D2  dC 2  h1 dD 2  C1 f1  D1  dC 1  h0 dD 1  C0 f0  D0  dC 0  h−1 dD 0  C−1 f−1  D−1  dC −1  ···  h−2 dD −1  ···  It suffices to show that if f vanishes in Ktac P, that is, if there is a homotopy h as indicated by the dashed arrows above, then β≥0 (f ) vanishes in K−,b P/Kb P.  THE GORENSTEIN DEFECT CATEGORY  5  Using this homotopy h, we see that the map ···  dC 3  C2  dC 2  f2  ···  dD 3  D2  dC 1  C1  C0  dD 1  D1  ···  0  ···  f0 −h−1 ◦dC 0  f1 dD 2  0  D0  is nullhomotopic in K−,b P. Consequently, the map β≥0 (f ) is homotopic to the map ···  dC 3  C2  dC 2  0  ···  dD 3  D2  dC 1  C1  C0  ···  0  ···  h−1 ◦dC 0  0 dD 2  0  dD 1  D1  D0  g de  de  de  −  0 g  1 g  2 g de  1  in K−,b P. Clearly, this map factors through the stalk complex with C−1 in degree zero. Therefore β(f ), which equals the image of β≥0 (f ) in the quotient K−,b P/Kb P, vanishes by [Nee, Lemma 2.1.26]. This shows that the functor β is well-defined. It is easy to check that β is a triangle functor. The natural isomorphism β ◦ Σ Σ ◦ β is given by  β(ΣC) :  ···  C1  C0  C−1  0  ···  Σ(β(C)) :  ···  C1  C0  0  0  ···  This is indeed an isomorphism in K−,b P/Kb P, since its mapping cone in K−,b P is isomorphic to the stalk complex with C−1 in degree one, which belongs to Kb P. Using a similar isomorphism, one checks that β commutes with mapping cones. D be a morphism in Ktac P such Next, we prove that β is faithful. Let f : C that β(f ) = 0. We may think of f as a morphism of complexes. Then the condition β(f ) = 0 means that, up to homotopy, the brutal truncation β≥0 (f ) factors through a bounded complex C ′ ∈ Kb P. Choose a positive integer n such that Ci′ = 0 for i ≥ n. By truncating at degree n, we see that the induced map β≥n (f )◦π : C β≥n (D) of complexes is nullhomotopic. It then follows from Lemma 2.1(b) that f itself is nullhomotopic, and this shows that the functor β is faithful. β(D) be a morphism in It remains to show that β is full. Let ψ : β(C) K−,b P/Kb P between two complexes in the image of β. Then ψ is represented by a diagram g  β≥0 (C)  C′  f  β≥0 (D)  of complexes and maps in K−,b P, where the mapping cone C(g) of the map g belongs to Kb P. Up to homotopy, in sufficiently high degrees, the complex C ′ then coincides with β≥0 (C), and then also with C. Therefore, for some positive integer n, there is an equality β≥n (C) = β≥n (C ′ ), and the truncation β≥n (g) is the identity.  6  PETTER ANDREAS BERGH, DAVID A. JORGENSEN & STEFFEN OPPERMANN  Furthermore, the truncation β≥n (f ) is a morphism β≥n (f ) : β≥n (C) β≥n (D). b D of complexes in Ktac P: we By Lemma 2.1(a), it admits and extension f : C b shall prove that ψ = β(f ). Consider the solid part of the diagram C′ g  f θ  π  β≥0 (C)  β≥0 (fb) ◦ π  β≥−1 (C) π  1  β≥0 (D)  β≥0 (fb)  β≥0 (C) of complexes and maps in K−,b P, where π is the natural projection. The lower two triangles obviously commute. Furthermore, by Lemma 2.1(a), the identity chain map 1 : β≥n (C) β≥n (C ′ ) admits an extension θ : β≥−1 (C) C ′ , and by construction the equalities β≥n    β≥n (π)  β≥0 (fb) ◦ π  =  β≥n (g ◦ θ)  =  β≥n (f ◦ θ)  hold. The chain map π − g ◦ θ can be viewed as a chain map C β≥0 (C), and its truncation β≥n (π−g◦θ) is trivially nullhomotopic. Thus, by Lemma 2.1(b), the map π − g ◦ θ itself is nullhomotopic, and this shows that the top left triangle commutes. Similarly, the top right triangle commutes, hence the diagram is commutative. Consequently, the map ψ equals β(fb), and so the functor β is full.   We shall apply Theorem 3.1 to the case when the additive category P is the category proj A of finitely generated projective modules over a left Noetherian ring A. The following result shows that, in this situation, if the functor is dense (i.e. an equivalence in view of Theorem 3.1), then all higher extensions between any module and the ring vanish. Recall first that the Verdier quotient K−,b (proj A)/Kb (proj A) is the classical singularity category Dbsg (A) of A.  Proposition 3.2. Let A be a left Noetherian ring and proj A the category of finitely generated projective left A-modules. If the functor Dbsg (A)  βproj A : Ktac (proj A)  is dense, then ExtnA (M, A) = 0 for all n ≫ 0 and every finitely generated left A-module M . Proof. Let M be a finitely generated left A-module, and d  d  d  d  1 2 3 4 P0 P1 −→ P2 −→ P3 −→ P : · · · −→  its projective resolution: this is a complex in K−,b (proj A). Since the functor βproj A is dense, the complex P is isomorphic in Dbsg (A) to βproj A (T ) for some totally acyclic complex T ∈ Ktac (proj A). For some n ≫ 0, the two complexes β≥n (P ) and β≥n (T ) coincide up to homotopy, giving ∼ H−i (HomA (P, A)) ∼ Exti (M, A) = = H−i (HomA (T, A)) A  for all i ≥ n + 1. Since the complex T is totally acyclic, the group Hj (HomA (T, A)) vanishes for all j ∈ Z, and this proves the result.   THE GORENSTEIN DEFECT CATEGORY  7  Specializing to the case when the ring is either left Artin or commutative Noetherian local, we obtain the following two corollaries. Recall that a commutative local ring is Gorenstein if its injective dimension (as a module over itself) is finite. Corollary 3.3. Let A be a left Artin ring, and proj A the category of finitely generated projective left A-modules. If the functor Dbsg (A)  βproj A : Ktac (proj A)  is dense, then the injective dimension of A as a left module is finite. Proof. There are finitely many simple left A-modules S1 , . . . , St , and by Proposition 3.2 there exists an integer n such that ExtiA (⊕Sj , A) = 0 for i ≥ n + 1. The injective dimension of A is therefore at most n.  Corollary 3.4. Let A be a commutative Noetherian local ring, and proj A the category of finitely generated projective (i.e. free) A-modules. If the functor Dbsg (A)  βproj A : Ktac (proj A) is dense, then A is Gorenstein.  Proof. Let k be the residue field of A. By Proposition 3.2 there exists an integer n such that ExtiA (k, A) = 0 for i ≥ n + 1. The injective dimension of A is therefore at most n.  The following result shows that, in the situation of Proposition 3.2, every injective module has finite projective dimension. Proposition 3.5. Let A be a left Noetherian ring and proj A the category of finitely generated projective left A-modules. If the functor Dbsg (A)  βproj A : Ktac (proj A)  is dense, then the projective dimension of every finitely generated injective left Amodule is finite. Proof. Let I be a finitely generated injective left A-module, and PI ∈ K−,b (proj A) a projective resolution of I. For every n ≥ 1, denote by ΩnA (I) the image of the nth differential in PI . It suffices to show that the identity on PI factors through an object in Kb (proj A), for this would imply that ΩnA (I) is projective for high n. Let T be a totally acyclic complex in Ktac (proj A), and M the image of its zeroth P for some P ∈ proj A (take differential. Then there is a monomorphism f : M I factors through f . for example P = T−1 ). Since I is injective, every map M Now for every n ≥ 1, denote by ΩnA (M ) the image of the nth differential in T . We claim that every map g : ΩnA (M ) ΩnA (I) factors through a projective module. To see this, note that every such map lifts to a chain map β≥n (T ) β≥n (PI ), and by PI . This gives Lemma 2.1(a) this chain map can be extended to a chain map T ′ a map g : M I, which factors through a projective module by the above. Since g = ΩnA (g ′ ), the map g also factors through a projective module, as claimed. We show next that HomDbsg (A) (βproj A (T ), PI ) = 0. Any morphism ψ in this group is (represented by) a diagram g  β≥0 (T )  C f  PI  8  PETTER ANDREAS BERGH, DAVID A. JORGENSEN & STEFFEN OPPERMANN  in K−,b (proj A), with the cone of g belonging to Kb (proj A). As in the proof of Theorem 3.1, we can assume that (up to homotopy) the two complexes β≥0 (T ) and C agree in high degrees. From the above, it then follows that for high n, every map B n (PI ) factors through a projective module, where B n (D) denotes the B n (C) image of the nth differential in a complex D. This shows that ψ = 0. We can now show that the identity on PI factors through an object in Kb (proj A). Namely, since the functor βproj A is dense, the complex PI is isomorphic in Dbsg (A) to βproj A (T ) for some acyclic complex T ∈ Ktac (proj A). From what we showed above, we obtain HomDbsg (A) (PI , PI ) ≃ HomDbsg (A) (βproj A (T ), PI ) = 0, and the result follows.    Recall that a Noetherian ring (i.e. a ring that is both left and right Noetherian) is Gorenstein if its injective dimensions both as a left and as a right module are finite. By a classical result of Zaks (cf. [Zak, Lemma A]), the two injective dimensions then coincide. However, it is an open question whether a Noetherian ring of finite selfinjective dimension on one side is of finite selfinjective dimension on both sides, and therefore Gorenstein. We have now come to the main result of this section. It deals with Artin rings (i.e. rings that are both left and right Artin) and commutative Noetherian local rings. Namely, for such a ring A, the functor βproj A is dense if and only if A is Gorenstein. As mentioned in the introduction, one may regard this as a triangulated category reformulation of the result of Auslander and Bridger [AusBri, Theorem (4.20)]; our approach was inspired by [Buc, Theorem 4.4.1]. Theorem 3.6. Let A be either an Artin ring or a commutative Noetherian local ring, and proj A the category of finitely generated projective left A-modules. Then the functor βproj A : Ktac (proj A)  Dbsg (A)  is dense if and only if A is Gorenstein. Proof. Suppose the functor βproj A is dense. If A is local, then it is Gorenstein by Corollary 3.4. If A is Artin, then the injective dimension of A as a left module is finite by Corollary 3.3. Moreover, by Proposition 3.5, every finitely generated injective left A-module has finite projective dimension. The duality between finitely generated left and right modules then implies that every finitely generated projective right A-module has finite injective dimension. Therefore A is Gorenstein. Conversely, suppose that A is Gorenstein, and let C be a complex in K−,b (proj A). Using the same notation as in the previous proof, there is an integer n such that the A-module B n (C) is maximal Cohen-Macaulay, and such that β≥n (C) is a projective resolution of B n (C). Since B n (C) is maximal Cohen-Macaulay, it admits a projective co-resolution C ′ , and splicing β≥n (C) and C ′ at B n (C) gives a totally acyclic complex T ∈ Ktac (proj A). Since β≥n (C) = β≥n (T ), the complexes C and βproj A (T ) are isomorphic in Dbsg (A), hence the functor βproj A is dense.  4. Defect categories Motivated by Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 3.6, we introduce triangulated defect categories for any left Noetherian ring A. Since the triangle functor βproj A : Ktac (proj A)  Dbsg (A)  THE GORENSTEIN DEFECT CATEGORY  9  is fully faithful by Theorem 3.1, the category Ktac (proj A) embeds in Dbsg (A) as the image of βproj A . The isomorphism closure hIm βproj A i is a thick subcategory of Dbsg (A), hence we may form the corresponding Verdier quotient. Definition. The Gorenstein defect category of a left Noetherian ring A is the Verdier quotient def DbG (A) = Dbsg (A)/hIm βproj A i, where proj A is the category of finitely generated projective left A-modules. In terms of the Gorenstein defect category, Theorem 3.6 takes the following form. Theorem 4.1. If A is either an Artin ring or a commutative Noetherian local ring, then DbG (A) = 0 if and only if A is Gorenstein. We can in fact define related defect categories as follows. Let C be a thick subcategory of Ktac (proj A), and βC the restriction of βproj A to C. Then the category C embeds in Dbsg (A) as the image of βC . The isomorphism closure hIm βC i is a thick subcategory of Dbsg (A), and we make the following definition. Definition. The C defect category of a left Noetherian ring A is the Verdier quotient def  DbC (A) = Dbsg (A)/hIm βC i We have the following results complementing Theorem 4.1, in the commutative local case. Recall that a complex C over a commutative local ring (A, m) is called minimal if dC n (Cn ) ⊆ mCn−1 for all n ∈ Z. Every complex in Ktac (proj A) is isomorphic in Ktac (proj A) to a minimal complex which is unique up to isomorphism. We define the complexity of a minimal complex C ∈ Ktac (proj A) to be def  cxA C = inf{d ∈ N | rank(Cn ⊕ C−n ) ≤ bnd−1 for n ≫ 0 and some real number b}, and extend this definition to all of Ktac (proj A) by setting cxA C = cxA C ′ if C is isomorphic in Ktac (proj A) to a minimal complex C ′ . Theorem 4.2. Let A be a commutative local ring. (1) Let C be the full subcategory of Ktac (proj A) consisting of complexes of finite complexity. Then DbC (A) = 0 if an only if A is a complete intersection. (2) Let C be the full subcategory of Ktac (proj A) consisting of complexes of complexity at most c. Then DbC (A) = 0 if an only if A is a codimension c complete intersection. Proof. For (1), if DbC (A) = 0 then the free resolution of the residue field of A has finite complexity. By a classical result of Gulliksen [Gul, Theorem 2.3], this implies that A is a complete intersection. Conversely, the same result by Gulliksen shows that if A is a complete intersection, then every minimal free resolution has finite complexity. For (2), it is well known that over a complete intersection, the complexity of a module is at most that of the residue field, and the latter equals the codimension; see for instance [Avr, Remark 8.1.1.2].  Theorem 4.1 suggests that the size of the Gorenstein defect category (of an Artin ring or a commutative Noetherian local ring) measures in some sense “how far” the ring is from being Gorenstein. One measure of the size of the Gorenstein defect category is its dimension in the sense of Rouquier (cf. [Ro2]); we recall now the definition. Let T be a triangulated category with suspension functor Σ. Given two subcategories A and B of T , we denote by A ∗ B the following full subcategory of T : an object X ∈ T belongs to A ∗ B if and only if there exists a distinguished triangle X B ΣA A  10  PETTER ANDREAS BERGH, DAVID A. JORGENSEN & STEFFEN OPPERMANN  in T , with A ∈ A and B ∈ B. Furthermore, we denote by thick1T (A) the full subcategory of T consisting of all objects isomorphic to a direct summand of a finite direct sum of suspensions of objects in A. Then we inductively define thicknT (A) by  def thicknT (A) = thick1T thickTn−1 (A) ∗ thick1T (A) . The dimension of T , denoted dim T , is defined as def  dim T = inf{d ∈ Z | there exists an object A ∈ T such that T = thickd+1 T (A)}. It would be interesting to find criteria which characterize the rings whose Gorenstein defect categories are n-dimensional. An answer to the following question would be a natural start. Question. What characterizes Artin rings and commutative Noetherian local rings with zero-dimensional Gorenstein defect categories? We end with an important example; it is the smallest commutative local ring — in a sense which we make precise — for which the Gorenstein defect category is interesting. We show that the dimension of the defect category is at most one. Note that it is also a finite dimensional k-algebra. We need the following lemma, which gives an upper bound on the dimension of the singularity category. It improves [Ro1, Proposition 3.7]; if A is an Artin ring, then the lemma shows that the dimension of Dbsg (A) is at most ℓℓ(A) − 2, where ℓℓ(A) is the Loewy length of A. Lemma 4.3. Let A be either a commutative Noetherian local ring or an Artin ring, and let r be its radical. If rn = 0, then dim Dbsg (A) ≤ n − 2. Proof. Consider the stalk complex A/r in the bounded derived category Db (A). It follows from the proof of [Ro2, Lemma 7.35] that Db (A) = thicknDb (A) (A/r). The proof also shows that if M is an A-module with rt M = 0, then as a stalk complex M belongs to thicktDb (A) (A/r). In the singularity category Dbsg (A), every indecomposable object is isomorphic to a stalk complex of a module, and this stalk complex is again isomorphic to the shift of the stalk complex given by its first syzygy. Since rn−1 Ω1A (M ) = 0 for every A-module M , we see that Dbsg (A) = n−1 b thickD  b (A) (A/r). Consequently, the dimension of Dsg (A) is at most n − 2. sg  Example 4.4. Let k be a field and R = k[x, y, z]/(x2 , y 2 , z 2 , yz), a quotient of a polynomial ring. Note that R is a finite dimensional commutative local k-algebra with maximal ideal n = (x, y, z), embedding dimension 3, Loewy length 3 and length 6. The image of βproj R is nonzero, since R admits, for example, the totally acyclic complex x x x x ··· − →R− →R− →R− → ··· However, R is not Gorenstein as its socle is clearly 2-dimensional. We claim that R is the smallest non-Gorenstein ring to admit non-trivial totally acyclic complexes, in terms of the invariants listed above. Indeed, consider a commutative local ring A with maximal ideal m satisfying mn = 0. If the Loewy length of A were 2, that is n = 2, then A would be of minimal multiplicity, and non-Gorenstein rings with minimal multiplicity are Golod [Avr, 5.2.8]. By [AvrMar, 3.5] Golod rings do not admit non-trivial totally reflexive modules. Thus one is forced to consider rings with Loewy length at least 3. Now consider the embedding dimension of A. If A has embedding dimension 1 or 2, then A is a complete intersection [Sch], which is a Gorenstein ring. Therefore one must consider rings of embedding dimension at least 3. Now by a theorem due to Christensen and Veliche [ChrVel, Theorem A],  THE GORENSTEIN DEFECT CATEGORY  11  if A admits a totally acyclic complex, and m3 = 0, then the socle of A is m2 and the length of A is twice its embedding dimension. Thus the ring R above is the least commutative local non-Gorenstein ring, in terms of Loewy length, embedding dimension and length, which admits non-trivial totally acyclic complexes. Since the maximal ideal n of R satisfies n3 = 0, Lemma 4.3 shows that the dimension of the singularity category Dbsg (R) is at most one. Since the Gorenstein defect category DbG (A) is a quotient of Dbsg (R), it follows from [Ro2, Lemma 3.4] that dim DbG (A) ≤ 1. References [AusBri] M. Auslander and M. Bridger, Stable module theory, Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society, No. 94 American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I. 1969 146 pp. [Avr] L. Avramov, Infinite free resolutions, Six lectures on commutative algebra (Bellaterra, 1996), 1 -118, Progr. Math., 166, Birkhuser, Basel, (1998). [AvrMar] L. Avramov and A. Martsinkovsky, Absolute, relative, and Tate cohomology of modules of finite Gorenstein dimension, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 85 (2002), no. 2, 393 -440. [Buc] R.-O. Buchweitz, Maximal Cohen-Macaulay modules and Tate-cohomology over Gorenstein rings, 1987, 155 pp; see https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/handle/1807/16682. [ChrVel] L. W. Christensen, O. Veliche, Acyclicity over local rings with radical cube zero, Illinois J. Math. 51 (2007), no. 4, 1439 -1454. [Gul] T.H. Gulliksen, On the deviations of a local ring, Math. Scand. 47 (1980), no. 1, 5-20. [IyeKra] S. Iyengar and H. Krause Acyclicity versus total acyclicity for complexes over Noetherian rings, Doc. Math. 11 (2006), 207240. [Nee] A. Neeman, Triangulated categories, Annals of Mathematics Studies, 148, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2001, viii+449 pp. [Ro1] R. Rouquier, Representation dimension of exterior algebras, Invent. Math. 165 (2006), no. 2, 357-367. [Ro2] R. Rouquier, Dimensions of triangulated categories, J. K-theory 1 (2008), no. 2, 193-256. [Sch] G. Scheja, Uber die Bettizahlen lokaler Ringe, Math. Ann. 155 (1964) 155 -172. [Zak] A. Zaks, Injective dimension of semi-primary rings, J. Algebra 13 (1969), 73-86. Petter Andreas Bergh, Institutt for matematiske fag, NTNU, N-7491 Trondheim, Norway E-mail address: bergh@math.ntnu.no David A. Jorgensen, Department of mathematics, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA E-mail address: djorgens@uta.edu Steffen Oppermann, Institutt for matematiske fag, NTNU, N-7491 Trondheim, Norway E-mail address: steffen.oppermann@math.ntnu.no

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 0. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
