Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_6818

Abstract:
An object evaluator to generate flexible applications (Extended abstract)  arXiv:cs/0106017v1 [cs.LO] 10 Jun 2001  L.Yu.Ismailova, K.E. Zinchenko Vorotnikovskiy per, 7, bld. 4 JurInfoR-MSU Institute for Contemporary Education Moscow, 103006, Russia {larisa,kz}@jurinfor.ru WWW: http://www.jurinfor.ru Teach  ★✥ ❡ Teach-Course ✛✘ ✛✘  Abstract  Course  This paper contains a brief discussion of an object evaluator which is based on principles of evaluations in a category. The main tool system referred as the Application Development Environment (ADE) is used to build database applications involving the graphical user interface (GUI). The separation of a database access and the user interface is reached by distinguishing the potential and actual objects. The variety of applications may be generated that communicate with different and distinct desktop databases. The commutative diagrams’ technique allows to involve retrieval and call of the delayed procedures.  ❡  Logic L  ❡  h  ❡ ❡  ③❡  hL  ❡  ✚✙ ❡ ✚✙ ✧✦  Introduction  Figure 1: Event Driven Objects. (Here: Let event be an assigning potential teachers to the courses. E.g., Logic is under assigning so that potential teachers become the actual teachers (of Logic). The domain Course is used as a category of indices, Teach is a domain of possible teachers (not assigned to courses), and Teach-Course is a domain of the subsets of Teach, each subset being corresponded to the specifies index. More generally, possible object h is a map from the event (index) L into the actual object hL .)  Recent research activity generated the valuable advance in understanding the nature of an object withing the information system. Filling in the gap between the manifold of known data models, implemented information systems and theoretical approaches caused the experimental efforts in development the object-oriented tools. Here is breafly discussed the Application Development Environment (ADE) that is used to build database applications involving the graphical user interface (GUI). ADE computing separates the database access and the user interface. The variety of applications may be generated that communicate with different and distinct desktop databases. The advanced techniques allows to involve remote or stored procedures retrieval and call. According to an object-oriented traditions [FW96], ADE include some basic features of inheritance, encapsulation, and polymorphism. They are used to derive an actual object to cover the needed information resources. The potential object (PO) is composed with the menu (M), data access (DA), and modular counterparts (MC). The Ancestor Potential Objects (APO) contain the menus, events, event evolver, attributes and functions (that are encapsulated). The Descendant Potential Objects (DPO) are inherited from APO. The aim of the current contribution is to give a brief profile of the ADE project without any detailed mathematical or implementational consideration. Nevertheless, some mathematical background corresponds to the references [AHV95], [RDPS96], [Fit96]. Other less traditional for the database area ideas are due to [JD93] to conform the object computation strategies using the commutative dia-  grams. The main ADE building blocks have the relative uniformity to resolve the modular linkages. ADE enables the host computational environment to extend the properties of the distinct MC.  1  Indexing the objects by events  The main feature to evaluate the objects within modular structures is based on the triggering events. An event triggers the assignment of potential objects to the domains of the actual objects. All of this is done as a singular Modular Counterpart (MC). Each MC is attached to object which is thus determined. The MC is a holder of all the controls to communicate with the user. The event is assigned by the user call (for instance, clicking) or selection. Thus, when the activity is initiated, the following main events may be triggered: respond to a request from the user application, database retrieval or updating. The possible order of the events is prescribed by evolver and is detrmined by the scripts. A fragment of the event driven procedure is shown in Figure 1. Note that a set of the possible objects {h|h : Course → T easch − Logic} = HT each−Logic (Course) in this figure represents an idea of functor-as-object for Course is a category of events, T each − Logic is a (sub)category of the actual objects – type. More rigorously, hL belongs to a type derived as followed: possible object h from the domain Teach (i.e. it has this sort) is applied to the index L (i.e. is observed from L), so that the event L  Proceedings of the First East-European Symposium on Advances in Databases and Information Systems (ADBIS’97). St.-Petersburg, September 2–5, 1997. St.-Pb.: St.-Petersburg University, 1997.  141  triggered the object hL to be born.  1.1  Triggering events: menu  Menu gives more flexibility to the attribute selection. Ususally the lists of possible attributes are supported to give the developer or user more freedom. Menus are established to be encapsulated in APO and are inherited in DPO. An exmaple could assist the ideas beyond the menu driven objects. In Figure 2 the events of assigning teachers to courses reflect a pure relational solution (by plain relations) and the enhanced solution. The enhancement is done by observing the triggering event as a stimulus to generate the actual object. The most prominent feature is that the actual objects are established after indexing. It means that before indexing there are no visible actual objects, and all the objects are potential. Let the domain of indices be the Course. The domains Teach-Logic (denoted by T chL and TeachInformatic (denoted by T chInf ) are established as the actual objects – the professors are the actual teachers and assigned to the courses. Another way to construe and maintain the relationship between Course, N ame and Hours is given by their direct correspondence. In the Figure 2 the table of instances Relationship-1 is a plain relation which gives an assignment of professors to the courses and courses to the hours, and all of this is in accordance with the normalized relational model. Note that this relationship gives the local univers in spite of the potential nature of its tuples and their elements. From this point of view the indexing captures more meaning. Thus, clicking the menu Course user triggers an assigning process which result in the Teach-Course domain.  1.2  Domains: N ame  Hours  Logic  Johnes  20  Inf ormatics  Smith  30  Doe Jackson Relationship-1: Course  N ame  Hours  Logic  Johnes  20  Logic  Smith  20  Inf ormatics  Doe  30  Inf ormatics  Jackson  30  Course: Logic  Deriving types in a particular application  Inf ormatics  The particular application is derived from Potential Object Library (POL) giving rise to Actual Object Libraries (AOL). A computational idea in use is given in Figure 3. The correspondence between potential and actual objects is established in a category style evaluation. Note, that the known effects to generate the value of a logical expression tend to construe the filters. Their mathematical properties are left out of the scope of this paper. A feature of the filter is to compose its substitutional part with the evaluation part. The substitution effects an environment so that an old environment is mapped into the new environment. The modified environment contains the encapsulated instances under a further evaluation.  2  Course  Teach-Informatics: Teach:  T chInf  T ch Johnes  Doe Jackson  Smith Doe ◗ ◗ ◗ Jackson ◗ ◗ ◗ Indexing ◗ ◗ ◗ s  Teach-Logic: T chL Johnes Smith  Computational and relative backgrounds  ADE concepts are based on a variant of computation theory for information systems. The main idea is to observe the function and an argumrnt as the distinct and separate entities. The function value is generated whenever the function object is applied to an argument object. During the evaluation process the old environment is mapped into the new environment. This transition captures the necessary inclusions, e.g., encpsulated partiotions of the computation. The switching of an environment gives the effect of transition from a ‘previous stage of knowledge’ to the ‘current stage of knowledge’ resulting in the evolution of the concepts. Their computational solutions are fitted to the known object-oriented paradigms, also data base and knowledge base engineering are included. Some vital concepts have clear mathematical representions: data object that represents the computer stored data; metadata object that represents the conceptual information; assignment that captures more dynamics and intrinsic states; expansible database that represent the individualized self contained object couples. The main feature of the general approach is in embedding the typed entities into the initially typeless system that is based on the a  Indexing the actual objects. (Here: Teach is the intensional object (denoted by T ch) and its extention correspondes to the domain of potential objects – the professors are the potential teachers. The actual objects are established after indexing. Let the domain of indices be the Course. The domains Teach-Logic (denoted by T chL and TeachInformatic (denoted by T chInf ) are established as the actual objects – the professors are the actual teachers and assigned to the courses. On an other hand Relationship-1 is a plain relation which gives an assignment of professors to the courses and courses to the hours, and all of this is in accordance with the normalized relational model. Note that this relationship gives the local univers in spite of the potential nature of its tuples and their elements. From this point of view the indexing captures more meaning.)  Figure 2:  142  Logic (  Jones  /x)  ✛ Substx  [Logic,  Smith  Jones  ]  Smith  ❄  T chL ✛  F st  true  ✒ ε  ˆT ch × idName  ˆT ch  T ch − F ilter ✲  ❄  Jones  [T chL ,  Smith  ]  Figure 3: Genration of the actual objects by indexing. (Here: This commutative diagram has an entry point Logic and the exit point T chL and is supplementary to the domains in Figure 2. The element Logic is from the domain of indices Course, and the domain of potential objects Teach is given relatively Course. This relativisation generates the domain of actual objects T chL , or Teach-Logic. This separation is due to the logical filtering T ch − F ilter of the input objects. The filtering is composed from the substitutional part Substx and mapˆT ch. The substitution Substx modifies the computational environment so that, e.g., Logic(Jones/x) means that the occurence of variable x is replaced by the element Jones being tested. Whenever the positive result is generated the element is pushed into the domain T chL as its new inhabitant. The notationˆT ch is used to mark the shifting of index and F st is the first projection of the ordered pair being tested. The map ε applies the function object to an argument object and results in the function value.)  types in a database environment. The attempts to formalize an idea of ‘information system’ [Ris93] with the lattices of the domains as a basis of smart computations are known. However, their fruitfulness is observed for very special and restricted cases. The logical attempts to investigate the concepts of the ‘object’ and the ‘substitution’ in order to render theoretical computer science with the trustworthy representations are known [Tha94]. The indicated difficulties have the same nature as in a predicate calculus. The results obtained by [BH95], give the background to combine databases and knowledge bases for assisted browsing. In particular, the contribution of the current research is to represent ‘stages of knowledge’ by the transitions observed in the commutative diagrams. All these investigations as well as adjoining contemporary works employ the idea of ‘object’ borrowed from more or less traditional ideas of the object-oriented approach. The analysis of problems arose and, in particular, representation of transition processes in information systems reflects the principle effect of varying the primary established objects. The attempts of partial solutions do not yet result in an adequate mathematical apparatus.  theory of the potential, or possible objects. The last one is fitted to capture the dynamics of different objects and switching the states in the information systems. The prescribed modes in the information systems as a rule are corresponded to the known case study: the relational database theory for plain relations, frame theory for potential objects. The implementation results in the non-plain indexed relations and gives the generalized notion of the (relational) database management system. To extract its possible advantages the unified architecture based on extensible data objects’ model is proposed. It supports the main object-oriented mechanisms of encapsulation, polymorphism and inheritance and contains five major components. They are Conceptual Shell (CS), Application Development Environment (ADE), Basic Relational Tool System (BRTS), Meta Relational Tool System (MRTS), and System Excnage. Some general counterparts neatly corresponding to ADE are to be reflected as a two layered scheme. The first layer consists of the relational sybsystem and the second layer consists of the frame-based event driven subsystem. All the operations of the higher level are mapped into the corresponding operations within the lower level. Both the subsystems are relatively self-contained, and incorporated into the ToolKit. BRTS supports relational interfaces (extentional level), MRTS adds the intentional level, and the pair <BRTS, MRTS> gives the enhanced relational features. ADE contains the extensible data objects’ model and manipulates the switching, or variable concepts so that the computational idead of functor-as-object is resolved. Both BRTS and MRTS are embedded into ADE. CS adds an external interactive mode to maintain and generate applications.  3  4  The relative applied research  The starting point for ADE project originates from the various object notions. Known results in the field of relational data bases, in the field of conceptual modelling, in the field of knowledge based systems (including inference and transformation mechanisms) chiefly deal with established modes of information systems. For this situation an assumption of implicite environment which is fixed before the analysis is prescribed. Nevertheless an update of the database usually violate the consistency of the data model. Allowing different transaction mechanisms brings more flexibility to the data model. But this potential flexibility to be implemented needs some sophisticated and difficult in implementation mechanisms with very complicated computational background. An information system developer needs the transparent solutions based on some clear to understood conceptions. The main advatage of disadvantage of the practical solution depends on the initial ‘building blocks’. The known solutions tends to maintain some kind of framework which ramify the behaviour of the objects.  The relative approaches in use  The ADE notion is based on the theory of variable concepts in the form of variable sets. The origin of the variable sets would be commented taking in mind the computations in Figure 3. The resulting evaluation according to the commutative diagram generates the types (intensional objects) which are determined by the indexed sets (extentional objects). This assignment, as we see, depends on a category of indices in use. The same constructions were used in an elementary category theory, in particular in representation of predicate logic. Until present time these results were applied mainly to the semantics of programs especially in denotational semantics of programming languages. Here the construction in Figure 3 fills in the gap between evaluating the expressions in a category and generating the derived 143  Establishing the representation of a concept as invariant on possible changes, creating the tools of ‘evolving the concept’ as a mathematical process overtakes these essential difficulties. The distinction between potential and actual objects makes some contribution to an information system dynamics, and, in particular, to better understanding of the environment transition, or switching processes whenever the knowledge concerning the objects and their behaviour drifts from one ‘stage of knowledge’ to another ‘stage of knowledge’. Developing the derived types’ evaluator as in Figure 3 is also important by the following reasons. Information systems contain besides database (DB) also the metadata base (MDB) that does include different facts concerning database. These fact are mainly related, as we see, to the domains of potential objects. The potential objects are to be observed as the ‘pieces of knowledge’ and are naturally the metadata. In applications metadata bases are often used as the components of knowledge system with knowledge bases. Both parts, DB and MDB communicate each other and the host computational environment of information system. Some incite concerning their shared functions would be given by the commutatiive diagram to ealuate e.g., the derived types. The relative ideas were understood from 1987 in the nine known research projects of extensible database systems. The main ideas were concentrated on a model of data. Even the project without any pre-defined data model was proclaimed, but the desirable degree of flexibility was not achieved. The most prominent experiments with experimental (object-oriented) extensible system have used the molecular chaining of objects to avoid the known difficulties in designing and development. But the completed solution was not obtained neither in a theory nor in practice. Some kind of contribution to override this problem is given here by the Modular Counterparts (MC). The design of the systems which accumulate and process both information and metainformation does influence the effectiveness of information system, the efforts of its designing, maintenance, modifications and extentions. This results in the problem of designing the Application Development Environment (ADE) which communicates with the varying DB and MDB.  5  Swithching the computational environment brings in both the flexibility and unexpected difficulties. For instance, the data object understanding is now based on the higher order logic. The corresponding data model is assosiated with the higher order function spaces. We fill that the information system community has the minimal experience to establish and analize the corresponding data models. The feasibility of the higher order object evaluator is another point of interest that influenced the current research. Our proposal is to use the commutative diagram techique, at least, whenever other models fail to support the object evaluation.  6  ADE contribution to the research activity  ADE has under research the idea of a concept as the variable entity to possess the creation of the variable concepts and associated transition effects. In their turn the variable concepts lead to parameterized type system. The approach developed in ADE is based on the reasons stated. The usage of the method of embedding typed system (including the apparatus of variable concepts) into untyped system is based on the commutative diagrams support. Combining the ideas of variable concepts will make possible development of a wide range of applied information systems, particularly in the field of data base management systems for advanced applications whenever the knowledge fragments are explicitely or implicitely involved.  7  General features  ADE is implemented on the base of the two layered architecture (shown in Figure 4) and is viewed to be a comprehensive research as follows: establishing the primitive frame to represent and analyze a ‘variable concept’; setting up the approach to integrate the commutative diagram technique with the needs of evaluating the objects; developing methods to adopt some intentional concepts, in particular, to develop and use corresponce between potential and actual objects; creating the tool kit to explicate and apply the advantages of variable concepts and generating the derived types ‘on fly’; augmenting the possibilities of host programming system to fit in the demands of switching the computational environment; specifying the enhanced data models; fixing the possible ranges of design and development those systems that involve the idea of data/metadata object; creating the generalized tool kit on the basis of the mathematical concepts in the current contribution. The target prototype system Application Development Environment (ADE) is mainly based on the idea of variable, or switching concept and covers the vital mechanisms of encapsulation, inheritance and polymorphism. Variable concepts naturally generate families of similar types that are derived from the generic types, or sorts. Concepts in ADE are equipped with the evolvents that manage the transitions, or switching between the types. In particular, the identity evolvent supports the constant concepts and types (statical concepts). To achieve the needed flexibilty a general ADE layout consists of the uniform modular units, as shown in Figure 4. In ADE Data Object Definition Language (DODL) contains the construction of data objects’ base scheme as a relation between concepts. Concepts are included into the type system with the interpretation over the variable domains. A coherent set of variable domains generates the data objects’ base. Basis to maintain the data objects in use and their bases is generated by computational models with applicative structures. The developer obtains the set  Objectives of the proposed ADE conception  ADE is both the research project and tool kit aimed at development of object evaluator which is based on the sound computational ground. The computational models and methods which being considered together comprise a theory of computations for objectoriented information systems which covers both the data management and knowledge based solutions. In particular, the knowledge concerning the possible behaviuor of the actual domains is contained in the corresponding potential domains. The measure of correspondence is mainly determined by the details of indexing procedure. The main research aims denominated here are to bring more meaning in evaluations with the objects. Some dominant trends are to persue the knowledge of the entities as follows: data object to represent the storable data; metadata object to represent the conceptual information; assignment to represent internal states and dynamics; extensible database to represent relatively self-contained couples of objects and some additional derived concepts. All of these notions are important to succeed in ADE development. At the present time in a field of information systems’ development the experience having been accumulated deals with the methods to handle static or quasi-static application domains. The mathematical approvements, e.g., database consistency are adopted almost exclusively for static domains. 144  Interface:  ✛ ✚  C-interface  ❄✻  ✘✛ ✙✚  DPO-interface  ❄✻ MRTS  ❄ ✛  ✻  PO-manager  ✚ ✻  ❄  ✛  PO-library  Object:  ✚  ❄ ✛ ✚  ✻  PO-relations  System:  ✙✚  CR-interface  ❄✻  ✘  ✙  CS: Conceptual Shell  Shell:  Manager:  ❄✻  ✘✛  ❄  ✻  ❄ ✘✛  DPO-manager  ✙✚ ✻  ✘  ✙ ✛  ✲ ✘ ✙  ✛  Retrieval System ✚  ❄✻  ✻  ❄  ✻  ✘✛❄  BRTS  ✻  Relational manager  ✙✚ ✻  ❄  ✛  ❄  AO-library  ✛  System  ✚  ✲ ✛❄  Exchange  ✚  ✻  AO-relations  ✻ ❄ ✛ ✘ ✲  Storage  ✛ ✙ ✚System  ✘  ✙  ✘  ✙  ✘  ✙  ✘  ✙  Figure 4: Application Development Environment: ADE. (Abbreviations: C - Conceptual; CR - Conceptual Relational; DPO - Descendent Potential Object; CS - Conceptual Shell; PO - Potential Object; AO - Actual Object; MRTS - Meta Relational Tool System; BRTS - Basic Relational Tool System. Conceptual interface gives the abilities to establish, update or remove the restrictions imposed to the objects in use. The objects are ‘based’. The PO-base consists of the potential objects and is equipped with the language to maintain their features. They are conformed with a partial order which enables the inheritance of the properties. The atomic PO are setted up as the sorts. DPO-interface serves the set-theoretic operations, triggers and built-in procedures on sorts. AO-library contains the derived types which are used as ranges for the relational Search System. To maintain the indexing procedure DPO-interface is script-based and use the SQL-cursors. CR-interface is attached to the AO-base. System Excange makes a valid request and response for the system counterparts.)  145  10  of the means that establish, support and modify the linkages between the data objects’ base schemes, data objects’ base and computational models. DODL declares: type system as a set of metadata objects; em linkages between the types; system of domains; linkages between the domains; extentions of domains and types; computational tools of applicative pre-structures and structures. The third part of the implementation supports two level of interfaces. The first is the Intentional Management System (IMS) to support concepts (metadata objects) of different kinds, and the second is associated Extentional Management System (EMS) to support the appropriated extentions (data objects) generated by the intentions. Both the counterpats are included into Conceptual Shell. EMS is embedded into the unified computational model. It is object-oriented extensible programming system Basic Relational Tool System (BRTS). BRTS has the fixed architecture with the one level comprehension, separate self- contained components, interfaces and languages. It is the First Order Tool (FOT) and generates ‘fast prototypes’. D(M)ODL and D(M)OML of BRTS contain the SQL-based relational complete languages that cooperate with ADE. BRTS mainly supports relatively large number of low cardinality relations (extentions) and supports Data (Metadata) Object Model D(M)OM with retrieval, modifications and definitions of a storable information. IMS is also embedded into the computational model and supports a numerous matadata objects. Their amount is almost the same as for data objects. IMS is based on D(M)OM with a simple comprehension to manage metadata base and is supported by Meta Relational Tool System (MRTS). MRTS manipulates with the metaobjects (concepts) and metarelations (frames) and is embedded into ADE.  8  At present it is difficult to estimate real benefits of using the apparatus of variable concepts in particular applied information systems. This is due to current study of the mathematical apparatus being developed and the approach on the whole. The possible gains and prospects that may be yielded by the ADE approach are set forth below: high degree of generalization of the approach developed and therefore the unification of the tool system design; taking into account the intentional features (‘subjects’) within the mathematics in development and creation of ‘dynamical scripts’ for the problem domain; relative simplicity of the resulting formalization and adequate languages of interfaces; possibility to aggregate/disaggregate the representations of the entities and feasible and transparent tolls to capture more meaning of the objects; clarity, referential transparency and fully explicit constructions that are in the nature of relational systems and simplification both of system and applied programming by the compositional, or functional style; possibilities to handle collections of objects or concepts; establishing of formal object properties inheritance systems and its modular implementation; potential possibilities of straightforward exploiting the apparatus of higher order logic (including the descriptions theory) in an area of information systems to generate the enhanced means and tools of design, implementation and management with a powerful selectivity.  New supporting technologies 11  A main result is the experimental verification of variable concepts approach. This would be applied to develop the variety of applied information systems. Computations with variable concepts and appropriated programming system allows to built a system especially to manipulate the objects. One of the features enables declarations and manipulations of superobjects. The database extensibility, development of databases with varying data models, dynamical databases, analysers of ‘data object’ dynamics, the ‘bases of invariants’ etc. would be achieved. The knowledge base systems grounded on the concepts which are metadata objects. This feature is based on the PO techniques. Maintenance of the systems of ‘variable concepts’ and their interrelations, management of switching the systems of concepts, management of database modification etc.  9  Improvements in design, engineering and management processes  11.1  Technical description Experimental techniques  The feature of current research is in primary creation of the needed tool system to be adequate to the newly generated mathematical apparatus. Conceptual Shell. An approach to provide experiments needs the technological object-oriented Conceptual Shell (CS). CS implementation gives a systematical approach to development, application and use of the programming systems with databases and metadata bases to support: variations occurred in a problem domain or in its representation, especially the more detailed or aggregated information; database and metadata base management system to integrate data objects, metadata objects and programs within the unified computational framework - Extensible Computational Environment; designing the representation of problem domain by linking data objects and metadata objects; growth of a variety of datum, metadatum and corresponding languages. The main counterparts of the project are briefly summarized below. Application Development Environment. The basic computational mechanisms that support evaluation of the expressions, switching the concepts, declaring of the descriptions for intentions, generating their extentions and extensibility of primary data object model. Basic Relational Tool System. Supports the purely relational and/or enhanced solutions to validate the storable data objects (extentional level). Meta Relational Tool System. Supports the relational solutions for metadata objects with the inheritance of properties (in-  Usage of intentions and extentions  ADE gives a smart framework for intentions and extensions and intentional tool/applied system. It enables the possibility to develop the conceptual support that encircles the ajunct ideas: establishing the logical apparatus (on the basis of higher order theory) to study the hierarchies of variable concepts; development of specialized ‘tool theories’ to estimate a selective power of newly designed programming systems, database systems and models for systems with databases and knowledge bases; support and development of specialized semantical theories and models for systems with databases and knowledge bases. Possible applications of this framework: ‘rapid prototypes’ of newly developed computer information systems, estimation of their ranges, adaptation to variations in problem domains, demands, programming systems, experts. The specific feature of architecture: two levelled design - intentional and extentional levels. 146  tentional level). The important task of project would be resolved when both BRTS and MRTS will be embedded into ADE. This enables the possibility of higher order logic to the direct experimental verification. System Exchange. Supports the correspondence between the potential and actual obkects in use. Generates the linkages between the APO-objects and DPO-objects.  The experimental research and verification of the obtained model is based on prototypes - CS, ADE, BRTS, BMRS. The difficulties to implement full scale prototype are resolved by the high level object-oriented programming language. Some candidate programming systems are tested to enable the needed computational properties. After that the main programming tool kit is selected. Preliminary candidate tools were C++ or Modula-2. An attention is paid to select an appropriate database management system. If needed the original DBMS is attached. At the preliminary tests the attention was paid to OLE-2 techniques.  Enhanced properties. The potential (or actual) objects can be composed to result in the valid expressions. These expressions are evaluated via the Conceptual Shell and the series of transmissions via System Exchange. The events are viewed as the interrelated entities. A natural assumption is the possibility to compose distinct events generating the evolvents of events. Non identity evolvents generate the families of ordinary concepts and capture the dynamics of evaluations. The verification of this effect (‘switching concepts’) is included in the final stage of the project and needs a careful selection of the problem domains that clearly and transparently demonstrate all the dynamical features and advantages of the method. Additional experiments will include the ‘partial’ and ‘fully’ dynamical problem domains with the appropriated applied information systems. Awaited corollary. The dynamical properties are captured by both the intentions (‘weak dynamics’) and the evolvents (‘strong dynamics’). Upon finishing the (full scale) prototype system, its implementation and verification the higher order object oriented information system (tool and applied) with the dynamical properties (and switching concepts) will be achieved.  11.3  Conclusions: interpretation of the results  11.2  Software  Tools  Some ready made original systems were tested and expanded to achieve the prototype system with the properties mentioned.  11.4  The resulting two level comprehension model and computational environment verify the feasibility of the approach. The adequate, neutral and semantical representation of data is the target in the sphere of extensible systems and their moderations and modifications. The relational solutions are the criteria in database technology. Therefore, the variable concepts generate the power and sound representation of data objects, have the boundary conditions as the known results in information systems (both in a theory and applications) and capture the additional effects of dynamics to simulate, in particular, the encapsulation, polymorphism and inheritance. The last gives the contribution in development of object-oriented systems.  Generation of the results and applications  This is multistage process as follows: 1) creating the data objects’ base; 2) creating the metadata objects’ base; 3) embedding the results of the previous stages into ADE with subsequent extentions and adding the dynamics; 4) generation of concepts’ families; 5) switching the families; 6) performance analysis and improvements. An important faze is gathering the data and generating the data objects, development of applied data objects’/metaobjects’ bases. This enables the extentional/intentional level of information in use to apply the enhanced methods of higher order (relational) logic.  11.5  References [AHV95] S. Abiteboul, R. Hull, and V. Vianu. Foundations of Databases. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 1995.  Evaluation of the results  The basic step of evaluation is to generate the known results in the information systems technology. The most prominent particular cases are listed below. Relational solutions. Are achieved by BRTS (the first order extentions). These are the tunes of relational completeness within the first order relational language (the basis of induction). The step of induction by complexity (the higher order extentions) is in iterating the first order relational structures to obtain the higher order structure. This is achieved by embedding BRTS into ADE with the subsequential experiments to verify possible restrictions of implementation. Meta relational solutions. They are imposed by the intentions of the objects and correspondences between potential and actual objects. Are directly supported by MRTS (the first order intentions) including the inheritance of properties. This supports the basis of induction. The step of induction generated the composite intentions (the higher order intentions). The observation is that the concepts in this sense are exactly the statical concepts from the proposed theory of variable concepts. Therefore, embedding MRTS into ADE with the statical restrictions of the concepts generate the first order frame (or intentional) system without comprehenced frames. Awaited corollary. Restriction of the variable concepts to the statical (identity) evolvents enables the known (meta)realtional solutions. The two level architecture is adopted with the <intention, extention> pair matching the traditional representation of (meta)data objects. 147  [BH95]  R. Burke and K.J. Hammond. Combining databases and knowledge bases for assisted browsing. In C. Knoblock and A. Levy, editors, Information Gathering from Heterogeneous, Distributed Environments, AAAI Spring Symposium Series, Stanford University, Stanford, California, March 1995.  [BW90]  K.B. Bruce and P. Wegner. An Algebraic Model of Subtype and Inheritance. In F. Bancilhon and P. Buneman, editors, Advances in Database Programming Languages, ACM Press, Frontier Series, pages 75–96. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 1990.  [CC92]  Y. Chiarmarella and J.P. Chevallet. About Retrieval Models and Logic. The Computer Journal, 35(3):233– 242, 1992.  [DM95]  O.M.F. De Troyer and R. Meersman. A Logic Framework for a Semantics of Object Oriented Data Modelling. In M.P. Papazoglou, editor, Proceedings of the OOER’95, 14th International Object-Oriented and Entity-Relationship Modelling Conference, volume 1021 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 238–249, Gold Coast, Australia, December 1995. Springer-Verlag.  [Fit96]  B. Fitzgerald. Formalized systems development methodologies: a critical perspective. Information Systems Journal, 6(1):3–23, January 1996.  [FW96]  P.J.M. Frederiks and Th.P. van der Weide. From a FileOriented View to an Object-Oriented View. Technical Report CSI-R9601, Computing Science Institute, University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, January 1996.  [GZC89]  R.H. Güting, R. Zicari, and D.M. Choy. An algebra for structured office documents. ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems, 7(4):124–157, April 1989.  [HBW95] A.H.M. ter Hofstede, F.J.M. Bosman, and Th.P. van der Weide. Toward a Data Modeling Shell. Technical Report CSI-R9513, Computing Science Institute, University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, November 1995. [JD93]  M. Johnson and C.N.G. Dampney. On the value of commutative diagrams in information modelling. In M. Nivat, C. Rattray, T. Rus, and Scollo G., editors, Proceedings of the Third International Conference AMAST’93 on Algebraic Methodology and Software Technology, Workshops in Computing, pages 44– 58, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, June 1993. Springer-Verlag.  [MK60]  M.E. Maron and J.L. Kuhns. On Relevance, Probabilistic Indexing and Information Retrieval. Journal of the ACM, 7:216–244, 1960.  [RDPS96] A. Ruiz-Delgado, D. Pitt, and C. Smythe. A Review of Object-oriented Approaches in Formal Methods. The Computer Journal, 38(10):777–784, 1996. [Ris93]  N. Rishe. A methodology and tool for top-down relational database design. Data & Knowledge Engineering, 10:259–291, 1993.  [RP96]  D. Redmond-Pyle. Software development methods and tools: some trends and issues. Software Engineering Journal, 11(2):99–103, March 1996.  [SRL+ 90] M. Stonebraker, L.A. Rowe, B. Lindsay, J. Gray, M. Carey, M. Brodie, P. Bernstein, and D. Beech. Third-Generation Database System Manifesto. SIGMOD Record, 19(3):31–44, September 1990. [Tha94]  B. Thalheim. Towards a Framework for Database Design Strategies. In T.A. Halpin and R. Meersman, editors, Proceedings of the First International Conference on Object-Role Modelling (ORM-1), pages 274–293, Magnetic Island, Australia, July 1994.  [TYF86]  T.J. Teorey, D. Yang, and J.P. Fry. A logical design methodology for relational databases using the extended entity-relationship model. ACM Computing Surveys, 18(2):197–222, 1986.  148

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
