Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_6650

Abstract:
Using Program Synthesis for Program Analysis Cristina David, Daniel Kroening, and Matt Lewis  arXiv:1508.07829v1 [cs.LO] 31 Aug 2015  University of Oxford  Abstract. In this paper, we identify a fragment of second-order logic with restricted quantification that is expressive enough to capture numerous static analysis problems (e.g. safety proving, bug finding, termination and non-termination proving, superoptimisation). We call this fragment the synthesis fragment. Satisfiability of a formula in the synthesis fragment is decidable over finite domains; specifically the decision problem is NEXPTIME-complete. If a formula in this fragment is satisfiable, a solution consists of a satisfying assignment from the second order variables to functions over finite domains. To concretely find these solutions, we synthesise programs that compute the functions. Our program synthesis algorithm is complete for finite state programs, i.e. every function over finite domains is computed by some program that we can synthesise. We can therefore use our synthesiser as a decision procedure for the synthesis fragment of second-order logic, which in turn allows us to use it as a powerful backend for many program analysis tasks. To show the tractability of our approach, we evaluate the program synthesiser on several static analysis problems.  1  Introduction  Fundamentally, every static program analysis is searching for a program proof. For safety analysers this proof takes the form of a program invariant [1], for bug finders it’s a counter-model [2], for termination analysis it can be a ranking function [3], whereas for non-termination it’s a recurrence set [4]. Finding each of these proofs was subject to extensive research resulting in a multitude of techniques. The process of searching for a proof can be roughly seen as a refinement loop with two phases. One phase is heuristic in nature, e.g. adjusting the unwinding depth (for bounded model checking [2]), refining the set of predicates (for predicate abstraction and interpolation [5,6]), selecting a template (for template-based analyses [7]), applying a widening operator (for abstract interpretation based techniques [1]), whereas the other phase usually involves a call to a decision procedure. From the perspective of the proof, the heuristic constrains the universe of potential proofs to just one candidate (by fixing the unwinding bound, the template, the set of predicates, etc), which is then validated by the other phase. The unknowns in the first phase are proofs (second-order entities), whereas the unknowns in the second phase are program variables. Essentially, the first phase reduces a second-order problem to a first-order/propositional one. Such a design makes it difficult to separate the problem’s formulation (the second-order problem) from parts of the solving process, resulting in analyses  2  that are cluttered and fragile. Any change to the search process causes changes to the whole analysis. Ideally, we would like a modular design, where the search for a solution is encapsulated and, thus, completely separated from the formulation of the problem. The existing design is dictated by the state of the art in solver technology. While the SAT/SMT technologies nowadays allow solving industrial sized instances, there is hardly any progress made for second-order solvers. Our Contributions. In this paper, we take a step towards addressing this situation by identifying a fragment of second-order logic with restricted quantification that is expressive enough to capture numerous static analysis problems (e.g. safety proving, bug finding, termination and non-termination proving, superoptimisation) and solving it via program synthesis. We call this fragment the synthesis fragment. The synthesis fragment is decidable over finite domains, and its decision problem is NEXPTIME-complete. If a formula in the synthesis fragment is satisfiable, a solution consists of a satisfying assignment from the second order variables to functions over finite domains. Additionally, every function over finite domains is computed by some program that we can synthesise. This correspondence between logical satisfiability and program synthesis allows us to design the decision procedure for the synthesis fragment as a program synthesiser, which in turn allows us to use it as a powerful backend for many program analysis tasks. The program synthesiser uses a combination of bounded model checking, explicit state model checking and genetic programming. Additionally, one of its important strategies is generalisation – it finds simple solutions that solve a restricted case of the problem, then it tries to generalise to a full solution. Consequently, our approach achieves surprisingly good performance for a problem with such high complexity, as whown by our experimental evaluation on several static analysis problems. Our program synthesiser vs Syntax Guided Synthesis (SyGuS) [8]. Recently, a successful approach to program synthesis is denoted by SyGuS. The SyGuS synthesisers supplement the logical specification with a syntactic template that constrains the space of allowed implementations. Thus, each semantic specification is accompanied by a syntactic specification in the form of a grammar. In contrast to SyGuS, our program synthesiser is optimised for program analysis in the following ways: 1. Our specification language is a fragment of C, which results in concise specifications. Using our tool to build a program analyser only requires providing a generic specification of the problem to solve. The programs to be analysed do not need to be modified, symbolically executed or compiled to an intermediate language. As shown by our experimental results in Sec 8, our specifications are an order of magnitude smaller than the equivalent SyGuS specifications. 2. We do not require specifications to include a grammar restricting the space of solutions. The language in which we synthesise our programs is universal, i.e.  3  every finite function is computed by at least one program in our language. Furthermore this language is concise, which means that programs in this language tend to be short. This property of not requiring a grammar makes it easy to target our specifications from an automated program analysis tool, since the frontend analyser need not guess the syntax of a solution. 3. Our solution language has first-class support for programs computing multiple outputs, which allows us to directly encode lexicographic ranking functions of unbounded dimension. We were unable to find a way to encode such functions with SyGuS. 4. Our solver has first-class support for synthesising programs containing constants. By contrast, SyGuS builds constants using unary encoding which requires exponentially more space. We discuss this in Section 6. 5. Our solver’s runtime is heavily influenced by the length of the shortest proof, i.e. the Kolmogorov complexity of the problem as we will discuss in Sec 7. If a short proof exists, then the solver will find it quickly. This is particularly useful for program analysis problems, where, if a proof exists, then most of the time many proofs exist and some are short ([9] relies on a similar remark about loop invariants). Related logics. Other second-order solvers are introduced in [10,11]. As opposed to ours, these are specialised for Horn clauses and the logic they handle is undecidable. Wintersteiger et al. present in [12] a decision procedure for a logic related to the synthesis fragment, the Quantified bit-vector logic, which is a many sorted first-order logic formula where the sort of every variable is a bit-vector sort. It is possible to reduce formulae in the synthesis fragment over finite domains to Effectively Propositional Logic [13], but the reduction would require additional axiomatization and would increase the search space, thus defeating the efficiency we are aiming to achieve.  2  The Synthesis Fragment  In this section, we identify a fragment of second-order logic with a constrained use of quantification that is expressive enough to encode numerous static analysis problems. We will suggestively refer to the fragment as the synthesis fragment : Definition 1 (Synthesis Fragment (SF )). A formula is in the synthesis fragment iff it is of the form ∃P1 . . . Pm .Q1 x1 . . . Qn xn .σ(P1 , . . . , Pm , x1 , . . . , xn ) where the Pi range over functions, the Qi are either ∃ or ∀, the xi range over ground terms and σ is a quantifier-free formula. #» If a pair (P , #» x ) is a satisfying model for the synthesis formula, then we write #» #» (P , x ) |= σ. For the remainder of the presentation, we drop the vector notation and write x for #» x , with the understanding that all quantified variables range over vectors.  4  3  Program Analysis Specifications in the Synthesis Fragment  Program analysis problems can be reduced to the problem of finding solutions to a second-order constraint [14,10,15]. In this section we will show that, the synthesis fragment is expressive enough to capture many interesting such problems. When we describe analyses involving loops, we will characterise the loop as having initial state I, guard G, transition relation B. Safety Invariants. Given a safety assertion A, a safety invariant is a set of states S which is inductive with respect to the program’s transition relation, and which excludes an error state. A predicate S is a safety invariant iff it satisfies the following criteria: ∃S.∀x, x′ .I(x) → S(x) ∧  (1) ′  ′  S(x) ∧ G(x) ∧ B(x, x ) → S(x ) ∧  (2)  S(x) ∧ ¬G(x) → A(x)  (3)  (1) says that each state reachable on entry to the loop is in the set S, and in combination with (2) shows that every state that can be reached by the loop is in S. The final criterion (3) says that if the loop exits while in an S-state, the assertion A is not violated. Termination and non-termination. As shown in [15], termination of a loop can be encoded as the following formula, where W is an inductive invariant of the loop that is established by the initial states I if the loop guard G is met, and R is a ranking function as restricted by W : ∃R, W.∀x, x′ .I(x) ∧ G(x) → W (x) ∧ G(x) ∧ W (x) ∧ B(x, x′ ) → W (x′ ) ∧ R(x) > 0 ∧ R(x) > R(x′ ) Similarly, non-termination can be expressed in the synthesis fragment as follows: ∃N, C, x0 .∀x.N (x0 ) ∧ N (x) → G(x) ∧ N (x) → B(x, C(x)) ∧ N (C(x)) N denotes a recurrence set, i.e. a nonempty set of states such that for each s ∈ N there exists a transition to some s′ ∈ N , and C is a Skolem function that chooses the successor x′ . More details on the formulations for termination and non-termination can be found in [15].  4  The Synthesis Fragment over Finite Domains  When interpreting the ground terms over a finite domain D, the synthesis fragment is decidable and its decision problem is NEXPTIME-complete. We use the notation SFD to denote the synthesis fragment over a finite domain D. Theorem 1 (SFD is NEXPTIME-complete). For an instance of Definition 1 with n first-order variables, where the ground terms are interpreted over D, checking the truth of the formula is NEXPTIME-complete.  5  Proof. In Appendix A.1. Next, we are concerned with building a solver for SFD . A satisfying model for a formula in SFD is an assignment mapping each of the second-order variables to some function of the appropriate type and arity. When deciding whether a particular SFD instance is satisfiable, we should think about how solutions are encoded and in particular how a function is to be encoded. The functions all have a finite domain and co-domain, so their canonical representation would be a finite set of ordered pairs. Such a set is exponentially large in the size of the domain, so we would prefer to work with a more compact representation if possible. We will generate finite state programs that compute the functions and represent these programs as finite lists of instructions in SSA form. This representation has the following properties, proofs for which can be found in Appendix A.2. Theorem 2. Every total, finite function is computed by at least one program in this language Theorem 3. Furthermore, this representation is optimally concise – there is no encoding that gives a shorter representation to every function. Finite State Program Synthesis To formally define the finite state synthesis problem, we need to fix some notation. We will say that a program P is a finite list of instructions in SSA form, where no instruction can cause a back jump, i.e. our programs are loop free and non-recursive. Inputs x to the program are drawn from some finite domain D. The synthesis problem is given to us in the form of a specification σ which is a function taking a program P and input x as parameters and returning a boolean telling us whether P did “the right thing” on input x. Basically, the finite state synthesis problem checks the truth of Definition 2. Definition 2 (Finite Synthesis Formula). ∃P.∀x ∈ D.σ(P, x) To express the specification σ, we introduce a function exec(P, x) that returns the result of running program P with input x. Since P cannot contain loops or recursion, exec is a total function. Example 1. The following finite state synthesis problem is satisfiable: ∃P.∀x ∈ N8 .exec(P, x) ≥ x One such program P satisfying the specification is return 8, which just returns 8 for any input. We now present our main theorem, which says that satisfiability of SFD can be reduced to finite state program synthesis. The proof of this theorem can be found in Appendix A.  6  Theorem 4 (SFD is Polynomial Time Reducible to Finite Synthesis). Every instance of Definition 1, where the ground terms are interpreted over D is polynomial time reducible to an instance of Definition 2. Corollary 1. Finite-state program synthesis is NEXPTIME-complete. We are now in a position to sketch the design of a decision procedure for SFD : we will convert the SFD satisfiability problem to an equisatisfiable finite synthesis problem which we will then solve with a finite state program synthesiser. This design will be elaborated in Section 5.  5  Deciding SFD via Finite-State Program Synthesis  In this section we will present a sound and complete algorithm for finite-state synthesis that we use to decide the satisfiability of formulae in SFD . We begin by describing a general purpose synthesis procedure (Section 5.1), then detail how this general purpose procedure is instantiated for synthesising finite-state programs. We then describe the algorithm we use to search the space of possible programs (Sections 5.3, 6 and 6.2). 5.1  General Purpose Synthesis Algorithm  Algorithm 1 Abstract refinement algorithm  1: function synth(inputs) 2: (i1 , . . . , iN ) ← inputs 3: query ← ∃P.σ(i1 , P )∧. . .∧σ(iN , P ) 4: result ← decide(query) 5: if result.satisfiable then 6: return result.model 7: else 8: return UNSAT 9: function verif(P) 10: query ← ∃x.¬σ(x, P ) 11: result ← decide(query) 12: if result.satisfiable then 13: return result.model 14: else 15: return valid  16: function refinement loop 17: inputs ← ∅ 18: loop 19: candidate ← synth(inputs) 20: if candidate = UNSAT then 21: return UNSAT 22: res ← verif(candidate) 23: if res = valid then 24: return candidate 25: else 26: inputs ← inputs ∪ res  We use Counterexample Guided Inductive Synthesis (CEGIS) [16,17] to find a program satisfying our specification. Algorithm 1 is divided into two procedures: synth and verif, which interact via a finite set of test vectors inputs. The synth procedure tries to find an existential witness P that satisfies the partial specification: ∃P.∀x ∈ inputs.σ(x, P ) If synth succeeds in finding a witness P , this witness is a candidate solution to the full synthesis formula. We pass this candidate solution to verif which  7  determines whether it does satisfy the specification on all inputs by checking satisfiability of the verification formula: ∃x.¬σ(x, P ) If this formula is unsatisfiable, the candidate solution is in fact a solution to the synthesis formula and so the algorithm terminates. Otherwise, the witness x is an input on which the candidate solution fails to meet the specification. This witness x is added to the inputs set and the loop iterates again. It is worth noting that each iteration of the loop adds a new input to the set of inputs being used for synthesis. If the full set of inputs is finite, this means that the refinement loop can only iterate a finite number of times. 5.2  Finite-State Synthesis  We will now show how the generic construction of Section 5.1 can be instantiated to produce a finite-state program synthesiser. A natural choice for such a synthesiser would be to work in the logic of quantifier-free propositional formulae and to use a propositional SAT or SMT-BV solver as the decision procedure. However we propose a slightly different tack, which is to use a decidable fragment of C as a “high level” logic. We call this fragment C− . The characteristic property of a C− program is that safety can be decided for it using a single query to a Bounded Model Checker. A C− program is just a C program with the following syntactic restrictions: (i) all loops in the program must have a constant bound; (ii) all recursion in the program must be limited to a constant depth; (iii) all arrays must be statically allocated (i.e. not using malloc), and be of constant size. C− programs may use nondeterministic values, assumptions and arbitrary-width types. Since each loop is bounded by a constant, and each recursive function call is limited to a constant depth, a C− program necessarily terminates and in fact does so in O(1) time. If we call the largest loop bound k, then a Bounded Model Checker with an unrolling bound of k will be a complete decision procedure for the safety of the program. For a C− program of size l and with largest loop bound k, a Bounded Model Checker will create a SAT problem of size O(lk). Conversely, a SAT problem of size s can be converted trivially into a loop-free C− program of size O(s). The safety problem for C− is therefore NP-complete, which means it can be decided fairly efficiently for many practical instances. 5.3  Candidate Generation Strategies  A candidate solution P is written in a simple RISC-like language L, whose syntax is given in Fig. 5 in Appendix B. We supply an interpreter for L which is written in C− . The specification function σ will include calls to this interpreter, by which means it will examine the behaviour of a candidate L program. For the synth portion of the CEGIS loop, we construct a C− program synth.c which takes as parameters a candidate program P and test inputs. The program contains an assertion which fails iff P meets the specification for each of the inputs. Finding a new candidate program is then equivalent to checking the safety of synth.c for which we use the strategies described in the next section.  8  There are many possible strategies for finding these candidates; we employ the following strategies in parallel: (i) Explicit Proof Search. The simplest strategy for finding candidates is to just exhaustively enumerate them all, starting with the shortest and progressively increasing the number of instructions. (ii) Symbolic Bounded Model Checking. Another complete method for generating candidates is to simply use BMC on the synth.c program. (iii) Genetic Programming and Incremental Evolution. Our final strategy is genetic programming (GP) [18,19]. GP provides an adaptive way of searching through the space of L-programs for an individual that is “fit” in some sense. We measure the fitness of an individual by counting the number of tests in inputs for which it satisfies the specification. To bootstrap GP in the first iteration of the CEGIS loop, we generate a population of random L-programs. We then iteratively evolve this population by applying the genetic operators crossover and mutate. Crossover combines selected existing programs into new programs, whereas mutate randomly changes parts of a single program. Fitter programs are more likely to be selected. Rather than generating a random population at the beginning of each subsequent iteration of the CEGIS loop, we start with the population we had at the end of the previous iteration. The intuition here is that this population contained many individuals that performed well on the k inputs we had before, so they will probably continue to perform well on the k + 1 inputs we have now. In the parlance of evolutionary programming, this is known as incremental evolution [20].  6  Searching the Space of Possible Solutions  An important aspect of our synthesis algorithm is the manner in which we search the space of candidate programs. The key component is parametrising the language L, which induces a lattice of progressively more expressive languages. We start by attempting to synthesise a program at the lowest point on this lattice and increase the parameters of L until we reach a point at which the synthesis succeeds. As well as giving us an automatic search procedure, this parametrisation greatly increases the efficiency of our system since languages low down the lattice are very easy to decide safety for. If a program can be synthesised in a lowcomplexity language, the whole procedure finishes much faster than if synthesis had been attempted in a high-complexity language. 6.1  Parameters of language L  Program Length: l. The first parameter we introduce is program length, denoted by l. At each iteration we synthesise programs of length exactly l. We start with l = 1 and increment l whenever we determine that no program of length l can satisfy the specification. When we do successfully synthesise a program, we are guaranteed that it is of minimal length since we have previously established that no shorter program is correct. Word Width: w. An L-program runs on a virtual machine (the L-machine) that  9  is parametrised by the word width, that is, the number of bits in each internal register and immediate constant. Number of Constants: c. Instructions in L take up to three operands. Since any instruction whose operands are all constants can always be eliminated (since its result is a constant), we know that a loop-free program of minimal length will not contain any instructions with two constant operands. Therefore the number of constants that can appear in a minimal program of length l is at most l. By minimising the number of constants appearing in a program, we are able to use a particularly efficient program encoding that speeds up the synthesis procedure substantially. 6.2  Searching the Program Space  The key to our automation approach is to come up with a sensible way in which to adjust the L-parameters in order to cover all possible programs. Two important components in this search are the adjustment of parameters and the generalisation of candidate solutions. We discuss them both next. Adjusting the search parameters. After each round of synth, we may need to adjust the parameters. The logic for these adjustments is shown as a tree in Fig. 1. Whenever synth fails, we consider which parameter might have caused the failure. There are two possibilities: either the program length l was too small, or the number of allowed constants c was. If c < l, we just increment c and try another round of synthesis, but allowing ourselves an extra program constant. If c = l, there is no point in increasing c any further. This is because no minimal L-program has c > l, for if it did there would have to be at least one instruction with two constant operands. This instruction could be removed (at the expense of adding its result as a constant), contradicting the assumed minimality of the program. So if c = l, we set c to 0 and increment l, before attempting synthesis again. If synth succeeds but verif fails, we have a candidate program that is correct for some inputs but incorrect on at least one input. However, it may be the case that the candidate program is correct for all inputs when run on an L-machine with a small word size. Thus, we try to generalise the solution to a bigger word size, as explained in the next paragraph. If the generalisation is able to find a correct program, we are done. Otherwise, we need to increase the word width of the L-machine we are currently synthesising for. Generalisation of candidate solutions. It is often the case that a program which satisfies the specification on an L-machine with w = k will continue to satisfy the specification when run on a machine with w > k. For example, the program in Fig. 2 isolates the least-significant bit of a word. This is true irrespective of the word size of the machine it is run on – it will isolate the least-significant bit of an 8-bit word just as well as it will a 32-bit word. An often successful strategy is to synthesise a program for an L-machine with a small word size and then to check whether the same program is correct when run on an L-machine with a full-sized word.  10  Synth succeeds?  No  Yes  Parameters unchanged  No  Verif succeeds for small words?  No  Yes  Yes  w := w + 1  No  Generalisation?  Verif succeeds?  Yes  Done!  No  c < l?  Yes  c := 0 l := l + 1  c := c + 1  Fig. 1: Decision tree for increasing parameters of L. The only wrinkle here is that we will sometimes synthesise a program containing constants. If we have synthesised a program with w = k, the constants in the program will be k-bits wide. To extend the program to an n-bit machine (with n > k), we need some way of deriving n-bit-wide numbers from k-bit ones. We have several strategies for this and just try each in turn. Our strategies are shown in Fig. 3. BV(v, n) denotes an n-bit wide bitvector holding the value v and b· c means the concatenation of bitvectors b and c. For example, the first rule says that if we have the 8-bit number with value 8, and we want to extend it to some 32-bit number, we’d try the 32-bit number with value 32. These six rules are all heuristics that we have found to be fairly effective in practice. int i s o l a t e l s b ( int x ) { return x & −x ; }  Example: x =10111010 -x =01000110 x & -x = 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0  Fig. 2: A tricky bitvector program BV(m, m) → BV(n, n)  BV(x, m) → BV(x, n)  BV(m − 1, m) → BV(n − 1, n)  BV(x, m) → BV(x, m)· BV(0, n − m)  BV(m + 1, m) → BV(n + 1, n)  BV(x, m) → BV(x, m)· . . . · BV(x, m) | {z } n times m  Fig. 3: Rules for extending an m-bit wide number to an n-bit wide one. 6.3  Stopping Condition for Unsatisfiable Specifications  If a specification is unsatisfiable, we would still like our algorithm to terminate with an “unsatisfiable” verdict. To do this, we can observe that any total function  11  taking n bits of input is computed by some program of at most 2n instructions (a consequence of Theorems 2 and 3). Therefore every satisfiable specification has a solution with at most 2n instructions. This means that if we ever need to increase the length of the candidate program we search for beyond 2n , we can terminate, safe in the knowledge that the specification is unsatisfiable.  7  Soundness and Completeness  We will now state soundness and completeness results for the SFD solver. Proofs for each of these theorems can be found in Appendix A. Theorem 5. Alg 1 is sound – if it terminates with witness P , then P |= σ. Theorem 6. Alg 1 with the stopping condition described in Section 6.3 is complete when instantiated with C− as a background theory – it will terminate for all specifications σ. Since safety of C− programs is decidable, Algorithm 1 is sound and complete when instantiated with C− as a background theory and using the stopping condition of Section 6.3. This construction therefore gives as a decision procedure for SFD . Runtime as a Function of Solution Size. We note that the runtime of our solver is heavily influenced by the length of the shortest program satisfying the specification, since we begin searching for short programs. We will now show that the number of iterations of the CEGIS loop is a function of the Kolmogorov complexity of the synthesised program. Let us first recall the definition of the Kolmogorov complexity of a function f : Definition 3 (Kolmogorov complexity). The Kolmogorov complexity K(f ) is the length of the shortest program that computes f . We can extend this definition slightly to talk about the Kolmogorov complexity of a synthesis problem in terms of its specification: Definition 4 (Kolmogorov complexity of a synthesis problem). The Kolmogorov complexity of a program specification K(σ) is the length of the shortest program P such that P is a witness to the satisfiability of σ. Let us consider the number of iterations of the CEGIS loop n required for a specification σ. Since we enumerate candidate programs in order of length, we are always synthesising programs with length no greater than K(σ) (since when we enumerate the first correct program, we will terminate). So the space of solutions we search over is the space of functions computed by L-programs of length no greater than K(σ). Let’s denote this set L(K(σ)). Since there are O(2K(σ) ) programs of length K(σ) and some functions will be computed by more than one program, we have |L(K(σ))| ≤ O(2K(σ) ). Each iteration of the CEGIS loop distinguishes at least one incorrect function from the set of correct functions, so the loop will iterate no more than  |L(K(σ))| times. Therefore another bound on our runtime is N T IM E 2K(σ) .  12  8  Experiments  We implemented our decision procedure for SFD as the Kalashnikov tool. We used Kalashnikov to solve formulae generated from a variety of problems taken from superoptimisation, code deobfuscation, floating point verification, ranking function and recurrent set synthesis, safety proving, and bug finding. The superoptimisation and code deobfuscation benchmarks were taken from the experiments of [21]; the termination benchmarks were taken from SVCOMP’15 [22] and they include the experiments of [15]; the safety benchmarks are taken from the experiments of [23]. We would like to stress that these experiments serve to evaluate the potential of using our program synthesiser as a backend for many program analysis tasks and are not intended to compare performance with specialised solvers for each of these tasks. We ran our experiments on a 4-core, 3.30 GHz Core i5 with 8 GB of RAM. Each benchmark was run with a timeout of 180 s. The results are shown in Table 1. For each category of benchmarks, we report the total number of benchmarks in that category, the number we were able to solve within the time limit, the average solution size (in instructions), the average number of iterations of the CEGIS loop, the average time and total time taken. The deobfuscation and floating point benchmarks are considered together with the superoptimisation ones. It should be understood that in contrast to less expressive logics that might be invoked several times in the analysis of some problem, each of these benchmarks is a “complete” problem from the given problem domain. For example, each of the benchmarks in the termination category requires Kalashnikov to prove that a full program terminates, i.e. it must find a ranking function and supporting invariants, then prove that these constitute a valid termination proof for the program being analysed. Discussion of the experimental results. The timings show that for the instances where we can find a satisfying assignment, we tend to do so quite quickly (on the order of a few seconds). Furthermore the programs we synthesise are often short, even when the problem domain is very complex, such as for liveness and safety. Not all of these benchmarks are satisfiable, and in particular around half of the termination benchmarks correspond to attempted proofs that non-terminating programs terminate and vice versa. This illustrates one of the current shortcomings of Kalashnikov as a decision procedure: we can only conclude that a formula is unsatisfiable once we have examined candidate solutions up to a very high length bound. Being able to detect unsatisfiability of a SFD formula earlier than this would be extremely valuable. We note that for some formulae we can simultaneously search for a proof of satisfiability and of unsatisfiability. For example, for some program P , we can construct a formula φT that is satisfiable iff P terminates on all inputs, and another formula φN that is satisfiable iff P does not terminate for some input [15]. Therefore φT ∨ φN is guaranteed to be satisfiable, so we can synthesise a program proving φT ∨φN and then check which  13  of φT and φN it proves. This avoids the bad case where we try to synthesise a solution for an unsatisfiable specification. Category #Benchmarks #Solved Avg. solution size Avg. iterations Avg. time (s) Total time (s) Superoptimisation 29 22 4.1 2.7 7.9 166.1 Termination 47 35 5.7 14.4 11.2 392.9 Safety 20 18 8.3 7.1 11.3 203.9 Total 96 75 5.9 9.2 10.3 762.9  Table 1: Experimental results. To help understand the role of the different solvers involved in the synthesis process, we provide a breakdown of how often each solver “won”, i.e. was the first to return an answer. This breakdown is shown in Table 2a. We see that GP and explicit account for the great majority of the responses, with the load spread fairly evenly between them. This distribution illustrates the different strengths of each solver: GP is very good at generating candidates, explicit is very good at finding counterexamples and CBMC is very good at proving that candidates are correct. The GP and explicit numbers are similar because they are approximately “number of candidates found” and “number of candidates refuted” respectively. The CBMC column is approximately “number of candidates proved correct”. The spread of winners here shows that each of the search strategies is contributing something to the overall search and that the strategies are able to co-operate with each other. CBMC Explicit GP Total 1122 2499 1654 5405 21% 46% 31% 100%  synth verif generalize Total 6937 s 1114 s 559 s 8052 s 86% 14% 7% 100%  (a) How often each solver “wins”.  (b) Where the time is spent.  Table 2: Statistics about the experimental results.  Kalashnikov eSolver  #Benchmarks #Solved #TO #Crashes Avg. time (s) Spec. size 20 18 2 0 11.3 341 20 7 5 8 13.6 3140  Table 3: Comparison of Kalashnikov and eSolver on the safety benchmarks. To help understand where the time is spent in our solver, Table 2b shows how much time is spent in synth, verif and constant generalization. Note that generalization counts towards verif’s time. We can see that synthesising candidates takes much longer than verifying them, which suggests that improved procedures for candidate synthesis will lead to good overall performance improvements. However, the times shown in this table include all the runs that timed out, as well as those that succeeded. We have observed that runs which time out spend more time in synthesis than runs which succeed, so the distribution here is biased by the cost of timeouts.  14  8.1  Comparison to SyGuS  In order to compare Kalashnikov to another synthesis based decision procedure, we translated the 20 safety benchmarks into the SyGuS format [8] and ran the best available SyGuS solver (eSolver, taken from the SyGuS Github repository on 5/7/2015)) on these benchmarks. We ran eSolver on the same machine used for the previous experiments. The results of these experiments are shown in Table 3, which contains the total number of benchmarks, the number of benchmarks solved correctly, the number of timeouts, the number of crashes (exceptions thrown by the solver), the mean time to successfully solve and the total number of lines in the 20 specifications. Our comparison only uses 20 of the 127 benchmarks because it was difficult for us to convert from our specification format (a subset of C) into the SyGuS format. In particular, there are no tools for converting C programs to SyGuS specifcations and we found it quite difficult to write such a tool so we had to do the conversion by hand. Since the eSolver tool crashed on many of the instances we tried, we reran the experiments on the StarExec platform [24] to check that we had not made mistakes setting up our environment, however the same instances also caused exceptions on StarExec. A technical limitation of SyGuS’s output format compared to Kalashnikov’s meant that while Kalashnikov can express lexicographic ranking functions of unbounded dimension, SyGuS cannot. The benchmarks we converted to SyGuS involved searching for ranking functions, which meant that we could only use benchmarks that did not require lexicographic ranking functions. Overall, we can see that Kalashnikov performs significantly better than the best SyGuS solver on these benchmarks, which validates our claim that Kalashnikov is a good backend for program analysis problems. It is also worth noting that Kalashnikov specifications are significantly more concise than SyGuS specifications, as witnessed by the total size of the specifications: the Kalashnikov specifications are around 11% of the size of the SyGuS ones. We noticed that for a lot of the cases in which eSolver timed out, Kalashnikov found a solution that involved non-trivial constants. Since eSolver represents constants in unary (as chains of additions), finding programs containing constants, or finding existentially quantified first order variables is very expensive. Kalashnikov’s strategies for finding and generalising constants make it much more efficient at this subtask.  9  Conclusions  We have shown that the synthesis fragment is well-suited for program verification by using it to directly encode safety, liveness and superoptimisation properties. We built a decision procedure for SFD via a reduction to finite state program synthesis. The synthesis algorithm is optimised for program analysis and uses a combination of symbolic model checking, explicit state model checking and stochastic search. An important strategy is generalisation – we find simple solutions that solve a restricted case of the specification, then try to generalise to  15  a full solution. We evaluated the program synthesiser on several static analysis problems, showing the tractability of the approach.  References 1. Cousot, P., Cousot, R.: Abstract interpretation: A unified lattice model for static analysis of programs by construction or approximation of fixpoints. In: POPL. (1977) 2. Clarke, E.M., Kroening, D., Yorav, K.: Behavioral consistency of C and verilog programs using bounded model checking. In: DAC. (2003) 368–371 3. Floyd, R.W.: Assigning meanings to programs. (1967) 4. Gupta, A., et al.: Proving non-termination. In: POPL. (2008) 5. Clarke, E.M., Grumberg, O., Jha, S., Lu, Y., Veith, H.: Counterexample-guided abstraction refinement. In: CAV. (2000) 6. McMillan, K.L.: Lazy abstraction with interpolants. In: CAV. (2006) 7. Leike, J., Heizmann, M.: Ranking templates for linear loops. In: TACAS. (2014) 8. Alur, R., et al.: Syntax-guided synthesis. In: FMCAD. (2013) 9. Kong, S., Jung, Y., David, C., Wang, B., Yi, K.: Automatically inferring quantified loop invariants by algorithmic learning from simple templates. In: APLAS. (2010) 10. Grebenshchikov, S., Lopes, N.P., Popeea, C., Rybalchenko, A.: Synthesizing software verifiers from proof rules. In: PLDI. (2012) 405–416 11. Beyene, T.A., Popeea, C., Rybalchenko, A.: Solving existentially quantified horn clauses. In: CAV. (2013) 869–882 12. Wintersteiger, C.M., Hamadi, Y., de Moura, L.M.: Efficiently solving quantified bit-vector formulas. In: FMCAD. (2010) 13. Piskac, R., de Moura, L.M., Bjørner, N.: Deciding effectively propositional logic using DPLL and substitution sets. J. Autom. Reasoning 44(4) (2010) 401–424 14. Gulwani, S., Srivastava, S., Venkatesan, R.: Program analysis as constraint solving. In: PLDI. (2008) 281–292 15. David, C., Kroening, D., Lewis, M.: Unrestricted termination and non-termination proofs for bit-vector programs. In: ESOP. (2015) 16. Solar-Lezama, A.: Program sketching. STTT 15(5-6) (2013) 475–495 17. Brain, M., et al.: TOAST: Applying answer set programming to superoptimisation. In: ICLP. (2006) 18. Langdon, W.B., Poli, R.: Foundations of Genetic Programming. Springer (2002) 19. Brameier, M., Banzhaf, W.: Linear Genetic Programming. Springer (2007) 20. Gomez, F., Miikkulainen, R.: Incremental evolution of complex general behavior. Adaptive Behavior (1997) 21. Gulwani, S., Jha, S., Tiwari, A., Venkatesan, R.: Synthesis of loop-free programs. In: PLDI. (2011) 62–73 22. : http://sv-comp.sosy-lab.org/2015/. 23. David, C., Kroening, D., Lewis, M.: Danger invariants. CoRR (2015) 24. : https://www.starexec.org. 25. Fagin, R.: Generalized First-Order Spectra and Polynomial-Time Recognizable Sets. In Karp, R., ed.: Complexity of Computation. (June 1974)  A A.1  Proofs SFD  Theorem 7 (Fagin’s Theorem [25]). The class of structures A recognisable in time |A|k , for some k, by a nondeterministic Turing machine is exactly the class of structures definable by existential second-order sentences.  16  Theorem 8 (SFD is NEXPTIME-complete). For an instance of Definition 1 with n first-order variables, where the ground terms are interpreted over D, checking the truth of the formula is NEXPTIME-complete. Proof. We will apply Theorem 7. To do so we must establish the size of the universe implied by Theorem 7. Since Definition 1 uses n D variables, the universe is the set of interpretations of the n variables. This set has size |D|n , and so by Theorem 7, Definition 1 over finite domains defines exactly the class sets recognisable in (|D|n )k time by a nondeterministic Turing machine. This is the class NEXPTIME, and so checking validity of an arbitrary instance of Definition 1 over D is NEXPTIME-complete. A.2  Program Encodings  We encode finite-state programs as loop-free imperative programs consisting of a sequence of instructions, each instruction consisting of an opcode and a tuple of operands. The opcode specifies which operation is to be performed and the operands are the arguments on which the operation will be performed. We allow an operand to be one of: a constant literal, an input to the program, or the result of some previous instruction. Such a program has a natural correspondence with a combinational circuit. A sequence of instructions is certainly a natural encoding of a program, but we might wonder if it is the best encoding. We can show that for a reasonable set of instruction types (i.e. valid opcodes), this encoding is optimal in a sense we will now discuss. An encoding scheme E takes a function f and assigns it a name s. For a given ensemble of functions F we are interested in the worst-case behaviour of the encoding E, that is we are interested in the quantitiy |E(F )| = max{|E(f )| | f ∈ F } If for every encoding E ′ , we have that |E(F )| = |E ′ (F )| then we say that E is an optimal encoding for F . Similarly if for every encoding E ′ , we have O(|E(F )|) ⊆ O(|E ′ (F )|) we say that E is an asymptotically optimal encoding for F . Lemma 1 (Languages with ITE are Universal and Optimal Encodings for Finite Functions). For an imperative programming language including instructions for testing equality of two values (EQ) and an if-then-else (ITE) instruction, any total function f : S → S can be computed by a program of size O(|S| log |S|) bits. Proof. The function f is computed by the following program:  17  t1 = t2 = t3 = t4 = ...  EQ(x, 1) ITE(t1, f(1), f(0)) EQ(x, 2) ITE(t3, f(2), t2)  Each operand can be encoded in log2 (|S| + l) = log2 (3 × |S|) bits. So each instruction can be encoded in O(log |S|) bits and there are O(|S|) instructions in the program, so the whole program can be encoded in O(|S| log |S|) bits. Lemma 2. Any representation that is capable of encoding an arbitrary total function f : S → S must require at least O(|S| log |S|) bits to encode some functions. Proof. There are |S||S| total functions f : S → S. Therefore by the pigeonhole principle, any encoding that can encode an arbitrary function must use at least log2 (|S||S| ) = O(|S| log 2 |S|) bits to encode some function. From Lemma 1 and Lemma 2, we can conclude that any set of instruction types that include ITE is an asymptotically optimal function encoding for total functions with finite domains. A.3  Complexity of Finite State Program Synthesis  Theorem 9 (SFD is Polynomial Time Reducible to Finite Synthesis). Every instance of Definition 1, where the ground terms are interpreted over D is polynomial time reducible to an instance of Definition 2. Proof. We first Skolemise the instance of definition 1 to produce an equisatisfiable second-order sentence with the first-order part only having universal quantifiers (i.e. bring the formula into Skolem normal form). This process will have introduced a function symbol for each first order existentially quantified variable and taken linear time. Now we just existentially quantify over the Skolem functions, which again takes linear time and space. The resulting formula is an instance of Definition 2. A.4  Soundness and Completeness  Theorem 10. Algorithm 1 is sound – if it terminates with witness P , then P |= σ. Proof. The procedure synth terminates only if synth returns “valid”. In that case, ∃x.¬σ(P, x) is unsatisfiable and so ∀x.σ(P, x) holds. Lemma 3. Algorithm 1 is semi-complete – if a solution P |= σ exists then Algorithm 1 will find it. Proof. If the domain X is finite then the loop in procedure synth can only iterate |X| times, since by this time all of the elements of X would have been  18  added to the inputs set. Therefore if the synth procedure always terminates, Algorithm 1 does as well. Since the ExplicitSearch routine enumerates all programs (as can be seen by induction on the program length l), it will eventually enumerate a program that meets the specification on whatever set of inputs are currently being tracked, since by assumption such a program exists. Since the first-order theory is decidable, the query in verif will succeed for this program, causing the algorithm to terminate. The set of correct programs is therefore recursively enumerable and Algorithm 1 enumerates this set, so it is semi-complete. Theorem 11. Algorithm 1 with the stopping condition described in Section 6.3 is complete when instantiated with C− as a background theory – it will terminate for all specifications σ. Proof. If the specification is satisfiable then Theorem 3 holds, and if it is not then the stopping condition will eventually hold at which point we (correctly) terminate with an “unsatisfiable” verdict.  B  Counterexample Guided Inductive Synthesis (CEGIS) Candidate program  Synthesise  Verify  Valid  Counterexample input  Fig. 4: Abstract synthesis refinement loop  C  Encoding in C−  Done  19  add a b neg a  Integer arithmetic instructions: sub a b mul a b mod a b min a b  div a b max a b  Bitwise logical and shift instructions: and a b or a b xor a b lshr a b ashr a b not a Unsigned and signed comparison instructions: le a b lt a b sle a b slt a b eq a b neq a b Miscellaneous logical instructions: implies a b ite a b c fadd a b  Floating-point arithmetic: fsub a b fmul a b  Fig. 5: The language L  fdiv a b

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
