Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_6755

Abstract:
Fully Dynamic Connectivity in O(log n(log log n)2) Amortized Expected Time∗  arXiv:1609.05867v1 [cs.DS] 19 Sep 2016  Shang-En Huang Univ. of Michigan  Dawei Huang Univ. of Michigan  Tsvi Kopelowitz Univ. of Michigan  Seth Pettie Univ. of Michigan  September 20, 2016  Abstract Dynamic connectivity is one of the most fundamental problems in dynamic graph algorithms. We present a new randomized dynamic connectivity structure with O(log n(log log n)2 ) amortized expected update time and O(log n/ log log log n) query time, which comes within an O((log log n)2 ) factor of a lower bound due to Pǎtraşcu and Demaine. The new structure is based on a dynamic connectivity algorithm proposed by Thorup in an extended abstract at STOC 2000, which left out some important details.  ∗ Supported by NSF grants CCF-1217338, CNS-1318294, and CCF-1514383. dwhuang9@gmail.com, kopelot@gmail.com, seth@pettie.net  Contact: sehuang@umich.edu,  1  Introduction  The dynamic connectivity problem is one of the most fundamental problems in dynamic graph algorithms. The goal is to support the following three operations on an undirected graph G with n vertices: • Insert(u, v): Insert a new edge (u, v) into G. • Delete(u, v): Delete edge (u, v) from G. • Conn?(u, v): Return true if and only if u and v are in the same connected component in G. In this paper we prove the following bound on the complexity of dynamic connectivity. Theorem 1.1. There exists a Las Vegas randomized dynamic connectivity data structure, that supports insertions and deletions of edges in amortized expected O(log n(log log n)2 ) time, and answers connectivity queries in worst case O(log n/ log log log n) time. Previous Results. The dynamic connectivity problem has been studied under both worst case and amortized measures of efficiency, and in deterministic, randomized Monte Carlo, and randomized Las Vegas models. We therefore have the opportunity to see six incomparably best algorithms!q Luckily, there are currently only four. The best deterministic-worst case update √ 2 time is O( n(logloglogn n) ) [10], improving on the longstanding O( n) bound [3, 1], and the best deterministic-amortized update time is O(log2 n/ log log n) [15], improving on earlier O(log2 n)time algorithms [8, 14] (see also [6, 7]). Kapron et al. [9] designed a worst case randomized Monte Carlo algorithm with O(log5 n) update time, that is, there is some 1/ poly(n) probability of answering a connectivity query incorrectly. The update time was recently improved to O(log4 n) [4]. In all dynamic connectivity algorithms the update time determines the query time [6]: O(t(n) log n) update implies O(log n/ log t(n)) query time; see Theorem 2.1. Thorup [14], in an extended abstract presented at STOC 2000, proposed a Las Vegas randomizedamortized algorithm with update time O(log n(log log n)3 ), that is, queries must be answered correctly with probability 1, and the total update time for m updates is a random variable, which is m · O(log n(log log n)3 ) in expectation. Unfortunately, the extended abstract [14] sketched or omitted a few critical data structural details. The problem of completing Thorup’s research program has, over the years, evolved into an important open research problem in the area of dynamic graph algorithms. A bound of O(log n poly(log log n)) is substantially better than the best worst case and/or deterministic algorithms [10, 8, 9, 15], and comes within a tiny poly(log log n) factor of known cell-probe lower bounds [11, 12]. Pǎtraşcu and Demaine [11] showed that for t(n) = Ω(1), update time O(t(n) log n) implies query time Ω(log n/ log t(n)) and Pǎtraşcu and Thorup [12] showed that there is no similar tradeoff in the reverse direction, that update time o(log n) implies Ω(n1−o(1) ) query time. Whether there is a dynamic connectivity structure supporting all operations in O(log n) time (even amortized) is one of the main open questions in this area. This bound has only been achieved on forests [13] and embedded planar graphs [2]. Our Contribution. Thorup [14] proposed a dynamic connectivity structure based on four innovative ideas: (1) using a single, hierarchical representation of the graph, (2) imposing an overlay network of shortcuts on this representation in order to navigate between certain nodes in O(log log n) time, (3) using random sampling (as in [7, 6]) to find replacement edges after Delete operations, and (4) maintaining a system of approximate counters to facilitate efficient random sampling of 1  edges. The interactions between these four elements is rather complex. Dynamic changes in the hierarchy (1) may require destroying and rebuilding the shortcuts in (2), and may invalidate the approximate counters in (4). In order for (3) to work correctly the approximate counters must be very accurate. In this paper we use the same tools introduced by Thorup, but apply them differently in order to simplify parts of the algorithm, to accommodate a proof of correctness, and improve the expected amortized update time to O(log n(log log n)2 ). Here is a summary of the technical differences. • Thorup [14] (as in [8, 15]) assigns each edge a depth (aka level) between 1 and log n and maintains a spanning forest F. Depths are non-decreasing over time, so we can charge each depth promotion (from i to i + 1) (log log n)2 units of work. The depths of F-edges induce a hierarchy H, which is then refined into a binary hierarchy, Hb , by substituting “local trees” connecting each H-node to its H-children. One of the primitive operations supported by the hierarchy H is to return an almost uniformly random depth-i edge touching some component corresponding to an H-node. To implement this random sampling efficiently one needs a system of shortcuts and approximate counters. However, it is not obvious how to efficiently maintain approximate counters after edge promotions. Our data structure uses a more complicated classification of edges, which simplifies how approximate counters are implemented and analyzed. Each edge has a depth, as before, and each edge is either a witness (in F) or non-witness. The endpoints of a depth-i non-witness edge can be either primary or secondary. We only keep approximate counters for i-primary endpoints, and only sample i-primary endpoints. When an edge is promoted from depth i−1 to i, its endpoints are secondary, so there is no immediate need to update approximate counters for depth i. So long as good replacement edges can be found by sampling from the pool of i-primary endpoints we are happy, but if none can be found we are also happy to spend some time promoting depth-i edges to depth-(i + 1), and upgrading i-secondary endpoints to i-primary status. Since each edge’s endpoints can be upgraded at most 2 log n times over the lifetime of the edge, each upgrade can also be charged (log log n)2 units of work. Whenever we upgrade i-secondary endpoints to i-primary status, we are guaranteed that the number of promotions/upgrades is large enough to completely rebuild the system of approximate counters for a pool of i-primary endpoints. • One of Thorup’s [14] ideas was to maintain log n forests (one for each edge depth) on different subsets of the Hb -nodes, via a system of shortcuts. However, to be efficient it is important that these forests share shortcuts whenever possible. We provide a new method for storing and updating shortcuts, that allows us to find the right shortcut at a Hb -node in O(1) time, and update information on all the shortcuts at a Hb -node in O(log log n) time. • We give a simpler random sampling procedure, which can be regarded as a two-stage version of the “provide or bound” routine of [6]. Our random sampling procedure is necessarily somewhat different than [14] because of the classification of non-witness edges into primary and secondary. The routine must either (i) provide a replacement edge with an i-primary endpoint, or (ii) determine that the fraction of such edges is less than a certain constant, with high probability. In case (ii) the procedure has found (statistical) evidence that there will be enough promotions/upgrades to pay for converting i-secondary endpoints to i-primary, promoting depth-i edges to depth-(i + 1), and rebuilding i-primary approximate counters. • The structure of H is uniquely determined by the depths of witness (F) edges, and Hb is a binary refinement of H. In Thorup’s [14] system Hb is only modified in response to structural 2  changes in H, due to promotions of witness edges in F. A key invariant maintained by our data structure is that certain approximate counters, once initialized, are only subject to decrements, never increments. Thus, to preserve this invariant we actually update Hb in response to non-witness edge promotions/upgrades, which necessarily have no effect on H. Organization of the Paper. In Section 2 we review several fundamental concepts of dynamic connectivity algorithms. Section 3 gives a detailed overview of the data structure invariants and its three main components: maintaining a binary hierarchical representation of the graph, maintaining shortcuts for efficient navigation around the hierarchy, and maintaining a system of approximate counters to support O(1)-approximate random sampling. Each of these three main components is explained in great detail in Sections 4, 5, 6.  2  Preliminaries  In this section we review some basic concepts and invariants used in prior dynamic connectivity algorithms [6, 5, 8, 14, 15]. Witness Edges, Witness Forests and Replacement Edges. A common method for supporting connectivity queries is to maintain a spanning forest F of G called the witness forest, together with a dynamic connectivity structure on F. Each edge in the witness forest is called a witness edge and all others non-witness edges. Notice that deleting a non-witness edge does not change the connectivity. A dynamic connectivity data structure for F supports fast queries via Theorem 2.1. Theorem 2.1 (Henzinger and King [5]). For any function t(n) = Ω(1), there exists a dynamic connectivity data structure for forests with O(t(n) log n) update time and O(log n/ log t(n)) query time. The difficulty in maintaining a dynamic connectivity data structure is to find a replacement edge e0 when a witness edge e ∈ F is deleted, or determine that no replacement exists. To speed up the search for replacement edges we maintain Invariant 1 (below) governing edge depths. Edge Depths. Each edge e has a depth de ∈ [1, dmax ], where dmax = blog nc. Let Ei be the set of edges with depth i. All edges are inserted at depth 1 and depths are non-decreasing over time. Incrementing the depth of an edge is called a promotion. Since we are aiming for O(log n(log log n)2 ) amortized time per update, if the actual time to promote an edge set S is O(|S| · (log log n)2 ), the amortized time per promotion is zero. Promotions are performed in order to maintain Invariant 1. There are other at most O(log S n) status changes that an edge will undergo, each affording O((log log n)2 ) work. Define Gi = (V, j≥i Ej ). Invariant 1 (The Depth Invariant). (1) (Spanning Forest Property) F is a maximum spanning forest of G with respect to the depths.  (2) (Weight Property) For each 1 ≤ i ≤ dmax , each connected component in the subgraph Gi contains at most n/2i−1 vertices. Hierarchy of connected components. Define V̂i to be in one-to-one correspondence with the connected components of Gi+1 , which are called (i + 1)-components. If u ∈ V , let ui ∈ V̂i be the unique (i + 1)-component containing u. Define Ĝi = (V̂i , Êi ) to be the multigraph (including parallel edges and loops) obtained by contracting edges with depth above i and discarding edges with depth below i, so Êi = {(ui , v i ) | (u, v) ∈ Ei }. The hierarchy H is composed of the undirected 3  multi-graphs Ĝdmax , Ĝdmax −1 , . . . , Ĝ0 . An edge e = (u, v) ∈ Ei is said to be touching all nodes xj ∈ V̂j where either uj = xj or v j = xj . Let Fi = Ei ∩ F be the set of i-witness edges; all other edges in Ei − Fi are i-non-witness edges. By Invariant 1, Fi corresponds to a spanning forest of Ĝi . The weight w(ui ) of a node ui ∈ V̂i is the number of vertices in its component: w(ui ) = |{v ∈ V | v i = ui }|. The data structure explicitly maintains the exact weight of all hierarchy nodes. The weight property in Invariant 1 can be restated as w(ui ) ≤ n/2i . Endpoints. The endpoints of an edge e = (u, v) are the pairs hu, ei and hv, ei. At one stage in our algorithm we sample a random endpoint from E 0 ⊂ E incident to a set V 0 ⊂ V ; this means that an edge (u, v) ∈ E 0 is sampled with probability proportional to |{u, v} ∩ V 0 |. An endpoint hu, ei is said to be touching the nodes ui ∈ V̂i for all i ∈ [1, dmax ].  3  Overview of the Data Structure  Following the key invariant in [8, 14, 15], the main goal is summarized as the following lemma: Lemma 3.1. Invariant 1 is maintained throughout updates to G. In the rest of this section, we provide an overview of the data structure. The underlined parts of the text refer to primitive data structure operations supported by Lemma 3.2, presented in Section 3.3. The data structure. The hierarchy H naturally defines a rooted forest (not to be confused with the spanning forest), which is called the hierarchy forest, and contains several hierarchy trees. We abuse notation and say that H refers to this hierarchy forest, together with several auxiliary data structures supporting operations on the forest. The nodes in H are the i-components for all 1 ≤ i ≤ dmax . The roots of the hierarchy trees are nodes in V̂0 , representing 1-components. The set of nodes at depth i is exactly V̂i . The set of children of a node v i at depth i is {ui+1 ∈ V̂i+1 | ui = v i }. The leaves are nodes in V̂dmax = V . See Figure 1 for an example. The nodes in H are called Hnodes, and the roots are called H-roots. Each non-leaf H-node v is associated with a binary local tree, implicitly supporting operations between v and its H-children (See Section 6). 2  2  1 2 v6  2  v1  3  1  v7 1  v15  v10  V̂1  3  3  1  3  v8  v5  v3 v2  V̂0  v14  2  v4 3 2  1  v13  2  v9 2  1 v12  V̂2  3 v11  v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6 v7 v8 v9 v10 v11 v12 v13 v14 v15  1  Figure 1: An illustration of a graph and the corresponding hierarchy forest H, where n = 15 and dmax = 3. All thick edges are witness edges and the thin edges are non-witness edges.  4  3.1  Insertion  To execute an insert(u, v) operation, where e = (u, v), the data structure first sets de = 1. If e connects two distinct components in G (which is verified by a connectivity query on F), then the data structure accesses two H-roots u0 and v 0 , merges u0 and v 0 and e is inserted into H (and F) as a 1-witness edge. Otherwise, e is inserted into H as a 1-non-witness edge.  3.2  Deletion  By the Spanning Forest Property of Invariant 1, the deletion of an edge e can only be replaced by edges of depth de or less. We always first look for a replacement edge at the same depth of the deleted edge. If we do not find a replacement edge at depth de then we demote e by setting de ← de − 1, which preserves Invariant 1, and continue looking for replacement edges at the new depth de . Demotion is merely conceptual; the deletion algorithm does not actually update de in the course of deleting e. To execute a delete(u, v) operation, where e = (u, v), the data structure first removes e from H. If e is an i-non-witness edge, then the deletion process is done. If e is an i-witness edge, the deletion of e could split an i-component. Specifically, prior to the deletion, the edge (ui , v i ) connected two (i + 1)-components, ui and v i , which, possibly together with some additional i-witness edges and (i+1)-components, formed a single i-component ui−1 = v i−1 in Ĝi . If no i-non-witness replacement edge exists, then deleting (u, v) splits ui−1 into two i-components. In order to establish if this is the case, the data structure first accesses ui , v i and ui−1 in H and implicitly splits the i-component ui−1 into two connected components cu and cv in F̂i = (V̂i , {(ui , v i ) | (u, v) ∈ Fi }) where ui ∈ cu and v i ∈ cv (we define cu and cv but without context to the subscripts, see Figure 2.a). The rest of the deletion process focuses on finding a replacement edge to reconnect cu and cv into one i-component. This process has two parts, explained in detail below: (1) establishing the two components cu and cv , and (2) finding a replacement edge. Notice that cu and cv do not correspond to H-nodes. 3.2.1  Establishing Two Components  To establish the two components cu and cv created by the deletion of e, the data structure executes in parallel two depth first searches (DFS) on F̂i − {(ui , v i )}, one DFS starting from ui and one DFS starting from v i . To implement a DFS, the data structure repeatedly enumerates all i-witness edge endpoints touching an (i + 1)-component. The DFSs are carried out in parallel until one of the connected components is fully scanned. By fully scanning one component, the weights of both components are determined (since w(ui−1 ) = w(cu ) + w(cv )). Without lost of generality, assume that w(cu ) ≤ w(cv ), and so by Invariant 1, w(cu ) ≤ w(ui−1 )/2 ≤ n/2i .  Witness Edge Promotions. The data structure promotes all i-witness edges touching nodes in cu and merges all (i + 1)-components contained in cu into one (i + 1)-component with weight w(cu ). This is permitted by Invariant 1, since w(cu ) ≤ w(ui−1 )/2 ≤ n/2i . The merged (i + 1)-component has the node ui−1 as its parent in H. See Figure 2.b. To differentiate between versions of components before and after the merges, we use a convention where bold notation refers to the components after the merges take place. Thus, we deonte the (i + 1)-component contracted from all (i + 1)-components inside cu by ui . Similarly, the graph Ĝi after merging some of its nodes is denoted by Ĝi . Having contracted the (i + 1)-components inside cu into ui , we now turn our attention to identifying whether the deletion of e disconnects ui from cv in Ĝi . This task reduces to determining whether there exists an edge in Ĝi that reconnects ui to any (i + 1)-components in ui−1 \ ui . 5  i−1 cu u  ui  cv  vi  (a)  i−1 cu u  ui  vi (b)  cv  ui−1  vi−1  ui  vi  (c)  Figure 2: Illustration of the hierarchy of components at depth i − 1 and i: (a) After identifying two components cu and cv , it turns out that cu has smaller weight although it has more (i + 1)components. (b) After merging all (i + 1)-components in the smaller weight component. (c) If no replacement edge is found, then cu and cv are two actual connected components in Ĝi and hence ui is split. 3.2.2  Finding a Replacement Edge  Notice that by definition of Ĝi and ui−1 , a depth i edge is a replacement edge in E if and only if it is an i-non-witness edge with exactly one endpoint x ∈ V such that xi = ui . To find a replacement edge, the data structure executes one or both of the following two auxiliary procedures: the sampling procedure and the enumeration procedure. Intuition. Consider these two situations. In Situation A at least a constant fraction of the inon-witness edges touching ui have exactly one endpoint touching ui , and are therefore eligible replacement edges. In Situation B a small  fraction (maybe zero) of these edges have exactly one endpoint in ui . If we magically knew which situation we were in and could sample i-non-witness endpoints uniformly at random then the problem would be easy. In Situation A we would iteratively sample an i-non-witness endpoint and test whether the other endpoint was in ui ; each test takes O(log n log log n) time. The expected number of samples required to find a replacement edge is O(1) and this cost would be charged to the deletion operation. In Situation B we would enumerate and mark every i-non-witness endpoint touching ui . Any edge with one mark is a replacement edge and any with two marks can be promoted to depth i + 1. Since a majority of the edges will end up being promoted, the amortized cost of the enumeration procedure is zero, so long as the enumeration and promotion cost is O((log log n)2 ) per endpoint. There are two technical difficulties with implementing this idea. First, the set of i-non-witness edges incident to ui is a dynamically changing set, and supporting (almost-)uniformly random sampling on this set is a very tricky problem. Second, we do not know which situation, A or B, we are in. Note that it is insufficient to take O(1) random samples and, if no replacement edges are found, deduce that we are in Situation B. Because the cost of enumeration is so high, we cannot afford to mistakenly think we are in Situation B unless the probability of error is inversely proportional to the cost of enumeration. Thorup [14] addresses the first difficulty by maintaining a system of approximate counters and two layers of overlay networks,1 and solves the second difficulty by using the “provide or bound” 1  The first overlay network, which we also use, supports navigation to the H-leaves incident to i-non-witness edges. The second overlay network, which is sketched in [14], is derived from a heavy-path decomposition of the first overlay network in order to guarantee some degree of balance. The second overlay network is used to facilitate dynamic updates to the approximate counters.  6  sampling procedure of [7]. Primary and Secondary Endpoints — A Simpler Sampling Method. The difficulty with supporting random sampling is dynamic updates: i-non-witness edges are inserted and deleted from the pool due to promotions, and we want to update various counters in response to each insertion/deletion. However, the number of counters that need to be updated turns out to be too large. Our solution is to maintain two endpoint types for i-non-witness edges: primary and secondary. A newly promoted i-non-witness edge has two i-secondary endpoints and when an i-secondary endpoint is enumerated (see below), the data structure upgrades that endpoint into an i-primary endpoint. The set of i-secondary endpoints is subject to individual insertions, but we never sample from the i-secondary endpoints. The set of i-primary endpoints is subject to bulk inserts/deletes, which are sufficiently large to pay for completely rebuilding the counters necessary to support random sampling. Rather than use the full power of [7], we give a simpler two-stage sampling procedure that either provides a replacement edge or states that, with high enough probability, the fraction of i-primary endpoints touching ui that belongs to replacement edges is small. If so, we enumerate all i-primary and i-secondary endpoints touching ui , upgrading i-secondary endpoints at replacement edges to i-primary endpoints, and promoting non-replacement i-non-witness edges to (i + 1)-non-witness edges. The cost for rebuilding the i-primary sampling structure is amortized O((log log n)2 ) time per promotion or upgrade, and therefore paid for. We now give a more detailed description of the sampling procedure. The Sampling Procedure. This is the only procedure that uses randomness. The procedure uses subroutines for (1 + o(1))-approximating the number s of i-primary endpoints touching ui , for (1 + o(1))-uniformly sampling an endpoint of an i-primary edge touching ui , and for enumerating every i-primary/i-secondary endpoint touching ui . The sampling procedure can be viewed as a twostage version of Henzinger and Thorup [7]. The data structure first estimates s up to a constant factor and then invokes the batch sampling test, which (1 + o(1))-uniformly samples O(log log s) iprimary endpoints touching ui . If an endpoint of a replacement edge is sampled, then the sampling procedure is terminated, returning one of the replacement edges. Otherwise, the data structure invokes the batch sampling test, which (1 + o(1))-uniformly samples O(log s) i-primary endpoints touching ui . The purpose of this step is not to find a replacement edge, but to increase our confidence that there are actually few replacement edges. If more than half of these endpoints belong to replacement edges, the sampling procedure is terminated and one replacement edge is returned. Otherwise, the data structure concludes that the fraction of the non-replacement edges touching ui is at least a constant, and invokes the enumeration procedure. The Enumeration Procedure. The data structure first upgrades all i-secondary endpoints touching ui to i-primary endpoints, enumerates all i-primary endpoints touching ui and establishes for each such edge how many of its endpoints touch ui (either one or both). An edge is a replacement edge if and only if exactly one of its endpoints is enumerated. Each non-replacement edge encountered by the enumeration procedure has both endpoints in an (i + 1)-component, namely ui , and can therefore be promoted to be a depth (i + 1)-non-witness edge (making both endpoints secondary), without violating Invariant 1. After all promotions and upgrades are completed, the sampling structure for i-primary endpoints touching ui is rebuilt. 3.2.3  Iteration and Conclusion  If a replacement edge e0 exists, then ui−1 is still an i-component and the data structure converts e0 from an i-non-witness edge to an i-witness edge. Otherwise, cu and cv form two distinct  7  i-components in Ĝi . In this case, depending on i, the data structure splits ui−1 into two sibling nodes or two H-roots: a new node ui−1 representing cu whose only child is ui , and vi−1 representing cv whose children are the rest of the (i + 1)-components in cv . Recall that while there may not be an i-non-witness replacement edge for e, there may be one at a lower depth, by the Spanning Forest Property. Therefore, if i = 1 then we are done. Otherwise, we set i = i − 1, conceptually demoting e, and repeat the procedure as if e were deleted at depth i − 1. 2 1  v8  v5 1  3  v1  v15  v10 2  v9  3  1  3  3  V̂1  3  2 v6  v3 v2  V̂0  v14  2  v4 3 2  1  v13  1 v12  V̂2  3  2  v11  v7 1  v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6 v7 v8 v9 v10 v11 v12 v13 v14 v15  1  Figure 3: After deletion of (v3 , v5 ) (See Figure 1.) By identifying {v1 , v2 , v3 } to be the smaller weight component, the witness edge (v2 , v3 ) is promoted and the corresponding nodes in V̂2 is merged. The edge (v3 , v4 ) is the replacement edge.  2 1  v8  v5  2  3 v6  v3 3  v1  3  1  v7 1  v15  v10  V̂1  3  3  1  3  V̂0  v14  2  v4  v2  1  v13  2  v9 2  1 v12  V̂2  3 v11  v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6 v7 v8 v9 v10 v11 v12 v13 v14 v15  1  Figure 4: After deletion of (v4 , v5 ): (1) Split the node in V̂2 associated with v4 and v5 . (2) Identify that {v5 , v6 , v7 } is the smaller weight component. (3) Merge nodes v52 and v62 = v72 . (4) Split the node v51 . (5) Found replacement edge (v1 , v6 ).  3.3  The Backbone of the Data Structure  Lemma 3.2 summarizes the primitive operations required to execute and Insert or Delete. Remember that the possible depths are integers in [1, dmax ], and that the possible endpoint types are witness, primary and secondary. Lemma 3.2. There exists a data structure supporting the following operations on H with the following amortized time complexities (in parentheses):  (1) Add or remove an edge with a given edge depth and endpoint type O(log n(log log n)2 ) . 8  (2) Given a set S of sibling H-nodes or H-roots, merge them into a single node ui , and then promote all i-witness edges touching ui into (i + 1)-witness edges. (O(k(log log n)2 + 1), where k is the number of i-witness edges touching ui ). (3) Given an H-node v i ∈ V̂i , upgrade all i-secondary endpoints associated with v i to i-primary endpoints (O((p + s)(log log n)2 + 1), where p and s denote the number of i-primary endpoints and i-secondary endpoints touching v i prior to the upgrade). (4) Given an H-node v i ∈ V̂i and a subset of i-primary endpoints associated with v i , promote them to (i + 1)-secondary endpoints. (O(k(log log n)2 + 1), where k is the number of all i-primary endpoints associated with v i ).  (5) Convert a given i-non-witness edge into an i-witness edge O(log n(log log n)2 ) . (6) Given two H-nodes ui−1 and ui where ui is an H-child of ui−1 , split ui−1 into two sibling Hnodes: one with ui as a single H-child and the other with the rest of ui−1 ’s former H-children  2 as its H-children O((log log n) ) .  (7) Given an H-node v i ∈ V̂i and a given endpoint type, enumerate all endpoints hu, ei where e is of the given endpoint type, de = i, and ui = v i . (O(k log log n + 1), where k is the number of enumerated endpoints).  (8) Given v i , return v i−1 O(log(w(v i−1 )) − log(w(v i )) + log log n) . (9) Given an H-node v i ∈ V̂i , return a (1 + o(1))-approximation to the number of i-primary endpoints touching v i (O(1)).  (10) (Batch Sampling Test) Given an H-node v i ∈ V̂i and an integer k, independently sample k i-primary endpoints touching v i (1 + o(1))-uniformly at random, and establish for each sampled endpoint whether the other endpoint is also in v i . (O(min(k log n log log n, k +(p+s) log log n)), where p and s are the number of i-primary and i-secondary endpoints touching v i , respectively). Notice that each data structure operation stated in Lemma 3.2 on its own does not guarantee that the data structure maintains Property 1. However, given the use of Lemma 3.2 in the description of the algorithm above, the proof of Lemma 3.1 is straightforward.  3.4  The Main Modules of the Data Structure  To support Lemma 3.2, the data structure utilizes five main modules, some of which depend on each other: (1) the H-leaf data structure (2) the notion of induced (i, t)-forests (3) the shortcut infrastructure (4) approximate counters, and (5) local trees. The H-leaf data structure is fairly straightforward and is described in detail in Section 3.4.1. Then we define the notion of overlaying O(log n) forests on H in Section 3.4.2. A brief overview of the other modules is described in Sections 3.4.3, 3.4.4, and 3.4.5. Sections 4, 5, and 6 provide a detailed explanation of each module. The data structure also uses lookup tables in several modules. We describe in Section 3.5 a way to amortize the cost constructing the lookup tables. The general operations involving multiple modules, as well as the proof of Lemma 3.2 are described and analyzed in detail in Section 7. 3.4.1  The H-Leaf Data Structure  The H-leaf data structure supports the following operations: (1) Given an endpoint with a specified edge depth and endpoint type, insert or delete an edge with an endpoint at the leaf. (2) Given a depth and type, enumerate all edge endpoints incident to the leaf with that depth and type. (3) Return a uniformly random endpoint among the set of edge endpoints with a given depth and type. 9  To support these operations, each leaf maintains a dynamic array of endpoints for each edge depth 1 ≤ i ≤ dmax and each endpoint type t ∈ {witness, primary, secondary}. Hence the three operations are supported in worst case O(1) time. 3.4.2  The Induced (i, t)-forest  For a given edge depth i ∈ [1, dmax ] and endpoint type t ∈ {witness, primary, secondary}, an H-leaf v is an (i, t)-leaf if v has an endpoint with depth i and type t. An H-node v i ∈ V̂i having an (i, t)-leaf in its subtree is an (i, t)-root. For each (i, t) pair, consider the induced forest F on H by taking the union of the paths from each (i, t)-leaf to the corresponding (i, t)-root. An H-node v in F is an (i, t)-node if • v is an (i, t)-leaf,  • v is an (i, t)-root,  • v has more than one child in F. In this case we call v an (i, t)-branching node, or  • v is an H-child of an (i, t)-branching node but has only one H-child in F. In this case we call v an single-child (i, t)-node. Notice that an (i, t)-root may or may not be an (i, t)-branching node. For each (i, t)-node other than an (i, t)-root, define its (i, t)-parent to be the nearest ancestor on F that is also an (i, t)-node. An (i, t)-child is defined accordingly. The (i, t)-parent/child relation implicitly defines an (i, t)-forest, which consists of (i, t)-trees rooted at V̂i nodes. The single-child (i, t)-nodes play a crucial role in the efficiency of traversing an (i, t)-tree. An H-node v has an (i, t)-status if v is an (i, t)-node. Storing (i, t)-status. Each node in v ∈ H stores two bitmaps of size O(log n) each, indicating whether v is an (i, t)-node, and if so then indicating whether v is an (i, t)-branching node or not. Operations on (i, t)-forests. A key idea introduced by Thorup [14] is that edges between an (i, t)-node and its (i, t)-parent or (i, t)-children do not need to be maintained explicitly. The two components that simulate these edges are the shortcut infrastructure, and the local trees (which also use a relaxed version of the shortcut infrastructure). In particular, the shortcut infrastructure supports efficient traversals from a single-child (i, t)-node to its unique (i, t)-child, while the local trees support efficient enumeration of all (i, t)-children of an (i, t)-branching node. Lemma 3.3 summarizes the operations on (i, t)-forests which are implemented via the shortcut infrastructure and local trees, together with their corresponding time cost. We emphasize that our implementation of the operations in Lemma 3.3 imply an O(log log n) factor improvement in time cost over the system of Thorup [14]. Lemma 3.3. There exists a data structure on H supporting the following operations:  • Given an H-leaf x, make x an (i, t)-leaf O(log n(log log n)2 ) . • Given an (i, t)-leaf x, remove the (i, t)-leaf status from x (O(log n log log n)). • Given an (i, t)-node v, return the (i, t)-parent of v. (O(log log n)).  • Given an (i, t)-node v, enumerate the (i, t)-children of v. (O(k log log n + 1)) where k is the number of enumerated (i, t)-children.  10  • Given an (i, t)-tree T rooted at v, an integer i ≤ i0 ≤ dmax , an endpoint type t0 , and two subsets of (i, t)-leaves S − and S + (these subsets need not be disjoint), update H so that all of the leaves in S − lose their (i, t)-leaf status, andall leaves in S + gain (i0 , t0 )-leaf status (if they did not have it before) O(|T |(log log n)2 + 1) . The proof of Lemma 3.3 is given in Section 7.2. 3.4.3  The Shortcut Infrastructure  The purpose of shortcuts is to simulate a traversal from a single-child (i, t)-node to its only Hchild. This traversal costs amortized O(log log n) time. The details and construction of shortcuts is described in Section 4. Nevertheless, there are two main conceptual components which we introduce that allow for simplification of the shortcut system, and the improved runtime in Lemma 3.3. Shared shortcuts and the local dictionary. Intuitively, a shortcut connects an H-node u and a descendant v of u in H. We say that such a shortcut leaves u and enters v. Since we are imposing O(log n) independent (i, t)-forests on H, when H-nodes merge or split, an inefficient implementation may necessitate updating information for several (i, t)-forests. However, notice that the paths between a single-child (i, t)-node to its (i, t)-child may overlap for several (i, t) pairs. To improve efficiency, a shortcut is shared between several (i, t)-forests, and is accessed through an O(log n) size array Downu with pointers to all shortcuts leaving u. Moreover, we employ a local dictionary, which is an array DownIdxu with a slot corresponding to each (i, t)-forest. Each location in DownIdxu stores an O(log log n) bit index of the location in Downu containing the pointer to the shortcut for that specific (i, t) pair. With the local dictionary, the data structure efficiently accesses the shortcut for any specific (i, t) pair by two array lookups. Lazy covers. One key aspect of shortcuts is that they do not cross (see Lemma 4.1), which means that if there is a shortcut between u and v, then there is no shortcut between a node in the internal path between u and v (exclusive) and a node that is either a proper descendent or proper ancestor of both u and v. Since shortcuts do not cross, they form a naturally partially ordered set (poset). When structural changes take place in H, all of the shortcuts that touch the nodes participating in these changes are removed. The cost for removing those shortcuts is amortized over the cost of creating them. However, once the structural changes are complete, we do not immediately return all the shortcuts back. Instead, the data structure partially recovers some of the shortcuts and employs a lazy approach in which shortcuts are only added when they are needed. We feel this method simplifies the description of the data structure. 3.4.4  Approximate Counters  Implementing the sampling operation in Lemma 3.2 reduces to being able to traverse from an (i, primary)-branching node to one of its (i, primary)-children v, where the probability is almost proportional to the number of i-primary endpoints touching v. The distribution over (i, primary)children of an (i, primary)-branching node is supported by maintaining an approximate i-counter at each (i, primary)-node. Notice that an H-node could be an (i, primary)-node for several i, so there are several i-counters maintained in an H-node. An approximate i-counter at such a node v stores an (1 + o(1)) approximation of the number of i-primary endpoints touching v. This quality of approximation provides the guarantees needed for the sampling operation, as shown in Section 7.1.1. We emphasize that approximate i-counters are only stored for i-primary endpoints, not i-secondary endpoints.  11  Each approximate i-counter uses O(log log n) bits, and its precision is relative to the depth and weight of the node. The i-counters are precisely maintained at the (i, primary)-leaves. When the data structure sums i-counters together, the approximate i-counters may lose precision. However, this precision depends on the height of the arithmetic formula tree implicitly formed in the (i, primary)-trees. The following property states the precision requirement in order to support accurate sampling: Invariant 2 (Precision of Approximate Counters). Let v be an H-node and let Ci (v) be the number of i-primary endpoints touching v. Let j be the depth of v and let H(v) = (dmax − j) · O(log log n) + blog(w(v))c. If v is an (i, primary)-node then v stores an approximate i-counter Ĉi (v), where 1 − (log−2 n)  H(v)+1  Ci (v) ≤ Ĉi (v) ≤ Ci (v).  The shortcut infrastructure and local trees together allow us to efficiently guarantee that Invariant 2 holds. This is captured by the following lemma. Lemma 3.4. There exists a data structure on H that maintains approximate i-counters and supports the following operations (the runtime is given in parenthesis): • Update the approximate counters to support a change in the number of (i, primary)-endpoints at a given H-leaf. (O(log n(log log n)2 ))  • Given an (i, primary)-root v i , update the approximate i-counters for all (i, primary)-nodes in the (i, primary)-tree of v i so that Invariant 2 holds for those nodes (O(|T |(log log n)2 + 1), where T is the (i, primary)-tree rooted at v i ).  • When merging two sibling H-nodes, compute the approximate i-counters for all i ∈ [1, dmax ] at the merged node. (O(log log n)).  • When splitting an H-node into two sibling H-nodes, compute the approximate i-counters for all i ∈ [1, dmax ] at the two sibling nodes. (O(log log n)). 3.4.5  The Local Trees  The local tree is a specially constructed binary tree, where the root is associated with an H-node v and the leaves are the H-children of v. The local trees support the following operations. Lemma 3.5. There exists a data structure that supports the following operations between an H-node v and its H-children.  • Add a new H-child x O((log log n)2 ) .  • Delete an H-child x O((log log n)2 ) .  • Merge two sibling H-nodes u and v. O((log log n)2 ) . • Return the H-parent v i−1 of H-node v i (O(log w(v i−1 ) − log w(v i ) + log log n)).  • Enumerate all local tree leaves with an (i, t)-status (O(log log n) per leaf). • Add (i, t)-status to a local tree leaf. (O((log log n)2 )).  12  • Given an (i, primary)-branching node uj−1 and an edge depth i, sample an (i, primary)-child uj with probability at most Ĉi (uj )(1 − log−2 n))−[log(w(u  ] /Ĉ (uj−1 ). i  j−1 ))−log(w(uj ))+O(log log n)  • Given an H-node v, test whether there is a unique (i, t)-leaf in the local tree rooted at v. If yes, return that (i, t)-leaf (O(log log n)).  3.5  Lookup Tables.  There are several components of our data structure that use small lookup tables of size O(n ) for a constant 0 <  < 1 for supporting fast operations on bit strings. By assuming that the initial graph is empty, the O(n ) sized lookup tables are built on-the-fly and their cost is amortized through the operations as follows. As long as the number of graph updates is m ≤ n, all edge depths are r at most blog mc. Hence, for each 0 ≤ r ≤ log log n, after the m = 22 -th graph update, the data structure rebuilds the lookup tables of size O(m ). The time cost for building the lookup tables during the first m operations is bounded by dlog log me  X  1  m 2i  = O(m ).  i=0  This is amortized o(1) per update.  4  Shortcut Infrastructure  H-shortcuts. An H-shortcut u v is a data structure connecting an ancestor u and a descendant v in H. For a positive integer `, define its least significant bit index, denoted by LSBIndex (`), to be the minimum integer b such that 2b divides ` but 2b+1 does not. The power of a pair of nodes u and v is defined as P(u, v) = min(LSBIndex (depthH (u) + 1), LSBIndex (depthH (v) + 1)). In order for an H-shortcut to exist between u and v, any node x on the path from u to v must have LSBIndex (depthH (x) + 1)) < P(u, v). If v is the H-child of u (and so P(u, v) = 0) then we say that u v is a fundamental H-shortcut. The H-shortcut u v is always accessible to v, but not necessarily to u. From the perspective of v, u v is called an upward H-shortcut, while from the perspective of u, if u has access to u v then u v is called a downward H-shortcut. We emphasize that our data structure does not store all of the possible H-shortcuts, as will be evident from the description below. The following lemma states that the set of H-shortcuts on a ancestor-descendant path do not cross each other. Lemma 4.1. For any four distinct H-nodes x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 along a root-to-leaf path in H, it is impossible to have two H-shortcuts x1 x3 and x2 x4 . Proof. For j ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} let hj be the depth of xj in H. Then h1 < h2 < h3 < h4 . Assume the converse, there are two H-shortcuts x1 x3 and x2 x4 . By definition this implies LSBIndex (h2 + 1) < LSBIndex (h3 + 1) and LSBIndex (h3 + 1) < LSBIndex (h2 + 1), a contradiction. 13  The covering relationships of H-shortcuts and the poset. We say that a b covers c d if c and d are on the path Pab in H. Notice that a shortcut covers itself. By Lemma 4.1 we define a covering order of H-shortcuts where an H-shortcut u v covers all other H-shortcuts that lie on the path Puv . Define  to be the covering partial order: (a  b)  (c  d) if a  b covers c  d.  For any uv-path Puv on H, the largest covering H-shortcuts of Puv , denoted by LCSH (u, v), is the set of maximal H-shortcuts (with respect to ) among all H-shortcuts having both endpoints on Puv .  v0 v1 (root)  v2  v3  v4  v5  v6  v7  v8  v9  v10 v11 v12 v13 v 14 v15 v16 v17 1 Figure 5: The figure above shows LCSH (v5 , v14 ) as an example, where vi has depthH (vi ) = i. The dotted edges are the set of all possible shortcuts. The following lemma bounds the size of LCSH (u, v). Lemma 4.2. For any two nodes u, v ∈ H with u an ancestor of v, all H-shortcuts in LCSH (u, v) form a path connecting u and v, and | LCSH (u, v)| = O(log log n). Proof. All H-shortcuts on Puv form a poset, and all fundamental H-shortcuts on Puv form the path between u and v. Thus, LCSH (u, v) forms a path connecting u and v. The H-shortcuts in LCSH (u, v) can be partitioned into two sequences: one with strictly increasing powers and one with strictly decreasing powers. To see this, notice that for any sequence of consecutive integers, there is a unique largest LSBIndex value among the sequence. For any H-node let p(x) = LSBIndex (depthH (x) + 1). Let v ∗ be the unique H-node on Puv such that p(v ∗ ) > p(x) for all H-node x ∈ Puv , x 6= v ∗ . It is straightforward to see that no H-shortcut on Puv crosses v ∗ and hence LCSH (u, v) = LCSH (u, v ∗ ) ∪ LCSH (v ∗ , v). Now we claim the following: let Pv0 v be the ancestor-descendant path such that p(v 0 ) > p(x) for all x in Pv0 v with x 6= v 0 . Then LCSH (v 0 , v) consists of H-shortcuts with decreasing powers. We prove this claim by induction on the value of p(v 0 ). For the base case v 0 = v, the largest covering H-shortcuts is an empty set. Consider the case where p(v 0 ) > p(v), let v 00 be the unique node on the path Pv0 v such that p(v 00 ) > p(x) for all x ∈ Pv0 v with x ∈ / {v 0 , v 00 }. The shortcut v 0 v 00 must H 0 be in LCS (v , v) since the power of v 0 v 00 is strictly greater than the power of any shortcut on Pv00 v . Then by the induction hypothesis on Pv00 v , the claim holds. Thus, all H-shortcuts in LCSH (v ∗ , v) have distinct (and decreasing) powers. By symmetry, all H-shortcuts in LCSH (u, v ∗ ) also have distinct (and increasing) powers. Finally, | LCSH (u, v)| = O(log log n) since the largest possible power of an H-shortcut is dlog log ne − 1. (i, t)-shortcuts. Let u be a single-child (i, t)-node and let v be the (i, t)-child of u (which must be either an (i, t)-branching node or an (i, t)-leaf). Intuitively, the purpose of maintaining H-shortcuts 14  is to allow to quickly move from u to v. To do this, the data structure strives to be able to traverse all of the H-shortcuts in LCSH (u, v), thereby simulating the traversal from u to v by scanning O(log log n) H-shortcuts. However, due to simplicity considerations, the data structure does not necessarily store all of the H-shortcuts in LCSH (u, v). Instead, the data structure maintains a set of (i, t)-shortcuts that support the following invariant. Invariant 3 ((i, t)-Shortcuts). Let u be a single-child (i, t)-node and let v be the (i, t)-child of u. Then the (i, t)-shortcuts on Puv that are stored by the data structure form a path connecting u and v.  Figure 6: An example of an (i, t)-tree and its corresponding (i, t)-shortcuts: filled circles are (i, t)nodes, and the curved line segments are (i, t)-shortcuts. An upper bound on the number of H-shortcuts that need to be stored at each H-node is captured by the following straightforward corollary. Corollary 4.1. Assume Invariant 3 holds for all pairs of nodes in H. Then for each node v ∈ H, and each (i, t) pair, there is at most one downward (i, t)-shortcut and at most one upward (i, t)shortcut at v. Covering and uncovering. Assume Invariant 3 holds. When the data structure traverses downward from a single-child (i, t)-node u to its (i, t)-child v, the data structure covers several (i, t)-shortcuts of higher powers (see Section 4.1). After the traversal, the set of (i, t)-shortcuts between u and v is exactly LCSH (u, v). Notice that, unless some of the (i, t)-shortcuts between u and v have been removed, subsequent traversals through the (i, t)-shortcuts between u and v will span only | LCSH (u, v)| = O(log log n) H-shortcuts. To support structural changes in H or in (i, t)-forests, the data structure will at times uncover an (i, t)-shortcut of power p by completely removing the (i, t)-shortcut and adding the two consecutive (i, t)-shortcuts of power p − 1 that were covered by the removed (i, t)-shortcut. In order to accommodate an efficient uncovering operation, during a covering operation the data structure continues to store the covered H-shortcuts thereby having them readily available for potential uncovering operations. The H-shortcuts stored by the data structure that are covered by some (i, t)-shortcuts 15  are called supporting H-shortcuts. Supporting shortcuts are accessible from the lower descendant H-node, but not necessarily the ancestor H-node.  Sharing shortcuts. An H-shortcut u v that is an (i, t)-shortcut could also be an (i0 , t0 )0 0 shortcut when (i, t) 6= (i , t ). For efficiency purposes, the data structure stores at most one copy of an H-shortcut even if there are many (i, t) pairs that use this shortcut. With this in mind, the maximum number of distinct H-shortcuts touching a given ancestor-descendant path is bounded by the following lemma. Lemma 4.3. Consider any node v on H. The total number of stored shortcuts having one endpoint at an ancestor of v (including v) is O(log n log log n). In particular, the number of distinct fundamental (i, t)-shortcuts having one endpoint at an ancestor of v is O(log n). Moreover, the number of H-shortcuts having both endpoints being ancestors of v (including v) is O(log n). Proof. For a given path P , an H-shortcut u v is said to be a deviating shortcut if exactly one of its endpoints is on the path P . Let P be the path from v ∈ H to the corresponding H-root. For each edge depth i and endpoint type t, at most one (i, t)-shortcut is deviating from P , and each such shortcut has at most O(log log n) supporting shortcuts having exactly one endpoint on P . In particular, for each (i, t) pair, at most one fundamental (i, t)-shortcut deviates from P . All H-shortcuts connecting H-nodes on P form a laminar set, and so there are at most O(log n) such H-shortcuts. Thus, the total number of stored shortcuts with one endpoint in P is O(log n log log n), and the total number of distinct fundamental (i, t)-shortcuts on P is O(log n).  4.1  The H-shortcut data structure  Information stored at nodes. Due to Corollary 4.1 every node in H has at most 3dmax + 1 = O(log n) downward (i, t)-shortcuts at any given time. Each node u stores an array Downu of size at most 3dmax + 1 storing all downward (i, t)-shortcuts, together with a bitmap bu indicating which array slots of Downu are full.2 The size of Downu is chosen to be exactly enough for storing pointers to (i, t)-shortcuts for all possible (i, t) pairs as well as one additional slot for temporary use. However, a single shortcut may be shared by many (i, t) pairs. In order to support fast access from u to its downward (i, t)-shortcut we make use of a local dictionary which is an array DownIdxu storing, for each (i, t) pair, a (log log n + 2)-bit index to the location in Downu of the appropriate downward H-shortcut, i.e., Downu [DownIdxu [i, t]] points to an (i, t)-shortcut leaving u, if it exists. Notice that for an H-node and a power p, there is at most one upward H-shortcut from v with power p. Thus, each node v maintains an array Upv of O(log log n) pointers to shortcuts, sorted by power to the upwards supporting H-shortcuts of v. Moreover, at each node v the data structure stores a (3dmax + 1)-length array UpIdxv of log log log n bit integers for each (i, t) pair. Thus, the upward (i, t)-shortcut x v is accessed via Upv [UpIdxv [i, t]] points to an (i, t)-shortcut entering v, if it exists. The reason for employing two step accessing local dictionaries is that each entry in the DownIdxu and UpIdxv is represented with O(log log n) bits, and there are O(log n) (i, t) pairs. These entries 2  Notice that when the data structure allocates the array Downu , it is not initialized and assumed to contain junk.  16  are packed into O(log log n) memory words in a specific representation so that the data structure is able to update the entire array efficiently via lookup tables in O(log log n) time. The following straightforward lemma is proven (proof omitted) using bitwise operations or O(n ) lookup tables on Downu , DownIdxu , bu , UpIdxv , and Upv . Lemma 4.4. The following operations with the given runtimes are supported via shortcut information stored at nodes (runtimes are stated in parentheses): • Given u v and a bitmap b of length 3dmax + 1, add u v as an (i, t)-shortcut for all (i, t) pairs indicated by b (O(min(|b| + 1, log log n)) where |b| is the number of 1s in b).  • Given u v and a bitmap b of length 3dmax + 1, remove the (i, t)-shortcut status from u v for all (i, t) pairs indicated by b (O(min(|b| + 1, log log n)) where |b| is the number of 1s in b). • Given u ∈ H and an (i, t) pair, return the (i, t)-downward H-shortcut leaving u or report that it does not exist (O(1)).  • Given v ∈ H and an (i, t) pair, return the (i, t)-upward H-shortcut leaving v or report that it does not exist (O(1)). • Given u ∈ H return an index of an empty slot in Downu (O(1)).  • Given u ∈ H enumerate all indices of used locations in Downu (O(k + 1) where k is the number of the enumerated indices).  Information stored at shortcuts. An H-shortcut u v is a small data structure storing the following information: (1) P(u, v): the power of the shortcut, (2) pointers to u and v, (3) if u v is stored at index j in Downu , then u v stores j, (4) a 3dmax + 1 length bitmap bu v containing one bit for each (i, t) pair (called the (i, t)-bit) indicating whether the shortcut is an (i, t)-shortcut or not, and (5) if P(u, v) > 0 then u v stores two pointers to shortcuts that it covers with power P(u, v) − 1. Lemma 4.5. The H-shortcut data structure supports the following operations (amortized runtime is given in parenthesis): 1. Given an (i, t) pair and an (i, t)-shortcut that is not a fundamental H-shortcut, uncover the (i, t)-shortcut (O(1)). 2. Given a single-child (i, t)-node u whose (i, t)-child is v such that Invariant 3 holds for the pair u and v, traverse down the path of (i, t)-shortcuts from u to v. After the path is traversed, the set of (i, t)-shortcuts on this path is exactly LCSH (u, v), and so Invariant 3 holds for the pair u and v after the traversal (O(log log n)). Proof. Uncovering a given (i, t)-shortcut u v that is not a fundamental H-shortcut and has power p > 0 is executed by setting bu v [i, t] = 0, following the two pointers from u v to its supported power p − 1 H-shortcuts u x and x v, and setting bu x [i, t] = bx v [i, t] = 1. We also update in a straightforward manner some local information in all affected nodes {u, v, x} in O(1) time. Traversing down an (i, t)-shortcut path. The data structure begins at u and repeatedly follows (i, t)-shortcuts going downwards until an (i, t)-node is reached. During this traversal, if there are two consecutive (i, t)-shortcuts x y 0 and y 0 y with the same power p and 0 LSBIndex (depthH (y )+1) is strictly smaller than both LSBIndex (depthH (x)+1) and LSBIndex (depthH (y)+ 17  1), then the data structure covers the two shortcuts with the H-shortcut x y having power p + 1. This is done as follows. First the data structure verifies if x y already exists in the data structure by checking whether Upy [P(x, y)] stores the pointer to a shortcut x y or not. If this shortcut already exists it is accessed through Upy , and if not then the shortcut is created and a pointer to x y is added to Upy . Then, the data structure sets the (i, t)-bit in bx y to 1, sets the (i, t)-bit in bx y0 and by0 y to 0. So it takes O(1) time to cover an (i, t)-shortcut. Next, the data structure uses Upx to access the upwards shortcut x0 x with power p + 1. If 0 0 x x is also an (i, t)-shortcut then the data structure covers x x and x y with x0 y and 0 recursively follows the upwards shortcut from x with power p + 2. It is straightforward to verify that at the end of the traversal the set of (i, t)-shortcuts connecting u and v is exactly LCSH (u, v). The time cost of traversing down the path is O(k +| LCSH (u, v)|) = O(k + log log n) where k is the number of (i, t)-shortcuts being covered during the traversal. In Section 7.5 we show that by defining the potential function to be the number of all (i, t)-shortcuts that could be covered but are not covered yet, this operation has amortized cost O(log log n).  4.2  Uncovering a path and covering  ui  vi  Figure 7: After deleting an i-witness edge (u, v), all affected H-nodes are on at most two paths. The dashed lines illustrate that the affected H-nodes are merged into one H-node at the same depth. When an edge (u, v) of depth i is deleted, H goes through several structural changes by merging an ancestor of ui (or v i ) with its H-siblings. So all affected H-nodes (and their H-siblings) ends up being on the paths originating at ui and v i and ending at their respective H-roots (see Figure 7). Updating the shortcut information during these structural changes in an efficient manner seems to be a very difficult task. So instead we employ the following strategy. First, we completely uncover and remove all H-shortcuts that touch H-nodes on the two paths. By Lemma 4.3 there are (1) O(log n) fundamental shortcuts, (2) O(log n) shortcuts with both endpoints on the path, and (3) O(log log n) deviating shortcuts from each path for each (i, t) pair. Removing a fundamental shortcut is a local tree operation taking O((log log n)2 ) time, which we explain in detail in Section 7.3. Uncovering a shortcut with both endpoints on the path takes O(log log n) time by Lemma 4.4. Uncovering a non-fundamental deviating (i, t)-shortcut takes O(1) time.  18  Thus, the total cost of uncovering and removing all of the H-shortcuts on the affected paths is O(log n(log log n)2 ). After removing these H-shortcuts Invariant 3 no longer holds for pairs of H-nodes where at least one node is on the affected paths. However, during the deletion operations we never use such shortcuts, so removing them does not affect the other operations that take place during the edge deletion process. In order to restore Invariant 3 for all pairs of H-nodes after the Delete operation, we guarantee that for all (i, t) pairs, all of the fundamental (i, t)-shortcuts are added back, which suffices for the invariant. Since the process of removing all H-shortcuts on a path or adding the fundamental shortcuts back depend on local trees, we defer the detailed description of these operations to Section 7.3. Covering all possible shortcuts connecting two nodes on the paths. In addition to adding all of the fundamental shortcuts, the data structure adds back all of the H-shortcuts on the paths from ui and v i to their corresponding H-roots. This is done by traversing the path O(log log n) times. In the p-th traversal the data structure covers all possible H-shortcuts of power p + 1 that have both endpoints on the path. Each shortcut is covered in O(log log n) time: to cover x y from x y 0 and y 0 y, the data structure first adds the shortcut x y into Upy . Then the data structure computes the bitwise AND of two bitmaps by setting bx y = bx y0 ∧ by0 y , and removes the bits in the covered shortcuts by setting bx y0 = bx y0 ⊕ bx y and by0 y = by0 y ⊕ bx y . Finally, the data structure updates UpIdxy , Downx and DownIdxx according to bx y . It is straightforward to see that, after O(log log n) times of traversal along the path, if there is any (i, t)-shortcut with at least one endpoint on the path that could be covered, the other endpoint must be outside of the path and hence it is a deviating (i, t)-shortcut. As mentioned before, we use a potential function to keep track of the number of potential Hshortcuts that could be added (by covering existing H-shortcuts) by the data structure without a structural change on H. By Lemma 4.3, there are O(log n log log n) deviating shortcuts and so we do not need to explicitly reconstruct all deviating shortcuts since the increase in potential is paid for by the Delete operation. Lemma 4.6. The data structure supports the following operations on H: • Given an H-node v, uncover and remove all H-shortcuts touching any node that is an ancestor of v (O(log n(log log n)2 )). • Given an H-node v, add all fundamental H-shortcuts that are shared by at least one (i, t) pair. These fundamental H-shortcuts have at least one endpoint being an ancestor of v (O(log n log log n)). • Assume Invariant 3 holds. Given an H-node v, for all (i, t) pair, cover all (i, t)-shortcuts having both endpoints at ancestors of v (O(log n log log n)).  5  Approximate Counters  In this section, we describe how approximate counters are implemented and how Invariant 2 is maintained after an update to G. Without loss of generality we may assume that the input graph G is a simple graph. Hence, all approximate counters are only required to represent (1 + o(1))-approximation of integers in [0, n2 ].  19  5.1  Approximate Counters  We are able to efficiently maintain approximate counters for nodes in H (with the required precision stated in Invariant 2) by updating approximate counters while only using addition operations, without ever using subtraction. Let β = 2 be a parameter that controls the quality of the approximation. Each approximate counter Ĉ is defined by a pair (m, e) composed of a mantissa m ∈ {0, 1}β log log n and an exponent e ∈ {0, 1}log log n+1 . The floating point representation of Ĉ concatenates m and e into a length (β + 1) log log n + 1 bitstring. The integer representation of Ĉ is m2e , where we treat the mantissa part and the exponent part as unsigned integers. Notice that an approximate counter represents up to 2(log n)β+1 different integers. From the definition above, every integer C ∈ [0, n2 ] is maintained as Ĉ = (m, e) in the data structure where m is the first β log log n bits of the binary representation of C and e is the number of truncated bits. By means of adding two approximate counters a and b, the result a + b is round down to the nearest possible approximate counter value. Notice that this kind of addition is not associative. We denote the operation of adding two approximate counters by a  b. The precision guarantee of  is summarized as follows: Corollary 5.1. Let a and b be two approximate counters. Then3 (1 − log−β n)(a + b) ≤ a  b ≤ a + b. Packing O(log n) Approximate Counters. Each node in H stores dmax = log n approximate counters. These counters are stored in O(log log n) words by packing O(log n/ log log n) counters in the floating pointer representation into each word. Thus, with the aid of lookup tables of size O(n ), the following lemma is straightforward. Lemma 5.1. The following operations are supported on approximate counters (runtimes are given in parenthesis): 1. Given a node v ∈ H and a depth i, update/return the approximate i-counter stored at v. (O(1)). 2. Given the floating point representation of an approximate counter, return its integer representation. (O(1)). 3. Given the integer representation of an approximate counter, return its floating point representation. (O(1)). 4. Given two approximate counters a and b, return a  b. (O(1)). 5. Given two arrays of O(log n) approximate counters packed into O(log log n) words, return an array with O(log n) approximate counters packed into O(log log n) words with O(log n) coordinate-wise summations of these counters. (O(log log n)). Notice that the lookup tables are of size O(n ) due to the fifth operation.  6  Local Trees  In this section, we follow the framework of Thorup [14]. A local tree L(v) for a node v is composed of a three layered binary tree and a special binary tree called the buffer tree. The three layered 3  The comparison and the usual addition both act on the integer representation of the approximate counters.  20  binary tree is composed of a top layer , a middle layer and a bottom layer . The bottom layer is composed of bottom trees of height O(log log n). H-node representatives. Intuitively, a local tree L(v) connects v with all H-children of v. We emphasize that in our construction, for each H-child x of v, there is a representative `x of x maintained as the local tree leaf in L(v). Technically, an H-node and its representative do not need to be stored separately in the data structure. However, they have very different meaning. For example, the approximate counters are only used locally in a local tree to support sampling operation from a branching node, so the approximate counters are not necessarily maintained in H-nodes. On the other hand, the H-shortcuts has nothing to do with the local trees, so in certain context when the data structure deletes an H-node representatives and reinserts it back to L(v), there should be no structural change to the H-nodes and the H-shortcuts. The algorithm adds new H-node representatives only to the buffer tree, while deletions of Hnode representatives can take place in both buffer and bottom trees. As in Thorup’s system, groups of sibling H-nodes are deleted, merged, and reinserted to buffer trees in response to the promotion of i-witness edges. However, in this paper, sometimes the data structure deletes a bottom tree leaf and reinserts it into the buffer tree in the same local tree, even though the structure of H does not change. This solves the efficiency issue caused by updating approximate counters in a long path in order to maintain Invariant 2. The weight of a node x in the local tree for v denoted by w(x) is defined as the sum of all weights of H-children of v in the subtree of x. However, the weights are explicitly maintained only in the bottom trees. Local tree roots and local tree leaves. The root of L(v) has two children: the root of the buffer tree and the root of the top tree. The root of L(v) also has a pointer pointing to v. Moreover, the local tree root maintains a bitmap indicating for which (i, t) pairs v is a (i, t)-branching node in H, approximate counters for these (i, t)-pairs. For an H-child x of v, there is a local tree leaf `x in L(v). `x belongs to either a buffer tree or a bottom tree. The local tree leaf `x stores a pointer to x and the weight of x, a parent pointer to a buffer tree node or a bottom tree node (depending on which tree this leaf is in), approximate counters and a bitmap maintaining the local (i, t)-status of the leaf, where an (i, t)-bit in the bitmap is set to 1 if and only if both v and x are (i, t)-nodes. Notice that if x is an (i, t)-branching node but v is not, then x is said to have (i, t)-status but `x does not have local (i, t)-status. Buffer Trees. A buffer tree has at most 2 logα n local tree leaves, where α is a constant to be determined in Section 6.2. Whenever its size exceeds logα n either from merging two H-nodes, or from inserting a new local tree leaf, this buffer tree becomes a bottom tree. Then the data structure adds this bottom tree into the bottom layer and creates a new empty buffer tree. The buffer tree is implemented by any O(log log n) height mergeable binary tree. Each buffer tree node stores approximate counters, and pointers to either a buffer tree parent or the local tree root. In addition, each buffer tree node maintains a bitmap indicating for each (i, t) pair, whether there is a local tree leaf in its subtree with (i, t)-status or not. Lemma 6.1. The data structure supports the following operations on the buffer trees: • Add a buffer tree leaf. (O((log log n)2 ))  • Delete a buffer tree leaf. (O((log log n)2 ))  • Merge two buffer trees of two sibling H-nodes. O((log log n)2 ) 21  • Add local (i, t)-status to a buffer tree leaf. (O(log log n))  • Remove local (i, t)-status from a buffer tree leaf. (O(log log n))  Bottom Trees. A bottom tree is a dynamic binary tree subject only to leaf-deletions. When the bottom tree is formed from a buffer tree, it has O(log log n) height with size Θ(logα n). Each bottom tree node maintains its weight (the weights are computed when the bottom tree is newly formed) and pointers to its parent and its children, the bitmap with the same definition as the bitmap stored in the buffer tree nodes. Invariant 4. The only nodes that are allowed to gain new (i, t)-status, or to increase their approximate i-counter values are buffer tree nodes and top tree nodes. Moreover, new local tree leaves can only be added into the buffer tree. Lemma 6.2. The data structure supports the following operations on the bottom trees: • Convert the buffer tree into a new bottom tree (O(logα n)). • Delete a bottom tree leaf. (O((log log n)2 ))  • Remove local (i, t)-status from a bottom tree leaf. (O(log log n)) Middle Trees. An important feature of the middle trees is that they are maintained as weightbalanced binary trees. The path from any middle tree leaf xB (which is also a bottom tree root) to the corresponding middle tree root xM has length O(log(w(xM )) − log(w(xB ))). This property is used to bound the number of local tree nodes being traversed from any H-node to its H-parent via a local tree. Each middle tree node x stores its rank : rank(x) = blog w(x)c. For each middle tree node x which is not a middle tree leaf, both children of x, denoted by xL and xR , have the same rank, rank(xL ) = rank(xR ) = rank(x) − 1. The middle trees are allowed to join if their roots have the same rank. To join two middle trees, the data structure creates a new middle tree node as a middle tree root, and set the pointers to the two tree roots as its children. Whenever there is a rank decrease at a bottom tree root xB due to the removal of a bottom tree leaf, the path from xB to the corresponding middle tree root xM is removed, leaving O(log(w(xM ))− log(w(xB ))) middle tree roots. These middle tree roots are re-inserted into the top tree. Moreover, if any approximate i-counter is changed at a bottom tree root xB with an (i, primary)status, then the data structure updates the approximate i-counter values of all (i, primary)-nodes in the path from xB to the corresponding middle tree root xM . Local Shortcuts. Each of the middle trees maintains local shortcut infrastructure in much the same way that shortcuts are maintained in H. Let u and v be two nodes in the same middle tree such that u is a proper ancestor of v. Then u v is an eligible local shortcut if and only if for any internal node x on the path Puv , LSBIndex (rank(x) + 1) < min(LSBIndex (rank(u) + 1), LSBIndex (rank(v) + 1)). Notice that the H-shortcuts are defined from the depths of H-nodes which increase along the path from an H-root to H-leaves, while in the middle trees the ranks of middle tree nodes decrease from an middle tree root to middle tree leaves. However, the definition of power is symmetric between u and v, so the incremental/decremental direction here makes no difference. A local shortcut with power 0 is called a trivial shortcut. Trivial shortcuts are simply middle tree edges which are accessible from the middle tree nodes. Similar to the H-shortcuts, two local 22  shortcuts on a path P are not crossing. Similarly we define the power of local shortcuts, and define the covering relation between two local shortcuts on the same path. All eligible local shortcuts in each middle tree forms a poset, and the largest covering local shortcuts between an ancestordescendant path Puv in a middle tree denoted by LCS(u, v) is defined. Similar to Lemma 4.2, we have | LCS(u, v)| = O(log log n). Local (i, t)-trees. Similar to the definition of the (i, t)-forests, consider the induced tree T on a local tree L(v) by taking union of the paths from each local leaves with (i, t)-status to the local tree root. For any local tree node in T with both of its children in T is called a local (i, t)-branching node. A local tree node x is said to be a local (i, t)-node if • x is the local tree root.  • x is a local tree leaf with local (i, t)-status.  • x is a bottom tree node, a buffer tree node or a top tree node in T .  • x is a middle tree root in T .  • x is a middle tree node and is a local (i, t)-branching node.  • x is a child of a local (i, t)-branching node in the middle tree, which we call x single-child (i, t)-node.  We define the local (i, t)-tree similar to the (i, t)-forest defined on H, and each local (i, t)-node is said to have (i, t)-status. Notice that a local (i, t)-tree is always a binary tree, this is important for maintaining the approximate i-counter precisions. Invariant 5. Let u be a single-child (i, t)-local node and let v be the (i, t)-local child of u. Then the local (i, t)-shortcuts on Puv that are stored by the data structure form a path connecting u and v. Lemma 6.3. The data structure supports the following operations on the middle trees: • Join two middle trees with the same rank. (O(log log n))  • Given a middle tree leaf xB , remove the entire path between xB and its corresponding middle tree root xM . (O(log n log log n)) • Remove (i, t)-status from a middle tree leaf. (O(log log n))  • Given an edge depth i ∈ [1, dmax ] and a middle tree leaf xB , update all approximate i-counters from xB to its corresponding middle tree root xM . (O(log n))  Top Trees. The top tree is a O(log log n) height mergeable binary tree. All middle tree roots are top tree leaves. As a consequence of the middle tree merging procedure described below, each top tree consists of at most 2 log n top tree leaves. Each top tree node x maintains pointers to its parent (or the local tree root if x is the top tree root) and children, approximate counters, a visiting bit and a bitmap of (i, t) pairs indicating whether a local tree leaf with (i, t)-status appears in the subtree of x. Whenever the middle tree joining procedure is performed, the entire top tree is immediately rebuilt.  23  Middle Tree Joining Procedure. There are at most log n possible ranks for a middle tree node. If there are at least 2 log n middle trees in a local tree, then the data structure invokes the middle tree joining procedure: repeatedly take two middle tree roots with the same rank, and merge the corresponding two middle trees. Lemma 6.4. The data structure supports the following operations on the top trees: • Add a middle tree root into the top tree. (O((log log n)2 ))  • Remove a middle tree root from the top tree. (O((log log n)2 ), this operation only comes after merging two H-nodes) • Merge the top trees of two local trees. (O((log log n)2 ))  • Given a list S of all middle tree roots, rebuild the entire top tree. (O(|S| log log n))  • Update approximate counters along the path from the given top tree leaf xM to the top tree root xT . (O((log log n)2 ))  From the construction of the local tree, it is straightforward to see that given an H-node x, accessing its H-parent v takes O(log(w(v)/w(x)) + log log n) time.  6.1  Local Tree Operations  In this section, we prove Lemmas 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, and 6.4, as well as the main local tree Lemma 3.5. Since we have packed the information in a local tree node into O(log log n) words, the operations updating the information inside individual local tree node takes O(log log n) time. Moreover, the height of the top tree, bottom trees and the buffer tree is always O(log log n). Thus, any local tree operation involved in updating a leaf-to-root path inside the top tree, bottom trees and the buffer tree takes O((log log n)2 ) time and are instantly paid for each operation. Other operations that involves reconstructing/updating a path of length O(log n) in the middle tree, their cost are charged to the updates in some bottom tree that invokes these middle tree operations. Here the constant α comes in and the polylog overhead cost is amortized through the creation of this polylog sized bottom tree. Hence the amortized cost per these operations is at most a constant. 6.1.1  Buffer Tree Operations — Proof of Lemma 6.1  A buffer tree is implemented by an off-the-shelf mergeable binary tree with O(log log n) amortized time for insertion, deletion, and merging. However, in order to support updates of approximate counters, a O(log log n) overhead is applied to each of the insertion, deletion, and merging operations. Hence the amortized time cost for insertion, deletion, and merging is O((log log n)2 ). To add (i, t)-status to a buffer tree leaf x, the data structure climbs up the buffer tree and sets the (i, t)-bit to 1 to all ancestors of x in the buffer tree. To remove (i, t)-status from a leaf x, the data structure updates all (i, t)-bits to ancestors of x. 6.1.2  Bottom Tree Operations — Proof of Lemma 6.2  When the buffer tree is converted to a bottom tree, the data structure computes the weight of each bottom tree node, and inserts the bottom tree root/middle tree root (a single node middle tree) into the top tree. If the top tree has at least 2 log n top tree leaves, then a middle tree joining procedure is performed and the top tree is rebuilt. To delete a bottom tree leaf x, the data structure updates the weights, the approximate counters, and the bitmaps at all ancestors of x in the bottom tree. For each (i, t) pair such that the (i, t)-bit 24  is set to 0 at the bottom tree root, the removing (i, t)-status operation is invoked in the middle tree. Furthermore, for each edge depth i, if the (i, primary)-bit is 1 at the bottom tree root and the approximate i-counter value is changed, then the data structure updates all approximate i-counters from the bottom tree root xB all the way up to the middle tree root xM , as well as the ancestors in the top tree. To remove (i, t)-status from a bottom tree leaf x, the data structure updates the (i, t)-bit to all ancestors of x in the bottom tree accordingly. If the bottom tree root loses (i, t)-status, then the corresponding middle tree operation is invoked. 6.1.3  Middle Tree Operations — Proof of Lemma 6.3  When a middle tree node x is created, it could be that (1) a new bottom tree is formed from a buffer tree (2) two middle trees rooted at xL and xR are joined by a new parent. In the former case, the bottom tree root is already maintaining the approximate counters and the bitmaps. In the latter case, the data structure first computes the approximate counters by adding two arrays of O(log n) approximate counters in O(log log n) time. Then the data structure sets the bitmap of x to be the bitwise OR of bitmaps stored in xL and xR . In order to maintain Invariant 5, the data structure adds trivial (i, t)-shortcuts whenever x has an (i, t)-bit set to 1 but exactly one of xL or xR has its (i, t)-bit set to 1. This is done in O(1) time using bitwise operations. Given a middle tree leaf xB , to remove the entire path between xB and its corresponding middle tree root xM , the data structure first uncovers all local shortcuts touching the path from xM to xB , by the same algorithm described in Section 4.2. Then the entire path is removed. Notice that, after the path is removed, each middle tree root x0 stores a bitmap indicating which (i, t) pairs appear in at least one middle tree leaf in the middle tree rooted at x0 . Then, the data structure enumerates all middle trees roots (as top tree leaves) from the top tree, removes all internal top tree nodes, performs the middle tree joining procedure, and then rebuilds the entire top tree from these middle trees. Removing (i, t)-status from a middle tree leaf. Similar to the (i, t)-forests, in the local (i, t)tree the middle tree edges between a local (i, t)-branching node x and its (i, t)-children are not considered as a trivial (i, t)-shortcut. If one of its middle tree children loses its (i, t)-status, a trivial (i, t)-shortcut is added from x to the other middle tree child y (both x and y lose the (i, t)-status unless x is the middle tree root.) To remove (i, t)-status from a bottom tree root/middle tree leaf x, the data structure follows the (i, t)-local upward shortcuts and/or its middle tree parent to find the local (i, t)-parent of x. Next, the data structure adds a trivial shortcut from the (i, t)-parent to the middle tree children that is not an ancestor of x. Then the data structure removes all (i, t)-shortcuts between x and (i, t)-parent. It is straightforward to update all approximate i-counters along the path from a given middle tree leaf xB to its corresponding middle tree root xM . 6.1.4  Top Tree Operations — Proof of Lemma 6.4  Similar on implementing the buffer tree, the top tree implements the insertion, deletion and merging in O((log log n)2 ) time. The rebuild takes time proportional to the number of middle trees with O(log log n) overhead for updating approximate counters at each top tree node in the post order of an traversal of the top tree.  25  6.1.5  Local Tree Operations — Proof of Lemma 3.5  Add a new H-child.  The local tree leaf is created and inserted into the buffer tree.  Delete an H-child x. Depending on whether the local tree representative of x is in a bottom tree or in the buffer tree, invoke the corresponding operation. Merge two sibling H-nodes u and v. To merge two local trees rooted at u and v, the data structure merges both their buffer trees and top trees. If the merged buffer tree has at least logα n leaves, then a new bottom tree is formed (which creates a single node middle tree root and is inserted into the top tree). Next, if the top tree has at least 2 log n leaves, the middle tree joining procedure is invoked and the top tree is rebuilt. Enumerate all local tree leaves with an (i, t)-status. The data structure performs a DFS from the local tree root. If the data structure encounters a top tree, a bottom tree, or a buffer tree node, the bitmaps in both children indicate whether the child contains a local tree leaf with an (i, t)-status or not. If the data structure encounters a middle tree node x, then the data structure checks in Down[DownIdx[i, t]] whether there is a downward local (i, t)-shortcut leaving x or not. If no downward local (i, t)-shortcut leaving x, then x is a local (i, t)-branching node and the data structure recursively performs the search on both middle tree children. Otherwise, the data structure navigates downward from a local (i, t)-non-branching node u to its highest descendant (i, t)-node v. The same navigation algorithm described in Section 4.1 is performed so that after the navigation all (i, t)-shortcuts on the path Puv are exactly local shortcuts in LCS(u, v). Hence, moving from a single-child local (i, t)-branching node to its local (i, t)-child takes amortized O(log log n) time per local tree leaf with an (i, t)-status. Add (i0 , t0 )-status to a subset of (i, t)-leaves. The data structure enumerates all the (i, t)leaves in the subset, and moves each such leaf from the bottom tree to the buffer tree and adds (i0 , t0 )-status to that buffer tree leaf. If the buffer tree has logα n leaves, then the data structure immediately converts the buffer tree into a bottom tree. Each movement of the leaf from a bottom tree to the buffer tree cost O((log log n)2 ) time (for updating the approximate counters). Add the (i, t)-status to a local tree leaf. This operation is invoked when a fundamental shortcut gets uncovered because an H-node becomes an (i, t)-branching node. The data structure moves the local tree leaf from the bottom tree into the buffer tree, and adds (i, t)-status at the buffer tree. The movement takes O((log log n)2 ) time.  6.2  Cost Analysis  Each operation involving a bottom tree, buffer tree, or top tree costs O((log log n)2 ). For each local tree leaf x being inserted into the buffer tree we store O(1) credits on x. Hence when a bottom tree is created we have O(logα n) credits. For a bottom tree root xB , by Invariant 4, the following three types of events changes the information stored in xB : (1) its weight is nonincreasing so at most log n rank changes happen to xB ; (2) the data structure only removes (i, t)status from xB , so at most 3dmax = O(log n) removals take place; (3) for each edge depth i, if xB has (i, primary)-status, then the approximate i-counter on xB is non-increasing. Each approximate i-counter represents up to O(logβ+1 n) values (see Section 5) so at most O(logβ+2 n) changes occur at xB . 26  Each of the above events triggers a deletion or an update to the entire path from xB to the corresponding middle root xM , and costs O(log n log log n) time for (1), O(log n) for both (2) and (3). Since we set β = 2, the events of the third type is the bottleneck of the cost, which can be amortized to O(1) as long as α ≥ β + 3 = 5. The removal of the local shortcuts are paid by the creation of the local shortcuts. The local shortcuts are created through (1) creation of a middle tree node (joining two middle trees) and (2) lazy covering. The cost of the first case is paid by the deletion of that middle tree node, which is paid by the creation of the bottom tree. The cost of the second case is due to the removal of (i, t)-status at the corresponding middle tree leaf with an (i, t)-status, which is charged into the second type of the events.  6.3  Maintaining Precision when Sampling  Recall that in Invariant 2 we defined H(xj ) = (dmax − j) · O(log log n) + blog(w(xj ))c for all xj ∈ V̂j . Define similarly for every local tree node v ∈ L(xj ), H` (v) = (dmax − j − 1) · O(log log n) + blog(w(v))c + hbot/top (v) where hbot/top (v) is precisely the number of top, bottom, and buffer trees nodes on a path from v to a descendant local tree leaf. With this definition, it is straightforward to see that when vL , vR are the children of v, that H` (v) ≥ max(H` (vL ), H` (vR )) + 1 We first prove that all nodes in a local tree have the correct precision in terms of H(v). 6.3.1  Maintaining Invariant 2.  Fix an edge depth i and an (i, primary)-branching node x. From the description of Section 6.1.5, for every local (i, primary)-branching node v ∈ L(x), we have Ĉi (v) = Ĉi (vL )  Ĉi (vR ) where vL and vR are the two local (i, primary)-children of v. Assume that for every local (i, primary)-leaf `y in L(x) representing the (i, primary)-child y of x, Ĉi (`y ) = Ĉi (y) satisfies the Invariant 2. By induction on H` (v),   Ĉi (v) ≥ 1 − log−β n (Ĉi (vL ) + Ĉi (vR ))  max(H` (vL ),H` (vR ))+1 ≥ 1 − log−β n (Ci (vL ) + Ci (vR ))  H` (v) ≥ 1 − log−β n Ci (v). On the other hand, Ĉi (v) ≤ Ĉi (vL ) + Ĉi (vR ) ≤ Ci (vL ) + Ci (vR ) = Ci (v). In addition, for any local single-child (i, primary)-node u, the i-counter Ĉi (u) is identical to the i-counter value from its (i, primary)-child v. Since H` (u) ≥ H` (v), the precision requirement still holds. Let x be the root of L(xj ). Then H` (x) ≤ H(xj ) and Invariant 2 follows, provided the constants in the asymptotic notation in the definitions of H` and H are set appropriately. 6.3.2  Sample an (i, primary)-child  Given an (i, primary)-branching node uj−1 . To sample an (i, primary)-child, the data structure starts navigating down the local (i, primary)-tree from the local tree root in L(uj−1 ). For each local 27  (i, primary)-branching node x, let xL and xR being the (i, primary)-children of x. The data structure then randomly chooses a child with probability proportional to Ĉ(xL ) and Ĉ(xR ) respectively, and navigates downward using (i, primary)-shortcuts to find the next local (i, primary)-branching child or a local tree leaf with (i, primary)-status. Let x0 be the root of L(uj−1 ), and the sequence x1 , x2 , . . . , xk be all local (i, primary)-branching nodes which are on the path between x0 and xk+1 = `uj . For all 1 ≤ t ≤ k, let x0t and x00t be the two local (i, primary)-children of xt , and x0t is an local ancestor of `uj . Then we have for all 1 ≤ t ≤ k, Ĉi (x0t ) = Ĉi (xt+1 ), and the probability that an (i, primary)-child uj is sampled is at most " # k k Y Y Ĉi (x0t ) Ĉi (x0t ) ≤ (1 − log−β n)−1 0 ) + Ĉ (x00 ) 0 )  Ĉ (x00 ) Ĉ (x Ĉ (x i i i i t t t t t=1 t=1 # " k Y Ĉi (xt+1 ) −β −1 (1 − log n) = Ĉi (xt ) t=1 = Ĉi (xk+1 )(1 − log−β n)−k /Ĉi (x1 )  j−1 )/w(uj ))+O(log log n))  ≤ Ĉi (uj )(1 − log−β n)−(log(w(u  7 7.1  /Ĉi (uj−1 ).  General Operations The Batch Sampling Test  In this section we show how the data structure performs the batch sampling test among i-primary endpoints touching ui , where ui is the H-node merged from Section 3.2.1. Let s be the number of i-primary endpoints touching ui , s2 be the number of i-secondary endpoints touching ui , and ŝ be the (1 + o(1))-approximation of s obtained via Lemma 3.2 (Operation 9). Single Sample Test. To (1 + o(1))-uniformly sample one i-primary endpoint touching ui , the data structure sets x = v i and recursively performs the following: if x is an (i, primary)-leaf, then randomly pick an i-primary endpoint at x uniformly at random. If x is an (i, primary)branching node, then the data structure samples an (i, primary)-child x0 of x through the local 0 tree L(x) with probability at most Ĉi (x0 )(1 + (1/ logβ n))log(w(x)/w(x ))+O(log log n) /Ĉi (x). If x0 is a single-child (i, primary)-node, the data structure repeatedly follows the (i, primary)-shortcuts leaving x0 to its (i, primary)-child x00 and recurses by setting x = x00 . Otherwise, x0 is either an (i, primary)-branching node or an H-leaf. In this case the data structure sets x = x0 and recurses. Notice that with accurate counters this procedure picks a perfectly uniformly random i-primary endpoint. Let hx, (x, y)i be the sampled endpoint and x0 = x, x1 , . . . , xk = ui be all (i, primary)branching nodes which are ancestors of x on H so that for each 0 ≤ j < k, xj+1 is an ancestor of  28  xj . Then, the probability of hx, (x, y)i being picked is at most " # k−1 1 Y Ĉi (xj ) −β −(log(w(xj )/w(xj+1 ))+O(log log n)) (1 − log n) Ci (x) j=0 Ĉi (xj+1 )   k−1 Pk−1 Y Ĉi (xj )  1  = (1 − log−β n)− j=0 [log(w(xj ))−log(w(xj+1 ))+O(log log n)] Ci (x) Ĉi (xj+1 ) j=0  1 Ĉi (x) (1 − log−β n)−O(log n+k log log n) Ci (x) Ĉi (ui ) 1 1 = (1 + o(1)) (1 − log−β n)−O(log n log log n) = (1 + o(1)) . i Ci (ui ) Ĉi (u )  =  Notice that in the summation, the log(w(xj )/w(xj+1 )) terms telescope to log n and the log log n terms sum to at most log n log log n. To check whether (x, y) is a replacement edge or not, it suffices to check whether y i = ui . Notice that the endpoint hy, (x, y)i is either primary or secondary. Then the status of this edge is confirmed by repeatedly accessing (i, t)-parents at most log n times where t is the endpoint type of hy, (x, y)i. The time cost telescopes into O(log n log log n) by summing over the local tree operations accessing H-parent from each encountered single-child (i, t)-node. Hence, performing a single sample test costs O(log n log log n)) time. The Preprocessing Method. Notice that another way to sample i-primary endpoints is to first enumerate all i-primary endpoints and all i-secondary endpoints touching ui in O((s + s2 ) log log n) time, mark all enumerated endpoints and store all i-primary endpoints in an array. Then the data structure samples an i-primary endpoint uniformly at random from all enumerated i-primary endpoints and checks whether the other endpoint is marked in O(1) time. Batch Sampling Test on k Samples. The data structure runs the single sample test k times, and runs the preprocessing method in parallel, and halts whenever one of them finishes its computation. Hence, the time cost for the batch sampling test on k samples is O(min((s + s2 ) log log n + k, k log n log log n)). 7.1.1  Cost Analysis for Sampling Procedure  The sampling procedure either returns a replacement edge, or invokes the enumeration procedure. Once the enumeration procedure is invoked, the data structure upgrades all enumerated i-secondary endpoints touching ui to i-primary endpoints, and all i-primary endpoints touching ui associated with non-replacement edges are promoted to (i + 1)-secondary endpoints. The first batch sampling test costs T1 = O(min((s + s2 ) log log n, log log s log n log log n)). The second batch sampling test, if invoked, costs T2 = O(min((s + s2 ) log log n, log s log n log log n)). The enumeration procedure, if invoked, costs TE = O((s + s2 )(log log n)2 ) 29  time, where s2 is the number of i-secondary endpoints touching ui . Let ρ be the fraction of the i-primary endpoints touching ui associated with replacement edges before the execution of the sampling procedure. The rest of the analysis is separated into two cases: Case 1. If ρ ≥ 3/4, the probability that the first batch sampling test returns with a replacement edge is at least 1 − (1/4 + o(1))O(log log s) > 1 − 1/ log s.4 The second batch sampling test, if invoked, returns a replacement edge if at least half the O(log s) endpoints sampled belong to replacement edges. By a standard Chernoff bound, the probability that the second batch fails to return a replacement edge and halt is exp(−Ω(log s)) < 1/s. The expected time cost is therefore T1 + (1/ log s)T2 + (1/s)TE = O((log n + (s + s2 )/s)(log log n)2 ) = O((log n + s2 )(log log n)2 ) and is charged to the Delete operation and the upgrade of i-secondary endpoints to i-primary status. Case 2. Otherwise, ρ < 3/4. If the enumeration procedure is ultimately invoked, a 1 − ρ = Ω(1) fraction of the i-primary endpoints touching ui belong to non-replacement edges, which are promoted to depth i + 1, and all s2 i-secondary endpoints are upgraded to either i-primary or (i + 1)-secondary status. In this case the time cost is T1 + T2 + TE = O((s + s2 )(log log n)2 ), which is charged to the promoted/upgrated endpoints. We need to prove that the probability of terminating after the second batch sampling test is sufficiently small. If ρ ≥ 1/4 then the probability of the first batch sampling test not returning a replacement edge is at most (3/4 + o(1))O(log log s) < 1/ log s. In this case the expected cost is T1 + (1/ log s)T2 = O(log n(log log n)). If ρ < 1/4 then, by a Chernoff bound, the probability that at least half the sampled endpoints belong to replacement edges is exp(−Ω(log s)) < 1/s. Therefore the expected cost when the enumeration procedure is not invoked with ρ < 1/4 is at most (1/s)(T1 + T2 ) = O(log n(log log n)), which is charged to the Delete operation.  7.2  Maintaining (i, t)-forests — Proof of Lemma 3.3  Add (i, t)-status to an H-leaf. Let x be the H-leaf. In order to identify the (i, t)-branching parent of x, the data structure climbs up H and finds the first H-node x0 that is either an (i, t)-node or has a downward (i, t)-shortcut x0 x00 . If x0 is an (i, t)-branching node, then since the H-child of 0 x that is also an ancestor of x is not an (i, t)-node, x0 is the (i, t)-branching parent of x. Otherwise, the data structure performs a binary search on the path Px0 x00 to find (i, t)-branching parent as follows: If x0 x00 is not a fundamental (i, t)-shortcut, the data structure uncovers x0 x00 into x0 y 00 and y x and recurses to one of the two subpaths depending on whether y is an ancestor of x or not. Otherwise, x0 x00 is fundamental, then x0 is the (i, t)-branching node. In this case, the data structure uncovers the fundamental (i, t)-shortcut x0 x00 (see Section 7.3). After the (i, t)-branching node is found, the data structure also identifies the single-child (i, t)node z and covers fundamental shortcuts along the path Pzx on H. The cost for walking up these local trees telescopes to O(log n log log n). 4  It is 1/4 + o(1) because the sampling procedure is only (1 + o(1))-approximate.  30  Remove (i, t)-status from an (i, t)-leaf. Let x be the H-leaf. The data structure navigates up from x by upward (i, t)-shortcuts until it reaches a single-child (i, t)-node q. The intermediate (i, t)-shortcuts are removed by setting the (i, t)-bits to 0. Then the data structure removes the (i, t)-status of the local tree leaf corresponding to q. If now the (i, t)-parent p (which is the H-parent of q) has only one (i, t)-child q 0 , p is no longer an (i, t)-branching node. The data structure removes the (i, t)-status of that leaf in the local tree, removes the (i, t)-branching status of p and covers the fundamental (i, t)-shortcut from p to q 0 . Notice that this operation is equivalent to first performing the lazy covering on the (i, t)shortcuts from x to its (i, t)-parent then removing it. Hence, the time cost for removing (i, t)-status from x is amortized O(log log n). Remove (i, t)-status from a set of (i, t)-leaves from a (i, t)-tree T . For each (i, t)-leaf x, the data structure removes the (i, t)-status from x using the above procedure. The time cost is amortized O(log log n) per leaf. Given an (i, t)-tree T and a set of leaves S + in T , add (i0 , t0 )-status to the leaves in S + , where i0 = i or i + 1. First of all, the data structure creates a dummy tree induced from the set of the leaves S + and the root of T , by first copying the entire (i, t)-tree T , enumerating all its leaves and removing all the leaves that do not belong to S + . Hence, we now assume S + is the entire leaf set of T . Notice that, after adding (i0 , t0 )-status to the leaves in S + , every (i, t)-branching node in T is also an (i0 , t0 )-branching node. Moreover, for each such (i, t)-branching node, adding (i0 , t0 )-status to the node creates at most one new (i0 , t0 )branching node. Adding (i0 , t0 )-status to every (i, t)-branching node is straightforward, by a traversal through T . To identify all newly created (i0 , t0 )-branching nodes, consider a path Puv between a single-child (i, t)-node u and its (i, t)-child v. If u is on the (i0 , t0 )-tree, then a binary search method is applied to P so that the data structure identifies the correct (i0 , t0 )-branching parent of v in amortized O(log log n) time. This is proved in Lemma 7.1. If i0 = i, then an (i, t)-root is also a (i0 , t0 )-root. Hence, by traversing T , for each such path Puv between a single-child (i, t)-node u and its (i, t)-child v, the prerequisite of Lemma 7.1 holds so each (i0 , t0 )-branching node is created in amortized O(log log n) time. Otherwise, i0 = i + 1. The data structures identifies all depth-(i + 1) H-nodes that have at least one (i, t)-leaf. Then for each such H-node it is an (i0 , t0 )-root so the prerequisite of Lemma 7.1 holds and the rest part is the same as the i0 = i case. To identify all depth-(i + 1) H-nodes, if the root of T is an (i, t)-branching node then we enumerate all (i, t)-children through local tree operation. Otherwise, the data structure repeatedly uncovers the root’s downward (i, t)-shortcut until it becomes a fundamental (i, t)-shortcut; following this shortcut leads to a depth-(i + 1) H-node, which is the (i0 , t0 )-tree root. After an (i0 , t0 )-branching node x is created, the data structure uncovers the fundamental (i0 , t0 )shortcut x y and adds the (i0 , t0 )-status to the local tree leaf representing y in L(x). Since at most 2|T | branching nodes are created, the entire operation takes O(|T |(log log n)2 ) time. Lemma 7.1. Let u be a single-child (i, t)-node and v be the (i, t)-child of u, and suppose the (i, t)shortcuts connect u and v form LCSH (u, v). If u is also an (i0 , t0 )-node, then the data structure identifies the (i0 , t0 )-branching parent of v, after v gains (i0 , t0 )-status, in worst case O(log log n) time. Proof. Since there is a sequence of downward (i, t)-shortcuts connecting from u to v, the data structure first traverses the (i, t)-shortcuts u(= u0 ) u1 , u1 u2 , . . . , uk−1 v(= uk ) in the set 31  LCSH (u, v) and finds the last H-node u` such that either u` has a downward (i0 , t0 )-shortcut or u` is an (i0 , t0 )-branching node. By the non-crossing property of the shortcuts, the following straightforward fact is useful to our binary search approach: Fact. If there are an (i, t)-shortcut x y and an (i0 , t0 )-shortcut x y 0 with y 6= y 0 , then y do 0 0 not have any (i , t )-leaf in its subtree in H and the (i, t)-branching node is on the path Pxy . Set x = u` . Then the binary search method is described in detailed as the following: If there exists an (i, t)-shortcut x y and an (i0 , t0 )-shorcut x z, then the data structure repeatedly uncovers the one with the larger power (or any one if both powers are the same) until either (1) z is an ancestor of v and there is a downward (i, t)-shortcut leaving z (this case can be tested through marking the H-nodes u1 , . . . , uk first); or (2) both x y and x z are fundamental. In the first case, the data structure sets x = z and repeat the above procedure until x = v. In the second case, the data structure sets x to be an (i0 , t0 )-branching node by uncovering the fundamental (i0 , t0 )-shortcut and adds the (i0 , t0 )-status to the corresponding local tree leaf. If there exists an (i, t)-shortcut but does not exist any (i0 , t0 )-shortcut leaving x, the data structure repeatedly uncovers the (i, t)-shortcut until it is an fundamental shortcut. Then the data structure adds the (i0 , t0 )-status to the corresponding local tree leaf. It is straightforward to see that the power of uncovered (i0 , t0 )-shortcuts throughout the algorithm is always decreasing, and that after the procedure is done and the (i, t)-branching node u0 is found, the (i, t)-shortcuts on the path are exactly LCSH (u, u0 ) and LCSH (u00 , v) where u00 is the (i, t)-child of u0 .  7.3  Covering Fundamental Shortcuts — Proof of Lemma 4.6  Let P be a path from the given H-node ui to the corresponding H-root u0 . Uncover and remove all H-shortcuts touching P . For each H-node x iterated from u0 to ui , the data structure first enumerates all downward H-shortcuts in Downx . Then the data structure repeatedly uncovers the H-shortcut with the largest power > 0 until every H-shortcut leaving x is a fundamental H-shortcut. It is straightforward to see that for each distinct H-shortcut leaving x, this H-shortcut is examined and uncovered at most once. Then the data structure uncovers each fundamental H-shortcut leaving x by the following. To uncover(remove) a fundamental H-shortcut x y, the data structure first deletes the local leaf `y in L(x) representing y and then inserts `y into the buffer tree. Notice that this operation does not alter the structure of H, so any H-shortcut leaving y is not affected. Then the data structure adds (i, t)-status to `y for all (i, t) pairs indicated from bx y . By the local tree operation listed in Lemmas 6.1 and 6.2, the time cost for uncovering(removeing) a fundamental H-shortcut is amortized O((log log n)2 ). Adding all fundamental H-shortcuts touching P shared by some (i, t) pairs. There are two types of fundamental H-shortcut touching P : (1) having both endpoints on P , and (2) deviating from P . To add all fundamental H-shortcuts touching P , the data structure checks for edge depth j iterated from i to 1 whether to add the fundamental shortcut ui−1 ui or not. To check this, the i data structure first obtains a bitmap b stored in u indicating which (i, t) pairs have an (i, t)-status at ui then accesses the path in the local tree L(ui−1 ) from ui to the local tree root of L(ui−1 ). Throughout the traversal in the local tree, for any node that is a local (i, t)-branching node, the  32  (i, t)-bit is removed from b. After the data structure reaches ui−1 , if there is any bit set to 1 in b, then the data structure creates the fundamental H-shortcut ui−1 ui with bui−1 ui = b. Also for each (i, t)-bit set to 1 in b, the data structure removes (i, t)-status from the local tree leaf representing ui . To handle the second case, notice that by Lemma 4.3, for each (i, t) pair there is at most one fundamental (i, t)-shortcut deviating from P . In particular, for an (i, t) pair, at most one deviating fundamental (i, t)-shortcut is added touching the unique H-node uj such that uj belongs to an (i, t)-forest but uj+1 does not. In the implementation, the data structure iterates j from i − 1 down to 1, and finds the set difference diff of the bitmap on uj and the bitmap stored on uj+1 . For every (i, t) pair indicated from diff , the data structure invokes the local tree operation test whether there is a unique (i, t)local-leaf or not. If there is a unique (i, t)-local-leaf `y representing an H-node y, then the data structure creates the fundamental H-shortcut uj−1 y and removes (i, t)-status from `y . To analyze the time cost, for (1) at most O(log n) H-shortcuts are covered, and each covering involves multiple (i, t) pairs so each covering can be done in O(log(w(uj )/w(uj+1 )) + log log n) time, which telescopes to O(log n log log n). Moreover, removing (i, t)-status on local tree leaves is charged into the bottom tree updates so it takes amortized O(log log n) time. For (2), the amortized O(log log n) time is used for each (i, t) pair so the time cost for creating and covering all deviating (i, t)-shortcuts is amortized O(log n log log n). Cover all (i, t)-shortcuts having both endpoints on P .  7.4  See Section 4.2.  Approximate Counters Operations — Proof of Lemma 3.4  Update ancestor approximate i-counters. The data structure updates the approximate icounters from a given H-leaf x to the corresponding H-root. For every encountered single-child (i, primary)-node, the data structure copies the approximate i-counter value from its (i, primary)child. For every encountered (i, primary)-branching node u, let v be the (i, primary)-child of u which is an ancestor of x. Let `v be the local tree leaf represents v. The data structure deletes `v from the local tree and reinserts `v into the buffer tree and then updates its approximate i-counter. The time cost is by updating approximate i-counters in each local tree rooted at an ancestor of x, which is O(log n(log log n)2 ). Update approximate i-counters in (i, primary)-tree T rooted at ui . The data structure traverses T , and updates the approximate counters in the post-order manner: for any (i, primary)node x, updates all counters in (i, primary)-children first, then update the approximate counters at x. To update an approximate i-counter at an (i, primary)-branching node x, the data structure enumerates all its (i, primary)-children of x, deletes and re-inserts all of the corresponding local leaves from bottom tree to the buffer tree in L(x). Then, the data structure update the approximate i-counter Ĉi (x) = Ĉi (xL )  Ĉi (xR ) where xL and xR are the roots of the buffer tree and the top tree of L(x). Notice that for all other edge depths i0 6= i, Invariant 2 still holds for i0 when the local tree leaves are deleted and re-inserted into the buffer tree in L(x). It is not guaranteed that for any given local tree root x, Ĉi0 (x) = Ĉi0 (xL )  Ĉi0 (xR ) where xL and xR are the buffer tree root and the top tree root in L(x). The time cost is O(|T | log log n). 33  Update approximate counters at a merged/split H-node x. The data structure obtains the indices set I from the bitmap maintained on x where i ∈ I if and only if x is an (i, primary)branching node. Then the data structure creates a bitmask of O(log log n) words from I, and copies in parallel the approximate i-counters for all i ∈ I from the local tree root in L(x) to x. This can be done by table lookups and bitwise operations in O(log log n) time.  7.5  Lazy Covering: Cost Analysis  The cost of deleting shortcuts is charged to the creation of those shortcuts, and can thus be ignored in an amortized analysis. Since we are using a lazy covering method, the amortized analysis focuses on the supporting potential shortcuts defined as follows: Definition 7.1. For an edge depth i and an endpoint type t, let u be a single-child (i, t)-node and v be the (i, t)-child of u. Then the potential (i, t)-shortcuts are the maximal shortcuts (with respect to the covering relation) that lie on the path Puv . The supporting potential shortcuts are the H-shortcuts that support some potential shortcuts. Notice that the  definition of the potential shortcuts is in contrast to the actual (i, t)-shortcuts that are stored in the data structure, since the stored (i, t)-shortcuts are not required to be maximal. However, the set of all supporting potential shortcuts is a superset of the set of all stored shortcuts. For any supporting potential shortcut u v, let k be the number of (i, t) pairs such that u v is covered by a potential (i, t)-shortcut. Define function f on u v by the following: f (u  v) = k, if u  v is not a fundamental shortcut, and 0 otherwise.  Let C be the set of all supporting potential shortcuts and C 0 be the set of all stored shortcuts. Then X Φ = f (C) − f (C 0 ) = f (u v) u v∈C−C 0  is the potential function used by the data structure to amortize the cost of creating (i, t)-shortcut pointers, when they are needed. Time Costs for Lazy Covering. The lazy covering method only covers non-fundamental shortcuts, so each covering takes O(1) time. Potential Changes. In the beginning of the deletion operation, the data structure spent O(log log n) time to uncover each H-shortcut with both endpoints on the path from ui (or v i ) to the corresponding H-root. These H-shortcuts may be shared by Ω(log log n) (i, t)-pairs. As mentioned in Section 4.2, the data structure covers every possible potential (i, t)-shortcut on these paths and adds all necessary fundamental H-shortcuts after each deletion operation. Hence the increase of Φ only depends on the number of deviating shortcuts, which is O(log n log log n) by Lemma 4.3. The only other case in which Φ increases is due to local changes to (i, t)-trees. These local changes pay for themselves as follows: • Adding a (i, t)-status to a leaf increases Φ by O(log n) since all new support maximal (i, t)shortcuts lie on the path from the leaf to its (i, t)-parent. • Removing (i, t)-status from a leaf x increases Φ by O(log log n), due to the fact that only the (i, t)-parent of x loses its (i, t)-status, so all new support maximal (i, t)-shortcuts u v have distinct powers. Thus, increases in the corresponding f -values sum up to log log n. 34  • Merging a dummy tree T induced from an (i, t)-tree into (i0 , t0 )-tree does not increase Φ because a potential (i0 , t0 )-shortcuts after merge is always a supporting shortcut for some potential (i0 , t0 )-shortcut before the merge, or an actual T -shortcut. Notice that before the merge the lazy covering method has been performed on T so the actual T -shortcuts are the potential T -shortcuts.  • Removing (i, t)-status from a subset of leaves in a (i, t)-tree T increases Φ by O(|T | log log n). Since O(|T |) leaves are removed from a (i, t)-tree, and each removal increases Φ by O(log log n).  7.6  Main Operations — Proof of Lemma 3.2  Operation 1 — Add or remove an edge with depth i and endpoint type t. The data structure first adds the given edge to the H-leaf data structure according to the (i, t) pair. Then the data structure adds (i, t)-status to both endpoints of the edge. By Lemma 3.3, the time cost is O(log(log log n)2 ). Operation 2 — Merge a subset of H-siblings into ui and promote all i-witness edges touching ui . This is combined from enumerating all (i, witness)-children from an (i, witness)branching node in the local tree and navigating downward along the (i, witness)-shortcut path. By Lemmas 3.5 and 4.5, the time cost is O(k(log log n)2 ) where k is the number of promoted i-witness edges. Operation 4 — Promote a subset of i-primary endpoints touching ui . This is combined from enumerating all (i, primary)-children from the local tree of an (i, primary)-branching node, and navigating downward along the (i, primary)-shortcut path. Then adds new (i+1, secondary)status to the subset of (i, primary)-leaves. By Lemmas 3.5 and 4.5, the time cost is O(k(log log n)2 ) where k is the number of promoted i-primary endpoints. Operation 3 — Upgrade all i-seconary endpoints touching ui . This is combined from enumerating all (i, secondary)-children from the local tree of an (i, secondary)-branching node, and navigating downward along the (i, secondary)-shortcut path. Then adds new (i, primary)status to the subset of (i, secondary)-leaves. In addition, all approximate counters in the entire (i, primary)-tree is updated via Lemma 3.4. The time cost is O((p + s)(log log n)2 ) where p is the number of i-primary edges touching ui and s is the number of i-secondary edges touching ui . Operation 5 — Convert an i-non-witness edge to an i-witness edge. The data structure removes the endpoints of the given edge from the H-leaf data structures. If any i-primary endpoint is removed, the data structure updates approximate i-counters at all (i, primary)-ancestors. Next, if necessary, the data structure removes (i, primary)-status and/or (i, secondary)-status from the leaves that touch the given edge. Then the data structure adds (i, witness)-status to these H-leaves. By Lemmas 3.3 and 3.4, the time cost is O(log n(log log n)2 ). Operation 6 — Split an H-node ui−1 with a single child ui . The data structure first creates a new H-node x. Then the local tree leaf representative `ui is deleted from L(ui−1 ). Next, the data structure inserts `ui into L(x). If i = 1, then x is an H-root and we are done. Otherwise i > 1, then the data structure creates a local tree leaf representative `x of x, accesses ui−2 from  35  ui−1 through local tree operation, and inserts `x into the local tree L(ui−2 ). The time cost is O(log(w(ui−2 )/w(ui−1 )) + (log log n)2 ). Operation 7 — Enumerate all (i, t) endpoints in the (i, t)-tree rooted at ui . The data structure performs a traversal on the implicitly maintained (i, t)-tree. For each traversed (i, t)leaf, the data structure enumerates all the endpoints of depth i and type t from the H-leaf data structure. By Lemmas 3.5 and 4.5, the time cost is O(k log log n), where k is the number of enumerated endpoints. Operation 8 — Accessing H-parent v i−1 from v i . the time cost is O(log(w(v i−1 )/w(v i )) + log log n).  This is a local tree operation. Lemma 3.5,  Operation 9 — Accessing an approximate i-counter. This can be done by table lookups in O(1) time.  Accessing the approximate i-counter.  Operation 10 — Batch Sampling Test. From Section 7.1, the batch sampling test on k samples has time cost O(min((p + s) log log n + k, k log n log log n)) where p is the number of iprimary edges touching ui and s is the nubmer of i-secondary edges touching ui .  References [1] D. Eppstein, Z. Galil, G. Italiano, and A. Nissenzweig. Sparsification – a technique for speeding up dynamic graph algorithms. J. ACM, 44(5):669–696, 1997. [2] D. Eppstein, G. F. Italiano, R. Tamassia, R. E. Tarjan, J. Westbrook, and M. Yung. Maintenance of a minimum spanning forest in a dynamic plane graph. J. Algor., 13(1):33–54, 1992. [3] G. Frederickson. Data structures for on-line updating of minimum spanning trees, with applications. SIAM J. Comput., 14(4):781–798, 1985. [4] D. Gibb, B. M. Kapron, V. King, and N. Thorn. Dynamic graph connectivity with improved worst case update time and sublinear space. CoRR, abs/1509.06464, 2015. [5] M. R. Henzinger and V. King. Randomized dynamic graph algorithms with polylogarithmic time per operation. In Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’95, pages 519–527, New York, NY, USA, 1995. ACM. [6] M. R. Henzinger and V. King. Randomized fully dynamic graph algorithms with polylogarithmic time per operation. J. ACM, 46(4):502–516, July 1999. [7] M. R. Henzinger and M. Thorup. Sampling to provide or to bound: With applications to fully dynamic graph algorithms. Random Structures & Algorithms, 11(4):369–379, 1997. [8] J. Holm, K. de Lichtenberg, and M. Thorup. Poly-logarithmic deterministic fully-dynamic algorithms for connectivity, minimum spanning tree, 2-edge, and biconnectivity. J. ACM, 48(4):723–760, July 2001.  36  [9] B. M. Kapron, V. King, and B. Mountjoy. Dynamic graph connectivity in polylogarithmic worst case time. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 1131–1142, 2013. [10] C. Kejlberg-Rasmussen, T. Kopelowitz, S. Pettie, and M. Thorup. Faster worst case deterministic dynamic connectivity. In Proceedings 24th European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA), pages 53:1–53:15, 2016. [11] M. Pǎtraşcu and E. Demaine. Logarithmic lower bounds in the cell-probe model. SIAM J. Comput., 35(4):932–963, 2006. [12] M. Pǎtraşcu and M. Thorup. Don’t rush into a union: take time to find your roots. In Proceedings of the 43rd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 559–568, 2011. Technical report available as arXiv:1102.1783. [13] D. D. Sleator and R. E. Tarjan. A data structure for dynamic trees. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 26(3):362–391, 1983. [14] M. Thorup. Near-optimal fully-dynamic graph connectivity. In Proceedings of the Thirtysecond Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’00, pages 343–350, New York, NY, USA, 2000. ACM. [15] C. Wulff-Nilsen. Faster deterministic fully-dynamic graph connectivity. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 1757–1769, 2013.  37

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
