Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_6391

Abstract:
Online and Dynamic Algorithms for Set Cover Anupam Gupta∗  Ravishankar Krishnaswamy†  Amit Kumar‡  arXiv:1611.05646v1 [cs.DS] 17 Nov 2016  Debmalya Panigrahi§  Abstract In this paper, we study the set cover problem in the fully dynamic model. In this model, the set of active elements, i.e., those that must be covered at any given time, can change due to element arrivals and departures. The goal is to maintain an algorithmic solution that is competitive with respect to the current optimal solution. This model is popular in both the dynamic algorithms and online algorithms communities. The diﬀerence is in the restriction placed on the algorithm: in dynamic algorithms, the running time of the algorithm making updates (called update time) is bounded, while in online algorithms, the number of updates made to the solution (called recourse) is limited. We give new results in both settings (all recourse and update time bounds are amortized): • In the update time setting, we obtain O(log n)-competitiveness with O(f log n) update time, and O(f 3 )-competitiveness with O(f 2 ) update time. The O(log n)-competitive algorithm is the ﬁrst one to achieve a competitive ratio independent of f in this setting. The second result improves on previous work by removing an O(log n) factor in the update time bound. This has an important consequence: we obtain the ﬁrst deterministic constant-competitive, constant update time algorithm for fully-dynamic vertex cover. • In the recourse setting, we show a competitive ratio of O(min{log n, f }) with constant recourse. The most relevant previous result is the O(log m log n) bound for online set cover in the insertion-only model with no recourse. Note that we can match the best oﬄine bounds with O(1) recourse, something that is impossible in the classical online model. These results also yield, as corollaries, new results for the maximum k-coverage problem and the non-metric facility location problem in the fully dynamic model. Our results are based on two algorithmic frameworks in the fully-dynamic model that are inspired by the classic greedy and primal-dual algorithms for oﬄine set cover. We show that both frameworks can be used for obtaining both recourse and update time bounds, thereby demonstrating algorithmic techniques common to these strands of research.  ∗  Carnegie Mellon University. Email: anupamg@cs.cmu.edu Microsoft Research India. Email: rakri@microsoft.com ‡ IIT Delhi. Email: amitk@cse.iitd.ac.in § Duke University. Email: debmalya@cs.duke.edu †  1  Introduction  In the (oﬄine) set cover problem, we are given a universe U of n elements and a family F of m sets with non-negative costs. The goal is to ﬁnd a subfamily of sets S ⊆ F of minimum cost that covers U . Several techniques achieve an approximation factor of ln n for this problem, and we cannot achieve (1 − ε) ln n unless P = N P [WS11, DS14]. The set cover problem has been popular due to its wide applicability. However, in many applications of this problem, we want to cover some subset A ⊆ U of the universe, and this set changes over time. In general, each update to A inserts or deletes an element, and now we must allow our algorithm to change the solution to restore the feasibility and approximation. We call this the (fully-)dynamic set cover problem. As in all dynamic algorithms, we want to avoid recomputing the solution from scratch, and hence constrain our algorithm to make only “limited” changes. This means it cannot use the oﬄine algorithm oﬀ-the-shelf. Two diﬀerent communities—in online algorithms and in dynamic algorithms— have approached such problems in slightly diﬀerent ways. Mainly, they diﬀer in the restrictions they place on the changes we can make after each update in the input. In online algorithms, where decisions are traditionally irrevocable, the dynamic (or so-called recourse) version of the model allows us to change a small number of past decisions while maintaining a good competitive ratio. The number of changes at each step is called its recourse. In the context of set cover, at each update, the algorithm is allowed to change a limited number of sets in the solution. In contrast, in dynamic algorithms, the parameter of interest is the running time to implement this change. This running time is usually called the update time. Note the diﬀerence between the models: the online model ostensibly does not care about run-times and places only an information-theoretic restriction, whereas the dynamic model places a stronger, computational restriction. Hence, a bound on the update time automatically implies the same bound on recourse, but not the other way around. In most cases, however, this observation cannot be used directly because the recourse bounds one desires (and can achieve) are much smaller than the bounds on update time. This is perhaps the reason that research in these two domains has progressed largely independent of each other; one exception is [LOP+ 15] for the Steiner tree problem. Indeed, for set cover, online algorithms researchers have focused on obtaining (poly)logarithmic approximations in the insert-only model with no recourse [AAA+ 09]. In dynamic algorithms, this problem has been studied as an extension of dynamic matching/vertex cover, and the current results give approximation factors that depend on f , the maximum element frequency.1 In this paper, we bring these two strands of research closer together, both in terms of algorithmic techniques and achieved results. We give new results, and improve existing ones, in both domains, and develop a general framework that should prove useful for other problems in both domains.  1.1  Our Results  Following the literature, our recourse/update time bounds, except where explicitly stated, are amortized bounds. In other words, the recourse/update time in a single input step can be higher than the given bounds, but the average over any preﬁx of input steps obeys these bounds. Let nt denote the number of elements that need to be covered at time t, and n denote the maximum value of nt , i.e., n = maxt nt . Similarly, let ft be the maximum frequency of elements active at time t, and f = maxt ft . Our main results for the setting of online algorithms with recourse are: 1  The frequency of an element is the number of sets it belongs to; hence f = 2 for vertex cover instances, where the elements are edges and the sets are vertices, since an edge/element belongs to two vertices/sets.  1  Theorem 1.1 (Recourse). There exist polynomial-time algorithms for the (fully-)dynamic set cover problem with O(1) recourse per input step: (a) an O(log nt )-competitive deterministic algorithm, and (b) an O(ft )-competitive randomized algorithm. Moreover, these can be combined to give a single algorithm that achieves O(min(ft , log nt ))-competitiveness with O(1) recourse. The only prior result known for online set cover is the seminal O(log m log n) competitive algorithm for the classical (insertion-only, no recourse) online model with m sets and n elements [AAA+ 09]. Moreover, there is a matching Ω(log m log n) lower bound, assuming P 6= N P [Kor05]. Hence, our result shows that this lower bound breaks down even if we allow only (amortized) constant changes in the solution per input step; moreover, we are able to remove the dependence on the number of sets m altogether from the competitive ratio. This is particularly useful because many problems in combinatorial optimization can be modeled as set cover using exponentially many sets. (See Appendix G.2 for an example: the dynamic non-metric facility location problem.) Observe that our competitive ratio is asymptotically tight assuming P 6= N P . Next, we give our results for dynamic set cover in the update-time setting: Theorem 1.2 (Update Time). There exist polynomial-time algorithms for the (fully-)dynamic set cover problem: (a) an O(log nt )-competitive deterministic algorithm with O(f log n) update time, and (b) an O(ft3 )-competitive deterministic algorithm with O(f 2 ) update time. Moreover, we can combine these into a single algorithm that achieves O(min(ft3 , log nt ))-competitive algorithm with O(f (f + log n)) update time. To the best of our knowledge, part (a) above is the ﬁrst result to obtain a competitive ratio independent of the maximum element frequency f , with guarantees on the update time. Indeed, the current-best existing result for dynamic set cover obtains a competitive ratio of O(f 2 ) with O(f log n) update time [BHI15a]. Our result of part (b) is able to remove the dependence on log n in the update time, although the competitive ratio worsens from O(f 2 ) to O(f 3 ). For the case of vertex cover where f = 2, we obtain an O(1)-competitive deterministic algorithm for the dynamic (weighted) vertex cover problem, with O(1) update time. The previous-best deterministic algorithm was (2 + ε)-competitive with O(ε−2 log n) update time [BHI15b]. For randomized algorithms, Solomon [Sol16] recently gave an algorithm to maintain maximal matchings with O(1) update time; this gives a 2-competitive algorithm for (unweighted) vertex cover. Our algorithm can be seen as giving (a) a deterministic counterpart to Solomon’s result for vertex cover (see [BHI15b] for a discussion of the challenges in getting a deterministic algorithm that matches the randomized results in this context), and (b) extending it from unweighted vertex cover to weighted set cover (a.k.a. hypergraph vertex cover). The algorithm in Theorem 1.2(a) can also be adapted to obtain a constant-competitive, O(log n)recourse, and O(f log n)-update time algorithm for the maximum k-coverage problem in the fullydynamic model. We give details of this application in Appendix G.1. Finally, we remark that the competitive ratios in Theorem 1.1 (a) and Theorem 1.2 (a) can be improved to O(log ∆t ), where ∆t := max |S ∩ At | is the maximum cardinality among all sets at time t. Although this a tighter bound since ∆t ≤ nt , for the sake of clarity, we will ﬁrst prove the bound of O(log nt ) in both cases, and then improve the analysis to obtain the tighter bound. 2  Non-Amortized Results. Given these amortized bounds on recourse and update time, one may wonder about non-amortized bounds. We give a partial answer to this question, for the case of recourse bounds. We show that if the algorithm were given exponential time, the recourse bound in Theorem 1.1(a) can be made non-amortized. We leave the problem of obtaining polynomial-time algorithms with non-amortized guarantees for these models an interesting open question. Theorem 1.3. There is a O(log n)-competitive deterministic algorithm for the dynamic set cover problem, with O(1) non-amortized recourse per input step. If all sets have the same cost (unweighted set cover), then the competitive ratio improves to O(1). This algorithm runs in exponential time.  1.2  Our Techniques  We grouped our results based on recourse or update time, but the techniques give a diﬀerent natural grouping. Indeed, the O(log n)-competitive results are based on related greedy-based algorithms, and the frequency-based results are based on primal-dual techniques. Greedy Algorithms. The results of Theorems 1.1(a) and 1.2(a) are based on a novel dynamic greedy framework for the set cover problem. A barrier to making greedy algorithms dynamic is their sequential nature, and element inserts/deletes can play havoc with this. However, we abstract out the intrinsic properties that the analysis of greedy uses, and show these properties can be maintained fast, and with small amounts of recourse. Our algorithm does simple “local” moves, and the analysis uses a delicate token scheme to ensure constant recourse and small run-time. In more detail, the greedy algorithm chooses sets one-by-one, minimizing the incremental costper-element covered at each step. The analysis then shows that number of elements covered at incremental-costs ≈ 2i (Opt/n) is at most n/2i , which will easily give us the desired O(log n) bound for approximation factor. So our abstraction in the dynamic setting is then the following: try to cover as many elements at low incremental costs! Indeed, if at some time we can ﬁnd a set S along with some elements X ⊆ S such that the new incremental-cost cS/|X| is at most half the current incremental-cost for each element in X, then we add such a set to the solution, and repeat. Of course, changes beget other changes—if set S now covers element e which was covered by T , the cost of T is now shared among fewer elements, causing their incremental-costs to increase. This can cause cascades of changes. We nevertheless show that this works using a delicate token-based argument: each new element brings L tokens with it, and any time a new set is bought, we expend one token. If we make sure that the total tokens remaining is always non-negative, we’d be done. Proving that this can be done with L = O(1) tokens per element is the basis of Theorem 1.1(a). The proof of Theorem 1.2(a) is similar, albeit we need to now argue about running times. Primal-Dual Algorithms. The results of Theorems 1.1(b) and 1.2(b) are inspired by primal-dual algorithms. Oﬄine, we raise some duals until some set constraint becomes tight (so that the set is paid for): we then pick this set in our solution. Elements pay for at most f sets, hence the f -approximation. But if elements disappear and take their dual with them, tight constraints can become slack, and we must take recourse action. For Theorem 1.2(b), let us use vertex cover to illustrate our ideas. Inspired by previous work [BGS15, BHI15b, Sol16], a natural idea is to place each vertex v at some integer level ℓ(v), and set the dual ye for an edge (u, v) to be 1/2max(ℓ(u),ℓ(v)) . To deﬁne the solution, then P we include all vertices whose dual constraints are approximately tight i.e., S = {v : 1/2 ≤ e∼v ye ≤ 2}. The cost is automatically bounded because we only include approximately-tight vertices, and the dual solution is approximately feasible. Now, when edges arrive/depart, these bounds might be violated and then we move the vertices up or down accordingly. To bound the updates, we again use a token scheme, 3  where tokens are added by arrivals/deletions, and are spent on updates. When vertices move, they also transfer some tokens to their neighbors on incident edges, which then use up these tokens when they move, and so on. A key idea in our analysis is to use asymmetry in token transfer—vertices moving down transfer more tokens to their neighbors than vertices moving up. Using this idea, we obtain a deterministic constant-competitive vertex cover algorithm with constant update time. These ideas extend to the set cover setting, giving O(f 3 )-competitive O(f 2 ) update time algorithms; this is the ﬁrst result for dynamic set cover with update time independent of n. Finally, Theorem 1.1(b): getting f -competitiveness and O(f )-recourse is easy, but making this O(1)recourse is the challenge. We show that an elegant randomized algorithm due to Pitt [Pit85]—for an uncovered element e, pick a random set covering it from the “harmonic” distribution, and repeat—can be made dynamic with O(1)-recourse. We then use dual-ﬁtting to bound the cost. Combiner Algorithm: We then show how we can dynamically maintain the best-of-both solutions with the same recourse/update-time bounds. In the oﬄine setting, getting such an algorithm is trivial as we can simply output the solution with lower cost. However, this is not immediate in the online setting as the lower-cost solution could oscillate between the two solutions we maintain; so we exploit the values of the two competitive-ratio guarantees to design our overall combiner algorithm.  1.3  Related Work  Set cover has been studied both in the oﬄine [WS11] and online settings [AAA+ 09]; under suitable complexity-theoretic assumptions, both the O(log n) and O(f )-approximations are best possible. Dynamic algorithms are a vibrant area of research; see [EGI99] for many applications and pointers. Maintaining approximate vertex covers and approximate matchings in a dynamic setting have seen much interest in recent years, starting with [OR10]; see [BGS15, NS16, GP13, BHI15b, BHI15a, BS15, BS16, BHN16]. For the exact version of the problem [San07] gives polynomial update times, and logarithmic times are ruled out by recent works [AW14, HKNS15, KPP16]. The study of online algorithms with recourse goes back at least to the dynamic Steiner tree problem in [IW91]: motivated by lower bounds for fully-dynamic inputs [ABK94, AKP+ 93] for online scheduling problems, [PW98, Wes00, AGZ99, SSS09, SV10, EL11] studied models with job reassignments. Maintaining an exact matching with small recourse was studied by [GKKV95, CDKL09, BLSZ14]; low-load assignments and ﬂows by [Wes00, GKS14], Steiner trees by [MSVW12, GGK13, GK14, LOP+ 15]. As far as we know, Lacki et al. [LOP+ 15] are the only previous work trying to bridge the online recourse and dynamic algorithms communities. Bibliographic Note: Very recently, and independently of us, Bhattacharya et al. [BCH16] get a deterministic O(1)-competitive, O(1) update-time algorithm for dynamic vertex cover. Since the manuscript became public very recently, we are yet to investigate the similarities and diﬀerences.  1.4  Notation  The input is a set system (U, F); cS is the cost of set S. In (dynamic) set cover, the input sequence is σ = hσ1 , σ2 , . . .i, where request σt is either (et , +) or (et , −). The initial active set A0 = ∅. If σt = (et , +), then At ← At−1 ∪ {et }; if σt = (et , −) then At ← At−1 \ {et }. We do not need to know either the universe U or the entire family F up-front. Indeed, at time t, we know only the elements seen so far, and which sets they belong to. We need to maintain a feasible set cover St ⊆ F, i.e., the sets in St must cover the set of active  4  elements At . Deﬁne nt := |At | and n = maxt nt . The frequency of an element e ∈ U is the number of sets of F it belongs to; let ft := maxe∈At frequency(e) be the maximum frequency of any active element at time t. Let Optt be the cost of the optimal set cover for the set system (At , F). Recourse and Update Times. The recourse is the number of sets we add or drop from our set cover over the course of the algorithm, as a function of the length of the input sequence. An online algorithm is α-competitive with r (amortized) recourse if at every time t, the solution St has total cost at most α · Optt , and the total recourse in the ﬁrst t steps is at most r · t. (Since every dropped set must have been added at some point and we maintain at most nt sets at time t—at most one for each active element—counting only the number of sets dropped until time t changes the recourse only by a constant factor.) For r worst-case recourse, the number of sets dropped at each time-step must be at most r. In the update-time model, we measure the amount of time taken to update the solution St−1 to St . We use the terms amortized or worst-case update time similarly.  2  Dynamic Greedy Algorithms  In this section, we describe our greedy framework and sketch the main ideas for proving Theorem 1.2(a) and Theorem 1.1(a). Complete details appear in Appendices A and B respectively.  2.1  The Dynamic Greedy Framework  We now describe a generic framework for greedy set cover algorithms in the fully dynamic model. We will later instantiate this framework in two diﬀerent ways to obtain our results in the recourse and update time settings. An algorithm for dynamic set cover maintains a solution (denoted St at time t) with sets that cover the active elements At . In addition, our greedy framework also maintains an assignment ϕt (e) of each active element e to a unique set in St covering it; deﬁne covt (S) := {e | ϕt (e) = S} to be the set of elements assigned to S, and S is said to be responsible for covering the elements in covt (S). Our algorithms also use the notions of volume and density. • Volume. At each time, our algorithm maintains for every element a notion of volume vol(e) > 0. P • Density. Deﬁne the density of a set S in St as ρt (S) := c(S)/ e∈covt (S) vol(e), the ratio of its cost and the volume of elements it covers. For concreteness, think of vol(e) = 1 for all e, and hence the density of a set S is the standard notion of per-element-cost of covering elements in covt (S). In fact this is what we will use for the update time algorithm; later, we will use a diﬀerent notion of volume in our constant recourse algorithm. The notion of element volumes is all that we need to characterize our algorithms. • Density Levels. We also place each set in St in some density level. Each density level ℓ has an associated range Rℓ := [2ℓ , 2ℓ+10 ] of densities. Any set S at level ℓ must have density ρt (S) in the interval Rℓ . We say that element e is at level ℓ if its covering set ϕt (e) is at level ℓ. Note that adjacent density ranges overlap across multiple levels; this range gives the necessary friction which prevents too many changes in our algorithm which helps in bounding both recourse and update time. The algorithm will dynamically make sure that each set S ∈ St covering a set covt (S) elements at some time t will be placed in one of its allowed levels. We are now armed to deﬁne the crucial “greedylike” concept in the dynamic setting — the notion of stability.  5  • Stable Solutions. A solution St is stable if for every density level ℓ, there is no subset X of elements currently at level ℓ (perhaps covered by diﬀerent P sets) that can all be covered by some set S, such that the density of the resulting set c(S)/ e∈X vol(e) < 2ℓ , i.e., the set S (if added to St ) and these elements X would belong in a strictly lower density level. Loosely, stability means there is no collection of elements that can jointly “defect” to be covered by a set S which charges them less cost-per-element. Now the dynamic algorithm just tries to maintain a stable solution. Suppose the current solution St−1 is stable. Arrival of e. Add the cheapest set covering e to St , and run Stabilize. Departure of e. Remove e from its covering set S = ϕt−1 (e), and update S’s density and covt (S) = covt−1 (S) \ {e}. If covt (S) = φ, delete S from St . Else, if its density falls outside the range of its level, move it to the highest level which can accommodate it. Run Stabilize. Stabilize. Repeatedly perform the following steps until the solution is stable: if there exists level ℓP and elements X currently at level ℓ, such that X ⊆ S for some S ∈ F, and the density c(S)/ e∈X vol(e) < 2ℓ : add S to St , and reassign the elements in X to S by updating ϕt (·) for elements in X; place S at the highest density level where it is allowed. Also update covt (·) for the sets previously covering elements in X. As a result, if the updated density of such a set S ′ previously covering some elements in X increases beyond 2ℓ+10 , we move it to the highest level that can accommodate it. This completes the description of the algorithm framework, and also completes the description of our dynamic algorithm for update time (since the notion of volume is vol(e) = 1 always). The bulk of our analyses is in showing that such algorithms terminate, and moreover, that they make a small number of updates. However, we can already show that if we ﬁnd a stable solution, the cost is small. Lemma 2.1. The sum of costs of sets in a level ℓ in any stable solution at time t is at most 210 Optt . Proof. Suppose not, and some level ℓ contains sets of total cost c · Optt where c > 210 . Let the total volume of elements at level ℓ be volℓ . Then there exists a set in St at this level with density at least c · (Optt /volℓ ), and therefore the upper density limit of this level is at least as large. In turn, this implies that the smallest density allowed at this level is at least (c/210 ) · (Optt /volℓ ) > (Optt /volℓ ). On the other hand, the optimal solution covers all elements at level ℓ and has an average density of Optt /volℓ ; in particular, there is some set with density at most Optt /volℓ . But the density of this set is too low for level ℓ, contradicting the stability condition. To complete the cost analysis, we will then argue that our algorithms maintain only O(log nt ) non-trivial density levels, so Lemma 2.1 implies O(log nt )-competitiveness.  2.2  An O(log nt )-Competitive O(f log n)-Update-Time Algorithm  We now present our O(log nt )-competitive algorithm with amortized update time of O(f log n), where f is the maximum element frequency. To completely describe the algorithm, we simply deﬁne the volume of elements. We then bound the competitive ratio, and ﬁnally the update time.  6  The volume of every element vol(e) = 1 at all times. Competitive Ratio. The total cost of all sets S with density ρt (S) ≤ Optt /nt is at most Optt , since there are nt active elements at time t. Moreover, by Lemma 2.1, the highest cost set in any stable solution has cost at most 210 · Optt . Since the element volumes are all 1, the maximum density of any set is at most 210 · Optt . Consequently we only need to consider the O(log nt ) levels with density between Optt /nt and 210 · Optt . Using Lemma 2.1 again, the algorithm is O(log nt )competitive. Update Time. We bound the update time in two steps. We ﬁrst bound the number of level changes made by elements to O(log n) per element arrival. Then, we bound the total update time by O(f ) times the number of level changes by elements. This gives the amortized update time bound of O(f log n). For this second step we use that the data structures we maintain change only when an element changes level, and that these data structures have an update time of O(f ) per element level change. These details are presented in Appendix A.4; here we focus on the ﬁrst step. We use a token-based scheme for this amortization. When an element arrives, it brings with it O(log n) tokens. Whenever an element changes level, it expends 1 token. In addition, tokens are transferred between elements during the algorithm. We always ensure that each element has a nonnegative number of tokens while it remains active; this implies the amortized bound of is O(log n) for element level changes. To this end, we maintain a strong invariant on the number of tokens elements will have with them: deﬁne the base level of an element e (denoted b(e)) as the largest integer i such that 2i ≤ cSe , where Se is the minimum-cost set in F that contains e. The base level of e decides the range of density levels it can reside in, as we observe now. Lemma 2.2. At all times, an element e resides at a level lo(e) := b(e) − log n − 2 or higher. Proof. Any set S below level b(e) − log n − 2 has cost < cSe , so S cannot contain e. Token Invariant: Any element e ∈ At covered at level i has at least 2(i − lo(e)) ≥ 0 tokens. Token Re-distribution: Our basic idea of token re-distribution is simple. There are two reasons for an element e to change its density level. The ﬁrst situation is that the element e being covered by set S ′ in our solution is now covered by a new set S that enters the solution at a lower level. In this case, e can spare tokens, since the token invariant at the lower level requires fewer tokens from e. So e spends one token to pay for the move, and contributes one token to S ′ ’s emergency fund (to “atone” for deserting its siblings in S ′ ). This emergency fund will come in handy when S ′ and its remaining elements move to a higher density level if it violates the density range for its current level. Indeed, the second situation for an element to change its density level is when covt (S) for a set S decreases to the extent that S no longer satisﬁes the upper bound on the density range in its current level. In that case S “ﬂoats up” to a higher level. Now the elements in covt (S) moving up have to spend one token for the move to the higher level, but also have to satisfy a more demanding token invariant. But they can satisfy this by sharing the tokens in the emergency fund, as we show next. Lemma 2.3. The Token Invariant is always satisfied. 7  Proof. We prove this by induction over the sequence of moves. Case I: if an element moves to a lower level, it requires at least 2 fewer tokens, and hence the invariant is satisﬁed even after e spends 1 token for the move and gives the other to the emergency fund of the set it is leaving. In Case II: suppose set S ﬂoats up from level i to level i + ℓ. We need to show that each element covered by S has an excess of at least 2ℓ + 1 tokens, which will be suﬃcient for it to satisfy the new token invariant at level i + ℓ, and also to expend one token for the move. Let tinit be the time when set S was added to level i, and let covinit (S) be the initial set of elements S covers at that stage. Also, let tfin be the current time, when set S moves to level i + ℓ. Let the set of elements covered by S at this time be covfin (S). Since a set is always moved to the highest level that can accommodate it, we know that level i + 1 could not accommodate S at time tinit , and so cS /|covinit | < 2i+1 . On the other hand, since level i + ℓ can accommodate S at time tfin , we have cS /|covfin | ≥ 2i+ℓ . It follows that |covinit | / |covfin | ≥ 2ℓ−1 . Moreover, the emergency fund contains |covinit |− |covfin | tokens, since each element that left S gave one token into this fund. Sharing this among the remaining |covfin | elements gives each element in covfin at least (|covinit | − |covfin |)/|covfin | ≥ 2ℓ−1 − 1 new tokens. So the token invariant holds for set S at level i + ℓ if 2ℓ−1 − 1 ≥ 2ℓ + 1. (1) Next, note that set S moves out of level i at time tfin because its density exceeds 2i+10 . Since it settles at the highest level that can accommodate it, it could not move to level i + ℓ + 1, and so its density is less than 2i+ℓ+1 . Taking logs, i + 10 < i + ℓ + 1, i.e., ℓ > 9, and so (1) easily holds. P In Appendix A we show a more nuanced recourse bound of O( P t log nt ), and also give details of the data structures for the updated update time bound of O( t f log n).  2.3  An O(log nt )-Competitive O(1)-Recourse Algorithm  The above algorithm has O(log n) amortized recourse, since the total number of set changes (which is the quantity of interest) in St is bounded by the number of times that elements change levels. We now improve this recourse bound to O(1). Intuitively, one way of reducing recourse is to slacken the stability condition. But we must slacken it carefully, since it aﬀects the competitive ratio. Our idea is to carefully use the ﬂexibility we have in deﬁning the element volume. As earlier, the base level b(e) for element e is the highest level i such that 2i ≤ cSe , where Se is the min-cost set containing e. We now use the following deﬁnition of element volume: The volume of an element e at density level i is given by vol(e, i) = 2i−b(e) .  Recall that the density ρt (S) of a set S is the ratio of its cost and the total volume of elements in covt (S). Now note that the density depends on the level of the set. To show our algorithm is valid, we need that each set S can be accommodated by at least one density level. (Proof in Lemma B.1.) Lemma 2.4. Every set covering any set of elements can be placed at some density level. Competitive Ratio. Again, we need to show there are O(log nt ) “interesting levels”. We ﬁrst show that an element cannot lie above its base level in a stable solution. 8  Claim 2.5. In a stable solution, the density level of any element e is b(e) or lower. So the volume of e is at most 1. Proof. Suppose element e is at level i ≥ b(e) + 1. Since vol(e, b(e)) = 1, we could possibly add the set Se at level b(e) and set ϕt (e) = Se . This contradicts stability of St . The total cost of all sets S with density ρt (S) ≤ Optt /nt is at most Optt since there are nt active elements, each with volume at most 1 by Claim 2.5. Moreover, for any element e, the cost of the min-cost set containing e is at most Optt , so b(e) ≤ log(Optt ). Hence, by Claim 2.5, all sets are in levels log(Optt ) or lower. So, we only need to consider sets in levels log(Optt ) down to log(Optt /nt ) − 10. Using Lemma 2.1, we get the competitive ratio to be O(log nt ). Recourse. Our token scheme is now more involved: a new element now brings just 1 token. Whenever a new set is added to the solution St , the system expends Ω(1) tokens. Note that because we are just measuring the recourse, i.e., the number of sets that change in our solution, we do not need to spend tokens when a set ﬂoats up. In addition, we show how to transfer tokens between elements to maintain the following invariant, which ensures that each element has non-zero tokens. Token Invariant: An element e ∈ At covered at level i has at least vol(e, i) = 2i−b(e) tokens. A new element e is initially covered by the minimum cost set containing it at level b(e). Since the element comes in with 1 token, the invariant is initially satisﬁed. Token Re-distribution: Our token re-distribution scheme is similar to that in the update time setting. When a new set S is added to the solution St at some level i, and some element e ∈ covt (S) is reassigned from its current level i′ to be covered by S, the token requirement of e decreases, and hence it has excess tokens. Element e expends half of these excess tokens towards the addition of S to the solution (we show in Claim 2.6 that a total of Ω(1) token can be expended per new set created); next e contributes the remaining half to the emergency fund for the set S ′ at level i′ it used to belong to. When such a set S ′ ﬂoats up, it now takes the tokens in the emergency fund and distributes it among the remaining elements in S in proportion to their respective volumes, since their token requirement is larger at the new level. In Lemma 2.7 we show this re-distribution suﬃces to maintain the token invariant. Claim 2.6. Whenever a new set S is added to St , the elements in covt (S) expend Ω(1) tokens. Proof. Suppose S is added at level i. Note that the volume, and therefore the token requirement, of every element covered by S at level i isP at most half of the token requirement at its previous level i′ ≥ i + 1. So it suﬃces to show that e∈covt (S) vol(e, i) ≥ Ω(1). Fix an element e ∈ covt (S). If e is above its base level, i.e., i ≥ b(e), then vol(e, i) ≥ 1. So, assume i < b(e). Since the density of every set at level i is at most 2i+10 , ρt (S, i) ≤ 2i+10 . On the other hand, by deﬁnition of base level, cS ≥ 2b(e) . Therefore, the total volume of elements in covt (S) is equal to cS /ρt (S, i) ≥ 2b(e)−i−10 > 2−10 since i < b(e). Now, we show that the token invariant holds at all times. Lemma 2.7. The Token Invariant is always satisfied.  9  Proof. The proof is by induction on the sequence of moves. When elements move down, their token requirement decreases, and the token invariant trivially holds. So, we focus on the case where a set S moves up from level i to level i + ℓ. Let tinit be the time when set S was added to level i, and let covinit (S) denote the initial set of elements it covers at that stage. Also, let tfin be the current time, when set S moves to level i + ℓ. Let the set of elements covered by S at this time be covfin (S). Correspondingly, for some density level j, let vol(covinit , j) and vol(covfin , j) denote the sum of level-j volumes of elements in covinit (S) and covfin (S) respectively. Recall that a set is always moved to the highest level that can accommodate it. This implies that at time tinit , level i + 1 could not accommodate S, i.e., cS /vol(covinit , i + 1) < 2i+1 . On the other hand, since level i + ℓ can accommodate S at time tfin , we have cS /vol(covfin , i + ℓ) ≥ 2i+ℓ . It follows that vol(covinit , i + 1) ≥ 2ℓ−1 . vol(covfin , i + ℓ) We now normalize this comparison of the two volumes at the same level: vol(covinit , i + 1) ℓ−1 vol(covinit , i) vol(covinit , i + 1)/2 = = ·2 ≥ 22(ℓ−1) . ℓ vol(covfin , i) vol(covfin , i + ℓ) vol(covfin , i + ℓ)/2  (2)  Remember that the emergency fund is distributed among the elements in covfin in proportion to their volumes. Since each departing element in (covinit \ covfin ) contributed half its excess tokens, i.e., at least 1/4 of its level-i volume, the number of tokens element e in covfin receives is at least (1/4) · (vol(covinit , i) − vol(covfin , i)) ·    vol(e, i) ≥ vol(e, i) · 22(ℓ−2) − (1/4) . vol(covfin , i)  The inequality follows from (2). Adding this to the vol(e, i) tokens that element e had at time tinit (using the token invariant inductively), element e has at least 22(ℓ−2) · vol(e, i) tokens at tfin . Therefore, the token invariant holds at level i + ℓ if this is at least vol(e, i + ℓ) = 2ℓ · vol(e, i). In other words, we want 22(ℓ−2) ≥ 2ℓ . (3) The rest of the proof is simple given our deﬁnition of volume. Set S is moving out of level i at time tfin is because its density exceeds 2i+10 . It settles at the highest level that can accommodate it, so it could not move to level 2i+ℓ+1 and its density at level i + ℓ + 1 was less than 2i+ℓ+1 . When a set moves up ℓ + 1 levels, its density decreases by a factor of 2ℓ+1 because of a corresponding increase in the volume of elements it covers. It follows that i + 10 < i + ℓ + 1 + (ℓ + 1), i.e., ℓ ≥ 4. To complete the proof, note that (3) holds for ℓ ≥ 4. A detailed description of the algorithm, along with more detailed proofs, appear in Appendix B.  3  Dynamic Primal Dual Algorithms  In §2 we saw dynamic algorithms inspired by the greedy analysis of set cover. However, the natural greedy algorithms do not yield competitive ratio better than O(log n) even for special cases like the vertex cover problem. So we turn our attention to dynamic algorithms based on the primaldual framework, which typically have approximation ratios depending on the parameter f , the maximum number of sets containing any element. Our ﬁrst result is a deterministic fully-dynamic algorithm in the update time model with O(f 3 )-competitiveness and an update time of O(f 2 ) (establishing Theorem 1.2(b)). Note that for vertex cover this gives constant-competitiveness with deterministic constant update time. (The randomized version of this result for the special case of 10  unweighted vertex cover follows from the recent dynamic maximal-matching algorithm of [Sol16].) Our algorithm follows a similar framework as [BHI15a], but we use a more nuanced and apparently novel asymmetric token transfer scheme in the analysis to remove the dependence on n in the update time. We then outline our algorithm with improved bounds in the recourse model: we get f -competitiveness with O(1) recourse (establishing Theorem 1.1(b))2 ; complete details of these algorithms appear in Appendices C and D respectively.  3.1  An O(f 3)-Competitive O(f 2)-Update-Time Algorithm  Given a set system (U, F), and an element e, let Fe denote the sets containing e, and let fe := |Fe |. For now we assume we know f such that fe ≤ f for all e ∈ At ; we discharge this assumption in Appendix F.1. Like the algorithms in Section 2, our algorithm assigns each set to a level, but the intuition now is diﬀerent. Firstly, only the sets in the solution St were assigned levels in Section 2, whereas all sets will be assigned levels in the primal-dual framework. Secondly, the intuition of a level in the greedy framework corresponds to the density (or incremental cost-per-element covered) of the sets, whereas the intuition of a level here loosely corresponds to how quickly a set becomes tight if we run the standard primal-dual algorithm. Sets that become tight sooner are in higher levels. We also deﬁne base levels, but now these are deﬁned not for elements but for sets. • Set and Element “Levels”. At all times, each set S ∈ F resides at an integer level, denoted by level(S). For an element e ∈ At , deﬁne level(e) := maxS :e∈S level(S) to be the largest level of any set covering it. • Set and Element “Dual Values”. Given levels for sets and elements, the dual value of an element e is deﬁned to be y(e) P := 2−level(e) . The dual value of a set S ∈ F is the sum of dual values of its elements, y(S) := e∈S∩At y(e).  Recall the dual of the set cover LP: P P max{ e∈At ỹe | e∈At ∩S ỹe ≤ cS ∀S ∈ F,  ỹe ≥ 0}.  (4)  Now our solution at time t is simply all sets whose dual constraints are approximately tight, i.e., St = {S : y(S) ≥ cS/β } for β := 32f . In addition, we will try to ensure that the duals y(e) we maintain will be approximately feasible for (4), i.e., for every set y(S) ≤ βcS . Then, bounding the cost becomes a simple application of LP duality. The main challenge is in maintaining such a dual solution dynamically. We achieve this by deﬁning a base level for every set to indicate non-tight dual constraints, and ensuring that all sets strictly above their base levels always have approximately tight dual constraints. Formally, the base level for set S is deﬁned to be b(S) := −⌈log(βcS )⌉ − 1, and our solution St consists of all sets that are located strictly above their respective base levels, i.e., St = {S ∈ F : level(S) > b(S)}. (To initialize, each set S is placed at level b(S).) We now give the intuition behind this deﬁnition of base levels. Suppose a new element e arrives and it is uncovered, i.e., all its covering sets are at their base levels. Then, element e has a dual value of y(e) = 1/2b(Se ) > 2βcSe , where Se is the minimum-cost set containing e. This implies that y(Se ) > 2βcSe , and so our algorithm moves Se up to a higher level and includes it in the solution. We ensure the approximate tightness and approximate feasibility of dual constraints using the stability property below. 2 In fact, we can get stronger guarantees for both the algorithms to have competitive ratio depend only on ft , the maximum frequency at time t and not f = maxt ft . We show how in Appendix F.1.  11  • Stable Solutions. A solution St is stable if: for all sets S with level(S) ≥ b(S) we have y(S) ∈ [cS/β , βcS ], and for all S with level(S) < b(S) we have y(S) < βcS . Loosely, the algorithm follows the principle of least eﬀort toward ensuring stability of all sets: if at some point y(S) is too large, S moves up the least number of levels so that the resulting y(S) falls within the admissible range – observe that as S moves up one level, every element e in S for which level(e) = level(S) halves its current dual value. Similarly if y(S) is too small, it moves down until y(S) ≥ cS/β . Indeed, since the competitive ratio is deﬁned purely by the two barriers 1/β and β, this lazy approach is very natural if the goal is to minimize the number of updates. Arrival: When e arrives, the current levels for sets deﬁne y(e) := 1/ maxS:e∈S 2level(S) . Update y(S) for all sets. Run Stabilize. Departure: Delete e from At . Update y(S) for all sets. Run Stabilize. Stabilize: Repeatedly perform the following steps until the solution is stable: If for some set S at level level(S) we have y(S) > βcS , ﬁnd the lowest level ℓ′ > level(S) such that placing S at level ℓ′ results in y(S) ≤ βcS . Analogously, if y(S) < cS/β , ﬁnd the highest level ℓ′ < level(S) such that placing S at level ℓ′ results in y(S) ≥ cS/β . If such an ℓ′ < b(S) − 1, we place S at level b(S) − 1 and drop S from St . Lemma 3.1 (Stability ⇒ Approximation). Any stable solution St has cost O(f 3 ) Optt . Proof. The cost of St is X  S∈St  cS ≤ β  X  y(S) = β  S∈St  X  X  S∈St e∈S∩At  y(e) ≤ f β  X  y(e).  e∈At  Now since y(e)/β is a feasible dual solution (see the set cover dual in (4)), the lemma follows from LP duality. 3.1.1  Bounding the Update Time  As in Section 2, most updates happen when the solution stabilizes itself at various points. Indeed, even termination of Stabilize is a priori not clear. In any call to Stabilize when a set S moves, let outold (S) and outnew (S) respectively denote the out-elements of S at the beginning and end of the move. These are the elements whose level is equal to the level of S, i.e., elements whose dual value changes when S moves up/down. Following Solomon [Sol16], we ﬁrst show that the total update time for maintaining our data structures in an upward move is O(f · |outnew (S)|), and that in a downward move is O(f · |outold (S)|). The details of the data structures establishing these bounds are given in Appendix C. Given these observations, it suﬃces to control the sizes of outnew (S) and outold (S), and charge them to distinct arrivals. Again, we use a token scheme for the amortized analysis of these costs. Token Distribution: When an element arrives, it gives 20f tokens to each of the f sets containing it, totaling O(f 2 ) tokens. When an element departs, it gives 1 token to each of the f sets covering it. When a set moves up from some level ℓ to level ℓ∗ in Stabilize, it expends f · |outnew (S)| tokens to pay for the update-time, and for all e ∈ outnew (S) it transfers 1 token to each set S ′ ∈ Fe . Similarly when a set moves down in Stabilize, it expends f · |outold (S)| tokens, and for all e ∈ outold (S) it 12  transfers 20f tokens to each S ′ ∈ Fe . Note the asymmetry between the number of tokens transferred in the two cases! Note that at most 20f 2 tokens are injected per element arrival/departure. Moreover, from the discussion above, the total update time for each up/downward move is O(1) times the number of tokens expended from the system. In what follows, we show that we never expend more tokens than we inject – thus obtaining an amortized O(f 2 ) bound on update times. To this end, we divide the movement of a set S into epochs, where each up-epoch is a maximal set of contiguous upward moves of S and a down-epoch is a maximal set of contiguous downward moves of S. (Epochs may span diﬀerent calls to Stabilize.) Lemma 3.2 (Up-Epochs). Consider an up-epoch of a set S ending at level ℓ. The total number of tokens expended or transferred by S during this epoch is at most 2ℓ+8 f 2 cS . Moreover, the total number of tokens that S gained during this epoch is at least 2ℓ+8 f 2 cS . Proof. Consider an up-epoch where S moves from ℓ0 → . . . → ℓk = ℓ via a sequence of up-moves. The tokens expended and transferred during the upward move ℓi−1 → ℓi is (f + f ) · |outnew (S)| ≤ ∗ (2f )β 2ℓ cS . The inequality holds because S satisﬁes the stability condition when it settles at level ℓi , and each out-element has dual P value 1/2ℓi . Therefore, the total tokens transferred/expended in this entire up-epoch is at most 2f ki=1 β2ℓi cS ≤ 4βf 2ℓ cS . Using β = 32f proves the ﬁrst claim. For the second claim, consider the moment when this epoch started. We ﬁrst observe that when S had moved down to level ℓ0 at the end of the previous epoch say at time t0 , then yt0 (S) < 2cS/β . Indeed, if this epoch is the ﬁrst ever epoch for set S then yS was 0. Else it was preceded by a down-epoch, in which case the ﬁnal down-move in the previous epoch happened because yS < cS/β and the down-move can at most double the yt0 (S) value at level ℓ0 . Let S(t0 ) be the elements of S which were active at that time. Now suppose at time t0 , we hypothetically placed S in level ℓ − 1 without changing the levels of other sets. Let yt′ 0 (e) be theP corresponding dual values for elements given by the sets being in these levels, and let yt′ 0 (S) := e∈S(t0 ) yt′ 0 (e). Clearly, yt′ 0 (S) < 2cS/β as well, since we are hypothetically placing S at a higher level ℓ − 1 instead of ℓ0 ≤ ℓ − 1. Now consider the ending time t1 of the up-epoch, just before we move S from ℓ − 1 to ℓ. Let S(t1 ) be the elements of P S active at this time, and let yt1 (e) be the dual values for all elements in S(t1 ). Then, yt1 (S) := e∈S(t1 ) yt1 (e). Clearly yt1 (S) > βcS , else we will not move S from ℓ − 1 to ℓ. Note that we placed S at level ℓ − 1 in both settings, so the increase from yt′ 0 (S) to yt1 (S) of more than (β −2)cS can only happen because (a) there are elements in S(t1 ) that are not present in S(t0 ), or (b) there are elements in S(t1 ) ∩ S(t0 ) that have moved down since time t0 . Each such element can contribute at most 2−(ℓ−1) to yt1 (S)−yt′ 0 (S), so there must be at least 2ℓ−1 ·(β −1)cS ≥ 15f cS 2ℓ events in total, and our token distribution scheme now says that S would have collected at least 300f 2 cS 2ℓ ≥ 2ℓ+8 f 2 cS tokens in this epoch, completing the proof.  Remark: Note that in the above lemma, the update time is bounded in terms of tokens expended, and this seemingly depends on set cost cS . At ﬁrst glance, this might appear strange because update times should be invariant to cost scaling. A closer scrutiny, however, reveals that the update time is indeed scale-free since higher set costs imply lower levels in the algorithm, and vice-versa. In other words, on scaling, the change in cS is compensated by an opposite change in 2ℓ . A similar lemma holds for down-epochs (see Appendix C for the proof). Lemma 3.3 (Down-Epochs). Consider a down-epoch for set S starting at level ℓ. The number of tokens expended/transferred by S during this epoch is at most 2ℓ+1 f cS . Moreover, the total number of tokens S gained in the beginning of this epoch is at least 2ℓ+1 f cS . 13  The above two lemmas show that for each set S and each epoch, the total number of tokens S expends or transfers is no more than what it receives via transfers or arrivals/departures. This shows that the total tokens never becomes negative, and hence proves the amortized bound.  3.2  An O(f )-Competitive O(1)-Recourse Algorithm  In this section, we consider the recourse model and give an algorithm with stronger guarantees than the one in the previous section. Our algorithm is inspired by the following oﬄine algorithm for set cover – arrange the elements in some arbitrary order and probe them in this order. We maintain a tentative solution S which is initially empty. When we probe an element e, two cases arise: (i) the element e is already covered by an element e ∈ S: in this case, we do nothing, or (ii) there is no such set in S: in this case, we pick a random set from Fe , where a set S ∈ Fe is chosen with probability P ′ 1/cS1/c ′ . This algorithm is O(f )-competitive in expectation [Pit85]. S ∈Fe  S  We now describe our dynamic implementation of this algorithm. Recall that At denotes the set of active elements at time t. At all times t, we maintain a partition of At into two sets Pt (called the probed set) and Qt (the unprobed set). Elements on which we have performed the random experiment outlined above are the ones in the probed set. We also maintain a bijection ϕ from Pt to St , the set cover solution at time t, i.e., for every probed element, there is a unique set in St and vice-versa. Elements can move from Qt to Pt at a latter point of time (i.e., an element currently in Qt can be in Pt′ for some t′ > t), but once an element is in set Pt it stays in Pt′ for all t′ ≥ t (till the element departs). We now describe the procedures which will be used our algorithm. At certain times, our algorithm may choose to probe an unprobed element. This will happen when there is no set in the current solution covering this element. Probing an element. When an unprobed element e ∈ Qt−1 is probed by the algorithm at time t, it selects a single set that it belongs to, where set any S containing e is chosen with probability P 1/cS 1/c ′ . This chosen set S is added to the current solution of the algorithm: St := St−1 ∪ {S}. ′ S ∈Fe  S  Element e moves from the unprobed set to the probed set: Pt = Pt−1 ∪ {e} and Qt = Qt−1 \ {e}. As long as e remains in the instance, i.e., is not deleted, the set S will also remain in the solution. We say that e is responsible for S and denote ϕ(e) := S. Having deﬁned the process of probing elements, we explain how elements are probed. These probes are triggered by element insertions and deletions as described below. Element Arrivals. Suppose element e arrives at time t. If e is already covered in the current solution St−1 , it is added to the unprobed set (i.e., Qt = Qt−1 ∪ {e}), and the solution remains unchanged (St = St−1 ). Else, if e is not covered in the current solution, then it is probed (which adds a set ϕ(e) to St as described above), and we set Pt = Pt−1 ∪ {e}. Element Departures. Suppose element e departs from the instance at time t. If e is currently unprobed, then we set Qt = Qt \ {e}, but the solution remains unchanged: St = St−1 . Else if e is a probed element, then we set Pt = Pt−1 \ {e}. In addition, the set ϕ(e) is also removed from the previous solution St−1 . This might lead to some elements in Qt becoming uncovered in the current solution. We pick the ﬁrst uncovered element3 and probe it, which adds a set covering it to S. This set might cover some previously uncovered elements. This process continues, with the ﬁrst uncovered element in the unprobed set being probed in each iteration. The probing ends once 3  We assume an arbitrary but fixed ordering on the elements.  14  all elements in the unprobed set (and therefore, all elements overall) are covered by the chosen sets. We then deﬁne this solution as St . It is easy to see the recourse bound: no set is deleted when elements arrive, and at most 1 set is deleted when an element departs. (Recall that we piggyback set additions on deletions.) The proof of the competitive ratio proceeds via a randomized dual ﬁtting argument, and is described in Appendix D.  4  Combining Two Dynamic Algorithms  As our results show in Theorem 1.1, we have obtained two diﬀerent algorithms; one has a competitive ratio of O(log nt ), and another works for instances with maximum frequency f and gives O(f )-competitiveness, both with constant recourse. In fact, we can get stronger guarantees for the second algorithm: a competitive ratio of ft , the maximum frequency at time t. Note that ft over time can change drastically if very high-frequency elements arrive/depart (we give details of this in Appendix F.1). Now, in this section we show how we can dynamically maintain the best-of-both solutions with constant recourse. Note that this is not as simple as maintaining the solution with lower cost—the identity of the lower-cost solution could oscillate between the two (depending on ft and nt , both of which can change over time), and there is no clear way to bound the recourse (or update-time) this way. We take a more problem-speciﬁc approach to overcome this diﬃculty: indeed, we maintain diﬀerent instances of the set cover problem, one corresponding to each f value (upto a power of two), and send each element with frequency (i.e., number of sets covering it) roughly 2i to the ith instance i ; for elements with frequency more than (log n ), we send them to a diﬀerent instance I . Then, Ipd t g i which has competitive ratio we run the primal-dual algorithm (Theorem 1.1(ii)) for instances Ipd O(2i ) and recourse O(1), and run greedy (Theorem 1.1(i)) for Ig which has competitive ratio O(log nt ) with recourse O(1). Finally, if nt itself doubles/halves thereby changing the competitive ratio guarantee of the greedy algorithm, we reassign all elements in Ig to the appropriate instance according to its frequency. We thus get the following theorem for the case of recourse. Theorem 4.1. There is an efficient O(min(ft , log nt ))-competitive algorithm with recourse O(1). We can similarly build a O(min(ft3 , log nt ))-competitive combiner for the update-time model, whose update-time is O(f (f + log n)). The full details appear in Appendix F.  Acknowledgments. We thank Yuting Ge and Archit Kulkarni for enlightening discussions. Theorem 1.3 was obtained in conversations with Yuting.  15  Appendix A  Dynamic Greedy Algorithm (Update-Time): Full Details  We now furnish full details of the proof of Theorem 1.2(i). While we gave most details in Section 2.2, here the proofs are more formal and give nuanced results, namely bounds in terms of nt (the number of active elements at time t) instead of n (the total number of elements seen until time t). Moreover, we deferred the details of the implementation and data structures, which we present here. Notation. Recall that our algorithm maintains a solution (denoted St at time t) with sets that cover the active elements At . In addition, it also maintains an assignment ϕt (e) of each active element e to a unique set in St covering it; deﬁne covt (S) := {e | ϕt (e) = S} to be the set of elements assigned to S. Clearly, the sets {covt (S) | S ∈ St } are mutually disjoint and their union is At . For any set S ∈ St in the current solution which covers the elements covt (S), we deﬁne its current density to be ρt (S) := cS/|covt (S)|. At each time t, we also maintain a partition of the sets in St into levels {Lt (i)}i∈Z , with each set in St belonging to exactly one of these levels — these levels correspond to the current densities of the sets, rounded to the nearest power-of-two. Consequently, each element e ∈ At is also present in a unique level, corresponding to level of the set ϕt (e) which currently covers it. For a level i, we let At (i) denote the set of active elements which are assigned to sets at level i; i.e., At (i) := {e ∈ At | ϕ(e) ∈ Lt (i)}. Deﬁne Lt (> i) and At (> i) similarly to denote the collection of sets (and elements) in levels i + 1 and greater. Finally, we use nt = |At | to denote the current number of active elements. Our competitive ratio and recourse bounds at time t will be in terms of nt . Algorithm 1 Dynamic(et , ±) 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12:  if the operation σt is (et , +) then let S be the cheapest set containing et . (so, covt (S) is just {et }) let i be the highest level such that 2i ≤ cS = ρt (S). Move S to Lt (i) else if the operation σt is (et , −) then remove et from the set S which covers it; let S ∈ Lt (i) if S becomes empty then remove S else if the current density of S exceeds 2i+10 then move S to the the highest level ℓ such that 2ℓ ≤ ρt (S) end if end if call Stabilize(t)  A.1  Analysis Preliminaries  We now analyze the algorithm. In Appendix A.2, we show that the cost of the solutions St are always at most a logarithmic factor oﬀ the optimal solution at time step t, and in Appendix A.3, we bound the total amortized recourse. But ﬁrst, we show that Stabilize terminates in ﬁnite steps. Claim A.1. Algorithm Stabilize terminates. Proof. Suppose some change in the algorithm (either an arrival or departure) triggered a call of the algorithm Stabilize. Now, we show that the while loop terminates after ﬁnitely many steps. To this 16  Algorithm 2 Stabilize(t) 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12:  while there exists set S ∈ F and level i such that cS/|S∩At (i)| < 2i do add a copy of set S to St and set covt (S) to S ∩ At (i) ⋆ assign S to the highest level i⋆ for which 2i ≤ ρt (S) while there exists set X ∈ Lt (i) such that covt (X) ∩ covt (S) 6= ∅ do set covt (X) ← covt (X) \ covt (S), and update ρt (X) accordingly if covt (X) = ∅ then remove X from the solution else if ρt (X) > 2j+10 then assign X to the highest level ℓ such that 2ℓ ≤ ρt (X) end if end while end while  ℓ+2 end, consider the vector vt = (nℓt , nℓ+1 t , nt , . . .), where ℓ is the lowest level with non-zero elements, and nit is the number of elements at level i in the current solution, i.e., nit = |At (i)|. We claim that this vector always increases lexicographically when we perform an iteration of the outermost while loop in Algorithm Stabilize. Indeed, when pick a set S (and a corresponding index i), the new level for S is i⋆ ≤ i by deﬁnition, and hence all elements in covt (S) move down from a level ≥ i to a level < i. Some elements at level above i (covered by sets corresponding to X in the description of the algorithm) may move to levels higher than i, but none of the levels at or below i lose any elements. Hence the vector vt increases lexicographically. Since none of the coordinates of this vector can be larger than nt , this process must terminate ﬁnitely.  The curious reader might wonder whether we need the above proof given that we would in any case need to bound the total update time of the algorithm. However, our update time analysis uses the ﬁnite termination of Stabilize and so we provided the above proof. We next show some crucial invariants the algorithm satisﬁes:  (i) A set S ∈ Lt (i) has current density 2i ≤ ρt (S) ≤ 2i+10 . (ii) For each level i ∈ Z, there exists no set S ∈ F such that cS/|S∩At (i)| < 2i , i.e., if we include a new copy of S into the solution and cover the elements in S ∩ At (i), then all the elements in S ∩ At (i) will strictly improve their density level (from ≥ i to < i)  It is now easy to check that the algorithm maintains both the invariants. Claim A.2. The solution St satisfies both the invariants at all times. Proof. Suppose the invariants are satisﬁed by St . Then during the next operation, each set that is added (in both procedures Dynamic and Stabilize) is placed at a level that satisﬁes invariant (i). Moreover, the algorithm Stabilize iterates till invariant (ii) is satisﬁed (and always moves sets to the right levels to satisfy invariant (i)). So provided this procedure terminates, we know that it satisﬁes both invariants at the end of time t + 1 as well. The proof for termination will in fact follow from the proofs which bound the amortized update time. 17  A.2  Cost Analysis  Next we bound the cost of our solution. Recall that Optt denotes the cost of the optimal solution at time t. Let ρt denote Optt /nt , and it be the index such that 2it −1 < ρt ≤ 2it . Lemma A.3. The solution St has cost at most O(log nt ) Optt .4 Proof. By Invariant (i), the density of any set at levels it or lower is at most 2it +10 < 211 · ρt . So the total cost of sets in Lt (≤ it ) is at most nt · 211 · ρt ≤ 211 · Optt . In order to bound the cost of sets at higher levels, we ﬁrst claim that for all non-negative integers i ≥ 0, the number of elements covered by sets at levels it +i is at most nt /2i ; i.e., |At (it +i)| ≤ nt /2i . Suppose not. Consider the optimal solution for At restricted to the elements in At (it + i). By averaging, there exists a set S in this solution for which cS/|S∩At (it +i)| ≤ Optt/|At (it +i)| < 2i+it . But then this set S and level i + it would violate invariant (ii), a contradiction. This proves the claim; Now, for each such level it + i, where 1 ≤ i ≤ log2 nt + 2, the density of sets in the solution at this level is at most 2it +i+10 (due to invariant (i)). therefore, the total cost of sets in this level (volume times density) is at most 2it +i+10 · nt/2i ≤ 211 · Optt . Finally, the above claim also implies that all elements are covered by level it + log nt + 2. So summing the above cost-per-level bound over levels it , . . . , it + log nt + 2 completes the proof.  A.3  Update Time I: Bounding Element-Level Changes  We bound the update time in two parts: in the ﬁrst part, we assign tokens to elements, so that whenever a new set S is created in Stabilize, we will expend Ω(1) tokens from the system and redistribute the remaining tokens to satisfy some token invariants. In addition, we also expend Ω(1) tokens for each element which changes its level. Then, in Appendix A.4 we show how to maintain data structures so that the amortized time to update them can be charged to O(f log Nt ) times the number of tokens expended. So if the total number of tokens injected into the system is at most O(log Nt ) per element insertion or deletion, we would get our amortized update time to be O(f log2 Nt ) per element insertion or deletion. We now proceed with the details of the ﬁrst part. In order to clearly describe our token invariant, we again recall the base level of e deﬁned as b(e), which is the largest integer i such that 2i ≤ cS where S is the cheapest set covering e. Before presenting the token invariant, we show a simple which lower bounds the levels above which an element can be covered. Claim A.4. Each element e is covered by a set at level at least lot (e) = b(e) − ⌈log nt ⌉ − 10 or above. Proof. Suppose e is covered by a set S in level i at the beginning of update operation at time t. At this time, density of S is at most 2i+10 . Since cS ≥ 2be , and density of S is at least cnSt , it follows that i ≥ be − ⌈log nt ⌉ − 10. During the operation at time t, e could change levels. If we add a new set S containing e during Algorithm Stabilize, then ρt (S) ≥ cS /nt , and cS ≥ 2be . So if we add S at level i, we know that ρt (S) ≥ 2i , and so, i ≤ be − ⌈log Nt ⌉. Any other operation will only move e to a higher level. This proves the claim. 4 In fact we show (Lemma A.10) using a more nuanced argument that the cost is at most O(log ∆t ) Optt where ∆t is the maximum set size maxS∈F |S ∩ At | at time t.  18  Token Invariant: Any element e ∈ At covered at level i has at least 2(i − lot (e)) ≥ 0 tokens.  Token Distribution Scheme: We inject tokens when elements arrive, and redistribute them when elements move sets or depart. Crucially, our redistribution would ensure that every time a new set is added to St , a constant λ units of tokens are expended from the system. More formally: (a) Element arrival σt = (et , +): We give et a total of 2⌈log nt ⌉ + 7 tokens, and et immediately expends one unit of token for the formation of the singleton set covering it. (b) Element departure σt = (et , −): Suppose e was covered by some set S at level i. Then et has at least 2 tokens by Claim A.4 and so it expends one token from the system, and equally distributes at least one token to the remaining elements covered by S. (c) Stabilize operation: Suppose we add a set S to the solution St at some level i⋆ during an iteration of the While loop in Stabilize. Consider any element e now covered by S but earlier covered by some set Uj at level i. Suppose e has τe ≥ 2(i − lot (e)) tokens (since it currently satisﬁes the token invariant). To satisfy e’s new token requirement, e retains τe′ = 2(i⋆ −lot (e)) tokens. Then, e expends 1/2(τe − τe′ ) tokens from the system toward the creation of this set, and equally distributes the remaining 1/2(τe − τe′ ) tokens among the remaining elements still covered by Uj , i.e., the set of elements covt (Uj ) \ covt (S). Now if a set violates invariant (i) and moves up, each remaining element expends 1 token from the system (which we show can be done while satisfying the new token requirement for these elements). (d) Phase transition: When nt becomes a power of two, say 2k , and suppose the previous (diﬀerent) power-of-two value of nt was 2k−1 , then we give each element in At an additional 2 tokens. This is because each element’s token invariants has changed now (because lot (e) has increased by 1) and needs two extra tokens.5 We begin with the following easy claims. P Claim A.5. The total number of tokens introduced into the system is O( t (log nt )).  Proof. New tokens are introduced only when elements arrive, and when nt becomes a power of two. Every element arrival introduces O(log nt ) tokens with it. Moreover, when nt becomes a power-of-two, say, 2k and the previous power-of-two value of nt was 2k−1 , then we add 2 · 2k tokens into the system in step (d) in the token distribution scheme. But we can charge these extra tokens to the 2k−1 arrivals which must have happened in the period when nt increased from 2k−1 to 2k . So each arrival is associated with introducing O(log nt ) tokens, which completes the proof. Claim A.6. Whenever an element moves its level up or down, one unit of token is expended from the system. Proof. This is easy to see, as whenever we create a new set S, we explicitly make each element in S expend one token in step (c) above. Likewise, when a set moves up levels for violating invariant (i), we make each element expend one token from the system. Lemma A.7. The Token Invariant is always satisfied. 5 If the previous (different) power-of-two value of nt was 2k+1 , then we have seen departures and the token requirement is weaker, so we don’t need to give extra tokens in this case.  19  Proof. We prove this by induction: indeed, suppose the invariant holds for all times up to t − 1 and consider a time-step t. Firstly, we show that when nt becomes a power-of-two, the token invariant is satisﬁed. Indeed, suppose we have nt = 2k , and the previous (diﬀerent) power-of-two value of nt was 2k−1 . Then the token invariant for each element increases by 2, which we make sure in step (d) in the token distribution scheme. On the other hand, suppose the previous power-of-two was nt = 2k+1 , then the token invariant only becomes weaker. Next, we show that the invariant holds if the operation σ t is (e, +). Indeed, we add a new set at level b(e) to cover e and also give it 2⌈log nt ⌉ + 7 tokens in step (a) of the token scheme. It expends one token for its data structure update, and the rest clearly satisfy its token invariant at level b(e). Similarly, if the operation is (et , −), we simply delete et . Since it had at least 2 tokens by Claim A.4, we are able to make it give 1 token to the remaining elements covered by the set which was covering et and also expend 1 token from the system. Now we show that the operation Stabilize maintains the invariant. To this end, suppose we ﬁnd a set S during an iteration of the While loop of procedure Stabilize. Firstly note that the elements which are covered by the new set have requisite number of tokens since they each drop their level by at least one and we ensure in the token scheme property (c) that they retain suﬃciently many tokens to satisfy their token invariant at the new level. Now we turn our attention to the more challenging scenario when sets move up in level having lost many elements and their current density exceeds the threshold for their current level. So consider the setting when a set S moves up from level i to level i + ℓ: we now show that each remaining element covered by S can be given 2ℓ + 1 tokens, which will be suﬃcient for it to satisfy the new token invariant at level i + ℓ, and also to expend one token which we do in step (c) of the token distribution scheme. To this end, consider the ﬁrst time tinit when a set S was added to level-i, and let covtinit (S) denote the initial set of elements it covers. Also consider the ﬁrst time tfin when it violates the invariant (i) for level i, and so it moves to some higher level, say i + ℓ. Let the set of remaining elements at this time be covtfin (S). We now make some observations regarding these cardinalities. Firstly, because this set moves up from level i, its current density 2i+10 . That is, |covtfin (S)| < cS/2i+10 .  cS/|covt (S)| fin  must be greater than (5)  Likewise, since it does not move up higher than i+ℓ, its density cS/|covtfin (S)| must be strictly less than 2i+ℓ+1 (recall that when a set is relocated, it is placed in the highest level that can accommodate it). Therefore we have, |covtfin (S)| > cS/2i+ℓ+1 .  (6)  Thus we get that 2i+ℓ+1 > 2i+10 , i.e., ℓ > 9. Next, we note that when the set ﬁrst entered level i at time tinit , its density cS/|covtinit (S)| must have been less than 2i+1 (otherwise we would have placed it at level i + 1 or above); therefore, we have |covtinit (S)| > cS/2i+1 .  (7)  Similarly, when the set (and the remaining elements it covers) moves from level i to level i + ℓ at time tfin , its density is at least 2i+ℓ , i.e., |covtfin (S)| ≤ cS/2i+ℓ . 20  (8)  So from eqs. (7) and (8), we have that |covtinit (S)|/|covt (S)| fin  = 2ℓ−1 .  To complete the proof, note that each element in covtinit (S)\covtfin (S) left 1 token with the remaining elements covtfin (S) (since it either departed from the instance or moved down at least one level due to some new sets being formed). So the tokens which the remaining elements gained is at least |covtinit (S)| − |covtfin (S)| ℓ−1  ≥ 2  |covtfin (S)| − |covtfin (S)|  ℓ−1  = (2  − 1) · |covtfin (S)|  ≥ (2ℓ + 1) · |covtfin (S)|  (9) (10) (11) (12)  The last inequality uses ℓ ≥ 9. Hence, when the set (along with the remaining elements) moves up to level i + ℓ, each of these elements get 2ℓ extra tokens to meet their new token requirement. Thus, we have shown that the token invariant holds at all times. Therefore, by Claims A.5, A.6 and Lemmas 2.3 and A.3 we get the following theorem. Theorem A.8. The above algorithm satisfies the following properties: 1. At all times t, the solution St is feasible for At and has cost O(log nt ) times the optimal cost. 2. Every time a new set is formed, each element expends one token from the system. 3. Every time a set changes level, each covered element expends one token from the system. P 4. The total number of tokens expended till time T is O( Tt=1 log nt ).  A.4  Update Time II: Details of Data Structures  We now give details of the data structures needed to complete the description of our fully dynamic algorithm. The crucial step to implement fast is in the Stabilize procedure where we ﬁnd the best density set using elements currently covered at level i for some i. The main observation is that we will look for such sets only when we move an element to a new level, say i. Therefore, it should suﬃce to look at the f sets containing an element whenever we change its level, and see if their current densities cS /|At (i)| < 2i . Since each element expends one token when it changes its level, the total update time would then be within a factor f of the total number of tokens spent by the elements, if we can maintain these data structures consistently. Indeed, implementing this idea requires us to be careful with the data-structure, although we use only simple data-structures such as doubly-linked lists and arrays. Data Structures.  We maintain the following data structures.  • For each S ∈ St , cov(S) is a doubly-linked list6 whose cells contain the diﬀerent active elements S is responsible for covering in the current solution; we also store the level of S using level(S). 6  All lists will be doubly-linked to allow constant-time inserts and deletes of elements (as long as we have a pointer to the element we want to delete). Moreover, each list element also maintains a pointer to the head of the list, where we maintain the current length of the list.  21  • For each set S ∈ F and each level i7 , densityLevelS [i] is an linked list of the set of elements in S ∩ At (i), i.e., the set of elements which are currently in level i which can be covered by S. This is the crucial data structure which helps us quickly see if there is an unstable set. The ﬁrst cell in densityLevelS [i] also has the size of this list, which we denote by n(S, i). • For each level i, there is one list unstableList(i) which has the candidate list of sets which may be unstable. Over time, as our algorithm makes changes by moving elements up and down, a set which entered this list may need to be removed since it may no longer be unstable. Moreover, if a set S is unstable at level i, then its cell in unstableList(i) will contain a pointer to densityLevelS [i] and vice versa. • We also have a global unstableList which is a linked list of pointers to the heads of all nonempty unstableList(i) for diﬀerent i’s. If an individual unstableList(i) becomes empty, then it deletes its corresponding node from this list. • A global list tempList which contains the list of sets which need to ﬂoat up after losing some elements. • Finally, every element e ∈ At stores the following: (i) coverNode(e) is a pointer to e’s cell in the list cov(S) where S is the set currently covering e; (ii) a linked list levelSet(e) which contains a pointer to each of the cells corresponding to e in the f diﬀerent lists densityLevelS [i] where S covers e, and i is the current level of e. Update Procedures. the update operations.  Now we give details of the procedures which will form building blocks of  • Algorithm 3 (RemoveElement) takes as input an element e which is currently at level i, and removes e from this level, either because we want to move it to a diﬀerent level or delete it. The procedure, by traversing levelSet(e), removes e from the corresponding lists densityLevelS [i] for every set S containing e. Since we are only removing an element from level i, we will not create any new unstable sets at level i, but it is possible that S was unstable at level i and now becomes stable after removal of e from it — this is why we have a pointer from densityLevelS [i] to the node corresponding to S in unstableList(i), if S is present in the latter list. In this case, we remove S from the list of unstable sets at level i. Observe that levelSet(e) becomes empty after this step since we are yet to place e in its new level. {densityLevelS }S∈Fe as long as e ∈ At ). • Algorithm 4 (InsertSet(S, X, i)) takes a set S along with a subset X ⊆ S and index i, adds S to our solution St , places it at level i and sets cov(S) to X. For every element e ∈ X, and every set S ′ ∈ Fe , we add e to densityLevelS ′ [i]. This may make some of these S ′ unstable, in which case we add them to the list of unstable sets at level i. • Next, Algorithm 5 describes the implementation of Stabilize, really just ﬁlling in the datastructure details in Algorithm 2. We ﬁrst ﬁnd an unstable set S at some level i. Let i⋆ be the level where it should be placed. After inserting S at level i⋆ , we need to remove elements getting covered by it – these elements have come down from level i to level i⋆ . Now, it is possible that the sets which were covering these elements (at level i) will ﬂoat up to higher 7  While there are many density levels overall, each set S will only concern with a range of O(log nt ) density levels between cS /nt and cS . So even though we index this array using a global density level of i, we only store log nt entries here and simply use an appropriate offset on the index. For clarity of presentation, we omit this detail.  22  levels. So, whenever we move such an element down, we also add the set previously covering it to a temporary list. Finally, we check all the sets in this list, and move them up if needed. Moving such a set up involves a call to InsertSet algorithm. • Having described Stabilize, the actual insert or delete operations are easy; Algorithm 6 (Dynamic) gives the implementation details for Algorithm 1. To add an element e, we check for the cheapest set containing it, and call InsertSet() with suitable parameters. To delete an element e currently covered by a set S, we update cov(S) and check if it needs to move up (or if cov(S) becomes empty, we will just delete it). These steps are formalized in Algorithm Update(). Running Time Analysis. Note that RemoveElement takes O(f ) time; RemoveSet and InsertSet take O(f · |X|) time. It follows that the outer while loop in Stabilize takes time O(f · |X|) + O(f · P ′ ′ S ′ |cov(S )|), where the summation is over those sets S ∈ tempList which move up. But notice that |X| elements from S have moved down at least one level, and elements in S ′ move up. So the total update time can be bounded in terms of f times the total number of times elements change levels. The same argument holds for the Dynamic algorithm. Hence we get the main theorem: Theorem A.9. There is a fully-dynamic O(log nt )-factor approximation algorithm for set cover PT with total update complexity of O( t=1 (f log(nt )) over T element operations. Algorithm 3 RemoveElement(e, i) for every set S containing e (use the list levelSet(e)) do 2: remove e from densityLevelS [i] and decrement n(S, i). 3: if (S ∈ unstableList(i) and cS /n(S, i) ≥ 2i ) then remove S from this list. 4: end for 1:  Algorithm 4 InsertSet(S, X, i) 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9:  add S to St , and set cov(S) ← X, level(S) ← i. for every e ∈ X do initialize levelSet(e) ← ∅. for each set S ′ containing e do add e to densityLevelS ′ [i], and add this node to levelSet(e). increment n(S ′ , i) if cS ′ /n(S ′ , i) < 2i then add S ′ to unstableList(i) if not already in this list. end for end for  A.5  Better Cost Analysis  We now state and prove Lemma A.10, which gets an improved competitive ratio of O(log ∆t ): recall that ∆t is the maximum set size at time t, i.e., maxS∈F |S ∩ At |. Lemma A.10. The solution St has cost at most O(log ∆t ) Optt . Proof. Our proof now proceeds via a dual ﬁtting argument. Recall the dual of the set cover LP: P P (13) max{ e∈At ỹe | e∈At ∩S ỹe ≤ cS ∀S ∈ F, ỹe ≥ 0}. 23  Algorithm 5 Implementation for Stabilize() 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13: 14: 15: 16: 17: 18: 19: 20: 21: 22: 23: 24: 25: 26:  while there is a level i such that unstableList(i) is non-empty do S ← dequeue(unstableList(i)) X ← densityLevelS [i] ⊲ these are the elements S will cover ⋆ ⋆ i i ← highest level such that 2 < cS /n(S, i) Initialize tempList ← ∅ for e ∈ X do RemoveElement(e, i) suppose coverNode(e) in list cov(S ′ )8 ⊲ i.e., S ′ was covering e at level i. add S ′ to tempList if not already in this list. remove coverNode(e) from list cov(S ′ ). add new node coverNode(e) to list cov(S). end for InsertSet(S, cov(S), i⋆ ) for every set S ′ ∈ tempList do ⊲ move S ′ up or delete if empty ′ if |cov(S )| = 0 then remove S ′ from the solution St . else ⊲ move S ′ to higher level if cS ′ /|cov(S ′ )| > 2i+10 then for e ∈ cov(S ′ ) do RemoveElement(e, i) end for ′ InsertSet(S ′ , cov(S ′ ), i′ ) where i′ is the highest level such that 2i < cS ′ /n(S ′ , i). end if end if end for end while  24  Algorithm 6 Implementation for Dynamic(et , ±) 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13: 14: 15: 16: 17: 18: 19: 20: 21: 22: 23:  if the operation σt is (et , +) then S ← cheapest set containing et cov(S) ← {et }. ⊲ add new copy of S with one element update coverNode(et ) accordingly i ← highest level such that 2i ≤ cS = ρt (S) level(S) ← i InsertSet(S, cov(S), i) else if the operation σt is (et , −) then S ← set covering et , say at level i RemoveElement(et , i) remove et from S and update cov(S) if |cov(S)| == 0 then ⊲ set S is empty remove S from solution St else if cS /|cov(S)| > 2i+10 then ⊲ move S up for e ∈ cov(S) do RemoveElement(e, i) end for ′ InsertSet(S, cov(S), i′ ), where i′ is the highest level such that 2i < cS /n(S, i). end if end if end if Stabilize()  25  P We now exhibit a dual ỹe such that (a) the cost of St can be bounded by O(1) e∈At ỹe , and (b) ỹe /(log ∆t + 2) is feasible for the dual LP (25). This will establish the proof of the lemma via standard LP duality. Let us deﬁne ỹe to be 2i if e is covered in level i. To show (a), consider any set S ∈ St which is at level i. Then, by invariant (i), the density of set S is at most 2i+10 . Therefore, the number of elements S currently covers (according to covt (·)) is at least cS /2i+10 . Since each such element P assigned to S has dual value ỹe = 2i , we get that cS ≤ 210 · e∈covt (S) ỹe . Summing over all S ∈ St , and noting that covt (·) deﬁnes a partition of the set of elements At , establishes (a).  To show (b), for any set S ∈ F, let us deﬁne iSh := max{i : 2i ≤ cS }, and iSl := iSh − ⌈log ∆t ⌉. We covered at level iSl or below: P ﬁrst bound the sum of duals for elements in set S that are ỹe ≤ cS . Indeed, for any such element e ∈ At (≤ iSl ), we have ỹe ≤ cS /∆t and the e∈At (≤iS l )∩S sum is over at most ∆t ≥ |At ∩ S| active elements in S. Next, we observe that for any level i, we have |At (i) ∩ S| ≤ cS /2i . Suppose not, and there exists i such that |At (i) ∩ S| > cS /2i . But then, this set S violates invariant (ii) at level i, contradicting the S i stability of St . This immediately P gives us that At (i) ∩ S = ∅ ifor i > ih , since 2 > cS . Furthermore, S S for all il ≤ i ≤ ih , we have e∈A Pt (i)∩S ỹe ≤ cS since ỹe = 2 for all such e ∈ At (i) ∩ S. Therefore, summing over all i, we get that e∈S ỹe ≤ (log ∆t + 2)cS . This establishes (b) and also completes the proof of the lemma. Using the above Lemma instead of Lemma A.3, we get the following theorem. Theorem A.11. There is aP fully-dynamic O(log ∆t )-factor approximation algorithm for set cover with total update time of O( Tt=1 (f log(nt )) over T element arrivals and departures.  B  Dynamic Greedy Algorithm (Recourse): Full Details  In this section, we prove Theorem 1.1(i). Our algorithmic framework is identical to the one in Appendix A, with the crucial change being that we don’t treat all elements identically. In fact, for each element e ∈ At , we will also deﬁne its volume vol(e, i) as a function of e and the level i it is located in. Similarly, P for a set of elements X ⊆ At and some level i, we extend the deﬁnition of volume to vol(X, i) = e∈X vol(e, i). Now, for any set S ∈ St in the current solution which covers the elements covt (S), we deﬁne its level-i-current density to be ρt (S, i) := cS/vol(covt (S),i). This now corresponds to the ratio of cost to the level-i volume of elements it covers. Finally, to complete the description, we now deﬁne the volume of an element e at some level i. Indeed, consider any element e, and let Se denote the minimum cost set which covers e. Then let b(e) be the highest level i such that 2i ≤ cSe . Then, the volume v(e, i) of element e at a level i is deﬁned to be 2i−b(e) . Note that the volume of an element is 1 at the level b(e) and decreases geometrically as it moves to lower indexed levels. For the remainder of the sub-section, b(e) is said to be the base level for element e. Our algorithm would always try to ﬁnd stable solutions where no local improvement in the current density of elements is possible. We formalize this with the following two invariants which our algorithm satisﬁes at the beginning all time-steps: (i) A set S ∈ Lt (i) has current density 2i ≤ ρt (S, i) ≤ 2i+10 . (ii) For each level i ∈ Z, there exists no set S ∈ F such that the elements S ∩ At (i) can be brought down to level i − 1 or below by adding a new copy of set S to St . Formally, there exists no S ∈ F such that cS/vol(S∩At (i),i) < 2i . 26  Algorithm 7 RecourseAlgo(et , ±) 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13:  if the operation σt is (et , +) then let S be the cheapest set containing et let b(e) be the highest level i such that 2i ≤ cS Add a copy of S to Lt (b(e)) and set covt (S) = {et } else if the operation σt is (et , −) then denote ϕt (e) by S, and set covt (S) = covt (S) \ {e}; suppose S belongs to level Lt (i) if covt (S) becomes empty then remove S from St else if the current density ρt (S, i) exceeds 2i+10 then move S to the the highest level ℓ such that 2ℓ ≤ ρt (S, ℓ) end if end if call Procedure Stabilize(t)  Algorithm 8 Stabilize(t) 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13:  while there exists set S ∈ F and level i such that cS/vol(S∩At (i),i) < 2i do ⋆ ⋆ let i⋆ ≤ i be the highest index such that 2i ≤ cS/vol(S∩At (i),i⋆ ) ≤ 2i +10 add a copy of set S to our solution and set covt (S) to S ∩ At (i) assign S to the level i⋆ while there exists set X ∈ Lt (i) such that covt (X) ∩ covt (S) 6= ∅ do set covt (X) ← covt (X) \ covt (S), and update ρt (X, i) accordingly if covt (X) = ∅ then remove X from the solution else if the current density of X exceeds 2i+10 then move X to the the highest level ℓ such that 2ℓ ≤ ρt (X, ℓ) end if end while end while  27  The analysis of this algorithm involves showing the following properties: • Correctness. For any unstable solution, the sequence of ﬁx operations is ﬁnite. Furthermore, any subset can always be placed in some level. • Competitive Ratio. Any stable solution has total weight O(log nt ) times Optt . • Recourse. The number of sets added by this algorithm to the solution, averaged over the element arrivals and departures, is O(1). The proof of termination of Stabilize is identical to Claim A.1 and we omit it for avoiding redundancy. Next, we prove the validity of the algorithm by showing that every subset can be placed at some level. In particular, this shows that the term i∗ is well deﬁned in the algorithm Stabilize. Lemma B.1. Every subset covering any set of elements can be placed at some density level. Proof. Consider a set S covering a subset X of elements, and suppose it does not satisfy the density condition in invariant (i) for any level. Since the vol(X, i) is an increasing function of i, there must be two adjacent levels i and i + 1 such that the set S has too low a density for level i + 1 and too high a density for level i. In other words, the former condition implies that 2i+1 > cS/vol(X,i+1) and 2i+10 < cS/vol(X,i). But note that by the way we have deﬁned vol, we have vol(X, i) = 2vol(X, i + 1), which in turn implies that 2i+10 < cS/vol(X,i) = 2cS/vol(X,i+1) < 2 · 2i+1 = 2i+2 , which gives us the desired contradiction.  B.1  Bounding Cost  Next we bound the cost of our solution. Let Optt denotes the cost of the optimal solution at time t. Let ρt denote Optt /nt , and let it be the index such that 2it −1 < ρt ≤ 2it . We ﬁrst begin with a simple but useful claim about the highest level an element can belong in. (Same as Claim 2.5.) Claim B.2. Consider any solution St which satisfies the invariants (i) and (ii). Then, for all elements e ∈ At , e will be covered in a level at most b(e). So the volume of e is at most 1. Proof. Suppose not, and suppose there exists an element e currently covered in level ℓ ≥ b(e) + 1 in a solution St which satisﬁes invariants (i) and (ii). Then, let S be the cheapest set containing e. Therefore, by deﬁnition of b(e), we have that 2b(e) ≤ cS < 2b(e)+1 , and moreover, that vol(e, b(e)) = 1. But now, we claim that S along with e would violate invariant (ii) at level ℓ. Indeed, we have that cS /vol(e, ℓ) ≤ cS /2 < 2b(e) < 2ℓ , which establishes the desired contradiction. The next lemma asserts that all density levels lower than it can be more or less ignored in calculating the cost of the solution. Lemma B.3. The total cost of all subsets in levels below it is O(Optt ). Proof. Every set S at a level below it has density at most 2it +10 ≤ 2 · (Optt /nt ) · 210 . Since the volume of every element at any levels is at most 1 (as it always appears in a level at most its base level from Claim 2.5), and there are at most nt elements in the current active set At , the total cost of sets in all levels including and below level it is at most Optt · 211 . 28  We next bound the cost of sets in any single level. Lemma B.4. The total cost of all subsets in any level i ≥ it at any time step is O(Optt ). Proof. Suppose not, and there exists some level i > it such that the sum of costs of sets in density level i is strictly greater than Optt · 210 . Then, since the density of every set in level i is at most 2i+10 , it follows that the total volume of elements in level i is strictly greater than Optt /2i . Since these elements are covered by an optimal solution of total cost Optt , it follows that there exists some set S ∈ F which would have current density in this level strictly less than 2i , which then contradicts invariant (ii). Finally, we show that the levels above it + log nt + 1 are empty. Lemma B.5. There are no sets in St at levels above it + log nt + 1. Proof. This almost immediately follows from Claim 2.5. Indeed, note that Optt ≥ 2b(e) for all e ∈ At since 2b(e) deﬁnes a lower bound on the cost of the cheapest set covering e. Therefore, the highest level with any element is at most maxe∈At b(e) which is at most log Optt ≤ log ρt + log nt ≤ it + log nt .  B.2  Bounding Recourse  Finally, we show the recourse bound. This will be proved via a token scheme, where the token invariant is that every element, when it ﬁrst enters a level, has tokens equal to its volume at the corresponding level; over time, it may gain more tokens as it stays at the level which it uses should it move to a higher level where our invariant will force it to have a higher token requirement. Clearly, when an element arrives, the invariant is satisﬁed as it enters its base level and therefore, requires one token which can be provided and charged to the element arrival. This is the only external injection of tokens into the system. Hence, if we are able to show a) that the token invariant can be maintained and b) whenever a new set is added to the solution, we can expend a constant λ fraction of tokens from the system, then we can claim that the total number of sets ever added (and therefore ever deleted) is at most 1/λ times the number of element arrivals. We now describe the token-based argument we use to bound the recourse, starting with the crucial invariant we maintain and then the token distribution scheme. Token Invariant: Consider any element e ∈ At which is covered at level i in the current solution St . Then, it has tokens at least as much as its level-i volume vol(e, i). Token Distribution Scheme: We inject tokens when elements arrive, and redistribute them when elements move sets or depart. Crucially, our redistribution would ensure that every time a new set is added to St , a constant λ units of tokens are expended from the system. More formally: (a) Element arrival σt = (et , +): We give et two units of tokens, and et immediately expends one unit of token for the formation of the singleton set covering it. (b) Element departure σt = (et , −): Suppose e was covered by some set S at level i. Then et equally distributes its tokens (at least vol(et , i)) to the remaining elements covered by S. (c) Stabilize operation: Suppose we add a set S to the solution St at some level i⋆ during an iteration of the While loop in Stabilize. Consider any element e now covered by S but earlier covered by some set Uj at level i. Suppose e has τe ≥ vol(e, i) tokens (since it currently 29  satisﬁes the token invariant). To satisfy e’s new token requirement, e retains vol(e, i⋆ ) tokens. Then, e expends 1/2(τe − vol(e, i)) tokens from the system toward the creation of this set, and equally distributes the remaining 1/2(τe − vol(e, i)) tokens among the remaining elements still covered by Uj , i.e., the set of elements covt (Uj ) \ covt (S). We now show that the above scheme will maintain the token invariant at all time-steps, and also guarantee a) that the number of tokens brought into the system is bounded by O(t) after t element operations, and b) that at least λ = 2−12 tokens are expended any time a new set is added to St . To this end, we begin with the following easy claims. Claim B.6. The total number of tokens introduced into the system is at most 2t. Proof. The only injection of tokens into the system is on element arrivals, when we introduce 2 tokens into the system per arrival. Claim B.7. Whenever a new set is created, λ ≥ 2−11 units of tokens are expended from the system. Proof. If the new set is added when an element arrives, then we expend one token from the system by deﬁnition in the token distribution scheme. So consider the case when a new set S is formed at some time-step t in some level i. We ﬁrst show that the total level-i volume of the elements covt (S) now covered by S is at least 2−10 . Indeed, consider an element e ∈ covt (S) with base level b(e). Recall that the base level is deﬁned according to the minimum cost set containing e, and so we have cS ≥ 2b(e) . But since the set is formed at level i, its current density satisﬁes ρt (S, i) ≤ 2i+10 . It follows that the total level-i volume vol(covt (S), i) of elements covered by this set S is at least cS /ρt (S, i) ≥ 2b(e)−i−10 . So if i ≤ b(e), we get the desired bound on the volume of the new set formed. On the other hand, if i > b(e), then it already has vol(e, i) > 1 and again we have vol(covt (S), i) ≥ 1 in this case. Next, note that when the new set is formed, each element e newly covered by S has dropped its level by at least 1, since this is the criterion for forming new sets in Stabilize. This implies that each such element had at least vol(e, i⋆ + 1) = 2vol(e, i⋆ ) tokens before the new set was formed. Then, it retains vol(e, i⋆ ) tokens to satisfy its new token requirement, and expends at least 1/2(2vol(e, i⋆ ) − vol(e, i⋆ )) = 1/2vol(e, i⋆ ) tokens for the formation of the new set. Since P each newly covered element does the same, we get that the total tokens expended is at least 1/2 e∈covt (S) vol(e, i⋆ ) ≥ 2−11 from the above volume lower bound. Claim B.8. The Token Invariant is always satisfied. Proof. We ﬁrst show that the invariant is satisﬁed after a new element arrives, i.e., the operation σ t is (e, +). By deﬁnition, element e gets covered by at level b(e), and so, its token invariant requires it to have vol(e, b(e) = 1 tokens which we give it when it arrives. Similarly, if the operation is (e, −), we simply delete e, and there is one fewer token invariant to satisfy. Now we show that the operation Stabilize maintains the invariant. To this end, suppose we ﬁnd a set S during an iteration of the While loop of procedure Stabilize. Firstly note that the elements which are covered by the new set have requisite number of tokens since they each drop their level by at least one and we ensure in the token scheme property (c) that they retain suﬃciently many tokens to satisfy their token invariant at the new level. Now we turn our attention to the more challenging scenario when sets move up in level having lost many elements and their current density exceeds the threshold for their current level. So consider the setting when a set S moves up from level i to level i + ℓ, and consider the ﬁrst time tinit when a set S was added to level-i, and let vol(covtinit (S), i) denote the initial level-i volume of 30  the elements it covers. Also consider the ﬁrst time tfin when it violates the invariant (i) for level i, and so it moves to some level, say i + ℓ. Let its level-i volume of the remaining elements at this time be vol(covtfin (S), i). We now make some observations regarding these volumes through the corresponding current densities. Firstly, because this set moves up from level i its level-i current density greater than 2i+10 . That is, vol(covtfin (S), i) < cS/2i+10 .  cS/vol(covt (S),i) fin  must be (14)  Likewise, since it does not move up higher than i + ℓ, its level-i + ℓ + 1-density cS/vol(covtfin (S),i+ℓ+1) must be strictly less than 2i+ℓ+1 (recall that when a set is relocated, it is placed in the highest level that can accommodate it). Therefore we have, vol(covtfin (S), i + ℓ + 1) > cS/2i+ℓ+1 .  (15)  Moreover, vol(covtfin (S), i + ℓ + 1) = 2ℓ+1 · vol(covtfin (S), i) by deﬁnition of the volume function. This, along with Equations (14) and (15) implies that 2i+ℓ+1 · 2ℓ+1 > 2i+10 , i.e., ℓ > 5. Next, we note that when the set ﬁrst entered level i at time tinit , its level-(i+1) density cS/vol(covtinit (S),i+1) must have been less than 2i+1 (otherwise we would have placed it at level i + 1 or above); therefore, we have vol(covtinit (S), i + 1) > cS/2i+1 ,  (16)  vol(covtinit (S), i) > cS/2i+2 ,  (17)  and so it’s level-i volume satisﬁes  Similarly, when the set (and the remaining elements it covers) moves from level i to level i + ℓ at time tfin , its level-(i + ℓ) density is at least 2i+ℓ , i.e., vol(covtfin (S), i + ℓ) ≤ cS/2i+ℓ ,  (18)  and hence its level-i volume satisﬁes vol(covtfin (S), i) ≤ cS/2i+2ℓ .  (19)  So from eqs. (17) and (19), we have that vol(covtinit (S),i)/vol(covt (S),i) fin  = 22ℓ−2 ≥ 16 · 2ℓ .  To complete the proof, note that all the elements in covtinit (S) \ covtfin (S) together left 1/4 of their vol(covtinit (S) \ covtfin (S), i) tokens with the remaining elements covtfin (S). So the tokens which the remaining elements gained is at least 1/4 (vol(covt  init  (S) \ covtfin (S), i))   = 1/4 vol(covtinit (S), i) − vol(covtfin (S), i)  (20) (21)   ≥ 1/4 16 · 2ℓ vol(covtfin (S), i) − vol(covtfin (S), i) ≥ 4 · 2 · vol(covtfin (S), i)  (23)  ≥ vol(covtfin (S), i + ℓ)  (24)  ℓ  31  (22)  Hence, when the set (along with the remaining elements) moves up to level i + ℓ, these elements have as many tokens as their volume in level i + ℓ, ensuring that the token invariant holds.  Thus, we have shown that the token invariant holds at all times. Therefore, by Claims 2.6, B.6 and B.8, we get the following lemma. Lemma B.9. The total number of sets added till time T is at most  2T/λ.  Putting Lemmas A.3 and B.9 together, we get the following theorem: Theorem B.10. For any sequence of T insertions or deletions, there is an efficient algorithm which maintains a collection of set cover solutions St such that each St is O(log nt )-competitive for the active set At , and the total recourse (i.e., number of sets added or deleted) is O(T ).  B.3  Better Cost Analysis  Much like in the update time model, we can again get an improved competitive ratio of O(log ∆t ) analysis for the same algorithm. Lemma B.11. The solution St has cost at most O(log ∆t ) Optt . Proof. Our proof is a suitable adaptation of that of Lemma A.10, but we provide complete details to make it self-contained. Recall the dual of the set cover LP: P P max{ e∈At ỹe | e∈At ∩S ỹe ≤ cS ∀S ∈ F,  ỹe ≥ 0}.  (25)  P We now exhibit a dual ỹe such that (a) the cost St can be bounded by O(1) e∈At ỹe , and (b) ỹe /(log ∆t + 2) is feasible for the dual LP (25). This will establish the proof of the lemma. To this end, we deﬁne ỹe to be 2i vol(e, i) if e is covered in level i. To show (a), consider any set S ∈ St which is in level i. Then, we have by invariant (i), that the density of set S is at most 2i+10 . Therefore, the volume of elements S currently covers (according to covt (·)) is at i least cS /2i+10 P . Since each such element assigned to S has dual value ỹe = 2 vol(e, i), we get that 10 cS ≤ 2 · e∈covt (S) ỹe . Summing over sets S ∈ St , and noting that covt (·) deﬁnes a partition of the set of elements At , establishes (a).  To show (b), for any set S ∈ F, we deﬁne iSh := max{i : 2i ≤ cS } and iSl := iShP− ⌈log ∆t ⌉. We ﬁrst bound the sum of duals of elements in S that are covered in levels iSl or below: e∈At (≤iS )∩S ỹe ≤ cS . l  Indeed, any element e ∈ At (≤ iSl ) has ỹe ≤ cS /∆t since the volume of any element in a stable solution is at most 1 by Claim B.2, and the sum is over |At ∩ S| ≤ ∆t active elements in S.  Next, we observe that for any level i, we have vol(At (i) ∩ S, i) ≤ cS /2i . Suppose not, and there exists i such that vol(At (i) ∩ S, i) > cS /2i . But then, this set S violates invariant (ii) at level i, contradicting the stability of St . This immediately gives us that At (i) ∩ S = ∅ for i > iSh . To see this, note that if a level i > iSh has an element e in S, i.e., e ∈ At (i) ∩ S, then the volume of e will be strictly greater than 1 since its base level b(e) ≤ iSh . This contradicts our volume bound of S cS /2i P ≤ cS /2ih +1 < 1 at all levels i > iSh . Moreover, this also gives us that for all iSl ≤ i ≤ iSh , we have e∈At (i)∩S ỹeP≤ cS since ỹe = 2i vol(e, i) for all such e ∈ At (i) ∩ S. Therefore, summing over all i, we get that e∈S ỹe ≤ (log ∆t + 2)cS . This establishes (b) and also completes the proof of the lemma. 32  Using the above Lemma instead of Lemmas B.3 and B.4, we get the following theorem. Theorem B.12. For any sequence of T element arrivals and departures, there is an efficient algorithm that maintains a set cover solution St that is O(log ∆t )-competitive for the active set At at each time t. Furthermore, the total recourse (i.e., number of sets added or deleted to this solution) over the entire sequence of T element arrivals and departures is O(T ).  C  Dynamic Primal-Dual Algorithm (Update-Time): Full Details  In this section, we furnish complete details of our dynamic primal-dual algorithm in the update time model and the proof of Theorem 1.2(ii). Recall our notation: given a set system (U, F), and an element e, let Fe denote the sets containing e, and let fe := |Fe |. Let ft = maxe∈At fe denote the maximum number of sets containing any active element. As described in Section 3.1, we maintain our sets in levels, and they automatically induce levels for elements. • Set and Element “Levels”. At all times, each set S ∈ F resides at an integer level, denoted by level(S). For an element e ∈ At , deﬁne level(e) := maxS :e∈S level(S) to be the largest level of any set covering it. • Set and Element “Dual Values”. Given levels for sets and elements, the dual value of an element e is deﬁned to be y(e) P := 2−level(e) . The dual value of a set S ∈ F is the sum of dual values of its elements, y(S) := e∈S∩At y(e).  Recall the dual of the set cover LP: P P max{ e∈At ỹe | e∈At ∩S ỹe ≤ cS ∀S ∈ F,  ỹe ≥ 0}.  (26)  Now our solution at time t is simply all sets whose dual constraints are approximately tight, i.e., St = {S : y(S) ≥ cS/β } for β := 32f . In addition, we will try to ensure that the duals y(e) we maintain will be approximately feasible for (26), i.e., for every set y(S) ≤ βcS . Then, note that bounding the cost becomes a simple application of weak duality. The question then — as with previous work as well, e.g. [BHI15a] — is about how we maintain such a dual solution dynamically when elements arrive and depart. We achieve this by deﬁning a base level for every set to indicate non-tight dual constraints, and maintaining that all sets above their base levels always have approximately tight dual constraints. Formally, the base level for set S is deﬁned to be b(S) := −⌈log(βcS )⌉ − 1, and our solution St consists of all sets which are located strictly above their respective base levels, i.e., St = {S ∈ F : level(S) > b(S)}. To initialize, each set S is placed at level b(S). We will maintain the invariant that every set lies either at its base level or above. The reason we deﬁne base level this way is the following: suppose a new element e arrives and it is uncovered, i.e., all its covering sets are at their base levels. Then, by the way we have deﬁned level of an element, it would have a dual value of y(e) = 1/2b(Se ) > 2βcSe where Se is the set with highest b(S) value (or equivalently lowest cost) among all sets covering e. Now this means that the set Se would have y(Se ) > 2βcSe and so our algorithm would move it up in order to satisfy approximate dual feasibility, thereby including it in the solution. We ensure the approximate tightness (and approximate feasibility) of dual constraints using the stability property below, which is again the key deﬁnition of our algorithm and similar to [BHI15a]. • Stable Sets. A set is stable if it satisﬁes the following conditions: if level(S) > b(S) we have y(S) ∈ [cS/β , βcS ], and if level(S) = b(S) we have y(S) < βcS . 33  As mentioned in Section 3.1, the algorithm follows the principle of least eﬀort toward ensuring stability of all sets: if at some point y(S) is too large, S moves up the least number of levels so that the resulting y(S) falls within the admissible range, and similarly if y(S) is too small, it moves down until y(S) ≥ cS/β . We re-state the high-level description of the algorithm for a self-contained presentation in this section. Arrival: When e arrives, deﬁne y(e) := 1/2maxS:e∈S level(S) , update all y(S), and run Stabilize. Departure: Delete e from At , update y(S) for all sets, and run Stabilize. Stabilize: While there exists some S at level level(S) such that y(S) > βcS : ﬁnd the lowest level ℓ′ > level(S) such that placing S at level ℓ′ results in y(S) ≤ βcS . Analogously, if y(S) < cS/β , ﬁnd the highest level ℓ′ < level(S) such that placing S at level ℓ′ results in y(S) ≥ cS/β . If such an ℓ′ ≥ b(S) − 1, we place S at level b(S) and drop S from St .  Data Structures. The algorithm will maintain a queue Q of sets for which one of the invariant conditions is violated. For each set S, the algorithm will maintain several doubly-linked lists, collectively denoted by lists(S) : (i) out(S): these are the elements in S whose level is equal to level(S), (ii) for every l > level(S), a list inl (S) of elements in S whose level is exactly l. Note that for every element e and each set S containing e, e is present in exactly one of the lists among out(S) and the diﬀerent inℓ (S) for ℓ > level(S). We use node(e, S) to refer to the physical node/cell containing e in the appropriate list it belongs to. Finally, for every element e, we have a doubly linked list, nodelist(e), which contains node(e, S) for every set S containing e. When Algorithm 10 (Stabilize) is invoked, it considers a set S in Q, and will either increase or decrease its level till it satisﬁes the stability property. We now describe how these steps work in detail. There are two cases (details given in Algorithm Stabilize): • Case (i) y(S) > βcS : In this case, we move the set S up. As it moves up, we need to keep track of change in y(S). One naive way to do this would be to re-compute y(S) each time it moves up. This could lead to high update time. Instead, we keep two running sums: y o (S), which is the contribution of elements in out(S) toward y(S), and y i (S), which is the remaining contribution to y(S). Now updating y o (S) and y i (S), as we move from a level ℓ − 1 to ℓ, only requires time dependent on inℓ (S). We keep moving S up till S satisﬁes the stability condition. Note that this will happen before S reaches the level ⌈log(n/cS )⌉. Indeed, if S reaches this level, then y(e) ≤ cnS , and so, y(S) < cS . Since y(S) can decrease by at most a factor of 2 when we go up one level, y(S) was at most 2cS just before moving to this level – but then we would not have moved S up.Finally, when the upward move stops at a level ∗ ℓ∗ , we update the following: (i) set y(e) values of all elements in out(S) to be 1/2ℓ ; (ii) if e was in the out(S ′ ) list of some set S ′ , then remove it and add e to the inℓ∗ (S ′ ) list, or if e was in the inℓ′ (S ′ ) list for some S ′ residing at a level below l∗ , remove e from this list and add it to the list inℓ∗ (S ′ ); (iii) update the corresponding y(S ′ ) values for all S ′ ∈ Fe ; and (iv) this may cause violation of stability property for some S ′ , in which case we add it to Q. Overall, this step requires some care in updating the data structures and we use nodelist(e) to guide us through the correct lists which e previously belonged to, and change them. These steps are formalized in Algorithm 10 Stabilize. In Lines 3-11, we move the set S up till it satisﬁes the stability property. In Lines 12-16, we go through all elements e in out(S) and 34  update the yS ′ values of any set S ′ containing any such element. This may also need placing e in the correct list for S ′ , and adding S ′ to Q (Algorithm 11 (UpdateDual)). Note that Algorithm 11 (UpdateDual) takes three parameters – an element e, its old y(e) value (before we moved S), and the new y(e) value (after we have moved S). • Case (ii) y(S) < cβS : In this case, we move S down. We again follow a similar process as in case (i). In case there was a set S ′ containing e at level ℓ, we need to remove it from out(S) and add it to inℓ (S). We stop moving S down it satisﬁes the stability condition (Lines 18-29). Note that it will trivially satisfy stability property if it reaches the base level b(S). Indeed, if it reaches the base level, then y(S) was at most cβS just before it moved to this level. Since y(S) can increase by at most a factor 2, it will satisfy the stability property required at the base level. As in case (i) above, updating y(e) value means that we need to call UpdateDual. For some technical details, we update all the data structures each time S moves a single level, whereas in case (i), we do these updates only after S settles ﬁnally in a level ℓ∗ after coming out of the loop at Line 3. Finally, we brieﬂy mention how updates are handled in Algorithm 9 (Dynamic) When a new element et arrives at time t, we simply set its dual value yt according to levels of sets containing it. Further, for each set S containing et , we update y(S) and place et in the appropriate list in lists(S). Finally, if S does not satisfy stability property, we add it to Q. If this update operation was deletion of an element et , we simply remove it and update the y(S) values for all sets containing it (and add it to Q if needed). Algorithm 9 Dynamic(et , ±) 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13:  if the operation σt is (et , +) then Set level(e) = maxS:e∈S level(S), and deﬁne y(e) to be 1/2level(e) . For all sets S containing e Update y(S) ← y(S) + y(e). Add e to the appropriate list in lists(S), and build nodelist(e). If y(S) > βcS , and S is already not in Q, add it to Q. else if the operation σt is (et , −) then For all sets S containing e (traverse using nodelist(e)) Update y(S) ← y(S) − y(e). Delete nodelist(e) and all node(e, S). If y(S) < cβS , and level(S) > bS and S is not in Q, add S to Q. end if If Q is non-empty, call Stabilize.  C.1  Analysis  We now analyze the update algorithm. Consider a time t and assume by induction that the stability property holds for every set S before this operation. We ﬁrst analyze the competitive ratio of our solution and the amortized update time till this time step. Then we will show that the invariants hold after the update operation at time t. We ﬁrst show that feasibility of our solution, and then bound the total cost. Claim C.1. Let e ∈ At . Then there exists S ∈ Fe with level(S) > b(S). 35  Algorithm 10 Stabilize 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13: 14: 15: 16: 17: 18: 19: 20: 21: 22: 23: 24: 25: 26: 27: 28: 29: 30: 31:  while Q is non-empty do S ← ﬁrst element of Q if y(S) > βcP ⊲ y(S) is too high, move S up S then y o (S) ← e∈out(S) y(e), y i (S) ← y(S) − y o (S) repeat level(S) ← level(S) + 1 ⊲ Move S up one step y o (S) ← y o (S)/2 + 2−level(S) · |inlevel(S) (S)| y i (S) ← y i (S) − 2−level(S) · |inlevel(S) (S)| y(S) ← y o (S) + y i (S) out(S) ← out(S) ∪ inlevel(S) (S). until y(S) ≤ βcS ⊲ Found the right level for all e ∈ out(S) do y old (e) ← y(e) ⊲ Store the old value of e’s dual y(e) ← 2−level(S) ⊲ This is the new dual old call UpdateDual(e, y (e), y(e)). end for else if y(S) < cS/β and level(S) > b(S) then repeat ⊲ y(S) is too low, move down level(S) ← level(S) − 1 for all e ∈ out(S) do if there is no other set containing e at level level(S) + 1 or higher then y old (e) ← y(e). y(e) ← 2−level(S) . call UpdateDual(e, y old (e), y(e)). else Remove e from out(S) and add it to inlevel(S)+1 (S). end if end for until y(S) < cS/β and level(S) > b(S) end if end while  Algorithm 11 UpdateDual (e, y old (e), y(e)) For all nodes (e, S) in nodelist(e) do If e is not in the correct list in lists(S) (according to y(e) value) 3: Delete node(e, S) and add a node corresponding to e in the correct list in lists(S). 4: Update y(S) ← y(S) − y old (e) + y(e). 5: If S does not satisfy one of the invariant conditions and is not in Q, add S to Q. 1:  2:  36  Proof. Suppose not. So every set containing e is at its base level (notice that a set is never placed 1 ≥ βcSe , where Se is the cheapest set below its base level in the algorithm). Then y(e) will be 2b(S e) containing e, implying that y(Se ) ≥ y(e) ≥ βcSe , hence S violates the stability property. Lemma C.2. The set cover algorithm is O(f 3 )-competitive. Proof. The proof follows from LP duality and the fact that all sets are stable. More formally, deﬁne y(e)/β . We claim that ze variables are dual feasible. Indeed, quantities ze for Pevery element e ∈ At as y(S) for any set S, e∈S ze = /β ≤ cS (using stability of S). Let St denote ourP set cover solution at time t. We know from stability that for any set S ∈ St , c y(S) ≥ S/β . Now e ze is a lower bound on the cost of an optimal solution. Since each element is in at most f sets, we see that X  e∈At  ze =  X y(e) X y(S) X cS ≥ ≥ . β β·f β2 · f  e∈At  S∈St  S∈St  Therefore, the dual objective value corresponding to ze is Ω(1/f 3 ) times the cost of our solution. We now analyze the update time of the algorithm. Lemma C.3. Suppose we move a set S down from a level ℓ to ℓ − 1 during algorithm Stabilize. Let outold (S) denote the list out(S) when S was at level ℓ before this move. Then |outold (S)| ≤ 2ℓ (cS/β ). Further, the total update time incurred during this move (line 19-line 28 of Stabilize) is O(f |outold (S)| + 1). Proof. We moved S down because y(S) < cS/β . Each element e ∈ outold (S) has y(e) value equal to 2−ℓ since level(e) = level(S) for all such elements. The ﬁrst claim then follows. The second statement follows from the fact that we spend O(f ) time for each element in outold (S) due to UpdateDual. The extra “+1” term in the statement is to account for the case when outold (S) is empty. Now we consider the case when a set S moves up. Instead of updating the data structures after incremental steps of 1, we perform them once S settles (i.e., after it has come out of the repeatuntil loop in Lines 3-11 in Stabilize). We now bound the total update time of this step. Lemma C.4. Suppose we move a set S up from a a level ℓ to ℓ∗ during the repeat-until loop in Lines 3-11 in Stabilize. Let outnew (S) denote the list out(S) when S settled at level ℓ∗ after ∗ this move. Then |outnew (S)| ≤ 2ℓ βcS . Further, the total update time incurred during these steps (line 3-line 16 of Stabilize) can be implemented in O(f |outnew (S)| + (ℓ∗ − ℓ)) time. Proof. This iteration ends at level ℓ∗ because y(S) ≤ βcS . Since each element in outnew (S) has y(e) value 1/2ℓ , the ﬁrst result follows. Each iteration of the inner loop (line 6-line 10) when we move S up from a level l − 1 to l takes time proportional to inl (S) + 1. Therefore, the overall time during the iterations of the inner while loop can be bounded by |outnew (S)|+ (ℓ∗ − ℓ) when S settles at level ℓ∗ , because outnew (S) eventually contains each of the intervening inl (S) sets. Similarly, updating y(e) and yS ′ values and running the UpdateDual for each e take time proportional to f |outnew (S)|. To analyze these update costs, we use the following token scheme. Token Distribution Scheme: Every set S maintains a certain non-negative number of tokens at any point of time. Whenever we move a set S up or down it will expend some tokens to account 37  for update time during these moves, and also transfer some tokens to some other sets. The only way tokens get injected into the system is when a element arrives or departs. We ﬁx a set S for rest of the discussion. We now give details of the token distribution scheme: (i) When a new element arrives or departs, it gives 20f tokens to each of the sets containing it. (ii) Suppose the set S moves down from a level ℓ to ℓ − 1. Consider the set outold (S) when S was at level ℓ. Then S spends 1 + f · |outold (S)| tokens, and transfers 20f tokens to every set S ′ such that S ′ ∈ Fe for all e ∈ outold (S). (iii) Suppose the set S moves up from level ℓ to ℓ∗ during line 3-line 16 in the algorithm Stabilize. Consider the set outnew (S) when S reaches level ℓ∗ . Then it spends (ℓ∗ − ℓ) + f · |outnew (S)| tokens, and transfers 1 token to every set S ′ such that S ′ ∈ Fe for all e ∈ outnew (S). We make some simple observations ﬁrst. Claim C.5. The total number of tokens injected into the system is O(f 2 T ) after T arrivals/departures. Proof. This follows from the deﬁnition of our token distribution scheme since we inject O(f 2 ) tokens per arrival/departure. Claim C.6. The total update time can be bounded by O(1) times the total number of tokens expended. Proof. This follows as an immediate corollary of Lemmas C.3 and C.4 and the deﬁnition of our token distribution scheme. We now show that at any time, the number of tokens expended is at most the number of tokens remaining. To do this, it will be convenient to divide the change in levels of a set S into epochs. For a set S, consider the sequence of levels of S as the algorithm progresses. This sequence can be broken into maximal sub-sequences of up and down moves. A maximal sub-sequence of up moves will be called an up-epoch. Deﬁne a down-epoch similarly, so every epoch is either an up-epoch or a down-epoch. Note that the moves (of S) during an epoch could have been made during diﬀerent calls to algorithm Stabilize at diﬀerent points in time. Lemma C.7. Consider a down-epoch for a set S starting at level ℓ. The number of tokens expended or transferred by S during this epoch is at most max(1, 2ℓ+1 f cS ). Moreover, the total number of tokens that S gained when it reached level ℓ at the beginning of this epoch is at least max(1, 2ℓ+1 f cS ). Proof. We ﬁrst assume that outold (S) is non-empty. Lemma C.3 shows that the total number of tokens needed by S when it moves down from a level l to l − 1 during this epoch is at most 1 + f |outold (S)| + 20f |{S ′ : S ′ ∈ Fe , e ∈ outold (S)}| ≤ 2f |outold (S)| + 20f |{S ′ : S ′ ∈ Fe , e ∈ outold (S)}| ≤ 22f 2 2l (cS/β ). Therefore, the total token requirement during this epoch is at most 22f 2 2ℓ+1 (cS/β ) ≤ 2f cS · 2ℓ , using β = 32f . Let us now count how many tokens S had at the beginning of this epoch. First observe that ℓ > b(S), otherwise S will not move down. So S must have moved up from level ℓ − 1 to ℓ during the preceding up-epoch. The set S must have moved up from level ℓ − 1 because y(S) was greater than βcS at that time. Since moving up cannot reduce y(S) by more than a factor of half, y(S) must have been at least (β/2)cS when S entered level ℓ. Since then, y(S) must have dropped to below cS/β (otherwise it will not move down). Thus y(S) has decreased by more than (β/2 − 1/β)cS ≥ 15f cS since β = 32f . Now y(S) can decrease by one of two events: (i) some element in S gets removed, or (ii) the y(e) value of some element in S 38  decreases. In either case, the contribution to the decrease in y(S) is at most 1/2ℓ . Therefore, at least 15 · 2ℓ f cS such events must have happened. Each such event would give at least 1 token to S – in case of element deletion, S gets 1 token by rule (i) of the token scheme. If an element e in S moves up, it must be the case that some set S ′ containing e moves up – during this process it would give 1 token to S (by rule (iii)). Thus, S gets a total of at least 15 · 2ℓ f cS while it is in level ℓ. This proves the lemma. If outold (S) were empty, observe that yS will not change when S moves down, and so, we will reach the base level for S immediately (i.e., we need not go through the repeat-until loop in Lines 18-29 in Algorithm Stabilize and can move to bS in one step). So, we need to spend only 1 token (in terms of running time). Clearly, at least event of kind (i) or (ii) as above must have occurred since S moved to level ℓ ﬁrst. Therefore, the set S would have received at least 1 token since then. Now we consider up-epochs. Lemma C.8. Consider an up-epoch of a set S ending at ℓ∗ . Then total number of tokens spent or ∗ transferred by S in this epoch is at most 2ℓ +8 f 2 cS . Further, the total number of tokens S gained ∗ while it stays at level ℓ at the beginning of this epoch is at least 2ℓ +8 f 2 cS . Proof. Consider an up-epoch where S moves from ℓ0 → . . . → ℓk = ℓ∗ via a sequence of up-moves. Let us see how many tokens are needed for the upward move ℓi−1 → ℓi . Using Lemma C.4 and our token scheme, (ℓi − ℓi−1 ) + f |outnew (S)| tokens are spent to account for running time, and f |outnew (S)| tokens are transferred. Therefore, the total token requirement during this upward ℓi move is at most ℓi P − ℓi−1 + 2f |outnew i−1 ) + 2f 2 βcS . Summing over all i gives us a  (S)|∗ ≤ (ℓi −ℓ∗ℓ+7 ∗ ∗ l 2 bound of (ℓ −ℓ0 )+ l≤ℓ 2f βcS · 2 ≤ (ℓ −ℓ0 )+2 f cS . Now we claim that (ℓ∗ −ℓ0 ) ≤ 2ℓ +7 f 2 cS ∗ 1 . and so, the sum can be bounded by 2ℓ +8 f 2 cS . To see this, observe that ℓ0 ≥ bS , and so, 2ℓ0 ≥ 4βc S ∗ ∗ ∗ 1 ℓ +7 2 ℓ +7 ℓ −ℓ 2 7 ℓ −ℓ 2 ∗ 0 0 0 Therefore, 2 f cS = 2 ·2 · f cS ≥ 2 · 4βcS · ·2 f cS ≥ (ℓ − ℓ0 ), because β = 32f . This proves the ﬁrst part of the lemma. For the second part, consider the time when this epoch started. We claim that when S had moved to level ℓ0 at the end of the previous epoch, then y(S) was at most 2cβS . Indeed, if this epoch started at the beginning of the algorithm, then y(S) was 0; otherwise it was preceded by a down-epoch. When we moved from level ℓ0 + 1 to ℓ0 , y(S) was less than cβS . Since y(S) can at most double when we move down one level, the claim follows. Let us then denote y(S) at the beginning of this epoch as y0 (S). Now, let S0 be the elements of S which were active at the time S moved to level ℓ0 . Now, hypothetically, suppose, at that time instant, we had placed S at level ℓ∗ − 1 without changing the levels of other sets. Let ye0 (e) be the P hypothetical dual values for ∗elements in S1 corresponding to these levels of sets, and let ye0 (S) = e∈S0 ye0 (e). Clearly because ℓ − 1 ≥ ℓ0 and the dual values decrease as a set moves up levels, we have ye0 (S) ≤ y0 (S) ≤ 2cβS .  Next, consider the time during this up-epoch when we move S from ℓ∗ − 1 to ℓ∗ , and let S ∗ be the elements of S active at this time. let y ∗ (e) be the dual values at this time for all elements P Similarly, ∗ ∗ ∗ in S , and let y (S) denote e∈S ∗ y (e). Since the algorithm moved S from ℓ∗ − 1 to ℓ∗ , we have y ∗ (S) > βcS .  To complete the proof, we consider the change from ye0 (S) to y ∗ (S) (of more than (β − 2/β )cS ): indeed, this can happen precisely because of two reasons: (i) there are elements in S ∗ which are not ∗ present in S0 – each such element contributes at most 2−(ℓ −1) to y ∗ (S), and (ii) there are elements in S ∗ ∩ S0 which have moved down since the beginning of this epoch. Again, any such element ∗ contributes at most 2−(ℓ −1) to y ∗ (S). Thus, each of these kind of events will contribute at most 39  ∗  ∗  ∗  2−(ℓ −1) to y ∗ (S) − ye0 (S). It follows that there must be at least 2ℓ −1 (β − 1)cS ≥ 15f cS 2ℓ events of either kind, using β = 32f . Then, our token distribution scheme now says that S would have ∗ collected at least 20f tokens from each such event, implying that S gained a total of 300f 2 cS 2ℓ tokens in this epoch, more than the number required, thus proving the lemma. Thus we have showed that after the end of any epoch, every set has more tokens with it than when the epoch began, even after expending tokens for updates. Therefore, the iterations in Stabilize will terminate because there are ﬁnite number of tokens. When Stabilize terminates, all sets will satisfy the stability property. Thus, from Lemmas 3.3, C.2 and C.8 and claims C.5 and C.6, we get the following theorem. Theorem C.9. There is an efficient O(f 3 )-competitive algorithm for dynamic set cover with an amortized update time of O(f 2 ).  D  Dynamic Primal-Dual Algorithm (Recourse): Full Details  In this section, we consider the recourse model and give an algorithm with stronger guarantees than the one in the previous section. Our algorithm is inspired by the following oﬄine algorithm for set cover: The algorithm maintains a tentative solution S, which is initially empty. Now, the algorithm arranges the elements in an arbitrary order for inspection. For each inspected element e, one of these two cases arise: • e is already covered by a set S ∈ St : in this case, the solution S remains unchanged. • no set in S covers e: in this case, the algorithm adds a randomly chosen set S ∈ Fe to add to the solution S, where set S ∈ Fe is chosen with probability: peS := P  1/cS . S ′ ∈Fe 1/cS ′  In this case, e is said to be a probed element.  Note the solution S can be deﬁned through a bijection ϕ from the set of probed elements. It is known that this oﬄine algorithm is O(f )-competitive in expectation [Pit85]. We now describe our adaptation of this algorithm to the fully dynamic model. Recall that At denotes the set of active elements at time t. At all times t, we maintain a partition of At into two sets Pt (called the probed set) and Qt (called the unprobed set). Elements in the probed set are exactly those on which we have performed the random experiment outlined above. All other elements are in the unprobed set. The algorithm maintains a bijection ϕ from the probed set Pt to St , the set cover solution at time t. In other words, for every probed element e ∈ Pt , there is a unique set ϕ(e) in St and vice-versa. Elements can move from the unprobed set to the probed set over time, i.e., an element in Qt can be in Pt′ at a later time t′ > t. But, once an element enters the probed set, it cannot move back to the unprobed set in the future. In other words, Pt ∩ At′ ⊆ Pt′ for all t′ ≥ t. We now describe the procedures which will be used in our algorithm. At certain times, our algorithm may choose to probe an unprobed element e. This will happen when there is no set in the current solution covering e. 40  Probing an element. When an unprobed element e ∈ Qt−1 is probed by the algorithm at time t, a set S containing e in randomly chosen with probability: peS := P  1/cS . S ′ ∈Fe 1/cS ′  This chosen set S is added to the current solution of the algorithm: St = St−1 ∪ {S}. Element e moves from the unprobed set to the probed set: Pt = Pt−1 ∪ {e} and Qt = Qt−1 \ {e}. As long as e remains in the active set of elements At , i.e., does not depart from the instance, the set S also remains in the solution St . We say that e is responsible for S and denote ϕ(e) := S. Having deﬁned the process of probing an element, we describe when an element is probed. These probes are triggered by element insertions and deletions as described below. Element Arrivals. Suppose element e arrives at time t. There are two cases: • If e is already covered in the current solution St−1 , it is added to the unprobed set, i.e., Qt = Qt−1 ∪ {e}. The solution St remains unchanged, i.e., St = St−1 . • If e is not covered in the current solution, then it is probed, which adds a set ϕ(e) to St as described above. We then set Pt = Pt−1 ∪ {e}. Element Departures. Suppose element e departs from the instance at time t. Again, there are two cases: • If e is currently an unprobed element, then we set Qt = Qt−1 \ {e} and the solution remains unchanged: St = St−1 . • If e is currently a probed element, then we set Pt = Pt−1 \{e}. In addition, the set ϕ(e) is also removed from the solution St−1 . This might lead to some elements in Qt becoming uncovered. (Note that each remaining element is Pt is still covered, by the sets they are respectively responsible for in the current solution.) We pick the element that arrived the earliest9 among the uncovered elements and move it to the probed set. On probing this element, a new set covering it is added to the solution. This set might cover some of the uncovered elements, which are then removed from the uncovered set. The process continues iteratively, probing the uncovered element that arrived the earliest in each step. Once there is no uncovered element left, we denote the new solution by §t . Analysis. First, we observe that the algorithm maintains a feasible solution by deﬁnition. In particular, it maintains the invariants that: • For every element e in the probed set Pt , there is a unique set ϕ(e) in the solution St . Moreover, this mapping is a bijection, implying St = {ϕ(e) : e ∈ Pt }. (Note that an element can have multiple sets in St covering it, but exactly one of these is deﬁned as ϕ(e). Conversely, a set in St covers multiple elements, but only one of them maps to it by function ϕ.) • Every element e in the unprobed set is covered in the solution S. 9  This can be any arbitrary but fixed order on the elements.  41  We ﬁrst show that the recourse is O(1), and next that the algorithm is f -competitive. Recourse Bound. As discussed in Section 1.4, it suﬃces to only count set deletions. Indeed, each set added was either deleted (and hence can be charged to the deletion), or still exists in St (but this number is at most the number of active elements nt , by the bijectiveness of the mapping ϕ). To complete the proof, note that no set is deleted from St on an element arrival, and at most one set, ϕ(e), is deleted when e departs. Competitive Ratio. To show the competitive ratio, it is useful to denote the set of elements in S at time t by St . Note that St evolves over time. The main property that we prove is the following. Lemma D.1. At time t, for any set St , " E  X  #  cϕ(e) ≤ f · cSt .  e∈St ∩Pt  Proof. Since the adversary is oblivious of the random choices made by the algorithm, we can consider a ﬁxed input sequence. Further, we condition on the random choices of elements not in St (irrespective of whether they are probed or not). We will show the desired bound under this conditioning, and so the result will follow once we remove the conditioning. The execution of our algorithm can now be seen as a tree. Given the ﬁxed input sequence, and coin tosses of elements not in St , we can determine the ﬁrst element probed by the algorithm. Similarly, given the random choices of the ﬁrst i elements in St which get probed, we can determine which element in St will be probed next. Therefore, let us deﬁne a sequence of random variables X1 , X2 , . . . and Y1 , Y2 , . . ., where Xi is the ith element of St that gets probed, and Yi is the set selected by this probed element. If we probe less than i elements, then Xi and Yi are deﬁned as ⊥. Now observe that given X1 , Y1 , . . . , Xi−1 , Yi−1 , we can determine the identity of Xi . Also, we need to deﬁne these random variables for i ≤ |St | only. For notational convenience, let m denote |St |. Finally, observe that # " X X E [cYi ] , cϕ(e) = E i  e∈St ∩Pt  where cYi is 0 if Yi = ⊥. Now we state the induction hypothesis. IH(i): E [cYi + . . . + cYm |X1 , Y1 , . . . , Xi−1 , Yi−1 ] ≤ f · cSt . Let us check this for i = m. Suppose we are given X1 , Y1 , . . . , Xm−1 , Ym−1 . Then we know the identity of Xm . If Xm = ⊥, we do not incur any cost, and so the statement holds trivially. Else, suppose Xm = e ∈ St . Then the expected cost of Ym is X  S ′ :e∈S ′  cS ′ · P  f 1/cS ′ =P ≤ f · cSt . S ′′ :e∈S ′′ 1/cS ′′ S ′′ :e∈S ′′ 1/cS ′′  Now suppose the statement holds for i + 1, and we want to prove it for i. Suppose we are given the random variables X1 , Y1 , . . . , Xi−1 , Yi−1 . This determines Xi also. Therefore, we can write the desired sum as   E [cYi | X1 , Y1 , . . . , Xi−1 , Yi−1 , Xi ] + E cYi+1 + . . . + cYm | X1 , Y1 , . . . , Xi−1 , Yi−1 , Xi . 42  Assume Xi 6= ⊥, otherwise both terms are 0 are we would be done. Let e denote Xi , and ∆e denote P S ′ :e∈S ′ 1/cS ′ . The ﬁrst term is at most f /∆e , the argument being similar to the base case, i = m. Let qe denote the probability that element e chooses set S. So qe = cS 1∆e and we can write the t second term as X     E cYi+1 + . . . + cYm | X1 , Y1 , . . . , Xi , Yi = S ′ · P Yi = S ′ | X1 , Y1 , . . . , Xi−1 , Yi−1 , Xi . S ′ :e∈S ′ ,S ′ 6=St  Using the induction hypothesis and independence, this can be bounded by X f · cSt · P[Yi = S ′ |Xi ] = f · cSt · (1 − qe ). S ′ :e∈S ′ ,S ′ 6=St  So, the overall sum is at most   f 1 + 1− f · cSt = f · cSt . ∆e cSt ∆e This proves the lemma. To complete the analysis, we use a dual ﬁtting argument. Deﬁne the dual of an element e as cϕ(e)/f (and 0 if the element is unprobed). The above lemma implies that this dual is feasible in expectation. Note that the dual objective is a 1/f fraction of the cost of algorithm’s solution. Hence, by standard LP duality, the competitive ratio of the algorithm is f in expectation.  E  A Scaling-Based Algorithm  In this section, we turn our focus to non-amortized bounded-recourse algorithms. We give algorithms which run in exponential time, and the competitive ratio matches that of the dynamic greedy algorithms from Section 2. However, we are able to get O(1) non-amortized O(1) recourse. Further, we get a similar result for the fractional set cover problem as well. The notion of recourse in the fractional setting can be deﬁned in a natural manner as follows – the number of changes while moving from one fractional solution to another, i.e., recourse, is deﬁned as the L1 -distance between the corresponding fractional solution vectors. Our techniques rely on reducing a general set cover instance to several instances where sets have nice cost structure in a particular instance. As a corollary, we get improved results for the unweighted set cover problem – the competitive ratio improves to O(1). Formally, the main results of this section will be: Theorem E.1. There are deterministic online algorithms which perform O(1) recourse operations per step, and achieve the following guarantees: (i) O(log n)-competitiveness for fully-dynamic (integral) set cover in exponential time, (ii) O(log n)-competitiveness for fully-dynamic (fractional) set cover in poly-time. (iii) For the fully-dynamic unweighted set cover problem, we get similar results as (i) and (ii) above along with improvement in competitive ratio to O(1). To get these results, we show a reduction from general instances to certain “nice” instances where the cheapest set covering every element of the universe has the same cost. This reduction loses a logarithmic factor in the competitiveness. Call a set-cover instance I = (U, F) well-scaled if for each element e, the cost of the cheapest set containing e is the same; i.e., for each e, e′ ∈ U , minS∈F :e∈S c(S) = minS ′ ∈F :e′ ∈S ′ c(S ′ ). In particular, an instance of unweighted set cover is a wellscaled instance. We now show how any set cover instance can be reduced to a small number of such well-scaled instances. 43  E.1  A Reduction to Well-Scaled Instances  In this section, we show that an on-line algorithm for well-scaled instances can be used for general instances. We incur a logarithmic loss in competitive ratio, but the recourse bound remains unchanged. Lemma E.2. Suppose we have an α(t)-competitive online algorithm r(t)-recourse algorithm A for well-scaled instances of length t, where α() and r() are monotone increasing. Then there is an O(α(t) log t)-competitive algorithm r(t)-recourse online algorithm for all dynamic set cover instances of length t. Proof. First, we can assume that all set costs c(S) are powers of 2, losing only a factor of 2 in the competitiveness. We show how to partition the input sequence σ into several well-scaled input sequences σ (0) , σ (1) , . . ., one for each power of 2, in an online fashion: indeed, when we see an element e such that the cheapest set covering e has cost 2k , we send e to the sequence σ (k) . By construction, each of the sequences σ (k) is well-scaled. We run the algorithm A on each of these independently. At any time t, let ℓ be the integer such that 2ℓ := maxe∈At minS∈F :e∈S c(S). Clearly, 2ℓ is a trivial lower bound on Optt . Notice that by deﬁnition, every element in At can be individually covered by a set of cost at most 2ℓ . We will construct sub-instances σ (k) , where c ≤ ℓ. We now show that the optimal cost for sub-instances σ (k) , where k ≤ ℓ − log t is very small. Indeed, the optimal cost of sub-instance σ (ℓ−log t−c) , where c ≥ 0 is an integer, is at most t · 2ℓ−log t−c ≤ 2ℓ−c ≤ 2−c · Optt . Hence the totalPcost incurred by the algorithms run on instances σ (ℓ−log2 t) , σ (ℓ−log2 t−1) , . . . is at most α(t)Optt · c≥1 2−c ≤ α(t)Optt . Moreover, the optimal cost of each of the other sub-instances σ ℓ , . . . , σ ℓ−log2 t+1 is at most Optt ; and so our algorithm incurs cost at most α(t)Optt for each of these sub-instances. Combining these, we get the total cost over all these scales is at most (log2 t + 2) · α(t)Optt . (k) Now we look at the recourse cost. P Let tk denote the length of the sub-instance σ . Then, the total recourse cost is at most k tk · r(tk ) ≤ r(t) · t. Note that if the recourse of algorithm A is non-amortized, so is the recourse of the combined algorithm.  E.2  An Algorithm for Well-Scaled Instances  We now show how to get an online O(1)-competitive algorithm with constant amortized recourse for any well-scaled input instances. This algorithm will solve set cover instances exactly and hence not run in polynomial time. We will then make this algorithm have non-amortized worst-case recourse budget per operation by losing only a constant factor in the competitive ratio. By scaling, we can assume that for each element the cheapest set covering it has unit cost. Let us recap some notation from the earlier sections: each element operation σt is either an insertion (et , +) or a deletion (et , −), and At denotes the set of active elements at time t. The algorithm maintains a solution St at time t (after processing the request σt ). The online algorithm runs in phases. Initially, when an element e arrives, we will start the ﬁrst phase, and pick the cheapest set containing e. We shall use τ (i) to denote the time t at which phase i begins. So τ (1) is 1. The algorithm will maintain the following invariant for all phases i, i ≥ 1: the solution Sτ (i) at the beginning of phase i is an optimal solution for the instance Aτ (i) , and so has cost Opt(Aτ (i) ). The update procedure for maintaining the solution is described in Algorithm 12. Note that the invariant is maintained by deﬁnition of the algorithm. We now show the competitiveness and the recourse guarantee of the algorithm. 44  Algorithm 12 Dynamic(et , ±) if the operation σt is (et , +) then Pick the cheapest (i.e., unit cost) set covering et . else if the operation σt is (et , −) then Do nothing end if If the number of inserts or the number of deletes in the current phase i is at least 21 Opt(Aτ (i) ) Recompute the solution, i.e., we drop all the sets St−1 , and start the new phase i + 1. (Hence, τ (i + 1) := t and St is an optimal solution for At ) Lemma E.3. At each time t, our solution is 3-competitive, and total number of sets added until time t is at most 4t. Proof. Suppose time t falls within phase i, i.e., t ∈ [τi , τi+1 ). Let L := t − τ (i) be the length of the phase until now, with Lins inserts and Ldel deletes, where Lins + Ldel = L. Moreover, by the criterion for ending the phase we know that Lins , Ldel ≤ 12 Opt(Aτ (i) ). The solution at time t consists of the optimal solution on Aτ (i) , plus unit-cost sets for each of the Lins insertions, and hence has cost Opt(Aτ (i) ) + Lins ≤ 32 Opt(Aτ (i) ). But also observe the following: Opt(At ) ≥ Opt(Aτ (i) ) − Ldel . 1 Opt(At ) ≥ Opt(Aτ (i) ). 2 1 Opt(Aτ (i+1) ) ≥ Opt(Aτ (i) ). 2  (27) (28) (29)  Indeed, to see the ﬁrst inequality above, notice that one feasible solution for covering Aτ (i) is to take the optimal solution for At and to add one unit-cost set for each of the deleted elements. The second inequality follows by plugging in Ldel ≤ 21 Opt(Aτ (i) ), and the third follows by setting t = τ (i + 1). Using (28), we immediately get that our solution costs at most 3 · Opt(At ). For the recourse bound, we inductively assume the recourse bound is true until the end of phase i − 1. If request t does not result in a phase ending, we only add a single new set, and so the recourse bound continues to hold. Suppose phase i ends when request t is received, so τ (i + 1) = t. Let L = t − τ (i) be the length of the phase. We add one new set for the Lins requests. Moreover, since Opt(Aτ (i+1) ) ≤ Opt(Aτ (i) ) + Lins  (30)  (by an argument identical to (27)), and since each set has at least unit cost, the number of sets in the new optimal solution is at most Opt(Aτ (i+1) ) ≤ Opt(Aτ (i) ) + Lins . Moreover, since the phase ended, at least one of Lins or Ldel reached 12 Opt(Aτ (i) ). So the total number of sets added in this phase is at most Lins + (Opt(Aτ (i) ) + Lins ) ≤ 2Opt(Aτ (i) ) ≤ 4 max(Lins , Ldel ) ≤ 4L. This completes the induction for phase i, and hence the proof. Note that any set that is deleted has to be previously added, so the bound on the amortized number of set additions and deletions per step is 8. 45  E.2.1  An algorithm for fractional set cover  Using ideas identical to Section E.2, we can also get a polynomial-time O(1)-competitive O(1)recourse algorithm for the fractional set cover problem on well-scaled instances by just using the optimal fractional solution Lp(Aτ (i) ) at the beginning of each phase, and by ending phase i when the number of inserts or deletes becomes 21 Lp(Aτ (i) ). Here the recourse is measured in terms of the sum of ℓ1 -distances between the {xS } vectors at consecutive times. Similarly, we can use the ideas from Section E.1 to get a a poly-time fractional O(log t)-competitive O(1)-recourse algorithm for all set cover instances. In fact, we can de-amortize the recourse as indicated in the following section.  E.3  De-Amortizing the Algorithm  We now show how to de-amortize the algorithms above, so that we perform only a constant number of set additions or deletions per step, while hurting the competitiveness only by a constant. The approach is based on two simple observations about Algorithm 12 (recall that St denotes the solution maintained by our algorithm at time t): Claim E.4. The length of phase i, τ (i + 1) − τ (i) is at least  1 2  · |Opt(Aτi )| and at least  1 6  · |Sτi −1 |.  Proof. The ﬁrst observation follows from the fact that τ (i+1)−τ (i) ≥ 12 ·Opt(Aτi ), and the fact that Opt(Aτi ) ≥ |Opt(Aτi )| (because each set has cost at least 1). Now we show the second statement. Note that the cost of our solution at the end of phase i − 1, i.e., Sτ (i)−1 , is at most 23 Opt(Aτ (i−1) ). Indeed, when phase i−1 started, we had a solution of cost Opt(Aτ (i−1) ), and then this phase inserted at most 12 · Opt(Aτ (i−1) ) elements. The length of phase i is at least 21 Opt(Aτ (i) ) ≥ 14 Opt(Aτ (i−1) ) using (27) with LHS being Opt(Aτ (i) ). In Algorithm 12, we were purging all the sets in Sτ (i)−1 and adding new sets from Opt(Aτ (i) ). The claim above shows that if we instead purge 12 sets from Sτ (i)−1 and add 4 news sets from Opt(Aτ (i) ) during each time step of phase i, then we will be done half-way during this phase, i.e., things will not spill over to the next stage. Thus, we will get a non-amortized constant recourse algorithm. In terms of competitive ratio, we will just need to account for the fact that we carry over sets from Sτ (i)−1 during phase i. We now give details of this idea. As indicated above, the new algorithm is as follows: use Algorithm 12 (in background) to ﬁgure out phases. Let S ′ (t) be the solution maintained by the algorithm at time t (we shall use S(t) to denote the solution maintained by Algorithm 12). At the start of phase i, we merely mark all the sets in S ′ (τ (i)) as “dirty” – note that we do not remove these sets yet. At each time t during phase i, if a new element arrives, choose the cheapest set containing it (of cost 1). Besides this, if S ′ (t) does not contain all the sets in Opt(Aτ (i) ), we bring in 4 new sets from Opt(Aτ (i) ) into S ′ (t). In case, S ′ (t) already contains all of Opt(Aτ (i) ), we purge 12 dirty sets from S ′ (t) (if there are any sets marked dirty). Note that we are allowing our algorithm to keep multiple copies of a set – a set could be marked dirty, and another copy of it could be in Opt(Aτ (i) ) (and so not marked dirty in our solution). Similarly, we are allowing duplicates when we pick a set on each element arrival. Now we analyze our algorithm. We maintain the following invariant for all i: at the end of phase i−1, i.e., at time τ (i)−1, the sets S(τ (i)−1) and S ′ (τ (i)−1) are identical. This follows immediately from Claim E.4. The cost of sets maintained at any time t during phase i is at most 23 Opt(Aτ (i−1) ) + Opt(Aτ (i) ) + 1 2 Opt(Aτ (i) )—the ﬁrst expression upper bounds the cost of the dirty sets which remained at the end 46  of phase i − 1 (which is same as S(τ (i) − 1)) , the second bounds the cost of the optimal solution to be brought in at the beginning of phase i, and the third bounds the cost of sets added in this phase. But note that Opt(Aτ (i−1) ) ≤ 2 Opt(Aτ (i) ) from (29). Hence the overall sum is O(1)Opt(Aτ (i) ) which is in turn o(Opt(At )) from (28). Hence at any time t the de-amortized algorithm is constantcompetitive, and adds and deletes at most a constant number of sets at each time step. This proves Theorem E.1(i). Part (ii) follows in a similar manner. Part (iii) of the theorem follows from the fact that unweighted instances are special cases of well-scaled instances.  F  The Combiner Algorithm  There are two classical approximation algorithms for set cover: one which gives a ln n-approximation, and the other which gives a f -approximation where f is the maximum frequency of any element, i.e., the maximum number of sets which can cover a single element. Therefore by computing both the solutions and outputting the one with least cost, we obtain an approximation ratio of min(ln n, f ). It is then natural to ask if we can obtain such a guarantee in the online-recourse or fully dynamic models for set cover. In this section, we give a combiner algorithm which takes in fully-dynamic (or online-recourse) algorithms with these kinds of diﬀerent guarantees and combines them into a single fully-dynamic (or online-recourse) algorithm. Theorem F.1. Let n = maxTt=1 nt denote the maximum universe size that will be seen in a particular dynamic instance. Suppose we are given different algorithms for fully-dynamic set cover: (a) an algorithm G with competitive ratio O(log nt ) at any time t and amortized work (or recourse) WG per insert/delete, and (b) a family of algorithms P Df which works on instances where element frequencies are bounded by f , and has competitive ratio O(f c ) for some constant c ≥ 1 and amortized work (or recourse) WP D per insert/delete, we can combine them into an efficient fullydynamic algorithm C with competitive ratio O(min(log nt , ftc )) and amortized work (or recourse) O(WG + WP D ). Our idea is the following: We partition the elements into diﬀerent groups, with group Fti denoting the collection of elements in At of frequency between [2i , 2i+1 ) for i ≥ 0. Let lt be such that 2c lt −1 < log nt ≤ 2c lt . Then, we cover the elements in Ft0 , Ft1 , . . . , Ftlt by individual runs of algorithm P Df (where we use P Df with f = 2i+1 for the elements in Fti ), and the rest of the elements by a single run of algorithm G. Lemma F.2. The cost of any solution respecting the above invariant is O(min(log nt , ft ))Optt at any time t. Proof. Firstly, note that if (ft )c < log2 nt , then by the algorithm above, we will not cover any element using algorithm G. So if ℓ := ⌈log ft ⌉, then the total cost of our solution is at most P ℓ i+1 )c · Opt ≤ O(f c ) · Opt = O(min(log n , f c )) Opt . On the other hand, if f ≥ log n , then t t t t t t t t i=0 (2 0 , F 1 , . . . , F lt , so the total cost of these solutions run algorithm P D only on elements in the groups F t t t Pt (2i+1 )c Optt = O(log nt ) Optt , and algorithm G maintains a solution of cost at most is at most li=0 O(log nt ) Optt on the remaining elements. So again the total cost is at most O(min(log nt , ft ))Optt , thereby completing the proof. Lemma F.3. There is an efficient way to maintain the above invariant with amortized work O(WG + WP D ) per element operation.  47  Proof. Firstly, when an element arrives, we insert into exactly one group, and thereby feed it into one of algorithms G or P D. Here we incur work of max(WG , WP D ) ≤ WG + WP D . Similarly, when an element departs, we delete it from exactly one group, and again incur work of max(WG , WP D ) ≤ WG + WP D . We now show how we can also maintain the invariant when the values lt and nt change, which would sometimes force us to recompute the solution to satisfy the invariant. Indeed, if lt increases from say k to k + 1, we will have to remove the elements in group Ftk+1 from the run of algorithm G and feed them to the run of algorithm P D corresponding to group Ftk+1 . But this work can be amortized to all the element arrivals which caused nt to essentially square itself, so as to to increase log nt by a factor of two, which in turn makes lt increase by 1. Similarly, if lt decreases from say k + 1 to k, we will have to remove the elements in group Ftk+1 from the corresponding run of algorithm P D and feed them to the run of algorithm G. But this work can be amortized to all the element departures which caused log nt decrease by a factor of two, which in turn made lt decrease by 1. Theorem F.1 then follows from Lemmas F.2 and F.3.  F.1  Knowledge of f , and Dependence on ft  In Section 3.1 and Appendix C, we assumed the algorithm was given a value f such that the frequencies fe ≤ f for all elements e, and then we showed an O(f c )-competitiveness guarantee for the algorithm, for some constant c ≥ 1. The idea used for the combiner also gives, in a blackbox fashion, an algorithm that does not require this knowledge up-front; indeed, the algorithm is O(ftc )-competitive, where ft := maxe∈At fe is the maximum frequency of any element active at time t. The idea is simple: for each integer i ∈ {0, 2, . . . , ⌈log2 m⌉ we run a copy Ai of the given O(f c )competitive algorithm A. For each update (e, ±), we feed it to Ai if fe ∈ (2i−1 , 2i ]; let σ i be the subsequence of the input σ given to Ai . Clearly this partitioning can be done with constant extra update time (and noP recourse) per element if element frequencies are given, else we can calculate these frequencies in e fe time. The set cover solution we output is the union of the solutions maintained by all these copies. To show competitiveness, look at time t, and let ℓ := ⌈log2 ft ⌉. There are no elements to be covered in the copies of Ai for i > ℓ, so the cost of the solution is at most ℓ ℓ X X σ i) ≤ (2i )c · Optt ≤ O(ft )c · Optt . (2i )c · Optt (σ i=0  G G.1  i=0  Applications Dynamic k-Coverage  In the k-coverage problem, given a set system (U, F) and an integer k, the goal is to pick k sets from F that maximize the size of their union. Note that all sets have unit cost in this model. The following fact is well-known: for the k-coverage problem, the greedy algorithm is a (1 − 1/e)approximation, and this is the best possible unless P = N P . Here, the greedy algorithm picks a set which covers the maximum number of yet-uncovered elements. Now, suppose Ui is the set of uncovered elements after i sets have been picked (so U0 = U ), and we pick as the i + 1st set some set Si ∈ F that satisﬁes |Si ∩ Ui | ≥ α maxT ∈F |T ∩ Ui | for some  48  constant fraction α > 0. It turns out that this “approximately greedy” algorithm also has a constant approximation ratio. We formally show this ﬁrst. Let a sequence of sets S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk be α-approximately-greedy if the following property holds: for all 1 ≤ i ≤ k, the residual coverage of the ith set Si is at least α times the residual coverage of the best possible set, given that S1 , S2 , . . . , Si−1 are already chosen. That is, |Si \ (S1 ∪ S2 ∪ . . . Si−1 )| ≥ α · |S ′ \ (S1 ∪ S2 ∪ . . . Si−1 )| for all S ′ ∈ F. Note that if α = 1, we get the greedy property. We ﬁrst show the approximation factor of an approximately greedy solution for the k-coverage problem. Lemma G.1. Consider an α-approximately-greedy sequence of sets S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk . Then these sets give a (1 − e−α )-approximate solution to the k-coverage problem. Proof. Let Ni denote the total coverage of the ﬁrst i sets in the sequence, i.e., Ni := |S1 ∪S2 ∪. . . Si |. From the α-approximate greedy property, and the fact that the optimal solution covers Opt elements with k sets, we get that for each i, Ni − Ni−1 ≥ α ·  (Opt − Ni−1 ) . k  Adding Opt on both sides and re-arranging terms, we get: (Opt − Ni−1 ) Opt − Ni ≤ Opt − Ni−1 − α · k  α (Opt − Ni−1 ) = 1− k  Using this inequality iteratively for i = 1, 2, . . . , k, we get:   α k Opt − Nk ≤ 1 − · Opt ≤ e−α · Opt, k  which implies that Nk ≥ Opt(1 − exp(−α)), completing the proof.  Now, we use this notion of approximate greediness to design an algorithm for k-coverage in the fully-dynamic setting. Our dynamic greedy framework with vol(e) = 1 for all elements naturally suggests the following algorithm: pick the k sets with smallest densities. Recall that the density is now ρt (S) := 1/|cov(S)|, since all sets have unit cost. Theorem G.2. The algorithm above is a constant-competitive fully-dynamic algorithm for kcoverage. It has recourse O(log n), and can be implemented with update time O(f log n). Proof. We ﬁrst make the algorithm more concrete to specify tie breaking issues. Our algorithm maintains a solution to the corresponding set cover instance where the cost of every set is 1. For each level i, we have a (doubly linked) list St,i of sets in St which are in level i. Whenever a set gets added or removed at some level i in our solution, we either add or remove a new location in St,i without changing the relative ordering of the remaining sets in this list. This can be easily done because each set at level i in St maintain a pointer to its location in St,i . Now, when we need to specify the solution for the k-coverage instance, we scan the lists St,i (starting from the smallest i) from left to right till we get k sets. It is easy to see that whenever we change our solution by t sets, Ω(t) new sets would have changed their levels. Therefore, the recourse and update time bounds for this algorithm follow from the corresponding bounds for the set cover instance.  49  It remains to show the approximate greediness of the solution, so that we can use Lemma G.1 and prove the competitive ratio. Let T1 , . . . , Tk be the k sets in the solution St , and let their respective levels be ℓ1 , ℓ2 , . . . , ℓk . Deﬁne Si := covt (Ti ); since ∪ki=1 Si ⊆ ∪ki=1 Ti , any approximation factor that we show for Si also holds for Ti . By the density range of level ℓi , we know that |Si | ≥ 2−ℓi −10 . (Note that all sets are of unit cost, so densities are reciprocals of coverage.) Moreover, since every element is covered by a unique set, Si ’s are disjoint. It follows that |Si | = |Si \ (S1 ∪ S2 ∪ . . . Si−1 )|. For any set S ′ ∈ F that is not among S1 , S2 , . . . , Si−1 , let S ′′ denote S ′ \ (S1 ∪ . . . ∪ Si−1 ). Observe that all elements in S ′′ are at levels ℓi or above. So, by the stability property of the dynamic set cover algorithm, for any j ≥ 0, the number of elements in S ′′ that are at level ℓi + j is at most 2−ℓi −j , for all j ≥ 0. Summing over all j ≥ 0, we get that |S ′′ | ≤ 2 · 2−ℓi . Thus, α = 2−11 suﬃces for α-approximate greediness. The theorem now follows from Lemma G.1.  G.2  Dynamic Non-Metric Facility Location  We now show how our dynamic greedy framework can be applied to the dynamic non-metric facility location problem. In the oﬄine problem, we are given a set of facilities F, and a collection of clients C. For each facility i ∈ F there is a facility opening cost fi , and for every i ∈ F, j ∈ C, there is a connection cost ci,j ≥ 0 of connecting client j to facility i. The goal is to open a set of facilities X P ⊆ F and P assign every client j to some open facility ϕ(j) ∈ X, to minimize the total cost f + i∈X i j cϕ(j),j . If all cij are either 0 or ∞, the problem reduces to set cover. As in set cover, this problem also admits an O(log n)-approximation oﬄine, where n is the number of clients. In the online setting of this problem, clients arrive online and must be irrevocably connected to facilities. Similarly, facilities once opened cannot be closed. For this problem, [AAA+ 04] gave an O(log n log m)-competitive algorithm, when there are m facilities and n clients. We now show that with O(1) recourse (i.e., we can open/close O(1) facilities per client), we can improve this bound to get a competitive ratio of O(log n).  Our techniques also illustrate one beneﬁt of Theorem 1.1(a), that the competitive ratio does not depend on the number of sets m. Indeed, the facility location problem can be modeled as a set cover problem with exponential number ofsets as follows: each client j corresponds to anPelement, and for each subset of clients J ′ ⊆ C and each facility i, we have a set S(J ′ , i) with cost j∈J ′ ci,j ′ + fi . This set contains exactly the elements in J ′ . By construction, a feasible set cover solution for this instance corresponds to a feasible facility location solution with an identical objective value. Therefore, we can apply our framework (speciﬁcally Theorem 1.1(a)) to get O(log n) competitive algorithms with O(1)-amortized recourse.  50  References [AAA+ 04] Noga Alon, Baruch Awerbuch, Yossi Azar, Niv Buchbinder, and Joseph (Seﬃ) Naor, A general approach to online network optimization problems, Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual ACMSIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (Philadelphia, PA, USA), SODA ’04, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2004, pp. 577–586. [AAA+ 09] Noga Alon, Baruch Awerbuch, Yossi Azar, Niv Buchbinder, and Joseph Naor, The online set cover problem, SIAM J. Comput. 39 (2009), no. 2, 361–370. MR 2520312 [ABK94]  Yossi Azar, Andrei Z. Broder, and Anna R. Karlin, On-line load balancing, Theoretical Computer Science 130 (1994), no. 1, 73–84.  [AGZ99]  M. Andrews, M. X. Goemans, and L. Zhang, Improved bounds for on-line load balancing, Algorithmica 23 (1999), no. 4, 278–301. MR 1673393 (2000b:68021)  [AKP+ 93] Yossi Azar, Bala Kalyanasundaram, Serge A. Plotkin, Kirk Pruhs, and Orli Waarts, Online load balancing of temporary tasks, Proceedings of the 1993 Workshop on Algorithms and Data Structures, 1993. [AW14]  Amir Abboud and Virginia Vassilevska Williams, Popular conjectures imply strong lower bounds for dynamic problems, FOCS, 2014, pp. 434–443.  [BCH16]  Sayan Bhattacharya, Deeparnab Chakrabarty, and Monika Henzinger, Deterministic fully dynamic approximate vertex cover and fractional matching in o(1) amortized update time, ArXiv Pre-print dated 1st November, 2016.  [BGS15]  Surender Baswana, Manoj Gupta, and Sandeep Sen, Fully dynamic maximal matching in O(log n) update time, SIAM J. Comput. 44 (2015), no. 1, 88–113. MR 3313568  [BHI15a]  Sayan Bhattacharya, Monika Henzinger, and Giuseppe F. Italiano, Design of dynamic algorithms via primal-dual method, Automata, languages, and programming. Part I, Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., vol. 9134, Springer, Heidelberg, 2015, pp. 206–218. MR 3382440  [BHI15b]  , Deterministic fully dynamic data structures for vertex cover and matching, Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SIAM, Philadelphia, PA, 2015, pp. 785–804. MR 3451078  [BHN16]  Sayan Bhattacharya, Monika Henzinger, and Danupon Nanongkai, New deterministic approximation algorithms for fully dynamic matching, Proceedings of the 48th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2016, Cambridge, MA, USA, June 18-21, 2016, 2016, pp. 398–411.  [BLSZ14]  Bartlomiej Bosek, Dariusz Leniowski, Piotr Sankowski, and Anna Zych, Online bipartite matching in offline time, FOCS, 2014, pp. 384–393.  [BS15]  Aaron Bernstein and Cliﬀ Stein, Fully dynamic matching in bipartite graphs, Automata, Languages, and Programming - 42nd International Colloquium, ICALP 2015, Kyoto, Japan, July 6-10, 2015, Proceedings, Part I, 2015, pp. 167–179.  [BS16]  , Faster fully dynamic matchings with small approximation ratios, Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2016, Arlington, VA, USA, January 10-12, 2016, 2016, pp. 692–711.  [CDKL09] Kamalika Chaudhuri, Constantinos Daskalakis, Robert D. Kleinberg, and Henry Lin, Online bipartite perfect matching with augmentations, INFOCOM, 2009, pp. 1044–1052. [DS14]  Irit Dinur and David Steurer, Analytical approach to parallel repetition, STOC’14—Proceedings of the 2014 ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, ACM, New York, 2014, pp. 624–633. MR 3238990  [EGI99]  David Eppstein, Zvi Galil, and Giuseppe F. Italiano, Dynamic graph algorithms, Algorithms and theory of computation handbook, CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 1999, pp. 8–1–8–25. MR 1797176  51  [EL11]  Leah Epstein and Asaf Levin, Robust algorithms for preemptive scheduling, ESA, Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., vol. 6942, Springer, Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 567–578. MR 2893232  [GGK13]  Albert Gu, Anupam Gupta, and Amit Kumar, The Power of Deferral: Maintaining a ConstantCompetitive Steiner Tree Online, Proceedings of the Forty-ﬁfth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (Dan Bonesh, Joan Feigenbaum, and Tim Roughgarden, eds.), STOC ’13, ACM, 2013, pp. 525–534.  [GK14]  Anupam Gupta and Amit Kumar, Online steiner tree with deletions, SODA, Jan 2014, pp. 455– 467.  [GKKV95] Edward F. Grove, Ming-Yang Kao, P. Krishnan, and Jeﬀrey Scott Vitter, Online perfect matching and mobile computing, WADS, 1995, pp. 194–205. [GKS14]  Anupam Gupta, Amit Kumar, and Cliﬀ Stein, Maintaining assignments online: Matching, scheduling, and flows, SODA, 2014, pp. 468–479.  [GP13]  Manoj Gupta and Richard Peng, Fully dynamic (1 + ǫ)-approximate matchings, 54th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2013, 26-29 October, 2013, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2013, pp. 548–557.  [HKNS15] Monika Henzinger, Sebastian Krinninger, Danupon Nanongkai, and Thatchaphol Saranurak, Unifying and strengthening hardness for dynamic problems via the online matrix-vector multiplication conjecture, Proceedings of the Forty-Seventh Annual ACM on Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2015, Portland, OR, USA, June 14-17, 2015, 2015, pp. 21–30. [IW91]  Makoto Imase and Bernard M. Waxman, Dynamic Steiner tree problem, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 4 (1991), no. 3, 369–384. MR 92f:68066  [Kor05]  Simon Korman, On the use of randomization in the online set cover problem, M.S. thesis, Weizmann Institute of Science (2005).  [KPP16]  Tsvi Kopelowitz, Seth Pettie, and Ely Porat, Higher lower bounds from the 3sum conjecture, Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2016, Arlington, VA, USA, January 10-12, 2016, 2016, pp. 1272–1287.  [LOP+ 15]  Jakub Lacki, Jakub Oćwieja, Marcin Pilipczuk, Piotr Sankowski, and Anna Zych, The Power of Dynamic Distance Oracles: Efficient Dynamic Algorithms for the Steiner Tree, Proceedings of the Forty-Seventh Annual ACM on Symposium on Theory of Computing (New York, NY, USA), STOC ’15, ACM, 2015, pp. 11–20.  [MSVW12] Nicole Megow, Martin Skutella, José Verschae, and Andreas Wiese, The power of recourse for online MST and TSP, ICALP (1), 2012, pp. 689–700. [NS16]  Ofer Neiman and Shay Solomon, Simple deterministic algorithms for fully dynamic maximal matching, ACM Trans. Algorithms 12 (2016), no. 1, 7.  [OR10]  Krzysztof Onak and Ronitt Rubinfeld, Maintaining a large matching and a small vertex cover, Proceedings of the 42nd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2010, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, 5-8 June 2010, 2010, pp. 457–464.  [Pit85]  Leonard Pitt, A simple probabilistic approximation algorithm for vertex cover, Tech. Report YaleU/DCS/TR-404, Yale University, 1985.  [PW98]  S. Phillips and J. Westbrook, On-line load balancing and network flow, Algorithmica 21 (1998), no. 3, 245–261. MR 1622126 (99d:68033)  [San07]  Piotr Sankowski, Faster dynamic matchings and vertex connectivity, SODA, 2007, pp. 118–126.  [Sol16]  Shay Solomon, Fully dynamic maximal matching in constant update time, FOCS, 2016.  [SSS09]  Peter Sanders, Naveen Sivadasan, and Martin Skutella, Online scheduling with bounded migration, Math. Oper. Res. 34 (2009), no. 2, 481–498. MR 2554070 (2010h:90049)  52  [SV10]  Martin Skutella and José Verschae, A robust PTAS for machine covering and packing, ESA (I), LNCS, vol. 6346, Springer, Berlin, 2010, pp. 36–47. MR 2762841  [Wes00]  Jeﬀery Westbrook, Load balancing for response time, J. Algorithms 35 (2000), no. 1, 1–16. MR 1747722 (2000k:68020)  [WS11]  David P. Williamson and David B. Shmoys, The design of approximation algorithms, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2011. MR 2798112  53

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
