Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_6453

Abstract:
arXiv:1305.6640v1 [cs.SE] 28 May 2013  Domain Types: Selecting Abstractions Based on Variable Usage Sven Apel 1 , Dirk Beyer 1 , Karlheinz Friedberger 1 , Franco Raimondi 2 , and Alexander von Rhein 1 1  2  University of Passau, Germany Middlesex University, London, UK  Technical Report, Number MIP-1303 Department of Computer Science and Mathematics University of Passau, Germany May 2013  Domain Types: Selecting Abstractions Based on Variable Usage Sven Apel 1 , Dirk Beyer 1 , Karlheinz Friedberger 1 , Franco Raimondi 2 , and Alexander von Rhein 1 1 University 2 Middlesex  of Passau, Germany University, London, UK  Abstract—The success of software model checking depends on finding an appropriate abstraction of the subject program. The choice of the abstract domain and the analysis configuration is currently left to the user, who may not be familiar with the tradeoffs and performance details of the available abstract domains. We introduce the concept of domain types, which classify the program variables into types that are more fine-grained than standard declared types, such as int or long, in order to guide the selection of an appropriate abstract domain for a model checker. Our implementation determines the domain type for each variable in a pre-processing step, based on the variable usage in the program, and then assigns each variable to an abstract domain. The model-checking framework that we use supports to specify a separate analysis precision for each abstract domain, such that we can freely configure the analysis. We experimentally demonstrate a significant impact of the choice of the abstract domain per variable. We consider one explicit (hash tables for integer values) and one symbolic (binary decision diagrams) domain. The experiments are based on standard verification tasks that are taken from recent competitions on software verification. Each abstract domain has unique advantages in representing the state space of variables of a certain domain type. Our experiments show that software model checkers can be improved with a domain-type guided combination of abstract domains.  I. I NTRODUCTION One of the main challenges in software model checking is to automatically find, for each program variable, the right abstract representation (also known as abstract domain) that suffices to efficiently prove the program correct or to identify an error path. Several abstract domains have been applied successfully to software-verification problems, with different strengths and weaknesses. 1 Abstract domains can be based on explicit (e.g., hash tables for integers, memory graphs for the heap) and symbolic (predicates, binary decision diagrams (BDD)) representations. For example, using an explicit-value domain [12] was efficient on many benchmarks from the recent competition on software verification, while using a BDD domain [13] was more efficient on event-condition-action (ECA) systems that involve only simple operations over integers in an ECA competition [27]. In the context of product-line verification, it has been shown that BDD-encodings of feature variables improve the performance [3], [22]. The overall picture is that different abstract domains are successful on different types of programs, and for every abstract domain, we can find programs for which the abstract domain is not successful. 1 For an overview, we refer the reader to the competition on software verification: http://sv-comp.sosy-lab.org .  So far, the choice of the abstract domain for a given verification problem (which often implies the choice of a certain verification tool as well) was left to the user. The precision (determining which facts to track) for an analysis using a particular abstract domain is often automatically adjusted using counterexample-guided abstraction refinement [21]. Also, several (component) analyses can be combined to an analysis combination, where each component analysis has its own precision [8], [12], which can be dynamically adjusted (based on certain domain-dependent measures) and determines the level of abstraction inside the component analysis. This concept is used to switch to another domain if the current domain is not successful. Our goal is to automate the choice of an effective abstract domain using a pre-analysis (that runs before the model checker starts the state-space exploration) and to automatically assign program variables to abstract domains. To achieve this goal, we analyze the usage of program variables and assign each variable to a certain domain type. In addition to the standard declared type in the programming language (e.g., int, char, bool), the domain type of a variable represents information about the value range and the operations in which the variable is involved. Using this idea, we can even determine domain types for variables in dynamically typed, or untyped, languages (we focus on statically-typed C programs, though). Our approach is based on a verification framework in which each abstract domain has a precision associated with it [8]. We can now use the domain types from the pre-analysis as guidance for assigning an abstract domain to each variable. In the experiments that we conducted to demonstrate the impact of our idea, we use two abstract domains, namely an explicitvalue domain and a BDD-based domain. For both domains, the precision is a set of variables (which shall be tracked in the domain). Depending on the domain type, we add each variable to the precision of either the explicit-value domain or the BDD domain. The precision of the abstract domain instructs the analysis to track only those variables with that abstract domain that occur in its precision. If the domain assignment is good, then this approach improves the overall verification performance, because then each domain manages only the variables that it is best suited for. Our analysis is implemented in the verification framework CPACHECKER [10], which implements configurable program analysis for C programs and provides abstract domains for an explicit-value analysis and a BDD-based analysis. However, the  Contributions. We make the following novel contributions: • We developed the concept of domain types and designed a pre-analysis that determines domain types of program variables. • We extended an existing model-checking tool to use and synchronize several abstract domains (explicit-value and BDD) in parallel, while each domain handles only the variables that it is suited for. • We evaluate our approach on seven benchmark sets from competitions on software verification.  int enabled, a, b; b=20; if (enabled || a > 5) { if (a == 0) { b = 0; } assert (b∗b > 200); }  Fig. 1: Example with variables of different domain types  approach is generally applicable to other model checking tools, other abstract domains, and to other (statically or dynamically II. BACKGROUND typed) programming languages that support different domain We explain the concepts that we use in our work informally, types. and give references below to the literature for detailed deWe evaluate our approach on 7 benchmark sets from different scriptions. In the presentation, whenever a concrete context application domains (a total of 335 files) that have been used by is necessary, we assume to verify C programs, and that we recent international competitions on software model checking analyze integer variables. (SV-COMP 2012, RERS challenge 2012 [6], [27]). We explore Abstract Domains and Program Analysis. Abstraction-based different mappings from domain types to abstract domains software model checkers automatically extract an abstract and discuss which abstract domain proves suitable for which model of the subject program and explore this model using one domain type. We also compare our approach to a competitive or more abstract domains. An abstract domain is an abstract model-checking tool that won several awards in software modelrepresentation of certain aspects of the concrete program states checking competitions. that the state exploration is supposed to track [1]. Different Our evaluation shows that the programs in our benchmark abstract domains can track different aspects of the program sets contain a significant number of variables that have a much state space and complement each other. For example, a shape narrower domain type than the declared type of the variable. domain stores, for each tracked pointer, the shape of the pointedThe evaluation also shows that the performance of model to data structures on the heap [9], [23], [30]. Another example checking improves when these variables are analyzed with is the explicit-value domain that, for each tracked variable, a suitable abstract domain. Our results are available on the tracks the explicit value of the variable [12], [25], [26]. supplementary website 2 . The two examples illustrate that abstract domains can Example. Fig. 1 illustrates the advantage of our approach on represent different information. However, it is also possible to an example program. The program contains three variables use different abstract domains to represent the same information that are declared by the programmer as ‘integer’. The variables in different ways. For example, consider a program in which the are used in different ways: the variable enabled is used as a value of variable x ranges from 3 to 9. This can be stored by an boolean and the variables a and b are numeric; variables a and interval domain using the abstract state x 7→ [3, 9] [15], or by b are used in a greater-than comparison and b is also used a predicate domain using the abstract state x ≥ 3 ∧ x ≤ 9 [5], in a multiplication. Neither the explicit-value analysis nor the [7], [24]. Every abstract domain consists of BDD-based analysis is able to efficiently verify such programs: (a) a representation of sets of concrete states, defining the The explicit-value domain is perfectly suited to handle variable abstract states (lattice elements), b, because b has a concrete value, and the multiplication and (b) an operator to decide if one abstract state subsumes another the greater than comparison can be easily computed, whereas abstract state (partial order), and BDDs are known to be inefficient for multiplications [28]. The BDD domain can efficiently encode the variables enabled and a, (c) an operator that combines two abstract states into a new abstract state that represents both (join). whereas the explicit-value analysis is not good at encoding facts Every tool for program analysis uses one or several abstract like a > 5. Thus, without the information about variable a, the domains to represent the states of the program. The abilities explicit-value analysis does not know the value of variable b of the abstract domain imply the effectivity (is the analysis and cannot determine the result of the multiplication. A solution that has been proposed before is to use both able to correctly solve the verification problem?) and efficiency abstract domains in parallel, with each domain handling all (is the analysis fast, does it scale to large programs?) of the variables. If the domains are well communicating (reduced program analysis. products), this could solve the verification task, but the Precision. Each abstract domain can operate on different levels load on each domain would be unnecessarily high, because of abstraction, i.e., it can be more fine-grained or more coarse. every domain has to handle more variables. Our experiments The level of abstraction of an abstract domain is determined show that the load on the abstract domain should not be by the abstraction precision, which controls if the analysis is underestimated, especially considering the BDD domain. coarse or detailed. For example, the precision of the shape domain could instruct the analysis which pointers to track, 2 http://www.sosy-lab.org/projects/domaintypes/ and how large a shape can maximally grow. The precision 2  number of boolean variables, most prominently in hardware verification [18], [28]. Values of integer variables can be represented by BDDs using a binary encoding of the values and representing the binary values in 32 boolean BDD variables. In our example, this would require 96 BDD variables for the three integer program variables. Because the size of the BDD has a strong impact on the performance of BDD operations, it is important to keep the number of BDD variables small. The abstraction precision of the BDD domain is also a simple set of program variables that the analysis should track using this abstract domain. Considering again our example, if we knew beforehand that variables x and y can be efficiently represented by the explicit-value domain, we would not include them in the precision, which would result in precision {z} for the BDD domain, which needs only 32 BDD variables. The additional power that allows us to store disjunctions in BDDs comes at a price: the performance decreases with a growing number of variables, and thus, we should parsimoniously use the BDD domain. To achieve the goal of a better assignment of variables to abstract domains, we introduce the concept of domain types in the next section.  1  2  0 1 2 3 4 5 6  int x,y,z; x=5; if (y > 1) { z = 2; } else { z = 3−1; }  (a) C Code  3  x→5  4  x→5 z→2  x→5 5  6  7  x→5  x→5 z→2  x→5 z→2  (b) Abstract reachability graph  Fig. 2: Code example and abstract reachability graph (nodes represent explicit states)  of the predicate domain is a set of predicates to track, which can, for example, grow by adding predicate during refinement steps [21]. Next, we describe the two abstract domains that we consider in our experiments. Explicit-Value Domain. The explicit-value domain stores concrete values for all program variables that occur in the precision (once a concrete value has been determined). Each abstract state of the domain is represented by a map that assigns to each program variable an integer value. Variables for which a concrete value cannot be determined do not appear in the map. For example, consider the code in Fig. 2 (a) and the corresponding abstract reachability graph (ARG) in Fig. 2 (b): Variable x is assigned, and the value is stored in a new abstract state (state 2 in Fig. 2 (b)). Then, a conditional statement spawns two possible execution paths, so the model checker explores both paths. The explicit domain cannot store information on variable y, because it does not have a concrete value. After both branches of the conditional statement are executed, the ARG has two “frontier” abstract states that are identical. Only one of these abstract states is stored because the other is subsumed, and state exploration continues from this ‘merged’ state. The explicit-value domain might suffer from a loss of information in cases where not all information can be stored, e.g., y > 1. On the one hand, this introduces imprecision and potentially false alarms, but, on the other hand, if values are present, all operations can be executed extremely fast. The abstraction precision controls which variables should be tracked in the explicit-value domain. For the code fragment from Fig. 2, we could use a precision {x, z} and omit y, if we knew beforehand that there is no point in representing variable y in the explicit-value domain.  III. D OMAIN T YPES Our new approach performs the verification process in three steps: (1) We start with analyzing the subject program in order to determine the domain type for each variable (preanalysis). (2) Then, each variable is mapped to an abstract domain that the analysis will use to represent information about the variable. The mapping from domain type to abstract domain is not yet automated. This mapping determins the precision for each abstract domain. (3) Finally, the actual model-checking procedure with the individual precisions per abstract domain is started. Figure 3 illustrates our approach of a model-checking engine that is based on domain-types. The state exploration algorithm is implemented in the main module. It uses several abstract domains to represent the state space of the program. Note that each variable is tracked by only one abstract domain. A. Domain Types — Classification  In statically-typed programming languages, each variable is declared to be of a certain type. The type determines which values can be stored in the variable and which operations can use the variable as operand. For the assignment of abstract domains to variables, we need more specific information about the variables, in particular, information on the operations that the variables are involved in. BDD Domain. The BDD domain stores information about For example, consider boolean variables in the programming program variables using binary decision diagrams (BDD). language C. The language C does not provide a type ‘boolean’. Each abstract state in the BDD domain is represented by a In C, the boolean values true and false are represented by the predicate over the variable values that the BDD represents [16]. integer values 1 and 0, respectively. When integer variables are BDDs can be efficient in storing predicates and performing read, the value 0 is interpreted as false and all other values are boolean operations. Because of this characteristics, BDDs interpreted as true. Let us consider the tiny code fragment in have been used in model checking of systems with a large Fig. 4). 3  TABLE I: Domain types that are considered in this paper Domain-Type Analysis  Model-Checking Algorithm  Domain type Bool IntEq  State Exploration  Domain Synchronization  Explicit Domain  BDD Domain  int x int y  int lock int enabled  IntEqAdd Int  Short description Boolean variable Equality comparisons with a constant value (==,!=) Linear arithmetics only (+,–) All integer variables  Bool  IntEq  IntEqAdd  BDD Library  Int  Fig. 3: A model-checking engine with two abstract domains and domain-type analysis. Fig. 5: Hierarchical structure of domain types  int enabled; ... if (enabled) { ... } else { ... }  B. Domain Types — Analysis  The first step of our approach is a static domain-type analysis that determines the domain types for all program variables. It works on an abstract representation of the program (a controlflow graph, in our case, but an abstract syntax tree would also be sufficient) and processes all program operations in which Fig. 4: Using an integer variable as boolean in C variables are used. For a variable x, the analysis in its search analyzes all expressions in which the variable x is involved. For example, the expressions x==0, x==x+1, and y==x*z yield The expression enabled in the if condition is internally the domain types Bool, IntEqAdd, and Int, respectively. In the following, we informally define the criteria that the expanded to the expression enables != 0 [2]. It is clear from the type analysis is based on (for brevity, we omit the formal type last section that such a variable should be represented in a BDD system). The four domain types are hierarchically overlapping by one single boolean variable, and not 32 boolean variables. (subtypes), as illustrated in Fig. 5. Therefore, we introduce a domain type Bool that represents the more precise type. To determine whether an integer variable Bool. A variable belongs into the domain type Bool if all has actually the domain type Bool, our pre-analysis inspects expressions in which the variable is used are the boolean all occurrences of the variable in expressions. If a variable is expressions &&, ||, and !, as well as the comparisons with zero found to be of domain type Bool, this fact can be considered ==0 and !=0. Comparisons with other variables are possible if in the assignment of the abstract domain and thus, the variable their domain type is Bool as well. can be represented by a more efficient data structures during IntEq. Variables of domain type IntEq are limited to boolean model checking. expressions, equality tests with constant values and simple Other programming languages such as JAVA provide more comparisons (==,!=) with other variables of domain type IntEq. restrictive types like boolean and byte, but for the purpose of IntEqAdd. The domain type IntEqAdd contains all variables assigning the best abstract domain, more precise information that are used in boolean expressions (&&, ||, !), linear arithmetic is beneficial. In dynamically-typed or even untyped languages, (+,–), comparisons (==,!=,<,>,<=,>=), and in bit operations (&,|,ˆ). types of variables are unknown before program execution. Int. All other variables are of domain type Int. This includes A static analysis of domain types can lead to considerable variables that use multiplication (*), division (/), and bitshift improvements here, because it can infer quite constrained operations (<<, >>). domain types. This information can be used during the Each variable that is of type Bool, is also of types IntEq, verification to choose efficient algorithms and data structures. IntEqAdd, and Int. The type system assigns the strongest (most Figure I shows the four domain types that we consider in the restrictive) possible type, i.e. the type system prefers domain static pre-analysis (many more are possible to be explored in type Bool over IntEqAdd). When we discuss variables of future work). Our pre-analysis assigns every program variable domain types in the text, we usually want to refer only to to exactly one of these domain types, from which an appropriate variables that are not of the “smaller” domain types (e.g., only abstract domain can be derived. the variables in IntEq that are not Bool); we use the set 4  IV. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION  if (a == 0) { b = 1042; c = b; } else { c = 989; }  To evaluate domain-type-based analysis approach, we conduct experiments with different configurations on a diverse set of verification tasks. The results give evidence that the choice of the representing abstract domains for the considered domain types has a significant impact on the effectiveness and efficiency. We make the following statements:  Fig. 6: Example of variables of IntEq domain type notation to denote this (e.g., IntEq \ Bool). Fig. 6 shows three variables of domain type IntEq. Variable a for example is (more precisely) of domain type Bool. In such cases, we assign the most restricted domain type: Bool. We consider usual optimizations, for example, if IntEq variables are limited to a small set of values, we use this information to re-map the possible values to a simpler domain of successive numbers and possibly save boolean BDD variables if the domain type IntEq gets assigned to the BDD domain.  Domain types. The subject systems contain a large set of integer variables that our domain-type analysis classifies into four specific domain types. Variable partitioning. The verification performance significantly changes if variables are treated with different abstract domains, compared to tracking all variables with the same abstract domain. Domain optimization. Using the BDD domain for variables of domain type IntEq \ Bool and IntEqAdd \ IntEq can improve the verification performance. Comparison with state-of-the-art. The best combination of the explicit-value domain and the BDD domain with domain-type analysis performs better than a competitive predicate-analysis approach that uses other optimization techniques such as counterexample-guided abstraction refinement (CEGAR).  C. Domain Assignment Once the domain types have been determined for all variables, we need to assign each variable to a certain abstract domain that the analysis uses to track the variable. For this, we use the domain assignment, which is a map that assigns an abstract domain to each domain type. For each abstract domain, we add all variables that the abstract domain should track to the abstraction precision of that abstract domain. In principle, every abstract domain can represent any variable, but each abstract domain has certain strengths and weaknesses (in terms of effectiveness and efficiency). Therefore, we have to map every domain type to an abstract domain that is appropriate for the usage of the variables. It seems straightforward to associate the domain type Bool with the BDD domain. The BDD domain can efficiently represent complicated boolean combinations of variables, but is sensitive to the number of represented variables. We can also represent the domain types IntEq \ Bool and IntEqAdd \ IntEq by the BDD domain. For domain type IntEq \ Bool, we know from the properties of the domain type that those variables only hold a limited and known set of values. Therefore, we can enumerate these values and represent them by BDD variables. To represent values of a set of size n, we need log2 (n) BDD variables. This representation can be very efficient. The explicit-value domain can in principle be used for all domain types, but the more different combinations of variable assignments need to be distinguished in the analysis, the larger the state space grows, perhaps leading to the problem of statespace explosion. Also, the explicit-value domain is not wellsuited for analyzing uninitialized variables. In our experiments, we show that different domain assignments have significantly different performance characteristics for different sets of verification tasks. Automatically finding an optimal domain assignment remains a research problem for future work. The goal of this paper is to show that the concepts of domain types provides a technique to approach this problem.  A. Implementation For our experiments, we extended the open verification framework CPACHECKER [10]. CPACHECKER offers various abstract domains and supports the concept of abstraction precisions in a modular way, such that it is easy to extend and configure. The tool is applicable to an extensive set of verification benchmarks, because it participated at the competition on software verification. This enables us to evaluate our approach on a large set of realistic programs. We reuse one of those abstract domains in our experiments, namely a version of the explicit domain (without CEGAR) [12]. We extended CPACHECKER with the domain-type analysis described in the previous section, and we implemented a new, flexible abstract domain that uses BDDs to represent variable values. For comparison of our domain-type-based approach with a stat-of-the-art verifier, we will use another configuration of CPACHECKER that participated at the competition in the last year. This other configuration implements a predicate analysis with CEGAR, interpolation, and adjustable-block encoding [11]. Explicit-Value Domain. We use the default explicit-value domain that is already implemented in CPACHECKER. The implementation can be used either with CEGAR or without. Its basic version works similarly to the explicit-value domain described in the background section. In this paper, we cannot compare with a CEGAR-based configuration because abstraction refinement is orthogonal to domain-type analysis. Therefore, we use the explicit-value domain without CEGAR in all experiments. It is possible to apply CEGAR to the BDDbased analysis, but this is out of scope of this paper. 5  BDD Domain. The BDD domain uses binary decision diagrams they are publicly available via the CPACHECKER repository3 . (BDD) to represent the values of variables, by encoding each Overall, this benchmark suite for software verification is the integer variable with one or more (boolean) BDD variables. most comprehensive and diverse suite of this kind that exists. The BDD domain uses a different encoding of variables in the It covers various application domains, such as device drivers, BDD for each domain type. For domain type Bool, we use software product lines, and embedded-systems simulation. exactly one BDD variable per program variable. For variables For our experiments, we consider only the verification of domain type IntEqAdd\IntEq, we use 32 (boolean) BDD tasks with expected result ‘safe’ (335 verification tasks). This variables to represent on program variable. For variables of choice makes it necessary that the model checker explores the domain type IntEq \ Bool, we know from the pre-analysis whole state space. If we also included ‘unsafe’ verification how many different values the variable can hold. Therefore, we tasks, the runtime would largely depend on which program can re-map the variable values to a new set of values with the path is explored first. Since we focus on differences between same cardinality and therefore need considerable fewer BDD combinations of abstract domains, the influence of the path variables (compared to 32 BDD variables). We use a simple precedence algorithm would merely blur the results. bijective map from the original constants in the program to The description of the systems that follows is partly taken a (smaller, successive) set of integer values, and need only from the report on the 2012 competition on software verificalog2 (n) bits to encode a set of n different program constants (of tion [6]. Unless stated otherwise the systems are taken from this arbitrary values) for a program variable. In our implementation, competition. The set NTDRIVER - SIMPLIFIED contains verificawe use one additional boolean variable to be able to encode tion tasks that are based on device drivers from the Windows NT the situation that the variable is different from all program kernel. The sets SSH and SSH - SIMPLIFIED contain verification constants for the variable. tasks that represent the connection-handshake protocol between SSH server and clients. The verification tasks ssh-simplified B. Experimental Setup have been manually pre-processed to remove heap accesses. We performed all experiments on an Ubuntu 11.10 system Each file checks a protocol-specific safety property. The set with 16 GB RAM and an Intel i7-2600 processor (8 cores, lock contains files from the CPACHECKER repository that were 3.4 GHz). Each verification run was limited to 15 GB of designed to investigate scalability properties of model-checking memory and 900 s of CPU time. We used CPACHECKER optimizations. The files in the set SYSTEMC are provided by the revision 7487. Each verification task from our benchmark set SyCMC project [19] and were taken (with some changes) from the SystemC distribution. The benchmark set ECA contains was verified using four different configurations: event-condition-action (ECA) programs, a kind of systems that Explicit-Int This configuration tracks all variables with the is often used in industry. The files in our benchmark set have been used in the RERS Grey-Box Challenge 2012 [27] on explicit-value domain. BDD-Bool This configuration uses both abstract domains, verification of ECA systems. The benchmark set PRODUCT where all variables of domain type Bool are in the SIMULATORS has been used in the competition on software precision of the BDD domain and all other variables verification 2013. They model the variability of some product lines [3]. are in the precision of the explicit-value analysis. BDD-IntEq This configuration uses both abstract domains, where all variables of domain type IntEq are in the Domain Types. Considering Fig. 7, an immediate observation precision of the BDD domain and all other variables is that the number of Int \ IntEqAdd variables is usually the lowest. An exception to this observation are the benchmark sets are in the precision of the explicit-value domain. BDD-IntEqAdd This configuration uses both abstract domains, SSH and NTDRIVERS, in which the number of Int\IntEqAdd where all variables of domain type IntEqAdd are in the variables is extremely high compared to all other domain types. precision of the BDD domain and all other variables are In the other benchmark sets, we note that there is a significant number of variables that do not fall into the domain type Int \ in the precision of the explicit-value domain. BDD-Int This configuration tracks all variables with the BDD IntEqAdd. This confirms the basic premise of our approach, that there are enough variables in each class of variables, in domain. order to explore the optimization potential. In most benchmark sets, the domain type with the largest number of variables is C. Verification Tasks either Bool or IntEq \ Bool. We expect that optimizations for We evaluate our approach on 7 benchmark sets that, in total, the domain types Bool and IntEq \Bool pay off, especially in consist of 335 verification tasks to be solved. The benchmark the benchmark sets ECA, LOCKS, and SYSTEMC, because these sets are (with number of verification tasks): domain types cover a large part of the variables in those sets. The benchmark set SSH - SIMPLIFIED also has a high number ECA (254) LOCKS (11) of IntEqAdd \ IntEq variables, so we expect a difference NTDRIVERS (11) PRODUCT SIMULATORS (4) between configurations that use different abstract domains for SSH (17) SSH - SIMPLIFIED (13) this domain type. SYSTEMC (25) All verification tasks of the benchmark sets have been used in international competitions on verification tools [6], [27];  3 http://cpachecker.sosy-lab.org/  6  31 61 91 131 171 211 251 File with n−th largest variable set  ●  1  2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 11 File with n−th largest variable set  Number of variables per domain type 10 20 30 40 50 1  2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 11 File with n−th largest variable set  ssh−simplified ●  Number of variables per domain type 0 5 10 15 20 25 30  ssh  1  3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 File with n−th largest variable set  ●  1  ●  1  2 3 4 File with n−th largest variable set  systemc Number of variables per domain type 0 20 40 60 80 100 120  1  productSimulators ●  Number of variables per domain type 0 2000 4000 6000  ●  ntdrivers Number of variables per domain type 0 50 100 150 200 250  locks Number of variables per domain type 0 5 10 15  Number of variables per domain type 0 10 20 30 40 50 60  eca  3 5 7 9 11 13 File with n−th largest variable set  ●  Bool IntEq \ Bool IntEqAdd \ IntEq Int \ IntEqAdd  ●  1  4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 File with n−th largest variable set  Fig. 7: Domain types of variables of for all verification tasks. The diagrams show, for each benchmark set, how many variables of each domain type the files contain (excluding variables that are already contained in a sub-type). The x-axis shows the verification tasks, sorted by their total number of variables and the y-axis shows the absolute number of variables in each domain type (excluding variables that are already considered for sub-types).  ●  ●  product simulators  Cpu time (in seconds) 5 50 500  ●  ntdrivers  Cpu time (in seconds) 5 50 500  locks  Cpu time (in seconds) 5 50 500  Cpu time (in seconds) 5 50 500  eca  ●  ●  ●  ●  31 61 91 131 171 211 251 Verified subject files  1  2  3  2  3  4 5 6 7 8 9 Verified subject files  5 7 9 11 13 15 17 Verified subject files  1  2 3 Verified subject files  4  systemc  ●  Cpu time (in seconds) 5 50 500  11  ●  ●  ●  ●  Explicit−Int BDD−Bool BDD−IntEq BDD−IntEqAdd BDD−Int  ●  1  ●  3  1 1  ssh−simplified  ●  1  11  1  1  Cpu time (in seconds) 5 50 500  ssh  4 5 6 7 8 9 Verified subject files  Cpu time (in seconds) 5 50 500  1  1  1  1  ●  1  3  5 7 9 11 Verified subject files  13  1  4  7 10 13 16 19 22 25 Verified subject files  Fig. 8: The quantile plots show the performance of the different configurations per benchmark set. Each plot shows the data of one benchmark set. Each data point (x, y) shows the x-fastest verification run which needed y seconds. All plots have logarithmic y-axes. In the SSH benchmark set, the configuration BDD-Int could not solve any verification task.  7  and therefore, consistently, the configurations that represent IntEq \ Bool variables with the BDD domain are performing best. This indicates that tracking IntEq \ Bool variables with BDDs is a good idea. The performance result is in line with the results of a recent paper on BDD-based software model checking [13], in which similar experiments are discussed. Our analysis of the variables in Fig. 7 explains the good result in that paper. The benchmark set LOCKS shows similar results: The configuration Bool shows that encoding the numerous Bool variables in BDDs improves the performance. Also, encoding IntEq \ Bool variables in BDDs improves the performance further. The LOCKS benchmark set has been designed to show the negative impact of a growing state space in analyses that work like the explicit-value analysis (single-block encoding without joins) [11]; therefore, this result was expected. For the benchmark set NTDRIVERS, we observe the opposite effect: the more variables are encoded in BDDs, the worse the performance gets. Fig. 7 shows that the verification tasks in this benchmark set contain many Int \ IntEqAdd variables. Only a few variables have a simple domain type and can be encoded in BDDs. If this is done, the BDD domain has a negative impact on the overall performance: the configurations Explicit-Int performs better than the BDD-based configurations. The verification tasks in benchmark set PRODUCT SIMULA TOR contains many IntEq \ Bool (130-256) and IntEqAdd \ IntEq variables (56-96). The performance of the configuration BDD-IntEq is best, as expected. However, the performance of the configuration BDD-IntEqAdd is worse than or equal to the performance of the configuration Explicit-Int. This means that it is too expensive to represent all variables of type IntEqAdd in the BDD. We have to use 32 BDD variables for each program variable and encode each operation on the program variables as BDD operations (e.g., additions with a full adder). This involves more complex operations on the BDDs, compared to the IntEq \Bool variables, for which the operations are simple assignments and comparisons. The benchmark also shows that the configuration BDD-Int needs substantially more time than all other configurations on two of the verification tasks, which means that there are some Int \ IntEqAdd variables which cannot be handled properly in the BDD domain. This configuration can still solve the verification tasks, however, it has to spend more time on expensive BDD operations and is therefore slower. Similar to the benchmark set NTDRIVERS, the configuration Explicit-Int is the best configuration for the benchmark set SSH. These two benchmark sets do not benefit from using the BDD domain. The configurations that handle more variables than the variables contained in Bool with BDDs, cannot solve many of the verification tasks in the benchmark set. The verification tasks contain many variables of domain type Int \ IntEqAdd. The verification tasks of the benchmark set SSH - SIMPLIFIED contains some variables of each domain type, but not too many overall. Most of the variables are of domain types Bool and IntEqAdd \ IntEq, and this is reflected by the good performance of the configurations BDD-IntEq and BDDIntEqAdd. The benchmark set SSH - SIMPLIFIED has been derived from the files in the benchmark SSH by removing  D. Results Due to the huge amount of verification results, we cannot provide the raw data of all verification runs in the paper. Instead, we show results aggregated by subject systems and configurations. We also provide a website 4 , where all results are available in form of interactive plots. The website does provide the raw data and the logfiles of all verification runs. Effectiveness. Table II gives an overview of the number of correctly solved verification tasks. Each row shows the results for one benchmark set. For each configuration, we show which percentage of the verification tasks could be correctly solved. The table suggests that some verification tasks are difficult to verify. In the benchmark set SYSTEMC, most configurations solve less than half of the verification tasks. Most of these failures are caused by timeouts and out-of-memory terminations; some are also due to limitations of the implemented abstract domains. We note that the combined configurations demonstrate very good effectiveness results. In terms of effectiveness, there is no clear winner, which suggests to further investigate verification based on domain-types. Efficiency. Before we discuss the details, we briefly give an overview over the results, based on Fig. 8. The diagrams show the performance of the configurations in separate quantile plots for each benchmark set. A point (x, y) in a quantile plot states that the xth-fastest verification run of the respective configuration took y s of CPU time. The right-most x-value of a configuration indicates the total number of correctly solved verification tasks. The area below the graph is proportional to the accumulated verification time. For the benchmark set ECA, the configurations that encode IntEq\Bool variables in BDDs are efficient. The configuration BDD-Bool performs similar to Explicit-Int. The benchmark set LOCK is a very good example for extremely good performance of BDDs encodings: the configurations Explicit-Int and BDD-Bool show a significant growth with increasing problem size, while the other configurations (encoding all variables as BDDs) perform extremely well. For the benchmark set PRODUCT SIMULATOR, the configuration BDD-IntEq is fastest, followed by the configuration Explicit-Int and then BDD-IntEqAdd. The benchmark SYSTEMC shows a very interesting detail: there are only two configurations that are able to solve most verification tasks: BDD-IntEqAdd and BDD-Int. All other configurations fail on exactly the same verification tasks. The plots also show that our approach does not perform well on two benchmark sets, namely the benchmark sets NTDRIVERS and SSH. On these benchmark sets, all combined configurations perform worse than the explicit analysis. E. Relating Results to Domain Types To explain why different configurations have different performance results on different benchmark sets, we relate the results in Fig. 8 to the domain-type statistics in Fig. 7. The verification tasks in benchmark set ECA contain many variables of domain type IntEq \ Bool (up to 58 variables), 4 http://www.sosy-lab.org/projects/domaintypes/  8  ECA LOCKS NTDRIVERS PRODUCT SIMULATORS SSH SSH - SIMPLIFIED SYSTEMC  Explicit-Int  BDD-Bool  BDD-IntEq  100 45 64 75 100 77 32  100 91 64 75 100 100 32  100 100 45 75 35 100 32  BDD-IntEqAdd 100 100 45 75 35 100 80  BDD-Int 100 100 45 75 0 100 80  TABLE II: Verification statistics for each configurations; each entry states the percentage of correctly solved verification tasks for the given configuration.  Cpu time (in seconds) 5 50 500  heap access operations. The effect on the variable setup is ● visible in Fig. 7, where in SSH nearly all variables are of type Int \ IntEqAdd, and in SSH - SIMPLIFIED most variables are of simpler domain types. This has a large impact on the effectiveness and performance of the verification: The more variables are encoded in BDDs, the better is the performance. A closer look at the source code of the verification tasks reveals Explicit−Int CPAchecker−Predicate that during the “simplification”, some local variables were BDD−IntEqAdd made global. The explicit domain is inefficient in tracking all 1 21 41 61 81 101 131 161 191 221 251 281 311 these variables, as can be seen in Fig. 8. If these variables are Verified subject files encoded in BDDs, these problems do not exist. The benchmark set SYSTEMC has a quite interesting characteristic: it contains many IntEq \ Bool variables, but the Fig. 9: Performance of the configuration BDD-IntEqAdd most successful configurations are BDD-IntEqAdd and BDD- with the baseline configuration Explicit-Int and a competitive Int. The reason for this is that many of the verification tasks implementation of predicate analysis; quantile plots contain uninitialized variables with an inequality comparison and an addition on one of the variables. The explicit-value analysis is not good at tracking facts in such cases, and thus, instances of the abstract domains in the program analysis, the configurations that use the explicit-value analysis for some where each instance handles an independent partition of the variables terminate unsuccessfully. The configurations BDD- domain type. To give further evidence for the quality of our apIntEqAdd and BDD-Int can efficiently analyze all operations proach, we compared the configuration BDD-IntEqAdd with and solve the verification tasks successfully. CPACHECKER-P REDICATE, which is based on a completely different abstract domain (predicate abstraction) and CEGAR, F. Evaluation interpolation, and adjustable-block encoding [11]. The conOur experimental study has shown that the performance figuration CPACHECKER-P REDICATE has won the category of combined approaches depends inherently on the domain ‘ControlFlowInteger’ in the SV-COMP 2012 and another types of the variables in the program. If the verification tasks analysis, based on CPACHECKER-P REDICATE, has won the contain variables of domain type IntEq, then representing these category ‘Overall’ in the SV-COMP 2013. Therefore, this variables with the BDD domain can improve the performance experiment is a representative comparison with the state-of-thesignificantly. If the programs contain some IntEqAdd\IntEq art in performance. Fig. 9 shows a quantile plot comparing the variables, analyzing them with the BDD domain does also performance of the new configuration BDD-IntEqAdd against improve performance (e.g., in the benchmark SSH - SIMPLIFIED). CPACHECKER-P REDICATE. Both approaches can successfully However, there seems to be a threshold at about 200 variables, solve most verification tasks, however, the new approach above which the overhead of analyzing integer operations with performs better in terms of CPU time, compared to both CPACHECKER-P REDICATE and configuration Explicit-Int. In BDDs has a visible negative effect. terms of solved verification tasks, CPACHECKER-P REDICATE Analyzing variables of domain type IntEq using BDDs performs slightly better. is much more efficient, so we expect the threshold to be 1  ●  Evaluative Summary. To evaluate our approach, we briefly discuss the statements that we list at the beginning of the section, based on the results. The first statement, concerning the domain types has already been discussed (Fig. 7). Concerning the variable partitioning, we confirm that analyzing variables of different domain types with different abstract domains can make a huge difference, in terms of effectiveness and efficiency. There are several new configurations that outperform the existing configurations (only explicit-value domain or only BDD domain) on several benchmark sets. The benchmark  considerably higher for this domain type. In general, it is not (yet) possible to make a clear statement about these thresholds, because the performance also depends on the other variables and on the operations that are used in the program. To counter the negative effect of large sets of variables of “expensive” domain types, we will in the future investigate three techniques: (1) introduce further detailed domain types such that we can make more fine-grained decisions on the domain assignment, (2) a prioritization function to assign only the “most profitable” variables to the respective domain, and (3) introduce several 9  sets NTDRIVERS and SSH mainly consist of variables that do simplified transport-protocol specification. In contrast to our not fit in simple domain types. So the best domain for these work, the approach is not based on a separate analysis to files is in fact the previously existing configuration Explicit- determine domain types of variables, but include the type Int. On the other benchmarks, we can assign the variables analysis in the actual model-checking process. By performing according to their domain types to abstract domains and in the domain-type analysis in advance, we avoid overhead during nearly all cases, the configuration that encodes the dominant the model checking process. The approach was evaluated on a variables with BDDs and uses the explicit-value domain for much smaller benchmark set. the rest performs best. The configuration BDD-Int performs We infer domain types for program variables according to nearly as good as the combined configurations, however, on their usage in program oparations. This principle is also used the verification tasks from PRODUCT SIMULATORS and SSH it by for type- and memory-safety analysis of C programs with is apparent that including the support of the explicit analysis liquid types [29]. A static program analysis is used to determine for Int \ IntEqAdd variables is critical. Our comparison with for each variable a predicate that restricts the possible values the configuration CPACHECKER -P REDICATE shows that our of the variable (the liquid type). In a second step, each usage of combined approach is also competitive against other, more the variable is checked for type-safety, or if it could lead to an optimized verification approaches that use the full power of unsafe memory access. In contrast to domain types, liquid types existing technology (including CEGAR, which we eliminated use a predicate for each variable. liquid types are fine-grained. from the discussion to not blur the picture). Overall, it might Domain types can be seen as coarse-grained in comparison, be beneficial to use the BDD domain for variables of domain but the granularity is flexible in both approaches. Our type type IntEqAdd, rather than using the explicit domain. This is checker for domain types does not depend on an SMT solver. confirmed by the performance of configurations BDD-IntEq, Roles of variables are used to analyze programs submitted BDD-IntEqAdd, and Explicit-Int in most benchmark sets (except by students [14]. Program slicing and data-flow analysis is for (NTDRIVERS and SSH). The configuration BDD-IntEqAdd applied to determine the role of each variable (e.g., constant or can successfully solve many verification tasks of the set loop index). The role determined by the analysis is compared SYSTEMC , for which all other configurations fail. to the role that the students have assigned to the variables. This work falls into the area of automated program comprehension. The rather strong behavioral variable types might be interesting G. Threats to Validity to extend our work. Threats to Internal Validity. Due to the large number of Java Pathfinder [32] has an extension that combines the benchmark verification tasks, we could not execute every standard explicit analysis with a BDD-based analysis for verification run several times in order to perform statistical boolean variables [3], [33]. In that approach, we manually significance tests on the results. However, we argue that relevant selected the variables that are to be tracked by BDDs, based parts of our discussion do not depend on the timing results (e.g., on domain knowledge. Our new approach handles a broader successfully solved verification tasks; number of variables per set of domain types and categorizes them automatically. domain type) and that the performance results are convincing. B EBOP [4], a model checker for boolean programs, encodes We performed several minor changes to the benchmark sets all program variables (only booleans in this case) in BDDs, and and configurations to address technical difficulties until we had use explicit-state exploration to handle the program counter. the final setup. None of these changed the big picture of the Our domain-type analysis would correctly classify all variables results. as Bool and encode them with BDDs; thus, we subsume this Threats to External Validity. The major threat to external approach as a special instance. A similar strategy was followed validity is that we have used only two abstract domains by others [20]. A hybrid approach combining explicit and BDD-based (explicit-value and BDD) to distribute variables. However, these domains are perfectly suited for the chosen domain types and representations analyzes the program variables with BDDs complement each other very well. Therefore it was an intuitive and the states of the property automaton explicitly [31]. In choice. Combinations with other domains have to be explored in our setting, this translates to encoding all program variables future work. Another threat is that our benchmark set consists of in BDDs, because the property automaton runs separately in a small number of verification tasks or of too many verification parallel, in CPACHECKER. This case can be represented in our tasks of a certain kind. We argue that the benchmark sets general framework as configuration BDD-Int. have been used by well-respected international competitions and represent programs that are used for evaluation by others VI. C ONCLUSION researchers. Also, we have seen that these programs contain a We introduced the concept of domain types, which makes diverse set of variables. it possible to assign variables to different abstract domains based on their usage by program operations. In this paper, V. R ELATED W ORK we outlined the approach by introducing a type hierarchy that The two symbolic domains BDDs and Presburger formulas splits the declared type ‘integer’ into four more detailed domain were previously use as representation for boolean and integer types, which reflect the usage of variables in the program. We variables [17]. The approach was evaluated on two systems, a performed an experimental study with two abstract domains, in control software for a nuclear reactor’s cooling system and a order to confirm that the domain assignment based on domain 10  types has a significant impact on the effectiveness and efficiency of the verification process. In the experiments, we considered five domain assignments: one for each considered abstract domain that tracks all program variables in one single abstract domain, without considering the different domain types, and three with different assignments of the variables to the two abstract domains according to the domain type. The insight of our work is that the concept of domain types is a simple yet powerful technique to create verification tools that implement a better choice for the domain assignment — state-of-the-art is to use either one single abstract domain, or a fixed combination of abstract domains that adjust precisions via CEGAR or otherwise dynamically, during the verification run. We confirmed that the benchmark set contains a significant set of variables for which we can determine different, narrower domain types. The insight of the domain type IntEq is that this domain type (and even more its sub-type Bool) dramatically decreases the number of possible values of the variables in the internal representation, and thus can yield a large speedup in verification time. The experiments show that performance can be improved if the variables are tracked in an abstract domain that is suitable for the domain type of the variable. There is still room for improvement. For example, we can consider CEGAR as an orthogonal improvement of the overall verification configuration. We can also combine more analyses through the communication between different domains using the strengthen operator — so far we use a simple cartesian combination. This would enable even finer domain assignments and to use more abstract domains in parallel. R EFERENCES [1] A. V. Aho, R. Sethi, and J. D. Ullman. Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools. Addison-Wesley, 1986. [2] American National Standards Institute. ANSI/ISO/IEC 9899-1999: Programming Languages — C. American National Standards Institute, 1430 Broadway, New York, NY 10018, USA, 1999. [3] S. Apel, A. von Rhein, P. Wendler, A. Größlinger, and D. Beyer. Strategies for product-line verification: Case studies and experiments. In Proc. ICSE. IEEE, 2013. [4] T. Ball and S. Rajamani. Bebop: A symbolic model checker for boolean programs. In Proc. SPIN, pages 113–130, 2000. [5] T. Ball and S. K. Rajamani. The S LAM project: Debugging system software via static analysis. In Proc. POPL, pages 1–3. ACM, 2002. [6] D. Beyer. Competition on software verification (SV-COMP). In Proc. TACAS, LNCS 7214, pages 504–524. Springer, 2012. [7] D. Beyer, T. A. Henzinger, R. Jhala, and R. Majumdar. The software model checker B LAST. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transfer, 9(5-6):505– 525, 2007. [8] D. Beyer, T. A. Henzinger, and G. Théoduloz. Program analysis with dynamic precision adjustment. In Proc. ASE, pages 29–38. IEEE, 2008. [9] D. Beyer, T. A. Henzinger, G. Théoduloz, and D. Zufferey. Shape refinement through explicit heap analysis. In Proc. FASE, LNCS 6013, pages 263–277. Springer, 2010. [10] D. Beyer and M. E. Keremoglu. CPACHECKER: A tool for configurable software verification. In Proc. CAV, LNCS 6806, pages 184–190. Springer, 2011.  11  [11] D. Beyer, M. E. Keremoglu, and P. Wendler. Predicate abstraction with adjustable-block encoding. In Proc. FMCAD, pages 189–197. FMCAD, 2010. [12] D. Beyer and S. Löwe. Explicit-state software model checking based on cegar and interpolation. In Proc. FASE, LNCS 7793, pages 146–162. Springer, 2013. [13] D. Beyer and A. Stahlbauer. BDD-based software model checking with CPACHECKER. In Proc. MEMICS, LNCS 7721, pages 1–11. Springer, 2013. [14] C. Bishop and C. G. Johnson. Assessing roles of variables by program analysis. In Conference on Computer Science Education, pages 131–136. TUCS, 2005. [15] B. Blanchet, P. Cousot, R. Cousot, J. Feret, L. Mauborgne, A. Miné, D. Monniaux, and X. Rival. A static analyzer for large safety-critical software. In Proc. PLDI, pages 196–207. ACM, 2003. [16] R. Bryant. Symbolic boolean manipulation with ordered binary-decision diagrams. ACM Computing Surveys, 24(3):293–318, 1992. [17] T. Bultan, R. Gerber, and C. League. Composite model-checking: verification with type-specific symbolic representations. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM), 9(1):3–50, 2000. [18] J. R. Burch, E. M. Clarke, K. L. McMillan, D. L. Dill, and L. J. Hwang. Symbolic model checking: 1020 states and beyond. In Proc. LICS, pages 428–439. IEEE, 1990. [19] A. Cimatti, A. Micheli, I. Narasamdya, and M. Roveri. Verifying SystemC: A software model checking approach. In Proc. FMCAD, pages 51–59. IEEE, 2010. [20] A. Cimatti, M. Roveri, and P. Bertoli. Searching powerset automata by combining explicit-state and symbolic model checking. In Proc. TACAS, pages 313–327, 2001. [21] E. M. Clarke, O. Grumberg, S. Jha, Y. Lu, and H. Veith. Counterexampleguided abstraction refinement for symbolic model checking. J. ACM, 50(5):752–794, 2003. [22] A. Classen, P. Heymans, P.-Y. Schobbens, and A. Legay. Symbolic Model Checking of Software Product Lines. In Proc. ICSE, pages 321–330. ACM, 2011. [23] K. Dudka, P. Müller, P. Peringer, and T. Vojnar. P REDATOR: A verification tool for programs with dynamic linked data structures. In Proc. TACAS. Springer, 2012. [24] S. Graf and H. Saïdi. Construction of abstract state graphs with P VS. In Proc. CAV, LNCS 1254, pages 72–83. Springer, 1997. [25] K. Havelund and T. Pressburger. Model checking Java programs using Java PATH F INDER. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transfer, 2(4):366–381, 2000. [26] G. J. Holzmann. The S PIN model checker. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., 23(5):279–295, 1997. [27] F. Howar, M. Isberner, M. Merten, B. Steffen, and D. Beyer. The RERS grey-box challenge 2012: Analysis of event-condition-action systems. In Proc. ISoLA, LNCS 7609, pages 608–614. Springer, 2012. [28] K. L. McMillan. The SMV system. Technical Report CMU-CS-92-131, Carnegie Mellon University, 1992. [29] P. M. Rondon, A. Bakst, M. Kawaguchi, and R. Jhala. Csolve: Verifying C with Liquid Types. In Proc. CAV, pages 744–750, 2012. [30] M. Sagiv, T. W. Reps, and R. Wilhelm. Parametric shape analysis via 3-valued logic. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 24(3):217–298, 2002. [31] Roberto Sebastiani, Stefano Tonetta, and Moshe Y. Vardi. Symbolic systems, explicit properties: on hybrid approaches for ltl symbolic model checking. In Proc. CAV, pages 350–363. Springer, 2005. [32] W. Visser, K. Havelund, G. Brat, S. Park, and F. Lerda. Model Checking Programs. Automated Software Engineering, 10(2):203–232, 2003. [33] A. von Rhein, S. Apel, and F. Raimondi. Introducing Binary Decision Diagrams in the Explicit-State Verification of Java Code. http://www.infosun.fim.uni-passau.de/cl/publications/docs/JPF2011.pdf, 2011.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
