Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_6752

Abstract:
TRANSITIVE PARALLELISM OF RESIDUES IN BUILDINGS  arXiv:1312.5541v3 [math.GR] 28 Jun 2016  ANTOINE CLAIS Abstract. We study the buildings in which parallelism of residues is an equivalence relation. If the building admits a group action, we describe how parallel residues are related to residues with equal stabilizers. This permits to retrieve the fact that in a Coxeter group or in a graph product, intersections of parabolic subgroups are parabolic.  Keywords: Buildings, Coxeter groups, parallel residues, parabolic subgroups. 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification: 20F55, 20E42. 1. Introduction In a building ∆, residues are convex subsets equipped with a natural building structure directly inherited from ∆. In [Tit74], J. Tits has introduced the notion of projection on residues that has been used extensively to study the abstract structure of buildings (see for instance [Ron89] or [AB08]). Indeed, residues are sufficiently nicely embedded in ∆ so that we can project the entire building on them i.e for any chamber x ∈ ∆ and any residue R ⊂ ∆ there exists a unique chamber projR (x) ∈ R realizing the distance between x and R. Two residues R and Q are parallel if projR (Q) = projQ (R). This notion has been introduced by J. Tits in [Tit92] and is the object of an extensive study in [MPW15, Chapter 21]. These residues derive from opposite residues in spherical buildings, with which they share a lot of properties. The goal of this article is to study parallel residues and to relate this notion to residues with equal stabilizers under a group action. 1.1. Main results. With a simple geometric argument, we can observe that in a thin building parallelism is a transitive relation and thus is an equivalence relation on the set of residues. In the thick case, this holds if and only if ∆ is right-angled (see [Cap14, Proposition 2.10]). We will study the intermediate case and characterize the buildings in which parallelism is a transitive relation by the structure of their residues of rank 2. Theorem 1.1 (Theorem 3.7). In a building ∆, parallelism is an equivalence relation on the set of residues if and only if any spherical residue of rank 2 is either thin or right-angled. Date: June 29, 2016. 1  2  ANTOINE CLAIS  The second result is a group theoretical application of Theorem 1.1. Therefore we will consider group actions on buildings. In this paper, all actions are assumed to be typepreserving. We recall that under this assumption, residues with equal stabilizers are parallel (see [MPW15, Proposition 22.3]). On the other hand, if the converse is true, then parallelism is an equivalence relation on the residues. In the thin and right-angled cases, the group is a Coxeter group or a graph product and we obtain the following corollary. Corollary 1.2 (Corollary 4.5). Let G be a Coxeter group or a graph product. Then, in G intersections of parabolic subgroups are parabolic. In the case of Coxeter groups, this Corollary is a classical fact due to J. Tits (see for instance [Dav08, Lemma 5.3.6] for another proof). In the case of graph products this corollary has been established recently by Y. Antolín and A. Minasyan by the means of Bass-Serre theory (see [AM15, Proposition 3.4]). The present article highlights in particular that these properties of Coxeter groups and graph products are true for the same reasons. 1.2. Organization of the article. In Section 2, we recall generalities about buildings, insisting on the notions of projections and right-angled buildings. Then, in Section 3 we discuss the notion of parallel residues and describe the buildings in which parallelism is an equivalence relation. Eventually, in Section 4, we study the situation where parallel residues admit the same stabilizers under a chamber-transitive group action. 1.3. Terminology and notation. All along this article, we will use the following conventions. The identity element in a group will always be designated by e. For a set E, the cardinality of E is designated by #E. If G is a graph then G (0) is the set of vertices of G and G (1) is the set of edges of G. For v, w ∈ G (0) , we write v ∼ w if there exists an edge in G whose extremities are v and w. Acknowledgment. I am most grateful to the reviewer of this article for his careful reading. His fruitful comments have been the origin of great improvements of this text. I would like to thank Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace for his advice and interest for this paper. My thanks also go to Fanny Kassel for her careful reading of the first version of this article. Eventually, I thank my Ph.D advisor Marc Bourdon, for the valuable and numerous discussions we had about this work.  2. Buildings Buildings are both combinatorial and geometric objects introduced by J. Tits to study Lie groups of exceptional types. In this section, we give a quick introduction to buildings. We emphasize the notion of a projection and the particular case of right-angled buildings. Buildings are the objects of extensive introductions in [Ron89] and [AB08] to which we refer for details.  TRANSITIVE PARALLELISM OF RESIDUES IN BUILDINGS  3  2.1. Chamber systems. Throughout this paper S is a fixed set. Definition 2.1. A chamber system X over S is a set endowed with a family of partitions indexed by S. The elements of X are called chambers. In this subsection, X is a chamber system over S. For s ∈ S, two chambers c, c0 ∈ X are said to be s-adjacent if they belong to the same subset of X in the partition associated with s. In this case, we write c ∼s c0 and s is called the type of the adjacency relation. Usually, omitting the type we refer to adjacent chambers and we write c ∼ c0 . Note that any chamber is adjacent to itself. A map f : X −→ X 0 between two chamber systems X, X 0 over S is a called a morphism if it preserves the adjacency relations. If a morphism f : X −→ X is a bijection, it is called an automorphism and if moreover f preserves the types of the adjacency relations, we say that f is a type preserving automorphism. We designate by AutT (X) the group of type preserving automorphisms of X. Given a subset of Y of X, then Y inherits naturally the structure of a chamber system. We call gallery, a finite sequence {ck }k=1,...,` of chambers such that ck ∼ ck+1 for k = 1, . . . , ` − 1. The galleries induce a metric on X. Definition 2.2. The distance between two chambers x and y is the length of the shortest gallery connecting x to y and is designated by dc (x, y). A shortest gallery between two chambers is called minimal. For I ⊂ S, a subset C of X is said to be I-connected if for any pair of chambers c, c0 ∈ C there exists a gallery c = c1 ∼ · · · ∼ c` = c0 such that for any k = 1, . . . , ` − 1, the chambers ck and ck+1 are ik -adjacent for some ik ∈ I. Definition 2.3. The I-connected components are called the I-residues or the residues of type I. The rank of an I-residue is the cardinality of I. The residues of rank 1 are called panels. We observe that a I-residue of a chamber system has a natural structure of a chamber systeme over I. A subset C of X is called convex if every minimal gallery whose extremities belong to C is entirely contained in C. Convexity is stable by intersection and for A ⊂ X, the convex hull of A is the smallest convex subset containing A. In particular, convex subsets of X are subsystems and residues are convex. The following example is crucial because it will be used to equip Coxeter groups and graph products with structures of chamber systems (see Definition 2.7 and Theorem 2.15). Example 2.4. Let G be a group, B a subgroup and {Hi }i∈I a family of subgroups of G containing B. The set of left cosets of Hi /B defines a partition of G/B. We denote by C(G, B, {Hi }i∈I ) this chamber system over I. This chamber system comes with a natural action of G. The group G is a group of type-preserving automorphisms of C(G, B, {Hi }i∈I ) and the action is chamber-transitive. In this paper we shall primarily be concerned with the case where B = {e}.  4  ANTOINE CLAIS  2.2. Coxeter systems. A Coxeter matrix over S is a symmetric matrix M = {mr,s }r,s∈S whose entries are elements of N ∪ {∞} such that ms,s = 1 for any s ∈ S and {mr,s } ≥ 2 for any r, s ∈ S distinct. Let M be a Coxeter matrix. The Coxeter group of type M is the group given by the following presentation W = hs ∈ S|(rs)mr,s = 1 for any r, s ∈ Si . We call special subgroup a subgroup of W of the form WI = hs ∈ I|(rs)mr,s = 1 for any r, s ∈ Ii with I ⊂ S. Definition 2.5. A parabolic subgroup of W is a subgroup of the form wWI w−1 where w ∈ W and I ⊂ S. An involution of the form wsw−1 for w ∈ W and s ∈ S is called a reflection. Example 2.6. Let Xd = Sd , Ed or Hd . A Coxeter polytope is a convex polytope of Xd such that any dihedral angle is of the form πk with k not necessarily constant. Let D be a Coxeter polytope and let σ1 , . . . , σn be the codimension 1 faces of D. We set M = {mi,j }i,j=1,...,n the matrix defined by mi,i = 1, if σi and σj do not meet in a codimension 2 face mi,j = ∞, and if σi and σj meet in a codimension 2 face mπi,j is the dihedral angle between σi and σj . A theorem of Poincaré (see for instance [GP01, Theorem 1.2.]) says that the reflection group of Xd generated by the codimension 1 faces of D is a discrete subgroup of Isom(Xd ) and is isomorphic to the Coxeter group of type M . Definition 2.7. With the notation introduced in Example 2.4, the Coxeter system associated with W is the chamber system over S given by C(W, {e}, {W{s} }s∈S ). We use the notation Σ(W, S) to designate this chamber system. The chambers of Σ(W, S) are the elements of W and two distinct chambers w, w0 ∈ W are s-adjacent if and only if w = w0 s. For I ⊂ S, notice that the I-residues of Σ(W, S) are the left-cosets of WI in W . Again W is a group of automorphisms of Σ(W, S) and the action is chamber-transitive. Now we recall classical terminology about Coxeter systems. Definition 2.8. i) Let r = wsw−1 be a reflection for some w ∈ W and s ∈ S. The wall Mr in Σ(W, S) is the set of all the panels stabilized by r. ii) Let M be a wall and R be a residue. We say that M crosses R if one of the panels of M is contained in R. In the particular case where W is a finite group we refer to a spherical Coxeter group and system. If M = {mr,s }r,s∈S with {mr,s } ∈ {2, ∞} for any r 6= s, then we refer to a right-angled Coxeter group or system. 2.3. Buildings. Hereafter (W, S) is a fixed Coxeter system. Definition 2.9 ([Tit74, Definition 3.1.]). A chamber system ∆ over S is a building of type (W, S) if it admits a maximal family Ap(∆) of subsystems isomorphic to Σ(W, S), called apartments, such that  TRANSITIVE PARALLELISM OF RESIDUES IN BUILDINGS  5  • any two chambers lie in a common apartment, • for any pair of apartments A and B, there exists an isomorphism from A to B fixing A ∩ B. If the group W is a spherical (resp. right-angled) Coxeter group then ∆ is called a spherical (resp. right-angled ) building. Hereafter, ∆ is a fixed building of type (W, S). A straightforward application of this definition is the existence of retraction maps of the building over apartments. Definition 2.10. Let x ∈ ∆ and A ∈ Ap(∆). Assume that x is contained in A. We call retraction onto A centered x the map πA,x : ∆ −→ A defined by the following property. For c ∈ ∆, there exists a chamber πA,x (c) ∈ A such that for any apartment A0 containing x and c, for any isomorphism f : A0 −→ A that fixes A ∩ A0 , then f (c) = πA,x (c) Example 2.11. i) Any infinite tree without leaf is a building of type (W, S) where W is the infinite dihedral group Z/2Z ∗ Z/2Z and S = {(1, 0), (0, 1)}. ii) For n ≥ 1 and k a field, the flags of subspaces of a n dimensional vector space over k is a spherical building (see [Ron89, Chapter 1]). On Figure 1 is represented the geometric realisation of the building of k3 where k is the finite field of order 2. The building ∆ is called a thin (resp. thick ) building if any panel contains exactly two (resp. at least three) chambers. Note that thin buildings are Coxeter systems. We recall that an I-residue of ∆ is itself a building of type (WI , I). Hence it makes sense to talk about thin, thick, spherical or right-angled residues. For x and y two chambers of ∆, the convex hull of the pair {x, y} in ∆ is the convex hull of {x, y} in any apartment containing x and y (see [Tit74, Proposition 3.18.]). This fact permits to build projections on residues. Proposition 2.12 ([Tit74, Proposition 3.19.3.]). Let R be a residue and x be a chamber in ∆. There exists a unique chamber projR (x) ∈ R such that dc (x, projR (x)) = dist(x, R). Moreover, for any chamber y in R there exists a minimal gallery from x to y passing through projR (x). Observe that not all convex subsets of a building admit projection maps. Indeed, let P be a panel of ∆. Then any subset C of P is convex. However, the projection of ∆ onto C exists if and only if #C = 1 or C = P . 2.4. Graph products and right-angled buildings. Let G denote a simplicial graph i.e no edge is a loop and no edge is double. If in G two distinct vertices v and v 0 are connected by an edge, we write v ∼ v 0 . A group Gv is associated with each v ∈ G (0) and we denote by FG the free product of the family {Gv }v∈G (0) . Definition 2.13. The graph product given by the pair (G, {Gv }v∈G (0) ) is the group defined by the following quotient Γ = FG /R, 0 −1 where R is the normal subgroup gg g g 0−1 : g ∈ Gv , g 0 ∈ Gv0 and v ∼ v 0 .  6  ANTOINE CLAIS  Example 2.14. If all the groups {Gv }v∈G (0) are of order 2 then Γ is a right-angled Coxeter group. If all the groups {Gv }v∈G (0) are infinite cycles, then Γ is a right-angled Artin group (see [Cha07]). In fact, all right-angled Coxeter and Artin groups may be obtained as a graph product. If G has no edge Γ is a free product and if G is a complete graph Γ is a free Abelian product. Now we designate by S the set G (0) . This is motivated by the fact that a Coxeter group is canonically associated to a graph product. From now on, we fix a graph product Γ given by a pair (G, {Gs }s∈S ). Then, the graph product defined by the pair (G, {Z/2Z}s∈S ) is isomorphic to the right-angled Coxeter group defined by the matrix M = {ms,t }s,t∈S given by: ms,t = 2 if s ∼ t and ms,t = ∞ if s  t in G. We denote by W this Coxeter group and by (W, S) the associated Coxeter system. With this notation, the following theorem associates a right-angled building to a graph product. Theorem 2.15 ([Dav98, Theorem 5.1.]). Let ∆ be the chamber system C(Γ, {e}, {Gs }s∈S ) (see Example 2.4). Then ∆ is a building of type (W, S). A classification of F. Haglund and F. Paulin states that the construction presented above describes all the right-angled buildings in which all the panels of same type have same cardinality. Theorem 2.16 ([HP03, Proposition 5.1.]). Let Γ be the graph product given by the pair (G, {Gs }s∈S ). Let ∆ be the building of type (W, S) associated with Γ by Theorem 2.15. Assume that ∆0 is a building of type (W, S) such that for any s ∈ S the {s}-residues of ∆0 are of cardinality #Gs . Then ∆ and ∆0 are isomorphic. By analogy with Definition 2.5, we define parabolic subgroups in Γ. Definition 2.17. For I ⊂ S we write ΓI = hGs : s ∈ Ii and a subgroup of the form gΓI g −1 , with g ∈ Γ, is called a parabolic subgroup of Γ. 3. Parallel residues Parallel residues have been defined by J. Tits in [Tit92]. This notion derives from the notion of opposite residues. We refer to [MPW15, Chapter 21] for details about parallel residues in general and to [Wei03, Chapters 5 and 9] for details about opposite residues. The goal of this section is to study the buildings in which parallelism of residues is a transitive relation. 3.1. Definition and first properties. In the rest of the paper, ∆ is a building of type (W, S). Definition 3.1. Let R and Q be two residues in ∆. We say that R is parallel to Q if projR (Q) = R and projQ (R) = Q. The following proposition summarizes some basic properties of parallel residues.  TRANSITIVE PARALLELISM OF RESIDUES IN BUILDINGS  7  Proposition 3.2 ([MPW15, Propositions 21.8 and 21.17]). Let R and Q be respectively a I-residue and a J-residue in ∆. Let Q0 = projQ (R) and R0 = projR (Q). Then the following properties hold. i) R is parallel to Q if and only if for any apartment A containing a chambers of both R and Q the residues R ∩ A and Q ∩ A are parallel in A. ii) R0 and Q0 are parallel residues. iii) The maps projR|Q0 : Q0 −→ R0 and projQ |R0 : R0 −→ Q0 are reciprocal bijections. iv) For any x, y ∈ R0 , dc (x, projQ (x)) = dc (y, projQ (y)) v) There exists a unique w(R, Q) ∈ W such that for any apartment A containing a chambers of both R0 and Q0 , for any chamber x in R0 ∩ A one has in A : w(R, Q)x = projQ0 (x). vi) Let w = w(R, Q), then R0 (resp. Q0 ) is of type I 0 = {s ∈ I : w−1 sw = t for some t ∈ J} (resp. J 0 = {s ∈ J : w−1 sw = t for some t ∈ I}). 3.2. Opposite residues. In this subsection, ∆ is a spherical building. If not further specified, the proofs of the following claims are contained in [Wei03, Chapters 5 and 9]. For a chamber x in ∆, a chamber y is called opposite to x if dc (x, y) = diam ∆, where dc is the distance over the chambers given by Definition 2.2. Clearly this definition is empty in the non-spherical case. However, it is very rich in the spherical case. Indeed, for any chamber x and apartment A containing x, there exists a unique chamber y opposite to x contained in A. We denote by opA : A −→ A the map sending a chamber to its opposite chamber in A. Definition 3.3. Let R and Q be two residues in ∆. We say that R and Q are opposite residues if there exists an apartment A intersecting both R and Q such that opA (R) = Q ∩ A and opA (Q) = R ∩ A. In fact two residues are opposite if and only if the condition of the preceding definition is satisfied for any apartment A intersecting both R and Q. Opposite residues are parallel (see for instance[MPW15, Proposition 21.24]). However the converse is false as any two chambers are always parallel. In fact, the notions of opposite and parallel residues in a spherical building are connected by the following proposition. Proposition 3.4 ([MPW15, Proposition 21.26]). Two parallel residues R and Q are opposite if and only if for some chamber x ∈ R there exists a chamber y ∈ Q opposite to x in ∆. Moreover, it appears that for any residue R ( ∆ and apartment A, there exists a residue Q such that A intersects Q and R is opposite to Q. Thus, any residue admits an opposite (and thus a parallel) residue. This is not true in the non-spherical case. Indeed, in the thin building associated with the infinite dihedral group, no panel admits a parallel residue. 3.3. Parallel residues defining an equivalence relation. By simple geometric arguments, we observe that in a thin building parallel residues are characterized by walls.  8  ANTOINE CLAIS  Proposition 3.5 ([MPW15, Proposition 21.19]). In a thin building, two residues are parallel if and only if the set of walls that cross them are equal. A consequence of the preceding proposition is that in a thin building, parallelism is an equivalence relation on the residues. In general, the relation induced by the parallelism may not be transitive as illustrated by the example of Figure 1. In fact, in the thick case, this happens if and only if the building is right-angled (see [Cap14, Proposition 2.10]). Q  T  R  Figure 1. In this spherical building R is parallel to Q and T but Q is not parallel to T . In the following we observe that this strong property leaves only few examples between thin and right-angled buildings. To this end we will use several times the following fact: two panels σ and σ 0 are parallel if and only if there exists an apartment A in which σ ∩ A is parallel to σ 0 ∩ A. This follows directly from the definition of the projections. We start by establishing a short lemma about thin and right-angled residues in ∆. Lemma 3.6. Let R be a thin or a right-angled residue in ∆ , let σ and σ 0 be two parallel panels in R and let δ be a panel in ∆. If δ is parallel to σ then it is parallel to σ 0 . Proof. If R is thin, then any apartment containing σ also contains σ 0 . Hence the lemma is satisfied by Propositions 3.2.i) and 3.5. Now we assume that R is right-angled. We define δ 0 := projR (δ) and we observe that as σ is contained in R one has projσ (δ) = projσ (δ 0 ). If δ 0 is not parallel to σ then projσ (δ 0 ) is a single chamber. But this is absurd because projσ (δ 0 ) = projσ (δ) and σ is parallel to δ. Likewise, if δ 0 is not parallel to δ then δ 0 is a single chamber. This implies again that projσ (δ) is a single chamber which is absurd. Hence δ 0 is parallel to both σ and δ. As in R parallelism is an equivalence relation, δ 0 is parallel to σ 0 . By convexity of the apartments and by Proposition 2.12, any apartment intersecting both δ and σ 0 intersects δ 0 . Then, by transitivity of parallelism in the apartments and by Propositions 3.2.i), we obtain that δ is parallel to σ.  To characterize buildings in which parallelism is an equivalence relation on the set of residues, we will use the following notation. For σ and δ two panels in ∆, for an apartment  TRANSITIVE PARALLELISM OF RESIDUES IN BUILDINGS  9  A intersecting both σ and δ we write r and t for the reflections in A stabilizing respectively σ ∩ A and δ ∩ A. We call order of the pair (σ, δ), and we write Ord(σ, δ), the order of rt in W and we observe that Ord(σ, δ) is well defined i.e it does not depend on the choice of A. Moreover, as a consequence of Proposition 3.2.i), σ is parallel to δ, if and only if Ord(σ, δ) = 1. Theorem 3.7. In a building ∆, the following are equivalent: i) ii) iii) iv)  Parallelism is an equivalence relation on the set of residues. Parallelism is an equivalence relation on the set of the panels. For any pair of panels σ and δ, if σ is thick then Ord(σ, δ) ∈ {1, 2, ∞}. Any spherical residue of rank 2 is either thin or right-angled.  Proof. The implications i) =⇒ ii) and iii) =⇒ iv) are immediate and we start by proving ii) =⇒ i). Let R, Q and T be residues such that R and Q are parallel to T . Let A be an apartment intersecting both R and Q. Let M be a wall crossing A ∩ R. By Propositions 3.2.i) and 3.5, it is enough to prove that M crosses A ∩ Q. To this end let σ ⊂ R be a panel such that σ ∩ A is crossed by M . Then, as R is parallel to T , there exists a panel σT in T that is parallel to σ. Now pick an apartment A0 intersecting both σT and A ∩ Q. As A0 ∩ T is parallel to A0 ∩ Q, there exists a panel δA0 in A0 ∩ Q that is parallel to σT ∩ A0 . We observe that the panel δ ⊂ Q containing δA0 is parallel to σT . Then, by assumption, σ is parallel to δ and by Proposition 3.5, M crosses δ ∩ A. We prove ii) =⇒ iii) by contradiction (this step is essentially the same as the proof of [Cap14, Proposition 2.10]). Let σ be a thick panel and δ be a panel such that Ord(σ, δ) = n > 2. In an apartment A intersecting both σ and δ, the wall crossing σ ∩ A intersects the wall crossing δ ∩ A. As a consequence, ∆ contains a residue R of rank 2 that is not right-angled nor thin. Then, we set σ 0 = projR (σ) and we choose two distinct panels σ1 , σ2 of the same type, contained in R, lying at a minimal distance and containing a chamber of σ 0 . Choose an 0 be the apartment A and a chamber x ∈ A such that πA,x (σ1 ) = πA,x (σ2 ). In R ∩ A, let δA 0 panel opposite to πA,x (σ1 ) and let δ be the panel in ∆ such that T ∩ A = TA . As πA,x decrease the distance over the chambers, then δ 0 is opposite to both σ1 and σ2 in R and thus is parallel to them in ∆. Here we prove iv) =⇒ ii). Let σ, σ 0 and δ be three panels such that σ and σ 0 are parallel to δ. We prove the implication by induction on d = max{dist(σ, δ), dist(σ 0 , δ)}. If d = 0 there is nothing to prove. If d > 0, consider R a residue of rank 2 containing σ and such that dist(δ, R) < dist(δ, σ) and choose an apartment A intersecting both σ and δ. There exists a panel TA in R ∩ A such that TA is parallel to σ ∩ A and dist(δ, R) = dist(δ ∩ A, TA ). This panel is the panel opposite to σ ∩ A in R ∩ A. We designate by T the panel in R containing TA and we check that T is parallel to both σ and δ. We do the same with σ 0 and we obtain T 0 parallel to both σ 0 and δ and such that dist(T 0 , δ) < d.  10  ANTOINE CLAIS  Now, by the induction assumption, we obtain that T is parallel to T 0 . To finish, we observe that σ and T (resp. σ 0 and T 0 ) are contained in thin or right-angled residues and the proof is achieved by Lemma 3.6.  As it is suggested by the preceding theorem, the buildings in which parallelism is an equivalence relation are obtained from right-angled buildings by substituting a given Coxeter system for chambers. Here we explain this fact in detail. In the rest of this section, ∆ is a building of type (W, S) satisfying the equivalent conditions of Theorem 3.7. Let M = {ms,r }s,r∈S be the Coxeter matrix associated to (W, S). We set: • S⊥ := {s ∈ S : ms,r ∈ {2, ∞} for any r 6= s}, • ST := S\S⊥ . The set S⊥ is the set of possibly thick types of ∆. We designate by RT a thin residue in Σ(W, S) of type ST and we define the following graph G: • G (0) = {wsw−1 ∈ W : w ∈ WST and s ∈ S⊥ }. Equivalently, G (0) is the set of walls that bound RT in Σ(W, S). • Two vertices v, v 0 ∈ G (0) are joined by an edge if and only if the corresponding reflections commute. Equivalently, if and only if the corresponding walls intersect in Σ(W, S). 0 the set of vertices of G and by (W , S 0 ) the Coxeter system Now we designate by S⊥ ⊥ ⊥ associated to G. By construction, it appears that the set of all the ST -residues of ∆ inherits 0 ). We denote by ∆ from ∆ a structure of right-angled building of type (W⊥ , S⊥ ⊥ this 0 building. Observe that S⊥ is not always equal to S⊥ . For instance if S is finite and if there 0 is infinite. exists s ∈ S⊥ and r, t ∈ ST such that ms,t = mr,t = ∞, then S⊥ From now on, we assume that in ∆⊥ all panels of the same type are of the same cardi0 we fix a group G such that #G = #σ . Then, by Theorem 2.15, nality. For each s ∈ S⊥ s s s ∆⊥ is isomorphic to the right-angled building associated to the graph product Γ given by the pair (G, {Gs }s∈S⊥0 ). In particular, Γ acts on ∆ with quotient equal to RT and in fact, under these assumptions, (W, S) and Γ determine ∆ up to isomorphism. Proposition 3.8. Let ∆ be a building of type (W, S) satisfying the equivalent conditions of Theorem 3.7 and let ∆⊥ be the right-angled building of the ST -residues of ∆. If in ∆⊥ all panels of the same type are of the same cardinality, then ∆ is uniquely determined, up to isomorphism, by these cardinalities. Proof. Let ∆ and ∆0 be two buildings of same type (W, S) satisfying the equivalent conditions of Theorem 3.7. Let ∆⊥ and ∆0⊥ be the two right-angled buildings associated to them and assume that in ∆⊥ and ∆0⊥ all panels of the same type are of the same cardinality. If these cardinalities are equal then ∆⊥ and ∆0⊥ are both isomorphic to the right-angled building given by the graph product Γ defined as in the preceding paragraph. Now we fix two base chambers x0 ∈ ∆ and x00 ∈ ∆0 . We designate by RT and RT0 the ST residues containing respectively x0 and x00 and we consider the isomorphism f : RT −→ RT0 mapping x0 7−→ x00 . Then we observe that f extends as a building isomorphism F : ∆ −→  TRANSITIVE PARALLELISM OF RESIDUES IN BUILDINGS  11  ∆0 as follow. For x ∈ ∆, let g ∈ Γ be such that x = γy with y ∈ RT then F (x) := γf (y).  As a particular case we obtain the following corollary. Corollary 3.9. Let ∆ be a building of type (W, S) satisfying the equivalent conditions of Theorem 3.7. If in ∆ all panels of the same type are of the same cardinality, then ∆ is uniquely determined, up to isomorphism, by these cardinalities. 4. Parallel residues and stabilizers In this section, G is a subgroup of AutT (∆) acting chamber-transitively. Here we discuss the relationship between the fact that two residues are parallel and the fact that these two residues have same stabilizers under the action of G. 4.1. Parallel residues with equal stabilizers. First, we recall that as the action of G is chamber-transitive, then two residues with equal stabilizers are parallel (see [MPW15, Proposition 22.3]). The following proposition describes the situation where the converse is true. Proposition 4.1. Suppose that StabG (P ) = StabG (P 0 ) for any pair P, P 0 of parallel residues. Then the following properties are satisfied: i) Parallelism is an equivalence relation on the residues. In particular, ∆ satisfies the equivalent conditions of Theorem 3.7. ii) The action is free. iii) For any pair of residues R, Q one has StabG (R) ∩ StabG (Q) = StabG (projR (Q)) = StabG (projQ (R)). Proof. i) Under the hypothesis of the proposition, two residues have same stabilizer if and only if they are parallel. ii) Let x be a chamber in ∆. As any pair of chambers are parallel residues, for all y ∈ ∆ one has StabG (x) = StabG (y). Thus StabG (x) = {e} iii) By symmetry, it is sufficient to prove, that StabG (R) ∩ StabG (Q) = StabG (projQ (R)). Let g ∈ StabG (R) ∩ StabG (Q). As g is an automorphism of ∆ that stabilizes both R and Q, the map projQ|R (·) is equivariant by g. Then g(projQ (R)) = projQ (R) and StabG (R) ∩ StabG (Q) < StabG (projQ (R)). Let g ∈ StabG (projQ (R)). As g preserves the types, if Q is a I-residue then g(Q) is also a Iresidue. In particular, Q and g(Q) are two I-residues containing projQ (R), thus g(Q) = Q. As projQ (R) is parallel to projR (Q), under our assumption g ∈ StabG (projR (Q)). We can use the previous argument to prove that g(R) = R and StabG (projQ (R)) < StabG (R) ∩ StabG (Q).  12  ANTOINE CLAIS   In the rest of the section, we assume that the action of G is chamber-transitive and that the assumption of the preceding proposition hold. In the thin case, it is clear that G is isomorphic to W . In the right-angled case, the next proposition says that it is isomorphic to a graph product of stabilizers of panels. To this end, we will use the following notation. For a right-angled Coxeter group W , we designate by GW the simplicial graph such that the graph product given by (GW , {Z/2Z}s∈S ) is isomorphic to W . Proposition 4.2. Let ∆ be a right-angled building of type (W, S) and G a group of type preserving automorphisms acting freely and chamber-transitively on ∆. Let x0 be a chamber in ∆ and let Gs be the stabilizer in G of the s-panel containing x0 . Then G is isomorphic to the graph product given by the pair (GW , {Gs }s∈S ). Proof. Let Γ be the graph product given by the pair (GW , {Gs }s∈S ). To Γ we associate the right-angled building ∆Γ given by Theorem 2.15. We observe that ∆Γ is of type (W, S) and that for σs (∆) and σs (∆Γ ) two panels of type s ∈ S respectively in ∆ and in ∆Γ one has: #σs (∆) = #σs (∆Γ ). Hence, by Theorem 2.16, ∆ and ∆Γ are isomorphic and we both denote them ∆. As a consequence, Γ is the subgroup of AutT (∆) generated by the set {Gs }s∈S . In particular, this proves that Γ < G. Now, for g ∈ G, we prove by induction on n = dc (x0 , gx0 ) that g is a product of elements of {Gs }s∈S . If n = 0 there is nothing to prove. If n > 0 consider a minimal gallery: x0 ∼ · · · ∼ xn−1 ∼ xn = gx0 . Let h ∈ G be such that hxn−1 = xn . As h preserves the type, h ∈ StabG (σ) where σ is the s-panel containing {xn−1 , xn }. Let γ ∈ G be such that γx0 = xn−1 . In particular, σ = γσs , StabG (σ) = γGs γ −1 where σs is the s-panel containing x0 and h = γgs γ −1 for one gs ∈ Gs . Then, by freeness of the action, g = hγ and with dist(x0 , γx0 ) = n − 1 the proof is achieved.  4.2. Application to intersection of parabolic subgroups. In this section, we apply Proposition 4.1 to thin and right-angled buildings under the action of Coxeter groups and graph products. First we verify that the assumption of the theorem are satisfied in the case of a Coxeter groups. Proposition 4.3. If ∆ is a thin building, then parallel residues have equal stabilizers. Proof. Let R be a residue. Here we prove that the stabilizer of R under the action of W is the subgroup G < W generated by the reflections about the walls that cross R. This will imply the proposition by Proposition 3.5.  TRANSITIVE PARALLELISM OF RESIDUES IN BUILDINGS  13  As W is type preserving, it is clear that G < StabW (R). Now we fix x0 ∈ R and for g ∈ StabW (R) we consider a minimal gallery x0 ∼ x1 ∼ · · · ∼ xn = gx0 . By convexity of the residues, this gallery is contained in R. Let ri ∈ W be the reflection that maps xi to xi+1 . Then, by simple chamber-transitivity of the action, g = rn . . . r0 and the proof is complete.  In the right-angled case we establish an analogue proposition. Proposition 4.4. Let Γ be the graph-product given by a pair (G, {Gs }s∈S ) and let ∆ be the associated right-angled building. Then any two parallel residues of ∆ have equal stabilizers. Proof. Let R and Q be two parallel residues. Up to a conjugation, we can assume that x0 is in R. According to Proposition 3.2.vii), R and Q are of same type I. We write I ⊥ = {s ∈ S\I : vs ∼ vi for all i ∈ I}. By [Cap14, Proposition 2.8.ii)], R and Q are both contained in T a J-residue where J = I ∪ I ⊥ . We observe that ΓJ = ΓI × ΓI ⊥ and that StabΓ (T ) = ΓJ . As a consequence, ΓJ acts transitively on the set of I residues contained in T . Thus, there exists g ∈ ΓJ such that gR = Q. Hence StabΓ (Q) = gStabΓ (R)g −1 and with StabΓ (R) = ΓI the proposition is proved.  Now we know that both actions of Coxeter groups and of graph-products on their associated buildings satisfy the assumption of Proposition 4.1. In the next proposition we obtain from this fact that intersections of parabolic subgroups are parabolic. From now on, ∆ is either a thin or a right-angled building of type (W, S). We fix a base chamber x0 ∈ ∆ and for s ∈ S we denote by σs the s-panel containing x0 . The group G is a group acting freely and chamber-transitively on ∆. In fact, G is either W in the thin case or a graph product Γ in the right-angled case (see Proposition 4.2). For I ⊂ S we set GI := hStabG (σs ) : s ∈ Ii . In fact, GI is either WI in the thin case or ΓI in the right-angled case (see Definitions 2.5 and 2.17). We recall that a parabolic subgroup gGI g −1 < G stabilizes the I-residue R = gGI x0 . We also recall that, according to Proposition 3.2.v), for R and Q two residues, w(R, Q) ∈ W is such that for any apartment A containing a chambers of both projR (Q) and projQ (R) and for any chamber x in projR (Q) ∩ A one has in A: w(R, Q)x = projQ (x). Corollary 4.5. For g ∈ G, and I, J ⊂ S, let R = GI x0 and Q = gGJ x0 . Then GI ∩ gGJ g −1 = γGK γ −1 , where γ ∈ GI and K = {s ∈ I : w−1 sw = t for some t ∈ J} with w = w(R, Q). Proof. Let P = GI ∩ gGJ g −1 , we choose γ ∈ GI such that dist(γx0 , Q) = dist(R, Q). As in ∆ parallel residues have equal stabilizers, with Proposition 4.1 P = StabG (R) ∩ StabG (Q) = StabG (projR (Q)) = γGK γ −1 .  14  ANTOINE CLAIS  On the other hand, the type K of the residue projR (Q) is given by Proposition 3.2.vi) which finishes the proof.  References [AB08]  Peter Abramenko and Kenneth S. Brown. Buildings, volume 248 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, New York, 2008. Theory and applications. [AM15] Yago Antolín and Ashot Minasyan. Tits alternatives for graph products. J. Reine Angew. Math., 704:55–83, 2015. [Cap14] Pierre-Emmanuel Caprace. Automorphism groups of right-angled buildings: simplicity and local splittings. Fund. Math., 224(1):17–51, 2014. [Cha07] Ruth Charney. An introduction to right-angled Artin groups. Geom. Dedicata, 125:141–158, 2007. [Dav98] Michael W. Davis. Buildings are CAT(0). In Geometry and cohomology in group theory (Durham, 1994), volume 252 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 108–123. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1998. [Dav08] Michael W. Davis. The geometry and topology of Coxeter groups, volume 32 of London Mathematical Society Monographs Series. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2008. [GP01] Damien Gaboriau and Frédéric Paulin. Sur les immeubles hyperboliques. Geom. Dedicata, 88(13):153–197, 2001. [HP03] Frédéric Haglund and Frédéric Paulin. Constructions arborescentes d’immeubles. Math. Ann., 325(1):137–164, 2003. [MPW15] Bernhard Mühlherr, Holger P. Petersson, and Richard M. Weiss. Descent in buildings, volume 190 of Annals of Mathematics Studies. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2015. [Ron89] Mark Ronan. Lectures on buildings, volume 7 of Perspectives in Mathematics. Academic Press, Inc., Boston, MA, 1989. [Tit74] Jacques Tits. Buildings of spherical type and finite BN-pairs. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 386. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1974. [Tit92] Jacques Tits. Twin buildings and groups of Kac-Moody type. In Groups, combinatorics & geometry (Durham, 1990), volume 165 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 249–286. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1992. [Wei03] Richard M. Weiss. The structure of spherical buildings. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2003. Laboratoire Paul Painlevé, Université Lille 1, 59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France E-mail address: antoine.clais@math.univ-lille1.fr

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
