Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_6669

Abstract:
Advice Complexity of the Online Induced Subgraph Problem∗ Dennis Komm1 , Rastislav Královič2 , Richard Královič3 , and Christian Kudahl4  arXiv:1512.05996v1 [cs.CC] 18 Dec 2015  1 2 3 4  Dept. of Computer Science, ETH Zurich; dennis.komm@inf.ethz.ch Dept. of Computer Science, Comenius University; kralovic@dcs.fmph.uniba.sk Google Inc., Switzerland; richard.kralovic@dcs.fmph.uniba.sk Dept. of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Southern Denmark kudahl@imada.sdu.dk  Abstract Several well-studied graph problems aim to select a largest (or smallest) induced subgraph with a given property of the input graph. Examples of such problems include maximum independent set, maximum planar graph, maximum induced clique, maximum acyclic subgraph (a.k.a. minimum feedback vertex set), and many others. In online versions of these problems, vertices of the graph are presented in an adversarial order, and with each vertex, the online algorithm must irreversibly decide whether to include it into the constructed subgraph, based only on the subgraph induced by the vertices presented so far. We study the properties that are common to all these problems by investigating the generalized problem: for an arbitrary but fixed hereditary property π, find some maximal induced subgraph having π. We study this problem from the point of view of advice complexity, i. e., we ask how some additional information about the yet unrevealed parts of the input can influence the solution quality. We evaluate the information in a quantitative way by considering the best possible advice of given size that describes the unknown input. Using a result from Boyar et al. [STACS 2015, LIPIcs 30], we give a tight trade-off relationship stating that for inputs of length n roughly n/c bits of advice are both needed and sufficient to obtain a solution with competitive ratio c, regardless of the choice of π, for any c (possibly a function of n). This complements the results from Bartal et al. [SIAM Journal on Computing 36(2), 2006] stating that, without any advice, even a randomized algorithm cannot achieve a competitive ratio better than Ω(n1−log4 3−o(1) ). Surprisingly, a similar result cannot be obtained for the symmetric problem: for a given cohereditary property π, find a minimum subgraph having π. We show that the advice complexity of this problem varies significantly with the choice of π. We also consider the so-called preemptive online model, inspired by some application mainly in networking and scheduling, where the decision of the algorithm is not completely irreversible. In particular, the algorithm may discard some vertices previously assigned to the constructed set, but discarded vertices cannot be reinserted into the set again. We show that, for the maximum induced subgraph problem, preemption cannot help much, giving a lower bound of Ω(n/(c2 log c)) bitspof advice needed to obtain competitive ratio c, where c is any increasing function bounded by n/ log n. We also give a linear lower bound for c close to 1.  1  Introduction  Online algorithms get their input gradually, and this way have to produce parts of the output without full knowledge of the instance at hand, which is a large disadvantage compared to  ∗  Supported in part by the Villum Foundation and the Stibo-Foundation and SNF grant 200021-146372. licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany  2  Advice Complexity of the Online Induced Subgraph Problem  classical offline computation, yet a realistic model of many real-world scenarios [5]. Most of the offline problems have their online counterpart. Instead of asking about the time and space complexity of algorithms to solve a computational problem, competitive analysis is commonly used as a tool to study how well online algorithms perform [5,17] without any time or space restrictions; the analogous offline measurement is the analysis of the approximation ratio. A large class of computational problems for both online and offline computation are formulated on graphs; we call such problems (online) graph problems. In this paper, we deal with problems on unweighted undirected graphs that are given to an online algorithm vertex by vertex in consecutive discrete time steps. Formally, we are given a graph G = (V, E), where |V | = n, with an ordering ≺ on V . Without loss of generality, assume V = {v1 , . . . , vn }, and v1 ≺ v2 ≺ . . . ≺ vn specifies the order in which the vertices of G are presented to an online algorithm; this way, the vertex vi is given in the ith time step. Together with vi , all edges {vj , vi } ∈ E are revealed for all vj ≺ vi . If vi is revealed, an online algorithm must decide whether to accept vi or discard it. Neither G nor n are known to the online algorithm. We study two versions of online problems; with and without preemption. In the former case, the decision whether vi is accepted or not is definite. In the latter case, in every time step, the online algorithm may preempt (discard) some of the vertices it previously accepted; however, a vertex that was once discarded cannot be part of the solution anymore. For an instance I = (v1 , . . . , vn ) of some graph problem, we denote by Alg(I) the solution computed by some online algorithm Alg; Opt(I) denotes an optimal solution for I, which can generally only be computed with the full knowledge of I. We assume that I is constructed in an adversarial manner to give worst-case bounds on the solution quality of any online algorithm. This means that we explicitly think of I as being given by an adversary that knows Alg and wants to make it perform as poorly as possible; for more details, we refer to the standard literature [5]. For maximization problems with an associated profit function profit, an online algorithm Alg is called c-competitive if, for every instance I of the given problem, it holds that profit(Alg(I)) ≥ 1/c · profit(Opt(I)) ;  (1)  likewise, for minimization problems with a cost function cost, we require cost(Alg(I)) ≤ c · cost(Opt(I))  (2)  for every instance I. In this context, c may be a positive constant or a function that increases with the input length n. We will use c and c(n) interchangeably to refer to the competitive ratio; the latter is simply used to emphasize that c may depend on n. Throughout this paper, log denotes the binary logarithm log2 . For q ∈ N, let [q] = {0, 1, . . . , q − 1}. Instead of studying specific graph problems, in this paper, we investigate a large class of such problems, which are defined by hereditary properties. This class includes many well-known problems such as maximum independent set, maximum planar graph, maximum induced clique, and maximum acyclic subgraph. We call any collection of graphs a graph property π. A graph has property π if it is in the collection. We only consider properties that are non-trivial, i. e., they are both true for infinitely many graphs and false for infinitely many graphs. A property is called hereditary if it holds that, if a graph G satisfies π, then also any induced subgraph G0 of G satisfies π; conversely, it is called cohereditary if it holds that, if a graph G satisfies π, and G is an induced subgraph of G0 , then also G0 satisfies π. For a graph G = (V, E) and a subset of vertices S = {v1 , . . . , vi } ⊆ V , let G[S] (or G[v1 , . . . , vi ]) denote  Dennis Komm, Rastislav Královič, Richard Královič, and Christian Kudahl  the subgraph of G induced by the vertices from S. For a graph G = (V, E), let G = (V, E) be the complement of G, i. e., {u, v} ∈ E if and only if {u, v} 6∈ E. Let Kn denote the complete graph on n vertices, and let K n denote the independent set on n vertices. We consider the online version of the problem of finding maximal (minimal, respectively) induced subgraphs satisfying a hereditary (cohereditary, respectively) property π, denoted by Max-π (Min-π , respectively). For the ease of presentation, we will call such problems hereditary (cohereditary, respectively) problems. Let SAlg := Alg(I) denote the set of vertices accepted by some online algorithm Alg for some instance I of a hereditary problem. Then, for Max-π , the profit of Alg is |SAlg | := profit(Alg(I)) if G[SAlg ] has the property π and −∞ otherwise; the goal is to maximize the profit. Conversely, for Min-π , the cost of Alg is |SAlg | := cost(Alg(I)) if G[SAlg ] has the property π and ∞ otherwise; the goal is to minimize the cost. As an example, consider the online maximum independent set problem; the set of all independent sets is clearly a hereditary property (every independent set is a feasible solution, and every induced subset of an independent set is again an independent set). With every vertex revealed, an online algorithm needs to decide whether it becomes part of the solution or not. The goal is to compute an independent set that is as large as possible; the profit of the solution thus equals |SAlg |. It is straightforward to define the problem without or with preemption. In this paper, we study online algorithms with advice for hereditary and cohereditary problems. In this setup, an online algorithm is equipped with an additional resource that contains information about the instance it is dealing with. A related model was originally introduced by Dobrev et al. [8]. Revised versions were introduced by Emek et al. [10], Böckenhauer et al. [4], and Hromkovič et al. [11]. Here, we use the model of the latter two papers. Consider an input I = (v1 , . . . , vn ) of a hereditary problem. An online algorithm Alg with advice computes the output sequence Algφ (I) = (y1 , . . . , yn ) such that yi is computed from φ, v1 , . . . , vi , where φ is the content of the advice tape, i. e., an infinite binary sequence. We denote the cost (profit, respectively) of the computed output by cost(Algφ (I)) (profit(Algφ (I)), respectively). The algorithm Alg is c-competitive with advice complexity b(n), if for every n and for each I of length at most n, there exists some φ such that cost(Algφ (I)) ≤ c · cost(Opt(I)) (profit(Algφ (I)) ≥ (1/c) · profit(Opt(I)), respectively) and at most the first b(n) bits of φ have been accessed by Alg.1 The motivation for online algorithms with advice is mostly of theoretical nature, as we may think of the information necessary and sufficient to compute an optimal solution as the information content of the given problem [11]. Moreover, there is a non-trivial connection to randomized online algorithms [3, 12]. Lower bounds from advice complexity often translate to lower bounds for semi-online algorithms. One could consider if knowing some small parameter for an online problem (such as the length of the input or the number of requests of a certain type) could result in a much better competitive ratio. Lower bound results using advice can often help answer this question. Similarly, lookahead can be seen as a special kind of advice that is supplied to an algorithm. This way, online algorithms with advice generalize a number of concepts introduced to give online algorithms more power. However, the main question posed is, how much could any kind of (computable) information help; and maybe even more importantly, which amount of information will never help to overcome some certain threshold, no matter what this information actually is.  1  Note that usually an additive constant is included in the definition of c-competitiveness, i. e., in (1) and (2). However, for the problems we consider, this changes the advice complexity by at most O(log n); see Remark 9 in Boyar et al. [7]).  3  4  Advice Complexity of the Online Induced Subgraph Problem  Organization, Related Work, and Results We are mainly concerned with proving lower bounds of the form that a particular number of advice bits is necessary in order to obtain some certain output quality for a given hereditary property. We make heavy use of online reductions between generic problems and the studied ones that allow to bound the number of advice bits necessary from below. Emek et al. [10] used this technique in order to prove lower bounds for the k-server problem. The foundations of the reductions as we perform them here are due to Böckenhauer et al. [2], who introduced the string guessing problem, and Boyar et al. [7], who studied a problem called asymmetric string guessing. Mikkelsen [19] introduced a problem, which we call the anti-string guessing problem, and which is a variant of string guessing with a more “friendly” cost function. Our reductions rely on some results from Bartal et al. [1] that characterize hereditary properties by forbidden subgraphs together with some insights from Ramsey theory. In Section 2, we recall some basic results from Ramsey theory, and define the generic online problems that we use as a basis of our reductions. In Section 3, we study both Max-π and Min-π in the case that no preemption is allowed; using a reduction from the asymmetric string guessing problem, we show that any c-competitive online algorithm for Max-π needs roughly n/c advice bits, and this is essentially tight. This complements the results from Bartal et al. [1] stating that, without any advice, even a randomized algorithm cannot achieve a competitive ratio better than Ω(n1−log4 3−o(1) ). Note that the advice complexity of the maximum independent set problem on bipartite and sparse graphs was studied by Dobrev et al. [9]. In the subsequent sections, we allow the online algorithm to use preemption. First, in Section 4, we use a reduction from the string guessing problem to show a lower bound of Ω(n/(c2 log c)) bits of advice that p are needed to obtain competitive ratio c, where c is any increasing function bounded by n/ log n. In Section 5, using a reduction from the anti-string guessing problem, we also give a linear lower bound for c close to 1.  2  Preliminaries  Hereditary properties can be characterized by forbidden induced subgraphs as follows: if a graph G does not satisfy a hereditary property π, then any graph H such that G is an induced subgraph of H does not satisfy π neither. Hence, there is a (potentially infinite) set of minimal forbidden graphs (w.r.t. being induced subgraph) Sπ such that G satisfies π if and only if no graphs from Sπ are induced subgraphs of G. Conversely, any set of graphs S defines a hereditary property πS of not having a graph from S as induced subgraph. Furthermore, there is the following bijection between hereditary and cohereditary properties: for a hereditary property π we can define a property π such that a graph G satisfies π if and only if it does not satisfy π (it is easy to see that π is cohereditary), and vice versa. Hence, a cohereditary property π can be characterized by a set of minimal (w.r.t. being induced subgraph) obligatory subgraphs Sπ̄ such that a graph G has the property π if and only if at least one graph from Sπ̄ is an induced subgraph of G. To each property π we can define the complementary property π c such that a graph G satisfies π c if and only if the complement of G satisfies π. Clearly, if π is (co)hereditary, so is π c . Moreover, if H is forbidden (obligatory, respectively) for π, H is forbidden (obligatory, respectively) for π c . The following statement is due to Lund and Yannakakis. I Lemma 1 (Lund and Yannakakis [14], proof of Theorem 4). Every non-trivial hereditary property π is satisfied either by all cliques or by all independent sets. Proof. Assume, for the sake of contradiction, that there is a hereditary property π, and  Dennis Komm, Rastislav Královič, Richard Královič, and Christian Kudahl  5  two numbers m, n, such that Km and K n do not satisfy π. Let r(m, n) be the Ramsey number [16], such that every graph with at least r(m, n) vertices contains Km or K n as induced subgraph. Since π is non-trivial, there is a graph G with more than r(m, n) vertices that satisfies π. G contains either Km or K n as induced subgraph, and since π is hereditary, either Km of K n satisfies π. J Bartal et al. proved the following theorem. I Theorem 2 (Bartal et al. [1] and references therein). In the known supergraph model, any randomized algorithm for the Max-π problem has competitive ratio Ω(n1−log4 3−o(1) ), even if preemption is allowed. J The theorem is formulated in the known supergraph model, where a graph G = (V, E) with n vertices is a-priori known to the algorithm, and the input is a sequence of vertices v1 , . . . , vk . The task is to select in an online manner the subgraph of the induced graph G[v1 , . . . , vk ], having property π. Note that n in the previous theorem thus refers to the size of the known supergraph, and not to the length of the input sequence. However, in the proof a graph with n = 4i vertices is considered, from which subgraphs of size 3i are presented. Each of these instances has an optimal solution of size at least 2i , and it is shown that any deterministic algorithm can have a profit of at most α(3/2)i log n on average, for some constant α. From that, using Yao’s principle [18] as stated in [6], the result follows. The same set of instances thus yields the following result. I Theorem 3 (Bartal et al. [1]). Any randomized algorithm for the Max-π problem has competitive ratio Ω(n2/ log 3−1−o(1) ), even if preemption is allowed. J Next, we describe some specific online problems that allow us to give lower bounds on the advice complexity using a special kind of reduction. Böckenhauer et al. [2] introduced a very generic online problem called string guessing with known history over alphabets of size σ (σ-SGKH). The input is a sequence of requests (x0 , . . . , xn ) where x0 = n and for i ≥ 1, xi ∈ {1, . . . , σ}. The algorithm has to produce a sequence of answers (y1 , . . . , yn , yn+1 ), where yi ∈ {1, . . . , σ} and yn+1 = ⊥ and where yi is allowed to depend on x0 , . . . , xi−1 (and of course any advice bits the algorithm reads). The cost is the number of positions i for which yi 6= xi . I Theorem 4 (Böckenhauer et al. [2]). Any online algorithm with advice for σ-SGKH that guesses γn bits of the input correctly must read at least     1−γ 1 + (1 − γ) logσ + γ logσ γ n log2 σ σ−1 J  advice bits.  Mikkelsen [19] introduced the problem anti-string guessing with known history over alphabets of size σ (anti-σ-SGKH). It is defined exactly as σ-SGKH except that the cost is the number of positions i for which yi = xi . I Theorem 5 (Mikkelsen [19, Theorem 11]). Let σ ≥ 2 and let 1 ≤ c < anti-σ-SGKH algorithm must read at least  σ σ−1 .  A c-competitive  b ≥ (1 − hσ (1/c))n log2 σ bits of advice, where n is the input length. This holds even if n is known in advance. Here, hσ is the σ-ary entropy function given by hσ (x) = x logσ (σ−1)−x logσ (x)−(1−x) logσ (1−x). J  6  Advice Complexity of the Online Induced Subgraph Problem  Boyar et al. [7] investigated a problem called maximum asymmetric string guessing (maxASGk). The input is a sequence of requests (x0 , x1 , . . . , xn ) where x0 = ⊥ and for i ≥ 1, xi ∈ {0, 1}. The algorithm has to produce a sequence of answers (y1 , . . . , yn , yn+1 ). The output is feasible if xi ≤ yi for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. The profit of the algorithm is the number of zeroes in y1 , . . . , yn for feasible outputs, and −∞ otherwise. The “blind” version of the problem, where the algorithm has to produce the outputs without actually seeing the requests (i. e., in each step, the algorithm receives some dummy request ⊥), is denoted maxASGu. In what follows, let   1 (c − 1)c−1 1 ≈ · Bc := log 1 + . cc c e ln 2 I Theorem 6 (Boyar et al. [7]). For any function c(n) such that 1 ≤ c(n) ≤ n, there is a c-competitive algorithm for maxASGk (maxASGu, respectively) with advice of size Bc · n + O(log n). Moreover, any c-competitive algorithm for maxASGk (maxASGu, respectively) must read at least Bc · n − O(log n) bits of advice. J Note that in general, it does not make much difference if the length of the input is initially known to the algorithm or not. More specifically, it changes the advice complexity by at most O(log n).  3  Max-π and Min-π without Preemption  First, we show that for any non-trivial hereditary property π, the Max-π problem is equivalent to the asymmetric string guessing in the following sense. I Theorem 7. If there is a c-competitive algorithm for maxASGu then there is a ccompetitive algorithm for Max-π using the same advice. Proof. Suppose there is a c-competitive algorithm Alg for maxASGu with c(n) < ∞. For any input for Max-π , consider a binary string representing this instance (with one bit per vertex) such that zeroes correspond to vertices in the optimal solution. Any feasible solution to maxASGu must cover all ones in the input string, so the set of zeroes in any feasible solution of maxASGu forms subset of vertices of the optimal solution of Max-π , and since π is hereditary, is a feasible solution of Max-π . The algorithm for Max-π works as follows: When a vertex arrives, send a ⊥ request to Alg. If Alg answers 0, include the vertex in the solution. Since Alg is c-competitive, it covers at least a (1/c)-fraction of the optimum. J I Theorem 8. If there is a c-competitive algorithm for Max-π that reads b bits of advice then there is a c-competitive algorithm for maxASGk using b + O(log2 n) bits of advice. Before proving Theorem 8 let us recall Lemma 3 from Bartal et al. [1]. I Lemma 9 (Bartal et al. [1]). Given any graph H, there exist constants n0 and α such that for all n > n0 there exists a graph G on n vertices such that any induced subgraph of G on at least α log n vertices contains H as an induced subgraph. This is a variant of Lemma 9 from Lund and Yannakakis [15]. I Lemma 10 (Lund and Yannakakis [15]). Let H be a graph on k vertices. For sufficiently large N , for any graph G on N vertices and for all ` = Ω(log N ), a pseudo-random subgraph G0 of G does not, with probability 1/2, contain a subset S of ` vertices that is a clique in G but H is not an induced subgraph of G0 |S.  Dennis Komm, Rastislav Královič, Richard Královič, and Christian Kudahl  Proof of Theorem 8. According to Lemma 1, π is satisfied either by all cliques or by all independent sets. Without loss of generality, suppose the latter (otherwise, swap the edges and non-edges in the following arguments). Consider a binary string ν = x1 , . . . , xn (for large enough n). Let us consider the graph Gν = (V, E) defined as follows. Let H be an arbitrary but fixed forbidden subgraph of π. Let G0 be the n-vertex graph from Lemma 9 with vertices V = {v1 , . . . , vn }. If xi = 0 for some i, delete from G0 all edges {vi , vj } for j > i. In the graph Gν thus defined, the vertices vi for which the corresponding xi satisfies xi = 0 (denoted by Iν ⊆ V in the sequel) form an independent set, and hence Gν [Iν ] has property π. On the other hand, any induced subgraph Gν [S] with property π can contain at most α log n vertices from V \ Iν (otherwise it would contain the forbidden graph H as induced subgraph). Note that, with O(log n) bits of advice to encode n, the graph Gν can be constructed from the string ν in an online manner: the base graph G0 is fixed for a fixed n, and the subgraph Gν [v1 , . . . , vi ] depends only on the values of x1 , . . . , xi−1 . Now let us consider a c-competitive algorithm Algπ for Max-π that uses b bits of advice. Let us describe how to derive an algorithm Alg for maxASGk from Algπ . For a given string ν = x1 , . . . , xn , where ⊥, x1 , . . . , xn is the input for maxASGk, the advice for Alg consists of three parts: first, there is a self-delimited encoding of n using O(log n) bits, followed by a (self-delimited) correction string eν of length O(log2 n) bits described later, and the rest is the advice for Algπ on the input Gν . Let S be the solution (set of vertices) returned by Algπ on Gν (with the proper advice). As argued before, S can contain at most α log n vertices from V \ Iν . The indices of these vertices from Sout := S ∩ (V \ Iν ) are part of the string eν . Apart from that, eν contains the indices of at most α log n vertices Sin ⊆ Iν such that |(S \ Sout ) ∪ Sin | = min{|S|, |Iν |}. The algorithm Alg works as follows: at the beginning, it constructs the graph G0 . When a request xi arrives, Alg sends the new vertex vi of Gν to Algπ , and finds out whether vi ∈ S. If vi ∈ Sin , Alg answers 0 regardless of the answer of Algπ . Similarly, if vi ∈ Sout , Alg answers 1. Otherwise, Alg answers 0 if and only if vi ∈ S. First note that Alg always produces a feasible solution: if the input xi = 1 then either vi 6∈ S, and Alg returns yi = 1, or else vi is included in Sout . Moreover, the number of zeroes (the profit) in the output of Alg is min{|S|, |Iν |}, where |Iν | is the profit of the optimal solution. Since Algπ is c-competitive, |S| ≥ (1/c) · profit(Opt(Gν )) ≥ (1/c) · |Iν |. J I Corollary 11. Let π be any non-trivial hereditary property. Let Ac,n be the minimum advice needed for a c-competitive Max-π algorithm. Then Bc · n − O(log n) ≤ Ac,n ≤ Bc · n + O(log2 n) . We have shown that the advice complexity of Max-π essentially does not depend on the choice of the property π. This is not the case with cohereditary properties and the problem Min-π . On one hand, there are cohereditary properties where little advice is sufficient for optimality: I Theorem 12. If a cohereditary property π can be characterized by finitely many obligatory subgraphs, there is an optimal algorithm for Min-π with advice O(log n). Proof. Since each obligatory subgraph has constant size, O(log n) bits can be used to encode the indices of the vertices (forming the smallest obligatory subgraph) that are included in an optimal solution. J On the other hand, there are properties for which the problem Min-π requires large advice.  7  8  Advice Complexity of the Online Induced Subgraph Problem  I Theorem 13 (Boyar et al. [7]). Any c-competitive algorithm for the minimum cycle finding problem requires at least Bc · n − O(log n) bits of advice. J The problem minimum cycle finding requires to identify a smallest possible set of vertices S such that G[S] contains a cycle. Hence, it is the Min-π problem for the non-trivial cohereditary property “contains cycle.” An upper bound analogous to Theorem 7 follows from [7]. I Theorem 14. Let π be any non-trivial cohereditary property. There is a c-competitive algorithm for Min-π which reads Bc · n + O(log n) bits of advice. J  4  Max-π with Preemption – Large Competitive Ratios  In this, and the following section, we consider the problem Max-π with preemption where π is a non-trivial hereditary property. In every time step, the algorithm can either accept or reject the currently given vertex and preempt any number of vertices that it accepted in previous time steps. However, vertices that were once rejected or preempted cannot be accepted in later time steps. The goal is to accept as many vertices as possible. After reach request, the solution is required to have the property π.2 Using a string guessing reduction, we prove the following theorem. I Theorem 15. Consider the Max-π problem with preemption, for a hereditary property π with a forbidden subgraph H, such that π holds p for all independent sets. Let c(n) be an increasing function suchthat c(n) logc(n) = o( n/ log n). Any c(n)-competitive Max-π algorithm uses at least Ω  n c(n)2 log c(n)  bits of advice.  Proof. First, for some given n and σ, let us define the graph Gn,σ that will be used in the reduction. To ease the presentation, assume that n0 = n/σ is integer. Let G1 be a graph with σ vertices, the existence of which is asserted by Lemma 9, such that any subgraph of G1 with at least κ1 log σ vertices contains H as induced subgraph. Let GB be the complement of a union of n0 cliques of size σ (i. e., GB consists of n0 independent sets V1 , . . . , Vn0 of size σ, and all remaining pairs of vertices are connected by edges). Applying Lemma 10 to GB proves an existence of a graph G2 ⊆ GB such that any subset of G2 with at least κ2 log n vertices contains H as an induced subgraph. The graph Gn,σ is obtained from G2 by replacing each independent set Vi with a copy of G1 (each such copy is called a “layer” in what follows). Let us suppose that a c(n)-competitive Max-π algorithm Alg is given that uses S(n) advice bits on instances of size n. Now fix an arbitrary n, and choose σ := 4cκ1 log(4cκ1 ). We show how to solve instances of σ-SGKH of length n0 − 1 using Alg. Let q1 , . . . , qn0 −1 be the instance of σ-SGKH, where qi ∈ {1, . . . , σ}. The corresponding instance G for the Max-π problem is as follows: take the graph Gn,σ , and denote by vi,1 , . . . , vi,σ the vertices of the set Vi . Let vi,qi be the distinguished vertex in set Vi . Delete from Gn,σ all edges of the form {vi,qi , vi0 ,qi0 } where i0 > i. The resulting graph G is presented to Alg in the order v1,1 , . . . , v1,σ , v2,1 , . . . , v2,σ , . . .. Note that G can be constructed online based on the instance q1 , . . . , qn0 −1 .  2  Note that without advice, the condition to maintain π in every time step is implicit. Indeed, if π should be violated in any step, the adversary may just end the input sequence. Then again, allowing advice changes this game. Here, an online algorithm may just accept all vertices, compute the optimal solution at the end, and preempt the corresponding vertices. Therefore, we require explicitly that π must be maintained in every time step.  Dennis Komm, Rastislav Královič, Richard Královič, and Christian Kudahl  The distinguished vertices form an independent set of size n0 , and thus a feasible solution. On the other hand, apart from the distinguished vertices, any solution can have at most κ1 log σ vertices in one layer (otherwise there would be a forbidden subgraph in that layer), and at most κ2 log n layers with vertices other than the distinguished one (if there are more than κ2 log n nonempty layers, choose one vertex from each nonempty layer; these form a clique in GB , and due to Lemma 10 induce H in G2 , and thus also in G). Hence, n0 ≤ profit(Opt(G)) ≤ n0 + K, where K := κ1 κ2 log σ log n. Since Alg is c-competitive, it produces a solution of size at least profit(Opt(G))/c. Since any solution can have at most K non-distinguished vertices, the solution of Alg contains at least g := profit(Opt(G))/c − K distinguished vertices. Consider an algorithm Alg0 for σ-SGKH of length n0 − 1, which simulates Alg: for the ith request, it presents Alg with the layer of vertices Vi . Let Cand(i) ⊆ Vi (the candidate set) be the set of vertices selected by Alg from Vi . As stated before, |Cand(i)| ≤ κ1 log σ. A set Cand(i) is good if it contains the distinguished vertex vi,qi . It follows from the definition of the problem that there are at least g good candidate sets. Alg0 uses an additional O(log log σ) bits of advice to describe a number j, 1 ≤ j ≤ κ1 log σ, and selects the jth vertex from any Cand(i) as an answer (if |Cand(i)| is smaller than j, it is extended in an arbitrary fixed way). The number j is selected in such a way that Alg0 gives the correct answer from a fraction of 1/(κ1 log σ) of good sets. Putting it together, the fraction of correctly guessed numbers by Alg0 is at least α :=  n0 − cK . cκ1 log σ(n0 − 1)  Note that 1 1 ≥α≥ cκ1 log σ 2cκ1 log σ holds for large enough n, provided that n0 ≥ 2cK − 1. To see that this inequality holds, note that n n0 ≥ 2cK − 1 ⇐⇒ ≥ 2cK − 1 ⇐⇒ (2cK − 1)4cκ1 log(4cκ1 ) ≤ n . 4cκ1 log(4cκ1 ) The last inequality holds for large enough n by the choice of c(·) due to the fact that (2cK − 1)4cκ1 log(4cκ1 ) = O(c(n)2 K log c(n)) = O((c(n) log c(n))2 log n) = o(n) . Due to Theorem 4, any algorithm for σ-SGKH that correctly guesses a fraction of α numbers (for σ1 ≤ α ≤ 1) on an input of length n0 − 1 requires at least S := F (σ, α) · (n0 − 1) · log2 σ bits of advice where   1−α F (σ, α) := 1 + (1 − α) logσ + α logσ α . σ−1 First, let us verify that 1/σ ≤ α: 1 1 ≤ ≤α σ 2cκ1 log σ σ ⇐⇒ ≥ 2cκ1 log σ 4cκ1 log(4cκ1 ) ⇐⇒ ≥ 2cκ1 log(4cκ1 ) + log log(4cκ1 ) ⇐⇒ ⇐⇒  2 log(4cκ1 ) ≥ log(4cκ1 ) + log log(4cκ1 ) log(4cκ1 ) ≥ log log(4cκ1 ) .  9  10  Advice Complexity of the Online Induced Subgraph Problem  Next, we use the bounds on α to get   1− cκ  1 1 log σ      log 2cκ11log σ 1 + · log σ 2cκ1 log σ log σ     cκ1 log σ   1 log(2cκ1 log σ)  log(σ − 1) 1  log cκ1 log σ−1 ≥1− 1− + · − cκ1 log σ cκ1 log σ log σ log σ 2cκ1 log σ cκ1 log σ−1   1 1 1 log(2cκ1 log σ) ≥ − + cκ1 log σ log σ ln 2(cκ1 log σ − 1) 2cκ1 log σ   F (σ, α) ≥ 1 + 1 −  1 cκ1 log σ   log ·  σ−1  and hence F (σ, α) log σ ≥  1 1 log(2cκ1 log σ) − − . cκ1 ln 2(cκ1 log σ − 1) 2cκ1 log σ  Since σ ≈ c log c, it holds   1 1 =o ln 2(cκ1 log σ − 1) c and for n 7→ ∞ log(2cκ1 log σ) 1 7→ 2cκ1 log σ 2cκ1 yielding F (σ, α) log σ = Ω(1/c). Finally, the theorem follows by noting that n0 − 1 = Ω(n/(c log c)). J Using a similar approach, we can get a stronger bound for the independent set problem. Due to space constraints, the proof is moved to Appendix A. I Theorem 16. Let c(n) be any function such that √ 1 + 1 + 4n . 8 ≤ c(n) ≤ 4 Any c(n)-competitive independent set algorithm that can use preemption requires at least Ac,n ≥  0.01 · log(2c) (n − 2c) 2c2  advice bits.  5  J  Max-π with Preemption – Small Competitive Ratios  In this section, we use Theorem 5 to give bounds on small constant values of the competitive ratio for algorithms for Max-π complementing the bounds from Theorem 15. In what follows, π is a non-trivial hereditary property and k is the size of a smallest forbidden subgraph according to π. I Theorem 17. If there is a c-competitive algorithm for Max-π with preemption that reads b(nk) bits of advice for inputs of length nk, then there exists a c-competitive algorithm for Anti-k-SGKH, which, for inputs of length n, reads b(kn) + O(log2 n) bits of advice.  Dennis Komm, Rastislav Královič, Richard Královič, and Christian Kudahl  Proof. According to Lemma 1 π is satisfied either by all cliques or by all independent sets. We assume in the following, that π is satisfied by all independent sets. We describe how to transform an instance of Anti-k-SGKH into an instance of Max-π with preemption. The length of the instance for Max-π with preemption will be k times as long as the length n of the Anti-k-SGKH instance. We proceed to show that a c-competitive algorithm for the latter implies a c-competitive algorithm for the former which reads at most O((log n)2 ) additional advice bits. Let ν = x1 , x2 , . . . , xn (with xi ∈ {1, . . . , k) be an instance of Anti-k-SGKH. Consider the n-vertex graph G̃ = (V (G̃), E(G̃)), given by Lemma 9 for a size-k smallest minimal forbidden subgraph H = (V (H), E(H)) from π. We recall that any induced subgraph of G̃ with at least α log n vertices contains H as an induced subgraph. Let us denote V (G̃) = {ṽ1 , . . . , ṽn } and V (H) = {h1 , . . . , hk }. We now describe the construction of a graph Gν = (V (Gν ), E(Gν )), which will be the input for the given algorithm for Max-π . To this end, let V (Gν ) =  n [ k [  vji ,  i=1 j=1 0  E(Gν ) = {{vji , vji 0 } | {hj , hj 0 } ∈ E(H)} ∪ {{vji , vji 0 } | i < i0 , {v˜j , v˜j 0 } ∈ E(G̃), j 6= xi }, where we assume an ordering v11 , . . . , vk1 , v12 , . . . , vk2 , . . . , v1n , . . . , vkn on the vertices. Moreover, we denote the requests v1i , . . . , vki as layer i. Let X denote the set of vertices vxi i for i = 1, . . . , n. We start with a few observations about Gν that are straightforward. I Observation 1. The graph Gν [X] is an independent set of size n. In particular, it has property π. I Observation 2. Gν [v1i , . . . , vki ] = H for an arbitrary but fixed i. Thus, any induced subgraph of Gν that contains Gν [v1i , . . . , vki ] not does not have property π. I Observation 3. Consider a set of vertices, V , in Gν which is disjoint from X. If |V | ≥ kα log n, then Gν [V ] does not have property π. Note that V must in this case contain vertices from at least α log n different layer. These have H as an induced subgraph since none of them are in X. Now consider a c-competitive algorithm Algπ for Max-π with preemption reading b(nk) bits of advice (recall that nk is the length of its input Gν ). We start by describing an algorithm Alg0 for Anti-k-SGKH, which uses b(nk) bits of advice (n is the length of its input). Afterwards, we use it to define another algorithm Alg for Anti-k-SGKH, which uses O(log2 n) additional advice bits and is c-competitive. For a given string ν = x1 , . . . , xn , let ⊥, x1 , . . . , xn be the input for Anti-k-SG. Let S be the solution (set of vertices) returned by Algπ on Gν (with the proper advice). Note that this is the resulting set of vertices after the unwanted vertices have been preempted. Alg0 works as follows: It constructs the graph Gν online and simulates Algπ on it. When a request i arrives, the goal of Alg0 is to guess a number in {1, . . . , k} different from xi . It does this by presenting all vertices in layer i to Algπ . It is important to note that the vertices in layer i can be presented without knowledge of xi , . . . , xn . Let Si denote the set of these vertices, which are accepted by Algπ and have not been preempted after request vki . In layer i, Alg0 outputs yi = w where w is the smallest number in {1, . . . , k} such that i vw ∈ / Si . Note that such a number always exists because of Observation 2. We now describe Alg, which uses O(log2 n) additional advice bits. The advice for Alg consists of three parts: First, a self-delimiting encoding of n (this requires O(log n) bits).  11  12  Advice Complexity of the Online Induced Subgraph Problem  This is followed by a list of up to kα log n indices i, where Alg outputs yi = xi . Let Serror denote the set of these indices. A self-delimiting encoding of this requires O(log2 n) bits (recall that α and k are constant). Finally, the advice which Alg0 received is included. This is b(nk) bits. The algorithm Alg works as follows: For each request, it does the following: If the request is not in Serror it outputs the same as Alg. If the request is in Serror it outputs another number in [k]. We now argue that Alg is c-competitive. We note that the optimal offline solution to Max-π on Gν contains at most kα log n vertices not in X. The same of course holds for the solution produced by Algπ . It holds that if in layer i, Algπ accepts a vertex in X, then Alg0 outputs yi 6= xi . This means that the score of Algπ is at most kα log n more than the score of Alg0 . Since the score of Alg is kα log n more than the score of Alg0 , we have that Alg is c-competitive. J Combining Theorems 5 and 17, we get the following corollary. I Corollary 18. For a non-trivial hereditary property, π, with a minimal forbidden subgraph k of size k, the following holds: Let 1 < c < k−1 . A c-competitive algorithm for Max-π with preemption must read at least b ≥ (1 − hk (1/c))n  log k − O(log2 n) k  bits of advice, where n is the input length. Here, hk is the k-ary entropy function given by hk (x) = x logk (k − 1) − x logk (x) − (1 − x) logk (1 − x).  6  Closing Remarks  In Corollary 11, we describe lower and upper bounds for the advice complexity of all online hereditary graph problems, which are essentially tight (there is just a gap of O(log2 n)). It turns out that, for all of them, roughly the same amount of information about the future is required to achieve a certain competitive ratio. Intriguingly, we see a quite different picture for cohereditary properties. Theorem 14 gives the same upper bound as we had for hereditary properties, and Theorem 13 shows that this upper bound is essentially tight. However, Theorem 12 shows that there exist cohereditary problems that have an advice complexity as low as O(log n) bits to be optimal. It remains open if it is only those problems with a finite set of obligatory graphs that have this very low advice complexity, or if this can also happen for cohereditary problems with an infinite set of obligatory graphs. For hereditary problems with preemption, we show that to achieve a competitive ratio k strictly smaller than k−1 , a linear number of advice bits is needed. This is asymptotically tight, since optimality (even without preemption) can be achieved with n bits. Furthermore, we show a lower bound for non-constant competitive ratios (that are roughly smaller than √ n). It remains open if there is an algorithm for the preemptive case, which uses fewer advice bits than the algorithms solving the same problem in the non-preemptive case. References 1  Y. Bartal, A. Fiat, and S. Leonardi. Lower bounds for on-line graph problems with application to on-line circuit and optical routing. SIAM Journal on Computing, 36(2):354–393, 2006.  Dennis Komm, Rastislav Královič, Richard Královič, and Christian Kudahl  2  3  4  5 6 7  8 9 10 11  12 13 14 15  16 17 18 19  H.-J. Böckenhauer, J. Hromkovič, D. Komm, S. Krug, J. Smula, and A. Sprock. The string guessing problem as a method to prove lower bounds on the advice complexity. Theoretical Computer Science 554:95–108, 2014. H.-J. Böckenhauer, D. Komm, R. Královič, and R. Královič. On the advice complexity of the k-server problem. In L. Aceto, M. Henzinger, and J. Sgall, editors, Proc. of ICALP 2011, volume 6755 of LNCS, pp. 207–218. Springer-Verlag, 2011. H.-J. Böckenhauer, D. Komm, R. Královič, R. Královič, and T. Mömke. On the advice complexity of online problems. In Y. Dong, D.-Z. Du, and O. H. Ibarra, editors, Proc. of ISAAC 2009, volume 5878 of LNCS, pp. 331–340. Springer-Verlag, 2009. A. Borodin and R. El-Yaniv. Online Computation and Competitive Analysis. Cambridge University Press, 1998. A. Borodin and R. El-Yaniv. On randomization in on-line computation. Information and Computation, 150(2):244 – 267, 1999. J. Boyar, L. M. Favrholdt, C. Kudahl, and J. W. Mikkelsen. Advice Complexity for a Class of Online Problems. In E. W. Mayr and N. Ollinger, editors, Proc. of STACS 2015, volume 30 of LIPIcs, pp. 116–129, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2015. Schloss Dagstuhl–LeibnizZentrum fuer Informatik. S. Dobrev, R. Královič, and D. Pardubská. Measuring the problem-relevant information in input. RAIRO Theoretical Informatics and Applications, 43(3):585–613, 2009. S. Dobrev, R. Královič, Richard Královič: Advice complexity of maximum independent set in sparse and bipartite graphs. Theory of Computing Systems 56(1):197–219, 2015. Y. Emek, P. Fraigniaud, A. Korman, and A. Rosén. Online computation with advice. Theoretical Computer Science, 412(24):2642–2656, 2011. J. Hromkovič, R. Královič, and R. Královič. Information complexity of online problems. In F. Murlak and P. Sankowski, editors, Proc. of MFCS 2010, volume 6281 of LNCS, pp. 24–36. Springer-Verlag, 2010. D. Komm and R. Královič. Advice complexity and barely random algorithms. RAIRO Theoretical Informatics and Applications, 45(2):249–267, 2011. I. Csiszár. The method of types. Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on 44(6):2505– 2523, 1998. J. M. Lewis and M. Yannakakis. The node-deletion problem for hereditary properties is NP-complete. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 20(2):219 – 230, 1980. C. Lund and M. Yannakakis. The approximation of maximum subgraph problems. In A. Lingas, R. Karlsson, and S. Carlsson, editors, Proc. of ICALP 1993, volume 700 of LNCS, pp. 40–51. Springer-Verlag, 1993. F. P. Ramsey. On a problem in formal logic. Proc. London Mathematical Society (3), 30:264–286, 1930. D. D. Sleator and R. E. Tarjan. Amortized efficiency of list update and paging rules. Communications of the ACM, 28(2):202–208, 1985. A. C.-C. Yao. Probabilistic computations: Toward a unified measure of complexity (extended abstract). In Proc. of FOCS 1977, pp. 222–227. IEEE Computer Society, 1977. J. W. Mikkelsen. Randomization can be as helpful as a glimpse of the future in online computation. CoRR, abs/1511.05886, 2015.  13  14  Advice Complexity of the Online Induced Subgraph Problem  A  Proof of Theorem 16  Consider an instance of σ-SGKH of length n0 − 1. We construct an unweighted undirected graph G as input for the maximum independent set problem with preemption as follows. We subdivide the input into n0 = n/σ layers. In every layer, vertex after vertex, σ vertices are given that form a clique. These cliques are denoted by C1 , . . . , Cn0 ; the clique Ci , 1 ≤ i ≤ n0 − 1, contains a designated vertex ci such that all vertices that are revealed subsequently are connected to all vertices v ∈ Ci if and only if v 6= ci . This way, G contains an independent set (namely {c1 , . . . , cn0 −1 , v} for any v ∈ Cn0 ) of size n0 . Note that due to the condition that an independent set is maintained in every time step, no online algorithm is allowed to accept more than one vertex in any layer. If, for clique Ci with 1 ≤ i ≤ n0 − 1, the algorithm accepts a vertex v 6= ci , in the next layer it has two choices. It can preempt v which reduces its profit by 1, or it can keep v and not have any more profit on the rest of the instance. Clearly, the second option is never superior to the first one, so we can assume, without loss of generality, that the algorithm always preempts incorrectly guessed vertices. Also, assuming that the algorithm always selects exactly one vertex means no loss of generality (it has no benefit not to select any vertex in a given layer). Given a c(n)-competitive independent set algorithm Alg, one can construct a σ-SGKH algorithm Alg0 as follows: for each request, Alg0 presents Alg with a new set of σ vertices, and the vertex selected by Alg is interpreted as the answer to σ-SGKH. The next request of σ-SGKH reveals the correct guess, so the instance for Alg can be constructed incrementally. The choice of the designated vertex ci for Ci with 1 ≤ i ≤ n0 − 1 by Alg increases the profit of Alg by 1, and corresponds to the correct guess of the natural number from 1 to σ by Alg0 . A wrong choice gets preempted, and does not contribute to the profit of Alg. Let α :=  n0 − c(n) . c(n)n0 − c(n)  (3)  Since Alg is c(n)-competitive, and the optimum has size n0 , Alg selects an independent set of size at least n0 /c(n) = α(n0 − 1) + 1, meaning that the fraction of correct guesses was at least α. On the other hand, due to Theorem 4, any algorithm for σ-SGKH that correctly guesses a fraction of α numbers (for σ1 ≤ α ≤ 1) on an input of length n0 − 1 requires at least S := F (σ, α) · (n0 − 1) · log2 σ bits of advice where   1−α F (σ, α) := 1 + (1 − α) logσ + α logσ α . σ−1 We have 1 n0 − c 1 ≥α= 0 ≥ . c cn − c 2c provided that 1 ≤ c <  n0 +1 2 .  Using (4), we get    c−1 1 log c(σ−1) c−1 1 log 2c F (σ, α) ≥ 1 + · + · c log σ 2c log σ     c log c−1 c − 1 log(σ − 1) 1 log(2c)  =1− · − · + c c log σ log σ 2c c−1     c log c−1 1 1 log(2c) . ≥ − · + c c log σ 2c c−1  (4)  Dennis Komm, Rastislav Královič, Richard Královič, and Christian Kudahl  15  Since for any x ≥ 0 it holds3 ln(1 + x) ≤ x(1 + x), we get    log 4(2c)ln 2 1 1 1 log(2c) 1 1 F (σ, α) ≥ − · + ≥ − · . c log σ ln 2(c − 1) 2c c log σ 2 ln 2(c − 1) Subsequently, for the required advice we get " # n−σ n−σ log σ log 4(2c)ln 2 . S≥ · log σ · F (σ, α) ≥ · − σ σ c 2 ln 2(c − 1) n  (5)  +1  We have to choose σ in such a way that α ≥ σ1 and c < σ 2 . It is easy to see that for σ = 2c both inequalities hold for the assumed values of c; the second inequality being equivalent to 4c2 − 2c − n < 0. The function  log 4(2c)ln 2 2 + ln 2 log(2c) h(c) := = 2 ln 2(c − 1) 2 ln 2(c − 1) converges to 12 log(2c) . Hence, for sufficiently large c, h(c) comprises a linear fraction of c Solving numerically, for c ≥ 8, h(c) ≤ 0.99 · log(2c) , yielding c S ≥ 0.01 ·  log σ c .  n − 2c log(2c) · , 2c c  which finishes the proof.  3  1 Let f (x) = ln(1 + x), g(x) = x(1 + x). It holds f (0) = g(0) = 0. The derivatives are f 0 (x) = 1+x , 0 0 0 0 0 g (x) = 1 + 2x. Both f (x), g(x) are increasing, f (0) = g (0) = 1, and f (x) is decreasing while g (x) is increasing.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
