Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_6287

Abstract:
arXiv:1507.02437v1 [cs.PL] 9 Jul 2015  Extending Basic Block Versioning with Typed Object Shapes Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert  Marc Feeley  DIRO, Université de Montréal, Quebec, Canada chevalma@iro.umontreal.ca  DIRO, Université de Montréal, Quebec, Canada feeley@iro.umontreal.ca  Categories and Subject Descriptors D.3.4 [Programming Languages]: Processors—compilers, optimization, code generation, run-time environments  Basic Block Versioning (BBV) [7] is a Just-In-Time (JIT) compilation strategy which allows rapid and effective generation of type-specialized machine code without a separate type analysis pass or complex speculative optimization and deoptimization strategies (Section 2.4). However, BBV, as previously introduced, is inefficient in its handling of object property types. The first contribution of this paper is the extension of BBV with typed object shapes (Section 3.1), object descriptors which encode type information about object properties. Type meta-information associated with object properties then becomes available at property reads. This allows eliminating run-time type tests dependent on object property accesses. The target of method calls is also known in most cases. The second contribution of this paper is a further extension of BBV with shape propagation (Section 3.3), the propagation and specialization of code based on object shapes. This allows eliminating some redundant shape tests, making for more compact and more efficient machine code. Shape propagation also provides some basic aliasing information. Typed shapes and shape propagation were implemented in Higgs, a JIT compiler for JS (ECMAScript 5.1) built around BBV. A detailed evaluation of the performance implications is provided in Section 4. Empirical results across 26 benchmarks show that, on average, the techniques introduced eliminate 48% of type tests, reduce code size by 17% and reduce execution time by 25%.  Keywords Just-In-Time Compilation, Dynamic Language, Optimization, Object Oriented, JavaScript  Abstract Typical JavaScript (JS) programs feature a large number of object property accesses. Hence, fast property reads and writes are crucial for good performance. Unfortunately, many (often redundant) dynamic checks are implied in each property access and the semantic complexity of JS makes it difficult to optimize away these tests through program analysis. We introduce two techniques to effectively eliminate a large proportion of dynamic checks related to object property accesses. Typed shapes enable code specialization based on object property types without potentially complex and expensive analyses. Shape propagation allows the elimination of redundant shape checks in inline caches. These two techniques combine particularly well with Basic Block Versioning (BBV), but should be easily adaptable to tracing Just-In-Time (JIT) compilers and method JITs with type feedback. To assess the effectiveness of the techniques presented, we have implemented them in Higgs, a type-specializing JIT compiler for JS. The techniques are compared to a baseline using Polymorphic Inline Caches (PICs), as well as commercial JS implementations. Empirical results show that across the 26 benchmarks tested, these techniques eliminate on average 48% of type tests, reduce code size by 17% and reduce execution time by 25%. On several benchmarks, Higgs performs better than current production JS virtual machines.  1.  2.  Background  2.1  JavaScript Objects  JavaScript objects use a prototype-based inheritance model [15] inspired from Self [6]. Objects can dynamically grow, meaning that properties can be added to or deleted from an object at any time. The types of properties are not constrained, and properties can be redefined to have any type at any time. Semantically, JS objects can be thought of as behaving somewhat like hash tables, but the semantics of property accesses are complex. In JS, object properties can be plain values or accessor (getter/setter) methods which may produce side-effects when executed. Individual object properties can have read-only (constant) attribute flags set, which prevents their redefinition. When a property is not defined on an object, the lookup must traverse the prototype chain recursively. These factors mean that each JS property read or write implies multiple hidden dynamic tests. Ideally, most of these tests should be optimized away to maximize performance. Global variables in JS are stored on a first-class global object, which behaves like any other. Properties of the global object can thus also be defined to be read-only, or be accessor methods. Hence, optimizing global property accesses is also a complex problem. Since the global object is a singleton and typically large in size, modern JS engines such as Google’s V8 tend to implement it using a different strategy from regular objects.  Introduction  Typical JavaScript programs make heavy use of object property accesses. Unfortunately, the highly dynamic semantics of JS make optimization difficult (Section 2.1). Late binding, dynamic code loading and the eval construct make type analysis a hard problem. Having to merge values of multiple different types causes a loss of precision which is difficult to avoid, even in analyses with high context-sensitivity.  [Copyright notice will appear here once ’preprint’ option is removed.]  1  2015/7/10  Figure 1. Object shapes as part of a shape tree 2.2  Figure 2. Property read using a Polymorphic Inline Cache (PIC)  Object Shapes  JS objects can be thought of as behaving like hash maps associating property name strings to property values and attribute flags. However, implementing objects using hash maps is inefficient both in terms of memory usage and property access time. Doing so means that each object must store a name string, a value and attribute flags for each property. Furthermore, each property access must execute a costly hash table lookup which may involve repeated indirections. High-performance JS engines (V8, SpiderMonkey, etc.) rely on the concept of object shapes, also known as “hidden classes”. This approach aims to exploit the fact that programs typically create many objects with the same properties, that objects are usually initialized early in their lifetime, and that property deletions and additions after initialization are infrequent. Shapes are object layout descriptors. They are composed of shape nodes, with each shape node containing the name, memory offset and attribute flags for one property. All existing shape nodes are part of a global tree structure representing the order in which properties have been added to objects. Each object has a shape pointer which points to a shape node representing the last property added to the said object. All objects are initially created with no properties and begin their lifetime with the empty shape. Adding a property to an object updates its shape pointer. Figure 1 illustrates the shape nodes for three different JS object literals. All objects have a hidden proto property which stores a pointer to the prototype object. All three objects also share properties named x and y, hence, part of the shapes of these two objects are made of the same shape nodes. The last property added to object a is z, and so it has shape S1. The last property added to objects b and c is w, and so these have shape S2. 2.3  chine code takes the form of a cascade of shape test operations and is updated as new object shapes are encountered. PICs can be thought of as offloading the property lookup overhead to code generation time instead of execution time. Figure 2 illustrates a property read implemented using a PIC. Two shape tests match previously encountered object shapes. Each test, if it encounters a matching shape, triggers the execution of a load machine instruction which reads the property from the object at the correct memory offset. This memory offset is determined at code generation time based on the object’s shape, which tells us where each property is located. In the optimal case for a PIC, a property read can be as fast as one comparison and one load machine instruction. 2.4  Basic Block Versioning  Basic Block Versioning (BBV), as introduced by Chevalier-Boisvert and Feeley [7] and adapted to Scheme by Saleil and Feeley [22] is a simple JIT compilation technique resembling trace compilation. BBV generates efficient type-specialized code without the use of costly type inference analyses or profiling. Basic blocks are lazily cloned and specialized on-the-fly in a way that allows the compiler to accumulate type information while machine code is generated, without a separate type analysis pass. The accumulated information allows the removal of redundant type tests, particularly in performance-critical paths. BBV lets the execution of the program itself drive the generation of type-specialized code, and is able to avoid some of the precision limitations of traditional, conservative type analyses as well as avoiding the implementation complexity of speculative optimization techniques. BBV does not require the use of on-stack replacement or deoptimization. It is intended to generate type-specialized code at low overhead, without needing a fixed point type analysis pass, which makes it particularly attractive for baseline compilers. Higgs segregates values into a few categories based on type tags [12]. These categories are: 32-bit integers (int32)1 , 64bit floating point values (float64), miscellaneous JS constants (const), and four kinds of garbage-collected pointers inside the  Polymorphic Inline Caches  Object shapes solve the space efficiency problem, that is, they are more space efficient than using hash maps, since multiple objects with the same set of properties and initialization order can share the same shape. However, shapes, by themselves, do not make property accesses faster. Naively traversing the shape structure of an object on every property access is likely slower than implementing objects using hash maps. Polymorphic Inline Caches (PICs), pioneered in the implementation of the Self programming language [6, 14], are commonly used to accelerate property accesses. They are used by modern JS VMs such as V8 and SpiderMonkey. The core idea is to generate machine code on-the-fly to determine the shape of an object and generate an efficient dispatch at each property access site. This ma-  1 Note  that while according to the ES5 specification all JavaScript numbers are IEEE double-precision floating point values, high-performance JavaScript VMs typically attempt to represent small integer values using machine integers so as to improve performance by using lower latency integer arithmetic instructions. We have made the same design choice for Higgs.  2  2015/7/10  heap (string, object, array, closure). These type tags form a simple, first-degree notion of types that is used to drive code versioning. BBV, as introduced, deals only with function parameter and local variable types. It has no mechanism for handling object property types and global variable types. The current work extends BBV to include a more advanced notion of object types based on typed shapes, and enable type-specialization based on object property and global variable types.  3.  Typed Shapes  In this section we present the main contributions of this paper. 3.1  Typed Shapes and Property Types  Object shapes in other JS engines encode property names, slot indices and meta-information such as attribute flags (writable, enumerable, etc.). We extend shapes to also encode property types: this makes it possible for us to specialize code based on the types of property values. Testing the shape of an object once gives us the type of all its properties. Figure 3 shows the object shapes associated with three different JS object literals. Shape nodes are now annotated with type tags corresponding to property values. Objects b and c share the same property names, but the type of their y property differs. The property b.y is a string, whereas c.y has value null which has type tag const. Our definition of typed shapes is not recursive. Shapes corresponding to property values which are object references do not encode the shape of the object being referenced. This is because objects are mutable. Hence, if a.b is an object, its shape cannot be guaranteed to remain the same during the execution of a program, but objects will always remain objects, so the type tag of a.b will not change so long as this property is not overwritten. With typed shapes, property values can always be stored in an unboxed representation, thereby avoiding boxing and unboxing overhead. In the optimal case, properties can be read and written in a single machine instruction. In commercial JS engines such as V8, Floating Point (FP) values may be stored in boxed representations, but Higgs can store FP values inside objects without indirection. A further advantage is that the shape of an object can tell us whether or not the object has a prototype or not. This eliminates the need to perform a null check when going up the prototype chain during a property read. 3.2  Figure 4. Object shapes for global properties and functions  3.3  Shape Propagation  As described in Section 2.3, Polymorphic Inline Caches (PICs) are a lazily generated chain of dynamic tests to identify an object’s shape and quickly select a fast implementation of a property read or write. We extend upon this idea, combining it with BBV, so that code may be specialized based on the shape of an object. Shape tests which are normally part of PICs are used to identify and propagate the shape of objects. Propagating shapes allows eliminating redundant (repeated) shape tests, and other optimizations based on an object’s shape. For instance, if we know that two object references point to objects of different shapes, then we know that they cannot point to the same object. As shown in [7], most Static Single Assignment (SSA) values are monomorphic in terms of type tags. Few values are polymorphic. This remains true when shapes come into the picture. Most program points see only one shape for a given value. However, the objects which are polymorphic in shape are sometimes megamorphic. That is, one property access site can receive objects of a large number of different shapes. This can quickly lead to combinatorial explosions in the number of possible block versions. Versioning serves to propagate type information effectively. Code duplication is useful, so long as there is not too much of it. The cost of tracking all possible types of megamorphic SSA values is not worthwhile, since these values are fairly rare. Hence, we have taken the approach of limiting how many different shapes can be tracked for a given SSA value. The maxshapes parameter serves to prevent code size explosions, avoiding the situation where rare polymorphic values cause disproportional code size growth.  Method Identity and the Global Object  The property type information currently encoded in Higgs includes type tags, but also function pointers (function/method identity). Encoding function pointers makes it possible to know the identity of callees at call sites. This enables us to specialize call sites based on the callee. For instance, when the identity of a callee is known, passing unused argument values (such as the hidden this argument) can be avoided. Our approach uses a unified implementation for all objects, including the global object. Hence, in Higgs, global property accesses can be optimized using the same techniques as regular property accesses. This contrasts with V8, which uses a collection of individual mutable cells to implement its global object. Figure 4 illustrates the global object shape in relation to a snippet of code where a call to enable debug replaces an inactive implementation of the debug function by one which displays error messages. The enable debug function causes the global object to switch from shape G1 to G2. The global object shape encodes the identity of functions, meaning that for both calls to debug, we know that it must be a function and what its identity is.  3.4  Shape Flips  Overwriting an existing property value may cause an object to transition to a new shape if the type of the new value doesn’t match the type encoded in the object’s current shape. We call this a shape flip. For instance, if object c from Figure 3 was to have its y property overwritten with a string value (e.g. c.y = "bif"), then the shape of c, which was previously S3, would change to S2. Empirically, such shape flips are relatively rare (see Section 4.3). However, property writes still need to be guarded based on the type of the written value. Fortunately, most of these guards are redundant and can be safely eliminated because BBV is very  3  2015/7/10  Figure 3. Type meta-information on object shapes and property additions a.z = a.z + 1 // with "a" as deﬁned in Figure 3  effective at propagating value types, and so most value types are known when machine code is generated. Since most value types are known, and property reads tend to significantly outnumber property writes (see Section 4.3), the overhead of testing some value types before writing them is easily recouped by eliminating type tests after property reads. That is, the number of type tests eliminated after property reads vastly outnumbers the number of guards added before property writes. Changing an object’s shape can be done with little execution time overhead. Assuming that the new shape has been previously allocated and initialized, which is often the case, changing an object’s shape is only a matter of writing a new shape pointer on the object, which can be done in a single machine instruction.  Property read PIC Yes  shape(a) != S1  ...  No  tmp1 = read_at_oﬀset(o, OFS1)  Yes  type(tmp1) != int32  ...  No  tmp2 = add_int32(tmp1, 1) Yes  3.5  overﬂow?  Shape and Type Checks  With polymorphic inline caches, reading or writing to an object property implies first performing a number of dynamic checks to dispatch read or write operations based on the object shape (see section 2.3). Many JS primitives, including arithmetic operators, also perform dynamic dispatch based on value types. Figure 5 illustrates the operations involved in incrementing the value of an integer property on an object (a.z = a.z + 1) when using traditional PICs (without typed shapes). There are four dynamic checks. A first check is performed to dispatch based on the object shape when reading the property. A second check is performed to dispatch based on the type of the property’s value (which is int32 in this case). A third check is performed to verify that the result of the integer addition operation did not result in an integer overflow. Finally, a fourth dynamic check is performed when writing back the incremented value. This last check is necessary because the property read and property write PICs are distinct. Typed shapes and shape propagation produce more efficient code, as illustrated in Figure 6. The dynamic dispatch based on the property type is eliminated, because this type is encoded in the object’s shape, and is thus automatically known once the object’s shape has been tested. The dispatch based on the object’s shape when writing back the property is eliminated because the object’s shape was previously tested and this information is propagated to the write. There is no need to guard the type of tmp2 when writing the new property value because this type is deduced based on the type of tmp1.  Property write PIC  ...  No Yes  shape(a) != S1  ...  No  write_at_oﬀset(o, OFS1, tmp2)  Figure 5. Operations involved in a property read and write with traditional Polymorphic Inline Caches (PICs)  4.  Evaluation  4.1  Experimental Setup  We have tested an implementation of the Higgs JIT compiler implementing typed shapes and shape propagation on a total of 26 classic benchmarks from the SunSpider and V8 suites. One benchmark from the SunSpider suite and one from the V8 suite were not included in our tests because Higgs does not yet implement the required features. Benchmarks making use of regular expressions were discarded because unlike V8 and SpiderMonkey, Higgs does not implement JIT compilation of regular expressions, and neither does Truffle/JS [26, 27].  4  2015/7/10  a.z = a.z + 1 // with "a" as deﬁned in Figure 3 Yes  shape(a) != S1  benchmark partial-sums v8-raytrace cordic bitwise-and 3d-raytrace bits-in-byte nsieve-bits 3bits-byte nsieve deltablue fannkuch recursive splay nbody spectral-norm navier-stokes fasta 3d-morph binary-trees richards base64 crypto-sha1 crypto-md5 3d-cube v8-crypto earley-boyer mean  ...  No  tmp1 = read_at_oﬀset(o, OFS1)  tmp2 = add_int32(tmp1, 1) Yes  overﬂow?  ...  No  write_at_oﬀset(o, OFS1, tmp2)  Figure 6. Operations involved in a property read and write with typed shapes and shape propagation, starting with an object of unknown shape  To measure execution time separately from compilation time in a manner compatible with V8, SpiderMonkey, Truffle/JS and Higgs, we have modified benchmarks so that they could be run in a loop. A number of warmup iterations are first performed so as to trigger JIT compilation and optimization of code before timing runs take place. The number of warmup and timing iterations were scaled so that short-running benchmarks would execute for at least 1000ms in total during both warmup and timing. Unless otherwise specified, all benchmarks were run for at least 10 warmup iterations and 10 timing iterations. V8 version 3.29.66, SpiderMonkey version C40.0a1, Truffle/JS v0.5 and GCC version 4.7.3 were used for performance comparisons. Tests were executed on a system equipped with an Intel Core i7-4771 quad-core CPU with 8MB L3 cache and 16GB of RAM running Ubuntu Linux 12.04. Dynamic CPU frequency scaling was disabled. 4.2  untyped shapes 13 214 17 2 65 2 3 2 3 127 3 4 56 35 6 45 28 7 16 92 8 23 26 43 289 535 64.0  typed shapes 18 420 40 5 164 6 9 6 9 396 10 14 200 128 22 186 123 34 100 604 56 200 230 389 3881 32324 1522.1  ratio 1.4 2.0 2.4 2.5 2.5 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.7 4.1 4.4 4.9 6.2 6.6 7.0 8.7 8.8 9.0 13.4 60.4 4.5  Figure 7. Shape nodes created with and without typed shapes  4.3  Reads and Writes  For most benchmarks, less than 4% of total writes result in a shape flip, and in the worst case, just 17% of total writes do. Writes to the global object are more likely to result in a shape flip. This is because much of these writes are due to the initialization of global variables which originally had the undefined value. Such initial writes to the global object constitute a minority of total property writes. The benchmarks in our set perform between 1.4 and 567 property reads for every property write. Since property reads outnumber property writes and shape flips have relatively little overhead, our prediction was that the overhead of shape flips would be easily recouped by the reduction in type test provided by typed shapes. This prediction is confirmed by the results obtained. The richards benchmark, which has the highest relative occurrence of shape flips, is actually one of the benchmarks which obtain the most significant speedup from typed shapes (see Figure 13).  More Shape Nodes  Typed shapes create shape nodes for each possible type a property may have. This necessarily increases the number of shapes created over the course of a program’s execution (see Figure 7). Enabling typed shapes results in a 4.5x mean increase in the number of shapes created. The case of earley-boyer shows the most dramatic increase. This is due to global object properties being redefined late during the benchmark’s execution, which causes large sections of the shape tree corresponding to the global object to be regenerated. It may be possible to optimize shape tree transformations and avoid recreating all shapes descending from the redefined property shape, but as we will see in the next subsections, the increase in the number of shape nodes created does not cause performance problems. The peak memory usage of the Higgs process was measured with various configurations. With typed shapes and unlimited shape propagation (maxshapes=∞), process memory usage increases by 3.7% on average. The earley-boyer benchmark, despite the large increase in the number of shapes generated, has lower memory usage than the baseline without typed shapes. This is because shape nodes are relatively small and typed shapes allow a large reduction in generated machine code size, as shown in Figure 11.  4.4  Dynamic Tests  Encoding type tags in property shapes implies that property writes must be guarded with type tag checks. Figure 8 shows the number of executed property guards relative to the number of property writes and property reads. In most cases, property writes do not execute any guards. This is because with BBV, the type tag of values is known and does not need to be tested. There are rare cases, such as with earley-boyer, where the number of tag guards outnumber property writes. In this case, it is because this benchmark is the output to a Scheme-to-JS compiler, and creates highly polymorphic cons pairs with elements of many different types through a unique constructor function. Even in this case, however, the number of write guards is less than the number of property reads, suggesting that the additional cost paid when  5  2015/7/10  property writes  property reads  bitwise-and 3d-morph cordic nbody recursive 3d-raytrace crypto-md5 crypto-sha1 spectral-norm v8-crypto deltablue v8-raytrace base64 fannkuch navier-stokes nsieve nsieve-bits bits-in-byte 3bits-byte richards fasta 3d-cube partial-sums earley-boyer splay binary-trees geo mean  160% 140% 120% 100% 80% 60% 40% 20% 0%  Figure 8. Number of type tag guards relative to property writes and reads  100%  maxshapes=0  maxshapes=2  maxshapes=5  maxshapes=∞  80% 60% 40%  0%  bitwise-and nbody partial-sums richards deltablue v8-raytrace 3d-morph 3d-raytrace crypto-md5 binary-trees splay crypto-sha1 recursive earley-boyer base64 v8-crypto fasta 3d-cube cordic spectral-norm nsieve bits-in-byte 3bits-byte fannkuch nsieve-bits navier-stokes geo mean  20%  Figure 9. Number of type tests relative to inline cache baseline testing type tags before property writes will be offset by the savings of eliminating type tests after property reads. Figure 9 shows the total number of type tag tests (including guards on property writes) performed with different maxshapes parameter values relative to a baseline which uses traditional inline caches without typed shapes or shape propagation. The chart makes it clear that typed shapes can reduce the number of type tests very significantly. In the case of the bitwise-and microbenchmark, which operates entirely on two global variables, type tests are reduced by nearly 100%. On average, a reduction of 48% is obtained with maxshapes=2. Note that going from maxshapes=0 to higher values produces a slight reduction in type tests on some benchmarks. This is because enabling the propagation of shapes allows eliminating a null check while traversing the prototype chain, since the prototype link is itself represented as a typed property. The benchmarks which benefit  the most from this phenomenon are those which make heavy use of prototypal inheritance. Figure 10 illustrates the number of shape tests relative to a baseline using inline caches without typed shapes or shape propagation. Notably here, setting maxshapes=0 increases the number of shape tests in many cases, by 17% on average. This is because typed shapes result in the creation of more shape nodes, as shown in Figure 7. Hence, individual inline caches tend to produce longer chains of tests. Interestingly, setting maxshapes=2 produces a reduction in the number of shape tests in most cases (45% on average). This is because there are many instances where multiple property reads on the same object occur within a given function, and shape propagation can allow us to eliminate further shape tests after the first property access on an object.  6  2015/7/10  maxshapes=0  maxshapes=2  maxshapes=5  maxshapes=∞  bitwise-and nbody partial-sums 3d-morph fasta 3d-raytrace bits-in-byte 3bits-byte nsieve-bits nsieve navier-stokes splay v8-crypto fannkuch crypto-md5 v8-raytrace crypto-sha1 3d-cube richards cordic deltablue base64 spectral-norm recursive earley-boyer binary-trees geo mean  180% 160% 140% 120% 100% 80% 60% 40% 20% 0%  Figure 10. Number of shape tests relative to inline cache baseline 4.5  Function Calls  marks, but results in a performance degradation on the splay benchmark. The splay benchmark has a high degree of shape polymorphism, and illustrates the motivation for the maxshapes parameter. Unlimited shape propagation can result in code bloat in some cases (as illustrated in Figure 11) which may increase instruction cache misses and cause performance degradations. The bitwise-and microbenchmark, using only global variable accesses in a small loop with no shape polymorphism, is an ideal showcase for typed shapes and shape propagation. However, in the current implementation of Higgs, shape propagation produces significant performance gains on a minority of sizable benchmarks. We believe this is in large part because the current implementation cannot preserve known shapes across function calls. Overcoming this limitation is part of future work (see Section 5.2).  In the absence of typed shapes, Higgs does not know the identity of callees at most call sites. With typed shapes, on average, callee identity is known for 90% of calls. For most benchmarks, the identity is known for all calls. There are some exceptions because at present Higgs cannot specialize calls performed using apply or calls made using closures passed as function arguments. 4.6  Code Size  Figure 11 shows the effect of typed shapes with various maxshapes parameter values on machine code size. With maxshapes=0, typed shapes result in a smaller code size on every benchmark, with an average reduction of 17%. However, enabling shape propagation without a limit on the number of shapes propagated (maxshapes=∞) results in a code size increase in several cases, and a pathological code size blowup in the case of the splay benchmark. Setting maxshapes=2 yields a 17% average code size reduction and avoids the pathological code size blowup on the splay benchmark. 4.7  4.9  The performance of Higgs (maxshapes=2) was compared with that of two configurations of Google’s V8 JIT compiler (see Figure 14). The first configuration uses only the V8 baseline JIT (with Crankshaft disabled). The second configuration uses Crankshaft, but disables inlining to make its capabilities more comparable to that of Higgs. With the addition of typed shapes and shape propagation, Higgs easily outperforms the V8 baseline compiler on all but one out of 26 benchmarks, with speedups of up to 682%. This suggests that the quality of the code generated by Higgs is much superior to the V8 baseline compiler. The large speedups obtained on bitwise-and show that Higgs has much faster global variable accesses than the V8 baseline compiler. Higgs lags behind Crankshaft without inlining, with Crankshaft performing 49% better on average. This is not surprising since Crankshaft is able to use type feedback and sophisticated analyses to optimize code at a much higher level than that of Higgs. Higgs is also at a disadvantage because it does not perform efficient register allocation for floating-point values, instead shuffling them in and out of general-purpose registers. Furthermore, we surmise based on the performance obtained on the recursive microbenchmark that Crankshaft has better optimized function calls than Higgs. This may have a significant performance impact on several benchmarks.  Compilation time  Typed shapes result in the allocation and manipulation of more shape nodes, which can add compilation-time overhead. The techniques presented in this paper may also result in the generation of more machine code, which can also increase compilation times. The effect of typed shapes and shape propagation on compilation time are explored in Figure 12. The splay benchmark, which exhibits a pathological code size blowup when shape propagation is left unlimited (maxshapes=∞), also shows a compilation time blowup. However, once again, setting maxshapes=2 resolves the issue. With maxshapes=2, the mean compilation time increase is just 1%, as upposed to 20% with maxshapes=∞. 4.8  Comparison with V8  Execution Time  Figure 13 shows the execution time with different maxshapes parameter values relative to a baseline using inline caches only. Setting maxshapes=0 produces an average execution time reduction of 20%, compared to 25% when maxshapes=2. Setting maxshapes to higher values produces speedups on most bench-  7  2015/7/10  maxshapes=0  200%  maxshapes=2  maxshapes=5  maxshapes=∞  150% 100%  0%  earley-boyer v8-raytrace deltablue v8-crypto crypto-md5 3d-raytrace richards crypto-sha1 nbody cordic 3d-cube navier-stokes base64 spectral-norm 3d-morph recursive binary-trees fannkuch fasta nsieve-bits partial-sums nsieve bits-in-byte 3bits-byte bitwise-and splay geo mean  50%  Figure 11. Code size relative to inline cache baseline  1200%  maxshapes=0  maxshapes=2  maxshapes=5  maxshapes=∞  1000% 800% 600% 400% 0%  earley-boyer v8-crypto navier-stokes deltablue 3d-raytrace nbody cordic 3d-cube richards bits-in-byte crypto-sha1 base64 nsieve-bits 3bits-byte spectral-norm recursive nsieve fannkuch 3d-morph partial-sums crypto-md5 bitwise-and binary-trees fasta v8-raytrace splay geo mean  200%  Figure 12. Compilation time relative to inline cache baseline The performance of Higgs is close to that of IonMonkey on several benchmarks, even outperforming it in a few cases. We believe that implementing a faster calling convention for Higgs, as well as other improvements outlined in Section 5.2, should make the performance of Higgs even more competitive.  Optimizing the calling convention used by Higgs is part of future work. 4.10  Comparison with SpiderMonkey  The execution time performance of Higgs was also compared to that of the SpiderMonkey baseline compiler and the IonMonkey optimizing JIT (see Figure 15). The IonMonkey configuration tested has inlining, loop unrolling and loop invariant code motion disabled to make its capabilities more comparable to that of Higgs. Higgs outperforms the SpiderMonkey baseline compiler by a wide margin, with speedups of up to 1357%. This confirms that in terms of execution time, Higgs performs significantly better than a typical baseline compiler. Higgs outperforms both Crankshaft and IonMonkey on bitwise-and, which again confirms that Higgs has faster global variable access, thanks to typed shapes and shape propagation.  4.11  Comparison with Truffle/JS  Since Truffle has longer warmup times than other systems, we have compared the performance of Higgs to that of Truffle with 10 and 100 warmup iterations. Higgs performs better than Truffle with 100 warmup iterations on 13 out of 26 benchmarks and yields an average speedup of 16%. Truffle has two main performance advantages over Higgs. The first is that after warmup, Truffle is able to perform deep inlining, as illustrated by the v8-raytrace benchmark. The second is that Truffle has sophisticated analyses which Higgs does not have. For  8  2015/7/10  maxshapes=0  120%  maxshapes=2  maxshapes=5  maxshapes=∞  100% 80% 60% 40% 0%  bitwise-and richards deltablue nbody recursive binary-trees crypto-md5 crypto-sha1 v8-raytrace base64 3d-raytrace earley-boyer spectral-norm cordic partial-sums 3d-morph v8-crypto fasta bits-in-byte 3d-cube fannkuch 3bits-byte navier-stokes nsieve-bits nsieve splay geo mean  20%  Figure 13. Execution time relative to inline cache baseline (lower is better)  V8 no inlining  1000%  V8 baseline  10%  earley-boyer fasta 3d-cube fannkuch cordic base64 recursive v8-crypto 3d-raytrace binary-trees v8-raytrace navier-stokes spectral-norm nsieve deltablue 3bits-byte crypto-md5 crypto-sha1 nsieve-bits richards partial-sums splay bits-in-byte 3d-morph bitwise-and nbody geo mean  100%  Figure 14. Execution time relative to V8 baseline and V8 without inlining (log scale, bars above 100% favor Higgs) that effectively prevents code size explosions. It is possible to imagine pathological cases where an immense blowup in the number of object shapes might occur, and our approach may lead to performance degradations. The results obtained, however, suggest that such pathological cases are uncommon. Furthermore, it is not difficult to imagine a mechanism to limit performance degradations on such edge cases, by simply disabling the type-specialization of shapes for specific shape subtrees. Hence, we stand by the proposition that typed shapes offer attractive performance advantages. At this point in time, Higgs lacks several crucial optimizations which would be needed were it to become a viable commercial compiler and directly compete against V8, SpiderMonkey and others. Notably, Higgs lacks function inlining, loop unrolling, loop invariant code motion, and automatic vectorization. Higgs also has relatively slow compile times since it is written in a garbage col-  instance, the recorded time for the 3bits-byte microbenchmark is zero, suggesting that Truffle was able to entirely eliminate the computation performed as its output is never used. Doing this requires a side-effect analysis which can cope with the semantic complexities of JavaScript. It is interesting to note that Higgs performs much better on the bitwise-and microbenchmark, indicating that Higgs has faster global variable accesses than Truffle/JS, SpiderMonkey and V8. Higgs also outperforms Truffle/JS on recursive, which takes advantage of known callee identities provided by typed shapes, as well as binary-trees, which makes heavy use of objects.  5.  Limitations and Future Work  5.1  Limitations  We have shown that typed shapes and shape propagation yield significant speedups on our benchmark set, and outlined a mechanism  9  2015/7/10  SM no inlining  10000%  SM baseline  1000%  10%  3d-morph partial-sums 3d-cube fasta earley-boyer 3d-raytrace base64 navier-stokes splay spectral-norm fannkuch v8-crypto cordic nsieve nsieve-bits recursive 3bits-byte deltablue crypto-sha1 crypto-md5 richards nbody bits-in-byte v8-raytrace binary-trees bitwise-and geo mean  100%  Figure 15. Speed relative to SpiderMonkey baseline and SpiderMonkey without inlining (log scale, bars above 100% favor Higgs)  Truffle 100 warmup itrs  10000%  Truffle 10 warmup itrs  1000%  10%  3bits-byte navier-stokes fannkuch nsieve-bits 3d-morph splay nsieve fasta partial-sums recursive binary-trees bitwise-and earley-boyer 3d-cube v8-crypto v8-raytrace cordic nbody base64 spectral-norm 3d-raytrace crypto-sha1 bits-in-byte crypto-md5 richards deltablue geo mean  100%  Figure 16. Speed relative to Truffle/JS (log scale, bars above 100% favor Higgs) lected programming language and has not been fine-tuned for fast compilation. Higgs is a one-PhD-student effort, whereas V8 and TM have large teams of expert software engineers to draw on. They can optimize their implementation in ways we simply cannot. We believe that this paper offers a convincing demonstration that typed shapes and shape propagation offer competitive performance advantages in the realm of optimizing object property accesses. The techniques outlined in this paper could benefit V8, SpiderMonkey and many other JIT compilers for object-oriented dynamic languages. 5.2  useful for global variables which are never mutated and effectively constant. An important limitation of the shape propagation approach as presented in this paper is that it is intraprocedural only. Known shapes are now propagated to callees, and furthermore, known shape information is lost whenever a function call is made. This is because function calls are currently treated as black boxes, and it is not guaranteed that callees will not change the shape of objects used in the caller. We believe it may be interesting to investigate interprocedural basic block versioning. Namely, it may be useful to specialize function entry points so that known types can be propagated from callers to callees. This would contribute to eliminating more type tests and shape tests. Typed shapes will make the implementation of interprocedural BBV easier and more efficient, since they provide precise information about callee identities.  Future Work  Work by Costa, Alves et al. [23] has shown that significant speedups can be obtained by specializing JS code based on function argument values, which are often constant. In a similar vein, typed shapes could be extended to allow for the direct encoding of constant values into object shapes. This would likely be particularly  10  2015/7/10  Trace compilation, originally introduced by the Dynamo [2] native code optimization system, and later applied to JIT compilation in HotpathVM [9] aims to record long sequences of instructions executed inside hot loops. Such linear sequences of instructions often make optimization simpler. Type information can be accumulated along traces and used to specialize code and remove type tests [8], overflow checks [24] or unnecessary allocations [3]. The TraceMonkey tracing JIT compiler for JS can specialize traces based on types [8]. It can also guard based on object shapes and eliminate some shape dispatch overhead inside traces, similarly to the shape propagation discussed in this paper. It does not, however specialize code based on property types. Trace compilation [4] and meta-tracing are an active area of research [5] in the realm of dynamic language optimization. Most tracing JIT compilers for languages which have some concept of objects, tuples or records could likely benefit from the approaches discussed in this paper. Facebook’s HipHop VM for PHP [1] uses an approach called Tracelet specialization which has many similarities with BBV. Seeing that PHP is an object-oriented dynamic language and that HipHop VM already specializes code using type guards, it seems this system could likely benefit from typed shapes and shape propagation. Grimmer, Matthias et al. [11] implemented an interpreter which can access C structs and arrays as JS objects at better speeds than native JS objects. This is useful when interfacing with C, but likely impractical as a drop-in replacement for JS objects. The upcoming ECMAScript 6 specification [16] will include typed arrays, which are arrays constrained to contain uniformly typed elements (for example, 8-bit signed integer arrays). There is a proposal for the inclusion of typed objects (also known as ”struct types”) in ECMAScript 7, a future revision of the JS specification. These are objects using pre-declared memory layouts with with type-annotated fields, much in the way one would declare a struct in C. One of the stated goals is to improve optimization opportunities for JIT compilers [21]. The work presented in this paper aims to bring much of the performance advantages of typed objects without requiring the programmer to declare explicit type annotations or fixed object layouts.  Having information about callee identities should also make it possible to implement a rudimentary system to assess whether or not callees modify object shapes or not. Having a way to guarantee that a callee will not cause any object to change shape makes it possible to avoid discarding shape information at call sites, thereby improving the effectiveness of shape propagation. Another inefficiency which may be useful to fix is the inefficient calling convention used by Higgs. Arguments are currently passed through the stack. Passing arguments directly in registers would make function calls significantly faster, making the performance of Higgs more competitive.  6.  Related Work  Polymorphic inline caches were originally introduced in literature discussing the efficient implementation of the Self programming language [6, 14]. Self did not use typed shapes exactly as discussed in this paper, but instead a concept of maps which grouped objects cloned from the same prototype. These served essentially the same function as shapes, reducing memory usage overhead and storing metadata relating to properties. Commercial JS implementations such as Google’s V8, Mozilla’s SpiderMonkey and Apple’s SquirrelFish all make use of polymorphic inline caches to speed up property accesses. These also make use of either object shapes or something resembling maps. Oracle’s Truffle framework for the implementation of dynamic languages [26, 27] uses a chaining of dynamic tests equivalent to polymorphic inline caches to improve performance. The Truffle object storage model [25] describes a typical implementation of an object system where each object contains a pointer to its shape, which describes the layout of the object (property locations) and property attribute metadata. Property additions cause shape transitions. Type tag information is stored in shapes and properties are unboxed. An important difference with our approach is that Truffle only allows for acyclic property type transitions, that is transition to wider types in the type hierarchy. Typed shapes allow objects to switch between different shapes so that property values are always unboxed. Several whole-program type analyses for JS were developed [17– 19]. These analyses are generally considered too expensive to use in a JIT compiler. They also tend to suffer from precision limitations when dealing with object types. It is often difficult, for instance, to prove that a specific property of an object must be initialized at a given program point. Not being able to prove this means that every property access must assume the property could take the undefined value, which pollutes analysis results. The work done by Kedlaya, Roesch et al. [20] shows strategies for improving the precision of type analyses by combining them with type feedback and profiling. This strategy shows promise, but does not explicitly deal with object shapes and property types. Work has also been done on a flow-sensitive alias analysis for dynamic languages [10]. This analysis tries to strike a balance between precision and speed, it is likely too expensive for use in JIT compilers, however. Work done by Brian Hackett et al. at Mozilla resulted in an interprocedural hybrid type analysis for JS suitable for use in production JIT compilers [13]. This approach has a notion of object types segregating objects by prototype, and tries to bound the possible types a given property associated with a given object type may have. The Mozilla approach does not always guarantee that a given property has a given type, and so often cannot unbox property values. It is also limited when it comes to proving that properties must exist, relying on a supplemental analysis which examines constructor function bodies to try and prove initialization. The approach we present is simpler and potentially more precise.  7.  Conclusion  We have described two techniques to effectively specialize code based on object and property types. Typed shapes, an extension to the familiar object shapes used in most commercial JavaScript engines, enables us to extract property type information on property reads. Shape propagation allows us to propagate object shapes as code is generated, reducing the overhead of Polymorphic Inline Caches (PICs). Across the 26 benchmarks tested, these techniques eliminate on average 48% of type tests and 45% of shape tests. Code size is reduced by 17% and execution time by 25%. Our results also show that Higgs has faster global variable accesses than Truffle/JS, SpiderMonkey and V8, likely because Higgs uses typed shapes to manipulate the global object as any other object, and this provides excellent performance. The techniques presented are simple to implement and combine particularly well with a compiler architecture based on Basic Block Versioning (BBV), but should be easily adaptable to compilers based on trace compilation or method JITs with type feedback. An unseen benefit of shape propagation is that it provides aliasing information, which may be very useful for many kinds of optimizations beyond the scope of this publication.  11  2015/7/10  Higgs is open source and the code used in preparing this publication is available on GitHub2 .  [13] Brian Hackett and Shu-yu Guo. Fast and precise hybrid type inference for JavaScript. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGPLAN conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), pages 239–250. ACM New York, June 2012. [14] Urs Hölzle, Craig Chambers, and David Ungar. Optimizing dynamically-typed object-oriented languages with polymorphic inline caches. In Proceedings of the European Conference on ObjectOriented Programming, ECOOP ’91, pages 21–38, London, UK, UK, 1991. Springer-Verlag. [15] ECMA International. ECMA-262: ECMAScript Language Specification. European Association for Standardizing Information and Communication Systems (ECMA), Geneva, Switzerland, fifth edition, 2009. [16] ECMA International. ECMA-262: Draft ECMAScript Language Specification. European Association for Standardizing Information and Communication Systems (ECMA), Geneva, Switzerland, sixth edition, 2015.  Acknowledgments Special thanks go to Laurie Hendren, Erick Lavoie, Vincent Foley, Paul Khuong, Tommy Everett, Brett Fraley and all those who have contributed to the development of Higgs. This work was supported, in part, by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and Mozilla Corporation.  References [1] Keith Adams, Jason Evans, Bertrand Maher, Guilherme Ottoni, Andrew Paroski, Brett Simmers, Edwin Smith, and Owen Yamauchi. The hiphop virtual machine. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Object Oriented Programming Systems Languages & Applications (OOPSLA), pages 777–790. ACM New York, 2014.  [17] Simon Holm Jensen, Anders Møller, and Peter Thiemann. Type analysis for JavaScript. In Proceedings of the 16th International Symposium on Static Analysis (SAS), pages 238–255. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009. [18] Simon Holm Jensen, Anders Møller, and Peter Thiemann. Interprocedural analysis with lazy propagation. In Proceedings 17th International Static Analysis Symposium (SAS). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, September 2010. [19] Vineeth Kashyap, John Sarracino, John Wagner, Ben Wiedermann, and Ben Hardekopf. Type refinement for static analysis of JavaScript. In Proceedings of the 2013 Dynamic Languages Symposium (DLS. ACM New York, 2013. [20] Madhukar N. Kedlaya, Jared Roesch, Behnam Robatmili, Mehrdad Reshadi, and Ben Hardekopf. Improved type specialization for dynamic scripting languages. SIGPLAN Not., 49(2):37–48, October 2013. [21] Nicholas D. Matsakis, David Herman, and Dmitry Lomov. Typed objects in javascript. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Symposium on Dynamic Languages, DLS ’14, pages 125–134, New York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM. [22] Baptiste Saieil and Marc Feeley. Code versioning and extremely lazy compilation of scheme. In Scheme and Functional Programming Workshop, 2014. [23] Henrique Nazare Santos, Pericles Alves, Igor Costa, and Fernando Magno Quintao Pereira. Just-in-time value specialization. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (CGO), CGO ’13, pages 1–11, Washington, DC, USA, 2013. IEEE Computer Society.  [2] V. Bala, E. Duesterwald, and S. Banerjia. Dynamo: a transparent dynamic optimization system. In Proceedings of the 2000 conference on Programming, pages 1–12. ACM New York, 2000. [3] Carl Friedrich Bolz, Antonio Cuni, Maciej FijaBkowski, Michael Leuschel, Samuele Pedroni, and Armin Rigo. Allocation removal by partial evaluation in a tracing jit. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGPLAN workshop on Partial Evaluation and Program Manipulation (PEPM), pages 43–52. ACM New York, 2011. [4] Carl Friedrich Bolz, Antonio Cuni, Maciej Fijalkowski, and Armin Rigo. Tracing the meta-level: Pypy’s tracing jit compiler. In Proceedings of the 4th workshop on the Implementation, Compilation, Optimization of Object-Oriented Languages and Programming Systems, pages 18–25. ACM, 2009. [5] Carl Friedrich Bolz, Tobias Pape, Jeremy Siek, and Sam TobinHochstadt. Meta-tracing makes a fast Racket. Workshop on Dynamic Languages and Applications, 2014. [6] C. Chambers, D. Ungar, and E. Lee. An efficient implementation of Self a dynamically-typed object-oriented language based on prototypes. SIGPLAN Not., 24(10):49–70, September 1989. [7] Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert and Marc Feeley. Simple and effective type check removal through lazy basic block versioning. In Proceedings of the 2015 European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming (ECOOP). LIPIcs, 2015. http://arxiv.org/abs/1411. 0352. [8] Andreas Gal, Brendan Eich, Mike Shaver, David Anderson, David Mandelin, Mohammad R. Haghighat, Blake Kaplan, Graydon Hoare, Boris Zbarsky, Jason Orendorff, Jesse Ruderman, Edwin W. Smith, Rick Reitmaier, Michael Bebenita, Mason Chang, and Michael Franz. Trace-based just-in-time type specialization for dynamic languages. SIGPLAN Not., 44(6):465–478, June 2009.  [24] Rodrigo Sol, Christophe Guillon, FernandoMagno Quinto Pereira, and Mariza A.S. Bigonha. Dynamic elimination of overflow tests in a trace compiler. In Jens Knoop, editor, Proceedings of the 2011 international conference on Compiler Construction (CC), pages 2–21. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011. [25] Andreas Wöß, Christian Wirth, Daniele Bonetta, Chris Seaton, Christian Humer, and Hanspeter Mössenböck. An object storage model for the truffle language implementation framework. In Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on Principles and Practices of Programming on the Java Platform: Virtual Machines, Languages, and Tools, pages 133–144, New York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM. [26] Thomas Würthinger, Christian Wimmer, Andreas Wöß, Lukas Stadler, Gilles Duboscq, Christian Humer, Gregor Richards, Doug Simon, and Mario Wolczko. One VM to rule them all. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM International Symposium on New Ideas, New Paradigms, and Reflections on Programming & Software, Onward! 2013, pages 187–204. ACM New York, 2013. [27] Thomas Würthinger, Andreas Wöß, Lukas Stadler, Gilles Duboscq, Doug Simon, and Christian Wimmer. Self-optimizing ast interpreters. In Proceedings of the 2012 Dynamic Language Symposium (DLS), pages 73–82. ACM New York, 2012.  [9] Andreas Gal, Christian W. Probst, and Michael Franz. HotpathVM: an effective jit compiler for resource-constrained devices. In Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on Virtual Execution Environments (VEE), pages 144–153. ACM New York, 2006. [10] Michael Gorbovitski, Yanhong A. Liu, Scott D. Stoller, Tom Rothamel, and Tuncay K. Tekle. Alias analysis for optimization of dynamic languages. In Proceedings of the 6th Symposium on Dynamic Languages, DLS ’10, pages 27–42, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM. [11] Matthias Grimmer, Thomas Würthinger, Andreas Wöß, and Hanspeter Mössenböck. An efficient approach for accessing C data structures from javascript. In Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Implementation, Compilation, Optimization of Object-Oriented Languages, Programs and Systems PLE, ICOOOLPS ’14, pages 1:1–1:4, New York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM. [12] David Gudeman. Representing type information in dynamically typed languages, 1993. 2 https://github.com/higgsjs/Higgs/tree/dls2015  12  2015/7/10

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
