Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_68

Abstract:
Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript Technical Report Matthias Keil and Peter Thiemann University of Freiburg Freiburg, Germany {keilr,thiemann}@informatik.uni-freiburg.de  arXiv:1612.00669v2 [cs.PL] 17 Jan 2017  Abstract Today’s JavaScript applications are composed of scripts from different origins that are loaded at run time. As not all of these origins are equally trusted, the execution of these scripts should be isolated from one another. However, some scripts must access the application state and some may be allowed to change it, while preserving the confidentiality and integrity constraints of the application. This paper presents design and implementation of DecentJS, a language-embedded sandbox for full JavaScript. It enables scripts to run in a configurable degree of isolation with fine-grained access control. It provides a transactional scope in which effects are logged for review by the access control policy. After inspection of the log, effects can be committed to the application state or rolled back. The implementation relies on JavaScript proxies to guarantee full interposition for the full language and for all code, including dynamically loaded scripts and code injected via eval. Its only restriction is that scripts must be compliant with JavaScript’s strict mode. 1998 ACM Subject Classification D.4.6 Security and Protection Keywords and phrases JavaScript, Sandbox, Proxy  1  Introduction  JavaScript is used by 93.1%1 of all the websites. Most of them rely on third-party libraries for connecting to social networks, feature extensions, or advertisement. Some of these libraries are packaged with the application, but others are loaded at run time from origins of different trustworthiness, sometimes depending on user input. To compensate for different levels of trust, the execution of dynamically loaded code should be isolated from the application state. Today’s state of the art in securing JavaScript applications that include code from different origins is an all-or-nothing choice. Browsers apply protection mechanisms, such as the same-origin policy [33] or the signed script policy [36], so that scripts either run in isolation or gain full access. While script isolation guarantees noninterference with the working of the application as well as preservation of data integrity and confidentiality, there are scripts that must have access to part of the application state to function meaningfully. As all included scripts run with the same authority, the application script cannot exert fine-grained control over the use of data by an included script. Thus, managing untrusted JavaScript code has become one of the key challenges of present research on JavaScript [2, 15, 5, 6, 32, 25, 30, 24, 23, 12]. Existing approaches are either based on restricting JavaScript code to a statically verifiable language subset (e.g.,  1  according to http://w3techs.com/, status as of March 2016 © Matthias Keil and Peter Thiemann; licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany  2  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  Facebook’s FBJS [8] or Yahoo’s ADsafe [1]), on enforcing an execution model that only forwards selected resources into an otherwise isolated compartment by filtering and rewriting like Google’s Caja project [11], or on implementing monitoring facilities inside the JavaScript engine [32]. However, these approaches have known deficiencies: the first two need to restrict usage of JavaScript’s dynamic features, they do not apply to code generated at run time, and they require extra maintenance efforts because their analysis and transformation needs to be kept in sync with the evolution of the language. Implementing monitoring in the JavaScript engine is fragile and incomplete: while efficient, such a solution only works for one engine and it is hard to maintain due to the high activity in engine development and optimization.  Contributions We present the design and implementation of DecentJS, a sandbox for JavaScript which enforces noninterference (integrity and confidentiality) by run-time monitoring. Its design is inspired by revocable references [39, 26] and SpiderMonkey’s compartment concept [41]. Compartments create a separate memory heap for each website, a technique initially introduced to optimize garbage collection. All objects created by a website are only allowed to touch objects in the same compartment. Proxies are the only objects that can cross the compartment boundaries. They are used as cross compartment wrappers to make objects accessible in other compartments. DecentJS adapts SpiderMonkey’s compartment concept. Each sandbox implements a fresh scope to run code in isolation to the application state. Proxies implement a membrane [39, 26] to guarantee full interposition and to make objects accessible inside of a sandbox.  Outline of this Paper The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces DecentJS’s facilities from a programmer’s point of view. Section 3 recalls proxies and membranes from related work and explains the principles underlying the implementation. Section 4 discusses DecentJS’s limitations and Section 5 reports our experiences from applying sandboxing to a set of benchmark programs. Finally, Section 6 concludes. Appendix A presents an example demonstrating the sandbox hosting a third-party library. Appendix B shows some example scenarios that already use the implemented system. Appendix C shows the operational semantics of a core calculus with sandboxing. Appendix D states some technical results. Appendix E discusses related work and Appendix ?? reports our experiences from applying sandboxing to a set of benchmark programs.  2  Transaction-based Sandboxing: A Primer  This section introduces transaction-based sandboxing and shows a series of examples that explains how sandboxing works. Transactional sandboxing is inspired by the idea of transaction processing in database systems [43] and transactional memory [35]. Each sandbox implements a transactional scope the content of which can be examined, committed, or rolled back. Central to our sandbox is the implementation of a membrane on values that cross the sandbox boundary. The membrane supplies effect monitoring and guarantees noninterference. Moreover, it features identity preservation and handles shadow objects. Shadow objects allow sandbox-internal modifications of objects without effecting there origins. The modified version  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  function Node (value, left, right) { this.value = value; this.left = left; this.right = right; } Node.prototype.toString = function () { return (this.left?this.left + ", ":"") + this.value +(this.right?", "+this.right:""); } function heightOf (node) { return Math.max(((node.left)?heightOf(node.left)+1:0), ((node.right)?heightOf(node. right)+1:0)); } function setValue (node) { if (node) { node.value=heightOf(node); setValue(node.left); setValue(node.right); } }  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18  Figure 1 Implementation of Node. Each node object consists of a value field, a left node, and a right node. Its prototype provides a toString method that returns a string representation. Function heightOf computes the height of a node and function setValue replaces the value field of a node by its height, recursively.  is only visible inside of the sandbox and different sandbox environments may manipulate the same object. Sandboxing provides transactions, a unit of effects that represent the set of modifications (write effects) on its membrane. Effects enable to check for conflicts and differences, to rollback particular modifications, or to commit a modification to its origin. The implementation of the system is available on the web2 .  2.1  Cross-Sandbox Access  We consider operations on binary trees as defined by Node in Figure 1 along with some auxiliary functions. As an example, we perform operations on a tree consisting of one node and two leaves. All value fields are initially 0. 19  var root = new Node(0, new Node(0), new Node(0)); Next, we create a new empty sandbox by calling the constructor Sandbox. Its first parameter acts as the global object of the sandbox environment. It is wrapped in a proxy to mediate all accesses and it is placed on top of the scope chain for code executing inside the sandbox. The second parameter is a configuration object. A sandbox is a first class value that can be used for several executions.  20  var sbx = new Sandbox(this, {/∗ some parameters ∗/});  2  https://github.com/keil/DecentJS  3  4  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  One use of a sandbox is to wrap invocations of function objects. To this end, the sandbox API provides methods call, apply, and bind analogous to methods from Function.prototype. For example, we may call setValue on root inside of sbx. 21  sbx.call(setValue, this, root); The first argument of call is a function object that is decompiled and redefined inside the sandbox. This step erases the function’s free variable bindings and builds a new closure relative to the sandbox’s global object. The second argument, the receiver object of the call, as well as the actual arguments of the call are wrapped in proxies to make these objects accessible inside of the sandbox. The wrapper proxies mediate access to their target objects outside the sandbox. Reads are forwarded to the target unless there are local modifications. The return values are wrapped in proxies, again. Writes produce a shadow value (cf. Section 3.2) that represents the sandbox-internal modification of an object. Initially, this modification is only visible to reads inside the sandbox. Native objects, like the Math object in line 10, are also wrapped in a proxy, but their methods cannot be decompiled because there exists no string representation. Thus, native methods must either be trusted or forbidden. Fortunately, most native methods do not have side effects, so we chose to trust them. Given all the wrapping and sandboxing, the call in line 21 did not modify the root object:  22  root.toString(); // returns 0, 0, 0 But calling toString inside the sandbox shows the effect.  23  sbx.call(root.toString, root); // return 0, 1, 0  2.2  Effect Monitoring  During execution, each sandbox records the effects on objects that cross the sandbox membrane. The resulting lists of effect objects are accessible through sbx.effects, sbx.readeffects, and sbx.writeeffects which contain all effects, read effects, and write effects, respectively. All three lists offer query methods to select the effects of a particular object. 24 25 26 27  sbx.call(heightOf, this, root); var rects = sbx.effectsOf(this); print(";;; Effects of this"); rects.foreach(function(i, e) {print(e)}); The code snippet above prints a list of all effects performed on this, the global object, by executing the heightOf function on root. The output shows the resulting accesses to heightOf and Math.  28 29 30 31 32 33  ;;; Effects of this (1425301383541) (1425301383541) (1425301383543) (1425301383543) ...  has [name=heightOf] get [name=heightOf] has [name=Math] get [name=Math]  The first column shows a timestamp, the second shows the name of the effect, and the last column shows the name of the requested parameter. The list does not contain write accesses to this. But there are write effects to value from the previous invocation of setValue.  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  34 35 36  37 38  var wectso = sbx.writeeffectsOf(root); print(";;; Write Effects of root"); wectso.foreach(function(i, e) {print(e)}); ;;; Write Effects of root (1425301634992) set [name=value]  2.3  Inspecting a Sandbox  The state inside and outside of a sandbox may diverge for different reasons. We distinguish changes, differences, and conflicts. A change indicates if the sandbox-internal value has been changed with respect to the outside value. A difference indicates if the outside value has been modified after the sandbox has concluded. For example, a difference to the previous execution of setValue arises if we replace the left leaf element by a new subtree of height 1 outside of the sandbox. 39  root.left = new Node(new Node(0), new Node(0)); Changes and differences can be examined using an API that is very similar to the effect API. There are flags to check whether a sandbox has changes or differences as well as iterators over them. A conflict arises in the comparison between different sandboxes. Two sandbox environments are in conflict if at least one sandbox modifies a value that is accessed by the other sandbox later on. We consider only Read-After-Write and Write-After-Write conflicts. To demonstrate conflicts, we define a function appendRight, which adds a new subtree on the right.  40 41 42  function appendRight (node) { node.right = Node(’a’, Node(’b’), Node(’c’)); } To recapitulate, the global root is still unmodified and prints 0,0,0,0,0, whereas the root in sbx prints 0,0,0,1,0. Now, let’s execute appendRight in a new sandbox sbx2.  43 44  var sbx2 = new Sandbox(this, {/∗ some parameters ∗/}); sbx2.call(appendRight, this, root); Calling toString in sbx2 prints 0,0,0,0,b,a,c. However, the sandboxes are not in conflict, as the following command show.  45  sbx.inConflictWith(sbx2); // returns false While both sandboxes manipulate root, they manipulate different fields. sbx recalculates the field value, whereas sbx2 replaces the field right. Neither reads data that has previously been written by the other sandbox. However, this situation changes if we call setValue again, which also modifies right.  46 47 48  sbx.call(setValue, this, root); var cofts = sbx.conflictsWith(sbx2); // returns a list of conflicts cofts.foreach(function(i, e) {print(e)}); It documents a read-after-write conflict:  1  Confict: (1425303937853) get [name=right]@SBX001 − (1425303937855) set [name= right]@SBX002  5  6  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  2.4  Transaction Processing  The commit operation applies select effects from a sandbox to its target. Effects may be committed one at a time by calling commit on each effect object or all at once by calling commit on the sandbox object. 49 50  sbx.commit(); root.toString(); // returns 0, 1, 0, 2, 0 The rollback operation undoes an existing manipulation and returns to its previous configuration before the effect. Again, rollbacks can be done on a per-effect basis or for the sandbox as a whole. However, a rollback did not remove the shadow object. Thus, after rolling back, the values are still shadow values in sbx.  51 52 53  sbx.rollback(); root.toString(); // returns 0, 1, 0, 2, 0 sbx.call(toString, this, root); // returns 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 The revert operation resets the shadow object of a wrapped value. The following code snippet reverts the root object in sbx.  54  sbx.revertOf(root); Now, root’s shadow object is removed and the origin is visible again in the sandbox. Calling toString inside of sbx returns 0,1,0,2,0.  3  Sandbox encapsulation  The implementation of DecentJS builds on two foundations: memory safety and reachability. In a memory safe programming language, a program cannot access uninitialized memory or memory outside the range allocated to a datastructure. An object reference serves as the right to access the resources managed by the object along with the memory allocated to it. In JavaScript, all resources are accessible via property read and write operations on objects. Thus, controlling reads and writes is sufficient to control the resources. DecentJS ensures isolation of the actual program code by intercepting each operation that attempts to modify data visible outside the sandbox. To achieve this behavior, all functions and objects crossing the sandbox boundary are wrapped in a membrane to ensure that the sandboxed code cannot modify them in any way. This membrane is implemented using JavaScript proxies [39]. More precisely, our implementation of sandboxing is inspired by Revocable Membranes [39, 37] and access control based on object capabilities [28]. Identity preserving membranes keep the sandbox apart from the normal program execution: We encapsulate objects passed through the membrane and redirect write operations to shadow objects (Section 3.2), we encapsulate code (Section 3.3), and we withhold external bindings from a function (Section 3.4). No unprotected value is passed inside the sandbox.  3.1  Proxies and membranes  A proxy is an object intended to be used in place of a target object. The proxy’s behavior is controlled by a handler object that typically mediates access to the target object. Both, target and handler, may be proxy objects themselves. The handler object contains trap functions that are called when a trapped operation is performed on the proxy. Operations like property read, property write, and function  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  7  Handler  Handler.get(Target,’x’,Proxy); Handler.set(Target,’x’,1,Proxy); Meta-Level Base-Level  Proxy  Target  Proxy.x; Proxy.x=1;  Target[’x’]; Target[’x’]=1;  Figure 2 Proxy operations. The operation Proxy.x invokes the trap Handler.get(Target,’x’,Proxy) (property get) and the property set operation Proxy.x=1 invokes Handler.set(Target,’x’,1,Proxy).  ProxyA x ProxyB  y  TargetA x TargetB  z ProxyC  y z TargetC  Figure 3 Property access through an identity preserving membrane (dashed line around target objects). The property access through the wrapper ProxyA.x returns a wrapper for TargetA.x. The property access ProxyA.y returns the same wrapper as ProxyB.z.  application are forwarded to their corresponding trap. The trap function may implement the operation arbitrarily, for example, by forwarding the operation to the target object. The latter is the default behavior if the trap is not specified. Figure 2 illustrates this situation with a handler that forwards all operations to the target. A membrane is a regulated communication channel between an object and the rest of the program. A membrane is implemented by a proxy that guards all operations on its target. If the result of an operation is another object, then it is recursively wrapped in a membrane before it is returned. This way, all objects accessed through an object behind the membrane are also behind the membrane. Common use cases of membranes are revoking all references to an object network at once or enforcing write protection on the objects behind the membrane [39, 26]. Figure 3 shows a membrane for TargetA implemented by wrapper ProxyA. Each property access through a wrapper (e.g., ProxyA.x) returns a wrapped object. After installing the membrane, no new direct references to target objects behind the membrane become available. An identity preserving membrane guarantees that no target object has more than one proxy. Thus, proxy identity outside the membrane reflects target object identity inside. For example, if TargetA.x.z and TargetA.y refer to the same object (TargetA.x.z===TargetA.y),  8  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  Handler  Handler.get(Target,’x’,Proxy); Handler.set(Target,’y’,1,Proxy); Handler.get(Target,’y’,Proxy); Meta-Level Base-Level  Proxy  Target  Shadow  Proxy.x; Proxy.y=1; Proxy.y;  Target[’x’];  Shadow[’y’]=1; Shadow[’y’];  Figure 4 Operations on a sandbox. The property get operation Proxy.x invokes the trap Handler. get(Target,’x’,Proxy), which forwards the operation to the proxy’s target. The property set operation Proxy.y=1 invokes the trap Handler.set(Target,’y’,1,Proxy), which forwards the operation to a local shadow object. The final property get operation Proxy.y is than also forwarded to the shadow object.  then ProxyA.x.z and ProxyA.y refer to the same wrapper object (ProxyA.x.z===ProxyA.y).  3.2  Shadow objects  Our sandbox redefines the semantics of proxies to implement expanders [42], an idea that allows a client side extension of properties without modifying the proxy’s target. A sandbox handler manages two objects: a target object and a local shadow object. The target object acts as a parent object for its proxy whereas the shadow object gathers local modifications. Write operations always take place on the shadow object. A read operation first attempts to obtain the property from the shadow object. If that fails, the read gets forwarded to the target object. Figure 4 illustrates this behavior, which is very similar to JavaScript’s prototype chain: the sandboxed version of an object inherits everything from its outside cousin, whereas modifications only appear inside the sandbox3 . As sandbox encapsulation extends the functionality of a membrane, each object visible inside the sandbox is either an object that was created inside or it is a wrapper for some outside object. A special proxy wraps sandbox internal values whenever committing a value to the outside, as shown in the last example. This step mediates uses of a sandbox internal value in the outside. This is form example required to wrap arguments values passed to committed sandbox function. The wrapping guarantees that the sandbox never gets access to unprotected references to the outside.  3.3  Sandbox scope  Apart from access restrictions, protecting the global state from modification through the membrane is fundamental to guarantee noninterference. To execute program code, DecentJS relies on an eval, which is nested in a statement with (sbxglobal) {/∗ body ∗/}. The with 3  Getter and setter functions require special treatment. Like other functions, they are decompiled and then applied to the shadow object. See Section 3.4.  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  var node = new Node(/∗ some sub−nodes ∗/); var sbx = new Sandbox(this, /∗ some parameters ∗/); with(sbxglobal){ (function(){ ‘‘use strict’’; function setValue(){ if(node){ node.value=heightOf(node); setValue(node.left); setValue(node.right); } } })(); }  Figure 5 Scope chain installed by the sandbox when loading setValue. The dark box represents the global scope. The dashed line indicates the sandbox boundary and the inner box shows the program code nested inside.  statement places the sandbox global on top of the current environment’s scope chain while executing body. This setup exploits that eval dynamically rebinds the free variables of its argument to whatever is in scope at its call site. In this construction, which is related to dynamic binding [14], any property defined in sbxglobal shadows a variable deeper down in the scope chain. We employ a proxy object in place of sbxglobal to control all non-local variable accesses in the sandboxed code by trapping the sandbox global object’s hasOwnProperty method. When JavaScript traverses the scope chain to resolve a variable access, it calls the method hasOwnProperty on the objects of the scope chain starting from the top. Inside the with statement, the first object that is checked on this traversal is the proxied sandbox global. If its hasOwnProperty method always returns true, then the traversal stops here and the JavaScript engine sends all read and write operations for free variables to the sandbox global. This way, we obtain full interposition and the handler of the proxied sandbox global has complete control over the free variables in body. Figure 5 visualizes the nested scopes created during the execution of setValue as in the example from Section 2. The sandbox global sbxglobal is a wrapper for the actual global object, which is used to access heightOf and Math.abs. The library code is nested in an empty closure which provides a fresh scope for local functions and variables. This step is required because JavaScript did not have standalone block scopes such as blocks in C or  9  10  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  Global Scope Sandbox1  Sandbox2  Sandbox3  JSCode  JSCode  JSCode  Figure 6 Nested sandboxes in an application. The outer box represents the global application state containing JavaScript’s global scope. Each sandbox has its own global object and the nested JavaScript code is defined w.r.t. to the sandbox global.  Java. Variables and named functions 4 created by the sandboxed code end up in this fresh scope. This extra scope guarantees noninterference for dynamically loaded scripts that define global variables and functions. The "use strict"5 declaration in front of the closure puts JavaScript in strict mode, which ensures that the code cannot obtain unprotected references to the global object. Figure 6 shows the situation when instantiating different sandboxes during program execution. Every sandbox installs its own scope with a sandbox global on top of the scope chain. Scripts nested inside are defined with respect to the sandbox global. The sandbox global mediates the access to JavaScript’s global object. Its default implementation is empty to guarantee isolation. However, DecentJS can grant fine-grained access by making resources available in the sandbox global.  3.4  Function recompilation  In JavaScript, functions have access to the variables and functions in the lexical scope in which the function was defined. The Mozilla documentation6 says: “It remembers the environment in which it was created.”. Calls to wrapped functions may still cause side effects through their free variables (e.g., by modifying a variable or by calling another side-effecting function). Thus, sandboxing either has to erase external bindings of functions or it has to verify that a function is free of side effects. The former alternative is the default in DecentJS. To remove bindings from functions passed through the membrane our protection mechanism decompiles the function and recompiles it inside the sandbox environment. Decompilation relies on the standard implementation of the toString method of a JavaScript function that returns a string containing the source code of the function. Each use of an external function in a sandbox first decompiles it by calling its toString method. To bypass potential tampering, we use a private copy of Function.prototype.toString for this call. Next, we apply eval to the resulting string to create a fresh variant of the function. As explained in Section 3.3, this application of eval is nested in a with statement that supplies the desired environment. Decompilation also places a "use strict" statement in front. To avoid a frequent decompilation and call of eval with respect to the same code, our implementation caches the compiled function where applicable.  4 5 6  Function created with function name() {/∗ body ∗/}. Strict mode requires that a use of this inside a function is only valid if either the function was called as a method or a receiver object was specified explicitly using apply or call. https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Closures  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  Instead of recompiling a function, we may use the string representation of a function to verify that a function is free of side effects, for example, by checking if the function’s body is SES-compliant7 [34]. However, it turns out that recompiling a function has a lower impact on the execution time than analyzing the function body. Functions without a string representation (e.g., native functions like Object or Array) cannot be verified or sanitized before passing them through the membrane. We can either trust these functions or rule them out. To this end, DecentJS may be provided with a white list of trusted function objects. In any case, functions remain wrapped in a sandbox proxy to mediate property access. In addition to normal function and method calls, the access to a property that is bound to a getter or setter function needs to decompile or verify the getter or setter before its execution.  3.5  DOM updates  The Document Object Model (DOM) is an API for manipulating HTML and XML documents that underlie the rendering of a web page. DOM provides a representation of the document’s content and it offers methods for changing its structure, style, content, etc. In JavaScript, this API is implemented using special objects, reachable from the document object. Unfortunately, the document tree itself is not an object in the programming language. Thus, it cannot be wrapped for use inside of a sandbox. The only possibility is to wrap the interfaces, in particular, the document object. We grant access to the DOM by binding the DOM interfaces to the sandbox global when instantiating a new sandbox. As all interfaces are wrapped in a sandbox proxy to mediate access, there are a number of limitations: By default, DOM nodes are accessed by calling query methods like getElementById on the document object. Effect logging recognizes these accesses as method calls, rather than as operations on the DOM. All query functions are special native functions that do not have a string representation. Decompilation is not possible so that using a query function must be permitted explicitly through the white list. A query function must be called as a method of an actual DOM object implementing the corresponding interface. Thus, DOM objects cannot be wrapped like other objects, but they require a special wrapping that calls the method on the correct receiver object. While read operations can be managed in this way, write operations must either be forbidden or they affect the original DOM. Thus, guest code can modify the original DOM unless the DOM interface is restricted to read-only operations. With unrestricted operations it would be possible to insert new <script> elements in the document, which loads scripts from the internet and executes them in the normal application state without further sandboxing. However, prohibiting write operation means that the majority of guest codes cannot be executed in the sandbox. To overcome this limitation, DecentJS provides guest code access to an emulated DOM instead of the real one. We rely on dom.js 8 , a JavaScript library emulating a full browser DOM, to implement a DOM interface for scripts running in the sandbox. This emulated DOM is merged into the global sandbox object when executing scripts.  7 8  In SES, a function can only cause side effects on values passed as an argument. https://github.com/andreasgal/dom.js/  11  12  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  As this pseudo DOM is constructed inside the sandbox, it can be accessed and modified at will. No special treatment is required. However, the pseudo DOM is wrapped in a special membrane mediating all operations and performing effect logging on all DOM elements. As each sandbox owns a direct reference to the sandbox internal DOM it provides the following features to the user: The sandbox provides an interface to the sandbox internal DOM and enables the host program to access all aspects of the DOM. This interface can control the data visible to the guest program. A host can load a page template before evaluating guest code. This template can be an arbitrary HTML document, like the host’s page or a blank web page. As most libraries operate on non-blank page documents (e.g., by reading or writing to a particular element) this template can be used to create an environment. Guest code runs without restrictions. For example, guest code can introduce new < script> elements to load library code from the internet. These libraries are loaded and executed inside the sandbox as well. All operations on the interface objects are recorded, for example, the access to window .location when loading a document. Effects can examined using a suitable API (cf. Section 2.2). The host program can perform a fine-grained inspection of the document tree (e.g., it can search for changes and differences). The host recognizes newly created DOM elements and it can transfer content from the sandbox DOM to the DOM of the host program.  3.6  Policies  A policy is a guideline that prescribes whether an operation is allowed. Most existing sandbox systems come with a facility to define policies. For example, a policy may grant access to a certain resource, it may grant the right to perform an operation or to cause a side effect. Our system does not provide access control policies in the manner known from other systems. DecentJS only provides the mechanism to implement an empty scope and to pass selected resources to this scope. When a reference to a certain resource is made available inside the sandbox, then it should be wrapped in another proxy membrane that enforces a suitable policy. For example, one may use this work’s transactional membranes to shadow write operations, Access Permission Contracts [18] to restrict the access on objects, or Revocable References [39, 40] to revoke access to the outside world.  4  Discussion  Strict Mode DecentJS runs guest code in JavaScript’s strict mode to rule out uncontrolled accesses to the global object. This restriction may lead to dysfunctional guest code because strict-mode semantics is subtly different from non-strict mode JavaScript. However, assuming strict mode is less restrictive than the restrictions imposed by other techniques that restrict JavaScript’s dynamic features. Alternatively, one could also provide a program transformation that guards uses of this that may access the global object.  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  Scopes DecentJS places every load in its own scope. Hence, variables and functions declared in one script are not visible to the execution of another script in the same sandbox. Indeed, we deliberately keep scopes apart to avoid interference. To enable communication DecentJS offers a facility to load mutually dependant scripts into the same scope. Otherwise, scripts may exchange data by writing to fields in the sandbox global object.  Function Decompilation If a top level closure is wrapped in a sandbox, then its free valriables have to be declared to the sandbox or their bindings are removed. Decompilation may change the meaning of a function, because it rebinds its free variables. Only “pure functions”9 can be decompiled without changing their meaning. However, decompiling preserves the semantics of a function if its free variables are imported in the sandbox. The new closure formed within the sandbox may be closed over variables defined in that sandbox. This task is rightfully manual as the availability of global bindings is part of a policy. In conclusion, decompilation is unavoidable to guarantee noninterference of a function defined in another scope as every property read operation may be the call of a side-effecting getter function.  Native Functions Decompilation requires a string that contains the source code of that function, but calling the standard toString method from Function.prototype does not work for all functions. A native function does not have a string representation. Trust in a native function is regulated with a white list of trusted functions. The Function.prototype.bind() method creates a new function with the same body, but the first couple of arguments bound to the arguments of bind(). JavaScript does not provide a string representation for the newly created function.  Object, Array, and Function Initializer In JavaScript, some objects can be initialized using a literal notation (initializer notation). Examples are object literals (using {}), array objects (using []), and function objects (using the named or unnamed function expression, e.g. function (){}). Using the literal notation circumvents all restrictions and wrappings that we may have imposed on the Object, Array, and Function constructors. As we are not able to intercept the construction using the literal notation enables unprotected read access to the prototype objects Object.prototype, Array.prototype, and Function.prototype. The newly created object always inherits from the corresponding prototype. However, we will never get access to the prototype object itself and we are not able to modify the prototype. Writes to the created objects always effect the object itself and are never forwarded to the prototype object.  9  A pure function is a function that only maps its input into an output without causing any observable side effect.  13  14  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  Even though all the elements contained in the native prototype objects are uncritical by default, a global (not sandboxed) script could add sensitive data or a side effecting function to one of the prototype objects and thus bypass access to unprotected data.  Function Constructor The function constructor Function creates a new function object based on the definition given as arguments. In contrast to function statements and function expressions, the function constructor ignores the surrounding scope. The new function is always created in the global scope and calling it enables access to all global variables. To prevent this leakage, the sandbox never grants unwrapped access to JavaScipt’s global Function constructor even if the constructor is white-listed as a safe native function. A special wrapping intercepts the operations and uses a safe way to construct a new function with respect to the sandbox.  Noninterference The execution of sandboxed code should not interfere with the execution of application code. That is, the application should run as if no sandboxes were present. This property is called noninterference (NI) [10] by the security community. The intuition is that sandboxed code runs at a lower level of security than application code and that the low-security sandbox code must not be able to observe the results of the high-security computation in the global scope. DecentJS guarantees integrity and confidentiality. The default “empty” sandbox guarantees to run code in full isolation from the rest of the application, whereas the sandbox global can provide protected references to the sandbox. In summary, the sandboxed code may try to write to an object that is visible to the application, it may throw an exception, or it may not terminate. Our membrane redirects all write operations in sandboxed code to local replicas and it captures all exceptions. A timeout could be used to transform non-terminating executions into an exception, alas such a timeout cannot be implemented in JavaScript.10  5  Evaluation  To evaluate our implementation, we applied it to JavaScript benchmark programs from the Google Octane 2.0 Benchmark Suite11 . These benchmarks measure a JavaScript engine’s performance by running a selection of complex and demanding programs (benchmark programs run between 5 and 8200 times). Google claims that Octane “measure[s] the performance of JavaScript code found in large, real-world web applications, running on modern mobile and desktop browsers. Each benchmark is complex and demanding . As expected, the run time increases when executing a benchmark in a sandbox. While some programs like EarleyBoyer, NavierStrokes, pdf.js, Mandreel, and Box2DWeb are heavily affected, others are only slightly affected: Richards, Crypto, RegExp, and Code loading, for instance. The observed run time impact entirely depends on the number of values that cross the membrane.  The JavaScript timeout function only schedules a function to run when the currently running JavaScript code—presumably some event handler—stops. It cannot interrupt a running function. 11 https://developers.google.com/octane 10  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  From the running times we find that the sandbox itself causes an average slowdown of 8.01 (over all benchmarks). This is more than acceptable compared to other language-embedded systems. The numbers also show that sandboxing with fine-grained effect logging enabled causes an average slowdown of 32.60, an additional factor of 4.07 on top of pure sandboxing. Because the execution of program code inside of a sandbox is nothing else than a normal program execution inside of a with statement and with one additional call to eval (when instantiating the execution) the run-time impact is influenced by (i) the number of wrap operations of values that cross the membrane, (ii) the number of decompile operations on functions, and (iii) the number of effects on wrapped objects. Readouts from internal counters indicate that the heavily affected benchmarks (RayTrace, pdf.js, Mandreel, and Box2DWeb) perform a very large number of effects. The RayTrace benchmark, for example, performs 51 million effects. Overall, an average slowdown of 8.01 is more than acceptable compared to other languageembedded systems. As Octane is intended to measure the engine’s performance (benchmark programs run between 5 and 8200 times) we claim that it is the heaviest kind of benchmark. Every real-world library (e.g. jQuery) is less demanding and runs without an measurable runtime impact. Appendix F also contains the score values obtained from running the benchmark suite and lists the readouts of some internal counters.  6  Conclusion  DecentJS runs JavaScript code in a configurable degree of isolation with fine-grained access control rather than disallowing all access to the application state. It provides full browser compatibility (i.e. all browsers work without modifications as long as the proxy API is supported) and it has a better performance than other language-embedded systems. Additionally, DecentJS comes with the following features: 1. Language-embedded sandbox. DecentJS is a JavaScript library and all aspects are accessible through a sandbox API. The library can be deployed as a language extension and requires no changes in the JavaScript run-time system. 2. Full interposition. DecentJS is implemented using JavaScript proxies [39]. The proxybased implementation guarantees full interposition for the full JavaScript language including all dynamic features (e.g., with, eval). DecentJS works for all code regardless of its origin, including dynamically loaded code and code injected via eval. No source code transformation or avoidance of JavaScript’s dynamic features is required. 3. Transaction-based sandboxing. A DecentJS sandbox provides a transactional scope that logs all effects. Wrapper proxies make external objects accessible inside of the sandbox and enable sandbox internal modifications of the object. Hence, sandboxed code runs as usual without noticing the sandbox. Effects reveal conflicts, differences, and changes with respect to another sandbox or the global state. After inspection of the log, effects can be committed to the application state or rolled back. Acknowledgments This work benefited from discussions with participants of the Dagstuhl Seminar “Scripting Languages and Frameworks: Analysis and Verification” in 2014. In particular, Tom Van Cutsem provided helpful advice on the internals of JavaScript proxies.  15  16  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  References 1 2  3  4  5  6  7  8 9  10 11 12  13  14  15 16  Adsafe: Making JavaScript safe for advertising. http://www.adsafe.org/, 2015. P. Agten, S. V. Acker, Y. Brondsema, P. H. Phung, L. Desmet, and F. Piessens. JSand: complete client-side sandboxing of third-party JavaScript without browser modifications. In R. H. Zakon, editor, 28th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, ACSAC 2012, Orlando, FL, USA, 3-7 December 2012, pages 1–10. ACM, 2012. J. Arnaud, M. Denker, S. Ducasse, D. Pollet, A. Bergel, and M. Suen. Read-only execution for dynamic languages. In J. Vitek, editor, Objects, Models, Components, Patterns, 48th International Conference, TOOLS 2010, Málaga, Spain, June 28 - July 2, 2010. Proceedings, volume 6141 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 117–136, Málaga, Spain, June 2010. Springer. A. Charguéraud. Pretty-big-step semantics. In M. Felleisen and P. Gardner, editors, ESOP, volume 7792 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 41–60, Rome, Italy, Mar. 2013. Springer. A. Dewald, T. Holz, and F. C. Freiling. ADSandbox: sandboxing JavaScript to fight malicious websites. In S. Y. Shin, S. Ossowski, M. Schumacher, M. J. Palakal, and C.-C. Hung, editors, Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC), Sierre, Switzerland, March 22-26, 2010, pages 1859–1864, Sierre, Switzerland, 2010. ACM. M. Dhawan and V. Ganapathy. Analyzing information flow in JavaScript-based browser extensions. In Twenty-Fifth Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, ACSAC 2009, Honolulu, Hawaii, 7-11 December 2009, pages 382–391. IEEE Computer Society, 2009. M. Dhawan, C. Shan, and V. Ganapathy. Enhancing JavaScript with transactions. In J. Noble, editor, ECOOP 2012 - Object-Oriented Programming - 26th European Conference, Beijing, China, June 11-16, 2012. Proceedings, volume 7313 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 383–408. Springer, 2012. Facebook SDK for JavaScript. https://developers.facebook.com/docs/javascript/, 2015. A. Felt, P. Hooimeijer, D. Evans, and W. Weimer. Talking to strangers without taking their candy: isolating proxied content. In L. Stein and A. Mislove, editors, Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Social Network Systems, SNS 2008, Glasgow, Scotland, UK, April 1, 2008, pages 25–30. ACM, 2008. J. A. Goguen and J. Meseguer. Security policies and security models. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pages 11–20, 1982. google-caja: A source-to-source translator for securing JavaScript-based web content. http: //code.google.com/p/google-caja/, (as of 2011). S. Guarnieri and V. B. Livshits. GATEKEEPER: mostly static enforcement of security and reliability policies for JavaScript code. In F. Monrose, editor, 18th USENIX Security Symposium, Montreal, Canada, August 10-14, 2009, Proceedings, pages 151–168. USENIX Association, 2009. A. Guha, C. Saftoiu, and S. Krishnamurthi. The essence of JavaScript. In T. D’Hondt, editor, ECOOP, volume 6183 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 126–150, Maribor, Slovenia, June 2010. Springer. D. R. Hanson and T. A. Proebsting. Dynamic variables. In Proceedings of the 2001 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, pages 264–273, Snowbird, UT, USA, June 2001. ACM Press, New York, USA. D. Hedin et al. JSFlow: Tracking information flow in JavaScript and its APIs. In ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC’14), Gyeongju, Korea, Mar. 2014. P. Heidegger, A. Bieniusa, and P. Thiemann. Access permission contracts for scripting languages. In J. Field and M. Hicks, editors, Proceedings 39th Annual ACM Symposium on  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  17  18  19  20  21 22 23  24  25  26  27 28  29  30  31  Principles of Programming Languages, pages 111–122, Philadelphia, USA, Jan. 2012. ACM Press. P. Heidegger and P. Thiemann. A heuristic approach for computing effects. In J. Bishop and A. Vallecillo, editors, Proceedings of the 49th International Conference on Objects, Models, Components and Patterns, volume 6705 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 147–162, Zurich, Switzerland, June 2011. Springer. M. Keil and P. Thiemann. Efficient dynamic access analysis using JavaScript proxies. In Proceedings of the 9th Symposium on Dynamic Languages, DLS ’13, pages 49–60, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM. M. Keil and P. Thiemann. Efficient dynamic access analysis using JavaScript proxies. In Proceedings of the 9th Symposium on Dynamic Languages, DLS ’13, pages 49–60, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA, 2013. ACM. M. Keil and P. Thiemann. Treatjs: Higher-order contracts for JavaScript. In J. Boyland, editor, 29th European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, ECOOP 2015, July 5-10, 2015, Prague, Czech Republic, volume 37 of LIPICS, pages 28–51, Prague, Czech Repulic, July 2015. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik. M. Keil and P. Thiemann. TreatJS: Higher-order contracts for JavaScript. Technical report, Institute for Computer Science, University of Freiburg, 2015. M. Keil and P. Thiemann. TreatJS Online. http://www2.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/ ~keilr/treatjs/, 2015. S. Maffeis and A. Taly. Language-based isolation of untrusted JavaScript. In Proceedings of the 22nd IEEE Computer Security Foundations Symposium, CSF 2009, Port Jefferson, New York, USA, July 8-10, 2009, pages 77–91. IEEE Computer Society, 2009. J. Magazinius, P. H. Phung, and D. Sands. Safe wrappers and sane policies for self protecting JavaScript. In T. Aura, editor, The 15th Nordic Conference in Secure IT Systems, Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer Verlag, Oct. 2010. L. A. Meyerovich and V. B. Livshits. ConScript: Specifying and enforcing fine-grained security policies for JavaScript in the browser. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pages 481–496, Berkeley/Oakland, California, USA, May 2010. IEEE Computer Society. M. S. Miller. Robust Composition: Towards a Unified Approach to Access Control and Concurrency Control. PhD thesis, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA, 2006. AAI3245526. M. S. Miller, M. Samuel, B. Laurie, I. Awad, and M. Stay. Caja: Safe active content in sanitized JavaScript. http://google-caja.googlecode.com, 2008. Google White Paper. M. S. Miller and J. S. Shapiro. Paradigm regained: Abstraction mechanisms for access control. In V. A. Saraswat, editor, Advances in Computing Science - ASIAN 2003 Programming Languages and Distributed Computation, 8th Asian Computing Science Conference, Mumbai, India, December 10-14, 2003, Proceedings, volume 2896 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 224–242. Springer, 2003. K. Patil, X. Dong, X. Li, Z. Liang, and X. Jiang. Towards fine-grained access control in JavaScript contexts. In 2011 International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, ICDCS 2011, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, June 20-24, 2011, pages 720–729. IEEE Computer Society, 2011. P. H. Phung, D. Sands, and A. Chudnov. Lightweight self-protecting JavaScript. In W. Li, W. Susilo, U. K. Tupakula, R. Safavi-Naini, and V. Varadharajan, editors, ASIACCS, pages 47–60, Sydney, Australia, Mar. 2009. ACM. J. G. Politz, S. A. Eliopoulos, A. Guha, and S. Krishnamurthi. ADsafety: Type-based verification of JavaScript sandboxing. In 20th USENIX Security Symposium, San Francisco, CA, USA, August 8-12, 2011, Proceedings. USENIX Association, 2011.  17  18  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  32  33 34 35  36 37  38  39 40  41  42  43  G. Richards, C. Hammer, F. Z. Nardelli, S. Jagannathan, and J. Vitek. Flexible access control for JavaScript. In A. L. Hosking, P. T. Eugster, and C. V. Lopes, editors, Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Object Oriented Programming Systems Languages & Applications, OOPSLA 2013, part of SPLASH 2013, Indianapolis, IN, USA, October 26-31, 2013, pages 305–322. ACM, 2013. Same-origin policy. https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Security/ Same-origin_policy/, 2008. SecureEcmaScript (ses). https://code.google.com/p/es-lab/wiki/SecureEcmaScript, 2015. N. Shavit and D. Touitou. Software transactional memory. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, pages 204–213, Ottowa, Ontario, Canada, 1995. ACM Press, New York, NY, USA. Signed scripts in Mozilla. http://www-archive.mozilla.org/projects/security/ components/signed-scripts.html/, 2015. T. S. Strickland, S. Tobin-Hochstadt, R. B. Findler, and M. Flatt. Chaperones and impersonators: Run-time support for reasonable interposition. In G. T. Leavens and M. B. Dwyer, editors, OOPSLA, pages 943–962. ACM, 2012. J. Terrace, S. R. Beard, and N. P. K. Katta. JavaScript in JavaScript (js.js): Sandboxing third-party scripts. In E. M. Maximilien, editor, 3rd USENIX Conference on Web Application Development, WebApps’12, Boston, MA, USA, June 13, 2012, pages 95–100. USENIX Association, 2012. T. Van Cutsem and M. S. Miller. Proxies: Design principles for robust object-oriented intercession APIs. In W. D. Clinger, editor, DLS, pages 59–72. ACM, 2010. T. Van Cutsem and M. S. Miller. Trustworthy proxies - virtualizing objects with invariants. In G. Castagna, editor, ECOOP, volume 7920 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 154–178, Montpellier, France, July 2013. Springer. G. Wagner, A. Gal, C. Wimmer, B. Eich, and M. Franz. Compartmental memory management in a modern web browser. In H. Boehm and D. F. Bacon, editors, Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium on Memory Management, ISMM 2011, San Jose, CA, USA, June 04 - 05, 2011, pages 119–128. ACM, 2011. A. Warth, M. Stanojevic, and T. Millstein. Statically scoped object adaptation with expanders. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications, pages 37–56, Portland, OR, USA, 2006. ACM Press, New York. G. Weikum and G. Vossen. Transactional information systems: theory, algorithms, and the practice of concurrency control and recovery. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 2001.  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16  <!DOCTYPE html> <html lang="en"> <head> <!−− third−party libraries −−> <script src="date.js"></script> <script src="jquery.js"></script> <script src="jquery.formatDateTime.js"></script> </head> <body> <!−− Body of the page −−> <h1 id="headline">Headline</h1> <script type="text/javascript"> window.$("#headline").text("Changed Headline"); </script> </body> </html> Figure 7 Motivating Example. The listing shows a snippet of an index.html file. The <script> tags load third-party libraries to the application state before executing the body. Within the <body> tag it uses jQuery to modify the DOM.  A  Motivation  JavaScript is the most important client side language for web pages. JavaScript developers rely heavily on third-party libraries for calenders, maps, social networking, feature extensions, and so on. Thus, the client-side code of a web page is usually composed of dynamically loaded fragments from different origins. However, the JavaScript language has no provision for namespaces or encapsulation management: there is a global scope for variables and functions, and every loaded script has the same authority. On the one hand, JavaScript developers benefit from JavaScript’s flexibility as it enables to extend the application state easily. On the other hand, once included, a script has the ability to access and manipulate every value reachable from the global object. That makes it difficult to enforce any security policy in JavaScript. As a consequence, program understanding and maintenance becomes very difficult because side effects may cause unexpected behavior. There is also a number of security concerns as the library code may access sensitive data, for example, it may read user input from the browser’s DOM. Browsers normally provide build-in isolation mechanisms. However, as isolation is not always possible for all scrips, the key challenges of a JavaScript developer is to manage untrusted third-party code, to control the use of data by included scrips, and to reason about effects of included code.  19  20  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37  <!DOCTYPE html> <html lang="en"> <head> <!−− DecentJS code−−> <script src="decent.js"></script> <!−− Runs Datejs in a fresh sandbox. −−> <script type="text/javascript"> var sbx = new Sandbox(this, Sandbox.DEFAULT); sbx.request("datejs.js"); sbx.applyRule( new Rule.CommitOn(Date, function(sbx, effect) { return (effect instanceof Effect.Set) && !(effect.name in Date); })); </script> <!−− ... −−> </head> <body> <!−− ... −−> </body> </html> Figure 8 Execution of library code in a sandbox. The first <script> tag loads the sandbox implementation. The body of the second <script> tag instantiates a new sandbox and loads and executes Datejs inside the sandbox. Later it commits intended effects to the native Date object.  A.1  JavaScript issues  As an example, we consider a web application that relies on third-party scripts from various sources. Figure 7 shows an extract of such a page. It first includes Datejs 12 , a library extending JavaScript’s native Date object with additional methods for parsing, formatting, and processing of dates. Next, it loads jQuery 13 and a jQuery plugin jquery.formatDateTime.js 14 that also simplifies formatting of JavaScript date objects. At this point, we want to ensure that loading the third-party code (Datejs and jQuery) does not influence the application state in an unintended way. Encapsulating the library code in a sandbox enables us to scrutinize modifications that the foreign code may attempt and only commit acceptable modifications.  A.2  Isolating third-party JavaScript  Transactional sandboxing is inspired by the idea of transaction processing in database systems [43] and software transactional memory [35]. Each sandbox implements a transactional scope the content of which can be examined, committed, or rolled back. 1. Isolation of code. A DecentJS sandbox can run JavaScript code in isolation to the 12  https://github.com/datejs/Datejs https://jquery.com/ 14 https://github.com/agschwender/jquery.formatDateTime 13  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  application state. Proxies make external values visible inside of the sandbox and handle sandbox internal write operations. An internal DOM simulates the browser DOM as needed. This setup guarantees that the isolated code runs without noticing the sandbox. 2. Providing transactional features. A DecentJS sandbox provides a transactional scope in which effects are logged for inspection. Policy rules can be specified so that only effects that adhere to the rules are committed to the application state and others are rolled back. Appendix 2 gives a detailed introduction to DecentJS’s API and provides a series of examples explaining its facilities. Figure 8 shows how to modify the index.html from Figure 7 to load the third-party code into a sandbox. We first focus on Datejs and consider jQuery later in Section A.4. The <!−− ... −−> comment is a placeholder for unmodified code not considered in this example15 . Initially, we create a fresh sandbox (line 24). The first parameter is the sandboxinternal global object for scripts running in the sandbox whereas the second parameter is a configuration object16 . The sandbox global object acts as a mediator between the sandbox contents and the external world (cf. Section 3.3). It is placed on top of the scope chain for code executing inside the sandbox and it can be used to make outside values available inside the sandbox. It is wrapped in a proxy membrane to mediate all accesses to the host program. Next, we instruct the sandbox to load and execute the Datejs library (line 25) inside the sandbox. Afterwards, the sandbox-internal proxy for JavaScript’s native Date object is modified in several ways. Among others, the library adds new methods to the Date object and extends Date.prototype with additional properties. Write operations on a proxy wrapper produce a shadow value (cf. Section 3.2) that represents the sandbox-internal modification of an object. Initially, this modification is only visible to reads inside the sandbox. Reads are forwarded to the target unless there are local modifications, in which case the shadow value is returned. The return values are wrapped in proxies, again.  A.3  Committing intended modifications  During execution, each sandbox records the effects on all objects that cross the sandbox membrane17 . The sandbox API offers access to the resulting lists for inspection and provides query methods to select the effects of a particular object. After loading Datejs, the effect log reports 16 reads and 142 writes on three different objects18 . However, as the manual inspection of effects is impractical and requires a lot of effort, DecentJS allows us to register rules with a sandbox and apply them automatically. A rule combines a sandbox operation with a predicate specifying the state under which the operation is allowed to be performed. For example, as we consider an extension to the Date object as intended, non-critical modification, we install a rule that automatically commits new properties to the Date object in Line 26. In general, a rule CommitOn takes a target object (Date) and a predicate. The predicate function gets invoked with the sandbox object (sbx) and an effect object describing an effect on the target object. In our example, the predicate checks if the effect is a property  15  Appendix A.6 shows the full HTML code. Sandbox.DEFAULT is a predefined configuration object for the standard use of the sandbox. It consists of simple key-value pairs, e.g. verbose:false. 17 The lists do not contain effects on values that were created inside of the sandbox. 18 Appendix A.7 shows a readout of the effect lists.  16  21  22  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  write operation extending JavaScript’s native Date object and that the property name is not already present. If we construct a function inside of a sandbox and this function is written and committed to an outside object, then the free variables of the function contain objects inside the sandbox and arguments of a call to this function are also wrapped. That is, calling this function on the outside only causes effects inside the sandbox. Furthermore, committing an object in this way wraps the object in a proxy before writing it to its (outside) target. Both measures are required to guarantee that the sandbox never gets access to unwrapped references from the outside world. At this point we have to mention that the data structure of the committed functions is constructed inside of sbx. All bound references of those functions still point to objects inside of the sandbox and thus using them only causes effect inside of the sandbox. Furthermore, committing an object wraps the object in a proxy before writing it to its target. This intercepts the use of the committed object, e.g. to wrap the arguments of a committed function before invoking the function. This is As an illustration, Figure 9 shows an extract of the membrane arising from JavaScript’s native Date object in Appendix ??. Executing Datejs in sbx (shown on the left in the first box) creates a proxy for each element accessed on Date: Date and Date.prototype. Only Date and Date.prototype are wrapped because proxies are created on demand. As proxies forward each read to the target the structure visible inside of the sandbox is identical to the structure visible outside. Extending the native Date object in sbx yields the state shown in the second box. All modifications are only visible inside of the sandbox. The new elements are not wrapped because they only exist inside of the sandbox. However, a special proxy wraps sandbox internal values whenever committing a value to the outside, as shown in the last box. This step mediates further uses of the sandbox internal value, for example, wrapping the this value and all arguments when calling a function defined in the sandbox. The wrapping guarantees that the sandbox never gets access to unprotected references to the outside.  A.4  Shadowing DOM operations  The example in Figure 8 omits the inclusion of jQuery for simplification purposes. However, our initial objective is to sandbox all third-party code to i reason about the modifications done by loading the third-party code ii prevent the application state from unintended modifications . Isolating a library like jQuery is more challenging as it needs access to the browser’s DOM. Calls to the native DOM interface expose a mixture of public and confidential information, so the access can neither be fully trusted nor completely forbidden. To address this issue, DecentJS provides an internal DOM 19 that serves as a shadow for the actual DOM when running a web library in the sandbox. Figure 10 demonstrates loading the jQuery library in a web sandbox. As we extend the first example, we create a new empty sandbox (line 46) and initialize the sandbox internal DOM by loading an HTML template (line 47). Using the Sandbox.WEB configuration activates the shadow DOM by instructing the sandbox to create a DOM interface and to merge this interface with the sandbox-internal global object. The shadow DOM initially  19  See Section 3.5 for a more detailed discussion.  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  contains an empty document. It can be instantiated with the actual HTML body or with an HTML template, as shown in Line 47. Figure 11 shows the template, which is an extract of the original index.html containing only the <script> tags for the jQuery library and selected parts of the HTML body. Loading the template also loads and executes the third-party code inside the sandbox. Afterwards, the internal effect log reports two write operations to the fields $ and jQuery of the global window object, and one write operation to the HTMLBodyElement interface, a child of Node, both of which are part of the DOM interface. To automatically commit intended modifications to the global window object, we install a suitable rule in Lines 48 and 49. As jQuery has been instantiated w.r.t. the sandbox internal DOM, using it modifies the sandbox internal DOM instead of the browser’s DOM. These modifications must be committed to the browser’s DOM to become visible (line 57). Alternatively, DecentJS allows us to grant access to the browser’s DOM by white listing the window and document objects. However, white listing can only expose entire objects and cannot restrict access to certain parts of the document model.  A.5  Using transactions  For wrapped objects, DecentJS supports a commit/rollback mechanism. In the first examples (Figure 8), we prevent the application state from unintended modification when loading untrusted code and commit only intended ones. However, Datejs and jquery.formatDateTime.js might both modify JavaScript’s native Date object. To avoid undesired overwrites, DecentJS allows us to inspect the effects of both libraries and to check for conflicts before committing to Date. The predicate in Line 81 checks for conflicts, which arise in the comparison between different sandboxes. A conflict is flagged if at least one sandbox modifies a value that is accessed by the other sandbox later on20 . Furthermore, we prescribe that in case of conflicts the methods from Datejs should be used. To this end, a second rule discards the modifications on Date from the second sandbox when detecting conflicts. The rollback operation undoes an existing manipulation and returns to its previous configuration. Such a partial rollback does not result in an inconsistent state as we do not delete objects and the references inside the sandbox remain unchanged.  A.6  Full HTML Example  Figure 13 shows the full html code from the example in Section A.  A.7  Effects Lists  This sections shows the resulting effect logs recorded by the sandboxes in Section A. See Appendix ?? for a detailed explanation of the output.  A.8 A.8.1  20  Effects of sbx All Read Effects on this  We consider only Read-After-Write and Write-After-Write conflicts. Write-after-Read conflicts are not handled because the hazard represents a problem that only occurs in concurrent executions.  23  24  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  131 132 133  134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141  sbx.readeffectOn(this).forEach(function(e) { print(e); }); (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0)  has [name=Date] get [name=Date] has [name=Number] get [name=Number] has [name=RegExp] get [name=RegExp] has [name=Array] get [name=Array]  A.8.2 142 143 144  145  sbx.writeeffectOn(this).forEach(function(e) { print(e); }); none  A.8.3 146 147 148  149 150 151 152 153 154  156 157  158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168  All Read Effects on Date  sbx.readeffectOn(Date).forEach(function(e) { print(e); }); (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1)  get get get get get get  A.8.4 155  All Write Effects on this  [name=prototype] [name=Parsing] [name=Grammar] [name=Translator] [name=CultureInfo] [name=parse]  All Write Effects on Date  sbx.writeeffectOn(Date).forEach(function(e) { print(e); }); (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1)  set set set set set set set set set set set  [name=CultureInfo] [name=getMonthNumberFromName] [name=getDayNumberFromName] [name=isLeapYear] [name=getDaysInMonth] [name=getTimezoneOffset] [name=getTimezoneAbbreviation] [name=_validate] [name=validateMillisecond] [name=validateSecond] [name=validateMinute]  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181  (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1)  set set set set set set set set set set set set set  A.8.5 182 183 184  185  187 188  189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 201 202 203 204 205 206 207 208 209 210  All Read Effects on Date.prototype  sbx.readeffectOn(Date.prototype).forEach(function(e) { print(e); }); (#2) get [name=toString]  A.8.6 186  [name=validateHour] [name=validateDay] [name=validateMonth] [name=validateYear] [name=now] [name=today] [name=Parsing] [name=Grammar] [name=Translator] [name=_parse] [name=parse] [name=getParseFunction] [name=parseExact]  All Write Effects on Date.prototype  sbx.writeeffectOn(Date.prototype).forEach(function(e) { print(e); }); (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2)  set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set  [name=clone] [name=compareTo] [name=equals] [name=between] [name=addMilliseconds] [name=addSeconds] [name=addMinutes] [name=addHours] [name=addDays] [name=addWeeks] [name=addMonths] [name=addYears] [name=add] [name=set] [name=clearTime] [name=isLeapYear] [name=isWeekday] [name=getDaysInMonth] [name=moveToFirstDayOfMonth] [name=moveToLastDayOfMonth] [name=moveToDayOfWeek] [name=moveToMonth]  25  26  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 225 226 227 228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 246 247 248 249 250 251 252 253 254 255 256 257 258  (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2)  set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set  [name=getDayOfYear] [name=getWeekOfYear] [name=isDST] [name=getTimezone] [name=setTimezoneOffset] [name=setTimezone] [name=getUTCOffset] [name=getDayName] [name=getMonthName] [name=_toString] [name=toString] [name=_orient] [name=next] [name=previous] [name=prev] [name=last] [name=_is] [name=is] [name=sun] [name=sunday] [name=mon] [name=monday] [name=tue] [name=tuesday] [name=wed] [name=wednesday] [name=thu] [name=thursday] [name=fri] [name=friday] [name=sat] [name=saturday] [name=jan] [name=january] [name=feb] [name=february] [name=mar] [name=march] [name=apr] [name=april] [name=may] [name=jun] [name=june] [name=jul] [name=july] [name=aug] [name=august] [name=sep]  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  259 260 261 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 272 273 274 275 276 277 278 279 280 281 282 283 284 285 286 287  (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2) (#2)  set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set set  A.9  Effects of sbx2  A.9.1 288 289 290  291 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 302  [name=september] [name=oct] [name=october] [name=nov] [name=november] [name=dec] [name=december] [name=milliseconds] [name=millisecond] [name=seconds] [name=second] [name=minutes] [name=minute] [name=hours] [name=hour] [name=days] [name=day] [name=weeks] [name=week] [name=months] [name=month] [name=years] [name=year] [name=toJSONString] [name=toShortDateString] [name=toLongDateString] [name=toShortTimeString] [name=toLongTimeString] [name=getOrdinal]  All Read Effects on this  sbx2.readeffectOn(this).forEach(function(e) { print(e); }); (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0)  has [name=window] get [name=window] has [name=module] get [name=module] has [name=Math] get [name=Math] has [name=Array] get [name=Array] has [name=Date] get [name=Date] has [name=undefined] get [name=undefined]  27  28  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310  (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0) (#0)  has [name=Symbol] get [name=Symbol] has [name=RegExp] get [name=RegExp] has [name=String] get [name=String] has [name=define] get [name=define]  A.9.2 311 312 313  314  sbxs.writeeffectOn(this).forEach(function(e) { print(e); }); none  A.9.3 315 316 317  318 319 320 321 322 323 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 333 334 335 336  338 339  340 341  All Read Effects on window  sbx2.readeffectOn(window).forEach(function(e) { print(e); }); (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1) (#1)  get [name=window] getOwnPropertyDescriptor [name=window] getOwnPropertyDescriptor [name=module] get [name=document] getOwnPropertyDescriptor [name=Math] getOwnPropertyDescriptor [name=Array] getOwnPropertyDescriptor [name=Date] getOwnPropertyDescriptor [name=undefined] getOwnPropertyDescriptor [name=Symbol] getOwnPropertyDescriptor [name=RegExp] get [name=top] get [name=setTimeout] has [name=onfocusin] get [name=location] getOwnPropertyDescriptor [name=String] get [name=XMLHttpRequest] getOwnPropertyDescriptor [name=define] get [name=jQuery] get [name=$]  A.9.4 337  All Write Effects on this  All Write Effects on window  sbx.writeeffectOn(window).forEach(function(e) { print(e); }); (#1) set [name=$] (#1) set [name=jQuery]  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  29  Date  ···  now()  Date  prototype  toString()  ···  Date  ···  now()  prototype  ···  Date  now()  prototype  toString() isWeekday()  Date  toString()  ···  now()  now()  prototype  toString() isWeekday()  Date  prototype  toString()  ···  now()  prototype  toString() isWeekday()  Figure 9 Shadow objects in the sandbox when loading Datejs (cf. Section ??). The structure of JavaScrip’s native Date object is shown in solid lines on the left. The shadow values are enclosed by a dashed line. Solid lines are direct references to non-proxy objects, whereas dashed lines are indirect references and proxy objects. Dotted lines connect to the target object. The first box shows the sandbox after reading Date.prototype whereas the second box shows the sandbox after modifying the structure of Date. The third box shows the situation after committing the modifications on Date.  30  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57  58 59 60  <!DOCTYPE html> <html lang="en"> <head> <!−− DecentJS code−−> <script src="decent.js"></script> <!−− ... −−> <!−− Runs jQuery in a fresh sandbox. −−> <script type="text/javascript"> var sbx2 = new Sandbox(this, Sandbox.WEB); sbx2.initialize("template.html"); sbx2.applyRule(new Rule.Commit(this, "jQuery")); sbx2.applyRule(new Rule.Commit(this, "$")); </script> </head> <body> <!−− Body of the page −−> <h1 id="headline">Headline</h1> <script type="text/javascript"> window.$("#headline").text("Changed Headline"); document.getElementById("headline").innerHTML=sbx2.dom.document. getElementById("headline").innerHTML; </script> </body> </html> Figure 10 Execution of a web library in a sandbox. The first <script> tag loads the sandbox implementation. The body of the second <script> tag instantiates a new sandbox and initializes the sandbox with a predefined HTML template (see Figure 11). Later it commits intended effects to the application state and copies data from the sandbox internal DOM.  61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71  <!DOCTYPE html> <html lang="en"> <head> <script src="jquery.js"></script> <script src="jquery.formatDateTime.js"></script> </head> <body> <!−− Body of the page −−> <h1 id="headline">Headline</h1> </body> </html> Figure 11 File template.html contains the <script> tags for loading the jQuery code from index.html in Figure 7.  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91  <!DOCTYPE html> <html lang="en"> <head> <!−− ... −−> <!−− Checks for conflicts with Datejs −−> <script type="text/javascript"> sbx2.applyRule( new Rule.Commit(Date, function(sbx, effect) { return !sbx.inConflictWith(sbx2, Date); }); sbx2.applyRule( new Rule.RollbackOn(Date, function(sbx, effect) { return sbx.inConflictWith(sbx2, Date); }); </script> </head> <body"> <!−− ... −−> </body> </html> Figure 12 Checking for conflicts. The HTML code first checks for conflicts between Datejs and jQuery before it commits the modification of the library or rolls back.  31  32  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127  128 129 130  <!DOCTYPE html> <html lang="en"> <head> <!−− DecentJS code−−> <script src="decent.js"></script> <!−− Runs Datejs in a fresh sandbox. −−> <script type="text/javascript"> var sbx = new Sandbox(this, Sandbox.DEFAULT); sbx.request("datejs.js"); sbx.applyRule(new Rule.CommitOn(Date, function(sbx, effect) { return (effect instanceof Effect.Set) && !(effect.name in Date); })); </script> <!−− Runs jQuery in a fresh sandbox. −−> <script type="text/javascript"> var sbx2 = new Sandbox(this, Sandbox.WEB); sbx2.initialize("template.html"); sbx2.applyRule(new Rule.Commit(this, "jQuery")); sbx2.applyRule(new Rule.Commit(this, "$")); </script> <!−− Checks for conflicts with Datejs −−> <script type="text/javascript"> sbx2.applyRule(new Rule.Commit(Date, function(sbx, effect) { return !sbx.inConflictWith(sbx2, Date); }); sbx2.applyRule(new Rule.RollbackOn(Date, function(sbx, effect) { return sbx.inConflictWith(sbx2, Date); }); </script> </head> <body> <!−− Body of the page −−> <h1 id="headline">Headline</h1> <script type="text/javascript"> window.$("#headline").text("Changed Headline"); document.getElementById("headline").innerHTML=sbx2.dom.document. getElementById("headline").innerHTML; </script> </body> </html> Figure 13 Execution of library code in a sandbox (cf. Section A in the paper). The first <script> tag loads the sandbox implementation. The second <script> tag instantiates a new sandbox sbx and loads and executes Datejs inside the sandbox. Later it commits intended effects to the native Date object. The third <script> tag instantiates sandbox sbx2 and initializes the sandbox with a predefined HTML template (see Figure 11 in the paper). Later it commits intended modifications to the application state. The last <script> tag checks for conflicts between Datejs and jQuery before it commits further modification on Date or rolls back. The <script> tag included in the body performs a modification of the sandbox internal DOM and copies the changes to the global DOM,  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  B  Application Scenarios  This section considers some example scenarios that use the implemented system. All examples are drawn from other projects and use this work’s sandboxing mechanism to guarantee noninterference.  B.1  TreatJS  TreatJS [20] is a higher-order contract system for JavaScript which enforces contracts by run-time monitoring. TreatJS is implemented as a library so that all aspects of a contract can be specified using the full JavaScript language. For example, the base contract typeNumber checks its argument to be a number. 1 2 3  var typeNumber = Contract.Base(function (arg) { return (typeof arg) === ’number’; }); Asserting a base contracts to a value causes the predicate to be checked by applying the predicate to the value. In JavaScript, any function can be used as any return value can be converted to boolean21 .  4  Contract.assert(1, typeNumber); // accepted TreatJS relies on the sandbox presented in this work to guarantee that the execution of contract code does not interfere with the contract abiding execution of the host program. As read-only access to objects and functions is safe and useful in many contracts, TreatJS facilitates making external references visible inside of the sandbox. For example, the isArray contract below references the global object Array.  5 6 7  var isArray = Contract.With({Array:Array}, Contract.Base(function (arg) { return (arg instanceof Array); })); However, TreatJS forbids all write accesses and traps the unintended write to the global variable type in the following code.  8 9 10 11  var typeNumberBroken = Contract.Base(function(arg) { type = (typeof arg); return type === ’number’; });  B.2  TreatJS Online  TreatJS-Online22 [22] is a web frontend for experimentation with the TreatJS contract system [20]. It enables the user to enter code fragments that run in combination with the TreatJS code. All aspects of TreatJS are accessible to the user code. However, the user code should neither be able to compromise the contract system nor the website’s functioning by writing to the browser’s document or window objects. Without any precaution, a code snippet like  21 22  JavaScript programmers speak of truthy or falsy about values that convert to true or false. http://www2.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/~keilr/treatjs/  33  34  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  function Observer(target, handler) { var sbx = new Sandbox({}, {/∗ parameters omitted ∗/}); var controller = { get: function(target, name, receiver) { var trap = handler.get; var result = trap && sbx.call(trap, target, name, receiver); var raw = target[name]; return observerOf(raw, result) ? result : raw; }}; return new Proxy(target, controller); }  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11  Figure 14 Implementation of an observer proxy (excerpt). The get trap evaluates the user specific trap in a sandbox to guarantee noninterference. Afterwards it performs the usual operation and compares the outcomes of both executions. Other traps can be implemented in the same way.  1 2 3  Contract.assert = function(arg) { return arg; } could change the Contract objects to influence subsequent executions, To avoid these issues, the website creates a fresh sandbox environment, builds a function closure with the user’s input, and executes the user code in the sandbox. The sandbox grants read-only access to the TreatJS API and to JavaScript’s built-in objects like Object, Function, Array, and so on, but it does not provide access to browser objects like document and window. Further, each new invocation reverts the sandbox to its initial state.  B.3  Observer Proxies  An observer proxy23 is a restricted version of a JavaScript proxy that cannot change the behavior of the proxy’s target arbitrarily. It implements a projection in that it either implements the same behavior as the target object or it raises an exception. A similar feature is provided by Racket’s chaperones [37]. Such an observer can cause a program to fail more often, but in case it does not fail it would behave in the same way as if not observer were present. Figure 14 contains the getter part of the JavaScript implementation of Observer, the constructor of an observer proxy. It accepts the same arguments as the constructor of a normal proxy object. It returns a proxy, but interposes a different handler, controller, that wraps the execution of all user provided traps in a sandbox. The controller’s get trap evaluates the user’s get trap (if one exists) in a sandbox. Next, it performs a normal property access on the target value to produce the same side effects and to obtain a baseline value to compare the results. observerOf checks whether the sandboxed result is suitably related to the baseline value.  23  This observer proxy in this Subsection should not be confused with the observer proxy mention in the paper. The observer mentions in Section 3.5 is a normal proxy implementing a membrane.  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  35  Constant 3c Variable 3 x, y Expression 3 e, f, g ::= c | x | op(e, f ) | λx.e | e(f ) | new e | e[f ] | e[f ] = g Figure 15 Syntax of λJ .  Value  3 u, v, w  ::= c | l  Closure Dictionary Object  3f 3d 3o  ::= − | (ρ, λx.e) ::= ∅ | d[c 7→ v] ::= (d, f, v)  Environment 3 ρ Store 3σ  ::= ∅ | ρ[x 7→ v] ::= ∅ | σ[l 7→ o]  Figure 16 Semantic domains of λJ .  C  Semantics of Sandboxing  This section first introduces λJ , an untyped call-by-value lambda calculus with objects and object proxies that serves as a core calculus for JavaScript, inspired by previous work [13, 21]. It defines its syntax and describes its semantics informally. Later on we extends λJ to a new calculus λSBX , which adds a sandbox to the core calculus. J  C.1  Core Syntax of λJ  Figure 15 defines the syntax of λJ . A λJ expression is either a constant, a variable, an operation on primitive values, a lambds abstraction, an application, a creation of an empty object, a property read, or a property assignment. Variables x, y are drawn from denumerable sets of symbols and constants c include JavaScript’s primitive values like numbers, strings, booleans, as well as undefined and null. The syntax do not make proxies available to the user, but offers an internal method to wrap objects. Sandbox  3S  ::= Λx.e  Expression 3 e, f, g ::= · · · | S | fresh e Term 3t ::= · · · | fresh S | wrap(v) Object Values  3o ::= · · · | (l, b l, ρb) 3 u, v, w ::= · · · | (b ρ, S)  Figure 17 Extensions of λSBX . J  36  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript Term  3 t ::= e | op(v, f ) | op(v, w) | l(f ) | l(v) | new v | l[f ] | l[c] | l[f ] = g | l[c] = g | l[c] = w  Figure 18 Intermediate terms of λJ .  C.2  Semantic Domains  Figure 16 defines the semantic domains of λJ . Its main component is a store that maps a location l to an object o, which is a native object (non-proxy object) represented by a triple consisting of a dictionary d, a potential function closure f , and a value v acting as prototype. A dictionary d models the properties of an object. It maps a constant c to a value v. An object may be a function in which case its closure consists of a lambda expression λx.e and an environment ρ that binds the free variables. It maps a variable x to a value v. A non-function object is indicated by − in this place. A value v is either a constant c or a location l.  C.3  Evaluation of λJ  A pretty-big-step semantics [4] introduces intermediate terms to model partially evaluated expressions (Figure 18). An intermediate term is thus an expression where zero or more top-level subexpressions are replaced by their outcomes. The evaluation judgment is similar to a standard big-step evaluation judgment except that its input ranges over intermediate terms: It states that evaluation of term t with initial store σ, and environment ρ results in a final store σ 0 and value v. ρ ` hσ, ti ⇓ hσ 0 , vi Figure 19 defines the standard evaluation rules for expressions e in λJ . The inference rules for expressions e are mostly standard. Each rule for a composite expression evaluates exactly one subexpression and then recursively invokes the evaluation judgment to continue. Once all subexpressions are evaluated, the respective rule performs the desired operation.  C.4  Sandboxing of λJ  This section extends the base calculus λJ to a calculus λSBX which adds sandboxing of J function expressions. The calculus describes only the core features that illustrates the principles of our sandbox. Further features of the application level can be implemented in top of the calculus. Figure 17 defines the syntax and semantics of λSBX as an extension of λJ . Expressions J now contain a sandbox abstraction S and a sandbox construction fresh e that instantiates a fresh sandbox. Terms are extended with a fresh S term. A new internal wrap(v) term, which did not occour in source programs, wraps a value in a sandbox environment. Objects now contain object proxies. A proxy object is a single location controlled by a proxy handler that mediates the access to the target location. For simplification, we represent handler objects by there meta-data. So, each handler is an sandbox handler that enforces write-protection (viz. by an secure location b l that acts as an shadow object for the proxies target object l and a single secure environment ρb).  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  37  Op-E Const  Var  ρ ` σ, c ⇓ σ, c  ρ ` σ, x ⇓ σ, ρ(x)  ρ ` σ, e ⇓ σ 0 , v ρ ` σ 0 , op(v, f ) ⇓ σ 00 , w ρ ` σ, op(e, f ) ⇓ σ 00 , w  Op-F  ρ ` σ, f ⇓ σ 0 , u ρ ` σ 0 , op(v, u) ⇓ σ 00 , w  Op  ρ ` σ, op(v, f ) ⇓ σ , w  ρ ` σ, op(v, u) ⇓ σ, w  00  w = op(v, u)  App-E Abs  l∈ / dom(σ)  ρ ` σ, e ⇓ σ 0 , l ρ ` σ 0 , l(f ) ⇓ σ 00 , w  σ = σ[l 7→ (∅, (ρ, λx.e), null)] 0  ρ ` σ, λx.e ⇓ σ 0 , l  ρ ` σ, e(f ) ⇓ σ 00 , w  App-F  ρ ` σ, f ⇓ σ 0 , v ρ ` σ 0 , l(v) ⇓ σ 00 , w  App  (d, (ρ0 , λx.e), u) = σ(l)  ρ ` σ, l(f ) ⇓ σ 00 , w  ρ0 [x 7→ v] ` σ, e ⇓ σ 0 , w  ρ ` σ, l(v) ⇓ σ 0 , w  New-E  ρ ` σ, e ⇓ σ 0 , v ρ ` σ 0 , new v ⇓ σ 00 , w  Get-E New  l∈ / dom(σ)  ρ ` σ, new e ⇓ σ , w  0  σ = σ[l 7→ (∅, −, v)]  ρ ` σ, new v ⇓ σ 0 , l  00  Get-F  ρ ` σ, f ⇓ σ 0 , c ρ ` σ 0 , l[c] ⇓ σ 00 , w  ρ ` σ, e[f ] ⇓ σ 00 , w Get-Proto  Get  (d, f, v) = σ(l)  00  ρ ` σ, l[f ] ⇓ σ , w  c ∈ dom(d)  (d, f, l0 ) = σ(l) c∈ / dom(d) ρ ` σ, l0 [c] ⇓ σ, v  ρ ` σ, l[c] ⇓ σ, d(c)  ρ ` σ, l[c] ⇓ σ, v  Put-E Get-Undef 0  (d, f, c ) = σ(l)  ρ ` σ, e ⇓ σ 0 , l ρ ` σ 0 , l[f ] ⇓ σ 00 , w  c∈ / dom(d)  ρ ` σ, l[c] ⇓ σ, undefined  ρ ` σ, e ⇓ σ 0 , l ρ ` σ 0 , l[f ] = g ⇓ σ 00 , w ρ ` σ, e[f ] = g ⇓ σ 00 , w  Put-F  ρ ` σ, f ⇓ σ 0 , c ρ ` σ 0 , l[c] = g ⇓ σ 00 , w ρ ` σ, l[f ] = g ⇓ σ 00 , w  Put-G  ρ ` σ, g ⇓ σ 0 , v ρ ` σ 0 , l[c] = v ⇓ σ 00 , w ρ ` σ, l[c] = g ⇓ σ 00 , w  Put  (d, f, u) = σ(l)  σ 0 = σ[l 7→ (d[c 7→ v], f, u)]  ρ ` σ, l[c] = v ⇓ σ 0 , v  Figure 19 Inference rules for intermediate terms of λJ .  38  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  Sandbox-Fresh-E  ρ ` σ, e ⇓ σ 0 , Λx.f ρ ` σ 0 , fresh Λx.f ⇓ σ 00 , v ρ ` σ, fresh e ⇓ σ , v 00  Sandbox-Fresh  ∅ ` σ, Λx.e ⇓ σ, (b ρ, Λx.e) ρ ` σ, fresh Λx.e ⇓ σ, (b ρ, Λx.e) Sandbox-Application  Sandbox-Abstraction  ρb ` σ, Λx.e ⇓ σ, (b ρ, Λx.e)  ρb ` σ, wrap(v) ⇓ σ 0 , vb ρb[x 7→ vb] ` σ 0 , e ⇓ σ 00 , w b  ρ ` σ, (b ρ, Λx.e)(v) ⇓ σ 00 , w b  Figure 20 Sandbox abstraction and application rules of λSBX . J  For clarity, we write vb, u b, w b for wrapped values that are imported into a sandbox, ρb for a sandbox environment that only contains wrapped values, and b l for locations of proxies and shadow objects. Consequently, values are extended with sandboxes which represents an sandbox expression wrapped in a sandbox environment that is to be executed when the value is used in an application.  C.4.1  Evaluation of λSBX J  Figure 20 contains its inference rules for sandbox abstraction and sandbox application of λSBX . The formalization employs pretty-big-step semantics [4] to model side effects while J keeping the number of evaluation rules manageable. The rule for expression fresh e (Rule Sandbox-Fresh-E) evaluates the subexpression and invokes the evaluation judgment to continue. The other rules show the last step in a pretty big step evaluation. Once all subexpressions are evaluated, the respective rule performs the desired operation. Sandbox execution happens in the context of a secure sandbox environment to preserve noninterference. So a sandbox definition (abstraction) will evaluate to a sandbox closure containing the sandbox expression (the abstraction) together with an empty environment (Rule Sandbox-Fresh). Each sandbox executions starts from a fresh environment. This guarantees that not unwrapped values are reachable by the sandbox. Sandbox abstraction (Rule Sandbox-Abstraction) proceeds only on secure environments, which is either an empty set or an environment that contains only secure (wrapped) values. Sandbox execution (Rule Sandbox-Application) applies after the first expression evaluates to a sandbox closure and the second expression evaluates to a value. It wraps the given value and triggers the evaluation of expressions e in the sandbox environment ρb after binding the wrapped value vb. Value vb acts as the global object of the sandbox. It can be used to make values visible inside ob the sandbox.  C.4.2  Sandbox Encapsulation  The sandbox encapsulation (Figure 21) distinguishes several cases. A primitive value and a sandbox closure is not wrapped. To wrap a location that points to a non-proxy object, the location is packed in a fresh proxy along with a fresh shadow object and the current sandbox environment. This packaging ensures that each further access to the wrapped location has to use the current environment.  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  39  Wrap-Const  Wrap-Sandbox  ρb ` σ, wrap(c) ⇓ σ, c  ρb ` σ, wrap((b ρ0 , S)) ⇓ σ, (b ρ0 , S)  Wrap-NonProxyObject  6 ∃l0 ∈ dom(σ) : (l, b l, ρb) = σ(l0 ) ρb ` σ, compile(l) ⇓ σ 0 , b l 0 b l 6∈ dom(σ 0 ) σ 00 = σ 0 [b l0 7→ (l, b l, ρb)] 00 b0 ρb ` σ, wrap(l) ⇓ σ , l  Wrap-Existing  ρb ` σ[b l 7→ (l, b l0 , ρb)], wrap(l) ⇓ σ, b l  Wrap-ProxyObject  ρb ` σ[b l 7→ (l, b l0 , ρb)], wrap(b l) ⇓ σ, b l Figure 21 Inference rules for sandbox encapsulation.  Recompile-FunctionObject Recompile-NonFunctionObject  l 7→ (∅, −, null)] σ = σ[b ρb ` σ[l 7→ (d, −, v)], compile(l) ⇓ σ, b l b l 6∈ dom(σ)  0  6 ∃b l ∈ dom(σ) : (d, (b ρ, λx.e), v) = σ(b l) 0 b b l 6∈ dom(σ) σ = σ[l 7→ (∅, (b ρ, λx.e), null)] ρb ` σ[l 7→ (d, (ρ, λx.e), v)], compile(l) ⇓ σ, b l  Recompile-Existing  ρb ` σ[b l 7→ (d, (b ρ, λx.e), v)], compile(b l) ⇓ σ, b l  Recompile-ProxyObject  ρb ` σ[l 7→ (l0 , b l, ρb)], compile(l0 ) ⇓ σ, b l 0 b ρb ` σ[l 7→ (l , l, ρb)], compile(l) ⇓ σ, b l  Figure 22 Inference rules for object re-compilation.  In case the location is already wrapped by a sandbox proxy or the location of a sandbox proxy gets wrapped then the location to the existing proxy is returned. This rule ensures that an object is wrapped at most once and thus preserves object identity inside the sandbox. The shadow object is build from recompiling (Figure 22) the target object. A shadow objects is a new empty object that may carry a sandboxed replication of its closure part. For a non-function object, recompiling returns an empty object that later on acts as a sink for property assignments on the wrapped objects. For a function object, recompiling extracts the function body from the closure and redefines the body with respect to the current sandbox environment. The new closure is put into a new empty object. This step erases all external bindings of function closure and ensures that the application of a wrapped function happens in the context of the secure sandbox environment. In case the function is already recompiled, function recompilation returns the existing replication.  C.4.3  Application, Read, and Assignment  Function application, property read, and property assignment distinguish two cases: either the operation applies directly to a non-proxy object or it applies to a proxy. If the target of the operation is not a proxy object, then the usual rules apply. Figure 23 contains the inference rules for function application and property access for the  40  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  App-Sandbox  ρb ` σ, wrap(v) ⇓ σ 0 , vb ρ ` σ0 , b l(b v ) ⇓ σ 00 , w b 0 b ρ ` σ[l 7→ (l , l, ρb)], l(v) ⇓ σ 00 , w b  Get-Shadow  c ∈ dom(b l)  ρ ` σ[l 7→ (l0 , b l, ρb)], b l[c] ⇓ σ 0 , vb ρ ` σ[l 7→ (l0 , b l, ρb)], l[c] ⇓ σ 0 , vb  Get-Sandbox  c 6∈ dom(b l)  ρ ` σ[l 7→ (l0 , b l, ρb)], l0 [c] ⇓ σ 0 , v 0 ρb ` σ , wrap(v) ⇓ σ 00 , vb ρ ` σ[l 7→ (l0 , b l, ρb)], l[c] ⇓ σ 00 , vb  Put-Sandbox  ρ ` σ[l 7→ (l0 , b l, ρb)], b l[c] = v ⇓ σ 0 , v ρ ` σ[l 7→ (l0 , b l, ρb)], l[c] = v ⇓ σ 0 , v  Figure 23 Inference rules for function application, property read, and property assignment.  non-standard cases. The application of a wrapped function proceeds by unwrapping the function and evaluating it in the sandbox environment contained in the proxy. The function argument and its result are known to be wrapped in this case. A property read on a wrapped object has two cases depending on if the accessed property has been written in the sandbox before, or not. The notation c ∈ dom(l) is defined as an shortcut of a dictionary lookup c ∈ dom(d) with σ(l) = (d, f, v). A property read of an affected field reads the property from the shadow location. Otherwise, it continues the operation on the target and wraps the resulting value. An assignment to a wrapped object is continues with the operation on the shadow location b l. In JavaScript, write operations do only change properties of the object’s dictionary. They do not affect the object’s prototype. Therefor, the shadow object did not contain any prototype informations. It acts only a shadow that absorbs write operations.  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  D  41  Technical Results  As JavaScript is a memory safe programming language, a reference can be seen as the right ti modify the underlying object. If an expressions body can be shown not to contain unprotected references to objects, then it cannot modify this data. To prove soundness of our sandbox we show termination insensitive noninterference. It requires to show that the initial store σ of a sandbox application is observational equivalent to the final store σ 0 , that remains after the application. In detail, the sandbox application may introduce new objects or even write to shadow objects (only reachable inside of the sandbox) but every value reachable from the outside remains unmodified. As the calculus in Appendix C did not support variable updates on environments ρ the only way to make changes persistent is to modify objects. Thus, proving noninterference relates different stores and looks for differences in the store with respect to all reachable values.  D.1  Observational Equivalence on Stores  First, we introduce an equivalence relation on stores with respect to other semantic elements. I Definition 1. Two stores σ, σ 0 are equivalent w.r.t constants c, c0 if the constants are equal. (σ, c) ' (σ 0 , c0 ) ⇔ c = c I Definition 2. Two stores σ, σ 0 are equivalent w.r.t locations l, l0 if they are equivalent on the location’s target. (σ, l) ' (σ 0 , l0 ) ⇔ (σ, σ(l)) ' (σ 0 , σ 0 (l0 )) I Definition 3. Two stores σ, σ 0 are equivalent w.r.t non-proxy objects (d, f, v), (d0 , f 0 , v 0 ) if they are equivalent on the objects’s constituents. (σ, (d, f, v)) ' (σ 0 , (d0 , f 0 , v 0 )) ⇔ (σ, d) ' (σ 0 , d0 ) ∧ (σ, f ) ' (σ 0 , f 0 ) ∧ (σ, v) ' (σ 0 , v 0 ) I Definition 4. Two stores σ, σ 0 are equivalent w.r.t dictionaries d, d0 if they are equivalent on the dictionary’s content. (σ, d) ' (σ 0 , d0 ) ⇔ dom(d) = dom(d0 ) ∧ ∀c ∈ dom(d).(σ, d(c)) ' (σ 0 , d0 (c)) I Definition 5. Two stores σ, σ 0 are equivalent w.r.t closures (ρ, λx.e), (ρ0 , λx.f ) if the are equivalent on the closure’s environment and both abstractions are equal. (σ, (ρ, λx.e)) ' (σ 0 , (ρ0 , λx.f )) ⇔ (σ, ρ) ' (σ 0 , ρ0 ) ∧ λx.e = λx.f I Definition 6. Two stores σ, σ 0 are equivalent w.r.t environments ρ, ρ0 if the are equivalent on the environment’s content. (σ, ρ) ' (σ 0 , ρ0 ) ⇔ dom(ρ) = dom(ρ0 ) ∧ ∀x ∈ dom(ρ).(σ, ρ(x)) ' (σ 0 , ρ(x))  42  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  I Definition 7. Two stores σ, σ 0 are equivalent w.r.t proxy objects (l, b l, ρb), (l0 , b l0 , ρb0 ) if they are equivalent on the objects’s constituents. (σ, (l, b l, ρb)) ' (σ 0 , (l0 , b l0 , ρb0 )) ⇔ (σ, l) ' (σ 0 , l0 ) ∧ (σ, b l) ' (σ 0 , b l0 ) ∧ (σ, ρb) ' (σ 0 , ρb0 ) I Definition 8. Two stores σ, σ 0 are equivalent w.r.t sandbox closures (b ρ, Λx.e), (b ρ0 , Λx.f ) if the are equivalent on the sandbox’s environment and both abstractions are equal. (σ, (b ρ, Λx.e)) ' (σ 0 , (b ρ0 , Λx.f )) ⇔ (σ, ρb) ' (σ 0 , ρb0 ) ∧ Λx.e = Λx.f Now, the observational equivalence for stores can be states as follows. I Definition 9. Two stores σ, σ 0 are observational equivalent under environment ρ if they are equivalent on all values v ∈ {ρ(x) | x ∈ dom(ρ)} σ 'ρ σ 0 ⇔ ∀x ∈ dom(ρ).(σ, ρ(x)) ' (σ 0 , ρ(x)) I Lemma 10. Suppose that ρi ` hσi , ei ⇓ hσi0 , vi i then for all σj , ρj with (σi , ρi ) ' (σj , ρj ) . ρj ` hσj , ei ⇓ hσj0 , vj i with (σi0 , ρi ) ' (σj0 , ρj ) and (σi0 , v) ' (σj0 , w). Proof. Proof by induction on the derivation of e.  D.2  J  Noninterference  I Theorem 11. For each ρ and σ with ρ ` hσ, (fresh Λx.e)(f )i ⇓ hσ 0 , vi it holds that σ 'ρ σ 0 . Proof. Proof by induction on the derivation of e.  J  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  E  Related work  There is a plethora of literature on securing JavaScript, so we focus on the distinguishing features of our sandbox and on related work not already discussed in the body of the paper.  Sandboxing JavaScript The most closely related work to our sandbox mechanism is the design of access control wrappers for revocable references and membranes [39, 26]. In a memory-safe language, a function can only cause effects to objects reachable from references in parameters and global variables. A revocable reference can be instructed to detach from the objects, so that they are no longer reachable and safe from effects. However, as membranes by themselves do not handle side effects (every property access can be the call of a side-effecting getter) they do not implement a sandbox in the way we did. Agten et al. [2] implement a JavaScript sandbox using proxies and membranes. As in our work, they place wrappers around sensitive data (e.g., DOM elements) to enforce policies and to prevent the application state from unprotected script inclusion. However, instead of encapsulating untrusted code they require that scripts are compliant with SES [34], a subset of JavaScript’s “strict mode” that prohibits features that are either unsafe or that grant uncontrolled access, and use an SES-library to execute those scripts. A language-embedded JavaScript parser transforms non-compliant scripts at run time, but doing so restricts the handling of dynamic code compared to our approach. TreatJS, a JavaScript contract system [20], uses a sandboxing mechanism similar to the sandbox presented in this work to guarantee that the execution of a predicate does not interfere with the execution of a contract abiding host program. As in our work, they use JavaScript’s dynamic facilities to traverse the scope chain when evaluating predicates and they use JavaScript proxies to make external references visible when evaluating predicates. Arnaud et al. [3] provide features similar to the sandboxing mechanism of TreatJS [20]. Both approaches focus on access restriction to guarantee side-effect free contract assertion. However, neither of them implements a full-blown sandbox, because writing is completely forbidden and always leads to an exception. Our sandbox works in a similar way and guarantees read-only access to target objects, but redirects write operations to shadow objects such that local modifications are only visible inside the sandbox. However, access restrictions in all tree approaches affect only values that cross the border between two execution environments. Values that are defined and used inside, e.g. local values, were not restricted. Write access to those values is fine. Patil et al. [29] present JCShadow, a reference monitor implemented as a Firefox extension. Their tool provides fine-grained access control to JavaScript resources. Similar to DecentJS, they implement shadow scopes that isolate scripts from each other and which regulate the granularity of object access. Unlike DecentJS, JCShadow achieves a better runtime performance. While more efficient, their approach is platform-dependent as it is tied to a specific engine and requires active maintenance to keep up with the development of the enigine. DecentJS, in contrast, is a JavaScript library based on the reflection API, which is part of the standard. Most other approaches (e.g., [11, 27, 8, 1]) implement restrictions by filtering and rewriting untrusted code or by removing features that are either unsafe of that grant uncontrolled access. For exampe, Caja [11, 27] compiles JavaScript code in a sanitized JavaScript subset that can safely be executed on normal engines. Because static guarantees do not apply to code created at run time using eval or other mechanisms, Caja restricts dynamic features  43  44  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  and rewrites the code to a “cajoled” version with additional run-time checks that prevent access to unsafe function and objects. Static approaches come with a number of drawbacks, as shown by a number of papers [23, 9, 31]. First, they either restrict the dynamic features of JavaScript or their guarantees simply do not apply to code generated at run time. Second, maintenance requires a lot of effort because the implementation becomes obsolete as the language evolves. Thus, dynamic effect monitoring and dynamic access restriction plays an important role in the context of JavaScript security, as shown by a number of authors [3, 39, 26, 19].  Effect Monitoring Richards et al. [32] provide a WebKit implementation to monitor JavaScript programs at run time. Rather than performing syntactic checks, they look at effects for history-based access control and revoke effects that violate policies implemented in C++. Transcript, a Firefox extension by Dhawan et al. [7], extends JavaScript with support for transactions and speculative DOM updates. Similar to DecentJS, it builds a transactional scope and permits the execution of unrestricted guest code. Effects within a transaction are logged for inspection by the host program. They also provide features to commit updates and to recover from effects of malicious guest code. JSConTest [16] is a framework that helps to investigate the effects of unfamiliar JavaScript code by monitoring the execution and by summarizing the observed access traces to access permission contracts. It comes with an algorithm [17] that infers a concise effect description from a set of access paths and it enables the programmer to specify the effects of a function using access permission contracts. JSConTest is implemented by an offline source code transformation. Because of JavaScrip’s flexibility it requires a lot of effort to construct an offline transformation that guarantees full interposition and that covers the full JavaScript language. This, the implementation of JSConTest has known omissions: no support for with and prototypes, and it does not apply to code created at run time using eval or other mechanisms. JSConTest2 is a redesign and a reimplementation of JSConTest using JavaScript proxies. The new implementation addresses shortcomings of the previous version: it guarantees full interposition for the full language and for all code regardless of its origin, including dynamically loaded code and code injected via eval. JSConTest2 [18] monitors read and write operations on objects through access permission contracts that specify allowed effects. A contract restricts effects by defining a set of permitted access paths starting from some anchor object. However, the approach works differently. JSConTest2 has to encapsulate sensitive data instead of encapsulating dubious functions.  Language-embedded Systems JSFlow [15] is a full language-embedded JavaScript interpreter that enforces information flow policies at run time. Like DecentJS, JSFlow itself is implemented in JavaScript. Compared to DecentJS, the JSFlow interpreter causes a significantly higher run-time impact than the our sandbox, which only reimplements the JavaScript semantics on the membrane. A similar slowdown is reported for js.js [38], another language-embedded JavaScript interpreter conceived to execute untrusted JavaScript code. Its implementation provides a wealth of powerful features similar to DecentJS: fine-grained access control, support for the full JavaScript language, and full browser compatibility. However, its average slowdown in the range of 100 to 200 is significantly higher than DecentJS’s.  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  F  Evaluation Results  This section reports on our experience with applying the sandbox to select programs. We focus on the influence of sandboxing on the execution time. We use the Google Octane Benchmark Suite24 to measure the performance of the sandbox implementation. Octane measures a JavaScript engine’s performance by running a selection of complex and demanding programs (benchmark programs run between 5 and 8200 times). Google claims that Octane “measure[s] the performance of JavaScript code found in large, real-world web applications, running on modern mobile and desktop browsers. Each benchmark is complex and demanding . We use Octane as it is intended to measure the engine’s performance (benchmark programs run between 5 and 8200 times). we claim that it is the heaviest kind of benchmark. Every real-world library (e.g. jQuery) is less demanding and runs without an measurable runtime impact. Octane 2.0 consists of 17 programs25 that range from performance tests to real-world web applications (Figure ??), from an OS kernel simulation to a portable PDF viewer. Each program focuses on a special purpose, for example, function and method calls, arithmetic and bit operations, array manipulation, JavaScript parsing and compilation, etc.  F.1  Testing Procedure  All benchmarks were run on a machine with two AMD Opteron processors with 2.20 GHz and 64 GB memory. All example runs and measurements reported in this paper were obtained with the SpiderMonkey JavaScript engine. For benchmarking, we wrote a new start script that loads and executes each benchmark program in a fresh sandbox. By setting the sandbox global to the standard global object, we ensure that each benchmark program can refer to properties of the global object as needed. As sandboxing wraps the global object in a membrane it mediates the interaction of the benchmark program with the global application state. All run time measurements were taken from a deterministic run, which requires a predefined number of iterations26 , and by using a warm-up run.  F.2  Results  Figure 24 and Figure 25 contains the run-time statistics for all benchmark programs in two different configurations, which are explained in the figure’s caption, and lists the readouts of some internal counters. Multiple read effects to the same field of an object are counted as one effect. As expected, the run time increases when executing a benchmark in a sandbox. While some programs like EarleyBoyer, NavierStrokes, pdf.js, Mandreel, and Box2DWeb are heavily affected, others are only slightly affected: Richards, Crypto, RegExp, and Code loading, for instance. Unfortunately, DeltaBlue and zlib do not run in our sandbox. DeltaBlue attempts to add a new property to the global Object.prototype object. As our sandbox prevents unintended modifications to Object.prototype the new property is only visible inside of the 24  https://developers.google.com/octane https://developers.google.com/octane/benchmark 26 Programs run either for one second or for a predefined number of iterations. If there are too few iterations in one second, it runs for another second. 25  45  46  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  Benchmark Richards DeltaBlue Crypto RayTrace EarleyBoyer RegExp Splay SplayLatency NavierStokes pdf.js Mandreel MandreelLatency Gameboy Emulator Code loading Box2DWeb zlib TypeScript Total  Baseline time (sec) 9 9 18 9 19 6 3 3 3 7 8 8 4 8 4 7 26  Sandbox w/o Effects time (sec) slowdown  Sandbox w Effects time (sec) slowdown  sec sec sec sec sec sec sec sec sec sec sec sec sec sec sec sec sec  12 sec 42 sec 74 sec 202 sec 9 sec 19 sec 19 sec 56 sec 113 sec 151 sec 151 sec 17 sec 11 sec 145 sec 61 sec  1.33 2.33 8.22 10.63 1.5 6.33 6.33 18.67 16.14 18.88 18.88 4.25 1.38 36.25 2.35  15 sec 88 sec 498 sec 249 sec 12 sec 33 sec 33 sec 61 sec 778 sec 483 sec 483 sec 26 sec 12 sec 1,302 sec 328 sec  1.67 4.89 55.33 13.11 2 11 11 20.33 111.14 60.38 60.38 6.50 1.50 325.50 12.62  135 sec  1.082 sec  8.01  4,401 sec  32.60  Figure 24 Timings from running the Google Octane 2.0 Benchmark Suite. The first column Baseline gives the baseline execution times without sandboxing. The column Sandbox w/o Effects shows the time required to complete a sandbox run without effect logging and the relative slowdown (Sandbox time/Baseline time). The column Sandbox w Effects shows the time and slowdown (w.r.t. Baseline) of a run with fine-grained effect logging.  current sandbox and only to objects created with new Object() and Object.create(), but not to those created using object literals. The zlib benchmark uses an indirect call27 to eval to write objects to the global scope, which is not allowed by the ECMAScript 6 (ECMA-262) specification. Another benchmark, Code loading, also uses an indirect call to eval. A small modification makes the program compatible with the normal eval, which can safely be used in our sandbox. In the first experiment we turn off effect logging, whereas in the second one it remains enabled. Doing so separates the performance impact of the sandbox system (proxies and shadow objects) from the impact caused by the effect system. From the running times we find that the sandbox itself causes an average slowdown of 8.01 (over all benchmarks). Our experimental setup wraps the global object in a membrane and mediates the interaction between the benchmark program and the global application state. As each benchmark program contains every source required to run the benchmark in separation, except global objects and global functions, the only thing that influences the execution time is read/write access to global elements. In absolute times, raw sandboxing causes a run time deterioration of 0.003ms per sandbox operation (effects) (0.011ms with effect logging enabled). For example, the Box2DWeb benchmark requires 145 seconds to complete and performs 132,722,198 effects on its membrane. Its baseline requires 4 seconds. Thus, sandboxing takes an additional 141 seconds. Hence, there is an overhead of 0.001ms per operation (0.010ms with effect logging enabled).  27  An indirect call invokes the eval function by using a name other than eval.  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  Benchmark  47  Objects  Effects  Size of Effect List Reads Writes Calls  Richards DeltaBlue Crypto RayTrace EarleyBoyer RegExp Splay SplayLatency NavierStokes pdf.js Mandreel MandreelLatency Gameboy Emulator Code loading Box2DWeb zlib TypeScript  14 21 18 33 16 16 16 15 36 31 31 28 12417 28 23  492073 4964248 51043282 4740377 296995 1635732 1635732 4089 77665629 39948598 39948598 1225935 107481 132722198 27518481  20 29 26 42 23 23 23 21 59 50 50 42 50 38 34  2 2 3 8 2 2 2 2 8 2 2 2 2 2 2  5 11 8 6 6 8 8 6 21 21 21 16 13 14 9  Total  12743  383949448  530  43  173  Figure 25 Numbers from internal counters. Column Objects shows the numbers of wrap objects and column Effects gives the total numbers of effects. Column Size of Effect List lists the numbers of different effects after running the benchmark. Column Reads shows the number of read effects distinguished from there number of write effects (Column Writes) and distinguished from there number of call effects (Column Calls). Multiple effects to the same field of an object are counted as one effect.  The results from the tests also indicate that the garbage collector runs more frequently, but there is no significant increase in the memory consumption. For the effect-heaviest benchmark Box2D we find that the virtual memory size increases from 157MByte (raw run) to 197MB (full run with effect logging). However, when looking at all benchmarks, the difference in the virtual memory size compared with the baseline run ranges from -126MByte to +40MByte for a raw sandbox run without effect logging and from -311MByte to +158MByte for a full run with fine grained effect logging. Appendix F.4 shows the memory usage of the different benchmark programs and their difference compared with the baseline.  F.3  Google Octane Scores Values  Octane reports its result in terms of a score. The Octane FAQ28 explains the score as follows: “In a nutshell: bigger is better. Octane measures the time a test takes to complete and then assigns a score that is inversely proportional to the run time.” The constants in this computation are chosen so that the current overall score (i.e., the geometric mean of the individual scores) matches the overall score from earlier releases of Octane and new benchmarks are integrated by choosing the constants so that the geometric mean remains the same. The rationale is to maintain comparability.  28  https://developers.google.com/octane/faq  48  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  Benchmark Richards DeltaBlue Crypto RayTrace EarleyBoyer RegExp Splay SplayLatency NavierStokes pdf.js Mandreel MandreelLatency Gameboy Emulator Code loading Box2DWeb zlib TypeScript  Isolation  Effects  Baseline  4825 2418 1387 954 911 1268 3630 989 434 346 2518 6572 7348 453 4554  4135 1131 179 767 1139 713 1818 890 63 106 526 4780 6000 50.1 792  6552 6982 5669 9692 10345 1535 8676 12788 15713 8182 9102 12526 31865 9136 18799 42543 12588  Figure 26 Scores for the Google Octane 2.0 Benchmark Suite (bigger is better). Block Isolation contains the score values of a raw sandbox run without effect logging, whereas block Effects contains the score values of a full run with fine-grained effect logging. The last column Baseline gives the baseline scores without sandboxing.  Figure 26 contains the scores of all benchmark programs in different configurations, which are explained in the figure’s caption. All scores were taken from a deterministic run, which requires a predefined number of iterations29 , and by using a warm-up run. As expected, all scores drop when executing the benchmark in a sandbox. In the first experiment, we turn off effect logging, whereas the second run is with effect logging. This splits the performance impact into the impact caused by the sandbox system (proxies and shadow objects) and the impact caused by effect system.  F.4  Memory Consumption  Figure 27, Figure 28, and Figure 29 shows the memory consumption recorded when running the Google Octane 2.0 Benchmark Suite. The numbers indicate that there is no significant increase in the memory consumed. For example, the difference of the virtual memory size ranges from -126 to 40 for a raw sandbox run and from -311 to +158 for a full run with fine grained effect logging.  29  Programs run either for one second or for a predefined number of iterations. If there are to few iterations in one second, it runs for another second.  M. Keil and P. Thiemann  49  Benchmark Virtual size Richards DeltaBlue Crypto RayTrace EarleyBoyer RegExp Splay SplayLatency NavierStokes pdf.js Mandreel MandreelLatency Gameboy Emulator Code loading Box2DWeb zlib TypeScript  Baseline Resident Text/Data size size  134 225 148 500 226 535 535 141 316 305 305 194 268 157 473  19 105 31 363 108 416 416 24 169 182 182 62 142 53 369  Shared size  109 201 124 476 202 511 511 116 292 280 280 170 243 132 448  5 6 5 6 6 6 6 5 6 6 6 6 6 5 6  Figure 27 Memory usage when running the Google Octane 2.0 Benchmark Suite without sandboxing. Column Virtual shows the virtual memory size, column Resident shows the resident set size, column Text/Data shows the Text/Data segment size, and column Text/Data shows the Text/Data segment size. All values are in MByte.  Benchmark  Richards DeltaBlue Crypto RayTrace EarleyBoyer RegExp Splay SplayLatency NavierStokes pdf.js Mandreel MandreelLatency Gameboy Emulator Code loading Box2DWeb zlib TypeScript  Virtual size diff.  Sandbox w/o Effects Resident Text/Data size diff. size diff.  135 232 148 374 224 466 466 134 274 263 263 188 259 197 424  20 106 31 272 107 352 352 18 123 133 133 60 138 97 325  1 +7 +0 -126 -2 -69 -69 -7 -42 -42 -42 -6 -9 +40 -49  1 +1 +0 -91 -1 -64 -64 -6 -46 -49 -49 -2 -4 +44 -44  110 208 124 350 200 422 422 109 250 239 239 163 234 172 428  1 +7 +0 -126 -2 -89 -89 -7 -42 -41 -41 -7 -9 +40 -20  Shared size diff. 5 6 6 6 6 6 6 5 6 5 5 6 6 6 6  0 0 +1 0 0 0 0 0 0 -1 -1 0 0 +1 0  Figure 28 Memory usage of a raw sandbox run without effect logging. Column Virtual shows the virtual memory size, column Resident shows the resident set size, column Text/Data shows the Text/Data segment size, and column Text/Data shows the Text/Data segment size. Sub-column size shows the size in MByte and sub-column diff. shows the difference to the baseline (Sandbox size - Baseline size) in MByte.  50  Transaction-based Sandboxing for JavaScript  Benchmark  Richards DeltaBlue Crypto RayTrace EarleyBoyer RegExp Splay SplayLatency NavierStokes pdf.js Mandreel MandreelLatency Gameboy Emulator Code loading Box2DWeb zlib TypeScript  Virtual size diff.  Sandbox w Effects Resident Text/Data size diff. size diff.  167 209 181 189 224 424 424 134 272 347 347 214 262 191 631  54 93 63 86 104 321 321 19 116 160 160 84 139 72 493  33 -16 +33 -311 -2 -111 -111 -7 -44 +42 +42 +20 -6 +34 +158  35 -12 +32 -277 -4 -95 -95 -5 -53 -22 -22 +22 -3 +19 +124  142 184 157 195 200 399 399 109 248 323 323 190 238 166 607  33 -17 +33 -281 -2 -112 -112 -7 -44 +43 +43 +20 -5 +34 +159  Shared size diff. 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 5 6 6 6 6 6 6 6  1 0 +1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 +1 0  Figure 29 Memory usage of a full run with fine-grained effect logging. Column Virtual shows the virtual memory size, column Resident shows the resident set size, column Text/Data shows the Text/Data segment size, and column Text/Data shows the Text/Data segment size. Sub-column size shows the size in MByte and sub-column diff. shows the difference to the baseline (Sandbox size - Baseline size) in MByte.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
