Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_6530

Abstract:
arXiv:1709.07566v1 [cs.CV] 22 Sep 2017  Smart Mirror: Intelligent Makeup Recommendation and Synthesis Tam V. Nguyen  Luoqi Liu  Department of Computer Science University of Dayton  Department of ECE National University of Singapore  tamnguyen@udayton.edu  liuluoqi@u.nus.edu.sg  ABSTRACT The female facial image beautification usually requires professional editing softwares, which are relatively difficult for common users. In this demo, we introduce a practical system for automatic and personalized facial makeup recommendation and synthesis. First, a model describing the relations among facial features, facial attributes and makeup attributes is learned as the makeup recommendation model for suggesting the most suitable makeup attributes. Then the recommended makeup attributes are seamlessly synthesized onto the input facial image.  Categories and Subject Descriptors I.4.9 [Image Processing and Computer Vision]: Applications  Keywords Makeup Recommendation, Makeup Synthesis  1.  INTRODUCTION  Nowadays, facial makeup has been indispensable for most modern women. As stated in L’Oreal annual report [5], the worldwide cosmetics market has reached e205 billion in 2016 along with 4% annual increase. Different from other commercial products, makeup product is person-dependent. The lack of personalized recommendation and effect visualization functionality hinders the cosmetic products’ growing for online shopping business. How to imitate the physical makeup process and synthesize the effects of these products has attracted the interest of research society [6, 7, 2, 8, 9] in the past years. Most of the studies utilize image pairs with before-and-after makeup effects. Tong et al. [9] extracted makeup from before-andafter training image pairs, and transferred the makeup effect defined as ratios to a new testing image. Meanwhile, Kristina Scherbaum et al. [8] used 3D image pairs of beforeand-after makeup, and modelled makeup as the ratio of apPermission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).  ACM MM ’17 Mountain View, CA, USA c 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-2138-9. DOI: 10.1145/1235  Figure 1: The user interface of our system: (a) the test facial image, (b) facial feature extraction, i.e., landmark point extraction, (c) makeup recommendation and synthesis, (d) comparison of the test facial image before and after makeup synthesis.  pearance. Guo and Sim [2] considered makeup effect existing in two layers of the three-layer facial decomposition result, and makeup effect of a reference image is transferred to the target image. Recently, Li et al. [4] presented a deep learning model to capture the underlying relations between facial shape and attractiveness. These works focus on the facial geometric feature while ignoring skin texture information. The aforementioned works are however still limited. First, they do not provide personalized makeup effect/products recommendation function, and the synthesized makeup is unnecessary to be suitable. Second, most of these methods adopt the global transformation approach; however, a good facial makeup effect can be generally decomposed into several individual effects like eye shadow, skin color and lip color. Therefore, in this work, we develop a practical system which can personalize the makeup product recommendation along with a function of visualizing the effect on an input facial image without makeup. The two functionalities, namely recommendation and synthesis, can supplement each other, and can significantly facilitate both in-store or online shopping experience. Our user-friendly interface is shown in Figure 1. Additionally, a short video about our system is available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tpY-FZtb-Cs.  BMD Database  Testing Phase  Training Phase Makeup Extraction  Lipstick Foundation  Eye  Makeup Invariant Features  Latent SVM  …  Recommend  Non-makeup Face  Synthesize  Facial Pupil Hair color shape Facial Attributes Narrow Eyes Black Hair White Skin  …  Face with Makeup  Figure 2: The flowchart of our proposed makeup recommendation and synthesis system.  2. 2.1  PROPOSED SYSTEM Beauty Makeup Dataset Collection  Makeup products make great commercial benefits among woman customers, however there exists no public dataset for academic research. Most previous works [9, 8, 2] are example-based or only work on a few selected samples. Chen and Zhang [1] released a benchmark for facial beauty study, but their focus is geometric facial beauty, not facial makeup. Thus, we first collected an image dataset, Beauty Makeup Dataset (BMD), from both professional makeup websites and popular image sharing websites (e.g. taaz.com and flickr.com) using key words such as make up, cosmetics, and celebrity makeup. The initially downloaded ∼ 500, 000 images are very noisy and contain many non-face images. Thus, we use a commercial face detector 1 to detect face and locate 87 facial key points in the images. Only images with faces in frontal pose, high resolution and with high face and landmark detection confidences are retained. The remaining ∼ 10, 000 images are carefully checked to remove faces without obvious makeup effects or with non-uniform illuminations. The final 500 images are in good quality and with obvious makeup effects. Then all faces are aligned and decomposed into different regions and the makeup effect analysis is performed for each region. More specifically, we focus on 1) the analysis of eye shadow and exploit spectral matting based methods to extract eye shadow templates; and 2) the modeling of colors of foundation, eye shadow and lip via color clustering method.  2.2  Makeup Recommendation and Synthesis  In this work, we propose a novel system for automatic facial makeup recommendation and synthesis. The flowchart of our system is illustrated in Figure 2. For facial makeup recommendation, makeup-invariant facial features and attributes are designed to describe the intrinsic traits of faces, and a latent SVM model [10] is learned from our BMD dataset to explore the relation among makeup-invariant facial features, attributes and makeup effects for personalized makeup recommendation. In the synthesis mode, the system recommended makeup products are seamlessly applied 1 OMRON, OKAO vision. http://www.omron.com/r d/coretech/vision/okao.html  Figure 3: The results of our makeup synthesis: before-makeup images are listed in the first row, and after-makeup ones are in the second row. Best viewed in ×3 size of original color PDF file. onto the testing face for visualizing effects. In particular, we process different facial parts (skin, eyes and lip) separately. Edge preserved filtering [3] is applied to imitate the physical effect of foundation, and then different colors are merged into respective regions. The makeup synthesis results are shown in Figure 3. A short video about our system is available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tpY-FZtb-Cs.  3.  CONCLUSION  In this work, we showcase a practical system of automatic personalized makeup recommendation and synthesis. It performs the beautification task in a learning-based manner and generates natural makeup results. We hope our work would attract more interesting research works in this area. In the future work, we are planning to focus on more detailed facial regions, i.e., eyebrow and eyelash. In addition, we shall further extend the proposed framework to handle makeup recommendation and synthesis in videos.  4.  REFERENCES  [1] F. Chen and D. Zhang. A benchmark for geometric facial beauty study. Medical Biometrics, pages 21–32, 2010. [2] D. Guo and T. Sim. Digital face makeup by example. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision Pattern Recognition, pages 73–79, 2009. [3] K. He, J. Sun, and X. Tang. Guided image filtering. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 1–14, 2010. [4] J. Li, C. Xiong, L. Liu, X. Shu, and S. Yan. Deep face beautification. In ACM Multimedia, pages 793–794, 2015. [5] L’Oreal. Annual report 2016. 2016. [6] T. V. Nguyen, S. Liu, B. Ni, J. Tan, Y. Rui, and S. Yan. Sense beauty via face, dressing, and/or voice. In ACM Multimedia, pages 239–248, 2012. [7] T. V. Nguyen, S. Liu, B. Ni, J. Tan, Y. Rui, and S. Yan. Towards decrypting attractiveness via multi-modality cues. TOMCCAP, 9(4):28:1–28:20, 2013. [8] K. Scherbaum, T. Ritschel, M. Hullin, T. Thormählen, V. Blanz, and H. Seidel. Computer-suggested facial makeup. In CGF, volume 30, pages 485–492, 2011. [9] W. Tong, C. Tang, M. Brown, and Y. Xu. Example-based cosmetic transfer. In Pacific Conference on Computer Graphics and Applications, pages 211–218, 2007. [10] Y. Wang and G. Mori. A discriminative latent model of object classes and attributes. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 155–168. Springer, 2010.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
