Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 10
ArXiv ID: hf_61

Abstract:
Diffeomorphic random sampling using optimal information transport  arXiv:1704.07897v1 [math.NA] 25 Apr 2017  Martin Bauer1 , Sarang Joshi2 , and Klas Modin3 1  3  Department of Mathematics, Florida State University bauer@math.fsu.edu 2 Department of Bioengineering, Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute, University of Utah sjoshi@sci.utah.edu Department of Mathematical Sciences, Chalmers University of Technology and the University of Gothenburg klas.modin@chalmers.se  Abstract. In this article we explore an algorithm for diffeomorphic random sampling of nonuniform probability distributions on Riemannian manifolds. The algorithm is based on optimal information transport (OIT)—an analogue of optimal mass transport (OMT). Our framework uses the deep geometric connections between the Fisher-Rao metric on the space of probability densities and the right-invariant information metric on the group of diffeomorphisms. The resulting sampling algorithm is a promising alternative to OMT, in particular as our formulation is semi-explicit, free of the nonlinear Monge–Ampere equation. Compared to Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods, we expect our algorithm to stand up well when a large number of samples from a low dimensional nonuniform distribution is needed. Keywords: density matching, information geometry, Fisher–Rao metric, optimal transport, image registration, diffeomorphism groups, random sampling MSC2010: 58E50, 49Q10, 58E10  1  Introduction  We construct algorithms for random sampling, addressing the following problem. Problem 1. Let µ be a probability distribution on a manifold M . Generate N random samples from µ. The classic approach to sample from a probability distribution on a higher dimensional space is to use Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods, for example the Metropolis–Hastings algorithm [6]. An alternative idea is to use diffeomorphic density matching between the density µ and a standard density µ0 from which samples can be drawn easily. Standard samples are then transformed by the diffeomorphism to generate non-uniform samples. In Bayesian inference,  for example, the distribution µ would be the posterior distribution and µ0 would be the prior distribution. In case the prior itself is hard to sample from the uniform distribution can be used. For M being a subset of the real line, the standard approach is to use the cumulative distribution function to define the diffeomorphic transformation. If, however, the dimension of M is greater then one there is no obvious change of variables to transform the samples to the distribution of the prior. We are thus led to the following matching problem. Problem 2. Given a probability distribution µ on M , find a diffeomorpism ϕ such that ϕ∗ µ0 = µ. Here, µ0 denotes a standard distribution on M from which samples can be drawn, and ϕ∗ is the the push-forward of ϕ acting on densities, i.e., ϕ∗ µ0 = |Dϕ|µ0 ◦ ϕ, where |Dϕ| is the Jacobian determinant. A benefit of transport-based methods over traditional MCMC methods is cheap computation of additional samples; it amounts to drawing uniform samples and then evaluating the transformation. On the other hand, transport-based methods scale poorly with increasing dimensionality of M , contrary to MCMC. The action of the diffeomorphism group on the space of smooth probability densities is transitive (Moser’s lemma [13]), so existence of a solution to Problem 2 is guaranteed. However, if the dimension of M is greater then one, there is an infinite-dimensional space of solutions. Thus, one needs to select a specific diffeomorphism within the set of all solutions. Moselhy and Marzouk [12] and Reich [15] proposed to use optimal mass transport (OMT) to construct the desired diffeomorphism ϕ, thereby enforcing ϕ = ∇c for some convex function c. The OMT approach implies solving, in one form or another, the heavily nonlinear Monge–Ampere equation for c. A survey of the OMT approach to random sampling is given by Marzouk et. al. [9]. In this article we pursue an alternative approach for diffeomorphic based random sampling, replacing OMT by optimal information transport (OIT), which is diffeomorphic transport based on the Fisher–Rao geometry [11]. Building on deep geometric connections between the Fisher–Rao metric on the space of probability densities and the right-invariant information metric on the group of diffeomorphisms [7, 11], we developed in [3] an efficient numerical method for density matching. The efficiency stems from a solution formula for ϕ that is explicit up to inversion of the Laplace operator, thus avoiding the solution of nonlinear PDE such as Monge–Ampere. In this paper we explore this method for random sampling (the initial motivation in [3] is medical imaging, although other applications, including random sampling, are also suggested). The resulting algorithm is implemented in a short MATLAB code, available under MIT license at https://github.com/kmodin/oit-random. 2  2  Density Transport Problems  Let M be an d–dimensional orientable, compact manifold equipped with a Riemannian metric g = h., .i. The volume density induced by g is denoted µ0 and without loss ofRgenerality we assume that the total volume of M with respect to µ0 is one, i.e., M µ0 = 1. Furthermore, the space of smooth probability densities on M is given by Z Prob(M ) = {µ ∈ Ω d (M ) | µ > 0, µ = 1}, (1) M d  where Ω (M ) denotes the space of smooth d-forms. The group of smooth diffeomorphisms Diff(M ) acts on the space of probability densities via push-forward: Diff(M ) × Prob(M ) 7→ Prob(M ) (ϕ, µ) → ϕ∗ µ .  (2) (3)  By a result of Moser [13] this action is transitive. We introduce the subgroup of volume preserving diffeomorphisms SDiff(M ) = {ϕ ∈ Diff(M ) | ϕ∗ µ0 = µ0 } .  (4)  Note that SDiff(M ) is the isotropy group of µ0 with respect to the action of Diff(M ). The spaces Prob(M ), Diff(M ), and SDiff(M ) all have the structure of smooth, infinite dimensional Fréchet manifold. Furthermore, Diff(M ) and SDiff(M ) are infinite dimensional Fréchet Lie groups. A careful treatment of these Fréchet topologies can be found in the work by Hamilton [5]. In the following we will focus our attention on the diffeomorphic density matching problem (Problem 2). A common approach to overcome the nonuniqueness in the solution is to add a regularization term to the problem. That is, to search for a minimum energy solution that has the required matching property, for some energy functional E on the diffeomorphism group. Following ideas from mathematical shape analysis [10] it is a natural approach to define this energy functional using the geodesic distance function dist of a Riemannian metric on the diffeomorphism group. Then the regularized diffeomorphic matching problem can be written as follows. Problem 3. Given a probability density µ ∈ Prob(M ) we want to find the diffeomorphism ϕ ∈ Diff(M ) that minimizes the energy functional E(ϕ) = dist2 (id, ϕ)  (5)  over all diffeomorphisms ϕ with ϕ∗ µ0 = µ. The free variable in the above matching problem is the choice of Riemannian metric—thus distance function—on the group of diffeomorphisms. Although not formulated as here, Moselhy and Marzouk [12] proposed to use the L2 metric on Diff(M ) Z Gϕ (u ◦ ϕ, v ◦ ϕ) = hu ◦ ϕ, v ◦ ϕi µ0 (6) M  3  for u ◦ ϕ, v ◦ ϕ ∈ Tϕ Diff(M ). This corresponds to distance-squared optimal mass transport (OMT), which induces the Wasserstein L2 distance on Prob(M ), see, for example, [14, 8, 16]. In this article we use the right-invariant H 1 -type metric GIϕ (u ◦ ϕ, v ◦ ϕ) = −  Z h∆u, viµ0 + λ M  k Z X i=1  Z hu, ξi iµ0  M  hv, ξi iµ0 ,  (7)  M  where λ > 0, ∆ is the Laplace–de Rham operator lifted to vector fields, and ξ1 , . . . , ξk is an orthonormal basis of the harmonic 1-forms on M . Because of the Hodge decomposition theorem, GI is independent of the choice of orthonormal basis ξ1 , . . . , ξk for the harmonic vector fields. This construction is related to the Fisher-Rao metric on the space of probability density [4, 2], which is predominant in the field of information geometry [1]. We call GI the information metric. See [7, 11, 3] for more information on the underlying geometry. The connection between the information metric and the Fisher-Rao metric allows us to construct almost explicit solutions formulas for Problem 2 using the explicit formulas for the geodesics of the Fisher-Rao metric. Theorem 1 ([11, 3]) Let µ ∈ Prob(M ) be a smooth probability density. The diffeomorphism ϕ ∈ Diff(M ) minimizing distGI (id, ϕ) under the constraint ϕ∗ µ0 = µ is given by ϕ(1), where ϕ(t) is obtained as the solution to the problem µ̇(t) ◦ ϕ(t), µ(t) v(t) = ∇(f (t)),  ∆f (t) =  d ϕ(t)−1 = v(t) ◦ ϕ(t)−1 , dt  (8) ϕ(0) = id  where µ(t) is the (unique) Fisher-Rao geodesic connecting µ0 and µ  r 2 Z r sin ((1 − t)θ) sin (tθ) µ µ + µ0 . µ0 , cos θ = µ(t) = sin θ sin θ µ0 µ0 M  (9)  The algorithm for diffeomorphic random sampling, described in the following section, is directly based on solving the equations (8).  3  Numerical Algorithm  In this section we explain the algorithm for random sampling using optimal information transport. It is a direct adaptation of [3, Algorithm 1]. Algorithm 1 (OIT based random sampling) Assume we have a numerical way to represent functions, vector fields, and diffeomorphisms on M , and numerical methods for 4  – – – – –  composing functions and vector fields with diffeomorphisms, computing the gradient of functions, computing solutions to Poisson’s equation on M , sampling from the standard distribution µ0 on M , and evaluating diffeomorphisms.  An OIT based algorithm for Problem 1 is then given as follows: 1. Choose a step size ε = 1/K for some positive integer K and calculate the k Fisher-Rao geodesic µ(t) and its derivative µ̇(t) at all time points tk = K using equation (9). 2. Initialize ϕ0 = id. Set k ← 0. k) 3. Compute sk = µ̇(t µ(tk ) ◦ ϕk and solve the Poisson equation ∆fk = sk .  (10)  4. Compute the gradient vector field vk = ∇fk . 5. Construct approximations ψk to exp(−εvk ), for example ψk = id −εvk .  (11)  ϕk+1 = ϕk ◦ ψk .  (12)  6. Update the diffeomorphism4  7. Set k ← k + 1 and continue from step 3 unless k = K. 8. Draw N random samples x1 , . . . xN from the uniform distribution µ0 . 9. Set yn = ϕK (xn ), n ∈ {1, . . . N }. The algorithm generates N random samples y1 , . . . , yN from the distribution µ. One can save ϕK and repeat 8-9 whenever additional samples are needed. The computationally most intensive part of the algorithm is the solution of Poisson’s equation at each time step. Notice, however, that we do not need to solve nonlinear equations, such as Monge–Ampere, as is necessary in OMT.  4  Example  In this example we consider M = T2 ' (R/2πZ)2 with distribution defined in Cartesian coordinates x, y ∈ [−π, π) by µ ∼ 3 exp(−x2 − 10(y − x2 /2 + 1)2 ) + 2 exp(−(x + 1)2 − y 2 ) + 1/10,  (13)  normalized so that the ratio between the maximum and mimimum of µ is 100. The resulting density is depicted in Fig. 1 (left). We draw 105 samples from this distribution using a MATLAB implementation of our algorithm, available under MIT license at 4  −1 −1 If needed, one may also compute the inverse by ϕ−1 k+1 = ϕk + εv ◦ ϕk .  5  https://github.com/kmodin/oit-random The implementation can be summarized as follows. To solve the lifting equations (8) we discretize the torus by a 256 × 256 mesh and use the fast Fourier transform (FFT) to invert the Laplacian. We use 100 time steps. The resulting diffeomorphism is shown as a mesh warp in Fig. 2. We then draw 105 uniform samples on [−π, π]2 and apply the diffeomorphism on each sample (applying the diffeomorphism corresponds to interpolation on the warped mesh). The resulting random samples are depicted in Fig. 1 (right). To draw new samples is very efficient. For example, another 107 samples can be drawn in less than a second on a standard laptop.  Fig. 1. (left) The probability density µ of (13). The maximal density ratio is 100. (right) 105 samples from µ calculated using our OIT based random sampling algorithm.  5  Conclusions  In this paper we explore random sampling based on the optimal information transport algorithm developed in [3]. Given the semi-explicit nature of the algorithm, we expect it to be an efficient competitor to existing methods, especially for drawing a large number of samples from a low dimensional manifold. However, a detailed comparison with other methods, including MCMC methods, is outside the scope of this paper and left for future work. We provide an example of a complicated distribution on the flat 2-torus. The method is straighforward to extended to more elaborate manifolds, e.g., by using finite element methods for the efficient solution of Poisson’s equation on manifolds. For non-compact manifolds, most importantly Rn , one might use standard techniques, such as Box–Muller, to first transform the required distribution to a compact domain.  6  Fig. 2. The computed diffeomorphism ϕK shown as a warp of the uniform 256 × 256 mesh (every 4th mesh-line is shown). Notice that the warp is periodic. It satisfies ϕ∗ µ0 = µ and solves Problem 3 by minimizing the information metric (7). The ratio between the largest and smallest warped volumes is 100.  7  Bibliography  [1] Amari, S., Nagaoka, H.: Methods of information geometry. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI (2000) [2] Bauer, M., Bruveris, M., Michor, P.W.: Uniqueness of the Fisher-Rao metric on the space of smooth densities. Bull. Lond. Math. Soc. 48(3), 499–506 (2016) [3] Bauer, M., Joshi, S., Modin, K.: Diffeomorphic density matching by optimal information transport. SIAM J. Imaging Sci. 8(3), 1718–1751 (2015) [4] Friedrich, T.: Die Fisher-information und symplektische strukturen. Math. Nachr. 153(1), 273–296 (1991) [5] Hamilton, R.S.: The inverse function theorem of Nash and Moser. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 7(1), 65–222 (1982) [6] Hastings, W.K.: Monte Carlo sampling methods using Markov chains and their applications. Biometrika 57(1), 97–109 (1970) [7] Khesin, B., Lenells, J., Misiolek, G., Preston, S.C.: Geometry of diffeomorphism groups, complete integrability and geometric statistics. Geom. Funct. Anal. 23(1), 334–366 (2013) [8] Khesin, B., Wendt, R.: The Geometry of Infinite-dimensional Groups, A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics, vol. 51. Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2009) [9] Marzouk, Y., Moselhy, T., Parno, M., Spantini, A.: Sampling via measure transport: An introduction. In: Ghanem, R., Higdon, D., Owhadi, H. (eds.) Handbook of Uncertainty Quantification. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2016) [10] Miller, M.I., Trouvé, A., Younes, L.: On the metrics and euler-lagrange equations of computational anatomy. Annu Rev Biomed Eng. (4), 375–405 (2002) [11] Modin, K.: Generalized Hunter–Saxton equations, optimal information transport, and factorization of diffeomorphisms. J. Geom. Anal. 25(2), 1306–1334 (2015) [12] Moselhy, T.A.E., Marzouk, Y.M.: Bayesian inference with optimal maps. Journal of Computational Physics 231(23), 7815 – 7850 (2012) [13] Moser, J.: On the volume elements on a manifold. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 120, 286–294 (1965) [14] Otto, F.: The geometry of dissipative evolution equations: the porous medium equation. Comm. Partial Differential Equations 26(1-2), 101–174 (2001) [15] Reich, S.: A nonparametric ensemble transform method for Bayesian inference. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 35(4), A2013–A2024 (2013) [16] Villani, C.: Optimal transport: old and new, Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften, vol. 338. Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2009)

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 10. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
