Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_785

Abstract:
Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  Or Sheffet 1  arXiv:1507.02482v4 [cs.DS] 21 Aug 2017  Abstract Linear regression is one of the most prevalent techniques in machine learning; however, it is also common to use linear regression for its explanatory capabilities rather than label prediction. Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) is often used in statistics to establish a correlation between an attribute (e.g. gender) and a label (e.g. income) in the presence of other (potentially correlated) features. OLS assumes a particular model that randomly generates the data, and derives tvalues — representing the likelihood of each real value to be the true correlation. Using t-values, OLS can release a confidence interval, which is an interval on the reals that is likely to contain the true correlation; and when this interval does not intersect the origin, we can reject the null hypothesis as it is likely that the true correlation is non-zero. Our work aims at achieving similar guarantees on data under differentially private estimators. First, we show that for wellspread data, the Gaussian Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform (JLT) gives a very good approximation of t-values; secondly, when JLT approximates Ridge regression (linear regression with l2 -regularization) we derive, under certain conditions, confidence intervals using the projected data; lastly, we derive, under different conditions, confidence intervals for the “Analyze Gauss” algorithm (Dwork et al., 2014).  1. Introduction Since the early days of differential privacy, its main goal was to design privacy preserving versions of existing techniques for data analysis. It is therefore no surprise that several of the first differentially private algorithms were machine learning algorithms, with a special emphasis on the ubiquitous problem of linear regression (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2008; Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Kifer et al., 2012; Bass1  Computing Science Dept., University of Alberta, Edmonton AB, Canada. This work was done when the author was at Harvard University, supported by NSF grant CNS-123723. Correspondence to: Or Sheffet <osheffet@ualberta.ca>.  ily et al., 2014). However, all existing body of work on differentially private linear regression measures utility by bounding the distance between the linear regressor found by the standard non-private algorithm and the regressor found by the privacy-preserving algorithm. This is motivated from a machine-learning perspective, since bounds on the difference in the estimators translate to error bounds on prediction (or on the loss function). Such bounds are (highly) interesting and non-trivial, yet they are of little use in situations where one uses linear regression to establish correlations rather than predict labels. In the statistics literature, Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) is a technique that uses linear regression in order to infer the correlation between a variable and an outcome, especially in the presence of other factors. And so, in this paper, we draw a distinction between “linear regression,” by which we refer to the machine learning technique of finding a specific estimator for a specific loss function; and “Ordinary Least Squares,” by which we refer to the statistical inference done assuming a specific model for generating the data and that uses linear regression. Many argue that OLS is the most prevalent technique in social sciences (Agresti & Finlay, 2009). Such works make no claim as to the labels of a new unlabeled batch of samples. Rather they aim to establish the existence of a strong correlation between the label and some feature. Needless to say, in such works, the privacy of individuals’ data is a concern. In order to determine that a certain variable xj is positively (resp. negatively) correlated with an outcome y, OLS assumes a model where the outcome y is a noisy version of a linear mapping of all variables: y = β · x + e (with e denoting random Gaussian noise) for some predetermined xi , yi ) OLS and unknown β . Then, given many samples (x establishes two things: (i) when fitting a linear function to best predict y from x over the sample (via computing  P P T −1 β= β̂ ( i yix i )) the coefficient β̂j is positive i x ix i (resp. negative); and (ii) inferring, based on βˆj , that the true βj is likely to reside in R>0 (resp. R<0 ). In fact, the crux in OLS is by describing βj using a probability distribution over the reals, indicating where βj is likely to fall, derived by computing t-values. These values take into account both the variance in the data as well as the variance of the noise e.1 Based on this probability distribution one can 1  For example, imagine we run linear regression on a certain β with coordinates β̂1 = β̂2 = (X, y ) which results in a vector β̂  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  define the α-confidence interval — an interval I centered at β̂j whose likelihood to contain βj is 1 − α. Of particular importance is the notion of rejecting the null-hypothesis, where the interval I does not contain the origin, and so one is able to say with high confidence that βj is positive (resp. negative). Further details regarding OLS appear in Section 2. In this work we give the first analysis of statistical inference for OLS using differentially private estimators. We emphasize that the novelty of our work does not lie in the differentially-private algorithms, which are, as we discuss next, based on the Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform (JLT) and on additive Gaussian noise and are already known to be differentially private (Blocki et al., 2012; Dwork et al., 2014). Instead, the novelty of our work lies in the analyses of the algorithms and in proving that the output of the algorithms is useful for statistical inference. The Algorithms. Our first algorithm (Algorithm 1) is an adaptation of Gaussian JLT. Proving that this adaptation remains (, δ)-differentially private is straightforward (the proof appears in Appendix A.1). As described, the algorithm takes as input a parameter r (in addition to the other parameters of the problem) that indicates the number of rows in the JL-matrix. Later, we analyze what should one set as the value of r. Our second algorithm is taken Algorithm 1 Outputting a private Johnson-Lindenstrauss projection of a matrix. n×d  Input: A matrix A ∈ R and a bound B > 0 on the l2 -norm of any row in A. Privacy parameters: , δ > 0. Parameter r indicating the number of rows in the resulting matrix. p  2 Set w s.t. w2 = 8B 2r ln(8/δ) + 2 ln(8/δ) . Sample Z ∼ Lap(4B 2 /) and let σmin (A) denote the smallest singular value of A. 2 if σmin (A)2 > w2 + Z + 4B ln(1/δ) then  Sample a (r×n)-matrix R whose entries are i.i.d samples from a normal Gaussian. return RA and “matrix unaltered”. else Let A0 denote the result of appending A with the d×dmatrix wId×d . Sample a (r × (n + d))-matrix R whose entries are i.i.d samples from a normal Gaussian. returnRA0 and “matrix altered”. end if verbatim from the work of Dwork et al (2014). We de0.1. Yet while the column X1 contains many 1s and (−1)s, the column X2 is mostly populated with zeros. In such a setting, OLS gives that it is likely to have β1 ≈ 0.1, whereas no such guarantees can be given for β2 .  liberately focus on algorithms that approximate the 2nd moment matrix of the data and then run hypothesis-testing by post-processing the output, for two reasons. First, they enable sharing of data2 and running unboundedly many hypothesis-tests. Since, we do not deal with OLS based on the private single-regression ERM algorithms (Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Bassily et al., 2014) as such inference requires us to use the Fisher-information matrix of the loss function — but these algorithms do not minimize a private loss-function but rather prove that outputting the minimizer of the perturbed loss-function is private. This means that differentially-private OLS based on these ERM algorithms requires us to devise new versions of these algorithms, making this a second step in this line of work... (After first understanding what we can do using existing algorithms.) We leave this approach — as well as performing private hypothesis testing using a PTR-type algorithm (Dwork & Lei, 2009) (output merely reject / don’t-reject decision without justification), or releasing only relevant tests judging by their p-values (Dwork et al., 2015) — for future work. Our Contribution and Organization. We analyze the performances of our algorithms on a matrix A of the form A = [X; y ], where each coordinate yi is generated according to the homoscedastic model with Gaussian noise, which is a classical model in statistics. We assume the existence of a vector β s.t. for every i we have yi = β Tx i + ei and ei is sampled i.i.d from N (0, σ 2 ).3 We study the result of running Algorithm 1 on such data in the two cases: where A wasn’t altered by the algorithm and when A was appended by the algorithm. In the former case, Algorithm 1 boils down to projecting the data under a Gaussian JLT. Sarlos (2006) has already shown that the JLT is useful for linear regression, yet his work bounds the l2 -norm of the difference between the estimated regression before and after the projection. Following Sarlos’ work, other works in statistics have analyzed compressed 2  Researcher A collects the data and uses the approximation of the 2nd -moment matrix to test some OLS hypothesis; but once the approximation is published researcher B can use it to test for a completely different hypothesis. 3 This model may seem objectionable. Assumptions like the noise independence, 0-meaned or sampled from a Gaussian distribution have all been called into question in the past. Yet due to the prevalence of this model we see fit to initiate the line of work on differentially private Least Squares with this Ordinary model.  Algorithm 2 “Analyze Gauss” Algorithm of Dwork et al (2014). Input: A matrix A ∈ Rn×d and a bound B > 0 on the l2 -norm of any row in A. Privacy parameters: , δ > 0. N ← symmetric (d × d)-matrix with upper   triangle entries sampled i.i.d from N 0, 2B T  return A A + N .  4  ln(2/δ) 2  .  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  linear regression (Zhou et al., 2007; Pilanci & Wainwright, 2014a;b). However, none of these works give confidence intervals based on the projected data, presumably for three reasons. Firstly, these works are motivated by computational speedups, and so they use fast JLT as opposed to our analysis which leverages on the fact that our JL-matrix is composed of i.i.d Gaussians. Secondly, the focus of these works is not on OLS but rather on newer versions of linear regression, such as Lasso or when β lies in some convex set. Lastly, it is evident that the smallest confidence interval is derived from the data itself. Since these works do not consider privacy applications, (actually, (Zhou et al., 2007; Pilanci & Wainwright, 2014a) do consider privacy applications of the JLT, but quite different than differential privacy) they assume the analyst has access to the data itself, and so there was no need to give confidence intervals for the projected data. Our analysis is therefore the first, to the best of our knowledge, to derive t-values — and therefore achieve all of the rich expressivity one infers from tvalues, such as confidence bounds and null-hypotheses rejection — for OLS estimations without having access to X itself. We also show that, under certain conditions, the sample complexity for correctly rejecting the null-hypothesis increases from a certain bound N0 (without privacy) to a √ bound of N0 + Õ( N0 · κ( n1 AT A)/) with privacy (where κ(M ) denotes the condition number of the matrix M .) This appears in Section 3. In Section 4 we analyze the case Algorithm 1 does append the data and the JLT is applied to A0 . In this case, solving the linear regression problem on the projected A0 approximates the solution for Ridge Regression (Tikhonov, 1963; Hoerl & Kennard, we aim  P 1970).T In 2Ridge2 Regression 2 z to solve minz (y − z x ) + w kz k , which means i i i we penalize vectors whose l2 -norm is large. In general, it is not known how to derive t-values from Ridge regression, and the literature on deriving confidence intervals solely from Ridge regression is virtually non-existent. Indeed, prior to our work there was no need for such calculations, as access to the data was (in general) freely given, and so deriving confidence intervals could be done by appealing back to OLS. We too are unable to derive approximated t-values in the general case, but under additional assumptions about the data — which admittedly depend in part on β k and so cannot be verified solely from the data — we kβ show that solving the linear regression problem on RA0 allows us to give confidence intervals for βj , thus correctly determining the correlation’s sign. In Section 5 we discuss the “Analyze Gauss” algorithm (Dwork et al., 2014) that outputs a noisy version of a covariance of a given matrix using additive noise rather than multiplicative noise. Empirical work (Xi et al., 2011) shows that Analyze Gauss’s output might be non-PSD if the input has small singular values, and this results in truly bad regressors. Nonetheless, under additional conditions (that imply that the output is PSD), we derive confidence  bounds for Dwork et al’s “Analyze Gauss” algorithm. Finally, in Section 6 we experiment with the heuristic of computing the t-values directly from the outputs of Algorithms 1 and 2. We show that Algorithm 1 is more “conservative” than Algorithm 2 in the sense that it tends to not reject the null-hypothesis until the number of examples is large enough to give a very strong indication of rejection. In contrast, Algorithm 2 may wrongly rejects the null-hypothesis even when it is true. Discussion. Some works have already looked at the intersection of differentially privacy and statistics (Dwork & Lei, 2009; Smith, 2011; Chaudhuri & Hsu, 2012; Duchi et al., 2013; Dwork et al., 2015) (especially focusing on robust statistics and rate of convergence). But only a handful of works studied the significance and power of hypotheses testing under differential privacy, without arguing that the noise introduced by differential privacy vanishes asymptotically (Vu & Slavkovic, 2009; Uhler et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2015; Rogers et al., 2016). These works are experimentally promising, yet they (i) focus on different statistical tests (mostly Goodness-of-Fit and Independence testing), (ii) are only able to prove results for the case of simple hypothesis-testing (a single hypothesis) with an efficient data-generation procedure through repeated simulations — a cumbersome and time consuming approach. In contrast, we deal with a composite hypothesis (we simultaneously reject all β s with sign(βj ) 6= sign(β̂j )) by altering the confidence interval (or the critical region). One potential reason for avoiding confidence-interval analysis for differentially private hypotheses testing is that it does involve re-visiting existing results. Typically, in statistical inference the sole source of randomness lies in the underlying model of data generation, whereas the estimators themselves are a deterministic function of the dataset. In contrast, differentially private estimators are inherently random in their computation. Statistical inference that considers both the randomness in the data and the randomness in the computation is highly uncommon, and this work, to the best of our knowledge, is the first to deal with randomness in OLS hypothesis testing. We therefore strive in our analysis to separate the two sources of randomness — as in classic hypothesis testing, we use α to denote the bound on any bad event that depends solely on the homoscedastic model, and use ν to bound any bad event that depends on the randomized algorithm.4 (Thus, any result which is originally of the form “α-reject the null-hypothesis” is now converted into a result “(α+ν)-reject the null hypothesis”.) 4  Or any randomness in generating the feature matrix X which standard OLS theory assumes to be fixed, see Theorems 2.2 and 3.3.  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  2. Preliminaries and OLS Background  kζk2 ∼ χ2k , and taking the quantity Z/  p kζk2 /k. It is a  k→∞  Notation. Throughout this paper, we use lower-case letters to denote scalars (e.g., yi or ei ); bold characters to denote vectors; and UPPER-case letters to denote matrices. The l-dimensional all zero vector is denoted 0l , and the l × m-matrix of all zeros is denoted 0l×m . We use e β in our model; and to denote the specific vector y − Xβ though the reader may find it a bit confusing but hopefully clear from the context — we also use e j and e k to denote elements of the natural basis (unit length vector in the direction of coordinate j or k). We use , δ to denote the privacy parameters of Algorithms 1 and 2, and use α and ν to denote confidence parameters (referring to bad events that hold w.p. ≤ α and ≤ ν resp.) based on the homoscedastic model or the randomized algorithm resp. We also stick to the notation from Algorithm 1 and use w to denote the posip  8B 2 2 tive scalar for which w =  2r ln(8/δ) + ln(8/δ) throughout this paper. We use standard notation for SVD composition of a matrix (M = U ΣV T ), its singular values and its Moore-Penrose inverse (M + ). The Gaussian distribution. A univariate Gaussian N (µ, σ 2 ) denotes the Gaussian distribution whose mean is µ and variance σ 2 . Standard concentration bounds on p Gaussians give that Pr[x > µ + 2σ ln(2/ν)] < ν µ, Σ) for any ν ∈ (0, 1e ). A multivariate Gaussian N (µ for some positive semi-definite Σ denotes the multivariate Gaussian distribution where the mean of the j-th coordinate is the µj and the covariance between coordinates j and k is Σj,k . The PDF of such Gaussian is defined only on the subspace colspan(Σ). A matrix Gaussian distribution, denoted N (Ma×b , Ia×a , V ) has mean M , independence among its rows and variance V for each of its columns. We also require the following property of Gaussian random variables: Let X and Y be two random Gaussians s.t. X ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) and Y ∼ N (0, λ2 ) where 2 1 ≤ σλ2 ≤ c2 for some c, then for any S ⊂ R we have 1 c Prx←Y [x ∈ S] ≤ Prx←X [x ∈ S] ≤ cPrx←Y [x ∈ S/c] (see Proposition A.2). Additional Distributions. We denote by Lap(σ) the Laplace distribution whose mean is 0 and variance is 2σ 2 . The χ2k -distribution, where k is referred to as the degrees of freedom of the distribution, is the distribution over the l2 -norm squared of the sum of k independent normal Gaussians. That is, given i.i.d X1 , . . . , Xk ∼ def N (0, 1) it holds that ζ = (X1 , X2 , . . . , Xk ) ∼ 2 N (00k , Ik×k ), and kζζ k ∼ χ2k . Existing tail bounds on the hχ2k distribution (Laurent & Massart, 2000) give that i p √ 2 2 Pr kζζ k ∈ ( k ± 2 ln(2/ν)) ≥ 1 − ν. The Tk distribution, where k is referred to as the degrees of freedom of the distribution, denotes the distribution over the reals created by independently sampling Z ∼ N (0, 1) and  known fact that Tk → N (0, 1), thus it is a common practice to apply Gaussian tail bounds to the Tk -distribution when k is sufficiently large. Differential Privacy. In this work, we deal with input in the form of a n × d-matrix with each row bounded by a l2 -norm of B. Two inputs A and A0 are called neighbors if they differ on a single row. Definition 2.1 ((Dwork et al., 2006a)). An algorithm ALG which maps (n × d)-matrices into some range R is (, δ)differential privacy it holds that Pr[ALG(A) ∈ S] ≤ e Pr[ALG(A0 ) ∈ S] + δ for all neighboring inputs A and A0 and all subsets S ⊂ R. Background on OLS. For the unfamiliar reader, we give here a very brief overview of the main points in OLS. Further details, explanations and proofs appear in Section A.3. xi , yi )}ni=1 where ∀i, x i ∈ We are given n observations {(x p R and yi ∈ R. We assume the existence of β ∈ Rp s.t. the label yi was derived by yi = β Tx i + ei where ei ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) independently (also known as the homoscedastic Gaussian model). We use the matrix notation where X denotes the (n × p)- feature matrix and y denotes the labels. We assume X has full rank. The parameters of the model are therefore β and σ 2 , which we set to discover. To that end, we minimize minz kyy − Xzz k2 and have β = (X T X)−1 X Ty = (X T X)−1 X T (Xββ + e) = β + X +e (1) β̂ ζ = y − Xβ̂β = (Xββ + e ) − X(ββ + X +e ) = (I − XX + )ee (2) And then for any coordinate j the t-value, which def β̂j −βj q is the quantity t(βj ) = , is ζk kζ −1 T (X X)j,j · √n−p  distributed according to Tn−p I.e., h i -distribution. R β and ζ satisfying t(βj ) ∈ S = Pr β̂ PDFTn−p (x)dx S  for any measurable S ⊂ R. Thus t(βj ) describes the likelihood of any βj — for any z ∈ R we can now give an estimation of how likely it is to have βj = z (which is PDFTn−p (t(z))), and this is known as t-test for the value z. In particular, given 0 < α < 1, we denote cα as the number for which the interval (−cα , cα ) contains a probability mass of 1 − α from the Tn−p -distribution. And so we derive a corresponding confidence interval Iα centered at β̂j where βj ∈ Iα with confidence of level of 1 − α. def  Of particular importance is the quantity t0 = t(0) = √  β̂j n−p q ,since (X T X)−1 j,j  kζζ k  if there is no correlation between xj  and y then the likelihood of seeing βˆj depends on the ratio of its magnitude to its standard deviation. As mentioned k→∞ earlier, since Tk → N (0, 1), then rather than viewing  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  this t0 as sampled from a Tn−p -distribution, it is common to think of t0 as a sample from a normal Gaussian N (0, 1). This allows us to associate t0 with a p-value, estimating the event “βj and β̂j have different signs.” Specifically, given α ∈ (0, 1/2), we α-reject the null hypothesis if p0 < α. R∞ 2 Let τα be the number s.t. Φ(τα ) = τα √12π e−x /2 dx = α. This means we α-reject the null hypothesis when |t0 | > τα . We now lower bound the number of i.i.d sample points needed in order to α-reject the null hypothesis. This bound is our basis for comparison between standard OLS and the differentially private version.5 Theorem 2.2. Fix any positive definite matrix Σ ∈ Rp×p and any ν ∈ (0, 21 ). Fix parameters β ∈ Rp and σ 2 and a coordinate j s.t. βj 6= 0. Let X be a matrix whose n rows are i.i.d samples from N (00, Σ), and β )i is sampled i.i.d from y be a vector where yi − (Xβ N (0, σ 2 ). Fix α ∈ (0, 1). Then w.p. ≥ 1 − α − ν we have p that OLS’s (1 − α)-confidence interval has length O(cα σ 2 /(nσmin (Σ))) provided n ≥ C1 (p + ln(1/ν)) for some sufficiently large constant C1 . Furthermore, there exists a constant C2 such that w.p. ≥ 1 − α − ν OLS n (correctly) rejects the null hypothesis provided n ≥ o 2 c2α +τα σ2 max C1 (p + ln(1/ν)), p + C2 β 2 · σmin (Σ) , where cα j Rc is the number for which −cαα PDFTn−p (x)dx = 1 − α.  3. OLS over Projected Data In this section we deal with the output of Algorithm 1 in the special case where Algorithm 1 outputs matrix unaltered and so we work with RA. To clarify, the setting is as follows. We denote A = [X; y ] the column-wise concatenation of the (n × (d − 1))-matrix X with the n-length vector y . (Clearly, we can denote any column of A as y and any subset of the remaining columns as the matrix X.) We therefore denote the output RA = [RX; Ryy ] and for simplicity we denote M = RX and p = d − 1. We denote the SVD decomposition of X = U ΣV T . So U is an orthonormal basis for the columnspan of X and as X is full-rank V is an orthonormal basis for Rp . Finally, in our work we examine the linear regression problem derived from the projected data. That is, we denote β = (X T RT RX)−1 (RX)T (Ryy ) = β + (RX)+ Ree β̃ σ̃ 2 =  r kζ̃ζ k2 , with ζ̃ζ = r−p  √1 Ry y r  −  √1 (RX)β̃ β r  (3) (4)  We now give our main theorem, for estimating the t-values β and σ̃. based on β̃ 5  Theorem 2.2 also illustrates how we “separate” the two sources of privacy. In this case, ν bounds the probability of bad events that depend to sampling the rows of X, and α bounds the probability of a bad event that depends on the sampling of the y coordinates.  Theorem 3.1. Let X be a (n × p)-matrix, and parameters β ∈ Rp and σ 2 are such that we generate the vector β + e with each coordinate of e sampled indepeny = Xβ dently from N (0, σ 2 ). Assume Algorithm 1 projects the matrix A = [X; y ] without altering it. Fix ν ∈ (0, 1/2) and r = p + Ω(ln(1/ν)). Fix coordinate j. Then we have β and σ̃ 2 as in Equations (3) that w.p. ≥ 1 − ν deriving β̃ β̃ −β and (4), the pivot quantity t̃(βj ) = q Tj T j −1 has a σ̃  (X R RX)j,j  distribution D satisfying e−a PDFTr−p (x) ≤ PDFD (x) ≤ ea PDFTr−p (e−a x) for any x ∈ R, where we denote a = r−p n−p . The implications of Theorem 3.1 are immediate: all estimations one can do based on the t-values from the true data X, y , we can now do based on t̃ modulo an approximation r−p factor of exp( n−p ). In particular, Theorem 3.1 enables us β. to deduce a corresponding confidence interval based on β̃ Corollary 3.2. In the same setting as in Theorem 3.1, w.p. ≥ 1 − ν we have the following. Fix any α ∈ (0, 12 ). Let c̃α denote the number s.t. the interval (c̃α , ∞) contains α2 e−a probability mass q of the Tr−p -distribution. Then Pr[βj ∈   β̃j ± ea · c̃α · σ̃  (X T RT RX)−1 j,j ] ≥ 1 − α.  6  We compare the confidence interval of Corollary 3.2 to the confidence intervalqof the standard OLS model, ζk (X T X)−1 As R is a JLwhose length is cα √kζ j,j . n−p matrix, known results regarding the JL transform give q  that kζ̃ζ k = Θ (kζζ k), and that (r − p)(X T RT RX)−1 j,j =  q (X T X)−1 We therefore have that Θ j,j . q √ q kζ̃ζ k r √ σ̃ (X T RT RX)−1 = (X T RT RX)−1 = j,j j,j r−p q q   kζζ k r·(n−p) √ (X T X)−1 j,j . So for values of r (r−p)2 · Θ n−p r r−p  = Θ(1) we get that the confidence interval   q of Theorem 3.1 is a factor of Θ cc̃αα n−p r−p -larger than the standard OLS confidence interval. Observe that when α = Θ(1), p which is the common case, the dominating factor is (n − p)/(r − p). This bound intuitively makes sense: we have contracted n observations to r observations, hence our model is based on confidence intervals derived from Tr−p rather than Tn−p . for which  In the supplementary material we give further discussion, in which we compare our work to the more straight-forward bounds one gets by “plugging in” Sarlos’ work (2006); and we also compare ourselves to the bounds derived from alternative works in differentially private linear regression. 6  Moreover,  this interval is essentially optimal: r−p  de-  note d˜α s.t the interval (d˜α , ∞) contains α2 e n−p probability mass qof the Tr−p -distribution. Then Pr[βj ∈   −1 T T ˜ β̃j ± dα · σ̃ (X R RX) ] ≤ 1 − α. j,j  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  Rejecting the Null Hypothesis. Due to Theorem 3.1, we can mimic OLS’ technique for rejecting the null hyβ̃ pothesis. I.e., we denote t̃0 = q T jT and re−1 σ̃  (X R RX)j,j  ject the null-hypothesis if indeed the associated p̃0 , denotr−p − n−p  ing p-value of the slightly truncated e r−p − n−p  t̃0 , is below  α·e . Much like Theorem 2.2 we now establish a lower bound on n so that w.h.p we end up (correctly) rejecting the null-hypothesis. Theorem 3.3. Fix a positive definite matrix Σ ∈ Rp×p . Fix parameters β ∈ Rp and σ 2 > 0 and a coordinate j s.t. βj 6= 0. Let X be a matrix whose n rows are sampled β )i i.i.d from N (00p , Σ). Let y be a vector s.t. yi − (Xβ is sampled i.i.d from N (0, σ 2 ). Fix ν ∈ (0, 1/2) and α ∈ (0, 1/2). Then there exist constants C1 , C2 , C3 and C4 such that when we run Algorithm 1 over [X; y ] with parameter r w.p. ≥ 1 − α − ν we (correctly) reject the null hypothesis using p̃0 (i.e., Algorithm 1 returns matrix unaltered and we can estimate t̃0 −  r−p  and verify thatnindeed p̃0 < α · e n−p o ) provided 2 σ 2 (c̃2α +τ̃α ) r ≥ p + max C1 β 2 σmin (Σ) , C2 ln(1/ν) , and n ≥ j n o w2 max r, C3 min{σmin where (Σ),σ 2 } , C4 p ln(1/ν) r−p  c̃α , τ̃α defined s.t.  PrX∼Tr−p [X > c̃α /e n−p ] = r−p  PrX∼N (0,1) [X > τ̃α /e n−p ] =  r−p α − n−p e . 2  n 2 2 o  σ (ΣA ) 2 min n, B 4min (n − ln(1/δ)) . This discussion culln(1/δ) minates in the following corollary. 2  2  +τ̃α ) , we = σβ 2(c̃σαmin (Σ) j   ^ thus conclude that if n − p ≥ Ω LB and n = 2.2   q B 2 ln(1/δ) ^ Ω σ · LB 2.2 , then the result of Theorem 3.3 min (ΣA ) n 2 2 o  σ (ΣA ) 2 holds by setting r = min n, B 4min (n − ln(1/δ)) . ln(1/δ)  ^ Corollary 3.4. Denoting LB 2.2  It is interesting to note that when we know ΣA , we also have a bound on B. Recall ΣA , the variance of the x ◦ y). Since every sample is an independent Gaussian (x draw from N (00p+1 , ΣA ) then we have an upper bound of B 2 ≤ log(np)σmax (ΣA ). So our lower bound on n (using κ(ΣA ) to denote number of ΣAq ) is given by  the condition   κ(ΣA ) ln(1/δ) ^ ^ n ≥ max Ω LB · LB . 2.2 , Ω̃ 2.2  Observe, overall this result is similar in nature to many other results in differentially private learning (Bassily et al., 2014) which are of the form “without privacy, in order to achieve a total loss of ≤ η we have a sample complexity bound of some Nη ; and with differential p privacy the sample complexity increases to Nη + Ω( Nη /).” However, ^ there’s a subtlety here worth noting. LB 2.2 is proportional (ΣA ) to σmin1(ΣA ) but not to κ(ΣA ) = σσmax . The additional min (ΣA ) dependence on σmax follows from the fact that differential privacy adds noise proportional to the upper bound on the norm of each row.  3.1. Setting the Value of r, Deriving a Bound on n Comparing the lower bound on n given by Theorem 3.3 to the bound ofTheorem 2.2,  we have that the data-dependent (c̃α +τ̃α )2 σ 2 bound of Ω β 2 σmin (Σ) should now hold for r rather than j n. Yet, Theorem 3.3 also introduces an additional depen2 w2 dency between n and r: we require n = Ω( w σ 2 + σmin (Σ) ) (since otherwise we do not have σmin (A)  w and Algorithm 1 might alter A before projecting it) and by definition p w2 is proportional to r ln(1/δ)/. This is precisely the focus of our discussion in this subsection. We would like to set r’s value as high as possible — the larger r is, the more observations we have in RA and the better our confidence bounds (that depend on Tr−p ) are — while satisfying √ n = Ω( ·min{σ2 ,σr min (Σ)} ). Recall that if each sample point is drawn i.i.d x ∼ xi ◦ yi ) is sampled from N (00p , Σ), then each sample (x N (00p+1 , ΣA ) for Σ defined in the proof of A   Theorem 3.3, β Σ Σβ that is: ΣA = . So, Theoβ T Σβ β β TΣ σ 2 +β   2  2  +τ̃α ) rem 3.3 gives the lower bound r − p = Ω σβ 2(c̃σαmin (Σ) j and the following lower bounds on n: n ≥ r and  √  B 2 ( r ln(1/δ)+ln(1/δ)) n = Ω , which means r = σmin (ΣA )  4. Projected Ridge Regression We now turn to deal with the case that our matrix does not pass the if-condition of Algorithm 1. In this case, the matrix is appended  with a d ×d-matrix which is wId×d . DeA noting A0 = we have that the algorithm’s w · Id×d output is RA0 . Similarly to before, we are going to denote d = p + 1 and decompose A = [X; y ] with X ∈ Rn×p and β + e and y ∈ Rn , with the standard assumption of y = Xβ ei sampled i.i.d from N (0, σ 2 ). We now need to introduce some additional notation. We denote the appended matrix and vectors X 0 and y 0 s.t. A0 = [X 0 ; y 0 ]. And so, using the output RA0 of Algorithm 1, we solve the linear regression problem derived from √1r RX 0 and √1r Ryy 0 . I.e., we set β 0 = (X 0T RT RX 0 )−1 (RX 0 )T (Ryy 0 ) ζ 0 = √1r (Ryy 0 − RX 0β 0 )  (5)  Sarlos’ results (2006) regarding the Johnson Lindenstrauss transform give that, when R has sufficiently many rows, solving the latter optimization problem gives a good approximation for the solution of the optimization problem β R = argminz kyy 0 − X 0z k2 = arg minz kyy − Xzz k2 + w2 kzz k2 . The latter problem is  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  known as the Ridge Regression problem. Invented in the 60s (Tikhonov, 1963; Hoerl & Kennard, 1970), Ridge Regression is often motivated from the perspective of penalizing linear vectors whose coefficients are too large. It is also often applied in the case where X doesn’t have full rank or is close to not having full-rank: one can show that the minimizer β R = (X T X + w2 Ip×p )−1 X Ty is the unique solution of the Ridge Regression problem and that the RHS is always well-defined. While the solution of the Ridge Regression problem might have smaller risk than the OLS solution, it is not known how to derive t-values and/or reject the null hypothesis under Ridge Regression (except for using X to manipulate β = (X T X)−1 X Ty and relying on OLS). β R back into β̂ In fact, prior to our work there was no need for such analysis! For confidence intervals one could just use the standard OLS, because access to X and y was given. Therefore, much for the same reason, we are unable to derive t-values under projected Ridge Regression.7 Clearly, there are situations where such confidence bounds simply cannot be derived.Nonetheless, under additional assumptions about the data, our work can give confidence intervals for βj , and in the case where the interval doesn’t intersect the origin — assure us that sign(βj0 ) = sign(βj ) w.h.p. This is detailed in the supplementary material. To give an overview of our analysis, we first discuss a β is fixed (i.e., the data is fixed model where e = y − Xβ and the algorithm is the sole source of randomness), and β. prove that in this model β 0 is as an approximation to β̂  so, in summary, in Section C we give conditions under which the q length of the interval I is dominated by the ζ0k c0α √kζr−p r(M 0T M 0 )−1 j,j factor derived from Theorem 4.1.  5. Confidence Intervals for “Analyze Gauss” In this section we analyze the “Analyze Gauss” algorithm of Dwork et al (2014). Algorithm 2 works by adding random Gaussian noise to AT A, where the noise is symmetric with each coordinate above  the diagonal  sampled i.i.d from 2 2 4 log(1/δ) N (0, ∆ ) with ∆ = O B . Using the same no2 tation for a sub-matrix of A as  [X; y ] as before, we  denote the output of Algorithm 2 as  where c0α denotes the number such that (−c0α , c0α ) contains 1 − α mass of the Tr−p -distribution. However, our goal remains to argue that βj0 serves as a good approximation for βj . To that end, we combine the standard OLS confidence interval — which says that w.p. ≥ 1 − α over the randomness of picking er in the homoscedastic model we have |βj − β̂j | ≤ cα kζζ k  (X T X)−1 j,j n−p  ^ TX X TX yg  we approximate β and kζζ k by βe =    g Ty  X  .  Ty yg  ^ TX X  −1  Thus,  g Ty and X  g ^ ] e + βe T X e resp. We now argue Ty − 2 y TXβ TX β ζ k2 = yg kζ g that it is possible to use βej and kζζ k2 to get a confidence interval for βj under certain conditions. Theorem 5.1. Fix α, ν ∈ (0, 12 ). Assume that there exists p η ∈ (0, 21 ) s.t. σmin (X T X) > ∆ p ln(1/ν)/η. Under the homoscedastic model, given β and σ 2 , if we assume also β k ≤ B and kβ̂ β k = k(X T X)−1 X Ty k ≤ B, then that kβ w.p. ≥ 1 − α − ν it holds that βj − βej is at most s   −1 −2 p ^ ^ TX TX O ρ· + ∆ p ln(1/ν) · X X ln(1/α) j,j  n×p  β = Theorem 4.1. Fix X ∈ R and y ∈ R. Define β̂ X +y and ζ = (I − XX + )yy . Let RX 0 = M 0 and Ryy 0 denote the result of applying Algorithm 1 to the matrix A = [X; y ] when the algorithm appends the data with a w · I matrix. Fix a coordinate j and any α ∈ (0, 1/2). When computing β 0 and ζ 0 as have that w.p. ≥ 1 −  in (5), we q  r 0 0 ζ0 α it holds that β̂j ∈ βj ± cα kζ k r−p · (M 0T M 0 )−1 j,j       j,j  r +∆  −2  √ ^ TX X j,j · ln(1/ν) · (B p + 1)    where ρ is w.h.p an upper bound on σ (details appear in the Supplementary material). β k ≤ B and kβ̂ βk ≤ B Note that the assumptions that kβ are fairly benign once we assume each row has bounded l2 -norm. The key assumption is that X T X is well-spread. Yet in the model where each row in X is sampled i.i.d from N (00, Σ), this assumption merely √ means that n is large enough — namely, that n = Ω̃(  ∆ p ln(1/ν) η·σmin (Σ) ).  6. Experiment: t-Values of Output  — with  the confidence interval q of Theorem 4.10 above, q and denotkζζ k kζζ k −1 0 T ing I = cα √n−p (X X)j,j + cα √r−p r(M 0T M 0 )−1 j,j we have that Pr[|βj0 − βj | = O(I)] ≥ 1 − α. And 7 Note: The naı̈ve approach of using RX 0 and Ryy 0 to interpolate RX and Ryy and then apply Theorem 3.1 using these estimations of RX and Ryy ignores the noise added from appending the matrix A into A0 , and therefore leads to inaccurate estimations of the t-values.  Goal. We set to experiment with the outputs of Algorithms 1 and 2. While Theorem 3.1 guarantees that computing the t-value from the output of Algorithm 1 in the matrix unaltered case does give a good approximation of the t-value – we were wondering if by computing the t-value directly from the output we can (a) get a good approximation of the true (non-private) t-value and (b) get the same “higher-level conclusion” of rejecting the nullhypothesis. The answers are, as ever, mixed. The two main  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  observations we do notice is that both algorithms improve as the number of examples increases, and that Algorithm 1 is more conservative then Algorithm 2. Setting. We tested both algorithms in two settings. The first is over synthetic data. Much like the setting in Theorems 2.2 and 3.3, X was generated using p = 3 independent normal Gaussian features, and y was generated using the homoscedastic model. We chose β = (0.5, −0.25, 0) so the first coordinate is twice as big a the second but of opposite sign, and moreover, y is independent of the 3rd feature. The variance of the label is also set to 1, and so the variance of the homosedastic noise equals to σ 2 = 1 − (0.5)2 − (−0.25)2 . The number of observations n ranges from n = 1000 to n = 100000. The second setting is over real-life data. We ran the two algorithms over diabetes dataset collected over ten years (1999-2008) taken from the UCI repository (Strack et al., 2014). We truncated the data to 4 attributes: sex (binary), age (in buckets of 10 years), number medications (numeric, 0-100), and a diagnosis (numeric, 0-1000). Naturally, we added a 5th column of all-1 (intercept). Omitting any entry with missing or non-numeric values on these nine attributes we were left with N = 91842 entries, which we shuffled and fed to the algorithm in varying sizes — from n = 30, 000 to n = 90, 000. Running OLS over the entire N observation yields β ≈ (14.07, 0.54, −0.22, 482.59), and t-Values of (10.48, 1.25, −2.66, 157.55).  get fairly high (in magnitude) t-values. As the result, we falsely reject the null-hypothesis based on the t-value of Analyze Gauss quite often, even for large values of n. This is shown in Figure 1b. Additional figures (including plotting the distribution of the t-value approximations) appear in the supplementary material. The results show that t-value approximations that do not take into account the inherent randomness in the DPalgorithms lead to erroneous conclusions. One approach would be to follow the more conservative approach we advocate in this paper, where Algorithm 1 may allow you to get true approximation of the t-values and otherwise reject the null-hypothesis only based on the confidence interval (of Algorithm 1 or 2) not intersecting the origin. Another approach, which we leave as future work, is to replace the T -distribution with a new distribution, one that takes into account the randomness in the estimator as well. This, however, has been an open and long-standing challenge since the first works on DP and statistics (see (Vu & Slavkovic, 2009; Dwork & Lei, 2009)) and requires we move into non-asymptotic hypothesis testing.  The Algorithms. We ran a version of Algorithm 1 that uses a DP-estimation of σmin , and finds the largest r the we can use without altering the input, yet if this r is below 25 then it does alter the input and approximates Ridge regression. We ran Algorithm 2 verbatim. We set  = 0.25 and δ = 10−6 . We repeated each algorithm 100 times. (a) Synthetic data, coordinate β1  Results. We plot the t-values we get from Algorithms 1 and 2 and decide to reject the null-hypothesis based on tvalue larger than 2.8 (which corresponds to a fairly conservative p-value of 0.005). Not surprisingly, as n increases, the t-values become closer to their expected value – the tvalue of Analyze Gauss is close to the non-private p t-value and the t-value from Algorithm 1 is a factor of nr smaller as detailed above (see after Corollary 3.2). As a result, when the null-hypothesis is false, Analyze Gauss tends to produce larger t-values (and thus reject the null-hypothesis) for values of n under which Algorithm 1 still does not reject, as shown in Figure 1a. This is exacerbated in real data setting, where its actual least singular value (≈ 500) is fairly small in comparison to its size (N = 91842). However, what is fairly surprising is the case where the null-hypothesis should not be rejected — since βj = 0 (in the synthetic case) or its non-private t-value is close to 0 (in the real-data case). Here, the Analyze Gauss’ tvalue approximation has fairly large variance, and we still  (b) Synthetic data, coordinate β3 Figure 1. Correctly and Wrongly Rejecting the Null-Hypothesis  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  Acknowledgements The bulk of this work was done when the author was a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard University, supported by NSF grant CNS-123723; and also an unpaid collaborator on NSF grant 1565387. The author wishes to wholeheartedly thank Prof. Salil Vadhan, for his tremendous help in shaping this paper. The author would also like to thank Prof. Jelani Nelson and the members of the “Privacy Tools for Sharing Research Data” project at Harvard University (especially James Honaker, Vito D’Orazio, Vishesh Karwa, Prof. Kobbi Nissim and Prof. Gary King) for many helpful discussions and suggestions; as well as Abhradeep Thakurta for clarifying the similarity between our result. Lastly the author thanks the anonymous referees for many helpful suggestions in general and for a reference to (Ullman, 2015) in particular.  References Agresti, A. and Finlay, B. Statistical Methods for the Social Sciences. Pearson P. Hall, 2009. Bassily, R., Smith, A., and Thakurta, A. Private empirical risk minimization: Efficient algorithms and tight error bounds. In FOCS, 2014. Blocki, J., Blum, A., Datta, A., and Sheffet, O. The Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform itself preserves differential privacy. In FOCS, 2012. Chaudhuri, Kamalika and Hsu, Daniel J. Convergence rates for differentially private statistical estimation. In ICML, 2012.  Dwork, Cynthia, Su, Weijie, and Zhang, Li. Private false discovery rate control. CoRR, abs/1511.03803, 2015. Hoerl, A. E. and Kennard, R. W. Ridge regression: Biased estimation for nonorthogonal problems. Technometrics, 12:55–67, 1970. Kasiviswanathan, S., Lee, H., Nissim, K., Raskhodnikova, S., and Smith, A. What can we learn privately? In FOCS, 2008. Kifer, Daniel, Smith, Adam D., and Thakurta, Abhradeep. Private convex optimization for empirical risk minimization with applications to high-dimensional regression. In COLT, 2012. Laurent, B. and Massart, P. Adaptive estimation of a quadratic functional by model selection. The Annals of Statistics, 28(5), 10 2000. Ma, E. M. and Zarowski, Christopher J. On lower bounds for the smallest eigenvalue of a hermitian positivedefinite matrix. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 41(2), 1995. Muller, Keith E. and Stewart, Paul W. Linear Model Theory: Univariate, Multivariate, and Mixed Models. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2006. Pilanci, M. and Wainwright, M. Randomized sketches of convex programs with sharp guarantees. In ISIT, 2014a. Pilanci, Mert and Wainwright, Martin J. Iterative hessian sketch: Fast and accurate solution approximation for constrained least-squares. CoRR, abs/1411.0347, 2014b.  Chaudhuri, Kamalika, Monteleoni, Claire, and Sarwate, Anand D. Differentially private empirical risk minimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 2011.  Rao, C. Radhakrishna. Linear statistical inference and its applications. Wiley, 1973.  Duchi, John C., Jordan, Michael I., and Wainwright, Martin J. Local privacy and statistical minimax rates. In FOCS, pp. 429–438, 2013.  Rogers, Ryan M., Vadhan, Salil P., Lim, Hyun-Woo, and Gaboardi, Marco. Differentially private chi-squared hypothesis testing: Goodness of fit and independence testing. In ICML, pp. 2111–2120, 2016.  Dwork, C. and Lei, J. Differential privacy and robust statistics. In STOC, 2009. Dwork, Cynthia, Kenthapadi, Krishnaram, McSherry, Frank, Mironov, Ilya, and Naor, Moni. Our data, ourselves: Privacy via distributed noise generation. In EUROCRYPT, 2006a. Dwork, Cynthia, Mcsherry, Frank, Nissim, Kobbi, and Smith, Adam. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in private data analysis. In TCC, 2006b. Dwork, Cynthia, Talwar, Kunal, Thakurta, Abhradeep, and Zhang, Li. Analyze gauss - optimal bounds for privacy preserving principal component analysis. In STOC, 2014.  Rudelson, Mark and Vershynin, Roman. Smallest singular value of a random rectangular matrix. Comm. Pure Appl. Math, pp. 1707–1739, 2009. Sarlós, T. Improved approx. algs for large matrices via random projections. In FOCS, 2006. Sheffet, O. Private approximations of the 2nd-moment matrix using existing techniques in linear regression. CoRR, abs/1507.00056, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/ abs/1507.00056. Smith, Adam D. Privacy-preserving statistical estimation with optimal convergence rates. In STOC, pp. 813–822, 2011.  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  Strack, B., DeShazo, J., Gennings, C., Olmo, J., Ventura, S., Cios, K., and Clore, J. Impact of HbA1c measurement on hospital readmission rates: Analysis of 70,000 clinical database patient records. BioMed Research International, 2014:11 pages, 2014. Tao, T. Topics in Random Matrix Theory. American Mathematical Soc., 2012. Thakurta, Abhradeep and Smith, Adam. Differentially private feature selection via stability arguments, and the robustness of the lasso. In COLT, 2013. Tikhonov, A. N. Solution of incorrectly formulated problems and the regularization method. Soviet Math. Dokl., 4, 1963. Uhler, Caroline, Slavkovic, Aleksandra B., and Fienberg, Stephen E. Privacy-preserving data sharing for genome-wide association studies. Journal of Privacy and Confidentiality, 2013. Available at: http:// repository.cmu.edu/jpc/vol5/iss1/6. Ullman, J. Private multiplicative weights beyond linear queries. In PODS, 2015. Vu, D. and Slavkovic, A. Differential privacy for clinical trial data: Preliminary evaluations. In ICDM, 2009. Wang, Yue, Lee, Jaewoo, and Kifer, Daniel. entially private hypothesis testing, revisited. abs/1511.03376, 2015.  DifferCoRR,  Xi, B., Kantarcioglu, M., and Inan, A. Mixture of gaussian models and bayes error under differential privacy. In CODASPY. ACM, 2011. Zhou, S., Lafferty, J., and Wasserman, L. Compressed regression. In NIPS, 2007.  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  A. Extended Introductory Discussion  A.2. Omitted Preliminary Details  Due to space constraint, a few details from the introductory parts (Sections 1,2) were omitted. We bring them in this appendix. We especially recommend the uninformed reader to go over the extended OLS background we provide in Appendix A.3.  Linear Algebra and Pseudo-Inverses. Given a matrix M we denote its SVD as M = U SV T with U and V being orthonormal matrices and S being a non-negative diagonal matrix whose entries are the singular values of M . We use σmax (M ) and σmin (M ) to denote the largest and smallest singular value resp. Despite the risk of confusion, we stick to the standard notation of using σ 2 to denote the variance of a Gaussian, and use σj (M ) to denote the j-th singular value of M . We use M + to denote the Moore-Penrose inverse of M , defined as M + = V S −1 U T where S −1 is a −1 matrix with Sj,j = 1/Sj,j for any j s.t. Sj,j > 0.  A.1. Proof Of Privacy of Algorithm 1 Theorem A.1. Algorithm 1 is (, δ)-differentially private. Proof. The proof of the theorem is based on the fact the Algorithm 1 is the result of composing the differentially private Propose-Test-Release algorithm of (Dwork & Lei, 2009) with the differentially private analysis of the Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform of (Sheffet, 2015). More specifically, we use Theorem B.1 from (Sheffet, 2015) that states that given a matrix A whose all of its 2 singular p values at greater than T (, δ) where T (, δ) = 2B 2 2r ln(4/δ) + 2 ln(4/δ) , publishing RA is (, δ) differentially private for a r-row matrix R whose entries sampled are i.i.d normal Gaussians. Since we have that all of the singular values of A0 are greater than w (as specified in Algorithm 1), outputting RA0 is (/2, δ/2)-differentially private. The rest of the proof boils down to showing that (i) the if-else-condition is (/2, 0)-differentially private and that (ii) w.p. ≤ δ/2 any matrix A whose smallest singular value is smaller than w passes the if-condition (step 3). If both these facts hold, then knowing whether we pass the if-condition or not is (/2)-differentially private and the output of the algorithm is (/2, δ)-differentially private, hence basic composition gives the overall bound of (, δ)differential privacy. To prove (i) we have that for any pair of neighboring matrices A and B that differ only on the i-th row, denoted a i and T T b i resp., we have B T B − b ib T i = A A − a ia i . Applying Weyl’s inequality we have b ib T σmin (B T B) ≤ σmin (B T B − b ib T i ) + σmax (b i) a ia T b ib T ≤ σmin (AT A) + σmax (a i ) + σmax (b i) ≤ σmin (AT A) + 2B 2 2  hence |σmin (A)2 −σmin (B)2 | ≤ 2B 2 , so adding Lap( 4B ) is (/2)-differentially private. To prove (ii), note that by standard tail-bounds on the Laplace distribution we have that Pr[Z < − 4B 2 ln(1/δ) δ ] ≤ . Therefore, w.p. 1 − δ/2 it holds that  2 any matrix A that passes the if-test of the algorithm must have σmin (A)2 > w2 . Also note that a similar argument shows that for any 0 < β < 1, any matrix A s.t. 2 passes the if-condition of σmin (A)2 > w2 + 4B ln(1/β)  the algorithm w.p. 1 − β.  The Gaussian Distribution. A univariate Gaussian N (µ, σ 2 ) denotes the Gaussian distribution whose mean is µ and variance σ 2 , with PDF(x) = √ 2 ( 2πσ )−1 exp(− x−µ bounds 2σ 2 ). Standard concentration p on Gaussians give that Pr[x > µ + 2σ ln(1/ν)] < ν µ, Σ) for any ν ∈ (0, 1e ). A multivariate Gaussian N (µ for some positive semi-definite Σ denotes the multivariate Gaussian distribution where the mean of the j-th coordinate is the µj and the co-variance between coordinates j and k is Σj,k . The PDF of such Gaussian is defined only on the subspace colspan(Σ), x) = where for every x ∈ colspan(Σ) we have PDF(x  −1/2  1 rank(Σ) T + ˜ x − µ ) Σ (x x − µ) (2π) · det(Σ) exp − 2 (x ˜ and det(Σ) is the multiplication of all non-zero singular values of Σ. A matrix Gaussian distribution denoted N (Ma×b , U, V ) has mean M , variance U on its rows and variance V on its columns. For full rank U and V it holds that PDFN (M,U,V ) (X) = (2π)−ab/2 (det(U ))−b/2 (det(V ))−a/2 ·  exp(− 21 trace V −1 (X − M )T U −1 (X − M ) ). In our case, we will only use matrix Gaussian distributions with N (Ma×b , Ia×a , V ) and so each row in this matrix is an i.i.d sample from a b-dimensional multivariate Gaussian N ((M )j→ , V ). We will repeatedly use the rules regarding linear operations on Gaussians. That in, for any c, it holds that cN (µ, σ 2 ) = µ, Σ) = N (c · µ, c2 σ 2 ). For any C it holds that C · N (µ µ, CΣC T ). And for any C is holds that N (M, U, V ) · N (Cµ C = N (M C, U, C T V C). In particular, for any c (which can be viewed as a b × 1-matrix) it holds that N (M, U, V ) · c = N (Mcc, U, c T V c ) = N (Mcc, c T V c · U ). We will also require the following proposition. 2  Proposition A.2. Given σ 2 , λ2 s.t. 1 ≤ σλ2 ≤ c2 for some constant c, let X and Y be two random Gaussians s.t. X ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) and Y ∼ N (0, λ2 ). It follows that 1c PDFY (x) ≤ PDFX (x) ≤ cPDFcY (x) for any x. Corollary A.3. Under the same notation as in Proposition A.2, for any set S ⊂ R it holds that 1c Prx←Y [x ∈ S] ≤ Prx←X [x ∈ S] ≤ cPrx←cY [x ∈ S] =  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  cPrx←Y [x ∈ S/c]  haustive account of OLS and we refer the interested reader to (Rao, 1973; Muller & Stewart, 2006).  Proof. The proof is mere calculation.  xi , yi )}ni=1 where for all i we have Given n observations {(x p x i ∈ R and yi ∈ R, we assume the existence of a pdimensional vector β ∈ Rp s.t. the label yi was derived by yi = β Tx i + ei where ei ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) independently (also known as the homoscedastic Gaussian model). We use the matrix notation where X denotes the (n × p)-matrix whose rows are x i , and use y , e ∈ Rn to denote the vectors whose i-th entry is yi and ei resp. To simplify the discussion, we assume X has full rank.  PDFX (x) = PDFcY (x)  r  2  x c2 λ2 exp(− 2σ 2) · 2 2 σ exp(− 2cx2 λ2 )  x2 1 1 ≤ c · exp( ( 2 2 − 2 )) ≤ c · exp(0) = c 2 c λ σ r x2 ) PDFX (x) λ2 exp(− 2σ 2 · = PDFY (x) σ 2 exp(− x22 ) ≥c  −1  2λ x2 1 exp( 2 ( λ2 − σ12 ))  ≥  exp(0) c  = c−1  The parameters of the model are therefore β and σ 2 , which we set to discover. To that end, we minimize minz kyy − Xzz k2 and solve β = (X T X)−1 X Ty = (X T X)−1 X T (Xβ β +ee) = β +X +e β̂  The Tk -Distribution. The Tk -distribution, where k is referred to as the degrees of freedom of the distribution, denotes the distribution over the reals created by independently sampling Z ∼ N (0, 1) and kζk2 ∼ χ2k , and taking the quantity √ Z 2 . Its PDF is given by   kζk /k − k+1 2 2 x . It k  PDFTk (x) ∝ 1 + is a known fact that as k increases, Tk becomes closer and closer to a normal Gaussian. The T -distribution is often used to determine suitable bounds on the rate of converges, as we illustrate in Section A.3. As the T -distribution is heavy-tailed, existing tail boundsp on the T -distribution (which are of the form:R if τν = C k((1/ν)2/k − 1) for some constant C ∞ then τν PDFTk (x)dx < ν) are often cumbersome to work with. Therefore, in many cases in practice, it common to assume ν = Θ(1) (most commonly, ν = 0.05) and use existing tail-bounds on normal Gaussians. Differential Privacy facts. It is known (Dwork et al., 2006b) that if ALG outputs a vector in Rd such that for any A and A0 it holds that kALG(A) − ALG(A0 )k1 ≤ B, then adding Laplace noise Lap(1/) to each coordinate of the output of ALG(A) satisfies -differential privacy. Similarly, (2006b) showed that if for any neighboring A and A0 it holds that kALG(A) − ALG(A0 )k22 ≤ ∆2 then adding Gaussian noise N (0, ∆2 · 2 ln(2/δ) ) to each coordinate of 2 the output of ALG(A) satisfies (, δ)-differential privacy. Another standard result (Dwork et al., 2006a) gives that the composition of the output of a (1 , δ1 )-differentially private algorithm with the output of a (2 , δ2 )-differentially private algorithm results in a (1 +2 , δ1 +δ2 )-differentially private algorithm. A.3. Detailed Background on Ordinary Least Squares For the unfamiliar reader, we give a short description of the model under which OLS operates as well as the confidence bounds one derives using OLS. This is by no means an ex-  β As e ∼ N (00n , σ 2 In×n ), it holds that β̂ ∼ β , σ 2 (X T X)−1 ), or alternatively, that for every coorN (β β ∼ N (βj , σ 2 (X T X)−1 dinate j it holds that β̂j = e T j β̂ j,j ). Hence we get  σ  β̂ −βj q j (X T X)−1 j,j  ∼ N (0, 1). In addition, we de-  note the vector β = (Xβ β + e ) − X(β β + X +e ) = (I − XX + )ee ζ = y − X β̂ and since XX + is a rank-p (symmetric) projection matrix, we have ζ ∼ N (0, σ 2 (I − XX + )). Therefore, kζζ k2 is equivalent to summing the squares of (n − p) i.i.d samples from N (0, σ 2 ). In other words, the quantity kζζ k2 /σ 2 is sampled from a χ2 -distribution with (n − p) degrees of freedom. We sidetrack from the OLS discussion to give the following β , as the next bounds on the l2 -distance between β and β̂ claim shows. Claim A.4. For any 0 < ν < 1/2, the following holds w.p. ≥ 1−ν over the randomness of the model (the randomness over e ) β − β̂ β k2 = kX +e k2 kβ = O σ 2 log(p/ν) · kX + k2F 2  +    (6)  2  β k = kβ β + X ek kβ̂  2 p β k + σ · kX + kF · log(p/ν) ) = O( kβ q ln(1/ν) 2 2 1 ζ kζ k − σ = O( n−p n−p ) Proof. Since e ∼ N (00n , σ 2 In×n ) then X +e ∼ N (00n , σ 2 (X T X)−1 ). Denoting the SVD decomposition (X T X)−1 = V SV T with S denoting the diagonal ma−2 −2 trix whose entries are σmax (X), . . . , σmin (X), we have T + 2 that V X e ∼ N (00n , σ S). And so, each coordinate of V T X +e is distributed like an i.i.d Gaussian. So  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  w.p. p≥ 1 − ν/2 non of these Gaussians is a factor of O(σ ln(p/ν)) greater than its standard deviation. And so w.p. ≥ 1 − ν/2P it holds that kX +e k2 =PkV T X +e k2 ≤ −2 −2 2 Since O(σ log(p/ν) i σi (X) ). i σi (X) = T −1 + + T trace((X X) ) = trace(X (X ) ) = kX + k2F , the bound of (6) is proven. β k2 is an immediate corollary of (6) using The bound on kβ̂ the triangle inequality.8 The bound on kζζ k2 follows from tail bounds on the χ2n−p distribution, as detailed in Section 2. β and ζ are Returning to OLS, it is important to note that β̂ β depends solely on independent of one another. (Note, β̂ X +e = (X + X)X +e = X + PU e , whereas ζ depends on (I − XX + )ee = PU ⊥ e . As e is spherically symmetric, the β is two projections are independent of one another and so β̂ independent of ζ .) As a result of the above two calculations, we have that the quantity def  tβ̂j (βj ) =  β̂j −βj q ζk kζ √ (X T X)−1 j,j · n−p  =  σ  β̂ −βj q j (X T X)−1 j,j  .  kζζ k √ σ n−p  is distributed like a T -distribution with (n − p) degrees of freedom. Therefore, we can compute an exact probability estimation for this quantity. That is, for any measurable S ⊂ R we have i Z h β and ζ satisfying tβ̂j (βj ) ∈ S = PDFTn−p (x)dx Pr β̂ S  The importance of the t-value t(βj ) lies in the fact that it can be fully estimated from the observed data X and y (for any value of βj ), which makes it a pivotal quantity. Therefore, given X and y , we can use t(βj ) to describe the likelihood of any βj — for any z ∈ R we can now give an estimation of how likely it is to have βj = z (which is PDFTn−p (t(z))). The t-values enable us to perform multitude of statistical inferences. For example, we can say which of two hypotheses is more likely and by how much (e.g., we are 5-times more likely that the hypothesis βj = 3 is true than the hypothesis βj = 14 is true); we can compare between two coordinates j and j 0 and report we are more confident that βj > 0 than βj 0 > 0; or even compare among the t-values we get across multiple datasets (such as the datasets we get from subsampling rows from a single dataset). In particular, we can use t(βj ) to α-reject unlikely values of βj . Given 0 < α < 1, we denote cα as the number for which the interval (−cα , cα ) contains a probability mass of 1 − α from the Tn−p -distribution. And so we derive a 8  Observe, though e is spherically symmetric, and is likely to be approximately-orthogonal to β , this does not necessarily hold for X +e which isn’t spherically symmetric. Therefore, we result β using the triangle bound. to bounding the l2 -norm of β̂  corresponding confidence interval Iα centered at β̂j where βj ∈ Iα with confidence of level of 1 − α. We comment as to the actual meaning of this confidence interval. Our analysis thus far applied w.h.p to a vector y derived according to this model. Such X and y will result in the quantity tβ̂j (βj ) being distributed like a Tn−p distribution — where βj is given as the model parameters and β̂j is the random variable. We therefore have that guarantee that for X and  y derived according to this model,  the q 2 def ζ kζ k −1 event Eα = β̂j ∈ βj ± cα · (X T X)j,j · n−p happens w.p. 1 − α. However, the analysis done over a given dataset X and y (once y has been drawn) views the quantity tβ̂j (βj ) with β̂j given and βj unknown. Therefore the event Eα either holds or does not hold. That is why the alternative terms of likelihood or confidence are used, instead of probability. We have q a confidence 2level of 1 − α ζ ˆ that indeed βj ∈ βj ± cα · (X T X)−1 · kζ k , because this j,j  n−p  event does happen in 1−α fraction of all datasets generated according to our model. Rejecting the Null Hypothesis. One important implication of the quantity t(βj ) is that we can refer specifically to the hypothesis that βj = 0, called the null hypothesis. This def  quantity, t0 = tβ̂j (0) =  √ β̂j n−p q , kζζ k (X T X)−1 j,j  represents how  large is β̂j relatively to the empirical estimation of standard deviation σ. Since it is known that as the number of degrees of freedom of a T -distribution tends to infinity then the T distribution becomes a normal Gaussian, it is common to think of t0 as a sample from a normal Gaussian N (0, 1). This allows us to associate t0 with a p-value, estimating the event “βj and β̂j have different signs.” Formally, we define R∞ 2 p0 = |t0 | √12π e−x /2 dx. It is common to reject the null hypothesis when p0 is sufficiently small (typically, below 0.05).9 Specifically, given α ∈ (0, 1/2), we say we α-reject the null hypothesis R ∞ if p0 <2 α. Let τα be the number s.t. Φ(τα ) = τα √12π e−x /2 dx = α. (Standard bounds p give that τα < 2 ln(1/α).) This means we α-reject the null hypothesis if t0 > τα or t0 < −τα , meaning if q |β̂j | > τα  kζζ k √ (X T X)−1 j,j n−p . ζ  We can now lower bound the number of i.i.d sample points needed in order to α-reject the null hypothesis. This bound will be our basis for comparison — between standard OLS and the differentially private version.10 9 R ∞ Indeed, it is more accurate to associate with t0 the value PDFTn−p (x)dx and check that this value is < α. However, |t0 | as most uses take α to be a constant (often α = 0.05), asymptotically the threshold we get for rejecting the null hypothesis are the same. 10 This theorem is far from being new (except for maybe fo-  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  Theorem A.5 (Theorem 2.2 restated.). Fix any positive definite matrix Σ ∈ Rp×p and any ν ∈ (0, 12 ). Fix parameters β ∈ Rp and σ 2 and a coordinate j s.t. βj 6= 0. Let X be a matrix whose n rows are i.i.d samples from β )i is sampled N (00, Σ), and y be a vector where yi − (Xβ i.i.d from N (0, σ 2 ). Fix α ∈ (0, 1). Then w.p. ≥ 1 − ν we have p that the (1 − α)-confidence interval is of length O(cα σ 2 /(nσmin (Σ))) provided n ≥ C1 (p + ln(1/ν)) for some sufficiently large constant C1 . Furthermore, there exists a constant C2 such that w.p. ≥ 1 − α − ν we (correctly) reject the null hypothesis provided ( ) σ 2 c2α + τα2 n ≥ max C1 (p + ln(1/ν)), C2 2 · βj σmin (Σ) cα denotes the number for which PDF (x)dx = 1 − α. (If we are content T n−p −cα with approximating Tn−p p with a normal Gaussian than one can set cα ≈ τα < 2 ln(1/α).) Here R cα  Proof. The discussion above ≥ 1−α q shows that w.p. 2 −1 kζζ k T we have |βj − β̂j | ≤ cα (X X)j,j n−p ; and in orderqto α-reject the null hypothesis we must have |β̂j | > kζζ k2 τα (X T X)−1 j,j n−p . Therefore, a sufficient condition for OLS to α-reject the null-hypothesis is to have n large q 2  kζζ k enough s.t. |βj | > (cα + τα ) (X T X)−1 j,j n−p . We therefore argue that w.p.≥ 1 − ν this inequality indeed holds. ζ  We assume each row of X i.i.d vector x i ∼ N (00p , Σ), and recall that according to the model kζζ k2 ∼ σ 2 χ2 (n − p). Straightforward concentration bounds on Gaussians and on the χ2 -distribution give: √ (i) W.p. ≤ α it holds that kζζ k > σ ( n − p + 2 ln(2/α))). (This is part of the standard OLS analysis.) √ (ii) W.p.p≤ ν it holds that σmin (X T X) ≤ σmin (Σ)( n − √ ( p + 2 ln(2/ν)))2 . (Rudelson & Vershynin, 2009) Therefore, due to the lower bound n = Ω(p + ln(1/ν)), w.p.≥ 1 − ν − α we have that none of hold. In such a case we have q these events p −1 T (X X)j,j ≤ σmax ((X T X)−1 ) = O( √ 1 ) nσmin (Σ) √ and kζζ k = O(σ n − p). This implies that the confidence interval of level 1 − α has length of q  q  2 −1 kζζ k σ2 T cα (X X)j,j · n−p = O cα nσmin (Σ) ; and that in order to α-reject that null-hypothesis it suffices to have q   2  σ |βj | = Ω (cα + τα ) nσmin (Σ) . Plugging in the lower bound on n, we see that this inequality holds.  We comment that for sufficiently large constants C1 , C2 , cusing on the setting where every row in X is sampled from an i.i.d multivariate Gaussians), it is just stated in a non-standard way, discussing solely the power of the t-test in OLS. For further discussions on sample size calculations see (Muller & Stewart, 2006).  it holds that all the constants hidden in the O- and Ωnotations of the proof are close to 1. I.e., they are all within the interval (1 ± η) for some small η > 0 given C1 , C2 ∈ Ω(η −2 ).  B. Projecting the Data using Gaussian Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform B.1. Main Theorem Restated and Further Discussion Theorem B.1 (Theorem 3.1 restated.). Let X be a n × p matrix, and parameters β ∈ Rp and σ 2 are such that β + e with each coordiwe generate the vector y = Xβ nate of e sampled independently from N (0, σ 2 ). Assume σmin (X) ≥ C · w and that n is sufficiently large s.t. all of the singular values of the matrix [X; y ] are greater than C · w for some large constant C, and so Algorithm 1 projects the matrix A = [X; y ] without altering it, and publishes [RX; Ryy ]. Fix ν ∈ (0, 1/2) and r = p + Ω(ln(1/ν)). Fix coordinate β , ζ̃ζ and σ̃ 2 as j. Then w.p. ≥ 1 − ν we have that deriving β̃ follows β β̃  = (X T RT RX)−1 (RX)T (Ryy ) = β + (RX)+ Ree  ζ̃ζ  = =  σ̃ 2  =  √1 Ry y − √1r (RX)β̃ β r  T 1 √ I − (RX)(X RT RX)−1 (RX)T ) Ree r  r kζ̃ζ k2 r−p  then the pivot quantity β̃j − βj  t̃(βj ) = σ̃  q  (X T RT RX)−1 j,j  has a distribution D satisfying e−a PDFTr−p (x) ≤ PDFD (x) ≤ ea PDFTr−p (e−a x) for any x ∈ R, where we r−p denote a = n−p . Comparison with Existing Bounds. Sarlos’ work (2006) utilizes the fact that when r, the numbers of rows in R, is large enough, then √1r R is a Johnson-Lindenstrauss matrix. q Specifically, given r and ν ∈ (0, 1) we denote η = Ω(  p ln(p) ln(1/ν) ), r  and so r = O( p ln(p)ηln(1/ν) ). 2  β = arg minz 1r kRXzz − Ryy k2 . In Let us denote β̃ this setting, Sarlos’ work (Sarlós, 2006) (Theorem 12(3)) guarantees that w.p.q≥ 1 − ν we have  p log(p) log(1/ν) β − β̃ β k2 ≤ ηkζζ k/σmin (X) = O ζ kβ̂ kζ k . rσmin (X T X) β − β̃ β k and using the Naı̈vely bounding |β̂j − β̃j | ≤ kβ̂ β j − β j from Section A.311 confidence interval for β̂ 11 Where we approximate cα , the tail bound of the Tn−p distribution with the tail p bound on a Gaussian, i.e., use the approximation cα ≈ O( ln(1/α)).  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  gives a confidence interval of q level 1 − (α + ν)  cenp ln(p) log(1/ν) tered at β̃j with length of O kζζ k + rσmin (X T X) q  log(1/α) ζk O (X T X)−1 = j,j n−p kζ q  p ln(p) log(1/ν)+log(1/α) O kζζ k . This implies that rσmin (X T X) our confidence interval has decreased its degrees of freedom from n − p to roughly r/p ln(p), and furthermore, that it no longer depends on (X T X)−1 j,j but rather on T 1/σmin (X X). It is only due to the fact that we rely on Gaussians and by mimicking carefully the original proof that we can deduce that the t̃-value has (roughly) r − p degrees of freedom and depends solely on (X T X)−1 j,j . (In the worst case, we have that (X T X)−1 j,j is proportional to σmin (X T X)−1 , but it is not uncommon to have matrices where the former is much larger than the latter.) As mentioned in the introduction, alternative techniques ((Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Bassily et al., 2014; Ullman, 2015)) for finding a DP estimator β dp of the linear regression give a β dp − β̂ β k = Õ(p/). Such data-independent12 bound of kβ bounds are harder to compare with the interval length given by Corollary 3.2. Indeed, as we discuss in Section 3 under “Rejecting the null-hypothesis,” enough samples from a multivariate Gaussian whose covariance-matrix is well conditioned give a bound which is well below the worstupper bound of O(p/). (Yet, it is possible that these techniques also do much better on such “well-behaved” data.) What the works of Sarlos and alternative works regrading differentially private linear regression do not take into account are questions such as generating a likelihood for βj nor do they discuss rejecting the null hypothesis. B.2. Proof of Theorem 3.1 β and ζ̃ζ , where our goal We now turn to our analysis of β̃ is to show that the distribution of the t̃-values as specified in Theorem 3.1 is well-approximated by the Tr−p distribution. For now, we assume the existence of fixed β + e . (Later, vectors β ∈ Rp and e ∈ Rn s.t. y = Xβ we will return to the homoscedastic model where each coordinate of e is sampled i.i.d from N (0, σ 2 ) for some σ 2 .) In other words, we first examine the case where R is the sole source of randomness in our estimation. Based on the assumption that e is fixed, we argue the following. Claim B.2. In our model, given X and β the output M = RX, we have that β̃ ∼ + 2 T −1 N β + X e , kPU ⊥ e k (M M ) and ζ̃ζ ∼   kPU ⊥ e k2 T −1 T N 0n, (Ir×r − M (M M ) M ) . Where r PU ⊥ denotes the projection operator onto the subspace orthogonal to colspan(X); i.e., PU = XX + and PU ⊥ = (Ir×r − XX + ). 12  In other words, independent of X, ζ .  Proof. The matrix R is sampled from N (0r×p , Ir×r , Ip×p ). Given X and RX = M , we learn the projection of each row in R onto the subspace spanned by the columns of X. That is, denoting u T as the i-th row of R and v T as the i-th row of M , we have that X Tu = v . Recall, initially u ∼ N (00n , In×n ) – a spherically symmetric Gaussian. As a result, we can denote u = PU u × PU ⊥ u where the two projections are independent samples from N (00n , PU ) and N (00n , PU ⊥ ) resp. However, once we know that v = X Tu we have that PU u = X(X T X)−1 X Tu = X(X T X)−1v so we learn PU u exactly, whereas we get no information about PU ⊥ so PU ⊥ u is still sampled from a Gaussian N (00n , PU ⊥ ). As we know for each row of R that u T PU = v T X + , we therefore have that R = RPU + RPU ⊥ = M X + + RPU ⊥ where RPU ⊥ ∼ N (0r×n , Ir×r , PU ⊥ ). From here on, we just rely on the existing results about the linearity of Gaussians. R ∼ N (M X + , Ir×r , PU ⊥ ) ⇒ Ree ∼ N (M X +e , kPU ⊥ e k2 Ir×r ) ⇒ M + Ree ∼ N (X +e , kPU ⊥ e k2 (M T M )−1 ) β = β + M + Ree implies β̃ β ∼ N (β β + so β̃ + X e , kPU ⊥ e k2 (M T M )−1 ). And as ζ̃ζ = T −1 T √1 (Ir×r e − M (M M ) M )Re then we r kP  have ζ̃ζ ∼ N (00r , U r⊥ + (Ir×r − M M )M = 0r×p .  e k2  (Ir×r − M M + )) as  Claim B.2 was based on the assumption that e is fixed. However, given X and y there are many different ways to β + e . However, the assign vectors β and e s.t. y = Xβ distributions we get in Claim B.2 are unique. To see that, β and recall Equations (1) and (2): β + X +e = X +y = β̂ PU ⊥ e = PU ⊥ y = (I − XX + )yy = ζ . We therefore have 2 β ∼ N (β̂ β , kζζ k2 (M T M )−1 ) and ζ̃ζ ∼ N (00n , kζζrk (I − β̃ M M + )). We will discuss this further, in Section 4, where we will not be able to better analyze the explicit distributions of our estimators. But in this section, we are able to β and ζ̃ζ . argue more about the distributions of β̃ So far we have considered the case that e is fixed, whereas our goal is to argue about the case where each coordinate of e is sampled i.i.d from N (0, σ 2 ). To that end, we now switch to an intermediate model, in which PU e is sampled from a multivariate Gaussian while PU ⊥ e is fixed as some arbitrary vector of length l. Formally, let Dl denote the distribution where PU e ∼ N (0, σ 2 PU ) and PU ⊥ e is fixed as some specific vector whose length is denoted by kPU ⊥ ek = l. Claim B.3. Under the same assumptions as in Claim B.2, given that e ∼ Dl , we have that  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  ∼ N β , σ 2 (X T  X)−1 + l2 (M T M )−1  2 ζ̃ζ ∼ N 0 n , lr (I − M M + ) .  β β̃    β = β + M + Ree = β + M + (M X + + Proof. Recall, β̃ RPU ⊥ )ee = β + X +e + M + R(PU ⊥ e ). Now, under the assumption e ∼ Dl we have that β is the sum of two independent Gaussians:  β , σ 2 X + · PU · (X + )T ) β + X +e ∼ N (β β , σ 2 (X T X)−1 ) = N (β ∼ N (00r , kPU ⊥ e k2 Ir×r ) RPU ⊥ e + e ⇒ M Re ∼ N (00p , kPU ⊥ e k2 (M T M )−1 ) Summing the two independent Gaussians’ means and β . Furthermore, in variances gives the distribution of β̃ Claim B.2 we have already established that  for any fixed  kPU ⊥ e k2 + e we have ζ̃ζ ∼ N 0 n , (I − M M ) . Hence, for r   2 e ∼ Dl we still have ζ̃ζ ∼ N 0 n , lr (I − M M + ) . (It is easy to verify that the same chain of derivations is applicable when e ∼ Dl .) Corollary B.4. Given that e ∼ Dl we have that β̃j ∼ −1 2 T N (βj , σ 2 (X T X)−1 j,j + l (M M )j,j ) for any coordinate j, and that kζ̃ζ k2 ∼  l2 r  · χ2r−p .  Proof. The corollary follows immediately from the fact β , and from the definition of the χ2 that βj = e T j β̃ distribution, as ζ̃ζ is a spherically symmetric Gaussian defined on the subspace colspan(M )⊥ of dimension r − p. To continue, we need the following claim. Claim B.5. Given X and M = RX, and given that e ∼ Dl β and ζ̃ζ are independent. we have that β̃ β = β + X +e + M + R(PU ⊥ e ). And Proof. Recall, β̃ so, given X, M and a specific vector PU ⊥ e we have β depends on (i) the projection that the distribution of β̃ of e on U = colspan(X) and on (ii) the projection of each row in R onto Ũ = colspan(M ). The distribution of ζ̃ζ = √1r PŨ ⊥ Ree = √1r PŨ ⊥ (M X + + RPU ⊥ )ee = √1 P ⊥ RPU ⊥ e depends on (i) the projection of e onto U ⊥ r Ũ (which for the time being is fix to some specific vector of length l) and on (ii) the projection of each row in R onto Ũ ⊥ . Since PU e is independent from PU ⊥ e , and since for any row u T of R we have that PŨ u is independent of PŨ ⊥ u , and since e and R are chosen independently, we have that β and ζ̃ζ are independent. β̃ Formally, consider any pair of coordinates β̃j and ζ̃k , and we have β̃j − βj  + T + = eT j X e + e j M (RPU ⊥ e )  ζ̃k  and  = eT k PŨ ⊥ (RPU ⊥ e )  Recall, we are given X and M = RX. Therefore, we know PU and PŨ . And so Cov[β̃j , ζ̃k ] = E[(β̃j − βj )(ζ̃k − 0)] + T = E[eeT j X e (RPU ⊥ e ) PŨ ⊥ e k ] T + + E[eeT j M (RPU ⊥ e )(RPU ⊥ e ) PŨ ⊥ e k ] + ee T PU ⊥ ]E[RT ]PŨ ⊥ e k = eT j X E[e T + + eT j M E[(RPU ⊥ e )(RPU ⊥ e ) ]PŨ ⊥ e k   + eeT PU ⊥ ] (M X + )T + E[(RPU ⊥ )T ] PŨ ⊥ ek = eT j X E[e  + + eT kPU ⊥ e k2 Ir×r PŨ ⊥ e k jM  + ee T PU ⊥ ](X + )T M T PŨ ⊥ e k + 0 = eT j X E[e  + + l2 · e T j M PŨ ⊥ e k =0+0+0=0 β and ζ̃ζ are Gaussians, having their covariance = 0 And as β̃ implies independence. β and ζ̃ζ are independent Gaussians Having established that β̃ and specified their distributions, we continue with the proof of Theorem 3.1. We assume for now that there exists some small a > 0 s.t. −1 −1 2 T 2 T l2 (M T M )−1 j,j ≤ σ (X X)j,j + l (M M )j,j 2a 2 T ≤ e · l (M M )−1 j,j  (7)  Then, due to Corollary A.3, denoting the distributions N1 = N (0, l2 (M T M )−1 = j,j ) and N2 −1 2 T N (0, σ 2 (X T X)−1 + l (M M ) ), we have that for any j,j j,j S ⊂ R it holds that13 e−a Prβ̃j ∼N1 [S] ≤ Prβ̃j ∼N2 [S] ≤ ea Prβ̃j ∼N1 [S/ea ] (8) More specifically, denote the function t̃(ψ, kξξ k, βj )  ψ − βj q r kξξ k r−p (M T M )−1 j,j q r ξ kξ k . r−p ψ − βj = q l l (M T M )−1  =  j,j  and observe that when we sample ψ, ξ independently s.t. 2 ξ k2 ∼ lr χ2r−p then ψ ∼ N (βj , l2 (M T M )−1 j,j ) and kξ t̃(ψ, kξξ k, βj ) is distributed like a T -distribution with r − p 13 In fact, it is possible to use standard techniques from differential privacy, and argue a similar result — that the probabilities of any event that depends on some function f (βj ) under βj ∼ N1 and under βj ∼ N2 are close in the differential privacy sense.  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  degrees of freedom. And so, for any τ > 0 we have that under such way to sample ψ, ξ we have Pr[t̃(ψ, kξξ k, βj ) > τ ] = 1 − CDFTr−p (τ ).  for any I = (τ1 , τ2 ) with τ1 < τ2 ≤ 0, and deduce that the PDF of the function t̃(ψ, kξξ k, βj ) at x — where −1 2 T we sample ψ ∼ N (βj , l2 (M T M )−1 j,j + σ (X X)j,j )  For any τ ≥ 0 and for any non-negative real value z let Szτ denote the suitable set of values s.t.  and kξξ k2 ∼ lr χ2r−p independently — lies in the range  e−a PDFTr−p (x), ea PDFTr−p (x/ea ) . And so, using Corollary B.4 and Claim B.5, we have that when e ∼ Dl , the distributions of β̃j and kζ̃ζ k2 are precisely as stated   ξ k, βj ) > τ ] Pr ψ∼N (βj , l2 (M T M )−1 ) [t̃(ψ, kξ j,j  l2 kξξ k2 ∼ r χ2r−p    Z∞ =  PDF l2  2 r χr−p  0  (z) ·  2  def    Pr [Szτ ] dz {ψ−βj ∼N (0, l2 (M T M )−1 j,j )}  above, and so we have that the distribution of t̃(βj ) = t̃(β̃j , kζ̃ζ k, βj ) has a PDF that at the point x is “sandwiched” between e−a PDFTr−p (x) and ea PDFTr−p (x/ea ).  Next, we aim to argue that this characterization of the PDF of t̃(βj ) still holds when e ∼ N (00n , σ 2 In×n ). r That is, Szτ = τ · z r−p (M T M )−1 , ∞ . j,j It would be convenient to think of e as a sample in N (00n , σ 2 PU ) × N (00n , σ 2 PU ⊥ ). (So while in Dl we have We now use Equation (8) (Since N (0, l2 (M T M )−1 ) is j,j PU e ∼ N (00n , σ 2 PU ) but PU ⊥ e is fixed, now both PU e and precisely N1 ) to deduce that PU ⊥ e are sampled from spherical Gaussians.) The reason why the above still holds lies in the fact that t̃(βj ) does not   Prψ∼N (βj , l2 (M T M )−1 +σ2 (X T X)−1 ) [t̃(ψ, kξξ k, βj ) > τ ] depend on l. In more details: j,j j,j l2     kξξ k2 ∼ r χ2r−p Pre ∼N (00n ,σ2 In×n ) t̃(βj ) ∈ I Z ∞ Z   = PDF l2 2 (z) [Szτ ]dz = Pr Pr v )dvv −1 −1 2 T 2 T 0n ,σ 2 In×n ) t̃(βj ) ∈ I | PU ⊥ e = v PDFPU ⊥ e (v e ∼N (0 ψ − βj ∼ N (0, l (M M )j,j + σ (X X)j,j ) 0 r χr−p v Z ∞ Z   [Szτ /ea ]dz = ≤ ea Pr PDF l2 2 (z) Pr t̃(βj ) ∈ I | l = kvv k PDFPU ⊥ e (vv )dvv 2 (M T M )−1 ) χ ψ−β ∼N (0, l e ∼D 0 j l r r−p j,j v ! Z ∞ Z Z   (∗)  = ea  PDF l2  0    q  r  χ2r−p  (z)  Pr  ψ−βj ∼N (0,  a  [Szτ /e ]dz  l2 (M T M )−1 j,j )  j,j  = ea 1 −  l2 kξξ k2 ∼ r χ2r−p  CDFTr−p (τ /ea )  = ea   ξ k, βj ) > τ ] Pr ψ∼N (βj , l2 (M T M )−1 +σ 2 (X T X)−1 ) [t̃(ψ, kξ j,j  > τ]  2  = e−a  l kξξ k2 ∼ r χ2r−p     1 − CDFTr−p (τ )  In other words, we have just shown that for any interval I = (τ, ∞) with τ ≥ 0 we have that  ξ k, βj ) ∈ I] Pr ψ∼N (βj , l2 (M T M )−1 +σ 2 (X T X)−1 ) [t̃(ψ, kξ j,j    PDFTr−p (z)dz v  PDFPU ⊥ e (vv )dvv  Z PDFTr−p (z)dz I/ea  where the last transition is possible precisely because t̃ is independent of l (or kvv k) — which is precisely what makes this t-value a pivot quantity. The proof of the lower bound is symmetric.  j,j  l2  kξξ k2 ∼ r χ2r−p −a  [t̃(ψ, kξ ξ k, βj ) e Pr  ψ∼N (βj , l2 (M T M )−1 j,j )   !Z  Z I/ea  = where the equality (∗) follows from the fact that τ /c Sz for any c > 0, since it is a non-negative interval. Analogously, we can also show that  ≥  e  a    Szτ /c    =  PDFPU ⊥ e (vv )dvv  PDFTr−p (z)dz I/ea  v   ξ k, βj ) > τ /ea ] = ea Pr ψ∼N (βj , l2 (M T M )−1 ) [t̃(ψ, kξ   ea  ≤  l2 kξξ k2 ∼ r χ2r−p a  j,j    R  is lower bounded by e PDFTr−p (z)dz and upper I R bounded by ea PDFTr−p (z)dz. We can now repeat I/ea  the same argument for I = (τ1 , τ2 ) with 0 ≤ τ1 < τ2 (using an analogous definition of Szτ1 ,τ2 ), and again  To conclude, we have shown that if Equation (7) holds, then for every interval   I ⊂ R we have that Pre ∼N (00n ,σ2 In×n ) t̃(βj ) ∈ I is lower bounded by e−a Prz∼Tr−p [z ∈ I] and upper bounded by ea Prz∼Tr−p [z ∈ (I/ea )]. So to conclude the proof of Theorem 3.1, we need to show that w.h.p such a as in Equation (7) exists. Claim B.6. In the homoscedastic model with Gaussian noise, if both n and r satisfy n, r ≥ p + Ω(log(1/ν)), then −1 −1 2 T 2 T we have that σ 2 (X T X)−1 j,j +l (M M )j,j ≥ l (M M )j,j and 2(r−p) −1 −1 2 T 2 T σ 2 (X T X)−1 j,j +l (M M )j,j ≤ (1+ n−p )·l (M M )j,j 2(r−p)  n−p , Theorem 3.1 now follows Using (1 + 2(r−p) n−p ) ≤ e r−p from plugging a = n−p to our above discussion.  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  Proof. The lower bound is immediate from non-negativity T −1/2 of σ 2 and of (X T X)−1 e j k2 . We therej,j = k(X X) fore prove the upper bound.  parameter r w.p. ≥ 1 − ν we correctly α-reject the null hypothesis using p̃0 (i.e., w.p. ≥ 1 − ν Algorithm 1 returns matrix unaltered and we can estimate t̃0 and verify that  First, observe that l2 = kPU ⊥ e k2 is sampled from σ 2 ·χ2n−p as U ⊥ is of dimension n − p. Therefore, it holds that w.p. ≥ 1 − ν/2 that  indeed p̃0 < α · e  σ2  √  n−p−  p  r−p − n−p  ) provided  (  σ 2 (c̃2 + τ̃α2 ) r ≥ p + max C1 2 α , C2 ln(1/ν) βj σmin (Σ)  2 2 ln(2/ν) ≤ l2  )  and 2  and assuming n > p+100 ln(2/ν) we therefore have σ ≤ 4 2 3(n−p) l . Secondly, we argue that when r > p + 300 ln(4/ν) we have that w.p. ≥ 1 − ν/2 it holds that −1 3 T T T (X X) ≤ (r − p)(X R RX)−1 j,j j,j . To see this, first 4 observe that by picking R ∼ N (0r×n , Ir×r , In×n ) the distribution of the product RX ∼ N (0r×d , Ir×r , X T X) is identical to picking Q ∼ N (0r×d , Ir×r , Id×d ) and taking the product Q(X T X)1/2 . Therefore, the distribution of (X T RT RX)−1 is  T 1/2 T T 1/2 −1 identical to (X X) Q Q(X X) = (X T X)−1/2 (QT Q)−1 (X T X)−1/2 . Denoting v = (X T X)−1/2e j we have kvv k2 = (X T X)−1 j,j . Claim A.1 from (Sheffet, 2015) gives that w.p. ≥ 1 − ν/2 we have  −1 T 1/2 T (r − p) · e T Q Q(X T X)1/2 ej j (X X) 1 = v T ( r−p QT Q)−1v ≥ 43 v Tv = 34 (X T X)−1 j,j   w2 n ≥ max r, C3 , C4 (p + ln(1/ν)) min{σmin (Σ), σ 2 }   16l2 (r−p) (X T RT RX)−1 j,j n−p −1 2 T T ≤ 2(r−p) l (X R RX) j,j n−p  and as we denote M = RX we are done. We comment that our analysis in the proof of Claim B.6 implicitly assumes r  n (as we do think of the projection R as dimensionality reduction), and so the ratio r−p n−p is small. However, a similar analysis holds for r which is comparable to n — in which we would argue that −1 2 T σ 2 (X T X)−1 j,j +l (M M )j,j σ 2 (X T X)−1  ∈ [1, 1 + η] for some small η.  PDFN (0,1) (x)dx =  the  numbers r−p α − n−p e 2  = r−p α − n−p 2e  s.t. and  resp.  Proof. First we need to use the lower bound on n to show that indeed Algorithm 1 does not alter A, and that various quantities are not far from their expected values. Formally, we claim the following. Proposition B.8. Under the same lower bounds on n and r as in Theorem 3.3, w.p. 1−α−ν we have that Theorem 3.1 holds and also that r−p 2 2 ζ̃ζ k2 = Θ( r−p r kPU ⊥ e k ) = Θ( r (n − p)σ )  and −1 T 1 (X T RT RX)−1 j,j = Θ( r−p (X X)j,j )  Proof of Proposition B.8. First, we need to argue that we 2 have enough samples as to have the gap σmin ([X; y]) − w2 sufficiently large. Since x i ∼ N (0, Σ), and yi = β Tx i + ei with ei ∼ xi ◦ yi ) is also N (0, σ 2 ), we have that the concatenation (x xi ] + sampled from a Gaussian. Clearly, E[yi ] = β T E[x β Txi + E[ei ] = 0. Similarly, E[xi,j yi ] = E[xi,j · (β β )j and E[yi2 ] = E[e2i ] + E[kXβ β k2 ] = σ 2 + ei )] = (Σβ β T X T Xβ β ] = σ 2 + β T Σβ β . Therefore, each row of A is E[β an i.i.d sample of N (00p+1 , ΣA ), with  B.3. Proof of Theorem 3.3 Theorem B.7 (Theorem 3.3 restated.). Fix a positive definite matrix Σ ∈ Rp×p . Fix parameters β ∈ Rp and σ 2 > 0 and a coordinate j s.t. βj 6= 0. Let X be a matrix whose n rows are sampled i.i.d from N (00p , Σ). Let y be a vector s.t. β )i is sampled i.i.d from N (0, σ 2 ). Fix ν ∈ (0, 1/2) yi −(Xβ and α ∈ (0, 1/2). Then there exist constants C1 , C2 , C3 and C4 such that when we run Algorithm 1 over [X; y ] with  denote  r−p τ̃α /e n−p  Combining the two inequalities we get: ≤  τ̃α  PDFTr−p (x)dx  r−p c̃α /e n−p R∞  which implies the required.  σ 2 (X T X)−1 j,j  c̃α ,  where R∞   ΣA =  Σ β TΣ  β Σβ    β T Σβ β σ 2 +β  Denote λ2 = σmin (Σ). Then, to argue that σmin (ΣA ) is large we use the lower bound from (Ma & Zarowski, 1995) (Theorem 3.1) combining with some simple arithmetic manipulations to deduce that σmin (ΣA ) ≥ min{σmin (Σ), σ 2 }.  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares r−p  Having established a lower bound on σmin (ΣA ), it follows that with n = Ω(p ln(1/ν)) i.i.d draws from N (00p+1 , ΣA ) we have w.p. ≤ ν/4 that σmin (AT A) = o(n) · min{σmin (Σ), σ 2 }. Conditioned on σmin (AT A) = Ω(nσmin (ΣA )) = Ω(w2 ) being large enough, we have that w.p. ≤ ν/4 over the randomness of Algorithm 1 the matrix A does not pass the if-condition and the output of the algorithm is not RA. Conditioned on Algorithm 1 outputting RA, and due to the lower bound r = p + Ω(ln(1/ν)), we have that the result of Theorem 3.1 does not hold w.p. ≤ α + ν/4. All in all we deduce that w.p. ≥ 1 − α − 3ν/4 the result of Theorem 3.1 holds. And since we argue Theorem 3.1 holds, then the following two bounds that are used in the proof14 also hold:  = Ω(e n−p (c̃α + τ̃α )σ̃    (c̃α +τ̃α )2 σ 2 βj2 σmin (Σ)    C. Projected Ridge Regression In this section we deal with the case that our matrix does not pass the if-condition of Algorithm 1. In this case, the matrix is appended  with a d× d-matrix which is wId×d . A 0 Denoting A = we have that the algorithm’s w · Id×d output is RA0 . Similarly to before, we are going to denote d = p + 1 and decompose A = [X; y ] with X ∈ Rn×p and y ∈ Rn , with β + e and ei sampled the standard assumption of y = Xβ i.i.d from N (0, σ 2 ).15 We now need to introduce some additional notation. We denote the appended matrix and vectors X 0 and y 0 s.t. A0 = [X 0 ; y 0 ]. Meaning:   X X 0 =  wIp×p  0T p  2  kPU ⊥ e k = Θ((n − p)σ ) Lastly, in the proof of Theorem 3.1 we argue that for a given PU ⊥ e the length kζ̃ζ k2 is distributed like kPU ⊥ e k2 2 χr−p . r  Appealing again to the fact that r = p + Ω(ln(1/ν) we have that w.p. ≥ ν/4 it holds that kζ̃ζ k2 > kP  (X T RT RX)−1 j,j ))  which, given the lower bound r = p + Ω indeed holds.  −1 T 1 (X T RT RX)−1 j,j = Θ( r−p (X X)j,j ) 2  q  e k2  2(r − p) U r⊥ . Plugging in the value of kPU ⊥ e k2 concludes the proof of the proposition.  and Based on Proposition B.8, we now show that we indeed reject the null-hypothesis (as we should). When Theorem 3.1 holds, reject the null-hypothesis iff p̃0 < α · e  r−p − n−p     y e def β  = X 0β + e 0 y 0 =  0 p  = X 0β +  −wβ w w   r−p  which holds iff |t̃0 | > e n−p τ̃α . This implies r−p  And so we respectively denote R = [R1 ; R2 ; R3 ] with R1 ∈ Rr×n , R2 ∈ Rr×p and R3 ∈ Rr×1 (so R3 is a vector denoted as a matrix). Hence:  n−p τ̃ · we α q reject that null-hypothesis when |β̃j | > e −1 σ̃ (X T RT RX)j,j ). Note that this bound is based  onCorollary 3.2 that determines  that |β̃j − βj | = q r−p −1 T T O e n−p c̃α · σ̃ (X R RX)j,j ) . And so we have that  M 0 = RX 0 = R1 X + wR2 and  w.p. ≥ 1 − ν we α-reject the null hypothesis when it holds q r−p n−p (c̃ + that |βj | > 3(c̃α + τ̃α )· σ̃ (X T RT RX)−1 ) ≥ e α j,j q τ̃α )σ̃ (X T RT RX)−1 j,j ) (due to the lower bound n ≥ r).  β +R1e +wR3 Ryy 0 = RX 0β +Ree0 = R1y +wR3 = R1 Xβ  Based on the bounds stated above we have that q q q √ √ r r σ̃ = kζ̃ζ k r−p = Θ(σ n − p r−p r r−p ) = Θ(σ n − p)    1 r−p  ·  1 nσmin (Σ)  And so, a sufficient condition for rejecting the nullhypothesis is to have r   n−p q 1 |βj | = Ω (c̃α + τ̃α )σ · nσmin (Σ) r−p 14  β0  = arg min 1r kRyy 0 − RX 0z k2 z  = (X 0T RT RX 0 )−1 (RX 0 )T (Ryy 0 )  and that −1 T 1 (X T RT RX)−1 j,j = Θ( r−p (X X)j,j ) = O  And so, using the output RA0 of Algorithm 1, we solve the linear regression problem derived from √1r RX 0 and √1 Ry y 0 . I.e., we set r  More accurately, both are bounds shown in Claim B.6.   Sarlos’ results (2006) regarding the Johnson Lindenstrauss transform give that, when R has sufficiently many rows, solving the latter optimization problem gives a good approximation for the solution of the optimization problem β R = arg minz kyy 0 − X 0z k2 = arg minz kyy − Xzz k2 + w2 kzz k2 15 Just as before, it is possible to denote any single column as y and any subset of the remaining columns as X.    Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  The latter problem is known as the Ridge Regression problem. Invented in the 60s (Tikhonov, 1963; Hoerl & Kennard, 1970), Ridge Regression is often motivated from the perspective of penalizing linear vectors whose coefficients are too large. It is also often applied in the case where X doesn’t have full rank or is close to not having full-rank. That is because the Ridge Regression problem is always solvable. One can show that the minimizer β R = (X T X + w2 Ip×p )−1 X Ty is the unique solution of the Ridge Regression problem and that the RHS is always defined (even when X is singular). The original focus of Ridge Regression is on penalizing β R for having large coefficients. Therefore, Ridge Regression actually poses a family of linear regression problems: minz ky − Xzz k + λkzz k2 , where one may set λ to be any non-negative scalar. And so, much of the literature on Ridge Regression is devoted to the art of fine-tuning this penalty term — either empirically or based on the λ that β R ] − β k2 + Var(β β R ).16 Here we yields the best risk: kE[β propose a fundamentally different approach for the choice of the normalization factor — we set it so that solution of the regression problem would satisfy (, δ)-differential privacy (by projecting the problem onto a lower dimension). While the solution of the Ridge Regression problem might have smaller risk than the OLS solution, it is not known how to derive t-values and/or reject the null hypothesis under Ridge Regression (except for using X to manipulate β = (X T X)−1 X Ty and relying on OLS). β R back into β̂ In fact, prior to our work there was no need for such analysis! For confidence intervals one could just use the standard OLS, because access to X and y was given. Therefore, much for the same reason, we are unable to derive t-values under projected Ridge Regression.17 Clearly, there are situations where such confidence bounds simply cannot be derived. (Consider for example the case where X = 0n×p and y is just i.i.d draws from N (0, σ 2 ), so obviously [X; y] gives no information about β .) Nonetheless, under additional assumptions about the data, our work can give confidence intervals for βj , and in the case where the interval doesn’t intersect the origin — assure us that sign(βj0 ) = sign(βj ) w.h.p. Clearly, Sarlos’ work (2006) gives an upper bound on the β 0 −β β R k. However, such distance bound doesn’t distance kβ come with the coordinate by coordinate confidence guarantee we would like to have. In fact, it is not even clear β 0 ] = β R (though it is obvious from Sarlos’ work that E[β 0T T 0 βR to see that E[(X R RX )]β = E[(RX 0 )T Ryy 0 ]). Here,  β 0 ] = β̂ β which, more often than not, does we show that E[β R not equal β . Comment about notation. Throughout this section we assume X is of full rank and so (X T X)−1 is well-defined. If X isn’t full-rank, then one can simply replace any occurrence of (X T X)−1 with X + (X + )T . This makes all our formulas well-defined in the general case. C.1. Running OLS on the Projected Data In this section, we analyze the projected Ridge Regression, under the assumption (for now) that e is fixed. That is, for now we assume that the only source of randomness comes from picking the matrix R = [R1 ; R2 ; R3 ]. As before, we analyze the distribution over β 0 (see Equation (9)), and the value of the function we optimize at β 0 . Denoting M 0 = RX 0 , we can formally express the estimators: β0 ζ0  = (M 0T M 0 )−1 M 0T Ryy 0 = √1r (Ryy 0 − RX 0β 0 )  (9) (10)  β +ee for a fixed e , and given Claim C.1. Given that y = Xβ X and M 0 = RX 0 = R1 X + wR2 we have that  β 0 ∼ N β + X +e ,  β + X +e k2 + 1) + kPU ⊥ e k2 )(M 0T M 0 )−1 (w2 (kβ  ζ 0 ∼ N 0r ,  β +X +e k2 +1)+kPU ⊥ e k2 w2 (kβ 0 0+ (I − M M ) r×r r and furthermore, β 0 and ζ 0 are independent of one another.  Proof. First, we write β 0 and ζ 0 explicitly, based on e and projection matrices: β0 ζ0  = (M 0T M 0 )−1 M 0T Ryy 0 β + M 0+ (R1e + wR3 ) = M 0+ (R1 X)β = √1r (Ryy 0 − RX 0β 0 ) = √1r (Ir×r − M 0 M 0+ )Ree0 = √1r PU 0⊥ (R1e − wR2β + wR3 )  with U 0 denoting colspan(M 0 ) and PU 0⊥ denoting the projection onto the subspace U 0⊥ .  16  Ridge Regression, as opposed to OLS, does not yield an unβ R ] 6= β . biased estimator. I.e., E[β 17 Note: The naı̈ve approach of using RX 0 and Ryy 0 to interpolate RX and Ryy and then apply Theorem 3.1 using these estimations of RX and Ryy ignores the noise added from appending the matrix A into A0 , and it is therefore bound to produce inaccurate estimations of the t-values.  Again, we break e into an orthogonal composition: e = PU e + PU ⊥ e with U = colspan(X) (hence PU = XX + ) and U ⊥ = colspan(X)⊥ . Therefore, β0  β + M 0+ (R1 XX +e + R1 PU ⊥ e + wR3 ) = M 0+ (R1 X)β 0+ β + X +e ) + M 0+ (R1 PU ⊥ e + wR3 ) = M (R1 X)(β  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  whereas ζ 0 is essentially √1 (Ir×r r (∗)  − M 0 M 0+ )(R1 XX +e + R1 PU ⊥ e − wR2β + wR3 )  √1 (Ir×r r  =  0  −M M  0+  )·  β + wR3 ) (R1 XX e + R1 PU ⊥ e + (M 0 − wR2 )β +  =  √1 (Ir×r r  − M 0 M 0+ )·  β + X +e k2 + 1) + kPU ⊥ e k2 )PU 0⊥ I.e., N 0 r , 1r (w2 (kβ 0 as PU 0⊥ M = 0r×r .    Finally, observe that β 0 and ζ 0 are independent as the former depends on the projection of the spherical Gaussian R1 X(β + X +e ) + R1 PU ⊥ e + wR3 on U 0 , and the latter depends on the projection of the same multivariate Gaussian on U 0⊥ .  β + X +e ) + R1 PU ⊥ e + wR3 ) (R1 X(β where equality (∗) holds because (I − M 0 M 0+ )M 0v = 0 for any v . We now aim to describe the distribution of R given that we know X 0 and M 0 = RX 0 . Since M 0 = R1 X + wR2 + 0 · R3 = R1 X(X + X) + wR2 = (R1 PU )X + wR2 then M 0 is independent of R3 and independent of R1 PU ⊥ . Therefore, given X and M 0 the induced distribution over R3 remains R3 ∼ N (00r , Ir×r ), and similarly, given X and M 0 we have R1 PU ⊥ ∼ N (0r×n , Ir×r , PU ⊥ ) (rows remain independent from one another, and each row is distributed like a spherical Gaussian in colspan(X)⊥ ). And so, we have that R1 X = R1 PU X = M 0 − wR2 , which in turn implies:  R1 X ∼ N M 0 , Ir×r , w2 · Ip×p  Observe that Claim C.1 assumes e is given. This may seem somewhat strange, since without assuming anything about e there can be many combinations of β and e for which β + e . However, we always have that β + X +e = y = Xβ + β . Similarly, it is always the case the PU ⊥ e = X y = β̂ β and ζ in (I − XX + )yy = ζ . (Recall OLS definitions of β̂ Equation (1) and (2).) Therefore, the distribution of β 0 and ζ 0 is unique (once y is set):   β , (w2 (kβ̂ β k2 + 1) + kζζ k2 )(M 0T M 0 )−1 β 0 ∼ N β̂ ! 2 β 2 2 ζ w (k β̂ k + 1) + kζ k ζ 0 ∼ N 0r , (Ir×r − M 0 M 0+ ) r And so for a given dataset [X; y ] we have that β 0 serves as β. an approximation for β̂  multiplying this random matrix with a vector, we get  An immediate corollary of Claim C.1 is that for any fixed e it holds that the quantity t0 (βj ) =  β +X +e ) ∼ N (M 0β + M 0 X +e , w2 kββ + X +e k2 Ir×r ) R1 X(β  kζζ 0 k  and multiplying this random vector with a matrix we get β +X +e ) ∼ N (β + X +e , M 0+ R1 X(β  β + X +e k2 (M 0T M )−1 ) w2 kβ  I.e., β +X +e ) ∼ kβ β +X +e k·N (u u, w2 (M 0T M )−1 ) M 0+ R1 X(β where u denotes a unit-length vector in the direction of β + X +e . Similar to before we have RPU ⊥ ∼ N (0r×n , Ir×r , PU ⊥ ) ⇒ M 0+ (RPU ⊥ e) ∼ N (00d , kPU ⊥ ek2 (M 0T M 0 )−1 ) wR3 ∼ N (00r , w2 Ir×r ) ⇒ M 0+ (wR3 ) ∼ N (00d , w2 (M 0+ M 0 )−1 ) Therefore, the distribution of β 0 , which is the sum of the 3 independent Gaussians, is as required. β + X +e ) + R1 PU ⊥ e + wR3 ) Also, ζ 0 = √1r PU 0⊥ (R1 X(β is the sum of 3 independent Gaussians, which implies its distribution is  β + X +e ), N √1r PU 0⊥ M 0 (β  2 + 2 2 1 β (w (kβ + X e k + 1) + kP ⊥ e k )PU 0⊥ U r  βj0 −(βj +(X +e )j ) q r 0T 0 −1 r−p ·(M M )j,j  =  kζζ 0 k  β 0 −β̂j q rj 0T 0 −1 r−p ·(M M )j,j  is dis-  tributed like a Tr−p -distribution. Therefore, the following theorem follows immediately. β = Theorem C.2. Fix X ∈ Rn×p and y ∈ R. Define β̂ X +y and ζ = (I − XX + )yy . Let RX 0 and Ryy 0 denote the result of applying Algorithm 1 to the matrix A = [X; y ] when the algorithm appends the data with a w · I matrix. Fix a coordinate j and any α ∈ (0, 1/2). When computing β 0 and ζ 0 as in Equations (9) it and (10), we have that w.p. ≥ 1 − α it holds that q   r β̂j ∈ βj0 ± c0α kζζ 0 k r−p · (M 0T M 0 )−1 j,j where c0α denotes the number such that (−c0α , c0α ) contains 1 − α mass of the Tr−p -distribution. Note that Theorem C.2, much like the rest of the discussion in this Section, builds on y being fixed, which means βj0 serves as an approximation for β̂j . Yet our goal is to argue about similarity (or proximity) between βj0 and βj . To that end, we combine the standard OLS confidence interval — which says that w.p. ≥ 1 − α over the randomness of picking r e in the homoscedastic model we have |βj − β̂j | ≤ cα kζζ k  (X T X)−1 j,j n−p  — with the confidence in-  terval of Theorem C.2 above, and deduce that w.p. ≥ 1 − α  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  we have that |βj0 − βj | is at most  1 − ν over the randomness of R we have (r −  kζζ 0 k2 −1 2 T p)(M 0T M )−1 j,j = Θ (w Ip×p + X X)j,j and r−p =  q q  kζζ k (X T X)−1 kζζ 0 k r(M 0T M 0 )−1 j,j j,j  √ √ O cα + c0α n−p r−p   Θ( w  (11) And so, in the next section, our goal is to give conditions under which the interval of Equation (11) isn’t much larger q in comparison to the interval length of 18  ζ0  ζ k c0α √kζr−p r(M 0T M 0 )−1 j,j we get from Theorem C.2; and more importantly — conditions that make the interval of Theorem C.2 useful q and not too large. (Note, in expecta-  tion  kζζ 0 k √ r−p  is about  β k2 + kζζ k2 )/r. So, for (w2 + w2 kβ̂  β k is very large, this interval example, in situations where kβ̂ isn’t likely to inform us as to the sign of βj .) Motivating Example. A good motivating example for the discussion in the following section is when [X; y ] is a strict submatrix of the dataset A. That is, our data contains many variables for each entry (i.e., the dimensionality d of each entry is large), yet our regression is made only over a modest subset of variables out of the d. In this case, the least singular value of A might be too small, causing the algorithm to alter A; however, σmin (X T X) could be sufficiently large so that had we run Algorithm 1 only on [X; y ] we would not alter the input. (Indeed, a differentially private way for finding a subset of the variables that induce a submatrix with high σmin is an interesting open question, partially answered — for a single regression — in the work of Thakurta and Smith (Thakurta & Smith, 2013).) Indeed, the conditions we specify in the following section depend on σmin ( n1 X T X), which, for a zero-mean data, the minimal variance of the data in any direction. For this motivating example, indeed such variance isn’t necessarily small. C.2. Conditions for Deriving a Confidence Interval for Ridge Regression  2  β k2 +kζζ k2 +w2 kβ̂ ). r  Proof. The former bound follows from known results on the Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform (as were shown in the proof of Claim B.6). The latter bound follows from standard concentration bounds of the χ2 -distribution.  Plugging in the result of Proposition C.3 to Equation (11) we get that w.p. ≥ 1 − ν the difference |βj0 − βj | is at most q  kζζ k O cα √ (X T X)−1 j,j n−p s  β k2 + kζζ k2 q 2 w2 + w2 kβ̂ + c0α (w Ip×p + X T X)−1 j,j r−p (12) We will also use the following proposition. Proposition C.4. (X T X)−1 j,j ≤   1+  w2 σmin (X T X)    (w2 Ip×p + X T X)−1 j,j  Proof. We have that (X T X)−1 = (X T X)−1 (X T X + w2 Ip×p )(X T X + w2 Ip×p )−1 = (X T X + w2 Ip×p )−1 + w2 (X T X)−1 (X T X + w2 Ip×p )−1 = (Ip×p + w2 (X T X)−1 )(X T X + w2 Ip×p )−1  Looking at the interval specified in Equation (11), we now give an upper bound on the the random quantities in this interval: kζζ k, kζζ 0 k, and (M 0T M 0 )−1 j,j . First, we give bound that are dependent on the randomness in R (i.e., we continue to view e as fixed).  = (X T X + w2 Ip×p )−1/2 ·  Proposition C.3. For any ν ∈ (0, 1/2), if we have r = p + Ω(ln(1/ν)) then with probability ≥  where the latter holds because (Ip×p + w2 (X T X)−1 ) and (X T X + w2 Ip×p )−1 are diagonalizable by the same matrix V (the same matrix for which (X T X) = V S −1 V T ). 2 Since we have kIp×p + w2 (X T X)−1 k = 1 + σ2 w (X) , it is  18  Observe that w.p.  ≥ 1 − α r over the randomness of e  we have that |βj − β̂j | ≤ cα kζζ k  (X T X)−1 j,j n−p  , and w.p.  ≥  1 − α over the randomness of R we have that |βj0 − β̂j | ≤ q r c0α kζζ 0 k r−p · (M 0T M 0 )−1 j,j . So technically, to give a (1 − α)βj0  confidence interval around that contains βj w.p. ≥ 1 − α, we need to use cα/2 and c0α/2 instead of cα and c0α resp. To avoid overburdening the reader with what we already see as too many parameters, we switch to asymptotic notation.  (Ip×p + w2 (X T X)−1 )· (X T X + w2 Ip×p )−1/2  min  w2 )I . 2 σmin (X) p×p T T −1 e j (X X) e j ≤ (1 +  clear that (Ip×p + w2 (X T X)−1 )  (1 + We deduce that (X T X)−1 j,j = w2 )(X T X 2 σmin (X)  + w2 Ip×p )−1 j,j .  Based on Proposition C.4 we get from Equation (12) that  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  |βj0 − βj | is at most v u w2 2  u t kζζ k (1 + σmin (X T X) ) O( cα + n−p s β k2 + kζζ k2 q 2 w2 + w2 kβ̂ (w Ip×p + X T X)−1 c0α j,j ) r−p (13) And so, if it happens to be the case that exists some small β , ζ and w2 satisfy η > 0 for which β̂ ! 2 kζζ k2 (1 + σminw(X T X) ) β k2 + kζζ k2 w2 + w2 kβ̂ 2 ≤η n−p r−p (14) then we have that Pr[β ∈ j   q βj0  ± O((1 + η) ·  1 − α.  c0α kζζ 0 k  r r−p  ·  (M 0T M 0 )−1 j,j )  ]  ≥  19  Moreover, if in this case |βj | > q q 2 2 kβ̂ β k2 +kζζ k2 + η) w +w r−p (w2 Ip×p + X T X)−1 j,j then Pr[sign(βj0 ) = sign(βj )] ≥ 1 − α. This is precisely what Claims C.5 and C.6 below do. Claim C.5. If there exists η > 0 2 2 s.t. n − p ≥ (r − p) and n = η2   2 1 3/2 B ln(1/δ) Ω r · · , then Pr[βj ∈ 1  η 2 σmin ( n X T X)   q r βj0 ± O((1 + η) · c0α kζζ 0 k r−p · (M 0T M 0 )−1 ) ] ≥ j,j 1 − α.  c0α (1  Proof. Based on the above discussion, it is enough to argue that under the conditions of the claim, the constraint 2 r−p of Equation (14) holds. Since we require η2 ≥ n−p then it is evident that kζζ k2 n−p  2  kζζ k2 n−p  η 2 kζζ k2 2(r−p) . So we now show that η 2 kζζ k2 2(r−p) under the conditions of the  ≤  · σminw(X T X) ≤ claim, and this will show the required. All that is left is some algebraic manipulations. It suffices to have: η2 2  ·  n−p T r−p σmin (X X)  η2 2  ≥  32B  ≥ which holds for n2 ≥ r3/2 · as we assume to hold.  ·  T n2 1 r σmin ( n X X) √ 2  r ln(8/δ) ≥ w2   64B 2 ln(1/δ) σmin ( n1 X T X)−1 , η 2  Claim C.6. Fix ν ∈ (0, 12 ). If (i) n = p + Ω(ln(1/ν)), β k2 = Ω(σ 2 kX + k2F ln( νp )) and (iii) r − p = (ii) kβ   Ω  (c0α )2 (1+η)2 βj2  β k2 + 1 + kβ  σ2 1 σmin ( n X T X)  , then in the  homoscedastic model, with probability ≥ 1−ν −α we have that sign(βj ) = sign(βj0 ). 19 We assume n ≥ r so cα < c0α as the Tn−p -distribution is closer to a normal Gaussian than the Tr−p -distribution.  Proof. Based on the above discussion, we aim to show that in the homoscedastic model (where each coordinate ei ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) independently) w.p. ≥ 1 − ν it holds that the magnitude of βj is greater than s c0α (1 + η)  β k2 + kζζ k2 q 2 w2 + w2 kβ̂ (w Ip×p + X T X)−1 j,j r−p  To show this, we invoke Claim A.4 to argue that w.p. ≥ 1 − ν we have (i) kζζ k2 ≤ 2σ 2 (n − p) (since n = p + β k2 ≤ 2kβ β k2 (since kβ β − β̂ β k2 ≤ Ω(ln(1/ν))), and (ii) kβ̂ p 2 + 2 2 2 + 2 β k = Ω(σ kX kF ln( νp ))). σ kX kF ln( ν ) whereas kβ 2 We also use the fact that (w2 Ip×p + X T X)−1 j,j ≤ (w + −1 T σmin (X X)), and then deduce that s  β k2 + kζζ k2 q 2 w2 + w2 kβ̂ (w Ip×p + X T X)−1 j,j r−p s β k2 ) + σ 2 (n − p) (1 + η)c0α w2 (1 + kβ ≤ √ 2 2 r−p w + σmin (X T X) s (1 + η)c0α 2σ 2 (n − p) β k2 ) + ≤ √ 2(1 + kβ ≤ |βj | r−p σmin (X T X)  (1 + η)c0α  due to our requirement on r − p. Observe, out of the 3 conditions specified in Claim C.6, condition (i) merely guarantees that the sample is large enough to argue that estimations are close to their expect value; and condition (ii) is there merely to guarantee that β k ≈ kβ β k. It is condition (iii) which is non-trivial to kβ̂ hold, especially together with the conditions of Claim C.5 that pose other constraints in regards to r, n, η and the various other parameters in play. It is interesting to compare the requirements on r to the lower bound we get in Theorem 3.3 — especially the latter bound. The two bounds are strikingly similar, with the exception that here we also β k2 require r − p to be greater than 1+kβ . This is part of the βj2 unfortunate effect of altering the matrix A: we cannot give confidence bounds only for the coordinates j for which βj2 β k2 . is very small relative to kβ In summary, we require to have n = p + Ω(ln(1/ν)) and β k compathat X contains enough sample points to have kβ̂ β k, and then set r and η such that (it is convenient rable to kβ to think of η as a small constant, say, η = 0.1) • r − p = O(η 2 (n − p)) (which implies r = O(n))  2 3 n2 • r = O( η 2 B 2 ln(1/δ) σmin ( n1 X T X) ) 2  βk • r − p = Ω( 1+kβ + β2 β  j  σ2 βj2  −1 1 · σmin ( n X T X))  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  to have that the (1 − α)-confidence interval around βj0 does not intersect the origin. Once again, we comment that these conditions are sufficient but not necessary, and furthermore — even with these conditions holding — we do not make any claims of optimality of our confidence bound. That is because from Proposition C.4 onwards our discussion uses upper bounds that do not have corresponding lower bounds, to the best of our knowledge.  D. Confidence Intervals for “Analyze Gauss” Algorithm To complete the picture, we now analyze the “Analyze Gauss” algorithm of Dwork et al (Dwork et al., 2014). Algorithm 2 works by adding random Gaussian noise to AT A, where the noise is symmetric with each coordi2 nate abovethe diagonal  sampled i.i.d from N (0, ∆ ) with  ∆2 = O B 4 log(1/δ) .20 Using the same notation for a 2  sub-matrix of A as [X; y ] as before, with X ∈ Rn×p and y ∈ Rn , we denote the output of Algorithm 2 as         ^ TX X TX yg    g  Ty  X =   Ty yg   T  X X +N y TX + nT  Ty  X y +n    y Ty + m  (15) where N is a symmetric p × p-matrix, n is a p-dimensional vector and m is a scalar, whose coordinates are sampled i.i.d from N (0, ∆2 ). Using the output of Algorithm 2, it is simple to derive anaβ and kζζ k2 (Equations (1) and (2)) logues of β̂ −1  −1 g ^ TX Ty = X T X + N X βe = X (X T y + n ) (16)  r +∆  −2  √ ^ TX X j,j · ln(1/ν) · (B p + 1)    where ρ is such that ρ2 is w.h.p an upper bound on σ 2 , defined as 2 def  ρ =    1√ √ n−p−2 ln(4/α)  2 ·     √ −1 B2 p p 2 g ^ T 2 kζζ k − C · ∆ 1−η ln(1/ν) + ∆ kX X kF · ln(p/ν)  for some large constant C. We comment that in practice, instead of using ρ, it might be better to use the MLE of σ 2 , namely:   −1 def 2 ^ 1 g 2 2 T σ = n−p kζζ k + ∆ kX X kF instead of ρ2 , the upper bound we derived for σ 2 . (Replacing an unknown variable with its MLE estimator is a common approach in applied statistics.) Note that the assumpβ k ≤ B is fairly benign once we assume each tion that kβ β k ≤ B simrow has bounded l2 -norm. The assumption kβ̂ β ply assumes that β̂ is a reasonable estimation of β , which is likely to hold if we assume that X T X is well-spread. The assumption about the magnitude of the least singular value of X T X is therefore the major one. Nonetheless, in the case we considered before where each row in X is sampled i.i.d from N (00, Σ), this assumption merely means that n is √ large enough s.t. n = Ω̃(  ∆ p ln(1/ν) η·σmin (Σ) ).  In order to prove Theorem D.1, we require the following proposition.  (17)  Proposition D.2. Fix any ν ∈ (0, 21 ). Fix any matrix M ∈ Rp×p . Let v ∈ Rp be a vector with each coordinate sampled independently from a Gaussian N (0, ∆2 ).i Then h p we have that Pr kMvv k > ∆ · kM kF 2 ln(2p/ν) < ν.  g ζ k2 to get a We now argue that it is possible to use βej and kζ confidence interval for βj under certain conditions. Theorem D.1. Fix α, ν ∈ (0, 12 ). Assume that there exists p η ∈ (0, 21 ) s.t. σmin (X T X) > ∆ p ln(1/ν)/η. Under the homoscedastic model, given β and σ 2 , if we assume also β k ≤ B and kβ̂ β k = k(X T X)−1 X Ty k ≤ B, then that kβ w.p. ≥ 1 − α − ν it holds that |βj − βej | it at most s   −1 −2 p ^ ^ TX TX O ρ· X + ∆ p ln(1/ν) · X ln(1/α) j,j j,j  Proof. Given M , we have that Mvv ∼ N (00, ∆2 · M M T ). Denoting M ’s singular values as sv1 , . . . , svp , we can rotate Mvv without affecting its l2 -norm and infer that kMvv |2 is distributed like a sum on p independent Gaussians, each sampled from N (0, ∆2 · svi2 ). Standard union bound gives that w.p. ≥ 1 − ν non of the pp Gaussians exceeds its standard deviation by a factor of 2 ln(2p/ν). Hence, w.p. P ≥ 1 − ν it holds that kMvv k2 ≤ 2∆2 i svi2 ln(2p/ν) = 2∆2 · trace(M M T ) · ln(2p/ν).  T  g ^ ] e + βe X e Ty − 2 y TXβ TX β ζ k2 = yg kζ −1  ^ ] Ty − y TX X TX = yg  ] Ty X  20 It is easy to see that the l2 -global sensitivity of the mapping A 7→ AT A is ∝ B 4 . Fix any A1 , A2 that differ on one row which is some vector v with kvv k = B in A1 and the all zero vector in A2 . Then GS22 = kAT1 A1 − AT2 A2 k2F = kvvv T k2F = trace(vvv T · v v T ) = (vv Tv )2 = B 4 .  Our proof also requires the use of the following equality, that holds for any invertible A and any matrix B s.t. I + B · A−1 is invertible: −1 −1 (A + B) = A−1 − A−1 I + BA−1 BA−1  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares −1  In our case, we have  T ^ TX we can bound the variance of X j→ X e by ! 2 −1 −1 ^ ^ T TX . Appealing to σ2 X j,j + kN k · X X j→  −1  ^ TX X = (X T X + N )−1 T  −1  −1  T   −1 −1  −1  T  − (X X) I + N (X X) N (X X)    −1 = (X T X)−1 I − I + N (X T X)−1 N (X T X)−1  def = (X T X)−1 I − Z · (X T X)−1 (18) = (X X)  T  Proof of Theorem D.1. Fix ν > 0. First, we apply to standard results about Gaussian matrices, such as (Tao, 2012) (used also by (Dwork et al., 2014) in their analysis), to see p that w.p. ≥ 1 − ν/6 we have kN k = O(∆ p ln(1/ν)). And so, for the remainder of the proof we fix N subject to having bounded operator norm. Note that by fixing N we ^ T X. fix X β + e with Recall that in the homoscedastic model, y = Xβ each coordinate of e sampled i.i.d from N (0, σ 2 ). We therefore have that −1  ^ TX βe = X  ^ TX (X Ty + n ) = X  −1  −1  ^ TX =X  −1  ^ TX =β −X  −1  ^ TX β +X Nβ  !  σ 2 ln(1/α) .  −1  −1 2  −1  2 ^ ^ TX X X T X j→ j→n ∼ N (0, ∆  ). Gaussian concentra−1  ^ TX tion bounds give that w.p ≥ 1−ν/6 we have |X j→n | =   −1 p ^ TX ln(1/ν) . O ∆ X j→ Plugging this into our above bounds on all terms that appear in Equation (19) we have that w.p. ≥ 1 − ν/2 − α/2 we have that βej − βj is at most  ^ TX X e+X  −1   n  ^ TX X j→ · B∆  O  p   p ln(1/ν)  −1   v u −1 −1 u p ^ ^ TX T  + O σt X j,j + ∆ p ln(1/ν) · X X j→  n  2    !  ln(1/α)   −1  ^ TX Denoting the j-th row of X  ^ TX as X j→ we deduce:  −1    ^ TX +O ∆ X j→  p   ln(1/ν)  −1  −1  −1  2  ^ TX 0, ∆2 I) is samTo bound X j→n note that n ∼ N (0 ^ T X. pled independently of X We therefore have that  −1  T  ^ TX X Te + X  −1  u −1 −1 u p ^ ^ T TX O t X j,j + ∆ p ln(1/ν) · X X j→  β + X Te + n ) (X T Xβ −1  ^ ^ T X − N )β TX β +X (X  Gaussian concentration bounds, we have that w.p. ≥ 1v − α/2 the absolute value of this Gaussian is at most  T ^ ^ ^ T TX TX β +X βej = βj − X j→ X e + X X j→n j→ Nβ  (19)  ^ T X we have Note that due to the symmetry of X −1 2  We naı̈vely bound the size of the −1 −1 ^ ^ TX TX β βk X by X j→ Nβ j→ kN kkβ   −1 p ^ TX O X j→ · B∆ p ln(1/ν) . −1  Te  ^ TX X j→ X e  term =  note that e is cho^ TX sen independently of X and since −1 2 T ^ T e ∼ N (00, σ I) we have X X j→ X e ∼   −1 −1 ^ ^ TX T N 0, σ2 · eT · X TX · X ej . Since jX X To  bound  ^ TX X j→  −2  ^ TX =X j,j (the (j, j)-coordinate of the ma−2  ^ TX trix X    ), thus |βej − βj | is at most  s  O σ· r +∆  −1  ^ TX X j,j + ∆ −2   −2 p ^ T p ln(1/ν) · X X j,j ln(1/α)  √ ^ TX X j,j · ln(1/ν) · (B p + 1)   (20)  we have −1  ^ TX X  ^ TX · X TX · X  −1  −1  −1  ^ ^ TX − N ) · X TX · (X  ^ TX =X −1  ^ TX =X  −1  ^ TX −X  −1  ^ TX ·N ·X  All of the terms appearing in Equation (20) are known ^ T X, except for σ — which is a parameter of the given X model. Next, we derive an upper bound on σ which we can then plug into Equation (20) to complete the proof of the theorem and derive a confidence interval for βj .  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  p most O(∆ · kzz k ln(1/ν)) w.p. ≥ 1 − ν/8. We can β k kI − Z(X T X)−1 k = upper bound kzz k ≤ 2kβ̂ B O( 1−η ), and so this term’s magnitude is upper   √ ∆·B ln(1/ν) bounded by O . 1−η  Recall Equation (17), according to which we have −1  g ^ ] Ty − y TX X TX ζ k2 = yg kζ  ] Ty X  (18)  = y Ty + m − (yy T X + n T )(X T X)−1 (I − Z · (X T X)−1 )(X Ty + n )  • Given our assumption about the least singular value of X T X and with the bound on kN k, we have that T ^ T X) ≥ σ σmin (X min (X X) − kN k > 0 and so  = y Ty + m − y T X(X T X)−1 X Ty + y T X(X T X)−1 Z(X T X)−1 X Ty T  T  −1  n  T  T  −1  Z(X T X)−1n  − 2yy X(X X) + 2yy X(X X)  ^ T X is a PSD. Therefore, the symmetric matrix X −1 −1/2 ^ ^ TX TX n = kX n k2 is strictly the term n T X positive. Applying Proposition D.2 we have that −1 T^ TX w.p. ≥ 1 − ν/8 it holds that n X n ≤   −1 2 ^ O ∆ kX T X kF · ln(p/ν) .  n − nT (X T X)−1 (I − Z · (X T X)−1 )n β = (X T X)−1 X Ty , and so we have Recall that β̂  T β Zβ̂ β = y T I − X(X T X)−1 X T y + m − β̂ T  ^ TX β (I − Z(X T X)−1 )n n − nTX − 2β̂  Plugging all of the above bounds into Equation (21) we get that w.p. ≥ 1 − ν/2 − α/2 it holds that  −1  n  (21)  and of course, both n and m are chosen independently of ^ T X and y . X Before we bound each term in Equation (21), we first give −1 a bound on kZk. Recall, Z = I + N (X T X)−1 N. Recall our assumption (given in the statement of Theop rem D.1) that σmin (X T X) ≥ ∆ p ln(1/ν). This imη T −1 plies that kN (X X) k ≤ kN k·σmin (X T X)−1 = O(η). Hence  √  ∆ p ln(1/ν) kZk ≤ (kI +N (X T X)−1 k)−1 ·kN k = O 1−η Moreover, this implies that kZ(X T X)−1 k ≤ O   1 and that kI − Z(X T X)−1 k ≤ O 1−η .    η 1−η    Armed with these bounds on the operator norms of Z and (I − Z(X T X)−1 ) we bound the magnitude of the different terms in Equation (21). • The term y T (I − XX + ) y is the exact term from the standard OLS, and we know it is distributed like σ 2 · χ2n−p distribution. Therefore, it is greater than p √ σ 2 ( n − p − 2 ln(4/α))2 w.p. ≥ 1 − α/2. • The scalar m sampled from m ∼ N (0, ∆2 ) is p bounded by O(∆ ln(1/ν)) w.p. ≥ 1 − ν/8. T  βk ≤  β Zβ̂ β is upper • Since we assume kβ̂ B, the term β̂ √ 2 B ∆ p ln(1/ν) . bounded by B 2 kZk = O 1−η T  β (I − Z(X T X)−1 )n n. We thus have • Denote z Tn = 2β̂ T that z n ∼ N (0, ∆2 kzz k2 ) and that its magnitude is at  σ2 ≤     1√ √ n−p−2 ln(4/α)   g ζ k2 + O (1 + kζ  2 ·  √ p B 2 p+B )∆ ln(1/ν) 1−η  ^ TX + ∆ 2 kX  −1   kF · ln(p/ν)  and indeed, the RHS is the definition of ρ2 in the statement of Theorem D.1.  E. Experiment: Additional Figures To complete our discussion about the experiments we have conducted, we attach here additional figures, plotting both the t-value approximations we get from both algorithms, and the “high-level decision” of whether correctly reject or not-reject the null hypothesis (and with what sign). First, we show the distribution of the t-value approximation for coordinates that should be rejected, in Figure 2, and then the decision of whether to reject or not based on this t-value — and whether it was right, conservative (we didn’t reject while we needed to) or wrong (we rejected with the wrong sign, or rejected when we shouldn’t have rejected) in Figure 3. As one can see, Algorithm 1 has far lower t-values (as expected) and therefore is much more conservative. In fact, it tends to not-reject coordinate 1 of the real-data even on the largest value of n (Figure 3c). However, because Algorithm 1 also has much smaller variance, it also does not reject when it ought to notreject, whereas Algorithm 2 erroneiously rejects the nullhypotheses. This can be seen in Figures 4 and 5.  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  (a) Synthetic data, coordinate β1 = 0.5  (a) Synthetic data, coordinate β1 = 0.5  (b) Synthetic data, coordinate β2 = −0.25  (b) Synthetic data, coordinate β2 = −0.25  (c) real-life data, coordinate β1 = 14.07 Figure 2. The distribution of the t-value approximations from selected experiments on synthetic and real-life data where the null hypothesis should be rejected  (c) real-life data, coordinate β1 = 14.07 Figure 3. The correctness of our decision to reject the nullhypothesis based on the approximated t-value where the null hypothesis should be rejected  Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares  (a) Synthetic data, coordinate β3 = 0  (a) Synthetic data, coordinate β3 = 0  (b) Real-life data, coordinate β2 = 0.57  (b) Real-life data, coordinate β2 = 0.57  Figure 4. The distribution of the t-value approximations from selected experiments on synthetic and real-life data when the null hypothesis is (essentially) true  Figure 5. The correctness of our decision to reject the nullhypothesis based on the approximated t-value when the null hypothesis is (essentially) true

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
