Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 10
ArXiv ID: hf_7334

Abstract:
arXiv:1605.04565v1 [stat.ME] 15 May 2016  Hierarchical Models for Independence Structures of Networks Kayvan Sadeghi and Alessandro Rinaldo University of Cambridge and Carnegie Mellon University  Abstract We introduce a new family of network models, called hierarchical network models, that allow to represent in an explicit manner the stochastic dependence among the edges. In particular, each member of this family can be associated with a graphical model defining conditional independence clauses among the edges of the network, called the dependency graph. Every network model of dyadic independence assumption can be generalized to construct members of this new family. Using this new framework, we generalize the Erdös-Rényi and β-models to create hierarchical Erdös-Rényi and β-models. We describe various methods for parameter estimation as well as simulation studies for models with sparse dependency graphs. We also provide a comprehensive discussion on open problems related to these newly defined models.  1  1  Introduction and background  1.1  Introduction  The statistical analysis of network data is concerned with modeling relational data taking the form of random graphs, or networks, where the nodes represent units in a certain population of interest and the random edges encode the complex of interactions among them. Most network models can be represented as exponential random graph models (ERGMs): linear exponential families over graphs, a practice that can be traced back to the seminal work of Holland and Leinhardt (1981) (but see also its discussion Fienberg and Wasserman (1981)) and Frank and Strauss (1986). Recently, the ERGM framework has been extended to include models arising from curved exponential families: see, e.g., Hunter and Handcock (2006); Robins et al. (2007). Many well-known network models and most models that can be fit to large networks rely on the unrealistic assumption of dyadic independence, that is probabilistic independence of the occurrence of edges in the network. For other network models that do not assume dyadic independence, all possible marginal or conditional independencies among the occurrence of edges, also called the independence structure of the network, have been mostly neglected or not studied, except for some attempts to deal with certain simple independence structures of network models such as that in stochastic block models Holland et al. (1983), or those arise from nodal attributes such as transitivity, homophily, and others; for example see Krivitsky et al. (2009). On the other hand, in the field of graphical models, there is a vast literature on the independence structure of sets of random variables. In graphical models, graphs, generally called Markov dependency or simply dependency graphs consist of nodes that correspond to random variables and edges that correspond to some types of conditional dependencies between their endpoints; see for example Lauritzen (1996). 2  In order to distinguish between different possible conditional independencies among random variables, different typologies of graphs are used in the graphical model literature, each of which corresponding to a particular class of models. One of the most popular class of graphical models is that of undirected graph models (Darroch et al., 1980), which assume conditional independence between random variables corresponding to two non-adjacent nodes in the dependency graph given all other variables (nodes of the graph). There is a natural duality between networks and dependency graphs: edges of the network are (binary) random variables, and hence can be considered to be nodes of a dependency graph. Edges of the dependency graph would then determine the conditional independence among these variables, i.e. the independence structure among the edges of the network. The first, and possibly the only, place where this duality has been used is in Frank and Strauss (1986), where they assumed the dependency graph to be the line graph of the complete graph, as defined in the graph theory literature. However, there have recently been other approaches to deal with certain “local” types of dependency in networks by using nodal attributes, i.e. extra information on the individuals presented by nodes of the network; see, for example, Schweinberger and Handcock (2012) and Fellows and Handcock (2012). The main goal of this paper is to exploit this duality between networks and dependency graphs. We basically use the model associated with a given dependency graph, and combine it with known network models that assume dyadic independence by further parametrizing the graphical model using the parameters in the network model. This allows us to derive new network models that preserve the independence structure of the given dependency graph and has similar properties to those of the original network model. For this purpose, we work with undirected graphical models, which imply that our proposed network models are of linear exponential family form. 3  In this paper, we demonstrate our approach for three well-known classes of network models: The Erdös-Rényi models, defined by Erdös and Rényi (1959) and studied vastly in the literature of networks and random graph theory, the β-models, defined by Blitzstein and Diaconis (2010); Chatterjee et al. (2011) and recently studied by Rinaldo et al. (2013) for undirected networks, and the p1 models defined by Holland and Leinhardt (1981) for directed networks. We also provide a method based on the gradient decent algorithm to estimate the maximum of the likelihood function for hierarchical Erdös-Rényi models. In principle, this method can be generalized to other families of hierarchical models, but the computational difficulties should be examined in more detail. We also provide simulation studies to apply the proposed method for the ML estimation, and to compare hierarchical Erdös-Rényi with Erdös-Rényi. At the end, we extensively discuss the properties of the proposed family of models, and possible directions for future work on these models. In particular, we provide ideas for developing an analogous theory for network models based on bidirected (i.e., marginal) graphical models instead of the undirected ones. Structure of the paper. In the remainder of this section, we formally define networks and dependency graphs, introduce the independence structures for undirected dependency graphs, and illustrate the duality between networks and dependency graphs. In Section 2.1, we introduce hierarchical log-linear models for undirected graphical models, and demonstrate how to use such models to define hierarchical network models, and the conditions for dependency graphs, under which this combination is permissable. In Section 2.2, we apply the Erdös-Rényi parametrization to hierarchical network models, defined in Section 2, write the models in exponential family form, and provide the corresponding normalizing constant in closed form. In Section 2.3,  4  we conduct a similar study as in section 3 for the β-model parametrization instead of Erdös-Rényi’s. In Section 3, we study the MLE estimation and provide algorithms for this purpose for (sparse) dependency graphs for hierarchical Erdös-Rényi. We also provide relevant simulation studies, which show that the models significantly take the simulated dependencies in the networks into account. In Section 4, we discuss several problems related to these models for further work. We discuss model selection for the dependency graph, and the existence of the MLE for these models, as well as the selection of dependency graphs that conform with the known notions of transitivity and homophily in network models. We finally discuss analogous models based on marginal independence. In the Appendix, we again conduct a similar study as in previous subsections for the p1 model parametrization.  1.2  Networks and dependency graphs  Undirected and bidirected dependency graphs. A dependency graph is a graph D = (N, F ), where the node set N consists of random variables X = (X1 , . . . , X|N | ), and edges indicate some specific types of conditional dependencies among the random variables corresponding to the nodes of D. In particular, for a given simple graph D, when random vectors XA and XB , corresponding to two disjoint subsets of the node set A and B, are conditionally independent given the random vector XC , corresponding to third subset C disjoint from A and B, we use the notation A⊥ ⊥ B | C instead of XA ⊥ ⊥ XB | X C . For undirected graph D, where all edges are depicted as full lines,  , it holds  that for two non-adjacent nodes i and j, i⊥ ⊥ j | V \ {i, j}, i.e. i and j are conditionally independent given the rest of the nodes (called the pairwise Markov property). For three disjoint subsets of the node set, A⊥ ⊥ B | C when every path between A and B has a node in C (called the global Markov property). It is known that these two conditions are equivalent for positive densities; see Pearl (1988); Lauritzen (1996). 5  (a)  (b)  Figure 1: (a) An undirected dependency graph. (b) a bidirected dependency graph. For a bidirected graph D, where all edges are depicted as bidirected edges, ≺ , it holds that for two non-adjacent nodes i and j, i⊥ ⊥ j, i.e. i and j are marginally independent. For three disjoint subsets of the node set, A⊥ ⊥ B | C when every path between A and B has no nodes in C. It is known that these two conditions are equivalent for distributions that satisfy the so-called composition property; see Sadeghi and Lauritzen (2014). For example, in the undirected graph of Figure 1(a), the pairwise Markov property implies that i⊥ ⊥ k | {j, l} and the global Markov property implies that {i, l}⊥ ⊥j | k , whereas in the bidirected graph of Figure 1(b), the pairwise Markov property implies that i⊥ ⊥ k and the global Markov property implies that {i, l}⊥ ⊥k Networks and their duality with dependency graphs. We define a network base to be a complete graph G = (V, E), where the node set V consists of labeled individuals and the edge set E, also called the set of dyads, consists of binary random variables taking values 0 or 1. In a network, which is a realization of the network base, nodes i and j are connected if the random variable corresponding to the edge ij takes the value 1, and they are disconnected otherwise. Now suppose that we are interested in networks with n = |V | nodes. For the  network base Gn , it holds that |E| = n2 := m. We take a dependency graph D with m nodes that are binary random variables. The basic assumption here is that Gn entails the same conditional independence structure among its edges as that of D 6  among its nodes. In the next sections, we use the corresponding dependency graph to model the independence structure for networks. Although this is a similar idea to that in Frank and Strauss (1986) for undirected graphs, it is different in the two following ways: 1) In Frank and Strauss (1986), a unique dependency graph (namely the line graph of the complete graph as defined in graph theory (see, e.g, West (2001), Section 4.2)) is used to model networks, whereas here we model any possible subgraph of the graph used in Frank and Strauss. Therefore, we deal with different possible independence structures that might occur for networks. 2) In Frank and Strauss (1986), they assume exchangeability among the edges of the network in order to reduce the number of parameters, whereas here we combine the graphical model with the known network models in the literature to obtain fewer number of parameters. This also ensures that our models inherit the desired properties of the baseline network model. Henceforth in this paper, we assume that a dependency graph is given, and the independence structure for the network is determined by this corresponding dependency graph. In the end, we will have a discussion on the selection of the dependency graph from network data.  2  Network models based on undirected hierarchical models  2.1  Undirected graphical models for networks  Hierarchical log-linear models for binary variables. Consider a vector x = (x1 , . . . , xm ) consisting of m binary elements, i.e. taking values 0 or 1. The goal is to model P (x), the probability of observing x, by using a simple undirected dependency graph D. For this purpose, one can use the hierarchical log-linear models, which have 7  been comprehensively studied for modeling undirected graphs in the graphical models literature; for a comprehensive study of these models see Lauritzen (1996) and Bishop et al. (2007). Let C be the set of all cliques, i.e. complete subgraphs, in D, and C0 = C ∪ {∅} be the set of all cliques including the empty subgraph. We write the hierarchical log-linear model as log(P (x)) =  X  uC (x), x ∈ {0, 1}m ,  (1)  C∈C0  where uC (x) = uC (xC ) is an arbitrary function. As can be seen, although the parameters do not appear in this notation, the terms in the model correspond to cliques of D. The hierarchical assumption in this model implies that if a term xA is set to zero so are all the terms xB such that A ⊆ B. Hence, the maximal cliques correspond to the maximal interaction terms not set to zero. These are also called the generators of the model. Expansion (1) can be also rewritten as P (x) =  Y C∈C0  euC (x) =  Y  ũC (x), x ∈ {0, 1}m .  (2)  C∈C0  Notice that the functions uC and ũC are not uniquely defined. Hierarchical network models. We should first warn the reader not to confuse these models with hierarchical ERGMs, proposed by Schweinberger and Handcock (2012). Here, as will be seen in this section, the goal is to use hierarchical log-linear models to model networks with dependencies among the edges, whereas hierarchical ERGMs addresses the lack of a natural dependence structure of relational phenomena by assuming that there is an underlying local dependence structure. Henceforth, let x ∈ Gn be a generic observed network with n nodes and up to  m = n2 edges. We are interested in P (x), x ∈ Gn , the probability of observing x. 8  We do not distinguish between the observed network x itself and the vector of its dyads x = (x12 , . . . , x1n , x23 , . . . , x2n , . . ., xn−1,n ), where every dyad is between two labeled nodes with labels i and j. Suppose that there is a given dependency graph D with m binary nodes, where nodes correspond to dyads of the network and are labelled as L = (12, . . . , 1n, 23, . . . , 2n, · · ·, n − 1n). This labeling is induced from the labeling of edges of the network. We provide a model for networks by using the hierarchical model in (2) with the binary dependency graph D and a network observation x with this particular labeling. Since nodes of D are binary variables, we set uC (x) = γC  Y  xc ,  c∈C  which implies that for every clique, there exists only one parameter, γC = uC (1C ). Hence, there are 2m − 1 equations and |C| parameters in the model. It is easy to show that among all dependency graphs with m nodes, the complete graph yields the largest number of parameters with 2m − 1 parameters. Therefore, |C| ≤ 2m − 1, a necessary condition for identifiability of this model, is always satisfied. We write the hierarchical model in (2), for networks, as P (x) = ũ exp{  X  γC  C∈C  Y  xc }, x ∈ Gn ,  (3)  c∈C  where ũ = u∅ is the normalizing constant, ensuring that the probabilities add up to 1. In addition, every c ∈ L, hence they can be written as c = ij, for some i, j. For example for the dependency graph in Figure 2, we have that P (x) = ũũ12 (x)ũ13 (x)ũ23 (x)ũ12,13 (x)ũ13,23 (x) = ũ exp{γ12 x12 + γ13 x13 + γ23 x23 + γ12,13 x12 x13 + γ13,23 x13 x23 }.  9  13 23  12  Figure 2: A dependency graph corresponding to a network with node set {1, 2, 3}. Markov dependence property. Here we impose a restriction on the dependency graph that allows us to obtain certain configurations (namely stars and triangles) in the network base G as the corresponding configurations of the cliques in D. This is the same restriction as that in Frank and Strauss (1986) for dependency graphs. Let i, j, k, and l be labels for the nodes of the network base G. We say that a dependency graph satisfies the Markov dependence property if when ij 6∼ kl in G then ij 6∼ kl in D, where the left hand side describes two edges (of G) that do not share a common node, whereas the right hand side describes two nodes (of D) that are not adjacent. Notice also that the definition requires only non-neighboring edges of G to be non-adjacent nodes in D and not vice versa; therefore, the dependency graphs we propose could be any subgraph of the line graph of G. For example, for networks with 4 nodes, all dependency graphs that satisfy the Markov dependence property are the subgraphs of the dependency graph D depicted in Figure 3.  10  1  2 23  24  12 4  34  3 13  G  14  D  Figure 3: A network base G with 4 nodes and its corresponding line graph D. One can observe that cliques in D correspond to stars and triangles in G: A clique of size 1, i.e. a node in D, corresponds to an edge, i.e. a 1-star in G; a clique of size 2, i.e. an edge in D, corresponds to a 2-star in G; a clique of size 3 of form (ij, ik, il) in D corresponds to a 3-star in G – we call the hub i of the star in G the hub of C, and write i = hub(C); a clique of size 3 of form (ij, ik, jk) in D corresponds to a triangle in G – we call such cliques hubless; and a clique of size r, r ≥ 4, corresponds to an r-star in G. In the next sections, we use the above model to generalize the Erdös-Rényi and β-models as well as the p1 model in order to deal with the independence structure implied by the dependency graphs. This is done by putting constraints on the parameters γC in (3) that come from the mentioned network models. Notice that the method is independent of the choice of the network models and can be applied to other network models that assume dyadic independence.  2.2  Hierarchical Erdös-Rényi models  Erdös-Rényi models. In Erdös-Rényi models, it is assumed that edges occur independently, and the probabilities pij of observing an edge between nodes i and j are  11  all equal to p. Hence the probability of observing a network is Y n Y p P (x) = pxij (1 − p)1−xij = (1 − p)( 2 ) exp{xij log( )}, x ∈ Gn . 1−p i<j i<j In order to come up with an Erdös-Rényi type model that captures the independence structure implied by a given D, we generalize this model in the sense that the model for the baseline, where the dependency graph is the null graph, is the same as the model above. This implies that, in this case, one can consider ũij = eqxij , where n p ), and leave (1 − p)( 2 ) in the normalizing constant ũ. q = log( 1−p Definition of hierarchical Erdös-Rényi models. In order to define the hierarchical Erdös-Rényi model, we set the following constraints on parameters in the model in (3) that conform with the constraints in Erdös-Rényi model. The remaining parameters after setting the constraints are denoted by the vector of parameters q and a single parameter t.   q (r) , if C = {ii , ii , . . . , ii }; 1 2 r γC =  t, if C = {ij, ik, jk}.  (4)  An interpretation of the parameters is provided in the next subsection. Notice that q (r) are hierarchical in the sense that q (r) = 0 implies that q (r+1) = 0. In the saturated model, which corresponds to the line graph of the network base Gn , the number of parameters is n, and for dependency graphs with maximal clique size d < n, the number of parameters is d + 1. In the example of Figure 2, under this model, we have P (x) = ũ exp{q (1) x12 + q (1) x13 + q (1) x23 + q (2) x12 x13 + q (2) x13 x23 }. This, for example, implies that 12⊥ ⊥ 23 | 13, as is also implied by the dependency graph, since P (x) = ũ exp{q (1) (x12 + x13 ) + q (2) x12 x13 } exp{q (1) x23 + q (2) x13 x23 }. 12  Exponential family form. Let d be the size of the largest clique in D. By using (4), (3) can be written in exponential family form: P (x) = exp{  d X  (r)  (t)  q (r) sC (r) (x) + tsC (t) (x) − ψ(q, t)}, x ∈ Gn ,  (5)  r=1 (r)  where C (r) is the set of all cliques with r nodes in D, q (r) ∈ R, and sC (r) (x) is the number of r-stars in x whose edges form a member of C (r) ; similarly, C (t) is the set (t)  of all cliques with 3 nodes in D of form {ij, jk, ik}, and sC (t) (x) is the number of triangles in x whose edges form a member of C (t) . (1)  Notice that sC (1) (x) is simply the number of edges of x since all nodes of D are considered cliques. Therefore, since parameter q (r) corresponds to higher order interactions (of dimension r) in the dependency graph, it can be interpreted as propensity for the network to possess specific r-stars related to the cliques of the dependency graph. Hence, q (1) can be interpreted in the same way as the parameter q in Erdös-Rényi. Similarly, t can be interpreted as propensity for the network to possess triangles related to dependency graph. Indeed, the sufficient statistics are correlated with each other, and the value 0 for a parameter means that given the value of other parameters, the number of cliques of the corresponding size tend to be close to the average number of possible cliques of that size. Notice also that for the saturated model, the model is n−1 X P (x) = exp{ q (r) s(r) (x) + ts(t) (x) − ψ(q, t)}, x ∈ Gn , r=1  where s(r) (x) is the number of r-stars; and s(t) (x) is the number of triangles. For example, the model corresponding to the graph in Figure 2, can be written in exponential family form as (2)  P (x) = exp{q (1) e(x) + q (2) s{{12,13},{13,23}} (x) − ψ(q)}. 13  Normalizing constant. Obtaining the normalizing constant in a closed form, for models in exponential family, in principle allows us to apply optimization methods for obtaining the MLE; see also the discussion in Section 3. Here we sum over all possible values of the binary vector x in (3) after inserting the parameters in (4), and set it equal to 1 in order to calculate the normalizing constant ψ(q, t): n(n−1)/2  ψ(q, t) = log(1 +  min(d,r)  X  X  r=1  H∈D(r)  exp{  X  0  0  c(r ) (H)q (r ) + c(t) (H)t}),  (6)  r0 =1 0  where D(r) is the set of all subgraphs of D with r nodes, and c(r ) (H) is the number of cliques of size r0 in H; and similarly c(t) (H) is the number of cliques of size 3 in H of n (1) form (ij, jk, ik). Notice that this could be written as ψ(q) = log((1 + eq )( 2 ) + f (q)), n  where the term log(1 + eq )( 2 ) corresponds to cliques of size 1, which are the nodes (1)  of the dependency graph. By neglecting the other term in the logarithm, we obtain the normalizing constant for the Erdös-Rényi model. For example, for the dependency graph in Figure 2, we obtain ψ(q) = log(1 + 3eq + e2q + 2e2q+q  2.3  (2)  (2)  + e3q+2q ).  Hierarchical β-models  We apply an analogous approach to that of the previous section, this time for the β-model instead of the Erdös-Rényi. The directed version of β-model is the p1 model, and the following approach can further generalize for p1 with some more technicalities. This is provided in the Appendix. β-models. In β-models, it is also assumed that edges occur independently, and the probability pij of observing an edge between nodes i and j is parameterized as follows: pi,j =  eβi +βj , ∀i 6= j, β1 , . . . , βn ∈ Rn , 1 + eβi +βj 14  where βi can be interpreted as the propensity of node i to have edges. The probability of observing a network is Pβ (x) =  Y  x  pijij (1 − pij )1−xij =  i<j  Y  e(βi +βj )xij  i<j  1 , x ∈ Gn . 1 + e(βi +βj )  In this case, the model above, which is the model for the baseline, can be considered to be ũij = e(βi +βj )xij and 1/(1 + e(βi +βj ) ) can be left in the normalizing constant ũ. Definition of hierarchical β-models. Now again suppose that there is a dependency graph D that satisfies the Markov dependence property, and is modeled by the hierarchical model (3). We have observed that cliques in D correspond to stars and triangles in G. In order to define the hierarchical β-model, we set the following constraints on the parameters in the model in (3) that conform with the constraints in the β-model. The remaining parameters, after setting the constraints, are denoted by vectors of parameters (β)i and a single vector of parameter τi .  (1) (1)    βi + βj , if C = {ij} (r)  γC =  (7)  βi , if C = {ii1 , ii2 , . . . , iir }, r ≥ 2      τi + τj + τk , if C = {ij, ik, jk}.  An interpretation of the parameters is provided in the next subsection. As before, (r)  notice that βi  (r)  are hierarchical in the sense that if βi  (r+1)  = 0 then βi  = 0. In the  saturated model, the number of parameters is n2 , but when the maximal clique size in the dependency graph is of size d, the number of parameters is n · d. In the example of Figure 2, under this model, we have (1)  (1)  (1)  (1)  (1)  (1)  (2)  (2)  P (x) = ũ exp{(β1 +β2 )x12 +(β1 +β3 )x13 +(β2 +β3 )x23 +β1 x12 x13 +β3 x13 x23 }. (8)  15  This, for example, implies that 12⊥ ⊥ 23 | 13, as is also implied by the dependency graph, since (1)  (1)  (1)  (1)  (2)  (1)  (1)  (2)  P (x) = ũ exp{(β1 +β2 )x12 +(β1 +β3 )x13 +β1 x12 x13 } exp{(β2 +β3 )x23 +β3 x13 x23 }. Exponential family form. By using (7), (3) can be written in exponential family form: P (x) = exp{  n X n X  (r) (r)  βi d  i=1 r=1 (r)  where Ci and d  (r) (r)  i,Ci  (r)  i,Ci  (x) + τi d  (t) (t)  i,Ci  (x) − ψ(β, τ )}, x ∈ Gn ,  is the set of all cliques with r nodes in D such that all their nodes share i,  (x) is the number of r-stars in x with hub i such that its endpoints pairing (t)  (r)  with i form a member of Ci ; similarly, Ci D of form {ij, jk, ik}, and d  (t) (t)  i,Ci  is the set of all cliques with 3 nodes in  (x) is the number of triangles in x that contain i and (t)  two other nodes such that they form a member of Ci . Notice that d  (1) (1)  i,Ci  (x) is simply the degree of node i since all nodes of D are con-  sidered cliques. (r)  Therefore, the parameter βi  can be interpreted as the propensity of node i in  the network to be the hub of specific r-stars related to the cliques of the dependency (1)  graph. Hence, βi  can be interpreted in the same way as the parameter βi in the  β-model. Similarly, τi can be interpreted as propensity for node i in the network to possess triangles related to dependency graph. For the saturated model, the model is P (x) = exp{  n X n X  (r) (r)  (t)  βi di (x) + τi di (x) − ψ(β, τ )}, x ∈ Gn ,  i=1 r=1 (r)  (t)  where di (x) is the number of r-stars with i as the hub; and di (x) is the number (r)  of triangles that contain i. Notice that in this case the sufficient statistics di (x) are (1)  deterministic for r ≥ 2 given di (x). However, sufficient statistics in the submodels 16  of the saturated model, d  (r) (r)  i,Ci  (x), can be random. For dense dependency graphs,  the correlation between sufficient statistics can be high, and in some cases there might even be linear dependencies. Verifying this requires a case by case verification, generally, but for sparser dependency graphs this is not an issue. For example, the model corresponding to the graph in Figure 2, can be written in exponential family form as (1) (1)  (1) (1)  (1) (1)  (2) (2)  (2) (2)  P (x) = exp{β1 d1 (x)+β2 d2 (x)+β3 d3 (x)+β1 d1,{{12,13}} (x)+β3 d3,{{13,23}} (x)−ψ(β)}. Normalizing constant. As in the hierarchical Erdös-Rényi case, we are interested in writing the normalizing constant in a closed form in order to be able to apply optimization methods for obtaining the MLE. We sum over all possible values of the binary vector x in (3) after inserting the parameters in (7), and set it equal to 1 in order to calculate the normalizing constant ψ(β, τ ). ψ(β, τ ) = log(  n(n−1)/2 P|V (H)| P P (d) X X Y β + C∈C (t) (H) (τc1 +τc2 +τc3 ) C∈C (d) (H) hub(C) − 1) (e d=2 (1 + eβi +βj ) + i<j  r=2  H∈D(r)  e  P  v∈H  βv1 +βv2  (9)  where D(r) is the set of all subgraphs of D with r nodes, V (H) is the node set of H, C (d) (H) is the set of all cliques in H with d nodes except the hubless cliques, C (t) (H) is the set of all hubless cliques, which are of form {(i, j), (i, k), (j, k)}, and we denote such i, j, and k by c1 , c2 , and c3 . In addition, we write v as (v1 , v2 ). Notice that in Q (9), the term i<j (1 + eβi +βj ) corresponds to cliques of size 1, which are the nodes of the dependency graph, and neglecting the other term in the logarithm, we obtain P the normalizing constant for β-model, i<j log(1 + eβi +βj ).  17  ),  For example, for the dependency graph in Figure 2, and from (8) we obtain X (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (1) (2) ψ(β) = log( exp{(β1 + β2 )x12 + (β1 + β3 )x13 + (β2 + β3 )x23 + β1 x12 x13 x (2)  +β3 x13 x23 }) (1)  = log(1 + eβ1  (1)  +β2  (1)  + eβ1  (1)  +β3  (1)  +eβ1 (1)  = log((1 + eβ1  (1)  +β2  (1)  + eβ2 (1)  (1)  +β3  (1)  (1)  + eβ1  (2)  (1)  +β3 +β2 +β3 +β3 (1)  )(1 + eβ1 (2)  (1)  +β3  (1)  +(eβ3 − 1)e2β3  (1)  (1)  + eβ1  (1)  )(1 + eβ2 (1)  (1)  (1)  (2)  +β2 +β1 +β3 +β1  (1)  +β1 +β2  (1)  (1)  (1)  + e β1  (1)  (1)  (1)  (1)  +β2 +β2 +β3 (1)  (1)  (2)  (2)  +β2 +β1 +β3 +β2 +β3 +β1 +β3 (1)  +β2  (2)  + (eβ1  (1)  (2)  ) + (eβ1 − 1)e2β1 (2)  +β3  (1)  − 1)e2β1  )  (1)  (1)  +β2 +β3 (1)  (1)  +2β2 +2β3  ).  Generalization to models with dyadic independence. The method proposed above for Erdös-Rényi and beta is not restricted to these models.. In general, if there is a model that assumes dyadic independence then this method can be applied in the following manner: Every ERGM can be written in the form expressed in (3). The idea is that, for every clique C, the parameter γC is further parametrized based on the baseline network model such that for every clique size r there is a family of parameters {θi,k }k ∈ K, where K is the set of parameters in the baseline network model. The baseline model corresponds to the empty dependency graph, and γij , for every i, j, is reparametrized by the first order parameters {θ1,k }k ∈ K in order to obtain the baseline network model. In general, by using the reparametrization of γC , (3) can be written in exponential family form and the sufficient statistics will show up in the model, In addition, for these models, if the normalizing constant of the baseline network model is in closed form then, by summing over all possible values of the binary vector x in the reparametrized version of (3), the normalizing constant can be written in closed form, although it still contains a sum over subgraphs of the dependency graph as oppose to a sum over all networks with n nodes. 18  Another example of this method is provided in the Appendix for p1 models.  3  Parameter estimation and simulation studies  3.1  Maximum likelihood estimation  One important difference between the proposed models in this paper and other ERGMs that do not assume dyadic independence is that the normalizing constants (see (6) and (9)) in our proposed models are in closed form in the sense that they do not depend on summation over all networks. The models inherit this property from the models on which they are based (i.e. the Erdös-Rényi and β-models). However, the normalizing constants depend on summation over subgraphs of the corresponding dependency graph, which can still be computationally demanding. We will, however, observe below that for sparse dependency graphs some computations are manageable. This is in contrast to other ERGMs without diadic independence assumption, which usually require some type of Markov chain Monte Carlo methods in order to compute the normalizing constant; see for example Hunter et al. (2008). Henceforth, for brevity, we assume that there is no triangle of form hij, ik, jki in the dependency graph D. This implies that the parameter t can be removed from the model. However, one can trivially generalize all the calculations and algorithms below to the case that t is existent in the model. Parameter estimation for hierarchical Erdös-Rényi models. By (5), the loglikelihood of the Erdös-Rényi model can be written as l(q) =  n−1 X  q (r) s(r) (x) − ψ(q),  r=1  where ψ(q) is defined in (6). 19  This function is obviously concave. The goal is to apply the gradient decent method (for example, see Snyman (2005)) to find its maximum. An element of the gradient of the log-likelihood, for m = n(n − 1)/2, is Pmin(d,r) (r0 ) 0 (i) c (H)q (r ) } r0 =1 H⊆D(r) c (H) exp{ , Pm P Pmin(d,r) (r0 ) (r0 ) } exp{ c (H)q 0 (r) r =1 r=1 H⊆D  Pm P ∂l(q)/∂q  (i)  r=1  (i)  = s (x) −  1+  (10)  where d is the maximal clique size in D. The main problem in computing the gradient vector is the large sum in both numerator and denominator, whose number of terms in the worst case is of order O(n3 d2m ). Here we will address this issue. By calculating the term r = 1 separately in (10), we obtain for 2 ≤ i ≤ d, Pm ∂l(q)/∂q  (i)  (i)  = s (x) −  r=i  erq  Pmin(d,r) (r0 ) 0 (i) c (H)q (r ) } r0 =2 H⊆D(r) c (H) exp{ ; Pmin(d,r) (r0 ) Pm rq(1) P (r0 ) } e exp{ c (H)q 0 (r) r =2 H⊆D r=2  (1)  1 + meq(1) +  P  (11) and ∂l(q)/∂q  (1)  (1)  = s (x) −  meq  (1)  +  1 + meq(1)  Pm  rq (1) r=2 re P rq (1) + m r=2 e  P  H⊆D(r)  P  H⊆D(r)  Pmin(d,r)  0 0 c(r ) (H)q (r ) } r0 =2 . Pmin(d,r) exp{ r0 =2 c(r0 ) (H)q (r0 ) }  exp{  (12) Suppose that D is sparse in the sense that the number of non-isolated nodes in D, denoted by m0 , is of order of a constant, i.e. not growing with n, or it is increasing by a rate slower than n. This implies that, based on our assumption, there is only a finite number of individuals in the model to which the connected edges are dependent. Notice that, by the increase of n, the dependency graph converges to the empty graph, and the model converges to Erdös-Rényi. Denote the induced subgraph by non-isolated nodes by D0 . An expression in the last term in the denominator of (11)  20  or (12) is expanded as follows: min(d,r)  X  exp{  0  0  c(r ) (H)q (r ) }  r0 =2  H⊆D(r) min(m0 ,r)   X  =  X  r00 =2  m − m0 r − r00  min(d,r00 )    X H⊆D  0(r 00 )  exp{  X  c  (r0 )  r0 =2  (H)q  (r0 )      0 m − m0 0 m−m , }+ +m r−1 r   a  where b := 0, for b > a. Therefore, by the same argument for numerators, (11) and (12) can be written as ∂l(q)/∂q (i) = s(i) (x)− Pm0 P 1+  Pm  r=1  erq(1) (  r 00 =i  m−m0 r  Pmin(d,r00 ) (r0 ) Pm 0 0 (i) rq (1) c (H)q (r ) }( r=2 m−m ) r 0 =2 H⊆D 0(r00 ) c (H) exp{ r−r 00 e ; P P P P 00 ) 0 0 0 min(d,r m m 0 0 m−m rq (1) ) + m0 r−1 ) + r00 =2 H⊆D0(r00 ) exp{ r0 =2 c(r ) (H)q (r ) }( r=2 m−m r−r 00 e (13)  and ∂l(q)/∂q (1) = s(1) (x)− Pm Pm0 P Pmin(d,r00 ) (r0 ) Pm 0 0 0 0 rq (1) m−m rq (1) ( r + m0 m−m c (H)q (r ) }( r=2 r m−m ) r 0 =2 r=1 re r 00 =2 H⊆D 0(r00 ) exp{ r−1 ) + r−r 00 e , Pm rq(1) m−m0  P P P P 00 ) 0 0 0 min(d,r m m (1) 0 0 m−m m−m 1 + r=1 e ( r + m0 r−1 ) + r00 =2 H⊆D0(r00 ) exp{ r0 =2 c(r ) (H)q (r ) }( r=2 r−r00 erq ) (14)  where   a b  := 0, for b < 0.  By fixing q (1) , and assuming m0 is of order of a constant, since d can no longer grow with n, the number of terms in the sum in both numerator and denominator is (1)  of order O(C2n ), where C is a constant. Now for every value of q∗ , by the gradient (1)  (1)  decent method, the largest value for g(q∗ ) = maxq(2) ,...,q(d) l(q∗ , q (2) , . . . , q (d) ) can be computed. (Notice that if f (x, y) is concave then so is f (x, y∗ ) for a fixed value of y∗ .) Hence, one can use iterative methods in optimization to find the value of q (1) within a certain range with a certain precision that maximizes the likelihood function. MLE existence and degeneracy. As it is often the case with ERGMs, the issues of existence of the MLE and degeneracy (Rinaldo et al., 2009; Handcock, 2003) affect 21  also the models we propose. In fact, in our simulations we have encountered several cases in which the likelihood function does not appear to be strongly convex, as the estimated Fisher information matrix becomes nearly singular along optimizing sequences of parameters with norms diverging to infinity. This is a clear indication of a nonexistent MLE and manifests itself in failed convergence of the MCMCMLE procedure and slow mixing (see the next section). As expected and as confirmed by the simulations described in the next section, such instances are more frequent in models with complex dependency graphs and whenever the observed network is too sparse or too dense. In such cases, we have also occasionally noted degeneracy phenomena: the likelihood function exhibit local maxima corresponding to the empty or the full graph. While the investigation of these important issues is clearly outside the scope of this paper, nonetheless we recommend using small dependency graphs and a careful monitoring of the convergence of the optimizing procedure of choice. In Section 4, we will also discuss an extension of the proposed models that may significantly reduce degeneracy.  3.2  Computational and simulation study  We have written code that calculates the MLE by the optimization method discussed above, although, at the moment it cannot computationally carry large networks (> 50 nodes) (notice that the computational difficulty depends also on the density of the dependency graph). We have also incorporated the corresponding statistics in the package ERGM (Hunter et al., 2007), by coding up the change statistics in the package ERGM.userterterms (Hunter et al., 2013), and can now utilize the functionality provided in the ERGM package such as those for approximating the MLE by MCMC methods and simulating networks based on ERGM models. The code for the optimization method as well 22  as the extended ERGM.userterterms are available in an additional documentation online. For a given network x and dependency graph D, and in order to have some base for comparisons regardless of the difference in the density of the simulated networks, we find the likelihood ratio under the MLE of hierarchical Erdös-Rényi and Erdös-Rényi (the latter can be exactly computed easily): S = 2lHER (q̂1 , . . . , q̂r ; x, D) − 2lER (q̂; x). Notice that since the Erdös-Rényi is a submodel of hierarchical Erdös-Rényi, it holds that lHER > lER , and hence S > 0. In addition, for two hierarchical models 1 and 2 and the same network, the difference between the log-likelihoods is proportional to S1 − S2 . We first provide a method to simulate a vector of size m of binary variables with conditional correlations (linear dependencies) induced by a given undirected dependency graph D. By this method the dependencies induced by the dependency graph is preserved, but there might be independencies that turn into non-linear dependencies among the simulated binary data: We simulate an m × m symmetric positive-definite matrix M (for example,by the use of The QR Decomposition of a Matrix in LAPACK (Anderson et al., 1999)). We then change the values of the matrix in order for zeros to correspond to missing edges of D as follows: For A⊥ ⊥ B | C, it holds that cov(A, B) = cov(A, C)cov(C, C)−1 cov(C, B). Thus, start with M as a covariance matrix and cycle through all pairs corresponding to the missing edges of D by forcing the formula to hold for (i, j, V \ {i, j}). We stop when the sum of the deviations from the concentrations fitted to the missing edges (i.e. the sum of the corresponding elements on the generated matrix) is smaller than some default. For more details, see Speed and Kiiveri (1986). Call the resulting matrix L. 23  We can now consider K = L−1 to be the concentration matrix, i.e. the inverse of the covariance matrix, of a Gaussian distribution with 0 mean that is Markov to D. We generate binary random variables by thresholding a normal distribution, i.e. by setting the simulated value of a variable to 0 if the corresponding value in the Gaussian distribution is negative, and to 1 if the corresponding value in the Gaussian distribution is positive. The linear conditional dependencies are preserved under thresholding; see Leisch et al. (1998) and the R package bindata, introduced in its appendix. We now assume that a simulated x is an observed network with every element corresponding to an edge. We find an approximation of the MLE for the hierarchical Erdös-Rényi model by the ERGM package, and also the MLE for Erdös-Rényi. We then calculate the likelihood ratio S. Notice that we discard the simulated networks for which the MLE does not seem to exist (as implied by ERGM). Here we conduct our study for several dependency graphs with complete connected components of different size (including isolated nodes); for this choice see the discussion on “model selection based on nodal attribute” and “model selection and exchangeability” in Section 4. The study is performed in four different directions: 1) We simulate networks from the same dependency graph, but a collection with low values of (partial) correlations ρij,ik , for all possible nodes ij and ik, among the dependant variables (|ρij,ik | < 0.1), and a collection with high values of the partial correlation (|ρij,ik | < 0.9). For example, here we provide the likelihood ratios for simulated networks with 50 nodes from the same dependency graph that contains a clique of size 25 and isolated nodes but one collection of networks are simulated from low correlations and the other from high correlations (depicted in Figure 4(a)); and the same for dependency graph with a clique of size 40 and isolated nodes (depicted in Figure 4(b)).  24  40  25  10  20  sorted value of S  30  20 15  sorted value of S  10  0  5 0  simulated networks  simulated networks  (a)  (b)  Figure 4: Ordered likelihood-ratios of networks simulated from a conditional independence structure implied by a dependency graph with 1225 nodes and (a) with one clique of size 25 together with isolated nodes – low correlations (black – at the bottom) and high correlations (blue – on top); (b) with one clique of size 40 together with isolated nodes – low correlations (black – at the bottom) and high correlations (blue – on top).  2) We simulate networks of the same size with different dependency graphs. In this case, the maximal clique size in the dependency graphs increases, and therefore, the number of parameters will increase. It is obvious that the likelihood ratio should increase as well, which is confirmed by our study. Here we show an example with n = 50 with four dependency graphs with growing density, i.e., dependence (a clique of size 5, 15, 25, 40, and 50 respectively and isolated nodes). This is depicted in Figure 5.  25  50 40 30  sorted value of S  20 10 0  simulated networks  Figure 5: Ordered likelihood-ratios of networks simulated from a conditional independence structure implied by a dependency graph with 1225 nodes and one clique of size 5 (black – at the bottom), 15 (blue – second from the bottom), 25 (red – in the middle), 40 (yellow – second from the top), and 50 (green – on top), and isolated nodes.  3) The following study indicates how well the model works. We again simulate networks of the same size, but with different dependency graphs of the same maximal clique size. Hence, the number of parameters are the same for different dependency graphs. Here we compare models for two dependency graphs, one of which contains only one clique other than isolated nodes, but the other has several disconnected cliques of the same size. In particular, we depict the values of the likelihood ratio S for networks with 50 nodes simulated from two dependency graphs that, along with isolated nodes, have respectively 1 component of size 5, and 10 components of size 5 (part (a) of Figure 6), and 1 component of size 25, and 2 components of size 25 (part (b) of Figure 6). In a separate observation, notice that we discard cases where the MLE does not exist (or at least cannot be computed by this method). It is seen that in Figure 26  6)(b), the number of simulated networks, for which the MLE seems to exist is visibly lower for the denser dependency graph. We observe the same trend in our simulation studies, where the simulated networks based on the models with denser dependency graphs demonstrate more non-existence of the MLE. This can be due to the fact that the value for certain statistics in some simulated networks is 0, or due to degeneracy  30 10  20  sorted value of S  15 10  0  0  5  sorted value of S  20  40  25  50  issues in other cases.  simulated networks  simulated networks  (a)  (b)  Figure 6: Ordered likelihood-ratios of networks simulated from a conditional independence structure implied by a dependency graph with 1225 nodes and (a) one clique of size 10 (black – at the bottom) and 5 cliques of size 10 (blue – on top) together with isolated nodes; (b) one clique of size 25 (black – at the bottom) and 2 cliques of size 25 (blue – on top) together with isolated nodes.  4) We increase the number of nodes and try to keep the density of dependency graph (whose size increases of order of n2 ) unchanged. As expected, we see that the value of S increases when increasing the number of nodes. Here we depict examples of this value for simulated networks of size 50, 100, and 200 in the graph of Figure 7 with dependency graphs that contain a clique of size n/2 along with isolated nodes. 27  100 80 60 40  sorted value of S  20 0  simulated networks  Figure 7: Ordered likelihood-ratios of networks simulated from a conditional independence structure implied by a dependency graph with m =  n 2    nodes and one clique of size n/2 = 25 (black – at  the bottom), n/2 = 50 (red – in the middle), and n/2 = 100 (blue – on top) together with isolated nodes.  4  Discussion and future work  Our aim in this paper was to introduce a new approach in order to propose a new family of models, where each model is the combination of a known network model and the hierarchical model for a given dependency graph. There are, however, still many open questions regarding the proposed models as well as natural ways to generalize such approach. It is important to note that each member of the proposed family of models might behave very differently, based on the choice of the baseline network model and the dependency graph. For each such model, a separate thorough study would be necessary to investigate whether the model is well-behaved, for example, based on the study  28  of the likelihood function, asymptotics, and the degeneracy of the model. However, there are issues common in all models, some of which we discuss in this section. In particular, we discuss the following: • As was seen in Section 3, parameter estimation based on optimization methods is computationally demanding. We discuss possible approaches for faster parameter estimation such as focusing on decomposable dependency graphs. In addition, we discuss an extension of current models to reduce degeneracy, which is essential for a meaningful parameter estimation. • The proposed approach can be mimicked for other graphical models – here we discuss a similar approach for (marginal) models based on bidirected graphs. • In this paper we assumed that the dependency graph is given. We discuss possible approaches for model selection, i.e. for choosing a dependency graph based on observed networks. Some approaches for parameter estimation and avoiding degeneracy. As discussed before, for these hierarchical models, if the normalizing constant of the baseline network model is in closed form then the normalizing constant is in closed form, although it still contains a sum over subgraphs of the dependency graph. This is an essential aspects of these models, which makes exact parameter estimation possible. However, as discussed in Section 3, because of computational demands, it is not possible to only apply normal optimization methods to find the MLE. In this paper, we provided a fairly more sophisticated method that works for “sparse” dependency graphs. The question of how to efficiently find solutions for gradients (13) and (14) is indeed an interesting optimization problem. By skipping the 1 in the denominator, a  29  general form for the gradient that one should deal with is  P Pci fi . fi  The other term in  the gradient is computationally manageable. Another method to deal with the computational difficulty for parameter estimation may be to further assume that the dependency graph is decomposable, which is equivalent to saying that there is no cycle of length more than 3 such that all its non-neighboring nodes (on the cycle) are not adjacent; for a complete review of these graphs, see Lauritzen (1996). In this case, the joint probability function factorizes with respect to maximal cliques and so-called separators, which are certain intersections of the maximal cliques. Computationally, it is much more efficient to find the MLE for every clique and separator since the number of nodes are much smaller (especially for sparse dependency graphs). In addition, since both maximal cliques and separators are complete graphs, the gradient gets further simplified. However, a difficulty is that the constraints in the model do not factorize accordingly, and one should investigate possible ways to deal with these constraints into this method. As seen by numerical evaluation and the discussion in the previous section, the proposed models in this paper may unsurprisingly happen to be degenerate. For the same issue for models with statistics for transitivity and degree distributions, Snijders et al. (2006) proposed a geometrically weighted degree distributions model, in which instead of a binary existing/missing dyad, the dyads are continuous random variables ranging between 0 and 1 (known as weights). It is seen that these models avoid degeneracy with much greater success than the discrete ones. Recently a similar idea with exponent weights has been used in Wilson et al. (2015), and the degeneracy reduction was tested for 2-star models. It is possible to extend the proposed models in this paper by using both these weights. One simple approach is to use numerical evaluation using the package ERGM (as we did in the previous section) to confirm degeneracy reduction. A more substantive approach is to use continuous graphical 30  models instead of the discrete ones, and apply parameter estimation by using the known methods in graphical models for continuous variables. Model selection based on nodal attribute network and models based on the bidirected marginal models. Throughout this paper we worked under the assumption that there is a given dependency graph. In general, the model depends on the labeling of the network, i.e. the individuals represented by the network. In practical cases, a sparse dependency graph may normally be provided by experts, by marking certain individuals whose relations with other individuals affect the whole or some parts of the network. If such an expert opinion is not available, there may be several methods to select a dependency graph. First of all, remember that in the defined hierarchical models, studied in this paper, as well as marginal models, discussed in this section, there are restrictions on dependency graphs by assuming that they satisfy the Markov dependence property. Not only do these restrictions lead to neat theoretical results, but there is also a practical justification for such restrictions. Here we provide some interpretation when there are marginal independencies as in the bidirected graphical models, discussed in Section 1.2. Notice that if the dependency graph consists only of cliques as connected components then the independence model induced by undirected and the bidirected graphs are the same (i.e. they are so-called Markov equivalent). Hence in the simulation study of the previous section, one could as well assume that the graphs were bidirected. For example, suppose that a given dependency graph captures the independence structure of a network of friendships. It is plausible to assume that the existence of an edge between individuals i and j and the existence of an edge between k and l are marginally independent, i.e., knowing whether i and j are friends would not change the probability of friendship between k and l when there is no information available  31  on the existence of other friendships in the network. This conforms with the missing edge between ij and kl in a bidirected dependency graph that satisfies the Markov dependence property. Moreover, a possible edge between ij and ik in the dependency graph indicates that knowing whether i has a friend j would impact the probability of i having another friend k. Following the above discussion, a common feature of networks, especially social networks, is transitivity, which states that given that we know whether j and k are friends (i.e. adjacent), knowing whether i is a friend of j would impact the probability of i being a friend of k, but only the friendship between i and j would not impact the friendship between i and k. For three nodes, this corresponds to that ij ⊥ ⊥ ik | jk does not hold, but the marginal independence ij ⊥ ⊥ ik holds. This can be represented by the bidirected dependency graph ij ≺ jk≺ ik. For more nodes, it is easy to observe that transitivity for all node triples cannot be represented by bidirected or undirected graphs since if no statements of form ij ⊥ ⊥ ik | jk hold, then the marginal independence statements cannot hold either. However, a bidirected dependency graph whose nodes are ordered can represent what we call ordered transitivity, which states that transitivity holds for i, j, and k as above only when ij < ik < jk. Notice that an order on the nodes of the network would imply a lexicographical ordering on the nodes of the dependency graph. For example, for a network with 4 nodes the dependency graph in Figure 8 represents the ordered transitivity.  32  12  13  23  34  14  24  Figure 8: A dependency graph that corresponds to the network with node set {1, 2, 3, 4} and that represents the ordered transitivity.  Another common feature of networks is homophily, which states that individuals with similar characteristics are more likely to relate; see Krivitsky et al. (2009). The opposite, where individuals relate to those with different characteristics is called heterophily and is seen in some social networks; for example, see Lozares et al. (2014). It is common to observe some nodal attributes along with an observed network. In this case these attributes can be used for selecting a dependency graph. Based on the discussion above, it is important to introduce a parallel theory to the previous sections to define a set of network models that preserve the independence structures of bidirected graphical models. For this purpose, instead of binary hierarchical models, we can use several bidirected graph models. One is proposed specifically for binary variables, or as we call it the marginal binary models, introduced by Drton and Richardson (2008). The parameters of this model are marginal probabilities for every connected subgraph of the dependency graph (as opposed to every clique in hierarchical models). This implies that the Markov dependence property should be defined differently for these models in order to ensure that in the dual graph one obtains the set of all connected subgraphs. In Drton and Richardson (2008), it was shown that these models are curved expo33  nential families (although without explicitly writing the model in curved exponential family form). In principle, one can write the model in curved exponential family form with natural parameters and set constraints that are associated with the network models (e.g. Erdös-Rényi, beta, etc.) as in the hierarchical case. A difference is that there are implicit constraints among the natural parameters, when written in curved exponential family form, which make the parameter estimation difficult. In order to deal with this possible problem, a thorough study of these constraints is needed. In addition, there might be possible approaches to simplify the model by setting even more constraints on the parameters in order to make the optimization more practical. There are other marginal models discussed in graphical models that are in curved exponential family form; see, for example, the multivariate logistic transformation, introduced in Lupparelli et al. (2009), and log-mean linear models, introduced in Roverato et al. (2013). Instead of the marginal binary models, it might be possible to apply these models to networks. Model selection based on dyadic relations. In principle, it is also possible to select dependency graphs purely based on the observed network, although in current form, it is computationally very demanding. By the Markov dependence property, the saturated dependency graph is the line graph of the complete graph. In order to select the dependency graph, the first step is to test whether any parameter is zero in the saturated model. We start with lower order parameters for which r = 2, make use of the hierarchy, and test the parameters with higher order if the lower order parameters are not zero. Notice that in the Erdös-Rényi model q (r) = 0 implies that there is no clique of size r in the dependency graph, and in particular, q (2) = 0 implies complete independence; (r)  in the β-model βi  = 0 implies that node ij, for a arbitrary j, is not on any cliques (2)  of size r in the dependency graph, and in particular, βi 34  = 0 implies that ij is an  isolated node and hence completely independent of everything else. After restricting the dependency graph by testing whether the parameters are equal to zero, a way forward is to compare dependency graphs mutually in a backward process: We start with the largest possible dependency graph, D0 , that conforms with parameters set to zero in the previous step. We also order the nodes of the dependency graph lexicographically. The node set is the {12, 13, . . . , 1n, 23, . . . , (n − 1, n)}. We remove the edge between the two highest order nodes in D0 and call the graph D1 . After estimating the parameters for D0 and D1 , we apply the likelihood ratio test, to test whether D1 fits significantly better than D0 . If that is the case, we then compare D1 and D2 , otherwise we compare D0 and D2 . By this process, one should eventually obtain the dependency graph that fits best to the observation. Model selection and exchangeability. As seen before, the saturated hierarchical model has the same independence structure as that of the Frank and Strauss (provided by the graph depicted in Figure 3), and in fact, the hierarchical Erdös-Rényi model is the same as the Frank Strauss model, having the number of all k-stars and triangles as sufficient statistics. The Frank and Strauss model is exchangeable in the sense that the model is invariant under relabeling of the nodes. This is in contrast to other hierarchical ErdösRényi models (with different dependency graphs), where labeling of the nodes indicate dependencies among certain individuals in the model. More precisely, A hierarchical Erdös-Rényi model is exchangeable if and only if the corresponding dependency graph is either empty or a line graph of the complete graph. The proof is the following: In the dependency graph, if there is an edge between ij and ik, but not between ij and il then consider two networks where one only contains edges ij and ik and the other one only ij and il. Based on exchangeability, since these two networks are obtained from each other by switching k and l, these two graphs  35  should have the same probability of occurrence, but by (5), these two graphs have different sufficient statistics. The only cases where the case above does not hold is when the dependency graph is empty or a line graph of the complete graph. In these cases, the corresponding models (Erdös-Rényi and Frank and Strauss) are known to be exchangeable. Hierarchical β-models are not exchangeable either since they inherit the nonexchangeability of its baseline model (β-model). Therefore, one can say that the proposed hierarchical model is to deal with models related to certain individuals rather than general structure of networks. It is also worth noting that a closest family of dependency graphs to exchangeable models are models with dependency graphs where all the connected components are cliques (as used in the simulation study of the previous chapter). This is because the model does not change under relabeling of nodes within each clique (except the hub).  Acknowledgements Work of the authors was supported by grant #FA9550-12-1-0392 from the U.S. Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). The authors are grateful to Sonja Petrović, Thomas Richardson, Despina Stasi, and Ryan Tibshirani for helpful discussions.  Appendix: Hierarchical p1 models The p1 models. The p1 models have been long studied in the literature of networks for modeling directed graphs, where reciprocation, i.e. the existence of edges in two different directions between a pair of nodes is allowed. It is assumed that occurrences of edges are independent and the probability of observing an edge between nodes i 36  and j is Pij (a, b) = λ̃ij α̃ia α̃jb β̃ib β̃ja θ̃a+b ρ̃ab ij ,  (15)  where a, b ∈ {0, 1}, and λ̃ij = eλij ; and so on. The parameter αi quantifies the effect of an outgoing edge from node i, the parameter βj instead measures the effect of an incoming edge into node j, while ρi,j controls the added effect of reciprocated edges (in both directions). The parameter θ measures the propensity of the network to have edges and, therefore, controls the density of the graph. The parameter λi,j functions as a normalizing constant. Here, for the sake of simplicity and to reduce the number of parameters, we assume that the added effects ρi,j are equal to 0. Again, as in the hierarchical beta case, we first deal with the baseline, where the dependency graph is the null graph: Denote an observed network by x. We lexicographically order all the dyads of x, where each dyad for a pair of nodes (i, j) is represented by (a, b): (0, 0) for no edge, (0, 1) for an arrow to j, (1, 0) for an arrow to i, and (1, 1) for a bi-directed edge. Let also φ = (α, β, θ), leaving λij in the normalizing constant and assuming ρi,j = 0. It holds that Pφ (x) =  Y 1 1 1 1 (Pij (0, 0) {xij =(0,0)} Pij (1, 0) {xij =(1,0)} Pij (0, 1) {xij =(0,1)} Pij (1, 1) {xij =(1,1)} ). i<j  We use the notations 100 (i, j) = 1{xij =(0,0)} and so on. Equation (15) implies that Pφ (x) =  Y 1 (i,j) (λ̃ij00 (λ̃ij α̃i β̃j θ̃)110 (i,j) (λ̃ij β̃i α̃j θ̃)101 (i,j) (λ̃ij α̃i β̃j β̃i α̃j θ̃2 )111 (i,j) ) i<j  Y (1 (i,j)+1 (i,j)) (1 (i,j)+1 (i,j)) (1 (i,j)+1 (i,j)) (1 (i,j)+1 (i,j)) 11 11 11 11 = ũ (α̃i 10 β̃j 10 β̃i 01 α̃j 01 θ̃(110 (i,j)+101 (i,j)+2111 (i,j)) ). i<j  X = exp{ ((110 (i, j) + 111 (i, j))αi + (110 (i, j) + 111 (i, j))βj + (101 (i, j) + 111 (i, j))βi i<j  +(101 (i, j) + 111 (i, j))αj + (110 (i, j) + 101 (i, j) + 2111 (i, j))θ + 111 (i, j))}. 37  This implies that ui,j = (αi + βj )(110 (i, j) + 111 (i, j)) + (αj + βi )(101 (i, j) + 111 (i, j)) + θ(110 (i, j) + 101 (i, j) + 2111 (i, j)). Definition of hierarchical p1 models. In order to define the hierarchical p1 model, we define uC (x), which appear in the model in (2) and we further assume θ = 0:  uC (x) =   (1) (1) (1) (1)   (αi + βj )(110 (i, j) + 111 (i, j)) + (αj + βi )(101 (i, j) + 111 (i, j)),      if C = {ij}           (r) Qr (r) Qr   (110 (i, is ) + 111 (i, is )) + αi βi  s=1 (101 (i, is ) + 111 (i, is )), s=1     if C = {ii1 , ii2 , . . . , iir }, r ≥ 2      (t)                                (t)  (βj + αk )(110 (i, j) + 111 (i, j))(101 (j, k) + 111 (j, k))(110 (k, i) + 111 (k, i)) (t)  (t)  (t)  (t)  +(βk + αi )(110 (i, j) + 111 (i, j))(110 (j, k) + 111 (j, k))(101 (k, i) + 111 (k, i)) +(βj + αi )(110 (i, j) + 111 (i, j))(101 (j, k) + 111 (j, k))(101 (k, i) + 111 (k, i)) (t)  +(τi + αj )(101 (i, j) + 111 (i, j))(110 (j, k) + 111 (j, k))(110 (k, i) + 111 (k, i)) (t)  (t)  +(βk + αj )(101 (i, j) + 111 (i, j))(110 (j, k) + 111 (j, k))(101 (k, i) + 111 (k, i)), if C = {ij, jk, ki}.  Notice that this model only takes into account stars where all the arrowheads are pointing to the hub or no arrowheads are pointing to the hub. All other cases are treated in lower orders; otherwise, if there were one parameter per each star configuration, the number of parameters would grow exponentially with n. (r)  Notice also that αi (r+1)  αi  (r)  and βi  (r)  are hierarchical in the sense that if αi  = 0 then  = 0; and similarly for β. In the saturated model, which corresponds to a (r)  complete dependency graph, the number of parameters is 2n2 , but by setting βi (r0 )  αi  =  = 0, the hierarchy implies that the number of parameters is reduced to n(r + r0 ).  38  In the example of Figure 2, under this model, we have (1)  (1)  (1)  (1)  (1)  (1)  (1)  (1)  (1)  (1)  (1)  (1)  P (x) = ũ exp{(α1 + β2 )(110 (1, 2) + 111 (1, 2)) + (α2 + β1 )(101 (1, 2) + 111 (1, 2)) +(α1 + β3 )(110 (1, 3) + 111 (1, 3)) + (α3 + β1 )(101 (1, 3) + 111 (1, 3)) +(α2 + β3 )(110 (2, 3) + 111 (2, 3)) + (α3 + β2 )(101 (2, 3) + 111 (2, 3)) (2)  (2)  +β1 (110 (1, 2) + 111 (1, 2))(110 (1, 3) + 111 (1, 3)) + α1 (101 (1, 2) + 111 (1, 2))(101 (1, 3) (2)  +111 (1, 3)) + β3 (110 (1, 3) + 111 (1, 3))(110 (2, 3) + 111 (2, 3)) (2)  +α3 (101 (1, 3) + 111 (1, 3))(101 (2, 3) + 111 (2, 3))}. This, for example, implies that 12⊥ ⊥ 23 | 13, as is also implied by the dependency graph, since P (x) factorizes such that the first factor only contains (1, 2) and (1, 3) and the second factor only contains (2, 3) and (1, 3).  References Anderson, E., Bai, Z., Bischof, C., Blackford, L. S., Demmel, J., Dongarra, J. J., Du Croz, J., Hammarling, S., Greenbaum, A., McKenney, A., and Sorensen, D. (1999). LAPACK Users’ Guide (Third Ed.). Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Bishop, Y. M., Fienberg, S. E., and Holland, P. W. (2007). Discrete Multivariate Analysis: Theory and Practice. Springer-Verlag, New York, USA. Blitzstein, J. and Diaconis, P. (2010). A sequential importance sampling algorithm for generating random graphs with prescribed degrees.  Internet Mathematics,  6(4):489–522. Chatterjee, S., Diaconis, P., and Sly, A. (2011). Random graphs with a given degree sequence. Annals of Applied Probability, 21(4):1400–1435. 39  Darroch, J. N., Lauritzen, S. L., and Speed, T. P. (1980). Markov fields and log-linear interaction models for contingency tables. Annals of Statistics, 8:522–539. Drton, M. and Richardson, T. S. (2008). Binary models for marginal independence. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B, 70(2):287–309. Erdös, P. and Rényi, A. (1959). On random graphs. Publicationes Mathematicae, 6:290–297. Fellows, I. and Handcock, M. S. (2012). Exponential-family random network models. submitted. http://arxiv.org/abs/1208.0121. Fienberg, S. E. and Wasserman, S. (1981). Discussion of an exponential family of probability distributions for directed graphs by holland and leinhardt. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 76:54–57. Frank, O. and Strauss, D. (1986). Markov graphs. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 81:832–842. Handcock, M. (2003). Assessing degeneracy in statistical models for social networks. Technical Report 39, Center for Statistica dn the Social Sciences, University of Washington. Holland, P. and Leinhardt, S. (1981). An exponential family of probability distributions for directed graphs. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 76:33–50. Holland, P. W., Laskey, K. B., and Leinhardt, S. (1983). Stochastic blockmodels: First steps. Social networks, 5(2):109–137. Hunter, D. R., Goodreau, S. M., and Handcock, M. S. (2008). Goodness of fit for social network models. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103:248– 258. 40  Hunter, D. R., Goodreau, S. M., and Handcock, M. S. (2013). ergm.userterms: A template package for extending statnet. Journal of Statistical Software, 52(2):1–25. Hunter, D. R. and Handcock, M. S. (2006). Inference in curved exponential family models for networks. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 15(3):565– 583. Hunter, D. R., Handcock, M. S., Butts, C. T., Goodreau, S. M., and Morris, M. (2007). Ergm: A package to fit, simulate and diagnose exponential-family models for networks. Journal of Statistical Software, 24(3):1–29. Krivitsky, P. N., Handcock, M. S., Raftery, A. E., and Hoff, P. D. (2009). Representing degree distributions, clustering, and homophily in social networks with latent cluster random effects models. Social Networks, 31:204–213. Lauritzen, S. L. (1996). Graphical Models. Clarendon Press, Oxford, United Kingdom. Leisch, F., Weingessel, A., and Hornik, K. (1998). On the generation of correlated artificial binary data. Lozares, C., Verd, J., Cruz, I., and Barranco, O. (2014). Homophily and heterophily in personal networks. from mutual acquaintance to relationship intensity. Quality & Quantity, 48(5):2657–2670. Lupparelli, M., Marchetti, G. M., and Bergsma, W. P. (2009). Parameterization and fitting of discrete bi-directed graph models. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 36:559–576. Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems : networks of plausible inference. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Mateo, CA, USA.  41  Rinaldo, A., Petrović, S., and Fienberg, S. E. (2009). On the geometry of discrete exponential families with application to exponential random graph models. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 3:446–484. Rinaldo, A., Petrović, S., and Fienberg, S. E. (2013). Maximum lilkelihood estimation in the beta model. Annals of Statistics, 41(3):1085–1110. Robins, G., Snijders, T., Wang, P., Handcock, M., and Pattison, P. (2007). Recent developments in exponential random graph (p∗ ) models for social networks. Social Networks, 29:192–215. Roverato, A., Lupparelli, M., and La Rocca, L. (2013). Log-mean linear models for binary data. Biometrika, 100(2):485–494. Sadeghi, K. and Lauritzen, S. L. (2014).  Markov properties for mixed graphs.  Bernoulli, 20(2):676–696. Schweinberger,  M.  exponential-family  and  Handcock,  random  graph  M.  S.  models  (2012). with  local  Hierarchical dependence.  http://sites.stat.psu.edu/ mus47/publications/h.ergm.pdf. Snijders, T. A. B., Pattison, P. E., Robins, G. L., and Handcock, M. S. (2006). New specifications for exponential random graph models. Sociological Methodology, 36(1):99–153. Snyman, J. A. (2005). Practical mathematical optimization : an introduction to basic optimization theory and classical and new gradient-based algorithms. Applied optimization. Springer, New York. Speed, T. P. and Kiiveri, H. T. (1986). Gaussian markov distributions over finite graphs. The Annals of Statistics, 14(1):pp. 138–150. 42  West, D. B. (2001). Introduction to Graph Theory. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA. Wilson, J. D., Denny, M. J., Bhamidi, S., Cranmer, S., and Desmarais, B. (2015). Stochastic weighted graphs: Flexible model specification and simulation. submitted.  43

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 10. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
