Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 7
ArXiv ID: hf_709

Abstract:
1  Joint Source-Channel Secrecy Using Uncoded Schemes: Towards Secure Source Broadcast Lei Yu, Houqiang Li, Senior Member, IEEE, and Weiping Li, Fellow, IEEE  arXiv:1607.07040v3 [cs.IT] 22 Jul 2017  Abstract This paper investigates a joint source-channel secrecy problem for the Shannon cipher broadcast system. We suppose list secrecy is applied, i.e., a wiretapper is allowed to produce a list of reconstruction sequences and the secrecy is measured by the minimum distortion over the entire list. For discrete communication cases, we propose a permutation-based uncoded scheme, which cascades a random permutation with a symbol-by-symbol mapping. Using this scheme, we derive an inner bound for the admissible region of secret key rate, list rate, wiretapper distortion, and distortions of legitimate users. For the converse part, we easily obtain an outer bound for the admissible region from an existing result. Comparing the outer bound with the inner bound shows that the proposed scheme is optimal under certain conditions. Besides, we extend the proposed scheme to the scalar and vector Gaussian communication scenarios, and characterize the corresponding performance as well. For these two cases, we also propose another uncoded scheme, orthogonal-transform-based scheme, which achieves the same performance as the permutationbased scheme. Interestingly, by introducing the random permutation or the random orthogonal transform into the traditional uncoded scheme, the proposed uncoded schemes, on one hand, provide a certain level of secrecy, and on the other hand, do not lose any performance in terms of the distortions for legitimate users. Index Terms Uncoded scheme, secrecy, permutation, orthogonal transform, Shannon cipher system.  I. I NTRODUCTION Investigations on joint source-channel coding (JSCC) could trace back to Shannon’s pioneering work [1], where a geometric method was developed to design a communication system. For the JSCC of transmitting a Gaussian source over a Gaussian broadcast channel, Goblick observed [2] that when the source and channel bandwidths are matched (i.e., one channel use per source sample), directly sending a scaled version of the source samples on the channel (i.e., linear scheme) is in fact optimal; while for this case the separation scheme that cascades source coding with channel coding indeed suffers a performance loss [3]. For vector Gaussian communication cases, the optimal linear coding was studied in [4]. In general, the schemes that consist of symbol-by-symbol mappings (not limited to the linear one) are named uncoded schemes. The optimality of uncoded schemes for the general source-channel pair L. Yu is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore (e-mail: leiyu@nus.edu.sg). This work was done when he was at University of Science and Technology of China. H. Li and W. Li are with the Department of Electronic Engineering and Information Science, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China (e-mail: {lihq,wpli}@ustc.edu.cn).  2  has been investigated in [3], which showed that the Shannon limit can be achieved by uncoded schemes only when the source and channel satisfy a certain probabilistic matching condition. To further improve the performance for mismatched source-channel pairs, the hybrid coding (or hybrid digital-analog coding) has been studied in [5]-[10], which combines the traditional digital coding and symbol-by-symbol mapping together. As for the converse part of JSCC problem, Reznic et al. [11] and Tian et al. [12] derived some nontrivial converse results for Gaussian source broadcast problem. Besides, Yu et al. [9], [10] generalized the achievability and converse results for the Gaussian communication to the general source-channel case. On information-theoretic security, the Shannon cipher system (the noisy broadcast version depicted in Fig. 1) was first investigated in Shannon’s pioneering work [13], where a sender A communicates with a legitimate receiver B secretly by exploiting a shared secret key. For lossy source communication, wiretapper might only want to decrypt a lossy version of the source. Schieler et al. [14] studied a distortion-based secrecy measure in the Shannon cipher system around the assumption that the wiretapper has ability to conduct list decoding with fixed list size, and the secrecy is measured by the minimum distortion over the entire list. Yu et al. [15] showed that the systems with this secrecy measure are equivalent to those with secrecy measured by a new quantity lossy-equivocation, which could be considered as a lossy extension of the traditional equivocation. Hence the list secrecy is closely related to the traditional equivocation as well. Furthermore, Yu et al. used this secrecy measure to study the problem of source-channel secrecy for the Shannon cipher system, and showed that for the source-channel pair satisfying certain conditions, an uncoded scheme could outperform the separate one. JSCC improves the robustness of communication or the performance of broadcast, while secrecy coding improves the security of communication by exploiting the secret key and/or the wiretap channel. Therefore, intuitively the robustness and the security could be obtained simultaneously if we combine JSCC and secrecy coding together. This joint source-channel secrecy (JSCS) problem has been considered in several works already. Yamamoto in [16] studied the secure lossy transmission over the noisy wiretap channel with secrecy measured by the wiretapper’s best reconstruction distortion. However, it is shown in [14] this secrecy measure is cheap and fragile, since only one bit of secret key suffices to achieve the optimality of secrecy, and meanwhile, only one bit of additional information for the wiretapper suffices to decrypt this optimal encryption scheme. A different formulation of the problem was considered in [17], where the authors assumed there is a fixed information leakage to the wiretapper and wish to minimize the distortion at the legitimate receiver, while at the same time providing a graceful distortion degradation when there is an SNR (Signal Noise Ratio) mismatch. They showed that, for a positive leakage, this can be achieved by a hybrid digital-analog coding. This scenario was extended to consider side information at the receiver in [18] or side information at the sender in [19]. Analog encryption (or analog scrambling) technologies, e.g., sign-change based scheme [20], permutation based scheme [20] and bandwidth-keeping scheme [21], can be seen as uncoded JSCS schemes as well, although they are not designed for a specified source-channel pair. Sign-change based scheme improves secrecy by changing the sign of each sample according to the secret key. But owing to at most one bit secret key used per sample, this scheme could not provide higher secrecy even with a higher key rate available. The permutation based scheme improves secrecy by shuffling the positions of samples. Unlike the sign-change based scheme, it supports any arbitrarily high  3  key rate. Furthermore, Kang and Liu [23] recently applied the permutation operation in a digital encryption scheme, and showed that the permutation is another powerful encryption technique (besides the one-time pad) to achieve the optimality of secrecy. A. Contributions In this paper, we consider the joint source-channel secrecy problem of secure source broadcast in the bandwidthmatched Shannon cipher system (see Fig. 1). The list secrecy [14] is used to measure secrecy, that is, the wiretapper is allowed to conduct list decoding with fixed list size, and the secrecy is measured by the minimum distortion over the entire list. We study an achievable region of secret key rate, list rate, wiretapper distortion, and distortions of all legitimate users and show optimality under certain conditions. Our contributions are as follows: 1) For the discrete source case, we propose a permutation-based uncoded scheme, which cascades a random permutation with a symbol-by-symbol mapping. Our scheme differs from the permutation based scheme proposed in [23] in two main aspects: 1) our scheme, coupling a permutation operation with a traditional uncoded scheme, is designed for the source-channel secrecy problem, however, the scheme in [23] couples a permutation operation with a digital scheme, and is designed for the source-secrecy coding problem; 2) in addition to the finite alphabet case, we also extend the scheme to source-channel pairs with countably infinite alphabets and Gaussian source-channel pairs, which require us to use some more powerful techniques, including unified typicality, d´tilted information, and geometric analysis. By analyzing the proposed scheme, we provide an inner bound for the admissible region. For the converse part, we give an outer bound by using our recent result [15]. Comparing the outer bound with the inner bound shows that the proposed scheme is optimal under certain conditions. 2) We extend the proposed scheme to scalar and vector bandwidth-matched Gaussian communication scenarios. For these two cases, we also propose another uncoded scheme, orthogonal-transform-based scheme, which achieves the same inner bounds as the one achieved by the permutation-based scheme. Interestingly, by introducing the random permutation or the random orthogonal transform into the traditional uncoded scheme, the proposed uncoded schemes, no matter for the discrete source case or the Gaussian source-channel case, on one hand, provide a certain level of secrecy, and on the other hand, do not lose any performance in terms of the distortions for legitimate users. Schieler and Cuff [14] studied the list secrecy problem for the noiseless point-to-point1 version of Shannon cipher system, and showed a digital scheme, in which the secret key is used to choose a source codebook to code the source sequence, is optimal. For this problem, a separate coding, cascading source coding and one-time pad, has been proven optimal as well [15]. Yu et al. [15] extended this problem to the noisy channel case, and showed that the separate strategy (cascading source coding, one-time pad, and channel coding) is suboptimal in general and a single-letter uncoded scheme could outperform the separate scheme. In this paper we extend 1 Here  system.  the word noiseless means the wiretap channel is noiseless, and the word point-to-point means there is only one legitimate user in the  4  Key  K   2nRK  Y1n  Sn  A  Xn  B1  Sˆ1n  n PY1Y2 Z | X Y2  Zn  B2  Sˆ2n  Eve  Fig. 1. The Shannon cipher broadcast system.  the problem to noisy broadcast scenarios, and propose two kind of uncoded schemes that adopt two different encryption strategies—random permutation and random orthogonal-transform (instead of the traditional one-time pad encryption). We show the proposed uncoded schemes could achieve the optimality under certain cases.  The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II formulates the joint source-channel secrecy problem. Section III proposes a permutation-based uncoded scheme for the discrete communication, and analyzed the corresponding performance. Sections IV and V extend the proposed scheme to the scalar and vector Gaussian communications respectively, and another scheme, orthogonal-transform based scheme, is also proposed in these two sections. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper. II. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION A. Problem setup Consider a bandwidth-matched2 Shannon cipher broadcast system with two legitimate users3 shown in Fig. 1, where a sender A and two legitimate receivers B1 and B2 share a secret key K that is uniformly distributed over “ nR ‰4 2 K and independent of a source S n . The sender A observes the discrete memoryless (DM) source sequence S n with each element i.i.d. (independent and identically distributed) according to PS , and then transmits it to the legitimate users B1 and B2 over a DM wiretap broadcast channel PY1 Y2 Z|X confidentially by utilizing the secret key and the wiretap channel. Finally, the legitimate users B1 and B2 produce source reconstructions Sp1n and Sp2n , respectively. Definition 1. An pn, RK q block code consists of “ ‰ 1) Encoder: ϕ : S n ˆ 2nRK ÞÑ X n ; 2 Although  here we consider a bandwidth-matched communication system, our results in this section are easy to be extended to any bandwidth-  mismatched system since any system with source-channel bandwidth ratio  ns nc  can be converted into a bandwidth-matched system, by considering  ns source symbols and nc channel symbols as a source supersymbol and a channel supersymbol, respectively. 3 Although  we only consider the system with two legitimate users, our results derived in this paper can be easily extended to the cases with  more legitimate users. 4 In  this paper, the set t1, ..., mu is sometimes denoted by rms.  5  “ ‰ 2) Decoders: ψi : Yin ˆ 2nRK ÞÑ Spin , i “ 1, 2. The encoder and decoders can be stochastic. Another output Z n of the channel is accessed by a wiretapper Eve. Based on Z n , the wiretapper produces a list LpZ n q Ď Sqn and the induced distortion is set to the minimum one over the entire list, i.e., minsqn PLpZ n q dE pS n , sqn q, řn where dE psn , sqn q fi n1 t“1 dE pst , sqt q is a distortion measure for the wiretapper. For given distortion levels D0 , D1 , D2 , Nodes A and B1, B2 want to communicate the source within distortions D1 , D2 (for B1 and B2 respectively) by exploiting the secret key and the wiretap channel, while ensuring that the wiretapper’s strategy always suffers distortion above D0 with high probability. Definition 2. The tuple pRK , RL , D0 , D1 , D2 q is achievable if there exists a sequence of pn, RK q codes such that @ ą 0, 1) Distortion constraint: ” ı nÑ8 P dB pS n , Spin q ď Di `  ÝÝÝÑ 1, i “ 1, 2; where dB psn , spn q fi  řn  1 n  t“1  (1)  dB pst , spt q5 is a distortion measure for the legitimate users;  2) Secrecy constraint: minn  Ln pz q: 1 log |Ln |ďRL ´ lim supnÑ8 n  ” P  ı nÑ8 n n q d pS , s q ě D ´  ÝÝÝÑ 1. min E 0 n n  sq PLpZ q  (2)  Definition 3. The admissible region R fi tAchievable pRK , RL , D0 , D1 , D2 qu. We assume that the wiretapper knows the pn, RK q code and the distributions PS and PY1 Y2 Z|X . B. Henchman problem The problem above is equivalent to the henchman problem [14], in which wiretapper reconstructs a single sequence with the help of a rate-limited henchman who can access to the source S n and the wiretapper’s observation Z n . As depicted in Fig. 2, the wiretapper receives the best possible nRn bits from the henchman to assist in producing a reconstruction sequence Sqn . Definition 4. The Rn henchman code (Hcode) of a pn, RK q block code consists of “ ‰ 1) Encoder: ϕH : S n ˆ Z n ÞÑ 2nRn ; “ ‰ 2) Decoder: ψH : 2nRn ˆ Z n ÞÑ Sqn . We assume that the wiretapper and henchman are aware of the pn, RK q block code adopted by Nodes A and B, and they cooperate to design a henchman code based on the pn, RK q block code. Definition 5. The tuple pRK , RL , D0 , D1 , D2 q is achievable in the henchman problem if there exists a sequence of pn, RK q codes such that @ ą 0, 5 For  simplicity, we only consider the legitimate users have the same distortion measure. Note that our results derived in this paper still hold  for the case with different distortion measures.  6  Key  K   2nRK  Y1n  Sn  A  B1  n PY1Y2 Z | X Y2  Xn  B2   Zn  S  n  Sˆ1n  Eve  ,Zn  Henchman  S  Sˆ2n  n  M   2nRL   Fig. 2. Henchman problem.  1) Distortion constraint: (1); 2) Secrecy constraint: min  Rn Hcodes: lim supnÑ8 Rn ďRL ´  ” ı nÑ8 P dE pS n , Sqn q ě D0 ´  ÝÝÝÑ 1.  (3)  The equivalence between the list secrecy problem and the henchman problem, shown in the following proposition, has been proven by Schieler and Cuff [14, Prop. 1]. Proposition 1. [14] The tuple pRK , RL , D0 , D1 , D2 q is achievable in the list reconstruction problem if and only if it is achievable in the henchman problem. Furthermore, the list secrecy problem and henchman problem are also equivalent to a lossy-equivocation secrecy problem; see [15]. In addition to the DM system, we also consider the Shannon cipher system with a Gaussian source S „ N p0, λq transmitted over a power-constrained Gaussian wiretap broadcast channel Yi “ X ` Vi , i “ 1, 2,  (4)  Z “ X ` V0 ,  (5)  where Vi , i “ 0, 1, 2 are zero-mean additive Gaussian noises with variances Ni , i “ 0, 1, 2, independent of X. For this case, the constraint on channel input power “ ‰ nÑ8 P ρ pX n q ď P `  ÝÝÝÑ 1, @ ą 0, should be added to Definitions 2 and 5, where ρ pxn q “  1 n  řn i“1  (6)  x2i . For the system involving the channel power  constraint, Proposition 1 still holds. III. D ISCRETE C OMMUNICATION A. Permutation based Scheme (Finite Alphabets) In this section, we propose a secure uncoded scheme by coupling the permutation operation with the traditional uncoded JSCC scheme. The uncoded scheme for JSCC system (with two receivers) consists of three symbol-by-  7  symbol mappings: x psq , sp1 py1 q, sp2 py2 q. The induced distortions are Di “ EdB pS, spi pYi qq, i “ 1, 2. It is easy to show that we can benefit from replacing the encoder x psq with a stochastic one PX|S when secrecy is considered řn for the system. On the other hand, observe that dB psn , spni q “ n1 t“1 dB pst , spi,t q “ ETsn ,spn dB ps, spi q, where Tsn ,psni i  denotes the joint type (empirical distribution) of psn , spni q. That is, the induced distortions only depend on the joint type of source and reconstruction sequences. Therefore, if we want to improve the secrecy of a scheme and at the same time retain the induced distortions unchanged, we only need to require the encryption and decryption operations does not change the joint type of source and reconstruction sequences. That is, for the encryption s1n psn , kq and s1n “ Tsn ,psni . To that end, here we consider a random permutation as the the decryption spni pp s1n i , kq, we require Ts1n ,p i encryption operation, and the inverse permutation as the decryption operation. Obviously, the permutation and its inverse operation do not change the joint type of the source sequence and its reconstructions. “ ‰( Codebook (Public Key) Generation: Generate a permutation set C “ Ψk , k P 2nRK with each element uniformly at random and independently selected from the set of permutations of rns (which is denoted as Sn ). As a public key, the codebook C is revealed to the sender and all the receivers (including the wiretapper). Encoding: Upon observing a source sequence sn and a key k , the encoder first generates s1n “ Ψk psn q , and then generates xn according to  śn t“1  (7)  PX|S pxt |s1t q. Here for a permutation sequence Ψk “ σ n , Ψk psn q fi  psσ1 , sσ2 , ..., sσn q denotes the permutation operation on sn (more precisely, on the indices of sn ) respect to the permutation sequence Ψk .6 Decoding (for Legitimate Users): For the legitimate user Bi, i “ 1, 2, upon the received sequence yin and the key k, the decoder first reconstructs s1n as sp1i,t “ spi pyi,t q, t P rns,  (8)  by using the symbol-by-symbol mapping spi p¨q, and then produces spni “ Ψ´1 s1n i q, k pp  (9)  by using the inverse permutation operation Ψ´1 k p¨q of Ψk p¨q. The proposed scheme above cascades a random permutation operation with the traditional uncoded JSCC scheme. The uncoded JSCC part provide a graceful degradation of the source for legitimate users with different channel qualities. The random permutation operation part that shifts the sequence in the same type provides a certain level of secrecy. Next we will analyze the asymptotic performance of the proposed scheme as blocklength n goes to infinity. At first, we need introduce some basic properties of the random codebook C. Observe that for any permutation sequence Ψ, the mapping between Ψ p¨q and Ψ´1 p¨q is bijective, hence we have the following lemma.  6 In  this paper, the permutation sequence is termed as permutation sequence, and to distinguish from it, the permutation mapping from one  sequence to another sequence is termed as permutation operation. When there is no disambiguation, we call both of them permutation.  8  Lemma 1. Suppose Ψ is a permutation sequence uniformly at random selected from Sn , the set of permutations of rns. Then Ψ´1 is also uniformly distributed on Sn , and moreover for any permutation sequence ψ P Sn , both Ψ pψq and Ψ´1 pψq also have the uniform distribution on Sn . Utilizing Lemma 1, we can establish the following lemma. Lemma 2. Suppose Ψ is a permutation sequence uniformly at random selected from Sn . Then Ψ psn q transforms an arbitrary sequence sn P S n into a random sequence that is uniformly distributed on the set of sequences of type Tsn (the type class of Tsn ). Moreover, for finite S, the set of sequences of type Tsn has cardinality 2npHpTsn q´op1qq , and hence “ ‰ P Ψ psn q “ s1n “ 2´npHpTsn q´op1qq 1 tTs1n “ Tsn u , s1n P S n ,  (10)  where op1q denotes a term tending zero as n Ñ 8. Proof: ÿ  “ ‰ P Ψ psn q “ s1n “  P pΨ “ ψq  (11)  1 n!  (12)  ψPSn :ψpsn q“s1n  ÿ “ ψPSn :ψpsn q“s1n  ś  pnTsn psqq! 1 tTs1n “ Tsn u n! 1 tTsn “ Ts1n u , “ |ts1n P S n : Ts1n “ Tsn u| “  sPS  where (14) follows from |ts1n P S n : Ts1n “ Tsn u| “  n! ś  sPS pnTs  n psqq!  (13) (14)  . This implies Ψ psn q transforms an arbitrary  sequence sn P S n into a random sequence uniformly distributed on the set of sequences of type Tsn . From the type counting lemma [29, Lem. 2.3], we have that for finite S, pn ` 1q  ´|S|  ˇ (ˇ 2nHpTsn q ď ˇ s1n P S n : Ts1n “ Tsn ˇ ď 2nHpTsn q .  (15)  Hence |ts1n P S n : Ts1n “ Tsn u| “ 2npHpTsn q´op1qq . Combining it with (14) gives us “ ‰ P Ψ psn q “ s1n “ 2´npHpTsn q´op1qq 1 tTs1n “ Tsn u .  (16)  Lemma 2 shows a nice property of the random permutation operation: The resulting sequence will be uniformly distributed on the set of sequences of type Tsn for the input sequence sn , if the permutation is randomly and uniformly chosen from the set of permutations of rns. Utilizing this property, we can characterize the performance of the proposed scheme, as shown in the following theorem. The proof of this theorem is given in Appendix A.  9  Theorem 1 (Permutation based Scheme for Finite Alphabets). For DM communication with finite alphabets q X , Z, Yi , Spi , i “ 1, 2 are all finite), the permutation based scheme above achieves the region Rpiq Ď R, (S, S, where Rpiq  $ ’ ’ ’ pRK , RL , D0 , D1 , D2 q : ď & fi D ě minspi EdB pS, spi pYi qq, i “ 1, 2, ’ i PX|S ’ ’ % R ď min R ` R pD q, R pD q( L  K  S|Z  0  S  0  , / / / . ,  (17)  / / / -  with pS, Y1 , Y2 , Zq „  ÿ  PS PX|S PY1 Y2 Z|X ,  (18)  x  RS pDq “  min  q IpS; Sq  (19)  q IpS; S|Zq  (20)  q PS|S q :EdE pS,SqďD  denoting the rate-distortion function of S, and RS|Z pDq “  min q PS|SZ :EdE pS,SqďD q  denoting the conditional rate-distortion function of S given two-sided information Z. Note that for the Rpiq above, the components pD1 , D2 q and the components pRK , RL , D0 q depend on each other through PX|S . Observe that for a given PX|S , minspi EdB pS, spi pYi qq, i “ 1, 2 are the minimal distortions that the legitimate users can achieve even for the non-secrecy communication case. On the other hand, min RK ` RS|Z pD0 q, RS pD0 q is larger than RS|Z pD0 q, the optimal RL can be achieved by uncoded schemes when there is no key. Hence compared with traditional uncoded schemes, the proposed scheme, on one hand, improves improve the performance of secrecy to a certain extent, and on the other hand, does not lose any performance in terms of the distortions of legitimate users. The first constraint of Rpiq is consistent with the performance of traditional uncoded schemes. The second constraint of Rpiq , roughly speaking, follows from the following argument. On one hand, the henchman and the wiretapper can ignore the signal Z n altogether and use a RS pD0 q-rate point-to-point source code to describe S n within distortion D0 . On the other hand, the proposed scheme forces the wiretapper’s optimal strategy to be an indirect guessing strategy: First, the wiretapper decrypts the secret key by using RK rate; then upon the observation Z n , the wiretapper reconstructs the sequence S 1n within distortion D0 by using rate RS|Z pD0 q (denote the reconstruction as Sq1n ); finally, upon the secret key and Sq1n , the wiretapper reconstructs the source S n as n 1n q1n qn Sqn “ Ψ´1 and Sq1n , since the k pS q. Obviously the distortion between S and S is the same as that between S  average distortion only depends the joint type of the sequences. Hence the wiretapper needs rate RK ` RS|Z pD0 q to achieve the distortion D0 . Now we consider a special case: sending a binary source over a binary wiretap broadcast channel. For the binary ` ˘ communication, the source is a Bernoulli source S „ Bern 21 with the Hamming distortion measure dB ps, spq “ dE ps, spq fi 0, if s “ sp; 1, otherwise. The binary wiretap broadcast channel is Yi “ X ‘ Vi , i “ 1, 2, Z “ X ‘ V0 with Vi „ Bern ppi q , V0 „ Bern pp0 q , 0 ď p0 , p1 , p2 ď 12 . Set X “ S ‘ E with E „ Bernpp1 q. Then from Theorem 1, we get the following corollary.  (  10  Corollary 1 (Binary Communication). For the binary communication above, we have Rpiq Ď R, where $ , ’ / / ’ pR , R , D , D , D q : K L 0 1 2 ’ / . ď & piq 1 R fi , Di ě p ‹ pi , i “ 1, 2, ’ ! ) / / ’ 0ďp1 ď 21 ’ % RL ď min RK ` rH2 pp1 ‹ p0 q ´ H2 pD0 qs` , r1 ´ H2 pD0 qs` / `  with rxs fi max t0, xu, ‹ denoting the binary convolution, i.e., x ‹ y “ p1 ´ xqy ` xp1 ´ yq,  (21)  and H2 denoting the binary entropy function, i.e., H2 ppq “ ´p log p ´ p1 ´ pq logp1 ´ pq.  (22)  B. Permutation based Scheme (More General Alphabets) Theorem 1 can be extended to more general alphabets cases, as shown in the following theorem. The proof of this theorem is given in Appendix C. Theorem 2 (Permutation based Scheme for More General Alphabets). Assume S is countable, Sq is finite, and X , Z, Yi , Spi , i “ 1, 2 are general7 . Assume H pSq is finite, and PS satisfies ˆ ˙ ˆ ˙ n 1 “o , NPS n log n ˆ ˙ ˆ ˙ 1 1 “o , ΦPS n log n ˆ ˙ ˆ ˙ δ n rP “o , @0 ă δ ď 1, N S log n log2 n  (23) (24) (25)  where NPS pαq fi |ts : PS psq ě αu| denotes the number of probability values that are not smaller than α, ř rP pβq fi minα:Φ pαqďβ NP pαq ΦPS pαq fi s:PS psqăα PS psq denotes the sum of probability values that are smaller than α, N S S PS denotes the minimum number N such that the sum of the probability values except N largest ones is not larger than β. Then Theorem 1 still holds. Remark 1. The conditions (23)-(25) is equivalent to as x Ó 0,8 ˆ ˙ 1 , NPS pxq “ o x log x1 ˆ ˙ 1 ΦPS pxq “ o , log x1 ¯ ´ rP pxq “ o x2 e xδ , @0 ă δ ď 1. N S  (26) (27) (28)  Remark 2. The conditions (23)-(25) require that the sequence PS psq , s P S should vanish as fast as possible. Obviously, (23)-(25) hold for any finite S. Besides, for any countably infinite S, it is easy to verify that any distribution PS such that PS psq “ o ps´α q , s “ 1, 2, ...9 for some α ą 1 satisfies (23)-(25) as well. However, if 7 An  alphabet is countable means that it is either finite or countably infinite. An alphabet is general means that it is either countable or  uncountable (e.g., continuous). 8 This  claim holds when we ignore n is an integer in (23)-(25).  9 Without  loss of generality, any countably infinite S can be converted into t1, 2, 3, ...u by some bijective mapping.  11  PS psq converges slower than or as slow as  1 s,  then  ř sě1  PS psq does not converge, and hence PS cannot be a  probability distribution. This implies Theorem 2 holds for almost all probability distributions. Note that for a countably infinite alphabet S, we need the conditions (23)-(25) to guarantee the existence of a high-probability set (unified typicality set), for each sequence of which, Lemma 2 still holds. This further makes Theorem 2 hold, just as done for the finite alphabets case. C. Outer Bound For the system with a single legitimate user (remove the legitimate user B2 from the system in Fig. 1), the following outer bound for the admissible region of pRK , RL , D0 , D1 q has been proven by us recently [15]. Lemma 3. [15] For the DM communication with only one legitimate user, $ ’ ’ pRK , RL , D0 , D1 q : C1 ě IpS; Sp1 q, ’ ’ ’ ’ ď & D1 ě EdB pS, Sp1 q, poq ! ´ ¯ R Ď R fi ’ RL ď min RK ` Γ IpS; Sp1 q, PY |X , PZ|X ` R p pD0 q, PSp |S ’ 1 S|S1 ’ 1 ’ ) ’ ’ % R pD q S  0  , / / / / / / . , / / / / / / -  where C1 denotes the channel capacity for the legitimate user, and ˘ ` Γ R, PY |X , PZ|X fi  min  max  QY Z|X :QY |X “PY |X , QX :IQ pX;Y qěR QZ|X “PZ|X  IQ pX; Y |Zq  (29)  with IQ p¨q denoting the mutual information under distribution QX QY Z|X , is a function specified by the wiretap channel. The first two constraints of Rpoq follow from the source-channel coding theorem [30], and the last constraint follows from an indirect decryption strategy for the wiretapper: Roughly speaking, the wiretapper first reconstructs Sp1n using rate ΓpIpS; Sp1 q, PY1 |X , PZ|X q, next decrypts the secret key using rate RK , then upon Y1n and secret key, produces the legitimate user’s reconstruction Sp1n , and finally upon Sp1n produces a final reconstruction Sqn using rate RS|Sp1 pD0 q. The details can be seen in [15]. By applying this lemma to the system with two legitimate users (the system considered in this paper), the following outer bound is immediate. Theorem 3 (Outer Bound). For the DM communication (with two legitimate users), $ ’ ’ ’ pRK , RL , D0 , D1 , D2 q : Ci ě IpS; Spi q, ď & R Ď Rpoq fi Di ě EdB pS, Spi q, i “ 1, 2, ’ ’ PSp Sp |S ’ 1 2 % R ď min tR , R , R pD qu L  1  2  S  0  , / / / . , / / / -  where Ci denotes the channel capacity for the legitimate user i, and ´ ¯ Ri “ RK ` Γ IpS; Spi q, PYi |X , PZ|X ` RS|Spi pD0 q, i “ 1, 2. When specialized to the binary communication, we have the following corollary.  (30)  12  Corollary 2 (Binary Communication). For binary communication, $ ’ ’ pRK , RL , D0 , D1 , D2 q : ’ & poq R Ď R fi Di ě pi , i “ 1, 2, ’ ! ) ’ ’ % RL ď min R1 , R2 , r1 ´ H2 pD0 qs`  , / / / . . / / / -  where `  `  Ri “ RK ` rH2 pp0 q ´ H2 ppi qs ` rH2 pDi q ´ H2 pD0 qs , i “ 1, 2.  (31)  Comparing Theorem 1 and Corollary 2, we can identify the optimality of the proposed scheme for binary communication. Theorem 4 (Optimality of the Proposed Scheme). For the binary communication (with 2 legitimate users), the proposed uncoded scheme is optimal if p0 ď pi ď Di ď D0 or p0 ě pi “ Di ě D0 holds for i “ 1 or 2. Remark 3. Theorem 4 implies under conditions that compared with one of legitimate users, the wiretapper has a better channel and wants to produce a worse reconstruction, or the legitimate user’s distortion is restricted to be the Shannon limit and meanwhile the wiretapper has a worse channel and wants to produce a better reconstruction, the proposed uncoded scheme is optimal. It is worth noting that these optimality conditions do not include the practical scenario in which the wiretapper has a worse channel than the legitimate users and a higher distortion requirement. But it does not mean our scheme is not optimal for the practical scenario. We believe that for the binary broadcast communication without secrecy requirement, the proposed uncoded scheme with p1 “ 0 and with no permutation operation is the unique scheme to achieve the Shannon limits for both the legitimate users. If so, when the secrecy requirement is involved, the proposed scheme is optimal as well, no matter what the wiretapper’s channel condition is and what his desired distortion level is. This is because RK rate of secret key could increase RL at most by RK , and our scheme satisfies this point. Of course, we need a rigorous proof about this claim, but unfortunately, now we have no idea how to prove it. We know that when there is no secrecy constraint, the traditional uncoded scheme could outperform the separate scheme for broadcast communication scenarios. It is not surprising that when secrecy constraint is involved, the proposed uncoded scheme still could outperform the separate scheme. However, surprisingly, the example given in [15] shows the proposed uncoded scheme may strictly outperform the separate coding even for the secure point-to-point communication (with only one legitimate user). IV. S CALAR G AUSSIAN C OMMUNICATION In this section, we consider a Gaussian source S „ N p0, λq transmitted over a bandwidth-matched10 and powerconstrained Gaussian wiretap broadcast channel (the average input power is constrained by P ). The distortion 2  measures are set to dB ps, spq “ dE ps, spq “ d ps, spq fi ps ´ spq . 10 Although  we can also convert a bandwidth-mismatched Gaussian system into a bandwidth-matched system, just as done in Remark 2, our  results in this section cannot be easily extended to the bandwidth-mismatched system since the linear coding used in our schemes is specified for the bandwidth-matched one.  13  For this communication system, we provide two uncoded schemes. The first one is just the scheme proposed in previous section. Next we will show that the permutation based scheme also works in the Gaussian communication case. The other one is an orthogonal-transform based scheme, which cascades a random orthogonal transform (instead of random permutation operation) with a symbol-by-symbol mapping. A. Permutation based Scheme It has been shown that linear coding is optimal for the bandwidth-matched Gaussian broadcast communication when there is no secrecy requirement [2]. Hence we set PX|S and spi pyi q, i “ 1, 2 to the linear functions x “ b 1 αs, spi “ βi yi , i “ 1, 2 in the proposed scheme for DM communications, where α “ Pλ with 0 ď P 1 ď P and ?  βi “  λP 1 P 1 `Ni .  Then we apply this permutation based scheme to the Gaussian communication. The performance of  this scheme is provided in the following theorem, the proof of which is given in Appendix E. Theorem 5 (Permutation based Scheme). For the Gaussian communication, the proposed permutation based scheme achieves the region Rpiq Ď R, where $ ’ ’ ’ pRK , RL , P, D0 , D1 , D2 q : ď & piq i R fi Di ě PλN 1 `N , i “ 1, 2, ’ !i ´ 0ďP 1 ďP ’ ’ % RL ď min RK ` 1 log` 2  , / / / . , λN0 D0 pP 1 `N0 q  ¯  , 12 log`  ´  λ D0  (32)  ¯) / / / -  with log` x fi max t0, log xu. Remark 4. The Rpiq here is just the one given in Theorem 1 with PX|S and spi pyi q, i “ 1, 2 set to x “ αs and spi “ βi yi , i “ 1, 2, respectively. This is because they are achieved by the same scheme. Remark 5. The first constraint of Rpiq is consistent with the performance of linear coding [2]. The second constraint of Rpiq follows from the similar argument to the DM case. Note that for Rpiq , P 1 is a variable. Moreover, the region of pD1 , D2 q and the region of pRK , RL , D0 q depend on each other through P 1 which satisfies 0 ď P 1 ď P . This finding is similar to the discrete communication case. Given pRK , D0 q, the minimum of achievable D1 (or D2 ) and the maximum of achievable RL are both decreasing in P 1 , which implies for the proposed scheme, transmitting the source using a larger power results in smaller distortions for legitimate users, but also leads to decrypting the source more easily for the wiretapper. The proposed scheme with P 1 “ P , on one hand, provides a certain level of secrecy, and on the other hand, it achieves the Shannon’s distortion limits for both legitimate users. The region in Theorem 5 with λ “ 1 and P 1 “ 1 is illustrated in Fig. 3. Given P 1 , pD1 , D2 q has no effect on the pRK , RL , D0 q tradeoff. B. Orthogonal-Transform based Scheme The proposed scheme above uses a random permutation operation (which shuffles the sequence within the same type class) to improve the level of secrecy. It works not only for the discrete communication but also for the continuous communication, such as the Gaussian communication. In this subsection we propose another secure uncoded scheme for the Gaussian communication case which is designed from a geometric point of view.  14  4 3.5 3  RL  2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0 0  1 0.2  0.5 0.4  0.6  0.8  1  0  N0  D0  Fig. 3. The region in Theorem 5 with λ “ 1 and P 1 “ 1.  To give an interpretation for the motivation of our proposed scheme, we consider a special case where the wiretapper has a noiseless channel. Apply linear coding to the Gaussian communication, then we know that given the Euclidean norm, the sequence of a Gaussian source uniformly distributed on some sphere, and so are the sequences of channel input, outputs, and source reconstructions. Assume we generate a set of bijective transforms (as a codebook), and randomly choose one of them (according to the key) to transform the source sequence before applying linear coding on it. To keep the power unchanged, these transforms are required to map a sphere into itself. On the other hand, by using the secret key the legitimate users could transform it back. Hence the induced distortions of legitimate users do not change as well. Furthermore, without knowing the secret key but with knowing the norm of the source sequence and the codebook, in the view of the wiretapper, the source sequence is uniformly distributed over the vectors that are possible to generate the channel output (wiretapper’s observation) through some key values. To make the wiretapper guess the source as difficultly as possible, these vectors should be “uniformly” (at equal distance) located on the sphere. This is because if so, the wiretapper has to cover either all these vectors or the whole sphere to meet the decryption requirement. It can be shown the orthogonal transform is one of such transforms. Hence it is adopted in our second scheme. “ ‰ Codebook (Public Key) Generation: Generate random n ˆ n matrices Qk , k P 2nRK independently whose elements are generated i.i.d. according to N p0, 1q. Then apply Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization process to the columns of each matrix, hence all the resulting matrices are orthogonal and they constitute a subset of orthogonal “ ‰( matrices C “ Ψk , k P 2nRK . As a public key, the codebook C is revealed to the sender and all the receivers (including the wiretapper). Encoding: Upon observing a source sequence sn and a key k, the encoder generates xn as follows. xn “ αΨk sn ,  (33)  15  b where α “  P1 λ  with 0 ď P 1 ď P .  Decoding (for Legitimate Users): For legitimate user Bi, i “ 1, 2, upon the received sequence yin and the key k, the decoder reconstructs the source as follows. spni “ βi ΨTk yin , ?  where βi “  λP 1 P 1 `Ni ,  (34)  and ΨTk denotes the transpose of the matrix Ψk .  Next we will analyze the asymptotic performance of this scheme. Similar to the case of permutation based scheme, we need first introduce some basic properties of the random codebook C. Lemma 4. [31] Suppose Q is a random n ˆ n matrix with each element independently distributed according to Gaussian distribution N p0, 1q. Let Q1 , Q2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , Qn be the columns of Q and let Ψ be the random matrix whose columns are obtained by applying the Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization procedure to Q1 , Q2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , Qn . Then both Ψ and ΨT have the uniform distribution (Haar measure under orthogonal transform) on the set of nˆn orthogonal matrices F pnq, and moreover for any orthogonal matrix A, both AΨ and ΨA also have the uniform distribution on F pnq. Utilizing Lemma 4, we can establish the following lemma. Lemma 5. Random orthogonal transform xn “ Ψsn with Ψ uniformly distributed on orthogonal matrices set F pnq, transforms an arbitrary vector sn P Rn into a random vector that is uniformly distributed on the pn ´ 1q-sphere with radius }sn }. Proof: From Lemma 4, without loss of generality we can assume Ψ is obtained in the manner described in Lemma 4. Let Ψ1 , Ψ2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , Ψn be the columns of Ψ. From Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization, we know that Ψ1 “  Q1 }Q1 } ,  and for any rotation matrix (or more generally, orthogonal matrix) A, AΨ1 “  AQ1 }Q1 }  “  AQ1 }AQ1 } .  On  the other hand, Q1 is a random vector with each element i.i.d. „ N p0, 1q, and it is easy to verify that for any rotation matrix A, AQ1 has the same distribution as Q1 , i.e., a normally distributed random vector is invariant to rotation. Therefore, AΨ1 has the same distribution as Ψ1 , i.e., Ψ1 is also invariant to rotation. This implies Ψ1 is T  uniformly distributed on the unit pn ´ 1q-sphere. In addition, observe Ψ p1, 0, ¨ ¨ ¨ , 0q “ Ψ1 . Hence the random matrix Ψ transforms vector p1, 0, ¨ ¨ ¨ , 0q  T  to a random vector uniformly distributed on the pn ´ 1q-sphere. For  arbitrary vector sn P Rn , we can easily find an orthogonal matrix B with the first column T  sn }sn } .  Hence sn can  T  be expressed as sn “ }sn } B p1, 0, ¨ ¨ ¨ , 0q . Then we have Ψsn “ }sn } ΨB p1, 0, ¨ ¨ ¨ , 0q . From Lemma 4, ΨB T  has the same distribution as Ψ. Hence ΨB p1, 0, ¨ ¨ ¨ , 0q is also uniformly distributed on the unit pn ´ 1q-sphere, which implies Ψsn is uniformly distributed on the pn ´ 1q-sphere with radius }sn }. Lemma 5 implies the resulting vector will be uniformly distributed on the sphere where the input vector is, if the transform matrix is randomly and uniformly chosen from the set of orthogonal matrices. This is a nice property of the random orthogonal transform, similar to the property of the random permutation operation. Utilizing the properties, we can establish the following theorem, the proof of which is given in Appendix F.  16  Theorem 6 (Orthogonal-Transform based Scheme). For the Gaussian communication, the inner bound Rpiq given in Theorem 5 can be achieved by the scheme above as well. The inner bound Rpiq can be understood from a geometric point of view. The random orthogonal transform in the proposed scheme guarantees that given Z n , S n has a uniform distribution on 2nRK small pn ´ 2q ´spheres with b 0 whose centers are uniformly distributed on the pn ´ 1q ´sphere with center O (the origin) and radius r2 “ PnλN 1 b `N0 nλP 1 radius r1 “ P 1 `N0 . However, owing to the uniform conditional distribution of the source given Z n and the lack ? r2 qn balls with radius nD0 to cover these pn ´ 2q ´spheres. of secret key, the wiretapper needs at least 2nRK p ?nD 0  On the other hand, under the unconditional case, the source has a uniform distribution on the pn ´ 1q ´sphere with ? r0 center O and radius r0 “ nλ. Hence if ignoring Z n , the wiretapper needs at least p ?nD qn balls with radius 0 ? nD0 to cover the sphere. This results in the inner bound Rpiq . It seems somewhat counterintuitive that the permutation based scheme achieves the same performance as the orthogonal-transform based scheme, as shown by Theorems 5 and 6; it is easy to observe that for low-dimension cases, e.g., 2-dimension case (see Fig. 4), permutations cannot always transform a source sequence into vectors “uniformly” (at equal distance) distributed over a sphere, so why does this property hold (with high probability) when the dimension goes to infinity? Actually, it indeed does. This is because as the dimension increases, such “bad”11 source sequences will occur with vanishing probability. This can be seen from that12 P prSsn P Uδn prSsqq Ñ 1 as n Ñ 8 (i.e., besides on the sphere, the source sequence should also with high probability appear the neighborhoods of the vectors in Uδn prSsq), and moreover, Uδn prSsq consists of a set of “good” source sequences. Hence the “good” source sequences will occur with high probability as the dimension increases, that is, permutations will transform an arbitrary source sequence from a high probability set into vectors “uniformly” distributed over a sphere. C. Comparison with Sign-Change Based Scheme In previous two subsections, we give an analysis of the asymptotic performance of permutation based scheme or orthogonal-transform based scheme. However, is it necessary to let the blocklength n go to infinity? What if n is set to be a finite value? In this subsection, we study the simplest finite blocklength case: n “ 1 (single-letter codes). For this case, the permutation based scheme is obviously inferior to the asymptotic case, since for 1 dimension case no permutation exists except for the source sequence itself. Hence in the following, we mainly consider the orthogonal-transform based scheme. For n “ 1, the orthogonal-transform based scheme reduces to a sign-change based scheme [20], [15]. Next we compare the proposed schemes with this sign-change based scheme [20], [15]. Assume RK “ 1, and the secret key is uniformly distributed on t0, 1u. Encoding: Upon observing a source sequence s and a key k , the encoder generates x as follows. x “ αΨk s, 11 Here  (35)  a source sequence is said to be “good” if its permutations are “uniformly” distributed over a sphere; otherwise it is “bad”. Obviously,  the permutations of a “good” source sequence are also “good”. ´ ¯ 12 Here rSs “ ∆ ¨ Round S and Uδn prSsq is the δ-unified typical set for PrSs ; see the proof in E. ∆  17  O  Fig. 4. Illustration of permutations of a source sequence for n “ 2 case.  b where α “  P1 λ  with 0 ď P 1 ď P , and Ψk “  $ ’ &´1, if k “ 0; ’ %1,  (36)  if k “ 1.  Decoding (for Legitimate Receivers): For legitimate receiver Bi, i “ 1, 2, upon the received sequence yi and the key k, the decoder reconstructs the source as follows. spi “ βi Ψk yi ,  (37)  ?  where βi “  λP 1 P 1 `Ni .  It is easy to verify that pSt , Kt , Xt , Y1,t , Y2,t , Zt , Sp1,t , Sp2,t q8 t“1 are i.i.d. and 1 rfV0 pz ´ αsq ` fV0 pz ` αsqs 2 ‰ 1“ fV01 ps ´ β0 zq ` fV01 ps ` β0 zq , “ fZ pzq ¨ 2  fS,Z ps, zq “ fS psq ¨  (38) (39)  ?  where β0 “ fV01  λP 1 P 1 `N0 ,  fV0 denotes the probability distribution function (pdf) of the wiretapper’s channel noise V0 , and ´ ¯ 0 denotes the pdf of V01 „ N 0, PλN . Given Z, S can be regarded as a Gaussian mixture with two components 1 `N 0  of equal weight and variance. For such single-letter scheme, in [15] we have shown the maximum achievable RL (or equivalently the minimum rate needed to code S within distortion D0 with two-sided information Z) equals the conditional rate-distortion function RS|Z pD0 q. The performance of the sign-change based scheme is given by the following theorem. Theorem 7 (Sign-Change based Scheme). [15] For the Gaussian communication with RK “ 1, the sign-change piq  based scheme above achieves the region Rsign Ď R, where $ ’ ’ pRK , RL , P, D0 , D1 , D2 q : ’ & ď piq i Rsign fi Di ě PλN 1 `N , i “ 1, 2, i ’ 0ďP 1 ďP ’ ’ % R ď R pD q L  S|Z  0  , / / / . , / / / -  18  with RS|Z pD0 q denoting the conditional rate-distortion function of S given two-sided information Z, defined in (20). Since it is hard (even if possible) to express RS|Z pD0 q in closed form, for ease of comparison, we will derive a closed-form upper bound for RS|Z pD0 q. The result is shown in the following lemma, and the proof is given in Appendix I. Lemma 6. If pS, Zq follows the distribution (38) or (39), then " ˆ ˙* 1 λ pUBq RS|Z pD0 q ď min RS|Z pD0 q, log` , 2 D0 where  (40)  $ 1 ’ 0 & pλ´D0 qpP1 `N0 q , ă D0 ď λ; if PλN 1 `N λP pUBq 0 RS|Z pD0 q fi ¯ ´ ’ λN0 λN0 %1 ` 1 log 2 D0 pP 1 `N0 q , if 0 ď D0 ď P 1 `N0 .  (41)  Since RS|Z pD0 q denotes the minimum rate needed to code S within distortion D0 when Z is available at both encoder and decoder, we can give an interpretation for the upper bound from the perspective of source coding. ´ ¯ ´ ¯ First, by ignoring the side information, we have RS|Z pD0 q ď 12 log` Dλ0 , where 21 log` Dλ0 is the minimum rate needed to code S without any side information. Second, if  λN0 P 1 `N0  ď D0 ď λ, then consider the following  timesharing coding strategy.13 If we code the secret key K (1 bit per symbol), then using a linear decoder (similar to those of legitimate users), we can reconstruct the source within distortion  λN0 P 1 `N0 .  On the other hand, if we do not  code anything, then it results in rate 0 and distortion λ. By using a timesharing strategy between these two schemes, pλ´D0 qpP 1 `N0 q 0 we need rate to reconstruct the source within distortion D0 . Finally, if 0 ď D0 ď PλN 1 `N , then we λP 1 0 λN0 P 1 `N0  by using rate 1 to code the secret key, and upon the reconstruction, ¯ ´ λN0 we further code the residual error within distortion D0 by using rate 12 log D0 pP 1 `N q . 0  reconstruct the source within distortion  Combining Theorem 7 and Lemma 6 gives us the following result. piq  Theorem 8 (Outer Bound of Rsign ). For the Gaussian communication with RK “ 1, the region achieved by the piq  poq  sign-change based scheme satisfies Rsign Ď Rsign , where $ ’ ’ pRK , RL , P, D0 , D1 , D2 q : & ď ’ poq i Rsign fi Di ě PλN 1 `N , i “ 1, 2, ’ !i ´ 1 ’ 0ďP ďP ’ % RL ď min RpUBq pD0 q, 1 log` S|Z  2  , / / / . . λ D0  (42)  ¯) / / / -  Remark 6. Observe that only 1 bit/symbol of key can be exploited by the sign-change based scheme even when RK ą 1. Hence for that case, its performance is still that given by Theorem 7 and outer bounded by 42. ´ ¯ pUBq λN0 From Lemma 6, it can be observed that when RK “ 1, RS|Z pD0 q “ 1 ` 21 log` D0 pP for 0 ď D0 ď 1 `N q 0 ´ ¯ pUBq poq ` λN0 λN0 1 0 for PλN ă D0 ď λ. Hence Rsign Ř Rpiq , where Rpiq 1 `N P 1 `N0 , and RS|Z pD0 q ă 1 “ 1 ` 2 log D0 pP 1 `N0 q 0 13 Note  that the argument here is only available for the inequality (40), and does not apply to the secrecy problem considered in this paper.  For the secrecy problem the wiretapper and henchman cannot benefit from adopting a timesharing strategy since the constraint (2) or (3) is to restrict the excess-distortion probability, instead of the average distortion.  19  1 Proposed JSCS Sign change (upper bound)  0.9 0.8 0.7  RL  0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0  0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1  D0  Fig. 5. Comparison of the achievable RL by the proposed (infinite blocklength) schemes and that by the sign-change based scheme. λ “ 1, N0 “ 0 (noiseless wiretap channel) and RK “ 1.  given in Theorem 5 denotes the achievable region by the permutation based scheme or orthogonal-transform based scheme. This implies for the same P 1 , the sign-change based scheme is strictly inferior to the proposed schemes under the condition  λN0 P 1 `N0  ă D0 ď λ. That is, the single-letter version of orthogonal-transform based scheme is  inferior to the corresponding infinite blocklength version. To see it clearer, the RL achieved by the proposed (infinite blocklength) schemes (given in Theorem 5) and the upper bound of RL achieved by the sign-change based scheme (given in Theorem 8) are illustrated in Fig. 5. D. Outer Bound For the Gaussian communication, the following outer bound has been proven for the system with only one legitimate user [15]. Lemma 7. [15] For the Gaussian communication with only one legitimate user, $ , ’ / ’ pRK , RL , P, D0 , D1 q : / ’ / & . poq λN1 R Ď R fi , D1 ě P `N1 , ’ ! ´ ¯) / ’ / ’ / % RL ď min R1 , 1 log` λ 2  (43)  D0  where R1 “ RK `  1 log` 2  ˆ  1 ` P{N1 1 ` P{N0  ˙ `  1 log` 2  ˆ  D1 D0  ˙ .  (44)  Using this result, we have the following outer bound for the system with 2 legitimate users (the system considered in this paper).  20  Theorem 9 (Outer Bound). For the Gaussian communication (with 2 legitimate users), , $ / ’ / ’ pRK , RL , P, D0 , D1 , D2 q : / ’ . & poq λNi R Ď R fi , Di ě P `Ni , i “ 1, 2, ’ ! ´ ¯) / / ’ / ’ % RL ď min R1 , R2 , 1 log` λ 2  (45)  D0  where Ri “ RK `  1 log` 2  ˆ  1 ` P{Ni 1 ` P{N0  ˙ `  1 log` 2  ˆ  Di D0  ˙ , i “ 1, 2.  (46)  Comparing Theorem 6 and Corollary 9, we can identify the optimality of the proposed schemes for the Gaussian communication. This result is similar to Theorem 4 for the binary communication. Theorem 10 (Optimality of the Proposed Schemes). For the Gaussian communication (with 2 legitimate users), the proposed scheme is optimal if N0 ď Ni , D0 ě Di or N0 ě Ni , D0 ď Di “  λNi P `Ni  holds for i “ 1 or 2.  A similar remark to Remark 3 applies to this theorem. V. V ECTOR G AUSSIAN C OMMUNICATION The proposed schemes are easily extended to vector Gaussian communication scenarios. Consider an m-vector Gaussian source S „ N p0, diag pλ1 , λ2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , λm qq14 transmitted over an m-vector Gaussian broadcast channel Yi “ X ` Vi , i “ 1, 2,  (47)  where Yi is the channel output vector observed by the i-th legitimate user, and Vi „ N p0, diagpNi,1 , Ni,2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , Ni,m qq is an additive Gaussian noise vector. A wiretapper Eve accesses to another channel output Z through a channel Z “ X ` V0 ,  (48)  where V0 „ N p0, diag pN0,1 , N0,2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , N0,m qq is an additive Gaussian noise vector as well. The distortion řm řm measures are set to dB ps, spq “ dE ps, spq “ j“1 psj ´p sj q2 , and the channel cost function is set to ρ pxq “ j“1 x2j . pi , S qi as super-symbols, then the proposed permutation based scheme can be Consider the vectors S, X, Yi , Z, S applied to the vector Gaussian case directly. The performance of this scheme can be proven by following similar steps to the proof for the scalar Gaussian case. Furthermore, we can apply the proposed orthogonal-transform based scheme to each subsource-subchannel pair, as shown in the following. ‰ “ Codebook (Public Key) Generation: Generate m¨2nRK random nˆn matrices Qj,k , j P rms , k P 2nRK independently whose elements are generated i.i.d. according to N p0, 1q. Then we apply Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization process on every matrix, hence all the resulting matrices are orthogonal, and constitute a subset of orthogonal “ ‰( matrices C “ Ψj,k , j P rms , k P 2nRK . As a public key, the codebook C is revealed to the sender and all the receivers (including the wiretapper). 14 In  this paper, we use bold font to denote vector or matrix, e.g., pS1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , Sm q and ps1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , sm q are denoted by S and s, respectively.  21  Encoding: Upon observing a source sequence sn “ psn1 , sn2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , snm q and a key k , the encoder generates xn “ pxn1 , xn2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , xnm q as follows. xnj “ αj Ψj,k snj , j P rms , b where αj “  Pj λj  with transmitting power P1 , P2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , Pm such that 0 ď  (49) řm j“1  Pj ď P .  Decoding (for Legitimate Users): For the legitimate user Bi, i “ 1, 2, upon the received sequence yin and the key k, the decoder reconstructs the source as follows. n spni,j “ βi,j ΨTj,k yi,j , j P rms ,  (50)  ? where βi,j “  λj Pj Pj `Ni .  The achievable regions by the proposed schemes (permutation based scheme and orthogonal-transform based scheme) are given in the following theorem, the proof of which is given in Appendix J. Theorem 11 (Performance of the Proposed Schemes). For the vector Gaussian communication, the permutation based scheme or the orthogonal-transform based scheme above achieves the same region Rpiq Ď R, where , $ / ’ / ’ pR , R , P, D , D , D q : K L 0 1 2 / ’ . & ď řm λj Ni,j piq , R fi Di ě j“1 Pj `Ni,j , i “ 1, 2, ’ / ’ ( / / ’ % RL ď min RK ` RS|Z pD0 q, RS pD0 q P1 , P2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , Pm ě 0, řm 0 ď j“1 Pj ď P with ˆ ˙ m ÿ 1 λj ` log RS pD0 q “ 2 µ j“1 ˆ ˙ m ÿ 1 λj N0,j log` RS|Z pD0 q “ 2 θ pPj ` N0,j q j“1  (51)  (52)  and with µ and θ such that D0  m ÿ  min tµ, λj u ,  (53)  " * λj N0,j “ min θ, . Pj ` N0,j j“1  (54)  “ j“1  D0  m ÿ  Remark 7. Actually, in Theorem 11, RS pD0 q denotes the rate-distortion function of the source S, and RS|Z pD0 q denotes the rate-distortion function of the source S with the side information Z available at both the encoder and b P decoder, where Zj “ λjj Sj ` V j , j P rms with V „ N p0, diag pN0,1 , N0,2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , N0,m qq independent of S. VI. C ONCLUDING R EMARKS In this paper, we studied the joint source-channel secrecy problem for secure source broadcast in the Shannon cipher system, in which the list secrecy is used to measure the secrecy of communication. We proposed two secure uncoded schemes: a permutation based scheme for discrete, scalar Gaussian, and vector Gaussian communications, and an orthogonal-transform based scheme for the latter two communications. In these two uncoded schemes, a  22  random permutation or a random orthogonal transform is cascaded with the traditional uncoded JSCC scheme. The analysis showed that the proposed schemes outperform the sign-change based scheme. Interestingly, by adding the random permutation operation or the random orthogonal transform into the traditional uncoded scheme, the proposed uncoded schemes, on one hand, provide a certain level of secrecy, and on the other hand, do not lose any performance in terms of the distortions for legitimate users. Although the proposed schemes adopt two different random transforms, permutation operation and orthogonal transform, they are consistent in two aspects: First, actually the permutation operation is one kind of orthogonal transform; second, for the Gaussian communication, the orthogonal transform can be also considered as a shift operation that shifts a sequence to another in the same “type”, if we treat the Euclidean norm of the source sequence as its “type”15 . Furthermore, it is worth noting that different from the common construction of codebook in information theory (including spherical codes such as the one used in [27]), the codebooks in the proposed schemes are constructed by generating a sequence of i.i.d. random permutations or random matrices, instead of a sequence of i.i.d. random samples. In other words, the codebooks used here specify a sequence of bijective operations or transforms and hence they apply to uncoded schemes; while the common codebooks in information theory only specify a sequence of samples and hence can only be used in quantization operation (or digital schemes). Furthermore, such random-permutation or random-matrix based codebook construction can be also found in [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], where they were used to design digital schemes for communication, secrecy communication, and antijamming communication problems. But different from those works, in our case they were used to design uncoded schemes, instead of digital schemes. It is worth noting that the proofs used in this paper follow basic outline of the proofs in [14]. But different from [14], besides the finite alphabet case, we also considered the countably infinite alphabet and continuous (Gaussian) alphabet cases. Hence some powerful techniques, including unified typicality, d´tilted information, geometric analysis, and discretization, are used in our proofs. Furthermore, the unified typicality used in our proofs is different from the existing one defined in [34]. The unified typical set defined by us has a good property that the sequences in it only have (nearly) sub-exponential number of types. This property coincides with the finite alphabet case, and is of crucial importance to our proofs. We believe our definition of unified typicality could be used to further extend the method of types to countably infinite alphabet cases (besides the extension in [34]). A PPENDIX A P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1 Denote  15 This  n Z 1n fi Ψ´1 K pZ q ,  (55)  n X 1n fi Ψ´1 K pX q ,  (56)  n Yi1n fi Ψ´1 K pYi q .  (57)  kind of type can be called “weak type”, since the relationship of it and the weak typicality is similar to that of the traditional type  (empirical distribution) and strong typicality.  23  Then from the fact that the permutation operation is bijective, we have that PCS n KS 1n X n Y n Z n X 1n Y 1n Z 1n Sp1n Spn i  i  i  i  “ PK PC PS n PS 1n |S n ΨK PX n |S 1n PYin Z n |X n PSp1n |Y n ΨK PSpn |Sp1n PX 1n |X n ΨK PYi1n |Yin ΨK PZ 1n |Z n ΨK  (58)  i  i  i  i  “ PK PC PS n PS 1n |S n ΨK PX 1n |S 1n ΨK PYi1n Z 1n |X 1n ΨK PSp1n |Y 1n ΨK PSpn |Y 1n ΨK PX n |X 1n ΨK PYin |Yi1n ΨK PZ n |Z 1n ΨK (59) i  i  i  i  “ PK PC PS n PX 1n |S n PYi1n Z 1n |X 1n PSpn |Y 1n PS 1n |S n ΨK PSp1n |Y 1n ΨK PX n |X 1n ΨK PYin |Yi1n ΨK PZ n |Z 1n ΨK , i  i  i  (60)  i  and similarly, PCS n KS 1n X n Y n Z n X 1n Y 1n Z 1n Sp1n Spn can be also expressed as i  i  i  i  PCS n KS 1n X n Y n Z n X 1n Y 1n Z 1n Sp1n Spn i  i  i  i  “ PK PC PS 1n PX n |S 1n PYin Z n |X n PSp1n |Y n PS n |S 1n ΨK PSpn |Sp1n PX 1n |X n ΨK PYi1n |Yin ΨK PZ 1n |Z n ΨK . i  i  i  (61)  i  Hence pΨK , Z n q Ñ Z 1n Ñ S n forms a Markov chain. Furthermore, since the permutation operation does not change the joint distribution of the sequences, we have PS n PX 1n |S n PYi1n Z 1n |X 1n PSpn |Y 1n “ PS 1n PX n |S 1n PYin Z n |X n PSp1n |Y n “ i i i i ś PS PX|S PYi Z|X PSpi |Yi , where PSpi |Yi pp s|yq fi 1 tp s “ spi pyqu denotes the conditional distribution induced by the decoder i, and PS PX|S PYi Z|X PSpi |Yi is the distribution given in (18). ´ ¯ Since S n , Spin is an i.i.d. sequence, by the law of large numbers, ” ı nÑ8 P dB pS n , Spin q ď EdB pS, Spi q `  ÝÝÝÑ 1,  (62)  for any  ą 0. Hence the distortion constraints for legitimate users are satisfied. Next we prove the secrecy constraint is also satisfied, i.e., if ( lim sup Rn ă min RK ` RS|Z pD0 q, RS pD0 q ,  (63)  nÑ8  ” “ ‰ı then lim ECZ n maxRn Hcodes P dE pS n , Sqn q ď D0 “ 0. To that end, we need the following lemma. nÑ8  Lemma 8. [15] For a sequence of random variables tXn u, and a sequence of events tAn u, limnÑ8 P pAn q “ 0, if and only if limnÑ8 P rP pAn |Xn q ą τn s “ 0 for some sequence tτn u with τn ą 0 and limnÑ8 τn “ 0. From Lemma 8, to prove the secrecy constraint we only need to show that if Rn satisfies (63), then ” ı “ ‰ lim PCZ n max P dE pS n , Sqn q ď D0 ą τn “ 0, nÑ8  Rn Hcodes  (64)  for some sequence tτn u with τn ą 0 and limnÑ8 τn “ 0. Next we prove this. Define event A fi  ` n 1n ˘ ` ˘( S ,Z P Tδn S, Z 1 ,  for δ ą 0. The δ-typical set is defined according to the notion of strong typicality, see [30]: ÿ Tδn pSq fi tsn P S n : |Tsn psq ´ PS psq| ď δu,  (65)  (66)  sPS  where Tsn denotes the type (or empirical distribution) of sn . For simplicity, Tδn pSq is also shortly denoted as Tδn . Since pS n , Z 1n q is an i.i.d. sequence, from the fact that the typical set has total probability close to one [30], we have the following lemma.  24  Lemma 9. [30] For any δ ą 0, P rAs Ñ 1, as n Ñ 8. “ ‰ Consider that for each n, the optimal Rn -rate henchman code that maximizes P dE pS n , Sqn q ď D0 |CZ n is ” “ ı ‰ adopted, then we only need to show lim PCZ n P dE pS n , Sqn q ď D0 |CZ n ą τn “ 0 for these codes. By utilizing nÑ8  Lemmas 8 and 9, we have ı ” “ ‰ PCZ n P dE pS n , Sqn q ď D0 |CZ n ą τn ı ” “ ‰ ďPCZ n P dE pS n , Sqn q ď D0 |CZ n ą τn , P rAc |CZ n s ď n ` P rP rAc |CZ n s ą n s ı ” “ ‰ ďPCZ n P dE pS n , Sqn q ď D0 , A|CZ n ` P rAc |CZ n s ą τn , P rAc |CZ n s ď n ` 1n ı ” “ ‰ ďPCZ n P dE pS n , Sqn q ď D0 , A|CZ n ą τn1 ` 1n ,  (67) (68) (69)  for some n and 1n that both vanish as n Ñ 8, where τn1 “ τn ´ n . By choosing proper τn , τn1 can be set to some sequence that converges to zero sub-exponentially fast (i.e., τn1 “ 2´opnq ). Since n vanishes as n Ñ 8, this guarantees that τn also vanishes as n Ñ 8. Owing to the rate constraint, given pC, Z n q, the reconstruction Sqn cannot take more than Rn values. Denote the set of possible values as cpC, Z n q, then ” “ ‰ P dE pS n , Sqn q ď D0 , A|CZ n “ P  min  sqn PcpC,Z n q  ı dE pS n , sqn q ď D0 , A|CZ n .  (70)  Now we apply a union bound to the right-hand side of (70) and write ı ” P n min n dE pS n , sqn q ď D0 , A|CZ n sq PcpC,Z q  ” ı P dE pS n , sqn q ď D0 , A|CZ n  (71)  ” ı n n n s q P d pS , q ď D , A|CZ max E 0 n n  (72)  ÿ ď sqn PcpC,Z n q  ď2nRn  sq PcpC,Z q  ” ı ď2nRn max P dE pS n , sqn q ď D0 , A|CZ n  (73)  sqn PSqn  nRn  max  “2  nRK 2ÿ  P rK “ k|CZ n s P rdE pS n , sqn q ď D0 , A|CZ n , K “ ks  sqn PSqn k“1  “2npRn ´RK q max  nRK 2ÿ  sqn PSqn k“1  P rdE pS n , sqn q ď D0 , A|Ψk , Z n s ,  (74)  (75)  where (75) follows from the Markov chain CKZ n Ñ ΨK Z n Ñ S n Z n A and P rK “ k|C “ c, Z n “ z n s “ 2´nRK (see (61)). Combine (69), (70), and (75), then we have ı ” “ ‰ PCZ n P dE pS n , Sqn q ď D0 |CZ n ą τn ” ďP  CZ n  max  nRK 2ÿ  sqn PSqn k“1  ı P rdE pS n , sqn q ď D0 , A|Ψk , Z n s ą τn1 2´npRn ´RK q ` 1n  nRK ˇ ˇ ” 2ÿ ı ˇ qn ˇ ď ˇS ˇ max PCZ n ξk,zn pq sn q ą τn1 2´npRn ´RK q ` 1n ,  sqn PSqn  k“1  (76)  (77)  25  where sn q fi P rdE pS n , sqn q ď D0 , A|Ψk , Z n s , ξk,zn pq  (78)  Therefore, if we can show that the probability in (77) decays doubly exponentially fast with n, then the proof will be complete. “ ‰ sn q , k P 2nRK are i.i.d. random variables, with mean Consider that given sqn and z n , ξk,zn pq EC ξk,zn pq sn q “ EC P rdE pS n , sqn q ď D0 , A|Ψk , z n s “ EΨk P rdE pS n , sqn q ď D0 , A|Ψk , z n s  (79) (80)  To complete the proof, we need introduce the following lemmas. The proof of Lemma 10 is given in Appendix B. Lemma 10. Assume S n is i.i.d. according to PS , then for any type t of sequences in S n and any sqn , PrdE pS n , sqn q ď D, S n P Tδn |TS n “ ts ď 2´npRS pDq´op1qq ,  (81)  where TS n denotes the type of S n , and op1q is a term that vanishes as δ Ñ 0 and n Ñ 8. Lemma 11. [14] Fix PS|Z and z n . If S n is distributed according to  śn i“1  PS|Z“zi , then for any sqn ,  PrdE pS n , sqn q ď D, pS n , z n q P Tδn |z n s ď 2´npRS|Z pDq´op1qq ,  (82)  where op1q is a term that vanishes as δ Ñ 0 and n Ñ 8. Lemma 12. [14] If X m is a sequence of i.i.d. random variables on the interval r0, as with ErXi s “ p, then m ”ÿ ı ´ e¨m¨p ¯k{a . (83) P Xi ą k ď k i“1 From (60), we have P rS n “ sn |Ψk , z n s “  ź  ` ˘ PS|Z si |zi1 .  (84)  Hence Lemma 11 implies “ ‰ n n 1n ξk,zn pq sn q “ P dE pS , sq q ď D0 , A|z ď 2´npRS|Z pD0 q´op1qq .  (85) (86)  On the other hand, n n n n n sn q ď EΨk PrdE pS , sq q ď D0 , S P Tδ |Ψk , z s EC ξk,zn pq ÿ “ PrS 1n “ s1n |z n sEΨk PrdE pS n , sqn q ď D0 , S n P Tδn |S 1n “ s1n , Ψk s  (87) (88)  s1n  ÿ “  PrS 1n “ s1n |z n sPrdE pS n , sqn q ď D0 , S n P Tδn |S 1n “ s1n s  (89)  PrS 1n “ s1n |z n sPrdE pS n , sqn q ď D0 , S n P Tδn |TS n “ Ts1n s  (90)  s1n  ÿ “ s1n  ď 2´npRS pD0 q´op1qq .  (91)  26  Using these bounds, we apply Lemma 12 to the probability in (77) by identifying m “ 2nRK ,  Then we have  (92)  a “ 2´npRS|Z pD0 q´op1qq ,  (93)  p ď 2´npRS pD0 q´op1qq ,  (94)  k “ τn1 2´npRn ´RK q .  (95)  nRK ” 2ÿ ı nβ sn q ą τn1 2´npRn ´RK q ď 2´nα2 , P ξk,zn pq  (96)  k“1  where α “ RS pD0 q ´ Rn ´ op1q  (97)  β “ RK ` RS|Z pD0 q ´ Rn ´ op1q. For small enough δ and large enough n, both α and β are positive and bounded away from zero, and (96) vanishes doubly exponentially fast. Therefore, the expression in (77) vanishes. This completes the proof of Theorem 1. A PPENDIX B P ROOF OF L EMMA 10 |t psq ´ PS psq| ą δ, then PrdE pS n , sqn q ď D, S n P Tδn |TS n “ ts “ 0. Hence we only need to consider ř the t’s such that sPS |t psq ´ PS psq| ď δ. If  ř  sPS  Consider ˇ (ˇ PrTS n “ ts “ ˇ s1n P S n : Ts1n “ t ˇ 2´npDpt||PS q`Hptqq “ 2´npDpt||PS q`op1qq  (98) (99)  for any type t of sequences in S n , where D pt||PS q denotes the relative entropy between t and PS , and (99) follows from (15). Moreover, from [32, Thm. 25] we have ¸ ˜ ř ˙ ˆ 2 p s |t psq ´ PS psq|q δ2 ď log 1 ` Ñ 0, D pt||PS q ď log 1 ` 2PS,min 2PS,min  (100)  as δ Ñ 0, where PS,min “ minsPS PS psq. Therefore, PrTS n “ ts ě 2´nop1q .  (101)  Utilizing (101), we get PrdE pS n , sqn q ď D, S n P Tδn |TS n “ ts PrdE pS n , sqn q ď D, S n P Tδn , TS n “ ts PrTS n “ ts n n PrdE pS , sq q ď D, S n P Tδn s ď . 2´nop1q “  To complete the proof, we need the following lemma.  (102) (103)  27  Lemma 13. [14] Assume S n is i.i.d. according to PS , then for any sqn , PrdE pS n , sqn q ď D, S n P Tδn s ď 2´npRS pDq´op1qq .  (104)  By the lemma above, (103) implies that PrdE pS n , sqn q ď D, S n P Tδn |TS n “ ts ď 2´npRS pDq´op1qq .  (105)  A PPENDIX C P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2 Define X 1n , Yi1n , Z 1n same as (55)-(57), then the distribution PCS n KS 1n X n Y n Z n X 1n Y 1n Z 1n Sp1n Spn also satisfies (60) i  i  i  i  and (61). Similar to the finite alphabet case, it is easy to show the distortion constraints for legitimate users are satisfied. Next following similar steps to the proof for the finite alphabet case, we prove the secrecy constraint is also satisfied for this case. Before proving that, we need introduce d´tilted information and conditional d´tilted information first. Let PSq‹ |S be a distribution that achieves the rate-distortion function RS pDq (which is not necessarily unique). Then d´tilted information is defined as follows. Definition 6 (d´tilted information [15]). For D ą Dmin fi inf tD : RS pDq ă 8u, the d´tilted information in s is defined as 1 S ps, Dq “ log “ ` ˘‰ , ‹ E exp λ D ´ λ‹ dps, Sq‹ q  (106)  where the expectation is with respect to PSq‹ , i.e. the unconditional distribution of the reproduction random variable that achieves RS pDq, and λ‹ “ ´RS1 pDq.  (107)  For pS, Zq that follow the distribution in (18), we define RS|Z“z pβq “  “min  ‰  q “ zq. IpS; S|Z  (108)  q PS|S,Z“z :E dE pS,Sq|Z“z ďβ q  Let PSq‹ |S,Z“z be a distribution that achieves RS|Z“z pβq. Define b‹ pzq fi ES,Sq‹ |Z“z dpS, Sq‹ q with the expectation taken with respect to PS|Z“z PSq‹ |S,Z“z . ( Definition 7 (Conditional d´tilted information [15]). For b‹ pzq ą βmin pzq fi inf β : RS|Z“z pβq ă 8 , the conditional d´tilted information in s under condition Z “ z is defined as S|Z“z ps, b‹ pzqq “ log  1 ” ´ ¯ı , ‹ ‹ ESq‹ |Z“z exp λ pzq b pzq ´ λ‹ pzq dps, Sq‹ q  (109)  where the expectation is with respect to PSq‹ |Z“z , i.e. the margin distribution of PS|Z“z PSq‹ |S,Z“z , and 1 λ‹ pzq “ ´RS|Z“z pb‹ pzqq.  Next we prove the secrecy constraint. To that end, we need re-define  (110)  28  n ! 1 ÿ A fi S n P Uδn , S pS i , D0 q ě RS pD0 q ´ δ, n i“1 n n ) 1 ÿ ‹ 1 1 ÿ S|Z“Zi1 pS i , b‹ pZi1 qq ě RS|Z pD0 q ´ δ, b pZi q ě D0 ´ δ n i“1 n i“1  (111)  for δ ą 0. The δ-unified typical set is defined as16 Uδn pSq fi T nδ pSq X Wδn pSq,  (112)  log n  where T nδ pSq defined in (66), denotes the log n  δ log n -strongly  ! Wδn pSq fi sn P S n  typical set, and  ˇ 1 ˇ ) ˇ ˇ : ˇ´ log PS n psn q ´ H pSqˇ ď δ , n  (113)  denotes the δ-weakly typical set [28]. For simplicity, Uδn pSq is also shortly denoted as Uδn . Since pS n , Z 1n q is an i.i.d. sequence, we have the following lemma. ´ rP Lemma 14. [15, Lem. 18] [34, Lem. 2] Assume PS satisfies N S  δ1 log n  ¯  ´ “o  n log2 n  ¯  , @0 ă δ 1 ď 1. Then for  any δ ą 0, P rAs Ñ 1 as n Ñ 8. Then the derivation up to (77) still holds, i.e., ” “ ı ‰ PCZ n P dE pS n , Sqn q ď D0 |CZ n ą τn nRK ˇ ˇ ” 2ÿ ı ˇ qn ˇ ξk,zn pq sn q ą τn1 2´npRn ´RK q ` 1n , ď ˇS ˇ max PCZ n  sqn PSqn  (114)  k“1  Therefore, if we can show that the probability in (114) decays doubly exponentially fast with n, then the proof will be complete. To that end, we need introduce the following lemmas. The proof of Lemma 15 is given in Appendix D. Lemma 15. Assume PS satisfies NPS  `1˘ n  ´ “o  n log n  ¯ , ΦP S  `1˘ n  ´ “o  1 log n  ¯ , and S n is i.i.d. according to PS ,  then for any type t of sequences in S n and any sqn P Sqn , n ‰ “ 1 ÿ P dE pS n , sqn q ď D, S n P Uδn , S pSi , Dq ě RS pDq ´ δ|TS n “ t ď 2´npRS pDq´op1qq , n i“1  (115)  where op1q is a term that vanishes as δ Ñ 0 and n Ñ 8. Lemma 16. [15] Fix PSZ and z n P Z n . Assume given Z n “ z n , S n is distributed according to  śn i“1  PS|Z“zi ,  then for any sqn P Sqn , n n ” ı 1 ÿ 1 ÿ ‹ P dE pS n , sqn q ď D, S|Z“zi pS i , b‹ pzi qq ě RS|Z pDq ´ δ, b pzi q ě D ´ δ|Z n “ z n n i“1 n i“1 ď 2´npRS|Z pDq´op1qq ,  (116)  16 Here  the δ-unified typical set is different from the one defined in [34]. Our definition has the benefit that it makes the following property ˇ (ˇ hold: For each sequence sn P Uδn pSq, ˇ s1n P Uδn pSq : Ts1n “ Tsn ˇ “ 2npHpSq´op1qq , or equivalently, PrTS n “ Tsn s “ 2´nop1q , where op1q is a term that vanishes as δ Ñ 0 and n Ñ 8. This property coincides with (101) for the finite alphabet case, and it is of crucial importance to our proof here (see (126)).  29  where op1q is a term that vanishes as δ Ñ 0 and n Ñ 8. Apply Lemmas 12, 15 and 16, then we have that the probability in (114) decays doubly exponentially fast with n. This completes the proof of Theorem 2. A PPENDIX D P ROOF OF L EMMA 15 δ log n  does not hold, then PrdE pS n , sqn q ď D, S n P Uδn |TS n “ ts “ 0. Hence we only ř need to consider the t’s satisfying sPS |t psq ´ PS psq| ď logδ n . If  ř  sPS  |t psq ´ PS psq| ď  The Lemma 2.6 of [29] says that for any type t of sequences in S n , PrTS n “ ts ě pn ` 1q  ´|suppptq|  2´nDpt||PS q ,  (117)  where supp ptq fi ts P S : t psq ą 0u denotes the suppose of t. n log n  pδ ` n q holds, where n is a term that vanishes as n Ñ 8. ( ( To that end, we divide S into two parts: s : PS psq ě n1 and s : PS psq ă n1 . Then ˇ" *ˇ ˇ" *ˇ ˇ 1 ˇˇ ˇˇ 1 ˇˇ ˇ |supp ptq| “ ˇ s : t psq ą 0, PS psq ě ` s : t psq ą 0, PS psq ă (118) n ˇ ˇ n ˇ ˇ" *ˇ ˇ" *ˇ ˇ 1 ˇˇ ˇˇ 1 ˇˇ ď ˇˇ s : PS psq ě ` s : t psq ą 0, PS psq ă (119) n ˇ ˇ n ˇ ˆ ˙ ÿ 1 “ NPS ` 1 tt psq ą 0u (120) n 1 s:PS psqă n ˆ ˙ ÿ 1 `n t psq , (121) ď NPS n 1 Now we prove that for any δ ą 0, |supp ptq| ď  s:PS psqă n  where (120) follows from the definition of NPS  `1˘ n  , and (121) follows from the fact t psq ě  1 n  for any s such that  t psq ą 0. ř ř ř ř Since sPS |t psq ´ PS psq| ě s:PS psqă 1 |t psq ´ PS psq| ě s:PS psqă 1 pt psq ´ PS psqq and sPS |t psq ´ PS psq| ď n  δ log n ,  n  we have ÿ 1 s:PS psqă n  t psq ď  ÿ 1 s:PS psqă n  PS psq `  δ log n  ˆ ˙ 1 δ “ ΦPS ` . n log n  (122)  (123)  Therefore,  ˆ ˙ ˆ ˙ 1 1 δn |supp ptq| ď NPS ` nΦPS ` . (124) n n log n ´ ¯ ´ ¯ ` ˘ ` ˘ Since NPS n1 “ o logn n , ΦPS n1 “ o log1 n , we have |supp ptq| ď logn n pδ ` n q. Therefore, (117) implies PrTS n “ ts ě 2´npDpt||PS q`δ`n q .  (125)  30  Furthermore, S n P Uδn implies D pt||PS q ď 2δ, which is obtained by following part of proof steps of [34, Thm. 3] (but with and δ replaced with δ and  n log n ,  respectively). Hence it holds that PrTS n “ ts ě 2´nop1q ,  (126)  where op1q is a term that vanishes as δ Ñ 0 and n Ñ 8. Utilizing (126), we can get n 1 ÿ S pSi , Dq ě RS pDq ´ δ|TS n “ ts n i“1 řn PrdE pS n , sqn q ď D, S n P Uδn , n1 i“1 S pSi , Dq ě RS pDq ´ δ, TS n “ ts “ PrTS n “ ts řn 1 n n PrdE pS , sq q ď D, n i“1 S pSi , Dq ě RS pDq ´ δs . ď 2´nop1q  PrdE pS n , sqn q ď D, S n P Uδn ,  (127) (128)  To complete the proof, we need the following lemma. Lemma 17. [15] Assume S and Sq are general (not necessarily countable) alphabets, and S n is i.i.d. drawn from S n according to PS . Then for any D ą Dmin (Dmin is defined in Definition 6) and any sqn P Sqn , PrdE pS n , sqn q ď D,  n 1 ÿ S pSi , Dq ě RS pDq ´ δs ď 2´npRS pDq´op1qq . n i“1  (129)  Hence by the lemma above, (128) implies that PrdE pS n , sqn q ď D, S n P Uδn ,  n 1 ÿ S pSi , Dq ě RS pDq ´ δ|TS n “ ts ď 2´npRS pDq´op1qq . n i“1  (130)  A PPENDIX E P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5 Similar to the DM cases, it is easy to show the distortion constraints for legitimate users are satisfied. Next by following similar steps to the proof for the DM cases, we prove the secrecy constraint is also satisfied. q Let To that end, we first need to discretize the source S and the reconstruction S. q P N fi t¨ ¨ ¨ , ´2∆, ´∆, 0, ∆, 2∆, ¨ ¨ ¨ u , rSs, rSs  (131)  q obtained by mapping S and Sq to the closest quantization point, i.e., rSs “ be quantized versions of S and S, ´ ¯ `S˘ q “ ∆ ¨ Round Sq . Then we have for any sn P Rn , ∆ ¨ Round ∆ , rSs ∆ 0ď  n 1 ÿ ∆2 2 psi ´ rsi sq ď . n i“1 4  (132)  Furthermore, it holds that a n n ndpsn , sqn q “ ||sn ´ rq ss ` rq ss ´ sqn || n  (133)  n  ě ||sn ´ rq ss || ´ || rq ss ´ sqn || n  n  n  (134) n  ss || ´ ||sn ´ rss || ´ || rq ss ´ sqn || ě || rss ´ rq b n n ě ndprss , rq ss q ´ ∆  (135) (136)  31  where (134) follows from triangle inequality. Utilizing this inequality, we have  „ ¯2 ´a n n n n n n D0 ` ∆ , A|Ψk , Z P rdpS , sq q ď D0 , A|Ψk , Z s ď P d prSs , rq ss q ď ‰ “ n ss q ď D01 , A|Ψk , Z n , “ P d prSsn , rq where D01 fi  `?  (137) (138)  ˘2 D0 ` ∆ .  Reorder the probabilities PrSs prssq, rss P N in decreasing order, and denote the result as Pi , i “ 1, 2, .... Then P1 “ PrSs p0q, P2j “ P2j`1 “ PrSs pj∆q, j ě 1. Obviously, ∆fS ppj ` 1q∆q ď P2j “ P2j`1 ď ∆fS pj∆q ,  (139)  2  and hence for Gaussian sources, P2j “ P2j`1 “ ope´j q. From Remark 2, we have that PrSs satisfies the conditions (23)-(25). Define event n ! 1 ÿ A fi S n P Wδn , rSsn P Uδn prSsq, S prSsi , D0 q ě RrSs pD0 q ´ δ, n i“1 n n ) 1 ÿ 1 ÿ ‹ 1 rSs|Z“Zi1 prSsi , b‹ pZi1 qq ě RrSs|Z pD0 q ´ δ, b pZi q ě D0 ´ δ n i“1 n i“1  (140)  for δ ą 0. Observe that the distribution PCS n KS 1n X n Y n Z n X 1n Y 1n Z 1n Sp1n Spn also satisfies (60) and (61), which implies i  i  i  i  pS n , Z 1n q is an i.i.d. sequence. Hence Lemma 14 still holds for this case. Following similar steps to the proof of Theorem 1, we can get ” “ ı ‰ PCZ n P dE pS n , Sqn q ď D0 |CZ n ą τn ” ď PCZ n  max n n  ss PN rq  ” “ PCZ n  max n n  ss PB rq  nRK 2ÿ  (141)  ı “ ‰ n ss q ď D01 , A|Ψk , Z n ą τn1 2´npRn ´RK q ` 1n P dprSsn , rq  (142)  k“1 nRK 2ÿ  k“1  ď |B n | max PCZ n n n ss PB rq  ı “ ‰ n ss q ď D01 , A|Ψk , Z n ą τn1 2´npRn ´RK q ` 1n P dprSsn , rq  nRK ” 2ÿ  ı n ss q ą τn1 2´npRn ´RK q ` 1n , ξk,zn prq  (143)  k“1  where ! ? ) ssn P N n : }rq ssn } ď nΓ B n fi rq with  ?  Γ fi  (144)  a ? a λ p1 ` δq ` ∆ ` D01 , ‰ “ n n ss q fi P d prSsn , rq ss q ď D01 , A|Ψk , Z n , ξk,zn prq  (145)  a and (142) follows that S n only appears in the ball with radius nλ p1 ` δq which implies rSsn only appears in a ? n ss P B n instead of the whole set the ball with radius λ p1 ` δq ` ∆ , hence it is sufficient to only consider rq N n.  32  Furthermore, observe that Volume of n´ball with radius |B | ď ∆n ´? ¯n ? n{2 π nΓ ` n∆2 ˘ ` “ ∆n Γ n2 ` 1  ?  n  n  ď 22  n  “ 22  nΓ `  log  q  p  ∆2  ´ 12 log πn`op1q  n∆2  (146) (147)  ? ? log π`n logp nΓ` n∆2 q´n log ∆´ n 2 log ? ? 2 Γ` ∆2 2πe  ?  n 1 2e ´ 2  log πn`op1q  (148)  .  (149)  Therefore, if we can show that the probability in (143) decays doubly exponentially fast with n, then the proof will be complete. Apply Lemmas 12, 15 and 16, then we have the probability in (143) decays doubly exponentially fast with m. ” “ ‰ı Hence lim ECZ n maxRn Hcodes P dE pS n , Sqn q ď D0 “ 0 if nÑ8  ( lim sup Rn ă min RK ` RrSs|Z pD01 q, RrSs pD01 q .  (150)  nÑ8  To complete the proof, we need to show RrSs|Z pD01 q ě RS|Z pD0 q and RrSs pD01 q ě RS pD0 q as ∆ Ñ 0. 1 1 1 q˚ q˚ Suppose PrSs q ˚ |rSsZ achieves RrSs|Z pD0 q, then RrSs|Z pD0 q “ IprSs; rSs |Zq and EdprSs, rSs q ď D0 . Since for  PrSsrSs q ˚ |SZ “ PrSs|S PrSs q ˚ |rSsZ , ´ ¯2 q ˚ q “ E S ´ rSs ` rSs ´ rSs q˚ EdpS, rSs ´ ¯2 ´ ¯ q ˚ ` E pS ´ rSsq2 ` 2E pS ´ rSsq rSs ´ rSs q˚ “ E rSs ´ rSs b q ˚ q ` ∆ EdprSs, rSs q ˚q ď EdprSs, rSs a ď D01 ` ∆ D01 ,  (151) (152) (153) (154)  a ˘ ` where (153) follows from the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality. On the other hand, RS|Z D01 ` ∆ D01 is defined a ˘ a ` q ˚ |Zq “ q q ď D1 ` ∆ D1 . Hence RS|Z D1 ` ∆ D1 ď IpS; rSs as the minimum IpS; S|Zq such that EdpS, Sq 0 0 0 0 q ˚ |Zq “ RrSs|Z pD1 q. Let ∆ Ñ 0, then we have RS|Z pD0 q ď lim∆Ñ0 RrSs|Z pD1 q. Similarly, we can IprSs; rSs 0 0 prove RS pD0 q ď lim∆Ñ0 RrSs pD01 q. This completes the proof of Theorem 5. A PPENDIX F P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6 Denote X 1n , Yi1n , Z 1n as (55)-(57), where ΨK p¨q denotes the orthogonal transform, instead of the permutation operation. Then it can be verified that for Gaussian source-channel pair, the distribution PCS n KS 1n X n Y n Z n X 1n Y 1n Z 1n Sp1n Spn i  i  i  also satisfies (60) and (61). Hence pΨK , Z n q Ñ Z 1n Ñ S n forms a Markov chain. Similar to the permutation-based scheme, it is easy to show the power constraint and the distortion constraints for legitimate users are satisfied. Next by following similar steps to the proof for the permutation-based scheme, we prove the secrecy constraint is also satisfied. But a slight difference is that here we use an argument from a geometric point of view, instead of the one from the view of rate-distortion theory (or method of types) used for Theorems  i  33  1, 2, and 5. Here we do not need to discretize the source. But we still need to discretize the reconstruction Sq as (131), since it will enable us to take the maximizing operation out of the probability, just as done in (141)-(143). Define event A fi  ( ` n 1n ˘ P Wδn pS, Zq , S ,Z  (155)  for δ ą 0. For jointly Gaussian variables X and Z, where Z “ X ` U and U is independent of X, the δ-weakly typical set and the δ-weakly jointly typical set become ˇ }xn }2 ˇ ! ) ˇ ˇ Wδn pXq fi xn P X n : ˇ ´ 1ˇ ď δ , nNX  (156)  and Wδn pX, Zq fi  ˇ }xn }2 ˇ ˇ ˇ pxn , z n q P R2n : ˇ ´ 1ˇ ď δ, nNX ˇ }z n }2 ˇ ˇ ˇ ´ 1ˇ ď δ, ˇ nNZ 2 ˇ }xn }2 ˇ ) }z n ´ xn } ˇ ˇ ` ´ 2ˇ ď δ , ˇ nNX nNU  !  (157) (158) (159)  respectively, where NZ , NX and NU denote the variances of Z, X and U , respectively. Since pS n , Z 1n q is an i.i.d. sequence, from the fact that (weakly) typical set has total probability close to one [28], we have the following lemma. Lemma 18. [28] For any δ ą 0, P rAc s Ñ 0, as n Ñ 8. Following similar steps to the proof of Theorem 5, we can get ” “ ı ‰ PCZ n P dpS n , Sqn q ď D0 |CZ n ą τn ď |B n | max PCZ n n n ss PB rq  nRK ” 2ÿ  ı n ss q ą τn1 2´npRn ´RK q ` 1n , ξk,zn prq  (160)  k“1  where B n is given by (144), and “ ‰ n n ss q fi P d pS n , rq ss q ď D01 , A|Ψk , Z n . ξk,zn prq  (161)  Since as shown in (149), |B n | is upper bounded by an exponential function, we only need to show that the probability in (160) decays doubly exponentially fast with n. To that end, we need introduce the following lemmas. The proofs of Lemmas 20 and 19 are given in Appendixes G and H, respectively. Lemma 19. Assume S n “ Z n ` U n , where Z n „ N p0, NZ Iq and U n „ N p0, NU Iq17 are independent, then for any z n , s̄n P Rn , Prd pS n , s̄n q ď D, pS n , z n q P Wδn |z n s ď 2´npRS|Z pDq´op1qq , where RS|Z pDq “ 17 Here  1 2  log`  `N ˘ U  D  , and op1q is a term that vanishes as δ Ñ 0 and n Ñ 8.  0 denotes an all-zero vector and I denotes an identity matrix  (162)  34  Lemma 20. Assume S n „ N p0, NS Iq and S 1n “ ΨS n , with Ψ uniformly distributed on orthogonal matrices set and independent of S n , then for any s1n , s̄n P Rn , Prd pS n , s̄n q ď D, S n P Wδn |s1n s ď 2´npRS pDq´op1qq , where RS pDq “  1 2  log`  `N ˘ S  D  (163)  , and op1q is a term that vanishes as δ Ñ 0 and n Ñ 8.  Then we have n  n n ss q ď D01 , S n P Wδn |Ψk , z n s ss q ď EΨk Prd pS , rq EC ξk,zn prq ż ˘ ` n “ EΨk Prd pS n , rq ss q ď D01 , S n P Wδn |Ψk , z n , s1n sfS 1n |Z n s1n |Ψk , z n ds1n ż ˘ ` n ss q ď D01 , S n P Wδn |s1n sfS 1n |Z n s1n |z n ds1n “ PΨk rd pS n , rq 1  ď 2´npRS pD0 q´op1qq ,  (164) (165) (166) (167)  where (167) follows from Lemma 20. Furthermore, Lemma 19 implies “ ‰ n n n ss q ď D01 , A|z 1n ξk,zn prq ss q “ P d pS , rq 1  ď 2´npRS|Z pD0 q´op1qq ,  (168) (169)  where (167) follows from ΨK Z n Ñ Z 1n Ñ S n . Applying Lemmas 12, we have that the probability in (160) decays doubly exponentially fast with n. This completes the proof of Theorem 6. A PPENDIX G P ROOF OF L EMMA 19 Consider that Prd pS n , s̄n q ď D, pS n , z n q P Wδn |z n s 2  2  2  ď Prd pS n , s̄n q ď D,  }z n } }S n ´ z n } }z n } P 1 ˘ δ, ` P 2 ˘ δ|z n s nNZ nNZ nNU  ď Prd pS n , s̄n q ď D,  }S n ´ z n } P 1 ˘ 2δ|z n s. nNU  (170)  2  Denote R “  1 n  (171)  2  }S n ´ z n } , then Prd pS n , s̄n q ď D, pS n , z n q P Wδn |z n s ż NU p1`2δq ď fR|Z n pr|z n q Prd pS n , s̄n q ď D|R “ r, Z n “ z n sdr.  (172)  NU p1´2δq  Given Z n “ z n , S n ´ z n „ N p0, NU Iq, and on the other hand, Gaussian distribution is isotropic (or invariant to rotation). Hence under condition of Z n “ z n and R “ r, S n is uniformly distributed over the sphere with center ? z n and radius nr. Prd pS n , s̄n q ď D|R “ r, Z n “ z n s ď  Ω pθq , Ω pπq  (173)  35  1 sin     O  Fig. 6. Cap cut out by the cone on the unit sphere.  where  c θ “ arcsin  D , r  (174)  and Ω pθq be solid angle in n space of a cone with half-angle θ, i.e., the area of a spherical cap on a unit sphere Ωpθq Ωpπq ,  (see Fig. 6). To approximate  we need the following lemma.  Lemma 21. [33] Let Ω pθq be solid angle in n space of a cone with half-angle θ, then it holds that ˆ ˆ ˙˙ Ω pθq sinn´1 θ 1 “? 1`O . Ω pπq n 2πn cos θ  (175)  Lemma 21 implies ? 1 1 1 Ω pθq “ 2nplog sin θ´ n logp 2πn sin θ cos θq` n logp1`Op n qqq Ω pπq  “ 2nplog sin θ`op1qq .  (176) (177)  Combine (173), (174) and (177), then we have for any r P NU p1 ˘ 2δq, ´ ¯ ?D n log n n n n r `op1q Prd pS , s̄ q ď D|R “ r, Z “ z s ď 2 ´ b n log N  ď2  U  ´ ´n  “2  1 2  log  (178)  ¯ D p1´2δq `op1q  NU D  (179)  ¯ ´op1q  ,  (180)  where op1q is a term that vanishes as δ Ñ¯ 0 and n Ñ 8. Combining (172) and (180) gives us Prd pS n , s̄n q ď ´ ´n  D, pS n , z n q P Wδn |z n s ď 2  1 2  log  NU D  ´op1q  . This completes the proof of Lemma 19. A PPENDIX H P ROOF OF L EMMA 20  Observe that Prd pS n , s̄n q ď D, S n P Wδn |s1n s 2  }S n } P 1 ˘ δ|s1n s nNS # + 1n 2 ` T 1n n ˘ }s } “ PΨ rd Ψ s , s̄ ď D|s1n s1 P1˘δ . nNS  “ Prd pS n , s̄n q ď D,  (181) (182)  36  Since Ψ is uniformly distributed on orthogonal matrices set (so is ΨT as stated in Lemma (4)), Lemma 5 implies that for any s1n , ΨT s1n is uniformly distributed over the sphere with center at the origin O and radius }s1n }. Hence ˘ ` Ω pθq PΨ rd ΨT s1n , s̄n ď D|s1n s ď , Ω pπq  (183)  where as described in the previous section, Ω pθq denotes solid angle in n space of a cone with half-angle θ, and d D . (184) θ “ arcsin 1 1n 2 n }s } 2  }s1n }  From Lemma 21, we have for any s1n such that  nNS  P 1 ˘ δ, ˜  ¸ c  n ˘ PΨ rd ΨT s1n , s̄n ď D|s1n s ď 2  `  log  D 1 s1n }2 n}  `op1q  (185)  ´ b n log N  D `op1q S p1´δq  ď2  ´ ´n  ď2  1 2  log  NS D  ¯  (186)  ¯ `op1q  ,  (187)  where op1q is a term that vanishes as δ Ñ 0 and n Ñ 8. Combining (182) and (187) gives us ´ n  n  n  Prd pS , s̄ q ď D, S P  Wδn |s1n s  ď2  ´n  1 2  log  NS D  ¯ `op1q  .  (188)  This completes the proof of Lemma 20. A PPENDIX I P ROOF OF L EMMA 6 q q “ By choosing Sq to be independent of Z, we have RS|Z pD0 q “ min IpS; S|Zq ď min IpS; Sq q q PS|SZ :EdpS,SqďD PS|S 0 q q :EdpS,SqďD0 ´ ¯ pUBq RS pD0 q “ 12 log` Dλ0 . Then we only need to prove RS|Z pD0 q ď RS|Z pD0 q. First consider the case of  λN0 P 1 `N0  ď D0 ď λ. Assume $ ’ &1, with probability p; Q“ ’ %0, with probability 1 ´ p,  independent of pS, Zq, denotes a timesharing random variable, and also assume $ ’ &β0 ΨK Z, if Q “ 1; SqQ “ ’ %0, if Q “ 0, where β0 “  ? λP 1 P 1 `N0  (189)  (190)  and ΨK is defined in (36). Then ” ı EdpS, SqQ q “ EQ E dpS, SqQ q|Q “p  λN0 ` p1 ´ pq λ. ` N0  P1  (191) (192)  37  Therefore, to satisfy distortion constraint EdpS, SqQ q ď D0 , it is sufficient to set p “  pλ´D0 qpP 1 `N0 q . λP 1  Substituting  SqQ into RS|Z pD0 q, we have RS|Z pD0 q ď IpS; SqQ |Zq  (193)  ď IpS; SqQ Q|Zq  (194)  “ IpS; SqQ |QZq  (195)  “ pIpS; SqQ |Z, Q “ 1q ` p1 ´ pq IpS; SqQ |Z, Q “ 0q  (196)  “ pIpS; SqQ |Z, Q “ 1q  (197)  ď pIpS; K|Z, Q “ 1q  (198)  ď pHpKq  (199)  “p  (200) 1  “  pλ ´ D0 q pP ` N0 q , λP 1  (201)  where (195) follows from Q is independent of pS, Zq. Next consider the case of 0 ď D0 ď  λN0 P 1 `N0 .  Observe that  RS|Z pD0 q “  q IpS; S|Zq  min  (202)  q PS|SZ :EdpS,SqďD 0 q  min  “  q IpS; S|Zq  (203)  q IpS; SK|Zq  (204)  q PS|SZK :EdpS,SqďD 0 q  min  ď  q PS|SZK :EdpS,SqďD 0 q  “ IpS; K|Zq `  min  q IpS; S|ZKq  (205)  q PS|SZK :EdpS,SqďD 0 q  ď HpKq `  min  q IpS; S|ZKq,  (206)  q PS|SZK :EdpS,SqďD 0 q  where (203) follows since, on one hand, by setting PS|SZK in (203) as PS|SZ we have (202)ě(203); on the other q q ř hand, given PSZK , both the constraint and the optimization objective only depend on PS|SZ “ k PS|SZK PK|SZ , q q hence it suffices to optimize (203) over PS|SZ . q The first term of (206) satisfies HpKq “ 1.  (207)  By (38) and (39), we have S and ΨK Z are jointly Gaussian, i.e.,  ?  where β0 “  λP 1 P 1 `N0 ,  ΨK  S “ β0 ΨK Z ` V01 (208) ´ ¯ 0 is defined in (36), and V01 „ N 0, PλN is independent of ΨK Z. Hence we can also 1 `N 0  write Sq˚ “ β0 ΨK Z ` V02  (209)  38  and S “ Sq˚ ` ∆V02 ,  where V02  (210) ¯ ´ 0 and ∆V02 „ N p0, D0 q are independent of each other and also independent of „ N 0, PλN 1 `N ´ D0 0  ΨK Z. Therefore, we can bound the second term in (206) as q IpS; S|ZKq ď IpS; Sq˚ |ZKq  min  (211)  q PS|SZK :EdpS,SqďD 0 q  “ hpS|ZKq ´ hpS|ZK Sq˚ q  (212)  “ hpS|Kq ` hpZ|SKq ´ hpZ|Kq ´ hpS ´ Sq˚ |ZK Sq˚ q  (213)  1 1 1 log 2πeλ ` log 2πeN0 ´ log 2πepP 1 ` N0 q ´ hpS ´ Sq˚ q 2 2 2 ˆ ˙ λN0 1 , ď log 2 D0 pP 1 ` N0 q ď  (214) (215)  where (211) follows since PSq˚ |SZK satisfies the constraint EdpS, Sq˚ q ď D0 , and (214) follows since ΨK Z Ñ Sq˚ Ñ S forms a Markov chain and S ´ Sq˚ is independent of Sq˚ . pUBq  Combining (206), (207) and (215) gives us RS|Z pD0 q ď RS|Z pD0 q. This completes the proof of Lemma 6. A PPENDIX J P ROOF OF T HEOREM 11 Following similar steps to the proof for the scalar Gaussian case, it is easy to prove Rpiq is achievable by the permutation based scheme. However, for the orthogonal-transform based scheme, the proof for the scalar Gaussian case cannot be applied to the vector Gaussian case directly, and some details need to be treated specially. Next we give a proof for this case. Following similar steps to the proof of Theorem 6, it can be shown that for vector Gaussian case, the distortion constraints and power constraint are satisfied for the tuples given in Theorem 11. Next we prove the secrecy constraint is also satisfied. Define events ( ` n 1n ˘ Sj , Z j P Wδn pSj , Zj q , ź A fi Aj , Aj fi  (216) (217)  jPrms  “ ‰ for δ ą 0. Similar to Lemma 18, it can be shown that for any δ ą 0, P Acj Ñ 0, as n Ñ 8. The derivation up to (160) still holds for vector Gaussian case. Hence ” ı “ ‰ qn q ď D0 |CZ n ą τn PCZ n max P dpS n , S Rn Hcodes  ” ď PCZ n where D01 fi  `?  max  qn PRmn s  nRK 2ÿ  k“1  ˘2 D0 ` m∆ .  “  n  n  ss q ď P dpS , rq  D01 , A|Ψj,k , j  P rms, Z  n  ‰  ą  τn1 2´npRn ´RK q  ff ı  ` 1n ,  (218)  39  ˘ ` ş śm n Observe that P rdpS n , rq ss q ď D0 , A|Ψj,k , j P rms, Z n s “ řm dpsn ,rqsj sn qďD1 ,A j“1 f snj |Ψj,k , zjn dsnj . One j“1 j ‰ ş ś śm 0 “ n sj s q ď dj , Aj |Ψj,k , Zjn may expect to exchange with , in order to write the expression as j“1 P dpSjn , rq řm for some dj , j P rms such that j“1 dj ď D01 . However, obviously this is not feasible. To address this problem, we ş ř need to discretize the source, and then eliminate the operation since after discretization it becomes a operation with the number of summands polynomial in n. `S˘ Discretize S by rSs “ ∆ ¨ Round ∆ . Then we have ‰ “ n P dpS n , rq ss q ď D01 , A|Ψj,k , j P rms, Z n ‰ “ n n ď P d prSs , rq ss q ď D02 , A|Ψj,k , j P rms, Z n , where D02 fi  (219)  `a 1 ˘2 D0 ` m∆ . In addition, observe that ‰ “ n n P d prSs , rq ss q ď D01 , A|Ψj,k , j P rms, Z n m ”ÿ ı n n sj s q ď D01 , A|Ψj,k , j P rms, Z n “P dprSj s , rq  (220)  j“1  “  m ÿ ź “ ‰ n n sj s q “ dj , Aj |Ψj,k , Zjn P dprSj s , rq  (221)  dPD mn j“1  ď  m ÿ ź “ ‰ n P dpSjn , rq sj s q ď d1j , Aj |Ψj,k , Zjn ,  (222)  dPD mn j“1  where d1j fi  `a  ˘2 dj ` ∆ , and n  n  n  n  n  n  Dmn fi dprss , rq ss q : rss , rq ss P B mn , d prss , rq ss q ď D01 ! ) a n n B mn fi rq ss P N mn : }rq sj s } ď nΓj , 1 ď j ď m  (  a a a n λj p1 ` δq ` ∆ ` mD01 . (221) follows from that Aj implies }rSj s } ď nλj p1 ` δq ` ∆, hence a n it is sufficient to only consider the case of }rq sj s } ď nΓj . (222) is obtained by using triangle inequality again. with  a  Γj fi  Combining (218), (219) and (222) gives us ” ı “ ‰ qn q ď D0 |CZ n ą τn PCZ n max P dpS n , S Rn Hcodes  ď |B mn |  max PCZ n n mn  ss PB rq  nRK ” 2ÿ  ı n ss q ą τn1 2´npRn ´RK q ` 1n , ξk,zn prq  (223)  k“1  where m ÿ ź “ ‰ n P dpSjn , rq sj s q ď d1j , Aj |Ψj,k , Zjn .  n  ξk,zn prq ss q fi  (224)  dPD mn j“1  “ ‰ n n Given rq ss and z n , ξk,zn prq ss q , k P 2nRK are i.i.d. with mean n  EC ξk,zn prq ss q “ EC  m ÿ ź ‰ “ n sj s q ď d1j , Aj |Ψj,k , Zjn P dpSjn , rq  (225)  dPD mn j“1 m ÿ ź  “ dPD mn j“1  ‰ “ n sj s q ď d1j , Aj |Ψj,k , Zjn . EΨj,k P dpSjn , rq  (226)  40  To bound (223), we need to bound |B mn | and |Dmn | first. Similar to (149), it can be shown |B n  mn  |ď2  n  n 2  j“1 log  ? Γj `  ∆2  2  q  ∆2  `Oplog nq  .  (227)  a a n sj s } ď nΓj , using triangle inequality we have nΓj , }rq  n  sj s such that }rsj s } ď In addition, for rsj s , rq n  ?  p  2πe  řm  n  n 2  n  dprsj s , rq sj s q “ }rsj s ´ rq sj s } ď 4nΓj .  (228)  Combine it with n n ¯2 ∆2 ÿ ´ 1 ÿ 2 prsi,j s ´ rq si,j sq “ li,j ´ q li,j , n i“1 n i“1 ´ ¯ ` si,j ˘ sqi,j fi Round ∆ and q li,j fi Round ∆ are both integers, then we have n  n  dprsj s , rq sj s q “  where li,j  n ´ ÿ  ¯2 li,j ´ q li,j  ď  i“1  In addition,  řn i“1  4n2 Γj . ∆2  (229)  (230)  ¯2  ´ li,j ´ q li,j  P N Y t0u, hence  |D  mn  m ˆ ź 4n2 Γj  |ď  j“1  ∆2  ˙ `1 .  (231)  That is, |Dmn | is bounded by a polynomial term of n. If we can show that the probability in (223) decays doubly exponentially fast with n, then the proof will be complete. To that end, by using Lemma 19 we have řm  n  ξk,zn prq ss q ď |Dmn | 2´np  j“1  RSj |Zj pd1j q´op1qq  ř 1 ´np m j“1 RSj |Zj pdj q´op1qq  (232)  “2  (233)  ď 2´nmpRS|Z pD0 `∆ q´op1qq ,  (234)  where RS|Z pDq given in (52) denotes the conditional rate-distortion function for source S with side information Z at both encoder and decoder, op1q is a term that vanishes as δ Ñ 0 and n Ñ 8, and ∆ is a term that vanishes as ∆ Ñ 0. (233) follows from that |Dmn | grows only polynomially fast with n. From Lemma 20, we have for any z n , n  EC ξk,zn prq ss q ď 2´nmpRS pD0 `∆ q´op1qq ,  (235)  where RS pDq given in (51) denotes the point-to-point rate-distortion function for S. Using these bounds and applying Lemmas 12, we have that the probability in (223) decays doubly exponentially fast with n. This completes the proof of Theorem 11. R EFERENCES [1] C. E. Shannon, “Communication in the presence of noise,” Proc. IRE, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 10-21, Jan. 1949. [2] T. J. Goblick, “Theoretical limitations on the transmission of data from analog sources,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-11, no. 4, pp. 558-567, Oct. 1965.  41  [3] M. Gastpar, B. Rimoldi, and M. Vetterli, “To code, or not to code: lossy source-channel communication revisited,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 1147-1158, May 2003. [4] K. H. Lee, and D. P. Petersen, “Optimal linear coding for vector channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 1283-1290, Dec. 1976. [5] S. Shamai, S. Verdú, and R. Zamir, “Systematic lossy source/channel coding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 564-579, Mar. 1998. [6] V. Prabhakaran, R. Puri, and K. Ramchandran, “Hybrid digital-analog codes for source-channel broadcast of Gaussian sources over Gaussian channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 7, pp.4573-4588, Aug. 2011. [7] L. Yu, H. Li, and W. Li, “Wireless scalable video coding using a hybrid digital-analog scheme,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 331-345, Feb. 2014. [8] L. Yu, H. Li, and W. Li, “Wireless cooperative video coding using a hybrid digital-analog scheme,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 436-450, Mar. 2015. [9] L. Yu, H. Li, and W. Li, “Distortion bounds for source broadcast over degraded channel,” IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2016. [10] L. Yu, H. Li, and W. Li, “Distortion bounds for source broadcast problem,” Submitted to IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2016. [11] Z. Reznic, M. Feder, and R. Zamir, “Distortion bounds for broadcasting with bandwidth expansion,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3778-3788, Aug. 2006. [12] C. Tian, S. Diggavi, and S. Shamai, “Approximate characterizations for the Gaussian source broadcasting distortion region,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 124-136, Jan. 2011. [13] C. E. Shannon, “Communication theory of secrecy systems,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 656–715, Oct. 1949. [14] C. Schieler, and P. Cuff, “The henchman problem: Measuring secrecy by the minimum distortion in a list,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 3436–3450, Jun. 2016. [15] L. Yu, H. Li, and W. Li, “Source-channel secrecy for Shannon cipher system,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 2596-2622, Apr. 2017. [16] H. Yamamoto, “Rate-distortion theory for the Shannon cipher system,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 827–835, May 1997. [17] M. P. Wilson, and K. Narayanan, “Transmitting an analog Gaussian source over a Gaussian wiretap channel under SNR mismatch,” IEEE International Conference on Telecommunications, pp.44-47, April 2010. [18] G. Bagherikaram and K. Plataniotis, “Secure hybrid digital-analog Wyner-Ziv coding,” in IEEE 22nd International Symposium on Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, pp. 1161 –1166, Sep. 2011. [19] G. Bagherikaram and K. Plataniotis, “Secure joint source-channel coding with interference known at the transmitter,” IET Communications, vol. 6, no. 17, pp. 2796 - 2808, Jan. 2013. [20] S. C. Kak and N. S. Jayant, “On speech encryption using waveform scrambling,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 56, pp. 781-808, May-Jun. 1977. [21] A. D. Wyner, “An analog scrambling scheme which does not expand bandwidth, Part I: Discrete time,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-25, pp. 261-274, May 1979. [22] R. Ahlswede and G. Dueck, “Good codes can be produced by a few permutations,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 430–443, May 1982. [23] W. Kang and N. Liu “Compressing encrypted data: Achieving optimality and strong secrecy via permutations,” IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 7153-7163, Dec. 2016. [24] D. Slepian, “Permutation modulation,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 53, pp. 228–236, Mar. 1965. [25] D. Slepian, “Group codes for the Gaussian channel,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 47, pp. 575–602, Apr. 1968. [26] T. Ericson, “A min-max theorem for antijamming group codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-30, pp. 792–799, Nov. 1984. [27] A. Lapidoth and S. Tinguely, “Sending a bivariate Gaussian over a Gaussian MAC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 2714–2752, Jun. 2010. [28] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, Wiley, New York, 1991. [29] I. Csiszár, and J. Körner, Information theory: coding theorems for discrete memoryless systems. Cambridge University Press, 2011. [30] A. El Gamal and Y.-H. Kim, Network Information Theory. Cambridge University Press, 2011. [31] M. L. Eaton, Multivariate Statistics: A Vector Space Approach, Wiley and Sons, New York, NY, 1983. [32] I. Sason and S. Verdú “f -divergence inequalities,” IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 11, pp. 5973–6006, Nov. 2016. [33] C. E. Shannon, “Probability of error for optimal codes in a Gaussian channel,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 38, pp. 611–656, 1959.  42  [34] S.-W. Ho and R. W. Yeung, “On information divergence measures and a unified typicality,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 5893–5905, Dec. 2010.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 7. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
