Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_784

Abstract:
1  Domain-Specific Face Synthesis for Video Face Recognition from a Single Sample Per Person  arXiv:1801.01974v1 [cs.CV] 6 Jan 2018  Fania Mokhayeri, Student Member, IEEE, Eric Granger, Member, IEEE, and Guillaume-Alexandre Bilodeau, Member, IEEE  Abstract—In video surveillance, face recognition (FR) systems are employed to detect individuals of interest appearing over a distributed network of cameras. The performance of still-tovideo FR systems can decline significantly because faces captured in the unconstrained operational domain (OD) over multiple video cameras have a different underlying data distribution compared to faces captured under controlled conditions in the enrollment domain (ED) with a still camera. This is particularly true when individuals are enrolled to the system using a single reference still. To improve the robustness of these systems, it is possible to augment the reference set by generating synthetic faces based on the original still. However, without knowledge of the OD, many synthetic images must be generated to account for all possible capture conditions. FR systems may therefore require complex implementations and yield lower accuracy when training on many less relevant images. This paper introduces an algorithm for domain-specific face synthesis (DSFS) that exploits the representative intra-class variation information available from the OD. Prior to operation (during camera calibration), a compact set of faces from unknown persons appearing in the OD is selected through affinity propagation clustering in the captured condition space (defined by pose and illumination estimation). The domain-specific variations of these face images are then projected onto the reference still of each individual by integrating an image-based face relighting technique inside the 3D morphable model framework. A compact set of synthetic faces is generated that resemble individuals of interest under capture conditions relevant to the OD. In a particular implementation based on sparse representation classification, the synthetic faces generated with the DSFS are employed to form a cross-domain dictionary that accounts for structured sparsity where the dictionary blocks combine the original and synthetic faces of each individual. Experimental results obtained with videos from the Chokepoint and COX-S2V datasets reveal that augmenting the reference gallery set of still-to-video FR systems using the proposed DSFS approach can provide a significantly higher level of accuracy compared to state-of-the-art approaches, with only a moderate increase in its computational complexity. Index Terms—Face Recognition, Single Sample Per Person, Face Synthesis, 3D Face Reconstruction, Illumination Transferring, Sparse Representation-Based Classification, Video Surveillance.  I. I NTRODUCTION Still-to-video (S2V) face recognition (FR) is an important function in several video surveillance applications, particularly for watch-list screening. Given one or more reference still images of a target individual of interest, S2V FR systems Fania Mokhayeri and Eric Granger are with the Laboratory for Imagery, Vision and Artificial Intelligence (LIVIA), École de technologie supérieure, Université du Québec, Montréal, Canada, (e-mail: fmokhayeri@livia.etsmtl.ca, eric.granger@etsmtl.ca). Guillaume-Alexandre Bilodeau is with the Image and Video Processing Laboratory (LITIV), Ṕolytechnique Montréal, Montréal, Canada, (e-mail: gabilodeau@polymtl.ca).  seeks to accurately detect their presence in videos captured over multiple distributed surveillance cameras [1]. Despite the recent progress in computer vision and machine learning, designing a robust system for S2V FR remains a challenging problem in real-world surveillance applications. One key issue is the visual domain shift between faces from the enrollment domain (ED), where reference still images are typically captured under controlled conditions, and those from the operational domain (OD), where video frames are captured under uncontrolled conditions with variations in pose, illumination, blurriness, etc. The appearance of faces captured in videos corresponds to multiple non-stationary data distributions that can differ considerably from faces captured during enrollment [2]. Another key issue is the limited number of reference stills that are available per target individual to design facial models. Although still faces from the cohort or other non-target persons, and trajectories of video frames from unknown individuals are typically available. In many surveillance applications (e.g., watch-list screening), only a single reference still per person is available for design, which corresponds to the so-called Single Sample Per Person (SSPP) problem. The performance of S2V FR systems can decline significantly due to the limited information available to represent the intra-class variations seen in video frames. Many discriminant subspaces and manifold learning algorithms cannot be directly employed with a SSPP problem. It is also difficult to apply representation-based FR methods such as sparse representation-based classification (SRC) [3], [4]. Different techniques for SSPP problems have been proposed to improve the robustness of FR systems, such as using multiple face representations [2], face frontalization [5], generating synthetic faces from the original reference stills [6], [7], and incorporating generic auxiliary set1 [8], [9]. This paper will focus on methods to augmenting the reference gallery set either through synthetic set generated based on the original reference still, or through intra-class variation information transferred from a generic set. A challenge with strategies for augmenting the reference gallery set is selecting a sufficient number of synthetic or generic faces to cover intraclass variations in the OD. Many synthetic faces or generic auxiliary faces may be generated or collected, respectively, to account for all possible capture conditions. In this case, FR systems would therefore require complex implementations and 1 A generic set is defined as an auxiliary set that contains multiple video frames per person from other unknown individuals. It provides an abundance of information on intra-class variations of the capture conditions in an OD.  2  1  ...  3  2  m  ...  Characterizing Capture Condition  Unlabeled ROIs from Video Trajectories (Operation Domain)  Pose and Illumination Representative  1  2  3  4  2  3  ...  q  1  +  ... ...  2  +  ...  3  +  ...  4  +  ...  ...  n  q  ...  ...  +  Reference Faces  ...  ...  n  ...  Labeled Reference Still ROIs (Enrollment Domain)  ...  Generating Synthetic Faces based on OD knowledge  ... ...  ... ...  1  Extended Reference Set 1 2 3 4  Synthetic Faces Faces Synthetic  Figure 1: Overview of the proposed DSFS algorithm to augment the reference gallery set. We assume that the gallery set initially contains only one reference still ROI per individual of interest. may yield lower accuracy when training on many facial images that provide less relevant information for FR in the OD. In this paper, a new approach is proposed that exploits the discriminant information of the generic set for the face synthesis process. The new algorithm called domain-specific face synthesis (DSFS) maps representative variation information from the generic set in the OD to the original facial regions of interest (ROIs) isolated in reference stills. In this way, a compact set of synthetic faces is generated that represent still reference ROIs and probe video ROIs under a common capture condition. As depicted in Fig. 1, the DSFS technique involves two main steps: (1) characterizing capture condition information from the OD, (2) generating synthetic face ROIs based on the information obtained in the first step. Prior to operation (during some camera calibration process), a generic set of facial ROIs is collected from video captured in the OD. A compact and representative subset of ROIs is selected by clustering this generic set in a capture condition space defined by pose, illumination, blur and contrast estimation measures. The 3D model of each reference still ROI is reconstructed via a 3D morphable model and rendered based on pose representatives. Finally, the illumination-dependent layers of the lighting representatives are extracted and projected on the rendered reference ROIs with the same pose. In this manner, domain-specific variations are effectively transferred onto the reference still ROIs. In a particular implementation for S2V FR, the original and synthetic ROIs are employed to design a structural dictionary with powerful variation representation ability for SRC. The dictionary blocks represent intra-class variations computed from either the reference faces themselves or the synthetic faces [10]. The cooperation of SRC with the proposed DSFS improves the robustness of SRC for video-based FR in a SSPP scenario to domain variations. In order to validate the performance of the proposed DSFS algorithm for S2V FR with a SSPP, this SRC implementation is evaluated and compared on two public face databases. The main advantage of the proposed approach is the ability to provide a compact set that can accurately represent the  original reference face with relevant of intra-class variations in pose, illumination, motion blur, etc., corresponding to capture condition in the OD. For instance, in the context of SRC implementations, this set can prevent over-fitting and refines more informative classes during the sparse coding process, and accordingly does not require a traditional dictionary learning process. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides an overview of related works for FR with a SSPP. Section III describes the proposed face synthesizing algorithm. Section IV presents a particular implementation of the DSFS for S2V FR system. In Section V, the experimental methodology (dataset, protocol, and performance metrics) for validation of FR systems is described and the experimental results is presented. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper and discusses some future research directions. II. R ELATED W ORK – S2V FACE R ECOGNITION FROM A S INGLE S TILL Several techniques have been proposed in the literature to improve the robustness of S2V FR systems designed using a SSPP. They can be categorized into techniques for (1) multiple face representation, (2) generic learning, and (3) generation of synthetic faces. An overview of the techniques is presented as bellow. A. Multiple Face Representation One effective approach to address the SSPP problem in FR is to extract discriminant features from face images. Bashbaghi et al. [2], [11] proposed a robust S2V FR system based on diverse face representations. They applied multiple appearanceinvariant feature extraction techniques to patches isolated in the reference still images in order to produce multiple face representations and generate a pool of diverse exemplarSVMs. This pool provides robustness to common nuisance factors encountered in surveillance applications. Jiwen et al. [12] proposed a discriminative multi-manifold analysis method by learning discriminative features from image patches. In this technique, the patches of each individual are considered to  3  form a manifold for each sample per person and a projection matrix is learned by maximizing the manifold margin of different persons. In [13] a face image is processed by several posespecific deep convolutional neural network (CNN) models to generate multiple pose-specific features. The multiple face representation techniques are, however, able to compensate only the small variations and consequently are not effective to tackle with variations in practical applications (e.g., extreme illumination, pose and expression variations). B. Generic Learning An early finding to compensate visual domain shift in FR systems is to employ a generic set to enrich the diversity of the reference gallery set that is the so-called generic learning concept [14]. Generic learning has been widely discussed by many researchers [12], [15], [16]. Su et al. proposed an adaptive generic learning method for FR which utilized external data to estimate the within-class scatter matrix for each individual and applies this information to the reference set [14]. In recent years, integration of sparse representationbased classification (SRC) with generic learning for FR has attracted significant attention. Deng et al. [8] added generic leaning into the SRC framework and proposed the extended SRC (ESRC), which provide additional information from other face datasets to construct an intra-class variation dictionary to represent the changes between the training and probe images. With further research, Deng et al. [9] proposed a generic learning method which projects the generic samples data to null space in order to reduce the negative influence of the naïve variation information. Yang et al. [17] introduced a sparse variation dictionary learning (SVDL) technique by taking the relationship between the reference set and the external generic set into account and obtained a projection by learning from both generic and reference set. In [18], the intra-class variation information from the OD is integrated with the reference set through domain adaptation to enhance the facial models. Authors in [19] proposed a robust auxiliary dictionary learning (RADL) technique that extracts representative information from generic dataset via dictionary learning without assuming prior knowledge of occlusion in probe images. Zhu et al. proposed a local generic representation-based framework (LGR) for FR with SSPP [20]. It builds a gallery dictionary by extracting the neighboring patches from the gallery dataset, while an intra-class variation dictionary is constructed by using an external generic training dataset to predict the intra-class variations. Authors in [21] proposed a robust S2V FR using a multi-classifier system in which each classifier is trained by a reference face still versus many lower-quality faces of non-target individuals captured in videos. In this system, the auxiliary set collected from videos of unknown people in the OD are employed to select discriminant feature sets and ensemble fusion functions. In [22], a supervised autoencoder network is proposed for S2V FR system to generate canonical face representations from unknown video ROIs that are robust to appearance variations commonly found in the operational video scene. Despite the significant improvements reported with generic learning, several critical issues remain to be  addressed. The generic intra-class variation may not be similar to that of gallery individuals, so the extraction of discriminative information from the generic set may not be guaranteed. Moreover, the large number of images collected from external data may contain redundant information which could lead to complex implementations and degrade the capability in covering intra-class variations. C. Synthetic Face Generation Augmenting the reference gallery set synthetically is another strategy to compensate the appearance variations in FR with SSPP. Shao et al. in [23] presented a SRC-based FR algorithm that extends the dictionary using a set of synthetic faces generated by calculating the image difference of a pair of faces. Authors in [24] augmented the reference gallery set by generating a set of synthetic face images under cameraspecific lighting conditions to design a robust S2V FR system under surveillance conditions. Blanz and Vetter [25] proposed 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) to reconstruct a 3D face from a single 2D face image and accordingly synthesize new face images. Authors in [26] employed a CNN to regress 3DMM shape and texture parameters directly from an input image without an optimization process which renders the face and compares it to the image. Zhang et al. proposed a 3D Spherical Harmonic Basis Morphable Model (SHBMM) that is an integration of spherical harmonics into the 3DMM framework [27]. Richardson et al. presented a face reconstruction technique from a single image by introducing an end-to-end CNN framework which derives the shape in a coarse-to-fine fashion [28]. In [29] a model-based deep convolutional autoencoder for 3D face reconstructing from a single is proposed, where a convolutional encoder network is combined with an expertdesigned generative model that serves as a decoder. Apart from 3D reconstruction techniques, some 2D-based techniques generate synthetic images under various illumination conditions by transferring the illumination of target images to the reference face images. Authors in [30] proposed an imagebased framework to relight the face through adaptive layer decomposition. Although synthetic images can improve the robustness of FR systems designed with a SSPP, they may not be covering the range intra-class variations in practical scenarios because of redundancy in the learned discriminative subspace, since they are highly correlated with the original face images. Many synthetic images should be generated to account for all possible capture conditions in ODs. Without the selection of representative face images from both the reference gallery and external data, generating the synthetic faces may require complex implementations and yield lower accuracy when training on many less relevant images. To overcome the challenges discussed above, this paper presents a framework that exploits both face synthesis and generic learning. The technique proposed in Section III generates a compact set of synthetic facial images per individual of interest that corresponds to relevant OD capture conditions, by mapping the intra-class variations from a representative set of video ROIs selected from the OD into the original reference still ROIs.  4  III. D OMAIN -S PECIFIC FACE S YNTHESIS This paper focuses on augmenting reference face set to cover the intra-class variations of individual appearing in ODs with a compact set of synthetic ROIs. A new Domain-Specific Face Synthesis (DSFS) technique is proposed that employs knowledge of the OD to generate a compact set of synthetic ROIs for the design of FR systems. Prior to operation, e.g., during a camera calibration process, DSFS selects video ROIs with representative pose angles and illumination conditions from facial trajectories of unknown persons captured in the OD. These video ROIs are selected via clustering facial trajectories in the captured condition space defined by pose and illumination conditions. Next, the DSFS exploits a 3D shape reconstruction method and an image-based illumination transferring technique to generate synthetic ROIs under representative pose angles and illumination conditions from the reference still ROIs. To do so, the 3D models of the reference still ROIs are reconstructed and rendered w.r.t. the representative pose angles. The illumination-dependent layers of the representative illumination conditions are then extracted and projected onto rendered images with the same view by applying a morphing between the layers. In other words, illumination-dependent layers of video ROIs from the OD are replaced with that of the still reference ROI from the ED. Fig. 2 shows the pipeline of the DSFS technique. A. Characterizing the Capture Conditions An important concern for the reference set augmentation is the selection of representative pose angles and illumination conditions to represent relevant capture conditions in the OD. As mentioned, adding a large number of potentially redundant images to the reference set can significantly increase the time and memory complexity, and may degrade the recognition performance due to over-fitting. With the DSFS technique, the representative pose angles and illumination conditions to cover relevant intra-class variations is approximated by characterizing the capture conditions from a large generic set of video ROIs. This set is formed with multiple ROIs isolated in several facial trajectories  of unknown persons captured in the OD. Let define R = ri ∈ Rd×d |i = 1, . . . , n  as the set of ROIs of still reference individuals, and G = gi ∈ Rd×d |i = 1, . . . , m as the video ROIs in the generic set, where n denotes the number of individuals in the reference gallery set, and m total number of ROIs in the generic set, respectively. In the proposed technique (see Fig. 3), an estimation of luminance, contrast and pose are measured for each video ROIs in the generic set gi . Next, a two-step clustering process is applied on video ROIs in the measurement space defined by pose, luminance and contrast. The first step is applied on all ROIs in the 3D metric space defined by pose (tilt, yaw and roll), while the second step is applied on ROIs of each pose cluster in the 2D space defined by luminance and contrast metrics. The prototype of each cluster is considered as an exemplar. The generic variational information obtained during this step is then transferred to the reference still ROIs during the face synthesizing step (see Section III B). Although many  algorithms are also suitable to implement DSFS, the following subsections describe DSFS with specific algorithms. 1) Estimation of Head Pose: The estimate of head pose for the ith video ROI (gi ) in the generic set is defined as pi = (θipitch , θiyaw , θroll )i . Euler angles θipitch , θiyaw , and θiroll are used to represent pitch, yaw and roll rotation around X axis, Y axis, and Z axis of the global coordinate system, respectively. In order to estimate the head pose, the discriminative response map fitting method [31] is employed. It is the current state-of-the-art method in terms of fitting accuracy and efficiency suitable for handling occlusions and changing illumination conditions. 2) Luminance-Contrast Distortion: Luminance and contrast distortion measures estimate the distortion between a video ROI and the corresponding reference still ROI. Components of the structural similarity index measure presented [32] are employed to measure the proximity of the average luminance and contrast locally by utilizing sliding window. The global luminance distortion in image quality (GLQ) factor between ri and gj is calculated by sliding a window of B×B pixels from the top-left corner to the bottomright corner of the image, for a total of M sliding steps: li,j =  M 1 X 2.µk (ri ).µk (gj ) + Cl , 2 2 M µ (r ) + µk (gj ) + Cl k=1 k i  (1)  where k is the sliding step and µk denotes mean values of the k th image window. Cl is a constant value defined as Cl = (Kl L)2 where L is the dynamic range of the pixel values and Kl  1. Similarly, the contrast distortion between ri and gi is estimated using global contrast distortion in image quality (GCQ) factor defined as: ci,j =  M 1 X 2.σk (ri ).σk (gj ) + Cc , 2 2 M σ (r ) + σk (gj ) + Cc k=1 k i  (2)  where σk denotes the standard deviation of the k th image window. Cc is a constant value defined as Cc = (Kc L)2 where L is the dynamic range of the pixel values and Kc  1. 3) Representative Selection: Affinity propagation (AP) [33] is applied to cluster video ROIs from the generic set defined in the normalized space defined by pj = (θipitch , θiyaw , θiroll ) and ui = (li , ci ) measures. This clustering algorithm aims to maximize the net similarity (average distortion between ROIs and pose angles), and produce a set exemplars. Two types of messages: responsibility and availability are exchanged between data points until a highquality set of exemplars and corresponding clusters emerges. AP is a suitable clustering technique for DSFS because: (1) it can automatically determine the number of clusters based on the data distribution, and (2) it produced exemplars that correspond to actual ROIs. Indeed, cluster centroids produced by many prototype-based clustering methods are not necessarily actual ROIs with a real-world interpretation. Given that clustering samples simultaneously in terms of both pj and ui may favor certain common pose angles, a two-step clustering algorithm is proposed to preserves diversity in pose angles and illumination effects. In the first step, clustering is  5  Reference ROI Generic Set  ri gi  Shading-Albedo Decomposition  Characterization of Capture Conditions  Iuij  Mi  pi  Shading-Albedo Decomposition  Rendering  Lij  ri  Si  Texture Mapping onto 3D Face Shape  Vi  Morphing  Synthetic face images under representative pose angles  Illumination-dependant layers of Lighting representative samples  ai  3D Shape Recovery  Statistical Deformable Model Trained from the 3D Shape Vectors  Synthetic Face Images under Representative Pose & Illumination  Domain-specific Synthetic Set  Figure 2: Block diagram of the DSFS technique applied to a reference still ROI.  gi  Estimation of Pose Angles  Roll Yaw  pi AP Clustering  Pitch  Generic Set  Estimation of Luminance Distortion  Pose Clusters  li  gi  AP Clustering inside pose clusters Estimation of Contrast Distortion  ci Pose and Lighting Exemplars  Figure 3: Pipeline for characterizing capture conditions of video ROIs in the operational domain.  performed on the pose angle vector, and then the population of each pose cluster is clustered according to GLQ and GCQ metrics to find the representative luminance and contrast samples. Representative luminance and contrast samples – called lighting exemplar – are found along with representative pose angles – called "pose exemplar" (Fig. 4).  P4 Pj ×× ××× × × × ×××××××××××××××××××× ×××××××× ×××××××××××× ×××××××××× × P3 ×××××××××××××× ××××××××××× ××××××× ×××××××××××××××××××× ××××××× × ×××××××××××××× ××××××P×1×××××× ×××××× × × × × × P2 Pitch × ×××××××××××××××××××××× ××××× ×××× × Yaw ×  Illumination  Roll  UjNj Uj2 ++ +++ ++++++++ ++ + + ++ +++++++ +++ +++ +++++ + ++ U 3+ + Uj1 ++ j + ++++ +++ ++++ + ++ ++ ++ +++++ +++ ++++++ +++ Contrast  Figure 4: An illustration of the AP clustering process. The clustering algorithm inputs a set of pose similarities sp (i, k) = − k pi − pk k2 indicating how well the sample pk with index k is similar to the sample pi from the generic set.  The pose responsibility rp (i, k) is defined as the accumulated evidence for how well-suited sample pk is to serve as the exemplar for sample pi , taking into account other potential exemplars for the sample pi . Evidence about whether each pose candidate exemplar would be a good exemplar is obtained from the application of the pose availability ap (i, k). The availability reflects the accumulated evidence for how appropriate it would be for sample pi to choose sample pk as its exemplar, taking into account the support from other samples that sample pk should be an exemplar. The availabilities are initialized to zero, and the pose responsibilities are then computed iteratively using the rule of Eq.3. The availabilities are updated in each iteration using Eq.4. rp (i, k) = sp (i, k) − max {ap (i, k 0 ) + sp (i, k 0 )} , 0 0 k |k 6=k  (3)  n o X ap (i, k) = min 0, rp (k, k) + max{0, rp (i0 , k)} . (4) i0 |i0 6∈{i,k}  For pi , the value of pk that maximizes ap (i, k) + rp (i, k) either identifies sample pi as an exemplar if k = i, or identifies the sample that is the exemplar for sample pi . The message-passing procedure is terminated after a fixed number of iterations when the local cost functions remain constant for some number of iterations. At the end of pose clustering, K pose clusters P = {P1 , P2 , . . . , Pj , . . . , PK } are determined, where pi = [θipitch , θiyaw , θiroll ]. The second clustering is then applied for each pose cluster in the li,j and ci,j measure space to find lighting exemplars. The first step computes illumination-contrast similarities su (i, k) = − k (ui − uk ) k2 . The corresponding responsibility and availability are obtained according to: ru (i, k) = su (i, k) − max {au (i, k 0 ) + su (i, k 0 )} , 0 0 k |k 6=k  (5)  n o X au (i, k) = min 0, ru (k, k) + max{0, ru (i0 , k)} . (6) i0 |i0 6∈{i,k}  The estimated rcl (i, k) and acl (i, k) are combined to mon-  6  itor the exemplar decisions and the algorithm is terminated when these decisions do not change for several iterations. At the end of the illumination-contrast clustering for each pose cluster Pj , a number of Nj lighting clusters Pj = {Uj1 , Uj2 , . . . , UjNj } are obtained. The central representative samples of illumination-contrast clusters in j th pose cluster are considered as the pose and lighting exemplars for j th pose as uij = (lji , cij ), 1 ≤ i ≤ Nj where l and c are illumination and contrast of center of ith illumination-contrast cluster Uji in the j th pose cluster Pj . Larger clusters represent a greater number of generic samples, they should have more influence for the classification. Therefore, a weight is assigned to each exemplar uij to indicate its importance, approximated based on its cluster size, Wij = nij /n, where nij is the number of samples in the cluster Uij and n is the total number of generic samples. This selection strengthens those classes that are more representative in reconstructing a probe sample.  the shape vector (S) is defined as Eq.8 [25]. A principal components analysis is performed to estimate the statistics of the 3D shape of the faces. S = S̄ +  mX S −1  S = [X1 , Y1 , Z1 , X2 , . . . , Xns , Yns , Zns ]T .  ri (x, y) = Bi (x, y).Ti (x, y) = Li (x, y).Mi (x, y).Ti (x, y) , (7) where B(x, y) = L(x, y).M(x, y) is a base layer, and L(x, y), M(x, y) and T(x, y) are shading, material, and texture components at a pixel (x,y), respectively. 2) 3D Face Reconstruction: 3D face model of reference ROIs, ri , are reconstructed using the 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) technique [25][35]. In this study, a customized version of the 3DMM is employed in which the texture fitting of the original 3DMM is replaced with image mapping. By replacing the texture fitting in the original 3DMM with 2D image mapping, an efficient method is implemented for 3D face reconstruction from one frontal face image. Basically, the shape model is defined as a convex combination of shape vectors of a set of examples in which  (9)  Here, for each reference ROI, ri , we reconstruct the 3D shape.  B. Face Synthesis  1) Intrinsic Image Decomposition: Each still reference image, ri , is decomposed and its materialdependent layer (albedo), Mi , is extracted based on the a texture-aware image model defined in [34]. This image decomposition method explicitly models a separate texture layer in addition to the shading layer and material layer in order to avoid ambiguity caused by textures, and employ simple constraints on shading and materials layers effectively. This model is presented as follows:  (8)  where, the 3D shape is represented by the probability distribution of faces around the averages of shape S̄ are calculated and the basis vectors S̃j , 1 ≤ j ≤ ms in Eq.8 where ms is the number of the basis vectors. Each vector S stores the reconstructed 3D shape in terms of x, y, z-coordinates of all vertices {1, . . . , ns } of a highresolution 3D mesh as  Si = S̄ + For generating synthetic ROIs based on the representative pose and lighting conditions, 3D models of reference ROIs are reconstructed and their material-dependent layers are extracted. In the rendering process, the extracted material layers are employed as a texture of the 3D model. This model is rendered w.r.t. the pose exemplars. Following this, the illumination-dependent layers of the lighting exemplars are extracted. Finally, the lighting layers are projected on the rendered images with the same view by applying a morphing between the layers. The following subsections describe the steps proposed for the face synthesizing with DSFS.  αk .S̃k ,  k=1  mX S −1  αji .S̃j ,  (10)  j=1  where αji ∈ [0, 1], 1 ≤ j ≤ ms are the shape parameters and Si is the reconstructed shape of the ith reference still ROI ri . The optimization algorithm presented in [25] is employed to find optimal αji , 1 ≤ j ≤ ms , for each reference still ROI ri . In the next step, the extracted material layers, Mi , are projected to the 3D geometry of the reference gallery set. Given the 3D facial shape and texture, novel poses can be rendered under various forms of the pose by adjusting the parameters of a camera model. In the rendering procedure, the 3D face is projected onto the image plane with Weak Perspective Projection which is a linear approximation of the full perspective projection. mX S −1 Vij = f ∗ Λ ∗ Rij ∗ (S̄ + αji ) + ti2d , (11) j=1 ij  where V is the 2D positions of model vertexes of the j th reconstructed pose of ri , f is the scale  factor, Λ is the 1  0  0  orthographic projection matrix 0 1 0 , Rij is the rotation matrix constructed from rotation angles pitch, yaw, roll and t2d is the translation vector [36]. Since the 2D image is directly mapped to the 3D model, no corresponding color information is available for some vertices because they are occluded in the frontal face image. Consequently, it is possible that there are still some blank areas on the generated texture map. In order to correct these blank space areas, a bilinear interpolation algorithm is utilized to fill in areas of unknown texture using the known colors in the vicinity [37].  3) Illumination Transferring: d×d For each pose exemplar, pj , a set of samples {Ijk |1 ≤ u ∈R k ≤ Nj } corresponding to the ujk , for k = 1, 2, ..., Nj , are selected as lighting exemplars. The illumination-dependent layer of each Ijk u are extracted using the same process described in section III-B1. Then, guided filter with the guidance of the input illumination layer is applied to preserve the  7  structure of the input face. For each pose exemplar pj , Nj the illumination layers, Ljk , for k = 1, 2, ..., Nj , are then projected to the rendered reference, Vij . This is performed by morphing between their filtered version according to the following steps: i) detect the landmark points of Ljk and Vij using active shape model to locate corresponding feature points. The landmark points of Ljk and Vij are denoted as ljk and vij , respectively; ii) define a triangular mesh over ljk and vij via the Delauij nay triangulation technique and obtain djk l and dv ; jk ij iii) coordinate transformations between dl and dv with affine projections on points; iv) warp each triangle separately from the source to destination using mesh warping technique which moves triangular patches to the newly established location to align two ROIs; v) cross-dissolve the triangulated layers considering warped pixel locations.  IV. D OMAIN - INVARIANT S TILL - TO -V IDEO FACE R ECOGNITION WITH DSFS Several studies have revealed the limit robustness of S2V FR system where the number of training images per class is limited and the underlying distribution between the still reference and probe video ROIs differ. In this section, a particular S2V FR implementation is considered (see Fig. 5) to assess the impact of using DSFS to generate synthetic ROIs to address these limitations.  Design/Enrollment Phase  Compact set of synthetic ROIs  gi  DSFS  Reference Still ROIs  Synthetic Set  Reference Set  ri  Generic Set Reference Still ROIs  Video ROIs  Synthetic ROIs  ri  ai  Face Detection Design a Cross-Domain Dictionary Video Frames  Dc  Operational Phase  PK  In this way, a number q = j=1 Nj of synthetic ROIs are generated for each reference still ROI ri . Therefore, the total number of synthetic ROIs are qtotal = nq. The synthetic set of ROIs for the ith reference still ROI are presented 2 by Ai = [ai1 , ai2 , . . . , aiq ] ∈ IRd ×q where aij is the j th concatenated synthetic ROI for the ith reference still ROI. The overall process of DSFS face generation technique is formalized in Algorithm 1.  Probe Video Frame  y  Face Detection  Probe Video ROI  Structured-SRC  Sparse Coefficients  Compute the Reconstruction Error  Output Identity  Stream of frames captured by video cameras  Cross-Domain Dictionary  Probe ROI  × Sparse coefficients associated with reference+synthetic ROIs  Figure 5: Block diagram of the proposed domain-invariant SRCAlgorithm 1: The DSFS Algorithm d×d |i = 1, . . . , n , and generic set Input: Reference  set R = ri ∈ R G = gi ∈ Rd×d |i = 1, . . . , m . Estimate pose angles. Calculate luminance and contrast distortion measures. // Eq.1, Eq.2 AP clustering on pose space to obtain P = {P1 , P2 , . . . , PK }. // SectionIII-A3 for j = 1 to K do AP clustering on Illumination and contrast space for the Pj to obtain {uji |1 ≤ i ≤ Nj }. // SectionIII-A3 end for i = 1 to n do Extract material-dependent layer of ri (Mi ). // SectionIII-B1 Recover 3D face model of ri using 3DMM (Si ). // SectionIII-B2 Map the texture of Mi to Si . for j = 1 to K do Render under pj pose to obtain Vij . for each uji , i = 1 to Nj do Extract illumination-dependent layers (Ljk ). // SectionIII-B1 Apply guided filter on Ljk . Morphing between the filtered Ljk and Vij to obtain Ai . // SectionIII-B3 end end end Output: all sets of synthetic face ROIs under representative pose and illumination conditions. 2 Ai = [ai1 , ai2 , . . . , aiq ] ∈ IRd ×q , i = 1, 2, . . . , n .  based S2V FR system.    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19  An augmented dictionary is constructed by employing the synthetic ROIs generated via DSFS technique, and classification is performed via a structured SRC approach. Since the synthetic ROIs for each individual (including the synthetic poses, illuminations, and etc.) form a block in this dictionary, the SRC is considered as a structured sparse recovery problem. The main steps of the proposed domain-invariant S2V FR with dictionary augmentation are summarized as follows: •  Step 1: Generation of Synthetic Facial ROIs In the first step, q synthetic ROIs Ai = [ai1 , . . . , aiq ] ∈ 2 Rd ×q are generated for each ri of the reference gallery set using DSFS technique, where q is the number of synthetic ROIs for each class.  •  Step 2: Augmentation of Dictionary The synthetic ROIs generated through the DSFS technique are added to the reference dictionary to design a cross-domain dictionary. let DR = [Ir 1 , Ir 2 , . . . , Ir n ] ∈ 2 Rd ×n be the reference gallery dictionary, where Ir i is the concatenated result of ri . The cross-domain dictionary 2 DC = [Ir 1 , A1 , . . . , Ir n , An ] ∈ Rd ×n(q+1) integrates the original and synthetic ROIs in a linear model where Aj is the j th set of synthetic ROIs added to the j th class. Since q synthetic ROIs are added to each class, the total  8  The class label of the probe ROIs y is then determined based on the block sparse reconstruction error as follows:  number of synthetic ROIs in the cross-domain dictionary are nc = n(q + 1). The presented dictionary design in this work enables SRC to perform recognition with only one reference still ROI and makes it robust to the visual domain shift. •  label(y) = arg min k y − D[i]x[i] k2 . i  In order to solve the SRC problem of equation 15, the classical alternating direction method (ADM) is considered [38]. ADM is an efficient first-order algorithm with global convergence.  Step 3: Classification Given a probe video ROI y, general SRC represents y as a sparse linear combination of the codebook DC , and derives the sparse coefficients of y by solving the `0 minimization problem as follows: min kxk0  A`0 :  s.t. y = DC x .  In order to apply ADM to the A`2 /`1 problem, we first define an auxiliary variable and transform it into an equivalent problem:  (12)  Since the generated synthetic ROIs for each individual form a block of the dictionary, a better classification can arise from a representation of the probe ROI produced from the minimum number of blocks from the dictionary instead of looking for the representation of a probe ROI in the dictionary of all the training data using the so-called structured SRC which its goal is to find a representation of a probe ROI that uses the minimum number of blocks from the dictionary. For a dictionary  DC = DC [1], DC [2], . . . , DC [n] with blocks DC [i], i = 1, . . . , n, the block sparsity is formulated in terms of mixed `2 /`0 norm as n X I(k x[i] k2 > 0) s.t. y = DC x , A`2 /`0 : min x  min k z k2,1 = x    zgi  0  0 0 .. .  vi := Wi x[i] +  0  ···  wi(q+1)  for i = 1, . . . , m ,  1 (λ1 )gi , β  (21) (22)  Finally, the multipliers λ1 and λ2 are updated in the standard way: ( λ1 ← λ1 − γ1 β1 (z − x) (23) λ2 ← λ2 − γ2 β2 (DC x − y) ! √ 5+1 , the sequence For β1 , β2 > 0 and γ1 , γ2 ∈ 0, 2  (k) (k) (x , z ) generated by ADM algorithm from any initial point (x(0) , z(0) ) converges to (x∗ , z∗ ), where (x∗ , z∗ ) is a solution of Eq. 19.         1 vi = max k vi k2 − , 0 , β1 k vi k2  where  (15) ··· ··· .. .  β1 β1 k z − x k22 − λT2 (DC x − y) + k DC x − y k22 . 2 2  Minimizing (Eq. 19) with respect to z is obtained by the one-dimensional shrinkage formula as follows:  where 0 wi2 .. .  y = DC x .  (β1 I+β2 DTC DC )x = β1 z−λ1 +β2 DTC y+DTC λ2 . (20)  Finally, the weighted matrix obtained in III-A3 which shows cluster weights is multiplied to the `1 -minimization term. n X A`2 /`1 : min kWi x[i] k2 s.t. y = DC x .   wi1  0  Wi =  .  ..  s.t. z = x,  (19) where λ1 ∈ Rn , λ2 ∈ Rm are multipliers and β1 , β2 > 0 are penalty parameters. Then we apply the ADM approach to minimize the augmented Lagrangian problem with respect to x and z alternately. The x-subproblem, namely minimizing (Eq. 19) with respect to x, is given by the following linear system:  i=1  i=1  k zgi k2  i=1  minx k z k2,1 − λT1 (z − x) +  (13) where I(.) is the indicator function, and x[i] is the ith block in the sparse coefficient vector x corresponding to the dictionary block DC [i]. Since each dictionary block corresponds to a specific class, i represents the class index ranging from 1 to n as well. This optimization problem seeks the minimum number of non-zero coefficient blocks that reconstruct the probe ROI. Note that the optimization program A`2 /`0 is NP-hard since it requires searching over all possible few blocks of x and checking whether they span the given y. A relaxation of this problem is obtained by replacing the `0 with the `1 norm and solving the Eq.14. n X A`2 /`1 : min k x[i] k2 s.t. y = DC x . (14)  x  m X  (18) Note that problem (Eq. 18) has two blocks of variables (x and z) and its objective function is separable in the form of f (x) + g(z) since it only involves z, thus ADM is applicable. The augmented Lagrangian problem is of the form  i=1  x  (17)  (16) •  Step 4: Validation In practical FR systems, it is important to detect and then  9  reject outlier invalid probe ROIs. We use the sparsity concentration index (SCI) criteria defined in [3]: . k. maxi k δi (x) k1 / k x k1 −1 SCI(x) = k−1  ∈ (0, 1) . (24) where k is the total number of classes in the probe set and x ∈ Rn is a coefficient vector. A probe ROI is accepted as valid if SCI ≥ τ and otherwise rejected as invalid, where τ ∈ (0, 1) is a threshold. The S2V face recognition process through dictionary augmentation is formalized in Algorithm 2. Algorithm 2: A SRC-based still-to-video FR system  1 2  Input: Reference  face models of n classes enlisted in the gallery R = ri ∈ Rd×d |i = 1, . . . , n , generic set G = gi ∈ Rd×d |i = 1, . . . , m , threshold τ , and a probe ROI y. Generate nq synthetic ROIs for each class using the DSFS method. Build the cross domain dictionary DC by adding synthetic ROIs to the reference gallery set. Solve the A`2 /`1 problem using ADM technique. // Eq. 15  3 4 5  if SCI ≥ τ then Find the class label y.  // Eq. 17  6 7  else  8  Reject as invalid. Output: Class label of y.  V. E XPERIMENTAL M ETHODOLOGY A. Databases In order to validate the proposed DSFS for S2V FR under real-world surveillance conditions, extensive experiments were conducted on two publicly available datasets – COX-S2V [39] and Chokepoint [40]. These datasets were selected because they are the most representative for watch-list screening applications. They contain a high-quality reference image per subject captured under controlled condition (with a still camera), and lower-quality surveillance videos for each subject captured under uncontrolled conditions (with surveillance cameras). Videos are captured over a distributed network of cameras that covers a range of variations (e.g., pose, illumination, scale). COX-S2V dataset [39] contains 1000 individuals, with 1 high-quality still image and 4 low-resolution video sequences per individual simulating video surveillance scenario. In each video, an individual walk through a designed S-shape route with changes in illumination, expression, scale, pose, and blur.The Chokepoint dataset [40] consists of 25 individuals walking trough portal 1, and 29 individuals (23 male and 6 female) walking trough portal 2. The recording of portal 1 and portal 2 are one month apart. A camera rig with 3 cameras is placed just above a door and is used for simultaneously recording the entry of a person during four sessions. In total, the dataset consists of 54 video sequences and 64, 204 face images. The appearance of the face captured have variations in terms of illumination conditions, pose, and misalignment.  B. Experimental protocol With the Chokepoint database, 5 individuals are randomly chosen as watch-list individuals that each individual includes a high-quality frontal captured image. Prior to each experiment, the video data is split into 3 parts. ROIs are extracted from the video sequences of 10 other individuals selected at random as a generic set to represent capture conditions. ROIs of the video sequences of the remaining individuals along with video sequences of the 5 already selected watch-list individuals are employed for testing. In order to obtain representative results, this process is repeated 5 times with a different random selection of watch-list and generic set individuals, and the average accuracy is reported with mean and standard deviation over all the runs. With COX-S2V, 30 individuals are randomly considered as watch-list individuals including a high-quality captured image per each individual. Their corresponding lowquality video sequences along with ROIs of the video sequences of 100 other individuals are employed for testing. The ROIs extracted from the video sequences of 100 other individuals are selected at random as a generic set to represent capture conditions. This process is replicated 5 times with different stills and videos of watch-list individuals, and the average accuracy is reported with mean and standard deviation over all the runs. During the enrollment, a generic set of faces is captured from video trajectories across all ODs (i.e., global modeling), and their ROIs are extracted using the Viola-Jones face detection algorithm [41]. Face detection is also applied to still images prior to face synthesis. AP clustering is applied to the generic set, where q representative video ROIs are selected under various pose, illumination and contrast conditions, and a weight is assigned to each exemplar according to the cluster size. Then, q synthetic face images are generated for each individual based on the information obtained from these selected exemplars. Recall that AP clustering seeks exemplars (samples that are representative of clusters), and automatically determines k and q, the number of clusters, for each independent replication. The domain-invariant dictionary is then designed using the reference still and synthetic ROIs. During the operational phase, recognition is performed by coding the probe image over the domain-invariant dictionary regarding the weights obtained in the enrollment domain. Throughout the experiments, the sparsity parameter Λ is fixed to 0.005. For reference, the S2V FR system based on individual-specific SVMs is also evaluated. During the enrollment, a non-linear SVM classifier with RBF kernel is trained for each individual using target ROIs (reference still of the individual plus the related synthetically face images) versus non-target ROIs (reference still of cohort persons plus their synthetic face images). C. Performance Measures To assess the ability of face synthesizing techniques to address shifts in domain, a domain shift quantification (DSQ) measure is employed. With this measure, the similarity between a dictionary designed using synthetic ROIs (DA ) is compared with a dictionary formed with images collected from the OD (DR ) by measuring the mean pixel error between the dictionaries. Given two dictionaries DA and DR with the same number of images, the DSQ measure is defined  10  VI. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION This section first presents some examples of synthetic faces generated using the DSFS technique, and compares them with synthetic faces generated using state-of-the-art face synthesizing methods: 3DMM [25], 3DMM-CNN [26], and SHBMM [27]. Then, the performance of S2V FR systems based on individual-specific SVMs and on SRC is presented when using these synthetic facial ROIs for system design. FR performance is assessed when increasing the number of synthetic ROIs per each individual according to pose angles and lighting effects. To characterize the impact on performance, these systems are tested with a growing number of synthetic ROIs and generic training set, and compared with several relevant state-of-the-art S2V FR systems: ESRC [8], RADL [19], SVDL [17]), LGR [20], and Flow-based face frontalization [5]. The final experiment compares the performance of a system designed with synthetic ROIs obtained with DSFS, to a system designed with a growing number of randomly-selected synthetic ROIs. A. Face Synthesis This subsection presents examples of pose and lighting exemplars obtained by clustering of facial trajectories in the captured condition space. Figs. 6a and 6b show an example of pose clusters obtained with Chokepoint video trajectories of 10 individuals, and with COX-S2V video trajectories of 100 individuals. In this experiment, k = 9 and k = 7 pose clusters (exemplars) are typically determined with the Chokepoint and COX-S2V videos, respectively. The second level of clustering is then applied in the illumination and contrast measure space on each pose clusters. Figs. 6c and 6d show the exemplars selected based on both pose and lighting with the proposed representative selection of DSFS (see section III-A). Overall, q = 22 and q = 18 exemplars were typically selected based on both pose and lighting clusters determined in Chokepoint and COX-S2V videos, respectively. Figs. 7a to 7d show examples of synthetic ROIs generated under different pose, illumination and contrast conditions  (b)  (a)  Pose Cluster 3  Pose Cluster 7  1  0.7  0.9 0.6  0.8 0.7  Illumination  0.5  Illumination  as Qdsq = kDTR DA kF where a higher value indicates less domain shift [42]. The accuracy of the S2V FR system is assessed per individual of interest at the transaction level, using the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) space, where the true positive rates (TPRs) are plotted as a function of false positive rates (FPRs) over all threshold values. TPR is the proportion of target ROIs that correctly classified as individuals of interest over the total number of target ROIs in the sequence, while FPR is the proportion of non-target ROIs incorrectly classified as individuals of interest over the total number of non-target ROIs. The area under ROC curve is a global scalar measure of accuracy that can be interpreted as the probability of correct classification over the range of TPR and FPR. Accordingly, accuracy of FR systems is estimated using the partial area under ROC curve pAUC(20%) (using the AUC at 0 <FPR≤ 20%). Since the number of target and non-target data are imbalanced, the area under precision-recall curves (AUPR) is also used to estimate the performance of FR systems.  0.4  0.3  0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3  0.2  0.2 0.1 0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  Contrast  (c)  0.8  0.9  1  0.1 0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1  Contrast  (d)  Figure 6: Examples of representative selection results using AP clustering technique in terms of (a,b) pose angles, and (c,d) luminance and contrast with Chokepoint dataset on video sequences of 10 individuals and COX-S2V dataset on video sequences of 100 individuals, respectively, where the center of clusters show exemplars.  using the DSFS face synthesizing technique on the Chokepoint and COX-S2V datasets, respectively, where Basel Face Model (BFM) are used as generative 3D shape model [35]. In Appendix A, Fig.12 compares the quality of synthetic face generated via DSFS, 3DMM [25], and 3DMM-CNN [26] techniques.. The synthetic ROIs generated using the DSFS are also evaluated quantitatively. Table I shows the DSQ values of the DSFS and other state-of-the-art face synthesizing methods including 3DMM [25] 3DMM-CNN [26], and SHBMM [27] on Chokepoint and COX-S2V datasets. Higher DSQ values indicate a smaller domain shift, and potentially higher recognition rate between the corresponding two domains. The results are provided under the two following scenarios. 1) Frontal View: In the first experiment, 5 individuals in ED are randomly selected. A set of synthetic face are generated with a frontal view under various lighting effects from the still ROI of each individual to design DA . The corresponding video ROIs in the OD under the frontal view are then collected to form DR . Finally, the DSQ is measured for the DA and Dr dictionaries. 2) Profile View: In the second experiment, 5 individuals in ED are again randomly selected. Their synthetic ROIs are generated with profile view and different illumination conditions to form DA . The corresponding video ROIs in OD under profile view are collected to construct DR . Finally, the DSQ is estimated for the dictionaries. As shown in Table I, DSQ values of DSFS method are higher followed most closely by SHBMM in both scenarios. Accordingly, the cross-domain dictionary designed by the synthetic ROIs generated via the DSFS method is most suitable to reduce visual domain shifts and potentially achieve a higher level of accuracy. These results are in line with the recognition performance results.  11  (c)  (b)  (a)  (d)  Figure 7: Examples of synthetic ROIs generated under different capture conditions using the DSFS technique with Chokepoint (a,b) and COX-S2V (c,d) datasets.  Table I: Average DSQ value for frontal and profile views on Chokepoint and COX-S2V datasets.  0.7  0.54 SVM SRC  0.52  0.65 0.5  DSFQ COX-S2V database  Frontal ViewProfile View  Frontal ViewProfile View  0.55  0.5  8.27  7.38  8.24  7.63  0.45  3DMM-CNN[26]  7.61  7.03  7.57  7.29  0.4  9.16  7.26  9.34  7.71  Proposed DSFS  9.53  8.17  9.58  8.39  0.46 0.44 0.42 0.4  3DMM[25] SHBMM[27]  0.48  AUPR  Chokepoint database  pAUC  Technique  0.6  0.38 0.36 Baseline p  1  p2  p3  p4  p5  p6  p7  p8  Baseline p  p9  Number of Synthetic Pose ROIs per each Individual  1  p2  p3  p4  p5  p6  p7  p8  p9  Number of Synthetic Pose ROIs per each Individual  (a)  (b)  0.7  0.58 0.56  0.65 0.54  B. Face Recognition  0.52  AUPR  pAUC  In this subsection, the performance achieved using the S2V FR system based on SRC and DSFS (see Section IV) is assessed experimentally. For reference, the S2V FR system based on individual-specific SVMs is also evaluated. 1) Pose Variations: The S2V FR system is evaluated versus the number of synthetic ROIs that incorporate growing facial pose. Figs. 8a and 8d show the average AUC and AUPR obtained by increasing the number of synthetic ROIs generated using DSFS from k representative pose angles (pi , i = 1 . . . k) and with fixed lighting condition. Results indicate that by adding extra synthetic ROIs generated under representative pose angles allows to outperform baseline systems designed with a original reference still ROI alone. AUC and AUPR accuracy increases by about 10%, typically with only k = 9 and k = 7 synthetic pose ROIs for Chokepoint and COX-S2V datasets, respectively. 2) Mixed Pose and Illumination Variations: The performance of S2V FR systems is assessed versus the number of synthetic ROIs generated under both pose and lighting effects. Figs. 9a and 9d show average AUC and AUPR obtained by increasing the number of synthetic ROIs used to design SRC and SVM classifiers on the Chokepoint and COX-S2V databases, where Ai is a set of synthetic ROIs generated using DSFS technique under various pose and illumination conditions. Adding synthetic ROIs generated under various pose, illumination and contrast conditions allows to significantly outperform the baseline system designed with the original reference still ROI alone. AUC and AUPR accuracy increases by about 40%, typically with only q = 24 and q = 18 synthetic ROIs for Chokepoint and COX-S2V datasets,  0.6  0.55  0.5  0.5 0.48 0.46 0.44  0.45 0.42 0.4  0.4 Baseline p 1  p2  p3  p4  p5  p6  p7  Number of Pose Samples per each Individual  (c)  Baseline p 1  p2  p3  p4  p5  p6  p7  Number of Pose Samples per each Individual  (d)  Figure 8: Average AUC and AUPR versus the number of synthetic ROIs generated with DSFS according to various pose and fixed illumination. The S2V FR system employs either SVM and SRC classifiers on Chokepoint (a,b) and COX-S2V (c,d) databases.  respectively. As shown in Figs. 9a and 9d, accuracy for DSFS+SRC trends to stabilize to its maximum value when the size of the generic set is greater than q in DSFS. To view performance stabilizing with more than q synthetic ROIs, additional samples were selected randomly among AP clusters. Note that the Chokepoint dataset contains faces captured for a range illumination conditions with various densities. Hence, some exemplars may represent many video ROIs. Our method assigns higher weights to such distributions, and may yield a higher level of performance. The results obtained with DSFS are also compared to S2V FR systems that exploit stateof-the-art face synthesis techniques including 3DMM [25] (with randomly selected images), and SHBMM [27] (with 9 spherical harmonic basis images). As shown in Fig. 9, DSFS always outperforms these other techniques. 3) Impact of Representative Selection: Without prior knowledge of the OD, synthetic faces are generated according to a uniform distribution. Adding a large number of synthetic ROIs to the dictionary as needed to cover all possible cases can  12  1  0.7  0.6  0.7  0.5 0.6 0.4  0.5  0.4  0.3 Baseline  5  10  15  20  25  Baseline  5  10  15  20  1  25  Number of Synthetic Pose and Illumination ROIs per each Individual  Number of Synthetic Pose and Illumination ROIs per each Individual  0.9  (a)  (b)  0.8 0.6  0.75  0.5  Baseline  0.4  0.7  0.4  Baseline  0.3  0.3 0.2  AUPR  0.8  pAUC  0.5  0.6  0.8  0.9  0.7  0.7  pAUC  1  0.8 3DMM(with all possible cond.)+SRC DSFS(with all capture cond.)+SRC DSFS(with rep. capture cond.)+SRC  AUPR  pAUC  0.8  conditions. The third dictionary employs 180 synthetic pose ROIs generated under different pose and illumination by 3DMM. The results in Fig. 10 suggest that augmenting the dictionary using representative synthetic ROIs with the DSFS technique yields a higher level of accuracy, particularly under both pose and illumination conditions.  0.8 3DMM+SVM 3DMM-CNN+SVM SHBMM+SVM DSFS+SVM 3DMM+SRC 3DMM-CNN+SRC SHBMM+SRC DSFS+SRC  AUPR  0.9  0.7  0.65  0.2  0.6  0.1  0.6  0.1  0  0 Synthetic Pose ROIs  0.55  Synthetic Pose ROIs  (a)  0.5 0.5  Synthetic Pose and Illuination ROIs  Synthetic Pose and Illuination ROIs  (b)  0.45 0.8  1  0.4  0.4 Baseline  5  10  15  20  Baseline  5  10  15  0.9  20  Number of Synthetic Pose and Illumination ROIs per each Individual  Number of Synthetic Pose and Illumination ROIs per each Individual  0.8  (c)  (d)  0.7  0.7 0.6  ROIs generated with DSFS, 3DMM, and SHBMM according to pose and lighting effects where S2V FR system employs either SVM and SRC classifiers on Chokepoint (a,b) and COX-S2V (c,d) databases.  AUPR  pAUC  Figure 9: Average AUC and AUPR versus the number of synthetic  0.5  0.6 Baseline  0.5 0.4  0.3  0.3 0.2 0.2 0.1  0.1 0  0 Synthetic Pose ROIs  Synthetic Pose and Illuination ROIs  (c)  significantly increase the time and memory complexity of a FR systems and, more importantly, may cause over-fitting. The proposed DSFS technique extracts representative information from the OD to produce a compact set of synthetic ROIs that are robust to intra-class variations in the OD. In order to evaluate the impact of generating synthetic ROIs based on representative information (i.e., pose and lighting cluster instances), three dictionaries are designed for SRC: (1) a dictionary designed with representative synthetic ROIs (DSFS technique); (2) a dictionary designed with the synthetic ROIs under all capture conditions (DSFS without AP clustering); and (3) a dictionary designed under all possible conditions. Figs. 10a and 10d compares the AUC and AUPR of the SRC-based S2V FR system according to different number of synthetic ROIs in terms of pose and illumination conditions. The first scenario evaluates the impact of representative selection in terms of pose with three dictionaries are designed for SRC. The first dictionary typically employs k = 9 and k = 7 representative synthetic pose ROIs generated with the DSFS technique for Chokepoint and COX-S2V datasets, respectively. The second dictionary employs 100 synthetic pose ROIs generated by DSFS technique under all OD capture conditions. The third dictionary employs 180 synthetic pose ROIs generated by 3DMM in a set of rotation angles ranging from to −60 to +60. The second scenario evaluates the impact of representative selection in terms of both pose and illumination conditions with three dictionaries are designed for SRC. The first dictionary typically employs k = 9 and k = 7 representative synthetic ROIs generated under different pose and illumination with the DSFS technique for Chokepoint and COX-S2V datasets, respectively. The second dictionary employs 100 synthetic pose ROIs generated under different pose and illumination by DSFS technique under all OD capture  Baseline  0.4  Synthetic Pose ROIs  Synthetic Pose and Illuination ROIs  (d)  Figure 10: Average AUC and AUPR of a S2VFR system designed with representative synthetic ROIs vs a system designed with randomly generated synthetic ROIs on Chokepoint (a,b) and COX-S2V (c,d) datasets.  C. Comparison with Reference Techniques With the above experimental setting, we compare the recognition rate of the DSFS technique with the recent face synthesizing methods (3DMM[25], SHBMM[27]) in a S2V FR framework. We also present the impact of using face synthesizing along with KSVD dictionary learning [43]. Following this, the recognition rate of the DSFS technique with existing generic learning techniques (ESRC[8], RADL[19], SVDL[17], LGR[20]) is compared that regularization parameter Λ is set to 0.005. Note that the performance of the face synthesizing techniques is evaluated w/o dictionary learning. We also compared the DSFS results with the results obtained by Flow-based face frontalization method [5]. The quality of frontalization via the flow-based face frontalization technique is shown in Fig. 13 (Appendix B). Table II lists and compares the recognition performance where the results (recognition rate) are illustrated by the mean and standard deviation of 5 runs. Next, we compare the computational complexity in terms of average running time for each individual as well as number of inner products needed per each iteration. Figs. 11a and 11b shows the computational complexity in terms of number of inner products with a growing number of synthetic ROIs. Table. III compares the complexity of the proposed DSFS-SRC algorithm with RADL[19], LGR[20], and flowbased frontalization techniques on Chokepoint and COX-S2V datasets per each iteration. The experiments are conducted in MATLAB R2016b (64bit) Linux version on a PC workstation with an INTEL CPU (3.41-GHz) and 16GB RAM.  13  Table II: Comparative transaction level analysis of the proposed FR approach and related state-of-the art FR methods with Chokepoint and COX-S2V databases. Category  pAUC  AUPR  pAUC  AUPR  Baseline  SRC  0.524±0.041  0.415±0.035  0.563±0.034  0.457±0.036  ESRC[8]  SRC SRC-KSVD  0.802±0.028 0.813±0.027  0.651±0.032 0.672±0.020  0.835±0.031 0.842±0.017  0.695±0.032 0.715±0.020  RADL[19]  SRC  0.852±0.035  0.724±0.031  0.892±0.025  0.753±0.027  LGR[20]  SRC  0.849±0.031  0.717±0.024  0.881±0.028  0.744±0.025  SVDL[17]  SRC  0.825±0.022  0.703±0.031  0.843±0.025  0.724±0.031  3DMM[25]  SRC SRC-KSVD  0.681±0.037 0.732±0.035  0.523±0.037 0.605±0.032  0.706±0.031 0.757±0.032  0.562±0.032 0.641±0.028  3DMM-CNN[26]  SRC SRC-KSVD  0.652±0.028 0.714±0.027  0.516±0.026 0.585±0.025  0.702±0.027 0.721±0.027  0.552±0.025 0.603±0.025  SHBMM[27]  SRC SRC-KSVD  0.725±0.034 0.786±0.028  0.593±0.040 0.672±0.022  0.739±0.035 0.791±0.030  0.607±0.041 0.681±0.028  Face Frontalization  Flow-based[5]  SRC  0.824±0.023  0.711±0.024  0.852±0.028  0.719±0.027  Face Synthesizing + Generic Learning  Proposed DSFS  SRC  0.903±0.032  0.752±0.037  0.925±0.26  0.774±0.31  Face Synthesizing  # 108  18 LGR RADL DSFS+SRC  4.5  cost than other state-of-the-art methods. The main reason is that the dictionary designed by DSFS technique is able to represent real-world capture conditions and does not require a traditional dictionary learning process.  # 108  16  4  Number of Inner Products  Number of Inner Products  COX-S2V database  Classifier  Generic Learning  5  Chokepoint database  Technique  3.5 3 2.5 2 1.5 1  14 12 10 8 6  VII. C ONCLUSIONS  4 2  0.5 0  0 10  50  100  150  200  Number of Synthetic ROIs in the Gallery Dictionary  10  200  400  600  800  1000  Number of Synthetic ROIs in the Gallery Dictionary  (a)  (b)  Figure 11: Time complexity versus the number of synthetic ROIs on Chokepoint (a) and COX-S2V (b) data.  Table III: Average computational complexity and time of the DSFS and state-of-the-art techniques on Chokepoint and COXS2V datasets. Technique  Chokepoint database  COX-S2V database  No.inner productsRun time(s)No.inner productsRun time(s) RADL[19]  52,650,000  3.12  350,500,000  6.17  LGR[20]  273,100,000  7.13  1,147,200,000  11.35  Face Frontalization+SRC[5]  40,510,000  3.14  245,320,000  4.08  Proposed DSFS+SRC  32,450,000  1.55  190,250,000  2.61  The results show our proposed method that is a joint use of generic learning and face synthesizing achieves superior recognition results compared to the other methods under the same configuration which verifies that our face synthesizing technique better preserves identity information. Although RADL, LGR and the flow-base face frontalization techniques can achieve comparable accuracy to our approach, they are computationally expensive. It can be concluded that augmenting the SRC with synthetic ROIs generated by DSFS technique has a good recognition rate with less computational  This paper proposes a domain-specific face synthesizing (DSFS) technique to improve the performance of still-tovideo FR systems when surveillance videos are captured under various uncontrolled controlled conditions, and individuals are recognized based on a single facial image. The proposed approach takes advantage of operational domain information from the generic set that can effectively represent probe ROIs. A compact set of synthetic faces is generated that resemble individuals of interest under capture conditions relevant to the operational domain. For proof-of-concept validation, augmented dictionary with a block structure is designed based on DSFS, and face classification is performed within a SRC framework. Our experiments on the Chokepoint and COX-S2V datasets show that augmenting the reference discretionary of still-to-video FR systems using the proposed DSFS approach can provide a significantly higher level of accuracy compared to state-of-the-art approaches, with only a moderate increase in its computational complexity. Result indicated that face synthesis alone cannot effectively resolve the challenges of the SSPP and visual domain shift problems. With DSFS, generic learning and face synthesis operate complementarity. The proposed DSFS technique could be improved to generate synthetic faces with expression variations for a robust FR. In addition, to improve performance, the representative synthetic ROIs generated using DSFS could be applied to generate local camera-specific ROIs. DSFS is general in that synthetic ROIs could be applied to train or fine-tune a multitude of face recognition systems like deep CNNs, with information that robust models to specific operational domains.  14  R EFERENCES [1] M. A. A. Dewan, E. Granger, G.-L. Marcialis, R. Sabourin, F. Roli, Adaptive appearance model tracking for still-to-video face recognition, Pattern Recognition 49 (2016) 129–151. [2] S. Bashbaghi, E. Granger, R. Sabourin, G.-A. Bilodeau, Dynamic ensembles of exemplar-svms for still-to-video face recognition, Pattern Recognition 69 (2017) 61–81. [3] J. Wright, A. Y. Yang, A. Ganesh, S. S. Sastry, Y. Ma, Robust face recognition via sparse representation, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 31 (2) (2009) 210–227. [4] A. Wanger, J. Wright, A. Ganesh, Z. Zhou, Y. Ma, Towards a practical face recognition system: robust registration and illumination by sparse representation, IIEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 34 (2) (2009) 597–604. [5] T. Hassner, S. Harel, E. Paz, R. Enbar, Effective face frontalization in unconstrained images, in: CVPR, 2015, pp. 4295–4304. [6] Y. Liu, I. J. Wassell, A new face recognition algorithm based on dictionary learning for a single training sample per person, in: BMVC, 2015. [7] I. Masi, A. T. Tran, T. Hassner, J. T. Leksut, G. Medioni, Do we really need to collect millions of faces for effective face recognition?, in: ECCV, 2016. [8] W. Deng, J. Hu, J. Guo, Extended SRC: Undersampled face recognition via intraclass variant dictionary, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 34 (9). [9] W. Deng, J. Hu, X. Zhou, J. Guo, Equidistant prototypes embedding for single sample based face recognition with generic learning and incremental learning, Pattern Recognition 47 (12) (2014) 3738–3749. [10] E. Elhamifar, R. Vidal, Robust classification using structured sparse representation, in: CVPR, 2011, pp. 1873–1879. [11] S. Bashbaghi, E. Granger, R. Sabourin, G.-A. Bilodeau, Robust watchlist screening using dynamic ensembles of svms based on multiple face representations, Machine Vision and Applications 28. [12] J. Lu, Y.-P. Tan, G. Wang, Discriminative multimanifold analysis for face recognition from a single training sample per person, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 35 (1) (2013) 39–51. [13] W. AbdAlmageed, Y. Wu, S. Rawls, S. Harel, T. Hassner, I. Masi, J. Choi, J. Lekust, J. Kim, P. Natarajan, et al., Face recognition using deep multi-pose representations, in: WACV, 2016, pp. 1–9. [14] Y. Su, S. Shan, X. Chen, W. Gao, Adaptive generic learning for face recognition from a single sample per person, in: CVPR, 2010, pp. 2699– 2706. [15] Y. Gao, J. Ma, A. L. Yuille, Semi-supervised sparse representation based classification for face recognition with insufficient labeled samples, IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 26 (5) (2017) 2545–2560. [16] Z.-M. Li, Z.-H. Huang, K. Shang, A customized sparse representation model with mixed norm for undersampled face recognition, IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 11 (10) (2016) 2203–2214. [17] M. Yang, L. Van Gool, L. Zhang, Sparse variation dictionary learning for face recognition with a single training sample per person, in: ICCV, 2013, pp. 689–696. [18] F. Nourbakhsh, E. Granger, G. Fumera, An extended sparse classification framework for domain adaptation in video surveillance, in: ACCV, 2016, pp. 360–376. [19] C.-P. Wei, Y.-C. F. Wang, Undersampled face recognition via robust auxiliary dictionary learning, IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 24 (6) (2015) 1722–1734. [20] P. Zhu, M. Yang, L. Zhang, I.-Y. Lee, Local generic representation for face recognition with single sample per person, in: ACCV, 2014, pp. 34–50. [21] S. Bashbaghi, E. Granger, R. Sabourin, G.-A. Bilodeau, Ensembles of exemplar-svms for video face recognition from a single sample per person, in: AVSS, 2015, pp. 1–6. [22] M. Parchami, S. Bashbaghi, E. Granger, S. Sayed, Using deep autoencoders to learn robust domain-invariant representations for still-to-video face recognition, in: AVSS, 2017, pp. 1–6. [23] C. Shao, X. Song, Z.-H. Feng, X.-J. Wu, Y. Zheng, Dynamic dictionary optimization for sparse-representation-based face classification using local difference images, Information Sciences 393 (2017) 1–14. [24] F. Mokhayeri, E. Granger, G.-A. Bilodeau, Synthetic face generation under various operational conditions in video surveillance, in: ICIP, 2015, pp. 4052–4056. [25] V. Blanz, T. Vetter, Face recognition based on fitting a 3D morphable model, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 25 (9) (2003) 1063–1074.  [26] A. T. Tran, T. Hassner, I. Masi, G. Medioni, Regressing robust and discriminative 3D morphable models with a very deep neural network, in: CVPR, 2017, pp. 1493–1502. [27] L. Zhang, D. Samaras, Face recognition from a single training image under arbitrary unknown lighting using spherical harmonics, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 28 (3) (2006) 351–363. [28] E. Richardson, M. Sela, R. Or-El, R. Kimmel, Learning detailed face reconstruction from a single image, in: CVPR, 2017, pp. 5553–5562. [29] A. Tewari, M. Zollhöfer, H. Kim, P. Garrido, F. Bernard, P. Pérez, C. Theobalt, Mofa: Model-based deep convolutional face autoencoder for unsupervised monocular reconstruction, arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10580. [30] X. Chen, H. Wu, X. Jin, Q. Zhao, Face illumination manipulation using a single reference image by adaptive layer decomposition, IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 22 (11) (2013) 4249–4259. [31] A. Asthana, S. Zafeiriou, S. Cheng, M. Pantic, Robust discriminative response map fitting with constrained local models, in: CVPR, 2013, pp. 3444–3451. [32] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, E. P. Simoncelli, Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity, IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 13 (4) (2004) 600–612. [33] B. J. Frey, D. Dueck, Clustering by passing messages between data points, science 315 (5814) (2007) 972–976. [34] J. Jeon, S. Cho, X. Tong, S. Lee, Intrinsic image decomposition using structure-texture separation and surface normals, in: ECCV, 2014, pp. 218–233. [35] P. Paysan, R. Knothe, B. Amberg, S. Romdhani, T. Vetter, A 3D face model for pose and illumination invariant face recognition, in: AVSS, 2009, pp. 296–301. [36] X. Zhu, Z. Lei, X. Liu, H. Shi, S. Z. Li, Face alignment across large poses: A 3D solution, in: CVPR, 2016, pp. 146–155. [37] D. Jiang, Y. Hu, S. Yan, L. Zhang, H. Zhang, W. Gao, Efficient 3d reconstruction for face recognition, Pattern Recognition 38 (6) (2005) 787–798. [38] W. Deng, W. Yin, Y. Zhang, Group sparse optimization by alternating direction method, in: SPIE, Vol. 8858, 2013, p. 88580R. [39] Z. Huang, S. Shan, R. Wang, H. Zhang, S. Lao, A. Kuerban, X. Chen, A benchmark and comparative study of video-based face recognition on cox face database, IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 24 (12) (2015) 5967–5981. [40] Y. Wong, S. Chen, S. Mau, C. Sanderson, B. C. Lovell, Patch-based probabilistic image quality assessment for face selection and improved video-based face recognition, in: CVPRW, 2011, pp. 74–81. [41] P. Viola, M. J. Jones, Robust real-time face detection, International Journal of Computer Vision 57 (2) (2004) 137–154. [42] J. Ni, Q. Qiu, R. Chellappa, Subspace interpolation via dictionary learning for unsupervised domain adaptation, in: CVPR, 2013, pp. 692– 699. [43] M. Aharon, M. Elad, A. Bruckstein, rmk-svd: An algorithm for designing overcomplete dictionaries for sparse representation, IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 54 (11) (2006) 4311–4322.  A PPENDIX A. Face Synthesizing Results Examples of the synthetic face images generated via DSFS, 3DMM[25] and 3DMM-CNN[26] techniques for individual ID#23 of the Chokepoint dataset in Fig. 12 shown. B. Face Frontalization Results Fig. 13 shows an example of the face frontalized for the facial probe ROI for individual ID#23 of the Chokepoint dataset via the flow-based face frontalization technique [5].  15  (i)  (ii)  (iii)  (i)  (iv)  (v)  (ii)  (iii)  (i)  (iv)  (v)  (ii)  (iii)  Figure 12: Synthetic face images generated via (a) DSFS, (b) 3DMM, (c) 3DMM-CNN with Chockpoint data.  Figure 13: Face frontalization via flow-based technique: (a) probe face image under profile view, (b) frontalized face image.  (iv)  (v)

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
