Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_7494

Abstract:
Predicting Demographics, Moral Foundations, and Human Values from Digital Behaviors  arXiv:1712.01930v2 [cs.CY] 7 Dec 2017  Kyriaki Kalimeri1,∗ Mariano G. Beiró2,∗∗ Matteo Delfino1 Robert Raleigh3 Ciro Cattuto1 1 Data Science Laboratory, ISI Foundation, Turin, Italy 2 Universidad de Buenos Aires, Facultad de Ingenierı́a, INTECIN (CONICET), CABA, Argentina 3 PathSight Predictive Science Inc., New York City, USA ∗ Corresponding author. E-mail: kalimeri@ieee.org ∗∗ Work done when in Data Science Laboratory, ISI Foundation, Turin, Italy  Abstract Personal electronic devices such as smartphones give access to a broad range of behavioral signals that can be used to learn about the characteristics and preferences of individuals. In this study we explore the connection between demographic and psychological attributes and digital records for a cohort of 7,633 people, closely representative of the US population with respect to gender, age, geographical distribution, education, and income. We collected self-reported assessments on validated psychometric questionnaires based on both the Moral Foundations and Basic Human Values theories, and combined this information with passively-collected multi-modal digital data from web browsing behavior, smartphone usage and demographic data. Then, we designed a machine learning framework to infer both the demographic and psychological attributes from the behavioral data. In a cross-validated setting, our model is found to predict demographic attributes with good accuracy (weighted AUC scores of 0.90 for gender, 0.71 for age, 0.74 for ethnicity). Our weighted AUC scores for Moral Foundation attributes (0.66) and Human Values attributes (0.60) suggest that accurate prediction of complex psychometric attributes is more challenging but feasible. This connection might prove useful for designing personalized services, communication strategies, and interventions, and can be used to sketch a portrait of people with similar worldviews.  Introduction How much do shallow digital records reveal us? Traditionally, personalization in services and advertising campaigns was based on strategic demographic attributes, mainly gender and age. Nowadays, the ubiquity of mobile devices allows for pervasive collection of data, revolutionizing the way we design personalized services as well as successful communication strategies. Here we present a large-scale longitudinal study demonstrating that easily accessible digital records of behavior, like web browsing data or mobile application usage, can be used to automatically infer not only basic demographical variables such as the gender but highly complex worldview attributes such as human  1/32  values as well. A cohort nearly representative to the US census with respect to a number of demographic variables was recruited; participants responded to standard psychometric questionnaires regarding their moral views and human values and, at the same time, they shared one month of their digital data (web browsing or smartphone usage). The individual digital traces were then employed to train a random forest classification model for predicting their moral constructs and human values. The predictions were then confronted with the answers to questionnaires’, showing that it is possible to infer moral views and human values from proxy digital data. These results offer a great potential for personalizing web services and fine-tuning communication strategies when addressing important social issues. In the remaining of this section we describe previous work related to the prediction of individual’s psychometric and demographic attributes from digital traces. Then we briefly introduce the two theories that are the basis of our study: the Moral Foundation Theory and the Schwartz Human Values Theory.  Inferring Users’ Demographics Early studies performed by means of traditional interviews revealed differences in the way men and women used the Internet; for instance, in a study from 2001 women seemed prone to use e-mail while males preferred web browsing [19]. One of the first approaches to predict users’ gender and age from their Web browsing behaviors, was presented by Hu et al. [18], where the web browsing view information was treated as a hidden variable to propagate demographic information between different users. Weber et al. [45] employed a Yahoo! query database to infer demographic information such as gender, but also more advanced attributes as income and ethnicity from web browsing query data on a closely representative sample of the US population. In a related study by Weber et al. [46], the queries submitted from different ZIP codes enriched by US census data were exploited to highlight the differences in user behavior and search patterns of several demographic groups. A number of studies inferred gender and age from communication traces recorded from smartphone devices over large populations ( [52], [7], [8]). Apart from inference on aggregated information of unique contacts, calls, texts and the total duration of calls for incoming and outgoing interactions, a recent study exploited demographic attributes prediction from the installed applications on smartphones [26], while [40] predicted the gender based on the lists of apps installed by 218 users. Other studies employ purchase data [44] or location check-ins [56] to infer users’ demographic attributes. Being able to automatically predict demographic characteristics allows for a deeper understanding of the communication and behavioral patterns in a wide range of applications. Also, understanding gender differences when interacting with sponsored search results [20] can help building better recommendation systems for e-commerce websites, improving user experience and increasing sales [55].  Inferring Users’ Personality Moving to a more complex and ambitious domain, researchers addressed the automatic prediction of people’s personalities from their digital data, in their attempt to endow machines with a notion of social and affective intelligence as well as to better understand open issues in social sciences [43]. The most dominant paradigm in computational personality research is the Big-Five (BF) or Five-Factor Model (FFM) [5]. Based on this model, many recent studies exploited the relationship between automatically extracted behavioral characteristics derived from smartphone data and self-reported Big-Five personality traits (Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Emotional Stability and Openness to Experience) [4,6].  2/32  Exploiting the predictive power of the users’ installed apps, Xu et al. [50] presented a large-scale study, where approximately two thousand users filled in the Big Five questionnaire by means of an Android app which recorded the mobile app adoption of each user. Several personality traits were then inferred using as predictors the mobile apps used by each individual, achieving on average 65% higher precision than randomness on all traits. Kosinski et al. [22] studied the role of personality on website preferences, combining personality profiles and website choices from more than 160, 000 users and investigating whether different websites attract audiences with different personalities. Facebook Likes have been also employed to predict the personality traits of the users by means of regression models [21, 53]. Bi et al. [1] predicted the demographics of users based on their past queries by employing domain adaptation and transfer learning.  Moral Foundations Theory In this study, we tackle the idea of predicting the moral constructs and human values based on digital traces. The cornerstone of our study is the Moral Foundations Theory (MFT) which focuses on the explanation of morality, its origins, development, and cultural variations [13, 15]. The Moral Foundations Theory, even if in its infancy, has already impacted not only psychology but a wide range of scientific domains (for a review see Graham et al. [10]). Moral cognitive neuroscience has long studied the neuroanatomical basis of moral motivations in moral cognition and emotion (for a review see Zahn et al. [54]). In particular, employing a preliminary framework of the Moral Foundations Theory (presented in [12]), Moll et al. [31] indicated the critical regions for social behavior and perception, which play a central role in moral appraisals, identifying the cognitive and emotional networks involved in judging and reacting to moral information. More recently, Lewis et al. [23] investigated the neurological basis of moral judgment, using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) based on the MFT. Interestingly, their findings suggest that variation in moral sentiment reflects individual differences in brain structure. The relation between brain structure and moral values has been also suggested by [33, 35, 36] while [17] assessed the relation between brain structure and the emotion of disgust based on the theory of human values [15]. These findings pave the way towards an integration of media communication and the human perception process of moral judgments, helping to clarify how and when dispositions and attitudes towards interpersonal and intergroup processes are formed, and their relation to persuasion and communication narratives [47]. Indicatively, MFT has been employed to explain attitudes and behaviors in complex situations such as politics [29], donations [48], climate change [49], and poverty [25]. The MFT may be considered to be at a higher level with respect to the dispositional traits of personality expressed in the Five-Factor model [5], providing insights on the characteristic adaptations of the individuals [14] as described by Dan McAdams’s threelevel account of personality (dispositional traits, characteristic adaptations, and life stories) [27, 28]. MFT focuses on the psychological basis of morality, identifying the following five moral foundations (see [13, 15]); care/harm, basic concerns for the suffering of others, including virtues of caring and compassion; fairness/cheating, concerns about unfair treatment, inequality, and more abstract notions of justice; loyalty/betrayal, concerns related to obligations of group membership, such as loyalty, self-sacrifice, and vigilance against betrayal; authority/subversion, concerns related to social order and the obligations of hierarchical relationships such as obedience, respect, and proper role fulfillment. purity/degradation, concerns about physical and spiritual contagion, including virtues of chastity, wholesomeness, and control of desires. These foundations collapse into two superior foundations, namely the (1) individualizing and (2) binding foundations. According to Haidt [13], the individualizing foundation asserts that the basic constructs of society are the individuals and hence focuses on their protection and  3/32  fair treatment, defending their right to pursue their own goals. In contrast, the binding foundation focuses on group-binding, based on the respect of leadership and traditions, and the defense of family as the nucleus of society.  Schwartz Human Values The moral domain is influenced also by virtue ethics, education, religion and the ethical codes of specific cultures [15]. Since social and moral values that transcend specific situations also contain emotional salience, we included the Schwartz theory of human values [37]. Schwartz identified ten basic values with universal, cross-culture validity [38] and discussed in detail the goals and motivations they express: self-direction, independent thought, action-choosing, creating, exploring; stimulation, need for variety and stimulation to maintain an optimal level of activation; hedonism, related to organismic needs and the pleasure associated with satisfying them; achievement, personal success through demonstrating competence according to social standards; power, the attainment or preservation of a dominant position within the more general social system; security, safety, harmony, and stability of society, of relationships, and of self; conformity, restraint of actions, inclinations, and impulses likely to upset or harm others and violate social expectations or norms; tradition, symbols and practices or groups that represent their shared experience and fate; benevolence, concern for the welfare of close others in everyday interaction; universalism, this value type includes the former maturity value type; including understanding, appreciation, tolerance, and protection for the welfare of all people and for nature. The above ten values can be clustered into four higher order value types, so-called quadrant values and into two dimensions: Openness to change (self-direction, stimulation) vs. Conservation (security, conformity, tradition) and Selfenhancement (universalism, benevolence) vs. Self-transcendence (power, achievement). Therefore, the first dimension captures the conflict between values that emphasize the independence of thought, action, and feelings and readiness for change and the values that emphasize order, self-restriction, preservation of the past, and resistance to change. The second dimension captures the conflict between values that emphasize concern for the welfare and interests of others and values that emphasize the pursuit of one’s own interests and relative success and dominance over others. Hedonism shares elements of both openness to change and self-enhancement.  Materials and Methods In this section we describe our data set in terms of the population composition, the demographic and psychometric gathered factors, and the structure and source of the individual digital traces. Then, we describe the details of the feature extraction process and the binarization of the ground truth psychometric scores. Finally, we present our classification model, including its parametrization, grid search and cross-validation steps and the use of the weighted AUROC performance measure.  Data Collection 7, 633 subjects participated in this study after being informed about its content, purpose and privacy policies, during a probability based recruitment campaign carried out in the United States of America by subcontracting a marketing company. Informed consent was obtained from all participants enabling the collection, storage, and treatment of data. Upon acceptance of the privacy policy∗ , the participants were asked to fill in a series of demographic information and standard psychometric questionnaires. Moreover, they ∗ https://www.researchnow.com/privacy-policy/  4/32  were requested to allow access to their basic mobile or desktop traffic data, for a period of one month. 5, 008 people (2, 823 women) consented the access to their desktop data while 2,625 people (1,544 women) consented access to mobile data, hereafter referred to as “Desktop” and “Mobile” data sets respectively. Demographic Data The intake survey covered basic demographic factors (age, gender, ethnicity† ), geographic factors (home location, expressed at zip-code level), socioeconomic factors (educational level, marital status, parenthood, wealth, income), health-related factors (exercise, smoke, and weight issues) and political orientation. Table S5 in B presents the complete list of the demographic information gathered along with the respective range of values. Psychometric Questionnaires Following the intake survey, each participant filled in two psychometric questionnaires, a first one regarding their moral values [11] and second one related to their human values [37], in line with the scopes of our study. The Schwartz human values were assessed by the Portrait Values Questionnaire [39], whose validity across cultures was validated in studies performed on 82 countries and samples belonging to highly diverse geographic, cultural, linguistic, religious, age, gender, and occupational groups. The questionnaire is based on self-assessments resulting in a numerical value per person for each one of the ten basic values. Quadrant values are then obtained as the sum of the individual items of which they consist. The Moral Foundations were assessed by the Moral Foundations Questionnaire [11], which is a validated measure of the degree to which individuals endorse each of five dimensions. The questionnaire is based on self-assessment evaluations and consists of 30 items, resulting in a unique numerical value per person and for each one of the five foundations. Mobile Data Participants were asked to download an application which, upon agreement of the privacy policy, logged the information described below. The data captured from the mobile devices are thoroughly described in Table 1. Desktop Data For the participants who permitted the logging of their desktops’ web browsing data, the domain names, the average time spent online and the number of visits per day on a particular domain were captured. All this information was aggregated by day, and only the domain name of each URL was stored to ensure the privacy of the participants. Web browsing Data. Similar to the mobile section, URLs for both secure and non-secure traffic were captured, though only the URLs’ domain was stored for privacy issues. For each visited URL the time stamp of the moment that the page was accessed was also recorded.  Feature Extraction We employ these digital traces of everyday behaviors to predict a series of not only demographic attributes but also deeper psychometric ones. Here we discuss the feature sets we identified to represent the behavioral sequences corresponding to web browsing, application usage, and mobility patterns. † We use the term “African American” as a short-hand for the term “black or African-American” as used in the official US census. See http://factfinder.census.gov/help/en/  5/32  Description of Mobile Data GPS Data.  Latitude and longitude were captured in the following instances: (i) whenever the device moved more than 8km respect to previous capture; (ii) during application login; (iii) every 30 minutes if previous criteria were not met. Together with the latitude and longitude, a timestamp was also recorded containing the date and time when the location was captured for each participant.  Applications’ Data.  Application usage was captured whenever the application was running in the “foreground”. Foreground usage means that an application is open on someone’s device, regardless of whether or not the application is currently being engaged with. Application usage data included for each participant, records of the date and time stamp, the local time zone and time spent on the application (in seconds).  Mobile browsing Data.  URL data was captured from the native browser on the subject’s device (not any 3rd party browsers). URLs for both secure and non-secure traffic were captured, though only the URLs’ domain was stored for privacy issues. Table 1. Detailed description of the smartphone data collection. Frequency of domain visits. Users and the domains they visited were represented as a sparse user-domain matrix, the entries of which were set equal to the raw counts of visits and zero otherwise. Having performed an initial exploratory analysis (see Effects of Quantity and Quality of Available Information in D), we set the minimum of amount of web-domain visits, required per subject S, to be N = 30. Users with a lower number of visits than this were discarded from the analysis. Frequency of applications used. Users and the domains they visited were represented as a sparse user-App matrix, the entries of which were set equal to the raw counts of visits, and zero otherwise. No minimum activity threshold was set for the applications used. Frequency of places visited. GPS data for a user consists of a series of points containing latitude, longitude, and a timestamp. We processed this information in two different ways. First, we aggregated the points by ZIP code and extracted the time spent by the user in different areas. We merged this information with socioeconomic data from the US census, as average income, health insurance status, employment, housing, occupation, education level, earnings, marital status and poverty, obtaining a series of features as for example the average income of the places visited by the user. Secondly, in a smaller geographical scale, we inferred the closest registered location from Google places for each geographical point, and we were able to reconstruct a (user, place category) matrix, where places were aggregated by category (as a hospital, restaurant, church, etc). Each entry of this matrix was set equal to the raw count of visits to places of the correspondent category.  6/32  Ground-Truth Ground truth levels for the moral traits and human values were obtained by considering the self-assessed questionnaires filled by the subjects without additionally labeled material by external judges. The moral foundation scores, as well as the Schwartz values (SV) described above, were quantized into two classes, “Low” and “High” thresholded at their respective median value. We opted for a binary strategy for all the numeric variables (MFT and SV), to limit phenomena of extremely unbalanced classes. The collected demographic information was either categorical or ordinal, and therefore we opted for a multiclass classification strategy maintaining the vast majority of the classes. The dropping criterion of a class was whether it appeared to have less than 10 samples in one of the cross-validation folds (see Table S5).  Classification Method To automatically identify the morality and human values of the participants having access only to their digital data we conceived this study as a supervised classification problem. The behavioral cues described in the Feature Extraction section were aligned to the ground truth values provided by each participant, regarding moral foundations scores, Schwartz values, and the demographic variables. No filter was applied to the original data. We designed a generic experimentation scheme, aiming to assess and compare the predictive power of (i) the distinct behavioral sequences (web browsing, mobile application usage, mobility patterns) and (ii) the fusion of the separate modalities, for the prediction of each of the MFT, SV and Demographic attributes. We opted for a Random Forest (RF) classifier [2] due to its ability to deal with sparse data and unbalanced labels. A 5-fold cross-validation was performed for each target variable along with a grid search for hyperparameter optimization (see C). The best performing model for each target variable was chosen as the one that maximized the weighted Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUROC) statistic [24]. The weighted AUROC statistic was preferred over the commonly-used accuracy metric since the former takes into account the effect of unbalanced labels, which holds true for most of our demographic attributes. All the prediction scores reported through this paper are in terms of the weighted AUROC. In detail, the best model for each target variable emerged from a grid-search step and was employed in a k-fold cross-validation with k = 5. In each fold, the entire feature space, X, is randomly shuffled and split into two mutually exclusive sets, the training set T r, (80% of X) and the testing set T s (20% of X). Furthermore, for each target variable, we estimated the relative rank (i.e. depth) of each feature as emerged from the “Gini” impurity function, assessing in this way its relative importance for the predictability of the target [2]‡ .  Results Moral Foundations In the Moral Foundations Theory and the individualistic/binding hyper-cluster we obtained prediction scores of 66% for authority, 62% for care, 58% for fairness, 63% for loyalty, 67% for purity, and 66% for individualists§ . The nature of these attributes is not trivial and hence, even if the prediction scores lie within a range of 20% to 40% better than a random prediction, they prove the feasibility and potentials of the approach. Overall, the web domains from Desktop browsing were more informative than mobile ‡ The § All  implementation of the model was performed using code from the scikit-learn project [34] prediction scores refer to weighted AUROC metric.  7/32  traces for the prediction. Table S1, in A reports the average weighted AUROC metric for the 5 folds and the respective standard deviations for models trained on the web domains of the Desktop data set, on web domains of the Mobile data set, on solely Application usage, and finally on the fusion of web browsing and application usage of the Mobile data set. Focusing on the individualistic versus social binding hyper-cluster, Table 2 presents the most important predictors for the individualistic versus binding foundations. In agreement with the literature on moral foundations and political orientation, the websites and applications that emerge as differentiators of these two groups are strongly reflecting their choice of information sources, for instance huffingtonpost.com for the individualists and foxnews.com for the binders. These findings are in line with existing literature studies on news selectivity and mechanisms of political opinion formation [51]. Moreover, according to a year-long Pew Report regarding political polarization and the sources people usually get informed from, people “with ideological views on the left and right have information streams that are distinct from those of individuals with more mixed political views and very distinct from each other” [30]. Taking a deeper look into the most predictive features in each of the models according to the feature importance measure, interesting insights emerge for each moral dimension. Indicatively, The Huffington Post and ThinkProgress are considered progressive sources of news and information that perceive the notion of authoritarian displays of power and arbitrary order as negative [30]. Visiting change.org is an important indicator of concern for equity and other’s suffering since it organizes around topics meant to invoke change; especially for those experiencing victim status. Similarly, TheAnimalRescue.com is evocative of nurturing and caring sentiments. Individuals who consider themselves as pure can be identified by installing applications like the Bible or the Gospels, and they tend to follow Fox News rather than The New York Times. In Table S2 in SI, we indicatively report the ten most predictive domains and applications for each model. Individualist (Desktop)  Individualist (Mob and Apps)  google.com (I) huffingtonpost.com (I) foxnews.com (B) FOX NEWS (B) dailykos.com (I) BIBLE (B) yelp.com (I) google.com (I) imdb.com (I) accuweather.com (B) cnsnews.com (B) HANGOUTS (I) wikipedia.org (I) EMERGENCY ALERTS (B) mrctv.org (B) facebook.com (I) theblaze.com (B) GOSPEL LIBRARY (B) thepetitionsite.com (I) wikipedia.org (I) Table 2. Top ten websites emerging as the best predictors of individualistic and binding foundations for two distinct models; the first one trained on Desktop browsing data and the second one on the fusion of mobile browsing and applications usage. The weighted AUROC metric is 66% for both cases. We note that among the predictors we find many news websites which are in line with the expected profiles of the two foundations. Moreover, there is consistency in the correlation of certain predictors (e.g. wikipedia.org) with a specific foundation indicating the stability of the approach.  8/32  Schwartz Human Values Comparatively, the prediction of Schwartz’s Human Basic Values and Quadrants proved to be a more difficult classification problem with respect to the Moral Foundations one. The average AUROC weighted metric for all the attributes was around 60%, with the most accurate predictions being the ones for the conservation (63%) and universalism (62%) values. Employing as predictors the Desktop browsing domains, mobile browsing or the fusion of mobile browsing and applications achieved similar results, with the latter yielding slightly higher ones. Table S1 in A, reports the AUROC weighted metric for each attribute while Table S3 reports the ten most predictive domains and applications for each model.  Demographic Data The prediction of the demographic data produced the highest scores; the most accurately predicted one being the “gender” attribute, with a 90% AUROC score. As mentioned, the reported score is weighted therefore the baseline (indicating a random prediction) is always 50%. Interestingly, gender was also noted to be the most predictable characteristic in other demographic studies. In the study by Kosinski et al. [21] the authors reported an accuracy of 93%, with 62% of women in the sample (59% in ours) when employing the users’ “Likes” on the Facebook platform as predictors. The prediction score for gender is of great importance not only because of the high accuracy achieved but mainly because it’s the most broadly studied attribute in the literature and perhaps the only one that can be employed to compare the validity and potentials of our study with respect to the state-of-the-art literature. Moving to less commonly studied demographic attributes as age (71%), marital status (67%), parenting (72%) and ethnicity (74%) our model is quite efficient at prediction; the latter was inferred with the same accuracy by the GPS data features alone, probably because it is mostly correlated with the geographic area and type of place visited by the users. Income and wealth were inferred with 60% and 66% respectively. Finally, we addressed health related attributes such as the presence of weight issues and the practice of physical exercise, achieving 63% and 64% AUROC weighted scores respectively. We were also able to capture the smoking behavior of individuals with accuracy of 64%. These AUROC scores show that digital footprints can represent a contribution for targeting individuals in health communication campaigns. In the prediction of demographic variables we have considered all the major categories in our analysis, which hardens the classification tasks. Complex attributes such as education level (59%) and political orientation (60%) were difficult to infer, but if we consider only the two major political parties, namely Democrats and Republicans, the AUROC weighted prediction score reaches 70%. Table S5 in B provides a complete list of all the categories (labels) considered for each predicted attribute. The feature importances for each model provide interesting insights on each attribute. For instance, Linkedin.com appears to be the most significant indicator of higher education, while FACEBOOK an indicator of college education. Interestingly the website of the Jehovah’s Witnesses Church is an indicator of lower educational level (high-school); these findings are consistent with studies on educational trends and social media usage, as reported in the Gallup Poll results in the US [32] and on educational trends and religion [41]. Top gender trends –Pinterest and Cartwheel by Target– were also pointed out as representative of the “gender” attribute [26]. As for the prediction of age, the social network preferences are the most predictive cues. For the political orientation prediction, some websites and apps emerge related to who participants trust for their daily information, for instance, huffingtonpost.com and Fox News emerged amongst the highest rated descriptors; this finding is in line with  9/32  the report of the Pew Research on the relation of the news sources and the political views of their audiences [30]. Indicatively, LinkedIn and adadvisor.net emerged as the most prevalent income predictors for the higher income class, while the most predictive applications and websites visited were related to fitness applications such as FITBIT and MAPMYRUN. Overall, these indicators being cross referenced by other studies are contributing to the validity of our approach, however, their exhaustive interpretation out of the scope of this study. Table S1 in A reports in detail the AUROC weighted metric for all the demographic attributes, while Table S4 indicatively reports the ten most predictive domains and applications for each model.  Conclusions We have assessed the potential predictive power of low level digital behavioral sequences to predict complex psychological attributes such as morality traits, human values and a series of advanced demographic attributes through a cross-validated machine learning framework for classification. While previous work had shown the possibility of inferring demographic attributes from platform specific traces, these results are supported by a general population sample, closely representative of the U.S.A population (see B), which is not affiliated to a specific web platform or application. Our design avoids many cultural and demographical biases inherent to the users of specific platforms [9]. The validation of our results was based on self-reported information provided through a concrete survey designed for the scopes of this study. Our findings suggest that digital traces can also be informative of the moral foundations and human values and can be used to sketch a portrait of emerging cyber-cultures, shared among people with a similar worldview. The exploitation of different navigation modalities (web browsing, application usage, GPS traces) an their combination with different sources of open-access information – Google Places, American Census Data – have allowed us to determine the predictive power of each modality by itself. At the same time, these findings point out the ease in predicting demographic attributes such as gender, ethnicity, and income, calling for further research on the understanding of bias embedded in the predictive models and decision-making algorithms which may lead to involuntary discrimination [42, 57]. Overall, deviations in performance between models inferencing from web browsing or smartphone usage were minimal for all attributes. Considering that smartphones are among the most widely deployed technologies of human history, the capability of automatically predicting demographic attributes and human/moral values from multi-modal passively collected data is potentially a key enabler for delivering better targeted and more effective interventions at the population scale or nowcasting social issues such as poverty. The outcome of this study highlights the possibility of learning complex psychological attributes by assessing web browsing data and/or mobile usage while gaining important insights on the population’s behavior and preferences. Such insights are of major importance not only for designing personalized web services but also for fine-tuning large scale communication strategies for addressing important social issues such as public health or environmental attitudes.  Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge support from the “Lagrange Project” of the ISI Foundation funded by the Fondazione CRT. The authors would like to thank all the participants  10/32  of the study. The authors also acknowledge Dr. Johan Bollen for his comments and feedback on earlier version of the manuscript.  Author’s Contributions KK, MD, RR and CC designed and supervised the study; RR collected the data; KK, MD and MB analyzed the data and prepared the figures; KK, MB and CC wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.  References 1. B. Bi, M. Shokouhi, M. Kosinski, and T. Graepel. Inferring the demographics of search users: Social data meets search queries. In Proceedings of the 22Nd International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’13, pages 131–140, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM. 2. L. Breiman. Random forests. Machine learning, 45(1):5–32, 2001. 3. U. S. C. Bureau. Pepagesex - annual estimates of the resident population for selected age groups by sex for the united states, states, counties, and puerto rico commonwealth and municipios: April 1, 2010 to july 1, 2014, generated by kyriaki kalimeri, using american factfinder, July 2015. 4. G. Chittaranjan, J. Blom, and D. Gatica-Perez. Mining large-scale smartphone data for personality studies. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 2012. 5. P. T. Costa Jr and R. R. McCrae. The five-factor model of personality and its relevance to personality disorders. Journal of Personality Disorders, 6(4):343, 1992. 6. Y.-A. de Montjoye, J. Quoidbach, F. Robic, and A. S. Pentland. Predicting personality using novel mobile phone-based metrics. In International Conference on Social Computing, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling, and Prediction, pages 48–55. Springer, 2013. 7. Y. Dong, Y. Yang, J. Tang, Y. Yang, and N. V. Chawla. Inferring user demographics and social strategies in mobile social networks. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’14, pages 15–24, New York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM. 8. B. Felbo, P. R. Sundsoy, A. Pentland, S. Lehmann, and Y. A. de Montjoye. Using deep learning to predict demographics from mobile phone metadata. CoRR, abs/1511.06660, 2015. 9. S. A. Golder and M. W. Macy. Digital footprints: Opportunities and challenges for online social research. Sociology, 40(1):129, 2014. 10. J. Graham, J. Haidt, S. Koleva, M. Motyl, R. Iyer, S. P. Wojcik, and P. H. Ditto. Moral foundations theory: The pragmatic validity of moral pluralism. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Forthcoming, 2012. 11. J. Graham, B. a. Nosek, J. Haidt, R. Iyer, S. Koleva, and P. H. Ditto. Mapping the moral domain. Journal of personality and social psychology, 101(2):366–85, Aug. 2011.  11/32  12. J. Haidt. The moral emotions. Handbook of affective sciences, 11:852–870, 2003. 13. J. Haidt and J. Graham. When morality opposes justice: Conservatives have moral intuitions that liberals may not recognize. Social Justice Research, 20(1):98–116, 2007. 14. J. Haidt, J. Graham, and C. Joseph. Above and below left?right: Ideological narratives and moral foundations. Psychological Inquiry, 20(2-3):110–119, 2009. 15. J. Haidt and C. Joseph. Intuitive ethics: How innately prepared intuitions generate culturally variable virtues. Daedalus, 133(4):55–66, 2004. 16. J. A. Hanley and B. J. McNeil. The meaning and use of the area under a receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve. Radiology, 143(1):29–36, 1982. 17. H. R. Heekeren, I. Wartenburger, H. Schmidt, K. Prehn, H.-P. Schwintowski, and A. Villringer. Influence of bodily harm on neural correlates of semantic and moral decision-making. NeuroImage, 24(3):887 – 897, 2005. 18. J. Hu, H.-J. Zeng, H. Li, C. Niu, and Z. Chen. Demographic prediction based on user’s browsing behavior. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’07, pages 151–160, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM. 19. L. A. Jackson, K. S. Ervin, P. D. Gardner, and N. Schmitt. Gender and the internet: Women communicating and men searching. Sex roles, 44(5-6):363–379, 2001. 20. B. J. Jansen and L. Solomon. Gender demographic targeting in sponsored search. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 831–840. ACM, 2010. 21. M. Kosinski, D. Stillwell, and T. Graepel. Private traits and attributes are predictable from digital records of human behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(15):5802–5805, 2013. 22. M. Kosinski, D. Stillwell, P. Kohli, Y. Bachrach, and T. Graepel. Personality and website choice. In ACM Web Sciences 2012. ACM Conference on Web Sciences, January 2012. 23. G. J. Lewis, R. Kanai, T. C. Bates, and G. Rees. Moral values are associated with individual differences in regional brain volume. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 24(8):1657–1663, 2012. 24. J. Li and J. P. Fine. Weighted area under the receiver operating characteristic curve and its application to gene selection. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics), 59(4):673–692, 2010. 25. M. Low and M. G. L. Wui. Moral foundations and attitudes towards the poor. Current Psychology, pages 1–11, 2015. 26. E. Malmi and I. Weber. You are what apps you use: Demographic prediction based on user’s apps. CoRR, abs/1603.00059, 2016. 27. D. McAdams and J. Pals. A new big five: Fundamental principles for an integrative science of personality. American Psychologist, 61(3):204–217, 4 2006. 28. D. P. McAdams. What do we know when we know a person? Personality, 63(3):365–396, 1995.  Journal of  12/32  29. A. Miles and S. Vaisey. Morality and politics: Comparing alternate theories. Social Science Research, 53:252 – 269, 2015. 30. A. Mitchell, J. Gottfried, J. Kiley, and K. E. Matsa. Political polarization and media habits. Pew Research, 2014. 31. J. Moll, R. de Oliveira-Souza, P. J. Eslinger, I. E. Bramati, J. Mourão-Miranda, P. A. Andreiuolo, and L. Pessoa. The neural correlates of moral sensitivity: a functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation of basic and moral emotions. The Journal of Neuroscience, 22(7):2730–2736, 2002. 32. F. Newport. The Gallup Poll. Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, 2011. 33. C. Parkinson, W. Sinnott-Armstrong, P. E. Koralus, A. Mendelovici, V. McGeer, and T. Wheatley. Is morality unified? evidence that distinct neural systems underlie moral judgments of harm, dishonesty, and disgust. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(10):3162–3180, 2011. 34. F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011. 35. D. Pizarro, Y. Inbar, and C. Helion. On disgust and moral judgment. Emotion Review, 3(3):267–268, 2011. 36. J. Schaich Borg, W. Sinnott-Armstrong, V. D. Calhoun, and K. A. Kiehl. Neural basis of moral verdict and moral deliberation. Social neuroscience, 6(4):398–413, 2011. 37. S. H. Schwartz. Universals in the Content and Structure of Values: Theoretical Advances and Empirical Tests in 20 Countries. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 25:1–65, 1992. 38. S. H. Schwartz. Basic human values: Their content and structure across countries. Valores e comportamento nas organizações, pages 21–55, 2005. 39. S. H. Schwartz. An overview of the schwartz theory of basic values. Online Readings in Psychology and Culture, 2(1):11, 2012. 40. S. Seneviratne, A. Seneviratne, P. Mohapatra, and A. Mahanti. Your installed apps reveal your gender and more! ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications Review, 18(3):55–61, 2015. 41. R. Stark and L. R. Iannaccone. Why the jehovah’s witnesses grow so rapidly: A theoretical application. Journal of Contemporary Religion, 12(2):133–157, 1997. 42. E. van Miltenburg. Stereotyping and bias in the flickr30k dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.06083, 2016. 43. A. Vinciarelli and G. Mohammadi. A survey of personality computing. IEEE Trans. Affective Computing, 5(3):273–291, 2014. 44. P. Wang, J. Guo, Y. Lan, J. Xu, and X. Cheng. Your cart tells you: Inferring demographic attributes from purchase data. In Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM ’16, pages 173–182, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.  13/32  45. I. Weber and C. Castillo. The demographics of web search. In Proceedings of the 33rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’10, pages 523–530, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM. 46. I. Weber and A. Jaimes. Who uses web search for what: and how. In Proceedings of the fourth ACM international conference on Web search and data mining, pages 15–24. ACM, 2011. 47. R. Weber, A. Eden, R. Huskey, J. M. Mangus, and E. Falk. Bridging media psychology and cognitive neuroscience. Journal of Media Psychology, 2015. 48. K. P. Winterich, Y. Zhang, and V. Mittal. How political identity and charity positioning increase donations: Insights from moral foundations theory. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 29(4):346 – 354, 2012. Special Issue on Consumer Identities. 49. C. Wolsko, H. Ariceaga, and J. Seiden. Red, white, and blue enough to be green: Effects of moral framing on climate change attitudes and conservation behaviors. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 65:7 – 19, 2016. 50. R. Xu, R. M. Frey, E. Fleisch, and A. Ilic. Understanding the Impact of Personality Traits on Mobile App Adoption – Insights from a Large-Scale Field Study”. Computers in Human Behavior, 62:244–256, sep 2016. 51. P. D. S. K. Yeo, M. A. Cacciatore, and D. A. Scheufele. News selectivity and beyond: Motivated reasoning in a changing media environment. In Publizistik und gesellschaftliche Verantwortung, pages 83–104. Springer, 2015. 52. J. J.-C. Ying, Y.-J. Chang, C.-M. Huang, and V. S. Tseng. Demographic prediction based on users mobile behaviors. Mobile Data Challenge, 2012. 53. W. Youyou, M. Kosinski, and D. Stillwell. Computer-based personality judgments are more accurate than those made by humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(4):1036–1040, 2015. 54. R. Zahn, R. de Oliveira-Souza, and J. Moll. The Neuroanatomical Basis of Moral Cognition and Emotion, pages 123–138. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2011. 55. X. W. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. He, H. Jiang, Y. Wu, and X. Li. We know what you want to buy: A demographic-based system for product recommendation on microblogs. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’14, pages 1935–1944, New York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM. 56. Y. Zhong, N. J. Yuan, W. Zhong, F. Zhang, and X. Xie. You are where you go: Inferring demographic attributes from location check-ins. In Proceedings of the Eighth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM ’15, pages 295–304, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM. 57. I. Zliobaite. A survey on measuring indirect discrimination in machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.00148, 2015.  14/32  Supplemental Material A  Analytical Classification Results  Table S1 presents the average prediction AUROC weighed metric for each of the moral foundations, Schwartz values, and demographic attributes respectively. Along with the average AUROC weighed metric the standard deviation over the 5-folds is reported in parenthesis. Each column corresponds to the performance obtained employing as predictors features from the Desktop Web Domains, Mobile Web Domains, Mobile Apps (STD) or fusion of the Mobile Apps and Domains. Tables S2, S3, S4 report the top predictive websites or applications emerged by the “gini” importances of each model.  B  Data Collection and Representativeness of the population  The corpus of this study closely follows the American census data not only in terms of gender distribution but also with respect to age groups and geography. In this section, we present the distribution of our entire population sample (7.633 participants) as compared to the official American census data [3]. The American census data are provided by the U.S. Census Bureau for the respective year of the study and contain information regarding sex, gender, and geographical location distribution [3]. Additionally, in Fig. S1 (b) we present the distribution of our population’s subset (2.625 subjects) who permitted the logging of their mobile phone data, referred to as “mobile data set”, as well as the population’s subset who permitted the logging of their desktop web browsing, referred to as “desktop data set” (Fig. S1 (c)). In Figure S1 we take into consideration also the gender distribution; again the white bars represent the expected distribution according to the American Census while the blue bars the actual percentage of the population in the entire (Fig. S1 (d)), mobile (Fig. S1 (e)) and desktop (Fig. S1 (f)) data sets respectively. Figure S2 depicts the geographical distribution of the population (observed values) in the entire data set (expected values) as compared to the American Census (Figure S2 (a)), while Table S6 reports the statistics on education, ethnicity, and income provided by the U.S. Census Bureau (2011-2015 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates) along with the respective statistics of our data set. For all the above variables the population employed in this study is following closely the census values.  C  Definition of model’s hyperparameters  The adjustment of the most important parameters for the training of the RF classifiers was performed by means of grid search parameter estimation with 5 fold cross-validation on the training set T r. For each attribute, we exploited the hyperparameter space with the set of values reported in Table S7. The best model for each target variable was chosen according to the behavior of the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) [16], which is an important statistical tool, that illustrates the performance of a binary classifier system as its discrimination threshold is varied. In the multiclass scenarios, the best performing model for each target variable was chosen to be the one that maximized the weighted area under of the receiver operating characteristic (weighted AUROC [24]). The AUROC statistic was preferred over the commonly-used accuracy metric, since it takes into account the effect of unbalanced labels, which holds true for most of our demographic attributes.  15/32  D  Effects of Quantity and Quality of Available Information  A common strategy followed in classification tasks with sparse data is to rank the feature vectors with respect to their content’s frequency of appearance, improving in this way the learning of the model and hence the prediction accuracy. In this way, the model learns a “forced” reality, while at the same time needs access to large long-term longitudinal observations. In cases where access to very large data sets is not possible or the training needs to be performed on a thin-slice of observations, the prediction of the model would be lower. In this exploratory analysis, we aim to compare the predictive power of the RF classification models avoiding biases due to the quantity or the quality of information.  E  How much digital information is needed for successful attribute prediction?  To address this question, the focus of attention was placed on understanding the relationship between the prediction accuracy score and the amount of information required for the prediction. In this paper, we opted only for a minimum activity threshold, exploiting the effect of user activity on the learning capabilities of a classification model in a large life-logging scenario. To exploit this tradeoff we performed an extensive analysis for the “gender” prediction task increasing steadily the amount of information contained in the training set. More specifically, we split the entire web-domain data set into a training set T r, consisting of the 80% of the samples and a testing, T s, containing the 20% of the samples. Then, based on a minimum activity criterion, we defined 20 subsets of the T r, namely T rn ; each one including only users that visited at most n domains. We considered 20 activity thresholds n, with n = [1, 2346] ranging linearly from the minimum to the maximum user activity in terms of unique domains seen by a single user, as depicted in Figure S3. We trained one RF model for each training set T rn , employing a 5 − f old validation approach. Worth-mentioning is the fact that the size of each training subsets T rn was always fixed to avoid biases related to the size of the training set instead of its informative content. Each RF model was tested against all the subsets of the testing set T s, namely T sm , where only users that visited at most m domains were included, accordingly. Overall, we considered 100 values of m, with m = [1, 1002] in a linear interval from the minimum to the maximum user activity in terms of unique domains seen by a single user in the testing set T s. This comparison revealed the minimum activity that the users should have the learning process of the predictive models to be robust. As expected, the more information is present in the training set, the higher the ROC scores, see Figure S3), suggesting that performances may improve the ROC-AUC score from 70% to 80%. Moreover, Figure S3 suggests that a minimum activity threshold may be set at approximately n = 30 domains, after which the fluctuations in ROC scores seem to stabilize (see dotted line in Figure S3).  E.1  Sensitivity of the model to the quality of available information (user activity)  This section presents an extensive analysis performed only on the most “active” users; as “active” we define a user that has visited at least 200 unique domains, given that the average number of unique domains visited by the users is 178 in the initial data set. The scope of this analysis is to assess the sensitivity of the RF models at the amount of informative content contained in the training data and its effect on the final prediction accuracy. Firstly, we filter our entire data set with a minimum activity  16/32  threshold thres = 200 domains, maintaining only the highly active users for the rest of our analysis. Then we split the data set containing only the active users, into a training set T ractive, consisting of the 80% of the samples and a testing, T sactive, containing the 20% of the samples. This analysis was performed for each one of the attributes mentioned in the list of demographic attributes (see Table S5) as well as the psychometric ones, MFT and Schwartz values. For each attribute, we trained an RF model on each subset of the training data set T ractive, namely T rn active, which contained only n domains for each one of the highly active users included in the data set, employing a 5 − f old validation approach. We considered 20 activity thresholds n, ranging linearly within the interval n = [1, 200] from the minimum to the maximum user activity in terms of unique domains seen by a single user. To keep the processing time low, we opted for an upper limit for the threshold value n = 200, which was suggested from our previous extended analysis on the “gender” classification task. Successively, we validated the T rn active models on the T sactive. We exploited two approaches for the selection of the domains to include in the T rn active subsets. The first approach is to rank the sparse feature vectors according to their content’s frequency of appearance; in this case for each threshold n, we include the n most frequently visited domains by each user. Figures S4, S5 and S6 refer to the results obtained by this approach. The second approach is based on random selection of the n visited domains by each user for the creation of each T rn active subset. Figures S7, S8 and S9 depict the results obtained by this approach. Figures S4, S5 and S6 depict the AUROC weighted metric for each considered attribute in the case of the most frequent domain selection approach. The blue line in each plot indicates the average AUROC weighted metric for the respective value of n over the 5 − f olds, while the shaded interval indicates its standard deviation. From this exploratory analysis, we note that increase of information contained in the training sets has a limited effect on the AUROC weighted metric after a brief stabilization step noted approximately for n < 40 domains. Figures S7, S8 and S9 depict the AUROC weighted metric for each considered attribute, in the case of random domain selection approach. The blue line in each plot indicates the average AUROC weighted metric for the respective value of n over the 5 − f olds, while the shaded interval indicates its standard deviation. Interestingly, even in the experimentation with random domains inclusion in the training sets, the increase of information contained in the training sets has a limited effect on the AUROC weighted metric. However, we note that in this case there are some fluctuations due exactly to the information included while in the first approach where the increase of informative content did not produce any fluctuations, suggesting, as expected, that the most informative content lies in the most frequently visited domains.  17/32  Morals  Desktop Web  Mobile Web  Mobile Apps  Domains (STD)  Domains (STD)  (STD)  Mobile Apps Domains (STD)  Authority  0.66 (0.02)  0.63 (0.03)  0.60 (0.02)  0.64 (0.05)  Care  0.62 (0.02)  0.55 (0.05)  0.57 (0.04)  0.55 (0.03)  Fairness  0.58 (0.01)  0.57 (0.04)  0.55 (0.01)  0.55 (0.02)  Loyalty  0.63 (0.02)  0.60 (0.03)  0.55 (0.04)  0.58 (0.05)  Purity  0.64 (0.01)  0.62 (0.02)  0.67 (0.04)  0.66 (0.04)  Individualist/  0.66 (<0.01)  0.65 (0.02)  0.64 (0.02)  0.66 (0.02)  Desktop Web  Mobile Web  Mobile Apps  Mobile Apps  Domains (STD)  Domains (STD)  (STD)  Domains (STD) 0.62 (0.05)  Binding Morals Conservation  0.63 (0.02)  0.61 (0.05)  0.59 (0.06)  Openness  0.56 (0.02)  0.56 (0.03)  0.57 (0.03)  0.58 (0.04)  SelfEnhancement 0.59 (0.01)  0.51 (0.01)  0.57 (0.04)  0.56 (0.04)  SelfTranscendence 0.58 (0.01)  0.57 (0.02)  0.58 (0.05)  0.59 (0.02)  Achievement  0.56 (0.03)  0.54 (0.03)  0.56 (0.04)  0.59 (0.04)  Benevolence  0.54 (0.01)  0.53 (0.04)  0.50 (0.02)  0.56 (0.01)  Conformity  0.59 (0.01)  0.57 (0.04)  0.58 (0.03)  0.58 (0.04)  Hedonism  0.56 (0.02)  0.57 (0.03)  0.59 (0.05)  0.60 (0.03)  Power  0.56 (0.02)  0.55 (0.03)  0.55 (0.01)  0.58 (0.05)  Security  0.58 (0.02)  0.56 (0.03)  0.53 (0.04)  0.55 (0.03)  SelfDirection  0.56 (0.02)  0.53 (0.03)  0.57 (0.03)  0.53 (0.02)  Stimulation  0.56 (0.01)  0.55 (0.03)  0.56 (0.03)  0.58 (0.02)  Tradition  0.58 (0.02)  0.60 (0.03)  0.58 (0.06)  0.60 (0.03)  Universalism  0.59 (0.01)  0.57 (0.02)  0.62 (0.06)  0.61 (0.04)  Morals  Desktop Web  Mobile Web  Mobile Apps  Mobile Apps  Domains (STD)  Domains (STD)  (STD)  Domains (STD)  Age  0.71 (0.01)  0.68 (0.03)  0.71 (0.03)  0.71 (0.02)  Education  0.59 (0.01)  0.57 (0.01)  0.59 (0.02)  0.59 (0.01)  Ethnicity  0.73 (0.02)  0.69 (0.02)  0.72 (0.05)  0.74 (0.02)  Exercise  0.61 (0.02)  0.59 (0.02)  0.63 (0.04)  0.60 (0.03)  Gender  0.86 (0.01)  0.88 (0.02)  0.90 (0.02)  0.89 (0.02)  Income  0.60 (0.01)  0.55 (0.02)  0.60 (0.02)  0.58 (0.01)  Marital Status  0.67 (0.02)  0.61 (0.02)  0.64 (0.01)  0.63 (0.03)  Parent  0.71 (0.01)  0.66 (0.02)  0.72 (0.04)  0.69 (0.04)  Political Orientation  0.58 (0.01)  0.58 (0.02)  0.59 (0.03)  0.60 (0.02)  Smoker  0.63 (0.06)  0.59 (0.06)  0.62 (0.03)  0.64 (0.04)  Wealth  0.66 (0.01)  0.60 (0.02)  0.61 (0.02)  0.62 (0.02)  Weight Issues  0.62 (0.02)  0.58 (0.02)  0.58 (0.03)  0.60 (0.02)  Table S1. The prediction scores of moral attributes, human values and demographics expressed in average weighted AUROC scores. Separate models are trained for each attribute and for each category of predictors (i) features of desktop web browsing, (ii) mobile browsing, (iii) mobile application usage and (iv) fusion of mobile browsing and application usage. In parenthesis, the weighted AUROC’s standard deviation (STD) of the five-fold cross validation process is reported. The best performing model is indicated in bold. 18/32  19/32  PAPA JOHN’S (−) AMAZON KINDLE (−) BING (−) change.org (+) about.com (+) ihg.com (+)  huffingtonpost.com (−)  thoughtcatalog.com (−)  REWARDS (−)  petco.com (−)  SOLITAIRE (+)  huffpost.com (−)  Fairness  care2.com (+)  imgur.com (−)  change.org (+)  marriott.com (+)  facebook.com (+)  accuweather.com (−)  MOBILE HOTSPOT (+)  mookie1.com (−)  ijreview.com (−)  SHOPKICK (−)  yahoo.com (−)  MAPS (−)  craigslist.org (−)  YOUTUBE (+)  CLOUD (+)  wikipedia.org (−)  PANDORA (−)  INSTAGRAM (−)  GMAIL (−)  americanexpress.com (+)  Loyalty  wikipedia.org (−)  yp.com (+)  facebook.com (−)  PANDORA (−)  iflscience.com (−)  LINKEDIN (−)  MAPS (−)  google.com (−)  YELP (−)  BIBLE (+)  Purity  Table S2. Top ten websites emerging as the best predictors for each moral foundation from mobile records (fusion of Web browsing and Application usage). Uppercase style indicates an APPLICATION while typewriter style indicates a Web Domain.  theanimalrescuesite.com (+) TWITTER (−)  SNAPCHAT (−)  npr.org (−)  thinkprogress.org (−)  MOBILE HOTSPOT (+)  iflscience.com (−)  HANGOUTS (−)  Care  Authority  20/32  ACCUWEATHER (−)  facebook.com (+) FOX NEWS (−) POLARIS OFFICE (+) MAPS (+) EMERGENCY ALERTS (−) SPRINT (+) CAPITAL ONE (+) PINTEREST (−)  MAPS (−)  indiegogo.com (−)  UBER (−)  lgbtqnation.com (−)  npr.org (−)  amazon.com (−)  huffpost.com (−)  BIBLE (+)  MAPS (+) SHAZAM (+)  GALAXY APPS (+)  amazon.com (−)  couponsherpa.com (−)  wikipedia.org (−)  google.com (−)  nerdist.com (+)  SPORTS  Achievement  instagram.com (−)  aarp.org (+)  WALMART (+)  SPOTIFY (−)  groupon.com (−)  CANDY CRUSH SAGA (−)  ttaa.com (+)  amazon.com (+)  bitecharge.com (+)  SPRINT (−)  HOTSPOT  PLAY STORE (−)  PINTEREST (−)  PHOTO GRID (−)  YOUTUBE (−)  FACEBOOK (−)  SelfDirection  TWITTER (+)  lds.org (−)  GOOGLE MOBILE (+)  target.com (+)  BIBLE (−)  NETFLIX (−)  kinja.com (+)  FACEBOOK (+)  INSTAGRAM (+)  GMAIL (+)  myfitnesspal.com (−)  YAHOO! MAIL (+)  papajohns.com (−)  REGAL (+)  MAPS (−)  Security  FACEBOOK (−)  huffpost.com (+)  FANTASY (−)  nytimes.com (+)  kmart.com (−)  mlnwap.com (−)  MINT (−)  bitecharge.com (+)  GAMESTOP (−)  EBAY (−)  SelfTranscendence  YELP (+)  buzzfeed.com (+)  ebay.com (+)  SHAZAM (+)  FACEBOOK (+)  YOUTUBE (+)  uproxx.com (+)  facebook.com (+)  google.com (+)  MAPS (+)  Stimulation  FIREFOX (−)  sparkpeople.com (−)  facebook.com (+)  LINE (−)  emgn.com (+)  battle.net (−)  imdb.com (−)  mpstat.us (+)  WEATHER (+)  EBAY (−)  Benevolence  Table S3. Top ten websites emerging as the best predictors for each of the Schwartz values and quadrants from mobile records (fusion of Web browsing and Application usage). Uppercase style indicates an APPLICATION while typewriter style indicates a Web Domain.  EVERNOTE (+) GROUPON (−)  FACEBOOK (−)  EBAY (−)  SNAPCHAT (−) twitter.com (+)  INSTAGRAM (−)  guff.com (−)  facebook.com (−)  PEOPLE (−)  YOUTUBE (−)  iflscience.com (−)  TWITTER (−) FACEBOOK (−)  YELP (−)  Universalism  southwest.com (−)  WHATSAPP (+)  yelp.com (−)  FOX NEWS (−)  imdb.com (+)  IBOTTA (−)  wikipedia.org (−)  amazon.com (−)  INKPAD (−) SPOTIFY (+)  FACEBOOK (+)  KROGER (+)  Tradition  PLAY STORE (+)  FOURSQUARE (+)  YOUTUBE (+)  att.com (−)  simplyhired.com (−)  YOUTUBE (+) PANDORA (+)  TAPPED OUT (+)  YELP (+)  iflscience.com (−)  BIBLE (+)  aarp.org (−)  FOX NEWS (+)  Power  Hedonism INSTAGRAM (+)  zimbio.com (−)  MINT (+)  TWITTER (+)  GMAIL (+)  xojane.com (+)  SCOUT (−)  linkedin.com (+)  SOUTHWEST (+)  Conformity  HOTSPOT  SNAPCHAT (+)  INSTAGRAM (+)  iflscience.com (−)  SelfEnhancement  SNAPCHAT (+)  SNAPCHAT (−)  WHATSAPP (+)  Openness  Conservation  21/32  SNAPCHAT (N )  Weight  FACEBOOK (Y )  SPORTS CENTER (N ) google.com (N )  UBER (N )  GMAIL (N )  aarp.org (55to64)  facebook.com (25to34)  TUMBLR (18to24)  google.com (18to24)  PINTEREST (25to34)  FACEBOOK (25to34)  YOUTUBE (25to34)  buzzfeed.com (25to34)  INSTAGRAM (18to24)  SNAPCHAT (18to24)  Age  NFL FANTASY FOOTBALL (L)  diply.com (L)  iflscience.com (D)  COLOR NOTE (L)  imgur.com (R)  FLIPBOARD (D)  facebook.com (D)  complex.com (D)  reddit.com (D)  MAPS (L)  Political Party  FACEBOOK (LT )  YOUTUBE (S)  CHASE (D)  jetblue.com (M )  google.com (S)  SNAPCHAT (S)  NCP(W )  FLIPBOARD(W )  NCPMOBILE(W )  GMAIL (S)  Marital Status  NYTIMES (1000KP lus)  facebook.com (50KLess)  AMAZON (100Kto250K)  SNAPCHAT (50KLess)  PINTEREST (50KLess)  FACEBOOK (50KLess)  MAPS (N )  UBER (N )  SWARM (N )  INSTAGRAM (N )  TUMBLR (N )  buzzfeed.com (N )  YELP (N )  elitedaily.com (N )  GMAIL (N )  SNAPCHAT (N ))  Parent  BIBLE (AA)  WHATSAPP (H)  WECHAT (A)  wetpaint.com (AA)  PINTEREST (W )  YOUTUBE (H)  LINE (A) slickdeals.net (A)  INSTAGRAM (50KLess)  SAFEWAY (A)  YELP (A)  Ethnicity  AMERITRADE (1000KP lus)  buzzfeed.com (50KLess)  YOUTUBE (50KLess)  Wealth  Table S4. Top ten websites emerging as the best predictors for each of the demographic attributes from mobile records (fusion of Web browsing and Application usage). Uppercase style indicates an APPLICATION while typewriter style indicates a Web Domain.  about.com (N ) 18andabused.com (Y )  bodybuilding.com (N )  LOSE IT! (Y )  YAHOO! MAIL (Y )  psychcentral.com (Y ) TRIP ADVISOR (N )  AMAZON KINDLE (Y )  google-analytics.com (N )  Smoker  target.com (F )  WORDSWITHFRIENDS (Y )  ESPN (Y )  gap.com (F )  sprintpcs.com (Y )  yahoo.com (N )  PLAY STORE (M )  mailchimp.com (N )  YELP (Y )  SPORTS CENTER (M )  MAPS (N )  yelp.com (Y )  buzzfeed.com (F )  express.com (N )  ANGRY BIRDS (N ) MYFITNESSPAL (Y )  INSTAGRAM (F )  active.com (Y )  FITBIT (Y )  PINTEREST (F )  playbuzz.com (F )  Exercise  Gender MAPS (Y )  PLAY STORE (30Kto50K)  FACEBOOK (someCollege)  MAPMYRUN (Y )  google.com (200KP lus)  gamestop.com (highSchool)  CARTWHEEL BY TARGET (F )  adadvisor.net (200KP lus)  att.com (tradeSchool)  FACEBOOK (F )  GMAIL (150Kto200K)  MI MOBILE (highSchool)  YOUTUBE (20KLess)  LINKEDIN (postGrad) TUMBLR (20KLess)  SNAPCHAT (20KLess)  YOUTUBE (someCollege)  FACEBOOK (30Kto50K)  GAMESTOP (20KLess)  PLAY STORE (someCollege)  google.com (postGrad)  linkedin.com (200KP lus)  linkedin.com (postGrad)  jw.org (highSchool)  Income  Education  Attribute  Age  Education  Ethnicity  Exercise  Gender  Income  Demographic Variables  Population  Range  (N = 7, 633)  18-24  262  25-34  1,308  35-49 50-54 55-64  1,759  65Plus  1,416  College Graduate  2,624  Post Graduate  2,211  Attribute  Political Party  Demographic Variables  Population  Range  (N = 7, 633)  Democrat  2,973  Republican  2,556  2,009  Libertarian  215  879  Independent  1,889  Wealth  50KLess  2,246  50K-100K  915  Some Graduate  1,680  100K-250K  1,213  High School  619  250K-500K  1,303  Trade School  479  500K-1000K  1,067  1000KPlus  889  No  4,239  Yes  3,394  No  2,533  Yes  5,100  No  7,027  Yes  606  Asian  338  African American  485  White  6,359  Hispanic  347  Weight Issues  No  3,328  Yes  4,305  Parent  Female  4,367  Male  3,266  20KLess  342  Divorced  733  20K-30K  492  Single  1,281  30K-50K  1,222  Married  4,690  50K-75K  1,613  Living Together  617  75K-100K  1,520  100K-150K  1,581  150K-200K  515  200KPlus  348  Smoker  Marital Status  Table S5. Complete list of the demographic attributes, their respective ranges and population in the data set exploited in our study. Each one of the options corresponds to a distinct “label” for the classification algorithms. For the attributes where the options were not binary a multiclass classification was performed.  22/32  Demographic Variables  US census (?)  Entire data set  Education High school graduate or higher (??)  86.7%  93%  Bachelor’s degree or higher (??)  29.8%  28%  Asian  5.7%  4.4%  African American  13.3%  6.3%  White  76.9%  83.3%  Hispanic  17.8%  4.5%  $53K  $50K - $75K  Ethnicity  Income Median income (? ? ?)  Table S6. Comparative statistics for the demographic attributes, education, ethnicity and income of the entire data set employed for this study and the US census. US census data are provided by U.S. Census Bureau (2011-2015 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates (?)). Education refers to the percent of persons age 25 years+ 2011-2015 (??) and income is expressed in 2015 US dollars (? ? ?).  Hyperparameter  Value Range  Number of estimators Maximum number of features (N)  150, 300, 600 √ {1/2, 1, 2} * N  Maximum depth  5, 7, 15  MInimum samples leaf  5  Class weight  ‘entropy’, ‘gini’  Table S7. RF hyperparameter space and respective set of attributes exploited.  23/32  (a) Entire Population  (b) Mobile Subset  (c) Desktop Subset  24/32  (a) Participants Geography  (b) Mobile Participants Geography  (c) Desktop Participants Geography  Supplemental Material, Figure S2. Geographical distribution of the participants population (observed values) in the entire data set (expected values) as compared to the American census (Fig. S2a) . The geographical distribution of the mobile (Fig. S2b) and the Desktop (Fig. S2c) data sets follow closely the geographical distribution of participants.  25/32  (a) ROC values for increasing number of domains.  (b) Proportion of labels in the T sm .  (c) Proportion of labels in the T rm .  Supplemental Material, Figure S3. ROC performances for all each trained model compared against the varying training sets. Note that the size of the testing set, T sm , is kept fixed for each model. Each color corresponds to a model trained on a training set, T rn , with n ranging from 20 to 600, while the color. Note that in Fig. S3a, for T sm , we plotted only the activity range between 0 to 500 to zoom in the initial interval of interest. After 500 the behavior of the model remains invariant.  26/32  (a) Authority  (b) Care  (c) Fairness  (d) Loyalty  (e) Purity  (f) Conservation  (h) Self Enhancement  (i) Self Transcendence  (g) Openness  Supplemental Material, Figure S4. ROC analysis on the most active users, increasing the number of domains visited according to their frequency.  27/32  (a) Achievement  (b) Benevolence  (c) Conformity  (d) Hedonism  (e) Power  (f) Security  (g) Self Direction  (h) Stimulation  (i) Tradition  (j) Universalism  Supplemental Material, Figure S5. ROC analysis on the most active users, increasing the number of domains visited according to their frequency.  28/32  (a) Age  (b) Education  (c) Ethnicity  (d) Exercise  (e) Gender  (f) Income  (g) Marital Status  (h) Parenthood  (i) Political Orientation  (k) Wealth  (l) Weight Issues  (j) Smoking  Supplemental Material, Figure S6. ROC analysis on the most active users, increasing the number of domains visited according to their frequency.  29/32  (a) Authority  (b) Care  (c) Fairness  (d) Loyalty  (e) Purity  (f) Conservation  (h) Self Enhancement  (i) Self Transcendence  (g) Openness  Supplemental Material, Figure S7. ROC analysis on the most active users, increasing the number of domains visited regardless of their frequency of appearance.  30/32  (a) Achievement  (b) Benevolence  (c) Conformity  (d) Hedonism  (e) Power  (f) Security  (g) Self Direction  (h) Stimulation  (i) Tradition  (j) Universalism  Supplemental Material, Figure S8. ROC analysis on the most active users, increasing the number of domains visited regardless of their frequency of appearance.  31/32  (a) Age  (b) Education  (c) Ethnicity  (d) Exercise  (e) Gender  (f) Income  (g) Marital Status  (h) Parenthood  (i) Political Orientation  (k) Wealth  (l) Weight Issues  (j) Smoking  Supplemental Material, Figure S9. ROC analysis on the most active users, increasing the number of domains visited regardless of their frequency of appearance.  32/32

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
