Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_7074

Abstract:
Optimal Fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss Embeddings for Large Data Sets Stefan Bamberger  ∗  Felix Krahmer  †  arXiv:1712.01774v1 [cs.DS] 5 Dec 2017  December 6, 2017  Abstract We introduce a new fast construction of a Johnson-Lindenstrauss matrix based on the composition of the following two embeddings: A fast construction by the second author joint with Ward [1] maps points into a space of lower, but not optimal dimension. Then a subsequent transformation by a dense matrix with independent entries reaches an optimal embedding dimension. As we show in this note, the computational cost of applying this transform simultaneously to all points in a large data set comes close to the complexity of just reading the data under only very mild restrictions on the size of the data set. Along the way, our construction also yields the least restricted Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform of order optimal embedding dimension known to date that allows for a fast query step, that is, a fast application to an arbitrary point that is not part of the given data set.  ∗ †  stefan.bamberger@tum.de, Department of Mathematics, Technische Universität München felix.krahmer@tum.de, Department of Mathematics, Technische Universität München  1 1.1  Introduction Johnson-Lindenstrauss Embeddings and Applications  Dimension reduction has played an increasingly significant role in data science in recent years due to the increasing size and dimensionality of available data. So-called Johnson-Lindenstrauss embeddings (JLEs) are of central importance in this context. Such maps reduce the dimension of an arbitrary finite set of points while preserving the pairwise distances up to a small deviation. JLEs were first introduced in [2] in the context of Banach spaces. They continue to be intensively studied in both mathematics and computer science. For reasons of practicability, most works focus on linear maps based on random constructions, aiming to be independent of the data to be considered. In this spirit, we work with the following definition of a Johnson-Lindenstrauss embedding (E can be thought of as the set of pairwise distances). Definition 1.1 (Johnson-Lindenstrauss Embedding). Let A ∈ Rm×N be a random matrix where m < N , ǫ, η ∈ (0, 1) and p ∈ N. We say that A is a (p, ǫ, η)-JLE (Johnson-Lindenstrauss embedding) if for any subset E ⊆ RN with |E| = p (1 − ǫ)kxk22 ≤ kAxk22 ≤ (1 + ǫ)kxk22  (1.1)  holds simultaneously for all x ∈ E with a probability of at least 1 − η. The original work of Johnson and Lindenstrauss constructed (p, ǫ, η)-JLEs with an embedding dimension of m ≥ Cη ǫ−2 log(p), which has recently been shown to be order optimal under minimal assumptions [3]. Various subsequent works developed simplified approaches for constructing JLEs. Notably, Achlioptas [4] considered a matrix A ∈ Rm×N with independent entries Ajk ∈ {±1} satisfying P(Ajk = 1) = P(Ajk = −1) = 12 . In this case the normalized matrix √1m A is a (p, ǫ, η)JLE in the above setting, again for order optimal embedding dimension. In many applications of Johnson-Lindenstrauss embeddings, even such simplified constructions are of limited use due to the trade-off between the complexity benefit for the original problem resulting from the dimension reduction and the additional computations required to apply the JLE. Ailon and Chazelle [5] addressed this issue in connection to the approximate nearest neighbor search problem (ANN), the problem of finding a point x̂ in a given finite set E ⊆ RN such that one has kx − x̂k ≤ (1 + ǫ) minv∈E kx − vk for a given x ∈ RN . Their algorithm uses a preprocessing step that transforms all p points in E using a JLE. In subsequent query steps, this JLE is applied to new inputs x, reducing the dimension for the subsequent computations. For this purpose, the authors design the so-called Fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform (FJLT) whose application to x requires a particularly low computation time. While the FJLT also ensures that the preprocessing can be performed in a fast way, the focus of their analysis is on the efficiency of the query step for a new data point that has not been preprocessed. In other applications, what would correspond to the preprocessing step in [5] is the central task of interest. That is, the data set to be embedded is given in full and the goal is to efficiently compute the dimension reduction of the whole set at once. For example, such a setup appears in various approaches for nonlinear dimension reduction such as Isomap [6], Locally Linear Embedding [7] or Laplacian Eigenmaps [8]. These methods exploit that a high-dimensional data set lying near a low-dimensional manifold can be locally approximated by linear spaces. Hence it is of key importance to identify the data points close to a point of interest in the data set, as the linear approximation will be valid only for those. Consequently, one only works with points in the data set, no new points enter at a later stage, and it suffices to apply the JLE 1  simultaneously to the whole data set before searching for multiple approximate nearest neighbors within its projection. A simultaneous fast transformation of the entire data set is also a central goal for various applications in randomized numerical linear algebra. The following lemma, for example, introduces a randomized approach for approximate matrix multiplication by multiplying Johnson-Lindenstrauss embeddings Â = (SA∗ )∗ and B̂ = SB rather than computing the product of the full matrices. Lemma 1.2 (Lemma 6 in [9]). Let A ∈ Rq×N , B ∈ RN ×p be matrices and S ∈ Rm×N a (q + p, ǫ, η)JLE. Then P(kAB − AS ∗ SBkF ≤ ǫkAkF kBkF ) ≥ 1 − η. Again, the JLE is applied to the whole matrices A∗ and B and no additional data points enter at a later stage. The computation time required for this approximate product consists, on the one hand, of the time O(qmp) for the reduced product and, on the other hand, of the computational effort to calculate SB and SA∗ , i.e. to apply the JLE to the entire data set (the columns of B and the rows of A). When the JLE used does not admit a fast transform and standard matrix multiplication is applied, its computational cost can easily dominate the computation time for the whole approximate product. Namely, assuming w.l.o.g. that q ≤ p, applying S to the data set requires O(mN q + mN p) = O(mN p) operations. If q ≤ N , this becomes the dominant part of the computation, if q ≤ m, it even surpasses the complexity of the original multiplication O(qN p). With a fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform, this changes and the cost of the multiplication in the embedding space will typically become dominant. Namely, if applying the transform requires say O(N log N ) operations per data point, the total cost for the JLE step is O(pN log N ), which will be less than O(mN p) in basically all interesting cases. Thus minimizing the total computational cost boils down to choosing the embedding dimension m as small as possible. Given that the Fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform by Ailon and Chazelle [5] and its extension by Ailon and Liberty [10] yield order-optimal embedding dimensions, they provide near-optimal solutions to these problems whenever the regime is admissible. However, these works only apply to 1 1 data sets of size p ≤ exp(Oǫ (N 3 )) or p ≤ exp(Oǫ (N 2 −δ )) for some arbitrary δ > 0 (that will impact the constants appearing in the embedding dimension), respectively. Here the notation Oǫ indicates that the involved constants may depend on ǫ. Follow-up works without such restrictions (e.g., [11], [1]) require additional logarithmic factors in the embedding dimension, which can directly impact the total computational cost as, e.g., in the second example discussed. To our knowledge, there were no constructions known before this work of Johnson-Lindenstrauss 1 embeddings for data sets of size exp(Ωǫ (N 2 )) or larger which admit a fast transform, neither for the query step nor for transforming the full data set simultaneously.  1.2  Contributions of this Work  The goal of this note is to provide such constructions, mainly for the case of simultaneous embeddings. Namely, our main result is a JLE construction with order optimal embedding dimension that allows for a simultaneous transformation of an entire large data set in time O(pN log m), which, up to logarithmic factors, corresponds to the number of operations required just to read the data. For the simultaneous transformation, we only require that p = exp(Oǫ (N 1−δ )) for δ > 0. This is nearly the size p = exp(O(N )), for which the identity provides a trivial order optimal embedding, so our result is close to being unrestricted for large p. At the same time, our construction also needs a slightly less restrictive condition on the size of the data set when the goal is to allow for a fast transform on an arbitrary new data point (i.e., 2  minimizing the cost of an individual query). Namely, our approach still allows for a fast transform 1 when p = exp(Θǫ (N 2 )), while the construction of Ailon and Chazelle [5] is no longer superior to standard matrix multiplication and the one of Ailon and Liberty [10] does not apply. In addition, 1 the number of operations required by our construction for slightly more than p = exp(Θǫ (N 2 )) points is still near-linear in N , while again the construction of Ailon and Liberty [10] does not apply.  1.3  Outline  We start by reviewing the construction of the Fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform in Section 2.1. Section 2.2 discusses previous work on alternative fast Johnson Lindenstrauss embeddings with no restriction on p, but an embedding dimension that is suboptimal by logarithmic factors. Section 3 then presents our main contribution, a construction that has both, an optimal embedding dimension and allows for fast (simultaneous) transformations of large data sets without an essential restriction on p. The proof of our main result regarding the complexity is presented in Section 4, before we conclude with a discussion in Section 5.  2  Background and Previous Work  2.1  Optimal Fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss Embeddings  The Fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transformation (FJLT) by Ailon and Chazelle [5] consists of a fast Hadamard transform combined with a sparse projection. More precisely, the embedding A = P HDξ ∈ Rm×N is defined as follows: • P ∈ Rm×N is a sparse projection with independent entries Pjk = bjk gjk where all bjk and −1 gjk are independent  and o P(bjk = 1) = q, P(bjk = 0) = 1 − q and gjk ∼ N (0, q ) for a n  q = min Θ  (log p)2 N  ,1 .  • H ∈ RN ×N is a full Hadamard matrix. • Dξ ∈ RN ×N is a diagonal matrix corresponding to a Rademacher vector ξ ∈ {1, −1}N . Lemma 1 in [5] states that this random matrix is a (p, ǫ, 32 )-JLE for m = Θ(ǫ−2 log p). Since the transformation by H can be computed in time O(N log N ) (using the Walsh-Hadamard transform described e.g. in [10]) and P is sparse with a high probability, it is also shown that the entire transformation needs  O N log N + min{N ǫ−2 log p, ǫ−2 (log p)3 } (2.1) 1  operations with a probability of at least 32 . This is of order O(N log N ) provided log p = Oǫ (N 3 ). Furthermore, the embedding dimension exhibits optimal scaling in N , p and ǫ [3]. A further improvement of this approach is achieved by Ailon and Liberty in [10] where the bound 1 1 for the fast transformation is raised from log p = Oǫ (N 3 ) to log p = Oǫ (N 2 −δ ) for any fixed δ > 0. The computation time is also lowered to O(N log m).  2.2  Unrestricted Fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss Embeddings  A different approach for the construction of Johnson-Lindenstrauss matrices was introduced by Ailon and Liberty in [11]. Compared to the aforementioned result, this construction does not 3  have a significant restriction on the number p of points in E for a fast transformation. However, its embedding dimension has an additional polylogarithmic factor in N as well as a suboptimal dependence on ǫ. The dependence on ǫ is improved in [1], making the construction optimal up to logarithmic factors in N . Both constructions are based on the restricted isometry property (RIP) of the embedding matrix, that is, approximate norm preservation of vectors with many vanishing entries. Definition 2.1 (Restricted Isometry Property (RIP)). A matrix Φ ∈ Rm×N has the (k, δ)-RIP (restricted isometry property) if one has (1 − δ)kxk22 ≤ kΦxk22 ≤ (1 + δ)kxk22 for all k-sparse x ∈ RN , i.e. for all x ∈ RN that have at most k non-zero entries. The following theorem of [1] shows that RIP matrices can be made to Johnson-Lindenstrauss transforms by randomizing their column signs. Theorem 2.2 (Theorem 3.1 from [1]). Let ǫ, η ∈ (0, 1) and E ⊆ RN with |E| = p < ∞. Assume ǫ N that Φ ∈ Rm×N has the (k, δ)-RIP for k ≥ 40 log 4p η and δ ≤ 4 . Let ξ ∈ {1, −1} be a Rademacher vector. Then ΦDξ is a (p, ǫ, η)-Johnson-Lindenstrauss embedding. Using an argument based on Gelfand widths, one can show that for sufficiently small δ, for a (k, δ)-RIP matrix in Rm×N , one must have m = Ω(k log N ). Thus Theorem 2.2 can only yield the Johnson-Lindenstrauss property for an embedding dimension of at least m = Ω(ǫ−2 log(p) log(N )). Theorem 2.2 can be applied to the transform P HDξ with a Rademacher vector ξ ∈ RN , a Hadamard matrix H ∈ RN ×N , and a projection P ∈ Rm×N selecting m entries uniformly with replacement. As P H ∈ Rm×N is shown to have the (k, δ)-RIP with high probability for m = Θ(δ−2 k(log N )4 ) in [12], this construction requires an embedding dimension of m = Θ(ǫ−2 log( ηp )(log N )4 ) which is optimal up to a factor of (log N )4 . At the same time, the construction admits a fast transform even for large values of p: Using the Walsh-Hadamard transform, one can always achieve a computation time of O(N log m) per data point. Similar results can also be obtained for subsampled random convolutions instead of subsampled Hadamard transform ([13], [14]). Improved embedding dimensions can be obtained using new RIP bounds for partial Hadamard matrices (more generally, subsampled unitary matrices with entries bounded by O( √1N )) that have  been shown in [15]. Namely, it is shown that m = Ω(δ−2 (log 1δ )2 k(log kδ )2 log(N )) implies the (k, δ)RIP with probability arbitrarily close to 1 for sufficiently large N . Thus, for k ≤ N and a fixed δ, m = Ω(k(log N )3 ) is sufficient. So for a fixed ǫ, this implies that the JLE construction introduced above needs an embedding dimension of m = Θ(log(p)(log N )3 ), improving the previous result by a factor of log N . However, for reasons of simplicity of presentation due to the simpler dependence on ǫ, we continue to work with the bound m = Θ(ǫ−2 log( ηp )(log N )4 ) and leave the possible refinement to the reader.  2.3  Rectangular Matrix Multiplication  We denote by ME ∈ RN ×p the matrix with the vectors in E as columns. Then simultaneously applying a transform A ∈ Rm×N to all vectors in E corresponds to computing the matrix product AME .  4  Thus the question of computing the simultaneous embedding closely connects to the topic of fast algorithms for matrix multiplication, which, starting with the seminal work of Strassen [16], developed into a core area of complexity theory (see, for example, Chapter 15 of [17] for an overview). Given that we are interested in dimension reduction, algorithms for the fast multiplication of rectangular matrices will be of particular relevance to this paper. When one of the two matrices is square and the other has many more columns, an asymptotically optimal family of algorithms has been provided by Lotti and Romani [18]. More precisely, their result can be summarized in the following proposition. Proposition 2.3. There exists an increasing function f : [1, ∞) → [2, ∞) such that for each exponent s ≥ 1, the multiplication of an n × n and an n × ns matrix can be computed in time O(nf (s) ) and f (s) − s is decreasing and converges to 1 for s → ∞. That is, in the limit, the number of operations will just be what is required to read the two matrices.  3  Main Result  Unless otherwise noted, in all theorems we assume that ǫ ∈ (0, 1) and η ∈ (0, 12 ) are arbitrary and that m < N . A helpful observation for creating Johnson-Lindenstrauss embeddings with good embedding dimension and fast multiplication is that the composition of two JLEs is again a JLE. We include a proof for completeness. Lemma 3.1. Let A ∈ Rm×n , B ∈ Rn×N be independent random matrices that are both (p, 3ǫ , η4 )JLEs. Then AB ∈ Rm×N is a (p, ǫ, η)-JLE. Proof. Let E ⊆ S N −1 with |E| = p. The probability that the norms in BE are distorted by more than 1 ± 3ǫ compared to E is ≤ η4 . For each fixed value of B that satisfies this norm preservation, the probability that a norm in A(BE) is distorted outside of the range [(1 − 3ǫ )2 , (1 + 3ǫ )2 ] is less than η4 . By a union bound, with a probability of at least 1−η all norms in ABE lie within [(1− 3ǫ )2 , (1+ 3ǫ )2 ] ⊆ [1 − ǫ, 1 + ǫ] as ǫ < 1. This lemma can be used to combine the advantages of fast JLEs with non-optimal embedding dimension (as in Theorem 2.2) and dense random matrices with optimal embedding dimension similar to those of Achlioptas [4]. A set of p vectors in RN is first mapped into a space of nonoptimal, but reduced dimension using a fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform and then a dense matrix maps the vectors from this space of reduced dimension to a space of optimal embedding dimension. Note that this leads to a smaller dense matrix and thus a faster computation compared to a JLE consisting of only a dense matrix. We apply this procedure to the fast transform from [1] and the dense ±1 matrix from [4], obtaining a JLE of optimal embedding dimension. Corollary 3.2. Consider the following matrices. • G ∈ {± √1m }m×n where the entries Gjk are independent with 1 1 1 P(Gjk = √ ) = P(Gjk = − √ ) = . m m 2  5  • R ∈ Rn×N is a random projection that selects n of the N entries of a vector uniformly at random with replacement. • H ∈ RN ×N is a full Hadamard matrix. • Dξ ∈ RN ×N where ξ ∈ {1, −1}N is a Rademacher vector. Let G, R and ξ be independent. If m ≥ c1 ǫ−2 log ηp and n ≥ c2 ǫ−2 log( ηp )(log N )4 for suitable absolute constants c1 and c2 , then GRHDξ ∈ Rm×N is a (p, ǫ, η)-JLE. Note that the resulting construction is very similar to the one introduced in [5]. Namely, similarly to the matrix P in the construction of [5] (cf. Section 2.1 above), the matrix P̃ = GR has many zero entries and independent random entries in all other locations. The main difference is that in our construction the non-zero entries are concentrated in just a few columns while in [5], their locations are random. As captured by the following theorem, this fact leads to a significant speed up when simultaneously projecting the entire data set, as the structure allows for the use of fast matrix multiplication. Theorem 3.3. Consider E ⊆ RN of size p = exp(Oǫ (N 1−δ )) for an arbitrary δ > 0. Then for embedding dimensions m = Θ(ǫ−2 log ηp ) and n = Θ(m(log N )4 ), the transformation GRHDξ introduced in Corollary 3.2 can be applied simultaneously to all points in E in time Oδ (pN log m).  4  Complexity Analysis – Proof of Theorem 3.3  4.1  Transformation of the Entire Data Set  The main novelty in our construction is that the last ingredient of our transform is a (smaller) dense matrix G such that Proposition 2.3 applies. As we will see, this proposition provides a speedup compared to individually applying G to all the RHDξ v, v ∈ E, when the size of the data set is 1 m = Ω(N 2 ). For technical reasons, we slightly shift the threshold distinguishing the two scenarios 1 δ 1 δ m = Ω(N 2 − 4 ) and m = O(N 2 − 4 ) (we discuss this scenario in Section 4.2). The first scenario can happen either when p is large or when p remains small, but ǫ−2 is large. We first consider the case that p is large, assuming that log(p) = Ω((log N )2 ). Recall that by assumption p = exp(Oǫ (N 1−δ )), more precisely we assume that p = exp(O(ǫ2 N 1−δ )) for a fixed δ > 0. Then our choice of m directly yields that m = O(N 1−δ ), thus we cover almost the entire range until the identity becomes an order optimal embedding (which happens at m = N ). To analyze the complexity, we note that computing the product consists of the following three steps. • Compute M1 := Dξ ME by multiplying the diagonal matrix Dξ by each column of ME . This requires O(pN ) operations. • Compute M2 := RHM1 by applying the trimmed Walsh-Hadamard transform to all columns of M1 in O(pN log m) operations. • Compute M3 := GM2 where G ∈ Rm×n and M2 ∈ Rn×N . Choose α = Split G and M2 up into blocks   V1   ..  M2 =  .  G = G1 . . . Gr Vr 6  log p log m ,  yielding p = mα .  n ⌉ such that G1 , . . . , Gr ∈ Rm×m and Vj ∈ Rm×p for j ∈ [r]. If necessary, pad the for r = ⌈ m matrices with zero rows and columns such that the corresponding submatrices have the same size. Since n ≥ m, this only changes the numbers of rows or columns by at most a constant factor.  Each of the r block multiplications required to compute this product is a multiplication of an m × m matrix by an m × mα matrix and thus requires O(mf (α) ) operations with f as in Proposition 2.3. In the end, we need O(pmr) operations to sum up the values for all entries of the result. In total, the number of operations is O(rmf (α) + pmr) = O(pnmf (α)−α−1 + pn) = O(pnmf (α)−α−1 ). Summing up the operations over all steps results in   O(pN log(m) + pnmf (α)−α−1 ) = O pN log(m) + pmf (α)−α (log N )4 . Proposition 2.3 guarantees the existence of a β = β(δ) such that α=  1 f (β)−β  (4.1)  > 1 − δ and we obtain  Ω((log N )2 ) log p = = Ωδ (log N ). log m O((1 − δ) log N )  Hence, for sufficiently large N ≥ N (δ), one has α ≥ β, i.e., (f (α) − α)(1 − δ) < 1. Substituting this into (4.1), using that m = O(N 1−δ ) and absorbing the cases where N < N (δ) into the constants yields a complexity of Oδ (pN log m + pN ) = Oδ (pN log m).   It remains to consider the case that p = O((log N )2 ) and consequently ǫ = O log1 −Nδ . This case N4  8  can be excluded by imposing the stronger condition that p = exp(O(ǫ4 N 1−δ )), which still is of the form p = exp(Oǫ (N 1−δ )). Namely, the two conditions for ǫ and p would imply that log p = o(1). 1 δ This proves the theorem for the case of embedding dimensions m = Ω(N 2 − 4 ).   Remark 4.1. Note that for log p = O((log N )2 ) and ǫ = O log1 −Nδ (the second case in the previous N4  8  consideration), the increased exponent of ǫ in our condition for p creates a larger gap between the applicability range of our result and the regime where the identity operator can be applied. Namely, 1−δ our proof only applies for m = O((log(N ))2 N 2 ), while the identity cannot be used below m = N . To circumvent this, one can apply the construction of Ailon and Chazelle [5] for this second case, encountering no such gap (as resulting from (2.1), the complexity is O(N (log N )4 )).  4.2  Transformation of Individual Data Points and Small Data Sets  Counting the number of operations for applying the transformation defined in Corollary 3.2 to a single data point using the standard algorithm for G yields the result O(N log(m) + m2 (log N )4 ). 1  ′  (4.2) 1  ′  For each δ′ > 0, in the regime p = exp(Oǫ (N 2 −δ )), more specifically p = exp(O(ǫ2 N 2 −δ )), which 1 ′ corresponds to m = O(N 2 −δ ), this is Oδ′ (N log(m)). δ 1 Consequently, for m = O(N 2 − 4 ), the case still missing in the previous section, the computation time required to simultaneously embed all points in E by individually applying the transform is of order Oδ (pN log m), which completes the proof of Theorem 3.3. 7  Remark 4.2. If p = exp(O(ǫ2 N r )) for 12 ≤ r ≤ 1, (4.2) becomes O(N 2r (log N )4 ). As promised, this is still linear up to logarithmic factors when r = 12 and close to linear for r slightly larger than 1 2 (this is in contrast to [10], which does not apply in either of these cases).  5  Discussion  In this note, we constructed a family of Johnson-Lindenstrauss embeddings with order optimal embedding dimension for all possible choices of the parameters N , p and ǫ. We showed that it allows for a fast simultaneous transformation of all p points in a given set E of size p in time O(pN log m), provided that p = exp(Oǫ (N 1−δ )) for some δ > 0. This improves upon the previously least restricted fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform by Ailon and Liberty [10], which required 1 that p = exp(Oǫ (N 2 −δ )). Our construction incorporates algorithms for fast multiplication of dense matrices. One may of course ask whether the Hadamard transformation step in our construction is necessary or whether such matrix multiplication algorithms could also be applied directly for a full Bernoulli matrix (as studied, for example, by Achlioptas [4]). This, however, does not seem to be the case. Namely, the analogous analysis to our proof above yields for the number of operations the bound of Θ(pN mf (α)−α−1 ). So if m = Θ(N r ), i.e. p = exp(Θǫ (N r )) for any r > 0, we obtain a complexity of Θ(pN 1+t ) for a t > 0 which is always larger than Θ(pN log N ). Of course this argument only yields that this particular approach fails, but as the number of entries of ME , one of the matrices to be multiplied, is N p, which is more or less the total complexity bound that we seek, we see very little leverage room for improvements. Independent from that, it remains a very interesting question to find Johnson-Lindenstrauss embeddings with optimal embedding dimension that allow for a fast query step, i.e., a fast application to a point not part of the given data set. Beyond its use for the approximate nearest neighbor search outlined above, such a result would also yield improvements in other application areas such as the construction of fast transforms with the restricted isometry property as in [19].  8  References [1] Felix Krahmer, Rachel Ward. New and Improved Johnson-Lindenstrauss Embeddings via the Restricted Isometry Property. SIAM Journal on Mathematical Analysis, 43(3):1269–1281, 2011. [2] William B. Johnson, Joram Lindenstrauss. Extensions of Lipschitz Mappings into a Hilbert Space. Contemporary Mathematics, 26:189–206, 1984. [3] Kasper Green Larsen, Jelani Nelson. Optimality of the Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma. Proceedings of the 58th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 2017. [4] Dimitris Achlioptas. Database-Friendly Random Projections: Johnson-Lindenstrauss with Binary Coins. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 66(4):671–687, 2003. [5] Nir Ailon, Bernard Chazelle. Approximate Nearest Neighbors and the Fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform. STOC ’06 Proceedings of the Thirty-Eighth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 557–563, 2006. [6] Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Vin de Silva, John C. Langford. A Global Geometric Framework for Nonlinear Dimensionality Reduction. Science, 290(5500):2319—-2323, 200. [7] Sam T. Roweis, Lawrence K. Saul. Nonlinear Dimensionality Reduction by Locally Linear Embedding. Science, 290(5500):2323–2326, 2000. [8] Mikhail Belkin, Partha Niyogi. Laplacian Eigenmaps and Spectral Techniques for Embedding and Clustering. In T. G. Dietterich and S. Becker and Z. Ghahramani, editor, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 14, pages 585–591. MIT Press, 2002. [9] Tamás Sarlós. Improved Approximation Algorithms for Large Matrices via Random Projections. FOCS ’06 Proceedings of the 47th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 143–152, 2006. [10] Nir Ailon, Edo Liberty. Fast Dimension Reduction Using Rademacher Series on Dual BCH Codes. Discrete & Computational Geometry, 42(4):615–630, 2009. [11] Nir Ailon, Edo Liberty. An Almost Optimal Unrestricted Fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 9(3):21:1–21:12, 2013. [12] Mark Rudelson, Roman Vershynin. On Sparse Reconstruction from Fourier and Gaussian Measurements. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 61(8):1025–1045, 2008. [13] Joel A. Tropp Holger Rauhut, Justin Romberg. Restricted isometries for partial random circulant matrices. Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis, 32(2):242 – 254, 2012. [14] Felix Krahmer, Shahar Mendelson, Holger Rauhut. Suprema of Chaos Processes and the Restricted Isometry Property. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 67(11):1877– 1904, 2014. [15] Ishay Haviv, Oded Regev. The Restricted Isometry Property of Subsampled Fourier Matrices. SODA ’16 Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual ACM-SIAM Aymposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 288–297, 2016.  9  [16] Volker Strassen. Gaussian Elimination Is Not Optimal. Numerische Mathematik, 13(4):354– 356, 1969. [17] Peter Bürgisser, Michael Clausen, Amin Shokrollahi. Algebraic Complexity Theory. SpringerVerlag Berlin Heidelberg, 1997. [18] Grazia Lotti, Francesco Romani. On the Asymptotic Complexity of Rectangular Matrix Multiplication. Theoretical Computer Science, 23:171–185, 1983. [19] Richard Baraniuk, Mark Davenport, Ronald DeVore, Michael Wakin. A Simple Proof of the Restricted Isometry Property for Random Matrices. Constructive Approximation, 28(3):253– 263, 2008.  10

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
