Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_7442

Abstract:
A Graph-Based Semantics Workbench for Concurrent Asynchronous Programs Claudio Corrodi1,2? , Alexander Heußner3 , and Christopher M. Poskitt1,4? Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland Software Composition Group, University of Bern, Switzerland Software Technologies Research Group, University of Bamberg, Germany 4 Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore 1  arXiv:1603.00307v1 [cs.SE] 1 Mar 2016  2  3  Abstract. A number of novel programming languages and libraries have been proposed that offer simpler-to-use models of concurrency than threads. It is challenging, however, to devise execution models that successfully realise their abstractions without forfeiting performance or introducing unintended behaviours. This is exemplified by Scoop—a concurrent object-oriented message-passing language—which has seen multiple semantics proposed and implemented over its evolution. We propose a “semantics workbench” with fully and semi-automatic tools for Scoop, that can be used to analyse and compare programs with respect to different execution models. We demonstrate its use in checking the consistency of semantics by applying it to a set of representative programs, and highlighting a deadlock-related discrepancy between the principal execution models of the language. Our workbench is based on a modular and parameterisable graph transformation semantics implemented in the Groove tool. We discuss how graph transformations are leveraged to atomically model intricate language abstractions, and how the visual yet algebraic nature of the model can be used to ascertain soundness.  1  Introduction  To harness the power of multi-core and distributed architectures, software engineers must program with concurrency, asynchronicity, and parallelism in mind. Classical thread-based approaches to concurrent programming, however, are difficult to master and error prone. To address this, a number of programming APIs, libraries, and languages have been proposed that provide safer and simpler-to-use models of concurrency, such as the block-dispatch model of Grand Central Dispatch [14], or the message-passing-based model of Scoop [40]. The concurrent programming abstractions that these languages provide rely on the existence of effective execution models for realising them; effective in the sense that they do so without forfeiting performance or introducing unintended behaviours. Devising execution models that successfully reconcile these requirements, however, is challenging: a model that is too restrictive can deny desirable concurrency ?  Research done whilst employed by the Chair of Software Engineering, ETH Zürich.  and lead to unnecessary bottlenecks; a model that is too permissive can lead to surprising and unexpected executions. This challenge is exemplified by Scoop [40], a message-passing paradigm for concurrent object-oriented programming that aims to preserve the wellunderstood modes of reasoning enjoyed by sequential programs, such as preand postcondition reasoning over blocks of code. Although the high-level language mechanisms for achieving this were described informally as early as the ‘90s [24,25], it took several years to understand how to effectively implement them: execution models [6,26,40], prototypes [28,37], and contrasting versions of a production-level implementation [11] gradually appeared over the last decade, and can be seen as representing multiple, partially conflicting semantics for realising Scoop. They are also unlikely to be the last, as new language features continue to be proposed, prototyped, and integrated, e.g. [27]. Despite the possible ramifications to behavioural and safety properties of existing programs, little work has been done to support formal and automatic comparisons of the program executions permitted by these different semantics. While general, toolsupported formalisations exist—in Maude’s conditional rewriting logic [26], for example, and in a custom-built Csp model checker [6]—these are tied to particular execution models, do not operate on program source code, and are geared towards “testing” the semantics rather than general verification tasks. Furthermore, owing to the need to handle waiting queues, locks, asynchronous remote calls, and several other intricate features of the Scoop execution models, these formalisations quickly become complex, making it challenging to ascertain their soundness with language designers who lack a formal methods background. The Challenge. There is a need for languages like Scoop to have tools that not only support the prototyping of new semantics (and semantic extensions), but that also facilitate formal, automatic, and practical analyses for comparing the executions permitted by these semantics, and highlighting where behavioural and safety-related discrepancies arise. The underlying formalism for modelling the semantics should not be ad hoc; rather, it should support re-use, a modular design, and be easily extensible for language evolutions and changes. Furthermore, such tools should be usable in practice: the modelling formalism must be accessible to and understandable by software engineers, and the analyses must support several idiomatic uses of the language mechanisms. Our Contributions. We propose a “semantics workbench” equipped with fully and semi-automatic tools for Scoop, that can be used to analyse and compare programs with respect to different execution models for the purpose of checking their consistency. We demonstrate its use by formalising the two principal execution models of Scoop, analysing a representative set of programs with respect to both, and highlighting some behavioural and deadlock-related discrepancies that the workbench uncovers automatically. Our workbench is based on a modular and parameterisable graph transformation system (Gts) semantics, built upon our preliminary modelling ideas in [18], and implemented in the generalpurpose Gts analysis tool Groove [16]. We leverage this powerful formalism to atomically model complex programmer-level abstractions, and show how its  inherently visual yet algebraic nature can be used to ascertain soundness. For language designers, this paper presents a transferable approach to checking the consistency of competing semantics for realising concurrency abstractions. For the graph transformation community, it presents our experiences of applying a state-of-the-art Gts tool to a non-trivial and practical problem in programming language design. For the broader verification community, it highlights a need for semantics-parameterised verification, and shows how Gts-based formalisms and tools can be used to derive an effective and modular solution. For software engineers, it provides a powerful workbench for crystallising their mental models of Scoop, thus helping them to write better quality code and (where need be) port it across different Scoop implementations. Plan of the Paper. After introducing the Scoop concurrency paradigm and its two most established execution models (Section 2), we introduce our formal modelling framework based on Gts, and show how to formalise different, parameterisable Scoop semantics (Section 3). Implementing our ideas in a small toolchain (Section 4) allows us to check the consistency of semantics across a set of representative Scoop programs (Section 5), and highlight both a behavioural and deadlock-related discrepancy. To conclude, we summarise some related work (Section 6), our contributions, and some future research directions (Section 7).  2  SCOOP and its Execution Models  Scoop [40] is a message-passing paradigm for concurrent object-oriented programming that aims to preserve the well-understood modes of reasoning enjoyed by sequential programs; in particular, pre- and postcondition reasoning over blocks of code. This section introduces the programmer-level language mechanisms and reasoning guarantees of Scoop, as well as its two most established execution models. These will be described in the context of Scoop’s production-level implementation for Eiffel [11], but the ideas generalise to any object-oriented language (as explored, e.g. for Java [37]). Language Mechanisms. In Scoop, every object is associated with a handler (also called a processor ), a concurrent thread of execution with the exclusive right to call methods on the objects it handles. In this context, object references may point to objects with the same handler (non-separate objects) or to objects with distinct handlers (separate objects). Method calls on non-separate objects are executed immediately by the shared handler. To make a call on a separate object, however, a request must be sent to the handler of that object to process it: if the method is a command (i.e. it does not return a result) then it is executed asynchronously, leading to concurrency; if it is a query (i.e. a result is returned and must be waited for) then it is executed synchronously. Note that handlers cannot synchronise via shared memory: only by exchanging requests. The possibility for objects to have different handlers is captured in the type system by the keyword separate . To request method calls on objects of separate type, programmers simply make the calls within separate blocks.  These can be explicit (we will use the syntax separate x ,y , . . . do . . . end ); but they also exist implicitly for methods with separate objects as parameters. Reasoning Guarantees. Scoop provides certain guarantees about the order in which calls in separate blocks are executed to help programmers avoid concurrency errors. In particular, method calls on separate objects will be logged as requests by their handlers in the order that they are given in the program text; furthermore, there will be no intervening requests logged from other handlers. These guarantees exclude object-level data races by construction, and allow programmers to apply pre- and postcondition reasoning within separate blocks independently of the rest of the program. Consider the following example (adapted from [40]), in which two distinct handlers are respectively executing blocks that set the “colours” of two separate objects: separate x , y do x . set_colour ( Green ) y . set_colour ( Green ) end  separate x , y do x . set_colour ( Indigo ) a_colour = x . get_colour y . set_colour ( a_colour ) end  The guarantees ensure that whilst a handler is inside its separate x , y block, the other handler cannot log intervening calls on x or y . Consequently, if the colours are later queried in another separate x , y block, both of them will be Green or both of them will be Indigo; interleavings permitting any other combination to be observed are entirely excluded. This additional control over the order in which requests are processed represents a twist on classical messagepassing models, such as the actor model [1], and programming languages like Erlang [2] that implement them. Execution Models. The abstractions of Scoop require an execution model that can realise them without forfeiting performance or introducing unintended behaviours. Two contrasting models have been supported by different versions of the implementation: initially, a model we call Request Queues (RQ) [26], and a model that has now replaced it which we will call Queues of Queues (QoQ) [40]. The RQ execution model associates each handler with a single Fifo queue for storing incoming requests. To ensure the reasoning guarantees, each queue is protected by a lock, which another handler must acquire to be able to log a request on the queue. Realising a separate x ,y , . . . block then boils down to acquiring locks on the request queues attached to the handlers of x ,y , . . . and exclusively holding them for the duration of the block. This coarse-grained solution successfully prevents intervening requests from being logged, but leads to performance bottlenecks in several situations (e.g. multiple handlers vying for the lock of a highly contested request queue). In contrast, the QoQ execution model associates each handler with a Fifo queue that itself contains (possibly several) Fifo subqueues for storing incoming requests. These subqueues represent “private areas” for handlers to log requests without interference from other handlers. Realising a separate x ,y , . . . block no longer requires vying for locks; instead, the handlers of x ,y , . . . simply generate private subqueues on which requests can be logged without interruption for the duration of the block. If another handler also wants to log requests, then  h0 h1  h2,'h3  h0 h3  h2  h1  Fig. 1. Logging requests under the RQ (left) and QoQ (right) execution models separate left_fork , right_fork do left_fork . use right_fork . use end  Listing 1. Eager philosophers  separate left_fork do separate right_fork do left_fork . use right_fork . use end end  Listing 2. Lazy philosophers  a new private subqueue is generated for it and its requests can be logged at the same time. The QoQ model removes the performance bottlenecks caused by the locks of RQ, while still ensuring the Scoop reasoning guarantees by completely processing subqueues in the order that they were generated. Figure 1 visualises three handlers (h1 , h2 , h3 ) logging requests (green blocks) on another handler (h0 ) under the two execution models. Note that the RQ and QoQ implementations (i.e. compilers and runtimes) include additional optimisations, and strictly speaking, can themselves be viewed as competing semantics. Semantic Discrepancies. Discrepancies between the execution models can arise in practice. In the mental model model of programmers, with RQ, separate blocks had become synonymous with acquiring and holding locks—which are not implied by the basic reasoning guarantees or the QoQ model. This discrepancy comes to light with the classical dining philosophers program (as provided in the official Scoop documentation [11]), which will form a running example for this paper. Under RQ, Listing 1 (“eager” philosophers) solves the problem by relying on the implicit parallel acquisition of locks on the forks’ handlers; no two adjacent philosophers can be in their separate blocks (representing “eating”) at the same time. Under RQ, Listing 2 (“lazy” philosophers) can lead to circular deadlocks, as philosophers acquire the locks in turn. With QoQ however—where there is no implicit locking—neither version represents a solution, and neither can cause a deadlock; yet the basic guarantees about the order of logged requests remain satisfied. We will return to this example in later sections, and show how such discrepancies can be detected by our workbench.  3  A Graph-based Semantic Model for the SCOOP Family  There are several established and contrasting semantics of Scoop [6,18,26,29,40] including a comprehensive reference semantics for RQ in Maude’s conditional rewriting logic [26], and a semantics for the core of QoQ in the form of simple structural operational rules [40]. These formalisations, however, cannot easily be used for semantic comparisons, due to their varying levels of detail, coverage, extensibility, and tool support. Hence we present in this section “yet another”  semantic model, called Scoop-Gts, based on our preliminary modelling ideas for RQ in [18], using the formalism of graph transformation systems (Gts). Our reasons to introduce Scoop-Gts are manifold: (a) we need a common modelling ground that can be parameterised by models of RQ and QoQ; (b) known models based on algebra, process calculi, automata, or Petri nets do not straightforwardly cover Scoop’s asynchronous concurrent nature, or would hide these features in intricate encodings; (c) existing approaches are often proposed from a theoretician’s point of view and are not easily readable by software engineers, whereas graphs and diagrammatic notations (e.g. Uml) might already be used in their everyday work. Choosing graph transformations as our base formalism is well-justified, as they satisfy the above requirements, and reconcile the goal to have a theoretically rigorous formalisation with the goal to be accessible to software engineers, e.g. for expert interviews with the language implementers (see [31] for a detailed discussion of the pros and cons of Gts in this setting). The “non-linear” context of graph rewriting rules proves to be a powerful mechanism for defining semantics and their interfaces for parameterisation. We formalised Scoop-Gts using the state-of-the-art Gts tool Groove [17]. Due to limited space, we provide all the files necessary to browse our Gts model as supplementary material [36], including input graphs generated from the example programs of Section 5 that can be simulated, analysed, and verified. SCOOP-Graphs. Each global configuration of a Scoop program, i.e. snapshot of the global state, is represented by a directed, typed attributed graph consisting of (i) handler nodes representing Scoop’s handlers, i.e. basic execution units; (ii) a representation of each handler’s local memory (i.e. “heap” of non-separate objects) and its known neighbourhood, consisting of references to separate objects that can be addressed by queries and commands; (iii) a representation of each handler’s stack, via stack frames that model recursive calls to non-separate objects; (iv) requests for modelling separate calls, which are stored in (v) subgraphs representing each handler’s input work queue; (vi) a global control flow graph (Cfg) presenting the program’s execution blocks (consisting of states and actions/transitions in-between); (vii) relations to model inter-handler and handler-memory relations (e.g. locking, waiting, etc.) and to assign each handler to its current state in the Cfg; and (viii) additional bookkeeping nodes, e.g. containing information on detected deadlocks, and nodes to model the interfaces/contexts for semantic parameterisation. An example Scoop-Graph can be seen in Figure 2, depicting a configuration with two concurrently running and two idle handlers. GTS-based Operational Semantics. The operational semantics of ScoopGts is given by graph-rewriting rules that are regimented by control programs. An example rule, concisely written using nesting as supported by Groove, can be seen in Figure 3. Note that nested rules (including ∀- and ∃-quantification) allow us to express complex, atomic rule matchings in a relatively straightforward and brief way (compared to rules in classical operational semantics, e.g. in [40] for multiple handler reservations). A simplified, example control program can be seen in Listing 3. Control programs allow us to make an execution model’s  handler  ReferenceValue  Handler with empty work queue, no running execution (stack empty), and one object on the local heap  Memory  sync  storage  Handler  value Variable name = "right"  StackFrame  active frame  variable  _lock storage  Handler  Memory  sync  Each handler oﬀers connectors for plugging in diﬀerent semantics, i.e. diﬀerent queue semantics, diﬀerent interprocess synchronisations, recursion models, etc.  handler  WorkQueue  WorkQueue  _queue  _queue  _QueueLock  _QueueLock  WorkQueue  WorkQueue  refers_to  sync  Memory  Handler  storage  Variable name = "right"  _lock Handler  storage  sync  Memory  parameter ControlState  to_action  ReferenceValue  value  _current_state  _current_state  Handler with empty work queue, currently running, where the stack frame holds a reference to a separate object. The handler holds a lock (under Rq semantics) to the workqueue of a diﬀerent handler  Object type = "FORK"  variable  active frame  Object type = "FORK"  refers_to  StackFrame  InlineParameter name = "right"  ActionStartInlineSeparateBlock  Cfg (excerpt)  expression  AttributeExpression name = "right_fork"  Fig. 2. 2. Reachable Reachable deadlock deadlock under under RQ RQ for for the the lazy lazy philosophers philosophers program program (Listing (Listing 2) 2) Fig. simplified from from Groove Groove output output with with additional additional highlighting highlighting and and information information in in colour colour simplified  scheduler explicit explicit (and (and thus thus open open to to parameterisation) parameterisation) and and help help us to implement scheduler “garbage collection” collection” for for the the model model (e.g. (e.g. removing removing bookkeeping bookkeeping edges edges no no longer longer “garbage needed). Furthermore, Furthermore, they they provide provide aa fine-grained fine-grained way way to control the atomicity needed). of Scoop Scoop operations, operations, by by wrapping wrapping sequences sequences of of rule rule applications applications into into so-called so-called of recipes. recipes. Semantic Modularity Modularity of of Scoop-Gts. Scoop-Gts. We We support support semantic semantic parameterisaparameterisaSemantic tion for for Scoop-Gts Scoop-Gts by by providing providing fixed fixed module module interfaces interfaces in in the the graph graph via via special special tion “plug-in nodes/edges” nodes/edges” (e.g. (e.g. WorkQueue WorkQueue,, Memory Memory,, StackFrame StackFrame in in Figure Figure 2), 2), and and “plug-in changing only only the the set set of of Gts Gts rules rules that that operate operate on on the the subgraphs subgraphs that that they they changing guard. We We have have modelled modelled both both RQ RQ and and QoQ QoQ with with distinct distinct sets sets of of rules rules that that guard. operate on on the the subgraphs subgraphs guarded guarded by by WorkQueue WorkQueue:: we we call call the the model model parameparameoperate terised by by RQ RQ and and QoQ QoQ respectively respectively Scoop-Gts(RQ) Scoop-Gts(RQ) and and Scoop-Gts(QoQ). Scoop-Gts(QoQ). terised As well well as as parameterising parameterising the the queue queue semantics, semantics, it it is is possible possible to to model model different diﬀerent As recursion schemes, schemes, memory memory models, models, and and global global interprocess interprocess synchronisations. synchronisations. recursion This This semantic semantic modularity modularity also also permits permits us us to to directly directly apply apply abstractions abstractions to to Scoop-Gts, Scoop-Gts, e.g. e.g. changing changing the the queue’s queue’s semantics semantics to to aa bag’s bag’s counting counting abstraction, abstraction, or or flattening flattening recursion. recursion. This This could could prove prove useful useful for for providing providing advanced advanced verificaverification tion approaches approaches in in the the workbench. workbench. Soundness/Faithfulness. Soundness/Faithfulness. The The relation relation of of Scoop-Gts Scoop-Gts to to the the most most prominent prominent execution models and runtimes is depicted in Figure 4. Due to the varying levels execution models and runtimes is depicted in Figure of of detail detail in in the the formalisations formalisations of of the the RQ RQ and and QoQ QoQ execution execution models models (and (and lack of formalisations of their implementations/runtimes), there is no universal of formalisations of their implementations/runtimes), there is no universal way way to to prove prove Scoop-Gts’s Scoop-Gts’s faithfulness faithfulness to to them. them. We We also also remark remark that that Scoop-Gts Scoop-Gts currently currently does does not not support support some some programming programming mechanisms mechanisms of of the the Eiffel Eiﬀel language language (e.g. exceptions, agents), but could be straightforwardly extended (e.g. exceptions, agents), but could be straightforwardly extended to to cover cover them. them. We We were were able able to to conduct conduct expert expert interviews interviews with with the the researchers researchers proposing proposing the the execution execution models models and and the the programmers programmers implementing implementing the the Scoop Scoop compiler compiler  refers_to  Object  value ReferenceValue  @ @  StackFrame  _creator_frame  8  @  handler  8  @  @@  Memory Memory @ storage  @  @ storage  Handler  @  @  Memory Memory  Legend for edge/node colouring: SubQueue red: negative application cond., blue: matched and deleted, Legend for edge/node colouring: green: newly created SubQueue next red: negative application cond., blue: matched and deleted, @ green: newly created next sync next_queue.next* QoQ SubQueue @  sync  != Handler  storage  StackFrame variable  @  @  active_frame  Variable value  variable Variable  @  active_frame  ReferenceValue  handler  Object  storage  refers_to  QoQ  _private_queue  Handler != Handler  next_queue.next*  current_state _private_queue  next  SubQueue  SubQueue next _open SubQueue _open  current_state InitialState InitialState  _creator_frame Fig. 3. Simplified QoQ rule for entering a separate x ,y ,. . . block, which uses 8∀Fig. 3. Simplified QoQ rule for entering a separate x ,y ,. . . block, which uses 8-that quantification to atomically match arbitrarily many handlers. The rule assumes quantification to atomically arbitrarily manyprivate handlers. The ruleopen assumes that the handlers’ queues alreadymatch contain some other subqueues the handlers’ queues already contain some other private subqueues open initialize_model ; // call gts rule for ini tialis ation while i n i t i a( l iprogress z e _ m o d e l ;& no_error ) { // call gts rule for ini tialis ation for each handler p: // choose handlers under some scheduling strategy while ( progress & no_error ) { alap n d l e r _ l opc:a l _ e x e c u t i o n _ s t e p ( p ) +; each handlers handler under executes actions as long as possible for eachh ahandler // // choose somelocal scheduling strategy tryalap s y n hcahnrdolneirs_altoicoanl__setxeepc u; t i o n _ s t e p ( p ) +; then try ( one ) possible r on is on step // // each handler executes local global actions sy asn ch long asa ti possible } try s y n c h r o n i s a t i o n _ s t e p ; // then try ( one ) possible global sy n ch r on is a ti on step } recipe handler_local_execution_step (p){ recipe ha io try s e p nadrlaetre__loobcjaelc_te_xcerceu at t i no_ns(tpe)p+;( p ) { // try local actions that are possibly applicable try s try e p a r aatses_iogbnjmeecntt__ctroe _ av ti // try local actions that are possibly applicable else a orni (apb)l+; e ( p ) +; else try a... s s i g;n m e n t _ t o _ v a r i a b l e ( p ) +; else // sequentially try all other possible actions else clean_ try ... ; // // sequentially try all collection other possible try up_mod el +; do some " garbage " to actions keep the model small // do some " garbage collection " to keep the model small } try clean_ up_mod el +; } recipe s y n c h r o n i s a t i o n _ s t e p () { recipe yn _ s t e p () { r e s e r vs e _ chharnodnliesrast i|o ndequeue_task | ...; // non - d e t e r m i n i s t i c a l l y try to synchronise // non - d e t e r m i n i s t i c a l l y try to synchronise } r e s e r v e _ h a n d l e r s | dequeue_task | ...; } ... // remaining recipes ( core functionality ) ... - - - - - - - - - - plug in - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -// // - - -remaining - - - - - - - - - -recipes - - - - - - -(-core - - - - -functionality - - - - - - - - - - - -)- - - - - - - - - - - - - - // - - - - - - - - - - plug in - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - recipe s e p a r a t e _ o b j e c t _ c r e a t i o n ( p ) { // provide different i m pl em e nt at i on s for RQ and QoQ recipe s e p a r a t e _ o b j e c t _ c r e a t i o n ( p ) { // provide different i m pl em e nt at i on s for RQ and QoQ ... // and parameterise the control program ... // and parameterise the control program }} ... // remaining recipes that are plugged in ... // remaining recipes that are plugged in  Listing 3. 3.Simplified Simplifiedcontrol controlprogram program Groove syntax) Listing (in(in Groove syntax) implements/optimises implements/optimises implements/optimises implements/optimises QoQ Runtime Runtime QoQ Model Execution Model RQ Runtime QoQ QoQExecution Execution ModelRQRQ Execution Model RQ Runtime render/simulate, render/simulate, render/simulate, render/simulate, “similar” “similar” in experiments “similar” ininexperiments experiments “proof” by expert interview “similar” in experiments implements SOS rules “proof” by expert interview implements SOS rules cover, “proof” cover, “proof” by expert interview instance of instance of by expert interview instance Scoop-Gts(RQ) of Scoop-Gts(QoQ) instance of Scoop-Gts(·)  Scoop-Gts(QoQ)  Scoop-Gts(·)  Scoop-Gts(RQ)  Fig. 4. execution models, andand the the runtimes 4. Relation Relationbetween betweenScoop-Gts, Scoop-Gts,the the execution models, and the runtimes Fig. 4. Relation between Scoop-Gts, the execution models, runtimes  and runtimes, runtimes, which that Scoop-Gts faithand whichhelped helpedtoto toimprove improveour ourconfidence confidence that Scoop-Gts faithand runtimes, which helped improve our confidence that Scoop-Gts faithfully covers their behaviour. Here, Scoop-Gts’s advantage of aofvisually accesfully covers their behaviour. Here, Scoop-Gts’s advantage a visually accesfully covers their behaviour. Here, Scoop-Gts’s advantage of a visually accessible notation were able to to directly use use simulasible notation was was extremely extremelybeneficial, beneficial,asas aswewe we were able directly simulasible was extremely beneficial, were able to directly use simulations notation in Groove during the interviews, which were understood andand accepted tions in Groove during the interviews, which were understood accepted tions Groove during the interviews, which were understood and accepted by the theininterviewees. Groove simulations of the ex- exby interviewees. In Inaddition, addition,wewe wecompared compared Groove simulations of the the by the interviewees. In addition, compared Groove simulations of executions of Scoop programs (see the benchmarks of Section 5) against their ecutions of of Scoop Scoop programs programs (see (see the the benchmarks benchmarks of of Section Section 5) 5) against against their their ecutions actual execution behaviour in the oﬃcial Scoop IDE and compiler (both the actual execution behaviour behaviour in in the the oﬃcial official Scoop Scoop IDE IDE and and compiler compiler (both (both the the actual currentexecution release that implements QoQ, and an older one that implemented RQ). current release that implements QoQ, and an older one that implemented RQ). current release that implements QoQ, Furthermore, and an older we onewere that able implemented RQ). Again, this augmented our confidence. to compare Again, this this augmented augmented our our confidence. confidence. Furthermore, Furthermore, we were able to compare Again, we were able to compare Scoop-Gts(QoQ) with the structural operational semantics for QoQ provided Scoop-Gts(QoQ) with the structural operational semantics foraQoQ QoQ provided Scoop-Gts(QoQ) with structural operational semantics for in [40]. Unfortunately, thethe provided semantic rules focus only on muchprovided simin [40]. Unfortunately, the provided semantic rules focus only on a much simplified preventing the a rigorous bisimulation proof focus exploiting in [40].core, Unfortunately, provided semantic rules only the on aalgebraic much simplified core, preventing a rigorous bisimulation proof exploiting the algebraic plified core, preventing a rigorous bisimulation proof exploiting the algebraic  Scoop-Gts [·] .scoop  flatten  generate Scoop-Graph  .gxl  input Cfg  .txt show result / highlight in code Eve IDE  Eve IDE plugin  .xml  (result)  wrapper Groove  result standalone tool  Fig. Overviewofofour our toolchain: toolchain: aa plugin plugin integrated of of Fig. 5.5.Overview integrated with withthe the(research (researchversion version the)official oﬃcialScoop ScoopIDE, IDE, which which interfaces interfaces with the) with aa wrapper wrapperthat thatutilises utilisesand andcontrols controls Groove in the background. The wrapper can also be used as part of a standalone tool Groove in the background. The wrapper can also be used as part of a standalone tool  characterisations of Gts. We can, however, straightforwardly implement and characterisations of Gts. We can, however, straightforwardly implement and simulate them in our model. simulate them in our model. To conclude, Scoop-Gts fits into the suite of existing Scoop formalisations, To conclude, Scoop-Gts the suite overloaded of existing word Scoop formalisations, and is able to cover (avoidingfits theinto semantically “simulate”) both and is able to cover (avoiding the semantically overloaded word “simulate”) both of the principal execution models. ofExpressiveness. the principal execution models. As previously discussed, Scoop-Gts is expressive enough to Expressiveness. As previously Scoop-Gts is expressive cover the existing RQ and QoQ discussed, semantic models of Scoop due to itsenough modu- to cover the existing RQ and QoQ semantic models of Scoop due to its modularity and the possibility to plug-in diﬀerent queueing semantics. We currently larity and the possibility to plug-in different queueing semantics. We currently plan to include other semantic formalisations of Scoop-like languages, e.g. the plan to include other semantic of Scoop-like languages, concurrent Eiﬀel proposed by [5]formalisations (similar to Scoop but diﬀerences regardinge.g. sep-the concurrent Eiffel proposed by [5] (similar to Scoop but differences separate object calls), other actor-based object-oriented languages, and regarding concurrency concepts like “co-boxes” [34]. Scoop-Gts is obviouslylanguages, Turing-complete (one can arate object calls), other actor-based object-oriented and concurrency simulatelike a 2-counter Minsky machine by non-recursive models with one (one object concepts “co-boxes” [34]. Scoop-Gts is obviously Turing-complete can per handler, similar Minsky to the construction [15]). A proper formalwith investigation simulate a 2-counter machine byinnon-recursive models one object into its computational power (also that ofinsubclasses of the model) ongoing. per handler, similar to the construction [15]). A proper formal isinvestigation into its computational power (also that of subclasses of the model) is ongoing.  4  4  Toolchain for the Workbench  Toolchain for the Workbench  Our semantics workbench consists of a toolchain that bridges the gap between Scoop program code and the analysis of Scoop-Gts models in Groove. In Our semantics workbench consists of a toolchain that bridges the gap between particular, it translates source code into Scoop-Graphs, executes the appropriScoop program code and the analysis of Scoop-Gts models in Groove. In ate analyses in Groove, and then collects and returns the results to the user. particular, it translates source code into Scoop-Graphs, executes the appropriOur toolchain is summarised in Figure 5. Its principal component is a plugate in Groove, and then collects andScoop/Eiﬀel returns the IDE results to the user. in analyses for the Eve IDE—a research version of the (including the Our toolchain is summarised in Figure 5. Its principal component is a plugproduction compiler and runtime) which supports the integration of verification intools for the Eve version ofthe theplug-in Scoop/Eiffel (including [38]. ForIDE—a a given research Scoop program, uses theIDE existing servicesthe production compiler and runtime) which supports the integration of verification of Eve to check that the code compiles, and then extracts a representation tools For ainheritance given Scoop the plug-in existing services of it[38]. in which has program, been “flattened”. Fromuses this the flattened program, ofwe Eve to check that the code compiles, and then extracts a representation generate a Scoop-Graph (encoded in the Graph eXchange Language) which ofcorresponds it in whichvery inheritance been “flattened”. flattened program, closely to has the abstract syntax treeFrom of thethis original program. See, weforgenerate Scoop-Graph (encoded infrom the Graph which example,a Figure 6, which is generated the codeeXchange in ListingLanguage) 2. Observe that between thevery InitialState FinalState the of control-flow graph directly corresponds closely to theand abstract syntax ,tree the original program. See, theFigure four actions of the original program: ofObserve separate forencodes example, 6, which is generated from thetwo codedeclarations in Listing 2. that blocks, and commands within We provide wrapper (written in directly Java) between the two InitialState and them. FinalState , thea control-flow graph  encodes the four actions of the original program: two declarations of separate blocks, and two commands within them. We provide a wrapper (written in Java)  InitialState class = "PHILOSOPHER" procedure = "lazy_eat"  AttributeExpression name = "left_fork"  expression  expression  InlineParameter name = "left"  AttributeExpression name = "right_fork"  parameter to_action  InlineParameter name = "right" parameter  ActionStartInlineSeparateBlock  to_state  ControlState  ActionStartInlineSeparateBlock  to_action  to_state LocalExpression name = "left"  _ends_with  ControlState  to_action  LocalExpression name = "right"  target  target  ActionCommand procedure = "use"  ActionCommand procedure = "use"  to_state  ControlState  to_action  to_state  ControlState  _ends_with  to_action  FinalState  to_state  ActionEndInlineSeparateBlock  to_action  ControlState  to_state  ActionEndInlineSeparateBlock  Fig. 6. Generated control-flow graph for Listing 2  around the external Groove tool, which takes a generated Scoop-Graph as input, and launches a full state-space exploration in Groove with respect to Scoop-Gts(RQ) or Scoop-Gts(QoQ). The results—including statistics and detected error states—are then extracted from Groove and returned to the programmer for inspection. A standalone version of this wrapper without the Eve integration is also available and can be downloaded from [36]. Checking the Consistency of Semantics. The workbench can be used to check the consistency of program executions under RQ and QoQ with respect to various properties. These properties are encoded in Scoop-Gts as error rules that match on configurations if and only if they violate the properties. If they match, they generate a special Error node that encodes some contextual information for the toolchain to extract, and prevents the execution branch from being explored any further. Two types of error rules are supported: general, safety-related error rules for detecting problems like deadlock (whether caused by waiting for request queue locks in RQ, or waiting on cycles of queries in QoQ); but also user-specified error rules for program-specific properties (as we will use in Section 5). If any of these error rules are applied in a state-space exploration, this information is extracted and reported by the workbench toolchain; discrepancies between semantics exist when such rules match under only one. Figure 2 shows an actual deadlock between two handlers attempting to enter the nested separate block of Listing 2 under RQ. This configuration is matched by an error rule for deadlock (not shown), which catches the circular waiting dependencies exhibited by the edges.  5  Evaluation  To evaluate the use of our workbench for checking the consistency of semantics, we devised a representative set of benchmark programs, based on documented Scoop examples [11] and classical synchronisation problems. We then deployed the toolchain to analyse their executions under RQ and QoQ with respect to  behavioural and safety-related properties, and highlight the discrepancies uncovered by the workbench for our running example. Everything necessary to reproduce our evaluation is available at [36]. Benchmark Selection. Our aim was to devise a set of representative programs covering different, idiomatic usages of Scoop’s concurrency mechanisms. To achieve this, we based our programs on official, documented examples [11], as well as some classical synchronisation problems, in order to deploy the language mechanisms in a greater variety of usage contexts. Note that it is not (yet) our goal to analyse large software projects, but rather to compare executions of representative programs with manageable state spaces under different semantics. We selected the following programs: dining philosophers—as presented in Section 2—with its two implementations for picking up forks (eagerly or lazily) which exploited the implicit locking of RQ; a third variant of dining philosophers without any commands in the separate blocks; single-element producer consumer, which uses a mixture of commands, queries, and condition synchronisation; and finally, barbershop and dining savages (based on [10]), both of which use a similar mix of features. These programs cover different usages of Scoop’s language mechanisms and are well-understood examples in concurrent programming. Note that while our compiler supports inheritance by flattening the used classes, these examples do not use inheritance; in particular, no methods from the implicitly inherited class ANY are used. By not translating these methods into the start graphs, we obtain considerably smaller graphs (which impacts the exploration speed, but not the sizes of the generated transition systems). Benchmark Results. Table 1 contains metrics for the inspected examples, obtained using our Groove wrapper utility. The presented values correspond to full state-space exploration. Metrics for elapsed time (wall clock time) and memory usage (computed using Java’s MemoryPoolMXBean) are the means of five runs, while the other values are the same for each run. The experiments were carried out on an off-the-shelf notebook with an Intel Core i7-4810MQ CPU and 16 GB of main memory. We used Oracle Java 1.8.0_25 with the -Xmx 14g option together with Groove 5.5.5. Across all instances, the start and final graph sizes are comparable. This can be explained by the fact that our implementation contains a number of simple “garbage collection” rules that remove edges and nodes that are no longer needed (e.g. the results of intermediate computations). Final graphs simply contain the control-flow graph and heap structure after the executions. Note that we do not perform real garbage collection. For example, unreachable objects are not removed; the graph size increases linearly with the number of created objects. The number of configurations denotes the number of recipe applications. This value is of interest because it allows one to directly compare explorations under different semantics (i.e. how much more concurrency is permitted). Recall that scheduler-specific rules are wrapped inside recipes. For example, enqueueing a work item may trigger more bookkeeping rules in QoQ than in RQ. Since the corresponding logic (see Listing 3) is implemented in a recipe, we end up with just one more configuration in both cases, independently of how many individ-  Table 1. Results for the dining philosophers (DP, with the number of philosophers), producer-consumer (PC, with the number of elements), barbershop (with the number of customers), and dining savages (with the number of savages) programs; time and memory metrics are means over five runs (standard deviation in brackets) Start graph  Semantics  DP 2 eager  RQ QoQ RQ QoQ RQ QoQ RQ QoQ RQ QoQ RQ QoQ RQ QoQ RQ QoQ RQ QoQ RQ QoQ RQ QoQ RQ QoQ  DP 2 lazy DP 2 eager (no commands) DP 2 lazy (no commands) DP 3 eager DP 3 lazy DP 3 eager (no commands) DP 3 lazy (no commands) PC 5 PC 20 Barbershop 2 Savages 2  Configurations 4219 5644 5679 9609 442 443 868 919 99198 199144 170249 444686 3269 3286 10877 11774 4085 12366 12890 50286 38509 54325 35361 79398  Rule Start graph size Final graph size applications (nodes/edges) (nodes/edges) 54441 72762 72692 123583 6010 6135 11211 11935 1270216 2532882 2166712 5683419 43967 45152 139216 151526 51283 156210 159958 632820 494491 702611 448576 1008596  226/343 226/343 221/334 221/334 254/395 254/395 250/387 250/387 226/343 226/343 221/334 221/334 254/395 254/395 250/387 250/387 307/476 307/476 307/476 307/476 302/466 302/466 410/631 410/631  261/396 284/462 288/470 256/387 300/473 300/473 325/541 296/465 277/422 304/498 319/536 272/413 316/499 316/499 355/604 312/491 353/548 353/548 398/593 398/593 346/538 346/538 459/716 459/716  Time [SD] (seconds)  19.34 [0.25] 25.61 [1.03] 24.76 [0.34] 42.46 [0.65] 6.08 [0.28] 5.84 [0.24] 9.53 [0.36] 10.66 [0.61] 469.94 [11.93] 1393.95 [31.06] 1149.07 [53.59] 2564.45 [55.94] 37.31 [1.68] 39.32 [0.65] 114.26 [5.17] 125.25 [4.19] 45.87 [0.74] 140.86 [2.83] 148.28 [2.85] 618.33 [15.42] 354.17 [16.58] 537.21 [8.19] 550.92 [14.99] 1299.52 [54.96]  Memory [SD] (GB) 1.60 [0.02] 1.63 [0.02] 2.05 [0.10] 2.22 [0.06] 0.57 [0.00] 0.57 [0.01] 0.66 [0.00] 0.66 [0.01] 11.14 [0.17] 13.88 [0.08] 13.33 [0.69] 11.99 [0.07] 1.70 [0.09] 1.52 [0.00] 3.39 [0.13] 3.63 [0.07] 2.07 [0.14] 3.14 [0.07] 3.78 [0.25] 6.67 [0.20] 6.91 [0.19] 7.79 [0.16] 7.06 [0.07] 11.33 [0.11]  ual rule applications are triggered within the recipe. Differences in the number of configurations arise from different branching at synchronisation points. For example, we can see that in most instances, QoQ generates considerably more configurations than the RQ implementation, which suggests that Scoop programs are “more concurrent” under QoQ. The time and memory columns show the raw power requirements of our toolchain. Unfortunately, the state-space explosion problem is inevitable when exploring concurrent programs. The number of configurations is, unsurprisingly, particularly sensitive to programs with many handlers and only asynchronous commands (e.g. dining philosophers). Programs that also use synchronous queries (e.g. producer-consumer) scale better, since queries force synchronisation once they reach the front of the queue. We note again that our aim was to facilitate automatic analyses of representative Scoop programs that covered the different usages of the language mechanisms, rather than optimised verification techniques for production-level software. The results suggest that for this objective, the toolchain scales well enough to be practical. Error Rules / Discrepancies Detected. In our evaluation of the various dining philosophers implementations, we were able to detect that the lazy implementation (Listing 2) can result in deadlock under the RQ model, but not under QoQ. This was achieved by using error rules that match circular waiting dependencies. In case a deadlock occurs that is not matched by these rules, we can still detect that the execution is stuck and report a generic error, after which we manually inspect the resulting configuration. While such error rules are useful for analysing Scoop-Graphs in general, it is also useful to define rules that  match when certain program-specific properties hold. For example, if we take a look at the eager implementation of the dining philosophers (Listing 1) and its executions under RQ and QoQ, we find that the program cannot deadlock under either. This does not prove however that the implementation actually solves the dining philosophers problem under both semantics. To check this, we defined an error rule that matches if and only if two adjacent philosophers are in their separate blocks at the same time, which is impossible if forks are treated as locks (as they implicitly are under RQ). Consequently, this rule matches only under the QoQ semantics, highlighting that under the new semantics, the program is no longer a solution to the dining philosophers problem. (We remark that it can be “ported” to QoQ by replacing the commands on forks with queries, which force the waiting.) We implemented program-specific correctness rules for the other benchmark programs analogously, but did not detect any further discrepancies.  6  Related Work  We briefly describe some related work closest to the overarching themes of our paper: frameworks for semantic analyses, Gts models for concurrent asynchronous programs, and verification techniques for Scoop. Frameworks for Semantic Analysis. The closest approach in spirit to ours is the work on K [21,33]. It consists of the K concurrent rewrite abstract machine and the K technique. One can think of K as domain specific language for implementing programming languages with a special focus on semantics, which was recently successfully applied to give elaborate semantics to Java [4] and JavaScript [30]. Both K and our workbench have the same user group (programming language designers and researchers) and focus on formalising semantics and analysing programs based on this definition. We both have “modularity” as a principal goal in our agendas, but in a contrasting sense: our modularity targets a semantic plug-in mechanism for parameterising different model components, whereas K focuses on modularity with respect to language feature reuse. In contrast to our approach, K targets the whole language toolchain— including the possibility to define a language and automatically generate parsers and a runtime simulation for testing the formalisation. Based on Maude’s formal power of conditional rewriting logic, K also offers axiomatic models for formal reasoning on programs and the possibility to also define complex static semantic features, e.g. advanced typing and meta-programming. Despite having similar formal underlying theoretical power (K’s rewriting is similar to “jungle rewriting” graph grammars [35]), Scoop-Gts models make the graph-like interdependencies between concurrently running threads or handlers a first-class element of the model. This is an advantage for analyses of concurrent asynchronous programs, as many concurrency properties can be straightforwardly reduced to graph properties (e.g. deadlocks as wait-cycles). Our explicit Gts model also allows us to compare program executions under different semantics, which is not a targeted feature of K. We also conjecture that our diagrammatic notations are easier for software engineers to grasp than purely algebraic and axiomatic formalisations.  Gts Models for Concurrent Asynchronous Programs. Formalising and analysing concurrent object-oriented programs with Gts-based models is an emerging trend in software specification and analysis, especially for approaches rooted in practice. See [31] for a good overview discussion—based on a lot of personal experience—on the general appropriateness of Gts for this task. In recent decades, conditional rewriting logic has become a reference formalism for concurrency models in general; we refer to [22] and its recent update [23] for details. Despite having a comparable expressive power, our approach’s original decision for Gts and for Groove as our state-space exploration tool led us to an easily accessible, generic, and parameterisable semantic model and tools that work in acceptable time on our representative Scoop examples. Closest to our Scoop-Gts model is the Qdas model presented in [15], which represents an asynchronous, concurrent waiting queue based model with global memory as Gts, for verifying programs written in Grand Central Dispatch [14]. Despite the formal work, there is currently no direct compiler to Gts yet. The Creol model of [20] focuses on asynchronous concurrent models but without more advanced remote calls via queues as needed for Scoop. Analysis of the model can be done via an implementation in Maude [19]. Existing Gts-based models for Java only translate the code to a typed graph similar to the control-flow sub-graph of Scoop-Gts [8,32]. A different approach is taken by [12], which abstracts a Gts-based model for concurrent OO systems [13] to a finite state model that can be verified using the SPIN model checker. Groove itself was already used for verifying concurrent distributed algorithms on an abstract Gts level [16], but not on an execution model level as in our approach. However, despite the intention to apply generic frameworks for the specification, analysis, and verification of object-oriented concurrent programs, e.g. in [9,41], there are no publicly available tools implementing this long-term goal that are powerful enough for Scoop. Scoop Analysis/Verification. Various analyses for Scoop programs have been proposed, including: using a Scoop virtual machine for checking temporal properties [29]; checking Coffman’s deadlock conditions using an abstract semantics [7]; and statically checking code annotated with locking orders for the absence of deadlock [39]. In contrast to our work, these approaches are tied to particular (and now obsolete) execution models, and do not operate on (unannotated) source code. The complexity of other semantic models of Scoop led to scalability issues when attempting to leverage existing analysis and verification tools. In [6], Scoop programs were hand-translated to models in the process algebra Csp to perform, e.g. deadlock analysis; but the leading Csp tools at the time could not cope with these models and a new tool was purpose-built (but no longer available/maintained today). In a recent deadlock detection benchmark on the RQ execution model formalised in Maude [26], the tool was not able to give verification results in reasonable time (i.e. less than one day) even for simple programs like dining philosophers5 ; our benchmarks compare quite favourably to this. Note that since our work focuses more on semantic modelling and com5  From personal communication with the researchers behind this benchmark.  parisons than it does on the underlying model checking algorithms, we did not yet evaluate the generic bounded model checking algorithms for temporal logic properties implemented in Groove and accessible for Scoop-Gts models.  7  Conclusion and Future Work  We proposed and constructed a semantic workbench for a concurrent asynchronous programming language via the following, general work flow: (i) derive a Gts-based semantic model from existing semi-formal documentation of execution models; (ii) continuously compare the model by simulation runs against the actual implementations; (iii) exploit semantic paramaterisation to derive a versatile model; (iv) if possible, conduct expert interviews to ascertain the model’s faithfulness; (v) apply existing generic model checking techniques for Gts to implement analyses against the different execution models; (vi) implement different analyses on top of this model. This workflow resulted in the formalisation Scoop-Gts, which covered the two principal execution models of Scoop, and allowed us to formally, automatically, and practically compare the executions of programs with respect to both. With the conducted expert interviews, and the results of applying our model to check the consistency of the semantics across a small but representative collection of Scoop programs in reasonable time, we were reassured of our choice of Gts as an underlying formalism: theoretically sound, yet diagrammatically accessible for software engineers, and able to scale to the sizes of programs we need for semantic comparisons. We are currently working on extending Scoop-Gts to cover some more advanced and esoteric features of Scoop (including distributed exception handling) and to enlarge the benchmark set, with the eventual aim of producing a conformance test suite for Scoop-like languages. As noted in [42], the shape of the rules and the control programs have a big influence on the running times of Groove. We are currently working on refactoring Scoop-Gts for better performance (relative to benchmarking on the conformance test suite). A more general line of research focuses on the shape of the Scoop-Graphs contained in the reachable state space of Scoop-Gts. Insights here would help us to devise better abstraction techniques (along the lines of [3]) with which we could implement better verification algorithms, and visualise the influence of different semantic parameters on Scoop-Graphs. Generalising Scoop-Gts to cover other actor-based concurrency languages would also extend this result towards differences between the semantics of programming language families expressed as Scoop-Graph properties. Acknowledgements. We thank our interviewees from the Scoop development and research team for the many helpful and insightful discussions. We are also deeply grateful for the work of the Groove developers that we leverage in this paper, and especially for their Groove-y feedback and support. The underlying research was partially funded by ERC Grant CME #291389.  References 1. Agha, G.: ACTORS: A Model of Concurrent Computation in Distributed Systems. MIT Press (1986) 2. Armstrong, J., Virding, R., Williams, M.: Concurrent Programming in ERLANG. Prentice Hall, 2nd edn. (1996) 3. Backes, P., Reineke, J.: Analysis of infinite-state graph transformation systems by cluster abstraction. In: Proc. VMCAI 2015. LNCS, vol. 8931, pp. 135–152. Springer (2015) 4. Bogdanas, D., Rosu, G.: K-Java: A complete semantics of Java. In: Proc. POPL 2015. pp. 445–456. ACM (2015) 5. Brooke, P.J., Paige, R.F.: Cameo: an alternative model of concurrency for Eiffel. Formal Aspects of Computing 21(4), 363–391 (2009) 6. Brooke, P.J., Paige, R.F., Jacob, J.L.: A CSP model of Eiffel’s SCOOP. Formal Aspects of Computing 19(4), 487–512 (2007) 7. Caltais, G., Meyer, B.: Coffman deadlocks in SCOOP. In: Proc. NWPT 2014 (2014), online version at http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.7514 8. Corradini, A., Dotti, F.L., Foss, L., Ribeiro, L.: Translating Java code to graph transformation systems. In: Proc. ICGT 2004. LNCS, vol. 3256, pp. 383–398. Springer (2004) 9. Dotti, F.L., Duarte, L.M., Foss, L., Ribeiro, L., Russi, D., dos Santos, O.M.: An environment for the development of concurrent object-based applications. In: Proc. GraBaTs 2004. ENTCS, vol. 127, pp. 3–13. Elsevier (2005) 10. Downey, A.B.: The Little Book of Semaphores. http://greenteapress.com/ semaphores/, acc.: Jan. 2016 11. Eiffel Documentation: Concurrent Eiffel with SCOOP. https://docs.eiffel. com/book/solutions/concurrent-eiffel-scoop, acc.: Oct. 2015 12. Ferreira, A.P.L., Foss, L., Ribeiro, L.: Formal verification of object-oriented graph grammars specifications. In: Proc. GT-VC 2006. ENTCS, vol. 175, pp. 101–114. Elsevier (2007) 13. Ferreira, A.P.L., Ribeiro, L.: A graph-based semantics for object-oriented programming constructs. In: Proc. CTCS 2004. ENTCS, vol. 122, pp. 89–104. Elsevier (2005) 14. Grand Central Dispatch (GCD) Reference. https://developer.apple.com/ library/mac/documentation/Performance/Reference/GCD_libdispatch_Ref/ index.html, acc.: Oct. 2015 15. Geeraerts, G., Heußner, A., Raskin, J.: On the verification of concurrent, asynchronous programs with waiting queues. ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems 14(3), 58 (2015) 16. Ghamarian, A.H., de Mol, M., Rensink, A., Zambon, E., Zimakova, M.: Modelling and analysis using GROOVE. International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer 14(1), 15–40 (2012) 17. Groove (project web page). http://groove.cs.utwente.nl/, acc.: Oct. 2015 18. Heußner, A., Poskitt, C.M., Corrodi, C., Morandi, B.: Towards practical graphbased verification for an object-oriented concurrency model. In: Proc. GaM 2015. EPTCS, vol. 181, pp. 32–47 (2015) 19. Johnsen, E.B., Owe, O., Axelsen, E.W.: A run-time environment for concurrent objects with asynchronous method calls. In: Proc. WRLA 2004. ENTCS, vol. 117, pp. 375–392. Elsevier (2005)  20. Johnsen, E.B., Owe, O., Yu, I.C.: Creol: A type-safe object-oriented model for distributed concurrent systems. Theoretical Computer Science 365(1-2), 23–66 (2006) 21. Lucanu, D., Serbanuta, T., Rosu, G.: K framework distilled. In: Proc. WRLA 2012. LNCS, vol. 7571, pp. 31–53. Springer (2012) 22. Meseguer, J.: Conditioned rewriting logic as a united model of concurrency. Theoretical Computer Science 96(1), 73–155 (1992) 23. Meseguer, J.: Twenty years of rewriting logic. Journal of Logic and Algebraic Programming 81(7-8), 721–781 (2012) 24. Meyer, B.: Systematic concurrent object-oriented programming. Communications of the ACM (CACM) 36(9), 56–80 (1993) 25. Meyer, B.: Object-Oriented Software Construction. Prentice Hall, 2nd edn. (1997) 26. Morandi, B., Schill, M., Nanz, S., Meyer, B.: Prototyping a concurrency model. In: Proc. ACSD 2013. pp. 170–179. IEEE (2013) 27. Morandi, B., Nanz, S., Meyer, B.: Safe and efficient data sharing for messagepassing concurrency. In: Proc. COORDINATION 2014. LNCS, vol. 8459, pp. 99– 114. Springer (2014) 28. Nienaltowski, P.: Practical framework for contract-based concurrent objectoriented programming. Doctoral dissertation, ETH Zürich (2007) 29. Ostroff, J.S., Torshizi, F.A., Huang, H.F., Schoeller, B.: Beyond contracts for concurrency. Formal Aspects of Computing 21(4), 319–346 (2009) 30. Park, D., Ştefănescu, A., Roşu, G.: KJS: A complete formal semantics of JavaScript. In: Proc. PLDI 2015. pp. 346–356. ACM (2015) 31. Rensink, A.: The edge of graph transformation - graphs for behavioural specification. In: Graph Transformations and Model-Driven Engineering. LNCS, vol. 5765, pp. 6–32. Springer (2010) 32. Rensink, A., Zambon, E.: A type graph model for Java programs. In: Proc. FMOODS 2009. LNCS, vol. 5522, pp. 237–242. Springer (2009) 33. Rosu, G., Serbanuta, T.: An overview of the K semantic framework. Journal of Logic and Algebraic Programming 79(6), 397–434 (2010) 34. Schäfer, J., Poetzsch-Heffter, A.: JCoBox: Generalizing active objects to concurrent components. In: Proc. ECOOP 2010, LNCS, vol. 6183, pp. 275–299. Springer (2010) 35. Serbanuta, T., Rosu, G.: A truly concurrent semantics for the K framework based on graph transformations. In: Proc. ICGT 2012. LNCS, vol. 7562, pp. 294–310. Springer (2012) 36. Supplementary material. http://www.swt-bamberg.de/fase2016_supp/ 37. Torshizi, F.A., Ostroff, J.S., Paige, R.F., Chechik, M.: The SCOOP concurrency model in Java-like languages. In: Proc. CPA 2009. Concurrent Systems Engineering Series, vol. 67, pp. 7–27. IOS Press (2009) 38. Tschannen, J., Furia, C.A., Nordio, M., Meyer, B.: Usable verification of objectoriented programs by combining static and dynamic techniques. In: Proc. SEFM 2011. LNCS, vol. 7041, pp. 382–398. Springer (2011) 39. West, S., Nanz, S., Meyer, B.: A modular scheme for deadlock prevention in an object-oriented programming model. In: Proc. ICFEM 2010. LNCS, vol. 6447, pp. 597–612. Springer (2010) 40. West, S., Nanz, S., Meyer, B.: Efficient and reasonable object-oriented concurrency. In: Proc. ESEC/FSE 2015. pp. 734–744. ACM (2015) 41. Zambon, E., Rensink, A.: Using graph transformations and graph abstractions for software verification. In: Proc. ICGT-DS 2010. ECEASST, vol. 38 (2011) 42. Zambon, E., Rensink, A.: Solving the N-Queens problem with GROOVE – towards a compendium of best practices. In: Proc. GT-VMT 2014. ECEASST, vol. 67 (2014)

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
