Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_7499

Abstract:
A	   high	   performance	   scientific	   cloud	   computing	   environment	   for	    materials	   simulations	    	    K.	   Jorissen*,	   F.D.	   Vila,	   and	   J.J.	   Rehr	    	    Department	   of	   Physics,	   University	   of	   Washington,	   Seattle,	   WA	   98195,	   USA	    *	   corresponding	   author	    	    	     Abstract	    	    We	   describe	   the	   development	   of	   a	   scientific	   cloud	   computing	   (SCC)	   platform	   that	   offers	    high	   performance	   computation	   capability.	   	   The	   platform	   consists	   of	   a	   scientific	   virtual	    machine	   prototype	   containing	   a	   UNIX	   operating	   system	   and	   several	   materials	   science	    codes,	   together	   with	   essential	   interface	   tools	   (an	   SCC	   toolset)	   that	   offers	   functionality	    comparable	   to	   local	   compute	   clusters.	   	   In	   particular,	   our	   SCC	   toolset	   provides	    automatic	   creation	   of	   virtual	   clusters	   for	   parallel	   computing,	   including	   tools	   for	    execution	   and	   monitoring	   performance,	   as	   well	   as	   efficient	   I/O	   utilities	   that	   enable	    seamless	   connections	   to	   and	   from	   the	   cloud.	   Our	   SCC	   platform	   is	   optimized	   for	   the	    Amazon	   Elastic	   Compute	   Cloud	   (EC2).	   	   We	   present	   benchmarks	   for	   prototypical	    scientific	   applications	   and	   demonstrate	   performance	   comparable	   to	   local	   compute	    clusters.	   To	   facilitate	   code	   execution	   and	   provide	   user-­‐friendly	   access,	   we	   have	   also	    integrated	   cloud	   computing	   capability	   in	   a	   JAVA-­‐based	   GUI.	   	   Our	   SCC	   platform	   may	   be	    an	   alternative	   to	   traditional	   HPC	   resources	   for	   materials	   science	   or	   quantum	    chemistry	   applications.	    	    Keywords:	   Cloud	   Computing,	   Scientific	   Computation,	   High	   Performance	   Computing,	    Condensed	   Matter	   Physics	    	    	     1. Introduction	     	    Cloud	   Computing	   (CC)	   is	   a	   computational	   paradigm	   in	   which	   dynamically	   scalable,	    virtualized	   resources	   are	   provided	   as	   a	   service	   over	   the	   internet.[1-­‐4]	   	   This	    paradigm	   has	   seen	   remarkable	   advances	   over	   the	   last	   few	   years,	   especially	   with	   the	    emergence	   of	   several	   commercial	   cloud	   services	   that	   take	   advantage	   of	   economies	    of	   scale.[5-­‐9]	   	   While	   many	   commercial	   applications	   have	   quickly	   embraced	   CC	    developments,	   scientists	   have	   been	   slower	   to	   exploit	   the	   possibilities	   of	   a	   CC	    environment.	   	   Scientists	   are	   not	   new	   to	   shared	   computing	   resources,	   such	   as	    Beowulf	   clusters,	   which	   are	   often	   needed	   for	   modern	   condensed	   matter	   and	    materials	   science	   simulations.	   	   Also	   cloud-­‐like	   resources	   such	   as	   Grid	   Computing	    and	   CONDOR	   clusters	   have	   been	   useful	   for	   some	   scientific	   applications.	   However	    these	   latter	   resources	   are	   typically	   loosely	   coupled,	   inhomogeneous,	   and	    geographically	   dispersed,	   and	   not	   well	   suited	   for	   the	   high	   performance	   computing	    (HPC)	   demands	   of	   many	   scientific	   codes.	   Recently,	   dedicated	   scientific	   cloud	   test	    	     1	     beds	   have	   begun	   to	   be	   explored	   by	   national	   research	   facilities	   such	   as	   NERSC[10]	    and	   the	   NEON	   network[11].	   	   Additionally,	   a	   number	   of	   studies	   have	   explored	   the	    concept,	   feasibility,	   or	   cost-­‐effectiveness	   of	   cloud	   computing	   for	   research.[12-­‐16]	   	    There	   have	   been	   commercial	   and	   community	   efforts	   to	   develop	   tools	   that	   make	    access	   to	   cloud	   resources	   easier.	   	   Notably	   the	   StarCluster	   project[17]	   provides	   a	    utility	   for	   managing	   general	   purpose	   computing	   clusters	   on	   EC2.	   	   However,	    significant	   further	   developments	   were	   needed	   to	   create	   a	   platform	   for	   materials	    simulations	   that	   meets	   all	   the	   particular	   needs	   of	   HP	   scientific	   computing	   without	    requiring	   further	   configuration,	   and	   is	   accessible	   not	   only	   to	   system	   administrators	    but	   also	   to	   general	   users.	   	   Furthermore	   the	   questions	   of	   cost-­‐effectiveness	   and	    performance	   have	   not	   been	   conclusively	   answered	   and	   need	   to	   be	   addressed	   for	    each	   type	   of	   scientific	   cloud	   application.	   	   In	   particular,	   concerns	   about	   CC	    performance	   are	   strong	   in	   the	   materials	   science	   community.	   	   Here	   we	   demonstrate	    that	   with	   the	   advent	   of	   UNIX-­‐based	   HPC	   cloud	   resources	   such	   as	   the	   Amazon	   EC2	    and	   the	   2nd	   generation	   cloud	   cluster	   tools	   described	   below,	   there	   is	   now	    considerable	   potential	   for	   Scientific	   Cloud	   Computing	   (SCC).	   In	   particular,	   we	   show	    that	   SCC	   is	   especially	   appropriate	   for	   materials	   science	   and	   quantum-­‐chemistry	    simulations,	   which	   tend	   to	   be	   dominated	   by	   computational	   performance	   rather	   than	    data	   transfer	   and	   storage.	    	    Recently	   we	   established	   proof	   of	   principle	   for	   the	   feasibility	   of	   SCC	   for	   some	    prototypical	   scientific	   applications.	   [18]	   In	   particular,	   we	   created	   an	   AMI	   (Amazon	    Machine	   Image)	   containing	   parallel	   codes,	   and	   a	   first	   generation	   set	   of	   tools	   to	    create	   and	   control	   clusters	   of	   virtual	   machines	   on	   the	   Amazon	   Web	   Services	   (AWS)	    Elastic	   Compute	   Cloud	   (EC2)	   (Fig.	   1).	   These	   tools	   are	   shell	   scripts	   that	   can	   be	   run	    from	   the	   command	   line	   on	   *NIX	   systems.	   Benchmarks	   in	   this	   environment	   showed	    that	   a	   parallelized	   scientific	   code	   with	   modest	   requirements	   in	   terms	   of	   memory	    and	   network	   speed,	   yielded	   similar	   performance	   on	   a	   virtual	   EC2	   cluster	   as	   on	   a	    local	   physical	   cluster.[18]	   However,	   at	   the	   time	   the	   capabilities	   of	   the	   EC2	   were	    limited	   by	   the	   high	   latency	   and	   low	   bandwidth	   of	   the	   cluster	   interconnects.	   Thus	   in	    the	   present	   work	   we	   describe	   a	   virtual	   SCC	   platform	   that	   takes	   advantage	   of	   current	    HPC	   cloud	   resources	   and	   demonstrates	   scalability	   and	   performance	   comparable	   to	    local	   compute	   clusters.	    	    This	   goal	   is	   accomplished	   in	   several	   steps:	   1)	   We	   briefly	   describe	   the	   elements	   of	    our	   SCC	   AMI,	   i.e.,	   the	   operating	   system	   and	   HPC	   scientific	   applications	   included	   in	    the	   improved	   AMI.	   	   (From	   here	   on,	   we	   will	   generally	   use	   the	   AWS	   specific	    terminology:	   “AMI”	   for	   a	   virtual	   machine	   image,	   and	   “EC2”	   for	   the	   Cloud.)	   2)	   We	    describe	   a	   2nd	   generation	   SCC	   toolset,	   consisting	   of	   bash	   scripts,	   that	   makes	   the	   EC2	    cloud	   perform	   virtually	   like	   a	   local	   HPC	   UNIX	   cluster,	   and	   we	   verify	   its	   improved	    performance.	   3)	   We	   present	   benchmarks	   for	   parallel	   performance	   of	   HPC	   scientific	    applications,	   focusing	   in	   particular	   on	   the	   intranet	   performance.	   4)	   Finally,	   in	   order	    to	   facilitate	   access	   to	   the	   EC2,	   we	   have	   developed	   a	   graphical	   user	   interface	   (GUI)	    that	   controls	   execution	   and	   I/O	   for	   a	   prototypical	   application.	    	     	     2	     We	   focus	   here	   primarily	   on	   scientific	   applications	   in	   condensed	   matter	   physics,	    materials	   science,	   and	   quantum-­‐chemistry.	   Most	   applications	   in	   those	   fields	   have	   a	    workflow	   and	   coding	   characteristics	   that	   rely	   on	   computational	   performance,	   rather	    than	   data-­‐managing	   capability.	   These	   special	   features	   in	   turn	   influence	   the	   choice	   of	    cloud	   paradigm.	   A	   key	   feature	   of	   such	   applications	   is	   their	   simple	   control	   and	   data	    workflows.	   Typical	   simulations	   involve	   a	   set	   of	   small	   input	   files	   of	   a	   few	   KB	   that	    define	   the	   parameters	   for	   the	   run;	   a	   series	   of	   computationally	   intensive	   steps;	   and	    the	   production	   of	   a	   set	   of	   small	   to	   medium	   size	   output	   files,	   typically	   ranging	   from	   1-­‐ 100MB.	   Thus,	   typical	   materials-­‐science	   simulations	   differ	   from	   data-­‐driven	   cloud	    applications	   that	   can	   take	   advantage	   of	   software	   frameworks	   such	   as	    MapReduce[19]	   or	   Hadoop[20].	   Nevertheless,	   given	   that	   there	   is	   very	   little	    communication	   to	   and	   from	   the	   cloud	   and	   that	   data	   transfer	   can	   be	   a	   substantial	    component	   of	   cloud	   computing	   costs,	   materials	   science	   applications	   tend	   to	   be	    relatively	   cost-­‐effective	   data	   wise.	   	   Another	   key	   trait	   of	   many	   scientific	   applications	    is	   their	   legacy	   character.	   For	   instance,	   many	   codes	   are	   written	   in	   FORTRAN	   and	    make	   extensive	   use	   of	   the	   Message	   Passing	   Interface	   (MPI)	   for	   parallelization.	    Consequently,	   the	   deployment	   of	   these	   applications	   to	   an	   Infrastructure-­‐as-­‐a-­‐ Service	   (IaaS)	   cloud	   environment	   such	   as	   EC2	   is	   highly	   advantageous.	   IaaS	    environments	   can	   be	   configured	   to	   match	   the	   non-­‐standard	   requirements	   of	   most	    legacy	   applications	   and	   offer	   the	   added	   advantage	   of	   providing	   traditional	    homogenous	   environments	   that	   are	   highly	   desirable	   for	   both	   users	   and	   developers.	    In	   contrast,	   Platform-­‐as-­‐a-­‐Service	   (PaaS)	   environments	   such	   as	   Microsoft’s	    Windows	   Azure	   Platform[21]	   require	   major	   changes	   in	   software	   structure	   and,	   at	    least	   at	   present,	   are	   not	   able	   to	   accommodate	   MPI.	    	    For	   applications	   that	   are	   highly	   data-­‐intensive,	   cloud	   computing	   may	   not	   currently	    be	   competitive.	   	   While	   the	   per-­‐GB	   cost	   of	   Simple	   Storage	   System	   (S3)	   storage[22]	    can	   be	   comparable	   to	   that	   of	   local	   solutions	   (e.g.	   [23]),	   and	   has	   the	   advantage	   of	    elasticity	   (one	   only	   pays	   for	   the	   storage	   or	   transfers	   needed	   at	   a	   given	   time),	   cloud	    storage	   can	   have	   considerable	   disadvantages.	   	   For	   example,	   local	   tests	   showed	   that	    data	   transfer	   to	   and	   from	   S3	   peaked	   at	   0.032Gbps	   [24]	   while	   a	   local	   service	   of	    comparable	   cost	   delivered	   10Gbps.	   	   If	   bandwidth	   is	   essential,	   this	   objection	   alone	    makes	   cloud	   storage	   unviable.	   	   Furthermore,	   data	   transfer	   to	   and	   from	   S3	   is	   charged	    per	   TB.	   	   Therefore,	   such	   communication	   is	   slow	   and	   costly	   for	   users	   who	   frequently	    need	   to	   move	   large	   amounts	   of	   data	   back	   and	   forth.	   	   For	   data	   that	   does	   not	   need	   to	    be	   accessed	   or	   moved	   much,	   	   tape	   archives	   are	   currently	   still	   a	   cheaper	   solution	   for	    archival	   purposes	   compared	   to	   S3	   storage.[23]	   	   For	   decades,	   supercomputer	   centers	    have	   offered	   safe,	   cheap	   archive	   services	   for	   large	   datasets	   that	   almost	   never	    change,	   coupled	   with	   finite	   amounts	   of	   spinning	   (expensive)	   scratch	   disk.	   	   The	    researcher	   typically	   uses	   the	   archive	   as	   the	   main	   data	   store,	   staging	   data	   onto	    spinning	   disk	   only	   when	   it	   is	   needed	   for	   calculation.	   	   Once	   the	   researcher	   is	   finished	    computing,	   any	   new	   data	   is	   moved	   back	   to	   the	   archive.	   	   This	   model	   is	   currently	   the	    most	   cost-­‐effective	   way	   of	   meeting	   the	   storage	   needs	   of	   scientists	   in	   an	   elastic	    computing	   environment	   and	   there	   is	   no	   competitive	   storage	   mode	   in	   the	   AWS	    Cloud.	   [24]	   	   While	   these	   objections	   are	   not	   important	   for	   the	   typical	   materials	     	     3	     science	   applications	   discussed	   in	   this	   paper,	   they	   would	   have	   to	   be	   considered	    carefully	   for	   more	   data-­‐intensive	   work.	    	    Although	   the	   principles	   outlined	   above	   are	   applicable	   to	   other	   cloud	   computing	    environments	   with	   comparable	   capabilities,	   the	   developments	   presented	   here	   are	    currently	   designed	   specifically	   for	   the	   EC2.	   	   In	   addition	   to	   the	   IaaS	   argument	   given	    above,	   this	   gives	   us	   the	   advantage	   of	   a	   major	   cloud	   provider	   with	   large	   capacity	   and	    a	   large	   user	   community,	   whose	   application	   programming	   interface	   (API)	   is	    somewhat	   of	   a	   standard.	   	   Finally,	   EC2	   offers	   virtual	   HPC	   resources,	   which	   we	   discuss	    in	   Section	   4.	   	   The	   tools	   we	   have	   developed,	   however,	   are	   intended	   to	   be	   generic	   and	    could	   be	   easily	   modified	   to	   use	   other	   cloud	   providers,	   or	   serve	   other	   applications	    where	   HPC	   resources	   are	   essential.	   	   Many	   further	   developments	   such	   as	   the	    inclusion	   of	   a	   wider	   variety	   of	   scientific	   codes	   with	   improved	   interfaces	   are	   now	    straightforward.	   	   Our	   developments	   have	   led	   to	   a	   functional,	   beta-­‐stage	   HPC	   SCC	    platform	   with	   the	   potential	   to	   make	   high	   performance	   scientific	   computing	   available	    to	   those	   who	   lack	   expertise	   and/or	   access	   to	   traditional	   HPC	   resources.	    	    	    	     	    Figure	   1	   Illustration	   of	   the	   cloud	   environment.	   The	   user	   runs	   an	   interface	   on	   a	   local	    machine.	   This	   interface	   could	   be	   a	   GUI	   (e.g.	   JFEFF),	   or	   our	   command	   line	   toolset.	   The	    interface	   creates	   a	   virtual	   cluster	   in	   the	   cloud	   and	   controls	   the	   execution	   of	   jobs	   on	    this	   cluster.	   When	   finished,	   the	   interface	   retrieves	   the	   results	   and	   terminates	   the	    virtual	   cluster.	    	    	     	   	   2.	   The	   Scientific	   Cloud	   Computing	   Machine	   Image	     	    In	   this	   section	   we	   briefly	   describe	   the	   scientific	   cloud	   computing	   AMI.	   This	   virtual	    machine	   image	   serves	   as	   a	   blueprint	   for	   a	   cloud	   instance	   specifically	   configured	   for	    parallel,	   HPC	   scientific	   computing	   applications.	   In	   a	   nutshell	   it	   is	   a	   minimal	   64-­‐bit	     	     4	     Fedora	   13	   LINUX	   distribution	   that	   is	   enhanced	   with	   tools	   typically	   needed	   for	    scientific	   computing,	   such	   as	   Fortran	   95	   and	   C++	   compilers,	   numerical	   libraries	   (e.g.	    BLAS,	   ScaLAPACK),	   MPI	   (1.4.3),	   PBS,	   PVFS,	   etc.	   Our	   2nd	   generation	   SCC	   AMI	   has	    several	   improvements	   over	   the	   original	   prototype[18]:	   This	   AMI	   is	   bundled	   with	    several	   widely	   used	   materials	   science	   codes	   that	   typically	   demand	   HPC	   capabilities.	    These	   include	   electronic	   structure	   codes	   (ABINIT[25],	   Quantum	   ESPRESSO[26],	   Car-­‐ Parrinello[27],	   and	   WIEN2k	   [19]),	   and	   excited-­‐state	   codes	   (AI2NBSE[28],	    Exc!ting[29],	   FEFF9[17],	   OCEAN[30],	   RT-­‐SIESTA[31]),	   and	   quantum	   chemistry	    codes	   (NWChem[32]),	   although	   here	   we	   only	   present	   benchmarks	   for	   FEFF9	   and	    WIEN2k.	   	   The	   64-­‐bit	   LINUX	   operating	   system	   is	   better	   suited	   for	   scientific	    computing	   than	   its	   32-­‐bit	   predecessor	   in	   the	   prototype	   [16].	   	   This	   machine	   image	   is	    now	   stored	   on	   Amazon’s	   Elastic	   Block	   Storage	   (EBS)[33]	   system,	   rather	   than	   the	    older	   S3[22]	   infrastructure,	   leading	   to	   a	   reduction	   in	   instance	   boot	   times	   of	   20-­‐50%	    (see	   Section	   2.4).	   Depending	   on	   needs,	   the	   new	   SCC	   AMI	   can	   be	   loaded	   onto	    different	   “instance	   types”.	   	   Slower	   but	   cheaper	   instances	   can	   be	   used	   for	   simple	    tasks,	   while	   higher	   performance	   workhorses	   are	   available	   for	   more	   demanding	    calculations.	   In	   particular,	   in	   Section	   4.2	   we	   discuss	   the	   new	   EC2	   “Cluster	    Instances”[34],	   which	   are	   very	   important	   for	   HPC.	     	    	    3.	   The	   Scientific	   Cloud	   Computing	   toolset	   	     	    3.1.	   Functionality	    	    Our	   2nd	   generation	   SCC	   toolset	   consists	   of	   a	   handful	   of	   bash	   scripts	   that	   run	   on	   a	    local	   machine	   (e.g.,	   a	   laptop	   PC	   or	   UNIX	   desktop),	   and	   are	   used	   to	   control	   the	   virtual	    SCC	   environment.	   The	   functionality	   of	   the	   toolset	   is	   twofold:	   First,	   it	   transforms	   a	    group	   of	   instances	   created	   by	   EC2	   based	   on	   our	   AMI,	   into	   an	   interconnected	   cluster	    that	   functions	   as	   a	   virtual	   parallel	   computing	   platform.	   	   How	   this	   is	   done	   is	    described	   in	   detail	   below	   for	   the	   “ec2-­‐clust-­‐launch”	   script.	   	   Second,	   the	   toolset	   is	   a	    wrapper	   for	   the	   EC2	   API,	   replacing	   cumbersome	   API	   calls	   by	   much	   more	   user-­‐ friendly	   calls	   that	   store	   many	   settings	   in	   the	   environment	   and	   in	   configuration	   files	    to	   keep	   the	   user	   from	   having	   to	   manage	   them	   manually.	   They	   function	   as	   an	    intermediary	   layer	   between	   the	   user	   and	   the	   EC2	   API[35].	   For	   example,	   a	   user	   could	    open	   an	   SSH	   session	   on	   an	   existing	   EC2	   instance	   by	   hand	   from	   a	   command-­‐line	    terminal	   by	   entering	   a	   rather	   complicated,	   session-­‐dependent	   command	    	    ssh -i/home/user/.ec2_clust/.ec2_clust_info.7729.r-de70cdb7/key_ pair_user.pem user@ec2-72-44-53-27.compute-1.amazonaws.com  	    Alternatively,	   using	   the	   SCC	   toolset	   script,	   the	   same	   task	   only	   requires	    	    ec2-clust-connect  	    The	   toolset	   also	   simplifies	   the	   use	   of	   applications	   within	   the	   cluster	   by	   providing	    scripts	   for	   launching	   and	   monitoring	   the	   load	   of	   different	   tasks.	    	     5	     	    	    3.2.	   Description	   of	   the	   tools	    	    Table	   1	   lists	   the	   currently	   available	   commands	   in	   the	   SCC	   toolset.	   All	   these	    commands	   are	   installed	   on	   the	   user’s	   local	   machine	   and	   act	   remotely	   on	   the	   virtual	    cluster.	   Moreover,	   some	   of	   these	   tools	   also	   have	   counterparts	   installed	   on	   the	   AMI	    that	   can	   be	   used	   to	   monitor	   the	   execution	   from	   within	   the	   cluster.	   The	   functionality	    of	   the	   tools	   is	   briefly	   summarized	   below,	   together	   with	   their	   LINUX	   equivalents.	    	    	    	    Table	   1	   	    	   SCC	   toolset	   commands	   to	   launch	   and	   interact	   with	   virtual	   EC2	   clusters	   and	   their	    LINUX	   counterparts.	    	    Name	    	    	    	    	    Function	    	    	    	    Analog	   	    	    ec2-clust-launch	   N	    	    Launch	   cluster	   with	   N	   instances	    boot	    ec2-clust-connect	    	    Connect	   to	   a	   cluster	    	    	    ssh	    ec2-clust-put	    	    	    Transfer	   data	   to	   a	   cluster	    	    scp	    ec2-clust-get	    	    	    Transfer	   data	   from	   a	   cluster	   	    scp	    ec2-clust-list	    	    	    List	   running	   clusters	   	    	    top	    	    ec2-clust-terminate	    	    Terminate	   a	   running	   cluster	   	    shutdown ec2-clust-run Start	   job	   on	   a	   cluster run	    ec2-clust-usage	    	    Monitor	   CPU	   usage	   in	   cluster	    top	    ec2-clust-load	    	    	    Monitor	   load	   in	   cluster	    	    loadavg 	    	    	    ec2-clust-launch –n N [–c Name] [–m MachineType] [–t InstanceType] [–e EphStorage] 	    The	   ec2-clust-launch	   script	   is	   the	   most	   important	   tool	   in	   the	   set:	   	   It	   performs	    all	   the	   tasks	   needed	   to	   launch	   and	   configure	   a	   cluster	   of	   N	   instances	   on	   the	   EC2.	    Optionally,	   the	   MachineType	   (i.e.	   AMI)	   and	   the	   InstanceType	   can	   be	   selected.	   	   AWS	    currently	   offers	   about	   a	   dozen	   InstanceTypes	   of	   varying	   CPU,	   memory,	   and	   network	    capabilities.[36]	   Schematically	   the	   ec2-­‐clust-­‐launch	   script	   performs	   the	   following	    tasks,	   as	   summarized	   from	   the	   comments	   within	   the	   script:	    	    #!/bin/sh ### Create a cluster of CLUST_NINS instances # Get the general configuration information # Check if the EC2_HOME is set and set all the derived variables # Check and set the location of the cluster tools # To avoid launch problems check for the presence of a lock  	     6	     # Create a lock for this process # Check if we have a cluster list # Get the total number of instances # Set the default cluster name (use current process id) # Set the default machine type # Process input options # Check that the PK (private key) and CERT files are available # Set the cluster index # Load the appropriate machine profile # Create an EC2 placement group if requesting cluster instances # Launch instances on EC2 # Get reservation ID and list of instance IDs # Get the instance rank indices # Save name and reservation ID in cluster list # Release the lock # Make a directory to hold the cluster information # Manage the certificates that are used to access the cluster # Monitor instances until all the information we need is available # Make directory that will be used to store info to transfer # Initialize setup script in transfer directory # Get public and private DNS names # Set the head instance public DNS name # Create a list of the internal EC2 addresses # Save information about the cluster to .ec2_clust_config file # Create a hosts file and mpi hostfile for all the cluster instances # Copy hosts files to directory to transfer and add to setup script # Copy monitor tools to directory to transfer, add to setup script # Set up ephemeral storage on cluster instances # Point SCRATCH file system to ephemeral volume # Add shared dir creation to setup script # Create the exports file for the head instance # Copy exports file to directory to transfer and add to setup script # Add nfs config reload to setup script # Add fstab update and mount to setup script # Copy user certificates to directory to transfer # Add user certificate setup to setup script # Compress the info storage directory # Make sure the keys are ready on the other side # Transfer all files at once but don't launch more processes than permitted by the OS # Run setup on all nodes # Optionally give the head node a head start so it can get the nfs exports ready by the time the nodes want to mount them # Do cleanup locally but save cluster information # Print out setup timing info	     	    We	   now	   discuss	   this	   set	   of	   operations	   further.	   	   Each	   of	   the	   N	   nodes	   is	   a	   clone	   of	   the	    selected	   AMI,	   with	   all	   its	   preinstalled	   software	   and	   data,	   running	   on	   virtualized	    hardware	   determined	   by	   the	   InstanceType	   (e.g.,	   “High	   CPU,	   8	   cores”).	   When	   the	   N	    instances	   have	   booted	   in	   EC2,	   the	   launch	   script	   performs	   setup	   tasks	   that	   transform	    the	   N	   individual	   machines	   into	   an	   N-­‐node	   cluster	   that	   functions	   like	   a	   traditional	    LINUX	   Beowulf	   cluster.	   The	   tasks	   mentioned	   above	   include	   mounting	   an	   NFS	    partition	   and	   creating	   appropriate	   “/etc/hosts”	   files	   on	   all	   nodes,	   and	   configuring	    passwordless	   ssh	   access	   between	   nodes,	   all	   of	   which	   are	   requirements	   for	   many	     	     7	     parallel	   scientific	   codes.	   	   One	   node	   is	   designated	   master	   node.	   	   This	   node	   generally	    distributes	   MPI	   jobs	   to	   the	   other	   nodes	   and	   makes	   a	   ‘working	   directory’	   partition	    available	   over	   the	   local	   network.	   	   The	   script	   also	   sets	   up	   a	   user	   account	   other	   than	    root	   for	   users	   to	   run	   the	   scientific	   codes	   provided	   in	   the	   AMIs.	   It	   is	   useful	   to	   tag	   the	    cluster	   with	   a	   Name	   (-­‐c	   argument),	   especially	   if	   one	   intends	   to	   run	   several	   clusters	    at	   the	   same	   time.	   Certain	   InstanceTypes	   can	   create	   additional	   ephemeral	   data	    volumes	   up	   to	   about	   2TB	   for	   storage	   intensive	   calculations	   (-e	   argument).	   The	    ec2-clust-launch	   command	   creates	   a	   temporary	   folder	   on	   the	   local	   control	    computer	   to	   store	   information	   about	   the	   cluster.	   This	   information	   includes	    identifiers	   and	   internal	   and	   external	   IP	   addresses	   for	   each	   of	   the	   instances	    comprising	   the	   cluster.	   	   The	   other	   scripts	   in	   the	   toolset	   access	   this	   information	   when	    they	   need	   to	   communicate	   with	   the	   cluster.	   User-­‐related	   information,	   e.g.	   identifiers	    for	   the	   user’s	   AWS	   account,	   is	   stored	   in	   environment	   variables.	    	    ec2-clust-connect [–c Name] 	    Opens	   a	   ssh	   session	   on	   the	   Name	   cluster,	   or	   on	   the	   most	   recently	   launched	   cluster	   if	    no	   argument	   is	   given.	   The	   script	   logs	   in	   with	   the	   user	   account	   created	   by	   ec2clust-launch,	   instead	   of	   the	   default	   root	   access	   offered	   by	   AWS.	    	    ec2-clust-connect-root [–c Name] 	    Opens	   a	   ssh	   session	   on	   the	   Name	   cluster	   and	   logs	   in	   as	   root.	   This	   is	   required	   only	   for	    developers,	   not	   for	   users	   running	   a	   calculation,	   unless	   runtime	   changes	   in	    configuration	   are	   needed.	    	    ec2-clust-put [–c Name] localfile remotefile 	    Copies	   the	   file	   localfile	   on	   the	   local	   machine	   to	   the	   file	   remotefile	   on	   the	   master	   node	    of	   the	   Name	   cluster	   (or	   the	   most	   recent	   cluster	   if	   none	   is	   specified).	   If	   localfile	   is	   a	    directory	   it	   will	   be	   copied	   recursively.	   	   The	   master	   node	   has	   a	   shared	   working	    directory	   that	   all	   other	   nodes	   can	   access.	    	    ec2-clust-get [–c Name] remotefile localfile 	    Copies	   the	   file	   remotefile	   on	   the	   head	   node	   of	   the	   Name	   cluster	   (or	   the	   most	   recent	    cluster	   if	   none	   is	   specified)	   to	   the	   file	   localfile	   on	   the	   local	   machine.	   	   If	   remotefile	   is	   a	    directory	   it	   will	   be	   copied	   recursively.	   	   The	   master	   node	   has	   a	   shared	   working	    directory	   that	   all	   other	   nodes	   can	   access.	    	    ec2-clust-list 	    Lists	   all	   active	   clusters.	   Each	   cluster	   is	   identified	   by	   a	   Name,	   its	   AWS	   reservation	   ID,	    and	   an	   index	   number.	    	     	     8	     ec2-clust-terminate [–c Name] 	    Terminates	   all	   N	   instances	   comprising	   the	   cloud	   cluster	   Name,	   and	   cleans	   up	   the	    configuration	   files	   containing	   the	   specifics	   of	   the	   cluster	   on	   the	   local	   machine.	   The	    cluster	   cannot	   be	   restarted;	   all	   desired	   data	   should	   be	   retrieved	   before	   running	   the	    ‘terminate’	   script.	   If	   no	   cluster	   is	   specified,	   the	   most	   recent	   one	   will	   be	   terminated.	    	    ec2-clust-run –e Task [–c Name] [-t]	    This	   tool	   connects	   to	   cluster	   Name	   (or	   the	   most	   recent	   cluster	   if	   none	   is	   specified)	    and	   executes	   a	   job	   there.	   Currently,	   Task	   can	   be	   WIEN2k	   or	   FEFF9.	   The	   tool	   loads	   a	    profile	   describing	   the	   selected	   Task.	   It	   scans	   the	   working	   directory	   for	   required	    input	   files	   and	   copies	   them	   to	   the	   cloud	   cluster	   Name.	   It	   then	   instructs	   the	   cluster	   to	    execute	   the	   task	   on	   all	   its	   nodes.	   It	   periodically	   connects	   to	   check	   for	   Task	   specific	    error	   files	   or	   successful	   termination.	   It	   copies	   relevant	   output	   files	   back	   to	   the	   local	    working	   directory,	   and	   terminates	   the	   cluster	   after	   completion	   if	   the	   –t	   flag	   is	   given.	    	    ec2-clust-usage [–c Name] 	    Reports	   current	   CPU	   and	   memory	   usage	   for	   all	   nodes	   in	   cluster	   Name.	   This	    command	   can	   be	   executed	   either	   from	   within	   the	   cluster	   or	   from	   outside	   it,	   where	    the	   –c	   option	   is	   not	   required.	    ec2-clust-load [–c Name] 	    Reports	   the	   1	   min,	   5	   min,	   and	   15	   min	   average	   load	   for	   all	   nodes	   in	   cluster	   Name.	   	   As	    in	   the	   ec2-clust-usage	   case,	   this	   command	   can	   be	   executed	   either	   from	   within	    the	   cluster	   or	   from	   outside	   it,	   where	   the	   –c	   option	   is	   not	   required.	    	    3.3.	   toolset	   System	   Requirements	    	    The	   present	   version	   of	   the	   SCC	   toolset	   has	   the	   following	   system	   and	   software	    requirements:	   the	   Java	   EC2	   API[35],	   the	   Java	   runtime	   environment	   (RTE),	   and	   a	    *NIX	   environment	   with	   Bash	   and	   Secure	   shells.	   Thus,	   the	   toolset	   can	   be	   installed	    under	   many	   common	   operating	   systems,	   including	   Mac	   OS	   and,	   using	   Cygwin[37]	   on	    MS	   Windows.	   In	   addition	   to	   these	   software	   requirements,	   the	   user	   needs	   a	   valid	    Amazon	   AWS	   account	   and	   appropriate	   security	   credentials,	   including	   a	   ssh	   key	   pair	    for	   the	   AWS	   account.	   	    	    	    3.4.	   Speed	   and	   Security	    	    A	   drawback	   of	   our	   original	   toolset[18]	   was	   its	   limitation	   to	   serial	   flow	   when	    launching	   clusters,	   as	   the	   launch	   script	   configured	   cloud	   nodes	   one	   at	   a	   time.	   This	    lead	   to	   cluster	   boot	   times	   that	   increased	   linearly	   with	   the	   number	   of	   nodes.	   	   It	   took	    about	   12	   minutes	   to	   prepare	   a	   16	   node	   cluster	   using	   the	   most	   lightweight	   version	   of	    	     9	     our	   AMI	   (see	   “Cluster	   Setup	   (v1)”	   and	   “S3	   backed	   (v1)”	   in	   Fig.	   2).	   Clearly,	   such	   setup	    times	   are	   not	   acceptable	   for	   HPC	   clusters	   using	   hundreds	   of	   nodes.	    	    To	   solve	   this	   issue	   in	   the	   2nd	   generation	   toolset	   (labeled	   “v2”	   in	   Fig.	   2),	   we	   have	    parallelized	   all	   setup	   tasks	   insofar	   as	   security	   is	   not	   compromised.	   That	   is,	   the	   local	    machine	   sends	   simultaneously	   to	   all	   nodes	   a	   small	   file	   containing	   configuration	   data	    and	   instructions,	   and	   then	   instructs	   each	   node	   to	   perform	   its	   setup	   tasks	    simultaneously	   with	   its	   peers.	   Separate	   transfers	   to	   each	   machine	   are	   necessary	   for	    security	   reasons,	   since	   we	   do	   not	   want	   to	   send	   the	   user	   login	   credentials	   at	   boot	   up	    time.	   Consequently	   the	   resulting	   setup	   time	   is	   now	   roughly	   independent	   of	   cluster	    size,	   as	   demonstrated	   by	   the	   “v2”	   results	   shown	   in	   Fig.	   2.	   A	   more	   modest	   but	   still	    significant	   speedup	   is	   obtained	   by	   switching	   AMI	   storage	   from	   S3-­‐	   to	   EBS-­‐ backed[33],	   so	   that	   the	   AWS	   system	   can	   copy	   blueprints	   into	   actual	   virtual	   machines	    more	   quickly.	   For	   large	   clusters	   consisting	   on	   the	   order	   of	   50-­‐250	   nodes,	   our	   cluster	    setup	   usually	   remains	   equally	   fast,	   though	   we	   occasionally	   have	   to	   wait	   an	    exceptionally	   long	   time	   for	   a	   few	   of	   the	   instances	   (e.g.	   2	   out	   of	   256)	   to	   boot	   in	   AWS.	   	     	    Figure	   2	   EC2	   cluster	   setup	   time	   using	   the	   1st	   (“v1”)	   and	   2nd	   (“v2”)	   generation	   toolset	    ec2-clust-launch	   script,	   as	   a	   function	   of	   the	   number	   of	   nodes	   in	   the	   cloud	    cluster.	   Right	   panel:	   total	   runtime	   of	   the	   launch	   script,	   including	   boot	   time	   of	   the	    EC2	   nodes	   and	   cluster	   setup	   tasks.	   Left	   panel:	   boot	   time	   and	   cluster	   setup	   time	    shown	   separately	   for	   S3	   backed	   clusters.	   During	   “Boot”	   we	   wait	   for	   Amazon	   EC2	   to	    ready	   the	   nodes	   we	   have	   requested.	   During	   “Cluster	   Setup”	   we	   configure	   the	   nodes	    to	   form	   a	   SCC	   cluster.	    	    	    	     	     4. Benchmarking	   the	   Scientific	   Cloud	   Computing	   Platform	    	    To	   evaluate	   the	   capabilities	   of	   our	   SCC	   platform	   for	   practical	   applications,	   we	   have	    carried	   out	   performance	   benchmarks	   for	   two	   widely	   used	   materials	   science	   codes:	    FEFF9	   [38,39]	   and	   WIEN2k[40,41].	   Each	   has	   an	   active	   user	   base	   of	   over	   a	   thousand	    research	   groups	   in	   physics,	   chemistry,	   materials	   science,	   and	   biophysics.	   Both	   codes	    	     10	     now	   serve	   as	   standard	   references,	   as	   evidenced	   by	   applications	   to	   a	   wide	   class	   of	    materials	   and	   material	   properties.[38-­‐41]	   FEFF9	   is	   an	   ab	   initio	   self-­‐consistent	    multiple-­‐scattering	   code	   for	   simultaneous	   calculations	   of	   excitation	   spectra	   and	    electronic	   structure.	   	   The	   approach	   is	   based	   on	   a	   real-­‐space	   Green’s	   function	    formalism	   for	   calculations	   of	   x-­‐ray	   and	   electron	   spectra,	   including	   x-­‐ray	   absorption	    (XAS),	   extended	   x-­‐ray	   absorption	   fine	   structure	   (EXAFS),	   electron	   energy	   loss	    spectroscopy	   (EELS),	   etc.	   	   WIEN2k	   yields	   electronic	   structure	   calculations	   of	    periodic	   solids	   based	   on	   density	   functional	   theory	   (DFT),	   and	   uses	   the	   full-­‐potential	    (linearized)	   augmented	   plane-­‐wave	   ((L)APW)	   +	   local	   orbitals	   (lo)	   method.	   Like	    FEFF9,	   WIEN2k	   is	   a	   relativistic	   all-­‐electron	   approach,	   and	   yields	   energy	   bands	   and	    phonons,	   as	   well	   as	   XAS	   and	   EELS,	   optical	   properties,	   etc.	   We	   do	   not	   discuss	    licensing	   issues	   here[42];	   however,	   we	   have	   focused	   on	   codes	   which	   can	   be	   licensed	    to	   run	   on	   the	   EC2	    	    The	   current	   trend	   in	   HPC	   is	   to	   distribute	   tasks	   more	   efficiently	   over	   a	   large	   number	    of	   cores,	   rather	   than	   exploiting	   faster	   CPUs.	   HPC	   codes	   are	   now	   developed	    accordingly.	   Thus	   HPC	   performance	   often	   hinges	   on	   fast	   communication	   between	    CPUs	   within	   a	   cluster.	   Heretofore,	   CC	   has	   been	   associated	   with	   lower	   intranet	    bandwidth	   and	   higher	   latency	   times	   than	   a	   dedicated	   local	   parallel	   cluster.	   This	    identifies	   one	   of	   the	   main	   concerns	   regarding	   the	   feasibility	   of	   High	   Performance	    Scientific	   Cloud	   Computing	   (HP-­‐SCC):	   Are	   the	   intranet	   capabilities	   of	   cloud	    providers	   good	   enough	   to	   support	   HP-­‐SCC?	   	   As	   previously	   demonstrated[18],	    virtualization	   itself	   does	   not	   noticeably	   degrade	   performance,	   but	   massive	   numbers	    of	   instances	   are	   housed	   in	   vast	   hardware	   farms,	   where	   they	   have	   to	   share	   the	    network	   with	   many	   other	   instances,	   some	   of	   which	   may	   not	   even	   be	   in	   the	   same	    hub.	   We	   now	   show	   that	   these	   concerns	   are	   not	   always	   warranted,	   e.g.	   on	   the	   newer	    HPC	   instances.	    	    In	   particular	   we	   compare	   results	   obtained	   on	   a	   virtual	   EC2	   cluster	   to	   results	   on	   a	    local	   Beowulf	   cluster.	   This	   local	   UNIX	   cluster	   consists	   of	   AMD	   Opteron	   nodes	   with	    16	   cores	   each	   at	   1.8GHz;	   32GB	   memory;	   a	   64bit	   platform;	   and	   connected	   with	   a	    20Gbps	   Infiniband	   internal	   network.	   	   Infiniband	   is	   currently	   the	   gold	   standard	   for	    networking,	   and	   typically	   has	   higher	   bandwidth	   and	   lower	   latency	   than	   Gigabit	    Ethernet	   networks.	   	   For	   the	   cloud	   cluster,	   we	   consider	   two	   different	   types:	   The	   first,	    labeled	   ‘Regular’,	   consists	   of	   instances	   with	   8	   virtual	   cores	   of	   about	   2.5GHz;	   7	   GB	    memory;	   a	   64bit	   platform;	   and	   “high”	   network	   capacity	   (“high”	   being	   a	   qualitative	    assessment	   made	   by	   AWS).	   The	   second,	   labeled	   ‘HPC’	   (i.e.,	   ‘Cluster	   Instance’	   in	   the	    AWS	   documentation),	   consists	   of	   instances	   that	   have	   8	   virtual	   cores	   at	   2.93-­‐ 3.33GHz;	   23GB	   memory;	   a	   64bit	   platform;	   and	   dedicated	   10Gbps	   Ethernet	    interconnects.	   This	   latter	   instance	   type	   was	   recently	   introduced	   by	   AWS	   with	   HPC	   in	    mind.[34]	   It	   is	   the	   only	   instance	   type	   with	   a	   guaranteed,	   quantitative	   network	   speed.	    Indeed,	   it	   is	   somewhat	   less	   “virtualized”	   than	   the	   other	   instances,	   as	   it	   is	   never	    shared	   with	   other	   AWS	   users,	   and	   some	   specifications	   of	   the	   underlying	   hardware	    are	   available;	   e.g.,	   each	   instance	   contains	   2	   Intel	   Xeon	   X5570,	   quad-­‐core	   “Nehalem”	    CPUs.	    	    	     11	     We	   measure	   performance	   by	   the	   speedup	   ratio,	   defined	   as	   the	   time	   taken	   to	   run	   the	    same	   calculation	   on	   a	   single	   core	   divided	   by	   the	   time	   taken	   on	   N	   cores.	   The	    proximity	   of	   the	   slope	   of	   the	   resulting	   curve	   to	   a	   1:1	   ratio	   (perfect	   scaling)	    quantifies	   the	   degree	   of	   parallelization	   of	   the	   code	   and	   the	   quality	   of	   the	   network,	    which	   can	   degrade	   performance	   if	   it	   is	   not	   able	   to	   keep	   up	   with	   the	   code	   in	   shifting	    data	   between	   cores.	    	    	    4.1.	   Loose	   coupling	   –	   the	   FEFF9	   code	    The	   FEFF9	   code[38]	   is	   naturally	   parallelized.	   The	   reason	   is	   that	   for	   calculations	   of	   x-­‐ ray	   and	   related	   spectra,	   nearly	   independent	   calculations	   have	   to	   be	   performed	   on	   an	    energy	   grid,	   and	   it	   is	   trivial	   to	   distribute	   these	   tasks	   over	   an	   array	   of	   processors	    using	   MPI.	   There	   is	   then	   very	   little	   need	   for	   communication	   between	   these	   parallel	    processes,	   except	   for	   I/O	   at	   the	   very	   end	   of	   the	   calculation,	   so	   we	   expect	   the	   FEFF9	    code	   to	   be	   relatively	   insensitive	   to	   network	   performance.	     	   	    Figure	   3	   Speedup	   of	   a	   FEFF9	   calculation	   of	   the	   XAS	   of	   LSCO.	   The	   diagonal	    represents	   perfect	   scaling,	   where	   N	   processors	   finish	   the	   task	   N	   times	   faster	   than	   1	    processor.	   Performance	   on	   three	   different	   platforms	   is	   shown:	   a	   physical	   cluster	    (“Local	   UW	   Opteron	   Cluster”)	   and	   two	   virtual	   clusters	   using	   “Regular”	   and	   “HPC	    Instances”.	   The	   inset	   shows	   the	   structure	   of	   the	   LSCO	   high	   temperature	    superconductor.	    Fig.	   3	   shows	   the	   speedup	   achieved	   by	   increasing	   the	   number	   of	   processors	    dedicated	   to	   a	   FEFF9	   calculation	   of	   the	   X-­‐ray	   Absorption	   Spectrum	   of	   a	   lanthanum	    strontium	   copper	   oxide	   (LSCO)	   high	   temperature	   superconductor	   on	   the	   physical	    Opteron	   cluster	   equipped	   with	   Infiniband,	   compared	   to	   two	   different	   virtual	   EC2	    cloud	   clusters:	   one	   consisting	   of	   so-­‐called	   “Regular”	   instances,	   which	   have	   network	    capabilities	   roughly	   equivalent	   to	   100	   Mbps	   Ethernet	   or	   worse;	   and	   so-­‐called	   “HPC	    instances”,	   which	   have	   dedicated	   10	   Gbps	   Ethernet	   connections	   and	   ought	   to	   deliver	     	     12	     strong	   network	   performance.	   The	   FEFF9	   code	   scales	   the	   same	   on	   all	   three	    architectures.	   Its	   parallelization	   has	   such	   a	   light	   footprint	   as	   to	   be	   insensitive	   to	    network	   performance.	   This	   confirms	   our	   earlier	   tests.[18]	    	    	    4.2.	   Tight	   coupling	   –	   the	   WIEN2k	   code	    The	   WIEN2k	   code	   has	   a	   more	   tightly	   coupled	   structure	   than	   FEFF9.	   In	   particular	   the	    Hamiltonian	   for	   a	   periodic	   system	   must	   be	   diagonalized	   on	   a	   grid	   of	   k-­‐points	   in	    order	   to	   calculate	   the	   eigenenergies	   and	   eigenstates.[40]	   This	   grid	   is	   chosen	   to	    sample	   the	   Brillouin	   Zone	   of	   the	   periodic	   structure	   efficiently.	   The	   Hamiltonian	   H(k)	    is	   a	   complex	   matrix	   whose	   order	   can	   vary	   from	   about	   100	   for	   a	   simple	   crystal	   to	   of	    order	   105	   for	   a	   complex	   structure	   with	   over	   1000	   atoms	   in	   the	   unit	   cell.	   The	    corresponding	   RAM	   memory	   needs	   range	   from	   about	   1MB	   to	   about	   100GB	   of	    memory	   space.	   BLAS/LAPACK	   and	   ScaLAPACK	   routines	   are	   used	   to	   perform	   the	    matrix	   diagonalization.	   WIEN2k	   is	   parallelized	   on	   two	   levels.	   The	   first	   is	   a	   simple	    distribution	   of	   the	   grid	   of	   k-­‐points	   over	   an	   array	   of	   processors,	   assigning	   a	   matrix	    H(k)	   to	   each	   processor.	   This	   type	   of	   parallelization	   is	   analogous	   to	   the	    parallelization	   of	   FEFF9	   and,	   as	   shown	   in	   Fig.	   4,	   it	   indeed	   behaves	   similarly.	   We	   see	    again	   that	   a	   virtual	   cloud	   cluster	   with	   low-­‐performance	   interconnects	   (slow	   speed,	    high	   latency)	   gives	   equal	   parallelization	   performance	   gains	   as	   a	   physical	   Infiniband	    cluster.	     	    Figure	   4	   Speedup	   of	   a	   WIEN2k	   calculation	   ("lapw1"	   diagonalization)	   of	   a	   32-­‐atom	    GaN	   cell	   on	   a	   grid	   of	   128	   k-­‐points.	   “Regular”	   cloud	   instances	   with	   slow	   network	    connections	   scale	   just	   as	   well	   as	   a	   local	   Infiniband	   cluster.	   The	   inset	   shows	   the	    structure	   of	   the	   GaN	   cell.	    	    	     	     13	     The	   second	   level	   of	   parallelization	   in	   WIEN2k	   is	   of	   a	   different	   nature:	   the	    diagonalization	   of	   the	   Hamiltonian	   for	   a	   single	   k-­‐point	   can	   be	   distributed	   over	    several	   processors.	   This	   is	   important	   because	   complex	   materials,	   characterized	   by	   a	    large	   unit	   cell,	   tend	   to	   have	   very	   large	   Hamiltonian	   matrices	   of	   order	   ~10,000	   and	    larger,	   and	   a	   Brillouin	   Zone	   grid	   containing	   only	   one	   or	   very	   few	   k-­‐points.	    ScaLAPACK	   routines,	   in	   conjunction	   with	   MPI,	   distribute	   the	   diagonalization	   over	    the	   processor	   grid.	   Clearly,	   this	   scheme	   requires	   the	   communication	   of	   large	    amounts	   of	   data	   in	   a	   time-­‐critical	   way.	   This	   situation	   is	   typical	   of	   many	   materials	    science	   codes.	     	    Figure	   5	   Speedup	   of	   the	   WIEN2k	   calculation	   ("lapw1"	   diagonalization)	   of	   a	   64-­‐atom	    cell	   of	   GaN	   at	   a	   single	   k-­‐point.	   This	   involves	   MPI/ScaLAPACK	   distribution	   of	   the	    Hamiltonian	   matrix	   across	   the	   network.	   	   The	   inset	   shows	   the	   structure	   of	   the	   GaN	    cell.	    	    Fig.	   5	   shows	   this	   second	   type	   of	   parallelization	   on	   “Regular”	   EC2	   cloud	   instances	    connected	   by	   the	   equivalent	   of	   a	   100Mbps	   Ethernet	   connection.	   Each	   of	   these	    “Regular”	   instances	   has	   8	   cores.	   When	   the	   parallelization	   is	   increased	   beyond	   8	    threads,	   and	   the	   MPI/ScaLAPACK	   communication	   changes	   from	   intranode	   to	    internode,	   the	   calculation	   stalls	   and	   the	   speedup	   drops	   to	   zero,	   indicating	   network	    performance	   failure.	   (RAM	   memory	   is	   not	   an	   issue	   in	   this	   test.)	   Because	   of	   this	    phenomenon	   it	   is	   still	   commonly	   assumed	   in	   the	   HPC	   community	   that	   Cloud	    Computing	   is	   not	   suitable	   for	   scientific	   computing.	   However,	   when	   repeating	   the	    calculation	   on	   a	   cluster	   of	   HPC	   EC2	   instances,	   which	   are	   connected	   by	   dedicated	    10Gbps	   Ethernet	   network,	   we	   find	   that	   the	   cloud	   cluster	   can	   deliver	   the	   same	    speedup	   as	   the	   local	   Infiniband	   cluster.	   This	   shows	   that	   SCC	   is	   capable	   of	   serious	    calculations	   commonly	   associated	   with	   HPC	   clusters.	    	    For	   a	   more	   rigorous	   test	   we	   calculated	   a	   much	   bigger	   system:	   a	   1200	   atom	   unit	   cell	    containing	   a	   slab	   of	   BN	   with	   a	   surface	   layer	   of	   Rh	   and	   a	   vacuum	   region.	   A	   few	   years	    	     14	     ago	   this	   was	   the	   largest	   WIEN2k	   calculation	   done	   at	   that	   time.[43]	   Fig.	   6	   shows	   that	    once	   more	   a	   virtual	   cloud	   cluster	   of	   “HPC	   instances”	   delivers	   equal	   (or	   even	   slightly	    better)	   parallelization	   gains	   as	   the	   local	   Infiniband	   cluster.	     	    Figure	   6	   Speedup	   for	   a	   WIEN2k	   calculation	   ("lapw1"	   diagonalization)	   of	   a	   1200	    atom	   cell	   containing	   a	   layer	   of	   Rh	   on	   a	   slab	   of	   BN.	   MPI/ScaLAPACK	   parallelization	    for	   a	   single	   k-­‐point.	   	   The	   inset	   shows	   the	   structure	   of	   Rh@BN	   slab.	    As	   an	   illustration	   we	   cite	   some	   absolute	   numbers	   for	   this	   calculation.	   Using	   128	    cores,	   the	   diagonalization	   of	   this	   complex	   matrix	   of	   order	   56,000	   took	   3h48min	   on	    the	   local	   Infiniband	   cluster	   and	   1h30min	   on	   a	   virtual	   HPC	   cloud	   cluster.	   	   The	    difference	   in	   runtime	   is	   largely	   due	   to	   different	   clock	   speed	   of	   2.93-­‐3.33GHz	   for	   the	    cloud	   cluster	   and	   1.8GHz	   for	   the	   local	   cluster.	   At	   current	   (Spring	   2011)	   EC2	    pricing[44],	   the	   cost	   of	   the	   diagonalization	   was	   about	   $40,	   though	   we	   have	   not	    explored	   strategies	   to	   maximize	   per-­‐dollar	   performance.	    	    	     5.	   Integration	   of	   the	   SCC	   platform	   in	   a	   User	   Interface	     	    JFEFF,	   the	   GUI	   for	   FEFF	   on	   the	   cloud	    	    The	   toolset	   and	   AMI	   described	   above	   constitute	   a	   complete	   SCC	   platform.	   	   However	    a	   graphical	   user	   interface	   is	   needed	   to	   create	   a	   user-­‐friendly	   experience	   that	   would	    make	   SCC	   a	   convenient	   resource	   for	   users	   who	   are	   not	   familiar	   with	   command-­‐line	    interfaces.	   	   The	   FEFF9	   code	   already	   has	   a	   Java-­‐based,	   cross-­‐platform	   GUI	   called	    JFEFF.[38]	   	   JFEFF	   is	   capable	   of	   starting	   FEFF9	   calculations	   either	   on	   the	   host	    computer,	   or	   on	   other	   computers	   accessible	   through	   ssh.	   	   We	   have	   developed	   an	    extension	   that	   links	   JFEFF	   to	   the	   SCC	   toolset	   in	   *NIX-­‐like	   environments.	   	   A	   user	   can	    therefore	   run	   a	   FEFF9	   calculation	   on	   the	   EC2	   cloud	   from	   the	   comfortable	   GUI	    environment	   (Fig.	   7)	   even	   from	   a	   laptop	   or	   a	   Smartphone.	   	   A	   full	   Java	   version	   of	   our	    SCC	   toolset	   will	   carry	   this	   functionality	   to	   all	   platforms	   and	   enable	   similar	   platform-­‐  	     15	     independent	   GUIs	   for	   SCC	   for	   other	   materials	   science	   and	   quantum	   chemistry	    applications.	    	     	    	    Figure	   7	   Running	   a	   FEFF9	   calculation	   on	   the	   EC2	   cloud	   using	   the	   JFEFF	   GUI.	   	   Left:	    the	   main	   JFEFF	   window	   specifies	   the	   calculation	   of	   a	   spectrum	   of	   a	   given	   material	    (here,	   the	   K-­‐edge	   EXAFS	   of	   Cu).	   	   Right:	   The	   ‘Settings’	   window	   configures	   cloud	    computing,	   e.g.	   the	   location	   of	   EC2	   login	   credentials,	   of	   the	   EC2	   toolset,	   and	   the	    desired	   number	   of	   nodes	   in	   a	   cloud	   cluster.	   A	   demo	   mode	   gives	   users	   an	    opportunity	   to	   try	   a	   cloud	   calculation	   before	   they	   set	   up	   their	   own	   AWS	   account.	   	    Once	   the	   calculation	   is	   finished,	   JFEFF	   copies	   the	   output	   files	   back	   to	   the	   local	    machine.	   The	   user	   can	   then	   display	   the	   result	   on	   the	   screen	   (not	   shown).	   	    	     6.	   Summary	   and	   Conclusions	    	    We	   have	   developed	   a	   2nd	   generation	   scientific	   AMI	   for	   the	   EC2	   cloud,	   containing	   a	    number	   of	   materials-­‐science	   codes	   and	   utilities	   that	   are	   commonly	   used	   in	   parallel	    scientific	   computing.	   Additionally,	   we	   have	   upgraded	   our	   Scientific	   Cloud	    Computing	   toolset	   and	   demonstrated	   large	   performance	   gains	   in	   the	   allocation	   of	    cloud	   clusters.	   	   It	   allows	   us	   to	   mount	   our	   AMI	   on	   EC2	   instances	   with	   variable	    performance	   specifications.	   	   The	   2nd	   generation	   SCC	   toolset	   is	   faster	   and	   more	    functional,	   without	   sacrificing	   security.	   	   Cloud	   clusters	   with	   hundreds	   of	   nodes	   can	    be	   created	   in	   reasonable	   setup	   times	   of	   a	   few	   minutes.	   	   	    	    We	   have	   expanded	   our	   benchmarks	   to	   include	   scientific	   codes	   that	   place	   much	    higher	   demands	   on	   internode	   communication.	   	   We	   tested	   two	   widely	   used	   materials	    science	   codes,	   FEFF9	   and	   WIEN2k.	   	   We	   found	   that	   cloud	   clusters	   can	   now	   provide	    the	   same	   speedup	   performance	   as	   a	   local	   Infiniband	   cluster.	   	   For	   network-­‐heavy	    applications,	   however,	   it	   is	   essential	   to	   use	   the	   newly	   available	   HPC	   (“Cluster	    instance”)	   EC2	   instances,	   which	   have	   sufficient	   HPC	   and	   network	   capability	   to	    support	   network-­‐intensive	   MPI/ScaLAPACK	   applications.	   	    	    	     16	     Finally,	   we	   have	   developed	   a	   Java-­‐based	   GUI	   for	   FEFF9	   on	   the	   EC2	   by	   extending	   the	    JFEFF	   GUI.[38]	   	   Thus	   the	   FEFF9	   code	   can	   be	   run	   on	   a	   cloud	   cluster	   from	   the	   JFEFF	    GUI	   running	   on	   the	   user’s	   local	   machine.	   	   This	   setup	   could	   easily	   be	   used	   to	   deploy	    other	   scientific	   codes	   to	   the	   cloud	   as	   long	   as	   the	   requirements	   of	   data	   transfer	   to	   and	    from	   EC2	   are	   modest,	   since	   AWS	   is	   currently	   not	   competitive	   with	   local	   solutions	   for	    the	   transfer	   and	   storage	   of	   very	   large	   (~>TB)	   data	   in	   terms	   of	   speed	   and	   cost.	   	    Similar	   approaches	   can	   then	   be	   used	   to	   configure	   SCC	   AMIs	   for	   specific	   purposes,	    e.g.,	   an	   AMI	   with	   applications	   for	   a	   theoretical	   x-­‐ray	   beamline[45],	   or	   a	   quantum-­‐ chemistry	   AMI.	     	     In	   conclusion,	   we	   have	   achieved	   the	   goal	   of	   developing	   a	   general	   Scientific	   Cloud	    Computing	   Platform	   for	   materials	   science	   applications	   that	   demand	   computational	    performance	   rather	   than	   large	   data	   handling	   capabilities.	   This	   platform	   has	   the	    potential	   to	   provide	   access	   to	   high	   performance	   scientific	   computing	   for	   general	    users,	   without	   requiring	   advanced	   technical	   computer	   skills	   or	   the	   purchase	   and	    maintenance	   of	   HPC	   infrastructure.	   The	   platform	   is	   also	   useful	   for	   developers,	   in	    that	   codes	   can	   be	   pre-­‐installed	   and	   optimized,	   thus	   simplifying	   their	   distribution.	    	    	     Acknowledgments	     The	   UW-­‐SCC	   project	   is	   supported	   by	   NSF	   grant	   OCI-­‐1048052.	   Additional	   EC2	   cloud	    computer	   time	   is	   provided	   by	   an	   Amazon	   AWS	   in	   Education	   research	   grant	    PC3VBYVHQ3TASL8.	   The	   FEFF	   project	   is	   supported	   by	   DOE-­‐BES	   grant	   DE-­‐FG03-­‐ 97ER45623.	   	   We	   especially	   thank	   AWS	   and	   in	   particular	   Deepak	   Singh	   for	   support	    and	   encouragement.	   We	   also	   thank	   Jeff	   Gardner	   for	   valuable	   discussions	   and	    comments.	    	    	    	    	     References	     	    	    	   [1]	   	    Vaquero,	   L.	   M.,	   Rodero-­‐Merino,	   L.,	   Caceres,	   J.,	   and	   Lindner,	   M.,	   	   A	   Break	   in	   the	    Clouds:	   Towards	   a	   Cloud	   Definition,	   	   Computer	   Communication	   Review	   	   39	   	    (2009)	   	   50-­‐55.	    	   [2]	   	    Wikipedia	   Cloud	   Computing,	   	   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cloud_computing	   	    (2011).	    	   [3]	   	    Buyya,	   R.,	   Yeo,	   C.	   S.,	   Venugopal,	   S.,	   Broberg,	   J.,	   and	   Brandic,	   I.,	   	   Cloud	   computing	    and	   emerging	   IT	   platforms:	   Vision,	   hype,	   and	   reality	   for	   delivering	   computing	    as	   the	   5th	   utility,	   	   Future	   Generation	   Computer	   Systems	   -­‐	   the	   International	    Journal	   of	   Grid	   Computing	   -­‐	   Theory	   Methods	   and	   Applications	   	   25	   	   (2009)	   	   599-­‐ 616.	     	     17	     	   [4]	   	    Armbrust,	   Michael,	   Fox,	   Armando,	   Griffith,	   Rean,	   Joseph,	   Anthony	   D.,	   Katz,	    Randy	   H.,	   Konwinski,	   Andrew,	   Lee,	   Gunho,	   Patterson,	   David	   A.,	   Rabkin,	   Ariel,	    Stoica,	   Ion,	   and	   Zaharia,	   Matei,	   	   Above	   the	   Clouds:	   A	   Berkeley	   View	   of	   Cloud	    Computing,	   	   EECS	   Department,	   University	   of	   California,	   Berkeley,	   	    http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2009/EECS-­‐2009-­‐28.html	   	    (2009).	    	   [5]	   	    Harms,	   Rolf	   and	   Yamartino,	   Michael,	   	   The	   Economics	   of	   the	   Cloud:	   A	   View	   from	    the	   Field,	   	   Microsoft	   Whitepaper,	   	    http://www.microsoft.com/presspass/presskits/cloud/docs/The-­‐Economics-­‐ of-­‐the-­‐Cloud.pdf	   	   (2010).	    	   [6]	   	    Cloud	   Identified	   as	   Top	   Strategic	   Technology	   for	   2011,	   	    http://www.cloudhorizon.com/cloud-­‐computing-­‐identified-­‐as-­‐top-­‐strategic-­‐ technology-­‐for-­‐2011/	   	   (2010).	    	   [7]	   	    Zenoss,	   Inc.,	   	   2010	   Virtualization	   and	   Cloud	   Computing	   Survey,	   	    http://mediasrc.zenoss.com/documents/wp_2010_virtualization_and_cloud_s urvey.pdf	   	   (2010).	    	   [8]	   	    Maltby,	   Emily,	   	   Small	   Companies	   Look	   to	   Cloud	   for	   Savings	   in	   2011,	   	    http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970203513204576047972349 898048.html?mod=WSJ_SmallBusiness_LEFTTopStories	   	   (2010).	    	   [9]	   	    Amazon	   EC2	   Growth	   Statistics	   for	   2010,	   	    http://www.cloudhorizon.com/amazon-­‐ec2-­‐growth-­‐statistics-­‐for-­‐2010/	   	    (2011).	    [10]	   	   Exploring	   CLOUD	   Computing	   for	   DOE's	   Scientific	   Mission,	   	    http://www.scidacreview.org/1002/html/hardware.html	   	   (2011).	    [11]	   	   Edmond,	   J.	   A.	   and	   Koopmans,	   M.,	   	   Practical	   Cloud	   Evaluation	   from	   a	   Nordic	    eScience	   User	   Perspective,	   	   http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1996129	   	    (2011).	    [12]	   	   Chen,	   Xiaoyu,	   Wills,	   Gary	   B.,	   Gilbert,	   Lester,	   and	   Bacigalupo,	   David,	   	   Using	   Cloud	    for	   Research:	   A	   Technical	   Review,	   	    http://tecires.ecs.soton.ac.uk/docs/TeciRes_Technical_Report.pdf	   	   (2010).	    [13]	   	   Davis,	   Matthew,	   Ball,	   Michael,	   Lawrence,	   Andrew,	   and	   Bailey,	   Richard,	   	   Cloud	    Computing	   for	   Research,	   	    http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/documents/research/esci/CloudWorkshopJuly2010.p df	   	   (2010).	    [14]	   	   Fenn,	   Michael,	   Holmes,	   Jason,	   and	   Nucciarone,	   Jeffrey,	   	   A	   Performance	   and	   Cost	    Analysis	   of	   the	   Amazon	   Elastic	   Compute	   Cloud	   (EC2)	   Cluster	   Compute	    Instance,	   	   Research	   Computing	   and	   Cyberinfrastructure	   Group,	   Penn	   State	    	     18	     University,	   	   http://rcc.its.psu.edu/education/white_papers/cloud_report.pdf	   	    (2011).	    [15]	   	   Masud,	   Raihan,	   	   High	   Performance	   Computing	   with	   Clouds,	   	    http://ix.cs.uoregon.edu/~raihan/HPC_with_Clouds_Raihan_Masud.pdf	   	    (2011).	    [16]	   	   Hill,	   Zach	   and	   Humphrey,	   Marty,	   	   A	   Quantitative	   Analysis	   of	   High	   Performance	    Computing	   with	   Amazon	   EC2	   Infrastructure:	   The	   Death	   of	   the	   Local	   Cluster?,	   	    http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~humphrey/papers/QuantitativeAnalysisEC2.pdf	   	    (2009).	    [17]	   	   Riley,	   Justin,	   	   StarCluster,	   	   http://web.mit.edu/starcluster	   	   (2011).	    [18]	   	   Rehr,	   J.	   J.,	   Vila,	   F.	   D.,	   Gardner,	   J.	   P.,	   Svec,	   L.,	   and	   Prange,	   M.,	   	   Scientific	   Computing	    in	   the	   Cloud,	   	   Computing	   in	   Science	   &	   Engineering	   	   12	   	   (2010)	   	   34-­‐43.	    [19]	   	   MapReduce,	   	   http://labs.google.com/papers/mapreduce-­‐osdi04.pdf	   	   (2011).	    [20]	   	   Hadoop,	   	   http://hadoop.apache.org/	   	   (2011).	    [21]	   	   Windows	   Azure,	   	   http://www.microsoft.com/windowsazure/	   	   (2011).	    [22]	   	   Amazon	   Simple	   Storage	   Service,	   	   http://aws.amazon.com/s3/	   	   (2011).	    [23]	   	   Lolo,	   a	   file-­‐based	   storage	   service	   for	   research	   computing	   customers	   at	   the	    University	   of	   Washington,	   	   http://escience.washington.edu/what-­‐we-­‐do/lolo	   	    (2011).	    [24]	   	   Gardner,	   J.	   P.,	   	   personal	   communication,	   	   	   	   (2011).	    [25]	   	   Gonze,	   X.,	   Amadon,	   B.,	   Anglade,	   P.	   M.,	   Beuken,	   J.	   M.,	   Bottin,	   F.,	   Boulanger,	   P.,	    Bruneval,	   F.,	   Caliste,	   D.,	   Caracas,	   R.,	   Cote,	   M.,	   Deutsch,	   T.,	   Genovese,	   L.,	   Ghosez,	    P.,	   Giantomassi,	   M.,	   Goedecker,	   S.,	   Hamann,	   D.	   R.,	   Hermet,	   P.,	   Jollet,	   F.,	   Jomard,	    G.,	   Leroux,	   S.,	   Mancini,	   M.,	   Mazevet,	   S.,	   Oliveira,	   M.	   J.	   T.,	   Onida,	   G.,	   Pouillon,	   Y.,	    Rangel,	   T.,	   Rignanese,	   G.	   M.,	   Sangalli,	   D.,	   Shaltaf,	   R.,	   Torrent,	   M.,	   Verstraete,	   M.	   J.,	    Zerah,	   G.,	   and	   Zwanziger,	   J.	   W.,	   	   ABINIT:	   First-­‐principles	   approach	   to	   material	    and	   nanosystem	   properties,	   	   Computer	   Physics	   Communications	   	   180	   	   (2009)	   	    2582-­‐2615.	    [26]	   	   Scandolo,	   S.,	   Giannozzi,	   P.,	   Cavazzoni,	   C.,	   de	   Gironcoli,	   S.,	   Pasquarello,	   A.,	   and	    Baroni,	   S.,	   	   First-­‐principles	   codes	   for	   computational	   crystallography	   in	   the	    Quantum-­‐ESPRESSO	   package,	   	   Zeitschrift	   fur	   Kristallographie	   	   220	   	   (2005)	   	    574-­‐579.	    [27]	   	   CPMD,	   	   http://www.cpmd.org	   	   (2011).	     	     19	     [28]	   	   Lawler,	   H.	   M.,	   Rehr,	   J.	   J.,	   Vila,	   F.,	   Dalosto,	   S.	   D.,	   Shirley,	   E.	   L.,	   and	   Levine,	   Z.	   H.,	   	    Optical	   to	   UV	   spectra	   and	   birefringence	   of	   SiO(2)	   and	   TiO(2):	   First-­‐principles	    calculations	   with	   excitonic	   effects,	   	   Physical	   Review	   B	   	   78	   	   (2008).	    [29]	   	   Sagmeister,	   S.	   and	   Ambrosch-­‐Draxl,	   C.,	   	   Time-­‐dependent	   density	   functional	    theory	   versus	   Bethe-­‐Salpeter	   equation:	   an	   all-­‐electron	   study,	   	   Physical	    Chemistry	   Chemical	   Physics	   	   11	   	   (2009)	   	   4451-­‐4457.	    [30]	   	   Vinson,	   J.,	   Rehr,	   J.	   J.,	   Kas,	   J.	   J.,	   and	   Shirley,	   E.	   L.,	   	   Bethe-­‐Salpeter	   equation	    calculations	   of	   core	   excitation	   spectra,	   	   Physical	   Review	   B	   	   83	   	   (2011).	    [31]	   	   Soler,	   J.	   M.,	   Artacho,	   E.,	   Gale,	   J.	   D.,	   Garcia,	   A.,	   Junquera,	   J.,	   Ordejon,	   P.,	   and	    Sanchez-­‐Portal,	   D.,	   	   The	   SIESTA	   method	   for	   ab	   initio	   order-­‐N	   materials	    simulation,	   	   Journal	   of	   Physics-­‐Condensed	   Matter	   	   14	   	   (2002)	   	   2745-­‐2779.	    [32]	   	   Valiev,	   M.,	   Bylaska,	   E.	   J.,	   Govind,	   N.,	   Kowalski,	   K.,	   Straatsma,	   T.	   P.,	   Van	   Dam,	   H.	   J.	    J.,	   Wang,	   D.,	   Nieplocha,	   J.,	   Apra,	   E.,	   Windus,	   T.	   L.,	   and	   de	   Jong,	   W.,	   	   NWChem:	   A	    comprehensive	   and	   scalable	   open-­‐source	   solution	   for	   large	   scale	   molecular	    simulations,	   	   Computer	   Physics	   Communications	   	   181	   	   (2010)	   	   1477-­‐1489.	    [33]	   	   Amazon	   Elastic	   Block	   Storage,	   	   http://aws.amazon.com/ebs/	   	   (2011).	    [34]	   	   Cluster	   Instances	   on	   the	   Amazon	   Elastic	   Compute	   Cloud,	   	    http://docs.amazonwebservices.com/AWSEC2/2011-­‐07-­‐ 15/UserGuide/index.html?using_cluster_computing.html	   	   (2011).	    [35]	   	   Amazon	   Elastic	   Compute	   Cloud,	   	   http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/	   	   (2011).	    [36]	   	   Amazon	   EC2	   Instance	   Types,	   	   http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-­‐types/	   	    (2011).	    [37]	   	   Cygwin,	   	   http://www.cygwin.org	   	   (2011).	    [38]	   	   Rehr,	   J.	   J.,	   Kas,	   J.	   J.,	   Vila,	   F.	   D.,	   Prange,	   M.	   P.,	   and	   Jorissen,	   K.,	   	   Parameter-­‐free	    calculations	   of	   X-­‐ray	   spectra	   with	   FEFF9,	   	   Physical	   Chemistry	   Chemical	   Physics	   	    12	   	   (2010)	   	   5503-­‐5513.	    [39]	   	   Rehr,	   J.	   J.	   and	   Albers,	   R.	   C.,	   	   Theoretical	   approaches	   to	   x-­‐ray	   absorption	   fine	    structure,	   	   Reviews	   of	   Modern	   Physics	   	   72	   	   (2000)	   	   621-­‐654.	    [40]	   	   Blaha	   P.,	   Schwarz,	   K.,	   Madsen,	   G.	   K.	   H.,	   Kvasnicka,	   D.,	   and	   Luitz,	   J.,	   	   WIEN2k,	   An	    Augmented	   Plane	   Wave	   +	   Local	   Orbitals	   Program	   for	   Calculating	   Crystal	    Properties,	   	   ISBN	   3-­‐9501031-­‐1-­‐2	   	   	   	   (2001).	    [41]	   	   An	   overview	   of	   studies	   using	   the	   WIEN2k	   code,	   	    http://www.wien2k.at/papers/index.html	   	   (2011).	     	     20	     [42]	   	   Peters,	   C.,	   	   Making	   Sense	   of	   Software	   Licensing,	   	    http://www.techsoup.org/learningcenter/software/page11393.cfm	   	   (2009).	    [43]	   	   Laskowski,	   R.	   and	   Blaha,	   P.,	   	   Unraveling	   the	   structure	   of	   the	   h-­‐BN/Rh(111)	    nanomesh	   with	   ab	   initio	   calculations,	   	   Journal	   of	   Physics-­‐Condensed	   Matter	   	   20	   	    (2008).	    [44]	   	   Amazon	   Elastic	   Compute	   Cloud	   Pricing,	   	   http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/pricing/	   	    (2011).	    [45]	   	   European	   Theoretical	   Spectroscopy	   Facility	   (ETSF),	   	   http://www.etsf.eu	   	    (2011).	    	    	     	     21

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
