Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_7241

Abstract:
STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  arXiv:1712.10133v2 [math.OA] 8 Jan 2018  YAIR HARTMAN AND MEHRDAD KALANTAR, WITH AN APPENDIX BY URI BADER, YAIR HARTMAN, AND MEHRDAD KALANTAR Abstract. We introduce the notion of stationary actions in the context of C ∗ -algebras. We develop the basics of the theory, and provide applications to several ergodic theoretical and operator algebraic rigidity problems.  Contents 1. Introduction 2. Preliminaries 2.1. Random walks and stationary dynamical systems 2.2. C ∗ -dynamical systems 2.3. Crossed product C ∗ -algebras 2.4. Positive definite functions, invariant and stationary random subgroups 3. Topological, measurable, and uniquely stationary boundaries 3.1. Topological vs. measurable boundaries 3.2. USB systems 4. Stationary C ∗ -dynamical systems 4.1. Basic facts 4.2. Unique stationary actions 4.3. Inner actions: stationary states as generalizations of traces 5. A new characterization of C ∗ -simplicity 5.1. C ∗ -simple measures 6. Freeness of USB: identifying C ∗ -simple measures 6.1. Noetherian actions 6.2. Groups with countably many amenable subgroups 7. Operator-algebraic superrigidity relative to subgroups 7.1. Unique stationarity relative to subgroups 7.2. Unique trace property relative to subgroups Appendix A. Extending mean-proximal actions References  MK was partially supported by the NSF Grant DMS-1700259. 1  2 6 7 9 9 10 11 11 13 15 15 18 18 23 25 27 27 29 30 30 33 35 37  2  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  1. Introduction Stationary actions provide a framework that includes all measure preserving actions, as well as their opposite systems, boundary actions. This framework is general enough to not suffer from an existential problem as in the case of invariant measures for nonamenable groups, and yet enjoy having enough meaningful structural properties. In the setup of unique stationary dynamical systems, random walk theory forms connection between topological and measurable dynamics. Study of these systems, specially in the noncommutative setting, is one of the main objectives of this work. In the case of non-amenable group actions, unique stationarity is sometimes more suitable replacement for the notion of unique ergodicity, even in the presence of invariant measures, as our results in this paper show. We introduce the notion of stationary C ∗ -dynamical systems, in order to develop new tools in the study of operator algebras associated to non-amenable groups. This includes traceless C ∗ and von Neumann algebras, for which many of powerful techniques from the finite-type theories are not applicable. Let µ ∈ Prob(Γ) be a probability measure on a countable discrete group Γ, A be a unital C ∗ -algebra, and let Γ y A by ∗-automorphisms. P Definition. A state τ on A is said to be µ-stationary if g∈Γ µ(g)gτ = τ .  We are particularly interested in inner actions. The underlying philosophy here is to view a C ∗ -algebra not only as a single structure, but rather as a noncommutative dynamical system via the action of its unitary group by inner automorphisms. Nontriviality of this action is an exclusive feature of noncommutative C ∗ -algebras. From this point of view, a trace is a noncommutative invariant probability measure, and admitting a unique trace is the noncommutative counterpart of unique ergodicity. Thus, stationary states are generalizations of traces, which in contrast, always do exist. We will see that despite this level of generality, they still reveal many meaningful structural properties, and in fact, provide a context in which techniques from measurable ergodic theory, in particular random walks, can be applied to study C ∗ -algebras associated to discrete groups. This is not entirely in line with the conventional expectation that topological dynamics interact with C ∗ -algebra theory, and measurable actions with von Neumann algebra theory. Indeed, we introduce new techniques to use measurable boundaries in certain C ∗ -algebraic rigidity problems, and we also obtain von Neumann algebraic relative superrigidity results by using topological boundaries. Topological and measurable boundary actions were introduced by Furstenberg in his seminal work [25,26] in the context of rigidity of Lie groups. These notions have recently turned out to be particularly relevant in questions of uniqueness of the canonical trace. The latter is closely related to several rigidity problems in ergodic theory and operator algebras [14, 18, 41, 50]. For instance, the problem of classifying the groups with the unique trace property, which had been open for almost 40 years, was finally settled by Breuillard, Kennedy, Ozawa, and the second named author in [14], where a characterization of this property was proven in terms of existence of faithful topological boundary actions. The original  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  3  proof in [14] used the notion of injective envelopes, but a simpler proof was provided soon after by Haagerup in [31, Theorem 3.3]. In fact, Haagerup’s proof has been very inspiring for our work, as it clearly shows why boundary actions are effective in this type of problems. A very closely related problem to the above is the classification of C ∗ simple groups. A group Γ is called C ∗ -simple if Cλ∗ (Γ), the reduced C ∗ -algebra of Γ, is simple, meaning that it has no non-trivial proper closed ideals. Similarly, after numerous partial results from many works over the span of four decades the first characterization of C ∗ -simplicity was proven by Kennedy and the second named author [41] in terms of existence of free topological boundary actions. Therefore, in particular, the above results combined imply C ∗ -simplicity is stronger than the unique trace property. Finally, Le Boudec [44] proved the existence of groups with faithful topological boundary actions, but no free such actions, hence completely settled the question of whether C ∗ -simplicity and the unique trace property are equivalent. As an application of our theory, we prove a new characterization of C ∗ -simplicity in terms of unique stationarity of the canonical trace. Theorem (Theorem 5.1). A countable discrete group Γ is C ∗ -simple if and only if there is µ ∈ Prob(Γ) such that the canonical trace is the unique µ-stationary state on Cλ∗ (Γ). In particular, this result shows that C ∗ -simplicity is also a uniqueness property of the canonical trace. This is indeed quite natural with our point of view that Cλ∗ (Γ) is rather a Γ-C ∗ -algebra via the inner action: every ideal is invariant, and therefore simplicity is a noncommutative minimality problem. Now considering the commutative picture, since stationary measures always exist, existence of a unique stationary probability with full support implies minimality. Also, our above characterization of C ∗ -simplicity provides an intrinsic dynamical explanation for the difference between the unique trace property and C ∗ -simplicity: while the former corresponds to unique ergodicity, the latter corresponds to unique stationarity. We may even give a manifestation of this in the commutative setting: every group Γ admits an action on a compact metric space such that the difference between unique ergodicity and unique stationarity of the action translates into the difference between the unique trace property and C ∗ -simplicity, as follows. Let Suba (Γ) denote the set of all amenable subgroups of Γ, which is a compact space on which Γ acts by conjugations. Bader, Duchesne and Lecureux [6] proved that Γ has the unique trace property if and only if Γ y Suba (Γ) is uniquely ergodic. Here we prove: Theorem (Corollary 5.6). A countable discrete group Γ is C ∗ -simple if and only if there is µ ∈ Prob(Γ) such that the action Γ y Suba (Γ) is uniquely µ-stationary. We would like to highlight the interesting, and somehow curious fact that C ∗ -simplicity, a purely C ∗ -algebraic property, would single out certain random walks (or measures) on Γ that reveal its C ∗ -simplicity. Moreover, it turns out that these measures posses significant ergodic theoretical properties, connecting C ∗ -simplicity to random walks on groups. Thus, it suggests to consider C ∗ -simplicity of Γ as rather a property of the measure(s) µ ∈ Prob(Γ) in the above theorems.  4  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  Definition. We say that µ ∈ Prob(Γ) is a C ∗ -simple measure if the canonical trace τ0 is the unique µ-stationary state on Cλ∗ (Γ). For instance, we prove: Theorem (Theorem 5.3). Suppose µ ∈ Prob(Γ) is C ∗ -simple. Then any measurable µ-stationary action with almost surely amenable stabilizers, is essentially free. In particular, the action of Γ on the Poisson boundary of µ is essentially free. Hence, we are naturally led to the problem of finding C ∗ -simple measures. Our proof of the existence of C ∗ -simple measures on C ∗ -simple groups does not reveal concrete measures. In fact, part of our construction of the C ∗ -simple measure follows a similar construction as in Kaimanovich–Vershik’s proof of Furstenberg’s conjecture on the existence of measures on amenable groups with trivial Poisson boundary. The following result, on the other hand, allows verifying C ∗ -simplicity of many concrete measures. Theorem (Theorem 4.12). Let µ ∈ Prob(Γ) and suppose Γ admits an essentially free µ-boundary which has a compact model that is uniquely µ-stationary. Then µ is a C ∗ simple measure. This result also highlights another advantage of our approach in using measurable boundaries in the above problems. In contrast to the topological case, measurable boundaries have been studied extensively, and there are several powerful methods due to the fundamental work of Kaimanovich [39], for realizing these boundaries. These methods have been resulted in many deep realization results (e.g. [16, 34, 39, 40, 45]). In fact, in many examples, a concrete unique stationary model of a boundary is provided, and under some regularity assumptions on the measure the corresponding stationary measure is the Poisson measure. To further highlight the contrast to the topological case, we remark that in the case of non-amenable discrete groups, the Furstenberg boundary is always a non-metrizable extremally disconnected space, not concretely identifiable in any known example. We take advantage of the concreteness of the topological models of measurable boundaries in order to verify their essentially freeness. For example, we prove a 0-1 Law (Theorem 6.2) for a class of stationary actions that include algebraic actions, which provides a freeness/triviality dichotomy for such actions. Using that we prove: Theorem (Theorem 6.5). Let Γ be a finitely generated linear group with trivial amenable radical. Then every generating measure on Γ is C ∗ -simple. We obtain this result by proving the existence of essentially free mean-proximal actions for linear groups. A crucial step in the proof is an extension result for mean-proximal actions that we prove jointly with Uri Bader (see Appendix A). Furthermore, we conclude C ∗ -simplicity of the measures in the following contexts. Theorem (Example 6.6, Theorems 6.7 and 6.8). Every generating measure on a mapping class group or a hyperbolic group Γ with trivial amenable radical is C ∗ -simple. The same conclusion holds for finitely supported measures on Out(Fn ).  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  5  In the last section, we study unique stationarity and unique trace property relative to subgroups, and prove several ergodic theoretical relative rigidity results. Theorem (Theorem 7.5). Let µ ∈ Prob(Γ) and suppose Γ admits an essentially free µboundary which has a compact model that is uniquely µ-stationary. Then a µ-stationary action is essentially free if its restriction to some co-amenable subgroup Λ ≤ Γ is essentially free. All our results mentioned up to this point, are obtained by applying the techniques developed here to use measurable boundaries to deduce C ∗ -algebraic rigidity properties. In contrast, a von Neumann algebraic relative superrigidity result below is proven in the last section by using topological boundary actions. The problem of rigidity of icc groups in the unitary group of their II1 factors is another example which translates to a uniqueness problem of the canonical trace: a finite factor M generated by Γ is canonically isomorphic to L(Γ) if and only if the trace on M is the canonical trace. Connes conjectured that certain latices in Lie groups satisfy this superrigidity (see [38]). The first major result in this direction was obtained by Bekka [8] where he proved Connes’ conjecture for the groups SLn (Z), n ≥ 3. Recently, the conjecture in its general form has been proven by Peterson in [50], where he further proves this superrigidity result for irreducible lattices in products of groups (see also [18, 51]). The theorem of Stuck-Zimmer on essential freeness of ergodic probability measure preserving actions of these lattices, as well as Margulis’ normal subgroup theorem are among corollaries of Peterson’s results. We prove a relative version of this operator algebraic superrigidity and its ergodic theoretical consequences. Theorem (Theorems 7.8 and 7.10). Let Γ be a countable discrete group that admits a faithful topological boundary, and let Λ ≤ Γ be an icc co-amenable subgroup. Suppose π : Γ → U(H) is a unitary representation such that π(Γ)′′ is a finite von Neumann algebra. If the restriction π|Λ extends to a von Neumann algebra isomorphism π(Λ)′′ ∼ = L(Λ), ′′ ∼ then π extends to a von Neumann algebra isomorphism π(Γ) = L(Γ). Recall that by Furman [24] a group Γ admits a faithful topological boundary if and only if it has a trivial amenable radical (that is, it has no non-trivial amenable normal subgroups). As a corollary we obtain the following relative version of the result of Stuck-Zimmer. Theorem (Theorems 7.9 and 7.10). Let Γ be a countable discrete group with trivial amenable radical, and let Λ ≤ Γ be a co-amenable subgroup. Then a probability measure preserving action Γ y (X, m) is essentially free if its restriction Λ y (X, m) is essentially free. In terms of Invariant Random Subgroup (IRS), the above is equivalent to that every IRS of Γ intersects Λ non-trivially with positive probability. In particular, every nontrivial normal subgroup N ⊳ Γ intersects Λ non-trivially.  6  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  In addition to this introduction, this paper has six other sections. In Section 2 we briefly review the requisite background material. In Section 3 we recall the definitions of measurable and topological boundaries, and prove that a unique stationary measurable boundary is a topological boundary. In Section 4 we introduce stationary C ∗ -dynamical systems, prove basic properties, and provide a number of examples. In particular, we show how unique stationarity implies C ∗ -simplicity. In Section 5 we prove our new characterization of C ∗ -simplicity in terms of unique stationarity of the canonical trace. We then prove various properties of C ∗ -simple measures, and obtain another characterization of C ∗ -simplicity in terms of unique stationarity of Suba . Section 6 is concerned with the question of freeness of unique stationary actions, and verifying that certain measures are C ∗ -simple. In Section 7, we apply our techniques to prove several superrigidity results relative to co-amenable subgroups. The paper also contains an appendix, which includes our joint result with Uri Bader, an extension theorem for mean-proximal actions that we need in the proof of C ∗ -simplicity of generating measures on finitely generated linear groups. Acknowledgements. We are grateful to Nir Avni and Uri Bader for many fruitful discussions and helpful suggestions during the course of completion of this project. We would also like to thank Hanfeng Li, Matthew Kennedy, Howard Masur, and Phillip Wesolek for helpful comments.  2. Preliminaries Throughout the paper Γ is a countable discrete group, and Γ y X denotes an action of Γ by homeomorphisms on a compact (Hausdorff) space X. The action Γ y X is minimal if X has no non-empty proper closed Γ-invariant subset. We denote by Prob(X) the set of all Borel probability measures on X. For ν ∈ Prob(X) we denote by Pν its corresponding Poisson map, i.e. the unital positive Γ-equivariant map Pν : C(X) → ℓ∞ (Γ) defined by Z (1) Pν (f )(g) = f (gx) dν(x), g ∈ Γ, f ∈ C(X). X  We also consider measurable actions, i.e. actions Γ y (Y, η) of Γ on probability spaces (Y, η) by measurable automorphisms. A measurable action Γ y (Y, η) is a non-singular action (or η is a non-singular measure) if gη and η are in the same measure class for every g ∈ Γ. The Poisson map associated to a non-singular measure is defined similarly to (1). Throughout the paper, unless otherwise stated, all measurable actions are assumed to be non-singular. A compact Γ-space X is said to be a compact model of a measurable Γ-space (Y, η) if there exists a Borel measure ν ∈ Prob(X) such that (Y, η) and (X, ν) are measurably isomorphic as Γ-spaces. It is a well-known fact that every measurable action on a standard Borel space has a compact model which is metrizable.  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  7  For a Hilbert space H we denote by B(H) the set of all bounded operators on H. A subalgebra A ≤ B(H) is a C ∗ -algebra if it is closed in the operator norm and under taking adjoint. In this case, A is unital if it contains the identity operator on H. If X is a compact space, then C(X) with the sup-norm and the complex conjugate as the involution is a C ∗ -algebra, and conversely, by Gelfand’s representation theorem, any unital commutative C ∗ -algebra is of this form. Hence unital C ∗ -algebras are viewed as algebras of continuous functions on “non-commutative compact spaces”. An element a in a C ∗ -algebra A is said to be positive, written a ≥ 0, if a = b∗ b for some b ∈ A. We denote by 1A the unit element in A. A linear map φ : A → B between C ∗ -algebras is positive if it sends positive elements to positive elements, and it is unital if φ(1A ) = 1B . φ is a ∗-homomorphism if it is a linear, multiplicative map with φ(a∗ ) = φ(a)∗ for all a ∈ A, and it is a *-isomorphism if it is moreover bijective. We denote by Aut(A) the group of all ∗-automorphisms on A. The non-commutative counterpart of probability measures are states on C ∗ -algebras. A state on A is a positive linear functional ρ : A → C with ρ(1A ) = 1. We denote by S(A) the (convex, weak*-compact) space of all states on A. A state ρ is faithful if ρ(a) > 0 for any non-zero positive element a. A state τ ∈ S(A) is a trace if τ (ab) = τ (ba) for all a, b ∈ A. Obviously every state on a commutative C ∗ -algebra is a trace, but on the other hand there are C ∗ -algebras that do not admit any trace. Let us recall the GNS construction associated to a state ρ ∈ S(A). Define the sesquilinear form ha, biρ := ρ(b∗ a) on A, and denote by L2 (A, ρ) the induced Hilbert space. Then the GNS representation πρ : A → B(L2 (A, ρ)) is defined by πρ (a)(b) = ab, for a ∈ A and b ∈ A ⊂ L2 (A, ρ). A von Neumann algebra is a C ∗ -algebra M that is also a dual Banach space. In this case the predual M∗ is unique. A bounded linear functional on M is called normal if it belongs to M∗ . Since B(H) itself is a dual Banach space (the predual being the space of trace-class operators), it follows that a unital C ∗ -subalgebra A ⊂ B(H) is a von Neumann algebra if and only if it is closed in the weak* topology of B(H), or equivalently closed in the weak or strong operator topologies. By von Neumann’s bicommutant theorem a self-adjoint unital subalgebra M ⊂ B(H) is a von Neumann algebra if and only if M ′′ = M, where M ′ = {x ∈ B(H) : xy = yx for all y ∈ M} is the commutant of M in B(H), and M ′′ = (M ′ )′ . If (X, ν) is a probability space, then L∞ (X, ν) is a von Neumann algebra, and every commutative von Neumann algebra is of this form. Hence, von Neumann algebras are viewed as algebras of essentially bounded measurable functions on “non-commutative probability spaces”. The GNS representation associated to normal states on a von Neumann algebra is defined similarly as in the C ∗ -algebra case. 2.1. Random walks and stationary dynamical systems. The theory of random walks on groups and their associated boundaries was introduced by Furstenberg [25, 26], and later studied extensively by various people. This theory provides a framework to  8  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  apply probabilistic ideas and methods in the study of analytic properties of groups. Let us briefly recall the notion of random walks on discrete groups. We refer the reader to [7, 23, 26] for more details. Let µ ∈ Prob(Γ) be generating, i.e. Γ is the semigroup generated by Supp(µ) = {g : µ(g) > 0}. The random walk on Γ with law µ (or just the (Γ, µ)-random walk) is the time-independent Markov chain with state space Γ, initial distribution δe (the Dirac probability measure supported at the neutral element e ∈ Γ), and transition probabilities p(g, h) = µ(g −1h) for g, h ∈ Γ. Thus, the probability of walking on the path e, g1 , g1g2 , . . . , g1 g2 · · · gk on the first k + 1 steps is µ(g1)µ(g2 ) · · · µ(gk ). The space of paths of the random walk is the probability space (Ω, Pµ ), where Ω = ΓN and Pµ is the Markovian measure, that is, the unique probability on Ω defined by Pµ ({ω ∈ Ω : ω1 = g1 , ω2 = ω1 g2 , . . . , ωk = ωk−1 gk }) = µ(g1 )µ(g2 ) · · · µ(gk ) for g1 , g2 , . . . , gk ∈ Γ and k ∈ N. For a fixed g ∈ Γ it follows that Pµ ({ω ∈ Ω : ωn = g}), the probability of the random walk being in position g at the n-th step, is equal to µn (g), where µn is the n-th convolution power of µ. Alternatively, Pµ can be described as the push-forward of the Bernoulli measure µ × µ × · · · under the transformation ΓN → ΓN∪{0} , (gk ) 7→ (ωk ), where ω0 = e and ωk = g1 g2 · · · gk for k ∈ N. In probabilistic terms, gk is the increment and ωk is the position of the random walk at time k. Suppose Γ y X is a continuous action on a compact space, and let µ ∈ Prob(Γ). A Borel probability measure ν on X is called µ-stationary if X ν= µ(g) gν. g∈Γ  In this case we say (X, ν) is a (Γ, µ)-space, and we write (Γ, µ) y (X, ν). The basic feature of stationary measures is their existence. Unlike invariant measures, on any compact Γ-space X there exists at least one µ-stationary measure. While the existence holds for arbitrary compact space, significant part of the theory is developed in the context of metrizable compact spaces. The following is the fundamental result in this context that builds the connection between stationary systems and the theory of random walks. Theorem 2.1 (Furstenberg). Let ν be a µ-stationary measure on a metrizable compact Γ-space X. Then for Pµ -almost every path ω ∈ Ω the limit νω := weak∗ − limn ωn ν exists. Moreover, we have Z ν=  νω dPµ (ω).  Ω  The measures νω are called the conditional measures. We will recall and prove other basic facts about stationary dynamical systems in the more general setting of actions on C ∗ -algebras in later sections.  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  9  Stationary actions areP also defined in measurable setting. A non-singular action Γ y (Y, η) is µ-stationary if g∈Γ µ(g) gη = η. Note that if X is a compact Γ-space, and µ ∈ Prob(Γ) is generating, then any µ-stationary ν ∈ Prob(X) is non-singular. 2.2. C ∗ -dynamical systems. We briefly recall the notion of group actions on C ∗ algebras and establish the notation and terminology that we will be using in the sequel. We refer the reader to [17] for more details. A unital C ∗ -algebra A is called a Γ-C ∗ -algebra if there is an action α : Γ y A of Γ on A by ∗-automorphisms, that is, α is a group homomorphism Γ → Aut(A). A class of examples of Γ-C ∗ -algebras that are of main interest to our work in this paper are obtained as follows. Let π : Γ → U(Hπ ) be a unitary representation on the Hilbert space Hπ (where U(Hπ ) is the group of unitary operators on Hπ ). Then Γ acts on B(Hπ ) by inner automorphism Adg (x) := π(g)xπ(g −1), g ∈ Γ, x ∈ B(Hπ ), as well as on any C ∗ -algebra A ≤ B(Hπ ) that is invariant under this action. In fact, every Γ-C ∗ -algebra is formed in the above fashion for some unitary representation of Γ. In particular, for any unitary representation π : Γ → U(Hπ ), the group Γ acts on the k·k  C ∗ -algebra Cπ∗ (Γ) := span{π(g) : g ∈ Γ} ⊂ B(Hπ ) by inner automorphisms. Throughout the paper Γ y Cπ∗ (Γ) denotes this action unless otherwise stated. An important example is the left regular representation λ : Γ → U(ℓ2 (Γ)) defined by (λg ξ)(h) = ξ(g −1h), h ∈ Γ and ξ ∈ ℓ2 (Γ). In this case Cλ∗ (Γ) is called the reduced C ∗ -algebra of Γ. The full C ∗ -algebra C ∗ (Γ) of Γ is the universal C ∗ -algebra generated by Γ in the sense that for any unitary representation π : Γ → U(Hπ ) there is a canonical surjective ∗homomorphism C ∗ (Γ) → Cπ∗ (Γ). We consider Γ as a subset of C ∗ (Γ) in the natural way. Similarly to compact spaces and probability measures (“the commutative case”), any action Γ y A induces an adjoint action Γ y S(A). We denote by SΓ (A) the simplex of all Γ-invariant states, that is, states ν such that gν = ν for all g ∈ Γ. It is obvious that SΓ (A) is compact in the weak* topology. In the case of Γ y Cπ∗ (Γ) by inner automorphisms, SΓ (Cπ∗ (Γ)) coincides with the set of all traces on Cπ∗ (Γ). In particular, in the case of the reduced C ∗ -algebra, SΓ (Cλ∗ (Γ)) is never empty as it contains the canonical trace τ0 (or τ0ΓPif we need to clarify its association to Γ), namely the extension of the linear functional cg λg 7→ ce . Similarly to the C ∗ -algebra case, a source of examples of Γ-von Neumann algebras for us is by means of unitary representation theory of groups. Let π : Γ → U(Hπ ) be a unitary representation on the Hilbert space Hπ . Then we have Γ y V Nπ (Γ) by inner weak*  automorphism, where V Nπ (Γ) := {π(g) : g ∈ Γ}′′ = span{π(g) : g ∈ Γ} ⊂ B(Hπ ), is the von Neumann algebra generated by the representation π. In the case of the left weak* is called the group von Neumann algebra regular representation, VNλ (Γ) = Cλ∗ (Γ) of Γ and is denoted by L(Γ). The canonical trace τ0 extends to a normal trace on L(Γ). 2.3. Crossed product C ∗ -algebras. The bridge between the theories of operator algebras and (topological or measure-theoretical) dynamics is made by the crossed product  10  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  construction. Loosely speaking, the crossed product C ∗ -algebra associated to an action Γ y A is a C ∗ -algebra that contains, and is generated by, copies of A and Γ such that the action Γ y A in this bigger algebra is by inner automorphisms. We recall the more precise definition below and refer the reader to [17] for P more details. Let Γ y A, and consider the Hilbert space ℓ2 (Γ, H) = {ξ : Γ → H | g∈Γ kξ(g)k2 < ∞}. For g ∈ Γ and a ∈ A define the operators λ̃(g), ι(a) ∈ B(ℓ2 (Γ, H)) by (λ̃(g)ξ)(h) = ξ(g −1h) and (ι(a)ξ)(h) = (h−1 a)ξ(h). Then the C ∗ -subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (Γ, H)) generated by λ̃(Γ) and ι(A) is called the reduced crossed product of the action Γ y A, and is denoted by Γ ⋉r A. It can also be seen that C ∗ ({λ̃(g) : g ∈ Γ}) is canonically isomorphic to Cλ∗ (Γ). The following simple lemma, which generalizes [3, Lemma 2], and in fact follows from its proof, is key in allowing passage between classical and non-commutative settings. We present a more elementary proof which was provided to us by Hanfeng Li. We thank him for this, as well as for pointing out to us the crucial fact that [3, Lemma 2] is also valid for actions on operator systems. Lemma 2.2. Let π : Γ → U(Hπ ) be a unitary representation. Suppose ρ is a state on B(Hπ ) and g ∈ Γ. If there is a ∈ B(Hπ ) with 0 ≤ a ≤ 1 such that ρ(a) = 1 and ρ(π(g −1 )aπ(g)) = 0, then ρ(π(g)) = 0. Proof. Since 0 ≤ π(g −1 )aπ(g) ≤ 1 and ρ(π(g −1 )aπ(g)) = 0 we get ρ(π(g −1)a2 π(g)) = 0. Similarly, ρ((1 −a)2 ) = 0, and the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality implies |ρ((1 −a)π(g))| ≤ ρ((1 − a)2 )ρ(1) = 0. So we have |ρ(aπ(g))| = |ρ(π(g)π(g −1)aπ(g))| = |ρ(π(g −1 )aπ(g)π(g −1))| ≤ ρ(π(g −1 )a2 π(g)) = 0. Hence ρ(π(g)) = ρ(aπ(g)) + ρ((1 − a)π(g)) = 0.    2.4. Positive definite functions, invariant and stationary random subgroups. A function φ : Γ → C is called a positive definite function (pdf ) if for any n ∈ N and g1 , g2 , . . . , gn ∈ Γ the matrix [φ(gi gj−1 )]i,j=1,...,n is positive. If π is a unitary representation of Γ on a Hilbert space Hπ , then for any state ρ on ∗ Cπ (Γ) the function φ(g) = ρ(π(g)) is a pdf on Γ. Conversely, if φ is a pdf on Γ then there is a unitary representation π (e.g. the GNS representation associated to φ [17]), and a vector ξ ∈ Hπ such that φ(g) = hπ(g)ξ, ξiHπ . This yields a canonical identification between the weak* compact convex space S(C ∗ (Γ)) of all states on the full C ∗ -algebra of Γ, and the space PΓ of all pdf φ : Γ → C normalized by φ(e) = 1, endowed with the pointwise convergence topology. In this correspondence, ρ is a trace if and only if φ is a character, i.e. a normalized conjugation invariant pdf (i.e. φ(h−1 gh) = φ(g) for all g, h ∈ Γ).  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  11  Let Sub(Γ) be the space of all subgroups of Γ with the topology inherited from 2Γ (known also as the Chabauty topology). It is a compact space, on which Γ acts by conjugation g.Λ = g −1 Λg. A Γ-invariant Borel probability measure η is called an invariant random subgroup (IRS) [1, 2]. If η is only µ-stationary for some µ ∈ Prob(Γ), we say that η is a µ-stationary random subgroup (µ-SRS). We denote by Suba (Γ) the closed, Γ-invariant subset of Sub(Γ) of all amenable subgroups. Lemma 2.3. Let η be Borel probability measure on Sub(Γ). Then the function φη (g) = η({Λ : g ∈ Λ}) is positive definite. If moreover, η is supported on Suba (Γ), then there is a state ρ on the reduced C ∗ -algebra Cλ∗ (Γ) such that φη (g) = ρ(λg ) for every g ∈ Γ. Proof. Given a subgroup Λ ∈ Sub(Γ), let 1Λ denote its characteristic function. It is not hard to see that 1Λ ∈ PΓ . The map Sub(Γ) ∋ Λ 7→ 1Λ ∈ PΓ is clearly continuous. Let η̄ ∈ Prob(PΓ ) be the push-forward of η, then φη is the barycenter of η̄. If Λ ≤ Γ is an amenable subgroup, then the quasi-regular representation Γ on ℓ2 (Γ\Λ) is weakly contained in the regular representation of Γ, which implies 1Λ corresponds to a state on Cλ∗ (Γ). Hence if η is supported on amenable subgroups then the barycenter of η̄ corresponds to a state ρ on Cλ∗ (Γ).  3. Topological, measurable, and uniquely stationary boundaries In this section we recall the notions of topological and measurable boundary actions of discrete groups. We comment on advantages of each setting over the other, and prove that a uniquely stationary measurable boundary (USB) is also a topological boundary. Thus, in the framework of such systems we may apply both topological and measuretheoretical techniques. 3.1. Topological vs. measurable boundaries. For more details on theory of boundary actions we refer the reader to [23, 26, 27]. Definition 3.1 (Topological boundary actions). A continuous action Γ y X on a compact space X is a topological boundary action if for every ν ∈ Prob(X) and x ∈ X there is a net gi of elements of Γ such that gi ν → δx in the weak* topology, where δx is the Dirac measure at x. It can be shown that an action Γ y X is a topological boundary if and only if for every η ∈ Prob(X) the Poisson map Pη is isometric ([5]). Proposition 3.2. [26] There is a unique (up to Γ-equivariant homeomorphism) maximal Γ-boundary ∂F Γ in the sense that every Γ-boundary X is a continuous Γ-equivariant image of ∂F Γ. The maximal boundary ∂F Γ is called the Furstenberg boundary of Γ. Definition 3.3 (Measurable boundary actions). Let µ ∈ Prob(Γ), and suppose ν is a µ-stationary measure on a metrizable Γ-space X. The action (Γ, µ) y (X, ν) is a  12  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  µ-boundary action if for almost every path ω = (ωk ) ∈ Ω of the (Γ, µ)-random walk, the sequence ωk ν converges to a Dirac measure δxω . In this case the map bnd : (Ω, Pµ ) → (X, ν) defined by bnd(ω) = xω is called a boundary map. A measurable non-singular action Γ y (Y, η) is called a µ-boundary action if it is µ-stationary and admits a compact metrizable model (X, ν) which is a µ-boundary in the above sense. Proposition 3.4. [26] There is a unique (up to Γ-equivariant measurable isomorphism) maximal µ-boundary (Πµ , ν∞ ) in the sense that every µ-boundary (X, ν) is a measurable Γ-equivariant image of (Πµ , ν∞ ). The maximal µ-boundary (Πµ , ν∞ ) is called the Poisson boundary of the pair (Γ, µ) (also known sometimes as the Furstenberg-Poisson boundary). One should note that since the Poisson boundary is defined up to measurable isomorphism, it should be considered as a measurable Γ-space. Alternatively, boundaries can be characterized in terms of their function algebras. This is key in allowing the use of algebraic tools in the study of boundary actions. The operator algebraic description of topological boundaries require some notions from the theory of injective envelopes as developed by Hamana [32]. Since we will not use this in our work here, we only recall the main result regarding this characterization, and refer the reader to [14, 41] for more details. Theorem 3.5. [41, Theorem 3.11] Let Γ be a discrete group. Then C(∂F Γ) is the smallest injective object in the category of unital Γ-C ∗ -algebras. The L∞ -algebras of measurable boundaries are precisely invariant von Neumann subalgebras of the algebra of bounded harmonic functions. Recall for µ ∈ Prob(Γ) a function f ∈ ℓ∞ (Γ) is said to be µ-harmonic if X (2) f (g) = µ(h)f (gh) for all g ∈ Γ. h∈Γ  We denote by H ∞ (Γ, µ) ⊂ ℓ∞ (Γ) the space of all bounded µ-harmonic functions. Observe that H ∞ (Γ, µ) is invariant under the action of Γ by left translations. The space H ∞ (Γ, µ) is not a subalgebra of ℓ∞ (Γ) in general, but the formula X (3) f1 · f2 (g) := lim f1 (h)f2 (h−1 g)µn (h) n→∞  h∈Γ  ∞  defines a multiplication on H (Γ, µ) and turns it to a commutative von Neumann algebra.  Proposition 3.6 (Furstenberg). The Poisson map Pν∞ defines a von Neumann algebra isomorphism L∞ (Πµ , ν∞ ) ∼ = H ∞ (Γ, µ). In particular, a measurable non-singular action Γ y (Y, η) is a µ-boundary if and only if the Poisson map Pν : L∞ (X, ν) → H ∞ (Γ, µ) is a von Neumann algebra embedding.  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  13  Abstractly, we know where to find examples of boundary actions. Measurable boundaries appear whenever one has a stationary action, and topological boundaries arise whenever one has an affine action on a compact convex space. Proposition 3.7 (Furstenberg). Suppose (X, ν) is a (Γ, µ)-space. Then the weak* closure of the set of conditional measure {νω : ω ∈ Ω}, with the push-forward of Pµ under the map ω 7→ νω , is a µ-boundary. Moreover every µ-boundary arises in this way. Proposition 3.8 ([27, Theorem III.2.3]). Suppose Γ y K is an affine action, and suppose K has no proper Γ-invariant compact convex subspace. Then the closure of the extreme points of K is a topological boundary. Moreover every topological boundary of Γ arises in this way. The main advantage of measurable boundaries over their topological counterparts is that they are much easier to concretely identify. In fact there have been extensive work in the past few decades which have led to concrete realization of the Poisson boundary for many of groups that arise naturally as symmetries of geometric objects. We discuss some examples below. In contrast, the Furstenberg boundary ∂F Γ of a nonamenable countable group Γ is an extremally disconnected non-metrizable space, and not concretely realizable in any known case. 3.2. USB systems. The study of these systems was initiated by Furstenberg in [26], where they were called µ-proximal actions. They were further studied in [29, 46]. Definition 3.9. Let µ ∈ Prob(Γ). We say that a µ-boundary (X, ν) is a (µ-)USB if it has a compact model (K, ν̄) such that ν̄ is the unique µ-stationary Borel probability measure on K. If (X, ν) is the (µ-)Poisson boundary, we say that (X, ν) is a (µ-)Poisson-USB. The following is a standard technique that allows us to assume that the topological model of a USB is metrizable. This will be important for us as we will make a heavy use of the existence of conditional measures. Lemma 3.10. Every USB (X, ν) has a compact metrizable model (K, ν̄) such that ν̄ is the unique µ-stationary Borel probability measure on K. Proof. Let (K ′ , η) be a compact model of (X, ν) as in the Definition 3.9. As abstract probability spaces, µ-boundaries are always standard. Therefore, using the fact that Γ is countable we can find a countable, Γ-invariant set of continuous functions in C(K ′ ), which is weak* dense in L∞ (K ′ , η). Then take K to be the spectrum of the (sup-)norm closure of this set.  Many natural examples of Poisson boundaries are in fact USB, namely, the Poisson boundary is being realized as a unique stationary measure on a compact space. The main tool for realizing the Poisson boundary on a compact space is the strip criterion of Kaimanovich [39], which proves, in many cases that the Poisson measure is actually unique. To name some examples (by no mean a complete list!) are linear groups acting on flag varieties [16,39,45], hyperbolic groups acting on the Gromov boundary [39], nonelementary subgroups of mapping class groups acting on the Thurston boundary [40],  14  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  and non-elementary subgroups of Out(Fn ) acting on the boundary of the outer space [34]. We discuss properties of these actions further in Section 6. Theorem 3.11. Let µ ∈ Prob(Γ), and suppose (X, ν) is a µ-USB. Then for any compact model of (X, ν), the restriction of the action to the support of the unique µ-stationary is a topological boundary action. Proof. To simplify notations, we assume X is already a compact model, that is X is a compact Γ-space and ν ∈ Prob(X) is the unique µ-stationary measure such that (X, ν) is a µ-boundary. Note that by unique stationarity of ν, its support is the unique minimal component of X. Thus, by passing to Supp(ν) if necessary, we also assume Γ y X is minimal. Assume first that X is metrizable. We show Prob(X) does not contain any proper non-empty compact convex Γ-invariant subsets. Then the theorem follows from Proposition 3.8. Suppose C ⊆ Prob(X) is a non-empty closed convex Γ-invariant set. Let Pn−1 k µ ∗ η ∈ C for all n ∈ N. η ∈ C. By Γ-invariance and closedness of C we have n1 k=0 Note any weak* cluster point of this sequence is µ-stationary, hence by uniqueness assumption ν ∈ C. As X is metrizable, and by the closedness of C we conclude that the conditional measures, νω ∈ C for Pµ -a.e. path ω ∈ Ω. Since (X, ν) is µ-boundary, νω are point measures for Pµ -a.e. ω. In particular, there is some x ∈ X such that δx ∈ C. By Γ-invariance of C we get δgx ∈ C for every g ∈ Γ, and therefore minimality of X and closedness of C yield {δx : x ∈ X} ⊂ C. Now the convexity of C implies Prob(X) = conv{δx : x ∈ X} ⊂ C. Now for the general case (not necessarily metrizable), let η ∈ Prob(X) and f ∈ C(X). Let A ⊂ C(X) be the Γ-invariant C ∗ -subalgebra generated by f . Then A = C(Y ) for a metrizable Γ-factor of X. Moreover, the pushforward of ν on Y is the unique µ-stationary measure on Y (see Corollary 4.3 below), and thus by the above Γ y Y is a topological boundary action. Therefore, we have kPη (f )k = kf k. This shows the Poisson map Pη is isometric. Hence, we conclude X is a topological Γ-boundary.  Perhaps the most significant application of topological boundaries so far has been in the problems of unique trace property and C ∗ -simplicity: the existence of a faithful topological boundary is equivalent to the unique trace property and the existence of a free boundary is equivalent to C ∗ -simplicity. A subtlety in applying these characterizations is that in general one has to pass to the maximal boundary, i.e. the Furstenberg boundary, which is too “large” to concretely realize and work with. But we will see, for example, that for determining the C ∗ -simplicity and the unique trace property of a group, it is enough to work with its USB actions (provided that the group admits such), rather than abstract topological boundaries. Recall that any group Γ admits a maximal normal amenable subgroup, called the amenable radical of Γ. We denote this subgroup by Rad(Γ). Proposition 3.12. Suppose Γ y (X, ν) is a µ-USB for some µ ∈ Prob(Γ). Then Rad(Γ) ⊆ ker(Γ y (X, ν)), and equality holds if (X, ν) is the µ-Poisson USB.  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  15  Proof. The first assertion can be proven by a straightforward modification of the proof of [24, Proposition 7]. Alternatively, by Theorem 3.11 the action Γ y Supp(ν) is a topological boundary action, hence by the conclusion of [24, Proposition 7], Rad(Γ) acts trivially on Supp(ν), and so Rad(Γ) ⊂ ker(Γ y (X, ν)). For the second part of the statement, if (X, ν) is the Poisson boundary, then the action Γ y (X, ν) is Zimmer-ameanble [55] and in particular the stabilizers StabΓ (x) are amenable for ν-a.e. x ∈ X. If follows that ker(Γ y (X, ν)) is a normal amenable group, and so ker(Γ y (X, ν)) ⊂ Rad(Γ).  4. Stationary C ∗ -dynamical systems Similarly to classical ergodic theory, invariant states may not exist in the setting of actions of non-amenable groups on C ∗ -algebras. For instance, in the case of inner action by subgroups of the unitary group of a given C ∗ -algebra, which is only non-trivial in the non-commutative setting, the invariant ergodic theory is only available in the tracial case. Hence, one has to appeal to other models of dynamical systems in infinite-type cases. In this section we begin studying the concept of stationary dynamical systems in the context of C ∗ -algebras. Let Γ y A and let µ ∈ Prob(Γ). The µ-convolution map on A is defined by X µ ∗ a := µ(g)g −1a. g∈Γ  Its adjoint induces a µ-convolution operator on the space of states S(A) given by X µ∗τ = µ(g)gτ. g∈Γ  Definition 4.1. Let A be a Γ-C ∗ -algebra. A state τ ∈ S(A) is said to be µ-stationary if µ ∗ τ = τ . In this case we say the pair (A, τ ) is a (Γ, µ)-C ∗ -algebra. We denote the collection of all µ-stationary states on A by Sµ (A). We say that A is uniquely stationary if there exists µ ∈ Prob(Γ) such that Sµ (A) has only one element. 4.1. Basic facts. In this section we review non-commutative versions of few basic facts about stationary actions. First, note that invariant states are µ-stationary for every µ ∈ Prob(Γ). Next, we observe that in contrast to the invariant case, stationary states always exist, and moreover, they can always be extended. The corresponding statement of the latter in the commutative setting is that any stationary measure on a factor can be “pulled back” (not necessarily in a unique way) to a stationary measure on the extension. Proposition 4.2. Suppose A is a Γ-C ∗ -algebra and B ⊂ A is a Γ-invariant subalgebra. Then every µ-stationary η ∈ Sµ (B) can be extended to a µ-stationary state τ ∈ Sµ (A). In particular, for any Γ-C ∗ -algebra A, and any µ ∈ Prob(Γ), the set Sµ (A) is nonempty.  16  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  Proof. Let E = {ρ ∈ S(A) : ρ|B = η}. Then E is a compact convex subset of S(A) and the convolution map by µ is an affine contraction on E. Hence by Tychonoff (or Kakutani) fixed point theorem there is τ ∈ E such that µ ∗ τ = τ .  Corollary 4.3. Let A be a Γ-C ∗ -algebra, and let B ≤ A be a Γ-invariant C ∗ -subalgebra. Suppose µ ∈ Prob(Γ) and τ ∈ S(A) is unique µ-stationary. Then τ |B ∈ S(B) is unique µ-stationary for the action Γ y B. Let A be a Γ-C ∗ -algebra. The Poisson map Pτ : A → ℓ∞ (Γ) associated to a state τ on A is defined by Pτ (a)(g) = hg −1a, τ i. Poisson maps are unital, positive and Γ-equivariant. We observe the converse. Lemma 4.4. Suppose ϕ : A → ℓ∞ (Γ) is a unital positive Γ-equivariant map. Then there is τ ∈ S(A) such that ϕ = Pτ . Proof. Suppose ϕ is as above. Define the linear functional τ on A by ha, τ i = ϕ(a)(e) for all a ∈ A. Since ϕ is positive and unital, it follows τ is a state on A, and moreover we have  Pτ (a)(g) = hg −1 a, τ i = ϕ(g −1a)(e) = g −1 (ϕ(a) (e) = ϕ(a)(g) for all g ∈ Γ and a ∈ A.  Lemma 4.5. Suppose A is a Γ-C ∗ -algebra, and let µ ∈ Prob(Γ). Then a state τ ∈ S(A) is µ-stationary if and only if Pτ (a) ∈ H ∞ (Γ, µ) for every a ∈ A. Proof. Suppose τ is µ-stationary, then for every a ∈ A and g ∈ Γ we have X X µ(h)Pτ (a)(gh) = µ(h)hh−1 g −1a, τ i h∈Γ  h∈Γ  = hg −1 a,  X  µ(h)hτ i = hg −1 a, τ i = Pτ (a)(g),  h∈Γ  ∞  which shows Pτ (a) ∈ H (Γ, µ). Conversely, suppose Pτ (a) ∈ H ∞ (Γ, µ) for all a ∈ A. Then X X ha, µ(h)hτ i = µ(h)Pτ (a)(h) = Pτ (a)(e) = ha, τ i h∈Γ  for all a ∈ A, which implies  h∈Γ  P  h∈Γ  µ(h)hτ = τ .    The following fundamental result which is the noncommutative version of Theorem 2.1 is proved similarly to the classical case. We include a proof for the convenience of those readers who may not be familiar with the classical theory of stationary actions. Theorem 4.6. Suppose (A, τ ) is a separable (Γ, µ)-C ∗-algebra. Then the weak* limits τω := limn ωn τ exists for Pµ -a.e. path ω ∈ Ω. Moreover, we have Z (4) τ = τω dPµ (ω) Ω  in the weak* sense. We call the states τω conditional states.  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  17  Proof. Let g1 , . . . , gn ∈ Γ. Denote the cylinder {ω ∈ Ω : ωi = gi for i = 1, . . . , n} by Cg1 ,...,gn . Then for every a ∈ A we have Z XZ 1 1 ha , hτ idPµ (ω) ha , ωn+1 τ idPµ (ω) = P(Cg1 ,...,gn ) Cg1 ,...,gn P(Cg1 ,...,gn ) h∈Γ Cg1 ,...,gn ,h X 1 Pµ (Cg1,...,gn ,h ) ha , hτ i = P(Cg1 ,...,gn ) h∈Γ X 1 = P(Cg1 ,...,gn )µ(gn−1 h)ha , hτ i ) P(Cg1 ,...,gn h∈Γ X =ha , µ(gn−1h)hτ i h∈Γ  =hgn−1 a ,  X  µ(h)hτ i  h∈Γ  =ha , gn τ i,  which shows the sequence of functions fn (ω) := ha, ωn τ i on Ω is a bounded martingale with respect to the sequence of σ-algebras {σn := h{Cg1,...,gn : g1 , . . . , gn ∈ Γ}i}n∈N . Hence, the sequence fn (ω) converges for Pµ -a.e. ω by the martingale convergence theorem. Now let {am : m ∈ N} be a dense subset of A. For each m ∈ N, by the above, there is a set Ωm ⊂ Ω of full measure such that limn ham , ωn τ i converges for every ω ∈ Ωm . Then Ω0 = ∩m∈N Ωm has full measure, and limn ham , ωn τ i exists for every m ∈ N and ω ∈ Ω0 . Hence the conditional states τω := limn ωn τ exist for Pµ -a.e. ω. Applying dominated convergence theorem, we get Z Z ha , τω i dPµ (ω) = limha , ωn τ i dPµ (ω) Ω Ω n Z = lim ha , ωn τ i dPµ (ω) n Ω XZ ha , gτ i dPµ(ω) = lim n  = lim n  = lim n  g∈Γ  X  {ω:ωn =g}  ha , gτ iPµ ({ω : ωn = g})  g∈Γ  X  ha , gτ iµn (g)  g∈Γ  = limha , n  X  µn (g)gτ i  g∈Γ  = limha , τ i n  = ha , τ i for all a ∈ A, which yields (4).    18  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  4.2. Unique stationary actions. In classical dynamics unique ergodicity (i.e. existence of a unique invariant measure on a compact space) is equivalent to uniform convergence of averages of continuous functions in the Birkhoff’s ergodic theorem. For general non-amenable groups, instead, the appropriate notion is unique stationarity. Glasner–Weiss [29] proved that a (G, µ)-space (X, ν) is unique stationary if and only if Pn−1 k 1 for R every f ∈ C(X) the averages of convolutions n k=0 µ ∗ f converge uniformly to f dν. Proposition 4.7. An action (Γ, µ) y (A, τ ) is uniquely stationary if and only if n−1  (5)  1X k n→∞ µ ∗ a − τ (a)1A −−−→ 0 n k=0  for all a ∈ A.  Proof. The proof is similar to the classical case (see e.g. [28]). Let µn = Suppose (5) holds for all a ∈ A, and suppose η ∈ Sµ (A). Then  1 n  Pn−1 k=0  µk .  ha, ηi = ha, µn ∗ ηi = hµn ∗ a, ηi → ha, τ ih1A , ηi = ha, τ i for all a ∈ A. Hence η = τ . Conversely, suppose τ is the unique µ-stationary state on A. Observe that for every a ∈ A we have kµn ∗ (µ ∗ a − a)k → 0. Thus, if we let V0 = span{µ ∗ a − a : a ∈ A}, then kµn ∗ bk → 0 for all b ∈ V0 . Also by stationarity, τ vanishes on V0 . Consequently, for t ∈ C and b ∈ V0 we get kµn ∗ (t1A − b) − ht1A − b, τ i1A k = kt1A − µn ∗ b − ht1A , τ i1A k = kµn ∗ bk → 0, which shows that (5) holds for every a ∈ V = C ⊕ V0 . Next, we show V = A which then completes the proof of the theorem. Towards a contradiction, suppose otherwise. Then applying the Hahn-Banach theorem we can choose η ∈ A∗ with kηk = 1, η 6= τ but such that the restrictions of η and τ to V ( A coincide. It follows η is a state on A since kηk = 1 = η(1A ). Moreover, ha, µ ∗ η − ηi = hµ ∗ a − a, ηi = hµ ∗ a − a, τ i = 0 for all a ∈ A. This implies η is µ-stationary which contradicts the uniqueness assumption.  4.3. Inner actions: stationary states as generalizations of traces. An exclusive feature of noncommutative C ∗ -algebras is non-triviality of the inner action by their unitary groups. This allows one to consider a C ∗ -algebra A as rather a C ∗ -dynamical system. In this point of view, traces on A are nothing but invariant states, which may or may not exist in general. Thus, stationary states are generalizations of traces that do always exist, and in fact may be more appropriate objects to consider when the groups involved are non-amenable.  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  19  In this section, we prove some basic properties of stationary states in this setup, and see that they satisfy some useful properties of traces. Lemma 4.8. Suppose π is a unitary representation of Γ, and consider the action Γ y Cπ∗ (Γ) by inner automorphisms. Let µ ∈ Prob(Γ) be generating, and suppose τ is a µ-stationary state on Cπ∗ (Γ). Then the left kernel Iτ = {a ∈ Cπ∗ (Γ) : τ (a∗ a) = 0} of τ is a two-sided closed ideal of Cπ∗ (Γ). Proof. The inequality a∗ b∗ ba ≤ kb∗ bka∗ a for operators on Hilbert spaces implies the well-known fact that the left kernel of any state is a left ideal. It is also obviously closed. We show Iτ is also Γ-invariant. Let a ∈ Iτ . Then X X µ(g)τ ((π(g −1)aπ(g))∗ (π(g −1)aπ(g))) = µ(g)τ (π(g −1)a∗ aπ(g)) g∈Γ  g∈Γ  = τ (a∗ a) = 0,   which implies τ (π(g −1 )aπ(g))∗(π(g −1 )aπ(g)) = 0 for every g ∈ Supp(µ). This implies π(g −1)Iτ π(g) ⊂ Iτ for every g ∈ Supp(µ). Since µ is generating the same is true for P every g ∈ Γ. Thus, for every finite linear combination b = ni=1 ti π(gi ) ∈ Cπ∗ (Γ), ti ∈ C, and every a ∈ Iτ , there are a1 , . . . , an ∈ Iτ such that n n X X ab = ti aπ(gi ) = ti π(gi )ai , i=1  i=1  and the latter sum is in Iτ since it is a left ideal. This shows Iτ is also a right ideal.   Since every ideal of a C ∗ -algebra is invariant with respect to inner action by the unitary group, the problem of simplicity of a C ∗ -algebra translates into a minimality problem for a noncommutative dynamical system. Hence connection to stationarity is expected. Proposition 4.9. Let π be a unitary representation of Γ. The C ∗ -algebra Cπ∗ (Γ) is simple if and only if there is a generating µ ∈ Prob(Γ) such that every µ-stationary state on Cπ∗ (Γ) is faithful. Proof. If Cπ∗ (Γ) is simple and µ ∈ Prob(Γ) is generating, then by Lemma 4.8 every µ-stationary state is faithful. Conversely, suppose for some generating µ ∈ Prob(Γ), all µ-stationary states are faithful. Assume for sake of contradiction that Cπ∗ (Γ) has a non-trivial proper ideal I. Then the Γ y Cπ∗ (Γ) induces an action Γ y Cπ∗ (Γ)/I. By Proposition 4.2 there exists a µ-stationary state τ on Cπ∗ (Γ)/I. Composing τ with the canonical quotient map Cπ∗ (Γ) → Cπ∗ (Γ)/I we obtain a µ-stationary state on Cπ∗ (Γ) that vanishes on I, which contradicts the assumption.  An important special case is the reduced C ∗ -algebra. Corollary 4.10. If Γ y Cλ∗ (Γ) is uniquely stationary then Γ is C ∗ -simple. Proof. The canonical trace τ0 is Γ-invariant, and hence µ-stationary for any µ. Recall also that τ0 is faithful. The corollary now follows from Proposition 4.9.   20  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  In Section 5 we will prove the converse of this, which provides a new characterization of C ∗ -simplicity. But at this point some concrete examples are in order. In particular, we demonstrate how in general unique stationarity can be deduced. Here and throughout the paper, F2 denotes the free group on two generators a and b, and ∂F2 denotes its Gromov boundary, which is a compact space naturally identified with the set of all infinite reduced words in the generators. We have the natural action F2 y ∂F2 by concatenation with the subsequent cancellation of pairs of consecutive inverses. Example 4.11. Let µ ∈ Prob(F2 ) be the uniform measure on the set of generators {a, a−1 , b, b−1 }. We show the canonical trace τ0 is the unique µ-stationary state on Cλ∗ (F2 ). One can see that the “uniform measure” on ∂F2 , given by ν([w]) = 4·31n−1 where w is a finite word of length n and [w] is the set of all infinite reduced words that start with w, is the unique µ-stationary probability on ∂F2 . Moreover, (∂F2 , ν) is a µ-boundary. Now, let τ be a µ-stationary state on Cλ∗ (F2 ). By Proposition 4.2 we can extend τ to a µ-stationary state τ̃ on F2 ⋉r C(∂F2 ), where F2 y F2 ⋉r C(∂F2 ) is also by inner automorphisms. Then τ̃ |C(∂F2 ) is stationary and by uniqueness, this restriction is ν. Hence τ̃ω |C(∂F2 ) = δbnd(ω) for a.e. ω ∈ Ω, where bnd : (Ω, Pµ ) → (∂F2 , ν) is the boundary map. It is obvious that the action F2 y (∂F2 , ν) is essentially free. Hence, it follows from Lemma 2.2 that for every non-trivial g ∈ F2 , τω (λg ) = 0 for Pµ -a.e. ω. Thus, τω = τ0 for Pµ -a.e. path ω ∈ Ω. Thus, applying Theorem 4.6 we get Z τ= τω dPµ (ω) = τ0 , Ω  which shows τ0 is the unique µ-stationary state on Cλ∗ (F2 ).  We note that in the above reasoning there is nothing particularly special about the uniform measure. The above conclusion holds for any generating measure on F2 . In fact, there is nothing also particularly special about the free group here, the conclusion holds for any measure µ on any groups Γ that admits an essentially free µ-USB. Theorem 4.12. Suppose Γ is a countable discrete group, and let µ ∈ Prob(Γ). If Γ admits an essentially free µ-USB, then the canonical trace τ0 on Cλ∗ (Γ) is uniquely µ-stationary. Proof. Repeat the argument given in Example 4.11 above on a metrizable model of the USB (such a model exists by Lemma 3.10).  In particular, any such group Γ is C ∗ -simple. Of course if (X, ν) is an essentially free USB, by Theorem 3.11 the action Γ y Supp(ν) is a topologically free topological boundary, hence Γ is C ∗ -simple by results of [14]. However, for those groups with essentially free USB actions, the above theorem, besides giving a much simpler proof of C ∗ -simplicity, reveals more than just C ∗ -simplicity of Γ, namely, a probability µ ∈ Prob(Γ) with respect to which the canonical trace is uniquely stationary. In Section 5 we will prove that the existence of such µ is equivalent to C ∗ -simplicity of Γ, and we conclude various  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  21  properties of boundaries and random subgroups associated to such measures. Next is an example of a faithful uniquely stationary state on a purely infinite C ∗ algebra. Example 4.13. Let A = F2 ⋉r C(∂F2 ), and let µ ∈ Prob(F2 ) be generating. As usual, let τ0 denote the canonical trace on Cλ∗ (F2 ). Also, let ν ∈ Prob(∂F2 ) be the unique µ-stationary probability on ∂F2 . Now suppose τ ∈ Sµ (A). Then τ |C(∂F2 ) = ν, and by |C(∂F2 ) = δbnd(ω) and τω |Cλ∗ (F2 ) = τ0 Example 4.11 above, τ |Cλ∗ (F2 ) = τ0 . Hence, we have τωP for a.e. path ω ∈ Ω. So for a linear combination g∈F2 fg λg where fg ∈ C(∂F2 ) is non-zero for at most finitely many g ∈ Γ, using the fact that δbnd(ω) is multiplicative on C(∂F2 ), we see X X fg (bnd(ω))h λg , τω i fg λg , τω i = h g∈F2  g∈F2  =  X  fg (bnd(ω))τ0 (λg )  g∈F2  = fe (bnd(ω)). for a.e. path ω ∈ Ω. Thus, from (4) it follows Z X X fg λg , τω idPµ (ω) fg λg , τ i = h h Ω g∈F 2  g∈F2  =  Z  fe (bnd(ω))dPµ (ω)  Ω  =  Z  fe dν.  ∂F2  P Since the set of all finite linear combinations g∈F2 fg λg is dense in A, this formula uniquely determines τ . P Note also τ = ν ◦ E, where E : A → C(∂F2 ) is the canonical conditional expectation g∈F2 fg λg 7→ fe (see e.g. [17]). Since both E and ν = τ |C(∂F2 ) are faithful, so is τ . In particular, this also implies the well-known fact that F2 ⋉r C(∂F2 ) is simple (see e.g. [3]). Similarly, normal stationary states with respect to the inner action by the unitary group of a von Neumann algebra can provide a suitable replacement for normal traces in the case of non-finite von Neumann algebras. Proposition 4.14. Suppose Γ y M is a von Neumann algebraic dynamical system. If M admits a faithful unique normal µ-stationary state τ for some µ ∈ Prob(Γ), then M is a factor. Proof. This can be proved exactly as in the tracial case. Suppose M is not a factor, and let p ∈ M be a non-trivial central projection. Let µ ∈ Prob(Γ) and suppose τ ∈ M∗ is a 1 τ (·p). Then τ1 ∈ M∗ is a normal state faithful normal µ-stationary state. Set τ1 := τ (p)  22  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  and using the fact that every central element is fixed by Γ, we get X 1 X µ(g)τ1 (g −1 a) = µ(g)τ ((g −1a)p) τ (p) g∈Γ g∈Γ X 1 µ(g)τ (g −1(ap)) = τ (p) g∈Γ 1 τ (ap) τ (p) = τ1 (a) =  1 τ (·(1−p)) is a normal for all a ∈ M, which shows τ1 is µ-stationary. Similarly, τ2 := τ (1−p) µ-stationary state, and obviously τ = τ (p)τ1 + τ (1 − p)τ2 . But since τ1 (1 − p) = 0, we have τ 6= τ1 , hence τ is not the unique normal µ-stationary state on M.   Example 4.15. We follow the notations of Example 4.13. The von Neumann algebra crossed P product M = F2 ⋉ L∞ (∂F2 , ν) is a type III factor. The set of all linear combinations g∈F2 fg λg , where fg ∈ L∞ (∂F2 , ν) is non-zero for at most finitely many g ∈ F2 , P is weak* dense in M. The map g∈F2 fg λg 7→ fe extends to a faithful normal condiR P tional expectation E : M → L∞ (∂F2 , ν). Thus g∈F2 fg λg 7→ ∂F2 fe dν defines a faithful normal state τ on M. Note that the reduced C ∗ -crossed product A = F2 ⋉r C(∂F2 ) is an F2 -invariant weak* dense C ∗ -subalgebra. From Example 4.13 we know τ |A is µstationary, where µ ∈ Prob(F2 ) is any generating probability. Since τ is normal and A is weak* dense in M, it follows τ is a µ-stationary state on M. Moreover, if τ ′ is another normal µ-stationary state on M, then its restriction τ ′ |A is again µ-stationary, hence equal to τ |A by unique stationarity property established in Example 4.13. Since both τ and τ ′ are normal and A is weak* dense in M, it follows τ ′ = τ , which implies unique stationarity of τ . Example 4.16 (Noncommutative USB). Noncommutative Poisson boundaries were defined by Izumi in [36]. This concept has found many important applications in various operator algebraic contexts. Let us briefly recall the definition. Suppose M is a von Neumann algebra, and Φ : M → M is a Markov operator, i.e. a unital completely positive normal map. Then the fixed point space Fix(Φ) = {x ∈ M : Φ(x) = x} is a unital self-adjoint weak* closed subspace of M, and there is a positive contractive idempotent E : M → Fix(Φ). Endowed with the Choi-Effros product, x ◦ y := E(xy), the space Fix(Φ) becomes a von Neumann algebra, called the Poisson boundary of Φ, and denoted by H∞ (M, Φ). A class of examples of Markov operators are obtained from canonical extensions of convolution operators, as follows. Let µ ∈ Prob(Γ), and define Φµ : B(ℓ2 (Γ)) → B(ℓ2 (Γ)) by P Φµ (x) = g∈Γ µ(g)ρg xρg−1 , where ρ : Γ → U(ℓ2 (Γ)) is the right regular representation. Then Φµ is a Markov map on B(ℓ2 (Γ)), and Izumi proved [37] that the Poisson boundary H∞ (B(ℓ2 (Γ)), Φµ ) is canonically isomorphic to the von Neumann crossed product Γ ⋉ H∞ (Γ, µ).  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  23  Now, for instance, continuing to follow the notations of Example 4.13, M = F2 ⋉ L∞ (∂F2 , ν) is identified with the Poisson boundary of the Markov map Φµ where µ is the uniform measure on the set of generators. Note also that M is the von Neumann algebra generated by the reduced crossed product A = F2 ⋉r C(∂F2 ) in the GNS representation of the unique stationary state τ ∈ S(A). Thus, the C ∗ -dynamical system Γ y (A, τ ) gives an example of a noncommutative Poisson USB. Example 4.17. Suppose π : Cλ∗ (F2 ) → B(Hπ ) is an irreducible representation. Consider the inner action Γ y B(Hπ ) by unitaries π(λg ), g ∈ Γ. Let µ ∈ Prob(F2 ) be generating, in particular Supp(µ)′′ = B(Hπ ). We show in this case B(Hπ ) does not admit any normal µ-stationary state. Note first that simplicity of Cλ∗ (F2 ) implies π is injective. Suppose τ ∈ B(Hπ )∗ is a µ-stationary state, then τ |π(Cλ∗ (F2 )) is µ-stationary, hence equals to the canonical trace τ0 by Example 4.11. Since τ is normal, and tracial on a weak* dense subalgebra, it follows τ is a normal trace on B(Hπ ), which implies Hπ is finite dimensional. But that cannot be the case since π : Cλ∗ (F2 ) → B(Hπ ) is injective. 5. A new characterization of C ∗ -simplicity In this section we prove a new characterization of C ∗ -simplicity of a group Γ in terms of unique stationarity of the action Γ y Cλ∗ (Γ). Theorem 5.1. A countable discrete group Γ is C ∗ -simple if and only if there is µ ∈ Prob(Γ) such that the canonical trace τ0 is the unique µ-stationary state on Cλ∗ (Γ) with respect to the Γ-action by inner automorphisms. Proof. We Ponly need to prove the forward implications, the converse is Corollary 4.10. Let f = g∈Γ f (g)δg be a function on Γ with finite support, and fix ε0 > 0. We denote P by λ(f ) = g∈Γ f (g)λg the left regular representation of f . By [31, Theorem 4.5] there are h1 , h2 , . . . , hn ∈ Γ such that n  1X < ε0 λ −1 n k=1 hk ghk for all g ∈ Supp f \ {e}. We then have n n X1X 1X λ −1 λ(f )λhk − τ0 (λ(f ))1Cλ∗ (Γ) = f (g)λh−1ghk − τ0 (λ(f ))λe k n k=1 hk n g∈Γ k=1 n X 1X f (g)λh−1ghk ≤ k n k=1 g6=e   1 f (e) − τ0 (λ(f )) λe n n X 1X = |f (g)| λ −1 n k=1 hk ghk g6=e  +  24  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR n  ≤ kf k∞  X  g∈Supp f \{e}  1X λ −1 n k=1 hk ghk  < kf k∞ #{Supp f }ε0 .  Now, let finitely supported functions f1 , f2 , . . . , fj on Γ, and ε > 0 be given. Let F = j [ ε Supp fi , and c = maxi {kfi k∞ }. Then, setting ε0 = in the above calculations, c (#F ) i=1 n 1X there are h1 , h2 , . . . , hn ∈ Γ such that for µ = δh ∈ Prob(Γ) we have n k=1 µ ∗ λ(fi ) − τ0 (λ(fi ))1Cλ∗ (Γ) < ε  for all i = 1, . . . , j. Since the set {λ(f ) : f has finite support} is norm-dense in Cλ∗ (Γ), for any given a1 , . . . , aj ∈ Cλ∗ (Γ) and ε > 0, we may find µ ∈ Prob(Γ) such that µ ∗ ai − τ0 (ai )1Cλ∗ (Γ) → 0 for all i = 1, . . . , j. P Choose an increasing sequence {nk } of positive integers such that ( ki=1 21i )nk < 21k for all k ∈ N. Let {ai }i∈N be a dense subset of the unit ball of Cλ∗ (Γ). Using the above, for every l ∈ N choose µl , inductively, so that 1 µl ∗ µkr ∗ · · · ∗ µk1 ∗ as − τ0 (as ) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) < l 2 ∞ X1 for all 1 ≤ s, k1 , . . . , kr < l, and r < nl . Let µ = µ ∈ ℓ1 (Γ). Given any a in the l l 2 l=1 unit ball of Cλ∗ (Γ) and ε > 0, let j ∈ N be such that ka − aj k < ε and 1/2j < ε. Then µnj ∗ a − τ0 (a) 1Cλ∗ (Γ)  ≤  µnj ∗ a − µnj ∗ aj + µnj ∗ aj − τ0 (aj ) 1Cλ∗ (Γ)  +  τ0 (aj ) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) − τ0 (a) 1Cλ∗ (Γ)  < 2ε + µnj ∗ aj − τ0 (aj ) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) . We expand and split the term µnj ∗ aj − τ0 (aj ) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) as follows: X 1 1 ∗ · · · ∗ µ ∗ a + µ µknj ∗ · · · ∗ µk1 ∗ aj k j k n 1 knj k j n k 2 ...2 1 2 j . . . 2k1 max ki ≤j max ki >j ! ! X X 1 1 τ0 (aj ) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) − τ0 (aj ) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) − knj knj k1 k1 . . . 2 . . . 2 2 2 max ki >j max ki ≤j X  ≤  X  max ki ≤j  +  X  max ki >j  2knj    1 µknj ∗ · · · ∗ µk1 ∗ aj − τ0 (aj ) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) . . . 2k1  2knj    1 ∗ µknj ∗ · · · ∗ µk1 ∗ aj − τ0 (aj ) 1Cλ (Γ) . . . 2k1  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  ≤ 2kaj k  X  max ki ≤j  2knj  25  X 1 1 + µknj ∗ · · · ∗ µk1 ∗ aj − τ0 (aj ) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) k n . . . 2k1 max ki >j 2 j . . . 2k1  j X X 1 nj 1 µknj ∗ · · · ∗ µk1 ∗ aj − τ0 (aj ) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) = 2kaj k( ) + knj i k1 2 . . . 2 2 i=1 max ki >j X 1 ≤ 2ε + µknj ∗ · · · ∗ µk1 ∗ aj − τ0 (aj ) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) . knj k1 . . . 2 2 max ki >j  Now consider one of the terms µknj ∗ · · · ∗ µk1 ∗ aj in the last sum above and let kj be the first index such that kj > j. Then we have µknj ∗ · · · ∗ µk1 ∗ aj − τ0 (aj ) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) ≤ µkj ∗ · · · ∗ µk1 ∗ aj − τ0 (aj ) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) < ε, where the last inequality follows from the construction of {µl }. This implies X 1 µknj ∗ · · · ∗ µk1 ∗ aj − τ0 (aj ) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) < ε. knj k1 . . . 2 2 max ki >j Hence we get µnj ∗ a − τ0 (a) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) < 5ε. Since kµk = 1, this yields µn ∗ a − τ0 (a) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) = µn−nj ∗ µnj ∗ a − τ0 (a) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) ≤ µnj ∗ a − τ0 (a) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) < 5ε for all n > nj . Hence n→∞  µn ∗ a − τ0 (a) 1Cλ∗ (Γ) −−−→ 0 for all a ∈ Cλ∗ (Γ), which by Proposition 4.7 implies the canonical trace τ0 is the unique µ-stationary state on Cλ∗ (Γ).  5.1. C ∗ -simple measures. In this section we prove several properties of the measures µ that “capture” C ∗ -simplicity in the sense of Theorem 5.1. We see that these measures posses significant ergodic theoretical properties. Thus, in some sense, one should consider C ∗ -simplicity of Γ as a property of the measure(s) µ ∈ Prob(Γ) in Theorem 5.1. Definition 5.2. We say that a measure µ ∈ Prob(Γ) is C ∗ -simple if the canonical trace τ0 is the unique µ-stationary state on Cλ∗ (Γ). Theorem 5.3. Suppose µ ∈ Prob(Γ) is C ∗ -simple. Then any measurable µ-stationary action with almost surely amenable stabilizers, is essentially free. In particular, any Zimmer-amenable µ-stationary action (e.g. the Poisson boundary action Γ y (Πµ , ν∞ )) is essentially free. Proof. Suppose µ ∈ Prob(Γ) is C ∗ -simple, and let Γ y (X, ν) be a measurable µstationary action such that StabΓ (x) is amenable for ν-almost every x ∈ X. Consider the map Ψ : X → Sub(Γ) defined by Ψ(x) = StabΓ (x). Then η = Ψ∗ ν is an amenable µ-SRS of Γ. Therefore by Lemma 2.3 there is a state τ on Cλ∗ (Γ) such that  26  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  τ (λg ) = η({Λ : g ∈ Λ}) for all g ∈ Γ. Since η({Λ : g ∈ Λ}) = ν({x : g ∈ StabΓ (x)}) = ν(Fix(g)), and since ν is µ-stationary it follows X X µ(g)ν(Fix(g −1hg)) µ(g)τ (λg−1 λh λg ) = g∈Γ  g∈Γ  =  X  µ(g)ν(g −1Fix(h))  g∈Γ  =  X  µ(g)gν(Fix(h))  g∈Γ  = ν(Fix(h)) = τ (λh ), which shows τ is µ-stationary. Hence, τ = τ0 , which yields ν(Fix(g)) = 0 for all nontrivial g ∈ Γ, i.e. Γ y (X, ν) is essentially free.  Essential freeness of the abstract Poisson boundary has some ergodic theoretical consequences, for example it implies genericity of stationary measures (see [12]). The following corollary is a weaker conclusion of Theorem 5.3 at the topological level. Corollary 5.4. (see also [14, Proposition 7.6 & Remark 7.7]) Suppose Γ is C ∗ -simple. Then any minimal action Γ y X on a compact space with amenable stabilizers is topologically free, that is, the set {x ∈ X : StabΓ (x) is trivial} is dense in X. Proof. Since by Proposition 4.2 every compact Γ-space admits a stationary measure, it follows from Theorem 5.3 that there is some x ∈ X which has trivial stabilizer, and so does every point in its orbit. Now the assertion follows from minimality.  Also, Theorem 5.3 and Theorem 4.12 imply the following measurable version of the main result of [41]. Corollary 5.5. If Γ is C ∗ -simple then Γ admits an essentially free measurable boundary action, and, conversely, Γ is C ∗ -simple if it admits an essentially free µ-USB for some µ ∈ Prob(Γ). In [6] Bader, Duchesne and Lecureux proved that every amenable IRS of a group Γ is supported on its amenable radical Rad(Γ). Consequently, Rad(Γ) is trivial if and only if δ{e} is the unique invariant probability measure on Suba (Γ); or that Γ has the unique trace property if and only if Γ y Suba (Γ) is uniquely ergodic. Thus, the following is a more concrete evidence that the difference between the unique trace property and C ∗ -simplicity is indeed the difference between unique ergodicity and unique stationarity. Corollary 5.6. If µ is a C ∗ -simple measure on Γ then (Γ, µ) y (Suba (Γ), δ{e} ) is uniquely µ-stationary. Conversely, if Γ is not C ∗ -simple then (Γ, µ) y (Suba (Γ), δ{e} ) is never uniquely stationary.  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  27  Proof. Suppose that µ is C ∗ -simple, and let η be an amenable µ-SRS of Γ. As shown in the proof of Theorem 5.3 the function g 7→ η({Λ : g ∈ Λ}) extends to a µ-stationary state Cλ∗ (Γ). Thus, by unique stationarity of the canonical trace, we get η({Λ : g ∈ Λ}) = 0 for every non-trivial g ∈ Γ. Hence ! [ X η (Sub(Γ)\{e}) = η {Λ : g ∈ Λ} ≤ η ({Λ : g ∈ Λ}) = 0, g6=e  g6=e  which implies η = δ{e} . Conversely, if Γ is not C ∗ -simple, then by [42, Theorem 1.1] Γ has a non-trivial amenable URS (that is, a minimal subset of Suba (Γ) which is not the fixed point {e}). But any URS supports a µ-stationary probability for any µ ∈ Prob(Γ). Hence δ{e} is not unique stationary on Suba (Γ) for any µ ∈ Prob(Γ).  Remark 5.7. Note that since for any µ ∈ Prob(Γ) every URS supports a µ-SRS, it follows from the above corollary that every amenable URS of a C ∗ -simple group Γ is trivial. This is one direction of one of the main results of [42]. In the proof above, we are using the other direction of that result. It is natural to ask whether a generalization of the result of Bader-Duchesne-Lecureux about amenable IRS, which was mentioned above, holds for stationary random subgroups. It is evident that the argument presented in [6, Theorem 1.4] cannot be extended to the stationary case, and in fact any non-C ∗ -simple group Γ with trivial amenable radical has a non-trivial amenable SRS. But rephrasing the above corollary, it implies Γ is C ∗ -simple if and only if there is µ ∈ Prob(Γ) such that every amenable µ-SRS of Γ is trivial. 6. Freeness of USB: identifying C ∗ -simple measures Our proof of the existence of C ∗ -simple measures (Theorem 5.1) is not completely constructive. But, in light of the results of Section 5.1, it is natural to ask for concrete examples of C ∗ -simple measures. In this section we present several approaches to prove that a given measure is C ∗ -simple. 6.1. Noetherian actions. For a probability space (X, ν) we denote by MALG(ν) its measure algebra, that is, the Boolean algebra of equivalence classes of measurable sets modulo ν-null sets. It is a partially ordered set with respect to inclusion, and if Γ acts on (X, ν) then it clearly acts on MALG(ν). Definition 6.1. Let Γ y (X, ν) be a measurable action. We say that a collection F ⊂ MALG(ν) is a Γ-Noetherian lower semilattice (NLS) if F is Γ-invariant, closed under intersections, and any descending chain Y1 ≥ Y2 ≥ · · · in F , stabilizes. The main result of this section is the following theorem, which is a generaliztion of the well-known fact that (non-invariant) ergodic stationary actions are atomless, and also of [40, Lemma 2.2.2]. We are grateful to Uri Bader for suggesting this direction.  28  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  Theorem 6.2. (0-1 Law for Noetherian actions) Let Γ y X, and let µ ∈ Prob(Γ) be generating. Suppose ν ∈ Prob(X) is an ergodic µ-stationary measure such that (X, ν) has no non-trivial finite factor. If F is a Γ-NLS collection in MALG(ν), then ν(Y ) ∈ {0, 1} for any Y ∈ F . Proof. We prove the theorem by Noetherian induction with respect to inclusion. Let Y ∈ F and assume ν(Z) ∈ {0, 1} for any Z < Y , and for sake of contradiction suppose 0 < ν(Y ) < 1. Then ν(Z) = 0 for any Z < Y , and in particular, for any g ∈ Γ, either gY = Y or ν(Y ∩ gY ) = 0. By non-singularity of ν it moreover follows that for any g, h ∈ Γ either gY = hY or ν(gY ∩ hY ) = 0. Therefore, by ergodicity,  S P we have 1 = ν = [g] ν(gY ), where [g] is the equivalence class of all h such g gY that hY = gY . In particular, the set of numbers {ν(gY )} ⊂ [0, 1] has a maximum. Observe that these numbers are the values of a bounded harmonic function (the Poisson map of 1Y ). But a bounded harmonic function with a maximum mustFbe constant. Hence it follows there are finitely many g1 , g2 , . . . , gn ∈ Γ such that X = ni=1 gi Y , and ν(gi Y ) = 1/n for every i = 1, . . . , n. Since ν(Y ) < 1 we must have n > 1. But this means (X, ν) has a non-trivial finite factor, which contradicts the assumptions.  It is well known that µ-boundaries do not admit non-trivial invariant factors and hence we get the following. Corollary 6.3. Let (X, ν) be a µ-boundary and assume there is a Γ-NLS F ⊂ MALG(ν) such that Fix(g) ∈ F for all g ∈ Γ. Then every g ∈ Γ acts on X either trivially or essentially freely. In particular, if Γ y (X, ν) is faithful, it is essentially free. Example 6.4. (Algebraic Actions) Let k be a local field, and let G(k) y V(k) be an algebraic action of a k-algebraic group on a k-variety. Let Γ ≤ G(k) be a countable subgroup, and let F denote the family of all subvarities of V(k). Then F is a Γ-NLS. Let µ ∈ Prob(Γ) be generating, and suppose ν ∈ Prob(V(k)) is such that (V(k), ν) is a µ-boundary. Then by Theorem 6.2 every subvariety has trivial ν measure. Furthermore, since the action is algebraic, Fix(g) ∈ F for all g ∈ Γ and so by Corollary 6.3 every faithful µ-boundary algebraic action is essentially free. Recall that a Γ-space X is said to be mean-proximal if X is a µ-USB for all generating µ ∈ Prob(Γ). We say that a mean-proximal space X is essentially free if for every generating µ ∈ Prob(Γ) the action Γ y (X, νµ ) is essentially free, where νµ ∈ Prob(X) is the unique µ-stationary measure. In the following, to conclude C ∗ -simplicity of the measures in question, we construct a mean-proximal space and verify the essential freeness using the 0-1 Law above. In the proof of the following theorem, we need at certain step to extend an essentially free mean-proximal action of a finite index normal subgroup. We prove, jointly with Uri Bader, the required extension results for mean-proximal actions in Appendix A. Theorem 6.5. Let Γ be a finitely generated linear group with trivial amenable radical. Then any generating measure on Γ is C ∗ -simple.  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  29  Proof. Let H denote the Zariski closure of Γ and denote by H0 ⊳ H the connected component of the identity. Since Rad(Γ) = {e} we may assume that H0 is also semisimple. Now let Γ0 = Γ ∩ H0 . Then Γ0 ⊳ Γ and [Γ : Γ0 ] < ∞. By Theorem A.4 in Appendix A below, it is enough to find an essentially free metrizable Γ0 -mean-proximal space. To construct such a space, we show that for any given g 6= e ∈ Γ0 , there exists a metrizable Γ0 -mean-proximal space Xg on which g acts essentially freely. Then the product of all Xg is the desired essentially free Γ0 -mean-proximal space, by Lemma A.1. Fix some g 6= e ∈ Γ0 . Observe that Rad(Γ0 ) = {e} and hence we can find an element h in the normal closure of g with an eigenvalue α which is not a root of the identity. Let R1 be the finitely generated ring generated by the entries of the matrices of Γ0 , and let R2 be the finitely generated ring generated by the polynomials that define H0 . So R = hR1 , R2 , αi is a finitely generated ring and I = {αz }z∈Z ⊂ R is infinite. By a result of Breuillard and Gelander [13, Lemma 2.1] we can find an embedding R ⊂ k, where k is a local field, such that I ⊂ k is unbounded. Consider Γ0 as a subgroup of GLn (k). Then hz ∈ Γ0 has an eigenvalue whose absolute value is greater than 1 for some z ∈ Z. In particular, it follows Γ0 is not relatively compact in H0 (k). Thus, Γ0 is Zariski dense in the k-group H0 , which is connected and semi-simple. Hence, by results of Margulis [46, Lemmas IV.4.4 and IV.4.5], there exist an irreducible representation π : H0 (k) → GLm (k) such that π(hz ) is proximal for some z ∈ Z. Thus we may apply another result of Margulis [46, Theorem IV.3.7] to conclude the projective space P(k m ) is Γ0 -mean-proximal, and as π(hz ) is proximal, it acts non-trivially. Since hz is in the normal closure of g, it follows g acts non-trivially on P(k m ). Now if µ ∈ Prob(Γ0 ) is generating, and ν ∈ Prob(P(k m )) is the unique µ-stationary measure, then by the 0-1 law (Theorem 6.2) and Example 6.4, g acts ν-essentially freely on P(k m ).  6.2. Groups with countably many amenable subgroups. As mentioned before, there are many results on concrete realization of the Poisson boundary on a natural USB. Taking advantage of this, in the following we use some of the main results in this contexts to provide further examples of C ∗ -simple measures. In [12] it is shown that if a group has only countably many amenable subgroups, then the action on the (abstract) Poisson boundary is essentially free for any generating µ. Thus any generating measure µ on such a group, for which there exists a µ-Poisson USB, is a C ∗ -simple measure. A good source of examples of groups with countably many amenable subgroups is the class of groups satisfying a “finitely generated” version of the Tits alternative. By that we mean any subgroup that does not contain a free subgroup, is a finitely generated amenable group. Examples of such groups are mapping class groups [11, 35, 47], and Out(Fn ) [9, 10]. Example 6.6. Let Γ be hyperbolic group and let Λ ≤ Γ be a non-elementary subgroup with trivial amenable radical. Then the Gromov boundary of Γ is an essentially free µ-USB for any generating measure µ on Λ [39]. Hence, any generating measure on Λ is C ∗ -simple.  30  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  Theorem 6.7. Let Γ be a mapping class group. (1) If Rad(Γ) = {e} then any generating µ ∈ Prob(Γ) is C ∗ -simple. (2) Let Λ ≤ Γ be a non-elementary subgroup with Rad(Λ) = {e}. Then any generating measure on Λ with finite entropy and finite logarithmic moment is C ∗ -simple. Proof.  (1) By results of [40], the Thurston boundary is mean-proximal and the unique stationary measure (for any generating µ) is supported on minimal projective foliations (in fact, on the uniquely ergodic ones). By [43, Theorem 1.4], any quasi-invariant probability which is supported on the minimal projective foliations is Zimmer-amenable. Since stationary measures are quasi-invariant, we conclude that the stabilizer of a.e. point is amenable. Since there are only countably many amenable subgroups, the Thurston boundary is indeed an essentially free mean-proximal space. (2) In [40] it is proved that under these assumptions, the Thurston boundary is a Poisson USB of Λ. In particular, the stabilizers are a.e. amenable and hence, similarly as above, the Thurston boundary is an essentially free USB.   Note that in (1) we do not know that the µ-boundaries are Poisson boundaries, hence we need other tools to verify the amenability of the stabilizers. Theorem 6.8. Let Γ = Out(Fn ) and let Λ ≤ Γ be a non-elementary subgroup with Rad(Λ) = {e}. Then any generating, finitely supported measure on Λ is C ∗ -simple. Proof. By [34] the boundary of the outer space is a Poisson USB for any finitely supported measure on Λ. Hence the result follows similarly to part (2) in Theorem 6.7.  In particular, it follows that all non-elementary subgroups of a mapping class group or of Out(Fn ) are C ∗ -simple (a strengthening of the results of [15]). We conclude this discussion by pointing out that if µ ∈ Prob(Γ) admits a Poisson µUSB, then any µ-boundary which is not the Poisson boundary, is not Zimmer-amenable by [48, Theorem 9.2]. Hence there is no abstract guarantee that the stabilizers would be amenable. This, in a way, highlights the importance of the tools presented in Section 6.1 to conclude essential freeness of measurable boundary actions. 7. Operator-algebraic superrigidity relative to subgroups In this section we study unique stationarity and unique trace property of groups Γ relative to their subgroups Λ ≤ Γ, and consequently, derive several superrigidity results for Γ relative to Λ. 7.1. Unique stationarity relative to subgroups. Recall that we have canonical inclusions Cλ∗ (Λ) ⊆ Cλ∗ (Γ) and C ∗ (Λ) ⊆ C ∗ (Γ). We denote by τ0Γ the canonical trace on both reduced and full C ∗ -algebras of Γ. Definition 7.1. We say a pair (Γ, Λ) where Λ is a subgroup of Γ is µ-stationary rigid if the canonical trace τ0Γ is the unique µ-stationary state on C ∗ (Γ) that restricts to the canonical trace τ0Λ on C ∗ (Λ).  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  31  Stationary rigidity of (Γ, Λ) entails strong rigidity properties for Γ relative to Λ. Theorem 7.2. Suppose (Γ, Λ) is a µ-stationary rigid pair. Then a measurable µstationary action Γ y (X, ν) is essentially free if its restriction to Λ is essentially free. Proof. By Lemma 2.3 the function φ(g) = ν(Fix(g)) is a pdf on Γ, hence extends to a state τ on C ∗ (Γ). Moreover, as shown in the proof of Theorem 5.3 the state τ is µ-stationary. Since the restriction Λ y (X, ν) is essentially free, we have ν(Fix(h)) = 0 for all non-trivial h ∈ Λ, which means φ|Λ = δe , and equivalently τ |C ∗ (Λ) = τ0Λ . Hence, τ = τ0Γ by µ-stationary rigidity of the pair (Γ, Λ), which implies φ = δe , i.e. Γ y (X, ν) is essentially free.  Theorem 7.3. Suppose (Γ, Λ) is a µ-stationary rigid pair. Then any non-trivial µ-SRS of Γ intersect non-trivially with Λ with positive probability. Proof. Suppose η is a µ-SRS of Γ. Then as explained in the proof of Theorem 7.2 the pdf g 7→ η ({Λ′ : g ∈ Λ′ }) extends to a µ-stationary state τ on C ∗ (Γ). If Λ′ ∩ Λ = {e} for η-a.e. Λ′ ∈ Sub(Γ), then η ({Λ′ : h ∈ Λ′ }) = 0 for every non-trivial h ∈ Λ, hence τ |C ∗ (Λ) = τ0Λ . Since the pair (Γ, Λ) is µ-stationary rigid it follows τ = τ0Γ , which implies η ({Λ′ : g ∈ Λ′ }) = 0 for all non-trivial g ∈ Γ. As shown in the proof of Corollary 5.6 this implies η = δ{e} .  We may state a von Neumann algebraic relative superrigidity for a given stationary rigid pair (Γ, Λ) in the setting of unitary representations of Γ whose von Neumann algebras admit normal faithful stationary states. But since at this point we do not have a characterization of those von Neumann algebras, the significance of such rigidity result in terms of application is not clear, although by Example 4.15 the class of von Neumann algebras admitting normal faithful stationary states is strictly larger than the class of finite von Neumann algebras. But using the fact that stationary states on C ∗ -algebras always exist, we obtain the following C ∗ -algebraic\representation-theoretical relative rigidity. Proposition 7.4. Suppose (Γ, N) is a µ-stationary rigid pair, where N ⊳ Γ is a normal subgroup. Let π : Γ → U(Hπ ) be a unitary representation. If λN is weakly contained in the restriction of π to N, then λΓ is weakly contained in π. Proof. Suppose λN is weakly contained in the restriction of π to N, i.e. there is a canonical surjective ∗-homomorphism Cπ∗ (N) → Cλ∗ (N). In particular, the canonical trace τ0N is continuous on Cπ∗ (N). Since N is normal, Cπ∗ (N) is an invariant subalgebra of Cπ∗ (Γ) for the inner action by Γ. Thus, by Proposition 4.2 we can extend τ0N to a µstationary ρ ∈ S(Cπ∗ (Γ)). Considering ρ as a state on C ∗ (Γ), it is still µ-stationary, and thus the assumption of µ-stationary rigidity implies ρ = τ0Γ . Hence the canonical trace τ0Γ is continuous on Cπ∗ (Γ), which implies there is a canonical surjective ∗-homomorphism Cπ∗ (Γ) → Cλ∗ (Γ), and equivalently λΓ is weakly contained in π.  The following is the main result of this section where we prove any group that admits an essentially free USB is stationary rigid relative to its co-amenable subgroups. Recall  32  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  that a subgroup Λ ≤ Γ is co-amenable if every affine action of Γ with a Λ-fixed point has a fixed point. Theorem 7.5. Let µ ∈ Prob(Γ). If Γ admits an essentially free µ-USB, then (Γ, Λ) is a µ-stationary rigid pair for every co-amenable subgroup Λ ≤ Γ. Proof. Suppose τ is a µ-stationary state on C ∗ (Γ) such that τ |C ∗ (Λ) = τ0Λ . Let πτ : C ∗ (Γ) → B(L2 (C ∗ (Γ), τ )) be the GNS representation of τ . Then the Hilbert subspace L2 (C ∗ (Λ), τ ) is canonically isomorphic to L2 (C ∗ (Λ), τ0Λ ) = ℓ2 (Λ). Moreover, L2 (C ∗ (Λ), τ ) is invariant under πτ (h) for every h ∈ Λ, and πτ |Λ : Λ → B(L2 (C ∗ (Λ), τ )) is unitarily equivalent to the left regular representation of Λ. Thus, the map πτ (h) 7→ λh , h ∈ Λ, extends to a surjective ∗-homomorphism Cπ∗τ (Λ) → Cλ∗ (Λ). But, since the canonical trace τ0Λ coincides with τ on Cπ∗τ (Λ), and the latter is faithful, it follows the canonical surjective ∗-homomorphism above is also injective. Hence, by Arveson’s Extension Theorem [4, Theorem 1.2.3], we may extend the map λh 7→ πτ (h), h ∈ Λ, to a unital (completely) positive map B(ℓ2 (Λ)) → B(L2 (C ∗ (Γ), τ )), which is then automatically Λ-equivariant with respect to inner actions on both sides. Suppose (X, ν) is an essentially free µ-USB. Considering X as a Λ-space via the restriction actions, we have a unital positive Λ-equivariant map C(X) → ℓ∞ (Λ). Composing with the above map, we obtain a unital positive Λ-equivariant map C(X) → B(L2 (C ∗ (Γ), τ )). Let E = {Φ : C(X) → B(L2 (C ∗ (Γ), τ )) | Φ is positive and unital}, and define a Γaction on E by (g ·Φ)(f ) := g(Φ(g −1f )). Then E endowed with the point-weak* topology (i.e. Φi → Φ iff Φi (f ) → Φ(f ) weak* for every f ∈ C(X)) is a compact convex Γ-space. Observe that Φ ∈ E is a Λ-fixed point if and only if it is Λ-equivariant. So, by the above, E contains a Λ-fixed point. Since Λ is a co-amenable subgroup, E contains also a Γ-fixed point, which is a Γ-equivariant positive unital map ι : C(X) → B(L2 (C ∗ (Γ), τ )). Using Proposition 4.2 we extend τ to a µ-stationary state τ̃ on B(L2 (C ∗ (Γ), τ )). Then τ̃ ◦ ι gives a µ-stationary probability on C(X), and therefore by the uniqueness assumption we have τ̃ |ι(C(X)) = ν ◦ ι. Hence τ̃ω ◦ ι = (τ̃ ◦ ι)ω = δbnd(ω) for a.e. path ω ∈ Ω, where bnd : (Ω, Pµ ) → (X, ν) is the boundary map. Let g ∈ Γ be non-trivial. Since the action Γ y (X, ν) is essentially free, g bnd(ω) 6= bnd(ω) for a.e. path ω ∈ Ω. Consequently, for a.e. ω ∈ Ω there is fω ∈ C(X), 0 ≤ fω ≤ 1, with τ̃ω (ι(fω )) = fω (bnd(ω)) = 1 and τ̃ω (πτ (g −1 )ι(fω )πτ (g)) = f (g bnd(ω)) = 0. Hence, Lemma 2.2 implies τω (πτ (g)) = τ̃ω (πτ (g)) = 0 for a.e. path ω ∈ Ω. Thus, applying Theorem 4.6 we get Z τ (πτ (g)) = τω (πτ (g)) dPµ(ω) = 0. Ω  Hence τ =  τ0Γ .    Applying results of Section 6.2 we get the following. Corollary 7.6. Let Γ be a hyperbolic group, a mapping class group, or a finitely generated linear group, and assume that Rad(Γ) = {e}. Then for any co-amenable subgroup Λ ≤ Γ the pair (Γ, Λ) is µ-stationary rigid for any generating µ.  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  33  7.2. Unique trace property relative to subgroups. In this section we consider a relative unique ergodicity for the canonical trace. This should be considered as a relative character rigidity property. Definition 7.7. We say a pair (Γ, Λ) of a group Γ and a subgroup Λ is tracial rigid if the canonical trace τ0Γ on C ∗ (Γ) is the unique tracial extension of the canonical trace τ0Λ on C ∗ (Λ). Recall that a von Neumann algebra is finite if it has a normal faithful trace. Theorem 7.8. Suppose (Γ, Λ) is a tracial rigid pair, and Λ is an icc group. Suppose π : Γ → U(Hπ ) is a unitary representation such that M = π(Γ)′′ is a finite von Neumann algebra. If the restriction π|Λ extends to an isomorphism L(Λ) ∼ = π(Λ)′′ then π extends to an isomorphism L(Γ) ∼ = M. Proof. Since Λ is icc, π(Λ)′′ ∼ = L(Λ) is a factor, and in particular admits a unique trace, which is the canonical trace τ0Λ . Now suppose τ is a normal trace on M, then its restriction to Cπ∗ (Γ) is the canonical trace by tracial rigidity of the pair (Γ, Λ). Since Cπ∗ (Γ) is weak* dense in M, it follows τ = τ0Γ is the unique trace on M, thus also faithful. Now let ιτ : M → B(L2 (M, τ )) denote the GNS map. Then the map δg → ιτ (π(g)) extends to a unitary Uτ from ℓ2 (Γ) onto L2 (M, τ ), and we have Uτ∗ π(g)Uτ δh = Uτ∗ π(g)ιτ (π(h)) = Uτ∗ ιτ (π(gh)) = δgh = λg δh for all g, h ∈ Γ. Hence Ad(Uτ ) : L(Γ) → M is the desired isomorphism.    Theorem 7.9. Suppose (Γ, Λ) is a tracial rigid pair. Then a probability measure preserving action Γ y (X, m) is essentially free if its restriction Λ y (X, m) is essentially free. Equivalently, any non-trivial IRS of Γ intersects Λ non-trivially, with positive probability. In particular, every non-trivial normal subgroup N ⊳ Γ intersects Λ non-trivially. Proof. For g ∈ Γ denote Fix(g) = {x ∈ X : gx = x}. Then the function g 7→ m(Fix(g)) is positive definite on Γ by Lemma 2.3, hence extends to a trace τ on C ∗ (Γ). Moreover, by invariance of m we get m(Fix(hgh−1 )) = m(hFix(g)) = m(Fix(g)) for all g, h ∈ Γ, which implies τ is a trace. If the restriction Λ y (X, m) is essentially free, then m(Fix(h)) = 0 for every non-trivial h ∈ Λ, and equivalently τ |C ∗ (Λ) = τ0Λ . Thus by the assumption of tracial rigidity of the pair (Γ, Λ) we get τ = τ0Γ , hence the action Γ y (X, m) is essentially free. For the IRS formulation, it is well known that any given IRS is the push-forward of some measure preserving action via the stabilizer map x 7→ StabΓ (x) (see for example [1]).  By working with topological boundaries instead of unique stationary measurable boundaries we are able to generalize Theorem 7.5 for the case of tracial pairs.  34  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  Theorem 7.10. Suppose Λ ≤ Γ is co-amenable. Then every tracial extension of the canonical trace τ0Λ to C ∗ (Γ) is supported on Rad(Γ). In particular, if Γ has trivial amenable radical, then the pair (Γ, Λ) is tracial rigid. Proof. Suppose τ is a trace on C ∗ (Γ) such that τ |C ∗ (Λ) = τ0Λ . Denote by πτ : C ∗ (Γ) → B(L2 (C ∗ (Γ), τ )) the GNS representation of τ . Let g ∈ / Rad(Γ), then it follows from [24] that Γ admits a topological boundary action Γ y X on which g acts non-trivially. Now, an argument similar to the proof of Theorem 7.5 yields a Γ-equivariant unital positive map ι : C(X) → B(L2 (C ∗ (Γ), τ )). Extend the trace τ ∈ S(πτ (C ∗ (Γ))) to a state ρ on B(L2 (C ∗ (Γ), τ )). Let x ∈ X be such that gx 6= x, and choose f ∈ C(X), 0 ≤ f ≤ 1, with f (x) = 1 and f (gx) = 0. Consider the restriction ρ|ι(C(X)) as a probability on X. Since Γ y X is a boundary action, there is a net (gi ) ⊂ Γ such that gi ρ|ι(C(X)) → δx . By passing to a subnet, if necessary, we may assume gi ρ converges weak* to a state η on B(L2 (C ∗ (Γ), τ )). Then η|ι(C(X)) = δx , and therefore η(ι(f )) = f (x) = 1 and η(π(g −1)ι(f )π(g)) = η(ι(g −1 f )) = f (gx) = 0. Hence Lemma 2.2 yields τ (π(g)) = η(π(g)) = 0. This shows τ = τ0Γ .  Corollary 7.11. Let Γ be a group with trivial amenable radical. Suppose Λ ≤ Γ is co-amenable, and suppose Λ is a character rigid group. Then a probability measure preserving action of Γ on the standard Lebesgue space is essentially free if its restriction to Λ is ergodic. Proof. Any ergodic measure preserving action of a character rigid group is essentially free. Thus, the assertion follows immediately from Theorems 7.9 and 7.10.   STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  35  Appendix A. Extending mean-proximal actions Uri Bader, Yair Hartman and Mehrdad Kalantar In this appendix we prove an extension theorem for mean-proximal actions that is needed in our proof of C ∗ -simplicity of generating measures on linear groups (Theorem 6.5). Our results below can be proven in more general forms, but we state them as we need them in this work. Throughout this section, Γ is a countable discrete group. By a Γ-space we mean a compact space X on which Γ acts by homeomorphims. A Γ-space X is said to be Γmean-proximal, if for every generating µ ∈ Prob(Γ), there exists a unique µ-stationary measure νµ ∈ Prob(X) such that (X, νµ ) is a (Γ, µ)-boundary (see Definition 3.3). Lemma Q A.1. Let {Xj } be a countable collection of metrizable Γ-mean-proximal spaces. Then j Xj equipped with the diagonal action is a Γ-mean-proximal space. Proof. Fix a generating µ ∈ Prob(Γ), and let (Ω, Pµ ) Q denote the path space of the (Γ, µ)′ random walk (see Section 2.1). For each j , let πj ′ : j Xj → Xj ′ be the corresponding Q projection map. Let ν be a µ-stationary probability on j Xj , and for each j denote by ν j the pushforward of ν under πj . Then ν j ∈ Prob(Xj ) is µ-stationary, hence by the uniqueness assumption, is also a (Γ, µ)-boundary. Since the collection {Xj } is countable we can find Ω0 ⊂ Ω with Pµ (Ω0 ) = 1 such that for every ω ∈ Ω0 , the conditional measures (ν j )ω are Dirac measures for all j (see Furstenberg’s Theorem 2.1 for the definition). Since the projections πj are equivariant, we observe (νω )j = (ν j )ω for all j and ω ∈ Ω0 . Thus, it follows that νω is a Dirac measure for all ω ∈ Ω0 (note that the product space Q is also metrizable). This implies ( j Xj , ν) is a (Γ, µ)-boundary. The uniqueness of ν follows from the fact that every stationary measure is completely determined by its conditional measures (Theorem 2.1), and that the conditional measures νω project onto the Dirac measures (ν j )ω .   Theorem A.2. Let Γ be a finitely generated group, and let X be a metrizable Γ-meanproximal space. Then there exists a metrizable Γ-mean-proximal space Y such that X is a factor of Y , and the action Γ y Y extends to an action Aut(Γ) y Y . Proof. For α ∈ Aut(Γ) let Xα be a copy of X equipped with the action g · x = α−1 (g)x. Obviously Xα is a metrizable Γ-mean-proximal for every α ∈ Aut(Γ). Q Since Γ is finitely generated, Aut(Γ) is countable, hence Lemma A.1 yields that Z = α Xα equipped with the diagonal action of Γ is mean-proximal. In particular, Z contains a unique minimal component Y , which is also Γ-mean-proximal, and hence a topological boundary by Theorem 3.11. On the other hand, the group Aut(Γ) also acts naturally on Z by permuting the indices, namely (β · z)α0 = zβ −1 α0 , for β, α0 ∈ Aut(Γ) and z = (zα )α∈Aut(Γ) ∈ Z. One observes the relation g · β · z = β · β(g −1 ) · z for g ∈ Γ, β ∈ Aut(Γ), and z ∈ Z. Thus, it follows if Z ′ ⊂ Z is Γ-invariant, then so is β(Z ′ ) for all β ∈ Aut(Γ). In particular, β(Y ) = Y for every β ∈ Aut(Γ) by the uniqueness. Hence the restriction to Y defines an action Aut(Γ) y Y .  36  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  Now fix g ∈ Γ, and let βg ∈ Aut(Γ) be the inner automorphism βg (h) = ghg −1. Considering g and βg as homeomorphism on Z via the above actions of Γ and Aut(Γ), straightforward calculations show the composition g −1βg : Z → Z is equivariant with respect to the diagonal action of Γ. In particular, we have g −1 βg (Y ) = Y by the uniqueness. But since Γ y Y is a topological boundary action, it follows g −1βg is the identity map on Y , which implies the restriction of the action Aut(Γ) y Y to Γ ≤ Aut(Γ) (via inner automorphism) coincided with the diagonal action of Γ when restricted to Y , and this completes the proof.  We will use the notion of recurrent subgroups in order to relate boundary actions of a group to its finite index subgroups. We recall the definition, and refer the reader to [26] for more details. Let µ ∈ Prob(Γ) be generating. A subgroup Λ ≤ Γ is said to be µ-recurrent if almost every path of the (Γ, µ)-random walk passes through Λ (infinitely many times, automatically). In this case, there exists a hitting measure θ ∈ Prob(Λ) such that the restriction map ℓ∞ (Γ) → ℓ∞ (Λ) yields an isometric isomorphism between the algebras of bounded harmonic functions H ∞ (Γ, µ) and H ∞ (Λ, θ). Lemma A.3. Let X be a metrizable Γ-space and let Λ ≤ Γ be µ-recurrent for a generating µ ∈ Prob(Γ). Then any µ-stationary measure ν ∈ Prob(X) is θ-stationary, where θ ∈ Prob(Λ) is the hitting measure. Moreover, if ν ∈ Prob(X) is a (Λ, θ)-boundary then it is also a (Γ, µ)-boundary. In particular, if (X, ν) is a θ-USB, then it is also a µ-USB. Proof. For a proof of the first assertion see [33, Corollary 2.14]. The second part follows directly from the definitions.  We say a Γ-mean-proximal space X is essentially free if for any generating measure µ ∈ Prob(Γ), the action Γ y (X, νµ ) is essentially free. Theorem A.4. Let Γ be a finitely generated group with trivial amenable radical, and let Λ be a normal subgroup of Γ of finite index. If Λ admits an essentially free metrizable mean-proximal action, then so does Γ. Proof. Let X be an essentially free metrizable Λ-mean-proximal space, and let Y be the Γ-space given by Theorem A.2 (considering Γ ≤ Aut(Λ)). Since Y is a Λ-extension of X, it is Λ-essentially free. Since Λ has finite index in Γ, it is µ-recurrent for any generating µ ∈ Prob(Γ), thus Lemma A.3 implies that Y is also Γ-mean-proximal. To see that Y is also Γ-essentially free, let µ ∈ Prob(Γ) be generating, and let θ ∈ Prob(Λ) be the corresponding hitting measure. Denote by ν = νµ = νθ ∈ Prob(Y ) the unique stationary measure. Since Λ y (X, ν) is essentially free, the stabilizers StabΓ (x) are finite subgroups of Γ for ν-almost every x. Thus, the pushforward η of ν under the stabilizer map x 7→ StabΓ (x) is a stationary measure on the compact space Sub(Γ) (of all subgroups of Γ, endowed with the conjugate action of Γ) that is supported on finite subgroups.  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  37  Note that Γ has only countably many finite subgroups, hence η is invariant (see, e.g. the discussion in Section 6.2), i.e. an IRS. But by [6] every amenable IRS is supported on the amenable radical of Γ, which is trivial by assumption. Hence StabΓ (x) is trivial for ν-almost every x, and this finishes the proof.  Remark A.5. The assumption of metrizability was not necessary in Lemmas A.1 and A.3, and was only needed in Theorem A.2 to ensure metrizability of the space Y . In all conclusions, the general case can be reduced to the metrizable case by either passing to a metrizable model, or considering metrizable factors and taking an inverse limit. Since we only use the results of this appendix in situations where all spaces in considerations are metrizable, we did not take those extra steps and just tailored the statements for our particular purposes here. But, the fact that we can conclude these results for arbitrary products and inverse limits leads to a deeper point: there is a theory of mean-proximal actions parallel to those of proximal and strongly proximal actions. One can prove the existence of a universal action, and canonical extension results. We intend to devote a followup paper to a conceptual study of a class of topological dynamical systems that include all these examples.  References [1] Miklós Abért, Yair Glasner, and Bálint Virág, Kesten’s theorem for invariant random subgroups, Duke Math. J. 163 (2014), no. 3, 465–488. [2] Miklos Abert, Nicolas Bergeron, Ian Biringer, Tsachik Gelander, Nikolay Nikolov, Jean Raimbault, and Iddo Samet, On the growth of L2 -invariants for sequences of lattices in Lie groups, Ann. of Math. (2) 185 (2017), no. 3, 711–790. [3] R. J. Archbold and J. S. Spielberg, Topologically free actions and ideals in discrete C ∗ -dynamical systems, Proc. Edinburgh Math. Soc. (2) 37 (1994), no. 1, 119–124. [4] William B. Arveson, Subalgebras of C ∗ -algebras, Acta Math. 123 (1969), 141–224. MR0253059 [5] R. Azencott, Espaces de Poisson des groupes localement compacts, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 148, Springer, Berlin, 1970. [6] Uri Bader, Bruno Duchesne, and Jean Lécureux, Amenable invariant random subgroups, Israel J. Math. 213 (2016), no. 1, 399–422. With an appendix by Phillip Wesolek. [7] Uri Bader and Yehuda Shalom, Factor and normal subgroup theorems for lattices in products of groups, Invent. Math. 163 (2006), no. 2, 415–454. [8] Bachir Bekka, Operator-algebraic superridigity for SLn (Z), n ≥ 3, Invent. Math. 169 (2007), no. 2, 401–425. [9] Mladen Bestvina, Mark Feighn, and Michael Handel, The Tits alternative for Out(Fn ). I. Dynamics of exponentially-growing automorphisms, Ann. of Math. (2) 151 (2000), no. 2, 517–623. [10] , The Tits alternative for Out(Fn ). II. A Kolchin type theorem, Ann. of Math. (2) 161 (2005), no. 1, 1–59. [11] Joan S. Birman, Alex Lubotzky, and John McCarthy, Abelian and solvable subgroups of the mapping class groups, Duke Math. J. 50 (1983), no. 4, 1107–1120. [12] Lewis Bowen, Yair Hartman, and Omer Tamuz, Generic stationary measures and actions, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 369 (2017), no. 7, 4889–4929. [13] E. Breuillard and T. Gelander, A topological Tits alternative, Ann. of Math. (2) 166 (2007), no. 2, 427–474.  38  Y. HARTMAN AND M. KALANTAR  [14] Emmanuel Breuillard, Mehrdad Kalantar, Matthew Kennedy, and Narutaka Ozawa, C ∗ -simplicity and the unique trace property for discrete groups, Publications mathématiques de l’IHÉS (to appear), arXiv:1410.2518. [15] Martin R. Bridson and Pierre de la Harpe, Mapping class groups and outer automorphism groups of free groups are C ∗ -simple, J. Funct. Anal. 212 (2004), no. 1, 195–205. [16] Sara Brofferio and Bruno Schapira, Poisson boundary of GLd (Q), Israel J. Math. 185 (2011), 125–140. [17] Nathanial P. Brown and Narutaka Ozawa, C ∗ -algebras and finite-dimensional approximations, Graduate Studies in Mathematics, vol. 88, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2008. [18] D. Creutz and J. Peterson, Character rigidity for lattices and commensurators, Preprint (2013), arXiv:1311.4513. [19] Pierre de la Harpe, On simplicity of reduced C ∗ -algebras of groups, Bull. Lond. Math. Soc. 39 (2007), no. 1, 1–26. [20] Pierre de la Harpe and Jean-Philippe Préaux, C ∗ -simple groups: amalgamated free products, HNN extensions, and fundamental groups of 3-manifolds, J. Topol. Anal. 3 (2011), no. 4, 451–489. [21] Artem Dudko and Rostislav Grigorchuk, On diagonal actions of branch groups and the corresponding characters, preprint (2014), arXiv:1412.5476. [22] Anna Erschler, Liouville property for groups and manifolds, Invent. Math. 155 (2004), no. 1, 55–80. [23] Alex Furman, Random walks on groups and random transformations, Handbook of dynamical systems, Vol. 1A, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2002, pp. 931–1014. , On minimal strongly proximal actions of locally compact groups, Israel J. Math. 136 (2003), [24] 173–187. [25] Harry Furstenberg, A Poisson formula for semi-simple Lie groups, Ann. of Math. (2) 77 (1963), 335–386. , Boundary theory and stochastic processes on homogeneous spaces, 1973. [26] [27] Shmuel Glasner, Proximal flows, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 517, Springer-Verlag, BerlinNew York, 1976. [28] Eli Glasner, Ergodic theory via joinings, Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, vol. 101, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2003. [29] Eli Glasner and Benjamin Weiss, Weak mixing properties for non-singular actions, Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems 36 (2016), no. 7, 2203–2217. [30] Y. Guivarc’h and A. Raugi, Frontière de Furstenberg, propriétés de contraction et théorèmes de convergence, Z. Wahrsch. Verw. Gebiete 69 (1985), no. 2, 187–242 (French). [31] Uffe Haagerup, A new look at C ∗ -simplicity and the unique trace property of a group, preprint (2015), arXiv:1509.05880. [32] Masamichi Hamana, Injective envelopes of C ∗ -dynamical systems, Tohoku Math. J. (2) 37 (1985), no. 4, 463–487. [33] Yair Hartman, Yuri Lima, and Omer Tamuz, An Abramov formula for stationary spaces of discrete groups, Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems 34 (2014), no. 3, 837–853. [34] Camille Horbez, The Poisson boundary of Out(FN ), Duke Math. J. 165 (2016), no. 2, 341–369. [35] N. V. Ivanov, Algebraic properties of the Teichmüller modular group, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 275 (1984), no. 4, 786–789 (Russian). [36] Masaki Izumi, Non-commutative Poisson boundaries and compact quantum group actions, Adv. Math. 169 (2002), no. 1, 1–57. [37] , Non-commutative Poisson boundaries, Discrete geometric analysis, Contemp. Math., vol. 347, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2004, pp. 69–81. [38] V. F. R. Jones, Ten problems, Mathematics: frontiers and perspectives, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2000, pp. 79–91. [39] Vadim A. Kaimanovich, The Poisson formula for groups with hyperbolic properties, Ann. of Math. (2) 152 (2000), no. 3, 659–692.  STATIONARY C ∗ -DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS  39  [40] Vadim A. Kaimanovich and Howard Masur, The Poisson boundary of the mapping class group, Invent. Math. 125 (1996), no. 2, 221–264. [41] Mehrdad Kalantar and Matthew Kennedy, Boundaries of reduced C ∗ -algebras of discrete groups, J. Reine Angew. Math. 727 (2017), 247–267. [42] Matthew Kennedy, An intrinsic characterization of C ∗ -simplicity, preprint (2015), arXiv:1509.01870. [43] Yoshikata Kida, The mapping class group from the viewpoint of measure equivalence theory, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 196 (2008), no. 916, viii+190. [44] Adrien Le Boudec, C ∗ -simplicity and the amenable radical, Invent. Math. 209 (2017), no. 1, 159– 174. [45] François Ledrappier, Poisson boundaries of discrete groups of matrices, Israel J. Math. 50 (1985), no. 4, 319–336. [46] G. A. Margulis, Discrete subgroups of semisimple Lie groups, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3) [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas (3)], vol. 17, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991. [47] John McCarthy, A “Tits-alternative” for subgroups of surface mapping class groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 291 (1985), no. 2, 583–612. [48] Amos Nevo and Michah Sageev, The Poisson boundary of CAT(0) cube complex groups, Groups Geom. Dyn. 7 (2013), no. 3, 653–695. [49] Alexander Yu. Olshanskii and Denis V. Osin, C ∗ -simple groups without free subgroups, Groups Geom. Dyn. 8 (2014), no. 3, 933–983. [50] Jesse Peterson, Character rigidity for lattices in higher-rank groups, preprint (2015). [51] Jesse Peterson and Andreas Thom, Character rigidity for special linear groups, J. Reine Angew. Math. 716 (2016), 207–228. [52] Robert T. Powers, Simplicity of the C ∗ -algebra associated with the free group on two generators, Duke Math. J. 42 (1975), 151–156. MR0374334 [53] T. Poznansky, Characterization of linear groups whose reduced C*-algebras are simple, arXiv preprint arXiv:0812.2486 (2008). [54] Michah Sageev and Daniel T. Wise, The Tits alternative for CAT(0) cubical complexes, Bull. London Math. Soc. 37 (2005), no. 5, 706–710. [55] Robert J. Zimmer, Amenable ergodic group actions and an application to Poisson boundaries of random walks, J. Functional Analysis 27 (1978), no. 3, 350–372. Department of Mathematic, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA E-mail address: hartman@math.northwestern.edu Department of Mathematics, University of Houston, Houston, TX, USA E-mail address: kalantar@math.uh.edu Weizmann Institute, Rehovot E-mail address: uri.bader@gmail.com

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
