Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_7004

Abstract:
Optimal Distance Labeling Schemes for Trees Ofer Freedman∗1 , Paweł Gawrychowski∗1 , Patrick K. Nicholson2 , and Oren Weimann∗1 1 2  University of Haifa, Israel Bell Labs, Dublin, Ireland  arXiv:1608.00212v2 [cs.DS] 14 May 2017  Abstract Labeling schemes seek to assign a short label to each node in a network, so that a function on two nodes (such as distance or adjacency) can be computed by examining their labels alone. For the particular case of trees, following a long line of research, optimal bounds (up to low order terms) were recently obtained for adjacency labeling [FOCS ’15], nearest common ancestor labeling [SODA ’14], and ancestry labeling [SICOMP ’06]. In this paper we obtain optimal bounds for distance labeling. We present labels of size 1{4 log2 n ` oplog2 nq, matching (up to low order terms) the recent 1{4 log2 n ´ Oplog nq lower bound [ICALP ’16]. Prior to our work, all distance labeling schemes for trees could be reinterpreted as universal trees. A tree T is said to be universal if any tree on n nodes can be found as a subtree of T . A universal tree with |T | nodes implies a distance labeling scheme with label size log |T |. In 1981, Chung et al. proved that any distance labeling scheme based on universal trees requires labels of size 1{2 log2 n ´ log n ¨ log log n ` Oplog nq. Our scheme is the first to break this lower bound, showing a separation between distance labeling and universal trees. The Θplog2 nq barrier for distance labeling in trees has led researchers ? to consider distances bounded by k. The size of such labels was improved from log n ` Opk log nq [WADS ’01] to log n ` Opk 2 plogpk log nqq [SODA ’03] and finally to log n ` Opk logpk logpn{kqqq [PODC ’07]. We show how to construct labels whose size is the minimum between log n ` Opk logpplog nq{kqq and Oplog n ¨ logpk{ log nqq. We complement this with almost tight lower bounds of log n ` Ωpk logplog n{pk log kqqq and Ωplog n ¨ logpk{ log nqq. Finally, we consider p1 ` εq-approximate distances. We show that the recent labeling scheme of [ICALP ’16] can be easily modified to obtain an Oplogp1{εq ¨ log nq upper bound and we prove a matching Ωplogp1{εq ¨ log nq lower bound.  ∗  The research was supported in part by Israel Science Foundation grant 794/13.  1  Introduction  Labeling schemes seek to assign a short label to each vertex in a network, so that a function on two nodes (such as distance or adjacency) can be computed by examining their labels alone. This is particularly desirable in distributed settings, where nodes are often processed using only some locally stored data. Recently, with the rise in popularity of distributed computing platforms such as Spark and Hadoop, labeling schemes have found renewed interest. Indeed, the goal of minimizing the size of the maximal label has been the subject of a great deal of recent research [1, 5–10, 17, 18, 27]. For the particular case of trees, the functions that have been studied are distance [5, 8, 20, 21, 26], adjacency [6, 11, 13], nearest common ancestor [9, 17], and ancestry [1, 18] (a recent survey of these results can be found here [29]). Tree labeling schemes have recently found new uses in large scale graph processing. For example, distance oracles for general graphs use distance labelings for spanning trees rooted at judiciously chosen vertices [2–4]. Universal trees. A particularly clean way of looking at labeling schemes is through universal graphs. A graph G is said to be universal for a given family of graphs, if every graph in the family is an induced subgraph of G. Similarly, a tree T is said to be universal for all trees on n nodes if any tree on n nodes can be found as a subtree of T . For adjacency labeling in graphs, Kannan et al. [24] observed that if a family of graphs has a universal graph with |G| vertices then it has an adjacency labeling scheme with label size log |G|, and vice versa. For distance labeling in trees, until the present work, this statement was only known to be true in one direction. Namely, a universal tree T of all trees on n nodes implies a distance labeling scheme with label size log |T |. We prove that the converse is in fact not true. The use of universal trees is powerful, but it is limited. Already 50 years ago, Goldberg and Livshits [22] showed how to construct a universal tree T that is of size |T | “ nplog n´2 log log n`Op1qq{2 which was shown by Chung et al. [14] to be the smallest possible up to the Op1q error term. This shows the first limitation of using universal trees for distance labeling: there is a lower bound of log |T | “ 1{2 log2 n ´ log n ¨ log log n ` Oplog nq on the label size. The second limitation is the query time. The universal tree construction of Goldberg and Livshits was given before labeling schemes were ever invented. Of course, one could naively use their universal tree T for distance labeling of an arbitrary tree on n nodes by finding its isomorphic subtree in T and assigning labels which are just the IDs of the nodes in T . However, such a non-algorithmic labeling would require prohibitive query time and space since T needs to be computed. This latter limitation was overcome by algorithmic labeling schemes achieving logarithmic query time: An upper bound of Oplog2 nq bits on the label size was first shown by Peleg [26] and a lower bound of 1{8 log2 n ´ Oplog nq bits was shown by Gavoille et al. [21]. Very recently, Alstrup et al. [8] improved the lower bound to 1{4 log2 n ´ Oplog nq and observed that the upper bound can be improved to 1{2 log2 n ` Oplog nq with a somewhat straightforward use of a nearest common ancestor labeling scheme. All the above labeling schemes can be reinterpreted as building a universal tree, and are therefore subject to the 1{2 log2 n ´ log n ¨ log log n ` Oplog nq lower bound of Chung et al. In other words, the scheme of Alstrup et al. is optimal (up to low order terms) amongst all schemes that translate to universal trees. To see why the scheme of Alstrup et al. indeed translates to a universal tree, we show in Section 3.6 that their scheme can be casted as a level-ancestry scheme and we show in Section 3.5 that every level-ancestry scheme translates to a universal tree. We give the first distance labeling scheme that does not translate to a universal tree. This enables us to circumvent the Chung et al. [14] lower bound for labels based on universal trees and to match the general lower bound of Alstrup et al. [8]. Namely, in Section 3 we prove the following:  1  Theorem 1.1. There is a scheme for tree distance labeling with 1{4 log2 n ` oplog2 nq bit labels and constant query time. The above theorem means that universal trees capture more than is required for distance labeling. To illustrate this, we need to describe the related problem of level-ancestor labelings. Labeling schemes for level-ancestors. In this problem, we are given a rooted tree and seek to assign labels so that we can compute (the label of) any k-th ancestor of a node from its label alone. Notice that here a query receives a single label and a value k, and that all labels must be distinct (no scheme which uses the same label twice can be correct). It is not hard to see that labels supporting level-ancestor queries can be used to answer distance queries. Thus, any lower bound for tree distance labeling immediately applies to levelancestor labeling, but the converse is not true. Nevertheless, it turns out that all previous distance labeling schemes are also level-ancestor schemes. Like the labeling scheme of Alstrup et al. [8], our scheme is also based on a heavy path decomposition of the tree, which can be seen as a way of transforming an arbitrary tree into an edge-weighted tree of logarithmic depth. However, while the labels in [8] store the weights of every edge on the path to the root (thus allowing for level-ancestor queries), we show that it is possible to carefully distribute the bits between the labels so that the distance can be computed given any pair of labels, yet a single label is not enough to extract the level-ancestors. We determine this separation between tree distance labeling and level-ancestor labeling by proving that labeling for distances is roughly half as expensive as labeling for level-ancestors: Theorem 1.2. Any scheme for level-ancestor labeling must use at least 1{2 log2 n´log n log log n bits for the maximum length label. We prove the above theorem in Section 3.5 by showing that, as opposed to distance labeling, no level-ancestor labeling scheme can do better than the one based on universal trees. Namely, we prove that any level-ancestor labeling scheme with labels of length L implies a universal rooted tree of size Op2L q, and then invoke the known lower bound for universal trees [14, 22]. In particular, it means that for level-ancestor queries, the scheme of Alstrup et al. [8] is optimal (after some modifications described in Section 3.6). Labeling schemes for bounded distances. The Θplog2 nq barrier on distance labeling in trees has initiated a line of research that improves the label size when the distances are bounded: In k-distance labeling, we are given the labels of u and v and need to decide if the length of the u-to-v path is at most k, and if so return it. For k “ 1, this is exactly adjacency labeling, which was recently shown by Alstrup et al. [6] to require only log n ` Op1q bits. For k ě 2, this was first?considered by Kaplan and Milo [25] who showed how to construct labels of length log n ` Opk log nq. The query time was not explicitly specified in their implementation, but appears to be Opkq. A shorter label of log n ` Opk 2 logpk log nqq bits was then given by Alstrup, Bille, and Rauhe [5] who also proved that any scheme for k ě 2 (i.e., the scheme is able to answer “ancestor or sibling” queries) requires log n ` Ωplog log nq bits. Hence the Oplog log nq addend cannot be avoided, but it remained unclear what should be the exact dependency on k nor the query time (Alstrup, Bille, and Rauhe considered constant k in which case their bounds are tight and their Opk 2 q query time is constant). The labeling scheme of Alstrup, Bille, and Rauhe was then improved by Gavoille and Labourel [20] who presented a bound of log n ` Opk logpk logpn{kqqq bits and Opkq query time solution. In Section 4 we show how to construct a labeling scheme with improved label size and constant query time, and prove an almost matching lower bound. Formally, we prove: Theorem 1.3. For k ă log n, there is a k-distance labeling scheme with labels of length log n ` Opk logpplog nq{kqq bits, and any such scheme requires log n ` Ωpk logplog n{pk log kqq bits. 2  For k ě log n, there is a k-distance labeling scheme with labels of length Oplog n ¨ logpk{ log nqq bits, and any such scheme requires Ωplog n ¨ logpk{ log nqq bits. In both cases, the query time is constant. For the upper bound, our starting point is the scheme of Alstrup, Bille, and Rauhe [5]. We observe that, instead of storing the same information for each of the nearest k heavy paths above a node, it is possible to store all information for the topmost of these heavy paths and less information for all the rest. To improve the query time, we show that only a subtle change is needed in the definition of the so-called significant preorder numbers. The new definition retains all the nice properties of the previous while being much easier to operate on. Our constant query time assumes the standard word-RAM model with word size Ωplog nq. For the lower bounds we take two different approaches. For k ă log n, we show how to construct a family of trees such that, in any k-distance labeling scheme, different trees can share some labels but every tree has to introduce many additional unique labels. For k ě log n, we use the clever lower bound technique from (unbounded) distance labelings, that was introduced by Gavoille et al. [21] and refined by Alstrup et al. [8]. It is based on constructing a weighted almost complete binary tree, where all the leaves are at the same distance from the root. After arguing that the labels of nodes in such a tree must be long, the weights are removed by subdividing edges while not increasing the size of the tree by too much. We show that only a small tweak is required to this known lower bound for distance labeling in order to get a lower bound for k-distance labeling. Labeling schemes for approximate distances. Finally, we consider p1 ` εq-approximate distance labeling, where given the labels of u and v we need to output a value that is at least dpu, vq and at most p1`εq¨dpu, vq. For the case ε P r1{ log n, 1q, Gavoille et al. [19] proved a tight bound of Θplogp1{εq ¨ log nq. Very recently, Alstrup et al. [8] considered the general trade-off and designed, for any constant ε ď 1, an Oplog nq bit labeling scheme. In Section 5 we show that their solution can be easily made to produce labels of size Oplogp1{εq ¨ log nq and that this is the best possible: Theorem 1.4. For any ε ď 1, there is a p1`εq-approximate distance labeling scheme with labels of length Oplogp1{εq ¨ log nq, and any such scheme requires Ωplogp1{εq ¨ log nq bits. The lower bound is obtained by reducing exact distance labeling to p1 ` εq-approximate distance labeling. This is achieved by appropriately stretching the lengths of the edges in the lower bound instances of Gavoille et al. [21]. For the upper bound, we slightly modify the scheme of Alstrup et al. [8], which originally stored a sequence of integers using simple unary encoding. Such an encoding requires Op1{ε ¨ log nq bits. We show that with a more complicated binary encoding we can obtain a scheme with Oplogp1{εq ¨ log nq bits and a constant query time. We conclude this section with the following table summarizing our contribution. Label type  Upper bound  Lower bound  Exact  1{4 log2 n ` oplog2 nq  1{4 log2 n ´ Oplog nq [8]  Approximate  Oplogp1{εq ¨ log nq  Ωplogp1{εq ¨ log nq  k ě log n  Oplog n ¨ log logk n q  Ωplog n ¨ log logk n q  k ă log n  log n ` Opk log logk n q  n 1 log n ` Ωpk log klog log k q  k-distance 1  This lower bound only holds for k “ op logloglogn n q.  3  2  Preliminaries  We consider a rooted tree T , or we arbitrarily root it. We denote the root by rootpT q, and the distance between node v to rootpT q by root-distancepvq. We denote the subtree rooted at u as Tu , and the number of nodes of T by |T |, or simply n if T is known from the context. For two nodes u, v, we denote their distance by dpu, vq, their nearest common ancestor by NCApu, vq. First, observe that: dpu, vq “ root-distancepuq ` root-distancepvq ´ 2 ¨ root-distancepNCApu, vqq. This means that a labeling scheme for root-distancepNCApu, vqq that assumes u ‰ v can actually be used for dpu, vq queries with only Oplog nq additional bits to the label size (the additional bits are simply the distance to the root). Next, observe that although our input tree is unweighted (i.e., all edges have weight 1), if our distance labeling scheme can handle edges-weights in t0, 1u then we can assume the input tree is binary and that the queries are on leaves only. This can be achieved by connecting every internal node u to a leaf node u` with an edge of weight 0, and then standardly binarizing the tree (by inserting Opnq intermediate nodes with edge-weights 0 connecting them). Heavy path decompositions. We apply a variant of heavy path decompositions [31]. We start at the root of the tree T and repeatedly descend from the current node to its (unique) child whose subtree is of size at least |T |{2 as long as possible, that is, we terminate when there is no such child. Note that this is different than the more common versions in which we descend from the current node u to its child v with the largest subtree until (depending on the version) we reach a leaf or |Tv | ă |Tu |{2. This gives us a heavy path P starting at rootpT q and many subtrees hanging off the heavy path. We call the edges of P heavy, and all other edges outgoing from the nodes of P light. The construction is then applied recursively to all subtrees hanging off the heavy path. In the end, each node u P T has at most one heavy child, denoted heavypuq, so we obtain a decomposition of T into disjoint heavy paths (some of which consist of a single node). The light depth of a node u P T , denoted lightdepthpuq, is the number of light edges on the path from u to the root and is at most log n [30]. We order the children of every node u so that heavypuq is the rightmost child and assign preorder numbers prepuq to every node u. Then, for any node v P Tu , we have that prepvq P rprepuq, prepuq ` |Tu |q.  v u  Figure 1: On the left, a heavy path decomposition of a binary tree T . Light nodes are white, and heavy nodes are black. The heavy edges are solid, the light edges are dashed, and the exceptional edges are dashed and hollowed. On the right, the collapsed tree CpT q. The collapsed tree. Given the heavy path decomposition of a binary tree T , we define its collapsed tree, denoted CpT q, whose nodes correspond to heavy paths in T . The heavy path 4  starting at rootpT q corresponds to the root of the collapsed tree. Every light edge hanging off this heavy path corresponds to an edge outgoing from the root of CpT q, and so on. The children of every node in CpT q are ordered according to the top-to-bottom order on the hanging subtrees (i.e, if two subtrees connect to the same heavy path P then the one connecting at a lower depth is to the left of the other). Since T is binary, ties can only happen at the last node of the heavy path P , in which case we set the right subtree to be the subtree of maximum size, and call the light edge branching to the right subtree the exceptional edge associated with heavy path P . See Fig. 1 (right). Note that the height of the collapsed tree is at most log n. Every heavy path P in T is associated with a node u1 in CpT q and every node u P P is said to be associated with u1 . We refer to the node u P P closest to the root of T as the head of P and denote it as headpP q or headpu1 q. We use lightdepthpu, vq to denote lightdepthpNCApu, vqq. Finally, we say that u dominates v if the inorder number of u’s associated node in CpT q is smaller than that of v’s. Observe that (1) If the NCApu, vq-to-u path in T starts with a light edge and the NCApu, vq-to-v path starts with a heavy edge then u dominates v, and (2) If both these paths start with a light edge then the dominated vertex is the one whose path starts with the exceptional edge. Labeling schemes for NCA. A nearest common ancestor scheme assigns a unique label to every node, so that given the labels of nodes u, v we can return the label of NCApu, vq. Alstrup et al. [9] design such a scheme with labels of length Oplog nq bits. They use a heavy path decomposition that slightly differs from ours, but it can be easily verified that the following lemma still holds: Lemma 2.1 ([8, 9]). There is an NCA labeling scheme with label size Oplog nq, which given the labels of u and v returns the label of NCApu, vq as well as lightdepthpu, vq in constant time. Encoding integers. To store a single integer x, we use Elias δ codes [16] that require log x ` Oplog log xq bits. This encoding is self-delimiting, meaning we can concatenate multiple variablelength values into a single label in a way that each individual value can be decoded later. To store a monotone sequence of integers we use the following: Lemma 2.2. A monotone sequence of s integers in r0, M s can be encoded with Ops¨maxt1, log M s uq bits, so that we can: (1) extract the k th number in the sequence, (2) find the position of the successor of a given integer in the sequence, (3) given the representation of two sequences, find the longest common suffix of two specified prefixes. The first operation takes constant time, and the second and third take constant time if both s and M are Oplog nq. Proof. Let the sequence be 0 ď x1 ď x2 ď . . . ď xs ď M . The encoding consists of x1 and the differences x2 ´ x1 , x3 ´ x2 , . . . , xs ´ xs´1 . Each ř number is encoded using the Elias γ code, so the total size of the encoding becomes Ops ` si“1 logpxi ´ xi´1 qq, where x0 “ 0. By Jensen’s inequality, this is maximized when all numbers are equal, so the total size of the encoding is L “ Ops ¨ maxt1, log M s uq. To provide constant time access to every xi , we need to store some auxiliary data. We partition the universe r0, M s into blocks of length b “ M s . For each xi , we store xi mod b. This is done by reserving rlog bs bits for every i “ 1, 2, . . . , s and arranging them one after another. We also store b encoded using the Elias γ code, so that in constant time we can calculate where the rlog bs bits storing xi mod b are. This takes Oplog b ` s ` s log bq “ OpLq space so far. It 5  remains to show how to encode yi “ xi div b. Notice that 0 ď y1 ď y2 ď . . . ď ys ď s, so this is a monotone sequence of s integers from r0, ss. We encode it with a single bit vector of length at most 2s, which is the concatenation of 0yi ´yi´1 1 for i “ 1, 2, . . . , s (and y0 “ 0). Then, to extract yi we need to find the position p of the ith bit set to 1 in the bit vector and then return p ´ i ` 1. By augmenting the bit vector with a select structure of Clark [15, Chapter 2.2], which takes opsq additional bits of space, we can retrieve the ith bit set to 1 in constant time. Thus, in OpLq additional space we can encode xi mod b and xi div b, and then recover xi in constant time. To provide constant time successor queries (when both s and M are Oplog nq), we remove all duplicates and store the resulting sequence y1 ă y2 ă . . . ă yr in an additional predecessor structure from the second branch of Pǎtraşcu and Thorup [28]. This structure uses Opr ¨ log M q log M bits and answers queries in Oplog log log n q “ Op1q time. The space can be actually improved to M M Opr ¨ log r qq “ Ops ¨ maxt1, log s uq as explained in detail by Belazzougui and Navarro [12]. Finally, to compute the longest common suffixes of two specified prefixes given the encodings of x1 ď x2 ď . . . ď xs and y1 ď y2 ď . . . ď ys , we observe that for s, M “ Oplog nq the encodings fit in a constant number of machine words. Hence, we can first shift both encodings (in constant time) to reduce the problem to computing the longest common suffix. First, we check if xs “ ys . If not, we are done. Otherwise, we only need to find the longest common suffix of the sequences of differences. This can be done by first calculating the longest common suffix of their encodings, and then counting how many differences have their encodings fully in the common suffix. The former can be done in constant time using the standard word-RAM operations. The latter can be done by storing an additional bit vector of length L, where we mark the starting position of the encoding of each xi with a bit set to 1. The bit vector is augmented with the rank structure of Jacobson [23], which takes opLq additional bits and allows us to count bits set to 1 in any prefix in constant time. ph, M q-trees. To obtain a lower bound for distance labeling, Gavoille et al. [21] consider a family of rooted binary trees called ph, M q-trees. The trees are weighted and the weight of every edge is in r0, M s. For h “ 0 the tree is a single node. For h ě 1, the tree consists of a root connected to its single child with an edge of length M ´ x for some x P r0, M q, and the child is connected to two (possibly different) ph ´ 1, M q-trees with edges of length x. See Fig. 2. A lower bound for tree distance labeling is implied by the following lemma: M  x1  x1  M  x4  x2 M x4 x4  M  x2  M  x2  x5  x1 M x3  M x5 x5  x6  M x6 x6  x3 x3  x7  M x7 x7  Figure 2: A p3, M q-tree, where x1 , . . . , x7 P r0, M q.  Lemma 2.3 ([21]). For h ě 1 and M ě 2, any scheme for distance labeling in ph, M q-trees requires labels of at least h{2 ¨ log M bits, even if we only query leaves.  6  3  Distance Labeling  In this section we prove Theorem 1.1. In Section 3.1 we review the labeling scheme framework of the existing solutions (in a slightly different way), and in Section 3.2 we describe our improved solution and its analysis.  3.1  Distance Arrays  We now review the general framework for distance labeling. For each node u P T , consider the set of light edges `1 puq, . . . , `k puq along the root-to-u path. For any light edge e in the collapsed tree CpT q branching from u1 to its child v 1 let dpeq “ dpheadpu1 q, headpv 1 qq. That is, the distance along the heavy path represented by u1 to the endpoint where the light edge branches and to its other end. Let Dpuq denote the list rdp`1 puqq, . . . , dp`k puqqs, which we call the distance array of u. The next lemma shows that designing an efficient distance labeling scheme boils down to efficiently encoding distance arrays. Lemma 3.1. If we can access the elements of the distance arrays Dpuq and Dpvq then with additional Oplog nq bits we can compute dpu, vq. Proof. We first describe the additional Oplog nq-bits. They are composed of: 1. root-distancepuq, 2. the NCA label of u generated by Lemma 2.1, 3. the inorder number of the node u1 corresponding to u in CpT q (so that given u, v P T we can determine which node dominates the other). Now, suppose that u is associated with u1 P CpT q and v with v 1 P CpT q. We use (2) to determine j “ lightdepthpu, vq ` 1. We assume that the inorder number of u1 is smaller than that of v 1 (using (3) we can verify this and swap řj u with v otherwise). Thus, u dominates v, which implies that root-distancepNCApu, vqq “ i“1 dp`i puqq ´ 1. Recall from Section 2 that root-distancepNCApu, vqq together with root-distancepuq and root-distancepvq suffice to compute dpu, vq.  3.2  Modified Distance Arrays  The main challenge remaining, is how to efficiently encode Dpuq for an arbitrary node u. This can clearly be done using Θplog2 nq bits. By using properties of the heavy path decomposition, ř ř n 2 i Alstrup et al. [8] gave a more precise bound of: ki“1 log dp`i puqq “ log i“1 logpn{2 q “ 1{2 log n` Oplog nq. In their description, sums of the suffixes of Dpuq are stored instead of Dpuq itself, but this is essentially the same. Furthermore, distance arrays must be made self-delimiting by adding an additional Oplog n log log nq-bits, so we get an overall space bound of 1{2 log2 n ` Oplog n log log nq. In this section, we present an improved method and analysis for encoding the distance arrays. We show řj that our encoding uses less space, but in the process we lose the ability to compute the sum i“1 dp`i puqq, which is used to answer the query. However, in Section 3.3 we show that in fact a query can still be answered by adding only a small amount of auxiliary information. Our modified distance array D̂puq will have the following key property, which is weaker than that of the original distance array: Property 3.2. Given the modified distance arrays D̂puq and D̂pvq for leaves u, v P T such that u dominates v, we can compute the value dp`j puqq where j “ lightdepthpu, vq ` 1.  7  At a high level, the main idea behind the modified distance array is that, to reduce the number of bits stored for each distance dp`1 puqq, . . . , dp`k puqq at node u, we potentially push some of the bits to labels of nodes dominated by u. This is acceptable if our goal is to satisfy Property 3.2 since we need only compute dp`i puqq if the other queried node v is dominated by u. An important observation for the analysis later is that if `i puq is exceptional, we need not store dp`i puqq at all in order to satisfy Property 3.2. The modified distance array consists of two parts: 1. a list of truncated distances d̂p`1 puqq, . . . , d̂p`k puqq; 2. a list of accumulators ap`1 puqq, . . . , ap`k puqq. Accumulator ap`i puqq will potentially (but not necessarily) store some of the bits of the distances dp`i pvqq where v is a node that dominates u, and i “ lightdepthpu, vq ` 1. The construction of the labels is recursive: Consider the heavy path P extending from the root of T . Let n1 , . . . , nm`1 be the sizes of the subtrees T1 , . . . , Tm`1 hanging from P via light edges e1 , . . . , em`1 , where em`1 is the exceptional edge. The edges e1 , . . . , em`1 are ordered according to their left-to-right order in the collapsed tree, and we use w1 , . . . , wm to denote the nodes in P from which e1 , . . . , em branch (em`1 also branches from wm ). See Fig. 3. We 1 rooted at nodes w , . . . , w . For use n11 , . . . , n1m to denote the sizes of the subtrees T11 , . . . , Tm 1 m 1 1 consistency, nm`1 denotes the size of Tm`1 “ Tm`1 . Note that, for an arbitrary node u P Ti we have that `1 puq “ ei .  P  T10  w1  T20  e1 w2 T1  T30  e2  T40  w3 T2  e3 w4 T3  e4 T4  e5  T5  1 . The edge e is Figure 3: A heavy path P and the subtrees T1 , . . . , Tm`1 and T11 , . . . , Tm 5 exceptional.  For an arbitrary node u P Ti where i P r1, ms, we assume that we have some encoding of its modified distance array excluding the encoding of dpei q “ dp`1 puqq using plog2 ni ` log ni log qq{4 bits, where q is a parameter to be fixed later. We call this encoding the recursive problem, and the problem of encoding dp`1 puqq the top-level problem. Recall that if i “ m ` 1 (i.e., u P Tm`1 ) we need not encode the distance dpem`1 q, since that edge is exceptional. We analyze the space of the top-level problem for Ti1 for i “ m, m ´ 1, . . . , 1 (i.e., from bottom to top), bounding the overall label size in terms of n1i . The goal of each iteration is to produce labels for Ti1 of size plog2 n1i ` log n1i log qq{4. Consider the labels generated in the 1 recursive problem for nodes in Ti and in the previous iteration for Ti`1 (or, if i “ m, in the recursive problem for Tm`1 ). The following two lemmas show how many bits we can spend to generate the labels for nodes in Ti1 . Note that these lemmas ignore the cost of making the 8  encoding self-delimiting, as well the fact that we must take the ceiling of the bound because we cannot store a fraction of a bit. We handle these issues later. Lemma 3.3 (Slack Lemma). Assume that the recursive problem for nodes in Ti can be solved by storing an encoding of size plog2 ni ` log ni log qq{4 bits for some parameter q. If ni “ p ¨ n1i and p ě 1{q then we can spend additional 1{2 logp1{pq log n1i bits on the top-level problem for nodes in Ti to obtain an encoding of size plog2 n1i ` log n1i log qq{4 bits. Proof. To prove the lemma it is enough to calculate the difference between the size of the final encoding and the encoding for the recursive problem: “ plog2 n1i ` log q log n1i q{4 ´ plog2 pp ¨ n1i q ` log q logpp ¨ n1i qq{4 “ plog2 n1i ` log q log n1i ´ plog p ` log n1i q2 ´ log q log p ´ log q log n1i q{4 “ plog2 n1i ` log q log n1i ´ log2 p ´ 2 log p log n1i ´ log2 n1i ´ log q log p ´ log q log n1i q{4 “ p´ log2 p ´ 2 log p log n1i ´ log q log pq{4 “ p2 logp1{pq log n1i ` log q logp1{pq ´ log2 p1{pqq{4 “ p2 logp1{pq log n1i ` logp1{pqplog q ´ logp1{pqq{4 ě 1{2 logp1{pq log n1i . Additionally, we have the following: Lemma 3.4 (Thin Lemma). Assume that the recursive problem for nodes in Ti can be solved by storing an encoding of size plog2 ni ` log ni log qq{4 bits for some parameter q ě 2. If ni “ p ¨ n1i and p ď 1{28 then we can spend additional 2 log n1i bits on the top-level problem for nodes in Ti to obtain an encoding of size plog2 n1i ` log n1i log qq{4 bits. Proof. Similarly as in the proof of Lemma 3.3, we calculate the difference: “ plog2 n1i ` log q log n1i q{4 ´ plog2 pp ¨ n1i q ´ log q logpp ¨ n1i qq{4 “ p2 logp1{pq log n1i ` logp1{pqplog q ´ logp1{pqq{4. Now, assuming that 2 log n1i is larger than the difference and using that p ě 1{n1i we obtain: 2 log n1i ą 1{2 logp1{pq log n1i ` 1{4 logp1{pq log q ´ 1{4 log2 p1{pq ě 1{2 logp1{pq log n1i ´ 1{4 log2 p1{pq ě 1{2 logp1{pq log n1i ´ 1{4 logp1{pq log n1i “ 1{4 logp1{pq log n1i so, after dividing by log n1i , 8 ą logp1{pq and p ą 1{28 . Hence for p ď 1{28 we can indeed use 2 log n1i additional bits. We call Ti thin if ni ď n1i {28 , and fat otherwise. We observe that, by the definition of the heavy path decomposition, log n ď logp2n1i q ď 2 log n1i . Thus, an immediate consequence of Lemma 3.4 is that if Ti is thin, then we can afford to store dpei q explicitly as d̂pei q, without having to push any bits to the accumulators of nodes in Ti`1 , . . . , Tm`1 . However, if Ti is fat, Lemma 3.3 indicates that we do not have enough slack to store all the bits of dpei q. Instead, we store as many bits as the slack allows (rounding up to the nearest bit) in the labels of nodes u in Ti . We then append all the remaining bits to the accumulators ap`i pvqq of all nodes Ťm`1 v P j“i`1 Tj (i.e., nodes dominated by u). Because Ti is fat, by the slack lemma for nodes in Ti we have slack 1{2 logpn1i {ni q log n1i (the assumption that Ti is fat allows us to adjust the constant q). On the other hand, using the same 1 calculations as in the slack lemma, the nodes in Ti`1 have slack 1{2 logpn1i {n1i`1 q log n1i : note that 9  1 the size of Ti`1 is larger than n1i {28 by the properties of the heavy path decomposition, as either i ă m and n1i`1 ě n{2, or i “ m and then ni`1 ě ni so n1i`1 ě n{4´1{2. Since n1i ą ni `n1i`1 , we have that the sum 1{2plogpn1i {ni q`logpn1i {n1i`1 qq log n1i can be lower bounded by the minimum of 1{2plogp1 ` xq ` logp1 ` x´1 qq log ni for x P p0, 8q. Thus, the slack is at least log n1i bits in total. However, the distance dp`puq1 q occupies log n bits, rather than log n1i . As before, we can use the properties of the heavy path decomposition to bound log n ď logp2n1i q “ 1 ` log n1i . Thus, dp`1 puqq occupies one extra bit more than we have accounted for with the slack. We store this extra bit in the truncated distance d̂p`1 puqq. Therefore, the truncated distance d̂p`1 puqq consists of the most significant r1{2 logpn1i {ni q log n1i s ` 1 bits of dp`i puqq. The remaining least significant t1{2 logpn1i {n1i`1 q log n1i u bits are concatenated to the accumulators of the nodes dominated by u in Ti`1 , . . . , Tm`1 . For each entry in the modified distance array for a node u, we are pushing at most two extra bits beyond those accounted for in the slack lemma. Thus, this works out to an additional Oplog nq-bits in total, per label. We make both parts of the modified distance array (the accumulators and truncated distances) self-delimiting, and also record, for each truncated distance, the number of bits pushed to the accumulators of dominated nodes. Overall, we end up with the following:  Lemma 3.5. The modified distance array D̂puq occupies at most 1{4 log2 n ` Oplog n log log nq bits. It remains to show that these modified distance arrays satisfy Property 3.2. To see this, consider the modified distance array for u and v, where j “ lightdepthpu, vq ` 1, and u dominates v. We have stored the number of bits that were pushed to the accumulator ap`j pvqq explicitly. The starting position of this contiguous range of bits can be found by noticing that the accumulator ap`j puqq is a suffix of ap`j pvqq, since all nodes that dominate u also dominate v. Hence, knowing the length of the accumulator ap`j puqq allows us to determine the starting position and, together with the explicitly stored number of pushed bits, recover the bits themselves. By combining them with d̂p`j puqq we can reconstruct dp`j puqq. We have therefore satisfied Property 3.2. It remains to show why this is enough for a distance query. In Section 3.3 we show that it is, with only additional lower order terms to the label size.  3.3  Wrapping Up the Proof of Theorem 1.1  In order to prove Theorem 1.1 we need to show how to answer a distance query without inflating the space of Lemma 3.5 by more than lower order terms. 1 P CpT q, and consider the Let u be some node contained in the heavy path mapped to u? 1 path from u to the root of CpT q. We partition this path into B “ log n fragments. The first fragment is the prefix starting at the root, denoted f0 puq, and terminating at the first node f1 puq such that the subtree rooted at headpf1 puqq has size at most n{2B . The i-th fragment is defined recursively from fi´1 puq, ending at a node fi puq such ? that the subtree rooted at headpfi puqq iB has size at most n{2 , for i P r1, hs, where h “ Op log nq. We explicitly store the distances dpfi puq, rootpT qq for each i P r1, hs as the fragment distance array F puq. Next, consider a light edge e in CpT q that branches from the heavy path corresponding to 1 u to the heavy path corresponding to v 1 . Recall that, in bounding the number of bits for the modified distance arrays, we used the fact that if the subtree rooted at headpu1 q has size n, then the distance, r “ dpheadpu1 q, headpv 1 qq, associated with the light edge e is bounded by n. Instead of recording this distance r, for each node u that stores r we instead record the distance r1 “ dpheadpfj puqq, headpv 1 qq, where j is the largest index such that the subtree rooted at headpfj puqq contains node headpv 1 q. ? Obviously, r1 requires more bits to store than r, Op log nq additional bits to be precise. However, since there ? are at most log n truncated distances in D̂puq, we can afford to inflate each of these by Op log nq bits. This only increases the lower order space term to Oplog1.5 nq 10  bits. Furthermore, for each truncated distance, we can also afford to store the corresponding index j from the fragment array using Oplog n log log nq extra bits. Thus, since Property 3.2 still holds after expanding the truncated distances, we can now recover r1 and read dpfj puq, rootpT qq from F puq. These two values sum to dpheadpu1 q, rootpT qq, which is exactly what we wanted to compute with distance arrays. The proof of Theorem 1.1 follows from the above 1{4 log2 n ` oplog2 nq-bit labeling scheme and the fact that we only need to label leaves and can assume T is binary (see Section 2).  3.4  Query Time Analysis  Up until now we have not discussed how long it takes to compute the distance given two labels for nodes u and v. Let us summarize the steps that are required to answer a query: 1. Ensure u dominates v, and swap them if that is not the case. This can be done by examining the inorder number for u and v, which are explicitly stored; Lemma 3.1 item (3). 2. Extract the explicitly stored distances of u and v from the root; Lemma 3.1 item (1). 3. Compute the index j “ lightdepthpu, vq ` 1, this is done using the explicitly stored NCA encoding; Lemma 3.1 item (2). 4. Extract the truncated distance d̂p`j puqq from array D̂puq. Note that D̂puq contains Oplog nq values, and has length Oplog2 nq bits. 5. Extract the accumulator values ap`j puqq from array D̂puq and ap`j pvqq from array D̂pvq. 6. Extract explicitly stored lengths of accumulator values ap`j puqq and ap`j pvqq. Note that there are Oplog nq explicitly stored lengths, and these lengths occupy Oplog n log log nq bits. 7. Use bitwise arithmetic to extract the relevant bits of ap`j pvqq which are then concatenated with d̂p`j puqq. This can be done with a constant number of shifts, bitwise and/or operations, and subtractions. 8. Extract the fragment number for j, as well as the fragment distance from array F puq. There are Oplog nq fragment numbers, occupying a total of Oplog n log log nq bits, and a ? total of Op log nq fragment distances, occupying a total of Oplog1.5 nq bits. 9. Compute the overall distance using addition and subtraction. With the exception of accessing the values stored in the various arrays just mentioned, all steps clearly take constant time. It remains to show how to access each array element in constant time (without increasing the space bound by more than a lower order term). First, we explicitly store the offsets of each of the (constant number of) data structures mentioned above (arrays, individual values, and the NCA labeling) for each label in a header, which is encoded using Elias δ codes in order to be self-delimiting. This header occupies at most Oplog nq bits, and provides constant time access to each data structure. Next we discuss how to access the array elements in constant time. Earlier, we mentioned that we used Elias δ codes to delimit each array element and then concatenate their encodings. Now, for each array that occupies x bits in total and stores y elements, let p1 ă p2 ă . . . ă py be the positions of the first bit of the encoding of each element in the concatenation. We apply Lemma 2.2 to this sequence. This takes Opx ¨ maxt1, log xy uq and allows us to calculate the first and the last bit of the encoding of any element in constant time. For each of our arrays, x “ Oplog nq and y “ Oplog2 nq, so storing the sequences increases the total space by only Oplog n log log nq bits. Since there is a constant number of arrays, we can afford to mark the location of their corresponding sequences in the header using Oplog nq bits. Then, each array access can be performed in constant time. 11  3.5  Lower bound for the Level-Ancestor Problem  In this section we prove Theorem 1.2. The main idea of the proof is to show a lower bound for the parent problem, where the goal is to assign a distinct label to every u P T so that given the label of u we can return the label of its parent (or a special value K denoting that u “ rootpT q. This is clearly a special case of the level-ancestor problem. The lower bound is obtained by showing a correspondence between the parent problem and the following universal tree problem: what is the size of the smallest rooted tree containing any rooted tree on n nodes as a subtree? The connection between these two problems is captured by the following lemma. Lemma 3.6. If there exists a labeling scheme for the parent problem on trees of size n that produces labels of size at most Spnq, then there exists a universal rooted tree containing all rooted trees on up to n nodes as subtrees of size Op2Spnq q. Proof. The proof is by construction. Let V be the set of all possible labels generated by the labeling scheme, and E be the directed edges between these labels defined as follows: if, a label u is assigned to a node of some tree, and v ­“ K is the label returned by the scheme for u, then pu, vq belongs to E. Note that v is determined solely from the bits of u, hence the graph G “ pV, Eq consists of one or more directed cycles. See Fig. 4 (left) for an example of such a graph. It is clear that G must contain any tree T on up to n nodes as a subgraph, since the labeling scheme works for all trees on n nodes or less. G is not necessarily a tree itself, but we now describe a general procedure that converts G into a new graph G1 “ pV 1 , E 1 q that itself is a rooted tree, and is such that that |V 1 | ď 2|V | ` 1. Each weakly connected component of G is either already a tree, or contains a cycle. In the latter case, we arbitrarily remove an edge pu, vq from the cycle (in the figure the chosen edge is intersected by the dashed line). After deleting pu, vq we duplicate the entire weakly connected component, and add a new edge pu, v 1 q where v 1 is the duplicate of v. After doing this for each weakly connected component, we have increased the number of vertices to at most 2|V |, and the resultant graph G1 is a forest of rooted trees. We add a single global root to make G1 a rooted tree. The total number of nodes in G1 is hence at most 2|V | ` 1. Since G was a universal graph for rooted trees on n nodes, any rooted tree not containing the deleted edge clearly appears as a subgraph in G1 . Moreover, for any rooted tree T containing pu, vq, there exists some subpath of the cycle in G which was in T . Since we duplicated each node in the cycle, it is clear that any such subpath also exists in G1 (together with any trees rooted at nodes in the subpath), thus, T appears as a subtree in G1 . The final detail is to consider the maximum length label output by the labeling scheme, which consists of Spnq bits. Hence, there are at most 2Spnq nodes in G and therefore at most Op2Spnq q nodes in G1 . Equipped with the previous lemma, we immediately get a lower bound on Spnq, provided we have a lower bound on the number of nodes in such a rooted universal tree. Goldberg and Lifschitz [22] have proved very accurate bounds on the number of nodes in such rooted universal trees (see [14] for the bound as we state it): Lemma 3.7 ([14, 22]). The smallest rooted tree containing all rooted trees on up to n nodes as subtrees has size nplog n´2 log log n`Op1qq{2 . By combining Lemmas 3.6 and 3.7, Theorem 1.2 follows immediately.  3.6  Effective Level-Ancestor Scheme  While Alstrup et al. [8] describe their scheme in terms of labeling for distance queries, in fact it is not difficult to tweak it to obtain a scheme for level-ancestor queries. We describe the necessary modifications to obtain a scheme for parent queries, i.e., assign distinct labels to every node 12  u  v  u v0  v  u0  Figure 4: Converting a weakly connected component to a rooted tree G1 by duplicating the path at the dotted line. u P T so that given the label of u we can return the label of its parent. This immediately implies a scheme for level-ancestor queries by repeatedly moving to the parent as long as necessary. The labeling consists of three parts. For a node u on a heavy path P we store: 1. dpu, rootpT qq, 2. the Oplog nq label generated by Lemma 2.1 applied on headpP q, 3. the array Dpuq and, additionally, dpu, headpP qq. (This is differently phrased but essentially equivalent to what the original labeling stores.) The labels in the NCA scheme are required to be distinct, so the labels of nodes belonging to different heavy paths are distinct. For two nodes on the same heavy path, storing dpu, headpP qq explicitly ensures that their labels are not the same. Each label consists of 1{2 log2 n ` Oplog nq bits, because of the bound on the encoding of Dpuq. We need to argue that given the label of u ­“ K we can construct the label of its parent. The NCA labeling scheme from Lemma 2.1 has the property that the label of every node u is a concatenation of heavy and light labels h0 .`1 .h1 .`2 . . . `k .hk . These labels uniquely determine the path from the root to u: h0 encodes how far along the heavy path starting at the root we should continue. Then, either k “ 0 and u in fact lies on the heavy path starting at the root, or `1 encodes which light edge outgoing from the current node should be followed. Finally, h1 .`2 . . . `k .hk recursively encodes the remaining part of the path to u in the subtree hanging off the heavy path starting at the root. It is not necessarily true that given the NCA label of a node u we can determine the NCA label of its parent. However, by truncating the NCA label of u we can construct the NCA label of the parent of headpP q. Given the label of u, we construct the label of its parent u1 as follows. dpu, rootpT qq needs to be decreased by 1. Then we inspect dpu, headpP qq. If u ‰ headpP q, we decrease dpu, headpP qq by 1 and are done. Otherwise, we can use the NCA label of u to determine the label of its parent as explained above. Let P 1 be the heavy path of u1 . The last element of the array D is dpu, headpP 1 qq, so by subtracting 1 we obtain dpu1 , headpP 1 qq. Finally, we remove the last element of D.  4  k-Distance Labeling  In this section we prove Theorem 1.3. Recall that in k-distance labeling, given the labels of u and v we need to decide if the length of the u-to-v path is at most k, and if so return it.  13  4.1  Lower Bound for Small k  We define a family of trees and show that labeling the leaves of all trees in that family for n k-distance queries requires log n ` Ωpk ¨ log klog log k q-bits. An ~x-regular tree, where ~x “ px1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , xk q P Nk , is a rooted tree of height k where all depth-i nodes have the same degree xi`1 . An p~x, h, dq-regular tree, where px1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , xk q “ ~x P rhsk , is a ~y -regular tree with ~y “ pdx1 , dh´x1 , dx2 , dh´x2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , dxk , dh´xk q. The total number of leaves in such a tree is dk¨h . See Fig. 5 for an example.  Figure 5: p~x, d, hq-regular tree with ~x “ p1, 2q and d “ h “ 2 We consider p~x, h, dq-regular trees for some parameters h and d to be chosen later. Consider a labeling scheme that assigns a label to every leaf of such a tree for 2k-distance queries. The following lemma shows that a p~x, h, dq-regular tree and a p~y , h, dq-regular tree cannot share many identical labels. More formally, let commonp~x, ~y q denote the maximum number of labels that can be used in both trees. The following is an upper bound on the sum of commonp~x, ~y q. ´ ´ ¯¯k ř 2 Lemma 4.1. ~x,~yPrhsk commonp~x, ~y q ď h ¨ dh 1 ` d´1 . ś Proof. We first prove that commonp~x, ~y q ď ki“1 dmintxi ,yi u dh´maxtxi ,yi u . By asking all 2k-distance queries between a specified subset S of leaves of the p~x, h, dq-regular tree we can recover the shape of the subtree induced by S. Hence, if two trees share commonp~x, ~y q labels, then they must have a common isomorphic subtree on commonp~x, ~y q leaves. To bound the maximum number of leaves in such a subtree, observe that the degree of a node at depth 2i´2 is at most mintdxi , dyi u, and the degree of a node at depth 2i´1 is at most mintdh´xi , dh´yi u. The maximum number of shared labels is hence product of all these quantities over i “ 1, . . . , k. śk themintx i ,yi u dh´maxtxi ,yi u . It then follows that We conclude that that commonp~x, ~y q ď i“1 d ÿ  commonp~x, ~y q “  ÿ  k ź  dmintxi ,yi u dh´maxtxi ,yi u  ~ x,~ y Prhsk i“1  ~ x,~ y Prhsk  k ź  ÿ  “  dmintx,yu dh´maxtx,yu  i“1 1ďx,yďh k ź  “  ph ¨ dh ` 2  k ź  ph ¨ dh ` 2  h´1 ÿ  i“1  x“1  k ź  h´1 ÿ  “  dx dh´y q  xăy  i“1  “  ÿ  ph ¨ dh ` 2  x“1  i“1  dx  h´x´1 ÿ y“0  dx  dh´x ´ 1 q d´1  k ź dh ď ph ¨ dh ` 2 ¨ h q d´1 i“1  14  dy q  ˆ “  ˆ h¨d 1` h  2 d´1  ˙˙k .  Since the total number of leaves in the p~x, h, dq-regular trees family is dk¨h ¨ hk , the number of distinct labels required to label them is thus at least: dk¨h ¨hk ´  ÿ  commonp~x, ~y q “ dk¨h ¨hk ´  ~ xă~ y  1 ÿ 3 1 commonp~x, ~y q “ ¨dk¨h ¨hk ´ 2 2 2 ~ x‰~ y  ÿ  commonp~x, ~y q.  ~ x,~ y Prhsk  ř 1 Now we set d “ 2k`1, and since p1` k1 q ď e k we have from Lemma 4.1 that ~x,~y commonp~x, ~y q ď e ¨ dk¨h ¨ hk , so the number of unique labels is at least: p3{2 ´ e{2q ¨ dk¨h ¨ hk ą 0.1 ¨ dk¨h ¨ hk . Setting n “ dk¨h this becomes 0.1 ¨ hk ¨ n, making the number of required bits at least: log n ` k log h ´ Op1q “ log n ` k log  log n log n ´ Op1q “ log n ` Ωpk ¨ log q. k log d k log k  Note that for the above calculation to make sense, we need that dk ď n.  4.2  Lower Bound for Large k  The lower bound from Section 4.1 is not meaningful for large values of k P rlog n, ns. In this section we show that the lower bound of Gavoille et al. [21] for general distance queries, can be translated into a lower bound of Ωplog n ¨ logpk{ log nqq for k-distance queries. The lower bound uses the family of ph, M q-trees (see Section 2). Recall that every edge of an ph, M q-tree has a weight from r0, M s. It is easy to verify that the number of nodes in such a tree is 3 ¨ 2h ´ 2, hence the distance between any two leaves is no more than 2hM . If M ď k{p2hq then, because the distance between any two leaves in the tree is at most 2hM ď k, any labeling of the leaves for k-distance can be used for general distance labeling. By Lemma a 2.3, such a labeling scheme would require labels of at least h{2 ¨ log M -bits. We set h “ log n{3 and M “ mintk{2h, 2h u. Then, by subdividing the edges of an ph, M q-tree we obtain an unweighted tree on at most n nodes. Labeling the leaves of such a tree for k-distance can be used for general distance labeling of the ph, M q-tree, so we obtain the following lower bounds: (1) if  k 2h  ď 2h , the number of required bits is  (2) if  k 2h  ą 2h , the number of required bits is  4.3  h 2 h 2  k ¨ log 2h “ Ωplog n ¨ log logk n q;  ¨ h “ Ωplog2 nq, so Ωplog n ¨ log logk n q for k ď n.  Upper Bound  In this section we present our improved upper bound for k-distance labeling. We build upon the ideas of Alstrup, Bille, and Rauhe [5], who presented an log n ` Opk 2 logpk log nqq bits labeling scheme. As a preliminary step, we will show an Oplog k ¨ log nq bits scheme for k ě log n, and then move to the more complicated log n ` Opk log logk n q bits scheme for k ă log n. Consider the heavy path decomposition of T . We define the light range of u, denoted Lu , to contain the preorder number of all nodes in Tu if u has no heavy child, and all nodes in Tu zTheavypuq otherwise. We say that v is a significant ancestor of u if prepuq P Lv . For example, in Fig. 1 v is a significant ancestor of u since the light range of v is Lv “ r5, 23q. The number of significant ancestors of u is equal to lightdepthpuq “ Oplog nq. The nearest common significant ancestor of u and v, denoted NCSApu, vq, is w such that prepwq is as large as possible and w is a significant ancestor of both u and v. In other words, w is the first significant ancestor on the path from u to the root, which is also a significant ancestor of v. The heavy path P such that headpP q is a child of NCSApu, vq is called the nearest common heavy path of u and v and denoted 15  NCHpu, vq. When there is no common significant ancestor for u and v we set NCSApu, vq to nil and NCHpu, vq to be the heavy path starting at the root. Let the significant ancestors of u and v on NCHpu, vq be u1 and v 1 , respectively. Then dpu, vq “ dpu, u1 q ` dpu1 , v 1 q ` dpv, v 1 q. Computing dpu, vq consists of two steps: 1. identifying NCHpu, vq, u1 and v 1 , and computing dpu, u1 q and dpv, v 1 q, 2. computing dpu1 , v 1 q. We describe these steps separately, and then describe how to implement them in constant time. Identifying NCHpu, vq. For an integer range A “ ra, bs Ă r1, ns we define its identifier idpAq by considering a binary trie representing all words of length rlog ns. The label of a node u in the trie is the concatenation of the labels of the edges on the path from the root to u. Every integer x P r1, ns corresponds to a leaf u in the trie, such that the label of u is the binary expansion of x. Then, NCApa, bq is the nearest common ancestor of the leaves corresponding to a and b in the trie, heightpAq is the height of the subtree rooted at NCApa, bq, and finally idpAq is the label of NCApa, bq. Observation 4.2. For any range A: 1. idpAq can be computed given heightpAq and any x P A, 2. A X B “ H ùñ idpBq ‰ idpAq. Alstrup, Bille, and Rauhe [5] use the notion of significant preorder numbers. We replace it with our notion of range identifier, that has very similar properties, yet is somewhat easier to operate on (and hence we are able to achieve much better query time). For any node u P T , let idpuq “ pidpLu q, lightdepthpuqq. Lemma 4.3. For any nodes u, v P T , if u ‰ v then idpuq ‰ idpvq. Proof. If lightdepthpuq ‰ lightdepthpvq then we are done. Otherwise, Lv and Lu are disjoint, so by Observation 4.2.2 idpLv q ‰ idpLu q and we are also done. Consider a node u P T and let u “ u0 , u1 , u2 , . . . be all of its significant ancestors in the order in which they appear on the path from u to rootpT q. Let ur be the last of these ancestors such that dpu, ur q ď k. We call ur the top significant ancestor of u. The label of u consists of prepuq, lightdepthpuq, and an encoding of heightpLui q for every i “ 0, 1, . . . , r. By Observation 4.2.1 this is enough to compute idpui q for every i “ 0, 1, . . . , r. Consequently, given the labels of u and v, we can either detect that the distance from u or v to NCApu, vq exceeds k, or calculate lightdepthpNCSApu, vqq. To encode heightpLvi q for every i “ 0, 1, . . . , r, we observe that Lvi Ď Lvi`1 and that r ď mintlog n, ku. Hence, we need to encode a non-decreasing sequence of mintlog n, ku numbers from r0, log ns. By Lemma 2.2, for k ă log n this can be done using Opk log logk n q bits and for k ě log n using Oplog nq bits, and allows us to calculate lightdepthpNCSApu, vqq or detect that dpu, vq ą k. We encode in the label of u the distance from u to ui for every i “ 0, 1, . . . , r ´ 1. Because 0 “ dpu, u0 q ă dpu, u1 q ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă dpu, ur´1 q ď k we need to encode an increasing sequence of mintlog n, ku numbers from the range r0, ks. By Lemma 2.2, if k ă log n this can be done using Opkq bits and if k ě log n using Oplog n ¨ log logk n q bits. Then, after having found lightdepthpNCSApu, vqq we can compute dpu, u1 q and dpv, v 1 q.  16  w u0 v0  u  v  Figure 6: w “ NCSApu, vq, u1 and v 1 are the significant ancestors of u and v on NCHpu, vq, respectively. Significant ancestors are white, heavy edges are solid, and light edges are dashed.  Computing dpu1 , v 1 q. Recall that u1 and v 1 are the significants ancestors on the NCHpu, vq of u and v, respectively. We want to compute dpu1 , v 1 q. If u1 is not the top significant ancestor of u and v 1 is not the top significant ancestor of v 1 then from the distances encoded in the labels of u and v we can retrieve dpu1 , NCSApu, vqq and dpv 1 , NCSApu, vqq, and return their absolute difference as dpu1 , v 1 q. Now consider the case that u1 is the top significant ancestor of u, but v 1 is not the top significant ancestor of v. To deal with this case, the label of u should also encode the distance α from u1 to the head of it’s heavy path. This distance might be very large (even up to n), so we cap it at 2k ` 1 to use only Oplog kq bits. Since v 1 is not the top significant ancestor of v, we can retrieve β “ dpv 1 , NCSApu, vqq as in the previous case. We know that β ď k because otherwise v 1 would be the top significant ancestor of v. Recall that dpu1 , v 1 q is equal to the absolute difference between dpu1 , NCSApu, vqq and dpv 1 , NCSApu, vqq. If α “ 2k ` 1 then this value must exceed k, so we terminate. Otherwise, we return |α ´ β|. The remaining and most complicated case is when u1 is the top significant ancestor of u and v 1 is the top significant ancestor of v 1 . If k ą log n, the solution is simple, as we can afford to store the distance from the top significant ancestor to the head of its heavy path for every node (i.e., dpu, ur`1 q) using Oplog nq bits. The rest of this section is dedicated for solving k ď log n. To make the further exposition more concise, we define the 2-approximation of an integer x, denoted txu2 , as the largest power of 2 not exceeding x. That is, txu2 “ 2tlog xu . Clearly, 2-approximation is monotone, meaning that x ď y implies txu2 ď tyu2 , and furthermore txu2 ă t2xu2 . Lemma 4.4. Let A, B, C be three open intervals such that A X B “ H and A, B Ď C. Then t|C|u2 ‰ t|A|u2 or t|C|u2 ‰ t|B|u2 . Proof. Assume that |B| ď |A|. Then 2|B| ď |A| ` |B| ď |C| and by the properties of 2approximation t|B|u2 ă t|C|u2 , so indeed t|B|u2 ‰ t|C|u2 . Symmetrically, if |A| ď |B| then t|A|u2 ‰ t|C|u2 . The following lemma captures the essence of the k-distance scheme of Alstrup, Bille, and Rauhe [5], while being optimized so that we can obtain our improvement. Lemma 4.5. Consider an increasing sequence of integers a1 ă a2 ă . . . ă as . Given ai ă aj , i1 “ i mod k, j 1 “ j mod k, and tai`t ´ ai u2 and taj ´ aj´t u2 for every t “ 1, 2, . . . , k we can calculate j ´ i or determine that j ´ i ą k in constant time. Proof. We start by setting t “ j 1 ´ i1 . Now either t “ j ´ i or j ´ i ě k ` t. Hence we only need to distinguish between these two cases.  17  Consider three intervals pai , ai`t q, paj´t , aj q and pai , aj q. If t “ j ´i then these three intervals are equal and so are tai`t ´ ai u2 , taj ´ aj´t u2 and taj ´ ai u2 . Otherwise j ´ i ě k ` t ą 2t, so pai , ai`t q and paj´t , aj q are two disjoint intervals contained in pai , aj q. Hence by Lemma 4.4 either tai`t ´ ai u2 ‰ taj ´ ai u2 or taj ´ aj´t u2 ‰ taj ´ ai u2 . Therefore after retrieving tai`t ´ ai u2 and taj ´ aj´t u2 and calculating taj ´ ai u2 we can distinguish between the two cases and either return j ´ i or report that j ´ i ą k. Notice that taj ´ ai u2 can be calculated in constant time using standard word-RAM operations. We need to show that, for every heavy path, we store enough information for applying Lemma 4.5. Consider a heavy path u1 ´ u2 ´ . . . ´ us , where u1 is the head. By the properties of the heavy path decomposition, idpLu1 q ă idpLu2 q ă . . . ă idpLus q. The label of every u P T such that ui is the top significant ancestor of u encodes the following: 1. idpLui q; 2. tidpLui`t q ´ idpLui qu2 and tidpLui q ´ idpLui´t qu2 for every t “ 1, 2, . . . , k; 3. i mod k. To encode idpLui q, we store heightpLui q using Oplog log nq bits. Encoding tidpLui`t q ´ idpLui qu2 and tidpLui q ´ idpLui´t qu2 for every t “ 1, 2, . . . , k reduces to encoding two non-decreasing sequences of k integers from r0, log ns. By Lemma 2.2, such a sequence can be stored using Opk log logk n q-bits. Finally, i mod k is encoded using Oplog kq bits. Notice that both Oplog log nq and Oplog kq are absorbed by Opk log logk n q. To conclude, given the labels of u and v, whose significant ancestors u1 and v 1 are on NCHpu, vq “ u1 ´ u2 ´ . . . ´ us and are both the top significant ancestors, we can now calculate dpu1 , v 1 q or detect that it exceeds k by retrieving the necessary information from the labels of u and v and then applying Lemma 4.5. Finally, in the following section (4.4) we show that queries can be supported in constant time. The gist of the improvement in the query time is that idpLui q can be obtained from prepuq by truncating the last heightpLui q trailing bits and setting the heightpLui qth bit to 1.  4.4  Query Time Analysis  We now show how to implement the query in constant time. The main difficulty is in determining lightdepthpNCSApu, vqq efficiently. Once it is known, from lightdepthpuq and the encoding of the distances from u to its significant ancestors implemented with Lemma 2.2 we obtain dpu, u1 q in constant time, and similarly for dpv, v 1 q (or conclude that dpu, vq exceeds k). Calculating dpu1 , v 1 q requires invoking Lemma 4.5 while providing access to the stored non-decreasing sequences of 2-approximations with Lemma 2.2, so also takes only constant time. Recall that the label of u contains prepuq, lightdepthpuq, and an encoding of the sequence heightpLu0 q ď heightpLu1 q ď ¨ ¨ ¨ ď heightpLur q implemented with Lemma 2.2. Similarly, the label of v contains prepvq, lightdepthpvq, and heightpLv0 q ď heightpLv1 q ď ¨ ¨ ¨ ď heightpLvs q. We want to calculate lightdepthpNCSApu, vqq. For now, we assume that r “ s and lightdepthpui q “ lightdepthpvi q for every i “ 0, 1, . . . , r. Then, calculating lightdepthpNCSApu, vqq reduces to finding the smallest i such that ui “ vi . Notice that then uj “ vj for every j “ i, i ` 1, . . . , r. If uj “ vj then clearly heightpLuj q “ heightpLvj q, so we start with locating the smallest i1 such that heightpLuj q “ heightpLvj q for every j “ i1 , i1 ` 1, . . . , r. This can be done in constant time by computing the longest common suffix of both sequences. Because lightdepthpuj q “ lightdepthpvj q for every j “ 0, 1, . . . , r, it remains to find the smallest i ě i1 such that idpLuj q “ idpLvj q for every j “ i, i ` 1, . . . , r. Observe that idpLuj q is obtained by clearing all heightpLuj q least significant bits of prepuq and, if heightpLuj q ą 0, setting the heightpLuj qth bit to 1, and similarly for idpLvj q. Without loss of generality, assume that 18  heightpLui1 q “ heightpLvi1 q ą 0 (if not, i “ i1 is checked separately in constant time). We find the longest common prefix of the binary expansions of prepuq and prepvq, i.e., the smallest ` ě 0 such that their binary expansions are the same after truncating the ` least significant bits. ` can be found in constant time using standard word-RAM operations MSBpprepuq XOR prepvqq. Then, for idpLui q “ idpLvi q to hold, we need to clear at least ` least significant bits of prepuq and prepvq. Hence it remains to find the smallest i ě i1 such that heightpLui q “ heightpLvi q ě i. Such an i can be found in constant time with a successor query on the encoded sequence. If r ‰ s or lightdepthpu0 q ‰ lightdepthpv0 q, then essentially the same argument works, except that we need to compute the longest common prefix of suffixes instead of whole sequences.  5  Approximate Distance Labeling  In this section we prove Theorem 1.4. Recall that in p1 ` εq-approximate distance labeling, given the labels of u and v we need to output some value in the interval rdpu, vq, p1 ` εq ¨ dpu, vqs.  5.1  Lower bound  To show the lower bound we modify the family of ph, M q-trees such that exact distances between leaves can be inferred from their approximate distances. Thereafter, we can invoke Lemma 2.3 to establish the lower bound. An ph, M q-tree is modified by first subdividing its edges to obtain an unweighted tree of height h ¨ M . The edges ofXthis unweighted \ tree are then further subdivided: every edge of depth hM ´d d ě 0 is subdivided into p1 ` εq edges. Note that in the original ph, M )-tree all leaves are at the same distance from the root. if the distance between two leaves is 2k in \ ř X Therefore, the original tree, it is f pkq “ 2 ki“1 p1 ` εqi in the final tree. A p1 ` εq-approximation of this distance belongs to the interval rf pkq, p1 ` εqf pkqs. We next show that these intervals are disjoint, so in fact a p1 ` εq-approximation of f pkq is enough to infer the original distance, 2k. Observe that f pkq is monotone, so to prove that the intervals rf pkq, p1 ` εqf pkqs are disjoint, it is enough to show that p1 ` εqf pkq ă f pk ` 1q, or: p1 ` εq ε  k ÿ ÿX X \ k`1 \ p1 ` εqi ă p1 ` εqi , or equivalently i“1 k ÿ  i“1  ] X \ Y p1 ` εqi ă p1 ` εqk`1 .  i“1  X \ Since p1 ` εqi ă p1 ` εqi , it is enough to show that: ε  k ÿ  Y ] p1 ` εqi ă p1 ` εqk`1 , or equivalently  i“1  Y ] p1 ` εqk`1 ´ p1 ` εq ă p1 ` εqk`1 .  Since x ´ 1 ă txu is always true, we conclude that the intervals are indeed disjoint. Hence, by Lemma 2.3 we obtain that labeling the leaves of the final tree for p1`εq-approximate distances requires h{2 ¨ log M bits. It remains to choose h and M and rephrase this bound in terms of the size of the final tree. The size of the final tree is at most 2  h´1 ÿ i“0  2  h´1´i  M ¨pi`1q ÿ j“M ¨i`1  ÿ X \ h´1 j p1 ` εq “ 2h´i i“0  19  M ¨pi`1q ÿ  p1 ` εqj  j“M ¨i`1  ď 2h ď 2h ď2 “2 ď  h´1 ÿ  2´i p1 ` εqM ¨i`1  i“0 h´1 ÿ  1 ε  h1  ε h1  ε  p1 ` εqM ´ 1 p1 ` εq ´ 1  2´i p1 ` εqM pi`1q`1  i“0  p1 ` εq  M `1  h´1 ÿˆ i“0  p1 ` εq  M `1 p  p1 ` εqM 2  ˙i  p1`εqM h q ´1 2 p1`εqM ´1 2  2 p1 ` εqM `1 p1 ` εqM ¨h ε p1 ` εqM ´ 2  We set M “ 2{ε. Then, because ε ď 1 and p1 ` εqM ě 4, the size is at most: 1 ` ε p1 ` εqM e2h ε p1 ` εqM ´ 2 8 ď e2h . ε  ď2  We set h “ logpε ¨ n{8q{p2 log eq “ Θplogpε ¨ nqq, and obtain that labeling trees of size n for ? p1 ` εq-approximate distances requires Ωplogp1{εq ¨ logpε ¨ nqq bits. Now, if ε ą 1{ n this is in ? fact Ωplogp1{εq ¨ log nq and we are done. Otherwise (ε ď 1{ n), we observe that a scheme with ? such small ε can be used for labeling a tree of size n for exact distances (by subdividing every ? ? edge into n edges). Such labeling requires Ωplog2 p nqq “ Ωplog2 nq bits, which for ε ě 1{n is also Ωplogp1{εq ¨ log nq as required.  5.2  Upper bound  We now describe a matching upper bound: a p1 ` εq-approximate distance labeling scheme with label size Oplogp1{εq ¨ log nq. Our scheme is based on the scheme of Alstrup et al. [8] whose label size is Op1{ε ¨ log nq. For any node v, let v1 , . . . , vk be the significant ancestors of v in the order they appear on the v-to-root path. Let rxs1`ε denote the smallest power of 1 ` ε larger than x. Observe that rxs1`ε is a p1 ` εq-approximation of x. The label of a node v in [8] is composed of the following fields: 1. dpv, rootpT qq, 2. the Oplog nq label generated by Lemma 2.1 applied on v, 3. the sequence rdpv, v1 qs1`ε , rdpv, v2 qs1`ε , . . . , rdpv, vk qs1`ε . Let w “ NCApu, vq. If w “ v or w “ u, we can extract the exact distance from (1). Otherwise, w.l.o.g. we can find the significant ancestor vj of v such that vj “ w using (2), and then find rdpv, wqs1`ε using (3). Alstrup et al. show that: dpu, vq ď dpu, rootpT qq ´ dpv, rootpT qq ` 2 ¨ rdpv, wqs1`ε ď p1 ` 2εq ¨ dpu, vq. This means we can compute a p1 ` εq-approximation of dpu, vq by replacing ε with ε{2. The bottleneck for the size of the label is storing the sequence in (3). In [8], this sequence is stored using a unary encoding of the sequence rdpv, v1 qs1`ε , rdpv, v2 qs1`ε ´rdpv, v1 qs1`ε , . . . , rdpv, vk qs1`ε ´ rdpv, vk´1 qs1`ε delimited by a single bit between two consecutive values. The maximal length of 20  the path is at most n, so such an encoding will require log1`ε n bits and additional k ď log n bits for the delimiters. This means that the final label size is Θplog1`ε nq, or Θp1{ε ¨ log nq for small ε. Instead, we store the sequence using Lemma 2.2, which yields a label of size Oplogp1{εq ¨ log nq bits and a constant query time.  References [1] S. Abiteboul, S. Alstrup, H. Kaplan, T. Milo, and T. Rauhe. Compact labeling scheme for ancestor queries. SIAM Journal on Computing, 35(6):1295–1309, 2006. [2] D. Ajwani, U. Meyer, and D. Veith. An I/O-efficient distance oracle for evolving real-world graphs. In 17th ALENEX, pages 159–172, 2015. [3] T. Akiba, Y. Iwata, and Y. Yoshida. Fast exact shortest-path distance queries on large networks by pruned landmark labeling. In 32nd SIGMOD, pages 349–360, 2013. [4] T. Akiba, C. Sommer, and K. Kawarabayashi. Shortest-path queries for complex networks: exploiting low tree-width outside the core. In 15th EDBT, pages 144–155, 2012. [5] S. Alstrup, P. Bille, and T. Rauhe. Labeling schemes for small distances in trees. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 19(2):448–462, 2005. [6] S. Alstrup, S. Dahlgaard, and M. B. T. Knudsen. Optimal induced universal graphs and adjacency labeling for trees. In 56th FOCS, pages 1311–1326, 2015. [7] S. Alstrup, C. Gavoille, E. B. Halvorsen, and H. Petersen. Simpler, faster and shorter labels for distances in graphs. In 27th SODA, pages 338–350, 2016. [8] S. Alstrup, I. L. Gørtz, E. B. Halvorsen, and E. Porat. Distance labeling schemes for trees. In 43rd ICALP, 2016. [9] S. Alstrup, E. B. Halvorsen, and K. G. Larsen. Near-optimal labeling schemes for nearest common ancestors. In 25th SODA, pages 972–982, 2014. [10] S. Alstrup, H. Kaplan, M. Thorup, and U. Zwick. Adjacency labeling schemes and induceduniversal graphs. In 47th STOC, pages 625–634, 2015. [11] S. Alstrup and T. Rauhe. Small induced-universal graphs and compact implicit graph representations. In 43rd FOCS, pages 53–62, 2002. [12] D. Belazzougui and G. Navarro. New lower and upper bounds for representing sequences. In 20th ESA, pages 181–192, 2012. [13] N. Bonichon, C. Gavoille, and A. Labourel. Short labels by traversal and jumping. Electronic Notes in Discrete Mathematics, 28:153–160, 2007. [14] F. Chung, R. Graham, and D. Coppersmith. On trees containing all small trees. The Theory and Applications of Graphs, pages 265–272, 1981. [15] D. R. Clark. Compact Pat Trees. PhD thesis, University of Waterloo, 1998. [16] P. Elias. Universal codeword sets and representations of the integers. IEEE transactions on information theory, 21(2):194–203, 1975. [17] J. Fischer. Short labels for lowest common ancestors in trees. In 17th ESA, pages 752–763, 2009.  21  [18] P. Fraigniaud and A. Korman. Compact ancestry labeling schemes for xml trees. In 21st SODA, pages 458–466, 2010. [19] C. Gavoille, M. Katz, N. A. Katz, C. Paul, and D. Peleg. Approximate distance labeling schemes. In 9th ESA, pages 476–487, 2001. [20] C. Gavoille and A. Labourel. Distributed relationship schemes for trees. In 18th ISAAC, pages 728–738, 2007. [21] C. Gavoille, D. Peleg, S. Pérennes, and R. Raz. Distance labeling in graphs. Journal of Algorithms, 53(1):85–112, 2004. A preliminary version in 12th SODA, 2001. [22] M. Gol’dberg and E. Livshits. On minimal universal trees. Mathematical Notes of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR, 4(3):713–717, 1968. [23] G. Jacobson. Space-efficient static trees and graphs. In 30th FOCS, pages 549–554, 1989. [24] S. Kannan, M. Naor, and S. Rudich. Implicit representation of graphs. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 5(4):596–603, 1992. [25] H. Kaplan and T. Milo. Short and simple labels for small distances and other functions. In 7th WADS, pages 246–257, 2001. [26] D. Peleg. Proximity-preserving labeling schemes. Journal of Graph Theory, 33(3):167–176, 2000. [27] C. Petersen, N. Rotbart, J. G. Simonsen, and C. Wulff-Nilsen. Near-optimal adjacency labeling scheme for power-law graphs. In 43rd ICALP, 2016. [28] M. Pǎtraşcu and M. Thorup. Time-space trade-offs for predecessor search. In 38th STOC, pages 232–240, 2006. [29] N. G. Rotbart. New Ideas on Labeling Schemes. PhD thesis, University of Copenhagen, 2016. [30] D. D. Sleator and R. E. Tarjan. A data structure for dynamic trees. Journal of computer and system sciences, 26(3):362–391, 1983. [31] M. Thorup and U. Zwick. Compact routing schemes. In 13th SPAA, pages 1–10, 2001.  22

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
