Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 6
ArXiv ID: hf_7245

Abstract:
Hybrid Rules with Well-Founded Semantics Wlodzimierz Drabent∗†  Jan Maluszyński†  arXiv:0906.3815v1 [cs.LO] 20 Jun 2009  March 13, 2009  Submitted for publication Abstract A general framework is proposed for integration of rules and external first order theories. It is based on the well-founded semantics of normal logic programs and inspired by ideas of Constraint Logic Programming (CLP) and constructive negation for logic programs. Hybrid rules are normal clauses extended with constraints in the bodies; constraints are certain formulae in the language of the external theory. A hybrid program is a pair of a set of hybrid rules and an external theory. Instances of the framework are obtained by specifying the class of external theories, and the class of constraints. An example instance is integration of (non-disjunctive) Datalog with ontologies formalized as description logics. The paper defines a declarative semantics of hybrid programs and a goal-driven formal operational semantics. The latter can be seen as a generalization of SLS-resolution. It provides a basis for hybrid implementations combining Prolog with constraint solvers. Soundness of the operational semantics is proven. Sufficient conditions for decidability of the declarative semantics, and for completeness of the operational semantics are given.  Keywords: integration of rules and ontologies, Semantic Web reasoning, knowledge representation, well-founded semantics, constructive negation, constraint logic programming. ∗  Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Ordona 21, Pl – 01-237 Warszawa, Poland. † Department of Computer and Information Science, Linköping University, S 581 83 Linköping, Sweden, wdr@ida.liu.se, jmz@ida.liu.se.  1  1  Introduction  This paper presents an approach to integration of normal logic programs under the well-founded semantics with external ﬁrst-order theories. The problem is motivated by the discussion about the rule level of the Semantic Web. It is often claimed that rule-based applications need non-monotonic reasoning for handling negative information. As the issue of non-monotonic reasoning and negation was thoroughly investigated in the context of logic programming (see e.g. [AB94] for a survey of classical work on this topic), it would be desirable to build-up on this expertise. Well-established formal semantics: the answer set semantics [BG94], the well-founded semantics [vGRS88], and the 3-valued completion semantics of Kunen [Kun87] provide theoretical foundations for existing logic programming systems. On the other hand, applications refer usually to domain-speciﬁc knowledge, that is often supported by speciﬁc reasoning or computational mechanisms. Domain-speciﬁc variants of logic programs are handled within the constraint logic programming framework CLP [MSW06]. In CLP the concept of constraint domain makes it possible to extend the semantics of pure logic programs and to use domain-speciﬁc constraint solvers for sound reasoning. Classical CLP does not support non-monotonic reasoning, but integration of both paradigms is discussed by some researchers (see e.g. [Stu95, DS98, Fag97]). Special kind of domain-speciﬁc knowledge are domain-speciﬁc terminologies, speciﬁed in a formal ontology description language, such as OWL [PSHH04]. This raises the issue of integration of rules and ontologies, which has achieved a considerable attention (see e.g. [Ros05, MSS05, EIST06, ADG+ 05, dBET08, MR07] and references therein). It is commonly assumed that an ontology is speciﬁed as a set of axioms in (a subset of) First Order Logic (FOL), usually in a Description Logic. A rule language, typically a variant of Datalog, is then extended by allowing a restricted use of ontology predicates. The extensions considered in the literature are mostly based on disjunctive Datalog with negation under the answer set semantics. In contrast to that, our focus is on normal logic programs under the well-founded semantics. Our objective is to extend them in such a way that domain-speciﬁc knowledge represented by a ﬁrst order theory can be accessed from the rules. The theory will be called the external theory. Going beyond Datalog makes it possible to use data structures like lists for programming in the extended rule language. We want to deﬁne the semantics of the extended language so that the existing reasoners for normal logic programs and for the external theory can be re-used for querying the extended programs. Thus, our objective is to provide a framework for hybrid integration of normal logic 2  programs and external theories. Integration of Datalog rules with ontologies speciﬁed in a Description Logic could then be handled within the framework as a special case. The choice of the well-founded semantics as the basis for our approach is motivated by existence of top-down query answering algorithms, which facilitate building a query answering method for our framework. Notice also that the well-founded semantics and the answer set semantics are equivalent for a wide class of programs, including stratiﬁed normal programs. We introduce a notion of hybrid program; such a program is a pair (P, T ) where T is a set of axioms in a ﬁrst order language L and P is a set of hybrid rules. T and P share function symbols but have disjoint alphabets of predicate symbols. This reﬂects the intuition that domain-speciﬁc knowledge is shared by many applications and is not redeﬁned by the applications. A hybrid rule is a normal clause whose body may include a formula in L, called the constraint of the rule. We deﬁne declarative semantics of hybrid programs as a natural extension of the well-founded semantics of logic programs. It is 3-valued; the semantics of a program (P, T ) is a set of ground literals over the alphabet of P . The semantics is undecidable (as is the well-founded semantics for normal programs). However it is decidable for Datalog hybrid programs, provided the constraints are decidable. The operational semantics presented in this paper is goal driven, allows non ground goals, and its internal data are possibly non ground goals and constraints. It combines a variant of SLS-resolution (see e.g. [AB94]) with handling constraints. The latter includes checking satisﬁability of the constraints w.r.t. T , which is assumed to be done by a reasoner of T . Thus the operational semantics provides a basis for development of implementations integrating LP (logic programming) reasoners supporting/approximating the well-founded semantics (such as XSB Prolog [SSW+ 07]) with constraint solvers. The operational semantics is sound w.r.t. the declarative one, under rather weak suﬃcient conditions. It is complete for Datalog hybrid programs under a certain syntactic condition of safeness. In the special case of hybrid rules without non-monotonic negation the rules can be seen as the usual implications of the FOL, thus as additional axioms extending T . In this case every ground atom which is true in the semantics of the hybrid program is a (2-valued) logical consequence of P ∪ T . The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives an (informal) introduction to the well-founded semantics of normal logic programs, and presents the notion of constraint used in this paper. Basic ideas of Description Logics and their use for deﬁning ontologies and ontological constraints are brieﬂy discussed. Section 3 gives a formal presentation of the syntax and declarative semantics of the generic language of hybrid rules, parameterized by 3  the constraint domain. Section 4 introduces the operational semantics; then soundness and completeness results relating the declarative semantics and the operational semantics are stated and proven. The last two sections contain discussion of related work and conclusions. A preliminary, abbreviated version of this work appeared as [DM07].  2 2.1  Preliminaries Normal logic programs and the well-founded semantics  In this work we use the standard terminology and notation of logic programming (see e.g. [Apt97]). The language of hybrid rules will be deﬁned as an extension of normal logic programs. We assume that the programs are built over a ﬁrst-order alphabet including a set PR of predicates, a set V of variables and a set F of function symbols with diﬀerent arities including a non-empty set of symbols of arity 0, called constants. Atomic formulae (or atoms) and terms are built in a usual way. A literal is an atomic formula (positive literal ) or a negated atomic formula (negative literal ). A literal (a term) not including variables is called ground. A normal logic program P is a ﬁnite set of rules of the form H ← B1 , ..., Bn  where n ≥ 0  where H is an atomic formula, and B1 , ..., Bn are literals. The rules are also called normal clauses. The rules with empty bodies (n = 0) are called facts or unary clauses; they are usually written without ←. A normal clause is called definite clause iﬀ all literals of its body are positive. A definite program is a ﬁnite set of deﬁnite clauses. In this paper, a Datalog program is a normal logic program with F being a ﬁnite set of constants. The Herbrand base HP is the set of all ground atoms built with the predicates, constants, and function symbols of P . For a subset S ⊆ HP , by ¬S we denote the set of negations of the elements of S, ¬S = { ¬a | a ∈ S }. A ground instance of a rule R is a rule R′ obtained by replacing each variable of R by a ground term over the alphabet. The set of all ground instances of the rules of a program P will be denoted ground(P ). Notice that in the case of Datalog ground(P ) is a ﬁnite set of ground rules. A 3-valued Herbrand interpretation (shortly – interpretation) I of P is a subset of HP ∪ ¬HP such that for no ground atom A both A and ¬A are in I. Intuitively, the set I assigns the truth value t (true) to all its members. 4  Thus A is false (has the truth value f) in I iﬀ ¬A ∈ I, and ¬A is false in I iﬀ A ∈ I. If A 6∈ I and ¬A 6∈ I then the truth value of A (and that of ¬A) is u (undeﬁned). This is in a natural way generalized to non ground atoms and non atomic formulae (see e.g. [AB94]). An interpretation I is a model of a formula F (which is denoted by I |=3 F ) iﬀ F is true in I. As usual, a 2-valued Herbrand interpretation is a subset of HP . It assigns the value t to all its elements and the value f to all remaining elements of the Herbrand base. It is well known that any deﬁnite program P has a unique least1 2-valued Herbrand model. We will denote it MP . A normal program may not have the least Herbrand model. The well-founded semantics of logic programs [vGRS88] assigns to every program P a unique (three valued) Herbrand model, called the well-founded model of P . Intuitively, the facts of a program should be true, and the ground atoms which are not instances of the head of any rule should be false. This information can be used to reason which other atoms must be true and which must be false in any Herbrand model. Such a reasoning gives in the limit the well-founded model, where the truth values of some atoms may still be undeﬁned. The well-founded semantics has several equivalent formulations. We brieﬂy sketch here a deﬁnition following that of [FD93]. While deﬁning the well-founded model, for every predicate symbol p we will treat ¬p as a new distinct predicate symbol. A normal program can thus be treated as a deﬁnite program over Herbrand base H ∪ ¬H. A 3valued interpretation over H can be treated as a 2-valued interpretation over H ∪ ¬H. Let I be such an interpretation (I ⊆ H ∪ ¬H). We deﬁne two ground, possibly inﬁnite, deﬁnite programs P/t I and P/tu I. For a given program P , P/t I is the ground instantiation of P together with ground unary clauses that show which negative literals are true in I. P/t I = ground(P ) ∪ { ¬A | ¬A ∈ I } P/tu I is similar but all the negative literals that are true or undeﬁned in I are made true here: P/tu I = ground(P ) ∪ { ¬A | A 6∈ I, A ∈ H } Now we deﬁne an operator ΨP (I) which produces a new Herbrand interpretation of P : ΨP (I) = (MP/t I ∩ H) ∪ ¬(H \ MP/tu I ) 1  in the sense of set inclusion.  5  It can be proved that the operator is monotonic; ΨP (I) ⊆ ΨP (J) whenever I ⊆ J. Its least ﬁxed point is called the well-founded model W F (P ) of program P . For some countable ordinal α we have W F (P ) = ΨαP (∅). The following example shows a simple Datalog program and its wellfounded model. Example 2.1 A two person game consists in moving a token between vertices of a directed graph. Each move consists in traversing one edge from the actual position. Each of the players in order makes one move. The graph is described by a database of facts m(X, Y ) corresponding to the edges of the graph. A position X is said to be a winning position X if there exists a move from X to a position Y which is a losing (non-winning) position: w(X) ← m(X, Y ), ¬w(Y ) Consider the graph  d → e ↑ ↓ b ↔ a → c → f  and assume that it is encoded by the facts m(b, a), m(a, b), . . . , m(e, f ) of the program. The winning positions are e, c. The losing positions are d, f . Position a is not a losing one since the player has an option of moving to b from which the partner can only return to a. This intuition is properly reﬂected by the well-founded model of the program, it contains the following literals with the predicate symbol w: w(c), w(e), ¬w(d), ¬w(f ). A non Datalog version of this example with an inﬁnite graph is presented in [Dra93].  2.2  External theories  In this section we discuss logical theories to be integrated with logic programs. 2.2.1  Constraints  Our objective is to deﬁne a general framework for extending normal logic programs, which, among others, can also be used for integration of Datalog rules with ontologies. Syntactically, the clauses of a logic program are extended by adding certain formulae of a certain logical theory. The added formulae will be called constraints. We use this term due to similarities with constraint logic programming [MSW06]. We will consider a 2-valued FOL theory, called external theory or constraint theory. A set of its formulae is chosen as the set of constraints. Our 6  operational semantics imposes certain restrictions on the set of constraints. They are introduced together with the operational semantics. The declarative semantics works for an arbitrary set of constraints. The function symbols and the variables of the language of the external theory are the same as those of the language of rules. On the other hand, the predicate symbols of both languages are distinct. We will call them constraint predicates and rule predicates. We assume that the external theory is given by a set of axioms T and the standard consequence relation ⊢ of the FOL, or equivalently the logical consequence |= . (Other consequence operations can be used instead; for instance deriving those formulae which are true in a canonical model of T , or in a given class of models.) We will sometimes use T as the name of the theory. Sometimes one deals with an external theory whose set Fc of function symbols is a proper subset of the set F of function symbols of the rules. For instance the external theory uses only constants, and the rules employ term constructors (i.e. non constant function symbols). In such case we simply extend the alphabet of the external theory so that its set of function symbols is F . The modiﬁed external theory is a conservative extension of the original one [Sho67]. A formula without symbols from F \ Fc is a logical consequence of T in one of them iﬀ it is a logical consequence in the other. Thus such modiﬁcation of the external theory is inessential; this justiﬁes our assumption of a common alphabet of function symbols. 2.2.2  Ontologies and ontological constraints  This section surveys some basic concepts of Description Logics (DLs) [BCM+ 03] and the use of DLs for specifying ontologies. An ontology may be deﬁned as a “speciﬁcation of a conceptualization” [Gru95]. An ontology should thus provide a formal deﬁnition of the terminology to be shared. Desciption Logics are speciﬁc fragments of the FOL. The syntax of a DL is built over disjoint alphabets of class names, property names and individual names. From the point of view of FOL they are, respectively, one and two argument predicate symbols, and constants. Depending on the kind of DL, diﬀerent constructors are provided to build class expressions (or brieﬂy classes) and property expressions (or brieﬂy properties). Some DLs allow also to represent concrete datatypes, such as strings or integers. In that case one distinguishes between individual-valued properties and data-valued properties. By an ontology we mean a ﬁnite set of axioms in some decidable DL. The axioms describe classes and properties of the ontology and assert facts about individuals and data. An ontology is thus a DL knowledge base consisting 7  of two parts: a TBox (terminology) including class axioms and property axioms and an ABox (assertions) stating facts about individuals and data. The axioms of DLs can be seen as an alternative representation of FOL formulae. Thus, the semantics of DLs is deﬁned by referring to the usual notions of interpretation and model, and an ontology can be considered a FOL theory. For most of decidable DLs there exist well developed automatic reasoning techniques. Given an ontology T in a DL one can use a respective reasoner for checking if a formula C is a logical consequence of T . If T 6|= C and T 6|= ¬C then C is true in some models of the ontology and false in some other models. Ontologies are often speciﬁed in the standard Web ontology language OWL DL, based on the Description Logic SHOIN (D). OWL Ontologies can be seen as set of axioms in this DL. OWL DL class axioms make it possible to state class equivalence A ≡ C and class inclusion A ⊑ C, where A is a class name and C is a class expression. Class expressions are built from class names using constructors, such as ⊤ (the universal concept), ⊥ (the bottom concept), intersection, union and complement. Classes can also be described by direct enumeration of members and by restrictions on properties (for more details see [PSHH04]). Property axioms make it possible to state inclusion and equivalence of properties, specify the domain and the range of a property, state that a property is symmetric, transitive, functional, or inverse functional. OWL DL assertions indicate members of classes and properties. Individuals are referred to by individual names. It is possible to declare that given individual names represent the same individual or that each of them represents a diﬀerent individual. The following example using some expressive constructions of OWL DL will be used in the sequel to discuss how integration of Datalog with OWL DL ontologies is achieved in our framework. Example 2.2 In some research area an author of at least 3 books is considered an expert. An OWL DL ontology referring to this research area has classes Author and Book, and a property isAuthorOf with domain Author and range Book. The class Expert can now be deﬁned using OWL DL cardinality restriction:2 Expert ≡ isAuthorOf min 3 Book The property isAuthorOf has the inverse property hasAuthor. The following class expression deﬁnes the class of authors which co-authored a book 2  In the Manchester OWL Syntax http://www.co-ode.org  8  with a given author X (e.g. smith) (isAuthorOf some (hasAuthor value X )) All individuals of class Book which appear in the ontology are declared as distinct. The ontology states that the individuals johns and brown of class Author are the same. (This may happen e.g. due to a change of the name of a person). There are also authors smith and burns; smith, burns and johns are declared to be distinct. In addition, the ontology asserts that johns is the author of the books b1, b2 and brown is the author of the books b2, b3. Thus an OWL DL reasoner will conclude that johns (brown) is an expert.  2.3  Datalog with Constraints: Introductory Examples  We now illustrate the idea of adding constraints to rule bodies on two simple examples. The intention is to give an informal introduction to the semantics of hybrid rules. The ﬁrst example will be used later on to accompany the formal presentation of the declarative and operational semantics of our framework. The second one illustrates some aspects of expressing external theories in OWL DL. Example 2.3 The example describes a variant of the game from Example 2.1 where the rules are subject to additional restrictions. Assume that the positions of the graph represent geographical locations described by an ontology. The ontology provides, among others, the following information • subclass relations (TBox axioms): e.g. F i ⊑ E (locations in Finland are locations in Europe); • classiﬁcation of some given locations represented by constants (ABox axioms). For instance, assuming that the positions of Example 2.1 represent locations we may have F i(b) (b is a location in Finland), E(c) (c is a location in Europe). We now add some restrictions as ontological constraints3 added to the 3  Symbol ¬ is used to denote two kinds of negation. Within a constraint it is the classical negation of the external theory. When applied to a rule predicate, ¬ denotes nonmonotonic negation. Thus two distinct negation symbols are not needed.  9  facts m(e, f ) and m(c, f ): w(X) ← m(X, Y ), ¬w(Y ) m(b, a) m(a, b) m(a, c) m(c, d) m(d, e)  m(c, f ) ← ¬F i(f ) m(e, f ) ← E(f )  d −→ ↑ b ↔ a → c −→  e ↓ E(f ) f  ¬F i(f )  Intuitively, this would mean that the move from e to f is allowed only if f is in Europe and the move from c to f – only if f is not in Finland. These restrictions may inﬂuence the outcome of the game: f will still be a losing position but if the axioms of the ontology do not allow to conclude that f is in Europe, we cannot conclude that e is a winning position. However, we can conclude that if f is not in Europe then it cannot be in Finland. Thus, at least one of the conditions E(f ), ¬F i(f ) holds. If E(f ) then, as in Example 2.1, e is a winning position, d is a losing one, hence c is a winning position. On the other hand, if ¬F i(f ) then the move from c to f is allowed, in which case c is a winning position. Therefore c is always a winning position; w(c) is considered to be a consequence of the program. Example 2.4 A committee of reviewers is to be created for evaluation of the applicants for an opened position. A reviewer has to be an expert, as deﬁned by the ontology of Example 2.2 and must not have a conﬂict of interest (coi ) with an applicant. Persons who are co-authors of a book have coi. (This implies that an author of a book has coi with himself/herself; this applies in particular to each expert). Additionally, some conﬂicts of interest are declared by facts. The following rules deﬁne a potential reviewer X for a candidate Y (relation mayreview). Two constraints are used: Expert(X) and (isAuthorOf some (hasAuthor value X))(Y ). They refer to the ontology of Ex. 2.2. mayreview(X, Y ) ← Expert(X), ¬coi(X, Y ) coi(X, Y ) ← (isAuthorOf some (hasAuthor value X))(Y ) coi(johns, burns) The intention is to query the rules and the ontology for checking if a given person may be a reviewer for a given candidate. Consider the individual johns of Example 2.2 and check if she might be appointed a reviewer for some of the people named in the ontology. An OWL DL reasoner can check that johns is an expert and that she has the conﬂict of interest with herself, 10  i.e. with johns alias brown. The conﬂict of interest with burns is stated explicitly. So johns cannot be appointed a reviewer for herself and for burns. To check if johns has the conﬂict of interest with smith one has to refer to the ontology for checking if they co-authored a book. If this is conﬁrmed by the reasoner (e.g. when the ontology asserts that both johns and smith are authors of b1) then coi(johns, smith) is true and johns cannot be a reviewer for smith. If non-existence of any co-authored book follows from the ontology, then coi(johns, smith) is false and johns can be a reviewer. Otherwise4 johns may be a reviewer for smith under the condition that they did not co-authored a book. This constraint should be returned in the answer to the query. An example employing non-nullary function symbols is given in [DHM07a]. The semantics of hybrid programs presented below formalizes the intuitions presented in the examples of this section.  3  Integration of rules and external theories  This section deﬁnes the syntax and the (declarative) semantics of hybrid programs, integrating normal rules with ﬁrst-order theories. The general principles discussed here apply in a special case to integration of Datalog with ontologies speciﬁed in Description Logics.  3.1  Syntax  We consider a ﬁrst-order alphabet including, as usual, disjoint alphabets of predicate symbols P, function symbols F (including a set of constants) and variables V. We assume that P consists of two disjoint sets PR (rule predicates) and PC (constraint predicates). The atoms and the literals constructed with these predicates will respectively be called rule atoms (rule literals) and constraint atoms (constraint literals). We will combine rules over alphabets PR , F , V with an external theory T over PC , F , V, employing constraints (a distinguished set of formulae of T ). Definition 3.1 A hybrid rule (over PR , PC , F , V) is an expression of the form: H ← C, L1 , . . . , Ln where, n ≥ 0 each Li is a rule literal and C is a constraint (over PC , F , V); C is called the constraint of the rule. 4  They are co-authors in some models of the ontology, and are not in some others.  11  A hybrid program is a pair (P, T ) where P is a set of hybrid rules and T is a set of axioms over PC , F , V. ✷ Hybrid rules are illustrated in Example 2.3. We adopt a convention that a constraint true, which is a logical constant interpreted as t, is omitted. Usually we do not distinguish between sequences, like L1 , . . . , Ln , and conjunctions, like L1 ∧ . . . ∧ Ln . Notation L will be used to denote a sequence of rule literals (similarly t a sequence of terms, etc.); t=u will denote a conjunction of equalities t1 =u1 , . . . , tk =uk .  3.2  Declarative Semantics  The declarative semantics of hybrid programs is deﬁned as a generalization of the well-founded semantics of normal programs; it refers to the models of the external theory T of a hybrid program. Given a hybrid program (P, T ) we cannot deﬁne a unique well-founded model of P since we have to take into consideration the logical values of the constraints in the rules. However, a unique well-founded model can be deﬁned for any given model of T . Roughly speaking, the constraints in the rules are replaced by their logical values in the model (t or f); then the well-founded model of the obtained logic program is taken. The well-founded models are over the Herbrand universe, but the models of T are arbitrary. By applying a substitution θ = {x1 /t1 , . . . , xn /tn } to a formula F we mean applying it to the free variables of F . Moreover, if a bound variable x of F occurs in some ti (1 ≤ i ≤ n) then x in F is replaced by a new variable. By a ground instance of a hybrid rule H ← C, L1 , . . . , Ln , where C is the constraint of the rule, we mean any rule Hθ ← Cθ, L1 θ, . . . , Ln θ, where θ is a substitution replacing the free variables of H ← C, L1 , . . . , Ln by ground terms (over the alphabet F ). So the constraint Cθ has no free variables, and Hθ, L1 θ, . . . , Ln θ are ground literals. By ground(P ) we denote the set of all ground instances of the hybrid rules in P . Definition 3.2 Let (P, T ) be a hybrid program and let M0 be a model of T . Let P/M0 be the normal program obtained from ground(P ) by • removing each rule constraint C which is true in M0 (i.e. M0 |= C), • removing each rule whose constraint C is not true in M0 , (i.e. M0 6|= C). The well-founded model W F (P/M0) of P/M0 is called the well-founded model of P based on M0 . A formula F (over PR , F , V) holds (is true) in the well-founded semantics of a hybrid program (P, T ) (denoted (P, T ) |=wf F ) iﬀ M |=3 F for each wellfounded model M of (P, T ). ✷ 12  Notice that the negation in the rule literals is non-monotonic, and the negation in the constraints is that from the external theory, thus monotonic. We say that F is false in the well-founded semantics of (P, T ) if (P, T ) |=wf ¬F , and that F is undefined if the logical value of F in each well-founded model of (P, T ) is u. There is a fourth case: F has distinct logical values in various well-founded models of P . Formally, the semantics of (P, T ) does not assign any truth value to such F . We may say that its truth value depends on the considered model of the external theory. Classes of models in which F has a speciﬁc truth value can by characterized by constraints. Such constraints provide suﬃcient conditions for F to have the speciﬁc truth value. They are constructed by the proposed operational semantics. Example 3.3 For the hybrid program (P, T ) of Example 2.3 we have to consider models of the ontology T . For every model M0 of T such that M0 |= E(f ) the program P/M0 includes the fact m(e, f ). The well-founded model of P/M0 includes thus the literals ¬w(f ), w(e), ¬w(d), w(c) (independently of whether M0 |= F i(f )). On the other hand, for every model M1 of the ontology such that M1 |= ¬F i(f ) the program P/M1 includes the fact m(c, f ). The well-founded model of P/M1 includes thus the literals ¬w(f ), w(c) (independently of whether M1 |= E(f ) ). Notice that each of the models of the ontology falls in one of the above discussed cases. Thus, w(c) and ¬w(f ) hold in the well-founded semantics of the hybrid program, and the logical value of w(a) and that of w(b) is u in each well-founded model of the program. On the other hand w(e) and ¬w(d) are true in those well-founded models W F (P/M0) of P for which the constraint E(f ) is true in M0 . Similarly, ¬w(e) and w(d) are true in those models for which E(f ) is false. Thus the well-founded semantics assigns unique truth values to w(a), w(b), w(c) and w(f ), but not to w(d) and w(e). The truth values of w(d) and w(e) can be characterized by additional constraints. Consider a case of hybrid rules without negative rule literals. So the nonmonotonic negation does not occur. Such rules can be seen as implications of FOL and treated as axioms added to T . For such case the well-founded semantics is compatible with FOL in the following sense: For any ground rule atom A if (P, T ) |=wf A then P ∪ T |= A.5 We omit a detailed proof. 5  The reverse implication does not hold. As a counterexample take T = { ∃x.q(x) } and P = { p ← q(x), r(x); r(x) ← }. P ∪ T |= p but (P, T ) 6|=wf p, as there exist models of T in which each ground atom q(t) is false. We can obtain (something close to) the reverse implication by considering only those well-founded models which are based on Herbrand models of T . If P ∪T |= A then M |= A for each well-founded model M of P based on a Herbrand interpretation M0 of T .  13  As the well-founded semantics of normal programs is undecidable, so is the well-founded semantics of hybrid programs. It is however decidable for Datalog hybrid programs with decidable external theories (Section 5). In Section 4 we show that sound reasoning is possible (for arbitrary hybrid programs) by appropriate generalization of SLS-resolution. For the Datalog case the proposed reasoning scheme is complete under a certain safeness condition.  3.3  Treatment of Equality  In this section we discuss how equality is treated by the declarative semantics introduced above. The semantics is based on Herbrand models. Thus it treats distinct ground terms as having diﬀerent values. Example 3.4 Consider a hybrid program (P, T ), where P = { p(a) }. Both p(a) and ¬p(b) hold in the well-founded semantics of (P, T ), even if T implies that a and b are equal. This feature of the semantics of hybrid programs may be found undesirable. We will call this phenomenon the problem of two equalities. Below we ﬁrst show that the problem is well known in constraint logic programming (CLP) and explain how it is dealt with. Then we discuss two more formal ways of avoiding it: external theories where equality satisﬁes Clark equality theory (CET), and hybrid rules which are congruent w.r.t. a given external theory. The problem of two equalities is familiar from CLP [MSW06], and is not found troublesome in practice. Most CLP implementations employ both syntactic equality and equality of the constraint domain6 . Let us denote the latter by =′ (and use = for the syntactic equality of the Herbrand domain). Formally, let us treat = as equality, and =′ as an equivalence relation. As an example consider CLP over arithmetic constraints [MSW06]. Terms 2 + 2 and 4 are distinct but denote the same number, we have 2 + 2 6= 4 and 2 + 2 =′ 4. Constraint predicates treat 2 + 2 and 4 as equal. (Formally, =′ is a congruence of the constraint predicates: p(t1 , . . . , tn ) iﬀ p(u1 , . . . , un ) whenever t1 =′ u1 , . . . , tn =′ un , for any constraint predicate p.) Other predicates may distinguish such terms. This is related to using uniﬁcation in the operational semantics; uniﬁcation is related to the syntactic equality. Apparently the programmers ﬁnd this feature natural and not confusing. They are aware of dealing both with the Herbrand interpretation and with a 6  See for instance the comment on an example constraint domain on p. 414 in [MSW06, Section 12.2].  14  non Herbrand one. They know that the latter is employed only by constraint predicates. They take care of distinguishing the two corresponding equalities. For instance to express a fact that size should be true for the number 4, a rule size(N) ← N=′ 4 will be used (instead of a fact size(4).). It what follows we refer to the free equality theory (CET, Clark equality theory) [Cla78]. CET consists of equality axioms x = x, x = y → f (x) = f (y) for each f ∈ F , x = y → (p(x) → p(y)) for each predicate symbol p, including =, and freeness axioms f (x) = f (y) → x = y f (x) 6= g(y) x 6= t  for each f ∈ F , for each pair of distinct f, g ∈ F , for each non variable term t such that the variable x occurs in t.  If the set F of function symbols is ﬁnite then CET additionally contains the weak domain closure axiom WDCA:7 _ ∃y (x = f (y)). f ∈F  When F contains only constants then CET reduces to the unique name assumption (UNA). Assume that we have an external theory T with equality =′ . We say that a set of hybrid rules P is congruent for a predicate symbol p w.r.t. T when T |= t1 =′ u1 , . . . , tn =′ un implies (P, T ) |=wf p(t1 , . . . , tn )  iﬀ  (P, T ) |=wf p(u1 , . . . , un ),  for any ground terms t1 , . . . , tn , u1 , . . . , un . When P is congruent w.r.t. T for any rule predicate p then we say that P is congruent w.r.t. T (or shortly that (P, T ) is congruent). Example 3.5 Program P = { p(a) } (from Ex. 3.4) is not congruent w.r.t. any T in which T |= a 6=′ b. 7 This axiom is needed for CET to be complete, in the sense that any closed formula (with = as its only predicate symbol) has the same logical value in each model of CET. Consider for instance F = {a} and ∃x(x 6= a). This formula is true in some models of CET without WDCA, but false in its (unique) Herbrand model.  15  The hybrid program from Ex. 2.4 with the fact coi(johns, burns) removed is congruent8 , independently from T . Example 3.6 (Constructing congruent programs) Consider the program from Examples 2.3, 3.3. The program implies w(c) and ¬w(g) (formally (P, T ) |=wf w(c) and (P, T ) |=wf ¬w(g)). Assume that T implies that c =′ g. For instance, the equality may be explicitly stated by an owl:sameAs assertion. Informally, equality c =′ g is incompatible with P ; the rules of P treat diﬀerently the objects c, g, while T states that they are equal. Formally, (P, T ) is not congruent. One can modify P to make it treat c, g in the same way. It is suﬃcient to add rules m(a, g), m(g, d), and m(g, f ) ← ¬F i(f ). (We replace c by g in the rules of P ). Now w(c) and w(g) hold in the well-founded semantics of the obtained program (P ′ , T ). The program is congruent, provided that T does not imply t1 =′ t2 for any other pair {t1 , t2 } = 6 {c, g} of constants occurring in the program. We can modify P to make it congruent independently from T . The idea is to replace (implicit) = by explicit =′ . For instance we may replace in P the rule w(X) ← m(X, Y ), ¬w(Y ) by w(X) ← X =′ X ′ , Y =′ Y ′ , m(X ′ , Y ′ ), ¬w(Y ). The obtained program (P ′′ , T ) is congruent for w, w.r.t. any T . Alternatively, the rules for m can be modiﬁed in a similar way to make the program congruent for m. Then the program is also congruent for w (without modifying the rule for w). The program transformations above can be seen as usual CLP programming tricks. For congruent hybrid programs the problem of two equalities does not exist. (Also, it does not exist for external theories without equality.) The example above informally introduces programming techniques for constructing congruent programs. Now we present two simple criteria assuring that a program is congruent. (Congruency is undecidable, like other non trivial semantic properties of programs.) First, if the equality =′ of T satisﬁes CET then each program (P, T ) is congruent. (As then if t, u are ground terms then t =′ u implies that the terms are identical.) Apparently for this reason some approaches of combining rules 8  The unchanged program is not congruent, unless the ontology implies that johns (brown) co-authored a book with burns. This is because coi(johns, burns) holds and coi(brown, burns) does not hold in the well-founded semantics of the program, but johns =′ brown.  16  and ontologies require that the ontology satisﬁes the unique name assumption (UNA). Another suﬃcient criterion is syntactic. Program (P, T ) is congruent if in each rule H ← C, L1 , . . . , Ln of P all the arguments t1 , . . . , tn of the head H = p(t1 , . . . , tn ) are variables, and any variable occurs at most once in H, L1 , . . . , Ln . (Thus the remaining occurrences of the variable are in the constraint C of the rule.) The proof that such (P, T ) is congruent is based on the fact that for any model M of T if T |= t1 =′ u1 , . . . , tn =′ un (for ground terms t1 , . . . , tn , u1 , . . . , un ) then a rule p(t1 , . . . , tn ) ← B is in P/M iﬀ p(u1 , . . . , un ) ← B is in P/M. As an example, notice that the rule for w in P ′′ (from Ex. 3.6) satisﬁes the suﬃcient condition, and the rules for m do not. Notice also that the condition is diﬀerent from usually considered safeness conditions (the former – roughly speaking – forbids certain variable occurrences, while the latter require). It is rather obvious how to construct programs satisfying this syntactic restriction, provided that the set of constraints includes equalities t =′ u of T . Instead of placing a non variable term t as an argument of the head of a rule, use a new variable xt and add xt =′ t to the constraint of the rule. Instead of writing more than one occurrences of a variable x in the rule literals of a rule, replace each (but one) occurrence of x by a new distinct variable x′ and add x′ =′ x to the constraint of the rule.  4  Reasoning with hybrid rules  Now we present a way of computing the well-founded semantics of Deﬁnition 3.2. Like in logic programming, the task is to ﬁnd instances of a given goal formula G which are true in the well-founded semantics of a given program. Similarly to logic programming, our operational semantics is deﬁned in terms of search trees. After introducing the operational semantics we prove its soundness and completeness, the latter for a restricted class of programs.  4.1  Constraints for the operational semantics  To construct the operational semantics we impose certain requirements on the external theory and the set of constraints. We need to deal explicitly with the syntactic equality = and its negation. So we require that = is a constraint predicate symbol and the external theory T includes the axioms CET (cf. Section 3.3). An external theory T ′ which does not satisfy this condition can be easily converted to a T which does. (T ′ may be a theory 17  without equality, or contain equality =′ not satisfying CET.) Namely T is the union T = T ′ ∪ CET. Reasoning in such T can be implemented employing Prolog and a reasoner for T ′ [DHM07b]. The former deals with =, the latter with the predicates of T ′ . The operational semantics constructs new constraints using conjunction, disjunction, negation, and existential quantiﬁcation. So we require that the set of constraints is closed under these operations. This imposes restrictions on the constraints. For instance many DLs do not allow negation of roles; for such DL a formula of the form r(X, Y ) cannot be a constraint. The actual choice of constraints is outside of the scope of this paper. It depends on the chosen external theory and the available reasoner for it. For instance, if a formula C is a constraint without = then the reasoner should be able to check whether C is satisﬁable in T ′ (where T and T ′ are as above).  4.2  Operational Semantics  The operational semantics presented below is a generalization of SLS-resolution [Prz89], which is extended by handling constraints originating from the hybrid rules. It is based on the constructive negation approach presented in [Dra93, Dra95]. In logic programming, the term constructive negation stands for generalizations of negation as failure (NAF) (see e.g. [AB94]). NAF provides a way of checking whether a given negative goal is a consequence of the program (under a relevant semantics). Constructive negation, roughly speaking, ﬁnds instances of a negative goal which are consequences. The main contribution of the operational semantics presented here is dealing with hybrid programs and arbitrary external theories. The constructive negation method of [Dra93, Dra95] dealt with logic programs, the equality was the only constraint predicate and CET was the constraint theory. The operational semantics is similar to SLDNF- and SLS-resolution [Llo87, Prz89]. For an input goal a derivation tree is constructed; its nodes are goals. Whenever a negative literal is selected in some node, a subsidiary derivation tree is constructed. So a tree of trees is obtained. Definition 4.1 By the restriction F |V of a formula F to a set V of variables we mean the formula ∃x1 , . . . , xn F where x1 , . . . , xn are those free variables of F that are not in V . By F |F ′ we mean F |V , where V are the free variables of formula F ′ . By a goal we mean a conjunction of the form C, L1 , . . . , Ln (n ≥ 0), where each Li is a rule literal and C is a constraint (the constraint of the goal). Consider a goal G = C, L, p(t), L′ and a rule R = p(u) ← C ′ , K, such  18  that no variable occurs both in G and R. We say that the goal G′ = t=u, C, C ′, L, K, L′ is derived from G by R, with the selected atom p(t), if the constraint t=u, C, C ′ is satisﬁable. We inductively deﬁne two kinds of derivation trees: t-trees and tu-trees. Their role is to ﬁnd out when a given goal is t, or respectively when it is t or u. Informally, if a constraint C is a leaf of a t-tree with the root G then C implies that G is t in the well-founded semantics of the program. (More generally, the same holds if C is a disjunction of such leaves.) On the other hand, for a tu-tree we deﬁne a notion of its cross-section. If C1 , . . . , Cn are the constraints of the goals of a cross-section of a tu-tree with the root G then, roughly speaking, ¬(C1 ∨ . . . ∨ Cn ) implies that G is f in the wellfounded semantics of the program. A formal explanation is provided by the soundness theorem (4.9) in the next section. For correctness of the deﬁnition (to avoid circularity) we assign ranks to the trees. This is a standard technique employed in similar deﬁnitions [Llo87, Prz89, Dra95]. In the general case ranks are countable ordinals, but natural numbers are suﬃcient for a language where the function symbols are constants. The children of nodes with an atom selected are deﬁned as in the standard SLD-resolution. The only diﬀerence is that instead of explicit uniﬁcation we employ equality constraints. The children of nodes with a negative literal selected are constructed employing the results of tu- (t-) trees of lower rank. A t-tree refers to tu-trees and vice versa. This is basically a reformulation of the corresponding deﬁnitions of [Dra93, Dra95]. Definition 4.2 (Operational semantics) A t-tree (tu-tree) of rank k ≥ 0 for a goal G w.r.t. a program (P, T ) satisﬁes the following conditions. The nodes of the tree are (labelled by) goals. In each node a rule literal is selected, if such a literal exists. A node containing no rule literal is called successful, a branch of the tree with a successful leaf is also called successful. 1. A constraint (C1 ∨ · · · ∨ Cn )|G (n ≥ 0)9 is an answer of the t-tree if C1 , . . . , Cn are (some of the) successful leaves of the t-tree. (It is not required that all the successful leaves are taken.) 2. By a cross-section (or frontier) of a tu-tree we mean a set F of tree nodes such that each successful branch of the tree has a node in F . Let 9  If n = 0 then by C1 ∨ · · · ∨ Cn we mean false, and by C1 ∧ · · · ∧ Cn we mean true.  19  F be a cross-section of the tu-tree and CF = { C1 , . . . } the constraints of the nodes in F . If CF = { C1 , . . . W , Cn } is ﬁnite then the constraint ¬(C1 |G ), . . . , ¬(Cn |G ) (the negation of (Ci |G )) is called a negative answer of the tu-tree. If CF is inﬁnite then a constraint C which implies ¬(Ci |G ) for each Ci ∈ CF is called a negative answer of the tu-tree. Moreover it is required that each free variable of C is a free variable of G. 3. If (in the t-tree or tu-tree) the selected literal A in a node G′ is an atom then, for each rule R of P , a goal derived from G′ with A selected by a variant R′ of R is a child of G′ , provided such a goal exists. Moreover it is required that no variable in R′ occurs in the tree on the path from the root to G′ . 4. Consider a node G′ = C, L, ¬A, L′ of the t-tree (tu-tree), in which the selected literal ¬A is negative. The node is a leaf or has one child, under the following conditions. (a) If the tree is a t-tree then i. G′ is a leaf, or ii. G′ has a child C ′ , C, L, L′ , where C ′ is a negative answer of a tu-tree for C, A of rank < k, and C ′ , C is satisﬁable. (b) If the tree is a tu-tree then i. G′ has a child C, L, L′ , or ii. G′ has a child C ′ , C, L, L′ , where C ′ = ¬C ′′ is the negation of an answer C ′′ of a t-tree for C, A of rank < k, and C ′ , C is satisﬁable, or iii. G′ is a leaf and there exists an answer C ′′ of a t-tree for C, A of rank < k such that ¬C ′′ , C is unsatisﬁable. An informal explanation for case 2 is that the constraints of the crosssection include all the cases in which G is t or u, thus their negation implies that G is f. A useful intuition is that adding a negative answer C to the nodes of the tu-tree results in a failed tree – a tree for C, G without any successful leaf. (For the constraint Ci of any node of the cross-section, the constraint C, Ci is unsatisﬁable. The same holds for any node which is a descendant of some node of the cross-section.) An informal explanation for case 4 is that in a t-tree (case 4(a)ii) C ′ implies that C, A is f, equivalently ¬(C, A) is t. Hence C ′ , C implies that ¬A is t. In a tu-tree (4(b)ii) ¬C ′′ includes all the cases in which C, A is not 20  t. Hence ¬C ′′ , C – the constraint of the child – includes all the cases in which A is not t, equivalently in which ¬A is t or u. Notice that in case 4(a)i the node G′ = C, L, ¬A, L′ may unconditionally be a leaf of a t-tree (of any rank). This corresponds to the fact that C ′ = ¬C is a negative answer for any tu-tree for C, A. (Take the cross-section { C, A }). Hence in the supposed child of G′ (case 4(a)ii) the constraint ¬C, C is unsatisﬁable. Conversely, according to 4(b)i, node G′ = C, L, ¬A, L′ in a tu-tree may have C, L, L′ as the child. This corresponds to the fact that C ′′ = false is an answer of any t-tree. Hence C is equivalent to ¬C ′′ , C (which is the constraint obtained in 4(b)ii). Thus 4(b)i is a special case of 4(b)ii. Example 4.3 Consider a query w(c) for the hybrid program of Example 2.3. It can be answered by the operational semantics by construction of the following trees. (Sometimes we replace a constraint by an equivalent one.) 1. A t-tree for w(c): w(c) | X=c, m(X, Y ), ¬w(Y ) / \ X=c, Y =f, ¬F i(f ), ¬w(Y ) X=c, Y =d, ¬w(Y ) | | X=c, Y =f, ¬F i(f ) X=c, Y =d, ¬(X=c, Y =d, ¬E(f )) The tree refers to negative answers derived in the cases 2, 4 below. The constraint in the second leaf is equivalent to X=c, Y =d, E(f ) (as α ∧ ¬(α ∧ β) is equivalent to α ∧ ¬β). The answer obtained from the two leaves C1 , C2 of the tree is ∃X, Y (C1 ∨ C2 ). It is equivalent to ¬F i(f ) ∨ E(f ). As this constraint is a logical consequence of the ontology, w(c) holds in each well-founded model of the program. 2. A tu-tree for X=c, Y =d, w(Y ), employing an answer from the t-tree from case 3: X = c, Y = d, w(Y ) | X = c, Y = d, X ′ = Y, m(X ′ , Y ′ ), ¬w(Y ′ ) | X = c, Y = d, X ′ = d, Y ′ = e, ¬w(Y ′ ) | ′ ′ X = c, Y = d, X = d, Y = e, ¬(X = c, Y = d, X ′ = d, Y ′ = e, E(f )) 21  The leaf is equivalent to X=c, Y =d, X ′ =d, Y ′ =e, ¬E(f ), see the explanation in the previous case. Hence from the cross-section containing the leaf we obtain a negative answer equivalent to ¬(X=c, Y =d, ¬E(f )) and to D = ¬(X=c, Y =d) ∨ E(f ). Informally, D implies falsity of the root of the tu-tree. (For a formal treatment see Theorem 4.9 and Lemma 4.8 below). Hence E(f ) implies ¬w(d). Formally, if M0 |= E(f ) for some model M0 of T then then w(d) is false in W F (P/M0) (the well-founded model of P based on M0 ). 3. A t-tree for Y ′ = e, w(Y ′ ) employing a negative answer from case 4: Y ′ = e, w(Y ′ ) | ′ ′′ ′ Y = e, X = Y , m(X ′′ , Y ′′ ), ¬w(Y ′′ ) | ′ ′′ ′ ′′ Y = e, X = Y , X = e, Y ′′ = f, E(f ), ¬w(Y ′′ ) | ′ ′′ Y = e, X = e, Y ′′ = f, E(f ) The corresponding answer is (equivalent to) Y ′ =e, E(f ). Informally, the answer implies Y ′ = e, w(Y ′ ). From Lemma 4.8 below it follows that if E(f ) holds in some model M0 of T then w(e) is true in the corresponding well founded model of P . Notice that if C, Y ′ =e is a satisﬁable constraint then C may be added to the nodes of the tree (maybe with renaming of variables X ′′ , Y ′′ ). Hence C, Y ′ =e, E(f ) is an answer for C, Y ′ =e, w(Y ′ ). To construct the t-tree of case 2 we use C = (X=c, Y =d, X ′ =d). 4. A tu-tree for Y =f, w(Y ), with atom m(X ′ , Y ′ ) selected in the leaf: Y =f, w(Y ) | ′ Y =f, Y =X , m(X ′ , Y ′ ), ¬w(Y ′ ) From the empty cross-section a negative answer true is obtained. So w(f ) is false in the well-founded semantics of the program. Similarly, true is a negative answer for C, Y =f, w(Y ), where C is an arbitrary constraint. Various simpliﬁcations of t- (tu-) trees are possible. For instance in case 3 of the last example the nodes of the tree may be replaced by w(e); 22  m(e, Y ), ¬w(Y ); E(f ), ¬w(f ); E(f ). This issue is outside of the scope of this paper. We do not deal here with actual implementing of the operational semantics. (An implementation is described in [DHM07b].) We only mention that – similarly as in CLP – it is not necessary to check satisﬁability of the constraint for each node. The answers (negative answers) of trees obtained in this way are logically equivalent to those of t-trees (tu-trees) from Def. 4.2.  4.3  Soundness  In this section we prove soundness of the operational semantics of hybrid programs (Def. 4.2) with respect to their declarative semantics (Def. 3.2). Before the actual proof we discuss ground instances of goals and trees, and introduce safe programs and goals. These notions are employed in the proof. For our proofs we use the characterization of the well-founded semantics of logic programs from Section 2.1. So for a given model M0 of the external theory, the well-founded model of the program is ΨαP/M0 (∅) for some α. 4.3.1  Ground instances of trees  By an extension of a substitution θ we mean any substitution of the form θ ∪ θ′ (where θ = {x1 /t1 , . . . , xn /tn } and θ′ = {y1 /u1 , . . . , yn /un } are substitutions with disjoint domains, {x1 , . . . , xn } ∩ {y1, . . . , ym } = ∅). By a grounding substitution for the variables of a formula F (or just “for F ”) we mean a substitution replacing the free variables of F by ground terms. (The domain of the substitution may include other variables.) Let G = C, L be a goal and M0 a model of T . Let θ be a grounding substitution for the variables of G. (Notice that Cθ has no free variables.) If Cθ is true in M0 then we say that θ is applicable to G (w.r.t. M0 ), and by the result Gθ of applying θ to G we mean the ground goal Lθ; it is called a ground instance of G. Similarly, we say that θ is applicable to a rule H ← C, L; the result Hθ ← Lθ is called a normal ground instance of the rule.10 Notice that a rule Rθ is a normal ground instance of a rule R ∈ P w.r.t. M0 iﬀ Rθ ∈ (P/M0 ). Consider a t-tree or tu-tree Tr for G and θ as above. A ground instance Trθ of Tr w.r.t. M0 is deﬁned recursively as follows. The nodes of Trθ are ground instances of (some) nodes of Tr, each node H of Trθ corresponds 10  Definition 3.2 employs another kind of ground instance, namely Hθ ← Cθ, Lθ. As ground instances in that sense are not used below, we sometimes skip the word “normal.” To simplify notation, we write Rθ for a normal ground instance of a rule R, when this does not lead to ambiguity.  23  to a node G′ of Tr such that H is a ground instance of G′ . The root of Trθ is Gθ and it corresponds to the root G of Tr. If a node G′ θ′ of Trθ corresponds to node G′ of Tr (where θ′ is a grounding substitution for the variables of G′ ), G′′ is a child of G′ in Tr, θ′′ is an extension of θ′ then G′′ θ′′ is a child of G′ θ′ in Trθ, provided that θ′′ is applicable to G′′ . A node of Trθ corresponding to a successful leaf of Tr will be called a successful leaf of Trθ. Example 4.4 Consider a program P = {p(a) ← q(y)}. The t-tree (or tutree) Tr for p(x) consists of two nodes; the child of p(x) is x = a, q(y). For θ = {x/b} the ground instance Trθ consists of one node p(b). For σ = {x/a} the root p(a) of Trσ has a child q(t) for each ground term t. Each node q(t) in Trσ corresponds to the node x = a, q(y) of Tr. Notice that if G′ θ′ and its child G′′ θ′′ in Trθ correspond, respectively, to G′ and G′′ in Tr, and G′′ is derived from G′ by a rule R ∈ P then G′′ θ′′ is derived from G′ θ′ by a normal ground instance Rσ ∈ (P/M0 ) of R. (This means that Rσ is H ← B, H is an atom in G′ θ′ and G′′ is G′ θ′ with H replaced by B.) Thus if a leaf G′ θ′ of Trθ corresponds to a node G′ of Tr, and a positive literal A is selected in G′ then no normal ground instance of a rule in the program has the head Aθ. If no negative literal is selected in Tr then Trθ is an SLD-tree ([Llo87]) for program (P/M0 ). 4.3.2  Safeness  We introduce a notion similar to DL-safeness [MSS05, Ros06], but taking into account that constraints may contain equality =. Definition 4.5 Let C be a constraint. A variable x is bound in C to a ground term t (to a variable y) if T |= C → x = t (respectively T |= C → x = y). For instance, in x = f (y), y = a variable x is bound to ground term f (a), and y is bound to a. Notice that any variable is bound to itself independently of the constraint. A simple suﬃcient condition is that, for variables x0 , . . . , xn (n ≥ 0) and a ground term t, if C is a conjunction of constraints C1 , . . . , Cl and the set {C1 , . . . , Cl } contains equalities x0 =x1 , . . . , xn−1 =xn (resp. x0 = x1 , . . . , xn−1 =xn , xn =t) then x0 is bound to xn (resp. to t) in C. Definition 4.6 A rule R = H ← C, L, where C is the constraint of R, is safe if 24  – each variable of H, – each variable of a negative literal of L, and – each free variable of C is bound in C to a ground term or to a variable appearing in a positive literal in L. Let V be a set of variables. When the conditions above are satisﬁed with possible exception for the variables from V then we say that R is safe apart of V . A set of rules is safe if all its rules are safe. A hybrid program (P, T ) is is safe if P is safe. A goal G = C, L is safe if the rule p ← G is safe (where p is a 0-argument predicate symbol). G is safe apart of V if the rule p ← G is safe apart of V . If the root of a t-tree (tu-tree) for a safe program is safe then any node of the tree is safe. Hence, in the constraint of a successful leaf, all the free variables are bound to ground terms. In the Appendix we prove a more general property: Lemma 4.7 Let (P, T ) be a safe program, V a set of variables, and G a goal. Consider a t-tree (or a tu-tree) with the root G. 1. Each node of the tree is safe apart of V0 , where V0 is the set of free variables of G. 2. Assume that no variable from V occurs in any variant of a rule from P used in constructing the tree. If G is safe apart of V then each node of the tree is safe apart of V . 4.3.3  Soundness theorem  We will say that the set of constraints has the witness property if for any model M of the external theory T and for any constraint C, whenever M |= ∃C then M |= Cθ for some grounding substitution θ for C. The witness property is implied by the parameter names assumption (PNA) [dBPPV07] that restricts the interpretations of T to those in which every domain element is a value of a ground term. The operational semantics may be not sound for constraints without witness property and non safe programs. As an example take P = { p ← q(x) } and T = {∃x.q(x)}. Then (a constraint ∃x.q(x) equivalent to) true is an answer of the t-tree for p. However (P, T ) 6|=wf p (as there exist models of T in which every ground instance of q(x) is false).  25  Lemma 4.8 (Soundness) Consider a program (P, T ), a goal G, a model M0 of T , and a countable ordinal number k. Assume that M0 is a Herbrand interpretation, or the set of constraints has the witness property, or P is safe. 1. If C is an answer of a t-tree of rank k for G then for any grounding substitution θ (for the variables of G) M0 |= Cθ implies Ψk+1 P/M0 (∅) |=3 Gθ. 2. If C is a negative answer of a tu-tree of rank k for G then for any grounding substitution θ (for the variables of G) M0 |= Cθ implies k+1 ΨP/M (∅) |=3 ¬Gθ. 0 The proof is presented in the Appendix.11 It is based on studying ground instances of the t- (tu-) tree for G and viewing them as SLD-trees of a program (P/M0 )/t I (respectively a program related to (P/M0 )/tu I) from the deﬁnition of ΨP/M0 . As a corollary we obtain: Theorem 4.9 (Soundness) Let (P, T ) be a hybrid program and G = C0 , L a goal (where C0 is the constraint of G). Assume that P is safe, or the set of constraints has the witness property. If C is an answer of a t-tree for (P, T ) and G then, for any substitution θ, T |= Cθ implies (P, T ) |=wf Lθ. If C is a negative answer of a tu-tree for (P, T ) and G then, for any substitution θ, T |= Cθ implies (P, T ) |=wf ¬Lθ. PROOF. Let G = C0 , L and C be an answer of the t-tree. T |= Cθ implies M0 |= Cθθ′ for any substitution θ′ and any model M0 of T . Consider a θ′ such that xθ′ is ground for each free variable x of (C, L)θ. From Lemma 4.8, applied to M0 , C, G, and the substitution θθ′ , it follows that M |=3 Gθθ′ , where M is the well-founded model or P based on M0 . Notice that Gθθ′ = Lθθ′ . As M |=3 Lθθ′ for each θ′ as above and M is a Herbrand interpretation, we have M |=3 Lθ. As the latter holds for each well-founded model of P , we obtain (P, T ) |=wf Lθ. The proof for a negative answer of a tu-tree is analogical. ✷ It may be desirable to have an operational semantics which is sound also for non safe programs and constraints without the witness property. This can be obtained by employing, in formula restrictions (Def. 4.1), a certain non standard quantiﬁer ∃′ instead of ∃. For the new quantiﬁer it holds that 11  From the proof it follows that safeness is needed only for the rules that have been used in constructing t-trees (the t-trees referred to, directly or indirectly, by the t- (tu-) tree for G). Alternatively, the witness property is necessary only for the constraints that are successful leaves of these t-trees.  26  if I |= ∃′ F then I |= F θ for some grounding substitution θ for F (for any formula F and interpretation I). The details are outside the scope of this paper.  4.4  Completeness  In a general case our operational semantics is not complete. Roughly speaking, the reason is using only ﬁnite constraint formulae as (negative) answers12 in case 4 of Def. 4.2. We show completeness of our operational semantics for the case where the Herbrand universe is ﬁnite and the program and goals are safe. The completeness result includes independence from the selection rule. We ﬁrst present a technical lemma about simplifying goals for which t-trees (tu-trees) are constructed. Then we restrict our considerations to safe programs over a ﬁnite universe, show how a kind of a most general (negative) answer for a given tree can be obtained, and deﬁne a notion of a maximal t- (tu-) tree. Intuitively, a maximal tree (of a suﬃciently high rank) derives everything that is required by the declarative semantics. This is made formal in a completeness lemma, from which completeness of the operational semantics follows. The following lemma shows how a tree for A may replace a tree for C, A. So, for a ﬁxed A, many trees for goals C, A may be replaced by a single tree. (On the other hand, for a ﬁxed C the tree for A may have more nodes than the corresponding one for C, A.) Lemma 4.10 Consider a program (P, T ). Let A be an atom and C a constraint. If ¬(C1 |A ), . . . , ¬(Cn |A ) is a negative answer of a tu-tree (respectively a negation of an answer of a t-tree) of rank k for A then ¬(C, (C1|A )), . . . , ¬(C, (Cn|A )), or equivalently ¬C ∨ ¬(C1 |A ), . . . , ¬(Cn |A ), is a negative answer of a tu-tree (the negation of an answer of a t-tree) of rank k for C, A. PROOF. Without loss of generality we can assume that if a variable x occurs both in the tree for A and in C then x occurs in A. If C ′ , L is a node of the tree for A then C, C ′, L is a node of the tree for C, A provided that C, C ′ is satisﬁable. Assume the negative answer for A is obtained from a ﬁnite crosssection. Consider a “corresponding” cross-section of the tree for C, A whose node constraints are those of C, Ci that are satisﬁable. The corresponding 12  In [Dra93, Dra95] this problem was solved by allowing an infinite set of children of a node with a negative literal selected. Example 4.10 in [Dra93] shows that this is actually necessary. Thus it provides a counterexample for completeness of the operational semantics of Def. 4.2.  27  negative answer is ¬((C, C1 )|A ), . . . , ¬((C, Cn )|A ). Each (C, Ci )|C,A is equivalent to C, (Ci |A ). The cases of an inﬁnite cross-section, and of a t-tree, are similar. ✷ 4.4.1  Maximal trees  For this section we assume that the Herbrand universe is ﬁnite. Hence the alphabet of function symbols is ﬁnite and contains only constants. A t- (tu-) tree may be inﬁnite. Moreover, the set of nodes in the tree with a negative literal selected may be inﬁnite. Hence the tree may refer to an inﬁnite set of subsidiary trees. The answers (negative answers) of the tree may be obtained from an inﬁnite set of successful leaves (an inﬁnite crosssection); so it seems that we have to deal with an inﬁnite set of answers (as there may not exists one which implies all the others). In what follows we show how to avoid inﬁnite sets of answers. Notice ﬁrst that the set of selected negative literals in a t- (tu-) tree is ﬁnite, up to renaming of variables (as the Herbrand universe is ﬁnite). By Lemma 4.10, instead of constructing a possibly inﬁnite set of subsidiary tu(t-) trees for goals of the form C, A, it is suﬃcient to construct a ﬁnite set of tu- (t-) trees for goals of the form A. In a t- (tu-) tree with a safe root, if C is a successful leaf then each free variable x of C is bound to a constant cx . This deﬁnes a grounding substitution θ = {x1 /cx1 , . . . , xm /cxm } for the free variables x1 , . . . , xm of C. Now C is equivalent to x1 = cx1 , . . . , xm = cxm , C and to x1 = cx1 , . . . , xm = cxm , Cθ. By a grounded constraint from a program P (from a goal G) we mean a constraint Cσ such that constraint C is the constraint of a rule of P (the constraint of G) and the substitution σ replaces all the free variables of C by constants. A constraint is in a solved form for a program P and an initial goal G if it is a conjunction of constraints of the form x = c, C0 or ¬C0 , where x is a variable, c is a constant, and C0 is a grounded constraint from P or G. The set of grounded constraints from a given program or a given goal is ﬁnite. So the set of constrains in solved form (for P and G) with the free variables from G is ﬁnite, up to equivalence. We now show that, under certain conditions, the successful leaves of t(tu-) trees may be seen as disjunctions of constraints in solved form. Lemma 4.11 Let the Herbrand universe be ﬁnite and Tr be a t-tree (tutree) for a safe goal G and a safe program (P, T ). Assume that each negative answer (negation of an answer) employed in the tree is of the form 28  ¬C1 , . . . , ¬Cn , where each Ci is in solved form for P and G. Then the constraint of any success leaf C of the tree is equivalent to a disjunction of constraints in solved form. Also, C|G is equivalent to a disjunction of constraints in solved form for P and G. PROOF. Consider a success leaf C. Each free variable x of C is bound in C to a constant cx . Let θ = {x1 /cx1 , . . . , xm /cxm } (where x1 , . . . , xm are the free variables of C). C is equivalent to x1 = cx1 , . . . , xm = cxm , C and to x1 = cx1 , . . . , xm = cxm , Cθ (Cθ has no free variables). Cθ = C1 , . . . , Cn , where each Ci is a ground equality, or a grounded constraint from P or from G, or a ¬Ci′ θ where Ci′ is a constraint in a solved form. ¬Ci′ is equivalent to ¬D1 ∨ . . . ∨ ¬Dl , where each Di is of the form x = c or is a possibly negated grounded constraint from P or from G. Thus ¬Ci′ θ is equivalent to true (if some ground disequality ¬Di θ is true), or to ¬Dj1 ∨ . . . ∨ ¬Djl′ , where each Dji is a possibly negated grounded constraint from P or G. Each Ci which is a ground equality is equivalent to true (as it is satisﬁable). So applying distributivity (φ, (ψ ∨ ψ ′ ) ≡ φ, ψ ∨ φ, ψ ′ ) to x1 = cx1 , . . . , xm = cxm , Cθ results in an equivalent disjunction of constraints in solved form. Removing from the latter constraint each xi = ci where xi not free in G produces a disjunction of constraints in solved form equivalent to C|G . ✷ As discussed above, the set of disjunctions of constraints in solved form (for P and G) with the free variables from G is ﬁnite, up to equivalence. Thus from the lemma it follows that the set of success leaves of the t-tree (tu-tree) is equivalent to a ﬁnite set of disjunctions of constraints in solved form. Formally: If the tree satisﬁes the conditions of Lemma 4.11 then there exists a constraint D (we will call it a finite answer of the t-tree, resp. finite pseudo-answer of the tu-tree), such that M0 |= C|G θ for some success leaf C of the tree  iﬀ  M0 |= Dθ,  for every model M0 of T and every substitution θ grounding the variables of G. Moreover, D is a disjunction of constraints in solved form, for P and the root G of the tree. (D is equivalent to a constraint (C1 |G ) ∨ . . . ∨ (Cm |G ) where each Ci is a success leaf of the tree.) Notice that the negation of a pseudo-answer of a tu-tree is a negative answer of the tree. (The corresponding cross-section contains all the successful leaves.) Informally, a ﬁnite answer is a most general answer that can be obtained from a given t-tree, and the negation of a ﬁnite pseudo-answer is a most general negative answer that can be obtained from a given tu-tree.  29  Now for a given rank and goal we deﬁne a maximal t- (tu-) tree. The intention is that the tree provides a (negative) answer which is more general than other (negative) answers for this goal of the same rank. Definition 4.12 Let the Herbrand universe be ﬁnite, and (P, T ) be a safe program. A maximal t-tree (tu-tree) for a goal and (P, T ) is deﬁned inductively: A maximal t-tree of rank 0 is a t-tree in which each node with a negative literal selected is a leaf. A maximal tu-tree of rank 0 is a tu-tree in which if a negative literal is selected in a node G′ and the constraint of G′ is C then the constraint of the child of G′ is C (cf. Def. 4.2 case 4(b)i). A maximal t-tree (tu-tree) of rank k > 0 is a t-tree (tu-tree) in which a node G′ with a negative literal ¬A selected has a child G′′ iﬀ C, ¬D is satisﬁable, where C is the constraint of G′ and D is a ﬁnite pseudo-answer (a ﬁnite answer) of a maximal tu-tree (t-tree) for A of rank k − 1; moreover C, ¬D is the constraint of G′′ .13 The deﬁnition is correct: From Lemma 4.10 and 4.11 by induction on the rank we obtain that, for a safe program P and a safe goal G, the tree described in the deﬁnition satisﬁes the conditions of Lemma 4.11, it has a ﬁnite (pseudo-) answer which is a disjunction of constraints in solved form;14 hence the ﬁnite (pseudo-) answers employed in the deﬁnition exist. Notice that a maximal t- (tu-) tree is deﬁned for any safe program and any goal G0 . If G0 is safe then the tree has a ﬁnite (pseudo) answer. 4.4.2  Completeness theorem  By a selection rule we mean a function which, given a sequence of goals G0 , . . . , Gn , selects a rule literal in Gn provided Gn contains at least one rule literal and G0 , . . . , Gn is a preﬁx of a branch of a t-, tu-, or SLD-tree. Now we are ready to state and prove completeness of the operational semantics. We ﬁrst show that a (negative) answer of any maximal (tu-) ttree for G of rank j – speaking informally – describes all the instances of G that are true (false) in a corresponding approximation ΨkP/M0 (∅) of the well-founded model of P/M0 . 13  By Lemma 4.10, ¬C ∨ ¬D is a negative answer (the negation of an answer) for C, A. Hence according to Def. 4.2, the constraint of the child of G′ is C, (¬C ∨ ¬D), which is equivalent to C, ¬D. 14 For P and G. If G consists of a single atom A then the constraints are in solved form for P and any goal.  30  Lemma 4.13 (Completeness) Assume that the Herbrand universe is ﬁnite. Consider a safe program (P, T ). Let G be a safe goal, C0 be the constraint of G, and k > 0 be a natural number. Consider a selection rule R, and a maximal t-tree and a maximal tu-tree for G of rank k − 1 if G does not contain a negative literal, and of rank k otherwise. Let M0 be a model of T , and θ be a grounding substitution for the variables of G such that M0 |= C0 θ 1. If ΨkP/M0 (∅) |=3 Gθ and C is a ﬁnite answer of the t-tree then M0 |= Cθ. 2. If ΨkP/M0 (∅) |=3 ¬Gθ and D is a ﬁnite pseudo-answer of the tu-tree (and thus ¬D is a negative answer) then M0 |= ¬Dθ. The basic idea of the proof is that in case 1. it follows that there exists a successful SLD-derivation for Gθ and a certain program (P/M0 )/t J. This derivation is shown to be a branch of a ground instance of the maximal t-tree for G. In case 2. there does not exist a successful SLD-derivation for Gθ and a certain program (P/M0 )/tu J. However such a derivation is shown to be a branch of a ground instance of the maximal tu-tree for G, under assumption that M0 |= Dθ. Hence M0 |= ¬Dθ. The detailed proof is given in the Appendix. As a main result we obtain completeness and independence from the selection rule (of the operational semantics of Def. 4.2 w.r.t. the declarative semantics of Def. 3.2). Theorem 4.14 (Completeness) Assume that the Herbrand universe is ﬁnite. Consider a safe program (P, T ), a safe goal G = C0 , L (where C0 is the constraint of G), and a selection rule R. Let θ be a grounding substitution for the variables of G such that C0 θ is satisﬁable. 1. If (P, T ) |=wf Lθ then there exists a t-tree (of a ﬁnite rank) for G via R with an answer C such that T |= Cθ. 2. If (P, T ) |=wf ¬Lθ then there exists a tu-tree (of a ﬁnite rank) for G via R with a negative answer C such that T |= Cθ. PROOF. As the Herbrand universe is ﬁnite, the set of possible programs P/M0 is ﬁnite. Thus there exists a natural number k such that ΨkP/M0 (∅) is the well founded model of P/M0 for each M0 . Now the Theorem follows from Lemma 4.13. ✷  5  Decidability  Now we show that the well-founded semantics for hybrid programs is decidable in the case of Datalog, i.e. when the set F of function symbols is a ﬁnite 31  set of constants. (No safeness condition is needed.) The proof employs the soundness and completeness results from the previous sections. Theorem 5.1 (Decidability) Assume that the Herbrand universe is ﬁnite, and that for any closed constraint C it is decidable whether T |= C. There exists an algorithm which, for a hybrid program (P, T ) and a ground atom A, ﬁnds out whether (P, T ) |=wf A and whether (P, T ) |=wf ¬A. PROOF. We ﬁrst show that each maximal t- and tu-tree for program (ground(P ), T ) can be represented and constructed in a ﬁnite way. We say that a constraint is in ground solved form if it is built out of the constraints of the rules of ground(P ) by means of ¬ and ∧. The set of such constraints up to logical equivalence is ﬁnite. (Convert them to a disjunctive normal form, remove repeated literals in the conjunctions, remove repeated conjunctions.) Let B be a ground rule atom, and Tr be a t-tree or a tu-tree for B. Each satisﬁable equality constraint that appears in the tree is of the form a = a (where a ∈ F ), hence it is valid and may be removed. Assume that each lower rank (negative) answer employed in the tree is in ground solved form. Then each constraint in the tree is in ground solved form. So the set of these constraints is ﬁnite up to equivalence. The set of rule literals that appear in Tr is a subset of the literals of ground(P ). Thus the set is ﬁnite. So the set of conjunctions of such literals is ﬁnite, up to logical equivalence. (Repeated occurrences of a literal can be removed.) As a result we obtain that the set of nodes of Tr is ﬁnite up to logical equivalence. Assume now that the (negative) answers from lower rank trees employed in Tr are known. Then a ﬁnite representation of Tr can be constructed top-down starting from the root B. Before adding a node G to the current (sub-graph of the) tree, it is checked whether a node G′ logically equivalent to G already exists. If it does and the same literal is selected in both nodes then G is not added. This process terminates, its result is a tree Tr ′ which is a ﬁnite sub-graph of Tr. Each successful leaf of Tr is (logically equivalent to) a successful leaf of Tr ′ . In the terminology of the previous section, the disjunction of the successful leaves of Tr ′ is a ﬁnite (pseudo-) answer of Tr (and is logically equivalent to each ﬁnite (pseudo-) answer of Tr). In this way ﬁnite representations of the maximal t- and tu-trees for all the atoms can be constructed, ﬁrst for rank 0 and then stepwise for ranks 1, 2, . . . . The process is terminated at rank k when for each atom A the obtained ﬁnite (pseudo-) answers of rank k − 1 and k are equivalent (as it is then a ﬁnite (pseudo-) answer for A of any rank > k). 32  The well-founded models of P and those of ground(P ) are the same; hence the programs are equivalent: (P, T ) |=wf F iﬀ (ground(P ), T ) |=wf F for any formula F . As ground(P ) is ﬁnite and safe, the completeness lemma (4.13) applies. Thus, for any selection rule R, • if (P, T ) |=wf A then T |= C, for some ﬁnite k ≥ 0 and any maximal t-tree of rank ≥ k for A and (ground(P ), T ), with a ﬁnite answer C, • if (P, T ) |=wf ¬A then T |= ¬D, for some ﬁnite k ≥ 0 and any maximal tu-tree of rank ≥ k for A and (ground(P ), T ), with a ﬁnite pseudoanswer D. Hence, by the soundness theorem (4.9), (P, T ) |=wf A iﬀ T |= C (respectively (P, T ) |=wf ¬A iﬀ T |= ¬D) for the ﬁnite answer C (pseudo-answer D) for A computed above. Checking whether T |= ¬C and T |= ¬D is decidable by the assumptions of the theorem. ✷ The decidability result should be compared with the fact that under the assumption of Th. 5.1 it is undecidable whether P ∪ T |= A [LR98]. The diﬀerence is that the logical consequence deals with arbitrary interpretation domains, while the semantics of hybrid programs interprets P over the Herbrand universe, which in this case is ﬁnite.  6  Related Work  The notions of external theory and constraints used in hybrid rules are similar to those used in CLP. However, classical CLP does not support nonmonotonic reasoning. The results presented in this paper can thus also be seen as an approach to integration of both paradigms, based on the wellfounded semantics of normal programs. We are aware of few papers on non monotonic negation for CLP. The approach of [Fag97] employs the 3-valued completion semantics. It is similar to the work presented here; in both cases the operational semantics follows the idea of [Dra95] of selecting a cross section of a derivation tree and negating the disjunction of respective constraints. The completion semantics is also used in [Stu95]. An approach generalizing the well-founded semantics for CLP is presented in [DS98]. It however assigns the semantics only to some programs (those that can be transformed to an irreducible program), while our semantics deals with all programs. In contrast to our approach, the operational semantics of [DS98] is not top-down and goal driven. In consists of applying program transformations to obtain an irreducible program; the latter can be used to obtain answers to goals. 33  The presented framework makes it possible to integrate normal logic programs with ontologies expressed as ﬁrst-order theories, including those speciﬁed in the web ontology languages OWL-DL and OWL-Lite. The problem of integration of rules and ontologies has been addressed in diﬀerent ways. One line of research aims at achieving the integration by embedding rules, ontologies and their combinations in a known logic. A well-known proposal of this kind is SWRL [HPS04], extending ontologies with Horn formulae within FOL, but not allowing non-monotonic rules. More recent attempts [dBET08, MR07, dBPPV07] address the issue of nonmonotonicity by embedding non-monotonic rules and DL ontologies in various logics which make it possible to capture non-monotonicity. In contrast to that, we achieve the integration by a direct deﬁnition of the semantics of hybrid rules. The declarative semantics combines the FOL semantics of the external theories with the well-founded semantics of logic programs. Negation in the constraints of the external theory is interpreted in the classical way, while negation in rule literals is non-monotonic. We now compare our work with the approaches to integration of rules and ontologies which make similar assumptions. We note ﬁrst that all related work of this kind is based on Datalog rules, while our approach admits non-nullary function symbols. Our work is strongly motivated by the early AL-log approach [DLNS98] where positive Datalog was extended by allowing the concepts of ALC DL as constraints in safe Datalog rules. The operational semantics of AL-log relies on an extension of SLD-resolution where the disjunction of constraints from diﬀerent derivations is to be submitted for validity check to the DL-reasoner. We adopted the AL-log idea of extending rules with constraints in the body, and applied it to more expressive rules including non-monotonic negation, and to arbitrary external theories of FOL. In our approach the heads of the hybrid rules are atoms built with rule predicates. Thus the semantics of the rule predicates depends on the external theory which is assumed to be given a priori and not to depend on the rules. The rationale for that is that the rules describe a speciﬁc application while the theory (for example an ontology) provides a knowledge common for an application domain. In contrast to that, several papers [MSS05, Ros05, Ros06] allow the use of ontology predicates in the heads of rules, deﬁning thus an integrated language where rule predicates and ontology predicates may be mutually dependent, and ontology predicates can be (re-) deﬁned by rules. The paper [MSS05] deﬁnes DL rules, a decidable combination of OWLDL with disjunctive Datalog without non-monotonic negation. In contrast to that, our primary concern is non-monotonic reasoning. 34  The r-hybrid knowledge bases [Ros05] and the more recent DL+log [Ros06] are based on disjunctive Datalog with non-monotonic negation under the stable model semantics. The objective is to deﬁne a generic integration scheme of this variant of Datalog with an arbitrary Description Logic. The DL-rules deﬁned under this scheme may include DL predicates not only in their bodies but also in the heads. A hybrid DL+log knowledge base consists of a DL knowledge base K and a set of hybrid rules P. A notion of non-monotonic model of such a knowledge base is deﬁned by referring to ﬁrst-order models15 of K and to the stable models of disjunctive Datalog. This is similar to our deﬁnition of declarative semantics in that models of K are used to transform the set of grounded hybrid rules into a set of ground Datalog rules, not including DL-atoms. However, as the heads of the hybrid rules may include DL-atoms, the transformation is more elaborate than our P/M0 transformation. Also the semantics of DL+log is based on stable models of the transformed ground rules, while our semantics is based on the well-founded semantics of P/M0 . For stratiﬁed normal logic programs the stable model semantics is equivalent to the well-founded semantics [AB94]. Thus for stratiﬁed sets of rules DL+log coincides with our approach (provided the rules are non disjunctive, and without DL-atoms in their heads, and the external theory satisﬁes the requirements of DL+log). The proposed reasoning algorithm (NMSAT-DL+log) works bottom-up and is based on grounding. Our operational semantics works top-down and does not require grounding. Decidability of DL+log is achieved by a weak safeness condition. The condition is similar to that in our approach. However here it is not needed for decidability (but for completeness of the operational semantics; it is also one of alternative suﬃcient conditions for soundness). The language of Description Logic Programs (dl-programs) [ELST04a] integrates OWL DL with Datalog rules with negation. This is done by allowing in the bodies so called dl-queries to a given ontology. The queries may locally modify the ontology. Two kinds of declarative semantics are considered for the integrated language. The semantics of choice extends the stable model semantics of Datalog with negation16 [ELST04a] but an extension of the well-founded semantics is also considered [ELST04b]. In both variants of the declarative semantics the truth value of a rule w.r.t. to an interpretation depends on dl-queries in the rule being logical consequences 15  However, only a fixed domain of interpretation is considered, with a fixed interpretation of constants. Moreover, the interpretation is a bijection (each domain element is denoted by a distinct constant), and the domain is countably infinite. 16 More recent versions of this work are based on disjunctive Datalog with negation. A further extension is HEX-programs [EIST06], where external atoms are used to model interface with arbitrary external computations.  35  of the respective ontologies. This makes the semantics incompatible with the standard semantics of the ﬁrst order logic. For example consider rules P = { p ← Q1 ; p ← Q2 }, where none of DL-formulae Q1 , Q2 is a logical consequence of the ontology T , but in each model of T at least one of them is true. Then p is a logical consequence of P ∪ T , but will not follow from (P, T ) represented as a dl-program. In contrast to that, our approach is compatible with FOL, in the sense explained in Section 3.2. In the last example, p follows from the hybrid program (P, T ).  7  Conclusions  We presented a framework for integration of normal logic programs under the well-founded semantics with ﬁrst-order theories. Syntactically the integration is achieved by extending the bodies of normal clauses with (certain) formulae of a given external theory, resulting in the notions of hybrid rule and hybrid program. It is assumed that the theories are external sources of knowledge and are not modiﬁed during the integration. Therefore it is required that the predicates of the extended normal program and the predicates of the external theory are distinct. The main contributions of this work are: • The declarative semantics of hybrid programs, combining the (3-valued) well-founded semantics of normal programs with the (2-valued) logical semantics of the external theory. It combines non-monotonic negation of the well-founded semantics with the classical negation of FOL. It allows non constant function symbols. It contrast to most of related approaches it is deﬁned for arbitrary external FOL theories. The declarative semantics is undecidable, however it is decidable for Datalog hybrid programs with decidable external theories. In the special case of a hybrid program (P, T ) where P does not include negation, the declarative semantics is compatible with the semantics of FOL, in the sense explained in Section 3.2. The semantics makes possible reasoning by cases (cf. Ex. 2.3). • The operational semantics that describes how to answer (not necessarily ground) conjunctive queries. This includes handling of non-ground negative queries by combination of the ideas of CLP [MSW06] and constructive negation of [Dra95]. The operational semantics can be seen as an extension of SLS-resolution with handling of non-ground negative queries and constraints of the external theory. It can be implemented by compilation to Prolog [DHM07b], and employing an LP reasoner 36  for the well-founded semantics and a reasoner for the external theory. So the implementation requires rather small eﬀorts thanks to re-using the existing reasoners. A prototype implementation of this kind is described in [DHM07b]. It allows non constant function symbols, the external theories are OWL ontologies. It uses XSB Prolog [SSW+ 07] as an LP engine, and can use various OWL reasoners. It is eﬃcient, in the sense that the number of queries to the OWL reasoner is small. • Soundness and completeness results: the operational semantics was shown to be sound w.r.t. the declarative semantics. It is complete (and independent from the selection rule) for safe hybrid programs where the function symbols are constants. The external theory can be a theory of a constraint domain of CLP. Thus our framework additionally provides a method of adding non-monotonic negation to CLP, in a way generalizing the well-founded semantics. It contrast to most of related work, our approach works for arbitrary external FOL theories. There are no restrictions on the alphabet of function symbols (it may be ﬁnite or inﬁnite). We do not impose any conditions on the equality in the external theories, like unique name assumption (UNA) or freeness axioms (CET). There are certain requirements related to the operational semantics; however we show how an arbitrary external theory T ′ can be extended to a theory T satisfying the requirements. This paper does not study implementation techniques. They are subject of future work, begun in [DHM07b]. Acknowledgement. This research has been partially funded by the European Commission and by the Swiss Federal Oﬃce for Education and Science within the 6th Framework Programme project REWERSE number 506779 (cf. http://rewerse.net).  Appendix Here we present proofs of Lemma 4.7 and of two main technical lemmas from Sections 4.3 and 4.4. By var(F ) we denote the set of free variables of a formula F . Proof of Lemma 4.7. We ﬁrst prove part 2 by induction. Then part 1 follows immediately. Assume that a node Gi is safe apart of V . We show that each its child is safe apart of V . 37  Let Gi = C, L, p(t), L′ and its child Gi+1 = t=u, C, C ′, L, K, L′ be derived from Gi by a rule R = p(u) ← C ′ , K. Let N be the negative literals of L, L′ , and N ′ be the negative literals of K. Each free variable of u, C ′ , N ′ , is bound in C ′ to a ground term or to a variable occurring in a positive literal of K (as R is safe). Each variable from var(C, N) \ V is bound in C to a ground term or to a variable occurring in a positive literal of L, L′ or in t (as Gi is safe apart of V ). Hence each variable from var(C, N, t=u, C ′ , N ′ ) \ V is bound in C, t=u, C ′ to a ground term or to a variable occurring in a positive literal of K, L, L′ . Let Gi = C, L, ¬A, L′ with a negative literal ¬A selected, with a child Gi+1 = C, C ′ , L, L′ . We have var(C ′ ) ⊆ var(C, A), thus var(C, C ′) \ V ⊆ var(C, A) \ V . Thus each variable from var(C, C ′) \ V is bound in C, C ′ to a ground term or to a variable occurring in a positive literal of L, L′ . As the negative literals of Gi+1 are those of Gi , we obtain that Gi+1 is safe apart of V. ✷ The proofs below refer to ground programs of the form P/M0 (cf. Def. 3.2), and the operator deﬁning the well-founded semantics of normal logic programs (cf. Section 2.1): ΨP/M0 (I) = (M(P/M0 )/t I ∩ H) ∪ ¬(H \ M(P/M0 )/tu I ) Remember that from monotonicity of ΨP/M0 it follows that k ′ ≤ k implies ′ ΨkP/M0 (∅) ⊆ ΨkP/M0 (∅). Proof of Soundness Lemma 4.8. By transﬁnite induction on the rank of the t-tree and tu-tree. Assume that the lemma holds for t-trees and tu-trees of rank < k. We can assume that θ binds only the free variables of G. 1. Assume that C is an answer of a t-tree for G of rank k, and that M0 |= Cθ. Consider the branch G1 , . . . , Gm of the tree from the root G to the leaf C ′ (i.e. G1 = G, Gm = C ′ ) such that C = (. . . ∨ C ′ ∨ . . .)|G and M0 |= (C ′ |G )θ. We show that some ground instance of C ′ θ is true in M0 . This is obvious when M0 is a Herbrand interpretation or when the set of constraints has the witness property. If P is safe then C ′ is safe apart from the set V0 = var(G), by Lemma 4.7. So each variable x ∈ var(C ′ )\V0 is bound in C ′ to a ground term tx . Consider a substitution ϕ = { x/tx | x ∈ var(C ′ ) \ V0 }. Formula C ′ |G is equivalent to (C ′ ϕ)|G and to C ′ ϕ. Hence M0 |= C ′ ϕθ. The latter formula is a ground instance of C ′ θ, as ϕθ = θϕ. Thus substitution θ can be extended to a substitution θ′ such that M0 |= C ′ θ′ , and Gθ′ = Gθ. Notice that θ′ is applicable to all the goals in the branch (as for any such goal its constraint is of the form C1 , . . . , Cl , where C ′ = C1 , . . . , Cn , l ≤ n). 38  The sequence G1 θ′ , . . . , Gm θ′ is a successful branch of an instance of the considered t-tree for G. If a positive literal is selected in Gi then Gi+1 θ′ is derived from Gi θ by a rule from (P/M0 ). Whenever a negative literal ¬A is selected in Gi and Ci is the constraint of Gi then the constraint of Gi+1 is Ci , C ′′ , where C ′′ is a negative answer of a tu-tree of rank j < k for Ci , A. As θ′ is applicable to Gi+1 , we have M0 |= (Ci , C ′′ )θ′ . By the inductive ′ ′ assumption, Ψj+1 P/M0 (∅) |=3 ¬Aθ . The same holds for any k ≥ j. Thus the sequence G1 θ′ , . . . , Gm θ′ is a successful SLD-derivation for Gθ′ ′ +1 and the program Pt = (P/M0 )/t ΨkP/M (∅) for some k ′ < k. (If k = 0 then Pt = 0 P/M0 .) Hence MPt |= Gθ, by soundness of SLD-resolution [Apt97]. By the k ′ +2 deﬁnition of ΨP/M0 , for each positive literal A′ of Gθ we have ΨP/M (∅) |=3 A′ . 0 ′ +1 For each negative literal ¬A′ of Gθ we have ¬A′ ∈ Pt , i.e. ΨkP/M (∅) |=3 ¬A′ . 0 By monotonicity of ΨP/M0 for each literal L of Gθ we have Ψk+1 P/M0 (∅) |=3 L. k+1 Hence ΨP/M0 (∅) |=3 Gθ. 2. Consider a tu-tree Tr of rank k for G. Let the negative answer C be obtained from Tr and its cross-section F . Let CF be the constraints of the nodes of F . So C implies ¬(Ci |G ) for each Ci ∈ CF . Assume that M0 |= Cθ. Then M0 6|= Ci θ′ , for any extension θ′ of θ grounding the variables of Ci and for each Ci ∈ CF . Thus, in a ground instance Trθ of the tree, no node corresponds to a node of F (nor to a descendant of a node of F ). Hence no leaf of Trθ is successful. Out of Trθ we construct an SLD-tree with root Gθ for a certain ground program. The tree has no success leaves, hence Gθ is false in the least Herbrand model of the program (by completeness of SLD-resolution). In Trθ, consider a leaf G′ θ′ corresponding to a node G′ = (C ′ , L, ¬A, L′ ) of Tr, with a negative literal ¬A selected. The node G′ does not have a child C ′ , L, L′ (such a child implies that G′ θ′ is not a leaf). Hence case 4(b)ii or 4(b)iii has been applied to the node. Thus there exists an answer C ′′ of a t-tree for C ′ , A of rank k ′ < k. Moreover (¬C ′′ , C ′ )θ′ is false in M0 (otherwise ¬C ′′ , C ′ is satisﬁable, G′ has a child ¬C ′′ , C ′ , L, L′ , and G′ θ′ has a child Lθ′ , L′ θ′ ). Hence ¬C ′′ θ′ is false in M0 (as C ′ θ′ is true in M0 ). ′ +1 From M0 |= C ′′ θ′ and from the inductive assumption we obtain ΨkP/M (∅) |=3 0 ′ ′′ ′ Aθ . By monotonicity of ΨP/M0 the same holds for any k ≥ k . Thus ′ +1 ¬Aθ′ 6∈ (P/M0 )/tu ΨkP/M (∅), by the deﬁnition of /tu . As k ′ + 1 ≤ k, we 0 have ¬Aθ′ 6∈ (P/M0 )/tu ΨkP/M0 (∅). Hence the node G′ θ′ (with ¬Aθ′ selected) is a leaf of an SLD-tree for program (P/M0 )/tu ΨkP/M0 (∅). (Notice that this reasoning is also valid for a non ﬁnite k. In particular, k ′ + 1 < k if k is a limit ordinal.) If a non-leaf node G′ θ′ in Trθ corresponds to G′ = (C ′ , L, ¬AG′ , L′ ) of 39  Tr, with ¬AG′ selected, then the child of G′ θ′ is (L, L′ )θ′ . For each such node G′ θ′ of Trθ, let us add ¬AG′ θ′ to the child and all its descendants. The obtained tree is an SLD-tree for Gθ and a program Ptu ∪ Pvoid , where Ptu = (P/M0 )/tu ΨkP/M0 (∅), and each clause of Pvoid is of the form ¬A ← ¬A. Adding Pvoid to a deﬁnite clause logic program does not change its least Herbrand model. The obtained tree does not have a success node. By completeness of SLD-resolution [Apt97] MPtu 6|= Gθ, and for some literal L of Gθ we have L 6∈ MPtu . If L is of the form ¬A then A ∈ ΨkP/M0 (∅) (by the deﬁnition of /tu ), and L is f in ΨkP/M0 (∅). Otherwise L ∈ H \ MPtu and ¬L ∈ Ψk+1 P/M0 (∅), hence L is k+1 k+1 k+1 f in ΨP/M0 (∅). In both cases L is f in ΨP/M0 (∅), thus ΨP/M0 (∅) |=3 ¬Gθ. ✷ Proof of Completeness Lemma 4.13. If ΨkP/M0 (∅) |=3 Gθ or ΨkP/M0 (∅) |=3 ¬Gθ then we say that k − 1 is a level of Gθ when G does not contain a negative literal and k is a level of Gθ when G contains a negative literal. The proof is by induction on a level of Gθ; the rank of the constructed t- or tu-tree for G is the level of Gθ. k−1 Let Gθ be of level k ′ ∈ {k − 1, k}. Let us denote I = ΨP/M (∅) and 0 ′ k J = ΨP/M0 (∅). So J = ΨP/M0 (I) if G contains a negative literal, and J = I otherwise. In both cases I ⊆ J. 1. Assume ΨkP/M0 (∅) |=3 Gθ. Each positive literal A in Gθ is a member of M(P/M0 )/t I (by the deﬁnition of Ψ) and hence of M(P/M0 )/t J . For each negative literal ¬A in Gθ, we have J |=3 ¬A (as then ΨkP/M0 (∅) = J). Thus ¬A ∈ (P/M0 )/t J, by the deﬁnition of /t . So, by completeness of SLDresolution, for any selection rule there exists a successful SLD-derivation D for the goal Gθ and program (P/M0 )/t J. We now show how negative literals in the derivation are related to lower rank tu-trees. Consider a negative literal ¬A occurring in D. We have ¬A ∈ (P/M0 )/t J (i.e. ¬A ∈ J), so A is of level k ′ − 1. By the inductive assumption, for any goal B such that A = Bθ′ is a ground instance of B, if C ′ is the negation of a ﬁnite pseudo-answer of a maximal tu-tree for B via R of rank k ′ − 1 then M0 |= C ′ θ′ . Consider a maximal t-tree Tr of rank k ′ for G and (P, T ) via R. Let Trθ be a ground instance of Tr. It can be seen as an SLD-tree via a selection rule R′ , for a certain ground deﬁnite program containing the rules of P/M0 and some facts of the form ¬A. For R′ there exists a derivation D as above. We show that D is a branch of Trθ. We prove by induction on i that the i-th goal of D is a node of Trθ. Let a goal G′ θ′ of D be a node of Trθ, corresponding to a node G′ of Tr. If a positive literal is selected in G′ θ′ and in G′ then 40  any goal derived from G′ θ′ by a rule from P/M0 is a ground instance G′′ θ′′ of a child G′′ of G′ in Tr, where θ′′ is an extension of θ′ . If a negative literal ¬A is selected in G′ θ′ then a ¬B is selected in G′ and ¬A = ¬Bθ′ . The tree Tr refers to a maximal tu-tree for B, and to the negation C ′ of its ﬁnite pseudo-answer. As explained in the previous paragraph, M0 |= C ′ θ′ follows from the inductive assumption. The child G′′ of G′ in Tr is G′ with ¬Bi removed and C ′ added. So substitution θ′ is applicable to G′′ , and G′′ θ′ is G′ θ′ with ¬Ai removed. Thus the successor of G′ θ′ in D is the child G′′ θ′ of G′ θ′ in Trθ. The last goal of D is empty, it is a ground instance of a leaf Cs of Tr. Thus M0 |= (Cs θ)|G . Let C be a ﬁnite answer of the t-tree. M0 |= Cθ. 2. Assume that ΨkP/M0 (∅) |=3 ¬Gθ. Some literal L of Gθ is false in ΨkP/M0 (∅) = ΨP/M0 (I). If L = A is an atom then ¬A ∈ ΨP/M0 (I) ⊆ ΨP/M0 (J). Hence A 6∈ M(P/M0 )/tu J (by the deﬁnition of ΨP/M0 ). If L = ¬A is a negative literal then A ∈ ΨP/M0 (I) = J. Hence ¬A 6∈ (P/M0 )/tu J (by the deﬁnition of /tu ). In both cases, L 6∈ M(P/M0 )/tu J . Thus, by soundness of SLD-resolution, there does not exist a successful SLD-derivation for Gθ and the program (P/M0 )/tu J (as otherwise L ∈ M(P/M0 )/tu J , contradiction). Consider a maximal tu-tree Tr of rank k ′ for G via R, with a pseudoanswer D. We have to show that M0 |= ¬Dθ. Assume the contrary; then Tr has a success leaf Cs such that M0 |= (Cs |G )θ. Consider a branch of Tr from G to Cs . Let G1 , . . . , Gl be the goals of the branch (G = G1 , Gl = Cs ). As P is safe, by Lemma 4.7 there exists a substitution θ′ which is an extension of θ and is applicable to the nodes of the branch. (See part 1 of the proof of Lemma 4.8 for details.) We show that G1 θ′ , . . . , Gl θ′ is a successful SLDderivation for Gθ and (P/M0 )/tu J , which is a contradiction. If a positive literal is selected in Gi and a rule r ∈ P is applied to Gi to obtain Gi+1 then Gi+1 θ′ is obtained from Gi θ′ by applying a normal ground instance rσ ∈ (P/M0 )/tu J of r. Assume a negative literal ¬B is selected in Gi . The constraint of Gi+1 is equivalent to Ci , ¬C ′′ where Ci is the constraint of Gi and C ′′ is a ﬁnite answer of a maximal t-tree of rank k ′ − 1 for B. We have M0 |= ¬C ′′ θ′ , as θ′ is applicable to Gi+1 . Suppose Bθ′ ∈ J. This leads to contradiction: such Bθ′ is of level k ′ − 1 and, by the inductive assumption, the answer C ′′ satisﬁes M0 |= C ′′ θ′ . Thus Bθ′ 6∈ J and ¬Bθ′ ∈ (P/M0 )/tu J. Thus Gi+1 θ′ is obtained from Gi θ′ by applying a rule from (P/M0 )/tu J. Hence G1 θ′ , . . . , Gl θ′ is a successful SLD-derivation for Gθ and (P/M0 )/tu J; the assumption that M0 |= (Cs |G )θ is false. So M0 |= ¬(Cs |G )θ for each success leaf Cs of Tr. Let D be a ﬁnite pseudo-answer of Tr. Then M0 |= ¬Dθ for a negative answer ¬D of the tree. ✷  41  References [AB94]  Krzysztof R. Apt and Roland N. Bol. Logic programming and negation: A survey. J. Log. Program., 19/20:9–71, 1994.  [ADG+ 05]  Grigoris Antoniou, Carlos Viegas Damásio, Benjamin Grosof, Ian Horrocks, Michael Kifer, Jan Maluszynski, and Peter F. Patel-Schneider. Combining rules and ontologies. a survey., 2005. FP6 NoE REWERSE, Deliverable I3-D3, available at http://rewerse.net/deliverables/m12/i3-d3.pdf.  [Apt97]  K. R. Apt. From Logic Programming to Prolog. International Series in Computer Science. Prentice-Hall, 1997.  [BCM+ 03]  F. Baader, D. Calvanese, D. McGuiness, D. Nardi, and P. PatelSchneider, editors. The Description Logic Handbook. Cambridge University Press, 2003.  [BG94]  Chitta Baral and Michael Gelfond. Logic programming and knowledge representation. Journal of Logic Programming, 19/20:73–148, 1994.  [Cla78]  K. L. Clark. Negation as failure. In H. Gallaire and J. Minker, editors, Logic and Databases, pages 293–322. Plenum Press, 1978.  [dBET08]  Jos de Bruijn, Thomas Eiter, and Hans Tompits. Embedding approaches to combining rules and ontologies into autoepistemic logic. In Gerhard Brewka and Jérôme Lang, editors, KR, pages 485–495. AAAI Press, 2008.  [dBPPV07] Jos de Bruijn, David Pearce, Axel Polleres, and Agustı́n Valverde. Quantiﬁed equilibrium logic and hybrid rules. In Marchiori et al. [MPdSM07], pages 58–72. [DHM07a]  Wlodzimierz Drabent, Jakob Henriksson, and Jan Maluszynski. HD-rules: A hybrid system interfacing prolog with DLreasoners. In Proceedings of the ICLP’07 Workshop on Applications of Logic Programming to the Web, Semantic Web and Semantic Web Services (ALPSWS2007), CEUR Workshop Proceedings Vol 287, 2007. http://www.ceur-ws.org/Vol-287.  [DHM07b]  Wlodzimierz Drabent, Jakob Henriksson, and Jan Maluszynski. Hybrid reasoning with rules and constraints under well-founded semantics. In Marchiori et al. [MPdSM07], pages 348–357. 42  [DLNS98]  F. Donini, M. Lenzerini, D. Nardi, and A. Schaerf. AL-Log: Integrating Datalog and description logics. Intelligent Information Systems, 10(3):227–252, 1998.  [DM07]  Wlodzimierz Drabent and Jan Maluszynski. Well-founded semantics for hybrid rules. In Marchiori et al. [MPdSM07], pages 1–15.  [Dra93]  W. Drabent. SLS-resolution without ﬂoundering. In L. M. Pereira and A. Nerode, editors, Proc. 2nd International Workshop on Logic Programming and Non-Monotonic Reasoning, pages 82–98. MIT Press, June 1993.  [Dra95]  W. Drabent. What is failure? An approach to constructive negation. Acta Informatica, 32(1):27–59, February 1995.  [DS98]  Jürgen Dix and Frieder Stolzenburg. A framework to incorporate non-monotonic reasoning into constraint logic programming. J. Log. Program., 37(1-3):47–76, 1998.  [EIST06]  Thomas Eiter, Giovambattista Ianni, Roman Schindlauer, and Hans Tompits. Eﬀective integration of declarative rules with external evaluations for semantic-web reasoning. In York Sure and John Domingue, editors, ESWC, volume 4011 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 273–287. Springer, 2006.  [ELST04a]  T. Eiter, T. Lukasiewicz, R. Schindlauer, and H. Tompits. Combining answer set programming with description logics for the semantic web. In Proc. of the International Conference of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR’04), 2004.  [ELST04b] Thomas Eiter, Thomas Lukasiewicz, Roman Schindlauer, and Hans Tompits. Well-founded semantics for description logic programs in the semantic web. In Grigoris Antoniou and Harold Boley, editors, RuleML, volume 3323 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 81–97. Springer, 2004. [Fag97]  François Fages. Constructive negation by pruning. J. Log. Program., 32(2):85–118, 1997.  [FD93]  Gérard Ferrand and Pierre Deransart. Proof method of partial correctness and weak completeness for normal logic programs. J. Log. Program., 17(2/3&4):265–278, 1993. 43  [Gru95]  Tom R. Gruber. Towards principles for the design of ontologies used for knowledge sharing. Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 43:907–928, 1995.  [HPS04]  Ian Horrocks and Peter F. Patel-Schneider. A proposal for an OWL rules language. In WWW ’04: Proceedings of the 13th international conference on World Wide Web, pages 723–731, New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM.  [Kun87]  K. Kunen. Negation in logic programming. Journal of Logic Programming, 4(4):289–308, 1987.  [Llo87]  J. W. Lloyd. Foundations of logic programming. Springer series in symbolic computation. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., second extended edition, 1987.  [LR98]  A. Levy and M.-C. Rousset. Combining horn rules and description logics in carin. Artif. Intell., 104(1-2):165–209, 1998.  [MPdSM07] Massimo Marchiori, Jeﬀ Z. Pan, and Christian de Sainte Marie, editors. Web Reasoning and Rule Systems, First International Conference, RR 2007, Innsbruck , Austria, June 7-8, 2007, Proceedings, volume 4524 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2007. [MR07]  Boris Motik and Riccardo Rosati. A faithful integration of description logics with logic programming. In Manuela M. Veloso, editor, IJCAI 2007, Proceedings of the 20th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 477–482, 2007.  [MSS05]  Boris Motik, Ulrike Sattler, and Rudi Studer. Query answering for OWL-DL with rules. J. Web Sem., 3(1):41–60, 2005.  [MSW06]  K. Marriott, P. J. Stuckey, and M. Wallace. Constraint logic programming. In Handbook of Constraint Programming. Elsevier, 2006.  [Prz89]  T. C. Przymusinski. On the declarative and procedural semantics of logic programs. Journal of Automated Reasoning, 5:167– 205, 1989.  [PSHH04]  Peter F. Patel-Schneider, Patrick Hayes, and Ian Horrocks. OWL web ontology language semantics and abstract syntax. W3C Recommendation, 10 February 2004. Available at http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-semantics/. 44  [Ros05]  Riccardo Rosati. On the decidability and complexity of integrating ontologies and rules. Journal of Web Semantics, 3:61–73, 2005.  [Ros06]  Riccardo Rosati. DL+log: Tight integration of Description Logics and disjunctive Datalog. In Patrick Doherty, John Mylopoulos, and Christopher A. Welty, editors, KR, pages 68–78. AAAI Press, 2006.  [Sho67]  J. R. Shoenﬁeld. Mathematical Logic. Addison-Wesley, 1967.  [SSW+ 07]  C. Sagonas, T. Swift, D. S. Warren, et al. The XSB System. Volume1: Programmer’s Manual, 2007. Available at http://xsb.sourceforge.net.  [Stu95]  P. J. Stuckey. Negation and constraint logic programming. Information and Computation, 118(1):12–33, 1995.  [vGRS88]  A. van Gelder, K. A. Ross, and J. S. Schlipf. Unfounded sets and well-founded semantics for general logic programs. In Principles of Database Systems, pages 221–230. ACM, 1988.  45

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 6. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
