Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_7425

Abstract:
Approximating PageRank locally with sublinear query complexity Marco Bressan Sapienza Univ. Roma bressan@di.uniroma1.it  Enoch Peserico Univ. Padova enoch@dei.unipd.it  Luca Pretto Univ. Padova pretto@dei.unipd.it  arXiv:1404.1864v2 [cs.DS] 5 Feb 2018  Abstract Can we approximate the centrality score of a given node by exploring only a vanishing fraction of the graph? In this paper we develop a combination of techniques that we apply to the case of PageRank, where the centrality of a node depends on every arc in the graph. We obtain an algorithm that, given any one node in any n-node graph, with probability 1−δp returns a multiplicative (1 ± ǫ) approximation of its PageRank score using at most 2 2 2 1 O n 3 3 log(n/δ) ln(1/δ) 3 ǫ− 3 = Õ(n 3 ) graph exploration queries – where a query returns either a given node’s list of neighbours, or a node chosen uniformly at random. Until now, every algorithm required in general Ω(n) queries. We also show that this upper bound is essentially optimal by proving an almost matching lower bound. Our techniques can be applied to other centrality measures, even though we leave the analysis of the resulting bounds for future work.  1  Introduction  Graph centralities are a key tool in modern network analysis. Historically, centrality scores were computed processing the entire input graph in batch fashion through algebraic techniques, and returning the exact scores of all nodes. In recent years, however, this approach has often proved inadequate for dealing with the massive size, and the rate of evolution, of real-world networks such as the web or online social networks. In such scenarios, the standard assumption that the entire input graph is readily available to the algorithm that computes the centrality scores is often unrealistic; at the same time, computing the exact scores of all nodes in the network is often unnecessary, and one only needs a quick approximation of the scores of a few target nodes. In this paper we develop randomized, sampling-based techniques to approximate the centrality of a given node in a graph while exploring a minimal portion of the graph itself. We assume the graph is accessible via exploration queries that allow one to retrieve the neighbourhood of a node and to jump to a node chosen uniformly at random in the graph; these queries are not introduced by us, but are standard in previous literature on the subject. We stress that we focus on query complexity (the number of queries necessary for the task), leaving computational complexity for future work. In other words, our goal is to minimize the portion of the graph we need to fetch, rather than the amount of operations we perform on the fecthed portion, so our work falls into the category of “local algorithms” in the sense of Brautbar and Kearns [10]. More precisely, the problem we investigate can be expressed as follows: Given any node v in a graph G, and any ǫ, δ > 0, how many exploration queries are necessary to approximate the centrality score P (v) of v within a factor (1 ± ǫ) with probability at least 1 − δ? Note that with Θ(n) queries one can always retrieve the whole graph G and compute all the scores; thus the question is what one can do with o(n) queries. In this paper we focus on the case of PageRank – perhaps the most celebrated centrality measure – for which the general question of whether o(n) queries are always sufficient to approximate P (v) has remained open until now. 1  We present an algorithm that computes a multiplicative (1 ± ǫ)-approximation of P (v) with 2 probability 1 − δ with only Õ(n 3 ) queries, for any given v, regardless of the graph’s topology – which we show is asymptotically optimal. Our techniques apply also to other centrality measures, such as eigenvector centrality or Katz centrality. In terms of what bounds may be attained, however, we only look at PageRank and leave other centrality measures for future work. The paper is organized as follows. This introduction briefly reviews PageRank and its related approximation problem (Subsection 1.1). Section 2 outlines the main results of the paper. Section 3 summarizes the state of the art. Section 4 presents our techniques and uses them to prove our upper bounds. Section 5 provides some concluding remarks. All the details omitted to ease the reader’s burden can be found in the appendix, including the pseudocode of all our algorithms.  1.1  PageRank and its local approximation  PageRank [15] is a classic graph centrality measure, employed in an ever-growing number of applications (see [21]) and named one of the top 10 algorithms in data mining [37]. The PageRank score of a node u in a graph G of n nodes u1 , . . . un can be defined in terms of an abstract surfer, who navigates G starting from an arbitrary node. At each timestep, with some positive probability α the surfer moves to a child of the current node chosen uniformly at random, or to a node chosen uniformly at random if the current node is dangling, i.e. has no children. Otherwise, with positive probability 1 − α the surfer performs a random jump leading to a node chosen uniformly at random; the parameter α is called the damping factor. The PageRank score P (ui ) of ui is simply the stationary probability of the surfer being on ui . The row vector p whose ith component is P (ui ) is then the unique solution of: p = αpM +  (1 − α) 1 n  (1)  where 1 is the n-dimensional row vector whose components all equal 1 and M is an n by n matrix whose generic element Mi,j equals n−1 if ui has no children, and equals m−1 or 0 if ui has m > 0 children and uj respectively is or is not one of them. Thus, 1−α n ≤ P (ui ) ≤ 1. Computing exactly all PageRank scores from Equation 1 can be done using standard linear algebra tools – but requires retrieving and manipulating the entire adjacency matrix of the graph. Instead, here we seek to approximate the PageRank score of a target node v by “exploring a small portion” of the whole graph. This problem is often referred to as local PageRank approximation (“local” denotes the requirement of computing a single specific entry of the score vector). To formalize the intuitive notion of “exploring a small portion” of the graph we adopt the model used in previous work on local PageRank approximation. The algorithm receives in input the ID of the target node v, and has no other prior information about the graph itself. It is then given access to an oracle that accepts two types of exploration queries: • Neighbourhood( u) (see [6, 4]), which takes in input a node u and returns a list of all arcs entering and/or leaving it; effectively returning the corresponding row and column of the adjaceny matrix. This models different scenarios. For example, in web crawling, one can find the pages pointed by/pointing to a given web page by crawling the page and by performing a “links-to” interrogation to a search engine. In online social networks, restrictions are often imposed on whether a user profile can be accessed or not; but once one can access it, one can retrieve its neighbors at a relatively small cost. • RandomNode() (see [10, 9]), also known as jump, which returns a node picked uniformly at random in the graph. Random access can be available depending on the context, but we can pessimistically assume that it has a non-negligible cost. For instance, one could very quickly generate random node IDs in a known range, but that range can be extremely  2  large with only a minuscule fraction of it actually mapped to existing nodes (e.g. in the case of web-page URLs). We shall also use RandomChild( u) [10, 9], also known as crawl, that returns a child of u chosen uniformly at random (or the empty set if u is childless). RandomChild( u) can always be replaced by Neighbourhood( u) followed by a random choice, and we use it simply because it makes the algorithms easier to read and understand. As it is in previous work, we allow algorithms to invoke Neighbourhood( ·) or RandomChild( ·) only on a node that is already known, i.e., either on the target node v or on a node returned by a previous query invocation.  2  Our contribution  In this paper we develop novel randomized techniques to efficiently estimate the PageRank score P (v) of any given node v in a graph. Our techniques, coupled with simple node-sampling and outdegree-sketching routines, yield the following result: 2p 1 2 Theorem 1. O n 3 3 log(n/δ) ln(1/δ) 3 ǫ− 3 RandomNode() and Neighbourhood(·) queries are sufficient to obtain with probability (1 − δ) a (1 ± ǫ)-approximation of the PageRank score of any node in any n-node graph. As an intermediate result towards Theorem 1, we develop an upper bound that depends on the knowledge of the outdegrees of the graph and can be of use e.g. in graphs of bounded degree: Theorem 2. Let out(u) denote the outdegree of u. If for any pair u, u′ of nodes with nonzero outdegree one has an estimate of out(u′ )/out(u) that is within a multiplicative factor γ of the  1p 1 actual value, then the bound of Theorem 1 becomes O n 2 γ 2 ln(1/δ) 1ǫ .  The main technical contributions behind these upper bounds are (1) a score estimator parameterized on the topologies of a sequence of explored subgraphs, and (2) an iterative algorithm that explores the “right” sequence of subgraphs in order to minimize the variance of the estimator. These techniques can be applied to other centrality measures, too – see Subsection 4.5; the precise bounds that can be derived depend on the centrality measure at hand. Here we focus on PageRank, which we see as a first step towards a more general result. Finally, we show that our bounds are essentially optimal, by providing a lower bound on the number of RandomNode() and Neighbourhood( ·) queries needed to approximate P (v). We actually give lower bounds for the easier ranking version of the problem: determine which of two given nodes in a graph has the higher PageRank score, provided their scores are not too close. The bounds immediately apply also to the score approximation problem, since one can rank the two nodes correctly if one can obtain (1 ± ǫ)-approximations of their scores for a small enough ǫ. The proof is given in Appendix A.11.  Theorem 3. Choose any real functions f (n), γ(n) with n1 ≤ f (n) ≤ 1 and γ(n) ≥ 1, any constant η > 0. There exists a graph of arbitrarily large size n and maximum outdegree O(γ(n)) containing two nodes u and v with P (u), P (v) in Θ(f (n)) and P (u) > (1 + η)P (v) such that any  2 1 1 1 queries to have probability algorithm must perform in expectation Ω min n 3 , n 2 γ(n) 2 , f (n) 1 2 + Ω(1) of correctly determining that P (u) > P (v).  3  Related work  A first set of existing results on local PageRank approximation concerns those algorithms based exclusively on Neighbourhood( ·) queries. The problem itself was introduced in [16] under a Neighbourhood( ·)-based graph access model, together with some heuristic approximation strategies 3  and encouraging experimental results. Subsequently, [1] presented a Neighbourhood( ·)-based algorithm to find the nodes that contribute the most to the score of a target node; one may also use the algorithm as a score approximation algorithm, but in the worst case it performs Ω(n) queries. A series of negative results [6, 14, 13] then showed that, if one uses only Neighbourhood( ·) (without RandomNode()), in the worst case any Monte Carlo algorithm needs Ω(n) queries and any Las Vegas algorithm needs n − o(n) queries. At the same time, several works addressed the problem of approximating the PageRank scores of the top-ranking nodes in the graph. In particular, [18, 3, 9, 8] developed a simple but powerful technique to sample nodes from a graph with probability proportional to their PageRank score using O(1) jump-and-crawl (i.e. RandomNode() and RandomChild( ·)) queries per sample. Using this technique one can obtain a (1 ± ǫ) approximation of the PageRank score P (v) of a node v with Õ(1/P (v)) jump-and-crawl queries; and [9, 8] also proved that Ω(1/P (v)) queries are in general necessary if one is restricted to jump-and-crawl queries. Since at most a vanishing fraction of all nodes in a graph can have PageRank score asymptotically larger than 1/n, ensuring worst-case o(n) query complexity with only jump-and-crawl queries is impossible. Finally, recent papers [32, 29, 5, 30] have looked at approximating the Personalized PageRank (PPR) [15] of a target node and related problems. In particular, just after our preliminary report [12], another report [31] introduced FAST-PPR, an approximation algorithm for PPR. FAST-PPR approximates the PPR score of a given node within p a factor (1 ± ǫ), whenever the score is larger than a given δ; it has expected running time Õ( d/δ) over the choice of a random target node, if the graph has average degree d. FAST-PPR and our algorithm both leverage a similar idea: coupling the exploration of a subgraph surrounding the target node with node sampling by random walks. However, results and techniques are different. First, FAST-PPR gives average-case computational complexity bounds, while we give worst-case query complexity bounds. Second, our techniques make explicit the role of outdegrees (Theorem 2); as a result, 2 thanks to our outdegree sketching scheme we need only Õ(n 3 ) queries, while FAST-PPR needs Ω(n) in the worst case. Third, our estimator makes the analysis easier (although perhaps being trickier to build) and avoids the “target-avoiding” random walk of [32].  4  Upper Bounds  This section presents the key techniques behind our local approximation algorithm for PageRank, and behind the proofs of Theorems 1 and 2. All missing details are in the appendix. Let us give a quick outline. We begin in Subsection 4.1 by developing a “diffuse” estimator of P (v) that is a weighted sum of random variables, each one tied to a node in a subgraph surrounding v and indicating if it gets hit by a random walk. In Subsection 4.2 we derive concentration bounds showing how the variance of this estimator, and thus the number of queries required to estimate P (v), is controlled by the relative imbalance between the coefficients of the weighted sum: the better the balance, the smaller the variance. In Subsection 4.3 we then present an iterative graph exploration scheme that builds an estimator with perfectly balanced coefficients, assuming the outdegree of each node in the graph is known beforehand. With these tools, in Subsection 4.4 we address the general case where the outdegrees are initially unknown or only partially known, proving both Theorem 1 and 2. First we show that, if one has outdegree estimates that distort by a factor at most γ the true ratio between any two outdegrees, then 1 1 P (v) can be estimated with O(n 2 γ 2 ) queries – the upper bound of Theorem 2. Then, by using a simple outdegree approximation scheme that yields γ = O(n log(n)/k) with high probability 2 2 using k queries, for k = Õ(n 3 ) we prove the Õ(n 3 ) upper bound of Theorem 1. Finally, in Subsection 4.5 we discuss the applicability of our methods to other centrality measures. For the sake of concreteness, all our algorithms are translated into pseudocode in Appendix A.9. Remark. In what follows, we assume the number n of nodes in the graph is known. An 4  accurate approximation of n would also suffice, and such an approximation can be obtained using RandomNode() calls in a birthday-like argument while keeping unchanged the asymptotic complexity and approximation guarantees of our algorithm, including the dependence on δ and ǫ; see the bounds in [11]. Furthermore, we assume that G is free from dangling nodes, which makes the discussion much lighter. Such an assumption can also be lifted with no impact on our final results, as discussed in Appendix A.10.  4.1  A diffuse PageRank estimator  The first cornerstone of our algorithm, presented in this section, is a “diffuse” estimator of P (v) which, in a nutshell, employs a subgraph around v as an “antenna” that collects the information obtained by sampling nodes through PageRank random walks. Let us start with a simple example. From Equation 1 one can immediately derive the following elementary relationship: P (v) =  1−α + n  X  P (u)  u:(u,v)∈G  α out(u)  (2)  Clearly, if in the equation above we replace P (u) with a random variable χu having E[χu ] = P (u), by linearity of expectation we obtain an unbiased estimator of P (v). We apply this construction to a more general version of Equation 2. Consider an arbitrary induced subgraph Ḡ of G. The frontier F (Ḡ) of Ḡ is the set of arcs leading from G \ Ḡ to Ḡ: Definition 1. Given an induced subgraph Ḡ = (V̄ , Ē) of G = (V, E), its frontier is F (Ḡ) = {(u, w) ∈ E : u ∈ / V̄ , w ∈ V̄ }. Given any u ∈ G, if there exists an arc (u, w) ∈ F (Ḡ) then we say u is on the frontier F (Ḡ), and with a slight abuse of notation we write u ∈ F (Ḡ). Now, similarly to how Equation 2 expresses P (v) as a function of the scores of the parents of v, we can express P (v) as a function of the scores of the nodes on the frontier F (Ḡ). Formally, we prove (see Appendix A.2): Lemma 4. For any induced subgraph Ḡ of G and any v ∈ Ḡ we have: P (v) = cḠ +  X  P (u)  u∈F (Ḡ)  cḠ (u) out(u)  (3)  where cḠ and cḠ (u) depend only on α, n, Ḡ and F (Ḡ). Now suppose again that for each u ∈ G we have an indicator random variable χu with E[χu ] = P (u). Then if in Equation 3 we replace P (u) with χu we obtain, by linearity of expectation, a random variable which is an unbiased estimator of P (v). Formally: Lemma 5. P (v) = E[pḠ (v)], where X  pḠ (v) = cḠ +  χu  u∈F (Ḡ)  cḠ (u) out(u)  (4)  This is a first, simple estimator of P (v) that can be used whenever we have explored a subgraph Ḡ containing u (i.e. we have invoked Neighbourhood( ·) on all of its nodes). Before proceeding let us describe how to take a sample of pḠ (v).  5  Taking a sample of pḠ (v). We employ SampleNode(), a simple node-sampling routine originally introduced in [18, 3] and which is formally defined in Appendix A.3. SampleNode() emulates PageRank’s random walk using RandomNode() and RandomChild( ·) queries, returning the last node visited before a random jump. It is not hard to prove (see Appendix A.4): Lemma 6. SampleNode() returns node u with probability P (u). We can therefore implement the random variables χu needed by pḠ (v) (Equation 4) by simply defining χu as the indicator random variable of the event that SampleNode() returns u. Note also that, although out(u) appears in pḠ (v) for all nodes u on the frontier, and although those nodes could be Θ(n), we do not need to know out(u) unless u is the node returned by SampleNode() (in which case we just need to invoke Neighbourhood( u)). Indeed, any summation term associated to a node not returned by SampleNode() is set to zero by the corresponding indicator variable, and we can just disregard it. For what concerns complexity, it is immediate to see from the pseudocode in Appendix A.3 that one call to SampleNode() makes O(1) queries in expectation. By standard concentration bounds, the probability that O(ℓ) queries are not sufficient to complete ℓ calls is exponentially small in ℓ (see Appendix A.5); in our analysis we will therefore equivalently use the number of SampleNode() calls in place of the number of queries required to perform those calls. Gaining a degree of freedom by weighting nodes along the exploration. Consider again pḠ (v) as defined by Equation 4. The advantage of pḠ (v) over the “naive” estimator χv is the following: when P (v) is small, SampleNode() is much more likely to return some of the nodes on the frontier F (Ḡ) rather than v itself, and thus the variance of pḠ (v) can be much cḠ (u) of the random lower than that of χv . The crucial point in this sense are the coefficients out(u) variables χu : if those coefficients were all identical, then the weighted sum in Equation 4 would have a small variance, and E[pḠ (v)] could be estimated with only a few samples. However, those coefficients are determined by the topology of Ḡ – which we know only after exploring it – and by outdegrees of the nodes on the frontier. We now develop a more sophisticated estimator, that we can build along the exploration of the graph, which yields control over the coefficients. Consider a sequence of increasingly larger induced subgraphs G0 , . . . , Gm , each one containing v, obtained by progressively exploring G through m+1 Neighbourhood( ·) queries in the following way. Start by querying v; this reveals the subgraph G0 induced by v, as well as its frontier F (G0 ). Then, for each i = 1, . . . , m, invoke Neighbourhood( ·) on a node on F (Gi−1 ); so that we learn the subgraph Gi induced by that node and all the nodes in Gi−1 , as well as its frontier F (Gi ). Now, by Lemma 5, to each subgraph Gi we can associate an estimator pGi (v) with E[pGi (v)] = P (v). Therefore, if we take a convex linear combination of the estimators through m that sum to 1, we obtain again an unbiased estimator of P (v): multipliers β0m , . . . , βm pm (v) =  m X  βim pGi (v) =  m X i=0  i=0   X cG (u)  χu i βim cGi + out(u)  (5)  u∈F (Gi )  Let us put Equation 5 in a more telling form, highlighting for each node u the random variable χu and its coefficient. Let u1 , . . . , um be the nodes that have been queried in sequence after v, so that ui ∈ Gi \ Gi−1 . For each u in G let j(u) be the smallest i such that u ∈ F (Gi ). By rearranging the terms of Equation 5 we obtain: pm (v) =  m X i=0  βim cGi  +  m X i=1  χui  i−1  X  cG (ui ) βjm j out(ui ) j=j(ui )    +  X  χu  u∈F (Gm )  m  X  βjm  j=j(u)  cGj (u)  out(u)  (6)  Equation 6 has the following meaning. The first summation collects all the constant terms from Equation 5. The second summation gathers the χui associated to nodes ui that were on the 6  frontier of some Gi , but have since been queried and are now in Gm . The third summation is similar to the second, but concerns only those nodes that are (still) on F (Gm ). The random variable pm (v) is our diffuse estimator of P (v). By comparing it with pḠ (v) (Equation 4) one can see a crucial difference: pm (v) contains the random variables associated to all the nodes inside Gm as well as those on its frontier, and those random variables are weighted m by coefficients that depend not only on the topology of Gm but also on multipliers β0m , . . . , βm that we can control. These multipliers are the key to make pm (v) concentrated around its mean. To this end, in the next subsection we derive concentration bounds for pm (v) which highlight the role of the coefficients in obtaining our final approximation guarantees.  4.2  Concentration bounds for pm (v).  In this section we derive bounds on the probability that pm (v) falls far from P (v), expliciting its relationship with the coefficients of the χu and with the number of queries spent to build and sample the estimator. We start by rewriting Equation 6 more compactly. Define: cm = cm (ui ) =  m X  βim cGi  i=0 i−1 X  βjm  cm (u) =  cGj (ui ) out(ui )  ∀i = 1, . . . , m  (8)  cGj (u) out(u)  ∀u ∈ F (Gm )  (9)  βjm  j=j(ui ) m X j=j(u)  (7)  Then Equation 6 simplifies to: pm (v) = cm +  m X  χui cm (ui ) +  i=1  X  χu cm (u)  (10)  u∈F (Gm )  Equation 10 will be a focal point of our analysis. We call inner summation its first summation, and frontier summation its second summation; similarly, we call inner coefficients the coefficients cm (ui ), and frontier coefficients the coefficients cm (u). Now to the probability bounds. Instead of pm (v), which is tied to a single invocation of SampleNode(), we analyse an estimator pℓm (v) which is the average of ℓ independent realizations of pm (v) (this is indeed the estimator we will use in our algorithm). Formally, consider ℓ executions of SampleNode(), and for each node z ∈ G let χhz be the indicator random variable of thePevent that the h-th execution returns z. In Equation 10 replace each random variable χz by 1ℓ ℓh=1 χhz . We obtain the following estimator: pℓm (v)  ℓ m  X 1 XX h h χui cm (ui ) + χu cm (u) = cm + ℓ h=1  i=1  (11)  u∈F (Gm )  By straightforward manipulations, and by the probability bounds of Appendix A.1 applied to the non-positively correlated random variables χhu , we can prove (see Appendix A.6): Lemma 7. hℓ i    P r |pℓm (v) − P (v)| > ǫP (v) ≤ 2 exp − ǫ2 E (pℓm (v) − cm ) /3 c  (12)  Finally, we lower bound the expectation E[ cℓ (pℓm (v) − cm )] appearing at the right-hand side of P P h cm (ui ) ; Equation 12. Again by straightforward manipulations, cℓ (pℓm (v) − cm ) ≥ ℓh=1 m i=1 χui c 7  P P h cm (ui ) ]. Since E[χh ] = P (u ) ≥ hence we focus on lower bounding E[ ℓh=1 m i ui i=1 χui c Pℓ Pm h cm (ui ) cm (ui ) 1−α ui , we have E[ h=1 i=1 χui c ] ≥ ℓ m n · mini=1,...,m { c }. Therefore: E  1−α n  n c (u ) o i 1−α m i (pℓm (v) − cm ) ≥ ℓ m · min i=1,...,m c n c  hℓ  for any  (13)  This ties the concentration of pℓm (v) to the number of queries and to the imbalance between the coefficients. It is convenient to capture that imbalance into a definition: Definition 2. We say that pm (v) is γ-balanced if each inner coefficient is at least 1/γ times  i) any other inner or frontier coefficient, that is, if mini=1,...,m cm (u ≥ 1/γ. c Indeed, if pm (v) is γ-balanced then the right-hand side of Equation 13 is at least Plugging this value at the exponent of Equation 12, we obtain:  1−α 1 γ ℓm n .  Lemma 8. If pm (v) is γ-balanced, then   −(ǫ2 γ1 ℓm 1−α )/3 n P r |pℓm (v) − P (v)| > ǫP (v) ≤ 2e  (14)  Lemma 8 is the arrival point of this subsection: it tells the roles of ℓ, m and γ in the concentration of pℓm (v). Intuitively, if γ is close to 1, then pℓm (v) behaves essentially as the sum of mℓ (or more) non-positively correlated indicator random variables; its variance is small, and with a small number of queries ℓ and m we can achieve the desired approximation guarantees. On the other hand, if γ is large, we must increase ℓ and m in order to achieve good approximation guarantees. Note again that ℓ has the sole effect of appearing at the exponent of the bound, but is otherwise irrelevant to our analysis; therefore, for the sake of simplicity we will analyse the simpler estimator pm (v), and resort to Lemma 8 only for the final bounds.  4.3  An exploration scheme to build a 1-balanced estimator.  Having pinned down the relationship between the imbalance of the coefficients and the concentration of the estimator (Lemma 8), we can now focus on building a balanced (i.e. concentrated) estimator. We show how, if the outdegrees of G are known beforehand, with just m + 1 queries one can build a 1-balanced estimator pm (v). More precisely, we give an iterative strategy for sem while building a sequence of 1-balanced lecting the nodes u1 , . . . , um and multipliers β0m , . . . , βm estimators p1 (v), . . . , pm (v). The key idea is the following. Recall the expression of pm (v) in Equation 10. By construction, m appears in every frontier coefficient, but in none of the inner coefficients. the multiplier βm m m (and rescaling β m , . . . , β m Therefore by altering βm m−1 so that they add up to 1 − βm ) one can 0 control the relative ratio between inner and frontier coefficients. Exploiting this fact, we can make the largest frontier coefficient match exactly the inner coefficients; the corresponding node u′ is then the next to be queried, and its term is moved to the inner summation while the frontier summation gains new terms associated to the new frontier nodes that point to u′ . In this way we can iteratively build pm (v) from pm−1 (v), by rescaling and moving terms from the frontier summation to the inner summation while always keeping the inner coefficients all identical and never smaller than any frontier coefficient. Let us describe the iterative step of the construction in more detail. Suppose we have built an estimator pm−1 (v) that satisfies the following three conditions: (1) all inner coefficients are identical, (2) all inner coefficients are at least as large as any frontier coefficient, and (3) there exists a frontier coefficient that equals the inner coefficients (conditions (1) and (2) state that pm−1 (v) is 1-balanced, while condition (3) is needed by our construction). Starting from pm−1 (v), we can build a new estimator pm (v) that still satisfies all three conditions in the following way. Let u′ be the frontier node whose frontier coefficient matches the inner coefficients. We let um be u′ , and move its term from the frontier summation to the inner summation of Equation 10, 8  therefore setting cm (um ) = cm−1 (u′ ). The inner summation now has m terms, and its m inner coefficients are all identical since by hypothesis on the third condition cm (um ) matches all other inner coefficients. We then add to the frontier summation the new terms relative to those nodes that appear on the frontier of the new subgraph Gm , which we learn by invoking Neighbourm; hood( ·) on um . To this end, we must pick a new set of nonnegative multipliers β0m , . . . , βm m weights the new terms each βim replaces the corresponding βim−1 for all i ≤ m − 1, while βm m−1 m m appearing on the frontier summation. Let then βi = βi (1 − βm ) for all i ≤ m − 1. We are in m ), and thus keeping condition (1) other words rescaling all inner coefficients by a factor (1 − βm satisfied. On the other hand, any frontier coefficient cm (u) is the sum of cm−1 (u), rescaled by m ), and of a new term proportional to β m ; hence if we gradually increase β m starting from (1 − βm m m 0, some frontier coefficient will eventually match the inner coefficients. At this point, conditions (2) and (3) are also both satisfied. m that satisfies condition Note that, although we have depicted the selection of the value of βm m is the smallest (3) as a “continuous” process, it can easily be computed in one shot. In fact, βm nonnegative real such that, for some u ∈ F (Gm ), we have: m in m m (1 − βm )cm−1 = (1 − βm )cm−1 (u) + βm  cGm (u) out(u)  (15)  where cin m−1 = cm−1 (u1 ) = . . . = cm−1 (um−1 ) is any inner coefficient at step m − 1. If we then let ∆m (u) = cin m−1 − cm−1 (u), it is easy to check that: m βm =  min  u∈F (Gm )  ∆m (u) ∆m (u) +  cGm (u) out(u)  (16)  Note also that the construction requires computing the frontier coefficients, which depend on the outdegrees of the frontier nodes. We can thus perform the construction if we know the outdegree of each node of the graph in advance. Appendix A.7 gives a formal description and analysis of the construction, proving the following lemma; the routine BalancedEstimator(v, out, m) in Appendix A.9 gives pseudocode of the whole construction. Lemma 9. If the outdegree of every node in G is known beforehand, then with m + 1 Neighbourhood(·) queries one can build a 1-balanced estimator pm (v). Unfortunately, we do not know the outdegree of a node before querying it. In the next section we show that, still, the techniques developed so far can be used in the general case, i.e. when the outdegrees are known only approximately (or are totally unknown).  4.4  Using approximate knowledge of the outdegrees  In this section we analyse the exploration scheme of Subsection 4.3 assuming the outdegrees of the graph are not known in advance. In a nutshell we prove that knowing the relative ratios of the outdegrees up to an approximation factor γ allows one to build a γ-balanced estimator. This will lead to the proof of Theorem 2 and, by plugging in a simple outdegree sketching routine, to the proof of Theorem 1. Suppose then the outdegrees of G are initially unknown. In this case the construction of the m as described in Subsection 4.3 becomes problematic, since sequences u1 , . . . , um and β0m , . . . , βm at each step it requires computing the frontier coefficients cm (u), which in turn requires knowing the outdegrees of the frontier nodes. Suppose however we have an estimate out(u) b of out(u), for each u ∈ G. We then proceed through the construction by using, in place of the actual Pi−1 cG (ui ) β m bj i ) and frontier coefficients coefficients, the surrogate inner coefficients ĉm (ui ) = j=j(u i ) j out(u P m m m cGj (u) . Now, the u , . . . , u ĉm (u) = m 1 m and β0 , . . . , βm selected by the scheme will j=j(u) βj out(u) b produce inner coefficients and frontier coefficients that are no longer balanced in the sense of 9  Lemma 9. However, by precisely the same argument of Lemma 9, the surrogate coefficients will be balanced, i.e. all ĉm (ui ) will be identical and at least as large as any ĉm (u). Then, since b i) out(u) b cm (ui ) = out(u out(ui ) ĉm (ui ) and cm (u) = out(u) ĉm (u), the imbalance among the actual coefficients is bounded by how much the estimates “distort” the ratios between the actual outdegrees. In fact, the construction can be carried out even if we only know estimates of the ratios between the outdegrees. Formally, one can prove a generalization of Lemma 9 which follows immediately from the proof of Lemma 9 and the definitions of ĉm (ui ) and ĉm (u): Lemma 10. If for any pair of nodes u, u′ ∈ G with nonzero outdegrees one has an estimate of out(u)/out(u′ ) which is at most γ times the actual value, then with m + 1 Neighbourhood(·) queries one can build a γ-balanced estimator pm (v). Proving Theorem 2. By virtue of Lemma 10pwe can readily prove Theorem 2: it suffices to  1 1 1 2 2 ln(1/δ) ǫ . One can then make the probability invoke Lemma 8 for large enough m, ℓ = O n γ of erring by more than a multiplicative factor (1 ± ǫ) in the estimate of P (v) arbitrarily smaller than any given δ > 0. It remains to prove Theorem 1. The last ingredient we need to this end is a simple routine to approximate the outdegrees of G. The intuition is the following. Invoke RandomNode() to pick a node uniformly at random in G, and then we invoke Neighbourhood( ·) to discover its parents. Clearly, for any given u ∈ G the probability that u appears as a parent of the sampled node is exactly out(u) n . We can therefore estimate out(u) simultaneously for all u ∈ G simply by repeating this procedure and counting, for each u ∈ G, the number of times u appeared as a parent; the only tricky part is in determining the number of samples needed to guarantee a good approximation for all nodes – or, more precisely, for all nodes whose outdegree is large enough to make it likely for their children to be hit. The scheme is described formally in Appendix A.9, and yields the following guarantees (proof in Appendix A.8): Lemma 11. With k RandomNode() and k Neighbourhood(·) queries one can obtain estimates n log(n) with probability 1 − 2n {out(u)} b u∈G such that, for any b > 0, we have γ ≤ 4b k  b − 8 ln(2) +1  .  Proving Theorem 1. We can now conclude the proof of Theorem 1. By Lemma 11, we can make arbitrarily smaller than δ the probability that γ > 4b n log(n) by choosing a large enough k , and by b ∈ O(1 + ln(1/δ)/ ln(n)) = O(ln(n/δ)/ ln(n)). We can then assume γ ≤ 4b n log(n) k Lemma 10 and Lemma 8 we obtain: 1−α   )/3 −(ǫ2 4bnkℓm log(n) n (17) P r |pℓm (v) − P (v)| > ǫP (v) ≤ 2e  To make the right-hand side arbitrarily smaller than δ, it suffices to choose k, ℓ, m large enough  2 and such that kℓm ∈ O bn log(n) ln(1/δ) . Also, to minimize the overall number of queries ǫ2 O(k + ℓ + m) we need k = ℓ = m. Since b ∈ O(ln(n/δ)/ ln(n)), we get:   2p 1 2 (18) k = ℓ = m ∈ O n 3 3 log(n/δ) ln(1/δ) 3 ǫ− 3 which concludes the proof.  4.5  Approximating other centrality measures  The score estimator of Subsection 4.1 and the exploration scheme of Subsection 4.3 can be applied to centrality measures other than PageRank, at least as long as they satisfy two requirements.  10  First, it must be possible, once we have queried the nodes of the subgraph Ḡ of G containing v, to write the score S(v) of v in the form X (19) S(u) · cḠ (u, v) S(v) = cḠ (v) + u∈F (Ḡ)  where cḠ (v) ≥ 0 and cḠ (w, v) ≥ 0. Second, we need a way to draw random variables χu with expectation E[χu ] = S(u). There are at least two centrality measures that satisfy these requirements. P∞ i Katz centrality [26]. The Katz score is defined as S(v) = i=0 Ci (v)β , where Ci (v) counts the number of (not necessarily simple) paths of length i ending in v, and β > 0 is a real small enough to guarantee convergence. Let CiḠ (v) be the count restricted to paths that use only nodes in Ḡ. Also, denote by CiḠ (u, v) the number of paths of length i that lead from u to v, and whose nodes except the first one are all in Ḡ. It is a matter of standard to P∞ calculations Ḡ Ḡ show that S(u) satisfies Equation 19 if we set cḠ (v) = Ci (v) and cḠ (u, v) = j=0 Cj (u, v). For what concerns the χu , consider a random walk on G that, starting from a node chosen uniformly at random, at each step either takes an outgoing arc at random or terminates with probability 1 − β. Note that S(u) is proportional to the sum, over all possible paths terminating in u, of the probability that the walk follows that path times the product of the outdegrees of the nodes preceding u in the path. If we define χu as the product of the outdegrees of the nodes visited before u if the walk terminates in u, and 0 otherwise, we then have E[χu ] = S(u). Eigenvector centrality and Markov chains. In eigenvector centrality, the graph G represents an ergodic Markov chain, and S(v) which is the stationary probability π(v) of v. There exist encouraging results on estimating single-state stationary probability of Markov chains [28, 5]; however, worst-case bounds for multiplicative approximations are still missing. We can assume that querying a state u reveals the corresponding row and column of the chain’s transition matrix. Exploiting the ergodicity of the chain, it is not hard to show that S(u) can be expressed in the form given by Equation 19. Defining the χu is trickier. Informally speaking, it can be done by simulating the chain (similarly to SampleNode()) for long enough and taking the last node/state visited. One must take care of the mixing time, which determines how close the expectations E[χu ] come to the desired values P (u). Note that the exact bounds that can be derived depend on the specific centrality measure at hand, and require analysis that is beyond the scope of this work.  5  Conclusions  We have described the first algorithm that provides a (1±ǫ) approximation of the PageRank score of any given node in an n-node graph with a sublinear query complexity. We have also shown 2 that this algorithm is essentially optimal, so that to improve upon its Θ̃(n 3 ) query complexity, one must inevitably turn to graphs or nodes with “special properties”. Our proofs incidentally 1 1 hint at how this may be accomplished, showing how query complexity drops to Θ(n 2 γ 2 ) given an upper bound γ on the outdegrees of the graph. Characterizing similar “special properties” seems then an obvious line of future research. The techniques yielding our results are modular, and we believe they may be applied to other problems. In this sense, we note that our algorithm is the first to approximate the stationary probability of any given state in a Markov chain (from a specific but non-trivial class of practical interest) accessing only a sublinear number of rows and columns of the transition matrix. All previous work on estimating the stationary probability of a given state in a Markov chain requires exploring, in general, a non-vanishing portion of the transition matrix. It would be interesting to understand for which other classes of Markov chains our techniques may improve current query complexity bounds.  11  References [1] R. Andersen, C. Borgs, J. Chayes, J. Hopcroft, V. Mirrokni, and S.-H. Teng. Local computation of PageRank contributions. Internet Mathematics, 5(1–2):23–45, 2008. [2] A. Auger and B. Doerr (eds.). Theory of Randomized Search Heuristics: Foundations and Recent Developments, vol. 1 of Series on Theoretical Computer Science. World Scientific Publishing Co., Inc., 2011. [3] K. Avrachenkov, N. Litvak, D. Nemirovsky, and N. Osipova. Monte Carlo methods in PageRank computation: When one iteration is sufficient. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, 45(2):890–904, 2007. [4] B. Bahmani, R. Kumar, M. Mahdian, and E. Upfal. PageRank on an evolving graph. In Proc. of ACM KDD, pages 24–32. 2012. [5] S. Banerjee and P. Lofgren. Fast bidirectional probability estimation in Markov models. In Proc. of NIPS, pages 1423–1431. 2015. [6] Z. Bar-Yossef and L.-T. Mashiach. Local approximation of PageRank and reverse PageRank. In Proc. of ACM CIKM, pages 279–288. 2008. [7] Z. Bar-Yossef and L.-T. Mashiach. Local approximation of PageRank and reverse PageRank. In Proc. of ACM SIGIR, pages 865–866. 2008. [8] C. Borgs, M. Brautbar, J. T. Chayes, and S.-H. Teng. Multiscale matrix sampling and sublinear-time PageRank computation. Internet Mathematics, 10(1-2):20–48, 2014. [9] C. Borgs, M. Brautbar, J. T. Chayes, and S.-H. Teng. A sublinear time algorithm for PageRank computations. In Proc. of WAW, pages 41–53. 2012. [10] M. Brautbar and M. Kearns. Local algorithms for finding interesting individuals in large networks. In Proc. of ICS, pages 188–199. 2010. [11] M. Bressan, E. Peserico, and L. Pretto. Simple set cardinality estimation through random sampling. CoRR abs/1512.07901, December 2015. https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.07901. [12] M. Bressan, E. Peserico, and L. Pretto. Approximating PageRank locally with sublinear query complexity. CoRR abs/1404.1864, April 2014. http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.1864. [13] M. Bressan, E. Peserico, and L. Pretto. The power of local information in PageRank. CoRR abs/1604.00202, April 2016. http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.00202. [14] M. Bressan and L. Pretto. Local computation of PageRank: the ranking side. In Proc. of ACM CIKM, pages 631–640. 2011. [15] S. Brin and L. Page. The anatomy of a large scale hypertextual Web search engine. In Proc. of WWW. 1998. [16] Y.-Y. Chen, Q. Gan, and T. Suel. Local methods for estimating PageRank values. In Proc. of ACM CIKM, pages 381–389. 2004. [17] A. Dasgupta, R. Kumar, and T. Sarlós. On Estimating the Average Degree. In Proc. of WWW, pages 795–806. 2014. [18] D. Fogaras, B. Rácz, K. Csalogány, and T. Sarlós. Towards scaling fully personalized PageRank: Algorithms, lower bounds, and experiments. Internet Mathematics, 2(3):333– 358, 2005. 12  [19] Y. Fujiwara, M. Nakatsuji, T. Yamamuro, H. Shiokawa, and M. Onizuka. Efficient personalized PageRank with accuracy assurance. In Proc. of ACM KDD, pages 15–23. 2012. [20] D. Gleich and M. Polito. Approximating personalized PageRank with minimal use of web graph data. Internet Mathematics, 3(3):257–294, 2007. [21] D. Gleich. PageRank Beyond the Web. SIAM Review, 57(3):321–363, 2015. [22] Z. Gyöngyi, H. Garcia-Molina, and J. Pedersen. Combating web spam with TrustRank. In Proc. of VLDB, pages 576–587. 2004. [23] O. Goldreich, S. Goldwasser, and D. Ron. Property testing and its connection to learning and approximation. Journal of the ACM, 45(4):653–750, 1998. [24] O. Goldreich and D. Ron. Property testing in bounded degree graphs. Algorithmica, 32(2):302–343, 2002. [25] S. D. Kamvar, M. T. Schlosser, and H. Garcia-Molina. The EigenTrust algorithm for reputation management in P2P networks. In Proc. of WWW, pages 508–516. 2003. [26] L. Katz. A new status index derived from sociometric analysis. Psychometrika, 18(1):39–43, 1953. [27] R. Kumar, P. Raghavan, S. Rajagopalan, D. Sivakumar, A. Tomkins, and E. Upfal. Stochastic models for the web graph. In Proc. of IEEE FOCS, pages 57–65. 2000. [28] C. E. Lee, A. Ozdaglar, and D. Shah. Computing the stationary distribution, locally. In Proc. of NIPS, pages 1376–1384. 2013. [29] P. Lofgren, S. Banerjee, and A. Goel. Bidirectional PageRank estimation: From averagecase to worst-case. In Proc. of WAW, pages 164–176. 2015. [30] P. Lofgren, S. Banerjee, and A. Goel. Personalized PageRank estimation and search: A bidirectional approach. In Proc. of ACM WSDM, pages 163–172. 2016. [31] P. Lofgren, S. Banerjee, A. Goel, and C. Seshadhri. FAST-PPR: Scaling Personalized PageRank estimation for large graphs. CoRR abs/1404.3181, April 2014. http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.3181 [32] P. Lofgren, S. Banerjee, A. Goel, and C. Seshadhri. FAST-PPR: Scaling Personalized PageRank estimation for large graphs. In Proc. of ACM KDD, pages 1436–1445. 2014. [33] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd. The PageRank citation ranking: Bringing order to the web. Technical report, Stanford University. 1998. [34] A. Panconesi and A. Srinivasan. Randomized distributed edge coloring via an extension of the Chernoff-Hoeffding bounds. SIAM Journal on Computing, 26(2):350–368, 1997. [35] Z. E. Schnabel. The estimation of total fish population of a lake. The American Mathematical Monthly, 45(6):348–352, 1938. [36] P. Tarau, R. Mihalcea, and E. Figa. Semantic document engineering with WordNet and PageRank. In Proc. of ACM SAC, pages 782–786. 2005. [37] X. Wu, V. Kumar, J. Ross Quinlan, J. Ghosh, Q. Yang, H. Motoda, G. J. McLachlan, A. Ng, B. Liu, P. S. Yu, Z.-H. Zhou, M. Steinbach, D. J. Hand, and D. Steinberg. Top 10 algorithms in data mining. Knowledge and Information Systems, 14:1–37, 2007. [38] Z. A. Zhu, S. Lattanzi, and V. S. Mirrokni. A local algorithm for finding well-connected clusters. In Proc. of ICML (3rd cycle), pages 396–404. 2013.  13  A A.1  TECHNICAL DETAILS Probability bounds  This appendix provides Chernoff-type probability bounds that are repeatedly used in our analysis; these bounds can be found in e.g. [2], and can be derived from [34]. Let X1 , . . . , Xn be binary random variables. We say that X1 , . . . , Xn are non-positively correlated if for all I ⊆ {1, . . . , n} we have: Y P r[∀i ∈ I : Xi = 0] ≤ P r[Xi = 0] (20) i∈I  P r[∀i ∈ I : Xi = 1] ≤  Y  P r[Xi = 1]  (21)  i∈I  The following lemma holds: Lemma 12. Let X1 , . . . , Xn be independent or, more P generally, non-positively correlated binary random variables. Let a1 , . . . , an ∈ [0, 1] and X = ni=1 ai Xi . Then, for any ǫ > 0, we have: ǫ2  P r[X < (1 − ǫ)E[X]] < e− 2 E[X]  (22)  P r[X > (1 + ǫ)E[X]] < e  (23)  ǫ2 − 2+ǫ E[X]  Note that Lemma 12 applies if X1 , . . . , Xn are indicator variables of mutually disjoint events, or if they can be partitioned into independent families {X1 , . . . , Xi1 }, {Xi1 +1 , . . . , Xi2 }, . . . of such variables.  A.2  Proof of Lemma 4  Proof. In order to proceed, we need the notion of PageRank resistance ℧G′ (u, v) of a subgraph G′ of G from a node u to a node v. Informally, ℧G′ (u, v) is the expected number of times a PageRank random walk starting in u visits v before leaving G′ or taking a random jump. Given two nodes u and v in a graph G, a path π from u to v is a sequence of arcs of G such that either π = ∅ and u = v, or π is the concatenation of a path π ′ from u to some node u′ such that (u′ , v) ∈ G with the arc (u′ , v). We denote by |π| the length of π, i.e. the number of arcs in it. Also, we denote by out(w) the outdegree of node w. Then: Definition 3. The PageRank resistance of a path π is: ℧π =  Y  (w,w ′ )∈π  α = α|π| out(w)  Y  (w,w ′ )∈π  1 out(w)  (24)  Given a path π and a subgraph G′ of G, we say that π is in G′ if the arcs of π are all arcs of Let then ΠG′ (u, v) denote the set of all the paths from u to v that are in G′ . The PageRank resistance of G′ from u to v is the sum of the PageRank resistances of all paths in ΠG′ (u, v):  G′ .  Definition 4. Given two nodes u and v in G and a subgraph G′ of G, the PageRank resistance ℧G′ (u, v) of G′ from u to v is: X ℧π (25) ℧G′ (u, v) = π∈ΠG′ (u,v)  A useful interpretation of ℧G′ (u, v) can be derived by breaking the summation in Equation 25 over all possible path lengths: X X ℧π (26) ℧G′ (u, v) = k≥0 π∈ΠG′ (u,v) |π|=k  14  The inner summation is the probability that the PageRank random walk reaches v from u in k steps without ever leaving G′ or taking a random jump. Therefore, ℧G′ (u, v) is the expected number of times a walk starting in u goes through v before leaving G′ or taking a random jump. Note that ℧G′ (u, v) is always finite, since the probability that the random walk follows some path of length k (and thus the inner summation in Equation 26) is bounded by αk . Note also that in any G′ there always exists a path from a node to itself, the empty path of length 0, whose PageRank resistance is exactly 1. Finally, note that the PageRank resistance between two nodes is monotonically non-decreasing with the subgraph G′ , that is, if G′ ⊆ G′′ ⊆ G then ℧G′ (u, v) ≤ ℧G′′ (u, v), since ΠG′ (u, v) ⊆ ΠG′′ (u, v). The key idea is then the following. Consider an induced subgraph Ḡ of G containing v, and recall that P (v) is the stationary probability that the PageRank random walk is in v. For the random walk to reach v, one of two disjoint events must occur since the last random jump takes place. In the first, the jump takes the walk to some node w in Ḡ, and then the walk reaches v by following a sequence of arcs without leaving Ḡ. In the second, at some point the walk is outside Ḡ; thus it must first reach some node u having an outgoing arc (u, w) in F (Ḡ), then follow (u, w) to enter Ḡ, and finally reach v by following a sequence of arcs without leaving Ḡ anymore. The probabilities of these events, whose sum is P (v), can be expressed as a function of the PageRank score of the nodes just outside Ḡ, and of their outdegrees, by using the notions of PageRank resistance and subgraph frontier introduced above. Let indeed out(u) denote the outdegree of u in the supergraph G. In the rest of this subsection we prove that, given any graph G without dangling nodes, any node v ∈ G, and any induced subgraph Ḡ of G containing v, the PageRank score of v can be written as: P (v) =  X1 − α  w∈Ḡ  n  ℧Ḡ (w, v) +  X  P (u)  (u,w)∈F (Ḡ)  α ℧ (w, v) out(u) Ḡ  (27)  P P Lemma 4 follows by defining cḠ = w∈Ḡ 1−α w:(u,w)∈F (Ḡ) α ℧Ḡ (w, v). n ℧Ḡ (w, v) and cḠ (u) = Now to the proof. Recall the PageRank random walk on the nodes of G defined in Subsection 1.1, and consider it at the stationary state so that at any given instant the walk is in u with probability P (u). Suppose the walk is currently in v, and thus by hypothesis in Ḡ. Clearly, since the last random jump performed in the past, the walk has either been only in nodes of Ḡ or has also been in some node of G \ Ḡ. We compute P (v) by analysing these two cases separately. We use the notions of path, path in a subgraph, and PageRank resistance of a path, as well as the related notation – see Appendix A.2. Let us start by computing the probability of the event Ev∈Ḡ that the walk is in v having always been in nodes of Ḡ since the last random jump. This event takes place if and only if, for some k ≥ 0, the random walk performed a random jump k steps ago, this jump brought the walk to some node w ∈ Ḡ, and the walk then followed a path π in Ḡ of length k from w to v. The probability of performing a random jump is (1 − α) at any instant, the probability that the jump leads to any given node is n1 , and the probability of following a path π is its PageRank resistance ℧π . Therefore P (Ev∈Ḡ ) is the sum of the product of these three terms over all k ≥ 0, all w ∈ Ḡ, and all paths of length k from w to v in Ḡ: P (Ev∈Ḡ ) =  X k≥0  =  (1 − α)  X 1 n  w∈Ḡ  X  ℧π  (28)  π∈ΠḠ (w,v) |π|=k  X 1−α ℧Ḡ (w, v) n  w∈Ḡ  where we used the fact that  P  π∈ΠḠ (w,v) ℧  π  = ℧Ḡ (w, v).  Let us now compute the probability of the event Ev∈/ Ḡ that the walk is in v having been in some node of G \ Ḡ since the last random jump. This event takes place if and only if the walk 15  enters Ḡ from G \ Ḡ through a frontier arc, and then follows a path entirely in Ḡ to v. Thus, for some k ≥ 0 the walk was k + 1 steps ago in a node u having some outgoing arcs in F (Ḡ), then followed one of these arcs (u, w) to a node w ∈ Ḡ, and finally followed a path π in Ḡ of length k from w to v. The probability of being in u is P (u) at any instant, the probability of following α for any given w, and the probability of following any given path π a frontier arc (u, w) is out(u) is ℧π . Similarly to above, then, we obtain P (Ev∈/ Ḡ ) by summing probabilities over all relevant variables: X X X α P (Ev∈/ Ḡ ) = P (u) ℧π (29) out(u) k≥0 (u,w)∈F (Ḡ)  =  X  P (u)  (u,w)∈F (Ḡ)  π∈ΠḠ (w,v) |π|=k  α ℧ (w, v) out(u) Ḡ  Since P (v) = P (Ev∈Ḡ ) + P (Ev∈/ Ḡ ), summing Equations 28 and 29 proves the thesis.  A.3  Formal definition of SampleNode()  Algorithm SampleNode() 1: current node ← RandomNode() 2: loop 3: with probability (1 − α) return current node 4: current node ← RandomChild(current node) 5: if current node = ∅ then current node ← RandomNode()  A.4  Proof of Lemma 6  Consider the random walk used in Subsection 1.1 to define PageRank in terms of an abstract surfer. We can imagine the surfer selects at any node, whether dangling or not, with probability (1 − α) a random jump leading to a node chosen uniformly at random, and with probability α either a virtual arc leading to a node chosen uniformly at random if the current node is dangling, or an actual arc leading to a child (chosen uniformly at random) of the current node otherwise. The stationary probability of the latest jump being τ steps in the past (i.e. of having followed exactly τ arcs, whether virtual or actual, after it) is (1 − α)ατ . Since SampleNode() follows, starting from a node chosen uniformly at random, exactly τ arcs (virtual or actual) with probability (1 − α)ατ , it returns node v with probability equal to P (v).  A.5  Query complexity of SampleNode()  Lemma 13. The probability that  2ℓ (1−ǫ)(1−α)  RandomNode() and RandomChild(·) queries are  not sufficient to complete ℓ calls to SampleNode() is less than e−ℓǫ  2 /2(1−ǫ)  .  Proof. If a sequence of SampleNode() calls performs q queries, then line 3 is executed at least q/2 times, each time making SampleNode() terminate independently with probability (1 − α). The expected number of SampleNode() calls one can complete with q queries is thus at least q(1 − α)/2, and by the bounds of Appendix A.1, the probability that the number of completed 2 2ℓ gives the calls does not reach (1 − ǫ)q(1 − α)/2 is less than e−q(1−α)ǫ /4 . Setting q = (1−ǫ)(1−α) thesis.  16  A.6  Proof of Lemma 7  Consider the random variable: ℓ X m X X ℓ ℓ cm (ui ) cm (u)  χhui (pm (v) − cm ) = + χhu c c c h=1  i=1  (30)  u∈F (Gm )  where c is the maximum among all inner and frontier coefficients of pm (v). Clearly, pℓm (v) is the sum of the nonnegative constant cm and of cℓ times cℓ (pℓm (v)−cm ), and thus deviates by more than a factor 1 ± ǫ from P (v) only if cℓ (pℓm (v) − cm ) deviates by more than a factor (1 ± ǫ) from its own expectation. Since cℓ (pℓm (v) − cm ) is by construction a sum of non-positively correlated indicator random variables with weights in [0, 1], the probability of the latter event can be bounded by applying the probability bounds of Appendix A.1, which yield for any ǫ in [0, 1]:  A.7    ℓ ℓ 2 P r |pℓm (v) − P (v)| > ǫP (v) ≤ 2e−ǫ E[ c (pm (v)−cm )]/3  (31)  Proof of Lemma 9  We prove a slightly stronger result anticipated in the sketch and needed by the proof: if the outdegree of every node in G is known beforehand, then with m + 1 Neighbourhood( ·) queries m so that p (v) is 1-balanced and there exists a one can choose u1 , . . . , um and β0m , β1m , . . . , βm m frontier node whose coefficient matches the inner coefficients. More formally, we prove one can make the coefficients of pm (v) simultaneously satisfy the following three conditions: 1. ∀i, i′ : 1 ≤ i, i′ ≤ m : cm (ui ) = cm (ui′ )  (32)  2. ∀u ∈ F (Gm ) : cm (u) ≤ cm (um )  (33)  ∃u ∈ F (Gm ) : cm (u) = cm (um )  (34)  3. if F (Gm ) 6= ∅, then  Let us start with the case m = 1. Equation 32 is trivially satisfied, regardless of the choice of u1 , and we can focus on the second and third conditions. Suppose then F (G0 ) is nonempty, for otherwise we can stop the construction and compute P (v), and let u1 be the parent of v with the smallest outdegree (breaking ties arbitrarily). Recalling the definitions of cm (ui ) and cm (u), we can then write for u1 : c1 (u1 ) = (1 − β11 )  cG0 (u1 ) out(u1 )  (35)  while for all u ∈ F (G1 ): c1 (u) =  0 X  (1 − β11 )  j=j(u)  cG (u) cG0 (u) + β11 1 out(u) out(u)  (36)  where we used the fact that β01 = 1 − β11 and split c1 (u) into the terms relative to j = 0 and j = 1. Since all arcs in F (G0 ) point to the same node v, then for all u ∈ F (G0 ) we have cG0 (u1 ) cG0 (u) ≤ out(u . Therefore c1 (u) ≤ c1 (u1 ) when cG0 (u1 ) = cG0 (u), and by choice of u1 we have out(u) 1) 1 1 β1 = 0, while 0 = c1 (u1 ) < c1 (u) when β1 = 1, for all u ∈ F (G1 ). By the continuity of c1 (u1 ) and c1 (u) as functions of β11 , we conclude that there exists a value of β11 in [0, 1) which makes the coefficients simultaneously satisfy also equations 33 and 34. m−1 Suppose now we have chosen u1 , . . . , um−1 and β0m−1 , β1m−1 , . . . , βm−1 that satisfy equations 32, 33 and 34. Again, suppose F (Gm−1 ) is nonempty, for otherwise we can stop the conm defined as follows: struction and compute P (v). Consider the sets u1 , . . . , um and β0m , β1m , . . . , βm 17  m )β m−1 for all i = 1, . . . , m − 1, for um is some node u′ satisfying Equation 34, while βim = (1 − βm i m some βm to be chosen later. One can verify that the resulting estimator pm (v) has the following inner and frontier coefficients. For all i = 1, . . . , m: m cm (ui ) = (1 − βm )cm−1 (ui )  (37)  while for all u ∈ F (Gm ): m m cm (u) = (1 − βm )cm−1 (u) + βm  cGm (u) out(u)  (38)  Note that by construction cm (um ) = cm−1 (u′ ). By inductive hypothesis, in pm−1 (v) the inner coefficients and the frontier coefficient of um are all identical; and therefore so are the inner m = 0 gives c (u ) = coefficients of pm−1 (v), and Equation 32 is again satisfied. Now, setting βm m i cm−1 (ui ) and cm (u) = cm−1 (u), and thus by inductive hypothesis cm (ui ) ≥ cm (u) for all i = m = 1 gives c (u ) = 0 < c (u). We 1, . . . , m−1 and all u ∈ F (Gm ). On the other hand, setting βm m i m m in [0, 1) which makes the coefficients simultaneously again conclude that there exists a value of βm satisfy also equations 33 and 34. Note that to perform the inductive step we only need to make one Neighbourhood( ·) query m . We thus need at most to the node um = u′ in order to learn F (Gm ) and choose the value of βm m + 1 queries to complete the construction, including an initial query to u0 = v. A final remark about the pseudocode of Section A.9: there, the routine BalancedEstimator(v, out, m) implements the construction by letting the first inner node to be v instead of one of its parents. This has no impact on the resulting guarantees, but makes the code simpler.  A.8  Proof of Lemma 11  Consider drawing k nodes independently and uniformly at random from G, and for each u in G let ψuj be the indicator random variable of the j-th node Pk of jthe event that u is a parentP n drawn. Let then out(u) b = k (b log(n) + j=1 ψu ), for any b > 0. Note that kj=1 ψuj is a sum of independent indicator random variables, and that E[out(u)] b = nk b log(n) + out(u) > out(u). Note also that we can take a sample of ψuj simultaneously for all u in G with an invocation of RandomNode() followed by an invocation of Neighbourhood( ·) on the node returned, and thus we can take a sample of out(u) b simultaneously for all u in G with k RandomNode() and k Neighbourhood( ·) queries. We prove our probabilistic bound on γ by showing probabilistic lower and out(u) b , for all u with out(u) > 0. upper bounds on the quantity out(u) Let us start with the lower bounds, distinguishing the cases out(u) ≤ nk b log(n) and out(u) > out(u) b n k b log(n). The first case just implies out(u) ≥ 1. In the second case, it is easy to see that P P E[ kj=1 ψuj ] > b log(n); hence the probability that kj=1 ψuj fails to reach half its expectation is, b log(n)  −  b  by the probability bounds of Appendix A.1, less than e− 8 = n 8 ln(2) . This is also a bound on b by construction of out(u), b and since out(u) < E[out(u)], b the probability that out(u) b < 12 E[out(u)] out(u) on the probability that out(u) b < 2 . Taking a union bound on all u, the probability that out(u) b out(u)  <  1 2  for some u is at most n  b +1 − 8 ln(2)  .  out(u) b Let us now turn to the upper bounds. Consider the event that out(u) > 2 nk b log(n); since P P out(u) b ≤ nk b log(n)out(u) + nk kj=1 ψuj , that event implies kj=1 ψuj > b log(n)out(u). We bound the probability of the latter event using again the bounds of Appendix A.1, setting ǫ so that ǫ+1 P ǫ ǫ2 2 ≥ 3ǫ = 1+ǫ (1 + ǫ)E[ kj=1 ψuj ] = b log(n)out(u). This requires ǫ ≥ 1, which implies 2+ǫ 6 ; P b log(n)out(u) j k ǫ2 hence at the exponent we can just plug in place of 2+ǫ E[ j=1 ψu ], obtaining an 6 b log(n)·out(u)  −  b  6 ≤ n 6 ln(2) . Taking a union bound on all u, the probability that upper bound of e− b +1 − 6 ln(2) out(u) b n . out(u) > 2 k b log(n) for some u is at most n  18  Putting the bounds together, the probability that  out(u) b out(u b ′) out(u) / out(u′ ) b − 8 ln(2) +1  4 nk b log(n) for some u, u′ with positive outdegrees is at most n  A.9  exceeds 2 nk b log(n)/ 21 =  +n  b − 6 ln(2) +1  < 2n  b − 8 ln(2) +1  .  Pseudocode  We provide a translation into pseudocode of the techniques described in Section 4. The routine ApproxPageRank (v, ǫ, δ, n) is the entry point; it invokes all the other in the appropriate order and returns an approximation of P (v) with the guarantees of Theorem 1. Note that in the code below appear two constants c and c′ . Their value is independent of n, δ, ǫ, and can be worked out from the bounds of Section 4. Algorithm ApproxPageRank(v, ǫ, δ, n) 1 2p 2 1: k, ℓ, m ← ⌈cn 3 3 log(n/δ) ln(1/δ) 3 ǫ− 3 ⌉ 2: b ← c′ ln(n/δ)/ ln(n) 3: out ← OutdegreeSketch(n, k, b) 4: c, coefs ← BalancedEstimator(v, out, m) 5: p ← EstimateScore(c, coefs, out, ℓ) 6: return p  Algorithm OutdegreeSketch(n, k, b) 1: out ← empty dictionary 2: out.default value ← n k b log(n) 3: for i = 1, . . . , k do 4: {P, C} ← Neighbourhood( RandomNode()) 5: for u ∈ P do 6: out[u] ← out[u]+ nk 7:  return out  19  Algorithm BalancedEstimator(v, out, m) 1: (P, C) ← Neighbourhood( v) 2: I ← {v} 3: F ← P \ {v} 4: G1 ← subgraph induced by I cG1 (u)  5: β11 ← minu∈F 1/ 1 + out[u] 6: c ← β11 cG1 7: cin ← 1 − β11 8: for u ∈ F do cG1 (u) 9: c1 (u) ← β11 out[u] 10: 11: 12: 13: 14: 15: 16: 17: 18: 19: 20: 21: 22: 23: 24: 25: 26: 27: 28: 29:  ⊲ inner nodes ⊲ frontier nodes  ⊲ ci , now with i = 1 ⊲ cin i , now with i = 1 ⊲ the ci (u)’s  for i = 2, . . . , m do ui ← any u ∈ F such that ci−1 (u) = cin (P, C) ← Neighbourhood( ui ) I ← I ∪ {ui } F ← F ∪P \ I Gi ← subgraph induced by I for u ∈ F do ∆u ← cin − ci−1 (u)  cGi (u) βii ← minu∈F ∆u /(∆u + out[u] ) i i c ← (1 − βi )c + βi cGi cin ← (1 − βii )cin for u ∈ F do cGi (u) ci (u) ← (1 − βii )ci−1 (u) + βii out[u]  ⊲ ∆i (u) ⊲ ci ⊲ cin i  coefs ← empty dictionary coefs.default value ← 0 for u ∈ I do coefs[u] ← cin for u ∈ F do coefs[u] ← cm (u) return (c, coefs)  Algorithm EstimateScore(c, coefs, out, ℓ) 1: p ← 0 2: for i = 1, . . . , ℓ do 3: u ← SampleNode() 4: (P, C) ← Neighbourhood( u) 5: out(u) ← |C| out[u]  6: p ← p + c + coefs[u] out(u) 7:  return 1ℓ p  A.10  Dealing with dangling nodes  Essentially, if G contains dangling nodes then the estimators for P (v) developed in Section 4 must be adapted by adding a random term (and, possibly, rescaling by a constant) which can be estimated with sufficient accuracy through just O(1) calls to SampleNode(). We start by generalizing Equation 27 to allow for dangling nodes in G – but not in Ḡ \ {v}. This is the most general assumption we need, since the subgraph Ḡ built by our algorithm never contains dangling nodes except possibly v. 20  Lemma 14. Given a graph G, a node v ∈ G, and an induced subgraph Ḡ of G containing v, if there are no dangling nodes in Ḡ \ {v} then the PageRank score of v can be written as:  X 1 − α X α P (v) = µḠ ℧ (w, v) + P (u) v n n Ḡ u∈G\{v} out(u)=0  w∈Ḡ  +  X   α ℧ (w, v) P (u) out(u) Ḡ  (39)  (u,w)∈F (Ḡ)  where µḠ v equals (1 −  α n  P  −1 w∈Ḡ ℧Ḡ (w, v))  if v is a dangling node and equals 1 otherwise.  Proof. We extend the proof of Equation 27 (see Appendix A.2). For the sake of the analysis we imagine that, if the current node is dangling, with probability 1 − α the walk performs the usual random jump and with probability α it follows one at random of n outgoing virtual arcs. Consider first the case out(v) > 0, i.e. v is not a dangling node. The only modification needed is in the analysis of Ev∈/ Ḡ : now this event can take place also if the walk enters Ḡ from a dangling node of G \ Ḡ, by following a virtual arc. If this happens, for some k ≥ 0 the walk was k + 1 steps ago in a dangling node u of G \ Ḡ, then followed an outgoing virtual arc of u to a node w ∈ Ḡ, and finally followed a path π in Ḡ of length k from w to v. The probability of being in u is P (u) at any instant, the probability of following a virtual arc to a node w is αn for any given w, and the probability of following any given path π is ℧π . The expression of P (Ev∈/ Ḡ ) given by Equation 29 thus gains a term relative to the dangling nodes in G \ Ḡ: X α ℧ (w, v) P (Ev∈/ Ḡ ) = P (u) out(u) Ḡ (u,w)∈F (Ḡ) X α X + P (u) (40) ℧Ḡ (w, v) n u∈G\Ḡ out(u)=0  w∈Ḡ  Since P (v) = P (Ev∈Ḡ ) + P (Ev∈/ Ḡ ), we obtain: X X1 − α α ℧Ḡ (w, v) + P (u) P (v) = n n u∈G\{v} out(u)=0  w∈Ḡ  +  X  P (u)  (u,w)∈F (Ḡ)  α ℧ (w, v) out(u) Ḡ  (41)  Let us now see how the above expression changes when out(v) = 0. In this case, v has outgoing virtual arcs that the random walk can take. The analysis already includes the event that the walk did not follow any of those arcs after the last random jump, as well as the event that the last time the walk followed one of those arcs it arrived in G \ Ḡ. We must then just add the event that, for some k ≥ 0, the random walk k + 1 steps ago was in v, then took one of v’s outgoing virtual arcs towards a node w ∈ Ḡ, and finally followed a path π in Ḡ of length k from w to v. The probability of being in v is P (v) at any instant, the probability of taking a virtual arc to w is αn for any node w, and the probability of taking a path π is ℧π for any π. Therefore when out(v) = 0 we obtain P (v) by adding to Equation 41 the following term: X X X α ℧π (42) P (v) n k≥0  w∈Ḡ  π∈ΠḠ (w,v) |π|=k  P This term equals P (v) αn w∈Ḡ ℧Ḡ (w, v), and thus P (v) is given by the expression of Equation 41 P multiplied by P (1− αn w∈Ḡ ℧Ḡ (w, v))−1 . We can then define a constant µḠ v equalling 1 if out(v) > 0 and (1 − αn w∈Ḡ ℧Ḡ (w, v))−1 if out(v) = 0, concluding the proof. 21  P We can now adapt the estimators of P (v). Define P∅ = u∈G\{v}:out(u)=0 P (u), the sum of the PageRank scores of all dangling nodes in G \ Ḡ. Starting from Equation 39, it is easy to verify that Equation 3 becomes: X  c (u) α Ḡ P (u) Ḡ P∅ µḠ (43) P (v) = 1 + v cḠ + µv 1−α out(u) u:(u,w)∈F (Ḡ)  These modifications also apply to the estimator pḠ (v) given by Equation 4 in Lemma 5, and then propagate through Equations 5, 6, 10, 11 and 30. The resulting estimators are thus just a α rescaled version of the original ones, with a first term further multiplied by (1 + 1−α P∅ ). If we α are able to accurately estimate (1 + 1−α P∅ ) with few queries, our final results still hold. P P Consider then p∅ = 1ℓ ℓh=1 u∈G\{v}:out(u)=0 χhu , the average of ℓ independent indicator random variables of the event that SampleNode() returns a dangling node in G \ {v}. Clearly α α p∅ ) as an estimator of (1 + 1−α P∅ ). It is easy to check E[p∅ ] = P∅ , and we can use (1 + 1−α α that, if (1 + 1−α p∅ ) falls off its expectation by more than a factor 1 ± ǫ, then ℓ p∅ falls off its  expectation by more than a factor 1 ± ǫ 1 + 1−α αP∅ . Since ℓ p∅ is a sum of non-positively correlated indicator random variables with expectation ℓ P∅ , by the probability bounds of Appendix A.1 the probability that such an event takes place is at most )2 /3 −ℓ P∅ ǫ2 (1+ 1−α αP  2e  ∅  −ℓ P∅ ǫ2 ( 1−α )2 /3 αP  (44)  2 1−α − ℓǫ ( α )2 /3 P∅  (45)  −ℓǫ2 ( 1−α )2 /3 α  (46)  < 2e  ∅  = 2e  < 2e  where the last inequality follows from the fact that P∅ < 1 by definition of PageRank score. 2 1−α 2 3α2 2 Since for any δ > 0 we have 2e−ℓǫ ( α ) /3 ≤ δ when ℓ = ǫ2 (1−α) 2 ln( δ ), by a simple union bound  the results of Theorems 1 and 2 remain valid by paying an additional O ǫ12 ln( 2δ ) queries.  A.11  Proof of Theorem 3  The proof hinges on the construction of a graph G of arbitrarily large size n, formed by two nearly identical subgraphs that one must distinguish in order to decide which of u and v has the higher score. The bound on the number of queries is obtained in expectation assuming that the decision must be made on a graph chosen uniformly at random from the family of all graphs isomorphic to G, and thus holds for at least one of those graphs. The two subgraphs (see Figure 1) contain a first level of ancestors whose contribution is “damped” by the presence of additional children (allowing one to increase the number of those ancestors while leaving the scores of u and v essentially unchanged), and differ solely for the presence, in one of the two, of a second level of ancestors which ensures that the scores of u and v are not within a factor (1 + η) of each other. To distinguish the two subgraphs, one must at least discover some second-level node. This can be done two ways. One can invoke RandomNode(), which leads to a second-level node with probability proportional to the number of those nodes. Alternatively, one can explore the first-level nodes via Neighbourhood( ·) queries (starting from u and v) until finding the sole non-orphan parent of u. With a careful choice of the number of nodes in each level, and with an adaptation that keeps the construction working for “small” f (n), one can always ensure a maximum outdegree O(γ(n)), scores of u and v in Θ(f (n)) but not within a factor (1 + η) of 1 1  2 1 , n 3 , n 2 γ(n) 2 queries to find any second-level node each other, and an expected Ω min f (n) and thus to determine which of u and v has the higher score with probability 12 + Ω(1) – proving the theorem. 1 We analyse separately, but with similar techniques, the two cases γ(n) > n 3 and 1 ≤ 1 γ(n) ≤ n 3 , assembling the general lower bound at the end. We will use the following equivalent 22  level 2  level 1  u  v  level 0  Figure 1: The structure of the generic graph used in the proof of Theorem 3. To decide which of u and v has the higher score, one must distinguish the two nearly-identical subgraphs. formulation of PageRank (see e.g. [6]), which is easier to compute explicitly on the graphs appearing in this proof: P (v) =  +∞ 1−αX τ X X  α n τ =0 πz,v z∈G  |πz,v |=τ  Y  (w,w ′ )∈π  1  out(w)  (47)  z,v  where a path πz,v is a sequence of zero or more arcs leading from z to v, and |πz,v | is the number of such arcs. In the case out(v) = 1 and its arc forms a self loop, we simplify the computation of P (v) as in [14] by disregarding that self loop (and thus all the paths it belongs to), applying 1 . To keep the proof simple, we assume that Equation 47, and then multiplying the result by 1−α f (n) and γ(n) are respectively in Θ(f (n0 )) and Θ(γ(n0 )) whenever n = Θ(n0 ), and show how to remove this hypothesis at the end. 1  Case γ(n) > n 3 We proceed as follows: first, for any n−2/3 ≤ f (n) ≤ 1 we exhibit a family Fn of arbitrarily large, isomorphic graphs on n nodes whose generic element has maximum outdegree O(γ(n)) and contains two nodes u, v with PageRank scores in Θ(f (n)) but not within a factor (1 + η) of each other. We prove that any algorithm, on some element in Fn , must 1 queries in expectation to decide which among u and v has the higher score perform Ω f (n)  with probability 21 + Ω(1). We then show how to adapt Fn for n1 ≤ f (n) < n−2/3 while bringing 1 the above expectation to Ω(n2/3 ), thus obtaining a lower bound of Ω(min( f (n) , n2/3 )) for any 1 n ≤ f (n) ≤ 1. To build a generic element G of Fn for n−2/3 ≤ f (n) ≤ 1, consider an arbitrary positive integer n0 (a rough approximation of the final number of nodes in G). The nodes of G√(see Figure 2) can be divided into three levels. Level 0 consists of 2 nodes u, v and ml l m f (n ) n √1 2 0 α 0 nodes w00 , w01 , . . .; each node in this level has (only) a self loop. Level 1 f (n0 ) m l √ f (n ) n consists of 2 nodes su , sv and 2 0 α 0 nodes w10 , w11 , . . .. The sole outgoing arcs of su and l √ m n0 f (n0 ) sv are, respectively, (su , u) and (sv , v); while (w1j , u) is an arc for 0 ≤ j < , and α m l √ m l √ n0 f (n0 ) n f (n ) (w1j , v) is an arc for ≤ j < 2 0 α 0 . Also, each node w1j has outgoing arcs α √ √ m l ⌈1/ f (n0 )⌉j ⌈1/ f (n0 )⌉(j+1)−1 j j (w1 , w0 ), . . . , (w1 , w0 ). Finally, level 2 consists of cηn0αf2(n0 ) nodes  w20 , w21 , . . . having outgoing arcs (w20 , su ), (w21 , su ), . . . , towards su , for a constant c > 0 to be determined later. The family Fn consists of all the graphs isomorphic to G. In particular, in an element drawn uniformly at random from Fn , each node is identified by a random integer in {1, . .√ . , n}; but we will keep denoting by u and v the (only) two level-0 nodes each having m l n0 f (n0 ) ≥ 2 incoming arcs from level-1 nodes, and by su and sv the (only) two level-1 1+ α 23  nodes whose sole arc points towards u and v respectively, so that su is the node pointed to by all the level-2 nodes. w20 w21 w10 w11  w00 w01  level 2  su  ...  ...  ...  sv  u  level 1  level 0  v 1  Figure 2: A generic graph Gof the family Fn for γ(n) > n 3 and n−2/3 ≤ f (n) ≤ 1. All level-1  1 nodes except su and sv have √ additional children besides u or v but, for simplicity, we f (n0 )  have drawn these children in normal size only for the leftmost node. In order to distinguish the two subgraphs, and thus u from v, one must find at least one of the nodes depicted in grey. ml m m l √ l √ f (n ) f (n ) n n √1 + 2 0 α 0 + The number of nodes in G is given by n = 4+ 2 0 α 0 f (n0 ) l m cηn0 f (n0 ) 17+cη 2n0 , which is a Θ(n0 ) between α and α2 n0 ; therefore, one can make G arbitrarα2 m l  = Θ √1 ily large by increasing n0 . The maximum outdegree of the graph is √ 1 , and f (n0 )  since f (n) ≥ n  − 32  f (n)  1 3  , this is an O(n ) ⊆ O(γ(n)). The PageRank scores of u and v are: l √ m ! n0 f (n0 ) α 1 l m 1+α 1+ P (u) = n 1+ √ 1 + α2  P (v) =  l cηn f (n ) m 0 0 2 α  f (n0 )  !  (48)  l √ n0  f (n0 ) α  1 l 1+α 1+ n 1+ √  m !!  1 f (n0 )  m  (49)  and both are in Θ( n0 fn(n0 ) ), land sincem n = Θ(n0 ), are also both in Θ(f (n)). Their difference P (u) − P (v) is equal to n1 α2 cηn0αf2(n0 ) , and therefore: P (u) − P (v) = P (v)  ≥ =  1 n    l  1 2 cηn0 f (n0 ) nα α2  √   1+α 1+  n0  1+    m  f (n0 ) α √ 1 f (n0 )  1 0) n cηn0 f (n√   2n f (n0 ) 0 1 1 + α + 1 n √  (50)  (51)  f (n0 )  cη  1+α n0 f (n0 )      +2  (52)  and for any c ≥ 4 the last term is greater than η for any η > 0, any α ∈ (0, 1), and any n0 > 0. Consider now a generic (Monte Carlo) algorithm that, using only RandomNode() and Neighbourhood( ·) queries, must decide which among u and v has the higher PageRank score in a graph 24  drawn uniformly at random from Fn (the ids of u and v are given in input in random order). Note that the information returned by RandomNode() queries is independent from their order relative to Neighbourhood( ·) queries. We can then simplify the analysis by ideally grouping together all RandomNode() invocations in a first phase, followed by all Neighbourhood( ·) queries in a second phase, each phase sporting at most q queries if the algorithm performs at most q queries overall. Let us consider the first phase. We reinforce the algorithm with an oracle that operates as follows: if RandomNode() returns a node among su , sv or w20 , w21 , . . ., it lets the algorithm immediately return the correct ranking of the input nodes; and when RandomNode() returns a level-0 node not in {u, v}, it reveals both the id of its unique parent (which can thus be marked as neither su nor sv ) and the ids of all its siblings (revealing all the information that would be given by a Neighbourhood( ·) on their parent). Since the graph is drawn uniformly at random from Fn , each single RandomNode() query returns the id of a node among su , sv or w20 , w21 , . . . with   probability 2 + cηn0αf2(n0 ) /n = O(f (n)); hence, the probability that some RandomNode() query in the first phase returns such an id is O(q · f (n)). If this does not happen, then the algorithm possesses no information about which of the input nodes has the higher PageRank score: conditioned on the fact of not discovering any of the above nodes, each of the possible output sequences of the RandomNode() queries has exactly the same probability. Let us turn to the second phase, conditioned on the event that the first phase ended with the algorithm having no information about which input node has the higher score. We slightly reinforce the algorithm by allowing two Neighbourhood( ·) invocations on the two target nodes at no cost before the phase begins. At this point, the algorithm knows the ids of all level-1 nodes; and, possibly, the ids of some level-0 nodes discovered during the first phase, together with the corresponding ids of their ≤ q parents marked as neither su nor sv . We can then assume that the algorithm invokes Neighbourhood( ·) on the ids of unmarked level-1 nodes, as querying any other node would not yield any information not already possessed; and we can reinforce it with an oracle that lets it immediately return the correct ranking of the input nodes upon querying su or sv . At any point, at most q level-1 nodes have been marked as neither su nor sv by the at most q RandomNode() and/or Neighbourhood( ·) queries; and thus, since the graph is drawn uniformly at random from Fn , at any point the probability of querying su or sv is at most m l √  n0 f (n0 ) − q . Therefore, the overall probability of querying su or sv in the second 1/ 1 + α l √ m l √ m   n0 f (n0 ) 1 n0 f (n0 ) phase is at most q/ 1 + − q , which for q < is in O √q , which for α 2 α n  f (n)  n−2/3  any f (n) ≥ is in O(q · f (n)). If neither su nor sv are found, the algorithm has once again no information about which input node has the higher PageRank score; therefore, conditioned on the event of reaching the end of the second phase, the probability that the algorithm returns the correct ranking is 12 . Since the probability of stopping before the end of the second phase l √ m 1 n0 f (n0 ) and returning the correct ranking is in O(q · f (n)) for any q < 2 , we thus have a α  total probability bound of 12 + O(q · f (n)) on the event of returning the correct ranking for any l √ m f (n ) n q < 12 0 α 0 . Considering the uniform distribution over the elements of Fn , denote by µ = µ(Fn ) the expected number of queries employed by the algorithm, by pq = pq (Fn ) the probability that it employs more than q queries, and by P r[success] the probability that it returns the correct ranking of the input nodes. P r[success] is then upper bounded by pq · 1 (at best, the algorithm always returns the correct ranking when using more than q queries) plus (1 − pq ) ≤ 1 times the probability of returning the correct ranking on an element drawn uniformly at random from Fn l √ m µ 1 n0 f (n0 ) using at most q queries. Using Markov’s inequality to write pq < q , for any q < 2 α  25  the following holds: 1  µ ·1+1· + O(q · f (n)) (53) q 2 µ  1 + q · f (n) (54) = +O 2 q   1 1 For any µ ∈ o f (n) we can thus pick some q(n) ∈ o f (n) ∩ ω(µ(Fn )) and an n0 sufficiently l √ m n f (n ) large to ensure q(n) < 12 0 α 0 , and Equation 53 yields P r[success] = 12 + o(1). This holds on average over the elements of Fn for any algorithm; and thus, for every given  algorithm there 1 exists some G ∈ Fn on which that algorithm must perform an expected Ω f (n) queries to return 1 the correct ranking with probability 2 + Ω(1). 2 For n1 ≤ f (n) < n− 3 , we obtain the generic element of Fn by adapting that built for  2 2/3  f (n) = n− 3 . First, remove the self-loops (u, u) and (v, v). Then, let k = logα f (n0 ) · n0 > 0, and add 2k nodes zu1 , . . . , zuk and zv1 , . . . , zvk , and 2k arcs (u, zu1 ), (zu1 , zu2 ), . . . , (zuk−1 , zuk ) and (v, zv1 ), (zv1 , zv2 ), . . . , (zvk−1 , zvk ); and add two self-loops (zuk , zuk ), (zvk , zvk ). The size of the graph is clearly still Θ(n0 ) and can be made arbitrarily large. The maximum outdegree of the graph is 1 Θ(n 3 ) = O(γ(n)). The PageRank scores of zuk and zvk are: P r[success] ≤  P (zuk )  1 = n  X k−1  1 P (zvk ) = n  k  α +α  i=0  2  +α  i  l cηn1/3 m     1+α 1+  0    n2/3 0 α   1/3  1 + n0   (55)  α2  X k−1  i  k  α +α  i=0     1+α 1+   n2/3  0 α   1/3  1 + n0     2/3 , and since αk = Θ(f (n0 ) · n0 ), both in Θ  cηn1/3  Their difference P (zuk ) − P (zvk ) is equal to n1 αk+2 α20 , and therefore 1/3  and thus both in Θ  αk n0 n  P (zuk ) − P (zvk ) =  P (zvk ) 1 Pk−1 n  ≥   1 k+2 cηn0 α n α2  1/3  f (n0 )·n0  n    = Θ(f (n)).  (57)   n2/3     0 i k  α1/3  i=0 α + α 1 +α 1 + 1+ n0  1 3  αk cηn0  1 1−α  (56)  1  + αk 2n03    (58)  1  and by the choice of α and since f (n0 ) ≥ n10 , then α < αk n03 ≤ 1 and the last term of Equation 57 cαη 1 is greater than 1/(1−α)+2α , which is greater than or equal to η for any c ≥ 2 + α(1−α) . The family Fn consists again of all the graphs isomorphic to G, and we give in input to the algorithm, in random order, the ids of zuk and zvk in a graph drawn uniformly at random from Fn . But returning the correct ranking of zuk and zvk is equivalent to returning that of u and v, 2 2 therefore the Ω(n2/3 ) lower bound obtained for f (n) = n− 3 must hold; and for f (n) < n− 3 , this  1 bound is equivalent to Ω min f (n) , n2/3 .  1 1 , n2/3 for any γ(n) > n 3 and n1 ≤ f (n) ≤ 1. We thus have a bound of Ω min f (n) 1  1  1  Case 1 ≤ γ(n) ≤ n 3 We proceed as follows: first, for any f (n) ≥ n− 2 γ(n)− 2 we exhibit a family Fn of arbitrarily large, isomorphic graphs on n nodes whose generic element has maximum 26  outdegree Θ(γ(n)) and contains two nodes u, v with PageRank scores in Θ(f (n)) but not within a factor (1 + η) of each other. We prove that any algorithm, on some element in Fn , must 1 queries in expectation to decide which among u and v has the higher score with perform Ω f (n) 1  1  probability 21 + Ω(1). We then show how to adapt Fn for n1 ≤ f (n) < n− 2 γ(n)− 2 while bringing 1 1 1 1 1 the above expectation to Ω(n 2 γ(n) 2 ), thus obtaining a lower bound of Ω(min( f (n) , n 2 γ(n) 2 )) for any n1 ≤ f (n) ≤ 1. 1 1 To build a generic element G of Fn for f (n) ≥ n− 2 γ(n)− 2 , consider an arbitrary positive integer n0 (a rough approximation of the final number of nodes in G). The nodes of G (see Figure 3) can be divided into three levels, plus some additional isolated nodes (see below). Level l√ ml m n0 γ(n0 ) 0 consists of 2 nodes u, v and 2 γ(n ) nodes w00 , w01 , . . .; each node in this level has 0 α l√ m n0 γ(n0 ) (only) a self loop. Level 1 consists of 2 nodes su , sv and 2 nodes w10 , w11 , . . .. The α  sole outgoing arcs of su and sv are, respectively, √ (s , u) and (sv , v); while (w1j , u) is an arc for l√ m l u m l√ m n0 γ(n0 ) n0 γ(n0 ) n0 γ(n0 ) j 0 ≤ j < , and (w , v) is an arc for ≤ j < 2 . Furthermore, 1 α α α ⌈γ(n )⌉j  ⌈γ(n )⌉(j+1)−1  j each arcs (w1j , w0 0 ), . . . , (w1j , w0 0 ). Finally, level 2 consists  outgoing  cηnode w1 has 0 of α2 n0 f (n0 ) nodes w2 , w21 , . . . having outgoing arcs (w20 , su ), (w21 , su ), . . . , towards su , for a constant c > 0 to be determined later. The family Fn consists of all the graphs isomorphic to G. In particular, in an element drawn uniformly at random from Fn , each node is identified by a random integer in {1, . . . , n}; but we will keep denoting by u and v the (only) two level-0 l√ m n0 γ(n0 ) nodes each having 1 + ≥ 2 incoming arcs from level-1 nodes, and by su and sv the α (only) two level-1 nodes whose sole arc points towards u and v respectively, so that su is the node pointed to by all the level-2 nodes.  w20 w21 w10 w11  w00 w01  ...  ...  level 2  su  ...  sv  u  level 1  level 0  v 1  1  1  Figure 3: A generic graph G of the family Fn for 1 ≤ γ(n) ≤ n 3 and f (n) ≥ n− 2 γ(n)− 2 . All level-1 nodes except su and sv have ⌈γ(n0 )⌉ additional children besides u or v but, for simplicity, we have drawn these children in normal size only for the leftmost node. Again, in order to distinguish the two subgraphs, and thus u from v, one must find at least one of the nodes depicted in grey. ml m l√ m l√ n0 γ(n0 ) n0 γ(n0 ) The number of nodes in G is given by n = 4+ 2 γ(n ) + 2 + 0 α α m l √ cη 16+2cη α2 n0 f (n0 ) , which is always between 4 n0 and α2 n0 . We then complete G by adding isolated nodes until n = 16+2cη n0 ∈ Θ(n0 ), which one can make arbitrarily large by increasing α2 n0 . The maximum outdegree of the graph is 1 + ⌈γ(n0 )⌉ = Θ(γ(n)). The PageRank scores of u  27  and v are:  m l√ n0 γ(n0 )   α 1   P (u) = 1+α 1+ n 1 + γ(n0 ) m l 2 cη n0 f (n0 ) +α α2 m l√ n0 γ(n0 )    α 1   P (v) = 1+α 1+ n 1 + γ(n0 ) q  1 n0 − 21 γ(n)− 2 , and both are in Θ n1 γ(n0 ) + n0 f (n0 ) , and since n = Θ(n0 ) and f (n) ≥ n   are in Θ(f (n)). Their difference P (u) − P (v) is equal to n1 α2 αcη2 n0 f (n0 ) , and therefore:   1 2 cη n f (n ) P (u) − P (v) nα α2 0√ 0 =   n γ(n )    0 0 P (v) 1 α n 1 + α 1 + 1+⌈γ(n0 )⌉   cηn0 f (n0 ) √ 2 n0 γ(n0 ) 1 + α + γ(n 0) cη = 1+α √2 n0 f (n0 ) + ≥  f (n0 )  1  (59)  (60) both  (61)  (62) (63)  n0 γ(n0 )  1  and since f (n) ≥ n− 2 γ(n)− 2 ≥ n1 , for c ≥ 4 the last term is greater than η for any η > 0, any α ∈ (0, 1), and any n0 > 0. Consider now a generic algorithm that receives in input, in random order, the ids of nodes u and v in a graph drawn uniformly at random from Fn , and must decide which one has the higher PageRank score using only RandomNode() and Neighbourhood( ·) queries. We apply the same l√ m 1 1 1 n0 γ(n0 ) = Θ(n 2 γ(n) 2 ) argument deployed for the case γ(n) > n 3 (see above), now with α   level-1 nodes and αcη2 n0 f (n0 ) = Θ(nf (n)) level-2 nodes; note that the presence of isolated nodes only reduces the probability that RandomNode() reveals useful information, and does not influence the probability that a Neighbourhood( ·) reveals useful information. This gives a lower  1 1 1 bound of Ω min n 2 γ(n) 2 , f (n) queries to bring the probability of success on Fn to 21 + Ω(1). 1  1  For n1 ≤ f (n) < n− 2 γ(n)− 2 , we obtain the generic element of Fn by adapting the graph 1 1 built for f (n) = n− 2 γ(n)− 2 . First, remove the self-loops (u, u) and (v, v). Then let k =   1/2 logα f (n0 ) · n0 · γ(n0 )1/2 > 0, and add 2k nodes zu1 , . . . , zuk and zv1 ,. . .,zvk , and 2k arcs (u, zu1 ), (zu1 , zu2 ), . . . , (zuk−1 , zuk ) and (v, zv1 ),(zv1 , zv2 ),. . .,(zvk−1 , zvk ); and add two self-loops (zuk , zuk ), (zvk , zvk ). The size of the graph is clearly still Θ(n0 ) and can be made arbitrarily large. The maximum outdegree of the graph is still Θ(γ(n)). The PageRank scores of zuk and zvk are: m l√ n0 γ(n0 )  X   k−1 α 1 P (zuk ) = αi + αk 1 + α 1 + n 1 + ⌈γ(n0 )⌉ i=0 l cη r n m 0 + α2 2 (64) α γ(n0 ) m l√ n0 γ(n0 )  X   k−1 α 1 αi + αk 1 + α 1 + (65) P (zvk ) = n 1 + ⌈γ(n0 )⌉ i=0   1/2 , and since αk = Θ(f (n0 ) · n0 γ(n0 )l1/2 ), both mare in and thus both are in Θ n q  n0 , and Θ f (n0n)·n0 = Θ(f (n)). Their difference P (zuk ) − P (zvk ) is equal to n1 αk+2 αcη2 γ(n 0) 1/2 αk n0 γ(n0 )−1/2  28  therefore P (zuk )  − P (zvk ) P (zvk )  =  l  1 k+2 cη nα α2  P  q    k−1 i 1 k 1+α 1+ α +α i=0 n q n0 αk cη γ(n 0)  ≥ q n0 1 k2 + α 1−α γ(n0 )  and by the choice of k and since f (n0 ) ≥  1 n0 ,  m  n0 γ(n0 ) l√  then α < αk  n0 γ(n0 ) α  1+⌈γ(n0 )⌉  q  m   (66)  (67)  n0 γ(n0 )  ≤ 1 and the last term of  cαη 1 Equation 66 is greater than 1/(1−α)+2α , which is greater than or equal to η for any c ≥ 2+ α(1−α) . The family Fn consists again of all the graphs isomorphic to G, and we give in input to the algorithm, in random order, the ids of zuk and zvk in a graph drawn uniformly at random from Fn . But returning the correct ranking of zuk and zvk is equivalent to returning that of u and 1 1 1 1 v, therefore the Ω n 2 γ(n) 2 lower bound obtained for f (n) = n− 2 γ(n)− 2 must hold; and for  1 1 1 1 1 . f (n) < n− 2 γ(n)− 2 , this bound is equivalent to Ω min n 2 γ(n) 2 , f (n)  1 1 1 1 We thus have a bound of Ω min n 2 γ(n) 2 , f (n) for any 1 ≤ γ(n) ≤ n 3 and n1 ≤ f (n) ≤ 1.  Generalization of f (n) and γ(n) To remove the assumption that f (n) and γ(n) are respectively in Θ(f (n0 )) and Θ(γ(n0 )) whenever n = Θ(n0 ), one must build the graphs as a function of n instead of n0 . Crucially, we must then properly rescale the number of nodes at each level in order to ensure that the graph has size exactly n while still guaranteeing that the scores of u and v are not within a factor (1 + η) of each other. We show how to perform this 1 1 “rescale” operation only for the case γ(n) > n 3 (see above); the case 1 ≤ γ(n) ≤ n 3 is com2 pletely analogous. For n− 3 ≤ f (n) ≤ 1, consider three arbitrarily small, positive reals λ0 , λ1 , λ2 . The p graph has the same structure as shown above (see Figure 2), but each  subgraph now has additional children ⌈λ1 n f (n)⌉ level-1 nodes (not counting su and sv ) each having √λ0 f (n)  besides u or v (except for su and sv ), and ⌈λ2 nf (n)⌉ level-2 nodes. The size of the graph is Θ(λ0 λ1 n + λ2 nf (n)) = O(n(λ0 λ1 + λ2 )); we can thus make it exactly equal to n by choosing sufficiently small lambdas and then adding isolated nodes if necessary. Note that now both the scores of the nodes and the lower bound still satisfy the thesis, even if f (Θ(n)) ∈ / Θ(n). We can further choose λ0 and λ1 such that also λλ10 is sufficiently small; and this ensures that the score contribution of the level-2 nodes is large enough to have the scores not within a factor (1 + η) of each other, for any n larger than a constant factor depending only on η, α, λ0 , λ1 , λ2 . Finally, we must ensure that the contribution of the level-2 nodes is sufficient to keep the scores differing 2 by more than (1 + η) when adapting the graph for f (n) < n− 3 , even when f (n) = Θ( n1 ) (i.e. when the contribution of the nodes nearest to zuk and zvk is also in Θ( n1 ) and may bring P (zuk ) and P (zvk ) too close). To do this, we simply reduce the length of the chain of nodes leading to zuk and zvk by a sufficiently large constant additive factor (note that this does not change the value of the scores asymptotically), until the score contribution from the level-2 nodes becomes sufficiently large. 1  Assembling the lower bound For any γ(n) > n 3 and any n1 ≤ f (n) ≤ 1, we have  1  1 1 1 queries; and proven a lower bound of Ω min f (n) , n2/3 = Ω min f (n) , n2/3 , n 2 γ(n) 2 1  for any 1 ≤ γ(n) ≤ n 3 and any n1 ≤ f (n) < 1, we have also proven a lower bound of  1 1  1 1 1 1 queries. Juxtaposing the two gives , n2/3 , n 2 γ(n) 2 = Ω min f (n) Ω min n 2 γ(n) 2 , f (n) 1 1  1 2/3 a general lower bound of Ω min f (n) , n , n 2 γ(n) 2 queries, which concludes the proof. 29

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
