Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_7161

Abstract:
Estimating scale-invariant future in continuous time  arXiv:1802.06426v1 [cs.AI] 18 Feb 2018  Zoran Tiganj1 , Samuel J. Gershman2 , Per B. Sederberg3 , and Marc W. Howard1 1  Center for Memory and Brain, Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Boston University 2 Center for Brain Science, Department of Psychology, Harvard University 3 Department of Psychology, University of Virginia  Abstract Natural learners must compute an estimate of future outcomes that follow from a stimulus in continuous time. Critically, the learner cannot in general know a priori the relevant time scale over which meaningful relationships will be observed. Widely used reinforcement learning algorithms discretize continuous time and use the Bellman equation to estimate exponentially-discounted future reward. However, exponential discounting introduces a time scale to the computation of value. Scaling is a serious problem in continuous time: efficient learning with scaled algorithms requires prior knowledge of the relevant scale. That is, with scaled algorithms one must know at least part of the solution to a problem prior to attempting a solution. We present a computational mechanism, developed based on work in psychology and neuroscience, for computing a scale-invariant timeline of future events. This mechanism efficiently computes a model for future time on a logarithmically-compressed scale, and can be used to generate a scale-invariant power-law-discounted estimate of expected future reward. Moreover, the representation of future time retains information about what will happen when, enabling flexible decision making based on future events. The entire timeline can be constructed in a single parallel operation.  1  Introduction  The ability to learn and operate in a continuously changing world with complex temporal relationships is critical for survival. For example, rats have to navigate around narrow holes and across wide fields, they have to learn that some stimuli present imminent danger requiring quick action, while others can serve as cues for events that will take place in a more distant future. Understanding the neural mechanisms that govern such behavioral flexibility and building artificial agents that have such capacity poses a significant challenge for neuroscience and artificial intelligence. In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent learns how to optimize its actions from interacting with the environment. The standard approach to RL is to consider each different configuration of the  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  2  environment as a different state (Sutton & Barto, 1998a). Temporal difference (TD) learning has been employed to learn the scalar value of temporally discounted expected future reward for each state. This approach has been tremendously useful and led to numerous practical applications (see e.g., Mnih et al., 2015). The method introduced in this paper addresses two major limitations to mainstream models of RL. First, because the goal of TD learning is to estimate the exponentially-discounted expected future reward, the method necessarily introduces a characteristic time scale (Figure 1a). If the delay associated with the to-be-learned relationship is small compared to this scale, the behavior of the model will be dramatically different than if it is large compared to this scale.1 Second, because TD learning attempts to estimate an integral over a function of future time, it discards detailed information about the time at which future events are expected to take place. Of course, human decision-makers can reason about the time at which future events will occur, leading many authors to augment the fast value computation supplied by TD learning with a model-based system (see Daw & Dayan, 2014 for a review). The model-based system is typically assumed to be slow, with the time taken to predict an outcome n steps in the future requiring n matrix operations. In this paper, we present an alternative method for predicting future outcomes in continuous time that addresses these limitations. 1.1  Fixing a scale limits flexibility  Consider the task of designing an agent that will be deployed in a realistic environment without additional intervention from the designer. Successful performance on many tasks requires the ability to learn across a range of timescales. To make this example more concrete, consider designing an agent that will be deployed on the streets of Boston to learn to complete the everyday tasks of a post-doc. In order to get from Boston University to Harvard, the agent must learn that switching onto the red line leads to Harvard Square about 20 min in the future. At Dunkin Donuts the agent must learn that paying money leads to a cup of coffee in about a minute. Grasping the cup and sipping the coffee predicts the taste of coffee immediately, but predicts the stimulating effect of caffeine several minutes in the future. In designing an agent to learn all of these tasks in an unknown environment, the designer will not necessarily know what temporal scales are important. We thus desire that the learning algorithm be scale-invariant. Algorithms based on the Bellman equation, which includes TD learning, typically estimate an exponentially-discounted expected future return. Exponential discounting γ τ fixes a characteristic time scale.2 The scaling results in very different policies at different temporal scales. (Figure 1a). Consider a world in which two rewards A and B follow a cue. The delay from the cue to B is twice the delay to A. Suppose that we do not know the units of time in the world and pick γ = 0.9. If the units of the world are such that the delay to A is 1 and the delay to B is 2, then the agent would prefer B if the value of A was $1 and B was $1.2. However, if the units of the world are very different such that the delay to A was 100 and the delay to B was 200, then even if the reward at B was $30, 000, the agent would still prefer A. This example makes clear that the success of a model that makes use of exponential discounting depends critically on aligning the choice of γ to the relevant scale of the world. 1 2  Similar arguments can be made when eligibility traces are considered. More precisely, the inverse of the time constant goes like − log γ.  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  3  a 1  1  0.8  0.8  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.2  0.2  0.2  y  1 0.8  0 0  1  2  0 0  x  10  20  0 0  x  100  200  x  b 5  0.5  40  4  0.4  30  3  0.3  20  2  0.2  10  1  0.1  0  0 0  y  50  0  1  x  2  10  x  20  0 0  100  200  x  Figure 1. Exponential discounting introduces a scale; power-law discounting is scale-free. a. An exponential function has qualitatively different properties at different scales. The function y = γ x is shown at three different scales for γ = 0.9. If x is on the order of the time constant (− log γ) we obtain the familiar exponential function with a clearly defined gradient for different values of x (middle). If x is small with respect to the time constant, we find a linear function with a shallow slope (left). If x is large relative to the time constant (right), the function approximates a delta function with a peak around zero. b. Power-law discounting (y = x−1 ). For all ranges of x values the power law gives the same relative gradient of values. 1.2  Representing the future with a scalar obscures temporal information  One could implement scale-invariant power-law discounting3 by choosing an appropriate spectrum of exponential discount rates (Kurth-Nelson & Redish, 2009; Sutton, 1995). However it is computed, a discounted value discards potentially important information about when an anticipated event will occur. For instance, consider the decision facing an agent about whether to buy a cup of very hot coffee. Drinking the coffee immediately would burn ones mouth. However, drinking the coffee after waiting a few minutes for it to cool down will result in a delicious and stimulating beverage. Is the value of the coffee negative (burned mouth) or positive (delicious beverage) or some weighted sum of the two? One way to answer the question is to state that the value of the coffee is a function over future time that is initially negative and then later positive. If the only information about this function that can be brought to bear in deciding whether to purchase the coffee is a single scalar value, then the decision-maker may choose an inappropriate action, either purchasing the coffee when she does not have time to wait for it to cool or missing the opportunity to enjoy a delicious beverage in the near future. Classical model-based RL enables decisions that take into account the time at which future events will take place. However the computational cost of traditional model-based solutions grows linearly with the horizon over which one needs to estimate the future. In this paper we present a method that constructs a function over future time for each stimulus. This representation of the future is logarithmically compressed and the estimate of the future at many different points in time 3  If f (t) = ta , then rescaling the time axis preserves the relative values at all time points, f (αt) = Cf (t).  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  4  can be computed in parallel. One could compute an integral over this representation to maintain a cached value with power-law discounting. But because the entire function is available one could also incorporate the time at which rewards will become available into the decision-making. 1.3  Scale-invariant temporal representations in the brain  The basic computational strategy we pursue is to 1) compute a scale-invariant representation of the temporal history leading up to the present and 2) at each moment associate the history with the stimulus observed in the present. Step 1 assumes the existence of a scale-invariant compressed representation of temporal history. Step 2 assumes the existence of an associative mechanism. There is ample neural evidence for both of these assumptions. A large literature from the cellular neuroscience literature provides evidence for an associative mechanism implementing Hebbian plasticity at synapses (Bliss & Collingridge, 1993; Lisman, Schulman, & Cline, 2002), which would be required for Step 2. There is also a growing body of evidence consistent with assumptions necessary for Step 1. Experiments from several species suggests that the brain maintains a compressed representation of time in multiple brain regions. “Time cells” fire during a circumscribed period of time within a delay interval (Pastalkova, Itskov, Amarasingham, & Buzsaki, 2008; MacDonald, Lepage, Eden, & Eichenbaum, 2011); a reliable sequence of time cells tile the delay on each trial (Figure 2a). Because the sequence is reliable, time cells can be used to reconstruct how long in the past the delay began. In many experiments, these sequences also carry information about what stimulus initiated the delay interval (Pastalkova et al., 2008; MacDonald, Carrow, Place, & Eichenbaum, 2013; Tiganj, Cromer, Roy, Miller, & Howard, in press; Terada, Sakurai, Nakahara, & Fujisawa, 2017). Because there are fewer cells that fire later in the sequence and those that fire later in the sequence fire for a longer duration (Howard, Shankar, Aue, & Criss, 2015; Salz et al., 2016), the ability to reconstruct time decreases as the start of the interval recedes into the past. Time cells have been observed in several brain regions, including hippocampus (MacDonald et al., 2011; Salz et al., 2016), prefrontal cortex (Tiganj, Jung, Kim, & Howard, 2016; Bolkan et al., 2017; Tiganj et al., in press) and striatum (Mello, Soares, & Paton, 2015; Akhlaghpour et al., 2016), in several species (Mau et al., 2017; Adler et al., 2012; Tiganj et al., in press) and in a wide variety of behavioral tasks. Taken together, these data indicate that at each moment the brain maintains a temporal record of what happened when leading up to the present. The decrease in accuracy for events further in the past suggests that this temporal record is compressed. As such, this neural data aligns to longstanding predictions from cognitive models (Brown, Steyvers, & Hemmer, 2007; Balsam & Gallistel, 2009; Howard et al., 2015). These models further predict that the form of compression should be logarithmic. Behavioral models built from a logarithmically-compressed representation readily account for scale-invariant behavior (Howard et al., 2015).4 1.4  Overview of this paper  In this paper we use a logarithmically-compressed record of the past—a set of appropriate time cells—to construct a scale-invariant estimate of the time of future events. A logarithmicallycompressed record of the past can be efficiently computed using a method we will describe in detail below (Shankar & Howard, 2012, 2013). At each moment, this representation of the past is 4  For much the same reason that, on a logarithmic scale, the difference between 1 and 2 is the same as the difference between 100 and 200, models built from a logarithmically-compressed temporal representation will be scale-invariant.  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  5  associated to the present. Neurally, this association requires nothing more elaborate than Hebbian plasticity, which can be implemented via long-term potentiation (Bliss & Collingridge, 1993). The past-to-present association can also be understood as a present-to-future association (Figure 2). As such, probing this association with the present stimulus enables us to identify the sequence of stimuli that will follow the probe stimulus at different points in the future. Section 2 describes this method more precisely. This method yields an estimate of the future that has very different properties than traditional approaches used in RL. The properties of this representation are described with illustrative examples in Section 3. Because the representation of the past is logarithmically compressed, so too is the estimate of the future that it produces. A cached scalar value can be computed from this timeline, yielding (scale-invariant) power-law discounting by summing over the predicted future. Notably, the compressed timeline representation also provides a function over simulated time. The future timeline can be computed in a single parallel operation and sums over potential outcomes. 2  Constructing a logarithmically-compressed timeline of the future  This approach requires two key components, a logarithmically-compressed memory representation and an associative memory between the compressed representation and the present stimulus. Subsection 2.1 describes a method for constructing a logarithmically-compressed temporal representation following Shankar and Howard (2013). Subsection 2.2 describes the associative memory. Subsection 2.3 specifies the future timeline that results from probing the associative memory with a stimulus. 2.1  Constructing a compressed memory representation of the past  Let us start by assuming that we are presented with a vector-valued input f (t), where f spans the space of all possible stimuli. At each time point we maintain the real-value Laplace transform of the input up to the current time step, F(s) = Lf (τ < t). F(s) is composed of a set of leaky integrators indexed by their (real) rate constant s. In this way, the history of f (τ < t) is written at time t across the units in F(s). Following Shankar and Howard (2012, 2013) at time zero we approximate f (τ ) by ∗ ∗ approximating the inversion of the Laplace transform as f̃ (τ ) = L-1 k F(s). The variable τ indexes the ∗ units in f̃ and is negative to indicate that the units are representing the past. Each unit’s value of τ is proportional to 1/s, the time constant of a corresponding unit in F (s). The form of L-1 k ensures ∗ ∗ that the resolution of f̃ (τ ) decreases as |τ | increases. By choosing the distribution of s appropriately, ∗ setting the present time to be zero, f̃ (τ ) gives a logarithmically compressed estimate of f (τ ). The remainder of this subsection describes each of these steps in more detail. 2.1.1 Updating the Laplace transform of the past. Let us define an input vector f consisting of N elements such that each its element corresponds to a unique input state. Thus if state α is observed at time t, the element in f (t) that corresponds to state α, is equal to one and other elements are zero. Each element of the input vector f is associated with a compressed memory representation, which is constructed as a two layer feedforward neural network with fixed, analytically derived weights (see Shankar & Howard, 2012, 2013 for a detailed derivation). The first layer of the network F(s) implements an approximation of the Laplace transform: F(s) = −sF(s) + f (t). dt  (1)  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  a  6  b  Figure 2. Associating the past to the present also enables one to associate the present to the future. a. Sequences of time cells in the brain contain information about the time of past events. This panel shows the activity of many neurons from the mouse mPFC during the delay period of a memory task. Each row gives the average firing rate as a function of time for one neuron. Red colors indicate a high firing rate. Because neurons fire for a circumscribed period of time during the delay, these neurons could be used to decode the time at which the delay started. Put another way, each neuron can be ∗ understood as coding for the presence of the start of the delay at a lag τ in the past. The number of cells active at any one time decreases as the delay unfolds (note the curvature) and the firing fields spread (note the increasing width of the central ridge). This reflects a decrease in accuracy for time as the start of the delay recedes further into the past. After Bolkan, et al., (2017). b. The formation ∗ of associations across values of τ enables prediction of the future. Top: An association M binds the ∗ current state of the past f̃ (τ ) to the present. M includes separate entries for the stimuli that preceded ∗ α at different time points τ < 0, each of which are associated to the state α. If we identify a sequence ∗ of time cells (a) with f̃ (τ ) formation of the association simply requires Hebbian plasticity at synapses ∗ connecting time cells with each τ to neurons representing the current stimulus. Probing M from the left with a state α provides an estimate of the average history that preceded α. Bottom: If the statistics of the world are translation invariant—or at minimum do not change rapidly—this same association, when probed from the right yields the future trajectory of states that follow the state α. To see why, consider the associations that are built after α is presented and recedes into the past. At ∗ each time step α is associated to whatever stimulus it precedes by τ < 0. After α has receded into the past, probing this association with α thus provides an estimate of the stimuli that will follow α at ∗ a time τ > 0 in the future.  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  7  a  s  1  s2 s3  * * *  *  Figure 3. Constructing a scale-invariant representation of the past. A transient input stimulus f (top row) is presented twice and feeds into a layer of leaky integrators F(s) with a spectrum of rate constants s constituting a discrete approximation of an integral transform (middle row). The transform is denoted as L since it is equivalent to the real part of the Laplace transform. Only ∗ three nodes in F(s) are shown. F(s) projects onto f̃ (t, τ ) through a set of weights defined with the operator denoted as L-1 k which implements an approximation to the inverse Laplace transform. ∗ Nodes in f̃ (τ ) activate sequentially following the stimulus presentation, thus constituting a memory representation. The width of the activation of each node scales with the peak time determined by the ∗ ∗ corresponding τ , making the memory scale-invariant. Logarithmic spacing of the τ ensures that the memory representation is compressed. One can see that F(s) at time t is the Laplace transform of f (τ < t) by solving Eq. 1: Z t  e−s(t−τ ) f (τ )dτ.  F(s, t) =  (2)  −∞ ∗  -1 The approximate inverse is computed as f̃ (τ ) = L-1 k F(s). Lk is a linear operator that approximates the inverse transform using Post’s inversion formula (Post, 1930). Denoting the k th derivative ∗ with respect to s as F(k) (s), at time t, f̃ (τ ) is computed as ∗  f̃ (τ ) = Ck sk+1 F(k) (s),  (3)  ∗  ∗  where Ck is a constant that depends only on k. Note that τ is negative and the values of s and τ are ∗ aligned as τ ≡ −k/s. To understand the properties of the memory representation we consider an impulse response of a cell in f̃ . If a particular state α was activated a time τo in the past, the corresponding activation of the ∗ cells in f̃ (τ ) is:   1 τo k −k τ∗o ∗ ˜ e τ, fα (τ ) = Ck ∗ ∗ (4) τ τ ∗ where Ck here is a different constant that depends only on k. The activity of each node in f˜α (τ ) is the product of an increasing power term   k τ ∗ τ  −k τ∗o  and a decreasing exponential term e  τ  .  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  8  a  b B  R A  A  *1  *1 *3  *2  *2  *3  *3 R  *  *2  B  *1  *  t  Figure 4. Constructing an associative memory for learning to predict the future. a. Illustration of the compressed memory representation f̃ as a function of time during presentation of the sequence A B R . Stimuli presented at different times (top) induce sequential activation (bottom) corresponding to ∗ f̃ (τ ). Activation corresponding to different stimuli is shown with different colors. For clarity, only ∗ ∗ a handful of τ nodes are displayed. b. A graphical depiction of the state of the associative M(τ ) after learning of the sequence A B R. Each graph shows the entries in M that predict the outcome ∗ shown on the left as a function of τ . The different cues A B R are shown in different colors in each graph. Top: Because A was not preceded by either B or R these stimuli do not cue A. Middle: B was preceded by A at a short lag. As a consequence, the states that predict B are those that code for A at a short lag. Bottom: R was preceded by both A and B. As a consequence, the states that cue R include A at a long temporal lag (broad peak to the left) and B at a shorter temporal lag (more narrow peak to the right). Note that the spacing of the peak for B reflects the timing between the stimuli (compare to the peak for A in the middle graph). ∗  In the time following a delta function input, each node in f˜α (τ ) has a peak in its activation that ∗ corresponds to the τ value of that node. Thus, following a transient input of state α, cells in f˜α activate sequentially. This memory representation has perfect accuracy in the limit when k → ∞ ∗ (when it effectively becomes a shift register). When k is finite and τ is a discrete variable supported with a limited number of nodes, the memory representation becomes an approximation of the past. The approximation is scale-invariant since the width of the activation of each node scales with the peak time. In other words, the accuracy of the memory representation decreases with the elapse of ∗ time since the stimulus presentation. With appropriately distributed s (and thus τ ) the representation of time is logarithmically compressed. ∗ Figure 4a shows the sequential, spreading activation with logarithmically spaced τ for three different transient stimuli. This implementation is neurally plausible as described in Howard et al. (2014). See Tiganj, Hasselmo, and Howard (2015) for a biologically plausible mechanism implementing leaky integrators with a spectrum of time constants and (Liu, Tiganj, Hasselmo, & Howard, Submitted) for a biologically plausible circuit implementing the inverse transform. 2.2  Constructing an associative memory ∗  At each time t, an associative memory tensor M(τ ) is updated with the outer product of the ∗ current input state f (t) and f̃ (τ ). Hence M can be understood as a matrix-valued function of past ∗ time, M(τ ) (Figure 4b): ∗  ∗  ∆M(τ ) = |f (t)ihf̃ (τ )|  (5)  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  9  where the dimensions of the matrix are the number of states. In the limiting case when k → ∞, f̃ ∗ takes the form of a shift register. Under these circumstances, each element in M(τ ) is proportional ∗ to the number of times the corresponding states followed one another at a time lag τ : ∗  h  ∗  i  hβ|M(τ )|αi ∝ P f(t + |τ |) = β, f(t) = α . ∗  (6) ∗  In the limiting case, column-normalized M(τ ), which we shall denote by M̄(τ ), gives the conditional ∗ probability of observing each state at a lag of |τ | given that each state was observed in the present:5 ∗  h  ∗  i  hβ|M̄(τ )|αi = P f(t + |τ |) = β | f(t) = α . 2.3  (7)  Estimating a future timeline ∗  M(τ ) stores the pairwise temporal relationships between all stimuli subject to logarithmic ∗ compression. Probing from the left, hα|M(τ ) gives the sum of states expected to precede α by a lag ∗ ∗ τ . Conversely, probing from the right gives the summed states expected to follow α at a lag |τ | in the future. We can thus define the future predicted to follow state α as: ∗  ∗  pα (−τ ) = M̄(τ )|αi. ∗  (8)  ∗  Note that τ on the rhs is negative, whereas −τ on the lhs is positive. In this way, the stored memories for the past can be used to estimate a timeline for the future (Figure 2). ∗ ∗ Note that p(τ > 0) is a future-time analog of f̃ (τ < 0). It inherits the same form of compression ∗ via the spacing of s and thus τ . The “blur” in the estimate of the time of presentation of a past ∗ ∗ stimulus in f̃ (τ < 0) naturally leads to an analogous blur in p(τ > 0). The properties of this representation of future time are illustrated in more detail in Section 3. 3  Illustrating the properties of the representation of future time  In this section we illustrate properties of the representation of future time induced by probing M with a particular state (Eq. 8). In subsection 3.1 we demonstrate that the representation that results is scale-invariant. In subsection 3.2 we show that a cached value for each state can be computed, resulting in a scale-invariant value that is discounted according to a power law. In subsection 3.3 we illustrate the flexibility of this method in generating non-monotonic functions enabling the user to solve problems such as the “hot coffee” problem described in the introduction. In subsection 3.4 we demonstrate that future time gives an estimate summed over all possible paths. 3.1  Scale-invariance of future time  If two environments differ only in their temporal scale, an artificial agent based on a scaleinvariant algorithm will take the same actions in both environments. This property is illustrated for this method through a simple toy example in Figure 5. In this example, there are two states to choose from, α and β, and a third rewarding state R that the agent is interested in predicting. The two environments shown in Figure 5 differ only in the temporal spacing between different stimuli. 5  One could imagine that this column normalization is implemented on-line by a divisive presynaptic normalization mechanism (Beck, Latham, & Pouget, 2011). In practice it could also be computed off-line.  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  10  The bottom environment (marked as Scale 4, Figure 5b) is a temporally stretched version of the top environment (marked as Scale 1, Figure 5a). Stretching the time axis of the top environment by 4 times would give exactly the bottom environment. At the decision point D at time t = 0 the agent needs to choose either state α or state β. Under the assumption that the agent has explored the environment by choosing each direction at least once, all needed temporal associations are stored in M̄. Next time when the agent faces the ∗ decision point at time t = 0 it can construct the future time as in Eq. 8. The prediction pα/β (τ ) constructed separately for α and β gives power-law discounted estimate of expected future reward. Values, defined as power-law discounted estimated future rewards, can be computed from the simulated time following Eq. 9. The ratio of the values for states α and β is constant when time is rescaled. This means that the relative values assigned to various choices do not depend on the time-scale of the environment, but only on their relative magnitude and timing. 3.2  Computing cached power-law discounted stimulus value by integrating over the timeline  There are circumstances where a decision-maker does not have time to evaluate a compressed function over future time and a cached value of each state would be sufficient. A cached value can be computed by maintaining, for each state, an average value over future time updated by taking an integral over the future: Z ∞  ∗  ∗  ∗  hr|pα (τ )i g(τ ) dτ ,  VA (t) =  (9)  0 ∗  ∗  where r is a vector describing the value of each state and g(τ ) is the number density of τ values ∗ −1  dN ∗ . dτ  In order to ensure Weber-Fechner spacing, we here set g(δ) = τ , but one could in general augment this by including a function to differentially weight the contribution of different values of ∗ τ . As long as that function does not introduce a scale, the cached value computed in this way will remain scale invariant. Figure 6 illustrates properties of value computed from Eq. 9. 3.3  Non-monotonic functions over future time  In traditional RL, the value of each state is a scalar. The approach introduced here provides a recipe for simulating a function of a logarithmically compressed future. The example in Figure 7 illustrates one case in which this type of representation has an advantage over the scalar representation. In this example state α is neutral; no meaningful outcome follows it. However, state β is followed sequentially by a negative outcome (e.g., a burned mouth) and then later by a positive outcome (e.g., delicious coffee). The ability to simulate outcomes as a function of future time can enable the agent to make decisions in a more flexible way than would be possible if all the available information about the future was expressed as a scalar. 3.4  Future time sums over trajectories  Figure 8 illustrates an important property of the proposed approach: simulated future time ∗ provides a probability of each stimulus τ in the future summed across all possible future trajectories. Let us assume that the agent has sampled the environment sufficiently many times to learn the transition probabilities and the temporal dynamics of the environment, which are now stored in ∗ M̄. Now computing the prediction pα (τ ) as in Eq. 8 provides an overall estimate of the reward averaged across all the future trajectories. However, it retains information about how far in the future  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  11  a Decision tree  Scale: 1 2R D R  0  5  10  15  25  30  35  40  45  50  55  45  50  55  45  50  55  Time Future time representation  0.03  Prediction  20  at scale 1 at scale 1  0.02 0.01 0 0  5  10  15  20  25  30  35  40  e  m  Ti  Future time *  b Decision tree  Scale: 4  2R D R  0  5  10  15  25  30  35  40  Time Future time representation  0.01  Prediction  20  at scale 1, rescaled by factor 4 at scale 1, rescaled by factor 4 at scale 4 at scale 4  0.005 0 0  5  10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45  50  55  e  m  Ti  Future time *  Figure 5. The representation of future time is scale-invariant. In this and subsequent figures, the agent evaluates the degree to which each of two states, α and β, predict a desired outcome R. The decision tree in the environment is shown in the top panel. The estimate of the future cued by each of ∗ the two states α and β as a function of future time τ is shown by the lines at the bottom. a. A simple decision tree in which α predicts reward after 5 units of time and β predicts reward after 10 units of time. The dashed lines show that the cues predict reward at different times. Note that the prediction of events further in the future is made with less precision. (The reward predicted by β is twice the size of the reward predicted by α to make the figure easier to read.) b. The same decision tree, but with the temporal intervals rescaled by a factor of 4. The solid lines show the predictions from the environment in a rescaled by a factor of 4 (i.e., stretched by a factor of 4 and multiplied by 4). Also note that the functions in the two environments are precisely rescaled versions of one another.  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  12  a  b  c  R R R R  value (units of R)  value (units of R)  0.02 R  1  0.5  0.01  0.005  0 0  100  200  Time  300  400  0  50  100 150 200 250  Time to reward  50  100  200  Time to reward  Figure 6. The value aggregated by integrating over future time obeys power-law discounting. a. Constructing prediction of the future reward. An agent observed a temporal sequence consisting of a state α, followed by a rewarding state R at some delay. b. The value of α computed according to Eq. 9 as a function of the delay between α and reward (expressed in the units of the reward R). The value associated with the five evenly spaced delays in a are shown as star symbols. The blue line is a power law with exponent −1. c. Same as b but on log-log axes.  Figure 7. The estimate of a future timeline enables the decision-maker to anticipate different outcomes at different points in time. Top: Choice α is neutral, predicting neither reward nor punishment. Choice β results in a negative outcome (e.g., a shock) after 10 units of time and then a large positive outcome after 20 units of time. Bottom: The representation of future time induced by each choice varies as a function of the temporal horizon. α is preferable to β at short delays but β is preferable to α at longer delays. A decision-maker could incorporate this information about the future time course when the choices are presented.  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  13  Figure 8. The estimate of a future timeline sums over all possible future trajectories. Top: The decision tree for a complex choice. Both α and β lead to a complex set of possible outcomes that occur at specific times with given probabilities (shown as numbers near each branch of the tree). Bottom: The estimate of a future timeline averages over different possible paths with each outcome weighted by its probability of occurrence given the choice stimulus (α or β). those outcomes will be obtained. This property allows a rapid evaluation of different decision trees. Evaluating a particular sequence of outcomes that depend on sequential actions would still require supplementing this representation with a more traditional model-based approach. Moreover, correctly learning the outcomes requires sampling the entire tree, which may be much slower than TD-based learning in an environment with Markov statistics. 4  Discussion  In this paper we show that, given a compressed representation of the past, a simple associative mechanism is sufficient to enable one to generate a compressed representation of the future. A compressed representation of the past has been extensively observed in the brain in many brain regions (MacDonald et al., 2011; Jin, Fujii, & Graybiel, 2009; Tiganj et al., in press). The associative mechanism we utilize can be understood as simple Hebbian association. The representation that is generated by this method has many potentially desirable computational properties. Because the representations of the past and the future are both scale-invariant, it is not necessary to have a strong prior belief about the relevant time scale of the problem one is trying to solve. A scale-invariant learning agent ought to be able to solve problems in a wide range of learning environments. While it remains to be shown that the form of compression of temporal sequences  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  14  in the brain is quantitatively scale-invariant (rather than merely compressed), scale-invariance is a design goal that can be implemented in artificial systems. Because the method directly estimates a function over future states, rather than an integral over future states, decision-makers can make adaptive decisions that take into account the time of future outcomes. The future timeline constructed using this method differs from traditional model-based approaches. After the association matrix M has been learned, the computation of the future trajectory is computationally efficient and can be accomplished in one parallel operation. In addition, the logarithmic form for the future means that even if the decision-maker queries the representation sequentially, the amount of time to access a future event goes up sublinearly. Recent behavioral evidence from human subjects shows just this result (Singh & Howard, 2017). Because the method treats time as a continuous variable, there is no need to discretize time. That is, the “distance” between two states need not be filled with other states. In TD learning, error propogates backward from one state to a preceding state via a gradient along intervening states. Using the method in this paper, one can learn that A predicts B separated by, say, 17.4 s without having to define a set of discrete states that intervene. The number of presentations necessary to establish a relationship between two stimuli in M depends on their number of pairings rather than the lag that intervenes between them. 4.1  Relationship to the successor representation  The idea of efficiently computing compressed summaries of the future arises in another approach to RL, based on the successor representation (SR; Dayan, 1993). Instead of estimating cached values (as in model-free approaches) or transition functions (as in model-based approaches), the SR estimates the discounted expected future occupancy of each state from every other state. The SR can then be combined with an estimated reward function to produce value estimates. Thus, this approach permits the computation of values without expensive tree search or dynamic programming, but retains some of the flexibility of model-based approaches by factoring the value function into predictive and reward components. From a neurobiological and psychological point of view, several lines of evidence have suggested that the brain might use such a representation to solve RL problems (Momennejad et al., 2017; Stachenfeld, Botvinick, & Gershman, 2016). The SR has many interesting computational properties, but it still runs afoul of the issues raised in this paper. In particular, the SR assumes exponential discounting and consequently imposes a timescale. If the world obeys a Markov process at the assumed timescale, then the SR will be able to efficiently solve RL problems. However, as we pointed out, realistic environments consist of problems occurring at many different scales. Moreover, effective decision-making requires explicit information about the time at which stimuli are expected to occur. Thus effective RL in the real world may require more temporal flexibility than what the SR can provide. 4.2  Relationship to models of episodic memory and planning  RL models have long utilized a rich interplay between planning, action selection, and prediction of future outcomes (e.g., Sutton & Barto, 1998b). Gershman and Daw (2017), building on an earlier proposal by Lengyel and Dayan (2008), proposed that retrieval of specific instances from memory could enhance RL-based decision-making. In psychology, the ability to consciously retrieve specific instances from one’s life is referred to as episodic memory (Tulving, 1983). Episodic memory could enhance the capabilities of RL-based models by enabling single-trial learning and bridging across  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  15  multiple experiences with the same stimulus to discover relationships among temporally-remote stimuli (Bunsey & Eichenbaum, 1996; Cole, Barnet, & Miller, 1995; Wimmer & Shohamy, 2012). Episodic memory has also been proposed to share a neural substrate with what is referred to as “episodic future thinking” (Tulving, 1985; Schacter, Addis, & Buckner, 2007). Recovery of an episodic memory results in vivid recall of one’s past self in a particular spatiotemporal context different from one’s present circumstances. Episodic future thinking is defined as imagination of one’s future self in a circumstances different from the present. Notably, behavioral and neuroimaging work shows that amnesia patients that are impaired at episodic memory also show deficits in episodic future thinking and that the brain regions engaged by episodic memory performance overlap with the regions engaged by episodic future thinking (Addis, Wong, & Schacter, 2007; Hassabis, Kumaran, Vann, & Maguire, 2007; Palombo, Keane, & Verfaellie, 2015). The present approach suggests the first steps of a computational bridge between episodic memory for the past and planning based on future time. In this paper, we showed that a temporal history ∗ f̃ (τ ) can be used to generate a prediction of the future via an associative memory. The sequentially∗ activated neurons that construct f̃ (τ ) strongly resemble sequentially-activated “time cells” measured in the hippocampus (MacDonald et al., 2011; Pastalkova et al., 2008), a brain region implicated in episodic memory. Moreover, the present approach is closely related to the temporal context model, a computational approach that has been applied to behavioral results in a range of episodic memory paradigms (TCM, Howard & Kahana, 2002; Sederberg, Howard, & Kahana, 2008; Polyn, Norman, & Kahana, 2009; Gershman, Moore, Todd, Norman, & Sederberg, 2012). In TCM, items are bound to the prevailing temporal context present when the item appeared via an associative context-to-item ∗ matrix. The temporal history f̃ (τ ) plays a role very similar to temporal context in TCM, although in TCM, temporal context is an exponentially-weighted sum over recent experience that introduces a ∗ scale rather than the scale-invariant representation of the past f̃ (τ ). The major departure of the present model from TCM is that we have not enabled recovery of a previous history to be recovered by an item and used to cue future outcomes. That is, one might ∗ imagine a model in which rather than cueing M(τ ) with a particular state α, one enables state α ∗ to recover a previous state of f̃ (τ ) that preceded α and then use that recovered temporal history to predict future outcomes. This kind of mechanism not only enables TCM to account for the contiguity effect in episodic memory, but also allows flexible learning across similar events. Future work should explore to what extent a similar contextual reinstatement process, instead in this case reinstating the compressed scale-free representation of the past (Howard et al., 2015), would help speed up learning or transfer of knowledge and predictions as an agent explores a novel world in similar, but not identical, trajectories (Gershman, 2017). 5  Acknowledgments  We gratefully acknowledge discussions with Karthik Shankar and Ida Momennejad. This work was supported by NIBIB R01EB022864, NIMH R01MH112169 and MURI N00014-16-1-2832. 6  References  Addis, D. R., Wong, A. T., & Schacter, D. L. (2007). Remembering the past and imagining the future: Common and distinct neural substrates during event construction and elaboration. Neuropsychologia, 45(7), 1363–1377.  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  16  Adler, A., Katabi, S., Finkes, I., Israel, Z., Prut, Y., & Bergman, H. (2012). Temporal convergence of dynamic cell assemblies in the striato-pallidal network. Journal of Neuroscience, 32(7), 2473-84. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4830-11.2012 Akhlaghpour, H., Wiskerke, J., Choi, J. Y., Taliaferro, J. P., Au, J., & Witten, I. (2016). Dissociated sequential activity and stimulus encoding in the dorsomedial striatum during spatial working memory. eLife, 5, e19507. Balsam, P. D., & Gallistel, C. R. (2009). Temporal maps and informativeness in associative learning. Trends in Neuroscience, 32(2), 73–78. Beck, J. M., Latham, P. E., & Pouget, A. (2011). Marginalization in neural circuits with divisive normalization. Journal of Neuroscience, 31(43), 15310–15319. Bliss, T. V., & Collingridge, G. L. (1993). A synaptic model of memory: long-term potentiation in the hippocampus. Nature, 361(6407), 31. Bolkan, S. S., Stujenske, J. M., Parnaudeau, S., Spellman, T. J., Rauffenbart, C., Abbas, A. I., . . . Kellendonk, C. (2017). Thalamic projections sustain prefrontal activity during working memory maintenance. Nature Neuroscience, 20(7), 987–996. Retrieved from http:// dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn.4568 Brown, S., Steyvers, M., & Hemmer, P. (2007). Modeling experimentally induced strategy shifts. Psychological Science, 18(1), 40-5. Bunsey, M., & Eichenbaum, H. B. (1996). Conservation of hippocampal memory function in rats and humans. Nature, 379(6562), 255-257. Cole, R. P., Barnet, R. C., & Miller, R. R. (1995). Temporal encoding in trace conditioning. Animal Learning & Behavior, 23(2), 144-153. Daw, N. D., & Dayan, P. (2014). The algorithmic anatomy of model-based evaluation. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 369(1655). doi: 10.1098/rstb.2013 .0478 Dayan, P. (1993). Improving generalization for temporal difference learning: The successor representation. Neural Computation, 5(4), 613–624. Gershman, S. J. (2017). Predicting the past, remembering the future. Current opinion in behavioral sciences, 17, 7–13. Gershman, S. J., & Daw, N. D. (2017). Reinforcement learning and episodic memory in humans and animals: An integrative framework. Annual Review of Psychology, 68, 101–128. Gershman, S. J., Moore, C. D., Todd, M. T., Norman, K. A., & Sederberg, P. B. (2012). The successor representation and temporal context. Neural Computation, 24(6), 1553–1568. Hassabis, D., Kumaran, D., Vann, S. D., & Maguire, E. A. (2007). Patients with hippocampal amnesia cannot imagine new experiences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 104(5), 1726-31. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0610561104 Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2002). A distributed representation of temporal context. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 46(3), 269-299. Howard, M. W., MacDonald, C. J., Tiganj, Z., Shankar, K. H., Du, Q., Hasselmo, M. E., & Eichenbaum, H. (2014). A unified mathematical framework for coding time, space, and sequences in the hippocampal region. Journal of Neuroscience, 34(13), 4692-707. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5808-12.2014 Howard, M. W., Shankar, K. H., Aue, W., & Criss, A. H. (2015). A distributed representation of internal time. Psychological Review, 122(1), 24-53.  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  17  Jin, D. Z., Fujii, N., & Graybiel, A. M. (2009). Neural representation of time in cortico-basal ganglia circuits. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(45), 19156–19161. Kurth-Nelson, Z., & Redish, A. D. (2009). Temporal-difference reinforcement learning with distributed representations. PLoS One, 4(10), e7362. Lengyel, M., & Dayan, P. (2008). Hippocampal contributions to control: the third way. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 889–896). Lisman, J., Schulman, H., & Cline, H. (2002). The molecular basis of camkii function in synaptic and behavioural memory. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3(3), 175–190. Liu, Y., Tiganj, Z., Hasselmo, M. E., & Howard, M. W. (Submitted). Biological simulation of scale-invariant time cells. MacDonald, C. J., Carrow, S., Place, R., & Eichenbaum, H. (2013). Distinct hippocampal time cell sequences represent odor memories immobilized rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 33(36), 14607–14616. MacDonald, C. J., Lepage, K. Q., Eden, U. T., & Eichenbaum, H. (2011). Hippocampal “time cells” bridge the gap in memory for discontiguous events. Neuron, 71(4), 737-749. Mau, W., Sullivan, D. W., Kinsky, N. R., Tiganj, Z., Wei, J., Howard, M., & Eichenbaum, H. (2017). Temporal coding of hippocampal neurons across scales. In Society for neuroscience abstracts (p. 253.05). Mello, G. B., Soares, S., & Paton, J. J. (2015). A scalable population code for time in the striatum. Current Biology, 25(9), 1113–1122. Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M. G., . . . others (2015). Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540), 529–533. Momennejad, I., Russek, E. M., Cheong, J. H., Botvinick, M. M., Daw, N., & Gershman, S. J. (2017). The successor representation in human reinforcement learning. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(9), 680. Palombo, D. J., Keane, M. M., & Verfaellie, M. (2015). The medial temporal lobes are critical for reward-based decision making under conditions that promote episodic future thinking. Hippocampus, 25(3), 345–353. Pastalkova, E., Itskov, V., Amarasingham, A., & Buzsaki, G. (2008). Internally generated cell assembly sequences in the rat hippocampus. Science, 321(5894), 1322-7. Polyn, S. M., Norman, K. A., & Kahana, M. J. (2009). A context maintenance and retrieval model of organizational processes in free recall. Psychological Review, 116, 129-156. Post, E. (1930). Generalized differentiation. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 32, 723-781. Salz, D. M., Tiganj, Z., Khasnabish, S., Kohley, A., Sheehan, D., Howard, M. W., & Eichenbaum, H. (2016). Time cells in hippocampal area CA3. Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 7476-7484. Schacter, D. L., Addis, D. R., & Buckner, R. L. (2007). Remembering the past to imagine the future: the prospective brain. Nature Reviews, Neuroscience, 8(9), 657-661. Sederberg, P. B., Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2008). A context-based theory of recency and contiguity in free recall. Psychological Review, 115, 893-912. Shankar, K. H., & Howard, M. W. (2012). A scale-invariant internal representation of time. Neural Computation, 24(1), 134-193. Shankar, K. H., & Howard, M. W. (2013). Optimally fuzzy temporal memory. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 14, 3753-3780.  SCALE-INVARIANT FUTURE  18  Singh, I., & Howard, M. W. (2017). Scanning along a compressed timeline of the future. bioRxiv, 229617. Stachenfeld, K. L., Botvinick, M. M., & Gershman, S. J. (2016). The hippocampus as a predictive map. bioRxiv, 097170. Sutton, R. S. (1995). Td models: Modeling the world at a mixture of time scales. In Icml (Vol. 12, pp. 531–539). Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998a). Reinforcement learning: An introduction (Vol. 1) (No. 1). MIT press Cambridge. Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998b). Reinforcement learning: An introduction (Vol. 1) (No. 1). MIT press Cambridge. Terada, S., Sakurai, Y., Nakahara, H., & Fujisawa, S. (2017). Temporal and rate coding for discrete event sequences in the hippocampus. Neuron. Tiganj, Z., Cromer, J. A., Roy, J. E., Miller, E. K., & Howard, M. W. (in press). Compressed timeline of recent experience in monkey lPFC. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. Tiganj, Z., Hasselmo, M. E., & Howard, M. W. (2015). A simple biophysically plausible model for long time constants in single neurons. Hippocampus, 25(1), 27-37. Tiganj, Z., Jung, M. W., Kim, J., & Howard, M. W. (2016). Sequential firing codes for time in rodent medial prefrontal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 27(12), 5663–5671. Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. New York: Oxford. Tulving, E. (1985). Memory and consciousness. Canadian Psychology, 26(1), 1-12. Wimmer, G. E., & Shohamy, D. (2012). Preference by association: how memory mechanisms in the hippocampus bias decisions. Science, 338(6104), 270-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1223252

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
