Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_71

Abstract:
1  Topology Estimation using Graphical Models in Multi-Phase Power Distribution Grids  arXiv:1803.06531v1 [cs.SY] 17 Mar 2018  Deepjyoti Deka*, Michael Chertkov*†, and Scott Backhaus* * Los Alamos National Laboratory, New Mexico, USA †Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia  Abstract—Distribution grid is the medium and low voltage part of a large power system. Structurally, the majority of distribution networks operate radially, such that energized lines form a collection of trees, i.e. forest, with a substation being at the root of any tree. The operational topology/forest may change from time to time, however tracking these changes, even though important for the distribution grid operation and control, is hindered by limited real-time monitoring. This paper develops a learning framework to reconstruct radial operational structure of the distribution grid from synchronized voltage measurements in the grid subject to the exogenous fluctuations in nodal power consumption. To detect operational lines our learning algorithm uses conditional independence tests for continuous random variables that is applicable to a wide class of probability distributions of the nodal consumption and Gaussian injections in particular. Moreover, our algorithm applies to the practical case of unbalanced three-phase power flow. Algorithm performance is validated on AC power flow simulations over IEEE distribution grid test cases. Keywords—Distribution networks, Power flow, Unbalanced threephase, Graphical models, Conditional independence, Computational complexity  I. I NTRODUCTION The operation of a large power grid is separated into different tiers/levels: transmission grid that consists of high voltage lines connecting the generators to the distribution substations, and distribution grid consisting of the medium and low voltage lines that connect distribution substations to loads. The structure of the transmission grid is made loopy to reliable delivery of electricity to substations via multiple, redundant paths. On the other hand, typical distribution grids are operationally radial (tree-like) with the substation at the root and loads positioned along the non-root nodes of the tree. The radial topology is selected from a subset of power distribution lines, which overall i.e. structurally form a loopy graph, by switching on/off breakers [1]. An illustration of the radial operational topology is presented in Fig. 1. Topology estimation in the distribution grid thus refers to the problem of determining the current set of operational lines which are energized, i.e. with respective switch statuses ‘on’. These Deepjyoti Deka and Scott Backhaus are with Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87544. Email: deepjyoti@lanl.gov (corresponding author), backhaus@lanl.gov M. Chertkov is with Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM and Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Russia. Email: chertkov@lanl.gov This work was supported by U.S. Department of Energys Office of Electricity as part of the DOE Grid Modernization Initiative.  changes may conducted in an ad-hoc way without proper and timely reporting to the distribution system operator. Accurate topology estimation in the distribution grid is necessary for checking system status/integrity, e.g. failure detection, and also for taking consecutive optimization and control decisions. Real-time topology estimation is hindered by the limited presence of real-time line-based measurements (flow and/or breaker statuses) in the distribution grid [2]. This reduced monitoring ability is often a legacy: in the past, and still today, distribution grids have received much less attention as compared to the backbone/transmission system. However these practices are under review - there has been an emerging effort in providing better observability at the distribution level through deployment of advanced nodal measurement devices like Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs) [3], micro-PMUs [4], Frequency Monitoring Network (FNET) [5] systems and alike. Similarly, smart devices like air-conditioners, thermostats and plug-in electric vehicles have built-in voltage/frequency monitors for their performance regulation, e.g. through participation in demand response programs. Such devices and smart meters are capable of providing real time measurements of voltages and frequency, though often limited to the grid nodes. The goal of this paper is to utilize nodal measurements of voltages, captured e.g. by smart meters, to efficiently estimate the operational radial topology of the distribution grids. It is worth mentioning that given a loopy set of permissible edges, one can construct a large set of candidate radial topologies. Thus brute force search of the current operating topology is computationally prohibitive. In this work, we overcome this combinatorial difficulty by utilizing the framework of graphical models to characterize nodal voltages in the operationally radial grid and design a topology learning algorithm based on it. Our learning framework is very general, in particular applicable to both single-phase and multi-phase systems characterized by possibly unbalanced power flows. Furthermore our learning algorithm does not require explicit information on the individual nodes’ injections or the value of line impedances. This reconstruction with limited information is of practical significance as line parameters in the distribution grids while changing/evolving are seldom calibrated and may not be known with the precision sufficient for topology estimation. A. Prior Work Topology learning, in power grids in general and in distribution grids in particular, is a fast growing area of research. Past research efforts in this area differ by the methodology for edge  2  detection, available measurements and the types of the flow model used. In the case of loopy transmission grids [6] uses a maximum likelihood estimator with low-rank and sparsityenforcing regularizers to estimate the grid structure from the information availaible via electricity prices. [7] uses a Markov random field model for bus phase angles to build a dependency graph to detect faults in grids. For linearized power flow models in radial grids with constant R/X (resistance to reactance) ratio, [8] presents a topology identification algorithm using the sign of inverse covariance matrix. [1], [9], [10], [11] present greedy structure learning algorithm using trends in second order moments of nodal voltage magnitudes for linearized power flow models, where observations are known only at a subset of the grid nodes. Sets of line flow measurements have been used for topology estimation using maximum likelihood tests in [12]. Further, there have been data-driven efforts to identify topology and phase in distribution grids. [13], [14], [15] include machine learning schemes that compare available time-series observations from smart meters with database of permissible signatures to identify topology changes, phase recovery and parameter estimation. The mentioned literature considers measurements from static power flow models. For measurements arising from system dynamics (swing equations), a graphical model based reconstruction scheme has been proposed to identify the operational topology in radial grids [16], loopy grids [17], [18]. In the broader category of multi-variate random distribution, graphical models [19] provide an important graphical tool to model the dependence/interaction structure between different variables. It has been used in learning, estimation and prediction problems in diverse fields like natural languages, genetic networks, social interactions, decoding in communication schemes etc. A group lasso and graph lasso based approximate scheme for topology identification in loopy grids is discussed in [20], [21]. In contrast to prior work, a majority of distribution grids are unbalanced [22] and have three-phase voltages and injections at different nodes. The overarching goal of this work is to present an efficient algorithm for topology estimation using multi-phase nodal voltages from a radial distribution grid using the graphical model framework.  well as additional edges relating two-hop neighbors in the gridgraph. Based on this factorization of the voltage distribution, we present our learning algorithm that uses conditional independence based tests (4 nodes per test, which we also call “quartet”) to identify the operational edges. In the special case where nodal injection fluctuations are modelled by Gaussian probability distributions, the conditional independence quartet test reduces to a test of voltage covariances at the nodes of the quartet. Our learning framework has several computational and practical advantages. First, the framework is independent of the exact probability distribution for each individual node’s power usage and voltage profile, and hence applicable to general distributions. Second, it does not require knowledge of line impedances and similar network parameters that are calibrated infrequently and hence may not be known accurately. Third, the computational complexity of each edge detection test does not grow with the network size - that is the test is local. Each test considers only a set of four nodes. Furthermore, the tests can be conducted in a distributed fashion. These results extend what was reported earlier in a conference version [25] where a single-phase version of this paper’s results were presented with limited simulations. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work claiming a provable topology learning algorithm for three-phase distribution grids. The material in the manuscript is organized as follows. The next, technical introduction, section provides a brief discussion of the distribution grid topology, power flow models and associated nomenclature. The linearized three-phase power flow model and its single-phase counterpart are described in Section III. Section IV analyzes the graphical model of power grid voltage measurements (we emphasize that the induced graphical model is built from but different from the grid-graph itself). Conditional independence properties of the voltage distribution are introduced and utilized in Section V to develop our main learning algorithm. Section VI is devoted to discussion of the details of the conditional independence quartet test. Experimental results on the algorithm’s IEEE radial networks test are presented in Section VIII. The last section is reserved for conclusions.  B. Contribution In this paper, we consider multi-phase power flows in a distribution grid and aim to estimate the radial operational topology using measurements of nodal voltages. The first contribution of this work is the development of a linearized coupled three-phase power flow model that generalizes our prior work in single-phase power flow model [1] and also relates to similar linearized models specific to radial grids [23], [24]. We analyze the probability distribution of the three-phase complex nodal voltages in the grid through the framework of graphical models. The second contribution of this work consists of proving that under standard assumptions about fluctuations of power consumption the distribution of nodal voltages can be described by a specific chordal graphical model. We show that the edges in the graphical model include both the actual operational lines/edges of the grid-graph as  II. D ISTRIBUTION G RID : S TRUCTURE & P OWER F LOWS A. Structure Radial Structure: The distribution grid is represented by a radial graph G = (V , E ), where V is the set of buses/nodes of the graph and E is the set of undirected lines/edges. The operational edge set E is realized by closing switches in an over-complete set of functional lines/edges E f ull (see Fig. (1)). The operational grid (note a difference with the functional gridgraph) is a collection of K disjoint trees, ∪k=1,··· ,K Tk , where each tree Tk spans a subset of the nodes VTk with a substation at the root node and connected by the set of operational edges ETk . We denote nodes by letters i, j and so on. The undirected ledge (line) connecting nodes i and j is denoted by (i j). The non-substation terminal nodes with degree one are called ‘leaf’ nodes. Node connected to a leaf node is called its ‘parent’ node. Nodes with degree greater than 1 are called ‘non-leaf’  3  Fig. 1. Schematic of a radial distribution grid with substations represented by large red nodes. The operational grid is formed by solid lines (black). Load nodes within each tree are marked with the same color.  nodes. Path Pi j : i − π1 − π2 − ..πn − j denotes the unique set of nodes such that edges (iπ1 ), (π1 π2 ), ..(πn j) connect i and j. To circumvent notational complications we limit in the remainder of the manuscript our topology learning problem to grids containing only one operational tree T = G = (V , E ). (Extension to the case of an operational forest layout is straightforward.) However, prior to discussing the learning, we will first review in the next subsection AC power flow models on a general graph-grid (which is not necessarily a tree). B. Power Flow models Notations: Real-/complex- valued quantities are represented in lower/upper case. We use hat- notation for a vector variable with components in multiple phases. The per phase component is described without the hat, with a particular phase as a superscript. The value of a variable at a specific grid location (bus or line) is marked by a subscript. If no subscript is mentioned, it refers to the vector of values for the variable at all permissible locations. For example, Ŵi (ŵi ) represents a multi-phase complex (real) variable at location i, while Wia (wai ) represents its value at the node i and phase a. W a (wa ) represents the vector with complex (real) values at all locations, for phase a. Single-Phase Power Flow (AC-PF): Here the voltages, currents and injections in the entire grid are defined over a single-phase (say phase a) that is skipped from notation in this paragraph notations for convenience. According to the Kirchhoff’s laws, the complex valued AC-PF equations governing power flow leaving node i of the grid-graph G = (V , E ) is given by: ∀i ∈ V :  Pi = pi + ĩqi =  v2i − vi v j eĩθi −ĩθ j Zi∗j j:(i j)∈E  ∑  (1)  where the real valued scalars, vi , θi , pi and qi denote, respectively, the voltage magnitude, phase, active and reactive power injection at node i. Vi (= vi exp(ĩθi )) and Pi mark, respectively, the nodal complex voltage and injection (ĩ2 = −1). Zi j = ri j + ĩxi j is the impedance of the line (i j). ri j (xi j ) stands for the line resistance (reactance). The unbalanced power flow equations over three phases are described next. Three-Phase Unbalanced Power Flow (AC-PF3) 1 : In a real-world setting, AC power systems have three unbalanced 1 Note that even though we discuss solely a three-phase system, our analysis extends to a general m phase system.  phases that operate over four wires (one for each phase and a common ground). Consequently, the active and reactive power injections at each bus are not scalars but have 3 components each. Similarly, the complex voltage (magnitude and phase) at each bus and the power flows on each line are of sizes 3 × 1, with a component for each phase. Using the notation described earlier, the three-phase complex power injections (P̂) and complex voltages (V̂ ) in the grid are  a   a  a  a   a ĩθa  vi e i Pi pi qi Vi b ∀i ∈ V : P̂i = Pib  =  pbi  + ĩ qbi  , V̂i = Vib  = vbi eĩθi  c c c c c Pi pi qi Vi vbi eĩθi  Here, [θai θbi θci ]T stands for the voltage phase angles at node i. Reference phase angles in the three phase system (all defined modulo 2π) are θ̂re f = [0 2π/3 − 2π/3]T  (2)  Impedance on line (i j) is represented by a 3 × 3 symmetric matrix Ẑ which relates the three phase current Iˆi j over line (i j) to the voltage difference according to (3) Ẑi j Iˆi j = Ẑi j [Iiaj Iibj Iicj ]T = (V̂i − V̂ j )  aa ab ac   aa ab ac  ri j ri j ri j xi j xi j xi j bc  bb where Ẑi j = r̂i j + ĩx̂i j = ribaj ribbj ribcj  + ĩ xba i j xi j xi j cc cb ca cc cb ca xi j xi j xi j ri j ri j ri j  Note that the diagonal values in Ẑi j denote the in-phase impedances, while the off-diagonal values denote the interphase impedances of the line. The real-valued resistance (r̂i j ) and reactances (x̂i j ) have a similar structure. The Kirchoff laws in three phases (AC-PF3) for the configuration F are then given by:   ∀i ∈ V : P̂i = ∑ diag V̂i IˆiHj = ∑ diag V̂i (V̂iH − V̂ jH )Ŷi j (4) j:(i j)∈E  j:(i j)∈E  where Ŷi j , the inverse of ẐiHj , is the three phase admittance matrix with in and out of phase components as described for Z. Note that Eq. (4) is the generalization of the Eq. (1) from one to three phases. In the next section, we introduce linear approximation to power flows. It is done first for the single-phase case and then extended to the case of the three phase unbalanced grids. The approximation is derived under assumptions that fluctuations in voltage magnitudes and phases between connected nodes are small. The assumptions are realistic for distribution grids functioning in the operationally stable regime. III. L INEAR P OWER FLOW M ODELS In this section we discuss a linear coupled approximate model (LC-PF3) for three phase unbalanced power flow. We show that it generalizes the linear power flow model (LCPF) that was discussed in our previous work [1] for the case of the single-phase network. In terms of functionality, LCPF3 model is geared more towards medium and low voltage distribution grids rather than high voltage transmission grids. We first describe the linear coupled power flow model in the  4  single-phase format [1], [8] as it helps to transition to the case of the three phase model. Linear Coupled Power Flow (LC-PF) model [1]: In this model, the single-phase PF Eq. (1) is linearized jointly over the phase angle difference between neighboring buses (θi −θ j ) and deviations of the voltage magnitude (vi − 1) from the reference voltage of 1 p.u., both of which are considered to be small. We arrive at the following set of Linear-Coupled (LC) equations:  (5) pi = ∑ (ri j (vi − v j ) + xi j (θi − θ j )) / x2i j + ri2j , j:(i j)∈E  qi =  (xi j (vi − v j ) − ri j (θi − θ j )) / x2i j + ri2j  ∑  j:(i j)∈E    (6)  One can conveniently express the linear equations of the LCPF model in the matrix form P = p + ĩq = M T [Z ∗ ]−1 M(v − ĩθ),  (7)  where [Z ∗ ] is a diagonal matrix where the nonzero elements are complex conjugates of the respective line impedances and M is the edge to node incidence matrix for G : every edge (i j) ∈ E is represented by a row Mi j = (eTi − eTj ), where ei is the standard basis vector associated with the vertex i. Note that in deriving Eq. (7) we ignore losses of both active and reactive powers in lines thus getting conservation of the net active and reactive powers. To make Eq. (7) invertible one fixes the voltage magnitude to unity and phase to zero at the reference/slack/sub-station bus. Then injections at the reference bus are equal to the negative sum of injections at all other buses. With these (standard) manipulations we effectively remove the reference bus from the system and without a loss of generality, measure voltage magnitudes and phases at other buses relative to that at the reference bus. Removing entries corresponding to the reference bus from matrix M and vectors p, q, v, θ, we arrive at an invertible full-rank system resulting in T  V 1 = v − ĩθ = M −1 [Z ∗ ]M −1 (p + ĩq)  (8)  where V 1 = v − ĩθ. Next, we describe linear approximations of the three phase power flow. Linear Coupled Three Phase Power Flow (LC-PF3): Consider the three phase PF described in Eq. (4) with reference phase angle θ̂re f in Eq. (2). Here, we consider small deviations in voltage magnitude and phase angle from nominal at each bus and small angle difference between neighboring buses. In three phases, our assumption can be stated as follows  β  αβ  β  ∀(i j) ∈ E : kθ̂i − θ̂ j k ≪ 1    β αβ β ĩ(θα −θβj ) β ĩ(θα α i −θi ) − v e i Yi j e v v ∑i i j  Piα = ∑  j:(i, j)∈E β∈{a,b,c} αβ  ⇒ Piα = ∑ eĩθre f  (9) (10)  Eq. (9) states that for each node, the angles at different phases are roughly separated by the same amount as the reference phase angles (i.e., by 2π/3). Under these small deviation assumptions, we approximate PF Eq. (4) at each phase for  ∑     αβ β β β β (vi − v j ) − ĩ(θi − θ j ) Yi j  (11)  β∈{a,b,c} j:(i, j)∈E  where Eq. (11) is derived similar to Eqs. (5,6) by ignoring second order terms in voltage magnitude and phase angle differences. The Linear Coupled Power Flow model in three phases (LC-PF3) is given by Eq. (11). Note that LC-PF3 equations reduce to the LC-PF Eqs. (5,6) if the number of phases is limited to one. This linearization provides several important attributes. First, the contributions of voltage magnitudes and angles in LC-PF3 are additive. Second, either quantity’s contribution is expressed in terms of differences in values at neighboring nodes for the same phase only. Third, the LC-PF3 is lossless in all phases individually, i.e., sum of injections at all nodes for a given phase is zero. We collect nodal voltage magnitudes and angles for each phase into vectors, and line admittances for each pair of phases into diagonal matrices to express LC-PF3 as a linear equation, similar to the single-phase LC-PF case in Eq. (7) Pα = pα + ĩqα = ∑ e  αβ  ĩθre f  M T [Y αβ ]M(vβ − ĩθβ ).  (12)  β∈{a,b,c}  Combining the expressions for power injections in all three phases, we arrive at   T  aa Pa Y M00 e−ĩ2π/3 Pb  = 0 M 0 Y ab 00M Y ac eĩ2π/3 Pc      va − ĩθa Y ac M00 − ĩ2π/3 b b bc     0 M 0 e (v − ĩθ ) Y 00M Y cc eĩ2π/3 (vc − ĩθc )  Y ab Y bb Y bc  T  (13a) ⇒ P† = M † Y † M † V †     Pa va − ĩθa where P† = e−ĩ2π/3 Pb  ,V † = e−ĩ2π/3 (vb − ĩθb ) ,M † = diag(M,M,M). eĩ2π/3 Pc eĩ2π/3 (vc − ĩθc )  Here Y † is a square block matrix where every block, Y αβ , is a diagonal matrix constructed from admittances of the respective pairs (α, β). Due to this specific structure, inverse of Y † has a similar block sparse pattern as Y † . In fact, the following holds. Theorem 1. Let Ŷi j and Ẑi j be the three phase admittance and impedance matrices"respectively for # edge (i j) ∈ E , where  † H Ŷi−1 j = Ẑi j . Define Y =  Y aa Y ab Y ac  Y ab Y bb Y bc  Y ac Y bc Y cc  where each block is a  diagonal matrix with " admittances#on all lines in E for a phase pair. Define Z † =  ∀i ∈ V : kv̂i − 1k = k[(vai − 1) (vbi − 1) (vci − 1)]T k ≪ 1 θαi − θi ≈ θre f = θαre f − θre f ∀α, β ∈ {a, b, c}  node i ∈ V as follows:  Z aa Z ab Z ac  Z ab Z bb Z bc  Z ac Z bc Z cc  of Y † takes the following form  Y†  −1  H  = Z† =   similarly. Then, the inverse  aa  ZH ab ZH ac ZH  ab  ZH bb ZH bc ZH  ac    ZH bc ZH  . cc ZH  The proof is omitted. (It reduces to showing that Y † Z † equal to an identity matrix.)  (14) H  is  5  Our next step consists in inverting Eq. (13a) and thus deriving expression for P via V . Since each M is blockdiagonal M † is rank deficient by 1. To resolve this apparent difficulty we follow the logic for single phase calculations of the pseudo-inverse. Specifically, we reduce the LC-PF3 system by considering a reference bus with reference voltage magnitudes and angles for all three phases. Furthermore, as LC-PF3 is lossless, injections at the reference bus are given by the negative sum of injections at all other nodes. Therefore, removing entries corresponding to the reference bus for each phase in M † , p† , q† , v† and θ†, we invert Eq. (13a) and express the three phase voltages in terms of the three phase injections in the reduced system as follows: V † = M†  −1 † H  Z  T  M †−1 P†  (15)  Note that both reduced LC-PF Eq. (8) and LC-PF3 Eq. (15) are defined over general grids (possibly loopy). [1] proves that for distribution grids, LC-PF is equivalent to a first order approximation of the DistFlow Model [26], [27], [28]. On the other hand, by ignoring line resistances and voltage magnitude deviations one reduces the LC-PF model to the DC model [29]. Similarly, the LC-PF3 model over a radial grid appears equivalent to the lossless approximation of the three phase DistFlow Model. [23] shows a different derivation of the LCPF3 which ignores components corresponding to line losses in the power flow equations. We will see in the following that the learning algorithms naturally extend to other linear models, including the DC-PF model. Aside from being lossless, another characteristic of the aforementioned models (LC-PF, LC-PF3) is that they represent nodal complex voltages as an invertible function of nodal injections at the non-reference buses. This property is fundamental to determining the graphical model of nodal voltages discussed in the following section. IV. G RAPHICAL M ODEL FROM P OWER F LOWS We now describe the probability distribution of nodal voltages in the distribution tree-grid T (see Fig. 2(a)) considered under LC-PF model or LC-PF3 model. First we make the following assumptions regarding statistics of the power injections in the distribution tree-grid: Assumption 1: Loads/injections at all non-substations nodes are modeled as PQ nodes, i.e. for any instance P and Q at a node is kept constant. Loads at the nodes are assumed generated from a probability distribution modeling an exogenous process. Loads at different nodes are statistically independent. Note that the latter, most important, part of the Assumption 1 concerning the independence is a formalization of the observation that consumers/producers act, e.g. switching on/off their devices, independently at short intervals. Similar assumptions of independence are reported in the literature [1], [30]. Note that Assumption 1 does not require that P and Q components at the same node are uncorrelated. In particular, active and reactive injections at the same node are allowed to be dependent. If each individual load/injection is by itself an accumulation/aggregation of many random processes one would expect, according to the law of large numbers, that  fluctuations of the load is well modeled by a Gaussian process [31], [32]. Under Assumption 1, the continuous random vector of injections at the non-substation nodes within the tree-grap T , P (under LC-PF Eq. (7)) and P† (under LC-PF3 Eq. (13a)) are described by the following Probability Distribution Functions (PDF):  P (P) = ∏ Pi (Pi ) P (P† ) = ∏ Pi (P̂i ) i∈V  (16)  i∈V  where Pi (Pi ) and Pi (P̂i ) are the p.d.f.s for injection at node i in single phase and three phases respectively. Note that P† and P̂ contain the exact information as the relation between them is governed by a phase specific constant rotation. Using the invertible relations between voltages and injections in the LC-PF and LC-PF3 models, one arrives at the following PDF of the complex voltage vector V 1 , V † for the non-substation nodes 1 P (P), (P,V 1 ) satisfy Eq. (8) |JP (V 1 )| 1 P (P† ), (P† ,V † ) satisfy Eq. (15), P (V † ) = |JP (V † )|  P (V 1 ) =  (17) (18)  where |JP (V 1 )| and |JP (V † )| represent the determinants of the Jacobian matrices for the invertible linear transformation from injections to voltages in the LC-PF and LC-PF3 models respectively. Note that as the transformation is linear, i.e. the Jacobian determinants are constant. We now describe the Graphical Model (GM) representation of the probability distribution for nodal voltages that we use below (in the following section) for topology estimation. Graphical Model: A n dimensional random vector X = [X1 , X2 , ..Xn ]T is described by an undirected graphical model GM [19] with node set VGM = {1, · · · , n} and edge set EGM representing conditional dependence: edge (i j) ∈ EGM if and only if ∀C ⊂ VGM − {i, j}, P (Xi |X j , XC ) 6= P (Xi |XC ). Here XC represents random variables corresponding to nodes in the set C. Stated differently, the set of neighbors of node i is represented by random variables that are conditionally dependent. It follows from this definition [19] that if deletion of a set of nodes C separates the graphical model GM into two disjoint sets A and B, then each node in A is conditionally independent of a node in B given all nodes in C. We now discuss the LC-PF and LC-PF3 models over the distribution tree-graph T and analyze the structure of the respective GMs of nodal voltages. Note that each node in the GM for single phase voltages represents two scalar variables, the voltage magnitude and phase at the corresponding node. Similarly, each node in the three phase GM corresponds to the complex voltage at each node in three phases (six scalar variables). Consider LC-PF model. For tree T = {V , E }, PDF of the single phase voltages is given by Eq. (17). Using  6  Eq. (7,16), one derives  P (V 1 ) =  1 ∏ Pi (Pi ) |JP (V 1 )| i∈ V  1 = ∏ Pi |JP (V 1 )| i∈ V  (Va1 − Vb1 )/Zi∗j j:(i j)∈E  ∑  !  (19)  where the Jacobian/determinant is constant. Note that each term under the product sign at the right hand side of Eq. (19) includes voltages corresponding to a node and all its neighbors in T . Consider two nodes i and j in V . If i and j are neighbors then terms Pi (Pi ), P j (Pj ) include voltages at both i and j. Similarly, if i and j are two hops away and share a common neighbor k, voltages at i and j appear in Pk (Pk ). However for i and j that are three or more hops away, no term includes voltages at i and voltages at j. Thus the PDF P (V 1 ) can be product separated into terms containing only i or j, but not both. This implies that voltages at two nodes i and j are conditionally independent given voltages at all other nodes if and only if the distance between them in T is greater than 2 hops. Next consider the GM 3 for the PDF of the three phase voltages (Eq. (18)). Using LC-PF3 Eq. (13a) with Eq. (16), the PDF of nodal voltages can be expanded as 1 ∏ Pi (P̂i) |JP (V † )| i∈ V    aβ β aβ ĩθ e re f (Via − V j )Yi j ∑   β∈{a,b,c}       bβ  β bβ  ĩθre f b 1   e (Vi − V j )Yi j  . ∑ = P   i ∑ ∏  |JP (V † )| i∈V  j:(i j)∈E β∈{a,b,c}    cβ   β cβ  ∑ eĩθre f (Vic − V j )Yi j  P (V † ) =  β∈{a,b,c}  Using the same analysis as that for the single phase case, one observes that the PDF of nodal voltages in LC-PF3 has a similar feature with voltages at nodes greater than two hops being conditionally independent. Using the aforementioned definition of conditional independence and GM structure, we arrive at the following lemma. Lemma 1. Graphical models GM 1 for the PDF of single phase voltages (Eq. (17)) and GM 3 for the PDF of three phase voltages (Eq. (18)) contains edges between single and two hops nodes in tree-graph T . Fig. 2(b) shows an example construction of a GM correspondent to either of the aforementioned power flow models. Each node in GM represents the single or three phase voltage at its corresponding node in T . A few properties of the GM of voltages are worth mentioning. First the GM, unlike the tree-graph T itself, is loopy due to edges between nodes separated by two hops in T . Note that each node and its immediate neighbors in T form a clique set in the GM, as shown in Fig. 2(b). It can be shown that GM 1 , GM 3 are chordal (every cycle of size greater than 3 has a chord) and have Junction-Tree based factorizations  with edges between non-leaf nodes as separators [19]. As we do not use the properties of chordal graphs in this paper, we omit further discussion on these properties. Finally, note that the structure of the GM requires independence of nodal injections but it is agnostic to the exact distribution of each nodal injection. l  l  j  u    v  t  j  u  k  (a)    v  t  k  (b)  Fig. 2. (a) Load nodes and edges in distribution tree T . (b) GM for LC-PF or LC-PF3 in T . Dotted lines represent two hop neighbors.  A. The Gaussian Case In prior work [1], [30], [31], [33], [32] loads have been modeled as independent Gaussian random variables. As linear functions of Gaussian random variables are Gaussian random variables too, the distribution of nodal voltages in LC-PF or LC-PF3 under the Gaussian assumption is a multivariate Gaussian. For multi-variate Gaussian distribution, two properties are particularly useful [19]: • The structure of the GM is given by the non-zero offdiagonal terms in the inverse covariance matrix of the random vector. • Variables i and j are conditionally independent given variables in set C if the conditional covariance of i and j, given set C, is zero. The first property can be used to validate Lemma 1 for the Gaussian GM as shown in the supplementary material. In the next section, we use the specific structure of the GM described in this section to develop our topology learning algorithm for voltage measurements, in particular arising from the Gaussian distributions. V.  T OPOLOGY L EARNING USING VOLTAGE C ONDITIONAL I NDEPENDENCE  Consider the tree-grid T with PDFs of nodal voltages P (V 1 ) and P (V † ) correspondent, respectively, to LC-PF and LCPF3. Let the corresponding GM for voltages be GM 1 (single phase) and GM 3 (three phase). As described in the previous section, the GM includes edges between true neighbors and two hop neighbors in T . Our topology learning algorithm is based on ‘separability’ properties of the GMs that are only satisfied for edges corresponding to true neighbors in T . To learn the topology without ambiguity, we make the following mild assumption on the structure of the operational tree-grid T. Assumption 2: The depth (length of the longest path) of the tree-grid T (excluding the substation node) is greater than three.  7  |=  |=  Theorem 2. (i j) is an operational edge between non-leaf nodes i and j in T if and only if there exists distinct nodes k and l such that Vk1 Vl1 |(Vi1 ,V j1 ) (for single phase) and Vk† Vl† |(Vi† ,V j† ) (for three phase). The proof is given in the supplementary material. Theorem 2 enables detection of edges between all non-leaf nodes using their voltage measurements. Let Tnl (see Fig. 3(a)) comprise of connections between all non-leaf nodes Vnl in grid T (estimated using Theorem 2). Let Vnl1 be the set of nodes of degree 1 in Tnl (Eg. node i). Note that Vnl1 consists of non-leaf nodes in grid T that are neighbors of only one non-leaf node. Then the next theorem provides results helping to determine true parent of each leaf node in T .  |=  4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13: 14: 15: 16: 17: 18: 19: 20: 21: 22: 23: 24:  |=  The proof is presented in the supplementary material. Let us emphasize that the first result in Theorem 3 identifies connections between leaves and parents that have a single nonleaf neighbor (Eg. parent i in Fig. 2). The remaining leaves are children of nodes with two or more non-leaf neighbors (Eg. non-leaf node j in Fig. 2). Such connections are identified by the second result in the theorem. Theorems 2 and 3 imply the topology learning steps in Algorithm 1. In the remainder of this section we discuss execution and complexity of Algorithm 1. Execution: Our topology learning algorithm proceeds in three steps. First, edges between non-leaf nodes are identified based on Theorem 2 in Steps (2-6) and radial network of nonleaf nodes Tnl is constructed in Step (7). Next, leaves in T connected to nodes of degree 1 (set Vnl1 ) in Tnl are identified using Theorem 3(1) in Steps (9-16). Finally edges between leaves and non-leaf nodes connected to two or more non-leaf nodes (set Vnl2 ) are identified using Theorem 3(2) in Steps (17-23). It is worth mentioning that the learning algorithm does not require any other information other than the voltage measurements at the grid nodes. It does not require information  E , Vnl ← 0/ for all (i j) ∈ E f ull do if ∃k, l ∈ V − {i, j} s.t. Vkin Vlin |(Viin ,V jin ) then E ← E ∪ {(i j)}, Vnl ← Vnl ∪ {i, j} end if end for Tnl = {Vnl , E } Vnl1 ← {nodes of degree 1 in Tnl }, Vnl2 = Vnl − Vnl1 for all k ∈ V − Vnl do for all i ∈ Vnl1 , (ki)inE f ull do Pick j, l ∈ Vnl with (i j), ( jl) ∈ E if Vkin Vlin |(Viin ,V jin ) then E ← E ∪ {(ik)}, Vnl ← Vnl ∪ {k} end if end for end for for all k ∈ V − Vnl do for all i ∈ Vnl2 , (ki) ∈ E f ull do if Vkin Vlin |(Viin ,V jin )∀ j, l ∈ Vnl , (i j), ( jl) ∈ E then E ← E ∪ {(ik)}, Vnl ← Vnl ∪ {k} end if end for end for T ← {Vnl , E } |=  1: 2: 3:  l  |=  |=  Theorem 3. Let Tnl be sub-graph of T with non-leaf nodes and respective edges removed. Let Vnl1 be the set of nodes of degree 1 in Tnl . Then the following statement holds: 1) Node i ∈ Vnl1 is the parent of leaf node k in T if and only if for any nodes j, l ∈ Vnl with edges (i j), ( jl), Vk1 Vl1 |(Vi1 ,V j1 ) (for single phase) and Vk† Vl† |(Vi† ,V j† ) (for three phase). 2) Let leaf node k’s parent be in set Vnl − Vnl1 . Then i is the parent of k if and only if for all nodes j, l ∈ T − {i, k} with edges (i j), ( jl), Vk1 Vl1 |(Vi1 ,V j1 ) (for single phase) and Vk† Vl† |(Vi† ,V j† ) (for three phase).  Input: Complex voltage observations V jin = V j1 (single phase) or V j† (three phase) at all non-substation nodes j ∈ V , Permissible edge set E f ull Output: Operational edge set E  |=  Y |(A, B) ≡ P (X,Y |A, B) = P (X|A, B)P (Y |A, B) (20)  |=  X  Algorithm 1 Topology Learning for Grid Tree T  |=  Note that Assumption 2 is satisfied when T includes at least two non-leaf nodes that are two or more hops away. This is thus not restrictive for the majority of distribution grids (real world and test cases) that have long paths. Under Assumption 2, the next theorem lists conditional independence properties in voltage distributions that distinguish true edges. We use the following notation for conditional independence of random variables X,Y given variables A, B:  l j  u  t  j  u   v  k  l    v  t  j  u  k    v  t  k  (a) (b) (c) Fig. 3. Learning steps in Algorithm 1 for radial grid in Fig. 2(a) (a) Learning edges between non-leaf nodes (b) Determining children of nodes that are neighbors of one non-leaf node (c) Determining children of nodes that have more than one non-leaf neighbors.  of line impedances or statistics of nodal injections. If the set of permissible lines is not available, all node pairs are considered as permissible edges in set E f ull . As an example, the steps in reconstruction for the radial grid in Fig. 2(a) are shown in Fig. 3. Complexity: The worst case computational complexity is O(N 4 ) where N is the number of nodes in the grid. The derivation is included in the supplementary material. Next, we describe the conditional independence test in Algorithm 1, and discuss specifically the effect of the Gaussianity of loads.  8  A. Gaussian Voltage Distribution We discuss the special case for Gaussian nodal voltages in detail as they are used in our numerical simulations. Voltages are Gaussian distributed if the loads/injections are Gaussian and relations between loads and voltages are linearwithin LC-PF and LC-PF3. As noted in Section IV-A, conditional independence of the Gaussian random variables is equivalent to vanishing conditional covariance. Consider the following real covariance matrices for LC-PF and LC-PF3. h ih iT in in in in , where Σin kl,i j = E Xkl,i j − E[Xkl,i j ] Xkl,i j − E[Xkl,i j ] ( T [vk vl vi θi v j θ j ] in LC-PF, in Xkl,i j= [vak val Re(Vi† ) Im(Vi† ) Re(Vi† ) Im(V j† )]T in LC-PF3 Re(Vi† )  and Im(Vi† ) refer to the real and imaginary parts vector Vi† . Thus, voltages at k, l are conditionally  where of complex independent given voltages at i, j if the following hold for the (1, 2)th entry in the inverse i−1 h =0 (21) Σin kl,i j (1,2)  Σin kl,i j  Note that in LC-PF, and its inverse are of size 6 × 6, while Σin in LC-PF3 is of size 14 × 14. Such conditional kl,i j independence test (per edge) requires inversion of the matrix which is the task of O(63 ) (single phase) or O(143 ) (three phase) complexity. As mentioned already in the previous section, an important feature of the test is its independence from the size of the network. Thresholding: Note that due to numerical errors, empirical estimates of true covariances may not be zero. Thus, we use the  Fig. 4. Layout of 20-bus radial distribution grid. Red circle marks the substation/reference bus. Black lines mark operational edges. The additional permissible edges available to Algorithm 1 are represented by dotted green lines.  |=  following thresholding in the test of the empirical conditional covariance to make decision on conditional independence of voltages in Algorithm 1: i−1 h Σin Vkin Vlin |(Viin ,V jin ) if < τabs . (22) kl,i j (1,2)  |=  We call this condabs -test with positive threshold τabs . However voltages at nodes k, l that are far apart may have low correlation and appear uncorrelated given even non-neighbor pair i, j. Thus we consider a relative test termed condrel -test with threshold τrel : i i−1  h h Vkin Vlin |(Viin ,V jin ) if Σin Σin < τrel (23) kl,i j kl,i j (1,2)  (1,2)  From the graphical model it is clear that removing a single node i or j does not make k, l conditionally independent even if one of them exists in the path from k to l. Empirically, however, covariance between k and l after conditioning on one of the two nodes i, j may be significantly reduced despite i, j not being an edge. We thus consider a hybrid test for conditional covariance termed condmod -test, where we also look at the effect of conditioning on both i, j relative to only one of i or j: Vkin Vlin |(Viin ,V jin ) if  h i−1 h i−1 in in Σ Σ kl,i j kl,i j  (1,2) (1,2) min  i−1 , h i−1  h in in Σkl,i Σkl, j |=  VI. C ONDITIONAL I NDEPENDENCE T EST Algorithm 1 performs the edge detection test for each edge by verifying if the complex voltages at nodes k, l are conditionally independent given voltages at two other nodes i, j. To reduce complexity, we check for conditional independence of voltage magnitudes in one phase at k, l given complex voltages at i, j. Note that complex voltage at a node in the single phase, LC-PF case consists of two scalars (voltage magnitude and phase angle), and correspondingly of 6 scalars in three phase, LC-PF3, case. The total number of scalar variables per conditional independence test is 6(= 2 + 2 × 2) in the LC-PF case and 14(= 2 + 6 × 2) in the LC-PF3 case. General Voltage Distributions: As voltage measurements are continuous random variables, testing their conditional independence for general distributions is a non-trivial task. Among non-parametric tests for conditional independence, distances between estimated conditional densities [34] or between characteristic functions [35] have been proposed. One can also bin the domain of continuous values and use discrete valued conditional independence test [36]. Another line of work [37], [38], [39] focuses on kernel-based conditional independence tests. In these schemes, conditional independence is characterized using vanishing Hilbert-Schmidt norm of covariance operators in Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces (RKHS).  (1,2)  (1,2)      < τmod   (24)  An advantage of the relative tests (Eq. (23,24)) over the absolute test (Eq. (22)) is through the feature that the thresholds used are less affected by network parameters, nodal injection covariances and other features that can vary within the network. VII. S IMULATIONS R ESULTS We test Algorithm 1 by extracting the operational edge set E of tree grid T from a loopy original edge set E f ull . If E f ull is not available, all node pairs are considered as potential edges. We first discuss the choice of conditional independence test to be used in the Algorithm 1. We consider a tree distribution network [40], [41] with 19 load nodes and one substation as shown in Fig. 4. We simulate active and reactive load profiles to follow Gaussian random variables uncorrelated across nodes with covariance values around 10% of the load/injections means. We generate nodal complex voltage samples from  9  0.6  Relative Errors in Topology Estimation  Relative Errors in Topology Estimation  0.3  0.25  0.2  0.15  LC-PF, thres 0.1  LC-PF, thres LC-PF, thres  rel abs mod  0.05 600  800  1000  Number of samples (x102)  LC-PF, thres LC-PF, thres  rel mod  0.5  (b) 0.4  0.3  (a) 0.2 500  1000  1500  2000  2500  3000  3500  2  Number of samples (x 10 )  (a)  0.7  Relative Errors in Topology Estimation  Fig. 7. Layouts of the modified IEEE test distribution grids. The red circles represent substations. (a) Single-phase 33-bus network [42] (b) Three phase 10-bus network [43] (c) Three phase 35-bus network [43]  (b)  Fig. 5. Accuracy of topology learning algorithm with different conditional independence tests and increasing number of LC-PF voltage samples for 20 bus test case in Fig. 4. (a) E f ull has 33 edges. (b) E f ull has 171 edges (i.e. all non-substation node pairs are considered legitimate). LC-PF, cov = 1e-5 AC-PF, cov = 1e-5 LC-PF, cov = 1e-4 AC-PF, cov = 1e-4  0.6  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.1  0 100  4000  (c)  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000  3  Number of samples (x 10 )  Fig. 6. Accuracy of topology learning algorithm with increasing number of voltage samples generated by LC-PF and AC-PF for 33 bus test case in Fig. 7(a). Injection covariances are taken to be 10− 4 and 10− 5. Permissible edge set E f ull has 76 edges .  the Gaussian indepenedent loads/injections through the LCPF model. The voltage measurements are provided as input together with permissible edge set E f ull of 33 edges (18 true edges and 15 additional edges as shown in Fig. 4). We test the Algorithm 1 with three threshold-based conditional independence/covariance tests, described above in Eqs (22, 23, 24), for sample data set of varying size. The average estimation errors (relative to the number of operational edges) generated by Algorithm 1 are presented in Fig. 5(a). Note that while increasing the number of samples leads to lesser number of errors for all three tests, the performance of condmod -test (Eq. (24)) is the best at higher sample sizes. This is further demonstrated in Fig. 5(b) where Algorithm 1 inputs all the non-substation node pairs (171 in total) as a permissible set of edges. Observe that the performance of condmod -test is better than that of condrel -test. The tolerance values used in the three tests are manually optimized by trial and error. In practice, they can be selected from experiments conducted with historical data. In the remainder of this section, we use condmod -test for the conditional covariance estimation and edge detection.  Next, we discuss topology estimation using voltage samples generated by single phase non-linear (lossy) AC-PF equations. We consider a radial modification of the 33-bus system [42] shown in Fig. 7(a). The input set E f ull comprises of 76 edges (32 true and 44 additional edges selected randomly). As before, we consider Gaussian load fluctuations and generate AC-PF samples using Matpower [42]. We show performance of the Algorithm 1 for different sample sizes and two distinct injection covariance tests in Fig. 6. For comparison, we also present the performance of Algorithm 1 over LC-PF voltage samples generated from the same injection samples as in the AC-PF model. Observe that the performance over AC-PF voltage samples is similar to the one observed in LC-PF and it improves with sample size increase, thus confirming that Algorithm 1, even though built on the linearization principles, performance empirically well over the data generated from the non-linear AC power flow models. Finally, we discuss performance of the three phase power flow models. First, we compare three phase voltages generated by linearized model LC-PF3 with that of non-linear three phase power flow model (AC-PF3). We consider three phase 10 and 35 bus test cases [44] that have been modified from IEEE 13 and 37 test cases [43]. We modify all nodal loads to be three phase, remove shunts and make all line impedances to be Y -connected with three phases. The networks are depicted in Figs. 7(b) and 7(c). Fig. 8(a) and 8(b) show relative errors in bus voltage magnitudes in each phase for LC-PF3 with respect to the true AC − PF3 values generated by a conventional back-forward sweep method. The results for each test network include two choices of the reference bus (bus 2 or bus 1). Note that the maximum relative error is less than 1% for both networks and any choice of the reference bus. This motivates us to evaluate the performance of topology identification using true three phase voltages generated by AC-PF3 and compare it with LCPF3. We consider bus 1 as reference node in both three phase test networks for our topology learning algorithm as it has degree 1. We consider two different Gaussian nodal injection covariances (10−5 and 10−4 ) in both networks and generate input voltage samples (using LC-PF3 and AC-PF3). For the three phase 10-bus network, we include all node pairs as permissible edges in E f ull . The performance of Algorithm 1 for different samples sizes for this case is depicted in Fig. 9(a).  10  0.01  Phase a, Ref. Bus 2 Phase b, Ref. Bus 2 Phase c, Ref. Bus 2 Phase a, Ref. Bus 1 Phase b, Ref. Bus 1 Phase c, Ref. Bus 1  8 7 6  Relative error in LC-PF3 bus volt. mag  Relative error in LC-PF3 bus volt. mag  ×10-3  5 4 3 2 1 0 1  Relative Errors in Topology Estimation  1 9  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  0.009 0.008 0.007  Phase a, Ref Bus 2 Phase b, Ref Bus 2 Phase c, Ref Bus 2 Phase a, Ref Bus 1 Phase b, Ref Bus 1 Phase c, Ref Bus 1  0.006 0.005 0.004 0.003 0.002 0.001 0 5  10  15  20  25  30  (a)  0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 50  35  bus number  bus number  LC-PF3, cov = 1e-5 AC-PF3, cov = 1e-5 LC-PF3, cov = 1e-4 AC-PF3, cov = 1e-4  0.9  100  150  200  250  300  350  400  450  500  550  600  3  Number of samples (x 10 )  (b)  (a)  For the 35 bus network, we pick at random 50 additional edges added to the true edges and input a permissible edge set E f ull of size 84 to Algorithm 1 along with the three phase voltage samples. The relative errors in topology estimation for different input sample sizes for this network are shown in Fig. 9(b). Note that for either of three phase networks, the errors for non-linear AC power flows are less or comparable to errors observed in linerized power flow model LC-PF3. Furthermore, the errors decrease with increase in the sample size. As before, we optimize values of the thresholds for condmod -test used in Algorithm 1 using trial and error search that, in practice, can be determined from historical or simulated data. VIII.  C ONCLUSION  In this paper, we develop algorithm which allows to estimate the radial topology of distribution grids. In particular, we derive linearized power flow model in single and unbalanced three phase cases and develop a Graphical Model based learning algorithm that is able to estimate operational topology of the networks from samples of nodal voltages. Our learning algorithm is very general as it does not require information on nodal injection statistics or line parameters. To the best of our knowledge this is the first approach which develops algorithm with guarantees for topology estimation in both balanced (effectively single phase) and unbalanced (three phase) networks. The learning algorithm uses conditional independence results for voltages at the quartets of nodes which reduces to a conditional covariance test over grids with Gaussian statistics of loads/injections. Computational complexity of the algorithm scales polynomially with the size of the networkprimarily due to the fact that complexity of each conditional independence test is independent of the network size. We demonstrate empirical efficacy of our algorithm on a number of AC-nonlinear IEEE test cases. This work has a number of promising future extensions. First, realistic networks may have portions where the three phase layout is split into three single-phase lines of different lengths. Extension of our algorithm to this case is straightforward. Second, the linear flow model based topology learning  0.7  Relative Errors in Topology Estimation  Fig. 8. Accuracy of voltages generated by linear LC-PF3 relative to voltages from non-linear AC-PF3 model for test systems in Fig. 7(b) and 7(c) with base load and selection of reference buses (1 or 2).  LC-PF3, cov = 1e-5 AC-PF3, cov = 1e-5 LC-PF3, cov = 1e-4 AC-PF3, cov = 1e-4  0.6  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.1  0 50  100  150  200  250  300  350  400  Number of samples (x 103)  (b) Fig. 9. Accuracy of topology learning algorithm with increasing number of three phase voltage samples generated by LC-PF3 and AC-PF3 with injection covariances 10−4 and 10−5 . (a) 10 bus test case in Fig. 7(b). All non-substation node pairs are considered as permissible edges. (b) 35 bus test case in Fig. 7(c). Permissible edge set E f ull has 84 edges.  can be used jointly with phase identification and impendance estimation (see [45] for an example of the latter in the single phase case). Topology estimation in the presence of missing nodes in three phase layout is another important research direction that we plan to pursue in the near future. Finally, we plan to extend our empirical AC (nonlinear) approach towards establishing rigorous bounds on the errors between linearized and non-liner flow models. This shall enable us to extend theoretcial guarantees for our reconstruction algorithm from the linearized versions of the power flow models to the full/AC/nonlinear formulations. R EFERENCES [1] D. Deka, M. Chertkov, and S. Backhaus, “Structure learning in power distribution networks,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, 2017. [2] R. Hoffman, “Practical state estimation for electric distribution networks,” in Power Systems Conference and Exposition, 2006. PSCE’06. 2006 IEEE PES. IEEE, 2006, pp. 510–517. [3] A. Phadke, “Synchronized phasor measurements in power systems,” Computer, 1993.  11  [4] [5]  [6] [7]  [8]  [9]  [10]  [11] [12] [13]  [14]  [15]  [16]  [17]  [18] [19]  [20]  [21]  [22]  [23]  [24]  A. von Meier, D. Culler, A. McEachern, and R. Arghandeh, “Microsynchrophasors for distribution systems,” pp. 1–5, 2014. Z. Zhong, C. Xu, B. J. Billian, L. Zhang, S.-J. S. Tsai, R. W. Conners, V. A. Centeno, A. G. Phadke, and Y. Liu, “Power system frequency monitoring network (fnet) implementation,” Power Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1914–1921, 2005. V. Kekatos, G. B. Giannakis, and R. Baldick, “Grid topology identification using electricity prices,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.0516, 2013. M. He and J. Zhang, “A dependency graph approach for fault detection and localization towards secure smart grid,” Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 342–351, 2011. S. Bolognani, N. Bof, D. Michelotti, R. Muraro, and L. Schenato, “Identification of power distribution network topology via voltage correlation analysis,” in Decision and Control (CDC), 2013 IEEE 52nd Annual Conference on. IEEE, 2013, pp. 1659–1664. D. Deka, S. Backhaus, and M. Chertkov, “Learning topology of the power distribution grid with and without missing data,” in Control Conference (ECC), 2016 European. IEEE, 2016, pp. 313–320. ——, “Tractable structure learning in radial physical flow networks,” in Decision and Control (CDC), 2016 IEEE 55th Conference on. IEEE, 2016, pp. 6631–6638. ——, “Learning topology of distribution grids using only terminal node measurements,” in IEEE Smartgridcomm, 2016. R. Sevlian and R. Rajagopal, “Feeder topology identification,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.07224, 2015. G. Cavraro, R. Arghandeh, A. von Meier, and K. Poolla, “Data-driven approach for distribution network topology detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.00724, 2015. J. Peppanen, M. J. Reno, M. Thakkar, S. Grijalva, and R. G. Harley, “Leveraging ami data for distribution system model calibration and situational awareness,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 2050–2059, 2015. V. Arya, T. Jayram, S. Pal, and S. Kalyanaraman, “Inferring connectivity model from meter measurements in distribution networks,” in Proceedings of the fourth international conference on Future energy systems. ACM, 2013, pp. 173–182. S. Talukdar, D. Deka, D. Materassi, and M. V. Salapaka, “Exact topology reconstruction of radial dynamical systems with applications to distribution system of the power grid,” in accepted in the American Control Conference (ACC), 2017. S. Talukdar, D. Deka, B. Lundstrom, M. Chertkov, and M. V. Salapaka, “Learning exact topology of a loopy power grid from ambient dynamics,” in Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Future Energy Systems. ACM, 2017, pp. 222–227. A. Y. Lokhov, M. Vuffray, D. Shemetov, D. Deka, and M. Chertkov, “Online learning of power transmission dynamics.” IEEE, 2018. M. J. Wainwright and M. I. Jordan, “Graphical models, exponential families, and variational inference,” Foundations and Trends R in Machine Learning, vol. 1, no. 1-2, pp. 1–305, 2008. Y. Liao, Y. Weng, G. Liu, and R. Rajagopal, “Urban distribution grid topology estimation via group lasso,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01845, 2016. D. Deka, M.Chertkov, S. Talukdar, and M. V. Salapaka, “Topology estimation in bulk power grids: Theoretical guarantees and limits,” in accepted in the Bulk Power Systems Dynamics and Control SymposiumIREP, 2017. W. H. Kersting, “Distribution system modeling and analysis,” in Electric Power Generation, Transmission, and Distribution, Third Edition. CRC press, 2012, pp. 1–58. L. Gan and S. H. Low, “Convex relaxations and linear approximation for optimal power flow in multiphase radial networks,” in Power Systems Computation Conference (PSCC), 2014. IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–9. T.-H. Chen, M.-S. Chen, K.-J. Hwang, P. Kotas, and E. A. Chebli, “Distribution system power flow analysis-a rigid approach,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 1146–1152, 1991.  [25]  [26]  [27]  [28]  [29] [30]  [31]  [32]  [33]  [34]  [35] [36] [37]  [38]  [39]  [40]  [41] [42]  [43] [44]  [45]  D. Deka, S. Backhaus, and M. Chertkov, “Estimating distribution grid topologies: A graphical learning based approach,” in Power Systems Computation Conference (PSCC), 2016. IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–7. M. Baran and F. Wu, “Optimal sizing of capacitors placed on a radial distribution system,” Power Delivery, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 735–743, Jan 1989. ——, “Optimal capacitor placement on radial distribution systems,” Power Delivery, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 725–734, Jan 1989. ——, “Network reconfiguration in distribution systems for loss reduction and load balancing,” Power Delivery, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1401–1407, Apr 1989. A. Abur and A. G. Exposito, Power system state estimation: theory and implementation. CRC Press, 2004. S. Bolognani, N. Bof, D. Michelotti, R. Muraro, and L. Schenato, “Identification of power distribution network topology via voltage correlation analysis,” in IEEE Decision and Control (CDC). IEEE, 2013, pp. 1659–1664. D. Lee and R. Baldick, “Short-term wind power ensemble prediction based on gaussian processes and neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 501–510, 2014. Y. Dvorkin, M. Lubin, S. Backhaus, and M. Chertkov, “Uncertainty sets for wind power generation,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 3326–3327, 2016. H. Zhu and G. B. Giannakis, “Sparse overcomplete representations for efficient identification of power line outages,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 2215–2224, 2012. L. Su and H. White, “A nonparametric hellinger metric test for conditional independence,” Econometric Theory, vol. 24, no. 04, pp. 829–864, 2008. ——, “A consistent characteristic-function-based test for conditional independence,” 2003. D. Margaritis, “Distribution-free learning of bayesian network structure in continuous domains,” 2005. K. Fukumizu, F. R. Bach, and M. I. Jordan, “Dimensionality reduction for supervised learning with reproducing kernel hilbert spaces,” The Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 5, pp. 73–99, 2004. A. Gretton, K. Fukumizu, C. H. Teo, L. Song, B. Schölkopf, and A. J. Smola, “A kernel statistical test of independence,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2007, pp. 585–592. K. Zhang, J. Peters, D. Janzing, and B. Schölkopf, “Kernel-based conditional independence test and application in causal discovery,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1202.3775, 2012. U. Eminoglu and M. H. Hocaoglu, “A new power flow method for radial distribution systems including voltage dependent load models,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 76, no. 13, pp. 106 – 114, 2005. [Online]. Available: http://www.dejazzer.com/reds.html “IEEE 1547 Standard for Interconnecting Distributed Resources with Electric Power Systems.” [Online]. Available: http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/scc21/1547/1547 index.html W. H. Kersting, “Radial distribution test feeders,” in Power Engineering Society Winter Meeting, 2001. IEEE, vol. 2. IEEE, 2001, pp. 908–912. A. Garces, “A linear three-phase load flow for power distribution systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 827–828, 2016. S. Park, D. Deka, and M. Chertkov, “Exact topology and parameter estimation in distribution grids with minimal observability,” in Power Systems Computation Conference (PSCC). IEEE, 2018.  IX. S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL A. Validation of Lemma 1 under Gaussian Injections As mentioned in Section IV-A, structure of Gaussian GM is given by the non-zero off-diagonal entries in the inverse  12  the steps in the proof of Theorem 2, voltages at k, l are conditionally independent given voltages at i, j. For the converse let i∗ 6= i be the true parent of k. Then, path Pkl from k to l in T does not include node i as i is connected to only one non-leaf node. If Pkl does not include j then k, l are not disconnected in GM 1 or GM 3 after removing nodes i, j. Otherwise, if Pkl : k − i∗ − .. − j − l, there exists a path from k to l in the GM containing the two hop −1 −1 ΩV 1 (i, j) = ∑ H1/Z neighbors of j after removing i, j. Therefore, the relation ∗ (i, k)(Ω p (k, k) + Ωq (k, k))H1/Z (k, j) k does not hold if i is not the parent of k. 2) Let non-leaf node i∗ ∈ Vnl − Vnl1 be the true parent of leaf T ∗ −1 where H1/Z ∗ = M [Z ] M is the reduced weighted Laplacian node k. If edges (i∗ j), ( jl) exist then using similar argument matrix for tree T , with weight for each edge (i j) given by as Theorem 2, the conditional independence relation holds. 1/Zi∗j . One arrives at For the converse, consider i ∈ Vnl − Vnl1 , i 6= i∗ . Consider  −1 path Pik : i − π1 − π2 − ..i∗ − k in T . If k, i are separated by H (i, j)H1/Z ∗ ( j, j)(Ω p ( j, j) + Ωq ( j, j)) +   1/Z −1 more than two hops, voltages at k, π2 are not conditionally H1/Z (i,i)H1/Z ∗ (i, j)(Ω p (i,i) + Ωq (i,i)) if (i j) ∈ E , ΩV−11 (i, j) = independent given voltages at nodes i, π1 . Next consider H1/Z (i,k)H1/Z ∗ ( j,k)(Ω p (k,k) + Ωq (k,k))−1 if (ik),( jk) ∈ E ,   Pik : i − i∗ − k has exactly two hops. As i∗ ∈ Vnl − Vnl1 , 0 otherwise i∗ has a non-leaf neighbor r 6∈ Pik . The assumption about We observe that the GM contains edges between nodes that k, r violates the relation as edge (kr) belongs to the GM. are separated by less than three hops in T , as proposed above. Therefore the conditional independence relation is satisfied The inverse covariance matrix for voltages in LC-PF3 model only by the true parent of k in Vnl − Vnl1 . under Gaussian injections can be derived in a similar way. covariance matrix. Consider the LC-PF Eq.( 7) where the vector of injection profiles follows an uncorrelated multivariate Gaussian distribution with diagonal covariance matrices Ω p , Ωq , Ω pq denoting the variance of active, reactive injections and covariance of active and reactive injections respectively. The covariance matrix of complex voltages ΩV 1 =   T ∗ E V 1 − E[V 1 ] V 1 − E[V 1 ] satisfies  B. Proof of Theorem 2 Note: GM 1 (single phase) and GM 3 (three phase) includes edges between node pairs in T that are one or two hops away (see Lemma 1). Below we present the proof for GM 1 only as its extension to GM 3 is straightforward. For the if part, consider nodes i, j such that voltages at k, l are conditionally independent given voltages at i, j. This means that removing nodes i, j from GM 1 separates nodes k, l into disjoint groups. We prove that (i j) is an edge between nonleaf nodes i, j by contradiction. Let Pkl be the unique path in T between nodes k, l. For separability of k, l, at least one of nodes i, j is included in Pkl . Let node j be excluded and Pkl : k − πi−1 − i − πi+1 − .. − l. Edge (πi−1 πi+1 ) exists in the GM as they are two hop neighbors. Thus removing i, j does not disconnect k, l when only one of i, j is included in Pkl . Finally, consider Pkl : k − πi−1 − i − πi+1 − π j−1 − j − π j+1 − .. − l, such that there is at least one node between i and j. Due to edges between two hop neighbors in the GM, removing i, j does not disconnect k, l. Note that as leaf nodes are not part of any path between two other distinct nodes, i, j are both nonleaf nodes. Hence (i j) has to be an edge between non-leaf nodes in T , by contradiction. For the only if part, consider non-leaf neighbors i, j in T . There exits neighbor k of i and neighbor l of j in T as shown in Fig. 2(b) with corresponding edges (ki), (k j), (il), (l j), (i j) in graphical model GM 1 . Every path from k to l in GM 1 includes an edge in {(ki), (k j)} and {(il), ( jl)}. Removing nodes i, j thus disconnects nodes k, l in GM 1 and makes voltages at k, l conditionally independent. C. Proof of Theorem 3 1) i ∈ Vnl1 is connected to one other non-leaf node. By Assumption 2, there exist non-leaf nodes j, l such that (i j), ( jl) are edges in T . If k is connected to i, using  D. Computational Complexity of Algorithm 1 Edge detection in Algorithm 1 depends on the conditional independence tests. Each test is conducted over voltages at four nodes only (thus quartet). Unlike in the case of a general GM, the computational complexity C in each test is thus independent of the size of the network N. Identifying the edge between a pair of non-leaf nodes i, j requires O(N 2 ) tests in the worst case as all combinations of k, l in Step (3) are considered. Therefore, total complexity of identifying the network of non-leaf nodes is O(N 4 ). Determining the nodes of degree 1 in Tnl has complexity O(N). Edge between leaf k and degree one node i in Tnl can be verified by conditional independent test with a single neighbor and two hop neighbor of i. Therefore, complexity of the edge detection of nodes (in Tnl ) of degree one and leaves has complexity O(N 2 ) as number of leaves in T and Tnl can be O(N). Finally, all combinations of neighbors and two hop neighbors are needed to verify leaves in Vnl2 = Vnl − Vnl1 . Steps (17-23) thus have complexity O(N 4 ). The overall worst-case complexity of the algorithm is O(N 4C) where C is independent of the network size N. Note that we do not assume any prior information of the number of edges or max-degree of a node. For example, if a set of permissible edges E f ull is given, then edge detection tests can be restricted to that set. The complexity will then reduce to O(N 2 |E f ull |C)

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
