Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_7384

Abstract:
Vertex-Coloring with Star-Defects Patrizio Angelini1 , Michael A. Bekos1 , Michael Kaufmann1 , and Vincenzo Roselli2  arXiv:1512.02505v2 [cs.DS] 23 Mar 2016  1  Wilhelm-Schickhard-Institut für Informatik, Universität Tübingen, Germany, {angelini,bekos,mk}@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de 2 Dipartimento di Ingegneria, Università Roma Tre, Italy, roselli@dia.uniroma3.it  Abstract Defective coloring is a variant of traditional vertex-coloring, according to which adjacent vertices are allowed to have the same color, as long as the monochromatic components induced by the corresponding edges have a certain structure. Due to its important applications, as for example in the bipartisation of graphs, this type of coloring has been extensively studied, mainly with respect to the size, degree, and acyclicity of the monochromatic components. In this paper we focus on defective colorings in which the monochromatic components are acyclic and have small diameter, namely, they form stars. For outerplanar graphs, we give a linear-time algorithm to decide if such a defective coloring exists with two colors and, in the positive case, to construct one. Also, we prove that an outerpath (i.e., an outerplanar graph whose weak-dual is a path) always admits such a two-coloring. Finally, we present NP-completeness results for non-planar and planar graphs of bounded degree for the cases of two and three colors.  1  Introduction  Graph coloring is a fundamental problem in graph theory, which has been extensively studied over the years (see, e.g., [3] for an overview). Most of the research in this area has been devoted to the vertex-coloring problem (or coloring problem, for short), which dates back to 1852 [18]. In its general form, the problem asks to label the vertices of a graph with a given number of colors, so that no two adjacent vertices share the same color. In other words, a coloring of a graph partitions its vertices into a particular number of independent sets (each of these sets is usually referred to as a color class, as all its vertices have the same color). A central result in this area is the so-called four color theorem, according to which every planar graph admits a coloring with at most four colors; see e.g. [11]. Note that the problem of deciding whether a planar graph is 3-colorable is NP-complete [10], even for graphs of maximum degree 4 [6]. Several variants of the coloring problem have been proposed over the years. One of the most studied is the so-called defective coloring, which was independently introduced by Andrews and Jacobson [1], Harary and Jones [13], and Cowen et al. [5]. In the defective coloring problem edges between vertices of the same color class are allowed, as long as the monochromatic components induced by vertices of the same color maintain some special structure. In this respect, one can regard the classical vertex-coloring as a defective one in which every monochromatic component is an isolated vertex, given that every color class defines an independent set. In this work we focus on defective colorings in which each component is acyclic and has small diameters. In particular, we call a graph G 1  (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  Figure 1: (a-c) Different colorings of the same graph: (a) a traditional 4-coloring, (b) an (edge, 3)-coloring (c) a (star, 2)-coloring; (d) a star with three leaves; its center has degree 3. tree-diameter-λ κ-colorable if the vertices of G can be colored with κ colors, so that all monochromatic components are acyclic and of diameter at most λ, where κ ≥ 1, λ ≥ 0. Clearly, a classical κ-coloring corresponds to a tree-diameter-0 κ-coloring. The diameter of a coloring is defined as the maximum diameter among the monochromatic components. We present algorithmic and complexity results for tree-diameter-λ κ-colorings for small values of κ and λ = 2. For simplicity, we refer to this problem as (star, κ)-coloring, as each monochromatic component is a star (i.e., a tree with diameter two; see Figure 1d). Similarly, we refer to the tree-diameter-λ κ-coloring problem when λ = 1 as (edge, κ)coloring problem. By definition, a (edge, κ)-coloring is also a (star, κ)-coloring. Figs.1a-1c show a trade-off between number of colors and structure of the monochromatic components. Our work can be seen as a variant of the bipartisation of graphs, namely the problem of making a graph bipartite by removing a small number of elements (e.g, vertices or edges), which is a central graph problem with many applications [12, 14]. The bipartisation by removal (a not-necessarily minimal number of) non-adjacent edges corresponds to the (edge, 2)-coloring problem. In the (star, 2)-coloring problem, we also solve some kind of bipartisation by removing independent stars. Note that we do not ask for the minimum number of removed stars but for the existence of a solution. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that the defective coloring problem is studied under the requirement of having color classes of small diameter. Previous research was focused either on their size or their degree [1, 5, 13, 16, 17]. As byproducts of these works, one can obtain several results for the (edge, κ)-coloring problem. More precisely, from a result of Lovász [16], it follows that all graphs of maximum degree 4 or 5 are (edge, 3)-colorable. However, determining whether a graph of maximum degree 7 is (edge, 3)colorable is NP-complete [5]. In the same work, Cowen et al. [5] prove that not all planar graphs are (edge, 3)-colorable and that the corresponding decision problem is NP-complete, even in the case of planar graphs of maximum degree 10. Results for graphs embedded on general surfaces are also known [2, 4, 5]. Closely related is also the so-called tree-partitionwidth problem, which is a variant of the defective coloring problem in which the graphs induced by each color class must be acyclic [7, 9, 21], i.e., there is no restriction on their diameter. Our contributions are: • In Section 2, we present a linear-time algorithm to determine whether an outerplanar graph is (star, 2)-colorable. Note that outerplanar graphs are 3-colorable [20], and hence (star, 3)-colorable, but not necessarily (star, 2)-colorable. On the other hand, we can always construct (star, 2)-colorings for outerpaths (which form a special subclass of outerplanar graphs whose weak-dual1 is a path). • In Section 3, we prove that the (star, 2)-coloring problem is NP-complete, even for graphs of maximum degree 5 (note that the corresponding (edge, 2)-coloring prob1 Recall that the weak-dual of a plane graph is the subgraph of its dual induced by neglecting the facevertex corresponding to its unbounded face.  2  lem is NP-complete, even for graphs of maximum degree 4 [5]). Since all graphs of maximum degree 3 are (edge, 2)-colorable [16], this result leaves open only the case for graphs of maximum degree 4. We also prove that the (star, 3)-coloring problem is NP-complete, even for graphs of maximum degree 9 (recall that the corresponding (edge, 3)-coloring problem is NP-complete, even for graphs of maximum degree 7 [5]). Since all graphs of maximum degree 4 or 5 are (edge, 3)-colorable [16], our result implies that the computational complexity of the (star, 3)-coloring problem remains unknown only for graphs of maximum degree 6, 7, and 8. For planar graphs, we prove that the (star, 2)-coloring problem remains NP-complete even for triangle-free planar graphs (recall that triangle-free planar graphs are always 3-colorable [15], while the test of 2-colorability can be done in linear time).  2  Coloring Outerplanar Graphs and Subclasses  In this section we consider (star, 2)-colorings of outerplanar graphs. To demonstrate the difficulty of the problem, we first give an example (see Figure 1) of a small outerplanar graph not admitting any (star, 2)-coloring. Therefore, in Theorem 1 we study the complexity of deciding whether a given outerplanar graph admits such a coloring and present a lineartime algorithm for this problem; note that outerplanar graphs always admit 3-colorings [20]. Finally, we show that a notable subclass of outerplanar graphs, namely outerpaths, always admit (star, 2)-colorings by providing a constructive linear-time algorithm (see Theorem 2). Lemma 1. There exist outerplanar graphs that are not (star, 2)-colorable. Proof. We prove that the outerplanar graph of Figure 2a is not (star, 2)-colorable. In particular, we show that in any 2-coloring of this graph there exists a monochromatic path of four vertices. Assume w.l.o.g. that vertex u has color gray. Then, at least two vertices out of u1 , . . . , u8 are gray, as otherwise there would be a path of four white vertices. Hence, u is the center of a gray star. Next, we observe that either u2 is white or the path u21 , . . . , u24 must consist of only white vertices. Similarly, we observe that either u3 is white or the path u31 , . . . , u34 must consist of only white vertices. If both u2 and u3 are white, then either one of paths u21 , . . . , u24 and u31 , . . . , u34 consists only of gray vertices, or there exists a path from one of u21 , . . . , u24 via u2 and u3 to one of u31 , . . . , u34 , that consists only of white vertices. Clearly, all aforementioned cases lead to a monochromatic path of four vertices. u u1 u21 u22 u23 u24  u2 u3  u8 u7 u6 u5 u4 u31 u32 u33 u34  v1 f1  v3 f2 f3 v2  (a)  v5 f4  v6 f5  v4 (b)  Figure 2: (a) An outerplanar graph that is not (star, 2)-colorable. (b) An outerpath, whose spine edges are drawn as dashed segments. Dotted arcs highlighted in gray correspond to edges belonging to the fan of each spine vertex. Note that |f6 | = 0. Lemma 1 implies that not all outerplanar graphs are (star, 2)-colorable. In the following we give a linear-time algorithm to decide whether an outerplanar graph is (star, 2)-colorable and in case of an affirmative answer to compute the actual coloring. 3  Theorem 1. Given an outerplanar graph G, there exists a linear-time algorithm to test whether G admits a (star, 2)-coloring and to construct a (star, 2)-coloring, if one exists. Proof. We assume that G is embedded according to its outerplanar embedding. We can also assume that G is biconnected. This is not a loss of generality, as we can always reduce the number of cut-vertices by connecting two neighbors a and b of a cut-vertex c belonging to two different biconnected components with a path having two internal vertices. Clearly, if the augmented graph is (star, 2)-colorable, then the original one is (star, 2)-colorable. For the other direction, given a (star, 2)-coloring of the original graph, we can obtain a corresponding coloring of the augmented graph by coloring the neighbors of a and b with different color than the ones of a and b, respectively. Denote by T the weak dual of G and root it at a leaf ρ of T . For a node µ of T , we denote by G(µ) the subgraph of G corresponding to the subtree of T rooted at µ. We also denote by f (µ) the face of G corresponding to µ in T . If µ 6= ρ, consider the parent ν of µ in T and their corresponding faces f (ν) and f (µ) of G, and let (u, v) be the edge of G shared by f (ν) and f (µ). We say that (u, v) is the attachment edge of G(µ) to G(ν). The attachment edge of the root ρ is any edge of face f (ρ) that is incident to the outer face (since G is biconnected and ρ is a leaf, this edge always exists). Consider a (star, 2)-coloring of G(µ). In this coloring, each of the endpoints u and v of the attachment edge of G(µ) plays exactly one of the following roles: (i) center or (ii) leaf of a colored star; (iii) isolated vertex, that is, it has no neighbor with the same color; or (iv) undefined, that is, the only neighbor of u (resp. v) which has its same color is v (resp. u). Note that if the only neighbor of u (resp. v) which has its same color is different from v (resp. from u), we consider u (resp. v) as a center. Two (star, 2)-colorings of G(µ) are equivalent w.r.t. the attachment edge (u, v) of G(µ) if in the two (star, 2)-colorings each of u and v has the same color and plays the same role. This definition of equivalence determines a partition of the colorings of G(µ) into a set of equivalence classes. Since both the number of colors and the number of possible roles of each vertex u and v are constant, the number of different equivalence classes is also constant (note that, when the role is undefined, u and v must have the same color). In order to test whether G admits a (star, 2)-coloring, we perform a bottom-up traversal of T . When visiting a node µ of T we compute the maximal set C(µ) of equivalence classes such that, for each class C ∈ C(µ), graph G(µ) admits at least a coloring belonging to C. Note that |C(µ)| ≤ 38. In order to compute C(µ), we consider the possible equivalence classes one at a time, and check whether G(µ) admits a (star, 2)-coloring in this class, based on the sets C(µ1 ), . . . , C( µh ) of the children µ1 , . . . , µh of µ in T , which have been previously computed. In particular, for an equivalence class C we test the existence of a (star, 2)-coloring of G(µ) belonging to C by selecting an equivalence class Ci ∈ C(µi ) for each i = 1, . . . , h in such a way that: 1. the color and the role of u in C1 are the same as the ones u has in C; 2. the color and the role of v in Ch are the same as the ones v has in C; 3. for any two consecutive children µi and µi+1 , let x be the vertex shared by G(µi ) and G(µi+1 ). Then, x has the same color in Ci and Ci+1 and, if x is a leaf in Ci , then x is isolated in Ci+1 (or vice-versa); and 4. for any three consecutive children µi−1 , µi , and µi+1 , let x (resp. y) be the vertex shared by G(µi−1 ) and G(µi ) (resp. by G(µi ) and G(µi+1 )). Then, x (resp. y) has the same color in Ci and Ci−1 (resp. Ci+1 ); also, if x and y are both undefined in Ci , then in Ci−1 and Ci+1 none of x and y is a leaf, and at least one of them is isolated. 4  Note that the first two conditions ensure that the coloring belongs to C, while the other two ensure that it is a (star, 2)-coloring. Since the cardinality of C(µi ) is bounded by a constant, the test can be done in linear time. If the test succeeds, add C to C(µ). Once all 38 equivalence classes are tested, if C(µ) is empty, then we conclude that G is not (star, 2)-colorable. Otherwise we proceed with the traversal of T . At the end of the traversal, if C(ρ) is not empty, we conclude that G is (star, 2)-colorable. A (star, 2)coloring of G can be easily constructed by traversing T top-down, by following the choices performed during the bottom-up visit. In the following, we consider a subclass of outerplanar graphs, namely outerpaths, and we prove that they always admit (star, 2)-colorings. Note that the example that we presented in Lemma 1 is “almost” an outerpath, meaning that the weak-dual of this graph contains only degree-1 and degree-2 vertices, except for one specific vertex that has degree 3 (see the face of Figure 2a highlighted in gray). Recall that the weak-dual of an outerpath is a path (hence, it consists of only degree-1 and degree-2 vertices). Let G be an outerpath (see Figure 2b). We assume that G is inner-triangulated. This is not a loss of generality, as any (star, 2)-coloring of a triangulated outerpath induces a (star, 2)-coloring of any of its subgraphs. We first give some definitions. We call spine vertices the vertices v1 , v2 , . . . , vm that have degree at least four in G. We consider an additional spine vertex vm+1 , which is the (unique) neighbor of vm along the cycle delimiting the outer face that is not adjacent to vm−1 . Note that the spine vertices of G induce a path, that we call spine of G2 . The fan fi of a spine vertex vi consists of the set of neighbors of vi in G, except for vi−1 and for those following and preceding vi along the cycle delimiting the outer face3 ; note that |fi | ≥ 1 for each i = 1, . . . , m, while |fm+1 | = 0. For each i = 1, . . . , m + 1, we denote by Gi the subgraph of G induced by the spine vertices v1 , . . . , vi and by the fans f1 , . . . , fi−1 . Note that Gm+1 = G. We denote by ci the color assigned to spine vertex vi , and by c(Gi ) a coloring of graph Gi . Finally, we say that an edge of G is colored if its two endpoints have the same color. Theorem 2. Every outerpath admits a (star, 2)-coloring, which can be computed in linear time. Proof. Let G be an outerpath with spine v1 , . . . , vk . We describe an algorithm to compute a (star, 2)-coloring of G. At each step i = 1, . . . , k of the algorithm we consider the spine edge (vi−1 , vi ), assuming that a (star, 2)-coloring of Gi has already been computed satisfying one of the following conditions (see Figure 3): Q0 : The only colored vertex is v1 ; Q1 : ci 6= ci−1 , vertex vi−1 is the center of a star with color ci−1 , and no colored edge is incident to vi ; Q2 : ci = ci−1 , and no colored edge other than (vi−1 , vi ) is incident to vi−1 or vi ; Q3 : ci 6= ci−1 , vertex vi−1 is a leaf of a star with color ci−1 , and no colored edge is incident to vi ; Q4 : ci 6= ci−1 , vertex vi−1 is the center of a star with color ci−1 , and vertex vi is the center of a star with color ci ; further, i < k and |fi | > 1; 2  Note that the spine of G coincides with the spine of the caterpillar obtained from the outerpath G by removing all the edges incident to its outer face, neglecting the additional spine vertex vm+1 . 3 Fan fi contains all the leaves of the caterpillar incident to vi , plus the following spine vertex vi+1 .  5  0 e 0|e|o Q0  1|e|o  oe|oo  Q1 v i  e|o  Q4  vi  Q3 v i o1 vi−1 1 1|o0 Q5 vi  v1 vi−1  vi−1  vi+1  vi−1 vi+1  ee|eo Q2 vi  1  1|o  vi−1  e1 0|e0  Figure 3: Schematization of the algorithm. Each node represents the (unique) condition satisfied by Gi at some step 0 ≤ i ≤ k. An edge label 0, 1, e, o represents the fact that the cardinality of a fan fi is 0, 1, even 6= 0, or odd 6= 1. If the label contains two characters, the second one describes the cardinality of fi+1 . An edge between Qj and Qh with label x ∈ {1, e, o} (with label xy, where y ∈ {0, 1, e, o}) represents the fact that, if Gi satisfies condition Qj and |fi | = x (resp. |fi | = x and |fi+1 | = y), then fi is colored so that Gi+1 satisfies Qh . Q5 : ci = ci−1 , vertex vi−1 is the center of a star with color ci−1 , and no colored edge other than (vi−1 , vi ) is incident to vi ; further, i < k and |fi | = 1. Next, we color the vertices in fi in such a way that c(Gi+1 ) is a (star, 2)-coloring satisfying one of the conditions; refer to Figure 3 for a schematization of the case analysis. In the first step of the algorithm, we assign an arbitrary color to v1 , and hence c(G1 ) satisfies Q0 . For i = 1, . . . , k we color fi depending on the condition satisfied by c(Gi ). Coloring c(Gi ) satisfies Q0 : Independently of the cardinality of fi , we color its vertices with alternating colors so that ci+1 6= ci . In this way, the only possible colored edges are incident to vi and not to vi+1 . So, c(Gi+1 ) satisfies condition Q1 . Coloring c(Gi ) satisfies Q1 : In this case we distinguish the following subcases, based on the cardinality of fi . • If |fi | = 0, we have that i = k and hence Gk = G. It follows that c(Gk ) is a (star, 2)-coloring of G. • If |fi | = 1 (that is, fi contains only vi+1 ; see Figure 4a), we set ci+1 = ci . Since the only neighbor of vi+1 in Gi+1 different from vi is vi−1 , whose color is ci−1 6= ci , and since vi has no neighbor with color ci other than vi+1 , by condition Q1 , coloring c(Gi+1 ) is a (star, 2)-coloring satisfying condition Q2 . • If |fi | > 1 (see Figure 4b), we color the vertices in fi with alternating colors so that ci+1 6= ci . This implies that every colored edge of Gi+1 not belonging to Gi is incident either to vi , if its color is ci , or to vi−1 , if its color is ci−1 ; the latter case only happens if |fi | is odd. Thus, vi (resp. vi−1 ) is the center of a star of color ci (resp. ci−1 ) in Gi+1 . Since vi has no neighbor with color ci in Gi , while vi−1 is a center also in Gi , coloring c(Gi+1 ) is a (star, 2)-coloring. Finally, since vi+1 has no neighbors with color ci+1 6= ci , by construction, c(Gi+1 ) satisfies condition Q1 . Coloring c(Gi ) satisfies Q2 : We again distinguish subcases based on |fi |. 6  vi  vi vi−1  vi−1 vi+1 (a)  vi vi+1  vi  vi−1 vi+1  (b)  vi−1 vi+1  (c)  (d)  vi vi+2  vi vi+2  vi−1 vi+1  vi−1 vi+1  (e)  (f)  Figure 4: Graph Gi+1 after coloring fi when c(Gi ) satisfies: Q1 and (a) |fi | = 1 or (b) |fi | > 1; Q2 and (c) |fi | = o, or |fi | = e and (d) |fi+1 | = 0, (e) |fi+1 | = 1, or (f) fi+1 > 1. Shaded regions represent Gi . Bold edges connect vertices with the same color, while spine edges are dashed. vi  vi  vi−1 vi+1  vi−1 vi+1  (a)  vi vi−1  (b)  (c)  vi vi+1  vi−1 vi+1 (d)  Figure 5: Graph Gi+1 after coloring fi when c(Gi ) satisfies: Q3 and (a) |fi | = 1, or (b) |fi | = e; Q4 (c); or Q5 (d). Shaded regions represent Gi . Bold edges connect vertices with the same color, while spine edges are dashed. • If |fi | = 0, we have that i = k and hence c(Gk ) is a (star, 2)-coloring of G = Gk . • If |fi | is odd, including the case |fi | = 1 (see Figure 4c), we color the vertices of fi with alternating colors in such a way that ci+1 6= ci . By construction, c(Gi+1 ) is a (star, 2)-coloring satisfying condition Q1 . • If |fi | is even and different from 0, instead, we have to consider the cardinality of fi+1 in order to decide the coloring of fi . We distinguish three subcases: |fi+1 | = 0 : Note that in this case i = k holds (see Figure 4d). We color the vertices of fi with alternating colors so that ci+1 = ci . Note that the unique neighbor of vi−1 in fi has color different from ci−1 , since |fi | is even. Hence, all the new colored edges are incident to vi , which implies that c(Gi+1 ) is a (star, 2)-coloring satisfying condition Q2 . |fi+1 | = 1 : Note that i < k and fi+1 only contains vi+2 (see Figure 4e). We color the vertices of fi with alternating colors so that ci+1 = ci . Since (i) all the new colored edges are incident to vi , (ii) vi and vi−1 have no neighbor with their same color in Gi (apart from each other), (iii) ci+1 = ci , and (iv) i < k, we have that c(Gi+1 ) is a (star, 2)-coloring satisfying condition Q5 . |fi+1 | > 1 : Note that i < k (see Figure 4f). Independently of whether |fi+1 | is even or odd, we color the vertices of fi so that ci+1 6= ci , the unique neighbor of vi+1 different from vi has also color ci+1 , and all the other vertices have alternating colors. Since each new colored edge is incident to either vi or vi+1 , since ci+1 6= ci , and since i < k, coloring c(Gi+1 ) is a (star, 2)-coloring satisfying condition Q4 . Coloring c(Gi ) satisfies Q3 : • If |fi | = 0, we have that i = k and hence c(Gk ) is a (star, 2)-coloring of G = Gk . • If |fi | = 1 (that is, fi contains only vi+1 ; see Figure 5a), we set ci+1 = ci . As in the analogous case in which c(Gi ) satisfies condition Q1 , we can prove that c(Gi+1 ) is a (star, 2)-coloring which satisfies condition Q2 . 7  • If |fi | is even and different from 0 (see Figure 5b), we color the vertices of fi with alternating colors in such a way that ci+1 6= ci . By construction, c(Gi+1 ) is a (star, 2)-coloring which satisfies condition Q1 . • If |fi | is odd and different from 1, we again consider the cardinality of fi+1 in order to decide the coloring of fi . For the four possible classes of values of |fi+1 |, the coloring strategy and the condition satisfied by the resulting coloring c(Gi+1 ) are the same as for the analogous case in which c(Gi ) satisfies Q2 and |fi | is even. Coloring c(Gi ) satisfies Q4 : Note that |fi | > 0, given that i < k, and |fi | = 6 1, by condition Q4 . Independently of whether |fi | is even or odd (see Figure 5c), we color the vertices in fi with alternating colors so that ci+1 6= ci . In this way, the only possible colored edges are incident to vi−1 and to vi , which are both centers of a star already in Gi , and not to vi+1 . Hence, c(Gi+1 ) is a (star, 2)-coloring satisfying condition Q1 . Coloring c(Gi ) satisfies Q5 : Note that |fi | = 1, by condition Q5 (that is, fi only contains vi+1 ; see Figure 5d). We set ci+1 6= ci ; clearly, c(Gi+1 ) is a (star, 2)-coloring satisfying condition Q3 . Observe that the running time of the algorithm is linear in the number of vertices of G. In fact, at each step i = 1, . . . , k, the condition Qj satisfied by c(Gi ) and the cardinalities of fi and fi+1 are known (the cardinality of all the fans can be precomputed in advance), and the coloring strategy to obtain c(Gi+1 ) and the condition satisfied by this coloring are uniquely determined by these information in constant time.  3  NP-completeness for (Planar) Graphs of Bounded Degree  In this section, we study the computational complexity of the (star, 2)-coloring and (star, 3)-coloring problems for (planar) graphs of bounded degree. Theorem 3. It is NP-complete to determine whether a graph admits a (star, 2)-coloring, even in the case where its maximum degree is no more than 5. Proof. The problem clearly belongs to NP; a non-deterministic algorithm only needs to guess a color for each vertex of the graph and then in linear time can trivially check whether the graphs induced by each color-set are forests of stars. To prove that the problem is NPhard, we employ a reduction from the well-known Not-All-Equal 3-SAT problem or naesat for short [19, p.187]. An instance of naesat consists of a 3-CNF formula φ with variables x1 , . . . , xn and clauses C1 , . . . , Cm . The task is to find a truth assignment of φ so that no clause has all three literals equal in truth value (that is, not all are true). We show how to construct a graph Gφ of maximum vertex-degree 5 admitting a (star, 2)-coloring if and only if φ is satisfiable. Intuitively, graph Gφ reflecting formula φ consists of a set of subgraphs serving as variable gadgets that are connected to simple 3-cycles that serve as clause gadgets in an appropriate way; see Figure 6c for an example. Consider the graph of Figure 6a, which contains two adjacent vertices, denoted by u1 and u2 , and four vertices, denoted by v1 , v2 , v3 and v4 , that form a path, so that each of u1 and u2 is connected to each of v1 , v2 , v3 and v4 . We claim that in any (star, 2)-coloring of this graph u1 and u2 have different colors. Assume to the contrary that u1 and u2 have the same color, say white. Since u1 and u2 are adjacent, none of v1 , v2 , v3 and v4 is white. So, v1 , . . . , v4 form a monochromatic component in gray which is of diameter 3; a contradiction. Hence, u1 and u2 have different colors, say gray and white, respectively. In addition, the colors of v1 , v2 , v3 and v4 alternate along the path v1 → v2 → v3 → v4 , as otherwise there 8  x2 = true v1 v2 v3 v4 u1  x3 = true ¬x2  u2  (a) variable-gadget  ¬x3  C2 ¬x1  C1  x2 x1  x3  v11 u11  v21  v31  G1  v41  v12  u12 u21  v22  v32  G2  v42  v13  u22 u31  v23  v33  G3  v43  x1 = f alse  u32  (b) a chain of length 3  (c) reduction; clause-gadgets are gray  Figure 6: Illustration of: (a) a graph with 6 vertices, (b) a chain of length 3, (c) the reduction from naesat to (star, 2)-coloring: φ = (x1 ∨ x2 ∨ x3 ) ∧ (¬x1 ∨ ¬x2 ∨ ¬x3 ). The solution corresponds to the assignment x1 = f alse and x2 = x3 = f alse. Sets Ox1 , Ex2 and Ex3 (Ex1 , Ox2 and Ox3 , resp.) are colored gray (white, resp.). would exist two consecutive vertices vi and vi+1 , with i = 1, 2, 3, of the same color, which would create a monochromatic triangle with either u1 or u2 . For k ≥ 1, we form a chain of length k that contains k copies G1 , G2 , . . . , Gk of the graph of Figure 6a, connected to each other as follows (see Figure 6b). For i = 1, 2, . . . , k, let ui1 , ui2 , v1i , v2i , v3i and v4i be the vertices of Gi . Then, for i = 1, 2, . . . , k − 1 we introduce between Gi and Gi+1 an edge connecting vertices v4i and v1i+1 (dotted in Figure 6b). This edge ensures that v4i and v1i+1 are not of the same color, since otherwise we would have a monochromatic path of length four. Hence, the colors of the vertices of the so-called spinepath v11 → v21 → v31 → v41 → . . . → v1k → v2k → v3k → v4k alternate along this path. In other words, if the odd-positioned vertices of the spine-path are white, then the even-positioned ones will be gray, and vice versa. In addition, all vertices of the spine-path have degree 4 (except for v11 and v4k , which have degree 3). For each variable xi of φ, graph Gφ contains a so-called variable-chain Cxi of length d ni2−2 e, where ni is the number of occurrences of xi in φ, 1 ≤ i ≤ n; see Figure 6c. Let O[Cxi ] and E[Cxi ] be the sets of odd- and even-positioned vertices along the spine-path of Cxi , respectively. For each clause Ci = (λj ∨ λk ∨ λ` ) of φ, 1 ≤ i ≤ m, where λj ∈ {xj , ¬xj }, λk ∈ {xk , ¬xk }, λ` ∈ {x` , ¬x` } and j, k, ` ∈ {1, . . . , n}, graph Gφ contains a 3-cycle of corresponding clause-vertices which, of course, cannot have the same color (clause-gadget; highlighted in gray in Figure 6c). If λj is positive (negative), then we connect the clausevertex corresponding to λj in Gφ to a vertex of degree less than 5 that belongs to set E[Cxj ] (O[Cxj ]) of chain Cxj . Similarly, we create connections for literals λk and λ` ; see the edges leaving the triplets for clauses C1 and C2 in Figure 6c. The length of Cxi , 1 ≤ i ≤ n, guarantees that all connections are accomplished so that no vertex of Cxi has degree larger than 5. Thus, Gφ is of maximum degree 5. Since Gφ is linear in the size of φ, the construction can be done in O(n + m) time. We show that Gφ is (star, 2)-colorable if and only if φ is satisfiable. Assume first that φ is satisfiable. If xi is true (false), then we color E[Cxi ] white (gray) and O[Cxi ] gray (white). Hence, E[Cxi ] and O[Cxi ] admit different colors, as desired. Further, if xi is true (false), then we color gray (white) all the clause-vertices of Gφ that correspond to positive literals of xi in φ and we color white (gray) those corresponding to negative literals. Thus, a clause-vertex of Gφ cannot have the same color as its neighbor at the variable-gadget. Since in the truth assignment of φ no clause has all three literals true, no three clause-vertices 9  u21 u22 u23  u12 u13 s u11 u24 u25 u36 u37 u21 u22 u23 u33 u34 u35 u47 u1 u45 u46 t u2 Schematization: u3 s t  (a)  (b)  u  u11 u12 u13  x  x1 x2 y x3  Schematization:  y  x  (c)  (d)  (e)  Figure 7: (a) clause-gadget, (b) transmitter-gadget, (c) variable-gadget, (d) a chain of length 11, (e) crossing-gadget. belonging to the same clause have the same color. Suppose that Gφ is (star, 2)-colorable. By construction, each of E[Cxi ] and O[Cxi ] is either white or gray, i = 1, . . . , n. If P [Cxi ] is white, then we set xi = true; otherwise, we set xi = f alse. Assume, to the contrary, that there is a clause of φ whose literals are all true or all false. By construction, the corresponding clause-vertices of Gφ , which form a 3-cycle in Gφ , have the same color, which is a contradiction. We now turn our attention to planar graphs. Our proof follows the same construction as the one of Theorem 3 but to ensure planarity we replace the crossings with appropriate crossing-gadgets. Also, recall that the construction in Theorem 3 highly depends on the presence of triangles (refer, e.g., to the clause gadgets). In the following theorem, we prove that the (star, 2)-coloring problem remains NP-complete, even in the case of triangle-free planar graphs. Note that in order to avoid triangular faces, we use slightly more complicated variable- and clause-gadgets, which have higher degree but still bounded by a constant. Theorem 4. It is NP-complete to determine whether a triangle-free planar graph admits a (star, 2)-coloring. Proof. Membership in NP can be shown as in the proof of Theorem 3. To prove that the problem in NP-hard, we again employ a reduction from naesat. To avoid crossings we will construct a triangle-free planar graph Gφ (with different variable- and clause-gadgets) similar to the previous construction, so that Gφ admits a (star, 2)-coloring if and only if φ is satisfiable. The clause-gadget is illustrated in Fig.7a. It consists of a 2 × 3 grid (highlighted in gray) and one vertex of degree 2 (denoted by u in Fig.7a) connected to the top-left and bottom-right vertices of the grid. We claim that the clause-vertices of this gadget (denoted by u, u11 and u23 in Fig.7a) cannot all have the same color. For a proof by contradiction assume that u, u11 and u23 are all black. Since u12 , u13 , u21 and u22 are adjacent either to u11 or to u23 , none of them is black. Hence, u21 → u22 → u12 → u13 is a monochromatic path of length three; a contradiction to the diameter of the coloring. Fig.7b illustrates the so-called transmitter-gadget, which consists of three copies of the 2 × 3 grid (highlighted in gray), each of which gives rise to a clause-gadget with the degree-2 vertices u1 , u2 and u3 . It also has two additional vertices (denoted by s and t in Fig.7b), each of which forms a clause-gadget with each of the three copies of the rectangular grid. We claim that in any (star, 2)-coloring of the transmitter-gadget s and t are of the same colors. Otherwise, a simple observation shows that there is a monochromatic path of length three; a contradiction to the diameter of the coloring. A schematization of the transmitter-gadget is given in Fig.7b. 10  The variable-gadget is illustrated in Fig.7c. We claim that in any (star, 2)-coloring of these gadget vertices x and y must be of different colors. Assume to the contrary that x and y are both white. Then, vertices x1 , x2 and x3 must also be white, due to the transmittergadgets involved. Hence, x → x1 → y → x3 → x1 is a white-colored cycle; a contradiction to the diameter of the coloring. A schematization of the variable-gadget is given in Fig.7c. The corresponding one for the chain is given in Fig.7d. Since we proved that the clause-vertices of the clause-gadgets cannot all have the same color and that the variable gadget has two specific vertices of different colors, the rest of the construction is identical to the one of the previous theorem. Note, however, that Gφ is unlikely to be planar, as required by this theorem. However we can arrange the variablegadgets and the clause-gadgets so that the only edges that cross are the ones joining the variable-gadgets with the clause-gadgets. Then, we replace every crossing by the crossinggadget illustrated in Fig.7e. This particular gadget has the following two properties: (i) its topmost and bottommost vertices must be of the same color (due to the vertical arrangement of the variable-gadgets), which implies that (ii) the leftmost and rightmost vertices must be of the same color as well. Hence, we can replace all potential crossings with the crossinggadget. Since the number of crossings is quadratic to the number of edges, the size of the construction is still polynomial. Everything else in the construction and in the argument remains the same. Note that Theorems 3 and 4 have been independently proven by Dorbec et al. [8]. In the following theorem we prove that the (star, 2)-coloring problem remains NP-complete even if one allows one more color and the input graph is either of maximum degree 9 or planar of maximum degree 16. Recall that all planar graphs are 4-colorable. Theorem 5. It is NP-complete to determine whether a graph G admits a (star, 3)-coloring, even in the case where the maximum degree of G is no more than 9 or in the case where G is a planar graph of maximum degree 16. Proof. Membership in NP can be proved similarly to the corresponding one of Theorem 3. To prove that the problem is NP-hard, we employ a reduction from the well-known 3coloring problem, which is NP-complete even for planar graphs of maximum vertexdegree 4 [6]. So, let G be an instance of the 3-coloring problem. To prove the first part of the theorem, we will construct a graph H of maximum vertex-degree 9 admitting a (star, 3)-coloring if and only if G is 3-colorable. Central in our construction is the complete graph on six vertices K6 , which is (star, 3)-colorable; see Figure 8a. We claim that in any (star, 3)-coloring of K6 each vertex is adjacent to exactly one vertex of the same color. For a proof by contradiction, assume that there is a (star, 3)-coloring of K6 in which three vertices, say u, v and w, have the same color. From the completeness of K6 , it follows that u, v and w form a monochromatic components of diameter 3, which is a contradiction. Graph H is obtained from G by attaching a copy of K6 at each vertex u of G, and by identifying u with a vertex of K6 , which we call attachment-vertex. Hence, H has maximum degree 9. As H is linear in the size of G, it can be constructed in linear time. If G admits a 3-coloring, then H admits a (star, 3)-coloring in which each attachmentvertex in H has the same color as the corresponding vertex of G, and the colors of the other vertices are determined based on the color of the attachment-vertices. To prove that a (star, 3)-coloring of H determines a 3-coloring of G, it is enough to prove that any two adjacent attachment-vertices v and w in H have different colors, which clearly holds since both v and w are incident to a vertex of the same color in the corresponding copies of K6 associated with them. 11  (a)  (b)  (c)  Figure 8: (a) The complete graph on six vertices K6 . (b) The attachment-graph for the planar case. (c) A planar graph of max-degree 4 that is not (star, 2)-colorable. For the second part of the theorem, we attach at each vertex of G the planar graph of Figure 8b using as attachment its topmost vertex, which is of degree 12 (instead of K6 which is not planar). Hence, the constructed graph H is planar and has degree 16 as desired. Furthermore, it is not difficult to be proved that in any (star, 3)-coloring of the graph of Figure 8b its attachment-vertex is always incident to (at least one) another vertex of the same color, that is, it has exactly the same property with any vertex of K6 . Hence, the rest of the proof is analogous to the one of the first part of the theorem.  4  Conclusions  In this work, we presented algorithmic and complexity results for the (star, 2)-coloring and the (star, 3)-coloring problems. We proved that all outerpaths are (star, 2)-colorable and we gave a polynomial-time algorithm to determine whether an outerplanar graph is (star, 2)-colorable. For the classes of graphs of bounded degree and planar triangle-free graphs we presented several NP-completeness results. However, there exist several open questions raised by our work. • In Theorem 3 we proved that it is NP-complete to determine whether a graph of maximum degree 5 is (star, 2)-colorable. So, a reasonable question to ask is whether one can determine in polynomial time whether a graph of maximum degree 4 is (star, 2)-colorable. The question is of relevance even for planar graphs of maximum degree 4. Note that not all planar graphs of maximum degree 4 are (star, 2)-colorable (Figure 8c shows such a counterexample found by extensive case analysis), while all graphs of maximum degree 3 are (edge, 2)-colorable [16]. • Other classes of graphs, besides the outerpaths, that are always (star, 2)-colorable are of interest. • In Theorem 5 we proved that it is NP-complete to determine whether a graph of maximum degree 9 is (star, 3)-colorable. The corresponding question on the complexity remains open for the classes of graphs of maximum degree 6, 7 and 8. Recall that graphs of maximum degree 4 or 5 are always (star, 3)-colorable. • One possible way to expand the class of graphs that admit defective colorings, is to allow larger values on the diameter of the graphs induced by the same color class. Acknowledgement: We thank the participants of the special session GNV of IISA’15 inspiring this work. We also thank Pascal Ochem who brought [8] to our attention, where some of our NP-completeness results have been independently proven. 12  References [1] J. Andrews and M. S. Jacobson. On a generalization of chromatic number. Congressus Numerantium, 47:33–48, 1985. [2] D. Archdeacon. A note on defective coloring of graphs in surfaces. Journal of Graph Theory, 11(4):517–519, 1987. [3] G. Chartrand and L. M. Lesniak. Graphs and digraphs. Wadsworth, 1986. [4] L. J. Cowen, R. H. Cowen, and D. R. Woodall. Defective colorings of graphs in surfaces: Partitions into subgraphs of bounded valency. Journal Graph Theory, 10(2):187–195, 1986. [5] L. J. Cowen, W. Goddard, and C. E. Jesurum. Defective coloring revisited. Journal of Graph Theory, 24(3):205–219, 1997. [6] D. P. Dailey. Uniqueness of colorability and colorability of planar 4-regular graphs are np-complete. Discrete Mathematics, 30(3):289–293, 1980. [7] G. Ding and B. Oporowski. On tree-partitions of graphs. Discrete Mathematics, 149(13):45–58, 1996. [8] P. Dorbec, M. Montassier, and P. Ochem. Vertex partitions of graphs into cographs and stars. Journal of Graph Theory, 75(1):75–90, 2014. [9] A. Edelman, A. Hassidim, H. Nguyen, and K. Onak. An efficient partitioning oracle for bounded-treewidth graphs. In L. A. Goldberg, K. Jansen, R. Ravi, and J. D. P. Rolim, editors, Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques, volume 6845 of LNCS, pages 530–541. Springer, 2011. [10] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson. Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness. W. H. Freeman, 1979. [11] G. Gonthier. Formal proof—the four-color theorem. Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 55(11):1382–1393, 2008. [12] F. Hadlock. Finding a maximum cut of a planar graph in polynomial time. SIAM Journal of Computing, 4(3):221–225, 1975. [13] F. Harary and K. Jones. Conditional colorability II: Bipartite variations. Congressus Numerantium, 50:205–218, 1985. [14] R. M. Karp. Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In R. Miller, J. Thatcher, and J. Bohlinger, editors, Complexity of Computer Computations, The IBM Research Symposia Series, pages 85–103. Springer, 1972. [15] L. Kowalik. Fast 3-coloring triangle-free planar graphs. Algorithmica, 58(3):770–789, 2010. [16] L. Lovász. On decomposition of graphs. Studia Scientiarum Mathematicarum Hungarica, 1:237–238, 1966. [17] L. Lovász. Three short proofs in graph theory. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 19(3):269–271, 1975. 13  [18] P. Maritz and S. Mouton. Francis Guthrie: A colourful life. The Mathematical Intelligencer, 34(3):67–75, 2012. [19] C. H. Papadimitriou. Computational complexity. Academic Internet Publ., 2007. [20] A. Proskurowski and M. M. Syso. Efficient vertex- and edge-coloring of outerplanar graphs. SIAM Journal on Algebraic Discrete Methods, 7(1):131–136, 1986. [21] D. R. Wood. On tree-partition-width. European Journal of Combinatorics, 30(5):1245– 1253, 2009. Part Special Issue on Metric Graph Theory.  14

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
