Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_7563

Abstract:
Optimal Topology Design for Disturbance Minimization in Power Grids  arXiv:1703.00558v1 [cs.SY] 2 Mar 2017  Deepjyoti Deka† , Harsha Nagarajan† , Scott Backhaus†  Abstract— The transient response of power grids to external disturbances influences their stable operation. This paper studies the effect of topology in linear time-invariant dynamics of different power grids. For a variety of objective functions, a unified framework based on H2 norm is presented to analyze the robustness to ambient fluctuations. Such objectives include loss reduction, weighted consensus of phase angle deviations, oscillations in nodal frequency, and other graphical metrics. The framework is then used to study the problem of optimal topology design for robust control goals of different grids. For radial grids, the problem is shown as equivalent to the hard “optimum communication spanning tree” problem in graph theory and a combinatorial topology construction is presented with bounded approximation gap. Extended to loopy (meshed) grids, a greedy topology design algorithm is discussed. The performance of the topology design algorithms under multiple control objectives are presented on both loopy and radial test grids. Overall, this paper analyzes topology design algorithms on a broad class of control problems in power grid by exploring their combinatorial and graphical properties.  I. I NTRODUCTION The power grid comprises of the network of generators, loads and transmission lines that enable the delivery of electricity. Operationally, the power grid is divided into several hierarchies. The long and medium interval voltages and powers at different generators and loads are decided in a settlement market. On the other hand, the dynamics of voltages and frequencies of grid nodes are represented by coupled swing equations that depend on the net power balance [1]. If the net power is positive, the frequency increases and if it is negative, the frequency decreases. Automatic feedback loops and centralized signalling from the grid operator change the injected nodal powers to stabilize these dynamics. Such control is necessary as the majority of devices in the power grid can safely operate only within a short guard band around their standard stable regime. In recent years, due to the proliferation of stochastic renewable resources and active loads, the fluctuations in operating frequency has increased and led to concerns about the stability of the grid [2]. Such problems have been compounded by the fact that new generation resources (including solar panels, wind resources) have lower rotating mass compared to traditional generators and thereby lower inertia to dynamics of the grid state variables. Improving the dynamic performance of the modern grid has thus received greater attention in both academia and industry. Efforts in this direction include analysis of techniques Center for Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos National Laboratory, NM, USA  (deepjyoti,harsha,backhaus)@lanl.gov. The work was supported by funding from the Advanced Grid Modeling Program in the Office of Electricity in U.S. Department of Energy.  to control loads as an ancillary service [3]. Independent system operators (ISOs) have started payment structures and novel markets to incentivize new controllable resources [4]–[6]. One of the techniques that can enable a grid to improve its dynamic performance using available resources is topology configuration. This refers to a pre-operation planned change in the grid topology. Note that topology reconfiguration of grids has been shown to help in grid resilience following natural calamities, address congestion issues with reduced wind curtailment as well as settlement in power markets [7]–[9]. In this paper, we are interested in quantifying its effect in improving system dynamics and utilizing it to design optimal topologies to achieve control goals. The topology of the grid (or any networked dynamic system) and its features (line impedances etc.) influence the flow of disturbances in the network and its stability. Past research within the power systems community has looked at specific goals (optimal loss reduction [10], improvement in feedback control [11], [12], consensus based network design [13] and augmentation [14]) while analyzing topology reconfiguration using system theoretic tools. There is also a line of work in topology design and augmentation for dynamic control using tools from semi-definite programming (SDP) [13], [15]. In this paper, we study the effect of topology on dynamics of the power grid under general control goals that depend on the state variables (voltage phase angles, frequency). Such goals include loss reduction, fast damping of oscillations to common set point etc [16]. We use H2 norm of the system dynamics [1] as a metric for performance that is commonly used to study the stability of linear dynamical systems. Under general cost functions, we show that the optimal topology reconfiguration can be formulated as a combinatorial optimization problem for weighted sum of effective inverse susceptances in the graph. This holds for both radial (treestructured) and loopy (with cycles) topologies. For radial topologies that relate to distribution grids, we show that the optimal configuration is given by the solution of the Optimum Communication Spanning Tree problem, a NPhard problem in graph theory. We present a combinatorial algorithm for radial topology design with provable bounded approximation gap from optimality. Compared to existing works [10], [11], [13] that use continuous valued relaxations, our formulation represents edge augmentation as a discrete option and is applicable for a wider range of operating conditions and parameter settings. For grids with loops, we use greedy augmentation schemes to design the topology of the grid from a constructed tree. We test the performance of our algorithms (for radial  and loopy networks) for physically relevant control goals on test power grid networks. To demonstrate their efficacy, we compare the performance with optimal topologies generated by brute-force enumeration over the set of permissible edges in the system. To summarize, we develop a theoretical framework for topology reconfiguration problems for power grids and develop topology design algorithms with bounded gap. We believe that hybrid approaches that combine interrelated areas (system theory, discrete optimization and graph theory) can enable significant improvements in grid design compared to individualistic methods. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II mathematically formulates our control problem under consideration. Section III studies the properties of optimal topology design of grids. Sections IV and V provide a detailed analysis of greedy-based algorithms with approximation guarantees for tree and loopy networks, respectively. Section VI discusses a numerical study based on two test cases followed by conclusions and future directions in Section VII.  The power grid is represented mathematically as a connected graph G = {V, E}, where V = {1, 2, ..N } is the set of N buses/nodes of the graph and E = {eij } is the set of undirected lines/edges. Let yij = gij − ĵbij denote the complex admittance of line (ij) in the grid (ĵ 2 = −1) with conductance gij > 0 and susceptance bij > 0. Each node i is associated with a time varying complex voltage Vi of magnitude |Vi | and phase angle θi . The frequency at node i i is denoted by ωi where ωi = δθ δt . Under stable operating conditions, the frequencies at all nodes are maintained at a constant value ω 0 = 60Hz (in U.S.A.). The temporal dynamics of the grid is represented by the following swing equation [1]: X Mi ω̇i + Di (ωi − ω 0 ) = Pim − Pij + ui (1) (ij)∈E  Here, Mi denotes the inertia of the rotating mass at node i, which primarily stems from inertia of generators. Di represents the damping at node i. Pim represents the real power injection at the node. Pij is the real power flowing out of node i through lines connected to its neighbors. Finally, ui is the external disturbance at node i. Using the DC power flow model [1], the power flow Pij on line (ij) is given by Pij = bij (θi − θj )  (2)  In the absence of external disturbances, the system of equations has a stable operating point (ωi = ω 0 , ω̇i = 0). As the swing equation is linear, we take the stable operating point as reference and express dynamics in terms of deviations from the reference. Abusing notation, from this point we use ωi , θi , Pij to denote the deviation from their stable states. Using the linear power flow equations, the swing equation in vector form is as follows: [M ]ω̇ + [D]ω = −Lb θ + u  (θi , ωi )  (3)  (θj , ωj ) L3  L2  Power grid G2 Fig. 1.  sj j  wij  bij  G1 ∼ ∼  L4  Illustration of power grid and its associated consensus graph.  Here ω, θ, u are the N ×1 vectors. [M ] and [D] are diagonal matrices representing the inertia and damping at nodes respectively. Lb is the N ×N susceptance weighted graph Laplacian of the grid G with the following structure: ( −b P ij  Lb (i, j) =  II. M ATHEMATICAL FORMULATION  si i  Consensus graph  (ij)∈E  0  bij  if (ij) ∈ E if j = i otherwise  (4)  Thus, the ith component of Lb θ gives the sum of outward power flows on all lines connected to node i. Writing Eq. (3) in standard LT I system form [1], we have h i h ih i h i 0 I 0 θ θ̇ = + u (5) −1 −1 −1 −M L −M D ω M ω̇ b  where I is the identity matrix of size N × N . Keeping our focus on topology design in the rest of the paper, we make the following assumption: Assumption 1: At each node i, Mi > 0 (non-zero inertia), and Di = d (constant damping). The assumption of non-zero inertia is made for convenience of presentation and our results hold for the case where certain nodes do not possess inertia. Further, using Kronreduction [17] of graphs, a network can be reduced to only nodes with inertia. The second assumption is similar to the ones in previous work [10], [11]. In their absence, some equality results (noted in later sections) will be replaced by bounds. Note that, unlike prior work, no assumption is made on relative values of inertia at different nodes in the system. A. Control Goals We now state a generalized set of control objectives that the observer/system operator is interested in optimizing, expressed as functions of the states (θi , ωi ) of the system at node i. Under ambient white noise u and given wij ≥ 0, si ≥ 0, we are interested in minimizing the expected steady-state value of a non-negative function f given by: X X f := wij (θi − θj )2 + si ωi2 , (6) ∀i6=j  i∈V  Note that f depends on the differences of phase angles of nodes (not necessarily neighboring) and on the magnitude of frequency at each node. It follows immediately that f = y T y,  the L2 norm of function y, where y is given by:  1/2   θ Lw 0 y= 0 S 1/2 ω  III. O PTIMAL T OPOLOGY R ECONFIGURATION P ROBLEM (7)  Here Lw is the Laplacian matrix of graph Gw with edge weights given by wij . Note that Gw is not restricted to have the same topology as the power grid G (see Fig. 1). In fact, it can even be a complete graph. S is a diagonal matrix with the ith diagonal entry given by si . As (weighted) Laplacian matrices are positive semi-definite, their matrix square roots 1/2 (Lw , S 1/2 ) exist. Well-known functions for grid control can be derived using different choices of wij (Lw ) and si (S) as listed: 1) Frequency Control: wij = 0, si = 1 (S = I, W = 0). 2) Line Loss Reduction: si = 0, wij = gij 1((ij) ∈ E) (S = 0, Lw = Lg , the conductance weighted Laplacian matrix for G). 3) Consensus: wij = 1, si = 0 (S = 0, Lw = I − 11T ). Further, we consider a modified ranked consensus control objective where each node i in the grid is given a rank ri > 0 and the weight wij for line (ij) is given by the sum of the ranks, i.e., wij = ri + rj . This can help prioritize consensus between critical nodes over others. For example, if generators are ranked higher than loads, the addition of ranks will imply that wij for a generator pair is greater than wij for generatorload pair, and further greater than wij for a load pair. Figure 1 graphically illustrates the power grid and it’s associated consensus graph for the grid control. For function f given in Eq. (7), next we formulate the topology design problem. Topology Design Problem: Given an input set of susceptance weighted edges E f ull and budget k ≥ N − 1, an edge set E needs to be selected to optimize the following problem: arg min lim E{y T (t)y(t)} E∈E f ull t→∞  s.t. |E| = k  (8a) (8b)  [θ, ω]T satisfies Eq. (5), y satisfies Eq. (7) (8c)  E is connected  (8d)  Here Eq. (8b) reflects the budget on number of edges. If k = N − 1, the problem is restricted to finding the optimal tree configuration. This is specifically important for radially operated distribution grids. Relation to Stability Analysis: Note that the cost function in Eq. (8) is exactly the squared H2 norm [18] of a system where the dynamics are represented by Eq. (5), while the observations are represented by Eq. (7). ||H||2H2 = lim E{y T (t)y(t)} t→∞  (9)  The popular H2 norm is used in the control community as a stability metric which has several interpretations. For unit impulse disturbances u = δ(t), H2 norm denotes the total variance of the output of the system to reach the steady state R∞ ( 0 E{y T (t)y(t)}dt). In our case, we consider the setting where the system is excited by persistent ambient noise u of known variance. In the next section, we use properties of H2 norm to determine a tractable form of the optimization objective for topology design.  The objective of the ISO, as discussed in the previous section, is to minimize the squared H2 -norm of the dynamic swing equations. The H2 norm of a standard LTI system can be described by the following set of equations [18]: ||H||2H2 = Tr(B T QB) (10) AT Q + QA = −C T C  (11)  where (A, B, C) for our are  the matrices   system   1/2 0 I 0 Lw 0 , and , −M −1 Lb −M −1 D M −1 0 S 1/2   Q1 Q0 respectively. Matrix Q = is positive semiQ∗0 Q2 definite and represents the observability Gramian of the system. As M is a diagonal matrix in our case, the H2 norm reduces to ||H||2H2 = Tr(M −1 Q2 M −1 ) = Tr(M −2 Q2 )  (12)  Eq. (11) can be expanded to:    0 −Lb M −1 Q1 Q0 + ∗ −1 Q0 Q2 I −DM     0 I Q1 Q0 Lw = − Q∗0 Q2 −M −1 Lb −M −1 D 0  0 S   (13a)  This gives us four equality relations, one for each submatrix. Since trace is invariant under cyclic permutations, the first equality reduces to Lb M −1 Q∗0 + Q0 M −1 Lb = Lw ⇒ 2Tr(Q0 M −1 ) = Tr(Lw L+ b )  (14a) (14b)  Multiplying M −1 on both sides of the fourth equality from Eq. (13a) and using Eq. (14b), we have (DM −1 Q2 + Q2 M −1 D)M −1 − (Q0 + Q∗0 )M −1 = SM −1 −1 ⇒ Tr(M −2 Q2 ) = (Tr(Lw L+ ))/2d b ) + Tr(SM  (15a)  The closed form of the squared H2 norm of the system is summarized in the following lemma. Lemma III.1. The squared H2 norm of the LTI dynamical system given by Eqs. (5,7) is given by (Tr(Lw L+ b ) + Tr(SM −1 ))/2d. Without Assumption 1 (constant damping), Eq. (15a) will provide a bound on the squared H2 norm based on the maximum and minimum values of nodal damping. A similar albeit restricted formulation is derived in [10] where Laplacian matrices Lw and Lb are defined over the same graph, assuming equal nodal inertias. Note that in Lemma III.1, the effect of S (weights associated with frequency deviations) on the H2 norm is separable from that of the grid topology (or Lb ). Thus, the search for the optimal grid topology can be limited to the first term of Lemma III.1. This provides the following reformulation of Problem 8: arg min Tr(Lw L+ b )  (16a)  E∈E f ull  s.t. |E| = k, rank(Lb ) = N − 1  (16b)  The N − 1 rank constraint for Lb ensures that the graph constructed using set E has one connected component. Note that brute force schemes to determine the optimal topology quickly become intractable due to the exponential number of candidate feasible graphs that can be constructed. A. Pseudo-inverse and graph distances We now use properties of Laplacian pseudo-inverse to describe Problem 16 in terms of effective graph distances. This will enable us to relate Problem 16 to studied problems + in graph theory. By definition, we define L+ b (i, i)+Lb (j, j)− + −1 2Lb (i, j) as effective inverse susceptance (bef f (i, j)) between nodes i and j in the graph. Effective inverse susceptance (similar to effective resistance) in the DC power flow model represents the ratio between phase angle difference between nodes i and j when one unit of active power is inserted at i and taken out at j. We can expand the cost function in Problem 16 as follows: Tr(Lw L+ b )=  X  + + wij (L+ b (i, i) + Lb (j, j) − 2Lb (i, j))  (17a)  wij b−1 ef f (i, j)  (17b)  ∀i6=j  =  X ∀i6=j  The optimal topology design problem 16 can now be interpreted as: Lemma III.2. The cost function in Problem 16 is equivalent to minimizing the weighted sum of effective inverse susceptances between all pairs of nodes in the graph. The expression in Eq. (17b) can also be listed in terms of the full-rank reduced Laplacian matrices L̂w , L̂b of size (N − 1) × (N − 1). In the next two sections, we analyze two variants of the optimal topology design problem: one for radial networks and the other for meshed networks, and discuss their computational hardness and solution schemes. IV. O PTIMAL T REE C ONSTRUCTION P ROBLEM We analyze the case where the number of graph edges is N − 1, i.e., the constructed graph is a tree. Note that constraining the network to be a tree is a common objective in distribution grids, which are historically operated in a radial configuration. Reformulation: In this case, the optimal Lb to be constructed in Problem 16 and Eq. (17b) corresponds to edge set E T for some tree T . Using properties of pseudo-inverse in trees [19], it can shown that the effective inverse susceptance b−1 ef f (i, j) for two nodes i and j in a radial graph has a simple expression - it is equal to the graph distance dTij between nodes i and j if each edge e in T is given distance de = 1/be . We thus have the following reformulation of the topology design Problem 16 for radial networks: X arg min wij dT (i, j) (18a) E T ∈E f ull  ∀i,j T  s.t. E  forms a tree  (18b)  Using this reformulation, we are able to connect Problem 18 to a NP-hard problem in graph theory.  Theorem IV.1. The optimal radial grid that minimizes the H2 -norm based cost function in Eq. 6 is given by the solution to the Optimal Communication Spanning Tree Problem [20] in graph theory. The Optimum Communication Spanning Tree problem in [20] determines the spanning tree that minimizes the sum of communication between all nodes, where the cost of communication between a node pair i and j is given by a constant multiplied by the sum of edge distances on the unique path connecting them. The Optimum Communication Spanning Tree problem can be shown to be NP-hard in general. Algorithm for Optimal Tree: We now discuss a scheme for topology design for Problem 18. We extend results in [21] to prove the approximation gap of our scheme. In particular, we consider rooted shortest-path trees in G̃, the graph formed by all candidate edges in E f ull . A shortest path tree T rooted at node k is a spanning tree in E f ull such that for each node i, distance dT (i, k) is equal to the distance dG̃ (i, k) on the shortest path from i to P k in G̃. The shortest-path tree with minimum total distance i dT (i, m) is called the minimum shortest path tree and its root m is called the ‘median’. The following result (extends Lemmas 3 and 5 in [21]) upper bounds the performance of the minimum shortest path tree for the objective in Problem 18. Lemma IV.2. The minimum shortestP path tree T rooted T at median m of graph satisfies G̃, ∀i,j wij d (i, j) ≤ P G̃ P i d (i, m) maxi ( j wij ). The proof is omitted due to space constraints. Further it can be shown that the following holds  X ∀i,j  T∗  wij d  (i, j) ≥  X i  G̃  d (i, m) min  i   X  wij   (19)  j∈S,|S|=N/2  The derivation of the above statement is postponed to the general version for space constraints. Combining Lemma IV.2 and inequality (19),we have Lemma IV.3. Let T ∗ be the optimal tree solution to Problem 18. The minimum shortest path tree T rooted at median m of graph G̃ has approximation gap from optimality given by: P P T maxi ( j wij ) ∀i,j wij d (i, j) P X ≤ T ∗ (i, j) mini ( wij ) ∀i,j wij d j∈S,|S|=N/2  For two specific cases discussed in the Introduction (consensus and ranked consensus), we can show that approximation gap given by Lemma IV.3 is bounded by 2. The tree construction steps are listed in Algorithm 1. We select node k that minimizes the objective of Problem 18 as root as it has performance at par or better than the median rooted tree. Computational Complexity: In terms of the number of nodes N , the complexity of Algorithm 1 is O(N 3 ) as the for loop iterates over N nodes, while each rooted spanning tree computation takes O(N 2 ) steps [21], when shortest path lengths to all nodes are known.  ⇠  Algorithm 1 Radial Grid Construction for Problem 16 E f ull  Input: Set of permissible susceptance (b) weighted edges over nodes in set V, weights wij for node pairs (i, j) Output: Tree T 1: Get graph Ĝ of all edges in E f ull . Compute weighted Laplacian matrix Lw using non-zero wij as weighted edges, temp ← ∞, k ← 1. 2: for all i ∈ Ĝ do 3: Find susceptance weighted Laplacian Lb of shortest path tree rooted at node i in Ĝ. 4: if Tr(Lw L+ b ) < temp then 5: k←i 6: end if 7: end for 8: T ← shortest path tree rooted at k  10 3  ⇠ ⇠  12  2  ⇠  11 13  4 5 1  2  8  ⇠  14 15  6  17  7  19  18  ⇠  ⇠  (a) 8 nodes, 9 fixed edges, and 10 additional edges  ⇠  ⇠  ⇠  (b) IEEE-39 bus system with 46 fixed edges, and 20 additional edges  In this section, we look at Problem 16 where the designed edge set E has cardinality k > N − 1 and hence creates a meshed grid. Note that unlike a tree grid, the effective inverse susceptance b−1 ef f (i, j) (see Eq.( 17b)) for a meshed network is not a simple linear function of the line susceptances. To bring tractability, we design the meshed network as a two step process: (a) construct a tree T with N − 1 edges, and then (b) add k − (N − 1) edges to tree T . The first step can be designed using Algorithm 1 in Section IV. The second step involves adding k − (N − 1) edges to the tree, such that Laplacian matrix Lb for edges minimizes Tr(Lw L+ b ). We use a greedy algorithm to determine additional edges. [22] shows that the optimization problem here is not supermodular [23] in general and hence strong theoretical guarantees may not be permissible. In next section, we show the effectiveness of the greedy approach through simulations. Algorithm for Meshed Network: Algorithm 2 builds a meshed network of k > N − 1 edges from a set E f ull . First we use Algorithm 1 to construct tree T and then greedily add k − (N − 1) edges to minimize the objective Tr(Lw L+ b ). Algorithm 2 Meshed Grid Construction for Problem 16 Input: Set of permissible susceptance (b) weighted edges E f ull over nodes in set V, weights wij for node pairs (i, j), Number of graph edges k Output: Graph G 1: Use Algorithm 1 to generate tree T with edges E T 2: E G ← E T 3: for n ∈ {0, k − (N − 1)} do 4: Find edge e ∈ E f ull − E G that minimizes Tr(Lw L+ b ) where Lb is susceptance weighted Laplacian formed by E G ∪ {e}. 5: E G ← E G ∪ {e} 6: end for 7: Form G using edges in E G  Computational Complexity: Using Algorithm 1 to form tree T , the overall complexity of Algorithm 2 is given by 0(N 3 ) + 0(kN 2 ). VI. N UMERICAL S IMULATIONS In this section, we demonstrate the performance of Algorithms 1 and 2 in designing radial and meshed networks to minimize two different cost functions for Problem 16. The cost functions used are : (a) consensus (wij = 1∀i 6= j)  Fig. 2. Test power grid networks. Additional edges (dotted) are randomly assigned to the base network.  and (b) ranked consensus (wij = ri + rj ). We first test our algorithms on a 8 node sub-graph of the IEEE 39bus test case [24]. We use a permissible edge set E f ull of cardinality 18 (see Fig. (2 (a)). Out of the 18 edges, 8 are derived from the original IEEE case, while the rest are randomly assigned. We consider the consensus cost and design networks with 7, 8, 9 and 10 edges selected from E f ull . To grade a constructed network, we determine the relative difference between its squared H2 norm and that of the optimal network of same edge cardinality determined by enumeration/brute-force. The results are summarized in Table I. TABLE I R ELATIVE P ERFORMANCE G AP OF DESIGNED GRIDS FOR CONSENSUS COST IN 8 NODE NETWORK . GA: G REEDY AUGMENTATION , OA: O PTIMAL AUGMENTATION . # of edges  Rooted Tree + GA(%)  Rooted Tree + OA (%)  Optimal Tree + GA (%)  Optimal Tree + OA (%)  0.0189 6.8742 19.3806 25.4962  0.0189 6.8742 19.3806 25.4956  0 6.8743 19.3790 25.4955  0 6.8743 19.3790 25.4955  7 (tree) 8 9 10  2.4  Relative performance of topology design  V. O PTIMAL M ESHED N ETWORK C ONSTRUCTION P ROBLEM  Rooted tree + greedy augmentation (C) Min spanning tree + greedy augmentation (C) Rooted tree + optimal augmentation (C) Rooted tree + greedy augmentation (RC) Min spanning tree + greedy augmentation (RC) Rooted tree + optimal augmentation (RC)  2.2  2  1.8  1.6  1.4  1.2 1 38  39  40  41  42  43  Number of edges in the grid  Fig. 3. Performance of grid design for different edge cardinalities in the 39-bus system with consensus (C) and ranked consensus (RC) cost functions. Performance refers to H2 -norm-based cost relative to the cost of optimal augmented network of 43 edges. Lower relative cost implies higher performance.  In Table I, the second column reflects the performance of best rooted tree designed with Algorithm 1 with edge augmented greedily using Algorithm 2. On the other hand, the third column reflects the performance achieved by bruteforce addition of edges to the rooted tree given by Algorithm 1. Finally, in fourth and fifth columns, we consider the optimal tree generated by enumeration. The edge addition to the optimal tree is conducted via Algorithm 2 in column 4 and by brute force search in column 5. The first entry in second column shows the relative performance difference for tree designed by Algorithm 1 is less than .02%. Similarly, comparing entries in column 2 with column 3, and column 4 with 5, we notice that the performance of greedy augmentation is comparable to that of brute force search. Finally, when the number of edges in the system is increased, the performance gap with the global optimal solution increases. Next, we consider the full IEEE 39-bus test-case (see Fig. 2 (b)) with E f ull composed of 66 edges. Fig. (3) demonstrates the performance in designing networks of different cardinalities (38 (tree), 39 − 43 (mesh)) for both consensus (C) and ranked consensus (RC) based cost functions. For both cost functions, we use Algorithm 1 to first construct a rooted-tree and then select extra edges either greedily (Algorithm 2) or by a brute-force search. Fig. (3) shows that the performance of greedy augmentation is comparable to that of brute force augmentation for all considered edge cardinalities under both cost functions. Further we present the performance of greedy addition of edges to the min spanning tree constructed from set E f ull and show that it is outshone by topologies designed by our algorithms. VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK This paper presents a general framework to study the effect of network topology on the dynamics of power grid. Combining ideas from control theory, algebraic graph theory and discrete optimization, we categorize the problem of optimal topology design to optimize a broad class of critical control objectives in the grid. We show the NP-hardness of the hardness of the topology design problem for both radial and meshed networks and discuss efficient algorithms and their computational complexity. For radial grid, we present a rooted spanning tree based topology design algorithm and demonstrate its approximation gap. For the meshed network, we discuss the application of greedy design algorithms to augment the topology beginning with a tree. The good performance and optimality gap of our topology design algorithms is presented on two test networks. Future research in this area will include application of our algorithms to real-data sets and development of optimization algorithms for solving nonlinear mixed-integer (MI) SDPs based on the recent developments in the literature [25], [26]. R EFERENCES [1] P. Kundur, Power system stability and control, vol. 7. [2] A. Ulbig, T. S. Borsche, and G. Andersson, “Impact of low rotational inertia on power system stability and operation,” IFAC Proceedings Volumes, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 7290–7297, 2014.  [3] S. P. Meyn, P. Barooah, A. Bušić, Y. Chen, and J. Ehren, “Ancillary service to the grid using intelligent deferrable loads,” IEEE Trans. on Automatic Control, vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 2847–2862, 2015. [4] F. O. No, “755,“frequency regulation compensation in the organized wholesale power markets,” issued october 20, 2011.” [5] J. Matevosyan, S. Sharma, S.-H. Huang, D. Woodfin, K. Ragsdale, S. Moorty, P. Wattles, and W. Li, “Proposed future ancillary services in electric reliability council of texas,” in PowerTech, 2015 IEEE Eindhoven. IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6. [6] N. Soni, S. Doolla, and M. C. Chandorkar, “Improvement of transient response in microgrids using virtual inertia,” IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1830–1838, 2013. [7] H. Nagarajan, E. Yamangil, R. Bent, P. Van Hentenryck, and S. Backhaus, “Optimal resilient transmission grid design,” in 2016 Power Systems Computation Conference (PSCC). IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–7. [8] D. Deka and S. Vishwanath, “Structural vulnerability of power grids to disasters: Bounds and reinforcement measures,” in Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference, PES, 2015, pp. 1–5. [9] J. C. Villumsen, G. Brønmo, and A. B. Philpott, “Line capacity expansion and transmission switching in power systems with largescale wind power,” IEEE Trans. on Power Systems, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 731–739, 2013. [10] E. Tegling, B. Bamieh, and D. F. Gayme, “The price of synchrony: Evaluating the resistive losses in synchronizing power networks,” IEEE Trans. on Control of Net. Sys., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 254–266, 2015. [11] E. Tegling, M. Andreasson, J. W. Simpson-Porco, and H. Sandberg, “Improving performance of droop-controlled microgrids through distributed pi-control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.08017, 2016. [12] E. Mallada and A. Tang, “Improving damping of power networks: Power scheduling and impedance adaptation,” in 2011 50th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control. IEEE, 2011, pp. 7729–7734. [13] M. Fardad, F. Lin, and M. R. Jovanović, “Design of optimal sparse interconnection graphs for synchronization of oscillator networks,” IEEE Trans. on Auto. Control, vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 2457–2462, 2014. [14] T. Summers, I. Shames, J. Lygeros, and F. Dörfler, “Topology design for optimal network coherence,” in Control Conference (ECC), 2015 European. IEEE, 2015, pp. 575–580. [15] A. Ghosh, S. Boyd, and A. Saberi, “Minimizing effective resistance of a graph,” SIAM review, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 37–66, 2008. [16] N. Jaleeli and L. S. VanSlyck, “Nerc’s new control performance standards,” IEEE Trans. on Power Systems, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 1092– 1099, 1999. [17] B. Kameshwar, P. Saverio, and B. F. Dörfler, “Placing rotational inertia in power grids,” in American Control Conference. IEEE, 2016, pp. 2314–2320. [18] S. P. Boyd, L. El Ghaoui, E. Feron, and V. Balakrishnan, Linear matrix inequalities in system and control theory. SIAM, 1994, vol. 15. [19] D. Deka, S. Backhaus, and M. Chertkov, “Structure learning and statistical estimation in distribution networks - part i,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1501.04131, 2015. [20] T. C. Hu, “Optimum communication spanning trees,” SIAM Journal on Computing, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 188–195, 1974. [21] B. Y. Wu, K.-M. Chao, and C. Y. Tang, “Approximation algorithms for the shortest total path length spanning tree problem,” Discrete applied mathematics, vol. 105, no. 1, pp. 273–289, 2000. [22] A. Olshevsky, “On (non) supermodularity of average control energy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08706, 2016. [23] G. L. Nemhauser, L. A. Wolsey, and M. L. Fisher, “An analysis of approximations for maximizing submodular set functions—i,” Mathematical Programming, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 265–294, 1978. [24] A. Pai, Energy function analysis for power system stability. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012. [25] H. Nagarajan, S. Rathinam, and S. Darbha, “On maximizing algebraic connectivity of networks for various engineering applications,” in Control Conference, 2015 European. IEEE, 2015, pp. 1626–1632. [26] H. Nagarajan, M. Lu, E. Yamangil, and R. Bent, “Tightening mccormick relaxations for nonlinear programs via dynamic multivariate partitioning,” in International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming. Springer, 2016, pp. 369–387.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
