Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_7109

Abstract:
N – BODY  NETWORKS : A COVARIANT HIERARCHICAL NEURAL NETWORK ARCHITECTURE FOR LEARNING ATOMIC POTENTIALS 1  arXiv:1803.01588v1 [cs.LG] 5 Mar 2018  Risi Kondor Departments of Computer Science & Statistics 1 The University of Chicago risi@cs.uchicago.edu  A BSTRACT We describe N –body networks, a neural network architecture for learning the behavior and properties of complex many body physical systems. Our specific application is to learn atomic potential energy surfaces for use in molecular dynamics simulations. Our architecture is novel in that (a) it is based on a hierarchical decomposition of the many body system into subsytems (b) the activations of the network correspond to the internal state of each subsystem (c) the “neurons” in the network are constructed explicitly so as to guarantee that each of the activations is covariant to rotations (d) the neurons operate entirely in Fourier space, and the nonlinearities are realized by tensor products followed by Clebsch–Gordan decompositions. As part of the description of our network, we give a characterization of what way the weights of the network may interact with the activations so as to ensure that the covariance property is maintained.  1. I NTRODUCTION In principle, quantum mechanics provides a perfect description of the forces governing the behavior of atomic systems such as crystals and biological molecules. However, for systems larger than a few dozen atoms, solving the Schrödinger equation explicitly, on present day computers, is not a feasible proposition. Even Density Functional Theory (DFT) (Hohenberg & Kohn, 1964), a widely used approximation in quantum chemistry, has trouble scaling to more than about a hundred atoms. Consequently, the majority of practical work in molecular dynamics foregoes modeling electrons explicitly, and falls back on the fundamentally classical (i.e., non-quantum) Born–Oppenheimer approximation, which treats atoms as solid balls that exert forces on nearby balls prescribed by sobk ), called (effective) atomic potentials. Assume that the potential attached to atom i is φi (b r1 , . . . , r with rbj = r pj − r i , where r i is the position vector of atom i and r pj is the position vector of its j’th neighbor. The total force experienced by atom i is then simply the negative gradient bk ). Classically, in molecular dynamics φi is usually given in terms of a Fi = −∇ri φi (b r1 , . . . , r closed form formula with a few tunable parameters. Popular examples of such so-called empirical potentials (empirical force fields) include the CHARMM models (Brooks et al., 1983; 2009) and others. Empirical potentials are fast to evaluate but are crude models of the quantum interactions between atoms, limiting the accuracy of molecular simulation. A little over ten years ago, machine learning entered this field, promising to bridge the gap between the quantum and classical worlds by learning the aggregate force on each atom as a function of the positons of its neighbors from a relatively small number of DFT calculations (Behler & Parrinello, 2007). In the last few years there has been a veritable explosion in the amount of activity in machine learned atomic potentials (MLAP), and molecular dynamics simulations based on this approach are starting to yield results that outperform 1 This note describes the neural network architecture first presented by the author at the “Machine Learning for Molecules and Materials” workshop at the Neural Information Processing Systems Conference (Long Beach, CA) on December 8, 2017.  1  R. KONDOR other methods (Bartók et al., 2010; Behler, 2015; Shapeev, 2015; Chmiela et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017; Schütt et al., 2017). Much of the arsenal of present day machine learning algorithms has been applied to the MLAP problem, from genetic algorithms, through kernel methods, to neural networks. However, rather than the statistical details of the specific learning algorithm, often what is critically important for problems of this type is the representation of the atomic environment, i.e., the choice of learning features that the algorithm is based on. This situation is by no means unique in the world of applied machine learning: in computer vision and speech recognition, in particular, there is a rich literature of such representational issues. What makes the situation in Physics applications somewhat special is the presence of constraints and invariances that the representation must satisfy not just in an approximate, but in the exact sense. As an example, one might consider rotation invariance. If rotation invariance is not fully respected by an image recognition system, some objects might be less likely to be accurately detected in certain orientations than in others. In a molecular dynamics setting, however, using a potential that is not fully rotationally invariant would not just degrade accuracy, but would likely lead to entirely unphysical molecular trajectories. 1.1. F IXED VS . LEARNED REPRESENTATIONS . Similarly to other branches of machine learning, in recent years the MLAP community has been shifting from fixed input features towards representations learned from the data itself, in particular, using “deep” neural networks to represent atomic enviroments. Several authors have found that certain concepts from the mainstream neural networks literature, such as convolution and equivariance, can be successfuly repurposed to this domain. In fact, the analogy with computer vision is more than just skin deep. In both domains two competing objectives are critical to success: 1. The ability to capture structure in the input data at multiple different length scales, , i.e., to construct a multiscale representation of the input image or the atomic environment. 2. The above mentioned invariance property with respect to spatial transformations, including translations, rotations, and possibly scaling. There is a rich body of work on addressing these objectives in the neural networks literature. One particularly attractive approach is the scattering networks framework of Mallat and coworkers, which, at least in the limit of an infinite number of neural network layers, provides a representation of functions that is both globally invariant with respect to symmetries and Lipschitz with respect to warpings (Mallat, 2012; Hirn et al., 2017). Inspired by recent work on neural networks for representing graphs and other structured objects by covariant compositional neural architectures (Kondor et al., 2018), in this paper we take the idea of learnable multiscale representations one step further, and propose N –body networks, a neural network architecture where the individual “neurons” correspond to physical subsystems endowed with their own internal state. The structure and behavior of the resulting model follows the tradition of coarse graining and representation theoretic ideas in Physics, and provides a learnable and multiscale representation of the atomic environment that is fully covariant to the action of the appropriate symmetries. However, the scope of the underlying ideas is significantly broader, and we believe that N –body networks will also find application in modeling other types of many-body Physical systems, as well. An even more general contribution of the present work is that it shows how the machinery of group representation theory, specifically the concept of Clebsch–Gordan decompositions, can be used to design neural networks that are covariant to the action of a compact group yet are computationally efficient. This aspect is related to the recent explosion of interest in generalizing the notion of convolutions to graphs (Niepert et al., 2016; Defferrard et al., 2016; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016; Gilmer et al., 2017; Kondor et al., 2018), manifolds (Monti et al., 2016; Masci et al., 2015), and other domains (Bruna & Mallat, 2013; Cohen et al., 2018), as well as the question of generalizing the concept of equivariance (covariance) in general (Cohen & Welling, 2016; 2017; Kondor & Trivedi, 2018). Several of the above works employed generalized Fourier representations of one type or another, but to ensure equivariance the nonlinearity was always applied in the “time domain”. Projecting back and forth between the time domain and the frequency domain is a major bottleneck, which we can eliminate because the Clebsch–Gordan transform allows us to compute one type of nonlinearity, tensor products, entirely in the Fourier domain.  2  N- BODY NETWORKS  2. R EPRESENTING STRUCTURED OBJECTS WITH NEURAL NETS To put our work in perspective, we begin with reviewing classical feed-forward neural networks, and then describe a relatively new, general purpose neural architecture for representing structured objects called compositional networks. A prototypical feed-forward neural network consists of some number of neurons {n`i } arranged in L+1 distinct layers. Layer ` = 0 is the input layer, where training and testing data enter the network, while the inputs of the neurons in layers ` = 1, 2, . . . , L are the outputs {fj`−1 } of the neurons in the previous layer. Each neuron computes its output (also called its activation) using a simple rule such as X  (1) fi` = σ wj` fj`−1 + b` , j  where the {wj` } weights and {b` } biases are learnable parameters, while σ is a fixed nonlinearity, such a sigmoid function or a ReLU operator. The output of the network appears in layer L, is compared with the desired output by means of a loss function, and the gradient of the loss is backpropagated through the network to update the parameters, usually by some variant of stochastic gradient descent. One of the reasons commonly cited for the spectacular success of feed-forward neural networks (especially “deep”, i.e., many layer ones) is their ability to implicitly decompose complex objects into their constituent parts. This is especially true of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), commonly used in computer vision (LeCun et al., 1998). In CNNs, the weights in each layer are tied together, which tends to force the neurons to learn increasingly complex visual features, from simple edge detectors all the way to complex shapes such as human eyes, mouths, faces, and so on. 2.1. C OMPOSITIONAL NETWORKS There has been a lot of interest in extending neural networks to learning from structured objects, such as graphs. A range of architectures have been proposed for this purpose, many of them based on various generalizations of the notion of convolution to these domains (Duvenaud et al., 2015; Kearns et al., 2016; Niepert et al., 2016; Gilmer et al., 2017). One particular architecture, which makes the part-based aspect of neural modeling very explicit, is that of compositional networks (comp-nets), introduced in (Kondor et al., 2018). To represent a structured object X , comp-nets start with decomposing X into a hierarchy of parts, subparts, subsubparts, and so on, down to some number of elementary parts {ei }, forming a so-called composition scheme2. Since each part Pi can be a sub-part of more than one higher level part, the composition scheme is not necessarrily a tree, but is rather a DAG (directed acyclic graph), as in Figure 1. The exact definition is as follows. Definition 1. Let X be a compound object with n elementary parts E = {e1 , . . . , en }. A composition scheme D for X is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) in which each node ni is associated with some subset Pi of E (these subsets are called the parts of X ) in such a way that 1. If ni is a leaf node, then Pi contains a single elementary part eξ(i) . 2. D has a unique root node nr , which corresponds to the entire set {e1 , . . . , en }. 3. For any two nodes ni and nj , if ni is a descendant of nj , then Pi ⊂ Pj . A comp-net is essentially just a composition scheme reinterpreted as a feed-forward neural network. In particular, in a comp-net each “neuron” ni also has an activation fi . For leaf nodes, fi is some simple pre-defined vector representation of the corresponding elementary part eξ(i) . For internal nodes, fi is computed from the activations fch1 , . . . , fchk of the children of ni by the use of some aggregation function Φ(fch1 , . . . , fchk ) similar to (1). Finally, the output of the comp-net is the output of the root node nr . 2 Note that in (Kondor et al., 2018) the elementary parts are called atoms, but we will avoid this terminology to avoid possible confusion with the physical meaning of the word.  3  R. KONDOR nr  {e2 , e3 , e4 }  n8  {e1 , e2 , e3 , e4 }  n9  fr  n10 {e1 , e2 , e4 }  f8 n8  nr  f9  f10  n9  n10  {e1 , e4 } {e3 , e4 }  n5  n6  {e2 , e3 }  n7  f5  f6  f7  n5  n6  n7  n1  n2  n3  n4  f1  f2  f3  f4  {e1 }  {e2 }  {e3 }  {e4 }  n1  n2  n3  n4  F IGURE 1. (a) A composition scheme for an object X is a DAG in which the leaves correspond to the elementary parts of X , the internal nodes correspond to sets of elementary parts, and the root corresponds to the entire object. (b) A compositional network is a composition scheme in which each node ni also carries a feature vector (activation) fi , which is computed from the feature vectors of the children of ni . Kondor et al. (2018) discuss in detail the behavior of comp-nets under transformations of X , in particular, how to ensure that the output of the network is invariant with respect to spurious permutations of the elementary parts, whilst retaining as much information about the combinatorial structure of X as possible. This is especially important in graph learning, the original problem that motivated the introduction of comp-nets, where X is a graph, e1 , . . . , en are its vertices, and {Pi } are subgraphs of different radii. The proposed solution, covariant compositional networks (CCNs), involves turning the {fi } activations into tensors that transform in prescribed ways with respect to permutations of the elementary parts making up each Pi .  3. C OMPOSITIONAL MODELS FOR ATOMIC ENVIRONMENTS Decomposing complex systems into a hierarchy of interacting subsytems at different scales is a recurring theme in physics, from coarse graining approaches to renormalization group theory. The same approach applied to the atomic neighborhood lends itself naturally to learning force fields. For example, to calculate the aggregate force on the central atom, in a first approximation one might just sum up independent contributions from each of its neighbors. In a second approximation, one would also consider the modifying effect of the local neighborhoods of the neighbors. A third order approximation would involve considering the neighborhoods of the atoms in these neighborhoods, and so on. The compositional networks formalism is thus a natural framework for force field learning. In particular, we consider comp-nets in which the elementary parts correspond to actual physical atoms, the internal nodes correspond to subsystems Pi made up of multiple atoms, and the corresponding activation, which we now denote ψi , and call the state of Pi , is effectively a learned coarse grained representation of Pi . What makes physical problems different from, e.g., learning graphs, however is their spatial character. In particular: 1. Each subsystem Pi is now also associated with a vector r i ∈ R3 specifying its spatial position. 2. The interaction between two subsystems Pi and Pj depends not only on their relative positions, but also on their relative orientation. Therefore, ψi and ψj must also have spatial character, somewhat similarly to the terms of the familiar monopole, dipole, quadrupole, etc. expansion. If we rotate the entire the atomic environment around the central atom by some rotation R ∈ SO(3)3, the position vectors transform as r i 7→ R r i . Mathematically, the second point above says that the ψi activations (states) must also transform under rotations in a predictable way, which is expressed by saying that they must be rotationally covariant. 3  SO(3) denotes the group of rotations in R3 , i.e., the group of three dimensional orthogonal, unit determinant matrices.  4  N- BODY NETWORKS 3.1. G ROUP REPRESENTATIONS AND N – BODY NETWORKS Just as covariance to permutations is the critical constraint on the graph CCNs, covariance to rotations is the guiding principle behind CCNs for learning atomic force fields. To describe this concept in its general form, we start out by assuming only that any given activation ψ is representable as a d dimensional (complex valued) vector, and that the transformation that ψ undergoes under a rotation R is linear, i.e., ψ 7→ ρ(R)ψ for some matrix ρ(R).  The linearity assumption is sufficient to guarantee that for any R, R0 ∈ SO(3), ρ(R) ρ(R0 ) = ρ(RR0 ). Complex matrix valued functions satisfying this criterion are called representations of the group SO(3). Standard theorems in representation theory tell us that any compact group G (such as SO(3)) has a sequence of so-called inequivalent irreducible representations ρ0 , ρ1 , . . . (irreps, for short), and that any other representation µ of G can be reduced into a direct sum of irreps in the sense that there is some invertible matrix C and sequence of integers τ0 , τ1 , . . . such that τ hM M̀ i −1 (2) µ(R) = C ρ` (R) C. m=1  `  Here τ` is called the multiplicity of ρ` in µ, and τ = (τ0 , τ1 , . . .) is called the type of µ. Another nice feature of the representation theory of compact groups is that the irreps can always be chosen to be unitary, i.e., ρ(R−1 ) = ρ(R)−1 = ρ(R)† , where M † denotes the Hermitian conjugate (conjugate transpose) of the matrix M . In the following we will always assume that irreps satisfy this condition. If µ is also unitary, then the transformation matrix C will be unitary too, so we can replace C −1 with C † . For more background in representation theory, the reader is referred to (Serre, 1977). In the specific case of the rotation group SO(3), the irreps are sometimes called Wigner D–matrices. The ` = 0 irrep consists of the one dimensional constant matrices ρ0 (R) = (1), the ` = 1 irrep (up to conjugation) is equivalent to the rotation matrices themselves, while for general `, assuming 0 that (θ, φ, ψ) are the Euler angles of R, [ρ` (R)]m,m0 = eiψm Ym` (θ, φ), where {Ym` } are the well known spherical harmonic functions. In general, the dimensionality of ρ` is 2` + 1, i.e., ρ` (R) ∈ C(2`+1)×(2`+1) . Definition 2. We say that ψ ∈ Cd is an SO(3)–covariant vector of type τ = (τ0 , τ1 , τ2 , . . .) if under the action of rotations it transforms as τ i hM M̀ ρ` (R) ψ. (3) ψ 7→ `  m=1  Setting ψ=  (4)  τ M M̀ `  we call  ` ψm ∈ C2`+1  ` ψm ,  m=1  the (l, m)–fragment of ψ, and `  ψ =  τ M̀  ` ψm  m=1  the `’th part of ψ. A covariant vector of type τ = (0, 0, . . . , 0, 1), where the single 1 corresponds to τk , we call an irreducible vector of order k or an irreducible ρk –vector. Note that a first order irreducible vector is just a scalar. ` The motivation behind the above definition is that each fragment ψm transforms in the very simple ` ` way ψm 7→ ρ` (R) ψm . Note that the words “fragment” and “part” are not standard in the literature, but we find them useful for describing covariant neural architectures. Also note that unlike (2), there is no matrix C in equations (3) and (4). This is because if a given vector ψ transforms according to a general representation µ whose decomposition does include a nontrivial C, this matrix can be easily be factored out by redefining ψ as Cψ. Here ψ ` is sometimes also called the projection of ψ to the `’th isotypic subspace of the representation space that ψ lives in and ψ = ψ 0 ⊕ ψ 1 ⊕ . . . is called the isotypic decomposition of ψ. With these representation theoretic tools in hand, we define the concept of SO(3)–covariant N –body neural networks as follows.  5  R. KONDOR | i  | i  | i  r  r  F  | i  | i  r  | i  r  | i  r  | i  r  | i  r  r  | i r  F IGURE 2. In a comp-net for learning atomic force fields, the output of each “part” Pi is (r i , ψi ), where r i is the position vector of the corresponding physical subsystem, and ψi is a vector describing its internal state. Definition 3. Let S be a physical system made up of n particles ξ1 , . . . , ξn . An SO(3)–covariant N–body neural network N for S is a composition scheme D in which 1. Each node nj , which we will sometimes also call a gate, is associated with (a) a physical sybsystem Pj of S; (b) a vector r j ∈ R3 describing the spatial poition of Pj ; (c) a vector ψj that that describes the internal state of Pj and is type τ j covariant to rotations. 2. If nj is a leaf node, then ψj is determined by the corresponding particle ξj . 3. If nj is a non-leaf node and its children are nch1 , . . . , nchk , then ψj is computed as (5)  bch1 , . . . , r bchk , ψch1 . . . , ψchk ), ψj = Φj (b rch1 , . . . , rbchk , r  bchi = rchi − rj and rbi = |b where r r i |. We call Φj the local aggregation rule. 4. D has a unique root nr , and the output of the network, i.e., the learned state of the entire system is ψr . In the case of learning scalar valued functions, such as the atomic potential, ψr is just a scalar. Note that what is described in Definition 3 is a general architecture for learning the state of N – body physical systems with much wider applicability than just learning atomic potentials. The main technical challenge of the present paper is to define the Φj aggregation rules in such a way as to guarantee that each ψj is SO(3)–covariant. This is what is addressed in the following section.  4. C OVARIANT AGGREGATION RULES To define the aggregation function Φ to be used in SO(3)–covariant comp-nets, all that bch1 , . . . , r bchk , the conwe assume is that it is a polynomial in the relative positions r stituent state vectors ψch1 , . . . , ψchk and the inverse distances 1/b rch1 , . . . 1/b rchk . Specifically, we say that Φ is a (P, Q, S)–order aggregation function if each component of ψ = bch1 , . . . , r bchk , ψch1 . . . , ψchk ) is a polynomial of order at most p in each compoΦ(b rch1 , . . . , rbchk , r nent of r chi , a polynomial of at most q in each component of ψchi , and a polynomial of order at most s in each 1/(b rchi ). Any such Φ can be expressed as M  ⊗pk ⊗q1 ⊗qk −sk −s1 1 (6) Φ(. . .) = L r ⊗p ⊗ . . . ⊗ r ⊗ ψ ⊗ . . . ⊗ ψ · r b · . . . · r b , ch1 chk ch1 chk ch1 chk p, q, s  where p, q and s are multi–indices of positive integers with pi ≤ P , qi ≤ Q and si ≤ S, and L is a linear function. The tensor products appearing in (6) are formidably large object that in most cases would be impractical to compute explicitly. Rather, this equation is just meant to emphasize that any learnable parameters of the network must be implicit in the linear operator L.  6  N- BODY NETWORKS The more stringent requirements on L arise from the covariance criterion. The key to understanding these is the observation that for any sequence ρ1 , . . . , ρp of (not necessarily irreducible) representations of a compact group G, their tensor product ρ(R) = ρ1 (R) ⊗ ρ2 (R) ⊗ . . . ⊗ ρp (R) is also a representation of G. Consequently, ρ has a decomposition into irreps, similar to (2). As an immediate corollary, any product of SO(3) covariant vectors can be similarly decomposed. In particular, by applying the appropriate unitary matrix C, the sum of tensor products appearing in (6) can be decomposed into a sum of irreducible fragments in the form 0  τ L M̀ M `=0 m=1  φ`m = C  M p, q, s   ⊗qk ⊗pk ⊗q1 −sk −s1 1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ ψ · r b · . . . · r b . ⊗ . . . ⊗ r ⊗ ψ r ⊗p ch1 chk ch1 chk ch1 chk  To be explicit, we define M  ⊗p1 ⊗pk ⊗q1 ⊗qk −sk −s1 ` ` (7) φm = Tm r ch1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ r chk ⊗ ψch1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ ψchk · rbch1 · . . . · rbchk , p, q, s  T10 , . . . , Tτ00 , T11 , . . . , Tτ12 , . . . , TτLL  where is an appropriate sequence of projection operators. The following proposition is a key result of our paper. Proposition 1. The output of the aggregation function (6) is a τ –covariant vector if and only if L is of the form 0  (8)  L(. . .) =  τ τ L M̀ M X̀  ` ` wm 0 ,m φm0 .  `=0 m=1 m0 =1 0  Equivalently, collecting all φ`m0 fragments with the same ` into a matrix F̃ ` ∈ C(2`+1)×τ` , all ` ` τ 0×τ` (wm , and reinterpreting the output of L as a collec0 ,m )m0 ,m weights into a matrix W ∈ C ` tion of matrices rather than a single long vector,  (9) L(. . .) = F̃ 0 W 0 , F̃ 1 W 1 , . . . , F̃ L W L . Proposition 1 tell us that L is only allowed to mix φ`m fragments with the same `, and that fragments can only be mixed in their entirety, rather than picking out their individual components. These are crucial consequences of equivariance. However, there are no further restrictions on the (W ` )` mixing matrices. In an N –body neural network the W ` matrices are shared across (some subsets of) nodes, and it is these mixing (weight) matrices that the network learns from training data. The F̃ ` matrices can be regarded as generalized matrix valued activations. Since each W ` interacts with the F ` matrices linearly, the network can be trained the usual way by backpropagating gradients of whatever loss function is applied to the output node nr , whose activation is usually scalar valued. It is important to note that N –body neural networks have no additional nonlinearity outside of Φ, since that would break covariance. In contrast, in most existing neural network architectures, as explained in Section 2, each neuron first takes a linear combination of its inputs weighted by learned weights and then applies a fixed pointwise nonlinearity, σ. In our architecture the nonlinearity is hidden in the way that the φ`m fragments are computed, since a tensor product is a nonlinear function of its factors. On the other hand, mixing the resulting fragments with the W ` weight matrices is a linear operation. Thus, in our case, the nonlinear part of the operation precedes the linear part. The generic polynomial aggregation function (6) is too general to be used in a practical N –body network, and would be far too costly computationally. Instead, we propose using a few specific types of low order gates, such as those described below. 4.0.1. Z EROTH ORDER INTERACTION GATES Zeroth order interaction gates aggregate the states of their children and combine them with their relative position vectors, but do not capture interactions between the children. A simple example of  7  R. KONDOR such a gate would be one where k k k X  X X −1 −2 bchi ), bchi ), b (10) Φ(. . .) = L (ψchi ⊗ r rbchi (ψchi ⊗ r rbch (ψ ⊗ r ) . ch ch i i i i=1  i=1  i=1  Note that the summations in these formulae ensure that the output is invariant with respect to permuting the children and also reduce the generality of (6) because the direct sum is replaced by an explicit summation (this can also be interpreted as tying some of the mixing weights together in a particular way). Let L be the largest ` for which τ` 6= 0 in the inputs. In the L = 0 case each ψchi state is a scalar quantity, such as electric charge. In the L = 1 case it is a vector, such as the dipole moment. In the L = 2 case it can encode the quadropole moment, and so on. A gate of the above form can learn how to combine such moments into a single (higher order) moment corresponding to the parent system. It is instructive to see how many parameters a gate of this type has. Let us assume the simple case bchi is (0, 1). According that each ψchi is of type τ = (1, 1, . . . , 1) (up to ` = L). The type of r to the Clebsch–Gordan rules (see Section 4.1), the product of two such vectors is a vector of type (1, 3, 2, . . . , 2, 1) (of length L+1). Further assume that desired output type is again τ = (1, 1, . . . , 1) of length L. This means that the ` = L + 1 fragment does not even have to be computed, and the size of the weight matrices appearing in (9) are W0 ∈ C1×3  W1 ∈ C1×9  W2 ∈ C1×6  W1 ∈ Cc×9c  W2 ∈ Cc×6c  W1 ∈ C9c×9c  W2 ∈ C6c×6c  ...  WL ∈ C1×6 .  The size of these matrices changes dramatically as we allow more “channels”. For example, if each of the input states are of type τ = (c, c, . . . , c), the type of ψchi ⊗b r chi becomes (c, 3c, 2c, . . . , 2c, 1c). Assuming again an output of type τ = (c, c, . . . , c), the weight matrices become W0 ∈ Cc×3c  ...  WL ∈ Cc×6c .  In many networks, however, the number of channels increases as we go higher in the network. Allowing the output type to be as rich as possible, without inducing linear redundancies, the output type becomes (3c, 9c, 6c, . . . , 6c, 3c), and W0 ∈ C3c×3c  ...  WL ∈ C6c×6c .  4.0.2. F IRST ORDER INTERACTION GATES In first order interaction gates each of the children interact with each other, and the parent aggregates these pairwise interactions. A simple example would be computing the total energy of a collection of charged bodies, which might be done with a gate of the form k k  X X −1 −1 bchi ⊗ r bchj ), bchi ⊗ r bchi ), rb (ψchi ⊗ ψchj ⊗ r (11) Φ(. . .) = L (ψchi ⊗ ψchj ⊗ r rbch i chj i,j=1  k X i,j=1  i,j=1  −2 −2 bchi ⊗ r bchj ), rbch rb (ψchi ⊗ ψchj ⊗ r i chj  k X i,j=1   −3 −3 b b rbch r b (ψ ⊗ ψ ⊗ r ⊗ r ) . chi chj chi chj i chj  Generalizing (6) slightly, if we know that the interaction only depends on the relative positions of the child systems, we can also use k k  X X −1 bchi ,chj ), bchi ,chj ), (12) Φ(. . .) = L (ψchi ⊗ ψchj ⊗ r rbch (ψchi ⊗ ψchj ⊗ r i ,chj i,j=1  k X i,j=1  i,j=1  −2 bchi ,chj ), rbch (ψchi ⊗ ψchj ⊗ r i ,chj  k X i,j=1   −3 b rbch (ψ ⊗ ψ ⊗ r ) , ch ch ch ,ch i j i j i ,chj  bchi ,chj = r bchi − r bchj and rbchi ,chj = |b where r r chi ,chj |. It is important to note that in the above electrostatics was used only as an example. There is no need to learn electrostatic interactions because they are perfectly described by classical physics. Rather, we envisage using the zeroth and first order interaction gates as constituents of a larger network for learning more complicated interactions with no simple closed form that nonetheless broadly follow similar scaling laws as classical interactions.  8  N- BODY NETWORKS 4.1. C LEBSCH –G ORDAN TRANSFORMS ` It remains to explain how the Tm projection maps appearing in (7) are computed. This is critical because the nonlinearities in our network are the tensor products, and our architecture hinges on being able to reduce vectors into a direct sum of irreducibles again straight after the tensor product operation.  Fortunately, representation theory provides a clear prescription for how this operation is to be performed. For any compact group G, given two irreducible representations ρ`1 and ρ`2 , the decomposition of ρ`1 ⊗ ρ`2 into a direct sum of irreducibles ρ`1(R) ⊗ ρ`2(R) =  (13)  C`†1,`2  ,τ2(`) h M κτ1M  `  i ρ` (R) C`1,`2  m=1  is called the Clebsch–Gordan transform. In the specific case of SO(3), the κ multiplicities take on the very simple form (which we already used in Section 4.0.1)  1 if |`1 − `2 | ≤ ` ≤ `1 + `2 κ`1,`2 (`) = 0 otherwise, and the elements of the C`1,`2 matrices can also be computed relatively easily via closed form formulae. We immediately see that (13) tells us how to reduce the product of covariant vectors into irreducible fragments. Assuming for example that ψ1 is an irreducible ρ`1 vector and ψ2 is an irreducible ρ`2 vector, ψ1 ⊗ ψ2 decomposes into irreducible fragments in the form ψ1 ⊗ ψ2 =  `M 1+`2  ψ`  ψ ` = C`1,`2,` (ψ1 ⊗ ψ2 ),  where  `=|`1−`2 |  and C`1,`2,` is the part of C`1,`2 matrix corresponding to the `’th “block”. Thus, in this case the operator T1` just corresponds to mutiplying the tensor product by C`1,`2,` . By linearity, the above relationship also extends to non-irreducible vectors. If ψ1 is of type τ 1 and ψ2 is of type τ 2 , then ψ1 ⊗ ψ2 = where κτ 1,τ 2 (`) =  XX `1  `2  (`) 1,τ2 M κτM `  ψ `m  m=1  [τ1 ]`1 · [τ2 ]`2 · I [|`1 − `2 | ≤ ` ≤ `1 + `2 ] ,  and I[·] is the indicator function. Once again, the actual ψ `m fragments are computed by applying the appropriate C`1,`2,` matrix to the appropriate combination of irreducible fragments of ψ1 and ψ2 . It is also clear that the by applying the Clebsch–Gordan decomposition recurisively, we can decompose a tensor product of any order, e.g., ψ1 ⊗ ψ2 ⊗ ψ3 ⊗ . . . ⊗ ψk = ((ψ1 ⊗ ψ2 ) ⊗ ψ3 ) ⊗ . . . ⊗ ψk . In an actual computation of such higher order products, however, a considerable amount of thought might have to go into optimizing the order of operations and reusing potential intermediate results to minimize computational cost.  5. C ONCLUSIONS There is considerable excitement in both the Machine Learning and the Physics/Chemistry communities about the potential of using neural networks to learn to the behavior and properties of complex physical systems. However, phyiscal systems have nontrivial invariance properties (in particular, invariance to translations, rotations and the exchange of identical elementary parts) that must be strictly respected.  9  R. KONDOR In this paper we proposed a new type of generalized convolutional neural network architecture, N –body networks, which provides a flexible framework for modeling interacting systems of various types, while taking into account these invariances (symmetries). The specific motivation for developing N –body networks is to learn atomic potentials (force fields) for molecular dynamics simulations. However, we envisage that they will be used more broadly, for modeling a variety of systems. The closest to our work in certai ways are Moment Tensor Potientials (Shapeev, 2015), although that framework does not have learnable parameters. N –body networks are distinguished from earlier neural network models for physical systems in that 1. The model is based on a hierarchical (but not necessarily strictly tree-like) decomposition of the system into subsystems at different levels, which is directly reflected in the structure of the neural network. 2. Each subsystem is identified with a “neuron” (or “gate”) ni in the network, and the output (activation) ψi of the neuron becomes a representation of the subsystem’s internal state. 3. The ψi states are tensorial objects with spatial character, in particular they are covariant with rotations in the sense that they transform under rotations according to specific irreducible representations of the rotation group. The gates are specially constructed to ensure that this covariance property is preserved throught the network. 4. Unlike most other neural network architectures, the nonlinearities in N –body networks are not pointwise operations, but are applied in “Fourier space”, i.e., directly to the irreducible parts of the state vector objects. This is only possible because (a) the nonlinearities arise as a consequence of taking tensor products of covariant objects (b) the tensor products are decomposed into irreducible parts by the Clebsch–Gordan transform. We believe that the last of these ideas is particularly promising, because it suggests the possibility of constructing neural that operate entirely in Fourier space, and use tensor products combined with Clebsch–Gordan transforms to induce nonlinearities. This might have significance for a range of other applications, as well. Experiments are ongoing to validate our framework on real physical systems. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The author would like to thank Shubhendu Trivedi, Brandon Anderson, Hy Truong Son, Horace Pan, Gábor Csányi and Michele Ceriotti for their input to this work. Financial support for this work was provided in part by DARPA award number D16AP00112.  R EFERENCES Albert P Bartók, Michael C Payne, Risi Kondor, and Gábor Csányi. Gaussian Approximation Potentials: the accuracy of quantum mechanics, without the electrons. Phys Rev Lett, 104(13):136403, 2010. Jörg Behler. Constructing high-dimensional neural network potentials: A tutorial review. Int J Quantum Chem, 115(16):1032–1050, March 2015. Jörg Behler and Michele Parrinello. Generalized neural-network representation of high-dimensional potential-energy surfaces. Phys Rev Lett, 98(14):146401, 2007. B. R. Brooks, C. L. Brooks, A. D. Mackerell, L. Nilsson, R. J. Petrella, B. Roux, Y. Won, G. Archontis, C. Bartels, S. Boresch, and et al. CHARMM: the biomolecular simulation program. Journal of Computational Chemistry, 30(10):1545–1614, Jul 2009. ISSN 1096-987X. Bernard R. Brooks, Robert E. Bruccoleri, Barry D. Olafson, David J. States, S. Swaminathan, and Martin Karplus. CHARMM: A program for macromolecular energy, minimization, and dynamics calculations. Journal of Computational Chemistry, 4(2):187–217, Jun 1983. ISSN 1096-987X. Joan Bruna and Stephane Mallat. Invariant scattering convolutional networks. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 35:1872–1886, August 2013. Stefan Chmiela, Alexandre Tkatchenko, Huziel E. Sauceda, Igor Poltavsky, Kristof T. Schütt, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Machine Learning of Accurate Energy-Conserving Molecular Force Fields. (May):1–6, 2016. ISSN 2375-2548. Taco S. Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convolutional networks. Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning, 48:2990–2999, 2016. Taco S. Cohen and Max Welling. Steerable CNNs. In iclr, 2017.  10  N- BODY NETWORKS Taco S. Cohen, Mario Geiger, Jonas Köhler, and Max Welling. Spherical CNNs. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. Michal Defferrard, Xavier Bresson, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Convolutional neural networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering. In nips, 2016. D. K. Duvenaud, D. Maclaurin, J. Iparraguirre, R. Bombarell, T. Hirzel, A. Aspuru-Guzik, and R. P. Adams. Convolutional networks on graphs for learning molecular fingerprints. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 2224–2232, 2015. Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E. Dahl. Neural message passing for quantum chemistry. 2017. M. Hirn, S. Mallat, and N. Poilvert. Wavelet scattering regression of quantum chemical energies. Multiscale Modeling & Simulation, 15(2):827–863, Jan 2017. ISSN 1540-3459. P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn. Inhomogeneous electron gas. Phys. Rev., 136:864–871, 1964. S. Kearns, K. McCloskey, M. Brendl, V. Pande, and P. Riley. Molecular graph convolutions: moving beyond fingerprints. Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular Design, 30:595–608, 2016. R. Kondor and S. Trivedi. On the generalization of equivariance and convolution in neural networks to the action of compact groups. 2018. R. Kondor, Truong Son Hy, H. Pan, S. Trivedi, and B. M. Anderson. Covariant compositional networks for learning graphs. 2018. Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, pp. 2278–2324, 1998. Yujia Li, Daniel Tarlow, Marc Brockschmidt, and Richard Zemel. Gated graph sequence neural networks. In iclr, 2016. S Mallat. Group Invariant Scattering. Technical report, 2012. Jonathan Masci, Davide Boscaini, Michael M. Bronstein, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Geodesic convolutional neural networks on riemannian manifolds. 2015. Federico Monti, Davide Boscaini, Jonathan Masci, Emanuele Rodola, Jan Svoboda, and Michael M. Bronstein. Geometric deep learning on graphs and manifolds using mixture model cnn. 2016. M. Niepert, M. Ahmed, and K. Kutzkov. Learning convolutional neural networks for graphs. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2016. Kristof T. Schütt, Farhad Arbabzadah, Stefan Chmiela, Klaus R. M uller, and Alexandre Tkatchenko. Quantum-chemical insights from deep tensor neural networks. Nature Communications, 8:13890, Jan 2017. ISSN 2041-1723. Jean-Pierre Serre. Linear Representations of Finite Groups, volume 42 of Graduate Texts in Mathamatics. Springer-Verlag, 1977. Alexander V Shapeev. Moment Tensor Potentials: a class of systematically improvable interatomic potentials. arXiv, December 2015. Linfeng Zhang, Jiequn Han, Han Wang, Roberto Car, and Weinan E. Deep Potential Molecular Dynamics: a scalable model with the accuracy of quantum mechanics. arXiv:1707.09571 [physics], July 2017. arXiv: 1707.09571.  11

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
