Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_7212

Abstract:
arXiv:1702.01662v1 [math.GT] 6 Feb 2017  AUT-INVARIANT NORMS AND AUT-INVARIANT QUASIMORPHISMS ON FREE AND SURFACE GROUPS MICHAEL BRANDENBURSKY AND MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  Abstract. Let Fn be a free group on n generators and Γg the surface group of genus g. We consider two particular generating sets: the set of all primitive elements in Fn and the set of all simple loops in Γg . We give a complete characterization of distorted and undistorted elements in the corresponding Aut-invariant word metrics. In particular, we reprove Stallings theorem and answer a question of Danny Calegari about the growth of simple loops. In addition, we construct inﬁnitely many quasimorphisms on F2 that are AutpF2 q-invariant. This answers an open problem posed by Miklós Abért.  1. Introduction. Let G be a group and let AutpGq be the group of all automorphisms of G. A function |¨| : G Ñ r0, 8q is called a norm if it satisfies the following conditions for all g, h P G: ‚ |g| “ 0 if and only if g “ 1G . ‚ |g| “ |g ´1 | ‚ |gh| ď |g| ` |h| If, in addition, |ghg ´1 | “ |h| then |¨| is called conjugation invariant. In this paper we study norms that are AutpGq-invariant, i.e., for each x P G and ψ P AutpGq we have |x| “ |ψpxq|. An example of such a norm is the word norm |¨|S defined by AutpGq-invariant generating set S, that is: |x|S “ mintn : x “ s1 . . . , sn , where si P S for each iu. Under mild assumptions, there is only one such norm up to bi-Lipschitz equivalence. We denote it by |¨|Aut and call it the Aut-norm of G. We focus on two types of groups: surface groups, where the Aut-norm counts the minimal number of simple loops needed to express an element in a group, and free groups, where the Aut-norm counts the minimal number of primitive elements needed to express an element in a group. 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 57. Key words and phrases. free groups, mapping class groups, quasi-morphisms, invariant norms. 1  2  MICHAEL BRANDENBURSKY AND MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  Let x P G. Recall that x is undistorted with respect to |¨| if there exists C ą 0 such that |xn | ą Cn. Otherwise it is distorted. Note that this notion depends only on the bi-Lipschitz class of |¨|. In this paper we characterize distorted and undistorted elements in surface and free groups. The main idea is to find an appropriate quasimorphism on G. More precisely, in order to show that x P G is undistorted in |¨|Aut , it is enough to find a homogeneous quasimorphism which is non-zero on x but is bounded on some AutpGqinvariant generating set S. This strategy was previously used in the context of conjugation invariant norms, see e.g. [5, 6]. We say that G satisfies a bq-dichotomy with respect to the Aut-norm, if for every element x P G, either the cyclic group xxy is bounded in the Autnorm, or we can find a homogeneous quasimorphism which does not vanish on x but is bounded on some AutpGq-invariant generating set. That is, all undistorted elements are detected by appropriate quasimorphisms. The main result of this paper is presented below, i.e. we prove the following theorem (see Theorems 2.10 and 3.15 in the text), which, in particular, answers (see Corollary 3.17) a question of Danny Calegari from 2007 (see [9, Question 1.6]) and gives a simple proof of Stallings theorem [21, Theorem 2.4] on Whitehead graphs of separable elements. Theorem 1. Surface groups and free groups satisfy a bq-dichotomy with respect to their Aut-norms. Moreover, in both cases, there is an explicit characterization of undistorted elements. In addition, methods we use allow us to prove the following theorem (see Corollary 4.6 in the text) which answers a question of Miklós Abért from 2010 (see [1, Question 47]) in the case of F2 . Theorem 2. The space of homogeneous AutpF2 q-invariant quasimorphisms on F2 is infinite dimensional. As a corollary we provide an infinite dimensional space of quasimorphisms on F2 where each quasimorphism can not be expressed as a finite sum of counting quasimorphisms, see Remark 4.7. 1.1. Aut-invariant norm on free groups. Let Fn be the free group of rank n. An element b is called primitive, if it is an element of some free basis of Fn . Note that if b is primitive and ψ P AutpFn q, then ψpbq is primitive and each base element has a form ψpbq for some fixed b. In other words, the set of all base elements in Fn is a single orbit of the AutpFn q action. Given an element of Fn where n ě 3, there is no effective way to decide if it is primitive or not. In his celebrated papers ([22, 23]), J. H. C. Whitehead provided an algorithmic method to solve this problem. However, the time complexity of this algorithm seems to be ineffective for large n (see [18] for an attempt to find fast algorithms). It is worth to note that in the case of F2 the situation  AUT-NORMS AND AUT-QUASIMORPHISMS ON Fn AND Γg  3  is completely different. There is quadratic in time algorithm which checks whether an element of F2 is primitive or not. It can be extracted from [19]. We consider the following norm: |x|p “ mintn | x “ b1 . . . bn , where bi is a primitive element in Fn u, which we call the primitive norm of x. A priori it is not clear whether this norm is unbounded. Indeed, for the free group of infinite rank, the norm of any element is at most 2. In case of arbitrary finite rank, the unboundedness was proven in [2] by exhibiting a relevant non-trivial homogeneous quasimorphism. Our Theorem 2.10 may be viewed as a generalization of this result. In the proof we use Whitehead graphs and Whitehead automorphisms, and as a corollary we obtain a result due to Stallings (See Corollary 2.11) on Whitehead graphs of separable elements. 1.2. Aut-invariant norm on surface groups. Let us denote by Sg the oriented closed surface of genus g and let ‹ P Sg be a base point. Let Γg “ π1 pSg , ‹q. An element s of Γg is called simple, if it can be represented by a based loop with no self-intersection points (such a loop is called simple). Simple elements generate Γg , thus we can consider the following norm: |x|s “ mintn | x “ s1 . . . sn , where si is a simple element in Γg u. We call |¨|s the simple loops norm. Danny Calegari proved that every non-simple element x P Γg is undistorted in this norm [9], leaving the case of simple elements open. Theorem 3.15 solves this case. In particular, we show that an element which is represented by simple separating closed curve is undistorted. Let us put an arbitrary hyperbolic metric on Sg . It is known that in every homotopy class of a based loop there is the unique based closed geodesic. Using Theorem 3.15 we draw some conclusions concerning the behavior of closed geodesic in Sg , see Subsection 3.18. 1.3. General Aut-norms. Let G be a group and H ă AutpGq be a subgroup of the group of automorphisms of G. H acts on G from the left. We say that ‚ G is H-generated by S Ă G if S̄ “ thpsq : s P S Y S ´1 , h P Hu generates G. ‚ H-invariant subset S̄ of G is H-finite if S̄{H is finite, i.e. S̄ is a sum of finitely many H-orbits. ‚ G is H-finitely generated if there exists an H-finite subset of G generating G. Equivalently, if there exists a finite set S Ă G such that S̄ “ thpsq : s P S Y S ´1 , h P Hu generates G.  4  MICHAEL BRANDENBURSKY AND MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  Having an H-finite set S̄ which generates G, we consider the word norm |¨|S̄ on G defined by S̄. Note, that |¨|S̄ is H-invariant, i.e. |hpgq|S̄ “ |g|S̄ for h P H and g P G. The norm |¨|S̄ depends on the choice of H-finite set S̄. However, as long as S̄ is H-finite, |¨|S̄ belongs to the same bi-Lipschitz equivalence class. We denote this equivalence class by |¨|H . The norm |¨|H is maximal among all H-invariant norms on G, namely: for every H-invariant norm |¨|, there exists C ą 0 such that |x| ă C|x|H for every x P G. Examples include (we always assume that G is H-finitely generated): (1) H is trivial, then |¨|H is the standard word norm. (2) H is the group of inner automorphisms of G, then |¨|H is the biinvariant word norm, see e.g. [5]. (3) H is the full automorphism group, then |¨|H is called the Aut-norm on G. Let us show that the primitive norm and the simple loops norm are examples of Aut-norms on free and surface groups. It is clear that the primitive norm is an Aut-norm since the set of primitive elements in Fn equals to the set tψpbq | ψ P AutpFn qu, where b is an arbitrary chosen primitive element. Thus this set is a single AutpFn q-orbit. In the case of the simple loops norm we use Baer-DehnNielsen theorem which states: AutpΓg q – MCG˘ pSg , ‹q. Now it follows form the classification of surfaces, that AutpΓg q-orbit of a simple element s P Γg is determined by the homeomorphism type of surface Sg zγs , where γs is the corresponding simple loop. Since there are only finitely many homeomorphism types of such surfaces, the set of simple elements consists of finitely many AutpΓg q-orbits. 1.4. Quasimorphisms and distortion. Let us recall a notion of a quasimorphism. A function q : G Ñ R is called a quasimorphism if there exists D such that |qpaq ´ qpabq ` qpbq| ă D for all a, b P G. Minimal such D is called the defect of q and denoted by Dq . A quasimorphism q is homogeneous if qpxn q “ nqpxq for all n P Z and all x P G. Homogeneous quasimorphisms are constant on conjugacy classes, i.e. qpxq “ qpyxy ´1 q for all x, y P G. We refer to [10] for further details. Lemma 1.5. Let G be a group and let H ă AutpGq. Assume that S̄ Ă G is an H-finite subset which generates G. Let x P G. If there exists a homogeneous quasimorphism q : G Ñ R such that qpxq ‰ 0 and q is bounded on S̄, then x is undistorted in the norm |¨|H .  AUT-NORMS AND AUT-QUASIMORPHISMS ON Fn AND Γg  5  Proof. Let w P G and C be such that |qpsq| ă C for all s P S̄. We can write w in the following form: w “ s1 . . . sn where n “ |w|H and si P S̄. The following inequality holds: |qpwq| ď  n ÿ  |qpsi q| ` pn ´ 1qDq ď nC ` pn ´ 1qDq ď pC ` Dq q|w|H .  1  We apply this to xn and get n|qpxq| “ |qpxn q| ď pC ` Dq q|xn |H . Since qpxq ‰ 0, |xn |H growths linearly with n. Remark 1.6. In Lemma 1.5, instead of assuming that q is homogeneous, it is enough to assume that qpxn q growths linearly. Corollary 1.7. Assume that q is an H-invariant homogeneous quasimorphism and qpxq ‰ 0. Then x is undistorted in |¨|H . Proof. In this case q is bounded on the set S̄. Sometimes we deal with non-homogeneous quasimorphisms. The following lemma allows us to pass to homogeneous ones. Lemma 1.8. Let q : G Ñ R be a quasimorphism such that qpxn q growths linearly. Then there exists a quasimorphism q̄ : G Ñ R, called the homogenization of q, which is homogeneous, |qpaq ´ q̄paq| ď Dq for all q P G, and q̄pxq ‰ 0. Proof. We define q̄paq “ lim qpan q{n. nÑ8  Straight-forward computations show that q̄ satisfies all the desired properties, see as well [10]. Acknowledgments. We would like to thank Mladen Bestvina for answering our questions, and Danny Calegari and Hugo Parlier for comments on the early draft of our paper. Both authors were partially supported by GIF-Young Grant number I-2419304.6/2016 and by SFB 1085 “Higher Invariants” funded by DFG. Part of this work has been done during the authors stay at the University of Regensburg and the second author stay at the Ben-Gurion University. We wish to express our gratitude to both places for the support and excellent working conditions.  6  MICHAEL BRANDENBURSKY AND MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  2. Aut-norms on free groups. In this section we use counting quasimorphisms in order to investigate distortion in free groups. 2.1. Whitehead graph. Let F be a free group (possibly not finitely generated). Let w P F and let B be any free basis of F. Here we use the convention that if b P B, then b´1 R B. Suppose that w is cyclically reduced with respect to the basis B and w “ w1 w2 . . . wn is the reduced expression of w in B. We define the Whitehead graph W hB pwq as follows: for each element b P B we have two vertices in W hB pwq labeled by b and b´1 . For ´1 every two consecutive letters wi , wi`1 in w, we draw an edge from wi to wi`1 . We regard wn , w0 as being consecutive in w, that is, we have an edge from wn to w0´1 . If w is not reduced with respect to B, then denote by rB pwq the unique cyclically reduced word in the conjugacy class of w. We define W hB pwq :“ W hB prB pwqq. b  a´1  a  b´1  Figure 2.1. W hta,bu paba´1 b´1 q. Theorem 2.2 (Whitehead [22]). If b P F is a base element and W hB pbq is connected, then W hB pbq has a cut-vertex. A vertex v of a graph is a cut-vertex if after removing v, the graph has more connected components. In the example below a, b, a´1 and b´1 are cut-vertices. b  a  a´1  b´1  c  c´1  Figure 2.2. W hta,b,cu paba´1 b´1 cq. Lemma 2.3. Let B be a free basis of F and let b P F be a cyclically reduced base element. Assume that x P F is a cyclically reduced word such that its Whitehead graph W hB pxq is connected and has no cut-vertex. Then the reduced expression of b in the basis B does not contain the reduced expressions of x2 and of x´2 as subwords.  AUT-NORMS AND AUT-QUASIMORPHISMS ON Fn AND Γg  7  Proof. Let us fist notice, that if a reduced expression of b contains the reduced expression of x2 , then W hB pbq contains W hB pxq as a subgraph. Indeed, every edge of W hB pxq is given by two cyclically consecutive letters in x. If x2 is a subword of b, we can find all those edges in W hB pbq. W hB pxq has no cut-vertex, is connected and has the same vertex set as W hB pbq. Thus if W hB pxq would be a subgraph of W hB pbq, then W hB pbq would be a connected graph with no cut-vertex. This would contradict the Whitehead Theorem 2.2. Remark 2.4. In Lemma 2.3, the assumption that b is cyclically reduced can not be omitted. For general b one can show that the number of occurrences of x2 minus the number of occurrences of x´2 is bounded by 2|x|B . Here |¨|B is the word metric defined by B. We would like to add that a variation of Lemma 2.3 already appeared in [2]. 2.5. Counting quasimorphisms. Let w P F and let B be a basis of F. Having an element x P F, we can write x and w as a reduced expressions in the base B. We define Cw pxq to be the number of occurrences of w as a subword of x (the subwords can overlap). In [7] Brooks proved that the following function Brw pxq “ Cw pxq ´ Cw px´1 q is a quasimorphism. Usually we suppress the basis B from the notation. Lemma 2.6. Let x P F be a cyclically reduced word. Assume that W hB pxq is connected with no cut-vertex. Then x is undistorted in the Aut-norm. Moreover, there exists a homogeneous quasimorphism which is bounded on primitive elements and non-zero on x. Proof. Let Brx2 be the counting quasimorphism defined with respect to the basis B. Let b P F be a base element. By Lemma 2.3 and Remark 2.4 we have that |Brx2 pbq| ď 2|x|B . n Moreover, |Brx2 px q| growths linearly with n, thus by Remark 1.6, x is undistorted in the Aut-norm. In order to obtain a desired quasimorphism, it is enough to consider the homogenization of Brx2 , see Lemma 1.8. 2.7. Separable sets. Let A be a finite subset of F. We call A separable, if there exist two non-trivial free factors F1 ,F2 such that F “ F1 ˚ F2 , and every element in A can be conjugated into F1 or F2 . We always assume that elements in A are cyclically reduced. Note that A is separable if and only if φpAq is separable, where φ P AutpFq. The following proposition follows from Proposition 2.2 and Proposition 2.3 in [21]. Proposition 2.8. Let x P F. If W hB pxq is disconnected, then x is separable. If W hB pxq is connected and has a cut-vertex, then there is ψ P AutpFq, such that |ψpxq|B ă |x|B .  8  MICHAEL BRANDENBURSKY AND MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  2.9. Distortion of elements in the Aut-norm of free groups. Theorem 2.10. Let F be a free group and let x P F. Then either a) x is separable and then the cyclic subgroup generated by x is bounded in the Aut-norm, or b) x is undistorted in the Aut-norm. Moreover, there exists a homogeneous quasimorphism which is bounded on the set of all primitive elements and non-trivial on x. Proof. Let |¨|p be the primitive norm, see Subsection 1.1. Suppose that x is separable. It means that F “ F1 ˚ F2 , F2 is not trivial and x can be conjugated into F1 . Since |¨|p is invariant under inner automorphisms, we can assume that x P F1 . Let B1 and B2 be some bases of F1 and F2 respectively. Let p P B2 and n P N. Note that the element xn p is primitive. Indeed, the set B1 Y txn pu Y pB2 ztpuq is a free basis of F. Thus |xn |p “ |xn pp´1 |p ď 2. Now suppose, that x is not separable. Let B be a basis of F. We claim that we can find an element y in the AutpFq-orbit of x such that W hB pyq is connected and has no cut-vertex. Note that W hB pxq is connected. Indeed, if it was not connected, then by Proposition 2.8, x would be separable. Let |¨|B the word norm defined by B. If W hB pxq has a cut-vertex, then again by Proposition 2.8 there is an automorphism ψ P AutpFq such that |ψpxq|B ă |x|B . Now we consider W hB pψpxqq. As before, it is a connected graph. If it has a cut-vertex, then we apply Proposition 2.8 again and find a new ψ and further reduce the length of the element. At the end we get an element y with the property that W hB pyq is connected with no cut-vertex. Now consider the cyclical reduction y 1 “ rB pyq. By definition we have W hB py 1 q “ W hB pyq. Lemma 2.6 gives us a homogeneous quasimorphism q bounded on primitives and non-trivial on y 1 . Since x and y 1 are in the same Aut-orbit, there exists ψ P AutpFq such that ψpxq “ y 1 . If we define q 1 pwq “ qpψpwqq, then q 1 is bounded on primitive elements and q 1 pxq ‰ 0. Corollary 2.11. An element x of F is separable if and only if W hB pxq is not connected or have a cut-vertex for every basis B. Proof. Assume that x is separable. If there is a basis B such that W hB pxq is connected and has no cut-vertex, then by applying Lemma 2.6 for an element rB pxq, we see that x is undistorted in the Aut-norm. Thus x is not separable by Theorem 2.10. To prove the reversed implication, we apply inductively Proposition 2.8 and obtain an element y in the same AutpFq-orbit as x, such that W hB pyq is not connected. Thus again by Proposition 2.8, an element y, and consequently x, is separable.  AUT-NORMS AND AUT-QUASIMORPHISMS ON Fn AND Γg  9  Remark 2.12. Corollary 2.11 is not entirely new. It can deduced from Theorem 2.4 and Proposition 2.3 in [21]. However, we think that our proof of this fact is interesting since it is simpler and shorter than the proof of Stallings. 3. Aut-norm on surface groups. In this section we study distortion in surface groups. Our main tool is the theory of mapping class groups. The principal idea is to embed surface group in its automorphism group (which is a mapping class group of a surface) via Birman embedding, and then find appropriate quasimorphisms on this group. In Subsection 3.1 we recall the Nielsen-Thurston normal form of a mapping class. Then in Subsection 3.3 we give the Nielsen-Thurston decomposition of mapping classes which lie in the image of Birman embedding. Finally in Subsection 3.14 we use the quasimorphisms defined by Bestvina-BrombergFujiwara to prove Theorem 1 for surface groups. 3.1. Nielsen-Thurston normal form. Let S be a compact oriented surface with finitely many punctures in the interior of S. By MCGpSq we denote the mapping class group of S, that is the group of isotopy classes of orientation preserving homeomorphisms of S. We assume that homeomorphisms and isotopies fix the boundary of S pointwise. We recall briefly the Nielsen-Thurston normal form of an element in MCGpSq. A loop γ in S is called essential, if no component of Szγ is homeomorphic to a disc, a punctured disc or an annulus. An element g P MCGpSq is called reducible if there exists a non-empty set C “ tc1 , . . . , cn u of isotopy classes of essential simple loops in S such that: (1) All elements in C can be represented by pairwise disjoint simple loops. (2) The set C is g-invariant. Such C is called a reduction system for g. A reduction system for g is maximal if it is not a proper subset of any other reduction system for g. There may be many maximal reduction systems. However, we can define the unique one by defining the canonical reduction system to be the intersection of all maximal reduction systems. Note that the canonical reduction system is not necessary maximal. Now let us describe the canonical form of an element of a mapping class group. Assume for a moment, that S has no boundary. Let g P MCGpSq and let C “ tc1 , . . . , cm u be its canonical reduction system. Choose pairwise disjoint representatives of the classes ci together with pairwise disjoint closed annuli R1 , . . . , Rm , where Ri is a closed neighborhood of the representative Ť of ci . Let S1 , . . . , Sp be closures of connected components of Sz m i“1 Ri .  10  MICHAEL BRANDENBURSKY AND MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  Then there is a power k and a representative ψ P Homeo` pSq of g k such that: (1) The homeomorphism ψ fixes the subsurfaces, i.e. ψpRi q “ Ri for 1 ď i ď m and ψpSi q “ Si for 1 ď i ď p. (2) The restriction of ψ to Ri is a power of a Dehn twist. (3) The restriction of ψ to Si is pseudo-Anosov or the identity. Thus, up to a finite power, any element is described as a commuting product of powers of Dehn twists and pseudo-Anosov homeomorphisms on subsurfaces. If S has a boundary, then we need to add to our collection Ri collar neighborhoods of boundary curves. Then the additional terms which can appear in the decomposition of gk are powers of Dehn twists along boundary curves. A mapping class group which has only one factor in the NielsenThurston decomposition is called pure. We have the following characterization of the canonical reduction system. Proposition 3.2. Assume that surface S has no boundary and possibly has punctures. The system C “ tc1 , . . . , cs u is the canonical reduction system for g if and only if the following two conditions hold. a) There exists k P N and pairwise disjoint loops γi representing classes ci such that gk restricted to any component of Szpγ1 Y . . . Y γs q is trivial or pseudo-Anosov. b) The set C is a minimal set with this property. Dehn twists are not mentioned in Proposition 3.2 since every Dehn twist along some γi becomes trivial in the mapping class group of Szpγ1 Y . . .Y γs q. 3.3. Filling curves and the theorem of Kra. Let S be a closed oriented surface of genus g, possibly with punctures, and let ‹ P S. Assume that S has negative Euler characteristic. We consider the Birman exact sequence: P ush  F  1 Ñ π1 pS, ‹q ÝÝÝÑ MCGpS, ‹q Ý Ñ MCGpSq Ñ 1. By MCGpS, ‹q we mean the group of homeomorphisms which fix ‹, taken up to isotopies which fix ‹ at any time. Since fixing a point and removing a point does not make any difference for mapping classes, we have M CGpS, ‹q “ M CGpSz‹q. The map F is the forgetful map. The map P ush is defined as follows: let γ be a based loop which represents an element in π1 pS, ‹q. Let ψ be any homeomorphism which fixes ‹, such that: there exists an isotopy H : r0, 1s ˆ S Ñ S such that Hp0, ¨q “ idS , Hp1, ¨q “ ψ and Hpt, ‹q “ γptq. Then P ushprγsq “ rψs. This is a well defined map. One can imagine that P ushprγsq takes ‹ and pushes it along the loop γ. For a detailed discussion see [11].  AUT-NORMS AND AUT-QUASIMORPHISMS ON Fn AND Γg  11  The goal of this subsection is to understand the Nielsen-Thurston decomposition of P ushprγsq. In Theorem 3.13 we generalize a theorem of I. Kra [16], for the short proof see [11]. It states that if γ is filling (see Definition 3.8), then P ushprγsq is pseudo-Anosov. Example 3.4. Let γ be a simple loop based at ‹. We identify a tubular neighborhood of γ with the annulus S1 ˆ r´1, 1s. Let γ ˘ “ S 1 ˆ t˘1u. Then ˘ P ushprγsq “ Tγ ` Tγ´1 ´ , where Tγ ˘ is the Dehn twist along γ . The surface S ´ ` is not a torus. Hence γ is not homotopic to γ in Szt‹u, and Tγ ` and Tγ ´ are different elements of M CGpS, ‹q. In what follows, a subsurface S 1 of S always assumed to be closed in S, and the boundary of S 1 is a union of pairwise disjoint simple loops. A loop is called primitive if, as an element of the fundamental group it is not a proper power of any other element. We always assume, that a loop in S is in general position, i.e., it is a smooth immersed loop with only double self-intersections. A loop is in a minimal position if it has minimal number of double points. Definition 3.5. Assume that S is closed oriented surface, possibly with punctures. Let γ : S1 Ñ S be a loop in a minimal position. We define a subsurface Sγ in the following way. First we consider a small collar neighborhood Γ : S1 ˆ r´1, 1s Ñ S, where Γ is a smooth immersion and Γp¨, 0q “ γp¨q, such that the image of Γ retracts onto the image of γ. Then we add to the image of Γ all the components of SzimpΓq which are disks or punctured disks. Lemma 3.6. Assume that S is a closed oriented surface, possibly with punctures. Let γ be a loop in minimal position such that it is not homotopic to a power of a simple loop. Then the boundary components of Sγ are essential simple loops in S. Proof. Assume that one boundary component B0 Sγ is not essential in S. Then B0 Sγ bounds a disc or a punctured disc D. Thus SzB0 Sγ has two connected components: D and SzD. Hence γ is contained either in D or SzD. By construction, it is impossible that γ Ă SzD, because then we would add D to Sγ . Thus γ Ă D. But in D every loop is homotopic to a power of a simple loop, contradiction. Lemma 3.7. Assume that S is a closed oriented surface, possibly with punctures. Let γ be a non-trivial loop in minimal position such that is not homotopic to a power of a simple loop. Let B1 Sγ and B2 Sγ be two homotopic components of BSγ . Then they bound an annulus lying outside of the interior of Sγ . Moreover, they are not homotopic to any other component of BSγ .  12  MICHAEL BRANDENBURSKY AND MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  Proof. Any two homotopic simple loops bound an annulus in S. Let A be an embedded annulus bounded by B1 Sγ and B2 Sγ . Since A is a connected component of SzpB1 Sγ Y B2 Sγ q, the loop γ is either outside A or inside A. γ cannot be inside A, since every loop in A is a power of a simple loop and this is excluded by the assumption. Now assume that some boundary component Bi Sγ of Sγ is homotopic to B1 Sγ . 1 Let B1 Sγ denote a loop in the interior of A homotopic to B1 Sγ . Let A1 be 1 an embedded annulus bounding B1 Sγ and Bi Sγ . If Bi Sγ is not B1 Sγ or B2 Sγ , then B1 Sγ or B2 Sγ are contained in the interior of A1 . This is impossible, since we already know that the interior of A1 is disjoint from Sγ . Thus Bi Sγ equals to B1 Sγ or B2 Sγ . In the following definitions and Lemma 3.10, S is an orientable surface, possibly with boundary and punctures. Definition 3.8. Let γ be a loop on S. We say that γ fills S, if every essential simple loop on S has non-trivial intersection with every curve homotopic to γ. Definition 3.9. A loop γ : S1 Ñ S has an embedded 1-gon if there is a closed arc α Ă S1 , such that γ restricted to the interior of α is an embedding and γpBαq is a single point. A loop γ : S1 Ñ S has an embedded 2-gon if there are two disjoint closed arcs α, β such that γpBαq “ γpBβq and γ restricted to α and β is an embedding. We need the following lemma. Lemma 3.10 (Lemma 2.8, [13]). Assume that γ has no embedded 1-gons and 2-gons. Let c be an essential simple loop and assume that c is disjoint from some curve homotopic to γ. Then there is a simple loop c1 isotopic to c such that γ is disjoint from c1 . The next two lemmas deal with the surface Sγ . Since we defined Sγ only for surfaces with no boundary, we assume below that BS “ H. Lemma 3.11. Let γ be a loop in minimal position on a closed orientable surface S, possibly with punctures. Then γ fills Sγ . Proof. By the definition of Sγ we see that every connected component of Sγ zγ is a disc or a punctured disc. It follows that every essential simple loop intersects γ non-trivially. If there is an essential simple loop c disjoint from some curve homotopic to γ, then by Lemma 3.10 we get some essential simple loop c1 disjoint from γ, which is a contradiction. Lemma 3.12. Assume that γ is in minimal position and is not homotopic to a power of a simple loop. Then the Euler characteristic of Sγ is negative.  AUT-NORMS AND AUT-QUASIMORPHISMS ON Fn AND Γg  13  Proof. On annulus, torus, disk, punctured disk or 2-punctured sphere, every loop is homotopic to a power of a simple loop. Thus Sγ is none of those. Every other oriented surface has negative Euler characteristic. Now we prove the main result of this subsection. Theorem 3.13 (Generalized Kra’s Theorem). Let S be a closed oriented surface (possibly with punctures) whose Euler characteristic is negative. Let ‹ be a base point. Then: a) If x P π1 pS, ‹q is a power of a simple element represented by γ n , where γ is a simple essential loop in S, then P ushpxq “ Tγn` Tγ´n ´ is the NielsenThurston decomposition of P ushpxq P M CGpS, ‹q. b) If x P π1 pS, ‹q is not a power of a simple element, then the ThurstonNielsen decomposition of P ushpxq P M CGpS, ‹q consists of a single pseudoAnosov component. Proof. If x is a power of a simple element, then by Example 3.4, P ushpxq “ Tγn` Tγ´n ´ . Since S is not a torus and γ is by assumption essential, γ ` and γ ´ are not homotopic essential disjoint simple loops. If an element of mapping class group can be represented as a product of powers of Dehn twists along disjoint not homotopic essential simple loops, then this representation is unique. It follows that the set C “ tγ ` , γ ´ u satisfies the conditions of Proposition 3.2. Indeed, if C is smaller, then P ushpxq equals to a power of Tγ ˘ , and hence is not equal to Tγn` Tγ´n ´ . Assume that x is not a power of a simple element. Let γ be a loop in minimal position which represents x. Then by Lemma 3.12 the Euler characteristic of Sγ is negative and by Lemma 3.11 γ fills Sγ . By the result of Kra ([16]), P ushpxq is pseudo-Anosov on Sγ . We have to prove that P ushpxq, as an element of MCGpS, ‹q, has the desired decomposition. Remark. Even though P ushpxq is pseudo-Anosov on Sγ , it does not follow automatically that it is pseudo-Anosov on the subsurface Sγ Ă S regarded as an element in MCGpS, ‹q. For example one can easily imagine a homeomorphism φ on S which is trivial in MCGpS, ‹q but is pseudo-Anosov on some smaller subsurface containing the support of φ. In addition, it also may happen that some boundary loops of Sγ are homotopic, and hence the set of boundary loops of Sγ cannot be taken as the canonical reduction system. Let C be a set of connected components of BSγ . By Lemma 3.7 and Lemma 3.6, we can write 1  1  C “ tB1 Sγ , B1 Sγ , . . . , Bt Sγ , Bt Sγ , Bt`1 Sγ , Bt`2 Sγ , . . . , Bu Sγ u,  14  MICHAEL BRANDENBURSKY AND MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI 1  such that for each 0 ă i ă t ` 1 loops Bi Sγ and Bi Sγ are homotopic, and the set C 0 “ tB1 Sγ , . . . , Bu Sγ u consists of pairwise not homotopic loops. We prove that C 0 is the canonical reduction system for P ushpxq. To do that, it is enough to check the first and the second conditions of Proposition 3.2. Let Sγ1 be the connected component of SzC 0 which contains γ. The surface Sγ1 is just Sγ with annuli attached to some boundary components. Thus if P ushpxq is pseudo-Anosov on Sγ , it is pseudo-Anosov on Sγ1 . On any other component of SzC 0 , P ushpxq is trivial. Let us check the second condition. Let C 1 Ă C 0 , Bi Sγ R C 1 and S 1 a connected component of SzC 1 which contains γ. Since Bi Sγ Ă S 1 , P ushpxq fixes Bt Sγ . All components of the boundary of S 1 are in C 0 , thus Bt Sγ is not homotopic to any component of the boundary of S 1 . Thus Bt Sγ is essential. Since P ushpxq is nontrivial and fixes an essential curve, it is reducible. It follows, that C 1 does not satisfy the second condition. Hence C 0 is the canonical reduction system. Thus the decomposition of P ushpxq consists of a single pseudo-Anosov map on Sγ1 . 3.14. Distortion of elements in the Aut-norm of surface groups. Theorem 3.15. Let x P Γg . Then either a) x is a power of a simple non-separating loop, then the cyclic subgroup generated by x is bounded in the Aut-norm, or b) x is undistorted in the Aut-norm. Moreover, there exists a homogeneous quasimorphism bounded on the set of all simple elements and non-trivial on x. We start with transferring the problem from finding a suitable quasimorphism on Γg to finding a quasimorphism on (a finite index subgroup) of MCGpSq. Let us consider the general case first. Let G be a group and let AutpGq be the group of automorphisms of G. Let cg pxq “ gxg ´1 be the inner automorphism induced by g. Define homomorphism c : G Ñ AutpGq by cpgq “ cg . Lemma 3.16. Let G be a H-finitely generated group for some H ă AutpGq, and let H˝ ă H be a finite index subgroup such that impcq ă H˝ . Let x P G and assume that there exists a homogeneous quasimorphism q : H˝ Ñ R such that qpcx q ‰ 0. Then x is undistorted in |¨|H . Proof. Let S̄ be an H-finite generating set of G. Then S̄ is H˝ -finite since #pS̄{H˝ q “ #pH{H˝ q#pS̄{Hq. Thus S̄ can be used to define both norms |¨|H and |¨|H˝ . To prove that x is undistorted in |¨|H it is enough to prove that it is undistorted in |¨|H˝ .  AUT-NORMS AND AUT-QUASIMORPHISMS ON Fn AND Γg  15  Let qr be the pull back of q to G, i.e. qrpwq “ qpcw q for w P G. Now we will show, that qr is H˝ -invariant. Let w P G and ψ P H˝ . Note that ψcw ψ ´1 “ cψpwq and that q is constant on conjugacy classes of H˝ . We have qrpψpwqq “ qpcψpwq q “ qpψcw ψ ´1 q “ qpcw q “ qrpwq.  We apply Corollary 1.7 and finish the proof.  We will use this lemma in the case of G “ Γg and H “ AutpΓg q. We need to take a finite index subgroup H˝ , because in most cases there is no homogeneous quasimorphism on the whole group AutpΓg q which is non-zero on a given element cx . We will be able to find such quasimorphism on some H˝ and conclude undistortedness of x in |¨|AutpΓg q . Proof of Theorem 3.15. Case 1. Let α and γ be the elements shown in the Figure 3.1. We first prove that the cyclic group generated by α is bounded in |¨|AutpΓg q . Let |.|s be the simple loops norm. It is a simple observation, that the loop αn γ is simple for any n P Z. Thus we have |αn |s “ |αn γγ ´1 |s ď 2. Since |¨|s defines bi-Lipschitz equivalence class |¨|AutpΓg q , the cyclic subgroup xαy is bounded in the Aut-norm. α  γ  Figure 3.1. Loops α and γ. Now assume that x P Γg is a power of a simple non-separating loop. Note that every simple non-separating loop can be mapped to α. Indeed, for every two simple non-separating loops β1 , β2 , the surfaces Szβi are homeomorphic, thus all simple non-separating loops are in one AutpΓg q-orbit. It follows that x can be mapped to αm for some m P N. Thus the subgroup generated by x is bounded. Case 2. Assume that x P Γg is not a power of a simple non-separating loop. Let S be a closed surface without punctures and let ‹ P Γg . Consider the natural map Ψ : MCGpS, ‹q Ñ AutpΓg q induced by the action of a homeomorphism on the fundamental group of pS, ‹q. Let Aut` pΓg q :“ impΨq, then Aut` pΓg q has index 2 in AutpΓg q. By Baer-Dehn-Nielsen theorem, Ψ is an embedding.  16  MICHAEL BRANDENBURSKY AND MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  It is easy to see (at least for simple elements, see Example 3.4) that P ushpwq induces a conjugation on Γg by w. Hence instead of working with Aut` pΓg q and homomorphism c, we work with MCGpS, ‹q and P ush. By the work of Bestvina-Bromberg-Fujiwara ([4]) we know that there are plenty of quasimorphisms on mapping class groups. We describe their result in the way that is convenient for us. The group MCGpS, ‹q acts on H1 pS, Z{3Zq. Let H˝ be the subgroup of MCGpS, ‹q which contains all elements that act trivially. Hence H˝ is a finite index subgroup of MCGpS, ‹q. Since conjugation acts trivially on homology, P ushpΓg q ă H˝ . It follows from[4, Corollary 5.3 and Corollary 5.5] that there exists a homogeneous quasimorphism on H˝ which is non-zero on P ushpxq if one of the following holds: a) In the Nielsen-Thurston decomposition of P ushpxq there is at least one pseudo-Anosov element. b) In the Nielsen-Thurston decomposition of P ushpxq there is at least one non-trivial power of a Dehn twist along some separating curve. Now we finish the proof. If x P Γg is not a power of non-separating simple loop, then by Theorem 3.13 either a) x is not simple, and Nielsen-Thurston decomposition contains exactly one pseudo-Anosov element, or b) x is a power of a Dehn twist along separating loop, and then the Nielsen-Thurston decomposition is P ushpxq “ Tγn` Tγn´ for some separating simple loop γ and n P N. In both cases we have a homogeneous quasimorphism q : H˝ Ñ R which is non-trivial on P ushpxq. Since H˝ is a finite index subgroup of MCGpS, ‹q it can be viewed as finite index subgroup of AutpΓg q. Using Lemma 3.16 we conclude the proof of the theorem. Let Sn be the set of all elements of Γg which are represented by curves with crossing-number at most n (see [9, Definition 1.1]) and let Sn1 be the set of all primitive elements in Sn . In [9] D. Calegari proved that x P Γg is undistorted in |¨|Sn if it has non-zero self-intersection number. He asked (see Question 1.6) whether simple elements are undistorted with respect to the metrics |¨|Sn1 . First of all, we note that all these metrics are bi-Lipschitz equivalent. Indeed, by [9, Remark 1.4] all sets Sn1 are AutpΓg q-finite. The proof is analogous to the proof of the fact that S0 , which is the set of all simple elements,  AUT-NORMS AND AUT-QUASIMORPHISMS ON Fn AND Γg  17  is AutpΓg q-finite. It means that all the metrics |¨|Sn1 define the same biLipschitz equivalence class |¨|AutpΓg q . Thus the part of Theorem 3.15 that concerns simple elements gives a complete answer to the question of D. Calegari, i.e., we proved the following Corollary 3.17. Simple separating elements in Γg are undistorted with respect to |¨|Sn1 -norm for every n, and simple non-separating elements generate bounded cyclic subgroup. 3.18. More applications and remarks. Theorem 3.19 (Many fellows property). Let S be a closed hyperbolic surface of genus g and l be a closed simple non-separating geodesic. Then for every p P l and every neighborhood U of p, there is another simple closed geodesic l1 passing through U . Proof. Assume a contrary that there exists p P l and some neighborhood U of p such that every closed geodesic different from l does pass through U . Let Γg be the fundamental group of S. For every x P Γg there is a unique closed geodesic lx in the free homotopy class of x. Two geodesics lx and lx1 are equal if and only if x and x1 are conjugated. Moreover, simple Let l “ lx0 . Let α be elements of Γg correspond to simple closed geodesics. ş a 1-differential form supported on U such that l α ‰ 0. In [3] Barge-Ghys showed that the following function: ż α, qpxq “ lx  is a homogeneous quasimorphism. If x is a simple element not conjugated to xo , then lx ‰ lxo and by our assumption lx does not pass through U . Hence qplx q “ 0. It follows that the only simple elements on which q is non-zero are conjugates of x0 . Since q is constant on conjugacy classes, it is bounded on the set of all simple elements. By Lemma 1.5 we get that x0 is undistorted in the simple loops norm which contradicts Theorem 3.15 Remark 3.20. Theorem 3.19 holds for separating closed geodesics as well, see [20, Lemma 5.1]. Note that unlike the set of all closed geodesics, the set of simple closed geodesics is not dense in S and as suggested by Theorem 3.19 there are some preferred tracks chosen by simple geodesics. For a further discussion of this phenomenon see [8]. Remark 3.21. Let x be a simple non-separating element and let γ be a loop that represents x. Then there is no finite index subgroup of MCGpS, ‹q containing P ushpxq such that Tγ ` is not conjugated to Tγ ´ . Indeed, otherwise one could find a quasimorphism on MCGpS, ‹q which is non-trivial on P ushpxq. Using Lemma 3.16 we see that x would be undistorted in the simple loops norm which contradicts Theorem 3.15.  18  MICHAEL BRANDENBURSKY AND MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  4. AutpF2 q-invariant quasimorphisms on F2 . Let Sg be a closed surface of genus g. Let ˝, ‹ P Sg be two arbitrary points. We shall regard ˝ as a puncture and ‹ as a base point. Let us consider the group MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q of mapping classes of Sg zt˝u fixing the point ‹. The natural action of a homeomorphism on F2g “ π1 pSg zt˝u, ‹q induces a map π : MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q Ñ AutpF2g q. We claim that this map is injective. Indeed, the surface Sg zt˝u can be described as a regular 4g-gon with opposite edges identified, such that the point ˝ lies in the center and ‹ is one of the vertices. If πpψq is the identity for some ψ P MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q, then there exists a representation of ψ fixing pointwise the edges of the 4g-gon. Thus we can regard this representation of ψ as a homeomorphism of the punctured disc fixing the boundary. By the Alexander trick ([11, Lemma 2.1]) such an element is isotopic to identity. In the next theorem we consider non-simple element x P F2g such that for every ψ P MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q we have x´1 ‰ ψpxq. We postpone the proof of existence of such elements to the next section (see Lemma 5.5). Theorem 4.1. Let x P F2g such that for every ψ P MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q we have x´1 ‰ ψpxq, and x cannot be represented by a simple loop in Sg zt˝u. Then there exists a non-trivial MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q-invariant homogeneous quasimorphism on F2g which is non-zero on x. P ush  Proof. We consider the Birman embedding F2g ÝÝÝÑ MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q. Since x is not simple, it follows from Theorem 3.13 that the Nielsen-Thurston decomposition of P ushpxq consists of one non-trivial pseudo-Anosov pure component. In addition, P ushpxq is not conjugated to its inverse in the group MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q. Indeed, if there is an element ψ P MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q which conjugates P ushpxq to its inverse, then it implies P ushpψpxqq “ ψP ushpxqψ ´1 “ P ushpxq´1 “ P ushpx´1 q. Since P ush is injective, we conclude that ψpxq “ x´1 which contradicts our assumption. Now we use quasimorphisms constructed in [4]. Note that if an element in a group is conjugated to its inverse, then every homogeneous quasimorphism vanishes on this element. If follows from [4, Theorem 4.2] that for pure elements of MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q, being conjugated to its inverse is the only obstruction to be detected by homogeneous quasimorphisms. Due to Lemma 3.16, P ushpxq is pure. Thus there exists a homogeneous quasimorphism q on MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q which is non-zero on P ushpxq. The pull-back of q to F2g by P ush gives us a MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q-invariant quasimorphism which does not vanish on x.  AUT-NORMS AND AUT-QUASIMORPHISMS ON Fn AND Γg  19  Remark 4.2. One would like to construct AutpFn q-invariant quasimorphisms on Fn by restricting a quasimorphism from AutpFn q to Fn which is embedded in AutpFn q via inner automorphisms. However, despite an extensive study of AutpFn q it is not known if there are quasimorphisms on AutpFn q which restrict non-trivially to Fn . Theorem 4.3. The linear space of MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q-invariant homogeneous quasimorphisms on F2g is infinite dimensional. Proof. It follows from Lemma 5.6 and Lemma 5.5 that there is an infinite sequence z1 , z2 , . . . of integers such that the elements xk “ azk b2zk a3zk b4zk have the following properties: a) xk and x´1 k belong to different AutpF2g q-orbits, b) for i, j P Zzt0u and k ‰ k1 , elements xik and xjk1 belong to different AutpF2g q-orbits. Elements xk are not simple. Indeed, every element x P F2g that can be represented by a simple loop in MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q is a base element of F2g , and hence is inverted by some automorphism of F2g . Recall that by Theorem 3.13, P ushpxk q is a pure mapping class, whose Nielsen-Thurston decomposition consists only of one pseudo-Anosov component. Moreover, using an argument from the proof of Theorem 4.1, property a) implies that the element P ushpxk q is not conjugated to its inverse in the mapping class group, and property b) implies that for k ‰ k1 and any nonzero i and j, P ushpxk qi is not conjugated to P ushpxk1 qj . In the language of chiral and achiral classes introduced in [4], it means that elements P ushpxk q represent different chiral classes for different k. Let k P N. It follows from [4, Proposition 4.4] that each function tP ushpx1 q, . . . , P ushpxk qu Ñ R is a restriction of a homogeneous quasimorphism on MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q. If we pull-back these quasimorphisms to F2g by P ush, we obtain that each function tx1 , . . . , xk u Ñ R is a restriction of some MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q-invariant homogeneous quasimorphism. Consequently, for each k P N we constructed a k-dimensional subspace of MCGpSg zt˝u, ‹q-invariant homogeneous quasimorphisms. For g ą 1, πpMCGpSg zt˝u, ‹qq has infinite index in AutpF2g q. The situation is different for g “ 1. For completeness we give a proof of the following lemma. Lemma 4.4. πpMCGpS1 zt˝u, ‹qq has index 2 in AutpF2 q.  20  MICHAEL BRANDENBURSKY AND MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  Proof. Let us extend the group MCGpS1 zt˝u, ‹q to MCG˘ pS1 zt˝u, ‹q by allowing orientation reversing homeomorphisms. Then π naturally extends to a map π 1 : MCG˘ pS1 zt˝u, ‹q Ñ AutpF2 q. By the same argument as in the beginning of this chapter, π 1 is injective. Let ta, bu be a basis of F2 . The group AutpF2 q is generated by the following automorphisms: a Ñ a´1 bÑb  aÑb bÑa  a Ñ ab b Ñ b.  Each one of them can be realized by an element of MCG˘ pS1 zt˝u, ‹q. Thus π 1 is onto. Every automorphism of Fn acts on its abelianisation which is isomorphic to Zn , thus defines a matrix over Z. Let Aut` pFn q be the subgroup consisting of all elements which define matrices of determinant 1. In the case of n “ 2, we have Aut` pF2 q “ πpMCGpS1 zt˝u, ‹qq. An immediate consequence of Theorem 4.3 is that the linear space of homogeneous Aut` pF2 q-invariant quasimorphisms is infinite dimensional. Remark 4.5. The fact that the space of homogeneous Aut` pF2 q-invariant quasimorphisms on F2 is non-trivial was recently proved in his thesis by Huber in [15]. He showed that certain rotation number quasimorphism is Aut` pF2 q-invariant. In the next corollary we improve this result to AutpF2 q-invariant homogeneous quasimorphisms. Corollary 4.6. The linear space of homogeneous AutpF2 q-invariant quasimorphisms on F2 is infinite dimensional. Proof. Let a and b be generators of F2 . Denote by σ the automorphism defined by σpaq “ a´1 , σpbq “ b. Let tzi u8 i“1 be a sequence of integers such that gcdpzi q ‰ gcdpzj q for i ‰ j. Let xk “ azk b2zk a3zk b4zk . Consider the set X :“ tx1 , σpx1 q, x2 , σpx2 q, . . .u Ă F2 . It follows from Lemma 5.5 that no xk is inverted by an automorphism of F2 . The same applies to elements σpxk q. It means that each P ushpσpxk qq is chiral. For every x, y P X, the elements P ushpxq and P ushpyq define different chiral classes in MCGpS1 zt˝u, ‹q, see Lemma 5.9. It follows from [4, Proposition 4.4] that each function tP ushpx1 q, P ushpσpx1 qq, . . . , P ushpxk q, P ushpσpxk qqu Ñ R is a restriction of a homogeneous quasimorphism on MCGpS1 zt˝u, ‹q. By pulling back to F2 , we obtain that every function tx1 , σpx1 q, . . . , xk , σpxk qu Ñ R  AUT-NORMS AND AUT-QUASIMORPHISMS ON Fn AND Γg  21  is a restriction of a homogeneous Aut` pF2 q-invariant quasimorphism. `  Let QpF2 qAut be the space of homogeneous Aut` pF2 q-invariant quasimorphisms on F2 . Let Xk “ tx1 , σpx1 q, . . . , xk , σpxk qu. Denote by RXk the set of all functions from Xk to R. We have the following commutative diagram: `  QpF2 qAut RXk  Symσ  Ć Sym σ  QpF2 qAut  `  RXk ,  where Symσ pqqpxq “ qpxq ` qpσpxqq, ` qAut .  for q P Q̄pF2 We claim that Symσ pqq is an AutpF2 q-invariant homogeneous quasimorphism. It is clear that Symσ pqq is a quasimorphism, because q is a quasimorphism and σ is an automorphism of F2 . To prove AutpF2 q invariance, we first note that Symσ pqq is σ-invariant, which is obvious from the definition. Moreover, for every ψ P Aut` pF2 q we can find ψ 1 P Aut` pF2 q such that ψ 1 σ “ σψ. Now Symσ pqqpψpxqq “ qpψpxqq ` qpσψpxqq “ qpxq ` qpψ 1 σpxqq “ qpxq ` qpσpxqq “ Symσ pqqpxq. Thus the quasimorphism Symσ pqq is σ-invariant and Aut` pF2 q-invariant, and consequently AutpF2 q-invariant. Ć σ is defined by Sym Ć σ pf qpxq “ f pxq ` f pσpxqq. The vertical The map Sym epimorphisms in the above diagram are restrictions. We have that Ć σ q “ tf P RXk : f pxl q “ f pσpxl qq for each l P t1, . . . , kuu ImpSym  Ć σ q is a restriction is a k-dimensional linear space. Each element of ImpSym ` of Symσ pqq for some q P QpF2 qAut , which is an AutpF2 q-invariant homogeneous quasimorphism. Thus for each k P N the space of AutpF2 q-invariant homogeneous quasimorphisms on F2 contains a k-dimensional subspace. Remark 4.7. In his thesis Hasse [14] proved that the space of quasimorphisms on F2 that are not AutpF2 q-invariant is dense in the space of all homogeneous quasimorphisms on F2 . In particular, finite linear combinations of counting quasimorphisms are not AutpF2 q-invariant. Hence a rotation number quasimorphism considered by Huber in [15] is not AutpF2 q-invariant, since it is a linear combination of counting quasimorphisms. It follows from Corollary 4.6, that there exists an infinite dimensional space of quasimorphisms on F2 where each quasimorphism can not be expressed as a finite linear combination of counting quasimorphisms. On the other hand R. Grigorchuk [12] showed that every quasimorphism is a linear combination of (possibly infinitely many) counting quasimorphisms.  22  MICHAEL BRANDENBURSKY AND MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  5. Whitehead algorithm and some elements of Fn . J. H. C. Whitehead [23] described an algorithm that given two elements x, x1 P Fn decides if there is ψ P AutpFn q for which ψpxq “ x1 . Below we recall the Whitehead algorithm. Definition 5.1. Let X be a basis of Fn . An element ψ P AutpFn q is called a) Permutation automorphism if ψ permutes the set X Y X ´1 . b) Whitehead automorphism if there is an element a P X Y X ´1 such that ψpaq “ a and ψpxq P tx, ax, xa´1 , axa´1 u for each x P Xztau. Let Ωn denote the set of all permutation automorphisms. The set Ωn is a finite subgroup of AutpFn q which is isomorphic to the extended permutation group. Theorem 5.2 (Whitehead). Let x P Fn and let m “ mint|ψpxq|X u where the minimum is taken over all ψ P AutpFn q. If |x|X ą m, then there exists a Whitehead automorphism h such that |hpxq|X ă |x|X . If x and x1 are in the same Aut-orbit and |x|X “ |x1 |X “ m, then there exists a sequence of permutation and Whitehead automorphisms t1 , . . . , tl such that: tl . . . t1 pxq “ x1 and |x|X “ |t1 pxq|X “ |t2 t1 pxq|X “ . . . “ |tl . . . t1 pxq|X “ m. Let x P Fn . We denote by x the conjugacy class represented by x. If c is any conjugacy class, we define its length by |c|X :“ mint|x|X , x “ cu. Note that AutpFn q acts on conjugacy classes of Fn . It is easy to see, that the analogous version of Whitehead algorithm works for conjugacy classes and the norm defined above. In the following lemmas we consider a sequence txk u8 k“2 where xk P Fn is of the form xk “ ak b2k a3k b4k . Here the elements a and b denote two different generators of Fn . Lemma 5.3. Let n “ 2 and X “ ta, bu. Let t be a permutation automorphism. Then tpxk q “ xk if and only if t is the identity, i.e. the group Ω2 acts freely on the orbit Ω2 pxk q. Proof. The conjugacy class tpxk q is represented by the element of the form uk v 2k u3k v 4k for some u, v P ta, b, a´1 , b´1 u. This element represents conjugacy class of ak b2k a3k b4k if and only if u “ a and v “ b. It means that tpaq “ a and tpbq “ b. Thus t is the identity.  AUT-NORMS AND AUT-QUASIMORPHISMS ON Fn AND Γg  23  Lemma 5.4. Let ψ be a Whitehead automorphism and let x P Ωn pxk q. Then either ψpxq “ x or |ψpxq|X ą |x|. Proof. The element x equals to φpxk q for some φ P Ωn . Thus x is represented by the element uk v 2k u3k v 4k , where u, v P XYX ´1 and u R tv, v ´1 u. Consider a Whitehead automorphism ψ. Assume that a from the definition of the Whitehead automorphism is not equal to u, v, u´1 , v ´1 . If ψpuq “ aua´1 and ψpvq “ ava´1 , then ψpxq “ x. In all other cases we have |ψpxq|x ą |x|x , since in ψpxq there always will be some occurrences of letter a. If a P tu, v, u´1 , v ´1 u, then up to inner automorphisms, there are only 5 different ways a Whitehead automorphism can act on tu, vu. They are listed below: uÑu vÑv  u Ñ uv ˘ vÑv  uÑu v Ñ vu˘ .  Direct computation shows that these automorphisms, except the one which fixes u and v, increase the length of x (provided that k ą 1). Thus ψ does not increase the length of x if and only if ψ fixes x. Lemma 5.5. Elements xk and x´1 k belong to different AutpFn q-orbits. Proof. It follows from Theorem 5.2 that Ωn pxk q is the set of all conjugacy classes minimizing the norm |¨|X in the AutpFn q-orbit of xk . Indeed, if some y P Fn minimizes the norm, then there exist permutation or Whitehead automorphisms t1 , . . . , tl such that |xk |X “ |t1 pxk q|X “ . . . “ |tl . . . t1 pxk q|X and tl . . . t1 pxk q “ y. Since |xk |X “ |t1 pxk q|X , we conclude that either t1 is a permutation automorphism, or t1 is a Whitehead automorphism and by Lemma 5.4 we have t1 pxk q “ xk . Then we apply the same argument to the element t1 pxk q and the equality |t2 pt1 pxk qq|X “ |t1 pxk q|X to conclude that t2 is a permutation automorphism or t2 pt1 pxk qq “ t1 pxk q. It follows that each ti is a permutation automorphism, or fixes the element ti´1 . . . t1 pxk q. Hence y P Ωn pxk q. ´1 If x´1 k is in the same AutpFn q-orbit as xk , then xk would minimize the norm. Thus to prove the lemma, it remains to prove that x´1 k does not for t P Ω , then necessarily belong to Ωn pxk q. Note that if tpxk q “ x´1 n k ´1 ´1 tpaq, tpbq P ta, a , b, b u. It is easy to check that for such automorphisms we always have tpxk q ‰ x´1 k .  Lemma 5.6. Let i, j P Zzt0u and let k, l ě 2 such that gcdpkq ‰ gcdplq. Elements pxk qi and pxl qj belong to different AutpFn q-orbits.  24  MICHAEL BRANDENBURSKY AND MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  Proof. For every element x P Fn there is a unique (up to a sign) number n and a unique (up to taking an inverse) element p which is not a proper power of any other element such that x “ pn “ pp´1 q´n . Assume that there exists an automorphism ψ P AutpFn q such that ψppxk qi q “ pxl qj . Both xk and xl are not proper powers, hence ψpxk q “ pxl q˘1 . In what follows we show that this is impossible. Every automorphism ψ : Fn Ñ Fn induces the abelianisation automorphism Abpψq : Zn Ñ Zn . Elements xk and pxl q˘ are mapped to vectors with coordinates equal to 4k, 6k and ˘4l, ˘6l in the abelianisation. It is enough to show, that these vectors belong to different AutpZn q-orbits. This is the case, since automorphisms of Zn preserve the greatest common divisor of coordinates of a vector, and gcdp4k, 6kq “ 2gcdpkq ‰ 2gcdplq “ gcdp˘4l, ˘6lq.  Lemma 5.7. Let n “ 2 and X “ ta, bu. Let σ P AutpF2 q be defined by σpaq “ a´1 , σpbq “ b. Then xk and σpxk q belong to different Aut` pF2 qorbits. Proof. Let us recall that the group Aut` pF2 q consists of automorphisms ψ for which detpAbpψqq “ 1. We have that σpxk q “ a´k b2k a´3k b4k and σ P AutpF2 qz Aut` pF2 q. Suppose that σpxk q “ ψpxk q for some automorphism ψ P Aut` pF2 q. It means that ψ ´1 σ P Stabpxk q and ψ ´1 σ P AutpF2 qz Aut` pF2 q. In what follows we show that Stabpxk q ă Aut` pF2 q which is a contradiction. Let us consider the stabilizer Stabpxk q of the conjugacy class xk . Of course Stabpxk q ă Stabpxk q. We show that Stabpxk q ă Aut` pF2 q. We use the construction from [17] in order to find a generating set of Stabpxk q. First we define a graph ∆ as follows: a vertex of ∆ is a conjugacy class of minimal length in the AutpF2 q-orbit of xk . It follows from the proof of Lemma 5.5 that this set equals Ω2 pxk q. Two vertices v1 , v2 P Ω2 pxk q are connected by a directed edge from v1 to v2 if there is a permutation or Whitehead automorphism ψ such that ψpv1 q “ v2 . We will consider edge embedded loops in ∆ based at xk . The theorem of McCool [17] says, that Stabpxk q is generated by elements which are products of labels read from all possible loops like this. It follows from Lemma 5.3 that the subgraph spanned by edges labeled with permutation automorphisms is a complete graph on the set Ω2 pxk q, with no loops. Lemma 5.4 implies that all edges labeled by Whitehead automorphisms are loops.  AUT-NORMS AND AUT-QUASIMORPHISMS ON Fn AND Γg  25  Let δ be a loop in ∆ based at xk . Now we show that the word w which is read from the labels of δ is trivial in AutpF2 q{ Aut` pF2 q – Z{2Z. Note that all Whitehead automorphisms belong to Aut` pF2 q. Thus we can ignore labels coming from edges labeled by Whitehead automorphisms. Since edges labeled by Whitehead automorphisms are loops, we can assume that δ goes through edges labeled only by permutation automorphisms. Thus we can assume, that the element read from labels of δ is just a permutation automorphism which fixes xk . By Lemma 5.3 this element is trivial. Remark 5.8. More detailed analysis shows that Stabpxk q is a cyclic subgroup generated by conjugation by xk . One also can prove the analog of Lemma 5.7 for Fn by replacing xk with more complicated elements. Lemma 5.9. Let i, j P Zzt0u and let k, l ě 2 such that gcdpkq ‰ gcdplq. Then: a) xik and σpxk qj belong to different Aut` pFn q-orbits. b) σpxk qi and σpxl qj belong to different AutpFn q-orbits. c) xik and σpxl qj belong to different AutpFn q-orbits. Proof. It follows from the proof of Lemma 5.6 that we can assume i “ 1 and j “ ˘1. Lemma 5.7 implies a) for j “ 1. To prove a) for j “ ´1 it is enough to note that σpxk q´1 and x´1 k are is in the same AutpFn q-orbit. If ´1 xk and σpxk q are in the same Aut` pFn q-orbit, then xk and x´1 k are in the same AutpFn q-orbit, which contradicts Lemma 5.5. The proof of b) and c) is analogous to the proof of Lemma 5.6. References [1] Miklós Abért. Some questions. http://www.renyi.hu/„abert/questions.pdf. [2] Valery Bardakov, Vladimir Shpilrain, and Vladimir Tolstykh. On the palindromic and primitive widths of a free group. J. Algebra, 285(2):574–585, 2005. [3] Jean Barge and Étienne Ghys. Surfaces et cohomologie bornée. Invent. Math., 92(3):509–526, 1988. [4] Mladen Bestvina, Ken Bromberg, and Koji Fujiwara. Stable commutator length on mapping class groups. Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble), 66(3):871–898, 2016. [5] Michael Brandenbursky, Światosław R. Gal, Jarek Kedra, and Michał Marcinkowski. ‘ The cancellation norm and the geometry of bi-invariant word metrics. Glasg. Math. J., 58(1):153–176, 2016. [6] Michael Brandenbursky and Jarek Kedra. On the autonomous metric on the group of ‘ area-preserving diﬀeomorphisms of the 2-disc. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 13(2):795–816, 2013. [7] Robert Brooks. Some remarks on bounded cohomology. In Riemann surfaces and related topics: Proceedings of the 1978 Stony Brook Conference, volume 97 of Ann. of Math. Stud., pages 53–63. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J., 1981. [8] Peter Buser and Hugo Parlier. The distribution of simple closed geodesics on a Riemann surface. In Complex analysis and its applications, volume 2 of OCAMI Stud., pages 3–10. Osaka Munic. Univ. Press, Osaka, 2007.  26  MICHAEL BRANDENBURSKY AND MICHAŁ MARCINKOWSKI  [9] Danny Calegari. Word length in surface groups with characteristic generating sets. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 136(7):2631–2637, 2008. [10] Danny Calegari. scl, volume 20 of MSJ Memoirs. Mathematical Society of Japan, Tokyo, 2009. [11] B. Farb and D. Margalit. A primer on mapping class groups, volume 49 of Princeton Mathematical Series. Princeton University Press, 2012. [12] R. I. Grigorchuk. Some results on bounded cohomology. In Combinatorial and geometric group theory (Edinburgh, 1993), volume 204 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 111–163. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1995. [13] Joel Hass and Peter Scott. Intersections of curves on surfaces. Israel J. Math., 51(12):90–120, 1985. [14] Antonius Hasse. The study of OutpFn q on the second bounded cohomology Hb2 pFn , Rq. Master thesis, Technion, 2016. [15] Thomas Huber. Rotation quasimorphisms for surfaces. Ph.D thesis, ETH, 2012. [16] Irwin Kra. On the Nielsen-Thurston-Bers type of some self-maps of Riemann surfaces. Acta Math., 146(3-4):231–270, 1981. [17] James McCool. Some ﬁnitely presented subgroups of the automorphism group of a free group. J. Algebra, 35:205–213, 1975. [18] Alexei D. Miasnikov and Alexei G. Myasnikov. Whitehead method and genetic algorithms. In Computational and experimental group theory, volume 349 of Contemp. Math., pages 89–114. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2004. [19] R. P. Osborne and H. Zieschang. Primitives in the free group on two generators. Invent. Math., 63(1):17–24, 1981. [20] Hugo Parlier. Hyperbolic polygons and simple closed geodesics. Enseign. Math. (2), 52(3-4):295–317, 2006. [21] John R. Stallings. Whitehead graphs on handlebodies. In Geometric group theory down under (Canberra, 1996), pages 317–330. de Gruyter, Berlin, 1999. [22] J. H. C. Whitehead. On Certain Sets of Elements in a Free Group. Proc. London Math. Soc., S2-41(1):48. [23] J. H. C. Whitehead. On equivalent sets of elements in a free group. Ann. of Math. (2), 37(4):782–800, 1936. Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Israel E-mail address: brandens@math.bgu.ac.il Ben Gurion University & Regensburg Universität & Uniwersytet Wrocławski E-mail address: marcinkow@math.uni.wroc.pl

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
