Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 9
ArXiv ID: hf_78

Abstract:
Memcapacitive neural networks Yuriy V. Pershin and Massimiliano Di Ventra  arXiv:1307.6921v1 [cond-mat.dis-nn] 26 Jul 2013  Abstract We show that memcapacitive (memory capacitive) systems can be used as synapses in artificial neural networks. As an example of our approach, we discuss the architecture of an integrate-and-fire neural network based on memcapacitive synapses. Moreover, we demonstrate that the spike-timing-dependent plasticity can be simply realized with some of these devices. Memcapacitive synapses are a low-energy alternative to memristive synapses for neuromorphic computation.  Y. V. Pershin is with the Department of Physics and Astronomy and USC Nanocenter, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, 29208 e-mail: pershin@physics.sc.edu. M. Di Ventra is with the Department of Physics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0319 e-mail: diventra@physics.ucsd.edu.  1  Memcapacitive neural networks Electronic devices with memory such as memristive [1], memcapacitive and meminductive systems [2] are promising components for unconvential computing applications because of their ability to store and process information at the same space location [3]. Moreover, if these devices are used as memory and computing elements in, e.g., neural networks, high-integration density and low-power consumption can be easily achieved. So far, only memristive devices have been considered as electronic synapses in artificial neural networks [4], [5], [6], [7]. In this article, we show instead that memcapacitive systems could play a similar role, thus offering the benefit of low power dissipation [2] and, in some instances, full compatibility with CMOS technology [8], an added benefit for electronic realizations of ”smart electronics”. According to their definition [2], voltage-controlled memcapacitive systems are described by the equations VC (t) = C −1 (x, q, t) q(t) ẋ = f (x, q, t)  (1) (2)  where q(t) is the charge on the capacitor at time t, VC (t) is the applied voltage, C is the memcapacitance, which depends on the state of the system and can vary in time, x is a set of n state variables describing the internal state of the system, and f is a continuous n-dimensional vector function. It is currently well established that in biological neural networks the synapse strength encodes memories [9]. In electronic circuits, the memory feature of memcapacitive systems (provided by their internal states characterized by x) can play a similar role. In figure 1 we show an example of memcapacitive neural network. In this leaky integrate-and-fire network, N input neurons are connected to the RC block of the output neuron with the help of memcapacitive synapses C1 −CN . Each memcapacitive synapse contains a memcapacitive system and two diodes. It is assumed that the switching of memcapacitive system involves a voltage threshold, which is above voltage pulse amplitudes involved in this network. Subjected to a voltage pulse from the i-th input neuron, the memcapacitive system Ci charges the integrating capacitor C in proportion to its capacitance Ci . As soon as the voltage across C reaches the threshold of Nout , Nout fires a forward voltage pulse  and uses the controllable switch S to reset C . The diodes connected to the ground discharge C1 − CN after the pulse disappearance, and can be replaced by resistors.  2  Fig. 2 presents simulations of the integrate-and-fire network in the LTspice environment assuming the firing of only one input neuron. Here, we compare the circuit response subjected to the same input pulse sequence (periodic firing of N1 ) at different values of corresponding synaptic connection (memcapacitance C1 ). The stronger synaptic connection (Fig. 2(a)) results in faster charging of the integrating capacitor C  and higher rate of the output neuron Nout firing. This result is compatible with operation of excitatory synapses. In order to model inhibitory synapses, one can use the synaptic connection similar to that shown in Fig. 1 with diodes connected with opposite polarity to the integrating capacitor and power supply voltage V (instead of the ground). The inset in Fig. 1 shows the schematics of the inhibitory synapse explicitly. Moreover, the inhibitory synapse should be driven by inverted pulses. To evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of using memcapacitive systems as synapses, we compare the energy dissipation in memcapacitive and memristive neural networks. Indeed, the circuit depicted in Fig. 1 can also operate with memristive synapses replacing the memcapacitive ones. Let us then estimate the amount of energy lost in both cases. For this purpose, we consider the situation when a single voltage pulse fired by N1 charges C by a small amount of charge q from VC = 0. In the case of memcapacitive network, the dissipated energy is the energy stored in C1 due to the pulse, namely, UC = qV1 /2 ≈ qV /2 if C1  C . In the case of memristive network, UR ≈ ∆tV I ≈ qV . Consequently, in this application, the memcapacitive synapses are two times more energy efficient. However, the memristive networks require less components as the diodes connected to the ground in Fig. 1 are not required when memristive synapses are not used. Let us now consider a realization of the spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) with memcapacitive  N1  V1 V  C1  GND  GND  NN  Fig. 1.  V  V  Nj . .  VN CN  C  ..  Cj  S  . . .  R  Vout  Nout  Memcapacitive synapses in an integrate-and-fire neural network. N input electronic neurons N1 -NN are connected to  the output neuron Nout using memcapacitive synapses. The inset: schematics of the inhibitory synapse.  3  18  18  16 12 10 8  VC  6 4  (a)  2  Fig. 2.  1  2  Time (μs)  12 10 8  VC  6 4  (b)  2  Vout  0 0  V1  14  Voltage (V)  Voltage (V)  16  V1  14  Vout  0 3  4  0  1  2  Time (μs)  3  4  Simulation of the integrate-and-fire memcapacitive network (Fig. 1) with only one spiking neuron. The regular 5V  100ns spikes of the input neuron N1 trigger the output neuron Nout (with 3V voltage threshold shown by the horizontal dashed line) at different frequencies depending on the strength of memcapacitive synapse (C1 =2nF in (a) and 0.8nF in (b)). This plot was obtained with C = 5nF, R = 10kΩ, and BAT54 diode model. Here, VC is the voltage across C, and the lines are shifted by 7V for clarity.  synapses. For this purpose, we consider a bipolar memcapacitive system with threshold [2], [10], which is also suitable for the integrate-and-fire network considered above. In biological neural networks, when a postsynaptic signal reaches the synapse before the action potential of the presynaptic neuron, the synapse shows long-term depression (LTD), namely its strength decreases (weaker connection between the neurons) depending on the time difference between the postsynaptic and presynaptic signals. Conversely, when the postsynaptic action potential reaches the synapse after the presynaptic action potential, the synapse undergoes a longtime potentiation (LTP), namely the signal transmission between the two neurons increases in proportion to the time difference between the presynaptic and postsynaptic signals. In electronic circuits, STDP can be implemented using double voltage pulses as shown in Fig. 3 (see also Ref. [7]). In this case, the pulse overlap provides opposite voltage polarities (across the synapse) depending on timing of presynaptic and postsynaptic pulses. Using a SPICE model of memcapacitive system with threshold [10] we simulate the dynamics of a memcapacitive synapse subjected to LTP and LTD pulses. The bottom line in Fig. 3 clearly shows the corresponding increase and decrease of the synaptic strength (memcapacitance). In conclusion, we have presented an alternative to simulate synaptic behavior that uses memcapacitive systems instead of memristive systems. The corresponding memcapacitive neural networks can operate  4  600  presynaptic  Voltage (V)  10  500  8  400  6  300  postsynaptic  4  200  2  100  0  Fig. 3.  Memcapacitance (pF)  12  LTP  0  2  LTD  4  6  8  Time (μs)  0 10  STDP with memcapacitive synapses. This plot was obtained using a model of bipolar memcapacitive system with  threshold [10] with Vt = 3V, Clow = 10pF, Chigh = 100pF, C(t = 0) = 50pF, β = 2 × 10−5 F/(V·s). Here, the lines are shifted by 5V for clarity.  at low energy consumption, and in some cases they are compatible with CMOS technology making them promising candidates for neuromorphic computing. This work has been partially supported by NSF grant ECCS-1202383, the Center for Magnetic Recording Research at UCSD, and Burroughs Wellcome Fund 2013 Collaborative Research Travel Grant. R EFERENCES [1] L. O. Chua and S. M. Kang, “Memristive devices and systems,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 64, pp. 209–223, 1976. [2] M. Di Ventra, Y. V. Pershin, and L. O. Chua, “Circuit elements with memory: Memristors, memcapacitors, and meminductors,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 97, no. 10, pp. 1717–1724, 2009. [3] M. Di Ventra and Y. V. Pershin, “The parallel approach,” Nature Physics, vol. 9, p. 200, 2013. [4] G. S. Snider, “Cortical computing with memristive nanodevices,” SciDAC Review, vol. 10, pp. 58–65, 2008. [5] S. H. Jo, T. Chang, I. Ebong, B. B. Bhadviya, P. Mazumder, and W. Lu, “Nanoscale memristor device as synapse in neuromorphic systems,” Nano Lett., vol. 10, pp. 1297–1301, 2010. [6] Y. V. Pershin and M. Di Ventra, “Experimental demonstration of associative memory with memristive neural networks,” Neural Networks, vol. 23, p. 881, 2010. [7] Y. V. Pershin and M. Di Ventra, “Neuromorphic, digital and quantum computation with memory circuit elements,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 100, p. 2071, 2012. [8] F. L. Traversa, F. Bonani, Y. V. Pershin, and M. Di Ventra, “Dynamic computing random access memory,” arXiv:1306.6133, 2013. [9] W. M. Cowan, T. C. Sudhof, and C. F. Stevens, Eds., Synapses.  The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001.  [10] D. Biolek, M. D. Ventra, and Y. V. Pershin, “Reliable spice simulations of memristors, memcapacitors and meminductors,” arXiv:1307.2717, 2013.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 9. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
