Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 10
ArXiv ID: hf_7346

Abstract:
Optimization of Smooth Functions with Noisy Observations: Local Minimax Rates  arXiv:1803.08586v1 [stat.ML] 22 Mar 2018  Yining Wang1 , Sivaraman Balakrishnan2 , and Aarti Singh1 1  2  Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon University March 26, 2018  Abstract We consider the problem of global optimization of an unknown non-convex smooth function with zeroth-order feedback. In this setup, an algorithm is allowed to adaptively query the underlying function at different locations and receives noisy evaluations of function values at the queried points (i.e. the algorithm has access to zeroth-order information). Optimization performance is evaluated by the expected difference of function values at the estimated optimum and the true optimum. In contrast to the classical optimization setup, first-order information like gradients are not directly accessible to the optimization algorithm. We show that the classical minimax framework of analysis, which roughly characterizes the worst-case query complexity of an optimization algorithm in this setting, leads to excessively pessimistic results. We propose a local minimax framework to study the fundamental difficulty of optimizing smooth functions with adaptive function evaluations, which provides a refined picture of the intrinsic difficulty of zeroth-order optimization. We show that for functions with fast level set growth around the global minimum, carefully designed optimization algorithms can identify a near global minimizer with many fewer queries. For the special case of strongly convex and smooth functions, our implied convergence rates match the ones developed for zeroth-order convex optimization problems [1, 22]. At the other end of the spectrum, for worst-case smooth functions no algorithm can converge faster than the minimax rate of estimating the entire unknown function in the ℓ8 -norm. We provide an intuitive and efficient algorithm that attains the derived upper error bounds. Finally, using the local minimax framework we are able to clearly dichotomize adaptive and non-adaptive algorithms by showing that non-adaptive algorithms, although optimal in a global minimax sense, do not attain the optimal local minimax rate.  1 Introduction Global function optimization with stochastic (zeroth-order) query oracles is an important problem in optimization, machine learning and statistics. To optimize an unknown bounded function f : X ÞÑ R defined on a known compact d-dimensional domain X Ď Rd , the data analyst makes n active queries x1 , . . . , xn P X and observes yt “ f pxt q ` wt ,  i.i.d.  wt „ N p0, 1q, 1 t “ 1, . . . , n.  (1)  1 The exact distribution of the independent noise variables εt is not important, and our results can be generalized to sub-Gaussian noise variables as well.  1  The queries x1 , . . . , xt are active in the sense that the selection of xt can depend on the previous queries and their responses x1 , y1 , . . . , xt´1 , yt´1 . After n queries, an estimate x pn P X is produced that approximately minimizes the unknown function f . Such “active query” models are relevant in a broad range of (noisy) global optimization applications, for instance in hyper-parameter tuning of machine learning algorithms [43] and sequential design in material synthesis experiments where the goal is to maximize strengths of the produced materials [37, 44]. We refer the readers to Section 2.1 for a rigorous formulation of the active query model and contrast it with the classical passive query model. The error of the estimate x pn is measured by the difference of f pp xn q and the global minimum of f : Lpp xn ; f q :“ f pp xn q ´ f ˚  where f ˚ :“ inf f pxq. xPX  (2)  To simplify our presentation, throughout the paper we take the domain X to be the d-dimensional unit cube r0, 1sd , while our results can be easily generalized to other compact domains satisfying minimal regularity conditions. When f belongs to a smoothness class, say the Hölder class with exponent α, a straightforward global optimization method is to first sample n points uniformly at random from X and then construct nonparametric estimates fpn of f using nonparametric regression methods such as (high-order) kernel smoothing or local polynomial regression [21, 49]. Classical analysis shows that the sup-norm rerP pn´α{p2α`dq q2 . construction error }fpn ´ f }8 “ supxPX |fpn pxq ´ f pxq| can be upper bounded by O rP pn´α{p2α`dq q upper bound on Lpp This global reconstruction guarantee then implies an O xn ; f q by p p considering x pn P X such that fn pp xn q “ inf xPX fn pxq (such an x pn exists because X is closed and bounded). Formally, we have the following proposition (proved in the Appendix) that converts a global reconstruction guarantee into an upper bound on optimization error: Proposition 1. Suppose fpn pp xn q “ inf xPX fpn pxq. Then Lpp xn ; f q ď 2}fpn ´ f }8 .  Typically, fundamental limits on the optimal optimization error are understood through the lens of minimax analysis where the object of study is the (global) minimax risk: inf sup Ef Lpp xn , f q, x pn f PF  (3)  where F is a certain smoothness function class such as the Hölder class. Although optimization appears to be easier than global reconstruction, we show in this paper that the n´α{p2α`dq rate is not improvable in the global minimax sense in Eq. (3) over Hölder classes. Such a surprising phenomenon was also noted in previous works [9, 25, 46] for related problems. On the other hand, extensive empirical evidence suggests that non-uniform/active allocations of query points can significantly reduce optimization error in practical global optimization of smooth, non-convex functions [43]. This raises the interesting question of understanding, from a theoretical perspective, under what conditions/in what scenarios is global optimization of smooth functions easier than their reconstruction, and the power of active/feedback-driven queries that play important roles in global optimization. In this paper, we propose a theoretical framework that partially answers the above questions. In contrast to classical global minimax analysis of nonparametric estimation problems, we adopt a local analysis which characterizes the optimal convergence rate of optimization error when the underlying function f is within the neighborhood of a “reference” function f0 . (See Section 2.2 for the rigorous local minimax formulation considered in this paper.) Our main results are to characterize the local convergence rates Rn pf0 q for a wide range of reference functions f0 P F. More specifically, our contributions can be summarized as follows: 2  r or O rP p¨q notation we drop poly-logarithmic dependency on n In the Op¨q  2  Figure 1: Informal illustrations of Algorithm 1. Solid blue curves depict the underlying function f to be optimized, black and red solid dots denote the query points and their responses tpxt , yt qu, and black/red vertical line segments correspond to uniform confidence intervals on function evaluations constructed using current batch of data observed. The left figure illustrates the first epoch of our algorithm, where query points are uniformly sampled from the entire domain X . Afterwards, sub-optimal locations based on constructed confidence intervals are removed, and a shrinkt “candidate set” S1 is obtained. The algorithm then proceeds to the second epoch, illustrated in the right figure, where query points (in red) are sampled only from the restricted candidate set and shorter confidence intervals (also in red) are constructed and updated. The procedure is repeated until Oplog nq epochs are completed. 1. We design an iterative (active) algorithm whose optimization error Lpp xn ; f q converges at a rate of Rn pf0 q depending on the reference function f0 . When the level sets of f0 satisfy certain regularity and polynomial growth conditions, the local rate Rn pf0 q can be upper bounded by Rn pf0 q “ r ´α{p2α`d´αβq q, where β P r0, d{αs is a parameter depending on f0 that characterizes the Opn volume growth of the level sets of the reference function f0 . (See assumption (A2), Proposition 2 and Theorem 1 for details). The rate matches the global minimax convergence n´α{p2α`dq for worst-case f0 where β “ 0, but has the potential of being much faster when β ą 0. We emphasize that our algorithm has no knowledge of the reference function f0 and achieves this rate adaptively. 2. We prove local minimax lower bounds that match the n´α{p2α`d´αβq upper bound, up to logarithmic factors in n. More specifically, we show that even if f0 is known, no (active) algorithm can estimate f in close neighborhoods of f0 at a rate faster than n´α{p2α`d´αβq . We further show that, if active queries are not available and queries x1 , . . . , xn are i.i.d. uniformly sampled from X , then the n´α{p2α`dq global minimax rate also applies locally regardless of how large β is. Thus, there is an explicit gap between local minimax rates of active and uniform query models when β is large. 3. In the special case when f is convex, the global optimization problem is usually referred to as zeroth-order convex optimization and this problem has been widely studied [1, 2, 6, 22, 29, 38]. Our results imply that, when f0 is strongly convex and smooth, the local minimax rate Rn pf0 q is r ´1{2 q, which matches the convergence rates in [1]. Additionally, our negative on the order of Opn results (Theorem 2) indicate that the n´1{2 rate cannot be achieved if f0 is merely convex, which seems to contradict n´1{2 results in [2, 6] that do not require strong convexity of f . However, it should be noted that mere convexity of f0 does not imply convexity of f in a neighborhood of f0 (e.g., }f ´ f0 }8 ď ε). Our results show significant differences in the intrinsic difficulty of zeroth-order optimization of convex and near-convex functions.  3  1.1 Related Work Global optimization, known variously as black-box optimization, Bayesian optimization and the continuousarmed bandit, has a long history in the optimization research community [30, 31] and has also received a significant amount of recent interest in statistics and machine learning [8, 9, 25, 35, 36, 43]. Among the existing works, [35, 36] are perhaps the closest to our paper in terms of analytical perspectives. Both papers impose additional assumptions on the level sets of the underlying function to obtain an improved convergence rate. However, several important differences exist. First, the level set assumptions considered in the mentioned references are rather restrictive and essentially require the underlying function to be uni-modal, while our assumptions are much more flexible and apply to multi-modal functions as well. In addition, [35, 36] considered a noiseless setting in which exact function evaluations f pxt q can be obtained, while our paper studies the noise corrupted model in Eq. (1) for which vastly different convergence rates are derived. Finally, no matching lower bounds were proved in [35, 36]. The (stochastic) global optimization problem is similar to mode estimation of either densities or regression functions, which has a rich literature [15, 32, 42]. An important difference between statistical mode estimation and global optimization is the way sample/query points x1 , . . . , xn P X are distributed: in mode estimation it is customary to assume the samples are independently and identically distributed, while in global optimization sequential designs of samples/queries are allowed. Furthermore, to estimate/locate the mode of an unknown density or regression function, such a mode has to be well-defined; on the other hand, producing an estimate x pn with small Lpp xn , f q is easier and results in weaker conditions imposed on the underlying function. Methodology-wise, our proposed algorithm is conceptually similar to the abstract Pure Adaptive Search (PAS) framework proposed and analyzed in [52]. The iterative procedure also resembles disagreement-based active learning methods [5, 16, 24] and the “successive rejection” algorithm in bandit problems [20]. The intermediate steps of candidate point elimination can also be viewed as sequences of level set estimation problems [41, 45, 47] or cluster tree estimation [4, 14] with active queries. Another line of research has focused on first-order optimization of quasi-convex or non-convex functions [3, 11, 23, 26, 39, 53], in which exact or unbiased evaluations of function gradients are available at query points x P X . [53] considered a Cheeger’s constant restriction on level sets which is similar to our level set regularity assumptions (A2 and A2’). [17, 18] studied local minimax rates of first-order optimization of convex functions. First-order optimization differs significantly from our setting because unbiased gradient estimation is generally impossible in the model of Eq. (1). Furthermore, most works on (first-order) non-convex optimization focus on convergence to stationary points or local minima, while we consider convergence to global minima.  2 Background and Notation We first review standard asymptotic notation that will be used throughout this paper. For two se8 quences tan u8 n“1 and tbn un“1 , we write an “ Opbn q or an À bn if lim supnÑ8 |an |{|bn | ă 8, or equivalently bn “ Ωpan q or bn Á an . Denote an “ Θpbn q or an — bn if both an À bn and an Á bn hold. We also write an “ opbn q or equivalently bn “ ωpan q if limnÑ8 |an |{|bn | “ 0. For two se8 quences of random variables tAn u8 n“1 and tBn un“1 , denote An “ OP pBn q if for every ǫ ą 0, there exists C ą 0 such that lim supnÑ8 Prr|An | ą C|Bn |s ď ǫ. For r ą 0, 1 ď p ď 8 and x P Rd , we denote Brp pxq :“ tz P Rd : }z´x}p ď ru as the d-dimensional ℓp -ball of radius r centered at x, where ř the vector ℓp norm is defined as }x}p :“ p dj“1 |xj |p q1{p for 1 ď p ă 8 and }x}8 :“ max1ďjďd |xj |. 4  For any subset S Ď Rd we denote by Brp px; Sq the set Brp pxq X S.  2.1 Passive and Active Query Models Let U be a known random quantity defined on a probability space U . The following definitions characterize all passive and active optimization algorithms: Definition 1 (The passive query model). Let x1 , . . . , xn be i.i.d. points uniformly sampled on X and y1 , . . . , yn be observations from the model Eq. (1). A passive optimization algorithm A with n queries is parameterized by a mapping φn : px1 , y1 , . . . , xn , yn , U q ÞÑ x pn that maps the i.i.d. observations tpxi , yi quni“1 to an estimated optimum x pn P X , potentially randomized by U .  Definition 2 (The active query model). An active optimization algorithm can be parameterized by mappings pχ1 , . . . , χn , φn q, where for t “ 1, . . . , n, χt : px1 , y1 , . . . , xt´1 , yt´1 , U q ÞÑ xt produces a query point xt P X based on previous observations tpxi , ti qut´1 i“1 , and φn : px1 , y1 , . . . , xn , yn , U q ÞÑ x pn  produces the final estimate. All mappings pχ1 , . . . , χn , φn q can be randomized by U .  2.2 Local Minimax Rates We use the classical local minimax analysis [51] to understand the fundamental information-theoretical limits of noisy global optimization of smooth functions. On the upper bound side, we seek (active) estimators x pn such that sup  sup  Pr rLpp xn ; f q ě C1 ¨ Rn pf0 qs ď 1{4,  f0 PΘ f PΘ1 ,}f ´f0 }8 ďεn pf0 q f  (4)  where C1 ą 0 is a positive constant. Here f0 P Θ is referred to as the reference function, and f P Θ1 is the true underlying function which is assumed to be “near” f0 . The minimax convergence rate of Lpp xn ; f q is then characterized locally by Rn pf0 q which depends on the reference function f0 . The constant of 1{4 is chosen arbitrarily and any small constant leads to similar conclusions. To establish negative results (i.e., locally minimax lower bounds), in contrast to the upper bound formulation, we assume the potential active optimization estimator x pn has perfect knowledge about the reference function f0 P Θ. We then prove locally minimax lower bounds of the form inf  sup  Pr rLpp xn ; f q ě C2 ¨ Rn pf0 qs ě 1{3,  x pn f PΘ1 ,}f ´f0 }8 ďεn pf0 q f  (5)  where C2 ą 0 is another positive constant and εn pf0 q, Rn pf0 q are desired local convergence rates for functions near the reference f0 . Although in some sense classical, the local minimax definition we propose warrants further discussion. 1. Roles of Θ and Θ1 : The reference function f0 and the true functions f are assumed to belong to different but closely related function classes Θ and Θ1 . In particular, in our paper Θ Ď Θ1 , meaning that less restrictive assumptions are imposed on the true underlying function f compared to those imposed on the reference function f0 on which Rn and εn are based. 5  2. Upper Bounds: It is worth emphasizing that the estimator x pn has no knowledge of the reference function f0 . From the perspective of upper bounds, we can consider the simpler task of producing f0 -dependent bounds (eliminating the second supremum) to instead study the (already interesting) quantity: sup Pr rLpp xn ; f0 q ě C1 Rn pf0 qs ď 1{4.  f0 PΘ f0  As indicated above we maintain the double-supremum in the definition because fewer assumptions are imposed directly on the true underlying function f , and further because it allows to more directly compare our upper and lower bounds. 3. Lower Bounds and the choice of the “localization radius” εn pf0 q: Our lower bounds allow the estimator knowledge of the reference function (this makes establishing the lower bound more pn can effectively optimize a function f close to challenging). Eq. (5) implies that no estimator x f0 beyond the convergence rate of Rn pf0 q, even if perfect knowledge of the reference function f0 is available a priori. The εn pf0 q parameter that decides the “range” in which local minimax rates apply is taken to be on the same order as the actual local rate Rn pf0 q in this paper. This is (up to constants) the smallest radius for which we can hope to obtain non-trivial lower-bounds: if we consider a much smaller radius than Rn pf0 q then the trivial estimator which outputs the minimizer of the reference function would achieve a faster rate than Rn pf0 q. Selecting the smallest possible radius makes establishing the lower bound most challenging but provides a refined picture of the complexity of zeroth-order optimization.  3 Main Results With this background in place we now turn our attention to our main results. We begin by collecting our assumptions about the true underlying function and the reference function in Section 3.1. We state and discuss the consequences of our upper and lower bounds in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 respectively. We defer most technical proofs to the Appendix and turn our attention to our optimization algorithm in Section 4.  3.1 Assumptions We first state and motivate assumptions that will be used. The first assumption states that f is locally Hölder smooth on its level sets. (A1) There exist constants κ, α, M ą 0 such that f restricted on Xf,κ :“ tx P X : f pxq ď f ˚ ` κu belongs to the Hölder class Σα pM q, meaning that f is k-times differentiable on Xf,κ and furthermore for any x, x1 P Xf,κ , 3 k ÿ  ÿ  j“0 α1 `...`αd “j  |f pα,jq pxq| `  ÿ  |f pα,kq pxq ´ f pα,kq px1 q| ď M. }x ´ x1 }α´k 8 α1 `...`αd “k  (6)  Here k “ tαu is the largest integer lower bounding α and f pα,jq pxq :“ Bj f pxq{Bxα1 1 . . . Bxαd d . We use Σακ pM q to denote the class of all functions satisfying (A1). We remark that (A1) is weaker than the standard assumption that f on its entire domain X belongs to the Hölder class Σα pM q. This 3  the particular ℓ8 norm is used for convenience only and can be replaced by any equivalent vector norms.  6  is because places with function values larger than f ˚ ` κ can be easily detected and removed by a pre-processing step. We give further details of the pre-processing step in Section 4.3. Our next assumption concern the “regularity” of the level sets of the “reference” function f0 . Define Lf0 pǫq :“ tx P X : f0 pxq ď f0˚ ` ǫu as the ǫ-level set of f0 , and µf0 pǫq :“ λpLf0 pǫqq as the Lebesgue measure of Lf0 pǫq, also known as the distribution function. Define also N pLf0 pǫq, δq as the smallest number of ℓ2 -balls of radius δ that cover Lf0 pǫq. (A2) There exist constants c0 ą 0 and C0 ą 0 such that N pLf0 pǫq, δq ď C0 r1 ` µf0 pǫqδ´d s for all ǫ, δ P p0, c0 s. We use ΘC to denote all functions that satisfy (A2) with respect to parameters C “ pc0 , C0 q. At a higher level, the regularity condition (A2) assumes that the level sets are sufficiently “regular” such that covering them with small-radius balls does not require significantly larger total volumes. For example, consider a perfectly regular case of Lf0 pǫq being the d-dimensional ℓ2 ball of radius r: Lf0 pǫq “ tx P X : }x ´ x˚ }2 ď ru. Clearly, µf0 pǫq — r d . In addition, the δ-covering number in ℓ2 of Lf0 pǫq is on the order of 1 ` pr{δqd — 1 ` µf0 pǫqδ´d , which satisfies the scaling in (A2). When (A2) holds, uniform confidence intervals of f on its level sets are easy to construct because little statistical efficiency is lost by slightly enlarging the level sets so that complete d-dimensional cubes are contained in the enlarged level sets. On the other hand, when regularity of level sets fails to hold such nonparametric estimation can be very difficult or even impossible. As an extreme example, suppose the level set Lf0 pǫq consists of n standalone and well-spaced points in X : the Lebesgue measure of Lf0 pǫq would be zero, but at least Ωpnq queries are necessary to construct uniform confidence intervals on Lf0 pǫq. It is clear that such Lf0 pǫq violates (A2), because N pLf0 pǫq, δq ě n as δ Ñ 0` but µf0 pǫq “ 0.  3.2 Upper Bound The following theorem is our main result that upper bounds the local minimax rate of noisy global optimization with active queries. Theorem 1. For any α, M, κ, c0 , C0 ą 0 and f0 P Σακ pM q X ΘC , where C “ pc0 , C0 q, define ! ) ´p2`d{αq ω εU pf q :“ sup ε ą 0 : ε µ pεq ě n{ log n , 0 f n 0  (7)  where ω ą 5 ` d{α is a large constant. Suppose also that εU n pf0 q Ñ 0 as n Ñ 8. Then for sufficiently large n, there exists an estimator x pn with access to n active queries x1 , . . . , xn P X , a constant CR ą 0 depending only on α, M, κ, c, c0 , C0 and a constant γ ą 0 depending only on α and d such that ” ı ´1{2 xn , f q ą CR logγ n ¨ pεU pf q ` n q ď 1{4. (8) sup sup Pr Lpp n 0 f0 PΣα κ pM qXΘC  f f PΣα κ pM q, pf q }f ´f0 }8 ďεU n 0  Remark 1. Unlike the (local) smoothness class Σακ pM q, the additional function class ΘC that encapsulates (A2) is imposed only on the “reference” function f0 but not the true function f to be estimated. This makes the assumptions considerably weaker because the true function f may violate either or both (A2) while our results remain valid.  7  Remark 2. The estimator x pn does not require knowledge of parameters κ, c0 , C0 or εU n pf0 q, and automatically adapts to them, as shown in the next section. It however requires knowledge of α and M , parameters of the smooth function class. Such knowledge is unlikely to be optional, as the key step of building honest confidence intervals that adapt to α and/or M is very difficult and in general not possible without additional assumptions, as shown by [10, 34]. Remark 3. When the distribution function µf0 pǫq does not change abruptly with ǫ the expression of εU n pf0 q can be significantly simplified. In particular, if for all ǫ P p0, c0 s it holds that µf0 pǫ{ log nq ě µf0 pǫq{rlog nsOp1q ,  (9)  then εU n pf0 q can be upper bounded as  ! ) Op1q εU ¨ sup ε ą 0 : ε´p2`d{αq µf0 pεq ě n . n pf0 q ď rlog ns  (10)  It is also noted that if µf0 pǫq has a polynomial behavior of µf0 pǫq — ǫβ for some constant β ě 0, then Eq. (9) is satisfied and so is Eq. (10). ´p2`d{αq µ pεq ě n{ logω nu is crucial in determining The quantity εU f0 n pf0 q “ inftε ą 0 : ε the convergence rate of optimization error of x pn locally around the reference function f0 . While the definition of εU n pf0 q is mostly implicit and involves solving an inequality concerning the distribution function µf0 p¨q, we remark that it admits a simple form when µf0 has a polynomial growth rate, as shown by the following proposition:  r ´α{p2α`d´αβq q. Proposition 2. Suppose µf0 pǫq À ǫβ for some constant β P r0, 2`d{αq. Then εU n pf0 q “ Opn ´1{2 À εU pf q “ Opn r ´α{p2α`d´αβq q. In addition, if β P r0, d{αs then εU n 0 n pf0 q ` n Proposition 2 can be easily verified by solving the system ε´p2`d{αq µf0 pεq ě n{ logω n with the condition µf0 pǫq À ǫβ . We therefore omit its proof. The following two examples give some simple reference functions f0 that satisfy the µf0 pǫq À ǫβ condition in Proposition 2 with particular values of β. Example 1. The constant function f0 ” 0 satisfies (A1) through (A3) with β “ 0.  Example 2. f0 P Σ2κ pM q that is strongly convex 4 satisfies (A1) through (A3) with β “ d{2.  Example 1 is simple to verify, as the volume of level sets of the constant function f0 ” 0 exhibits a phase transition at ǫ “ 0 and ǫ ą 0, rendering β “ 0 the only parameter option for which µf0 pǫq À ǫβ . Example 2 is more involved, and holds because the strong convexity of f0 lower bounds the growth rate of f0 when moving away from its minimum. We give a rigorous proof of Example 2 in the appendix. We also remark that f0 does not need to be exactly strongly convex for β “ d{2 to hold, and the example is valid for, e.g., piecewise strongly convex functions with a constant number of pieces too. To best interpret the results in Theorem 1 and Proposition 2, it is instructive to compare the “local” rate n´α{p2α`d´αβq with the baseline rate n´α{p2α`dq , which can be attained by reconstructing f in sup-norm and applying Proposition 1. Since β ě 0, the local convergence rate established in Theorem 1 is never slower, and the improvement compared to the baseline rate n´α{p2α`dq is dictated by β, which governs the growth rate of volume of level sets of the reference function f0 . In particular, for functions that grows fast when moving away from its minimum, the parameter β is large and therefore the local convergence rate around f0 could be much faster than n´α{p2α`dq . 4  A twice differentiable function f0 is strongly convex if there exists σ ą 0 such that ∇2 f0 pxq ľ σI, @x P X .  8  Theorem 1 also implies concrete convergence rates for special functions considered in Examples 1 and 2. For the constant reference function f0 ” 0, Example 1 and Theorem 1 yield that Rn pf0 q — n´α{p2α`dq , which matches the baseline rate n´α{p2α`dq and suggests that f0 ” 0 is the worst-case reference function. This is intuitive, because f0 ” 0 has the most drastic level set change at ǫ Ñ 0` and therefore small perturbations anywhere of f0 result in changes of the optimal locations. On the other hand, if f0 is strongly smooth and convex as in Example 2, Theorem 1 suggests that Rn pf0 q — n´1{2 , which is significantly better than the n´2{p4`dq baseline rate 5 and also matches existing works on zeroth-order optimization of convex functions [1]. The faster rate holds intuitively because strongly convex functions grows fast when moving away from the minimum, which implies small level set changes. An active query algorithm could then focus most of its queries onto the small level sets of the underlying function, resulting in more accurate local function reconstructions and faster optimization error rate. Our proof of Theorem 1 is constructive, by upper bounding the local minimax optimization error of an explicit algorithm. At a higher level, the algorithm partitions the n active queries evenly into log n epochs, and level sets of f are estimated at the end of each epoch by comparing (uniform) confidence intervals on a dense grid on X . It is then proved that the volume of the estimated level sets contracts geometrically, until the target convergence rate Rn pf0 q is attained. The complete proof of Theorem 1 is placed in Section 5.2.  3.3 Lower Bounds We prove local minimax lower bounds that match the upper bounds in Theorem 1 up to logarithmic terms. As we remarked in Section 2.2, in the local minimax lower bound formulation we assume the data analyst has full knowledge of the reference function f0 , which makes the lower bounds stronger as more information is available a priori. To facilitate such a strong local minimax lower bounds, the following additional condition is imposed on the reference function f0 of which the data analyst has perfect information. (A2’) There exist constants c10 , C01 ą 0 such that M pLf0 pǫq, δq ě C01 µf0 pǫqδ´d for all ǫ, δ P p0, c10 s, where M pLf0 pǫq, δq is the maximum number of disjoint ℓ2 balls of radius δ that can be packed into Lf0 pǫq. We denote Θ1C1 as the class of functions that satisfy (A2’) with respect to parameters C1 “ pc10 , C01 q ą 0. Intuitively, (A2’) can be regarded as the “reverse” version of (A2), which basically means that (A2) is “tight”. We are now ready to state our main negative result, which shows, from an information-theoretical perspective, that the upper bound in Theorem 1 is not improvable. Theorem 2. Suppose α, c0 , C0 , c10 , C01 ą 0 and κ “ 8. Denote C “ pc0 , C0 q and C1 “ pc10 , C01 q. For any f0 P ΘC X Θ1C1 , define ! ) εLn pf0 q :“ sup ε ą 0 : ε´p2`d{αq µf0 pεq ě n . (11)  Then there exist constant M ą 0 depending on α, d, C, C1 such that, for any f0 P Σακ pM {2q X ΘC X ΘC1 , ” ı 1 (12) xn ; f q ě εLn pf0 q ě . inf sup Pr Lpp f 3 x pn f PΣα κ pM q, }f ´f0 }8 ď2εLn pf0 q  5  Note that f0 being strongly smooth implies α “ 2 in the local smoothness assumption.  9  Remark 4. For any f0 and n it always holds that εLn pf0 q ď εU n pf0 q.  Op1q . Remark 5. If the distribution function µf0 pǫq satisfies Eq. (9) in Remark 3, then εLn pf0 q ě εU n pf0 q{rlog ns  Remark 4 shows that there might be a gap between the locally minimax upper and lower bounds in Theorems 1 and 2. Nevertheless, Remark 5 shows that under the mild condition of µf0 pǫq does not L change too abruptly with ǫ, the gap between εU n pf0 q and εn pf0 q is only a poly-logarithmic term in n. Additionally, the following proposition derives explicit expression of εLn pf0 q for reference functions whose distribution functions have a polynomial growth, which matches the Proposition 2 up to log n factors. Its proof is again straightforward. Proposition 3. Suppose µf0 pǫq Á ǫβ for some β P r0, 2 ` d{αq. Then εLn pf0 q “ Ωpn´α{p2α`d´αβq q. The following proposition additionally shows the existence of f0 P Σα8 pM q X ΘC X ΘC1 that satisfies µf0 pǫq — ǫβ for any values of α ą 0 and β P r0, d{αs. Its proof is given in the appendix. Proposition 4. Fix arbitrary α, M ą 0 and β P r0, d{αs. There exists f0 P Σακ pM q X ΘC X ΘC1 for κ “ 8 and constants C “ pc0 , C0 q, C1 “ pc10 , C01 q that depend only on α, β, M and d such that µf0 pǫq — ǫβ . Theorem 2 and Proposition 3 show that the n´α{p2α`d´αβq upper bound on local minimax convergence rate established in Theorem 1 is not improvable up to logarithmic factors of n. Such information-theoretical lower bounds on the convergence rates hold even if the data analyst has perfect information of f0 , the reference function on which the n´α{p2α`d´αβq local rate is based. Our results also imply an n´α{p2α`dq minimax lower bound over all α-Hölder smooth functions, showing that without additional assumptions, noisy optimization of smooth functions is as difficult as reconstructing the unknown function in sup-norm. Our proof of Theorem 2 also differs from existing minimax lower bound proofs for active nonparametric models [13]. The classical approach is to invoke Fano’s inequality and to upper bound the KL divergence between different underlying functions f and g using }f ´ g}8 , corresponding to the point x P X that leads to the largest KL divergence. Such an approach, however, does not produce tight lower bounds for our problem. To overcome such difficulties, we borrow the lower bound analysis for bandit pure exploration problems in [7]. In particular, our analysis considers the query distribution of any active query algorithm A “ pϕ1 , . . . , ϕn , φn q under the reference function f0 and bounds the perturbation in query distributions between f0 and f using Le Cam’s lemma. Afterwards, an adversarial function choice f can be made based on the query distributions of the considered algorithm A. We defer the complete proof of Theorem 2 to Section 5.3. Theorem 2 applies to any global optimization method that makes active queries, corresponding to the query model in Definition 2. The following theorem, on the other hand, shows that for passive algorithms (Definition 1) the n´α{p2α`dq optimization rate is not improvable even with additional level set assumptions imposed on f0 . This demonstrates an explicit gap between passive and adaptive query models in global optimization problems. Theorem 3. Suppose α, c0 , C0 , c10 , C01 ą 0 and κ “ 8. Denote C “ pc0 , C0 q and C1 “ pc10 , C01 q. Then there exist constant M ą 0 depending on α, d, C, C1 and N depending on M such that, for any f0 P Σακ pM {2q X ΘC X ΘC1 satisfying εLn pf0 q ď εrLn “: rlog n{nsα{p2α`dq , ı 1 ” for all n ě N. (13) xn ; f q ě εrLn ě Pr Lpp inf sup f 3 x qn f PΣα pM q, κ }f ´f0 }8 ď2r εLn  10  Intuitively, the apparent gap demonstrated by Theorems 2 and 3 between the active and passive query models stems from the observation that, a passive algorithm A only has access to uniformly sampled query points x1 , . . . , xn and therefore cannot focus on a small level set of f in order to improve query efficiency. In addition, for functions that grow faster when moving away from their minima (implying a larger value of β), the gap between passive and active query models becomes bigger as active queries can more effectively exploit the restricted level sets of such functions.  4 Our Algorithm In this section we describe a concrete algorithm that attains the upper bound in Theorem 1. We start with a cleaner algorithm that operates under the slightly stronger condition that κ “ 8 in (A1), meaning that f is α-Hölder smooth on the entire domain X . The generalization to κ ą 0 being a constant is given in Section 4.3 with an additional pre-processing step. Let Gn P X be a finite grid of points in X . We assume the finite grid Gn satisfies the following two mild conditions: (B1) Points in Gn are sampled i.i.d. from an unknown distribution PX on X ; furthermore, the density pX associated with PX satisfies p0 ď pX pxq ď p0 for all x P X , where 0 ă p0 ď p0 ă 8 are uniform constants; (B2) |Gn | Á n3d{ minpα,1q and log |Gn | “ Oplog nq. Remark 6. Although typically the choices of the grid points Gn belong to the data analyst, in some applications the choices of design points are not completely free. For example, in material synthesis experiments some environment parameter settings (e.g., temperature and pressure) might not be accessible due to budget or physical constraints. Thus, we choose to consider less restrictive conditions imposed on the design grid Gn , allowing it to be more flexible in real-world applications. For any subset S Ď Gn and a “weight” function ̺ : Gn Ñ R` , define the extension S ˝ p̺q of S with respect to ̺ as ď 8 8 S ˝ p̺q :“ B̺pxq px; Gn q where B̺pxq px; Gn q “ tz P Gn : }z ´ x}8 ď ̺pxqu. (14) xPS  The algorithm can then be formulated as two level of iterations, with the outer loop shrinking the “active set” Sτ and the inner loop collecting data that reduce lengths of confidence intervals on the active set. A pseudocode description of our proposed algorithm is given in Fig. 1.  4.1 Local Polynomial Regression We use local polynomial regression [21] to obtain the estimate fppxq. In particular, for any x P Gn and a bandwidth parameter h ą 0, consider a least square polynomial estimate fph P arg min gPPk  t ÿ  t1 “1  Irxt1 P Bh8 pxqs ¨ pyt1 ´ gpxt1 qq2 ,  (15)  where Bh8 pxq :“ tx1 P X : }x1 ´ x}8 ď hu and Pk denotes all polynomials of degree k on X . To analyze the performance of fph evaluated at a certain point x P X , define mapping ψx,h : śj ´1 d 1 pzq, . . . , ψ k pzqq where ψ j z ÞÑ p1, ψx,h x,h x,h : z ÞÑ r ℓ“1 h pziℓ ´ xiℓ qsi1 ,...,ij “1 is the degree-j j  polynomial mapping from Rd to Rd . Also define Ψt,h :“ pψx,h pxt1 qq1ďt1 ďt,xt1 PBh pxq as the m ˆ D 11  Parameters: α, M , δ, n Output: x pn “ xn , the final prediction Initialization: S0 “ Gn , ̺0 pxq ” 8, T “ tlog2 nu, n0 “ tn{T u; for τ “ 1, 2, . . . , T do Compute “extended” sample set Sτ˝´1 p̺τ ´1 q defined in Eq. (14); for t “ pτ ´ 1qn0 ` 1 to τ n0 do Sample xt uniformly at random from Sτ˝´1 p̺τ ´1 q and observe yt “ f pxt q ` wt ; end For every x P Sτ ´1 , find bandwidth ht pxq and build CI rℓt pxq, ut pxqs in Eq. (19); Sτ :“ tx P Sτ ´1 : ℓt pxq ď minx1 PSτ ´1 ut px1 qu, ̺τ pxq :“ mint̺τ ´1 pxq, ht pxqu. end Figure 1: The main algorithm. ř aggregated design matrix, where m “ tt1 “1 Irxt1 P Bh8 pxqs and D “ 1 ` d ` . . . ` dk , k “ tαu. The estimate fph defined in Eq. (15) then admits the following closed-form expression: : J fph pzq ” ψx,h pzqJ pΨJ t,h Ψt,h q Ψt,h Yt,h ,  where Yt,h “ pyt1 q1ďt1 ďt,xt1 PBh8 pxq and A: is the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse of A. The following lemma gives a finite-sample analysis of the error of fph pxq:  Lemma 1. Suppose f satisfies Eq. (6) on Bh8 px; X q, maxzPBh8 px;X q }ψx,h pzq}2 ď b and σIDˆD for some σ ą 0. Then for any δ P p0, 1{2q, with probability 1 ´ δ c 2 ˇ ˇ ˇfph pxq ´ f pxqˇ ď b M dk hα ` b 5D lnp1{δq “: ηh,δ pxq. σ σm loooomoooon looooooomooooooon bh,δ pxq  (16)  1 J m Ψt,h Ψt,h  ľ  (17)  sh,δ pxq  Remark 7. bh,δ pxq, sh,δ pxq and ηh,δ pxq depend on x becauses σ depends on Ψt,h , which further depends on the sample points in the neighborhood Bh8 px; X q of x. a In the rest of the paper we define bh,δ pxq :“ pb2 {σqM dk hα and sh,δ pxq :“ b 5D lnp1{δq{σm as the bias and standard deviation terms in the error of fph pxq, respectively. We also denote ηh,δ pxq :“ bh,δ pxq ` sh,δ pxq as the overall error in fph pxq. Notice that when bandwidth h increases, the bias term bh,δ pxq is likely to increase too because of the hα term; on the other hand, with h increasing the local neighborhood Bh8 px; X q enlarges and would potentially contain more samples, implying a larger m and smaller standard deviation term sh,δ pxq. A careful selection of bandwidth h balances bh,δ pxq and sh,δ pxq and yields appropriate confidence intervals on f pxq, a topic that is addressed in the next section.  4.2 Bandwidth Selection and Confidence Intervals Given the expressions of bias bh,δ pxq and standard deviation sh,δ pxq in Eq. (17), the bandwidth ht pxq ą 0 at epoch t and point x is selected as ht pxq :“  ( jt pxq 2 where j pxq :“ arg max j P N, j ď n : b 2 ,δ pxq ď sj{n2 ,δ pxq . t j{n n2 12  (18)  More specifically, ht pxq is the largest positive value in an evenly spaced grid tj{n2 u such that the bias of fph pxq is smaller than its standard deviation. Such bandwidth selection is in principle similar to the Lepski’s method [33], with the exception that an upper bound on the bias for any bandwidth parameter is known and does not need to be estimated from data. With the selection of bandwidth ht pxq at epoch t and query point x, a confidence interval on f pxq is constructed as ! ! ) ) ph pxq pxq ´ ηh pxq,δ pxq and ut pxq :“ min fph pxq pxq ` ηh pxq,δ pxq . (19) f ℓt pxq :“ max t1 t1 t1 t1 1 1 1ďt ďt  1ďt ďt  Note that for any x P X , the lower confidence edge ℓt pxq is a non-decreasing function in t and the upper confidence edge ut pxq is a non-increasing function in t.  4.3 Pre-screening We describe a pre-screening procedure that relaxes the smoothness condition from κ “ 8 to κ “ Ωp1q, meaning that only local smoothness of f around its minimum values is required. Let n0 “ tn{ log nu, x1 , . . . , xn0 be points i.i.d. uniformly sampled from X and y1 , . . . , yn0 be their corresponding responses. For every grid point x P Gn , perform the following: ´1{2d 1. Compute fqpxq as the average of all yi such that }xi ´ x}8 ď n0 log3 n “: h0 ;  2. Remove all x P Gn from S0 if fqpxq ě minzPGn fqpzq ` 1{ log n.  Remark 8. The 1{ log n term in removal condition fqpxq ě minzPGn fqpzq ` 1{ log n is not important, and can be replaced with any sequence tωn u such that limnÑ8 ωn “ 0 and limnÑ8 ωn nt “ 8 for any t ą 0. The readers are referred to the proof of Proposition 5 in the appendix for the motivation of this term as well as the selection of the pre-screening bandwidth h0 . At a high level, the pre-screening step computes local averages of y and remove grid points in S0 “ Gn whose estimated values are larger than the minimum in Gn . To analyze the pre-screening step, we state the following proposition: Proposition 5. Assume f P Σακ pM q and let S01 be the screened grid after step 2 of the pre-screening procedure. Then for sufficiently large n, with probability 1 ´ Opn´1 q we have ď min1 f pxq “ min f pxq and S01 Ď Bh80 px; X q, (20) xPS0  zPGn  xPLf pκ{2q  where Lf pκ{2q “ tx P X : f pxq ď f ˚ ` κ{2u. To interpret Proposition 5, note that large n, f P Σακ pM q implies f being α-Hölder Ť for sufficiently smooth (i.e., f satisfies Eq. (6)) on xPLf pκ{2q Bh80 px; X q, because κ ą 0 is a constant and h0 Ñ 0 as n Ñ 8. Subsequently, the proposition shows that with high probability, the pre-screening step will remove all grid points in Gn in non-smooth regions of f , while maintaining the global optimal solution. This justifies the pre-processing step for f P Σακ pM q, because f is smooth on the grid after pre-processing. The proof of Proposition 5 uses the fact that the local mean estimation is large provided that all data points in the local mean estimator are large, regardless of their underlying smoothness. The complete proof of Proposition 5 is deferred to the appendix.  13  5 Proofs of main theorems 5.1 Proof of Lemma 1 Our proof closely follows the analysis of asymptotic convergence rates for series estimators in the seminal work of [40]. We further work out all constants in the error bounds to arrive at a completely finite-sample result, which is then used to construct finite-sample confidence intervals. We start with as polynomial interpolation results for all Hölder smooth functions in Bh8t px; X q. Lemma 2. Suppose f satisfies Eq. (6) on Bh8 px; X q. Then there exists frx P Pk such that ˇ ˇ sup ˇf pzq ´ frx pzqˇ ď M dk hα .  (21)  zPBh8 px;X q  Proof. Consider frx pzq :“ f pxq `  k ÿ  ÿ  j“1 α1 `...`αd “j  d ź Bj f pxq pzℓ ´ xℓ qαℓ . Bxα1 1 . . . Bxαd d ℓ“1  (22)  By Taylor expansion with Lagrangian remainders, there exists ξ P p0, 1q such that ˇ ˇ ˇfrx pzq ´ f pzqˇ ď  ÿ  α1 `...`αd “k  d ˇ pαq ˇ ź ˇf px ` ξpz ´ xqq ´ f pαq pxqˇ ¨ |zℓ ´ xℓ |αℓ .  (23)  ℓ“1  Because f satisfies Eq. (6) on Bh8 px; X q, we have that |f pαq px`ξpz´xqq´f pαq pxq| ď M ¨}z´x}α´k 8 . Also note that |zℓ ´ xℓ | ď }z ´ x}8 ď h for all z P Bh8 px; X q. The lemma is thus proved. Using Eq. (16), the local polynomial estimate fph can be written as fph pzq ” ψx,h pzqJ θph , where ´1 J θph “ pΨJ t,h Ψt,h q Ψt,h Yt,h .  (24)  r Denote also that In addition, because frx P Pk , there exists θr P RD such that frx pzq ” ψx,h pzqJ θ. Ft,h :“ pf pxt1 qq1ďt1 ďt,xt1 PBh8 pxq , ∆t,h :“ pf pxt1 q´frx pxt1 qq1ďt1 ďt,xt1 PBh8 pxq and Wt,h :“ pwt1 q1ďt1 ďt,xt1 PBh8 pxq . Eq. (24) can then be re-formulated as ” ı ´1 J r (25) θph “ pΨJ t,h Ψt,h q Ψt,h Ψt,h θ ` ∆t,h ` Wt,h „ ´1 „  1 J 1 J “ θr ` (26) Ψt,h Ψt,h Ψ p∆t,h ` Wt,h q . m m t,h Because  1 J m Ψt,h Ψt,h  ľ σIDˆD and supzPB 8 pxq }ψx,h pzq}2 ď b, we have that h  › ›„ ´1 › › 1 1 b › › J J r 2 ď }∆t,h }8 ` › Ψt,h Ψt,h Ψt,h Wt › . }θph ´ θ} › › m σ m  (27)  2  Invoking Lemma 2 we have }∆t,h }8 ď M dk hα . In addition, because Wt „ Nm p0, Imˆn q, we have that ˜ ´1 ´1 ¸ „ „ 1 1 J 1 J 1 J . (28) Ψ Ψt,h Ψ Wt „ ND 0, Ψ Ψt,h m t,h m t,h m m t,h 14  Applying concentration inequalities for quadratic forms of Gaussian random vectors (Lemma 11), with probability 1 ´ δ it holds that › ›„ c ´1 › › 1 1 5D logp1{δq › › ΨJ Ψ ΨJ . (29) › t,h Wt › ď › › m t,h t,h m σm 2  We then have that with probability 1 ´ δ that  Finally, noting that  r 2 ď b M dk hα ` }θph ´ θ} t σh  c  5D logp1{δq . σm  r ď b}θph ´ θ} r2 |fph pxq ´ f pxq| “ |fph pxq ´ frx pxq| “ |ψpxqJ pθph ´ θq|  (30)  (31)  we complete the proof of Lemma 1.  5.2 Proof of Theorem 1 In this section we prove Theorem 1. We prove the theorem by considering every reference function f0 P Σακ pM q X ΘC separately. For simplicity, we assume κ “ 8 throughout the proof. The 0 ă κ ă 8 can be handled by replacing X with S0 which is the grid after the pre-screening step described in Section 4.3. We also suppress dependency on d, α, M, C, p0 , p0 in Op¨q, Ωp¨q, Θp¨q, Á, À and — r and Ωp¨q r notations. notations. We further suppress logarithmic terms of n in Op¨q The following lemma is our main lemma, which shows that the active set Sτ in our proposed algorithm shrinks geometrically before it reaches a certain level. To simplify notations, denote r c0 :“ 10c0 and (A2) then hold for all ǫ, δ P r0, r c0 s for all f0 P ΘC .  ´1{2 s log 2 nu, where C ą 0 Lemma 3. For τ “ 1, . . . , T define ετ :“ maxtr c0 ¨ 2´τ , C3 rεU 3 n pf0 q ` n is a constant depending only on d, α, M, p0 , p0 and C. Then for sufficiently large n, with probability 1 ´ Opn´1 q the following holds uniformly for all outer iterations τ “ 1, . . . , T :  Sτ Ď Lf pετ q.  (32)  Lemma 3 shows that the level ετ in Lf pετ q that contains Sτ ´1 shrinks geometriclly, until the ´1{2 s log 2 n is violated. If the condition is never violated, then at the condition ετ ě C3 rεU n pf0 q ` n end of the last epoch τ ˚ we have ετ ˚ “ Opn´1 q because τ ˚ “ log n, in which case Theorem 1 clearly ´1{2 s log 2 n holds. On the other hand, because Sτ Ď Sτ ´1 always holds, we have ετ ˚ À rεU n pf0 q ` n which justifies the convergence rate in Theorem 1. In the rest of this section we prove Lemma 3. We need several technical lemmas and propositions. Except for Proposition 6 that is straightforward, the proofs of the other technical lemmas are deferred to the end of this section. We first show that the grid Gn is sufficiently dense for approximate optimization purposes. Define x˚n :“ argminxPGn f pxq and fn˚ :“ f px˚n q. We have the following lemma: Lemma 4. Suppose (B1) and (B2) hold. Then with probability 1 ´ Opn´1 q the following holds: r ´3{ minpα,1q q; 1. supxPX minx1 PGn }x ´ x1 }8 “ Opn  r ´3 q. 2. fn˚ ´ f ˚ “ Opn  15  The next proposition shows that with high probability, the confidence intervals constructed in the algorithm are truthful and the successive rejection procedure will never exclude the true optimizer of f on Gn . Proposition 6. Suppose δ “ 1{n4 |Gn |. Then with probability 1 ´ Opn´1 q the following holds: 1. f pxq P rℓt pxq, ut pxqs for all 1 ď t ď n and x P Gn ; 2. x˚n P Sτ for all 0 ď τ ď n. Proof. The first property is true by applying the union bound over all t “ 1, . . . , n and x P Gn . The second property then follows, because ℓt px˚n q ď fn˚ and minxPSτ ´1 ut pxq ě fn˚ for all τ . The following lemma shows that every small box centered around a certain sample point x P Gn contains a sufficient number of sample points whose least eigenvalue can be bounded with high probability under the polynomial mapping ψx,h defined in Section 3.2. 1 pxq, . . . , K n pxq be n independent point Lemma 5. For any x P Gn , 1 ď m ď n and h ą 0, let Kh,m h,m sets, where each point set consists of m points sampled i.i.d. uniformly at random from Bh8 px; Gn q “ Gn X Bh8 pxq. With probability 1 ´ Opn´1 q the following holds true uniformly for all x P Gn , ℓ pxq, ℓ P rns as n Ñ 8: h P tj{n2 : j P N, j ď n2 u and Kh,m  1. suphą0 supzPBh8 pxq }ψx,h pzq}2 — Θp1q; 2. |Bh8 px; Gn q| — hd |Gn |; ℓ ℓ pxqq — Θp1q for all m ě Ωplog2 nq and m ď |G |, where σ 3. σmin pKh,m n min pKh,m pxqq is the ř 1 J least eigenvalue of m zPK ℓ pxq ψx,h pzqψx,h pzq . h,m  Remark 9. It is possible to improve the concentration result in Eq. (51) using the strategies adopted in [14] based on sharper Bernstein type concentration inequalities. Such improvements are, however, not important in establishing the main results of this paper. The next lemma shows that, the bandwidth ht selected at the end of each outer iteration τ is nearoptimal, being sandwiched between two quantities determined by the size of the active sample grid Srτ ´1 :“ Sτ˝´1 p̺τ ´1 q.  Lemma 6. There exist constants C1 , C2 ą 0 depending only on d, α, M, p0 , p0 and C such that with probability 1´Opn´1 q, the following holds for every outer iteration τ P t1, . . . , T u and all x P Sτ ´1 : C1 rr ντ ´1 n0 s´1{p2α`dq ´ τ {n ď ̺τ pxq ď ht pxq ď C2 rr ντ ´1 n0 s´1{p2α`dq log n ` τ {n,  (33)  where νrτ ´1 :“ |Gn |{|Srτ ´1 |.  We are now ready to state the proof of Lemma 3, which is based on an inductive argument over the epochts τ “ 1, . . . , T .  Proof. We use induction to prove this lemma. For the base case τ “ 1, because }f ´ f0 }8 ď εU n pf0 q and εU pf q Ñ 0 as n Ñ 8, it suffices to prove that S Ď L pr c {4q for sufficiently large n. Because 1 f0 0 n 0 r ´α{p2α`dq q for all Sr0 “ S0 “ Gn , invoking Lemmas 6 and 1 we have that |ut pxq ´ ℓt pxq| “ Opn x P Gn with high probability at the end of the first outer iteration τ “ 1. Therefore, for sufficiently c0 {4q. large n we conclude that supxPGn |ut pxq ´ ℓt pxq| ď c0 {8 and hence S1 Ď Lf0 pr 16  We now prove the lemma for τ ě 2, assuming it holds for τ ´ 1. We also assume that n (and hence n0 ) is sufficiently large, such that the maximum CI length maxxPG |ut pxq ´ ℓt pxq| after the first outer iteration τ “ 1 is smaller than c0 , where c0 is a constant such that 2 U Because }f ´ f0 }8 ď εU n pf0 q and ετ ´1 ě C3 εn pf0 q log n, for appropriately chosen constant C3 that is not too small, we have that }f ´ f0 }8 ď ετ ´1 . By the inductive hypothesis we have Sτ ´1 Ď Lf pετ ´1 q Ď Lf0 pετ ´1 ` }f ´ f0 }8 q Ď Lf0 p2ετ ´1 q.  (34)  Subsequently, denoting ρ˚τ ´1 :“ maxxPSτ ´1 ̺τ ´1 pxq we have Srτ ´1 “ Sτ˝´1 Ď L˝f0 p2ετ ´1 , ρ˚τ ´1 q.  (35)  µ˝f0 p2ετ ´1 , ρ˚τ ´1 q À |Hn | ¨ rρ˚τ ´1 sd À µf0 p2ετ ´1 q ` rρ˚τ ´1 sd .  (36)  Ť  2 pxq be the smallest covering set of Lf0 p2ετ ´1 q, meaning that Lf0 p2ετ ´1 q Ď xPHn Bρ˚ τ ´1 2 pxq, where Bρ2˚ pxq “ tz P X : }z ´ x}2 ď ρ˚τ ´1 u is the ℓ2 ball of radius ρ˚τ ´1 xPHn Bρ˚ τ ´1 τ ´1 centered at x. By (A2), we know Ť that |Hn | À 1 ` rρ˚τ ´1 s´d µf0 p2ετ ´1 q. In addition, the enlarged level 8 ˝ ˚ pxq. Subsequently, set satisfies Lf0 p2ετ ´1 , ρτ ´1 q Ď xPHn B2ρ ˚ τ ´1  Ť  Let  By Lemma 6, the monotonicity of |Srτ ´1 | and the fact that p0 ď pX pzq ď p0 for all z P X , we have ´1{p2α`dq  ρ˚τ ´1 À rµ˝f pετ ´1 , ρ˚τ ´1 qs1{p2α`dq n0  log n  (37)  ´1{p2α`dq  ď rµ˝f0 p2ετ ´1 , ρ˚τ ´1 qs1{p2α`dq n0 log n ¯1{p2α`dq ´ ´1{p2α`dq À µf0 p2ετ ´1 q ` rρ˚τ ´1 sd n0 log n.  (38) (39)  Re-arranging terms on both sides of Eq. (39) we have " * 1 1 1 ´ 2α`d ´ 2α ˚ log n, n0 log n . ρτ ´1 À max rµf0 p2ετ ´1 qs 2α`d n0  (40)  On the other hand, according to the selection procedure of the bandwidth ht pxq, we have that ηht pxq,δ pxq À bht pxq,δ pxq. Invoking Lemma 6 we have for all x P Sτ ´1 that ηht pxq,δ pxq À bht pxq,δ pxq À rht pxqsα  (41)  À rr ντ ´1 n0 s´α{p2α`dq log n  (42)  log n  (43)  ´α{p2α`dq  À rr ντ ´2 n0 s  À  rρ˚τ ´1 sα log n.  (44)  Here Eq. (42) holds by invoking the upper bound on ht pxq in Lemma 6, Eq. (43) holds because νrτ ´1 ě νrτ ´2 , and Eq. (44) holds by again invoking the lower bound on ̺τ ´1 pxq in Lemma 6. Combining Eqs. (40,44) we have " * α ´ α ´1 max ηht pxq,δ pxq À max rµf0 p2ετ ´1 qs 2α`d n0 2α`d log2 n, n0 2 log n . (45) xPSτ ´1  Recall that n0 “ n{ log n and εU n pf0 q ď ετ ´1 , provided that C3 is not too small. By definition, ´p2`d{αq µ pεq ď n{ logω n for some large constant ω ą 5 ` d{α. pf q satisfies ε every ε ě εU 0 f0 n Subsequently, α  α ´ 2α`d  rµf0 p2ετ ´1 qs 2α`d n0  α  ωα  α ´ 2α`d  log2 À 2ετ ´1 n 2α`d log´ 2α`d n ¨ n0 17  log2 n  (46)  À ετ ´1 {rlog ns  pω´5´d{αqα 2α`d  .  (47)  Because ω ą 5 ` d{α, the right-hand side of Eq. (47) is asymptotically dominated 6 by ετ ´1 . In ´1{2 addition, n0 log n is also asymptotically dominated by ετ ´1 because ετ ´1 ě C3 n´1{2 logω n. Therefore, for sufficiently large n we have max ηht pxq,δ pxq ď ετ ´1 {4.  (48)  xPSτ ´1  Lemma 3 is thus proved. 5.2.1  Proof of Lemma 4  Proof. Let HN Ď X be the finite subset of X such that |HN | “ N and supxPX minx1 PHn }x ´ x1 }8 is maximized. By standard results of metric entropy number of the d-dimensional unit box (see for example, [50, Lemma 2.2]), we have that supxPX minx1 PHn }x ´ x1 }8 À N ´1{d . For any x P Hn , consider an ℓ8 ball Br8n pxq or radius rn centered at x, with rn to be specified later. Because the density of PX is uniformly bounded away from below on X , we have that PX px P Br8n pxqq Á rnd . Therefore, applying union bound over all x P Hn we have that ! ) ‰ “ (49) PX Dx P HN , Gn X Br8n pxq “ H ď N p1 ´ rnd q|Gn | À exp ´rnd |Gn | ` log N .  Set N “ |Gn | and rn — n´3{ minpα,1q log n. The right-hand side of the above inequality is then upper bounded by Op1{n2 q, thanks to the assumption (A1) and that |Gn | Á n3d{ minpα,1q . The first property is then proved by noting that }x ´ x1 }8 . }x ´ x1 }8 ` max min }x ´ x1 }8 ď sup min sup min 1 1 1 xPX x PGn  (50)  xPHn x PGn  xPX x PHn  minpα,1q  To prove the second property, note that for any x, x1 P X , |f pxq ´ f px1 q| ď M ¨ }x ´ x1 }8 r ´3 q. The first property then implies that fn˚ ´ f ˚ “ Opn 5.2.2  .  Proof of Lemma 5  Proof. We first show that the first property holds almost surely. Recall the definition of ψx,h , we have that 1 ď }ψx,h pzq}2 ď D ¨ rmax1ďjďd h´1 |zj ´ xj |sk . Because }z ´ x}8 ď h for all z P Bh8 pxq, supzPB 8 pxq }ψx,h pzq}2 À Op1q for all h ą 0. Thus, suphą0 supzPB 8 pxq }ψx,h pzq}2 — Θp1q for all h h x P Gn . For the second property, by Hoeffding’s inequality (Lemma 10) and the union bound, with probability 1 ´ Opn´1 q we have that ˇ d ˇ 8 ˇ ˇ |Bh px; Gn q| log n ´ PX pz P Bh8 pxqqˇˇ À . (51) max ˇˇ x,h |Gn | |Gn |  In addition, note that PX pz P Bh8 px; X qq ě p0 λpBh8 px; X qq Á hd and PX pz P Bh8 px; X qq ď 8 p0 λpBh8 px; X qq À hd , where λp¨q a |Bh px; Gn q| adenotes the Lebesgue measure on X . Subsequently, is lower bounded by Ωphd |Gn |´ |Gn | log nq and upper bounded by Ophd |Gn |` |Gn | log nq. The second property is then proved by noting that hd Á n´d and |Gn | Á n3d{ minpα,1q . 6  We say tan u is asymptotically dominated by tbn u if limnÑ8 |an |{|bn | “ 0.  18  We next prove the third property. Because p0 ď pX pzq P p0 for all z P X , we have that p0  ż  »  —1 ψx,h pzqψx,h pzqJ dUx,hpzq ĺ E – m Bh8 px;X q ĺ p0  ż  ÿ  ﬁ  ℓ zPKh,m  Bh8 px;X q  ﬃ ψx,h pzqψx,h pzqJ ﬂ  ψx,h pzqψx,h pzqJ dUx,h pzq,  where Ux,h is the uniform distribution on Bh8 px; X q. Note also that ż ż ψx,h pzqψx,h pzqJ dUx,h pzq ψ0,1 pzqψ0,1 pzqJ dU pzq ĺ  (52)  (53)  (54)  Bh8 px;X q  X  ĺ 2d  ż  X  ψ0,1 pzqψ0,1 pzqJ dU pzq  (55)  where U is the uniform distribution on X “ r0, 1sd . The following proposition upper and lower ş bounds the eigenvalues of X ψ0,1 pzqψ0,1 pzqJ dU pzq, which is proved in the appendix.  Proposition 7. There exist constants 0 ă ψ0 ď Ψ0 ă 8 depending only on d, D such that ż ψ0,1 pzqψ0,1 pzqJ dU pzq ĺ Ψ0 IDˆD . ψ0 IDˆD ĺ  (56)  X  Using Proposition 7 and Eqs. (54,55), we conclude that » ﬁ —1 ÿ ﬃ Ωp1q ¨ IDˆD ĺ E – ψx,h pzqψx,h pzqJ ﬂ ĺ Op1q ¨ IDˆD . m ℓ  (57)  zPKh,m  Applying matrix Chernoff bound (Lemma 12) and the union bound, we have that with probability 1 ´ Opn´1 q, › › › › c › ›1 ÿ “ ‰ log n › › J J ψx,h pzqψx,h pzq ´ E ψx,h pzqψx,h pzq |z P Bh pxq › À max › . (58) › x,h,m,ℓ › m m ℓ › › zPKh,m pxq op  Combining Eqs. (57,58) and applying Weyl’s inequality (Lemma 13) we have a a ℓ pxqq À Op1q ´ Op log n{mq. Ωp1q ´ Op log n{mq À σmin pKh,m  (59)  The third property is therefore proved. 5.2.3  Proof of Lemma 6  Proof. We use induction to prove this lemma. For the base case of τ “ 1, we have Sr0 “ S0 “ Gn and therefore νrτ ´1 “ 1. Furthermore, applying Lemma 5 we have that for all h “ j{n2 , c log n α . (60) bh,δ pxq — h and sh,δ pxq — hd n0 19  Thus, for h selected according to Eq. (18) as the largest bandwidth of the form j{n2 , j P N such that ´1{p2α`dq bh,δ pxq ď sh,δ pxq, both bh,δ pxq, sh,δ pxq are on the order of n0 up to logarithmic terms of ´1{p2α`dq n, and therefore one can pick appropriate constants C1 , C2 ą 0 such that C1 n0 ď ̺1 pxq ď ´1{p2α`dq C2 n 0 log n holds for all x P Gn . We next prove the lemma for τ ą 1, assuming it holds for τ ´1. We first establish the lower bound part. Define ρ˚τ ´1 :“ minzPSτ ´1 ̺τ ´1 pzq. By inductive hypothesis, ρ˚τ ´1 ě C1 rr ντ ´2 n0 s´1{p2α`dq ´ pτ ´ 1q{n. Note also that νrτ ´1 ě νrτ ´2 because Srτ ´1 Ď Srτ ´2 , which holds because Sτ ´1 Ď Sτ ´2 and ̺τ ´1 pzq ď ̺τ ´2 pzq for all z. Let h˚t be the smallest number of the form jt˚ {n2 , jt˚ P rn2 s such that ντ ´1 n0 s´1{p2α`dq ´ τ {n. We then have h˚t ď ρ˚τ ´1 and therefore query points in epoch τ h˚t ě C1 rr are uniformly distributed in Bh8˚ px; Gn q. Subsequently, applying Lemma 5 we have with probability t  1 ´ Opn´1 q that  bh˚t ,δ pxq ď C 1 rh˚t sα  and  sh˚t ,δ pxq ě C 2  d  log n  , rh˚t sd νrτ ´1 n  (61)  where C 1 , C 2 ą 0 are constants that depend on d, α, M, p0 , p0 and C, but not C1 , C2 , τ or h˚t . By choosing C1 appropriately (depending on C 1 and C 2 ) we can make bh˚t ,δ pxq ď sh˚t ,δ pxq holds for all x P Sτ ´1 , thus establishing ̺τ pxq ě mint̺τ ´1 pxq, h˚t u ě C1 rr ντ ´1 n0 s´1{p2α`dq ´ τ {n. 2 We next prove the upper bound part. For any ht “ jt {n where jt P rn2 s, invoking Lemma 5 we have that d log n 1 α 2 rh r , (62) bh,δ pxq ě C and sh,δ pxq ď C minth, ρ˚τ ´1 ud ¨ νrτ ´1 n0 r 1 and C r 2 are again constants depending on d, α, M, p , p0 and C, but not C1 , C2 . Note also where C 0 ντ ´2 n0 s´1{p2α`dq ´ pτ ´ 1q{n ě C1 rr ντ ´1 n0 s´1{p2α`dq ´ τ {n, because νrτ ´1 ě νrτ ´2 . that ρ˚τ ´1 ě C1 rr r1, C r2 and C1 ), we can ensure bh,δ pxq ą By selecting constant C2 ą 0 carefully (depending on C sh,δ pxq for all h ě C2 rr ντ ´1 n0 s´1{p2α`dq `τ {n. Therefore, ̺τ pxq ď ht pxq ď C2 rr ντ ´1 n0 s´1{p2α`dq ` τ {n.  5.3 Proof of Theorem 2 In this section we prove the main negative result in Theorem 2. To simplify presentation, we suppress dependency on α, d, c0 and C0 in À, Á, —, Op¨q and Ωp¨q notations. However, we do not suppress dependency on C R or M in any of the above notations. rαs Let ϕ0 : r´2, 2sd Ñ R˚ be a non-negative function defined on X such that ϕ0 P Σκ p1q with κ “ 8, supxPX ϕ0 pxq “ Ωp1q and ϕ0 pzq “ 0 for all }z}2 ě 1. Here rαs denotes the smallest integer that upper bounds α. Such functions exist and are the cornerstones of the construction of information-theoretic lower bounds in nonparametric estimation problems [13]. One typical example is the “smoothstep” function (see for example [19]) ˙ˆ ˙ N ˆ 1 N `1 ÿ N ` n 2N ` 1 SN pxq :“ x p´xqn , n Z N ´ n n“0  N “ 0, 1, 2, . . .  where Z ą 0 is a scaling parameter. The smoothstep function SN is defined on r0, 1s and satisfies the Hölder condition in Eq. (6) of order α “ N on r0, 1s. It can be easily extended to SrN,d : r´2, 2sd Ñ R by considering SrN,d pxq :“ 1{Z ´ SN pa}x}1 q where }x}1 “ |x1 | ` . . . ` |xd | and a “ 1{p2dq. It is 20  r easy to verify that, with Z chosen appropriately, SrN,d P ΣN 8 p1q, supxPX SN,d pxq “ 1{Z “ Ωp1q and r SN,d pzq “ 0 for all }z}2 ě 1, where M ą 0 is a constant. For any x P X and h ą 0, define ϕx,h : X Ñ R˚ as ˆ ˙ z´x M hα 8 ϕ0 . (63) ϕx,h pzq :“ Irz P Bh pxqs ¨ 2 h It is easy to verify that ϕx,h P Σα8 pM {2q, and furthermore supzPX ϕx,h pzq — M hα and ϕx,h pzq “ 0 for all z R Bh8 pxq. Let Lf0 pεLn pf0 qq be the level set of f0 at εLn pf0 q.ŤLet Hn Ď Lf0 pεLn pf0 qq be the largest packing set such that Bh8 pxq are disjoint for all x P Hn , and xPHn Bh8 pxq Ď Lf0 pεLn pf0 qq. By (A2’) and the definition of εLn pf0 q, we have that ? |Hn | ě M pLf0 pεLn pf0 qq, 2 dhq Á µf0 pεLn pf0 qq ¨ h´d ě rεLn pf0 qs2`d{α ¨ nh´d . (64) For any x P Hn , construct fx : X Ñ R as fx pzq :“ f0 pzq ´ ϕx,h pzq.  (65)  Let Fn :“ tfx : x P Hn u be the class of functions indexed by x P Hn . Let also h — pεLn pf0 q{M q1{α such that }ϕx,h }8 “ 2εLn pf0 q. We then have that }fx ´ f0 }8 ď 2εLn pf0 q and fx P Σα8 pM q, because f0 , ϕx,h P Σα8 pM {2q. The next lemma shows that, with n adaptive queries to the noisy zeroth-order oracle yt “ f pxt q ` wt , it is information theoretically not possible to identify a certain fx in Fn with high probability. Lemma 7. Suppose |Fn | ě 2. Let An “ pχ1 , . . . , χn , φn q be an active optimization algorithm operℓ´1 ating with a sample budget n, which consists of samplers χℓ : tpxi , yi qui“1 ÞÑ xℓ and an estimator n φn : tpxi , yi qui“1 ÞÑ fpx P Fn , both can be deterministic or randomized functions. Then d ” ı 1 n ¨ supfx PFn }fx ´ f0 }28 . (66) inf sup Pr fpx ‰ fx ě ´ An fx PFn fx 2 2|Fn | Lemma 8. There exists constant M ą 0 depending on α, d, c0 , C0 such that the right-hand side of Eq. (66) is lower bounded by 1{3. Lemmas 7 and 8 are proved at the end of this section. Combining both lemmas and noting that for any distinct fx , fx1 P Fn and z P X , maxtLpz; fx q, Lpz; fx1 qu ě εLn pf0 q, we proved the minimax lower bound formulated in Theorem 2. 5.3.1  Proof of Lemma 7  Our proof is inspired by the negative result of multi-arm bandit pure exploration problems established in [7]. Proof. For any x P Hn , define nx :“ Ef0  «  n ÿ  i“1  ﬀ  Irx P Bh8 pxqs .  21  (67)  Because Bh8 pxq are disjoint for x P Hn , we have  ř  nx ď n. Also define, for every x P Hn , ı ℘x :“ Pr fpx “ fx . (68) f0  ř  ”  xPHn  Because xPHn ℘x “ 1, by pigeonhole principle there is at most one x P Hn such that ℘x ą 1{2. Let x1 , x2 P Hn be the points that have the largest and second largest nx . Then there exists x P tx1 , x2 u such that ℘x ď 1{2 and nx ď 2n{|Fn |. By Le Cam’s and Pinsker’s inequality (see, for example, [49]) we have that ” ” ı ı Pr fpx “ fx ď Pr fpx “ fx ` dTV pP An }P An q (69) fx  f0  f0  fx  c  ” ı 1 ď Pr fpx “ fx ` (70) KLpPfA0 n }PfAxn q f0 2 c 1 “ ℘x ` (71) KLpPfA0 n }PfAxn q 2 c 1 1 ď ` (72) KLpPfA0 n }PfAxn q. 2 2 It remains to upper bound KL divergence of the active queries made by An . Using the standard lower bound analysis for active learning algorithms [12, 13] and the fact that fx ” f0 on X zBh8 pxq, we have  „ Pf0 ,An px1:n , y1:n q An An (73) KLpPf0 }Pfx q “ Ef0 ,An log Pfx ,An px1:n , y1:n q śn  „ i“1 Pf0 pyi |xi qPAn pxi |x1:pi´1q , y1:pi´1q q (74) “ Ef0 ,An log śn i“1 Pfx pyi |xi qPAn pxi |x1:pi´1q , y1:pi´1q q śn „  Pf0 pyi |xi q i“1 “ Ef0 ,An log śn (75) i“1 Pfx pyi |xi q ﬁ » ÿ P py |x q i i ﬂ f (76) “ Ef0 ,An – log 0 Pfx pyi |xi q xi PBh pxq  ď nx ¨  sup  zPBh8 px;X q  KLpPf0 p¨|zq}Pfx p¨|zqq  ď nx ¨ }f0 ´ fx }28 . Therefore,  5.3.2  (77)  (78)  ” ı 1 c1 1 p Pr fx “ fx ď ` nx ε2n ď ` fx 2 4 2  d  n}fx ´ f0 }28 . 2|Fn |  (79)  Proof of Lemma 8  Proof. By construction, n supfx PFx }fx ´f0 }28 À M 2 nh2α and |Fn | “ |Hn | Á rC ε εLn pf0 qs2`d{α nh´d . Note also that h — pε{M q1{α — pC ε εLn pf0 q{M q1{α because }fx ´ f0 }8 “ ε “ C ε εLn pf0 q. Subsequently, n supfx PFx }fx ´ f0 }28 nrC ε εLn pf0 qs2 À “ M ´d{α . (80) 2|Fn | nrC ε εLn pf0 qs2 ¨ M d{α By choosing the constant M ą 0 to be sufficiently large, the right-hand side of the above inequality is upper bounded by 1{36. The lemma is thus proved. 22  5.4 Proof of Theorem 3 The proof of Theorem 3 is similar to the proof of Theorem 2, but is much more standard by invoking the Fano’s inequality [49]. In particular, adapting the Fano’s inequality on any finite function class Fn constructed we have the following lemma: Lemma 9 (Fano’s inequality). Suppose |Fn | ě 2, and tpxi , yi quni“1 are i.i.d. random variables. Then ” ı log 2 ` n ¨ supfx ,fx1 PFn KLpPfx }Pfx1 q inf sup Pr fpx ‰ fx ě 1 ´ , (81) log |Fn | fpx fx PFn fx  where Pfx denotes the distribution of px, yq under the law of fx .  Let Fn be the function class constructed in the previous proof of Theorem 2, corresponding to the largest packing set Hn of Lf0 pr εLn q such that Bh8 pxq for all x P Hn are disjoint, where h — pr εLn {M q1{α L such that }ϕx,h }8 “ 2r εn for all x P Hn . Because f0 satisfies (A2’), we have that |Fn | “ |Hn | Á µf0 pr εLn qh´d . Under the condition that εU rLn , it holds that µf0 pr εLn q ě rr εLn s2`d{α n. Therefore, n pf0 q ď ε |Fn | Á rr εLn s2`d{α ¨ nh´d Á rr εLn s2 ¨ nM d{α .  (82)  Because logpn{r εLn q Á log n and M ą 0 is a constant, we have that log |Fn | ě c log n for all n ě N , where c ą 0 is a constant depending only on α, d and N P N is a constand depending on M . Let U be the uniform distribution on X . Because x „ U and fx ” fx1 on X zBh8 pxq, we have that ż 1 (83) |fx pzq ´ fx1 pzq|2 dU pzq KLpPfx }Pfx1 q “ 2 X 1 ď Pr rz P Bh8 pxqs ¨ }fx ´ fx1 }28 (84) 2 U 1 (85) ď λpBh8 pxqq ¨ rεLn s2 2 À hd rr εLn s2 À rr εLn s2`d{α {M d{α . (86) By choosing M to be sufficiently large, the right-hand side of Eq. (81) can be lower bounded by an absolute constant. The theorem is then proved following the same argument as in the proof of Theorem 2.  6 Conclusion In this paper we consider the problem of noisy zeroth-order optimization of general smooth functions. Matching lower and upper bounds on the local minimax convergence rates are established, which are significantly different from classical minimax rates in nonparametric regression problems. Many interesting future directions exist along this line of research, including exploitation of additive structures in the underlying function f to completely remove curse of dimensionality, functions with spatially heterogeneous smoothness or level set growth behaviors, and to design more computationally efficient algorithms that work well in practice.  A  Some concentration inequalities  Lemma 10 ([27]). Suppose X1 , . . . , Xn are i.i.d. random variables such that a ď Xi ď b almost surely. Then for any t ą 0, ˇ ﬀ «ˇ " * n ˇ ˇ1 ÿ nt2 ˇ ˇ Xi ´ EX ˇ ą t ď 2 exp ´ . Pr ˇ ˇ ˇn 2pb ´ aq2 i“1 23  Lemma 11 ([28]). Suppose x „ Nd p0, Idˆd q and let A be a d ˆ d positive semi-definite matrix. Then for all t ą 0, ı ” a Pr xJ Ax ą trpAq ` 2 trpA2 qt ` 2}A}op t ď e´t . Lemma 12 ([48], simplified). Suppose A1 , . . . , An are i.i.d. positive semidefinite random matrices of dimension d and }Ai }op ď R almost surely. Then for any t ą 0, »› ﬁ › " * n ›1 ÿ › nt2 › › – ﬂ Pr › Ai ´ EA› ą t ď 2 exp ´ 2 . ›n › 8R i“1 op  Lemma 13 (Weyl’s inequality). Let A and A ` E be d ˆ d matrices with σ1 , . . . , σd and σ11 , . . . , σd1 be their singular values, sorted in descending order. Then max1ďiďd |σi ´ σi1 | ď }E}op .  B Additional proofs Proof of Proposition 1. Consider arbitrary x˚ P X such that f px˚ q “ inf xPX f pxq. Then we have that Lpp xn ; f q “ f pp xn q ´ f px˚ q ď rfpn pp xn q ` }fpn ´ f }8 s ´ rfpn px˚ q ´ }fpn ´ f }8 s ď 2}fpn ´ f }8 , where the last inequality holds because fpn pp xn q ď fpn px˚ q by optimality of x pn .  Proof of Example 2. Because f0 P Σ2κ pM q is strongly convex, there exists σ ą 0 such that ∇2 f0 pxq ľ σI for all x P Xf0 ,κ , where Xf0 ,κ :“ Lf0 pκq is the κ-level set of f0 . Let x˚ “ arg minxPX f0 pxq, which is unique because f0 is strongly convex. The smoothness and strong convexity of f0 implies that M σ }x ´ x˚ }28 @x P Xf0 ,κ . (87) f0˚ ` }x ´ x˚ }28 ď f0 pxq ď f0˚ ` 2 2 Subsequently, there exist constants c0 , C1 , C2 ą 0 depending only on σ, M, κ and d such that for all ǫ P p0, c0 s, (88) BC81 ?ǫ px˚ ; X q Ď Lf0 pǫq Ď BC82 ?ǫ px˚ ; X q. The property µf0 pǫq À ǫβ holds because µpLf0 pǫqq ě µpBC81 ?ǫ px˚ ; X qq Á ǫd{2 . To prove (A2), ? note that N pLf0 pǫq, δq ď N pBC82 ?ǫ px˚ ; X q, δq À 1 ` p ǫ{δqd . Because ǫd{2 À µpLf0 pǫqq “ µf0 pǫq,  we conclude that N pLf0 pǫq, δq À 1 ` δ´d µf0 pǫq and (A2) is thus proved. ‰ “ Proof of Proposition 4. Consider f0 ” 0 if β “ 0 and f0 pzq :“ a0 z1p ` . . . ` zdp for all z “ pz1 , . . . , zd q P r0, 1sd , where a0 ą 0 is a constant depending on α, M , and p “ d{β for β P p0, d{αs. The β “ 0 case where f0 ” 0 trivially holds. So we shall only consider the case of β P p0, d{αs. We first show f0 P Σακ pM q with κ “ 8, provided that a0 is sufficiently small. For any j ď k “ tαu and α1 ` . . . ` αd “ j, we have " Bj a0 j! ¨ zℓp´j if αℓ “ j, ℓ P rds; f pzq “ (89) 0 0 otherwise. Bxα1 1 . . . Bxαd d  24  Because z1 , . . . , zd P r0, 1s and p “ d{β ě α ě j, it’s clear that 0 ď Bj f0 pzq{Bxα1 1 . . . Bxαd d ď a0 j!. In addition, for any z, z 1 P r0, 1sd and αℓ “ k, ℓ P rds, we have ˇ ˇ k ˇ ˇ ˇ ˇ Bk 1 ˇ p´k ˇ α B ˇ ´ rzℓ1 sp´k ˇ (90) ˇ Bx 1 . . . Bxαd f0 pzq ´ Bxα1 . . . Bxαd f0 pz qˇ ď a0 k! ¨ rzℓ s 1 1 d d ˇ ˇmintp´k,1u ď a0 k! ¨ ˇzℓ ´ zℓ1 ˇ , (91)  where the last inequality holds because xt is mintt, 1u-Hölder continuous on r0, 1s for t ě 0. The |zℓ ´ zℓ1 |mintp´k,1u term can be further upper bounded by }z ´ z 1 }α´k 8 , because p “ d{β ě α. By selecting a0 ą 0 to be sufficiently small (depending on M ) we have f0 P Σα8 pM q. We next prove f0 satisfies µf0 pǫq — ǫβ with parameter β depending on a0 and p. For any ǫ ą 0, the level set Lf0 pǫq can be expressed as Lf0 pǫq “ tz P r0, 1sd : z1p ` . . . ` zdp ď ǫ{a0 u. Subsequently, « ˆ ˙ ﬀd « ˆ ˙ ﬀd ǫ 1{p ǫ 1{p . Ď Lf0 pǫq Ď 0, 0, a0 d a0  (92)  rǫ{pa0 dqsdp ď µf0 pǫq ď rǫ{a0 sdp .  (93)  Therefore, Because a0 , d are constants and dp “ β, we established µf0 pǫq — ǫβ for β “ dp. Finally, note that for any ǫ ą 0, Lf0 pǫq is sandwiched between two cubics whose volumes only differ by a constant. This proves (A2) and (A2’) on the covering and packing numbers of Lf0 pǫq. Proof of Proposition 5. By Chernoff bound and union bound, with probability 1 ´ Opn´1 q uniformly ? over all x P Gn , there are Ωp n0 log2 nq uniform samples in Bh80 px; X q. Subsequently, by standard Gaussian concentration inequality, with probability 1 ´ Opn´1 q we have inf  zPBh8 px;X q 0  ´1{4  f pzq ´ Opn0  q ď fqpxq ď  sup zPBh8 px;X q 0  ´1{4  f pzq ` Opn0  q  @x P Gn .  (94)  Fix arbitrary x r˚ P arg minxPGn f pxq. Because f P Σακ pM q for constant κ and h0 Ñ 0, f mintα,1u 8 is smooth on Bh0 pr x˚ ; X q and therefore supzPB 8 prx˚ ;X q f pzq ď f pr x˚ q ` Oph0 q ď f pr x˚ q ` h0  Op1{ log2 nq ď f ˚ ` Op1{ log2 nq, where the last inequality holds due to Lemma 4. On the other ´1{4 hand, for all x P Gn , fqpxq ě f ˚ ´ Opn0 q. Therefore, for sufficiently large n we must have fqpr x˚ q ď minzPGn fqpzq ` 1{ log n and subsequently x r˚ P S01 . Ť We next prove the statement that S01 Ď xPLf pκ{2q Bh80 px; X q. Consider arbitrary z P Gn and Ť z R xPLf pκ{2q Bh80 px; X q. By definition, f pz 1 q ě f ˚ ` κ{2 for all z 1 P Bh80 pz; X q. Subsequently, ´1{4 fqpzq ě f ˚ ` κ{2 ´ Opn0 q ą f ˚ ` 1{ log n for constant κ ą 0 and sufficiently large n, which implies z R S01 . Proof of Proposition 7. The upper bound part of Eq. (56) trivially holds because the absolute values of every element in ψ0,1 pzqψ0,1 pzqJ forş z P X “ r0, 1sd is upper bounded by Op1q. To prove the lower bound part, we only need to show X ψ0,1 pzqψ0,1 pzqJ dU pzq is invertible. Assume the contrary. Then there exists v P RD zt0u such that  „ż ż ˇ ˇ J J ˇψ0,1 pzqJ v ˇ2 dU pzq “ 0. (95) v ψ0,1 pzqψ0,1 pzq dU pzq v “ X  X  25  Therefore, xψ0,1 pzq, vy “ 0 almost everywhere on z P r0, 1sd . Because h ą 0, by re-scaling with constants this implies the existence of non-zero coefficient vector ξ such that ÿ αm P pz1 , . . . , zm q :“ ξα1 ,...,αm z1α1 . . . zm “ 0 almost everywhere on z P r0, 1sd . α1 `...`αm ďk  We next use induction to show that, for any degree-k polynomial P of s variables z1 , . . . , zs that has at least one non-zero coefficient, the set tz1 , . . . , zs P r0, 1sd : P pz1 , . . . , zs q “ 0u must have zero measure. This would then result in the desired contradiction. For the base case of s “ 1, the fundamental theorem of algebra asserts that P pz1 q “ 0 can have at most k roots, which is a finite set and of measure 0. We next consider the case where P pz1 , . . . , zs q takes on s variables. Re-organizing the terms we have P pz1 , . . . , zs q ” P0 pz1 , . . . , zs´1 q ` zs P1 pz1 , . . . , zs´1 q ` . . . ` zsk Pk pz1 , . . . , zs´1 q,  (96)  where P1 , . . . , Pk are degree-k polynomials of z1 , . . . , zs´1 . Because P has a non-zero coefficient, at least one Pj must also have a non-zero coefficient. By the inductive hypothesis, the set tz1 , . . . , zs´1 : Pj pz1 , . . . , zs´1 qu has measure 0. On the other hand, if Pj pz1 , . . . , zs´1 q ‰ 0, then invoking the fundamental theorem of algebra again on zs we know that there are finitely many zs such that P pz1 , . . . , zs q “ 0. Therefore, tz1 , . . . , zs : P pz1 , . . . , zs q “ 0u must also have measure zero.  Acknowledgments The work of SB was supported in part by the NSF grant DMS-17130003.  References [1] Alekh Agarwal, Ofer Dekel, and Lin Xiao. Optimal algorithms for online convex optimization with multi-point bandit feedback. In Proceedings of the annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2010. [2] Alekh Agarwal, Dean Foster, Daniel Hsu, Sham Kakade, and Alexander Rakhlin. Stochastic convex optimization with bandit feedback. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 23(1):213–240, 2013. [3] Naman Agarwal, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Brian Bullins, Elad Hazan, and Tengyu Ma. Finding approximate local minima faster than gradient descent. In Proceedings of the Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), 2017. [4] Sivaraman Balakrishnan, Srivatsan Narayanan, Alessandro Rinaldo, Aarti Singh, and Larry Wasserman. Cluster trees on manifolds. In Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2013. [5] Maria-Florina Balcan, Alina Beygelzimer, and John Langford. Agnostic active learning. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 75(1):78–89, 2009. [6] Sébastian Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, and Yin Tat Lee. Kernel-based methods for bandit convex optimization. In Proceedings of the annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), 2017.  26  [7] Sébastien Bubeck, Rémi Munos, and Gilles Stoltz. Pure exploration in multi-armed bandits problems. In Proceedings of the International conference on Algorithmic learning theory (ALT), 2009. [8] Sébastien Bubeck, Rémi Munos, Gilles Stoltz, and Csaba Szepesvári. X-armed bandits. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(May):1655–1695, 2011. [9] Adam D Bull. Convergence rates of efficient global optimization algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(Oct):2879–2904, 2011. [10] T Tony Cai and Mark G Low. An adaptation theory for nonparametric confidence intervals. The Annals of statistics, 32(5):1805–1840, 2004. [11] Yair Carmon, Oliver Hinder, John C Duchi, and Aaron Sidford. “convex until proven guilty": Dimension-free acceleration of gradient descent on non-convex functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.02766, 2017. [12] Rui Castro. Adaptive sensing performance lower bounds for sparse signal detection and support estimation. Bernoulli, 20(4):2217–2246, 2014. [13] Rui M Castro and Robert D Nowak. Minimax bounds for active learning. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 54(5):2339–2353, 2008. [14] Kamalika Chaudhuri, Sanjoy Dasgupta, Samory Kpotufe, and Ulrike von Luxburg. Consistent procedures for cluster tree estimation and pruning. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 60(12):7900–7912, 2014. [15] Hung Chen. Lower rate of convergence for locating a maximum of a function. The Annals of Statistics, 16(3):1330–1334, 1988. [16] Sanjoy Dasgupta, Daniel J Hsu, and Claire Monteleoni. A general agnostic active learning algorithm. In Proceedings of Advances in neural information processing systems (NIPS), 2008. [17] John Duchi and Feng Ruan. Local asymptotics for some stochastic optimization problems: Optimality, constraint identification, and dual averaging. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.05612, 2016. [18] John C Duchi, John Lafferty, and Yuancheng Zhu. Local minimax complexity of stochastic convex optimization. In Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2016. [19] David S Ebert. Texturing & modeling: a procedural approach. Morgan Kaufmann, 2003. [20] Eyal Even-Dar, Shie Mannor, and Yishay Mansour. Action elimination and stopping conditions for the multi-armed bandit and reinforcement learning problems. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7(Jun):1079–1105, 2006. [21] Jianqing Fan and Irene Gijbels. Local polynomial modelling and its applications. CRC Press, 1996. [22] Abraham D. Flaxman, Adam Tauman Kalai, and H. Brendan McHanan. Online convex optimization in the bandit setting: gradient descent without a gradient. In Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2005.  27  [23] Rong Ge, Furong Huang, Chi Jin, and Yang Yuan. Escaping from saddle points - online stochastic gradient for tensor decomposition. In Proceedings of the annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2015. [24] Steve Hanneke. A bound on the label complexity of agnostic active learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2007. [25] Elad Hazan, Adam Klivans, and Yang Yuan. Hyperparameter optimization: A spectral approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.00764, 2017. [26] Elad Hazan, Kfir Levy, and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Beyond convexity: Stochastic quasi-convex optimization. In Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2015. [27] Wassily Hoeffding. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 58(301):13–30, 1963. [28] Daniel Hsu, Sham Kakade, and Tong Zhang. A tail inequality for quadratic forms of subgaussian random vectors. Electronic Communications in Probability, 17(52):1–6, 2012. [29] Kevin G Jamieson, Robert Nowak, and Ben Recht. Query complexity of derivative-free optimization. In Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2012. [30] AHG Rinnooy Kan and Gerrit T Timmer. Stochastic global optimization methods part I: Clustering methods. Mathematical Programming, 39(1):27–56, 1987. [31] AHG Rinnooy Kan and Gerrit T Timmer. Stochastic global optimization methods part II: Multi level methods. Mathematical Programming, 39(1):57–78, 1987. [32] Jack Kiefer and Jacob Wolfowitz. Stochastic estimation of the maximum of a regression function. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 23(3):462–466, 1952. [33] Oleg V Lepski, Enno Mammen, and Vladimir G Spokoiny. Optimal spatial adaptation to inhomogeneous smoothness: an approach based on kernel estimates with variable bandwidth selectors. The Annals of Statistics, 25(3):929–947, 1997. [34] Mark G Low. On nonparametric confidence intervals. The Annals of Statistics, 25(6):2547–2554, 1997. [35] Cédric Malherbe, Emile Contal, and Nicolas Vayatis. A ranking approach to global optimization. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2016. [36] Cédric Malherbe and Nicolas Vayatis. Global optimization of lipschitz functions. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017. [37] Nathan Nakamura, Jason Seepaul, Joseph B Kadane, and B Reeja-Jayan. Design for lowtemperature microwave-assisted crystallization of ceramic thin films. Applied Stochastic Models in Business and Industry, 2017. [38] A. Nemirovski and D. Yudin. Problem complexity and method efficiency in optimization. A Wiley-Interscience Publication, 1983. [39] Yurii Nesterov and Boris T Polyak. Cubic regularization of newton method and its global performance. Mathematical Programming, 108(1):177–205, 2006. 28  [40] Whitney K Newey. Convergence rates and asymptotic normality for series estimators. Journal of econometrics, 79(1):147–168, 1997. [41] Wolfgang Polonik. Measuring mass concentrations and estimating density contour clusters-an excess mass approach. The Annals of Statistics, 23(3):855–881, 1995. [42] E Purzen. On estimation of a probability density and mode. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 33(3):1065–1076, 1962. [43] Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher KI Williams. Gaussian processes for machine learning, volume 1. MIT press Cambridge, 2006. [44] B Reeja-Jayan, Katharine L Harrison, K Yang, Chih-Liang Wang, AE Yilmaz, and Arumugam Manthiram. Microwave-assisted low-temperature growth of thin films in solution. Scientific reports, 2, 2012. [45] Philippe Rigollet and Régis Vert. Optimal rates for plug-in estimators of density level sets. Bernoulli, 15(4):1154–1178, 2009. [46] Jonathan Scarlett, Ilijia Bogunovic, and Volkan Cevher. Lower bounds on regret for noisy gaussian process bandit optimization. In Proceedings of the annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2017. [47] Aarti Singh, Clayton Scott, and Robert Nowak. Adaptive hausdorff estimation of density level sets. The Annals of Statistics, 37(5B):2760–2782, 2009. [48] Joel Tropp. An introduction to matrix concentration inequalities. Foundations and Trends R in Machine Learning, 8(1-2):1–230, 2015. [49] Alexandre B Tsybakov. Introduction to nonparametric estimation. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer, New York, 2009. [50] Sara A van de Geer. Empirical Processes in M-estimation, volume 6. Cambridge university press, 2000. [51] Aad W Van der Vaart. Asymptotic statistics, volume 3. Cambridge university press, 1998. [52] Zelda B Zabinsky and Robert L Smith. Pure adaptive search in global optimization. Mathematical Programming, 53(1):323–338, 1992. [53] Yuchen Zhang, Percy Liang, and Moses Charikar. A hitting time analysis of stochastic gradient langevin dynamics. In Proceedings of the annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2017.  29

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 10. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
