Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_700

Abstract:
Best Friends Forever (BFF): Finding Lasting Dense Subgraphs Konstantinos Semertzidis 1 , Evaggelia Pitoura 1 , Evimaria Terzi 2 , Panayiotis Tsaparas 1 1  Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Ioannina, Greece 2 Dept. of Computer Science, Boston University, USA  arXiv:1612.05440v3 [cs.SI] 3 Oct 2017  1  {ksemer,pitoura,tsap}@cs.uoi.gr 2 evimaria@cs.bu.edu  Abstract—Graphs form a natural model for relationships and interactions between entities, for example, between people in social and cooperation networks, servers in computer networks, or tags and words in documents and tweets. But, which of these relationships or interactions are the most lasting ones? In this paper, we study the following problem: given a set of graph snapshots, which may correspond to the state of an evolving graph at different time instances, identify the set of nodes that are the most densely connected in all snapshots. We call this problem the Best Friends For Ever (B FF) problem. We provide definitions for density over multiple graph snapshots, that capture different semantics of connectedness over time, and we study the corresponding variants of the B FF problem. We then look at the On-Off B FF (O2 B FF) problem that relaxes the requirement of nodes being connected in all snapshots, and asks for the densest set of nodes in at least k of a given set of graph snapshots. We show that this problem is NP-complete for all definitions of density, and we propose a set of efficient algorithms. Finally, we present experiments with synthetic and real datasets that show both the efficiency of our algorithms and the usefulness of the B FF and the O2 B FF problems.  I. I NTRODUCTION Graphs offer a natural model for capturing the interactions and relationships among entities. Oftentimes, multiple snapshots of a graph are available; for example, these snapshots may correspond to the states of a dynamic graph at different time instances, or the states of a complex system at different conditions. We call such sets of graph snapshots, a graph history. Analysis of the graph history finds a large spectrum of applications, ranging from social-network marketing, to virus propagation and digital forensics. A central question in this context is: which interactions, or relationships in a graph history are the most lasting ones? In this paper, we formalize this question and we design algorithms that effectively identify such relationships. In particular, given a graph history, we introduce the problem of efficiently finding the set of nodes, that remains the most tightly connected through history. We call this problem the Best Friends For Ever (B FF) problem. We formulate the B FF problem as the problem of locating the set of nodes that have the maximum aggregate density in the graph history. We provide different definitions for the aggregate density that capture different notions of connectedness over time, and result in four variants of the B FF problem. We then extend the B FF problem to capture the cases where subsets of nodes are densely connected for only a subset of the snapshots. Consider for example, a set of collaborators  that work intensely together for some years and then they drift apart, or, a set of friends in a social network that stop interacting for a few snapshots and then, they reconnect with each other. To identify such subsets of nodes, we define the On-Off B FF problem, or O2 B FF for short. In the O2 B FF problem, we ask for a set of nodes and a set of k snapshots such that the aggregate density of the nodes over these snapshots is maximized. Identifying B FF nodes finds many applications. For example, in collaboration and social networks such nodes correspond to well-acquainted individuals, and they can be chosen to form teams, or organize successful professional or social events. In a protein-interaction network, we can locate protein complexes that are densely interacting at different states, thus indicating a possible underlying regulatory mechanism. In a network where nodes are words or tags and edges correspond to their co-occurrences in documents or tweets published in a specific period of time, identifying B FF nodes may serve as a first step in topic identification, tag recommendation and other types of analysis. In a computer network, locating servers that communicate heavily over time may be useful in identifying potential attacks, or bottlenecks. The problem of identifying a dense subgraph in a static (i.e., single-snapshot) graph has received a lot of attention (e.g., [1], [2], [3]). There has been also work on finding dense subgraphs in dynamic graphs (e.g., [4]). However, in this line of work, the goal is to efficiently locate the densest subgraph in the current graph snapshot, whereas we are interested in locating subgraphs that remain dense in the whole graph history. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to systematically introduce and study density in a graph history, and define the B FF and O2 B FF problems. The most related work to ours is [5] where the authors study just one of the four variants of the B FF problem in the context of graph databases. We compare the performance of our algorithms for this variant with the algorithm proposed in [5] experimentally. We study the complexity of the different variants of the B FF and O2 B FF problems. Two of the B FF variants can be solved optimally, while the O2 B FF is NP-hard. We propose a generic algorithmic framework for solving our problems, that works in linear time. Experimental results with real and synthetic datasets show the efficiency and effectiveness of our algorithms in discovering lasting dense subgraphs. Two case studies on bibliographic collaboration networks, and hashtag co-occurrence networks in Twitter validate our approach.  To summarize, the main contributions of this work are the following:  while the minimum density, dm (G), of the graph is the minimum degree of any node in V :  • We introduce the novel B FF and O2 B FF problems of identifying a subset of nodes that define dense subgraphs in a graph history. To this end, we extend the notion of density for graph histories, and provide definitions that capture different semantics of density over time leading to four variants of our problems.  dm (G) = min degree(u, G).  • We study the complexity of the variants of the B FF and O2 B FF problems and propose appropriate algorithms. We prove the optimality, or the approximation factor of our algorithms whenever possible. • We extend our definitions and algorithms to identify the B FFs of an input set of query nodes. • We perform experiments with both real and synthetic datasets and demonstrate that our problem definitions are meaningful, and that our algorithms work well in identifying dense subgraphs in practice. Roadmap: In Section II, we provide definitions of aggregate density. We introduce the B FF problem and its algorithms in Section III, and the O2 B FF problem and its algorithms in Section IV, while in Section V we study extensions to the original problem. Our experimental evaluation is presented in Section VI and comparison with related work in Section VII. Section VIII concludes the paper. II. AGGREGATE DENSITY We assume that we are given as input multiple graph snapshots over the same set of nodes. Snapshots may be ordered, for example, when the snapshots correspond to the states of a dynamic graph. We may also have an unordered collection of graphs, for example, when the snapshots correspond to graphs collected as a result of some scientific experiments. We refer to such graph collections as a graph history. Definition 1 (G RAPH H ISTORY ). A graph history G = {G1 , G2 , . . . , Gτ } is a collection of τ graph snapshots, where each snapshot Gt = (V, Et ), t ∈ [1, τ ], is defined over the same set of nodes V . An example of a graph history with four snapshots is shown in Figure 1. Note that our definition is applicable to graph snapshots with different set of nodes by considering V as their union. We will now define the notion of density for a graph history. We start by reviewing two basic definitions of graph density for a single graph snapshot. Given an undirected graph G = (V, E) and a node u in V , we use degree(u, G) to denote the degree of u in G. The average density, da (G), of the graph G is the average degree of the nodes in V : da (G) =  2|E| 1 X degree(u, G) = |V | |V | u∈V  u∈V  Intuitively, for a given graph, dm is defined by a single node, the one with the minimum degree, while da accounts for the degrees and thus the connectivity of all nodes. For example, in Figure (1a), dm (G1 ) = 2, while da (G1 ) = 10/3. Clearly, dm is a lower bound for da . From now on, when the subscript of d is ignored, density can be either da or dm . We also define the density of a subset of nodes S ⊆ V in the graph G = (V, E). To this end, we use the induced subgraph G[S] = (S, E(S)) in G, where E(S) = {(u, v) ∈ E : u ∈ S, v ∈ S}. We define the density d(S, G) of S in G as d(G[S]). For example, again for snapshot G1 in Figure 1, for Sx = {x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 }, dm (Sx , G1 ) = da (Sx , G1 ) = 3, while for Sy = {y1 , y2 , y3 , y4 , y5 }, dm (Sy , G1 ) = 2 and da (Sy , G1 ) = 16/5. Between Sx and Sy , Sx has the highest minimum density, whereas Sy the highest average density. We now define the density of a set of nodes S on a graph history. For this, we need a way to aggregate the density of a set of nodes over multiple graph snapshots. Aggregating density sequences: Given a graph history G = {G1 , . . . , Gτ }, we will use d(S, G) = {d(S, G1 ), . . . , d(S, Gτ )} to denote the sequence of density values for the graph induced by the set S in the graph snapshots. We consider two definitions for an aggregation function g(d(S, G)) that aggregates the densities over snapshots: the first, gm , computes the minimum density over all snapshots: gm (d(S, G)) = min d(S, Gt ), Gt ∈G  while the second, ga , computes the average density over all snapshots: 1 X d(S, Gt ). ga (d(S, G)) = |G| Gt ∈G  Intuitively, the minimum aggregation function requires high density in each and every snapshot, while the average aggregation function looks at the snapshots as a whole. Again, we use g to collectively refer to gm or ga . We can now define the aggregate density f . Definition 2 (AGGREGATE D ENSITY ). Given a graph history G = {G1 , . . . , Gτ } defined over a set of nodes V and S ⊆ V , we define the aggregate density f (S, G) to be f (S, G) = g(d(S, G)). Depending on the choice of the density function d and the aggregation function g, we have the following four versions of f : (a) fmm (S, G) = gm (dm (S, G)), (b) fma (S, G) = gm (da (S, G)), (c) fam (S, G) = ga (dm (S, G)), and (d) faa (S, G) = ga (da (S, G)). Each density definition associates different semantics with the meaning of density among nodes in a graph history. Large values of fmm (S, G) correspond to groups of nodes S where each member of the group is connected with a large number of other members of the group at each snapshot. A node ceases  y5  y5  y5  y5  x1  x4  y1  y4  x1  x4  y1  y4  x1  x4  y1  y4  x1  x4  y1  y4  x2  x3  y2  y3  x2  x3  y2  y3  x2  x3  y2  y3  x2  x3  y2  y3  (a) G1  (b) G2  (c) G3  (d) G4  Fig. 1: A graph history G = {G1 , . . . , G4 } consisting of four snapshots.  to be considered a member of the group, if it loses touch with the other members even in a single snapshot. Large values of fma (S, G) are achieved for groups with high average density at each snapshot G ∈ G. As opposed to fmm (S, G), where the requirement is placed at each member of the group, large values of fma (S, G) are indicative that the group S has persistently high density as a whole. The faa (S, G) metric takes large values when the group S has many connections on average; thus, faa is more “loose” both in terms of consistency over time and in terms of requirements at the individual group member level. Lastly, fam (S, G) takes the average of the minimum degree node at each snapshot, thus is less sensitive to the density of S at a single instance. For example, in the graph history G in Figure 1, all aggregate densities for Sx are equal to 3. However, for Sy faa (Sy , G) = 31/10, while fma (Sy , G) = 12/5. That is, while faa (Sy , G) > faa (Sx , G), fma (Sy , G) < fma (Sx , G) due to the last instance. Note also that fmm (Sy , G) = 1 and that this value is determined by just one node in just one snapshot, i.e., node y4 in the last snapshot, while fam (Sy , G) = 2. The average graph: Finally, let us define the average graph of a graph history G which is an edge-weighted graph where the weight of an edge is equal to the fraction of snapshots in G where the edge appears. Definition 3 (AVERAGE G RAPH ). Given a graph history G = bG = {G1 , . . . , Gτ } on a set of nodes V , the average graph H b (V, E, w) b is a weighted, undirected graph on the set of nodes b = V × V , and for each (u, v) ∈ E, b w(u, V , where E b v) = |Gt =(V,Et )∈G|(u,v)∈Et | . |G| As usual, the degree of a node u in a weighted graph is bG ) = P defined as: degree(u, H b v). The average b w(u, (u,v)∈E graph performs aggregation on a per-node basis, in that, the b G is the average degree of u in degree of each node u in H time. With the average graph. we lose information regarding density at individual snapshots. With some algebraic manipulation, we can prove the following lemma that shows a connection between the average graph and the faa density function: Lemma 1. Let G = {G1 , . . . , Gτ } be a graph history over a set of nodes V and  S a subset of nodes in V , it holds: b faa (S, G) = da HG [S] .  III. T HE  B FF P ROBLEM  In this section, we introduce the B FF problem, we study its hardness and propose appropriate algorithms. A. Problem definition Given the snapshots of a graph history G, our goal is to locate the Best Friends For Ever (B FF), that is, to identify a subset of nodes of V such that these nodes remain densely connected with each other in all snapshots of G. Formally: Problem 1 (The Best Friends Forever (B FF) Problem). Given a graph history G and an aggregate density function f , find a subset of nodes S ⊆ V , such that f (S, G) is maximized. By considering the four choices for the aggregate density function f , we have four variants of the B FF problem. Specifically, fmm , fma , fam and faa give rise to problems: B FF - MM, B FF - MA, B FF - AM and B FF - AA respectively. B.  B FF algorithms  We now introduce a generic algorithm for the B FF problem. The algorithm (shown in Algorithm 1) is a “greedy-like” algorithm inspired by a popular algorithm for the densest subgraph problem on a static graph [6], [1]. We use G[S] = {G1 [S], . . . , Gτ [S]} to denote the sequence of the induced subgraphs of the set of nodes S. The algorithm starts with a set of nodes S0 consisting of all nodes V , and then it performs n − 1 steps, where at each step i it produces a set Si by removing one of the nodes in the set Si−1 . It then finds the set Si with the maximum aggregate density f (S, G). Algorithm 1 The F IND B FF algorithm. Input: Graph history G = {G1 , . . . , Gτ }; aggregate density function f Output: A subset of nodes S 1: S0 = V 2: for i = 1, . . . , n − 1 do 3: vi = arg min score (v, G [Si−1 ]) v∈Si−1  Si = Si−1 \ {vi } 5: return arg max f (Si , G)  4:  i=0...n−1  The F IND B FF algorithm forms the basis for the algorithms we propose for the four variants of the B FF problem. Interestingly, by defining appropriate scoring functions, score (v, G [S]), (used in line 3 to select which node to remove), we can get efficient algorithms for each of the variants.  Algorithm 2 The scorem algorithm.  Algorithm 3 The scorea algorithm.  Input: Graph history G = {G1 , . . . , Gτ } Output: Node with the minimum scorem 1: Lt [d] ← list of nodes with degree d in Gt 2: 3: procedure S CORE A ND U PDATE() 4: for t = 1, . . . , τ do 5: dmint ← smallest d s.t. Lt [d] 6= ∅ 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13: 14: 15: 16:  scorem = 0  min dmint  t=1,...,τ  t = arg min dmint t=1,...,τ  u = Lt0 [scorem ].get() for each Gt ∈ G do Lt [scorem ].remove(u) for each (u, v) ∈ Et do Lt [degree(v, Gt )].remove(v) Et = Et − (u, v) // update degreev∈V (v, Gt ) Lt [degree(v, Gt )].add(v) V = V \ {u} return u  1) Solving B FF - MM : For the B FF - MM problem, we define the score for a node v in S, scorem , as the minimum degree of v in the sequence G [S]. That is, scorem (v, G [S]) = min degree (v, Gt [S]) . Gt ∈G  At the i-th iteration of the F IND B FF algorithm, we select the node vi with the minimum scorem value. We call this instantiation of the F IND B FF algorithm F IND B FF M . Below we prove that F IND B FF M provides the optimal solution to the B FF - MM problem. Proposition 1. The B FF - MM problem can be solved optimally in polynomial time using the F IND B FF M algorithm. Proof: Let i be the iteration of the F IND B FF M algorithm, where for the first time, a node that belongs to an optimal solution S ∗ is selected to be removed. Let vi be this node. Then clearly, S ∗ ⊆ Si−1 and by the fact that at every iteration we remove edges from the graphs we have that scorem (vi , G [St−1 ]) ≥ scorem (vi , G [S ∗ ]) . Since vi is the node we pick at iteration i, every node u ∈ Si−1 satisfies: minGt ∈G degree(u, Gt [Si−1 ]) = scorem (u, G [Si−1 ]) ≥ scorem (vi , G [Si−1 ]) ≥ scorem (vi , G [S ∗ ]). Since this is true for every node u, this means that Si−1 is indeed optimal and that our algorithm will find it. The running time of F IND B FF M is O(nτ + M ), where n = |V |, τ the number of snapshots in the history graph and M = m1 +m2 +. . .+mτ the total number of edges that appear in all snapshots. The node with the minimum scorem value is computed by the procedure S CORE A ND U PDATE shown in Algorithm 2, which also removes the node and its edges from all snapshots. For each snapshot Gt , we keep the list of nodes with degree d (line 1 in Algorithm 2); these lists can be constructed in time O(nτ ). Given these lists, the time required  Input: Graph history G = {G1 , . . . Gτ } Output: Node with the minimum scorea 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13:  b G ← construct the average graph of G H bG L[d] ← list of nodes with degree d in H procedure S CORE A ND U PDATE() scorea ← smallest d s.t. L[d] 6= ∅ u = L[scorea ].get() L[scorea ].remove(u) b do for each (u, v) ∈ E b G )].remove(v) L[degree(v, H b=E b − (u, v) // update degreev∈V (v, H bG ) E b L[degree(v, HG )].add(v) V = V \ {u} return u  to find the node with the minimum scorem is O(τ ) (lines 4–8). Now in all snapshots, the neighbors of the removed node need to be moved from their position in the τ lists (lines 9–14); the degree of every neighbor of the removed node is decreased by one. Throughout the execution of the algorithm at most O(M ) such moves can happen. Therefore, the total running time of F IND B FF M is O(nτ + M ). Note that an algorithm that iteratively removes from a graph G the node with the minimum degree was first studied in [6] and shown to compute a 2approximation of the densest subgraph problem for the da (G) density in [1] and the optimal for the dm (G) density in [7]. 2) Solving B FF - AA: To solve the B FF - AA problem, we b shall use the average  HG of G. Lemma 1 shows that  graph b G [S] . Thus, based on the results of faa (S, G) = da H Charikar [1] and Goldberg [2], we conclude that: Proposition 2. The B FF - AA problem can be solved optimally in polynomial time. Although there exists a polynomial-time optimal algorithms for B FF - AA, the computational complexity of these algorithms b 2 ) for the case of the max-flow algorithm (e..g., O(|V ||E| in [2]), makes them hard to use for large-scale real graphs. Therefore, instead of these algorithm we use the F IND B FF algorithm, where we define the score of a node v in S, scorea , to be equal to its average degree of v in graph history G[S]. That is, 1 X scorea (v, G [S]) = degree (v, Gt [S]) . |G| Gt ∈G  At the i-th iteration, we select the node vi with the minimum average degree in G. We will refer to this instantiation of the F IND B FF, as F IND B FF A . Using Lemma 1 and the results of Charikar [1] we have the following: Proposition 3. F IND B FF A is a 21 -approximation algorithm for the B FF - AA problem. Proof: It is easy to see that F IND B FF A removes the node b G . Charikar [1] has shown that with the minimum density in H an algorithm that iteratively removes from a graph the node  with minimum density provides a 12 -approximation for finding the subset of nodes that maximizes the average density on a single (weighted) graph snapshot. Given the equivalence we established in Lemma 1, F IND B FF A is also a 12 -approximation algorithm for B FF - AA. We show the steps for finding the node with the minimum scorea value in Algorithm 3 that uses lists of nodes with degree d in the average graph to achieve an O(nτ + M ) total running time for F IND B FF A . 3) Solving B FF - MA and B FF - AM: We consider the application of F IND B FF M and F IND B FF A algorithms for the two problems. In the following propositions, we prove that the two algorithms give a poor approximation ratio for both problems. Recall that all our problems are maximization problems, and, therefore, the lower the approximation ratio, the worse the performance of the algorithm. Proposition 4. The approximation ratio of algorithm F IND B FF M for the B FF - AM problem is O n1 where n is the number of nodes.  f . We refer to this algorithm as F IND B FF G . F IND B FF G requires to check all nodes when choosing which node to remove at each step (shown in Algorithm 4), thus leading to complexity O(n2 τ + nM ). Algorithm 4 The scoreg algorithm. Input: Graph history G = {G1 , . . . Gτ }; an aggregate density function f Output: Node with the minimum scoreg 1: procedure S CORE A ND U PDATE() 2: scoreg [u] = ∅ for u ∈ V 3: for each u ∈ V do 4: V 0 = V \ {u} 5: scoreg [u] = f (V 0 , G) 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11:  u = arg min scoreg [v] v∈V for each Gt ∈ G do for each (u, v) ∈ Et do Et = Et − (u, v) V = V \ {u} return u  Proof: In the Appendix. Proposition 5. The approximation ratio of algorithm F IND B FF A for the B FF - AM problem is O n1 where n is the number of nodes. Proof: In the Appendix. Proposition 6. The approximation ratio  algorithm  of F IND B FF M for the B FF - MA problem is O √1n where n is the number of nodes.  IV. T HE  O2 B FF P ROBLEM  In this section, we relax the requirement that the nodes are connected in all snapshots of a graph history. Instead, we ask to find the subset of nodes with the maximum aggregate density in at least k of the snapshots. We call this problem On-Off B FF (O2 B FF) problem. We formally define O2 B FF, we show that it is NP-hard and develop two general types of algorithms for efficiently solving it in practice. A. Problem definition  Proof: In the Appendix. We also consider applying the F IND B FF A algorithm that selects to remove the node with the minimum average degree. We can show that F IND B FF A has a poor approximation ratio for the B FF - AM problem.  In the O2 B FF problem, we seek to find a collection Ck of k graph snapshots, and a set of nodes S ⊆ V , such that the subgraphs induced by S in Ck have high aggregate density. Formally, the O2 B FF problem is defined as follows:  Proposition 7. The approximation ratio  of  algorithm 1 √ F IND B FF A for the B FF - MA problem is O where n is n the number of nodes.  Problem 2 (The On-Off B FF (O2 B FF) Problem). Given a graph history G = {G1 , G2 , . . . , Gτ }, an aggregate density function f , and an integer k, find a subset of nodes S ⊆ V , and a subset Ck of G of size k, such that f (S, Ck ) is maximized.  Proof: In the Appendix. The complexity of B FF - MA and B FF - AM is an open problem. Jethava and Beerenwinkel [5] conjecture that the B FF - MA problem is NP-hard, yet they do not provide a proof. Given that F IND B FF A and F IND B FF M have no theoretical guarantees, we also investigate a greedy approach, which selects which node to remove based on the objective function of the problem at hand. This greedy approach is again an instance of the iterative algorithm shown in Algorithm 1. More specifically, for a target function f (either fam or fma ), given a set Si−1 , we define the score scoreg (v, G[Si ]) of node v ∈ Si as follows:  As for Problem 1, depending on the choice of the aggregate density function f , we have four variants of O2 B FF. Thus, fmm , fma , fam and faa give rise to problems O2 B FF - MM, O2 B FF - MA, O2 B FF - AM and O2 B FF - AA respectively. Note that the subcollection of graphs Ck ⊂ G does not need to consist of contiguous graph snapshots. If this were the case, then the problem could be solved easily by considering all possible contiguous subsets of [1, τ ] and outputting the one with the highest density. However, all the four variants of the O2 B FF become NP-hard if we drop the constraint for consecutive graph snapshots.  scoreg (v, G[Si−1 ]) = f (Si−1 , G) − f (Si−1 \ {v}, G) .  Theorem 1. Problem 2 is NP-hard for any definition of the aggregate density function f .  At iteration i, the algorithm selects the node vi that causes the smallest decrease, or the largest increase in the target function  We will prove that there exists a clique of size at least k in graph G if and only if there exists a set of nodes S and  Algorithm 5 The Iterative (ITR) F IND O2 B FF algorithm. Input: Graph history G = {G1 , . . . Gτ }; an aggregate-density function f ; integer k Output: A subset of nodes S and a subset of snapshots Ck ⊆ G. 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11:  converged = False (Ck0 , S 0 ) = I NITIALIZE (G, f ) ds0 = 0 while not converged do Ck = B EST S NAPSHOTS(S 0 , f ) S = F IND B FF(Ck , f ) ds = f (S, Ck ) if ds < ds0 then Converged = True else ds0 = ds, S 0 = S return S, Ck  a subset Ck ⊆ G of k snapshots, with f (S, Ck ) ≥ 1. The forward direction is easy; if there exists a subset of nodes S in G, with |S| ≥ k, that form a clique, then selecting this set of nodes S, and a subset Ck of k snapshots that correspond to nodes in S will wield fmm (S, Ck ) = fam (S, Ck ) = 1. This follows from the fact that every snapshot is a complete star where dm (S, Gi ) = 1 for all Gi ∈ Ck . To prove the other direction, we observe that all our snapshots consist of a star graph, and a collection of disconnected nodes. Given a set S, dm (S, Gi ) = 1, if i ∈ S and all nodes in S are connected to the center node i, and zero otherwise. Therefore, if fmm (S, Ck ) = 1 or fam (S, Ck ) = 1, then this implies that dm (S, Gi ) = 1 for all Gi ∈ Ck , which means that the k centers of the graph snapshots in Ck are connected to all nodes in S, and hence to each other. Therefore, they form a clique of size k in the graph G. In the case of faa and fma the construction proceeds as follows: given the graph G = (V, E), with |E| = m edges, we construct a graph history G = {G1 , . . . , Gτ } with τ = m snapshots. All snapshots are defined over the vertex set V . There is a snapshot Ge for each edge e ∈ E, consisting of the single edge e. We can prove that there exists a clique of size at least k in graph G if and only if there exists a set of nodes S and a subset CK ⊆ G of K = k(k − 1)/2 snapshots, with f (S, CK ) ≥ 1/k. We will prove that there exists a clique of size at least k in graph G if and only if there exists a set of nodes S and a subset CK ⊆ G of K = k(k − 1)/2 snapshots, with f (S, CK ) ≥ 1/k. The forward direction is easy. If there exists a subset of nodes S in G, with |S| = k, that form a clique, then selecting this set of nodes S, and the k2 snapshots CK in G that correspond to the edges between the nodes in S will yield faa (S, CK ) = fma (S, CK ) = 1/k. To prove the other direction, assume that there is no clique of size greater or equal to k in G. Let CK be any subset of K = k(k − 1)/2 snapshots, and let S be the union of the endpoints of the edges in CK . Since S cannot be a clique, it follows that |S| = ` > k. Therefore, faa (S, CK ) = fma (S, CK ) = 1/` < 1/k.  B.  O2 B FF algorithms  We consider two general types of algorithms: iterative and incremental algorithms. The iterative algorithm starts with an initial size k collection Ck of graph snapshots and improves it, whereas the incremental algorithm builds the collection incrementally, adding one snapshot at a time. Next, we describe these two types of algorithms in detail. Note that depending on whether we are solving the O2 B FF - MM, O2 B FF - MA, O2 B FF - AM or O2 B FF - AA problem, we use the appropriate version of the F IND B FF algorithm in each of these algorithms. 1) Iterative Algorithm: The iterative (ITR) algorithm (shown in Algorithm 5) starts with an initial collection of snapshots Ck0 and set of nodes S 0 (routine I NITIALIZE). At each iteration, given a set S, it finds the k graph snapshots with the highest d(S, Gi ) score; this is done by B EST S NAPSHOTS. B EST S NAPSHOTS computes the density d(S, Gi ) of S in each snapshot Gi ∈ G and outputs the k snapshots Ck with the highest density. Given Ck , the algorithm then finds the set S ⊆ V such that f (S, Ck ) is maximized. This step essentially solves Problem 1 on input Ck for aggregate density function f using the F IND B FF algorithm. The ITR algorithm keeps iterating between collections Ck and dense sets of nodes S until no further iterations can improve the score f (S, Ck ). An important step of the Iterative F IND O2 B FF is the initialization of Ck0 and S 0 . We consider three different alternatives for this initialization: random, contiguous, and at least-k. Random initialization (ITRR ): In this initialization, we randomly pick k snapshots Ck0 from G. These snapshots are then used for solving the corresponding B FF problem on input Ck0 and produce S 0 = F IND B FF(Ck0 , f ). Contiguous initialization (ITRC ): In this initialization, we first find an S 0 that consists of the best k contiguous graph snapshots. Given G = {G1 , . . . , Gτ }, we go over all the O(τ ) contiguous sets of k snapshots from G, and find the set of k snapshots Ck0 and corresponding set of nodes S 0 that maximize f (S 0 , Ck0 ). The intuition behind this initialization technique is that it assumes that the best k snapshots of G are going to be contiguous. Our experiments demonstrate that in practice this is true in many datasets – e.g., in collaboration networks that evolve over time and we expect to see some temporal locality. At least-k initialization (ITRK ): In this initialization, we solve the B FF problem independently in each snapshot Gi ∈ G. This results in τ different sets Si ⊆ V , one for each solution of B FF on Gi . S 0 includes the nodes that appear in at least k of the τ sets Si . The intuition behind this initialization is to include in the initial solution those nodes that appear to be densely connected in many snapshots. We also experimented with other natural alternatives, such as the union: S 0 = ∪i=1...τ Si and the intersection: S 0 = ∩i=1...τ Si ; the at least-k approach seems to strike a balance between the two. The running time of the iterative F IND O2 B FF algorithm is O (I (nτ + M )), where I is the number of iterations required until convergence, and the O(nτ +M ) comes from the running time of F IND B FF. In practice, we observed that the algorithm converges in at most 6 iterations.  Algorithm 6 The Incremental Density (INCD ) F IND O2 B FF algorithm. Input: Graph history G = {G1 , . . . Gτ }; aggregate-density function f ; integer k Output: A subset of nodes S and a subset of snapshots Ck ⊆ G. 1: Sij = F IND B FF({Gi , Gj }, f ), ∀Gi , Gj ∈ G 2: C2 = arg max f (Sij , {Gi , Gj }) Gi ,Gj ∈G  3: for i = 3 ; i ≤ k do 4: for each Gt ∈ G \ Ci−1 do 5: St = F IND B FF(Ci−1 ∪ {Gt }, f ) 6:  Gm = arg max f (St , Ci−1 ∪ {Gt }) Gt  Ci = Ci−1 ∪ {Gm } 8: S = F IND B FF(Ck , f ) 9: return S, Ck 7:  Algorithm 7 The Incremental Overlap (INCO ) F IND O2 B FF algorithm.  1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8:  Input: Graph history G = {G1 , . . . Gτ }; aggregate-density function f ; integer k Output: A subset of nodes S and a subset of snapshots Ck ⊆ G. Si = F IND B FF(Gi , f ), ∀Gi ∈ G |Si ∩ Sj | C2 = arg max Gi ,Gj ∈G |Si ∪ Sj | for i = 3 ; i ≤ k do SC = F IND B FF(Ci−1 , f ) |St ∩ SC | Gm = arg max Gt |St ∪ SC | Ci = Ci−1 ∪ {Gm } S = F IND B FF(Ck , f ) return S, Ck  2) Incremental Algorithm: The incremental algorithm starts with a collection C2 with two snapshots and incrementally adds snapshots to it until a collection Ck with k snapshots is formed. Then, the appropriate F IND B FF algorithm is used to compute the most dense subset of nodes S in Ck . We use two different policies for selecting snapshots. The first one, termed incremental density (INCD ) algorithm (shown in Algorithm 6), selects graph snapshots so as to maximize density, whereas the second one, termed incremental overlap (INCO ) algorithm (shown in Algorithm 7), selects graph snapshots so as to maximize the overlap among nodes in the dense subsets. Incremental density (INCD ): To select the pair of snapshots to form the initial collection C2 , we solve the B FF problem independently  for each pair of snapshots Gi , Gj ∈ G. This gives us τ2 dense sets Sij as solutions. We select the pair of snapshots whose dense subgraph Sij has the largest density (lines 1–2). The algorithm then builds the solution incrementally in iterations. In iteration i, we construct the solution Ci by adding to solution Ci−1 the graph snapshot Gm that maximizes the density function f . That is if St is the densest subset in the sequence Ci−1 ∪ {Gt }, Gm = arg max f (St , Ci−1 ∪ {Gt }) Gt  (lines 3–6). The running time of the INCD algorithm is O τ 2 (n + M ) + kτ (knτ + M ) . The first term is due to the initialization step in line 1, where we look for the best pair of snapshots. If efficiency is important we can initialize the  algorithm with a random pair to save time. Incremental overlap (INCO ): To form the initial collection C2 , we first solve the B FF problem independently in each snapshot Gi ∈ G. This gives us τ different sets Si ⊆ V , where Si is the most dense subgraph in Gi . The algorithm selects from these τ sets the two most similar ones, Si and Sj , and initializes C2 with the corresponding snapshots Gi and Gj (lines 1–2). For defining similarity between sets of nodes, we use the Jaccard similarity. To form Ci from Ci−1 , the algorithm first solves the B FF problem in Ci−1 . Let SC be the solution. Then, it selects from the remaining snapshots and adds to Ci−1 the snapshot Gm whose dense set St is the most similar with SC (lines 3–6). The running time of the INCO algorithm is O(τ 2 n + k (nτ + M )), where the first term is the time for the initialization and the second term for the for-loop. V.  B FF P ROBLEM E XTENSIONS  The definitions of the B FF and O2 B FF problem focus on the identification of a set of nodes S such that their aggregate density is maximized. We now consider natural extensions of the B FF problem by placing additional constraints on the dense subgraphs. Query-node constraint: An interesting extension is introducing a set Q of seed query nodes and requiring that the output set of nodes S has high density and also contains the input seed nodes. A similar extension was introduced for static (e.g., single snapshots) graphs in [7]. In practice, this variant of B FF identifies the lasting “best friends” of the query nodes. We call this the Q R -B FF problem. We can modify the F IND B FF algorithms appropriately so that they take into consideration this additional constraint. In particular, F IND B FF M stops when a query node in Q is selected to be removed. Let us call this modified algorithm, Q R -F IND B FF M . We can prove the following proposition. (We omit the proof due to space constraints.) Proposition 8. Q R -F IND B FF M solves the Q R -B FF - MM problem optimally in polynomial time. We also modify F IND B FF A so that it does not remove seed nodes as follows: If at any step, the node with the minimum average degree happens to be a seed node, the algorithm selects to remove the node with the next smallest degree that is not a seed node. The algorithm stops when the only remaining nodes are seed nodes. Let us call this modified algorithm, Q R -F IND B FF A . Proposition 9. Let S ∗ be an optimal solution for the Q R -B FF - AA problem and SA be the solution of the (S ∗ )+2 ω , Q R -F IND B FF A algorithm. It holds: faa (SA ) ≥ s faa2(s+q) P where q = |Q|, s = |S ∗ \ Q| and ω = u∈Q degree(u, S ∗ ). Proof: By Lemma 1, it suffices to show that the Q R -F IND B FF A algorithm provides an approximation of the average density of a single graph G. Let S ∗ be the optimal solution for G. Let G0 be the graph that results from G when we delete all edges between two query nodes in G. Clearly, S ∗ is also an optimal solution for G0 . Assume that  we assign each edge (u, v) to either u or v. For each node u, let a(u) be the number of edges assigned to it and let amax = maxu {a(u)}. It is easy to see that faa (S ∗ ) ≤ 21 amax , since each edge in the optimal solution must be assigned to a node in it. Now assume that the assignment of edges to nodes is performed as the Q R -F IND B FF A algorithm proceeds. Initially, all edges are unassigned. When at step i, a node u is deleted, we assign to u all the edges that go from Si−1 to u. Note that this assignment maintains the invariant that at each step, all edges between two nodes in the current set S are unassigned, while all other edges are assigned. When the algorithm stops, all edges have been assigned. Consider a single iteration of the algorithm when a node umin is selected to be removed and let S be the current set. Let s be the number of non-query nodes in S, and q = |Q| Pbe the number 1 of query nodes. It holds: faa (S) = s+q u∈S degree(u) P P 1 1 = s+q degree(u)+ degree(u). Let Ω = u∈Q s+q P v∈S\Q 1 degree(u). Since u has the smallest degree min u∈Q s+q among all nodes in S but the seed nodes, we have faa (S) ≥ 1 s+q s a(umin ) + Ω. Since all edges are assigned and edges are assigned to a node only when this node is removed, at some step of the execution of the algorithm a(umin ) = amax . Thus, s s 1 ∗ for some S, faa (S) ≥ s+q amax +Ω ≥ s+q 2 faa (S )+Ω. Connectivity constraint: Another meaningful extension is to impose restrictions on the connectivity of S. The connectivity of S in a graph history G = {G1 , . . . , Gτ } may have many different interpretations. One may consider a version where all the induced subgraphs Gt [S] for t ∈ {1, . . . , τ } are connected. Another alternative is that at least m > 0 of the τ Gt [S]’s are connected. Here, we assume that a definition of connectivity for S is given in the form of a predicate connected(S, G) which is true if S is connected and false otherwise. Our problem now becomes: given a graph history G, a set of query nodes Q ⊂ V and an aggregate density function f , find a subset of nodes S ⊆ V , such that (1) f (S, G) is maximized, (2) Q ⊆ S, and (3) connected(S, G) is true. To solve this problem, we can modify F IND B FF so that it tests for the connectivity predicate connected(S, G) and stops when the connectivity constraint no longer holds. In our experiments, we apply a simplest test, just running the algorithms on the connected components of the query nodes. Size constraint: Finally, note that the definition of B FF does not impose a constraint on the size of the output set of nodes S. In that respect the problem is parameter-free. If necessary, one can add an additional constraint to the problem definition by imposing a cardinality constraint on the output S. However the cardinality constraint makes the subgraph-discovery problem computationally hard [7]. This also holds for the B FF problem; simply consider a graph history with replicas of the same single-snapshot graph. VI. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION The goal of our experimental evaluation is threefold. First, we want to evaluate the performance of our algorithms for the B FF and the O2 B FF problems in terms of the quality of  the solutions and running time. Second, we want to compare the different variants of the aggregate density functions. Third, we want to show the usefulness of the problem, by presenting results of B FF’s and O2 B FF’s in two real datasets, namely research collaborators in DBLP and hashtags in Twitter. TABLE I: Real dataset characteristics Dataset DBLP10 Oregon1 Oregon2 Caida Twitter AS  # Nodes 2,625 11,492 11,806 31,379 849 7,716  # Edges (aver. per snapshot) 1,143 22,569 31,559 45,833 100 7,783  # Snapshots 10 9 9 122 15 733  Datasets and setting. To evaluate our algorithms, we use a number of real graph histories, where the snapshots correspond to collaboration, computer, and concept networks. • The DBLP10 1 dataset contains yearly snapshots of the coauthorship graph in the 2006-2015 interval, for 11 top database and data mining conferences. There is an edge between two authors in a graph snapshot, if they coauthored a paper in the corresponding year and more than two papers in the corresponding interval. • The Oregon1 2 dataset consists of nine graph snapshots of AS peering information inferred from Oregon route-views between March 31 2001 and May 26 2001 (one snapshot per week). • The Oregon2 3 dataset consists of nine weekly snapshots of AS graphs, between March 31, 2001 and May 26, 2001. • The Caida4 dataset, contains 122 CAIDA autonomous systems (AS) graphs, derived from a set of route views BGP-table instances. • In the Twitter dataset [8], nodes are hashtags of tweets and edges represent the co-appearance of hashtags in a tweet. The dataset contains 15 daily snapshots from October 27, 2013 to November 10, 2013. • The AS5 dataset represents a communication network of who-talks-to-whom from the BGP (Border Gateway Protocol) logs. The dataset contains 733 daily snapshots which span an interval of 785 days from November 8, 1997 to January 2, 2000. The dataset characteristics are summarized in Table I. Since we do not have any ground truth information for the real datasets, we also use synthetic datasets. In particular, we create graph snapshots using the forest fire model [9], a wellknown model for creating evolving networks, using the default forward and backward burning probabilities of 0.35. Then, we plant dense subgraphs in these snapshots, by randomly selecting a set X ⊂ V of the nodes and creating additional edges between them, different at each snapshot. 1 http://dblp.uni-trier.de/ 2 https://snap.stanford.edu/data/oregon1.html 3 https://snap.stanford.edu/data/oregon2.html 4 http://www.caida.org/data/as-relationships/ 5 https://snap.stanford.edu/data/as.html  A.  B FF evaluation  Since, as shown in Section III-B, F IND B FF M and F IND B FF A are provably good for the B FF - MM and B FF - AA problems respectively, we only consider these algorithms for these problems. For the B FF - MA and B FF - AM problems, we use all three algorithms, i.e., F IND B FF M , F IND B FF A , and F IND B FF G . For the B FF - MA problem, we also use the DCS algorithm proposed in [5] for a problem similar to B FF - MA. The DCS algorithm is also an iterative algorithm that removes nodes, one at a time. At each step, DCS finds the subgraphs with the largest average density for each of the snapshots. Then, it identifies the subgraph with the smallest average density among them and removes the node that has the smallest degree in this subgraph. Accuracy of F IND B FF and comparison of the density definitions: We start by an evaluation of the accuracy of our algorithms along with a comparison of the different aggregate densities. Since we do not have any ground truth information for the real data, we use first the synthetic datasets. First, we create 10 graph snapshots with 4, 000 nodes each using the forest fire model [9]. Then, in each one of the 10 snapshots we plant a dense random subgraph A with 100 nodes by inserting extra edges with probability pA . We vary the edge probabilities from pA = 0.1 to pA = 0.9, and in Fig. 2(a), we report the F measure achieved for the four density definitions, when trying to recover subgraph A. Recall that the F takes values in [0, 1] and the larger the value the better the recall and precision of the solution with respect to the ground truth (in this case A). B FF - MM is the most sensitive measure, since it reports A as a dense subgraph even for the smallest edge probability. B FF - MA and B FF - AM achieve a perfect F value, for an edge probability larger than pA = 0.1 and B FF - AA for an edge probability at least pA = 0.3. For smaller values, these three density definitions locate supersets of A, due to averaging. All variations of the F IND B FF algorithms produce the same results. We now study how the various density definitions behave when there is a second dense subgraph. In this case, we plant a subgraph A with edge probability pA = 0.5 in all snapshots and a second dense subgraph B with the same number of nodes as A and edge probability pB = 0.9 in a percentage ` of the snapshots, for different values of `. Fig. 2(b) depicts which of two graphs, graph A (shown in blue), or graph B (shown in red), is output by the F IND B FF algorithms for the different density definitions. B FF - MM and B FF - MA report A as the densest subgraph, since these measures ask for high density at each and every snapshot. However, B FF - AM and B FF - AA report B, when the very dense subgraph B appears in a sufficient number (more than half) of the snapshots. All density definitions and algorithms, recover the exact set A, or B, at each case. We also run all algorithms using the real datasets and present the results in Table II, where we report the value of the  BFF-MM  BFF-MA  BFF-AM  BFF-AA BFF-AA  1 0.8  F-measure  We ran our experiments on a system with a quad-core Intel Core i7-3820 3.6 GHz processor, with 64 GB memory. We only used one core in all experiments.  BFF-AM  A B  0.6  BFF-MA  0.4 0.2  BFF-MM  0 0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1  PA  (a) F -measure for the BF F problems  0%  20% 40% 60% 80% Fraction of planted snapshots for B  100%  (b) Dense graph reported by each of the BF F problems  Fig. 2: Accuracy and density definition comparison for B FF objective function and the size of the solution. A first observation is that as expected, the value of the aggregate density of the reported solution (independently of the problem variant) increases with the density of the graphs. For B FF - MM problem we observe that the solutions usually have small cardinality compared to the solutions for other problems, since the fmm objective is rather strict (the solution for Twitter was empty). The solutions for B FF - MM problem in the autonomous-system datasets appear to have higher fmm scores. This may be due to the fact that there are larger groups of nodes with lasting connections in these datasets, e.g., nodes that communicate intensely between each other during the observation period. Comparison of F IND B FF alternatives for B FF - MA and B FF - AM: As shown in Table II, for the B FF - MA problem, F IND B FF G and F IND B FF A perform overall the best in all datasets producing subgraphs with large fma values. F IND B FF A performs slightly worse than F IND B FF G only in the Caida dataset. In the Caida dataset, due probably to the large number of snapshots, F IND B FF A – which is based on the average degree – returns a set with the smallest density. F IND B FF M and DCS have comparable performance, since they both remove nodes with small degrees in individual snapshots. They are both outperformed by F IND B FF A and F IND B FF G . For the B FF - AM problem, F IND B FF A outperforms both F IND B FF M and F IND B FF G . Our deeper analysis of the inferior performance of F IND B FF G for this problem revealed that F IND B FF G often gets trapped in local maxima after removing just a few nodes of the graph and it cannot find good solutions. Running time: In Table III, we report execution times. As expected, the response time of F IND B FF G algorithm is the slowest in all datasets, due to its quadratic complexity. For the B FF - MA problem, F IND B FF A is in general faster than DCS. The difference in times in F IND B FF M algorithms are due to differences in the computation of the density functions. Additional experiments including ones with synthetic datasets with larger graphs and more intervals that show similar behavior are depicted in Figs. 3(a)(b). In particular the Fig. 3(a) show the execution time of the different algorithms for the B FF - MA problem for varying nodes with τ = 10, whereas Fig. 3(b) shows the execution time for varying snapshots. Summary: In conclusion, our algorithms successfully discovered the planted dense subgraphs even when their density is small, with B FF - MM being the most sensitive measure. Minimum aggregation over densities (i.e., B FF - MM, B FF - MA) requires a dense subgraph to be present at all snapshots,  TABLE II: Results of the different algorithms for the B FF problem on the real datasets. B FF - MM F IND B FF M Size fmm  Datasets  11 33 75 17 15  DBLP10 Oregon1 Oregon2 Caida Twitter AS  1.0 14.0 23.0 8.0 0.0 4.0  F IND B FF M Size fma  B FF - MA F IND B FF A F IND B FF G Size fma Size fma  DCS Size fma  3 80 140 33 836 19  8 73 131 29 7 18  14 77 116 57 720 16  1.33 23.7 44.33 13.76 0.04 8.53  1.75 23.86 45.24 12.76 0.29 6.67  61 80 132 60 13 20  1.7 24.05 45.95 15.43 0.62 9.0  F IND B FF M Size fam  1.29 24.05 44.91 15.05 0.05 8.75  11 33 63 20 12  1.0 14.22 24.44 12.72 0.0 7.44  B FF - AM F IND B FF A Size fam 4 35 44 36 3 14  1.7 15.0 23.22 18.11 1.0 9.05  F IND B FF G Size fam  B FF - AA F IND B FF A Size faa  4 20 461 311 3 14  8 59 147 96 5 38  1.0 2.0 3.22 3.43 1.0 3.14  2.75 25.73 47.89 33.21 1.38 16.38  TABLE III: Execution time (sec) of the different algorithms for the B FF problem on the real datasets. Datasets  B FF - MM F IND B FF M  F IND B FF M  DBLP10 Oregon1 Oregon2 Caida Twitter AS  0.08 0,27 0.36 2.24 0.37 3.49  0.05 0.24 0.29 2.51 0.57 2.82  F IND B FF M  F IND B FF A  1,000  F IND B FF A  2.04 48 52 2,519 2.81 738  DCS  F IND B FF G  15  Time (sec)  Time (sec)  0.03 0.21 0.47 2.30 0.24 2.16  F IND B FF M  DCS  F IND B FF G  B FF - MA F IND B FF A F IND B FF G  800 600 400  10  5  200 0  0 8  16  24  32  # nodes in thousands (a)  40  10  20  30  40  50  # snapshots (b)  Fig. 3: Synthetic dataset (pA = 0.5): execution time of the different algorithms for the B FF - MA problem for varying number of (a) nodes, and (b) snapshots. whereas average aggregation over densities (i.e., B FF - AM, B FF - AA) asks that the nodes are sufficiently connected with each other on average. For the B FF - MA and B FF - AM problems, F IND B FF A returns in general more dense subgraphs than the alternatives (including DCS). Both F IND B FF A and F IND B FF M scale well. They perform similarly for the different density functions with the differences in running time attributed to the complexity of calculating the respective functions. B.  O2 B FF evaluation  In this set of experiments, we evaluate the performance of the iterative and incremental F IND O2 B FF algorithms. Comparison of the algorithms in terms of solution quality: Similar to before, we plant a dense random graph A in k snapshots. We then run the F IND O2 B FF algorithms with the same value of k. In Fig. 4, we report the F measure for the different values of k expressed as a percentage of the total number of snapshots. For the iterative F IND O2 B FF algorithm, the at-least-k initialization (ITRK ) outperforms the other two, and it successfully locates A for all four density definitions, when A appears in a sufficient number of snapshots. Non-surprisingly, all initializations work equally well for average aggregation over time (i.e., O2 B FF - AM and O2 B FF - AA). For the incremental F IND O2 B FF algorithm, den-  DCS  F IND B FF M  B FF - AM F IND B FF A  F IND B FF G  B FF - AA F IND B FF A  0.34 0.83 1.03 11.22 0.47 17.37  0.05 0.48 0.58 6.31 0.85 9.29  0.08 0.57 0.65 5.97 0.28 10.43  1.58 131 57 1,652 2.65 470  0.04 0.28 0.48 2.14 0.52 2.64  sity (INCD ) slightly outperforms overlap (INCO ). Overall, the incremental algorithms achieve highest F , when compared with the iterative ones. We also conduct a second experiment in which we plant a dense random graph A with edge probability pA = 0.5 in all snapshots and a dense random graph B with edge probability pB = 0.9 in k snapshots. In Fig. 5, we report the F measure assuming that B is the correct output for the O2 B FF problem for different values of k expressed as a percentage of the total number of snapshots. Again, by comparing the different initializations for the iterative F IND O2 B FF algorithm, we observe that among the iterative algorithms, ITRK successfully locates B for all four density definitions, when B appears in a sufficient number of snapshots. As in the previous experiment, all initializations work equally well for average aggregation over time. The incremental algorithms outperform the iterative ones with INCD being the champion, since they achieve higher F measure values even when B appears in a few snapshots. We also apply the F IND O2 B FF algorithms on all real datasets for various values of k. In Figs. 6 – 8, we report the value of the aggregate density for DBLP10 , Oregon1 , and Oregon2 for different values of k, again expressed as a percentage of the total number of snapshots of the input graph history. Overall, we observed that, in contradistinction to the experiments with real datasets, the contiguous initialization (ITRC ) of the iterative O2 B FF - AA algorithm emerges as the best algorithm in many cases, slightly outperforming INCD . This is indicative of temporal locality of dense subgraphs in these datasets, i.e., in these datasets dense subgraphs are usually alive in a few contiguous snapshots. This is especially evident in datasets from collaboration networks such as the DBLP datasets. We also notice that the incremental algorithms find solutions with density very close to that of the iterative algorithms. Finally, we also observe that as k increases the aggregate density of the solutions decrease. This again is explained by the fact that often dense subgraphs are only “alive” in a few snapshots.  IN CD  IN CO  1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0  IT RC  20  40  60  80  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0  IT RC  20  k (in % of snapshots)  40  60  80  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0  IT RC  F-measure for B FF - AA  IT RR  F-measure for B FF - AM  IT RK  F-measure for B FF - MA  F-measure for B FF - MM  IT RC  20  k (in % of snapshots)  40  60  80  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0  20  k (in % of snapshots)  40  60  80  k (in % of snapshots)  Fig. 4: Synthetic dataset (pA = 0.9): F -measure values for the O2 B FF problems IN CD  IN CO  IT RC  1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 20  40  60  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0  80  IT RC  20  k (in % of snapshots)  40  60  80  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0  IT RC  F-measure for B FF - AA  IT RR  F-measure for B FF - AM  IT RK  F-measure for B FF - MA  F-measure for B FF - MM  IT RC  20  k (in % of snapshots)  40  60  80  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0  20  k (in % of snapshots)  40  60  80  k (in % of snapshots)  Fig. 5: Synthetic dataset (pA = 0.5, pB = 0.9): F -measure values for the O2 B FF problems IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IT RC  IN CO  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  IT RC  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  IT RC  5  5  4  4  4  4  3  2  2  1  3  20  40  60  1  80  faa  5  fam  5  fma  fmm  IT RC  3  2  20  40  60  1  80  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  3  2  20  k (in % of snapshots)  k (in % of snapshots)  IT RK  40  60  1  80  20  k (in % of snapshots)  40  60  80  k (in % of snapshots)  Fig. 6: DBLP10 dataset: scores of aggregate density functions f IT RC  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IT RC  IN CO  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  IT RC  17  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IT RC  IN CO  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  17 26  26  25  faa  fam  fma  fmm  16 16  24  15 24 14  15 20  40  60  20  80  k (in % of snapshots)  40  60  80  20  k (in % of snapshots)  40  60  22  80  20  k (in % of snapshots)  40  60  80  k (in % of snapshots)  Fig. 7: Oregon1 dataset: scores of aggregate density functions f IT RC  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  IT RC  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  IT RC  30  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  IT RC  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  30  50  50  48  fam  26  faa  28  fma  fmm  28  26  46 24  22  46  24  20  40  60  k (in % of snapshots)  80  44  20  40  60  k (in % of snapshots)  80  22  48  20  40  60  80  k (in % of snapshots)  Fig. 8: Oregon2 dataset: scores of aggregate density functions f  44  20  40  60  k (in % of snapshots)  80  IT RC  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  IT RC  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  600  TABLE IV: The B FF solutions for DBLP10 (in parenthesis dense author subgroups).  Time (sec)  Time (sec)  60 400  200  B FF - MM  (Wei Fan, Philip S. Yu, Jiawei Han, Charu C. Aggarwal), (Lu Qin, Jeffrey Xu Yu, Xuemin Lin), (Guoliang Li, Jianhua Feng), (Craig Macdonald, Iadh Ounis)  40  20  B FF - MA 0  (Wei Fan, Jing Gao, Philip S. Yu, Jiawei Han, Charu C. Aggarwal), (Jeffrey Xu Yu, Xuemin Lin, Ying Zhang)  0 20  40  60  80  20  k (in % of snapshots)  40  60  80  k (in % of snapshots)  (a)  B FF - AM  (b)  (Wei Fan, Jing Gao, Philip S. Yu, Jiawei Han)  Fig. 9: Execution time of the different algorithms for the O2 B FF - MM problem in (a) Synthetic (pA = 0.5, pB = 0.9), and (b) Oregon2 datasets. Convergence and running time: In terms of convergence, iterative F IND O2 B FF requires 2-6 iterations to converge in all datasets. In Fig. 9 we report the execution time of O2 B FF algorithms for the B FF - MM problem in synthetic (pA = 0.5, pB = 0.9), and (b) Oregon2 datasets. As we observed, iterative and incremental INCO algorithms scale well with k. Comparing incremental algorithms, INCO is up to 6x and 3.5x faster than INCD in synthetic and Oregon2 datasets respectively due to the quadratic complexity of the latter. Additional experiments including ones with synthetic datasets with larger graphs and more intervals are depicted in Fig. 10(a) and Fig. 10(b) respectively. In particular, Fig. 10(a) shows the execution time of the different algorithms for the O2 B FF - MM problem for varying number of nodes, with τ = 10 and k = 6 whereas Fig. 10(b) shows the execution time for varying number of snapshots with k = 16 τ . Summary: In conclusion, all algorithms successfully discovered the planted dense subgraphs that lasted a sufficient percentage (much less than half) of the snapshots with the incremental ones being more sensitive. Among the F IND O2 B FF algorithms, incremental algorithms outperform the iterative ones in most cases. Among the incremental algorithms, INCD is slightly better than INCO . However, given the slow running time of INCD , INCO is a more preferable choice. Finally, in datasets consisting of dense subgraphs with temporal locality, ITRC is a good choice for detecting such graphs. IT RC  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IT RC  IN CO  IT RK  IT RR  IN CD  IN CO  213 213  Time (sec)  Time (sec)  211 29 27  27 24  25 23  210  21 8  16  24  32  # nodes in thousands (a)  40  10  20  30  40  50  # snapshots (b)  Fig. 10: Synthetic dataset (pA = 0.5): execution time (log scale) of the different algorithms for the O2 B FF - MM problem for varying number of (a) nodes, and (b) snapshots.  B FF - AA  (Wei Fan, Jing Gao, Philip S. Yu, Jiawei Han, Charu C. Aggarwal, Mohammad M. Masud, Latifur Khan, Bhavani M. Thuraisingham)  C. Case studies In this section, we report indicative results we obtained using the DBLP10 and the Twitter datasets. These results identify lasting dense author collaborations and hashtag cooccurrences respectively. Lasting dense co-authorships in DBLP10 : In Table IV, we report the set of nodes output as solutions to the different B FF problem variants, on the DBLP10 dataset. First, observe that three authors “Wei Fan”, “Philip S. Yu”, and “Jiawei Han” are part of all four solutions. These three authors have co-authored only two papers together in our dataset, but pairs of them have collaborated very frequently over the last decade. The solutions for B FF - AM and B FF - AA contain additional collaborators of these authors. For B FF - AA we obtain a solution of 8 authors. Although, this group has no paper in which they are all co-authors, subsets of the authors have collaborated with each other in many snapshots, resulting in high value of faa . The solutions for B FF - MM and B FF - MA contain the aforementioned three authors and some of their collaborators, but also some new names. These are authors that have scarce or no collaborations with the former group. Thus, in this case, the solutions consist of more than one dense subgroups of authors (grouped in parentheses), that are densely connected within themselves, but sparsely or not connected with others, while this is not the case for B FF - AM and B FF - AA. In Table V, we report results for O2 B FF - MM, O2 B FF - MA, 2 O B FF - AM and O2 B FF - AA on the same dataset. These authors are the most dense collaborators for k = 2, 4, 6, and 8 (recall there are 10 years in the dataset). We also report the corresponding years of their dense collaborations. Many new groups of authors appear. For example, we have new groups of collaborators from Tsinghua University, CMU and RPI among others. The authors appeared in the solutions of B FF also appear here for large values of k. We also studied experimentally the Q R -B FF problem. In Table VI, we show indicative results for three of the authors of this paper as seed nodes. For E. Pitoura, we retrieve a group of ex-graduate students with whom she had a lasting and prolific collaboration; for E. Terzi close collaborators from BU University, and for P. Tsaparas, a group of collaborators from his time at Microsoft Research. Note that in the last case, the selected set consists of researchers with whom P.  TABLE V: The authors output as solutions to the O2 B FF problem on DBLP10 . k=2 Years: k=4 Years: k=6  Years: k=8  Years:  B FF - MM, B FF - MA, B FF - AM, B FF - AA  Christos Faloutsos, Leman Akoglu, Lei Li, Keith Henderson, Hanghang Tong, Tina Eliassi-Rad 2010 - 2011 B FF - MM, B FF - MA, B FF - AM  B FF - AA  Mo Liu, Chetan Gupta, Song Wang, Ismail Ari, Elke A. Rundensteiner 2010 - 2013  Yong Yu, Dingyi Han, Zhong Su, Lichun Yang, Shengliang Xu, Shenghua Bao)  B FF - MM, B FF - MA, B FF - AM  2007, 2009 - 2011 B FF - AA  Liyun Ru, Min Zhang, Yiqun Liu, Shaoping Ma  Min Zhang, Liyun Ru Bhavani, Yiqun Liu, Shaoping Ma), Latifur Khan, M. Thuraisingham, Mohammad M. Masud, Wei Fan, Jing Gao, Philip S. Yu, Jiawei Han  2007 - 2012 B FF - MM  2007 - 2012 B FF - AM  B FF - MA  B FF - AA  Min Zhang, Yiqun Liu, Shaoping Ma  Wei Fan, Jing Gao, Philip S. Yu, Jiawei Han, Charu C. Aggarwal  Liyun Ru, Min Zhang, Yiqun Liu, Shaoping Ma  2007 - 2014  2007 - 2008, 2010 - 2015  2007 - 2014  TABLE VI: An example of authors output as solutions to the Q R -B FF problem on DBLP10 . Q R -B FF E. Pitoura: G. Koloniari, M. Drosou, K. Stefanidis E.Terzi: V. Ishakian, D. Erdos, A. Bestavros P. Tsaparas: A. Fuxman, A. Kannan, R. Agrawal C. Faloutsos, D. Koutra: Chris H. Q. Ding, L. Akoglu, H. Huang, Lei Li, Tao Li, H. Tong  Tsaparas has co-authored several papers in the period recorded in our dataset, but these authors are also collaborating amongst themselves. Finally, we use one of the authors appearing in the dense subgraphs of the O2 B FF, namely C. Faloutsos as seed node. In this case, we obtain a dense subgraph similar to the one we have reported in Table V. Finally, we consider a query with two authors: C. Faloutsos and his student D. Koutra. Adding D. Koutra to the query set changes the consistency of the result, focusing more on authors that are collaborators of both query nodes. Lasting dense hashtag appearances in Twitter: In Table VII, we report results of the O2 B FF problem on the Twitter dataset. Note that the results of the B FF problem on this dataset (as shown in Table II) are very small graphs, since very few hashtags appear together in all 15 days of the dataset. As seen in Table VII, we were able to discover interesting dense subgraphs of hashtags appearing in k = 3, 6, and 9 of these days. These hashtags correspond to actual events (including f1 races and wikileaks) that were trending during that period. For each solution, we also report the selected snapshot dates. As expected there is time-contiguity in the selected dates, but our approach also captures the interest fluctuation over time. For example, for the wikileaks topic that is captured in the dense hashtag set {“wikileaks”, “snowden”, “nsa”, “prism”}, the best snapshots are collections of contiguous intervals, rather than a single contiguous interval. Note also, that for large values of k, we do not get interesting results which is a fact consistent with the ephemeral nature of Twitter, where hashtags are short-lived. This is especially true for fmm and fma that impose strict density constraints and as a result the solutions consist of disconnected edges.  Latifur Khan, Bhavani M. Thuraisingham, Mohammad M. Masud, Wei Fan, Jing Gao, Philip S. Yu, Jiawei Han, Charu C. Aggarwal 2007 - 2012, 2014 - 2015  VII. R ELATED W ORK To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to systematically study all the variants of the B FF, and O2 B FF problems. The research most related to ours is the recent work of Jethava and Beerenwinkel [5] and Rozenshtein et al. [10]. To the best of our understanding, the authors of [5] introduce one of the four variants of the B FF problem we studied here, namely, B FF - MA. In their paper, the authors conjecture that the problem is NP-hard and they propose a heuristic algorithm. Our work performs a rigorous and systematic study of the general B FF problem for multiple variants of the aggregate density function. Additionally, we introduce and study the O2 B FF problem, which is not studied in [5]. The authors of [10] study a problem that can be considered a special case of the O2 B FF problem. In particular, their goal is to identify a subset of nodes that are dense in the graph consisting of the union of edges appearing in the selected snapshots, which is a weak definition of aggregate density. Furthermore, they focus on finding collections of contiguous intervals, rather than arbitrary snapshots. They propose an algorithm similar to the iterative algorithm we consider, which we have shown to be outperformed by the incremental algorithms. There is a huge literature on extracting “dense” subgraphs from a single graph snapshot. Most formulations for finding subgraphs that define near-cliques are often NP-hard and often hard to approximate due to their connection to the maximumclique problem [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]. As a result, the problem of finding the subgraph with the maximum average or minimum degree has become particularly popular, due to its computational tractability. Specifically, the problem of finding a subgraph with the maximum average degree can be solved optimally in polynomial time [1], [2], [3], and there exists a practical greedy algorithm that gives a 2-approximation guarantee in time linear to the number of edges and nodes of the input graph [1]. The problem of identifying a subgraph with the maximum minimum degree, can be solved optimally in polynomial time [7], using again the greedy algorithm proposed by Charikar [1]. In our work, we use the average and minimum degree to quantify the density of the subgraph  TABLE VII: The hashtags and the chosen snapshot dates output as solutions to the O2 B FF problem on Twitter. k=3 Dates: k=6  Dates: k=9 Dates: k = 12  B FF - MM, B FF - MA  B FF - AM  B FF - AA  kimi, abudhabigp, f1, allowin  ozpol, nz, mexico, malaysia, signapore, vietnam, chile, peru, tpp, japan, canada Oct 27-28, Nov 7  abudhabigp, fp1, abudhabi, guti, f1, pushpush, skyf1, hulk, allowin, bottas, kimi, fp3, fp2 Oct 31-Nov 2  Oct 31-Nov 2 B FF - MM, B FF - MA  B FF - AM  B FF - AA  abudhabigp, f1, skyf1  wikileaks, snowden, nsa, prism  Oct 28-Nov 2  Oct 27-28, Nov 3,5,7  abudhabigp, fp1, abudhabi, guti, f1, pushpush, skyf1, hulk, allowin, bottas, kimi, fp3, fp2 Oct 28, Oct 30-Nov 1, Nov 9  B FF - MM, B FF - MA  B FF - AM  B FF - AA  (Too many tags to report)  wikileaks, snowden, nsa, prism Oct 27-31, Nov 3,5-7  assange, wikileaks, snowden, nsa, prism Oct 27-29,31, Nov 3,5-7,10  B FF - MM, B FF - MA  B FF - AM  B FF - AA  (Too many tags to report)  wikileaks, snowden, nsa Oct 27-Nov 1, Nov 3-7,10  assange, wikileaks, snowden, nsa, prism Oct 27-31, Nov 2-7, 10  Dates:  in a single graph snapshot, and we extend these definitions to sets of snapshots. The algorithmic techniques we use for the B FF problem are inspired by the techniques proposed by Charikar [1], and by Sozio and Gionis [7]; however, adapting them to handle multiple snapshots is non-trivial. Existing work also studies the problem of identifying a dense subgraph on time-evolving graphs [4], [16], [17]; these are graphs where new nodes and edges may appear over time and existing ones may disappear. The goal in this line of work is to devise a streaming algorithm that at any point in time it reports the densest subgraph for the current version of the graph. In our work, we are not interested in the dynamic version of the problem and thus the algorithmic challenges that our problem raises are orthogonal to those faced by the work on streaming algorithms. Other recent work [18] focuses on detecting dense subgraphs in a special class of temporal weighted networks with fixed nodes and edges, where edge weights change over time and may take both positive and negative values. This is a different problem, since we consider graphs with changing edge sets. Furthermore, density in the presence of edges with negative weights is different than density when edges have only positive weights. Finally, another line of research focuses on processing queries e.g., reachability, path distance, graph matching, etc. over multiple graph snapshots [19], [20], [21], [22], [23]. The main goal of this work is to devise effective storage, indexing and retrieving techniques so that queries over such sequences of graphs are answered efficiently. In this paper, we propose a novel problem that of finding dense subgraphs. VIII. S UMMARY In this paper, we introduced and systematically studied the problem of identifying dense subgraphs in a collection of graph snapshots defining a graph history. We showed that for many definitions of aggregate density functions the problem of identifying a subset of nodes that are densely-connected in all snapshots (i.e., the B FF problem) can be solved in linear time. We also demonstrated that other versions of the B FF problem (i.e., B FF - MA and B FF - AM) cannot be solved with the same algorithm. To identify dense subgraphs that occur in k, yet not all, the snapshots of a graph history we also defined the O2 B FF problem. For all variants of this problem we showed that they are NP-hard and we devised an iterative and an incremental algorithm for solving them. Our  extensive experimental evaluation with datasets from diverse domains demonstrated the effectiveness and the efficiency of our algorithms. R EFERENCES [1] M. Charikar, “Greedy approximation algorithms for finding dense components in a graph,” in Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization, 2000, pp. 84–95. [2] A. V. Goldberg, Finding a maximum density subgraph. University of California Berkeley, CA, 1984. [3] S. Khuller and B. Saha, “On finding dense subgraphs,” in ICALP, 2009, pp. 597–608. [4] A. Epasto, S. Lattanzi, and M. Sozio, “Efficient densest subgraph computation in evolving graphs,” in WWW, 2015, pp. 300–310. [5] V. Jethava and N. Beerenwinkel, “Finding dense subgraphs in relational graphs,” in ECML PKDD, 2015, pp. 641–654. [6] Y. Asahiro, K. Iwama, H. Tamaki, and T. Tokuyama, “Greedily finding a dense subgraph,” in SWAT, 1996, pp. 136–148. [7] M. Sozio and A. Gionis, “The community-search problem and how to plan a successful cocktail party,” in ACM SIGKDD, 2010, pp. 939–948. [8] P. Tsantarliotis and E. Pitoura, “Topic detection using a critical term graph on news-related tweets,” in Proceedings of the Workshops of the EDBT/ICDT, 2015, pp. 177–182. [9] J. Leskovec, J. M. Kleinberg, and C. Faloutsos, “Graph evolution: Densification and shrinking diameters,” TKDD, vol. 1, no. 1, 2007. [10] P. Rozenshtein, N. Tatti, and A. Gionis, “Discovering dynamic communities in interaction networks,” in ECML PKDD, 2014, pp. 678–693. [11] J. I. Alvarez-Hamelin, L. Dall’Asta, A. Barrat, and A. Vespignani, “Large scale networks fingerprinting and visualization using the k-core decomposition,” in NIPS, 2005, pp. 41–50. [12] J. Bourjolly, G. Laporte, and G. Pesant, “An exact algorithm for the maximum k-club problem in an undirected graph,” European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 138, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 2002. [13] K. Makino and T. Uno, “New algorithms for enumerating all maximal cliques,” in SWAT, 2004, pp. 260–272. [14] B. McClosky and I. V. Hicks, “Combinatorial algorithms for the maximum k-plex problem,” J. Comb. Optim., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 29–49, 2012. [15] C. E. Tsourakakis, F. Bonchi, A. Gionis, F. Gullo, and M. A. Tsiarli, “Denser than the densest subgraph: extracting optimal quasi-cliques with quality guarantees,” in ACM SIGKDD, 2013, pp. 104–112. [16] B. Bahmani, R. Kumar, and S. Vassilvitskii, “Densest subgraph in streaming and mapreduce,” PVLDB, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 454–465, 2012. [17] S. Bhattacharya, M. Henzinger, D. Nanongkai, and C. E. Tsourakakis, “Space- and time-efficient algorithm for maintaining dense subgraphs on one-pass dynamic streams,” in STOC, 2015, pp. 173–182. [18] S. Ma, R. Hu, L. Wang, X. Lin, and J. Huai, “Fast computation of dense temporal subgraphs,” in ICDE, 2017, pp. 361–372. [19] K. Semertzidis, E. Pitoura, and K. Lillis, “Timereach: Historical reachability queries on evolving graphs,” in EDBT, 2015, pp. 121–132. [20] V. Z. Moffitt and J. Stoyanovich, “Towards a distributed infrastructure for evolving graph analytics,” in WWW, 2016, pp. 843–848. [21] K. Semertzidis and E. Pitoura, “Durable graph pattern queries on historical graphs,” in ICDE, 2016, pp. 541–552. [22] U. Khurana and A. Deshpande, “Efficient snapshot retrieval over historical graph data,” in ICDE, 2013, pp. 997–1008. [23] C. Ren, E. Lo, B. Kao, X. Zhu, and R. Cheng, “On querying historical evolving graph sequences,” PVLDB, vol. 4, no. 11, pp. 726–737, 2011.  IX. A PPENDIX In this section we present counter-examples that demonstrate that the F IND B FF M and F IND B FF A when applied to the B FF - MA and B FF - AA yield a solution that is a poor approximation of the optimal solution. For the following, we use n = |V | to denote the number of nodes in the different snapshots, and τ = |G| to denote the number of snapshots. A. Proof of Proposition 4 Proof: In order to prove our claim we need to construct an instance of the B FF - AM problem where the F IND B FFM algorithm produces a solution with approximation ratio O n1 . We construct the graph history G = {G1 , ..., Gτ } as follows. The first τ − 1 snapshots consist of a full clique with n − 1 nodes, plus an additional node v that is connected to a single node u from the clique. The last snapshot Gτ consists of just the edge (v, u). In the first n − 2 iterations of the F IND B FF M algorithm, the node with the minimum minimum degree is one of the nodes in the clique (other than the node u). Thus the nodes in the clique will be iteratively removed, until we are left with the edge (u, v). Since node v is present in all intermediate subsets Si , the minimum degree in all snapshots Gt is 1. Therefore, the solution S of the F IND B FF M algorithm has fam (S) = 1. On the other hand clearly the optimal solution S ∗ consists of the nodes in the clique, where we have minimum degree n−2, except of the last instance where the minimum degree is zero. which proves our claim. Therefore, f (S ∗ ) = (n − 2) τ −1 τ B. Proof of Proposition 5 Proof: In order to prove our claim we need to construct an instance of the B FF - AM problem where the F IND B FFA algorithm produces a solution with approximation ratio O n1 . We construct the graph history G = {G1 , ..., Gτ }, where τ is even, as follows. Each snapshot Gt contains n = 2b+3 nodes. The 2b of these nodes form a complete b × b bipartite graph. Let u, v, and s denote the additional three nodes. Node s is connected to all nodes in the graph, in all snapshots, except for the last snapshot where s is connected only to u and v. Nodes u and v are connected to each other in all snapshots, and node u is connected to all 2b nodes of the bipartite graph in the first τ /2 snapshots, while node v is connected to all 2b nodes of the bipartite graph in the last τ /2 snapshots. Throughout assume that τ ≥ 2. Note that the optimal set S ∗ for this history graph consists of the 2b nodes in the bipartite graph, with fam (S ∗ , G) = b = Θ(n). The score scorea for every node w of the 2b nodes in the bipartite graph is scorea (w, G) = b + 1 + τ −1 τ . For the nodes u and v, we have scorea (u, G) = scorea (v, G) = 2bτ /2+2τ = τ b + 2. Node s has score scorea (s, G) = 2b τ −1 + 2. τ Therefore, in the first iteration, the algorithm will remove one of the nodes of the bipartite graph. Without loss of generality assume that it removes one of the nodes in the left partition. Now, for a node w in the left partition, we still have that scorea (w, G[S1 ]) = b + 1 + τ −1 τ . For a node w in the right partition we have that scorea (w, G[S1 ]) =  b + τ −1 τ . For nodes u and v we have scorea (u, G[S1 ]) = scorea (v, G[S1 ]) = (2b−1)ττ /2+2τ = b + 23 . For node s we have that scorea (s, G[S1 ]) = (2b − 1) τ −1 τ + 2. Therefore, in the second iteration the algorithm will select to remove one of the nodes in the right partition. Note that the resulting graph G[S2 ] is identical in structure with G, with n = 2(b − 1) + 3 nodes. Therefore, the same procedure will be repeated until all the nodes from the bipartite graph are removed, while nodes u and v will be kept in the set until the last iterations. As a result, the set S returned by F IND B FF A has fam (S, G) = 2 (the degree of the nodes u and v), yielding  approximation ratio O n1 . C. Proof of Proposition 6 Proof: In order to prove our claim we need to construct an instance of the B FF - MA problem where the F IND B FF M algo rithm produces a solution with approximation ratio O √1n . We construct the graph history G = {G1 , ..., Gτ } as follows. We have τ = m snapshots that are all identical. They consist of two sets of nodes A and B of size m and m2 respectively. The nodes in B form a cycle. The nodes in A in graph snapshot Gt form a clique with all nodes except for one node vt , different for each snapshot. The optimal set S ∗ consists of the nodes in A, that have average degree (m−1)(m−2) = Θ(m). m The F IND B FF M starts with the set of all nodes. The average 2 = Θ(1), which is degree of any snapshot is 2m +(m−1)(m−2) m2 +m also the value of the fma (V ) function. In the first m iterations of the algorithm, the nodes in A have scorem (v, Si ) = 0, so these are the ones to be removed first. Then the nodes in B are removed. In all iterations the average degree in each snapshot remains O(1). Therefore, the set S returned by the F IND B FFM 1 has fma (S)√= Θ(1), and the approximation ratio is Θ m . Since m = n, this proves our claim. D. Proof of Proposition 7 Proof: In order to prove our claim we need to construct an instance of the B FF - MA problem where the F IND B FF A algo rithm produces a solution with approximation ratio O √1n . The construction of the proof is very similar to before. We construct the graph history G = {G1 , ..., Gτ } as follows. We have τ = m snapshots that are all identical, except for the last snapshot Gm . The snapshots G1 , ..., Gm−1 consist of two sets of nodes A and B that form two complete cliques of size m and m2 respectively. In the last snapshot the nodes in B are all disconnected. The optimal set S ∗ consists of the nodes in A, that have fma (A) = m(m−1) = Θ(m − 1). m The F IND B FF A starts with the set of all nodes. The value of fma (V ) is determined by the last snapshot Gm that has average degree m(m−1) m2 +m = Θ(1). The nodes in A have average degree (over time) m(m−1) = Θ(m), while the nodes in m 2 −1) B have average degree (m−1)(m = Θ(m2 ). Therefore, m the algorithm will iteratively remove all nodes in A. In each iteration the resulting set Si has fma (Si ) = O(1). When all the nodes in A are removed, we have that fma (Si ) = 0. Therefore, 1 the approximation ratio for this instance is Θ( m ). Our claim 2 follows from the fact that n = m + m.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
