Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_7103

Abstract:
Scale-invariant temporal history (SITH): optimal slicing of the past in an uncertain world arXiv:1712.07165v1 [cs.AI] 19 Dec 2017  Tyler A. Spears 1 Marc W. Howard  Brandon G. Jacques 1 Per B. Sederberg 1∗  2  Abstract In both the human brain and any general artificial intelligence (AI), a representation of the past is necessary to predict the future. However, perfect storage of all experiences is not possible. One possibility, utilized in many applications, is to retain information about the past in a buffer. A limitation of this approach is that although events in the buffer are represented with perfect accuracy, the resources necessary to represent information at a particular time scale go up rapidly. Here we present a neurally-plausible, compressed, scale-free memory representation we call Scale-Invariant Temporal History (SITH). This representation covers an exponentially large period of time in the past at the cost of sacrificing temporal accuracy for events further in the past. The form of this decay is scale-invariant and can be shown to be optimal in that it is able to respond to worlds with a wide range of time scales. We demonstrate the utility of this representation in learning to play a simple video game. In this environment, SITH exhibits better learning performance than a fixed-size buffer history representation. Whereas the buffer performs well as long as the temporal dependencies can be represented within the buffer, SITH performs well over a much larger range of time scales for the same amount of resources. Finally, we discuss how the application of SITH, along with other human-inspired models of cognition, could improve reinforcement and machine learning algorithms in general.  Affiliations 1  Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, USA Department of Psychology, Boston University, USA ∗ Corresponding Author, Per B. Sederberg, 434-924-5725 (phone), pbs5u@virginia.edu (email) 2  1  Introduction In many situations, a natural or artificial learner is faced with a continuous stream of experience. It is often the case that it is advantageous to learn dependencies between causes and outcomes that are separated in time from one another, perhaps widely separated. In reinforcement learning (RL) applications an agent must learn to take actions in the present to optimize rewards in the future (Mnih et al., 2015). In order to effectively predict the future, one must represent the past (Ba, Hinton, Mnih, Leibo, & Ionescu, 2016). In this paper we consider the implications of different ways of representing the past for RL applications. A Markov Decision Process (MDP), according to (Kaelbling, Littman, & Cassandra, 1998), is a domain in which the current observable state is sufficient in determining the optimal action for transitioning to a new state. Here, “optimal” is defined as that choice which maximizes some future reward inherent in the domain. While the most basic definition of an MDP does not require any representation of the past, a Partially Observable MDP (POMDP) can provide challenges without such a history. A POMDP is a domain of problem that allows for uncertainty in the observation of the environment. Here, the exact status of a state ranges over a probability distribution; the action-taker (or, agent) must navigate an uncertain world. One solution to POMDPs is to store previous states. This way, in domains where temporal dependencies are present, the confidence of the agent that it is in a certain state increases. This allows the agent a higher probability of maximizing its future reward. However, choosing a representation of history is nontrivial, and there are at least two difficulties in selecting such a memory mechanism. The first is in balancing the cost of memory storage with accuracy of prediction. To date there have been two main approaches to history representation, either to maintain a fixed buffer size of information into the past (typically implemented as a first-in first-out (FIFO) buffer of length N ), or to maintain graded feature activations that decay exponentially into the past. These options are not unlike the long-standing debate arising from laboratory-based studies in the field of human memory as to the nature of short-term or working memory representations (Sederberg, Howard, & Kahana, 2008). The second difficulty is that of ensuring flexibility and generality in the representation. Unlike most laboratory-based studies, the real world manifests temporal relationships on an incredible diversity of time scales. Causes predict outcomes on the scale of milliseconds, seconds, hours, days and so on. However, an RL model constructed from a FIFO buffer of length N , or even an exponentially-decaying graded representation, introduces a characteristic scale. By introducing a particular 2  scale, one reduces the general capabilities of the model by forcing it to operate under that scale. Specifically, the model will have qualitatively different behavior when the temporal relationships to be estimated in the world are less than N compared to when the relationships that must be captured when the relationships are greater than N (Tiganj, Shankar, & Howard, 2017). One might address this concern by choosing N to be large, but this choice has significant implications for the amount of resources consumed by the agent during its decision-making process. The number of buffer nodes to represent a particular scale τ goes up linearly with τ ; in neural network applications, the number of weights can go up as rapidly as τ 2 . Successfully choosing N in a resource-conserving way requires us to know, a priori the temporal relationships we are likely to observe. In practice, this requires us to make critical assumptions about the problem we are trying to learn prior to training the model. Our goal is to provide a memory representation that tackles both difficulties. Here we consider the implications of utilizing a scale-invariant temporal history (SITH) model in place of a FIFO buffer of size N . SITH builds on a body of work in neural computation and cognitive psychology, as found in (Howard, Shankar, Aue, & Criss, 2015; Shankar & Howard, 2013). The method results in a logarithmically compressed representation that coarse-grains the history of what happened when in the past. With this logarithmic compression, the number of buffer nodes necessary to represent a time τ in the past goes up only like log τ , an exponential savings. The cost is that the resolution at which past events can be discriminated goes down linearly with the distance to the past. This decrement in accuracy obeys the Weber-Fechner law, a fundamental result in human and animal psychophysics (Fechner, Howes, & Boring, 1966). This form of coarse graining can be shown to be an optimal solution to processing signals with a particular scale, but where the agent uses an uninformative prior for the unknown scale (M. W. Howard & Shankar, in press).  Scale-Invariant Temporal History: An efficient buffer for learning across scales For each feature in an agent’s observation, one can imagine a set of units that have temporal receptive fields. The units that fire when a feature was active closest to the present have smaller receptive fields that are centered closer together, much like the fovea of the retina (Van Essen, Newsome, & Maunsell, 1984). These units provide high temporal accuracy, but are activated for only a small time into the past. Conversely, neurons that are active further away from the present have 3  larger receptive fields that are spaced further apart. In keeping with prior work (Shankar & Howard, 2013), the nodes of this representation are evenly spaced on a logarithmic scale. To attain this SITH representation from a stream of input, we first compute a set of leaky integrators dF (s) = −sF (s) + f (t), dt where each unit is indexed by its value of s and driven by the function f (t) that describes the activation of a particular feature (in our case pixels on a screen). It can be shown that this set of leaky integrators implements the Laplace transform of the input function over past times f (τ < t). We approximate the inversion of the Laplace transform using a linear operator L−1 k that provides a discrete approximation to the Post inversion formula (Shankar & Howard, 2013). The goal of this method is to approximate the history of the input function leading up to the present f (τ < t). We make this estimate by approximating the inversion of the Laplace transform of this history. For each unit in F (s), we assign a new ∗ ∗ ∗ unit in f˜(τ ), where s and τ are in one-to-one correspondence as s = −k/τ . At each moment we compute ∗ f˜(τ ) = L−1 k F (s). The integer k controls the degree of approximation. The error in the inversion introduces a coarse-graining function that depends on the value of k (for these simulations k = 4.) As k → ∞ the inversion becomes perfect. If we refer to the ∗ present as t = 0, a node with a particular value of τ provides a coarse-grained ∗ ∗ ∗ estimate of the true function τ in the past: f˜(τ ' f (τ ) with equality as k → ∞. However, the coarse-graining is scale-invariant; the error in the reconstruction ∗ ∗ can be shown to be proportional to τ . By choosing s such that the τ values are logarithmically compressed, we construct a scale-invariant temporal history. ∗  Note that the representation at a particular value of τ is independent of other ∗ values of τ . The evolution of the representation depends only on the values of F (s) ∗ in the neighborhood of −k/τ . This means that although the representation can be thought of as a continuous representation, we can sample whatever discrete values we find convenient for a particular application. In the applications described here, we take only five discrete values and use it in place of a traditional FIFO buffer. An example of this history is illustrated in Figure 1.  4  0.08  Activation  0.06  0.04  0.02  0.00 0.9  0.8  0.7  0.6  0.5  Time (s)  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.1  0.0  Figure 1: Scale-Invariant Temporal History. In order to have a sparse representation ∗ of temporal history, we sampled SITH at 5 logarithmically spaced τ times for every feature (or pixel, in our chosen domain). Each line represents the field’s activation function due to a feature that activated for one timestep at the corresponding colored dot.  Catch: A simple application to evaluate the ability to learn and express temporal relationships. To test the properties of time and memory on a learning agent, we required an environment that is solvable by human agents, presents stimuli through time, and has a meaningful reward structure. As demonstrated in (Mnih et al., 2015), video games meet all of these criteria. To reduce complexity and focus on the properties of our model, we chose a noise-free, simple video game environment that would not require convolution layers to extract meaningful features. Catch, modified slightly from previously published versions (Ba et al., 2016), provides a simple testbed to illustrate the essential advantages of a scale-invariant buffer. In Catch, an agent moves a basket left and right at the bottom of the game screen in order to catch falling balls that are starting at the top of the screen. Our representation of Catch is a game board comprising an 18 × 13 matrix of binary pixels; here, 1 represents the presence of a game piece, and 0 represents the absence of any game pieces. At the bottom of the game board is a 1 × 3 basket. Balls are spawned at the top of the game board and start to move down to the bottom at a rate of one pixel each frame. The agent receives a 1 point reward if the ball overlaps with the basket when the ball reaches the bottom row. If the ball does 5  not overlap, then the agent receives a -1 point punishment. During every frame, the agent has to make a decision to either move the basket one pixel to the left, one pixel to the right, or to not move at all. All games end after 10 balls fall to the bottom row, regardless of whether they were caught. New balls are spawned after the previous ball reaches the bottom of the screen, so there is only a maximum of 1 ball on the game screen at all times during training and testing. With the consideration that the basket is 3 pixels wide, the screen is 13 pixels wide, and there are 10 balls for each game, it is important to note that chance performance is approximately −5. We also note here that this version of Catch fits the definition of a MDP, as is shown in the results below. A simple modification to this game was made to demonstrate the effects of obscuring parts of the stimuli, similar to partially observable version of Catch found in (Ba et al., 2016). This variant, which we dub Hidden Catch, retained all properties of Catch as described above, with one exception. In the game screen, a mask of varying size was placed over all pixels in a set amount of rows, starting from the second to bottom-most row. This mask set these pixels’ values to 0, removing all information for the agent. The agent was able to see and move the basket in the same manner as before, however, the ball disappeared after passing behind the mask. The agent received no further information about the ball until the reward or penalty was given. Hidden Catch can be defined as a POMDP. The fundamental computational challenge posed by Hidden Catch is that the model must bridge larger and larger temporal gaps in order to behave optimally.  Models Tested As shown in (Mnih et al., 2015), Deep Q-learning Networks (DQN) are extraordinarily adept at solving simple video game environments. In order to provide the DQN with some sense of temporal change, previous applications have used a FIFO buffer as input to the network. The FIFO buffer keeps a perfectly accurate history of the past N game frames. A visualization of a buffer of size 5 is during a moment of gameplay is shown in Figure 3A. The contents of the buffer are then concatenated and flattened, and passed into the network via the input layer. Thus, the input to the network is of size N × S, where S is the size of the stimulus (game screen) at a single timepoint. During our tests, we used simple densely-connected, feedforward networks on our Catch variants, where the number of parameters depended on the FIFO buffer size N . All networks contained 4 layers: an input layer of size S × N , two hidden layers of the same size as the input layer, and an output layer of size 3, to indicate 6  all possible movements of the basket (left, right, and no move). We tested FIFO buffers of length 1, 5, and 10; the input sizes were then 234, 1170, and 2340, respectively. An illustration of the model with a FIFO buffer of size 5 is shown in Figure 2. Additionally, we trained and tested on an agent using our SITH representation with five nodes. An illustration of the input layer during a moment of gameplay with a SITH representation of 5 nodes is shown in Figure 3B. Note the “smearing” of the temporal representation and also how the early buffer nodes hold instances far in the past. Each agent was then tested on versions of Hidden Catch with logarithmically-spaced mask sizes of 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16.  Figure 2: Illustration of a model with a buffer size of 5. The most recent frame from the catch game is input into a fifo buffer. Then we concatenate the frames and flatten into a 1 × 1170 (5 × 18 × 13) vector. That vector is the input to our DNN, which consists of 2 fully connected hidden layers, same size as the input vector, and outputs a 1 × 3 vector where the max of those 3 numbers indicates the action our agent should take that frame. All networks also incorporated Q-Learning with a discount rate of 0.9. The memory store for experiencing replay stored up to 50 previous full games, with each game consisting of 10 balls worth of frames. For each frame observed from the environment, the network went through one session of experiencing replay, which consisted of replaying 10 random full games from its memory store. All networks were trained using the Adagrad optimizer with a learning rate of 0.01, an epsilon of 1 × 10−8 , and decay of 0 (Chollet, 2015). All networks were trained and tested on 500 epochs, where an epoch consisted of the back-propagation of error from a session of experiencing replay. Networks were tested on 100 games every 5 epochs of training, and tested on 1000 games after completing training. These models were trained and tested during five independent learning runs to get a sense of the variability in learning performance. 7  A  Most recent input  B  ∗  Figure 3: Comparison of a buffer of size 5 and SITH with 5 values for τ . Both examples received input from the same game. A. A buffer of 5 would present, as input to the network, the 5 most recent screen frames concatenated and flattened. The buffer contains perfect temporal accuracy, but spans a minimal amount of time into the past. B. The SITH representation is similarly concatenated and flattened before being passed to the network as input. Here, each index loses temporal accuracy as the frame goes further into the past. However, SITH spans much farther into the past than the buffer of equal size.  8  When dealing with the model where we used SITH as the input, we had to make some assumptions. The first was to treat each catch game frame as if 1/30 seconds passed. This allows SITH to have a general idea of how often it will be receiving information. Due to the overlap in the receptive fields, there was no need to pass in the entire gradient of each features’ past experience into the neural network. Instead, we “sliced” into SITH at logarithmically-spaced points into the past. Here, the set of all temporal receptive fields were centered around ∗ τ = [0.03333333, 0.07145296, 0.15316577, 0.32832442, 0.70379256]. The size and shape of these receptive fields are shown in Figure 1. In effect, SITH acted as a “blurred” representation of the past, where each “slice” into the past was a temporally-blurred game screen of features, each containing varying amounts of 1 th activation and temporal specificity. Each frame was presented for 30 of a second 1 1 and decayed for 30 − 300 seconds. This representation was then concatenated and flattened before being presented to the network. The 5 time indices pulled from SITH as input to the network made the network parameters equal in size to that of the model with a buffer size of 5; i.e., 1170 input features. The SITH models follow the exact configuration as in Figure 2, but with a SITH representation instead of a FIFO buffer.  Results Each of the 4 models described above (three FIFO buffer sizes and SITH) were trained on the fully visible catch game. As illustrated in Figure 4, the models all performed well; over 1000 testing games they received an average score at or close to 10, the maximum score possible. Despite having more information about the environment than a FIFO buffer of 1, the models based on FIFO buffers of size 5 and 10 had some variance in their final performance. This was most likely due to the corresponding networks having many parameters with extraneous information leading to overfitting. Overall, high performance was to be expected and served to establish a baseline for the critical test offered by Hidden Catch. After establishing baseline functionality by training and testing on the fully visible game of Catch, we then trained and tested tested all model configurations on Hidden Catch. These trials were run using logarithmically-spaced mask sizes, as seen in Figure 5. This illustration demonstrates the inflexible nature of the FIFO buffer. Each network performed well above chance as long as its FIFO buffer was able to capture the ball before being hidden behind the mask. However, as soon as the mask obfuscated that data from the network’s history, the network immediately failed. This is because the models that use FIFO buffers are not 9  B10  7.5  8  Mean Score  A 10.0 5.0  6  2.5 0.0  4  2.5  2  5.0 100  200  300  400  Training Epoch  500  0  B1  B5  B10  SITH  Figure 4: Model performance in the visible catch game. A. Plots mean score over 100 games as a function of training epoch. Each game consisted of a maximum of 10 balls, where the agent receives +1 reward for catching a ball, and −1 punishment for missing a ball. The colors match the models represented in B. Each line is the average over five training runs of each model. The area that is transparent around each line indicates a 90% confidence interval over these five runs. B. Mean score of each model from 1000 testing games after training. The error bars are drawn to show a 95% confidence interval around the mean of five training runs. able to bridge temporal gaps larger than the size of the FIFO buffer. The ball is hidden from the network during the most critical observations. For example, the FIFO buffer of 1 could only present the most recent observation to the network. It performed optimally when Catch was fully visible, but failed when only a single row (the second to bottom-most row) became obscured. A similar result occurs when testing the FIFO buffer of size 5 with a mask of 8, and a FIFO buffer of size 10 on a mask of 16. We note the success of the model that took a SITH buffer as input at a wide range of time scales, also seen in Figure 5. The agent learned to play all versions of Hidden Catch with scores well above chance due to the logarithmic spacing and preservation of time. Even in the most difficult scenario, where all but two rows were hidden from the network, the SITH model performed well above chance, as seen in Figure 6. Thus, the network is able to create a mapping of the ball’s location with that of a reward. As is the nature of SITH, however, this lossy representation is also responsible for the slower rate of training on increasing mask sizes, as well as higher variance in the final scoring benchmark; this is visualized in Figure 7.  10  Model  10  B1 B5 B10 SITH  8  Mean Score  6 4 2 0 2 4 6 0  1  2  Mask Size  4  8  16  Figure 5: Model performances with different mask sizes. We trained the networks with varying mask sizes with buffer sizes of 1, 5, and 10 (B1, B5, and B10, respectively). We also ran the same procedure on the network with a SITH representation. Each bar represents the average score of 1000 games, averaged over five independent training attempts of 500 epochs each. The error bars represent a 95% confidence interval around the mean of the five runs’ scores. This figure contains information shown previously in the mask sizes of 0 and 16. We also reiterate here that the chance score is approximately −5, due to the parameters of Catch.  11  Mean Score  A  6  B6  4  4  2  2  0  0  2  2  4  4  6  100  200  300  400  Training Epoch  500  6  B1  B5  B10  SITH  Figure 6: Model performance in the fully masked catch game. The mask size was set to 16, leaving only the top row and the bottom row as input to our models. A. Plots mean score over 100 games as a function of training epoch. Each game consisted of a maximum of 10 balls, where the agent receives +1 reward for catching a ball, and -1 punishment for missing a ball. The colors match the models represented in B. Each line is the average over five training runs of each model. The area that is transparent around each line indicates a 90% confidence interval over these five runs. B. Mean score of each model from 1000 testing games after training. The error bars are drawn to show a 95% confidence interval around the mean of five training runs.  Mean Score  10  Mask Size 0 1 2 4 8 16  5 0 5 100  200  Epochs  300  400  500  Figure 7: SITH training over epochs with various mask sizes. Each point on the line is the average score over 100 games at that point during training. Each line is the average of 5 different training sessions and the colored transparent area around them indicates a confidence interval of 90%.  12  Discussion We presented a novel approach for representing the history of features in a scalefree, optimally fuzzy, and neurally-plausible manner. We tested a DQN using a SITH representation as input for a toy example of the game Catch, and its variant, Hidden Catch. We verified that the model with SITH as input performs well when features are fully visible, and, more importantly, when features are partially observable. Additionally, this performance in Hidden Catch only needs the same amount of model parameters as a model based on a FIFO buffer of size 5 (Figure 8). It also outperforms a FIFO buffer of size 10 across a wider range of mask sizes. Moreover, a FIFO buffer of size 17 would be needed to perform well in a game of fully hidden catch at the cost of many more resources than a SITH buffer with 5 nodes.  1e7 3.0  Weights  2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 1  SITH  3  5  7  9  11 13 15 17  Buffer Size  Figure 8: Number of parameters in our model with various buffer sizes. With two hidden layers in our model, the number of parameters needed to be learned grows quadratically with the size of the buffer. In order to solve the hidden catch game with a mask size of x, we would need a FIFO buffer of size x+1. The horizontal line indicates the number of parameters for the model using the SITH buffer with 5 nodes, which was able the solve the hidden catch game up to a mask size of 16. When viewed from the angle of the problem domain, the reason for this performance is clear. The fully visible game of catch is an MDP, as shown by the optimal performance of a FIFO buffer of size 1. However, once a mask is introduced, the domain becomes a POMDP. By maintaining a representation of the past, SITH allows the agent to, in principle, view many POMDPs as MDPs. By definition, this allows an agent to make a more informed decision about its next action, given SITH is parameterized to cover the necessary temporal distance. It is pertinent to mention SITH’s capabilities in relation to those of the Long Short13  Term Memory (LSTM) architecture (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). While both approaches seek to capture temporal dependencies in uncertain environments, it is difficult to compare these approaches directly because they have very different properties. Whereas LSTM can learn and decay at different rates (along with triggers to store and erase information) and these rates must be learned, SITH effectively provides a logarithmically-spaced spectrum of decay rates that follow Weber-Fechner scaling laws seen in a range of behavioral and neurophysiological domains. Whereas LSTM events can be triggered by external events and/or internal states, SITH provides a veridical (although coarse-grained) record of the past. For these reasons it is not straightforward to compare the resources or learnability associated with each method. Moreover, SITH must be coupled to some form of learning architecture to be useful for actual applications. That said, future work will entail more detailed tests of whether there are cases whether SITH or LSTM models can out-perform, or complement, each other on various tasks. Due to its generality and efficiency, the SITH model provides a myriad of options for future work. As mentioned before, the Catch game used here provides an example of SITH helping the agent regard a POMDP as an MDP. However, a similar comparison can be made with many other video game environments. Additionally, due to the breadth of time covered by a SITH representation, we would expect our model to aid in many different environments with minimal parameter adjustment. One property not explicitly utilized here is the scale-invariant nature of SITH. This critical attribute would allow any SITH-enhanced agent to operate at different rates, with the modification of a single parameter α, which scales the rate of change in SITH (Shankar & Howard, 2012). For example, imagine learning to play a game at one speed and then having to play it at another. A human agent could do this with relative ease, but most current AI architectures would fail without significant retraining. Moreover, tuning this single SITH parameter could, in principle, be learned by the agent itself based on input differentials, minimizing the amount of parameter tuning for any given agent. As discussed previously, a learning architecture that commits to a particular scale is intrinsically limited in its flexibility. The size of the FIFO buffer N fixes a scale. In addition, the factor γ in the Bellman Equation for Q-learning also introduces a scale. The Bellman equation efficiently implements exponential discounting where outcomes δ steps into the future are discounted by γ δ . This exponential discounting introduces a scale as the generalization across time is very different for δ  log γ and for δ  log γ. Future work in RL should endeavor to replace the scale introduced by a fixed γ in Q-learning. One possibility is to replace a single γ with an ensemble of Q-learning implementations with different learning rates—a similar approach was taken to TD learning in (Kurth-Nelson & Redish,  14  2009). One could also note that an ensemble of Q-learning models with a spectrum of values of γ encodes the Laplace transform over future time points and use the Post approximation to invert the Laplace transform, resulting in a compressed estimate of future outcomes. This is very much in keeping with the spirit of the SITH method itself. One final possibility is to replace exponential discounting entirely with a power law-scaled prediction of the future, as shown in (Tiganj et al., 2017). Through the use of a single linear operator on a SITH representation, one would retain all advantages of the SITH model, but with an estimated value of the future. This future representation would remain compressed, with the estimation of events increasing like log N while predicting N points into the future. This would similarly remain scale-invariant, where the predicted value of a future state continues to be scaled by the same α as described above. Such a model has numerous advantages over the Bellman Equation, and could greatly improve any reinforcement learning algorithms that rely upon exponentially discounted expectations. With a SITH representation of both the past and the predicted future, a human-inspired sense of time can be brought directly to AI.  References Ba, J., Hinton, G., Mnih, V., Leibo, J. Z., & Ionescu, C. (2016). Using Fast Weights to Attend to the Recent Past. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1610.06258 Chollet, F. (2015). Keras. Retrieved from https://github.com/fchollet/keras Fechner, G. T., Howes, D. H., & Boring, E. G. (1966). Elements of Psychophysics. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Retrieved from https://search.lib.virginia. edu/catalog/u618100 Hochreiter, S., & Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation, 1735–1780. Retrieved from http://www.bioinf.jku.at/publications/ older/2604.pdf Howard, M. W., & Shankar, K. H. (in press). Neural scaling laws for an uncertain world. Psych Review. Retrieved from http://sites.bu.edu/tcn/files/2017/05/ WeberFechner-PsychRev-R2.pdf Howard, M. W., Shankar, K. H., Aue, W. R., & Criss, A. H. (2015). A distributed representation of internal time. Psychological Review, 122 (1), 24–53. https: //doi.org/10.1037/a0037840 Kaelbling, L. P., Littman, M. L., & Cassandra, A. R. (1998). Planning and acting 15  in partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial Intelligence, 101 (1), 99–134. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0004-3702(98)00023-X Kurth-Nelson, Z., & Redish, A. D. (2009). Temporal-difference reinforcement learning with distributed representations. PLoS One, 4 (10), e7362. Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M. G., . . . Hassabis, D. (2015). Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518 (7540), 529–533. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14236 Sederberg, P. B., Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2008). A context-based theory of recency and contiguity in free recall. Psychological Review, 115 (4), 893–912. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0013396 Shankar, K. H., & Howard, M. W. (2012). A scale-invariant internal representation of time. Neural Computation, 24 (1), 134–193. Shankar, K. H., & Howard, M. W. (2013). Optimally fuzzy temporal memory. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 14 (1), 3785–3812. Tiganj, Z., Shankar, K. H., & Howard, M. W. (2017). Scale invariant value computation for reinforcement learning in continuous time. In AAAI 2017 Spring Symposium Series—Science of Intelligence: Computational Principles of Natural and Artificial Intelligence. Van Essen, D. C., Newsome, W. T., & Maunsell, J. H. R. (1984). The visual field representation in striate cortex of the macaque monkey: Asymmetries, anisotropies, and individual variability. Vision Research, 24 (5), 429–448. https://doi.org/10. 1016/0042-6989(84)90041-5  16

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
