Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 9
ArXiv ID: hf_871

Abstract:
PREPRINT VERSION  Improving files availability for BitTorrent using a diffusion model C. Napoli, G. Pappalardo, and E. Tramontana  arXiv:1409.4565v1 [cs.NI] 16 Sep 2014  PUBLISHED ON: 2014 IEEE 23rd International WETICE Conference BIBITEX: @incollection{Napoli2014Improving year={2014}, isbn={978-1-4799-4249-7/14}, doi={10.1109/WETICE.2014.65}, booktitle={23rd International WETICE Conference}, title={Improving files availability for BitTorrent using a diffusion model}, publisher={IEEE}, author={Napoli, Christian and Pappalardo, Giuseppe and Tramontana Emiliano}, pages={191-196} } Published version copyright c 2014 IEEE UPLOADED UNDER SELF-ARCHIVING POLICIES NO COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT INTENDED  Improving files availability for BitTorrent using a diffusion model Christian Napoli, Giuseppe Pappalardo, and Emiliano Tramontana Dipartimento di Matematica e Informatica, University of Catania Viale A. Doria 6, 95125 Catania, Italy Email: {napoli, pappalardo, tramontana}@dmi.unict.it Abstract—The BitTorrent mechanism effectively spreads file fragments by copying the rarest fragments first. We propose to apply a mathematical model for the diffusion of fragments on a P2P in order to take into account both the effects of peer distances and the changing availability of peers while time goes on. Moreover, we manage to provide a forecast on the availability of a torrent thanks to a neural network that models the behaviour of peers on the P2P system. The combination of the mathematical model and the neural network provides a solution for choosing file fragments that need to be copied first, in order to ensure their continuous availability, counteracting possible disconnections by some peers. Keywords-Dependability, distributed caching, P2P, neural networks, wavelet analysis.  I. I NTRODUCTION In peer to peer (P2P) systems using BitTorrent, a shared content (named torrent) becomes split into fragments and the rarest fragments are automatically chosen to be sent first to users requesting the file. Fragments availability is given by the number of peers storing a fragment at a given moment, and periodically computed by a server storing peer ids, fragments held and requested [7]. For computing the priority of fragments to spread, at best availability has been freshly updated, however peers often leave the system hence file fragments availability quickly changes, possibly before the least available fragments have been spread [13]. This occurs so frequently that such a fundamental BitTorrent mechanism may become ineffective, and as a result some fragments can quickly become unavailable. Moreover, when choosing fragments to spread, communication latencies [8], [18] among peers are not considered, therefore fragments spreading will surely occur sooner on peers nearby the one holding the fragment to spread. As a result, the furthest peers could disconnect before receiving the whole fragment. This paper proposes a model for spreading file fragments that considers both a time-dependent priority for a fragment to spread and latencies among nodes. I.e. the priority of fragments to spread gradually changes according to the passing time and fragments availability. The priority variation is regulated in such a way that the availability of fragments is maximised while time goes. Fragments to spread are selected according to the results of our proposed diffusion model, developed by analogy to a diffusion model on a porous medium. Moreover, we  propose to characterise the typical availability of a torrent observed on the P2P system, by using an appropriate neural network. Then, the selection of fragments to spread aims at counteracting their decreasing availability estimated for a later time. Therefore, the proposed work aims at supporting Quality of Service and dependability of P2P systems by attributing a priority on both the fragment to spread and the destination peer. This in turn increases availability and performances [9], [10], [11], as well as consistency [1]. The rest of the paper is organised as follow. Next section provides the mathematical representation for the proposed model. Section III develops the model for the diffusion of contents on a P2P system. Section IV introduces the neural network that predicts the user behavious. Section V describes some experiments based on our proposed model and neural network predictions, as well as the preliminary results. Section VI compares with related work, and finally conclusions are drawn in Section VII. II. M ATHEMATICAL R EPRESENTATION In order to put forward our analogy between BitTorrent and a physical system, some conventions must be chosen and some extrapolations are needed. We first describe a continuum system using a continuum metric, however later on we will single out a few interesting discrete points of the continuum. Due to the analogy to BitTorrent, we use a distance metric (named δ), which will be assimilated to the network latency among nodes, i.e. the hosts on a network holding seeds, peers or leeches. For the nodes we use notations ni or niα : the first indicates a generic i-esime node on the BitTorrent network, the second indicates the α-esime node as seen from the i-esime node. Of course, niα and njα could be different nodes if i 6= j. Double indexing is needed since when we use something like δ ij , it will be representing the distance of the j-esime node as measured by the i-esime node. Moreover, let us express Pkij as the probability of diffusion of the k-esime file fragment from the i-esime node to the j-esime node. Finally, we distinguish between time and time steps: the first will be used for a continuum measure of temporal intervals and we will use for it the latin letter t, the second will indicate computational time steps (e.g. the steps of an iterative cycle) and we will use for it the greek letter τ . Therefore, while δ ij (t) will represent the continuous evolution during time t  of the network latency δ, which is measured by the i-esime node for the distance with the j-esime node, the notation δ ij (τ ) will represent the latency measured at the τ -esime step, i.e. the time taken by a ping from the i-esime node to the j-esime node, only for a specific time step τ . Finally, we will suppose that each node has the fragment zk of a file z and is interested in sharing or obtaining other portions of the same file, hence we will compute the probabilitylike function that expresses how easily the k-esime shared fragment is being copied from the i-esime node to the jesime node at a certain step τ and we will call it Pkij (τ ). Eventually, we are interested in an analytical computation for the urgency to share a fragment zk from ni to nj during a time set τ , and we will call it χi,j k (τ ). In the following sections we will distinguish between an actually measured value and a value predicted by a neural network using a tilde for predicted values as in x̃. III. F RAGMENTS DIFFUSION ON A P2P NETWORK In our work we compare the file fragments of a shared file to the diffusion of mass through a porous means. To embrace this view, it is mandatory to develop some mathematical tools, which we will explain in the following. A. Spaces and metrics Users in a P2P BitTorrent network can be represented as elements of a space where a metric could be given by the corresponding network communication latency. Therefore, for each node ni ∈ N , set of the nodes, it is possible to define a function δ : N × N → R / δ(ni , nj ) = δ ij  ∀ ni , nj ∈ N  (1)  where δ ij is the amount of time taken to bring a minimum amount of data (e.g. as for a ping) from ni to nj . By using the given definition of distance, for each node ni , it is also possible to obtain an ordered list Ωi so that n o|N | Ωi = niα ∈ N : δ(ni , niα ) ≤ δ(ni , niα+1 ) (2) α=0  In such a way, the first item of the list will be ni0 = ni and the following items will be ordered according to their network latency as measured by ni . Using this complete ordering of peers, it is possible to introduce the concept of content permeability and diffusion. Let us consider the files shared by one user of a P2P system: each file consists of fragments that can be diffused. Then, the diffusion of a file fragment can be analysed in terms of Fick’s law. B. Fick’s law and its use for P2P Fick’s second law is commonly used in physics and chemistry to describe the change of concentration per time unit of some element diffusing into another [21]. This work proposes an analogy between a P2P system and a physical system. The key idea is to model the sharing file fragments  as the diffusion of a substance into a porous means along one dimension. Different places of the porous means would represent different P2P nodes, whereas distances along such a one-dimension would be proportional to the network latencies. Then, P2P entities would be accommodated into the formalism of equations (1) and (2). Using both the First and Second Fick’s laws, the diffusion of a substance into a means is given as the solution of the following vectorial differential equation ∂Φ = ∇ · (D∇Φ) (3) ∂t where Φ is the concentration, t the time and D the permeability of the means to the diffusing matter. Since this is a separable equation and we use a 1–dimensional metric based on the distance δ, and assuming D as constant among the nodes, equation (3) can be written as a scalar differential equation ∂2Φ ∂Φ =D 2 (4) ∂t ∂δ This partial differential equation, once imposed the initial and boundaries conditions, admits at least Green’s Function as a particular solution [2]. Green’s Function lets us study the diffusion dynamics of a single substance and can be rewritten as solution of the equation (4) in the form:  δ  1 Φ(δ, t) = Φ0 Γ √ (5) , Φ0 = √ 4Dt 4πDt where Γ is the complementary gaussian error function. Γ function should then be computed by means of a Taylor expansion. However, to avoid such a computationally difficult task, we use an approximation proposed in [6], where a pure exponential approximation for Γ(x) has been obtained, having an error on the order of 10−9 . Then, it is possible to have the following equation h i  2 2 4 1 1   Φ(δ, t) ≈ Φ0 6 e(Φ0 δ) + 2 e− 3 (Φ0 δ) (6)   − 12 Φ0 = (4πDt) for every node at a certain distance δ ∈ R+ at a time t ∈ R+ . C. From concentration to probability In equation (6) the scaling factor Φ0 is a function of the time t. On the other hand, the used formalism was developed mainly to focus on the distance δ and managing t merely as a parameter. The above mathematical formalism is valid as long as the distances δ(ni , nj ) remain time-invariant. The common practice considers the distance between nodes δ as time-invariant, however the actual network latencies vary (almost) continuously, with time, and a stationary Ωi ordered set is a very unlikely approximation for the network. In our solution, we make time-dependent the latency embedded into our model. In turn, this makes it possible to choose different fragments to be shared as time goes.  For the P2P system, the equation (6) states that a certain file fragment zki in a node ni at a time t0 has a probability Pkij (t0 , t) to be given (or diffused) to node nj , at a distance δ ij (t0 ) from ni , within a time t, which is proportional to the Φ(δ, t) so that   ij 2 ij 2 1 − 43 (pij 1 (pij k δ ) + k δ ) Pkij (t0 , t) = pij e e (7) k 6 2  ij where the function pij k = pk (t0 , t) carries both the diffusion factors and the temporal dynamics. And since we are interested in a simple proportion, not a direct equation, we can also neglect the factor 4π and then write pij k in the normalised form 1 1 1 (8) ·p ·√ pij k (t, t0 ) = √ t 4π Dk (t0 )  It is now important to have a proper redefinition of the coefficient D. Let us say that Tk is the number of users using file fragment zk (whether asking or offering it), Sk is the number of seeders for the file fragment and ρk is the mean share ratio of the file fragment among peers (and leeches), then it is possible to consider the ’urge’ to share the resource as an osmotic pressure which, during time, varies the coefficient of permeability of the network D. In order to take into account the mutable state in a P2P system, D should vary according to the amounts of available nodes and file fragments. We have chosen to define D as Dk (t0 ) ,  Tk (t0 ) Sk (t0 ) + [Tk (t0 ) − Sk (t0 )] ρk (t0 )  (9)  by a formal substitution of D with Dk in Φ0 , we obtain the analytical form of the term pij k. D. Discrete time evolution on each node Indeed, the physical nature of the adopted law works in the entire variable space, however for the problem at hand discrete-time simplifications are needed. Let us suppose that for a given discrete time step τ = 0 node ni effectively measures the network latencies of a set of nodes {nj }, then an ordered set Ωi as in equation (2) is computed. Now, every node ni computes probability Pkij for each of its own file fragment zk and for every node nj . This probability corresponds to a statistical prevision of the possible file fragments spreading onto other nodes. Suppose that for a while no more measures for δ have been taken, and at a later discrete time step τ file fragment zki be copied to the first node to be served, which is chosen according to the minimum probability of diffusion, latencies and time since last measures were taken (see following subsection and equation (12)). Moreover, such a file fragment is reaching other nodes if the latency for such nodes is less than time ti , computed as tik (τ )  =  τ X  αk =0  δ(n  i  , niα )  (10)  Index k is used in equation (10) to refer to file fragment zki . Indeed, since nodes need and offer their own file fragments, the ordered set of nodes referred by a given node depend on resource zk , i.e. Ωik = {niαk }. It is now possible to have a complete mapping of the probability of diffusion by reducing the time dependence from (t0 , t) to a single variable dependence from the discrete time-step τ . For each resource zk as Pkij (τ ) stated that it is possible to reduce Dk (t0 , t) to a one-variable function Dk (τ ) by assuming that at t0 we have τ = 0 and considering only the values of Dk (t0 , t) when t is the execution moment of a computational step τ . E. Assigning priorities and corrections Once all the Pkij (τ ) have been computed, and values stored to a proper data structure, it is actually simple to determine the most urgent file fragment to share, which is the resource that has the least probability to be spread, i.e. the k for which Pkij (τ ) is minimum. Furthermore, we consider that while time goes on an old measured δ differs from the actual value, hence the measure becomes less reliable. To take into account the staleness of δ values, we gradually consider less bound to δ the choice of a fragment, and this behaviour is provided by the negative exponential in equation (11). Given enough time, the choice will be based only on the number of available fragments. However, we consider that by that time a new value for δ would have been measured and incorporated again into the model choosing the fragment. Generally, for nodes having the highest latencies with respect to a given node ni , more time will be needed to receive a fragment from the node ni . We aim at compensating such a delay by incorporating into our model the inescapable latencies of a P2P network. Therefore, the node that will receive a fragment first will be chosen according to its distance. In order to model the fact that distant nodes, having the highest values for δ, will take more time to send or receive file fragments, we have chosen a decay law. Now it is possible to obtain a complete time-variant analytical form of the spreading of file fragments χij k (τ ) =  e−cτ δ  ij  Pkij (τ )  (11)  where the decay constant c can be chosen heuristically, without harming the said law, and tuned according to other parameters. If k indicates a file fragment and k ∗ the index of the most urgent file fragment to share, this latter is trivially found as the solution of a maximum problem so that n o ij k ∗ : χij (12) k∗ (τ ) = max χk (τ ) k  Of course, all the priorities depend on the value of the bidimensional matrix of values of Pkij (we mark that the index  An innovative neuro-wavelet method for reconstruction of photometric data 7  1.728  step of the series, a set of coefficients di and residuals ai , and so that  x 10  Original signal Forward reconstruction Backward reconstruction Midpoint reconstruction  1.727  Ŵi [ai−1 (τ )] = [di (τ ), ai (τ )]  1.726  Topology of the WRNN  Corrected Flux [ADU]  1.725  Figure 1.  7  ∀ i ∈ [1, M ] ∩ N  (13)  where we intend a0 (τ ) = x(τ ). The input set can then be represented as an N × (M + 1) matrix of N time steps of a M level wavelet decomposition, where the τ -esime row represents the τ -esime time step as the decomposition  1.724  Mid Point  Forward NNET  1.723  1.722  Backward NNET  1.721  u(τ ) = [d1 (τ ), d2 (τ ), . . . , dM (τ ), aM (τ )] (14) i does not variate within the same node n ). Among these Each row of this dataset is given as input value to the values, there is no need to compute elements where j = i M input neurons of the proposed WRNN (Figure 1). The j and for those elements where the node n is not in the queue ij properties of this network make it possible, starting from for resource zk . In both these cases it is assumed Pk = 1. an input at a time step τn , (right) to predict the effective number Fig. 4. Neural networks structures (left), Forward and Backward reconstruction i Moreover, after n having completed to transfer zk to the of requests (or offers) at a time step τn+r . In this way the j node n , the element of indexes (j, k) is set to 1. In a similar WRNN acts like a functional fashion, each peer is able to identify a possible resource to ask for in order to maximize the diffusion of rare ones N̂ [u(τ (15) n )] = x̃(τ becauseones. wavelets do not verify some basic properties such as the absence of n+r ) instead this of common local minima, and does not provide by itself a suﬃciently response where r is graded the number of time[17]. steps of forecast in the future the existent rangeAND of possible transfer functions some particular andonly x̃ the predicted serie. classes IV.InWRNN PREDICTORS U SERS BEHAVIOR i  1.72  1.719  0  0.05  0.1  0.15  0.2 0.25 Time [Julian Days]  0.3  0.35  0.4  0.45  approximate the functional form of a wavelet. In this work the radial basis func-  In order make thewere P2P chosen system able to properly reB. Predicted behaviour tionsto(radbas) as transfer functions, indeed this user particular kind of act to peaks of requests, as well as very fast changes by even equation (15), it is then possible to functions well describes in first approximation halfAsof described a wavelet, if these of fragments availability and/or share ratio, we propose obtain future prediction the number of requests for functions do not verify the properties shown by (1) and a(2). Anyway, afterofscalan innovative solution based on Wavelet Recurrent Neural a specific torrent, as well as its ing, shift and chosen activation it is possible to obtainavailability in the future. Networks (WRNN) to repetition characteriseofthethe user behaviour and function, + fact, by considering both the predicted x̃k (τn+r ) and In several mother forecast. wavelet For filters. Let ftorrent, : [−1;the 1] → R to be the choosen transfer producing a short-term a given the modeled χk (τn+r ), it is possible, at a time step τn , function, then wavelet analysis provides compression and denoising on to take counteracting actions and improve the probability the observed time series of the amount of!users prividing diffusion + f (2x + 1) x of ∈ [− 1 , 0 ]for a rare torrent. This is achieved, in practice, or requesting fragments; f˜(x) a=proper f˜(x +recurrent 2k) = neural network ∀k values ∈ Z for Dk(4) by using (τn+r ), which account for − f (2x − 1) x ∈ [ 0 , 1altered ] (RNN), trained with the said observed time series, provides the forecast of future time steps. Such modified values are well-timed estimations of future data. The ensamble of the computed by ourfor WRNN, e.g. in a computing node of a verifies all the properties of a wavelet function. it is possible the selected said wavelet analysis and RNN is called WRNN [5], [15], Socloud. Therefore, predicted values neural networks to for simulate a wavelet by that using the radbas function defined in for Tk (τn+r ), Sk (τn+r ) [16] and provides forecasts the number of users and ρk (τn+r ) are sent to each node acting as a peer. thea[−1; 1] realSeveral domain. It isnetworks indeed possible that will share fragment. neural have beento verify Each time a new torrent becomes shared on the P2P employed to find polaritons propagation " 2k+1 and metal thicknetwork, then a new WRNN is created and trained on ness correspondence [3]; to predict the behaviour a cloud system, to provide f˜(x) dx of = users 0 ∀ h <a kserver, ∈ Z e.g. requested from (5) requesting resources [17], to perform wavelet transform in 2h+1 predictions related to the availability and peers of the novel a recursive lifting procedure [4], [20]. set of shared fragments for that torrent. The predictions will  It was shown that, in order to simulate a wavelet function, the chosen transfer be sent to the peers periodically, and allow peers to update functions wavelet. Thisupdate is thefrequency can be tuned in A. WRNN setup must be symmetrically periodical to emulate the valuesa of Dk (τ ). The reason for choosing a pair number of neurons in the aim to have the same number order to correctly match the dynamic of hosts. For this work, the initial datasets consists of a time series of positive weights in theorreconstruction layer. Theoretically, representing requestsand for negative a torrent,layer coming from peers, V. E XPERIMENTS if this happens, then the neuron of the exactly given declaration of availability for the torrentpairs coming fromsecond layer are emulating a reconstruction filter. Althoug this was a theoretical schema, there are both peers and seeds. Independently of the specificities of As shown in Figure 2, strong for the initial condition of the reasons for this theseries weights, thisτ experimental to havesome a non-zero sum, for a torrent happen to such data, let us call x(τ ), in where is the discrete setup, P2P system file fragments because neuralwith network beyond perform the inverse wavelet transform time step of data,the sampled intervals of onetohour. A be heterogeneously spread among peers (e.g. no one shares biorthogonal of the time series has fragment n. 2, and very few nodes have fragment n. 5). We must wavelet performdecomposition also the signal prediction. been computed to obtain the correct input set for the WRNN as required by the devised architecture shown in Figure 1. This decomposition can be achieved by applying the wavelet transform as a recursive couple of conjugate filters in such a way that the i-esime recursion Ŵi produces, for any time  report a simulation comprising 11 peers and 5 file fragments, and an evolution in only 5 time steps. In the order, step after step, peer n0 selects file fragment z4 and sends this to peer n10 . Both the fragment to spread and the destination peer have been chosen according to equation (12).  i In order: the initial condition (white cells represent the fragments), the normalised χij k (τ ) for a certain node n at different time steps τ  VI. R ELATED W ORK Several studies have analysed the behaviour of BitTorrent systems from the point of view of fairness, i.e. how to have users contribute with contents that can be uploaded by other users, levelling the amount of downloads with that of upload. Fewer works have studied the problem of unavailability of contents in P2P BitTorrent networks. In [19], authors proposed to order peers according to their  1  0.8  1 ( 3  )  2 ( 3  )  3 ( 3  )  0.6 ( )  Later on, as soon as possible, peer n0 selects another fragment, i.e. z3 to spread. Such a fragment could be send just after the transfer of the previous fragment has been completed, or concurrently to the first transmission. The shown evolution does not consider that the file fragment could have been passed, e.g., to node n10 , and so that for the next time step the value of χ for n10 would drop to zero. Note that the highest values of χ are an indication of the urgency of receiving a fragment. The described model and formula allow subsequent sharing activities, after the initial time steps, to be determined, in terms of which fragments should be sent. Figure 2 shows that after the first time steps it becomes more and more urgent for node n0 to obtain the missing fragments z2 and z5 . It is possible to see that the highest priority is for fragment z2 since its share ratio and the relative availability are very low with respect to fragment z5 . This was the expected behaviour of the developed model. For the simulation shown in Figure 2, all fragments, except z2 since it is actually unavailable, would be spread to peers in a very low number of time steps. Figure 3 shows the decay of several computed χ for different peers requiring fragment number 3. On the long run, this law will benefit nearby nodes, while on the short term, distant nodes are given the highest priority.  j 3  Figure 2.  0.4  0.2  0 1  Figure 3.  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  Time decay of normalised χjk (τ ) for increasing time steps τ  uploading bandwidth, hence when providing contents the selection of peers is performed accordingly. One of the mechanism proposed to increase files availability has been to use multi-torrent, i.e. for ensuring fairness, instead of forcing users stay longer, they provide their contribution to uploaders for fragments belonging to different files [12]. Similarly, in [13] authors show that by using multi-torrent availability can be easily increased, and confirm that fast replication of rare fragments is essential. Furthermore, bundling, i.e. the dissemination of a number of related files together, has been proposed to increase availability [14]. The above proposed mechanisms differ from our proposal, since we take into account several novel factors: the dynamic of data exchange between distant peers, a decay for the availability of peers, and the forecast of contents availability. Such factors have been related into a proposed model that manages to select the rarest content to be spread taking into account the future availability, and the peers that should  provide and take such a content. VII. C ONCLUSIONS This paper proposed to improve availability of fragments on a P2P system by adopting a mathematical model and a neural network. The former describes the fragments diffusion and the urgency to share fragments, whereas the latter provides an estimation of the availability of peers, and hence fragments, at later time. By using the estimate of future availability into the diffusion model, we can select the fragments that need to be spread to counteract their disappearance due to users disconnections. ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work has been supported by project PRISMA PON04a2 A/F funded by the Italian Ministry of University and Research within PON 2007-2013 framework. R EFERENCES [1] F. Bannò, D. Marletta, G. Pappalardo, and E. Tramontana. Tackling consistency issues for runtime updating distributed systems. In Proceedings of International Symposium on Parallel & Distributed Processing, Workshops and Phd Forum (IPDPSW), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2010. DOI: 10.1109/IPDPSW.2010.5470863. [2] B. S. Bokshtein, M. I. Mendelev, and D. J. Srolovitz. Thermodynamics and kinetics in materials science: a short course. Oxford University Press Oxford, 2005. [3] F. Bonanno, G. Capizzi, G. Lo Sciuto, C. Napoli, G. Pappalardo, and E. Tramontana. A cascade neural network architecture investigating surface plasmon polaritons propagation for thin metals in openmp. In Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing, volume 8467, pages 22–33. Springer, 2014. [4] G. Capizzi, C. Napoli, and F. Bonanno. Innovative secondgeneration wavelets construction with recurrent neural networks for solar radiation forecasting. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 23(11):1805–1815, 2012. [5] G. Capizzi, C. Napoli, and L. Paternò. An innovative hybrid neuro-wavelet method for reconstruction of missing data in astronomical photometric surveys. In Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing, pages 21–29. Springer, 2012. [6] M. Chiani, D. Dardari, and M. K. Simon. New exponential bounds and approximations for the computation of error probability in fading channels. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 2(4):840–845, July 2003.  [9] R. Giunta, F. Messina, G. Pappalardo, and E. Tramontana. Augmenting a web server with QoS by means of an aspectoriented architecture. In Proceedings of WETICE, pages 179– 184. IEEE, 2012. DOI: 10.1109/WETICE.2012.105. [10] R. Giunta, F. Messina, G. Pappalardo, and E. Tramontana. Providing qos strategies and cloud-integration to web servers by means of aspects. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, 2013. DOI:10.1002/cpe.3031. [11] R. Giunta, F. Messina, G. Pappalardo, and E. Tramontana. Kaqudai: a dependable web infrastructure made out of existing components. In Proceedings of WETICE, pages 146–151. IEEE, 2013. DOI:10.1109/WETICE.2013.47. [12] L. Guo, S. Chen, Z. Xiao, E. Tan, X. Ding, and X. Zhang. Measurements, analysis, and modeling of bittorrent-like systems. In Proceedings of ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet Measurement. USENIX Association, 2005. [13] S. Kaune, R. C. Rumin, G. Tyson, A. Mauthe, C. Guerrero, and R. Steinmetz. Unraveling bittorrent’s file unavailability: Measurements and analysis. In Proceedings of P2P, pages 1–9. IEEE, 2010. [14] D. S. Menasche, A. A. Rocha, B. Li, D. Towsley, and A. Venkataramani. Content availability and bundling in swarming systems. In Proceedings of Co-NEXT, pages 121– 132. ACM, 2009. [15] C. Napoli, F. Bonanno, and G. Capizzi. Exploiting solar wind time series correlation with magnetospheric response by using an hybrid neuro-wavelet approach. In Advances in Plasma Astrophysics, number S274 in Proceedings of the International Astronomical Union, pages 250–252. Cambridge University Press, 2010. [16] C. Napoli, F. Bonanno, and G. Capizzi. An hybrid neurowavelet approach for long-term prediction of solar wind. In Advances in Plasma Astrophysics, number S274 in Proceedings of the International Astronomical Union, pages 247–249. Cambridge University Press, 2010. [17] C. Napoli, G. Pappalardo, and E. Tramontana. A hybrid neuro–wavelet predictor for qos control and stability. In AI*IA 2013: Advances in Artificial Intelligence, volume 8249, pages 527–538. Springer, 2013. [18] G. Novelli, G. Pappalardo, C. Santoro, and E. Tramontana. A grid-based infrastructure to support multimedia content distribution. In Proceedings of UPGRADE-CN, pages 57–64. ACM, 2007. DOI: 10.1145/1272980.1272983. [19] D. Qiu and R. Srikant. Modeling and performance analysis of bittorrent-like peer-to-peer networks. SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 34(4):367–378, 2004.  [7] B. Cohen. Incentives build robustness in bittorrent. In Workshop on Economics of Peer-to-Peer systems, volume 6, pages 68–72, 2003.  [20] W. Sweldens. The lifting scheme: A construction of second generation wavelets. Journal on Mathematical Analysis, 29(2):511–546, 1998.  [8] R. Giunta, F. Messina, G. Pappalardo, L. Toscano, and E. Tramontana. Testing Replica Selection Policies in a PanEuropean Grid VO. In Proceedings of WETICE, pages 210– 215. IEEE, June 2008. DOI: 10.1109/WETICE.2008.48.  [21] J. L. Vázquez. The Porous Medium Equation: Mathematical Theory: Mathematical Theory. Oxford University Press, 2006.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 9. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
