Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_810

Abstract:
Real-Time Localization and Tracking of Multiple Radio-Tagged Animals with an Autonomous UAV  arXiv:1712.01491v4 [cs.SY] 14 Feb 2018  Hoa Van Nguyen, Michael Chesser, Fei Chen, S. Hamid Rezatofighi and Damith C. Ranasinghe School of Computer Science The University of Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia Email:{hoavan.nguyen,michael.chesser,fei.chen,hamid.rezatofighi,damith.ranasinghe}@adelaide.edu.au  Abstract—Autonomous aerial robots provide new possibilities to study the habitats and behaviors of endangered species through the efficient gathering of location information at temporal and spatial granularities not possible with traditional manual survey methods. We present a novel autonomous aerial vehicle system to track and localize multiple radio-tagged animals. The simplicity of measuring the received signal strength indicator (RSSI) values of very high frequency (VHF) radio-collars commonly used in the field is exploited to realize a low cost and lightweight tracking platform suitable for integration with unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Due to uncertainty and the nonlinearity of the system based on RSSI measurements, our tracking and planning approaches integrate a particle filter for tracking and localizing; a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) for dynamic path planning. This approach allows autonomous navigation of a UAV in a direction of maximum information gain to locate multiple mobile animals and reduce exploration time; and, consequently, conserve on-board battery power. We also employ the concept of a search termination criteria to maximize the number of located animals within power constraints of the aerial system. We validated our real-time and online approach through both extensive simulations and field experiments with two mobile VHF radio-tags.  I. I NTRODUCTION Understanding basic questions of ecology such as how animals use their habitat, their movements and activities are necessary for addressing numerous environmental challenges ranging from invasive species to diseases spread by animals and saving endangered species from extinction. Conservation biologists, ecologists as well as natural resource management agencies around the world rely on numerous methods to monitor animals. The most predominant, cost-effective tool suitable for a wide range of animal sizes is very high frequency (VHF) radio collar tagging and subsequent radio telemetry measurements to locate spatiotemporal information of concerned species [10, 20]. However, the traditional method of radio tracking typically requires researchers to trek long distances in the field, armed with cumbersome VHF radio receivers with handheld antennas and battery packs to manually home in on radio signals emitted from radio-tagged or collared animals. Consequently, the precious spatial data acquired through radio tracking comes at a significant cost to researchers in terms of manpower, time and funding. The problem is often compounded by other challenges, such as low animal recapture rates, equipment failures, and the inability to track animals that move into inaccessible terrain. Furthermore, many of our  Fig. 1.  An overview of the UAV tracking platform with its sensor system.  most endangered species also happen to be the most difficult to track due to their small size, inconspicuousness, and location in remote habitats. Automated tracking and location of wildlife with autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) can provide new possibilities to better understand ecology and our native wildlife to safeguard biodiversity and manage our natural resources cost-effectively. We present a low-cost approach capable of realization in a lightweight payload for transforming existing commodity drone platforms into autonomous aerial vehicle systems as shown in Fig. 1 to empower conservation biologists to track and localize multiple radio-tagged animals. The main contribution of our work is a new autonomous aerial vehicle system for simultaneously tracking and localizing multiple mobile radio-tagged animals using VHF radiocollars, commonly used in the field. In particular: i) our system is realized in a 260 g payload suitable for a multitude of low-cost, versatile, easy to operate multi-rotor UAVs without a remote pilot license. Our lightweight realization—of less than 2 kg system mass—is achieved through a new sensor design that exploits the simplicity of a software defined radio architecture for capturing received signal strength indicator (RSSI) value from multiple VHF radio tags and a compact, lightweight VHF antenna geometry; ii) due to the noisy, complex and nonlinear characteristics of RSSI data we integrate a sequential Monte Carlo implementation of a Bayesian filter, also known as particle filter (PF), for real-time tracking and localization jointly with a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) with Réyni divergence between prior and posterior estimates of animal locations for autonomy and dynamic online path planning to minimize flight time while maximizing number of located animals. Further, our formulation considers the trade-off between location accuracy and resource constraints of the UAV, its maneuverability, and  power constraints to develop a practical solution; and iii) we validate our method through extensive simulations and field experiments with mobile VHF radio-tags. II. R ELATED W ORK Since this application is related to locating animals, we will focus on progress made towards the autonomous localization and tracking of multiple radio-tagged animals here. Off-line estimations of a radio beacon from data logged from a UAV have been demonstrated in [8, 23]. Pioneering achievements in autonomous wildlife tracking have been made through simulation studies [14] and experimentally demonstrated systems [4, 11, 21, 22] in recent years. In particular, the first demonstration of a UAV for proved in [4]. The recent approaches [4, 22] for real-time localization of a static target (assuming stationary wildlife) used wireless signal characteristics captured by a receiver to estimate location; in particular, the angle-of-arrival (AoA) of a radio beacon was determined using an array of antennas with the information related to a ground-based receiver for location estimations. Although the approach can conveniently manage topological variations in terrain, AoA systems require a large bulky receiver system and multiple antenna elements as well as long observation times; 45 seconds per observation as reported in [4]. Moreover, the antenna systems being mounted on top of the UAV [4] is likely to lead to difficulty in tracking terrestrial animals although being suitable for locating avian species dwelling in trees. We can see that there are few investigations that have studied the problem of locating radio-collared animals using autonomous robots. Although a system based on angle-ofarrival was recently evaluated to locate a stationary animal, the development of a low-cost and lightweight autonomous system capable of long-range flights and localization of multiple mobile radio-collared animals still remains. This is especially significant in the realization of a system that is widely accessible to conservation biologists in the field where a very small UAV—of less than 2 kg—can be flown without a formal pilot license and with fewer restrictions given the exclusion of this category of UAVs from regulatory regimes [3, p.18]. We present an alternative approach exploiting RSSI based range only measurements because of the ability to use a simpler sensing system on board commodity UAVs to realize lower cost and longer flight range UAVs for tracking and localizing multiple animals. Together with a strongly principled approach for joint tracking and planning, our lightweight autonomous aerial robot platform provides a cost-effective method for wildlife conservation and management. III. T RACKING AND P LANNING P ROBLEM F ORMULATION Real-time tracking requires an online estimator and a dynamic planning method. This section presents our tracking and localizing formulation under a principled framework of a Bayesian filter for tracking and POMDP for planning strategy.  A. Tracking and localizing For tracking, we use a Bayesian filter. It is an online estimation technique which deals with the problem of inferring knowledge about the unobserved state of a dynamic system— in our problem, wildlife—which changes over time, from a sequence of noisy measurements. Suppose x ∈ X and z ∈ Z are respectively the system (kinematic) state vector in the state space X and the measurement (observation) vector in the observation space Z. The problem is estimating the state x ∈ X from the measurement z ∈ Z or calculating the marginal posterior distribution p(xk |z1 :k ) sequentially through prediction Z(1) and update (2) steps. p(xk |z1 :k −1 ) =  p(xk |xk −1 )p(xk −1 |z1 :k −1 )d xk −1 (1)  p(xk |z1 :k ) = R  p(zk |xk )p(xk |z1 :k −1 ) p(zk |xk )p(xk |z1 :k −1 )d xk  (2)  In the case of a nonlinear system or non-Gaussian noise, there is no general closed-form solution for the Bayesian recursion and p(xk |z1 :k ) generally has a non-parametric form. Therefore, in our problem, we use a particle filter implementation as an approximate solution for the Bayesian filtering problem due to our highly nonlinear measurement model. Particle Filter (PF): A particle filter uses a sampling approach to represent the non-parametric form of the posterior density p(xk |z1 :k ). The samples from the distribution are represented by a set of particles; each particle has a weight assigned to represent the probability of that particle being sampled from the probability density function. Then, these particles representing the nonparametric form of p(xk |z1 :k ) are propagated over time. In the simplest version of the particle filter, known as the bootstrap filter first introduced by Gordon in [5], the samples are directly generated from the transitional dynamic model. Then, to reduce the particle degeneracy, resampling and injection techniques are implemented; a detailed algorithm can be found in [17]. Measurement model: The update process of a PF requires the derivation of a likelihood of measurements. In our problem, based on estimating a target’s—VHF radio tag’s—range from the receiver, we require a realistic signal propagation model to obtain the likelihood of receiving a given measurement. We employ two VHF signal propagation models suitable for describing RSSI measurements in non-urban outdoor environments. Denoting h(x, u) as the RSSI measurement function between target x and observer (UAV) state u, we have: i) Log Distance Path Loss Model (LogPath): The received power is the only line of sight power component transmitted from a transmitter subjected to signal attenuation such as through absorption and propagation loss: h(x, u) = Prd0 − 10n log10 (d(x, up )/d0 ) + Gr (x, u)  (3)  where t t t T is the target’s position; up = • x = [px , py , pz ] u u u T [px , py , pz ] is the observer’s (UAV) position in Cartesian coordinates; u = [up ; θu ] is the UAV’s state which includes its heading angle θu .  • • • •  d(x, up ) is the euclidean distance between the target’s position and UAV’s position. Gr (x, u) is the UAV receiver antenna gain which depends on its heading, its position, and target’s position. Prd0 is received power at distance d0 . n is the path-loss exponent that characterizes the signal losses such as absorption and propagation losses and this parameter depends on the environment with typical values range from 2 to 4.  ii) Log Distance Path Loss Model with Multi-Path Fading (MultiPath): The received power is composed of both line of sight power component transmitted from a transmitter and the multi-path power component reflected from the ground plane subjected to signal attenuation such as through absorption and propagation loss: [24, p. 81]: h(x, u) = Prd0 − 10n log10 (d(x, up )/d0 ) + Gr (x, u) + 10n log10 (|1 + Γ(ψ)e−j4ϕ |)  (4)  where, in addition to terms in 3 • ψ is the contact angle of the reflected path and ground. p εg − cos2 (ψ)]/[sin(ψ) + • Γ(ψ) = [sin(ψ) − p 2 εg − cos (ψ)] is the ground reflection coefficient with εg is the relative permittivity of the ground. • 4ϕ = 2π4d/λ is the phase difference between two waves where λ is the wave length and 4d = ((ptx − pux )2 + (pty − puy )2 + (ptz + puz )2 )1/2 − d(x, u). In non-urban environments, received power is usually corrupted by environmental noise, with the assumption that the noise is white, the total received power z = Pr (x, u) [dB] is: z = h(x, u) + ηP  (5)  N (0, σP2 )  where ηP ∼ is Gaussian white noise with covariance σP2 . Notably, even if RSSI noise is not completely characterized by a white noise model, we can still model it as Gaussian noise by using a higher covariance σP2 to account for the unknown uncertainty. We use data captured in experiments using our sensor system to validate the physical sensor characteristics Gr (x, u) (see Sec. IV) and n defined by environmental characteristics, as well as estimate the propagation model reference power parameter Prd0 and noise σP (see Sec. VI-B). Measurement likelihood: Based on (5) with Gaussian noise ηP , the likelihood of measurement zk , given target and sensor position are xk and uk , respectively, at time k is p(zk |xk , uk ) ∼ N (zk ; h(xk , uk ), σP2 ) where N (z; µ, Σ) is a normal distribution with mean µ and covariance Σ. B. Path Planning The UAV planning problem is similar to the problem of an agent computing optimal actions under partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) to maximize its reward. Kaelbling et al. [9] have shown that a POMDP framework implements an efficient and optimal approach based on previous actions and observations to determine the true world states. POMDP in conjunction with a particle filter provides a  principled approach for evaluating planning decision to realize an autonomous system for tracking. In general, a POMDP is described by the 6-tuple (S, A, T , R, O, Z) where S is set of both UAV and target states (s = {x, u} ∈ S), A is set UAV of actions, T is state-transition function T (s, a, s0 ) = p(s0 |s, a), R(s, a) is reward function, O is set of observations and Z is observation function Z(s, a, o) = p(o|s, a) with s, s0 ∈ S is current state and next state respectively, a ∈ A is taken action and o ∈ O is the observation—i.e measurement. The goal of a POMDP is to find P an optimal policy to maximize the total k+H expected reward E[ t=k γ k−t R(st , at )] where H is lookahead horizon steps, γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor which serves as the value difference between the current reward versus the future reward; st , at is state and action at time step t and E[·] is the expectation operator [7]. The reward function can be calculated using different methods such as task-driven or information-driven strategies. When uncertainty is high, the information gain approach is preferable to reduce a target’s location uncertainty [2]; hence, we used this method to calculate our reward function. There are several approaches to evaluate information gain in robotic path planning such as Shannon entropy [4], KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence or Rényi divergence [6]. We adapted the approach in [15, 16] to implement Rényi divergence as our reward function since it fits naturally with our MonteCarlo sampling method. Here, Rényi divergence calculates the distance between prior and posterior densities [2, 16]: Z  α 1 (i) log Rk+H (a) = p(xk+H |z1:k ) α−1 (6) h i1−α (i) × p(xk+H |z1:k , zk+1:k+H (a)) dx where the prior density p(xk+H |z1:k ) is calculated by propagating current posterior particles sampled from p(xk |z1:k ) to time k +H using the prediction step (1). The posterior density (m) (m) p(xk+H |z1:k , zk+1:k+H (a)) where zk+1:k+H (a) is the future measurement set that will be observed if action a ∈ Ak is taken; this is calculated by applying both prediction (1) and update steps (2) up to time k + H. However, using Bayes update procedure is computationally expensive and prohibitive in a real-time setting. Instead, we implement a computationally efficient approach using a black box simulator proposed in [19] along with the Monte Carlo sampling approach. Hence, the problem transforms to find an optimal action a ∈ Ak to maximize total expected reward: k+H Ms 1 X X (m) γ k−t Rt (a) (7) ak ≈ arg max a∈Ak Ms m=1 t=k  where Ms is the number of future measurements. C. Multi-targets Tracking The particle filter proposed in Sec. III-A can be extended to multi-target tracking (MTT). However, MTT normally deals with the complex data association problem where it is difficult to determine which measurement belongs to which target. In contrast, for our system, each target can be estimated  from the measurement based on the signal frequency and tracked independently. Thus, we do not need to solve the data association problem. Notably, not all of the targets are detected due to, for example, the UAV movements, the measurement range limits imposed by propagations losses and receiver sensitivity. Therefore, if the target is not detected, the solver does not update its estimated position. Besides maximizing the number of targets localized and tracked, we formulated a termination condition for each target to conserve UAV battery power; a target is considered localized if its location uncertainty—as determined by its particle covariance—is sufficiently small (<NT h ). Then, those found targets are forgotten to aid the solver prioritize its computing resources on those targets with high uncertainty. IV. S YSTEM I MPLEMENTATION We implemented an experimental aerial robot system based on our tracking and planning formulation. An overview of the complete system is described in Fig. 2a. Our experimental system used a 3DR IRIS+ UAV platform and a new sensor system built with: i) a compact directional VHF antenna design; and ii) a software defined signal processing module capable of simultaneously processing signals from multiple targets and remotely communication with a ground control system for tracking and planning. In our system, the ArduPilotMega (APM) on the IRIS+ UAV transmits back its global positioning system (GPS) location to the Telemetry Host tool developed by our group to communicate with the APM module using MAVLink protocol over a 915 MHz full duplex radio channel. The sensor system together with the Antenna, SDR receiver and the embedded compute delivers targets’ RSSI data through a 2.40 GHz radio channel to the ground control system. GPS and targets’ RSSI data are delivered to our tracking and planning algorithm—solver—through the Telemetry Host using a RESTful web service. The solver estimates target locations and calculates new control actions per each POMDP cycle to command the UAV through MAVLink to fly to a new location. In order to ensure safety and meet University regulatory requirements we also employ QGroundControl— a popular cross-platform flight control and mission planning software—to monitor and abort autonomous navigation. We detail our Sensor System below. Signal Processing Module: In contrast to previous work [4], we propose using a software defined radio (SDR) receiver to implement the signal processing components. The key advantages of our choice are the ability to: i) reduce the weight of the receiver; ii) rapidly scan a large frequency spectrum to track multiple animals beaconing on different VHF frequency channels; and iii) because the signal processing chain is defined in software, we have the ability to reconfigure the system on the fly. In this work, we use the HackRF One SDR—an open source platform developed by Ossmann [13] capable of directly converting radio frequency (RF) signals to digital signals using an analog-to-digital converter (ADC)—together with an  Intel Edison board as our embedded compute module. We implemented a Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) filter to isolate, from multiple signals, each unique VHF frequency channel associated with an animal radio collar and measure the signal strength of the received signal. Antenna: A lightweight folded 2-element Yagi antenna was specially designed for our sensor system. Our design achieves a low profile antenna capable of being within the form factor of low-cost commodity UAVs suitable for easy operation in the field. Similar to a standard 2-element Yagi antenna, the folded design has one reflector and one driven element as shown in Fig. 2b. The antenna operates in the frequency range from 145 to 155 MHz (a typical range for wildlife radio tags), and a center frequency of f = 150 MHz. The length of driven and reflector elements are Dd = 0.3975λ and Dr = 0.402λ, respectively, while d1 = 0.1λ, d2 = 0.03λ and the inductive loading ring diameter is d3 = 0.015λ. Here, the wavelength λ = c/f = 2 (m) with c = 3·108 (m/s). The antenna gain model calculated for the the design is shown in Fig. 5b. A. Planning implementation for a real-time system Implementing planning algorithms on any real-time systems is always challenging because of its high computational demand. Thus, in this section, we present a few approaches to minimize the planning computational time while not scarifying the overall localization performance. i) Notably, for RSSI data, the uncertainty in the estimation of a target’s location is reduced when the maximum gain of the directional antenna mounted on the UAV points toward the target position. Hence, to increase the localization accuracy, the UAV heading angle θku must be controlled during the path planning process, although the multi-rotor UAV can be maneuvered without changing its heading. We adopted a set of discrete UAV rotation angles for the control actions Ak in [16] as this helps reduce the computational complexity of the POMDP planning process by limiting the number of possible actions to evaluate. ii) The solver performs planning in every Np observation cycles with Np > 1 instead of every observation. This approach helps to ensure that the solver prioritizes its limited computational resource on tracking targets instead of only performing planning steps. iii) A coarse planning interval tp in the planning procedure is implemented to minimize the computational time by reducing number of look-ahead steps while still having the same look-ahead horizon. For example, we want to estimate the target’s state in a 10 second horizon, we can use the normal interval tp = 1(s) and estimate the target’s state 10 times or use the coarser interval tp = 5(s) and perform the estimation twice; the latter approach is computationally less expensive. iv) Instead of selecting the best action from the possible action space Ak , the domain knowledge of the receiver antenna gain is used to select a subset of actions that gives the highest received gain using Alg. 1.  Fig. 2. a) The full communication channels between UAV and the ground control system with its main softwares and protocols. b) Folded 2-element Yagi antenna used in our sensor system for observations  Algorithm 1 Calculate the control action subset Input: Number of preferred actions NA,s , Ak , the antenna gain Gr , the target’s position xk+H Output: Ask 1: for l = 1 : NA,k do 2: Get ulk+H ∈ Ak (l) 3: Calculate Glr = Gr (xk+H , ulk+H ) 4: end for 5: Ask = Ak (Glr ≥ Top NA,s of Gr )  Following the above implementation approach, UAV motion includes two modes: i) changing its heading angle while hovering; and ii) moving forward to its direct location. In one planning procedure with Np cycles, the UAV needs b|4θ|/θmax c cycles to rotate, and spends the remaining cycles Np − b|4θ|/θmax c to move forward without changing its heading. Here b·c and | · | are the floor and absolute operator respectively, and θmax is the UAV maximum rotation angle in one cycle . The sign of 4θ decides the rotation direction (+ for the clockwise, and − for the counter-clockwise). V. S IMULATION E XPERIMENTS Implementing on a real system is time-consuming and difficult. Hence, we want to validate our systems firstly through several simulation experiments to: i) verify our tracking and planning algorithms; ii) investigate how our planning parameters such as different α values of the Rényi divergence or number of discrete actions NA,s = |Ask | created in Alg. 1 contribute to the overall algorithm performance; and iii) compare our proposed Rényi divergence based planning technique with other well-known methods, and the impact of the look-ahead horizon parameters on computational time and localization accuracy. All of the simulation experiments were processed on a PC with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-6700 CPU @ 3.40GHz, 32GB RAM and MATLAB-2016b. A. Tracking and Planning Simulation This simulation was implemented to validate our approach. In this experiment, the UAV attempted to search and localize 10 moving targets randomly located in an area of 500 m × 500 m. The following are list of parameters used in this simulation: the sampling time step is 1 second since the tag emits pulse signals every 1 second. The solver performed a planning procedure every Np = 5 s, and the look-ahead horizon parameters: H = NH tp = 5 s with number of horizon NH = 1 and the planning interval tp = 5 s. The UAV started  from its home location at u1 = [0, 0, 20, 0]T , moved under the constant velocity vu = 5 m/s with its maximum heading rotation angle θmax = π/6 rad/s. Number of particles for each target were capped at Ns = 10, 000, with the future sample measurement Ms = 50, Rényi divergence parameter α = 0.5, number of actions NA,s = 5. In addition, a target is considered localized if its location uncertainty determined by its particles covariance is small enough—NT h = 10, 000 was chosen as the limit. The LogPath measurement model with Prd0 = −22.3 dB, n = 3.1, σP = 4.22 was used to verify our proposed algorithm. To demonstrate that our algorithm was able to localize mobile targets, a wombat—an animal that usually wanders around its area was considered. Hence, a random walk model was used to to describe its behavior with a single target’s transitional density: p(xk |xk−1 ) = N (xk ; Fxk−1 , Q) (8) where F = I3 with In is n × n identity matrix , Q = 2 σQ diag([1, 1, 0]T ), σQ = 2 m/s. Fig. 3 shows localization results for 10 mobile targets where the estimation details are annotated next to the target’s position with two indicators: RMS and flight time—see Sec. V-B for definitions. In summary, for this scenario, it took the UAV 587 seconds to localize all ten moving targets with the maximum error distance less than 15 m, except for the outlier, target #2 (RMS = 26.3 m). At flight time 587 s, after finishing localizing the last target (target #7), the UAV was sent a command to fly back to its original station. In this case, the total UAV travel distance was 1.93 km. The results demonstrate that our algorithm can search and accurately localize multiple numbers of targets in real time (about 10 minutes) at the travel distance 1.93 km that most commercial off the shelf drones can do. B. Monte Carlo simulations For this experiment, all of Monte Carlo setup parameters were kept the same as in Sec. V-A, except for the investigated ones. In addition, to ensure the results were not random, all of the conducted experiments were performed over 100 Monte Carlo runs. The tracking algorithm was evaluated based on the following criterion: • Estimation Error is the absolute distance between ground truth and estimated target location Drms = P Ntg j j j j 2 j=1 drms /Ntg with drms = [(xtruth − xest ) + j j (ytruth − yest )2 ]1/2 . • Flight time (s) for UAV to localize all of the targets which includes hovering time when the UAV waits for commands from the solver to take an action. • UAV travel distance distance to find all of target positions  y (m)  400  5  RMS: 8.1 Flight time: 244  300 RMS: 11.2 10 Flight time: 101 RMS: 4.8 1 200 Flight time: 88 6 2 RMS: 26.3 RMS: 7.3 Flight time: 155 Flight time: 129 100  RMS: 10.8 Flight time: 419  RMS: 13.6 Flight time: 517  3  7  RMS: 14.2 Flight time: 587  0 0  100  200  300  400  500  x (m)  Fig. 3. Simulation results with 10 moving targets localized using a single UAV by Particle Filter and POMDP. TABLE I L OCALIZATION PERFORMANCE FOR DIFFERENT ALPHA VALUES  RMS (m) Flight time (s) UAV travel distance (km)  α = 0.1 12.35 724 2.38  α = 0.5 12.77 741 2.41  α = 0.9999 12.96 727 2.34  Computational cost: calculated for 2 scenarios: i) execution time for the solver to perform the tracking algorithm only (called non-planning time), and ii) the execution time for the solver to select the best action (planning step) as well as conduct tracking (called planning time). Firstly, our search and localization algorithms were evaluated using different α values for Réyni reward function in (6). Table I presents the Monte Carlo results for α = {0.1, 0.5, 0.9999}. In general, the α values do not significant impact the overall performance. However, applying α = 0.1 provides the best localization results in terms of estimation error and search duration. Applying α = 0.5 proposed in [16, 18] results in the worst performance, it increases flight time and travel distance necessary to complete the localization task. Using α = 0.9999 (considered as using KL divergence) which is popular in information gain helps to save UAV travel distance while sacrificing location accuracy. One explanation for this scenario is that our noisy measurement causes the (m) predicted posterior p(xk+H |z1:k , zk+1:k+H (a)) in (6) to be less informative due to high uncertainty. Therefore, the reward function should pace more emphasis more on the current posterior instead by using a small α value or setting α → 1 to completely ignore the future posterior. It also explains why selecting α = 0.5 (equally weighting the current and the future posterior) result in the worst localization performance. Equally important, we conducted experiments to understand how the action space set NA,s created by Alg. 1 affects to our tracking performance in term of planning time and localization error. Table II shows Monte Carlo results for NA,s = {2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}. It presents an interesting result that applying NA,s = 4 provides the best localization performance •  Number of actions NA,s RMS (m) Flight time (s) UAV travel distance (km) Planning time (s)  15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  14.18 840  12.64 781  12.17 693  12.27 723  12.83 756  12.63 799  2.62  2.53  2.39  2.50  2.52  2.70  1.16  1.19  1.23  1.27  1.36  1.47  RMS (m) Flight time (s) Travel Distance (km) 2  3  4 5 6 7 8 Number of Targets  9  944 844 744 644 544 444 344 244 144 10  2.5 2 1.5 1  Travel Distance (km)  4  RMS: 9.5 Flight time: 393  Flight time (s)  8  9  RMS (m)  500  TABLE II L OCALIZATION PERFORMANCE FOR DIFFERENT NUMBER OF ACTIONS  Real position of Target Estimated position of Target UAV Trajectory  RMS: 9.5 Flight time: 288  0.5  Fig. 4. Localization performance for different number of targets Ntg increase from 1 to 10.  in terms of estimation error, flight duration and travel distance; a desirable result for realizing real time planning with limited computational resources. Another aspect that we want to examine is how our proposed algorithm performs when a maximum number of targets Ntg change from 1 to 10. As depicted in the Fig. 4, our algorithm’s estimation error was stable and invariant to the number of targets. Moreover, it is reasonable that the flight time and the travel distance increased linearly with target numbers because it took more time and power to track more targets. Lastly, we examined how Rényi divergence performs in different look-ahead horizons H = NH tp compared to: i) the Shannon entropy [4]; ii) a naive approach that moves UAV to the closest estimated target location; and iii) a uniform search with predefined path used in [18]. Table III shows the Monte Carlo comparison results among various planning algorithms. All of parameters were reused from the Sec. V-A, except for α = 0.1 and NA,s = 4 were updated based on the previous experimental results. The result has demonstrated that Rényi divergence reward function is superior to other planning strategies in term of localization accuracy, including the Shannon entropy with the same horizon settings. For Rényi reward function itself, the large look ahead horizon number NH > 1 helps to improve the localization accuracy; however, it requires higher computational power (planning) and causes the UAV to travel further. Using NH = 1; tp = 5 provides the best trade-off between computational time and accuracy. Summary: According to the above simulation results, we select α = 0.1, NA,s = 4, and NH = 1, tp = 5 s as the planning parameters for the field experiment since these parameters provides the lowest computational cost, best performance in term of location estimation error, travel distance and flight time.  Fig. 5. a) Waterfall plot for rotor noise experiment when four motors at full rotation speed; b) Normalized antenna gain in E-plane G(φ). The red line is gain modeled pattern and black line is the normalized measured gain pattern from 30 measurements collected by rotating the UAV heading at 15◦ intervals; c) Plot of measured RSSI data points and its estimated models over a distance from 10 m to 320 m at 10 m intervals. TABLE III L OCALIZATION PERFORMANCE FOR DIFFERENT PLANNING ALGORITHM  NH tp (s) RMS (m) Flight time (s) UAV travel distance (km) Plan Time (s) Non Plan Time (s)  Uniform N/A N/A 18.8 921  Closest Target N/A N/A 13.4 799  Shannon [4] 1 5 12.6 774  1 5 12.5 699  Rényi 3 1 12.4 889  5 1 12.0 811  10 1 11.6 822  3.72  2.29  2.54  2.27  2.99  2.82  2.42  1.58  1.11  1.38  1.28  1.53  1.65  2.71  1.58  1.03  0.99  0.97  0.96  0.97  0.96  VI. F IELD E XPERIMENTS We describe here our extensive experiments regime to validate our approach and evaluate the performance of our aerial robot system in the field. Our aim is to: i) investigate the possibility for signal interference from spinning motors of a UAV on RSSI measurements; ii) estimate the model parameters in the sensor model and validate the proposed model; and iii) conduct field trials to demonstrate and evaluate our system capabilities. A. Rotors noise We investigated the rotor noise to confirm that our system is not affected by the electromagnetic interference from the UAV’s motors. It also helps to clear the concern raised in [4] that the rotor noise may affect the RSSI measurements. Four motors of the 3DR IRIS+ quad-copter shown in Fig.1 were used in this experiment. The RSSI data of a radio collar were measured across 149 MHz to 151 MHz frequency spectrum when four motors were operating at 20%,50%,100% of its maximum speed of 10, 212 rounds per minute. Fig 5a shows the frequency spectrum of the received signal. We can see that there was no difference in the frequency characteristics when the rotors were in ON and OFF states. This result confirms that the rotors do not spin fast enough to generate high-frequency interference to impact to our RSSI measurements. B. Sensor model validation and parameter estimation Antenna Gain: The antenna gain pattern was measured to verify its directivity compared to the antenna gain model Gr (x, u) = Gr (φ) calculated—following [12, p.1252]—based on the physical design as discussed in Sec. IV. Fig. 5b shows the measured and modeled radiation patterns Gr (φ) , here φ  is the angle between the UAV heading and the direction from its position to target’s position on 0xy plane. The result shows that the front-to-back ratio is smaller (2 dB) than expected and this is an artifact of folding the reflector on our design. Signal propagation model parameter validation: We collected RSSI data points over a range from 10 m to 320 m between the UAV and a VHF radio tag. The tag and UAV were kept at a height of 5 m above ground during this experiment. The tag was stationary at all times, while the UAV was directed to move away in a straight line from the tag at 10 m intervals whilst hovering at each location to allow the collection of approximately 30 measurements. The UAV heading was maintained to ensure consistent antenna gain during the experiment. Since we operated in an open terrain over a grassland, we selected the path loss exponent n = 2 suitable for modeling free space path loss. Fig. 5c shows the measured RSSI and the propagation models obtained using a nonlinear regression algorithm to estimate model parameters; we have the following results for reference power Prd0 in (3), (4) at the reference distance d0 = 1 m, and measurement noise variance σP in (5): d0 • LogPath model : Pr = −45.69 ; σP = 4.21 (dB). d0 • MultiPath model : Pr = −45.28 ; σP = 2.31 (dB). The results show that both models, as expected, derived a similar reference power Prd0 whilst providing a reasonable fit to measurement data and this affirms the validity of our propagation model. Although LogPath model is reasonable, MultiPath model is more accurate and yields a smaller measurement noise variance. The results confirms the impact of ground reflections, especially close to the signal source. C. Field Trials We present two sets of field experiments to validate the two measurement models and conducted a total of 16 autonomous flights to demonstrate our system capabilities. Our experiments were designed around Anonymous University regulations governing the conduct of experimental UAV research. Given the need to operate in autonomous mode, our flight zone as well as the scope of the experiment was restricted to University owned property designated for UAV flight tests. Therefore: i) the UAV task was set to search and localize two mobile targets in a search area 75 m × 300 m; and ii) instead of wildlife, we relied on two people, each wearing a VHF radio tag on their forearm, and a mobile phone based GPS data logger on  TABLE IV C OMPARISON OF L OCALIZATION PERFORMANCE Model LogPath MultiPath Cliff [4]  Target Type Mobile Mobile Stationary  Trials  RMS (m)  8 8 6  30.1 ± 12.8 22.7 ± 13.9 23.8 ± 14.0  Total Flight Time (s) 255 ± 104 138 ± 53 8381  Travel Distance (m) 549 ± 167 286 ± 121 N/A  their hands to obtain ground truth; with two extra personnel stationed to maintain constant sight of the UAV and people in the field and abort the autonomous mode to transfer control to manual operations by a pilot. The volunteers with the radio tags were asked to walk randomly and no other instructions were given. Fig. 6 shows the tracking and localization results along with UAV trajectories based on the two different measurement models. Table IV presents the summary comparison results of location estimates between the two measurement models. Smaller RMS (root mean square) estimation error values suggest a higher accuracy, while shorter flight times and travel distance to localize all targets are highly desirable for a practicable system given the power constrained nature of commodity UAVs. The result confirm that the MultiPath model is superior to the standard LogPath model since it has been able to account for ground reflections and the UAV is not required to approach the target as closely when using the LogPath model to reduce its measurement uncertainty. D. Discussion We also summarise results from Cliff et al. [4] for comparison in Table IV while Table V presents a complete comparison between our proposed system and Cliff et al. [4] system. Notably, our search area is smaller compared to Cliff et al. [4] (75 m × 300 m v.s 1000 m × 1000 m) due to our test flight zone restrictions, however, we have set up our initial distance from the UAV home position to its farthest target’s position (target #2 in this case) to be equivalent to the distance of the stationary target in [4]; approximately 300 m. The results in Table IV demonstrate that our proposed method can localize two mobile targets in a shorter flight time (the flight time of MultiPath model is one-sixth of that in Cliff et al. [4]) with better accuracy. Moreover, we search and locate two mobile targets; in contrast, Cliff et al. [4] method was implemented to locate a single and stationary target. In general, as shown in Table V, our system is more compact, lighter, and has a payload that is one-third of that in [4] and consequently capable of longer flight times on any given UAV. Although, our reliance on an SDR without a preamplifier has resulted in a shorter detection range, our total system mass being under 2 kg is significant since it enables ecologists to operate our system without a remote pilot licenses (RePL). Moreover, the ability to instantly collect range-only measurements also helps reduce flight time significantly compared to the bearing-only method, requiring full rotations of 1 Information regarding the total flight is not reported in Cliff et al. [4], however, as shown in Fig. 9 in Cliff et al. [4], one observation took 76.21s and one trial needed 11 observations, hence total flight time is 11 × 76.21 = 838.31s  Fig. 6. Field experiment results to search, track and localize two mobile tags for the two different measurement models. a) Standard LogPath. b) MultiPath. TABLE V C OMPARISON BETWEEN OUR SYSTEM AND C LIFF ET AL . [4] SYSTEM . Ours 260 1,280 Quadcopters (smaller drone) Software defined radio (digital-based,rapidly scan multiple frequencies to support multiple frequencies)  Cliff et al. [4] 750 2,200 Octocopters (relatively larger drone)  Detection range (m)  320  500  Measurement model  Range-only (exploiting the simplicity of a range-only measurement system)  Payload (g) Total mass (g) Drone type  Receiver Architecture  Filtering method Planning Nature of targets  Particle filter (O(N ) operations per iteration) Rényi divergence multiple mobile target tracking  Analog filtering circuit (analog-based, difficult to re-configure for a new frequency)  Bearing-only (antenna array, and UAV rotation at grid points with a phase difference measurement system) Grid-based filter (O(N 2 ) operations per iteration) Shannon entropy A single stationary target localization  a UAV at each observation point, as shown in the Table IV. Furthermore, as discussed in [1], the computational cost for grid-based methods used in [4] increases dramatically, with the number of cells whilst the grid must be dense enough to achieve accurate estimations; e.g. , a grid-based filter with N cells conducts O(N 2 ) operations per iteration, while a similar particle filter with N particles only requires O(N ) operations. Hence, the grid-based filter method only works in case of stationary targets as in [4] where the most expensive computational step, the prediction step, is skipped. Moreover, as shown in Table. III, our planning algorithm based on Rényi divergence is superior to the Shannon entropy approach in [4] in both important metrics: accuracy and flight time.  VII. C ONCLUSION We have developed and demonstrated an autonomous aerial vehicle system for range only tracking and localization of VHF radio-tagged animals under RSSI based measurement uncertainty and mobility of targets during their discovery in the field. The joint particle filter and POMDP with Rényi divergence based reward function provided an accurate method to explore, track and locate multiple animals while considering the resource constraints of the underlying UAV platform. In addition, we have realized a UAV system under 2 kg to ensure both the practicability and the accessibility of the technology to conservation biologists. While we have demonstrated a successful system, we have only formulated our approach as a two-dimensional tracking problem that is ideally suitable for tracking endangered species in largely flat terrains and grasslands. Consequently, the current approach is not suitable for tackle tracking wildlife in hills or mountainous areas and it would require: i) a UAV capability to maintain a fixed relative altitude above the ground; or ii) formulating a 3D tracking problem to extend our method to all topographical conditions. We leave the latter for future work. VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was jointly supported by the Western Australia Parks and Wildlife, the Australian Research Council (LP160101177), the Defense Science and Technology Group, and the University of Adelaide’s Unmanned Research Aircraft Facility. R EFERENCES [1] M Sanjeev Arulampalam, Simon Maskell, Neil Gordon, and Tim Clapp. A tutorial on particle filters for online nonlinear/non-Gaussian Bayesian tracking. IEEE Transactions on signal processing, 50(2):174–188, 2002. [2] Michael Anthony Beard, Ba-Tuong Vo, Ba Ngu Vo, and Sanjeev Arulampalam. Void probabilities and cauchy-schwarz divergence for generalized labeled multibernoulli models. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 65, 2017. [3] CASA. AC 101-01 v2.0 - Remotely piloted aircraft systems, 2018. [Online; accessed 14-February-2018]. [4] Oliver M Cliff, Robert Fitch, Salah Sukkarieh, Debbie Saunders, and Robert Heinsohn. Online Localization of Radio-Tagged Wildlife with an Autonomous Aerial Robot System. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2015. [5] Neil J Gordon, David J Salmond, and Adrian FM Smith. Novel approach to nonlinear/non-Gaussian Bayesian state estimation. IEE Proceedings F - Radar and Signal Processing, 140(2):107–113, 1993. [6] Alfred O Hero, Christopher M Kreucher, and Doron Blatt. Information theoretic approaches to sensor management. Springer US, 2008. [7] David Hsu, Wee Sun Lee, and Nan Rong. A point-based POMDP planner for target tracking. In Proc. of IEEE ICRA, pages 2644–2650, 2008.  [8] Austin M Jensen, David K Geller, and YangQuan Chen. Monte Carlo simulation analysis of tagged fish radio tracking performance by swarming unmanned aerial vehicles in fractional order potential fields. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, 74(1-2):287–307, 2014. [9] Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L. Littman, and Anthony R. Cassandra. Planning and acting in partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial Intelligence, 101(1):99 –134, 1998. [10] Roland Kays, Sameer Tilak, Margaret Crofoot, Tony Fountain, Daniel Obando, Alejandro Ortega, Franz Kuemmeth, Jamie Mandel, George Swenson, Thomas Lambert, et al. Tracking animal location and activity with an automated radio telemetry system in a tropical rainforest. The Computer Journal, pages 1931–1948, 2011. [11] Fabian Körner, Raphael Speck, Ali Haydar Göktogan, and Salah Sukkarieh. Autonomous airborne wildlife tracking using radio signal strength. In Proc. of IEEE/RSJ IROS, pages 107–112, 2010. [12] Sophocles J Orfanidis. Electromagnetic waves and antennas. Rutgers University New Brunswick, NJ, 2002. [13] Michael Ossmann. Software Defined Radio with HackRF, 2015. [14] André Posch and Salah Sukkarieh. UAV based search for a radio tagged animal using particle filters. In Australasian Conference on Robotics and Automation (ACRA), Sydney, Australia, Dec, pages 2–4, 2009. [15] Branko Ristic. Particle Filters for Random Set Models. Springer-Verlag New York, 2013. [16] Branko Ristic and Ba-Ngu Vo. Sensor control for multiobject state-space estimation using random finite sets . Automatica, 46(11):1812 – 1818, 2010. [17] Branko Ristic, Sanjeev Arulampalam, and Neil (chercheur) Gordon. Beyond the Kalman filter : particle filters for tracking applications. Artech House, 2004. [18] Branko Ristic, Mark Morelande, and Ajith Gunatilaka. Information driven search for point sources of gamma radiation. Signal Processing, 90(4):1225–1239, 2010. [19] David Silver and Joel Veness. Monte-Carlo planning in large POMDPs. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 2164–2172, 2010. [20] Bindi Thomas, John D Holland, and Edward O Minot. Wildlife tracking technology options and cost considerations. Wildlife Research, 38(8):653–663, 2012. [21] Pratap Tokekar, Deepak Bhadauria, Andrew Studenski, and Volkan Isler. A robotic system for monitoring carp in Minnesota lakes. Journal of Field Robotics, 27(6): 779–789, 2010. [22] Joshua Vander Hook, Pratap Tokekar, and Volkan Isler. Cautious Greedy Strategy for Bearing-only Active Localization: Analysis and Field Experiments. Journal of Field Robotics, 31(2):296–318, 2014. [23] Neeti Wagle and Eric Frew. Spatio-temporal characterization of airborne radio frequency environments. In IEEE  GLOBECOM Workshops, pages 1269–1273, 2011. [24] Jakes WC Jr. Microwave mobile communications. Wiley, New York, 1974.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
