Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 0
ArXiv ID: hf_860

Abstract:
arXiv:1512.05999v1 [math.AC] 18 Dec 2015  ON DING INJECTIVE, DING PROJECTIVE, AND DING FLAT MODULES AND COMPLEXES JAMES GILLESPIE Abstract. We characterize Ding modules and complexes over Ding-Chen rings. We show that over a Ding-Chen ring R, the Ding projective (resp. Ding injective, resp. Ding flat) R-modules coincide with the Gorenstein projective (resp. Gorenstein injective, resp. Gorenstein flat) modules, which in turn are nothing more than modules appearing as a cycle of an exact complex of projective (resp. injective, resp. flat) modules. We prove a similar characterization for chain complexes of R-modules: A complex X is Ding projective (resp. Ding injective, resp. Ding flat) if and only if each component Xn is Ding projective (resp. Ding injective, resp. Ding flat). Along the way, we generalize some results of Stovicek and Bravo-Gillespie-Hovey to obtain other interesting corollaries. For example, we show that over any Noetherian ring, any exact chain complex with Gorenstein injective components must have all cotorsion cycle modules. That is, Ext1R (F, Zn I) = 0 for any such complex I and flat module F . On the other hand, over any coherent ring, the cycles of any exact complex P with projective components must satisfy Ext1R (Zn P, A) = 0 for any absolutely pure module A.  1. introduction Let R be a Gorenstein ring in the sense of [Iwa79, Iwa80]. This is a left and right Noetherian ring R having finite injective dimension as both a left and right module over itself. Over such rings, exact chain complexes of projective, injective, and flat R-modules each have very nice homological properties. In particular, for an exact complex P of projectives, the complex HomR (P, Q) is also exact for any projective module Q. In general, such complexes are called totally acyclic complexes of projectives and the modules appearing as a cycle Zn P of such a complex are called Gorenstein projective. So over Gorenstein rings, any exact complex of projectives is totally acyclic and their cycles are all Gorenstein projective. Similar statements hold for exact complexes of injectives and flats, and the corresponding Gorenstein injective and Gorenstein flat modules. Gorenstein homological algebra is the study of these modules and complexes and the theory is particularly satisfying over Gorenstein rings. In this case, most results from traditional homological algebra have an analog in Gorenstein homological algebra. The book [EJ00] is a standard reference, but many authors have studied the subject. Stovicek recently proved the coherent analog of the above result concerning totally acyclic complexes of injectives [Sto14, Prop. 7.9]. It raises the same question for the projective and flat analogs, which is answered in this paper. Before explaining further, first recall that a (left) coherent ring is one in which all finitely Date: December 21, 2015. 1  2  JAMES GILLESPIE  generated (left) ideals are finitely presented. A ring that is both left and right coherent is called coherent and these include all Noetherian and Von Neumann regular rings. A lesson learned from [Ste70] is that many results in homological algebra extend from Noetherian to coherent rings by replacing finitely generated modules with finitely presented modules. In the process, injective modules are replaced with FP-injective (i.e. absolutely pure) modules. In this way, a Ding-Chen ring is a coherent ring R which has finite absolutely pure (i.e. FP-injective) dimension as both a left and right module over itself. They were introduced in [DC93, DC96]. Since a coherent ring is Noetherian if and only if the FP-injective modules coincide with the injective modules, the Ding-Chen rings are nothing more than Gorenstein rings whenever R is Noetherian. In [Gil10], the author noted that the work of Ding, Mao and Li, see especially [DM05, DM07, DM08, DLM09], provides a natural way to extend notions from Gorenstein homological algebra from Noetherian to coherent rings. In the process, the Gorenstein modules are replaced by Ding’s modules. For example, we say a module is Ding projective if it is a cycle module of some exact complex P of projectives such that HomR (P, F ) remains exact for all flat modules F . See Definitions 4.1, 6.1, and 7.1. It admittedly seems strange to require that HomR (P, F ) remain exact for all flat modules F rather than just all projectives. After all, it feels like we are requiring too much. However, it was shown in [BGH13] that the Ding projectives are the cofibrant objects of an especially nice Quillen model structure on R-Mod, the category of (left) R-modules, whenever R is coherent. It implies that every module M can be approximated by a Ding projective and that the full subcategory of all Ding projective modules naturally form a Frobenius category. We think of the associated stable category as the (projective) stable module category of R. The analog of this for the usual Gorenstein projectives over Noetherian rings simply doesn’t seem to be true, in general. The first result of this paper is an extension, to Ding-Chen rings, of the well known result concerning Gorenstein rings described in the first paragraph. Part (2) is the result of Stovicek which motivated the analogous question for Ding projectives and Ding flats. Theorem 1.1. Let R be a Ding-Chen ring. That is, a left and right coherent ring R such that R R and RR each have finite absolutely pure dimension. Let X be an exact chain complex. Then (1) If each component Xn is projective, then each cycle Zn X is Ding projective. Indeed HomR (X, F ) remains exact for all flat modules F . (2) If each component Xn is injective, then each cycle Zn X is Ding injective. Indeed HomR (A, X) remains exact for all absolutely pure A. (3) If each component Xn is flat, then each cycle Zn X is Ding flat. Indeed A ⊗R X remains exact for all absolutely pure A. Consequently, the Gorenstein modules coincide with the Ding modules whenever R is a Ding-Chen ring. Before discussing the proof methods we note that Gorenstein chain complexes have also been studied quite a bit. For example, it has been known for some time that over Gorenstein rings, a chain complex X is Gorenstein injective (resp. Gorenstein projective) if and only if each component is Gorenstein injective (resp. Gorenstein projective). See [GR99, EE05, YL11]. In [YLL11, YLL13], Yang, Liu,  DING MODULES AND COMPLEXES  3  and Liang characterize the Ding complexes over a Ding-Chen ring. The next result is a surprising refinement of their characterization. Theorem 1.2. Let R be a Ding-Chen ring and X a chain complex of R-modules. (1) X is Ding projective in Ch(R) if and only if each component Xn is a Ding projective R-module. (2) X is Ding injective in Ch(R) if and only if each component Xn is a Ding injective R-module. (3) X is Ding flat in Ch(R) if and only if each component Xn is a Ding flat R-module. Consequently, the Gorenstein complexes coincide with the Ding complexes whenever R is a Ding-Chen ring. We now briefly describe our methods used and highlight other results in the paper. First, the injective cases are proved in a completely different fashion than their projective analogs, (while the flat analogs are relatively easy). For the injective case, we generalize the approach of Stovicek to record a useful result concerning cotorsion pairs and direct limits. If (W, F ) is a cotorsion pair, then W is closed under direct limits whenever W satisfies the two out of three property on short exact sequences; see Proposition 3.1. The injective cases of Theorems 1.1 and 1.2 follow as corollaries, but the approach leads to a string of other interesting corollaries appearing in Sections 3 and 4. Perhaps the most interesting is Corollary 3.5. It implies that over any Noetherian ring, any exact chain complex with Gorenstein injective components must have all cotorsion cycle modules. That is, Ext1R (F, Zn I) = 0 for any such complex I and flat module F . The projective case requires a completely different approach than the injective one. Our proof of the projective part of Theorem 1.1 relies on a result proved in [BGH13, Theorem A.6]. To obtain the projective statement in Theorem 1.2 we in fact need to generalize this result to the category of chain complexes. Section 5 is devoted to this, with Theorem 5.9 being the main result. Finally, the following interesting result is proved in Theorem 3.6. Theorem 1.3. Let R be a coherent ring and P any exact complex of projectives. Then Ext1R (Zn P, A) = 0 for any absolutely pure module A. Regarding the structure of the paper, after some preliminaries in Section 2, we first address the injective cases in Sections 3 and 4. Sections 5 and 6 are devoted to the projective case, and Section 7 to the flat case. 2. preliminaries Throughout the paper R denotes a general ring with identity. An R-module will mean a left R-module, unless stated otherwise. The category of R-modules will be denoted R-Mod. It is an abelian category. 2.1. Chain complexes on abelian categories. Let A be an abelian category. We denote the corresponding category of chain complexes by Ch(A). In the case A = R-Mod, we denote it by Ch(R). Our convention is that the differentials of dn+1  d  n Xn−1 − → · · · is a our chain complexes lower degree, so · · · − → Xn+1 −−−→ Xn −→ chain complex. We also have the chain homotopy category of A, denoted K(A). Its objects are also chain complexes but its morphisms are chain homotopy classes  4  JAMES GILLESPIE  of chain maps. Given a chain complex X, the nth suspension of X, denoted Σn X, is the complex given by (Σn X)k = Xk−n and (dΣn X )k = (−1)n dk−n . For a given object A ∈ A, we denote the n-disk on A by Dn (A). This is the complex consisting 1A A concentrated in degrees n and n − 1, and 0 elsewhere. We denote only of A −−→ the n-sphere on A by S n (A), and this is the complex consisting only of A in degree n and 0 elsewhere. Given two chain complexes X, Y ∈ Ch(A) we define Hom(X, Y ) to be the comQ δn Q → plex of abelian groups · · · − → k∈Z Hom(Xk , Yk+n ) −→ k∈Z Hom(Xk , Yk+n−1 ) − · · · , where (δn f )k = dk+n fk −(−1)n fk−1 dk . We get a functor Hom(X, −) : Ch(A) − → Ch(Z). Note that this functor takes exact sequences to left exact sequences, and it is exact if each Xn is projective. Similarly the contravariant functor Hom(−, Y ) sends exact sequences to left exact sequences and is exact if each Yn is injective. It is an exercise to check that the homology satisfies Hn [Hom(X, Y )] = K(A)(X, Σ−n Y ). Being an abelian category, Ch(A) comes with Yoneda Ext groups. In particular, Ext1Ch(A) (X, Y ) will denote the group of (equivalences classes) of short exact sequences 0 − → Y − → Z − → X − → 0 under the Baer sum operation. There is a subgroup Ext1dw (X, Y ) ⊆ Ext1Ch(A) (X, Y ) consisting of the “degreewise split” short exact sequences. That is, those for which each 0 − → Yn − → Zn − → Xn − → 0 is split exact. The following lemma gives a well-known connection between Ext1dw and the above hom-complex Hom. Lemma 2.1. For chain complexes X and Y , we have isomorphisms: Ext1 (X, Σ(−n−1) Y ) ∼ = Hn Hom(X, Y ) = K(A)(X, Σ−n Y ) dw  In particular, for chain complexes X and Y , Hom(X, Y ) is exact iff for any n ∈ Z, any chain map f : Σn X − → Y is homotopic to 0 (or iff any chain map f : X − → Σn Y is homotopic to 0). In the case of A = R-Mod, we recall the usual tensor product of chain complexes. Given that X (resp. Y ) is a complex of right (resp. left) R-modules, the tensor product X ⊗Y is defined by (X ⊗Y )n = ⊕i+j=n (Xi ⊗Yj ) in degree n. The boundary map δn is defined on the generators by δn (x ⊗ y) = dx ⊗ y + (−1)|x| x ⊗ dy, where |x| is the degree of the element x. 2.2. The modified Hom and Tensor complexes. Here again, Ch(R) denotes the category of chain complexes of R-modules. The above Hom is often referred to as the internal hom, for in the case that R is commutative, Hom(X, Y ) is again an object of Ch(R). Note that the cycles in degree 0 of the internal hom coincide with the external hom functor: Z0 [Hom(X, Y )] ∼ = HomCh(R) (X, Y ). This idea in fact is useful to define an alternate internal hom as follows. Given X, Y ∈ Ch(R), we define Hom(X, Y ) to be the complex Hom(X, Y )n = Zn Hom(X, Y ) with differential λn : Hom(X, Y )n − → Hom(X, Y )n−1 defined by (λf )k = (−1)n dk+n fk . Notice that the degree n component of Hom(X, Y ) is exactly HomCh(R) (X, Σ−n Y ). In this way we get an internal hom Hom which is useful for categorical considerations in Ch(R). For example, Hom(X, −) is a left exact functor, and is exact if and only if X is projective in the category Ch(R). On  DING MODULES AND COMPLEXES  5  the other hand, Hom(−, Y ) is exact if and only if Y is injective in Ch(R). There i are corresponding derived functors which we denote by Ext . They satisfy that i Ext (X, Y ) is a complex whose degree n is ExtiCh(R) (X, Σ−n Y ). Similarly, the usual tensor product of chain complexes does not characterize categorical flatness. For this we need the modified tensor product and its left derived torsion functor from [EGR97] and [GR99]. We will denote it by ⊗, and it is defined in terms of the usual tensor product ⊗ as follows. Given a complex X of right R-modules and a complex Y of left R-modules, we define X⊗Y to be the complex whose nth entry is (X ⊗ Y )n /Bn (X ⊗ Y ) with boundary map (X ⊗ Y )n /Bn (X ⊗ Y ) → (X ⊗ Y )n−1 /Bn−1 (X ⊗ Y ) given by x ⊗ y 7→ dx ⊗ y. This defines a complex and we get a bifunctor −⊗− which is right exact in each variable. We denote the corresponding left derived functors by Tori . We refer the reader to [GR99] for more details. 2.3. Finitely generated projective complexes. A standard characterization of projective objects in Ch(R) is the following: A complex P is projective if and only if it is an exact complex with each cycle Zn P a projective R-module. We also recall that, by definition, a chain complex X is finitely generated if whenever X = Σi∈I Si , for some collection {Si }i∈I of subcomplexes of X, then there exists a finite subset J ⊆ I for which X = Σi∈J Si . It is a standard fact that X is finitely generated if and only if it is bounded (above and below) and each Xn is finitely generated. We say that a chain complex X is of type F P∞ if it has a projective resolution by finitely generated projective complexes. Certainly any such X is finitely presented and hence finitely generated. 2.4. Absolutely clean and level complexes; character duality. The so-called level and absolutely clean modules were introduced in [BGH13] as generalizations of flat modules over coherent rings and injective modules over Noetherian rings. The same notions in the category Ch(R) were also studied in [BG15]. Here we recall some definitions and results from [BG15]. Definition 2.2. We call a chain complex A absolutely clean if Ext1Ch(R) (X, A) = 1  0 for all chain complexes X of type F P∞ . Equivalently, if Ext (X, A) = 0 for all complexes X of right R-modules of type F P∞ . On the other hand, we call a chain complex L level if Tor1 (X, L) = 0 for all chain complexes X of right R-modules of type F P∞ . We refer to [BG15, Prop. 2.6/4.6] for proof of the following. Proposition 2.3. A chain complex A is absolutely clean if and only if A is exact and each Zn A is an absolutely clean R-module. A chain complex L is level if and only if L is exact and each Zn L is a level R-module. Recall that the character module of M is defined as M + = HomZ (M, Q/Z), and that M + is a right (resp. left) R-module whenever M is a left (resp. right) Rmodule. The construction extends to chain complexes: Given a chain complex X, we have X + = HomZ (X, Q/Z). Since Q/Z is an injective cogenerator for the category of abelian groups, the functor HomZ (−, Q/Z) preserves and reflects exactness.  6  JAMES GILLESPIE  So Proposition 2.3 immediately gives us the following corollary due to the perfect character module duality between absolutely clean and level modules [BGH13, Theorem 2.10]. Corollary 2.4. A chain complex L of left (resp. right) modules is level if and only if L+ = HomZ (L, Q/Z) is an absolutely clean complex of right (resp. left) modules. And, a chain complex A of left (resp. right) modules is absolutely clean if and only if A+ = HomZ (A, Q/Z) is a level complex of right (resp. left) modules. 2.5. Cotorsion pairs. Let A be an abelian category. By definition, a pair of classes (X , Y) in A is called a cotorsion pair if Y = X ⊥ and X = ⊥ Y. Here, given a class of objects C in A, the right orthogonal C ⊥ is defined to be the class of all objects X such that Ext1A (C, X) = 0 for all C ∈ C. Similarly, we define the left orthogonal ⊥ C. We call the cotorsion pair hereditary if ExtiA (X, Y ) = 0 for all X ∈ X , Y ∈ Y, and i ≥ 1. The cotorsion pair is complete if it has enough injectives and enough projectives. This means that for each A ∈ A there exist short exact sequences 0 − →A− →Y − →X − → 0 and 0 − → Y′ − → X′ − →A− → 0 with X, X ′ ∈ X ′ and Y, Y ∈ Y. Standard references include [EJ00] and [GT06] and connections to abelian model categories can be found in [Hov02] and [Gil15]. Recall that a Grothendieck category is a cocomplete abelian category with a set of generators and such that direct limits are exact. By an injective cotorsion pair (W, F ) in a Grothendieck category G we mean a complete cotorsion pair for which W is thick and W ∩F is the class of injective objects. Since Grothendieck categories have enough injectives it turns out that such a cotorsion pair is equivalent to an injective model structure on G. By this we mean the model structure is abelian in the sense of [Hov02] and all objects are cofibrant. The fibrant objects in this case are exactly F and the trivial objects are exactly W. See [Gil12] for more on injective cotorsion pairs. We also have the dual notion of projective cotorsion pairs (C, W) which give us projective model structures on abelian categories with enough projectives. 3. Injective cotorsion pairs and direct limits Let (W, F ) be a cotorsion pair in R-Mod, or Ch(R), or some other Grothendieck category. Assume that W is thick; that is, assume W satisfies the two out of three property on short exact sequences. In this section we show that W must be closed under direct limits. This leads to several interesting corollaries. The proof of the proposition below is adapted from Stovicek’s [Sto14, Prop. 5.3]. After studying the proof, the author simply realized that it can be reinterpreted to yield the following convenient result. Proposition 3.1. Let (W, F ) be a cotorsion pair in R-Mod with W thick. Then W is closed under direct limits. Proof. As a first step we show that W is closed under direct unions. It is in fact enough to prove this for well-ordered continuous direct unions. So assume that we have a λ-sequence of module monomorphisms X0 ֒→ X1 ֒→ X2 ֒→ · · · ֒→ Xi ֒→ Xi+1 ֒→ · · · with Xi ∈ W for each i < λ. Then each Xi+1 /Xi ∈ W by the thickness hypothesis. Since the diagram of modules is assumed continuous we see that its colimit is the same thing as the transfinite extension of the X0 , Xi+1 /Xi . Thus its colimit is  DING MODULES AND COMPLEXES  7  in W by Eklof’s lemma (assuming λ is a limit ordinal; if it is a successor ordinal λ = α + 1, then the colimit coincides with Xα ∈ W). Step two: We show that W is closed under direct limits. Again, it is enough to prove this for well-ordered continuous direct limits. (See [AR94, Section 1.6], especially Corollary 1.7 and the Remark that follows it where well-ordered direct limits are referred to as chains and continuous well-ordered direct limits as smooth chains.) So we consider a λ-diagram f0,1  f1,2  f2,3  fi,i+1  → ··· X0 −−→ X1 −−→ X2 −−→ · · · Xi −−−−→ Xi+1 − with each Xi ∈ W and Xγ = limi<γ {Xi , fi,i+1 } for each limit ordinal γ < λ. Our −→ job is to show that limi<λ Xi ∈ W. We will assume λ is a limit ordinal, for otherwise −→ the direct limit just equals Xλ−1 ∈ W. Following a standard way for defining direct limits (for example, see [Sten75, Prop IV.8.4, p.100]), limi<λ Xi is the cokernel of −→ L L → i<λ Xi where the first direct sum is the following homomorphism: i<j Xij − taken over all pairs i < j < λ, and Xij = Xi is just a copy of the domain of the map fij  Xi −−→ Xj , and the map is defined on the ith coordinate by xi 7→ ei xi − ej fij xi where the ei denotes L the canonical injection into the coproduct. In other words, the direct limit is ( i<λ Xi )/K where K is the image of this map: K = < ei xi − ej fij xi | xi ∈ Xi and i < j < λ > Note that since the maps ei and fij are linear we have that K is the set of all finite sums of the form ei xi − ej fij xi where the xi range through Xi and i < j ranges through all i < j < λ. There is a short exact sequence ⊆ M 0− →K− → → 0, Xi − → lim Xi − −→ i<λ  i<λ  and since W is closed under direct sums and is thick, it is enough to show that K ∈ W. We now show that K is a direct union (not well ordered, but still a direct union) of modules in W. So the proof will follow from the above Step 1. Thinking of λ as the set of all its smaller ordinals we define, for each finite subset J ⊆ λ with |J| > 1, the mapping M M Xi − → Xi φJ : i∈J\{j}  i<λ  where j denotes the maximum element of the finite subset J, and the map is defined on the ith coordinate via xi 7→ ei xi −ej fij xi . One now verifies each of the following: (1) S = {J ⊆ λ | 1 < |J| < ω} is a directedLposet and there is a functor D:S− → R-Mod defined on objects by J 7→ i∈J\{j} Xi , and on arrows by taking an inclusion J ⊆ J ′ to the map DJJ ′ defined on the ith coordinate as follows: xi 7→ ei xi if j = j ′ (that is, just a natural inclusion if J and J ′ have the same maximal element), but via xi 7→ ei xi − ej fij xi if j < j ′ . (2) Each DJJ ′ is a monomorphism. In fact it is a split monomorphism with retraction map the canonical projection. (3) Each φJ is also L a split monomorphism with similar retraction. The image of φJ identifies i∈J\{j} Xi with the submodule KJ = < ei xi − ej fij xi | xi ∈ Xi and i ∈ J\{j} > .  8  JAMES GILLESPIE  That is KJ is the set of all finite sums of elements of the form ei xi − ej fij xi as i ranges through J\{j} and xi ranges through Xi . (4) The direct system of monomorphisms D : S − → R-Mod is isomorphic via the natural transformation {φJ } to the direct system of submodules KJ . The direct limit limi<λ D identifies with the direct union of submodules L −→ S KJ ⊆ i<λ Xi . J∈SS (5) K = J∈S KJ . L Now since each i∈J\{j} Xi ∈ W, we conclude from (3), (4), (5) and Step 1 that K ∈ W. This completes the proof.  Of course generalizations of Proposition 3.1 to categories beyond R-Mod are possible and will be important for applications. The reader will note that the above proof holds in any Grothendieck category, giving the following generalization. Proposition 3.2. Let (W, F ) be a cotorsion pair in a Grothendieck category G with W thick. Then W is closed under direct limits. In particular, the class W of trivial objects is closed under direct limits whenever (W, F ) be an injective cotorsion pair. Proposition 3.2 has some interesting consequences that apply to each of the injective cotorsion pairs recently appearing in [BGH13, Gil12]. For example, it is shown in [BGH13] that for any ring R we have an injective cotorsion pair (W, GI) in R-Mod where GI is the class of Gorenstein AC-injective modules. The next corollary says that all modules of finite flat dimension are sent to zero in the corresponding stable homotopy category. Consequently, any Gorenstein AC-injective module is cotorsion and must be injective if it has finite flat dimension. Corollary 3.3. Let (W, F ) be an injective cotorsion pair in R-Mod or Ch(R). Then W contains all objects of finite flat dimension. Consequently, any fibrant object is cotorsion and must be injective whenever it is of finite flat dimension. Proof. Certainly W contains all projectives and hence all flat objects since these are precisely direct limits of projectives. Since W is thick and contains the flat objects it also contains all objects of finite flat dimension. The final statement follows since W ∩ F coincides with the class of injective objects.  Recall that a chain complex is flat if it is exact and each cycle module is a flat R-module. These complexes are categorically flat in Ch(R); they are direct limits of finitely generated projective complexes [GR99, Theorem 4.1.3]. A complex X is called DG-flat if each Xn is flat and E ⊗ X is exact whenever E is an exact chain complex of (right) R-modules. E ⊗ X is the usual tensor product of chain complexes recalled in Section 2.1. Again, the book [GR99] is a standard reference for DG-flat complexes. Corollary 3.4. Let (W, F ) be an injective cotorsion pair in Ch(R). Then each of the following hold: (1) Any exact complex Y ∈ F has all cotorsion cycle modules. That is, each Zn Y , and hence each Yn , is a cotorsion module. (2) If every complex in F is exact, then each DG-flat complex is in W. Here we will use the notation from [Gil04] where dg Ce denotes the class of all complexes C with each Cn cotorsion and with the property that all chain maps F − → C are null homotopic whenever F is a flat chain complex. It turns out that  DING MODULES AND COMPLEXES  9  dg Ce is precisely the right Ext orthogonal to the class of flat complexes. That is, dg Ce is really the class of cotorsion objects in the category of complexes. e Proof. For (1), we have that Y is cotorsion by Corollary 3.3. That is, Y ∈ dg C. The result now follows from [Gil04, Theorem 3.12] which tells us that the exact complexes in dg Ce are precisely the ones with cotorsion cycle modules. For (2), in the case that every complex Y ∈ F is exact we have Ext1Ch(R) (S n (P ), Y ) ∼ = Ext1R (P, Zn Y ) = 0 for each projective module P . So S n (P ) ∈ W for each projective P , and hence S n (F ) ∈ W for each flat module F . But it follows from [Gil07, Prop. 3.8] that each DG-flat complex is a retract of a transfinite extension of complexes of the form S n (F ) with F flat. Applying the well known Eklof’s lemma, we conclude that all DG-flat complexes are in W, proving (2).  Going back to the Gorenstein AC-injective modules appearing before Corollary 3.3, we get the following corollary. Corollary 3.5. Any chain complex X of Gorenstein AC-injective modules is in e Consequently, any exact complex of Gorenstein AC-injectives must have codg C. torsion cycle modules. Proof. We refer to [Gil12, Proposition 7.2]. It shows that there is an injective cotorsion pair in Ch(R) whose right side consists of the class of all complexes of Gorenstein AC-injective modules. The rest follows from what we already observed above.  Note that Corollary 3.5 implies Stovicek’s original result that any exact complex of injectives must have cotorsion cycle modules. However, the reader familiar with [Sto14] will realize that our methods are just a generalization of those employed by Stovicek. These methods however don’t dualize. So the following result is quite interesting. It is the dual of Stovicek’s result, assuming R is a coherent ring. Theorem 3.6. Let R be a coherent ring and P an exact complex of projectives. Then Ext1R (Zn P, A) = 0 for any absolutely pure module A. Consequently, any cycle Zn P must be a retract of a transfinite extension of finitely presented modules. Proof. Since P is exact, we have Ext1R (Zn P, A) = Ext1Ch(R) (P, S 0 (A)), and so we can instead show that Ext1Ch(R) (P, S 0 (A)) = 0 for all absolutely pure A. But it is enough to show Hom(P, S 0 (A)) = HomR (P, A) is exact whenever P is an exact complex of projectives and A is absolutely pure. Let D denote the class of all absolutely pure R-modules, and C denote the class of all flat (right) R-modules. Since R is coherent we have that (C, D) forms a perfect duality pair with respect to the character modules of Section 2.4. Therefore, by [BGH13, Theorem A.6], HomR (P, A) is exact for all absolutely pure A if and only if F ⊗R P is exact for all flat F . But certainly this is true. The last statement holds since the “set” S, of all finitely presented modules, cogenerates the complete cotorsion pair (⊥ (S ⊥ ), S ⊥ ) and S ⊥ is precisely the class of all absolutely pure modules.   10  JAMES GILLESPIE  Remark. Suppose R is any ring in which all level modules have finite flat dimension. Then the above argument will extend to show Ext1R (Zn P, A) = 0 for all absolutely clean modules A and exact complexes of projectives P . 4. Applications to Ding injective modules and complexes This section is devoted to studying Ding injective modules and chain complexes over Ding-Chen rings. As in [Gil10], a Ding-Chen ring is a (left and right) coherent ring with R R and RR each of finite FP-injective (absolutely pure) dimension. We refer to [Gil10] for more on Ding-Chen rings and Ding injective modules although the definitions below should suffice for our purposes. Definition 4.1. We call an R-module M Ding injective if there exists an exact complex of injectives · · · → I1 → I0 → I 0 → I 1 → · · · with M = ker (I 0 → I 1 ) and which remains exact after applying HomR (A, −) for any absolutely pure module A. In the same way, we call a chain complex X Ding injective if there exists an exact complex of injective complexes · · · → I1 → I0 → I 0 → I 1 → · · · with X = ker (I 0 → I 1 ) and which remains exact after applying HomCh(R) (A, −) for any absolutely pure chain complex A. Recall that a chain complex I is injective (resp. absolutely pure) in Ch(R) if and only if it is exact and each cycle Zn I is an injective (resp. absolutely pure) module. The content of Corollaries 4.3 and 4.4 is that the Hom condition in the above definitions come automatically when R is a Ding-Chen ring. In fact, for the module case, we have the following stronger statement. Theorem 4.2. Let R be a Ding-Chen ring. Then M is Ding injective if and only if M = Z0 I for some exact complex I of Ding injective R-modules. That is, any exact complex of Ding injectives automatically has Ding injective cycles. Proof. Since R is Ding-Chen, the modules of finite flat dimension coincide with the modules of finite absolutely pure dimension [DC93]. Denote this class by W. We have that (W, DI) is an injective cotorsion pair, where DI is the class of all Ding injective modules; see [DM07, Theorem 3.4] and [Gil10, Corollary 4.5]. f exDI) f By [Gil12, Prop. 7.2] it lifts to another injective cotorsion pair (⊥ exDI, f is the class of all exact complexes of Ding injectives. By on Ch(R), where exDI f for each flat module F and hence Corollary 3.4 (2) we have that S n (F ) ∈ ⊥ exDI f we have for each F of finite flat dimension. Thus for all W ∈ W and I ∈ exDI 1 1 n 0 = Ext (S (W ), I) = ExtR (W, Zn I). Hence each Zn I must be Ding injective.  Since injective modules are Ding injective we deduce the following corollary. Corollary 4.3. [Sto14, Prop. 7.9] Let R be a Ding-Chen ring. Then M is Ding injective if and only if M = Z0 I for some exact complex I of injective R-modules. Therefore, for any absolutely pure A, any exact complex I of injectives will remain exact after applying HomR (A, −).  DING MODULES AND COMPLEXES  11  It was shown by Yang, Liu, and Liang in [YLL13] that the Ding injective complexes are precisely the complexes X for which each Xn is Ding injective and all chain maps A − → X are null homotopic whenever A is an absolutely pure (FPinjective) chain complex. We now show that the null homotopy condition is automatic when R is a Ding-Chen ring. Corollary 4.4. Let R be a Ding-Chen ring. Then a complex X is Ding injective if and only if each Xn is a Ding injective R-module. Proof. The “only if” part is easy from the definition of Ding injective. For the converse, we use that for any coherent ring R, the Ding injective cotorsion pair f dwDI) f on Ch(R), (W, DI) on R-Mod lifts to an injective model structure (⊥ dwDI, f by [Gil12, Proposition 7.2]. Here, dwDI is the class of all complexes of Ding injective modules. From Corollary 3.3 we have that each complex of finite flat f But in the case that R is Ding-Chen, it is easy to see that dimension is in ⊥ dwDI. any absolutely pure complex A has finite flat dimension. Indeed such an A is an exact complex with each cycle module Zn A absolutely pure. Thus each Zn A has finite flat dimension. Now taking a flat resolution of A, the upper bound on the f flat dimensions implies that A itself has finite flat dimension. Hence A ∈ ⊥ dwDI for each absolutely pure A. It follows that Hom(A, X) is exact for any absolutely f whenever R is Ding-Chen. pure A and any complex X ∈ dwDI,  Remark. It was shown by Yang, Liu, and Liang in [YLL13] that the class of Ding f whenever R is Ding-Chen. So we now have injective complexes is precisely dg DI f f f = DI, f whenever R is a Ding-Chen ring. shown that both dg DI = dwDI and exDI (Again, we are using the notation from [Gil04].) 5. Complexes of projective complexes Our main purpose here is to prove Theorem 5.9, which will be our tool in Section 6 for characterizing Ding projective complexes. We get this by generalizing results in [BGH13, Appendix A], from modules to chain complexes. Since Ch(R) is itself an abelian category we can of course consider Ch(Ch(R)), the category of chain complexes of chain complexes. Using [Wei94, Sign Trick 1.2.5], the category Ch(Ch(R)) can be identified with the category of bicomplexes. However, for our purpose here it is somewhat easier to stick with the category Ch(Ch(R)). 5.1. Free chain complexes. A free R-module is one that is isomorphic to a direct sum of copies of R. Analogously, we say a chain complex F ∈ Ch(R) is free if it is isomorphic to a direct sum ⊕i∈I Dni (R) where each ni is some integer. Clearly this is equivalent to saying F is isomorphic to ⊕n∈Z Dn (Fn ) where each Fn is some free R-module. It is also equivalent to define F to be an exact complex with each Zn F a free R-module. However, it will be sufficient and most convenient for us to use the representations ⊕i∈I Dni (R). Evidently free complexes are closed under arbitrary direct sums. It is also easy to check that free complexes are projective objects in Ch(R), and that each projective complex P is a retract of a free complex. Lemma 5.1 (Eilenberg’s swindle). Given any projective chain complex P , there exists a free chain complex F such that P ⊕ F ∼ = F.  12  JAMES GILLESPIE  Proof. We follow [Lam99, Corollary 2.7]. Since P is projective, as noted above we can find another (projective) complex Q such that P ⊕ Q is a free complex. Setting F = (P ⊕ Q) ⊕ (P ⊕ Q) ⊕ (P ⊕ Q) ⊕ · · · will produce a free complex as desired. Indeed ∼ P ⊕ (Q ⊕ P ) ⊕ (Q ⊕ P ) ⊕ (Q ⊕ P ) · · · ∼ F = = P ⊕ F.  We now need to study chain complexes of projective chain complexes. That is, objects of Ch(Ch(R)) with each component a projective complex. Lemma 5.2. Let R be any ring, and P ∈ Ch(Ch(R)) a complex of projective chain complexes. Then P is a direct summand of a complex F of free chain complexes. Furthermore, if P is exact then F can be taken to be exact. Proof. By Lemma 5.1 we may, for each Pn , find a free chain complex F n such that Pn ⊕ F n ∼ = F n . We form F = P ⊕ (⊕n∈Z Dn (F n )). This is a complex of complexes which in degree n is the chain complex Pn ⊕ F n ⊕ F n+1 ∼ = F n ⊕ F n+1 , and so a free chain complex. We are done since P is a direct summand of P ⊕ (⊕n∈Z Dn (F n )). Moreover, P ⊕ (⊕n∈Z Dn (F n )) is exact whenever P is exact.  Theorem 5.3. Let R be any ring, and let S be the set of all bounded above complexes of finitely generated free complexes. The cotorsion pair (⊥ (S ⊥ ), S ⊥ ) in Ch(Ch(R)), cogenerated by S, is functorially complete. Moreover, C = ⊥ (S ⊥ ) is the class of all complexes of projective complexes. Proof. Since Ch(Ch(R)) is a Grothendieck category with enough projectives it follows from [Hov02, Corollary 6.8] that S cogenerates a functorially complete cotorsion pair (⊥ (S ⊥ ), S ⊥ ) in Ch(Ch(R)). Setting C = ⊥ (S ⊥ ), our aim is to show that this is precisely the class of all complexes of projective complexes. We note that S contains a set of projective generators for Ch(Ch(R)); for example, the set {Dn (Dm (R))}n,m∈Z . So it follows from [Hov02, Corollary 6.9/Proof of 6.5] that ⊥ (S ⊥ ) is precisely the class of all direct summands of transfinite extensions of objects in S. By Lemma 5.2 we only need to show that a complex of free complexes is a transfinite extension of bounded above complexes of finitely generated free complexes. So let F be a complex of free complexes and write each Fn = ⊕i∈In Dni (Ri ) for some indexing set In with each Ri = R. We assume that F is not (isomorphic to) a complex in S, so we can certainly find a nonzero Fn , and we then take just one summand Dnj (Rj ) for some j ∈ In . We start to build a bounded above subcomplex X ⊆ F by setting Xn = Dnj (Rj ) and setting Xi = 0 for all i > n. Now note d(Dnj (Rj )) ⊆ ⊕i∈In−1 Dni (Ri ) and that we can find a finite subset Ln−1 ⊆ In−1 such that d(Dnj (Rj )) ⊆ ⊕i∈Ln−1 Dni (Ri ). We set Xn−1 = ⊕i∈Ln−1 Dni (Ri ). We can continue down in the same way finding Ln−2 ⊆ In−2 with |Ln−2 | finite and with d(⊕i∈Ln−1 Dni (Ri )) ⊆ ⊕i∈Ln−2 Dni (Ri ). In this way we can construct the subcomplex → ··· → ⊕i∈Ln−2 Dni (Ri ) − → ⊕i∈Ln−1 Dni (Ri ) − X = ··· − →0− → Dnj (Rj ) − Note that X is a nonzero bounded above complex of finitely generated free complexes. That is, X ∈ S. We set X0 = X. To finish the proof we will argue that we can write F as the union of a continuous chain 0 6= X0 ( X1 ( · · · ( Xα ( Xα+1 ( · · · with each Xα+1 /Xα ∈  DING MODULES AND COMPLEXES  13  S. So we consider F/X0 , and in the same way as above we find a bounded above subcomplex X1 /X0 ⊆ F/X0 consisting of finitely generated free complexes in each degree. However, we are careful to construct X1 as follows: Let L0n denote the indexing sets of the previously constructed complex X0n = ⊕i∈L0n Dni (Ri ). Note that we can identify the quotient F/X0 with a complex whose degree n entry is ⊕i∈In −L0n Dni (Ri ). And so we may take X1 so that X1n = ⊕i∈L1n Dni (Ri ) with each L1n finite and L0n ⊆ L1n ⊆ In for each n. Continuing this process, we continue to construct an increasing union 0 6= X0 ( X1 ( X2 ( · · · corresponding to a nested union of subsets L0n ⊆ L1n ⊆ L2n ⊆ · · · for each n. Assuming this process doesn’t terminate we set Xω = ∪α<ω Xα and note that Xω Dni (Ri ) where n = ⊕i∈Lω n ω α ω ω Ln = ∪α<ω Ln . Of course X and F/X are complexes of free complexes and continuing this process we can obtain an ordinal λ and a continuous chain 0 6= X0 ( X1 ( · · · ( Xα ( Xα+1 ( · · · with F = ∪α<λ Xα and X0 , Xα+1 /Xα ∈ S.  5.2. Pure exact complexes of complexes. Let E : 0 − →X − →Y − →Z− → 0 be a short exact sequence in Ch(R). We say that E is pure if for each finitely presented complex F , the sequence of abelian groups HomCh(R) (F, E), that is 0− → HomCh(R) (F, X) − → HomCh(R) (F, Y ) − → HomCh(R) (F, Z) − → 0, is also exact. Pure exact sequences of complexes can be characterized in terms of the functors Hom and ⊗ from Section 2.2. In particular, E is pure exact if and only if Hom(F, E) is a short exact sequence of complexes for each finitely presented complex F if and only if F ⊗E is a short exact sequence of complexes for each finitely presented complex F (or just any complex F ). See [GR99, Theorem 5.1.3]. This leads us to the following notion of a pure exact complex of complexes. Definition 5.4. Let X ∈ Ch(Ch(R)). We say that X is a pure exact complex of complexes if the following equivalent conditions are satisfied: (1) HomCh(R) (F, X) = Hom(S 0 (F ), X) is an exact complex of abelian groups for each finitely presented chain complex F . (2) Hom(F, X) is an exact complex (of complexes of abelian groups) for each finitely presented chain complex F . (3) F ⊗X is an exact complex (of complexes of abelian groups) for each finitely presented chain complex F . (4) F ⊗X is an exact complex (of complexes of abelian groups) for each chain complex F . Lemma 5.5. Suppose X is a bounded complex of finitely presented complexes and Y is a pure exact complex of complexes. Then every chain map f : X − → Y is chain homotopic to 0. Proof. Note that it is equivalent to show Hom(X, Y) is exact, where Hom is the usual hom-complex of Section 2.1 (but applied to the case of A = Ch(R) instead of the more typical application of A = R-Mod). Let m be the largest degree i for which Xi is nonzero, and let A be the subcomplex of X with Ai = Xi for i < m and Am = 0. We have a degreewise split short exact sequence 0− →A− →X− → S m (Xm ) − →0 which for the given Y induces the short exact sequence 0− → Hom(S m (Xm ), Y) − → Hom(X, Y) − → Hom(A, Y) − → 0.  14  JAMES GILLESPIE  Now Hom(S m (Xm ), Y) is exact by condition (1) of Definition 5.4. The long exact sequence in homology now gives us the result by induction on m.  Let (C, W) denote the cotorsion pair of Theorem 5.3. The result below tells us that pure exact complexes of complexes are in W. Theorem 5.6. Let R be any ring and let C be a complex of projective complexes. If Y is a pure exact complex of complexes, then Hom(C, Y) is exact, or, equivalently Y ∈ W = C ⊥. Proof. In view of Theorem 5.3, it suffices to assume that C is a bounded above complex of finitely generated free complexes and to show that any chain map f : C − →Y is chain homotopic to 0. We construct a chain homotopy Dn : Cn − → Yn+1 with dDn + Dn−1 d = fn by downwards induction on n. Since C is bounded above, we can take Dn = 0 for large n to begin the induction. So we suppose that Di has been defined for i ≥ n and that dDn+1 + Dn d = fn+1 . e n still having dDn+1 + D e n d = fn+1 , The idea is to replace Dn with a new map D e and to also find a map Dn−1 such that dDn + Dn−1 d = fn . First note that (fn − dDn )d = d(fn+1 − Dn d) = d2 Dn+1 = 0,  π  → so there is an induced map gn : Cn /Bn C − → Yn , such that the composite Cn − gn Cn /Bn C −→ Yn equals fn − dDn . Now consider the bounded complex X of finitely presented complexes with Xn = Cn /Bn C, Xn−1 = Cn−1 , Xn−2 = Cn−1 /Bn−1 C, and Xi = 0 for all other i. There is a chain map g : X − → Y that is gn in degree n, fn−1 in degree n − 1, and fn−2 d¯ in degree n − 2. By Lemma 5.5, this chain → Yn+1 map must be chain homotopic to 0. This gives us maps Dn′ : Cn /Bn C − and Dn−1 : Cn−1 − → Yn such that dDn′ + Dn−1 d¯ = gn . Upon composing with π en = Cn − → Cn /Bn C this becomes dDn′ π + Dn−1 d = fn − dDn . Now setting D ′ e Dn +Dn π, we still have the required relation dDn+1 + Dn d = fn+1 because dDn+1 + (Dn + Dn′ π)d = dDn+1 + Dn d + 0 = fn+1 . Moreover, we have the other promised e n + Dn−1 d = fn . Indeed dD e n + Dn−1 d = d(Dn + D′ π) + Dn−1 d = relation: dD n ′ dDn + (dDn π + Dn−1 d) = dDn + (fn − dDn ) = fn .  Recall that for a complex X we have its character dual X + = HomZ (X, Q/Z). See Section 2.4. Lemma 5.7. Let C be a complex of complexes, and X a complex of right R-modules. Then X⊗C is exact if and only if Hom(C, X + ) is exact. Proof. X⊗C is exact if and only if (X⊗C)+ is exact. But also using parts (1) and (6) b) of [GR99, Proposition 4.2.1] we get (X⊗C)+ = HomZ (X⊗C, Q/Z) = Hom(X⊗C, D1 (Q/Z)) ∼ = Hom(C, X + ). = Hom(C, Hom(X, D1 (Q/Z))) ∼  We need just one more lemma before proving the main theorem. Lemma 5.8. Let Y ∈ Ch(R) be a complex, and C ∈ Ch(Ch(R)) be a complex of complexes . Then Hom(C, Y ) is exact if and only if Hom(C, S n (Y )) is exact for each n.  DING MODULES AND COMPLEXES  15  Proof. Pondering definitions, we see Hom(C, Y ) is the cochain complex, of complexes of abelian groups, whose degree zero entry is the complex of abelian groups ··· ← − HomCh(R) (Σn−1 C0 , Y ) ← − HomCh(R) (Σn C0 , Y ) ← − ··· (where HomCh(R) (Σn C0 , Y ) is the degree n component of this complex). So to say that the overall complex is exact means that the cochain complex of abelian groups, HomCh(R) (Σn C, Y ), is exact for each n. On the other hand, by again following definitions, Hom(C, S n (Y )) is isomorphic to the cochain complex, HomCh(R) (Σ−n C, Y ), of abelian groups. So exactness of Hom(C, S n (Y )) for all n is equivalent to exactness of Hom(C, Y ).  Now if C is a collection of chain complexes of right R-modules, and D is a collection of chain complexes of left R-modules, we say that (C, D) is a duality pair if X ∈ C if and only if X + ∈ D, and Y ∈ D if and only if Y + ∈ C. It is immediate from Corollary 2.4 that the absolutely clean and level complexes give rise to two duality pairs. One where C is the class of all absolutely clean complexes of right R-modules, and another where C is the class of all level complexes of right R-modules. Theorem 5.9. Suppose (C, D) is a duality pair in Ch(R) such that D is closed under pure quotients. Let C be a complex of projective complexes. Then X⊗C is exact for all X ∈ C if and only if Hom(C, Y ) is exact for all Y ∈ D. In particular, (1) A⊗C is exact for all absolutely clean complexes A if and only if Hom(C, L) is exact for all level complexes L. (2) L⊗C is exact for all level complexes L if and only if Hom(C, A) is exact for all absolutely clean complexes A. Proof. In view of Lemma 5.7, if Hom(C, Y ) is exact for all Y ∈ D, then X⊗C is exact for all X ∈ C. Conversely, suppose X⊗C is exact for all X ∈ C. Then if Y ∈ D, Y + ⊗C is exact, and so Lemma 5.7 tells us that Hom(C, Y ++ ) is exact. We conclude that Hom(C, D) is exact for all D ∈ D++ , and we note that D++ ⊆ D since (C, D) is a duality pair. Now, for any complex Y , the natural map Y − → Y ++ is a pure monomorphism of complexes [GR99, Proposition 5.1.4.(4)]. So if Y ∈ D, the quotient Y ++ /Y is also in D since D is closed under pure quotients. We can therefore create a resolution of Y ∈ D by elements of D++ . That is, we can find a pure exact resolution of Y by complexes of complexes in D++ . This gives us a short exact sequence 0− → S n (Y ) − →D− →P− →0 in which P is pure exact and D is a bounded above complex with entries in D++ . Theorem 5.6 tells us that Hom(C, P) is exact. Hence Hom(C, D) ∼ = Hom(C, S n (Y )). So by Lemma 5.8, it only remains to show that Hom(C, D) is exact whenever D is bounded above with components in D++ . But showing Hom(C, X) is exact for all complexes of projective complexes C, is equivalent to showing Ext1 (C, X) = 0 for all such C. By Lemma 5.8 and the first paragraph we conclude Ext1 (C, S n (D)) = 0 whenever D ∈ D++ . Now any bounded above complex D with entries in D++ can be seen to be an inverse transfinite extension of spheres S n (D) for some D ∈ D++ . By the dual of the Eklof Lemma,  16  JAMES GILLESPIE  we know that Ext1 (C, −) is closed under inverse transfinite extensions [EIJ07, Theorem 1.6]. So Ext1 (C, D) = 0, whence Hom(C, D) is exact for all complexes of projective complexes C. This completes the proof. As noted above, the absolutely clean complexes and level complexes give rise to two duality pairs. Moreover, each class is closed under pure quotients by [BG15, Propositions 2.7/4.7].  6. Applications to Ding projective modules and complexes We now wish to prove the duals to Corollaries 4.3 and 4.4. They are Theorem 6.2 and Corollary 6.3 below. Definition 6.1. We call an R-module M Ding projective if there exists an exact complex of projectives · · · → P1 → P0 → P 0 → P 1 → · · · with M = ker (P 0 → P 1 ) and which remains exact after applying HomR (−, F ) for any flat module F . In the same way, we call a chain complex X Ding projective if there exists an exact complex of projective complexes · · · → P1 → P0 → P 0 → P 1 → · · · with X = ker (P 0 → P 1 ) and which remains exact after applying HomCh(R) (−, F ) for any flat chain complex F . Recall that a chain complex P is projective (resp. flat) in Ch(R) if and only if it is exact and each cycle Zn P is a projective (resp. flat) module. Theorem 6.2. Let R be a Ding-Chen ring. Then a module M is Ding projective if and only if M = Z0 P for some exact complex P of projective R-modules. In the same way, a chain complex X is Ding projective if and only if X = Z0 P for some exact complex P of projective complexes. Proof. First, we look at the R-module case. Let P be any exact complex of projectives. We need to show that HomR (P, F ) remains exact for any flat (left) module F . But by [BGH13, Theorem 6.7], and since R is coherent, it is enough to show A ⊗R P is exact for all absolutely pure (right) modules A. Note that clearly F ⊗R P is exact for any flat (right) module F . It follows that M ⊗R P is exact for all M of finite flat dimension. But since R is a Ding-Chen ring, any absolutely pure module A does have finite flat dimension. So we are done. We note that a similar but alternate proof could be given, using Theorem 3.6 instead. Next, we see that the proof holds for chain complexes due to the work of Section 5. So now let P be any exact complex of projective complexes. We need to show that HomCh(R) (P, F ) remains exact for any flat (left) chain complex F . However, looking at the definition of Hom it is clear that this is equivalent to the statement that Hom(P, F ) remains exact for any flat complex F . Now by Theorem 5.9, and since R is coherent, this is equivalent to the statement that A⊗P is exact for all absolutely pure (right) complexes A. We note that F ⊗P is exact for any flat (right) complex F by [GR99, Proposition 5.1.2]. It follows that X⊗P is exact for all complexes X of finite flat dimension. But since R is a Ding-Chen ring, any absolutely pure complex A is an exact complex with an upper bound on the flat dimensions of the Zn A. It follows that A itself is a complex of finite flat dimension. So we are done.   DING MODULES AND COMPLEXES  17  Corollary 6.3. Let R be a Ding-Chen ring. Then a complex X is Ding projective if and only if each Xn is a Ding projective R-module. Proof. The “only if” part is easy to show. For the converse, Theorem 6.2 assures us that we only need to show X equals the zero cycles of some exact complex d2 d3 P2 −→ of projective complexes. Certainly we can find an exact complex · · · −→ d1 ǫ →X − → 0 with each Pi a projective complex. So it is left to extend this P1 −→ P0 − complex to the right. First note that there is an obvious (degreewise split) short exact sequence (1,d) M n+1 −d+1 0 → X −−−→ D (Xn ) −−−−→ ΣX → 0. n∈Z  Now each Xn is Ding projective. So we certainly can find a short exact sequence βn αn Qn −−→ Yn → 0 where Qn is projective and Yn is also Ding projective. 0 → Xn −−→ This gives us another short exact sequence L L n+1 n+1 M (αn ) M n+1 (βn ) M n+1 n∈Z D n∈Z D Dn+1 (Xn ) −−−−−−−−−−−→ D (Qn ) −−−−−−−−−−→ D (Yn ). n∈Z  L  n∈Z  n∈Z  (Qn ) is a projective complex and we will denote it by P 0 . Notice that n∈Z D Furthermore, let η : X → P 0 be the composite L n+1 (αn ) M n+1 (1,d) M n+1 n∈Z D X −−−→ D (Xn ) −−−−−−−−−−−→ D (Qn ). n+1  n∈Z  n∈Z  Then η is an monomorphism since it is the composite of two monomorphisms. Moreover, setting C 0 = cok η, it follows from snake lemma that C 0 sits in the L the n+1 0 (Yn ) → 0. In particular, C 0 short exact sequence 0 → ΣX − →C − → n∈Z D L n+1 0 is an extension of n∈Z D L(Yn ) and ΣX, and so C must be Ding projective n+1 in each degree since both of n∈Z D (Yn ) and ΣX are such. Since C 0 has the same properties as X, we may continue inductively to obtain the desired resolution η  d0  d1  d2  0− →X− → P 0 −→ P 1 −→ P 2 −→ · · · d  d  ǫ  1 2 → X → 0 by P0 − P1 −→ Finally, we paste the resolution together with · · · − → P2 −→ setting d0 = ηǫ and we are done.   7. Ding flat modules and complexes As pointed out in [Gil10], there is also a natural notion of a Ding flat module, but it turns out to be equivalent to the notion of a Gorenstein flat module. We recall the definition. Definition 7.1. We call an R-module M Ding flat if there exists an exact complex of flat modules · · · → F1 → F0 → F 0 → F 1 → · · · with M = ker (F 0 → F 1 ) and which remains exact after applying A ⊗R − for any absolutely pure (right) R-module A. In the same way, we call a chain complex X Ding flat if there exists an exact complex of flat complexes · · · → F1 → F0 → F 0 → F 1 → · · ·  18  JAMES GILLESPIE  with X = ker (F 0 → F 1 ) and which remains exact after applying A⊗− for any absolutely pure complex A. Proposition 7.2. Let R be any ring. A Ding flat module is nothing more than a Gorenstein flat module. Similarly, a chain complex X is Ding flat if and only if it is Gorenstein flat. A proof of the above proposition, for modules, goes back to [DM08, Lemma 2.8]. We provide a new proof which is very quick and easy. Proof. We give the proof for complexes but the same proof works for modules. Note that Ding flat complexes are clearly Gorenstein flat since injective complexes are absolutely pure. Conversely, suppose that X is a Gorenstein flat complex. By definition, this means there exists an exact complex F = · · · → F1 → F0 → F 0 → F 1 → · · · of flat complexes with X = ker (F 0 → F 1 ) which remains exact after applying I ⊗− for any injective complex I. We will show that this complex does in fact remain exact after applying A⊗− for any absolutely pure (right) chain complex A. So let such an A be given and note that it is equivalent to show that the map of complexes A⊗Zn F − → A⊗Fn is a monomorphism for each n. Now let A ֒→ I be an embedding into an injective complex I and note that this must be a pure monomorphism since A is an absolutely pure complex. For each n we have the commutative diagram: A⊗Zn F −−−−→ I⊗Zn F     y y A⊗Fn −−−−→ I⊗Fn  The two horizontal arrows are monomorphisms since A ֒→ I is pure. The right vertical arrow is also a monomorphism since I⊗F is exact. It follows that the left vertical arrow must also be a monomorphism.  Proposition 7.3. Let R be a Ding-Chen ring. Then a module M is Ding flat if and only if M = Z0 F for some exact complex F of flat R-modules. In the same way, a chain complex X is Ding flat if and only if X = Zn F for some exact complex F of flat complexes. Proof. The proof is easy and very similar to the last few sentences of the proof of Theorem 6.2. Briefly, say F is an exact complex of flat complexes; we wish to show that A⊗ F is exact for any absolutely pure complex A. Certainly F ⊗ F is exact for any flat complex F , and, since R is a Ding-Chen ring, any absolutely pure complex A has finite flat dimension. We argue that A⊗F is exact for any such A.  Corollary 7.4. Let R be a Ding-Chen ring. Then a complex X is Ding flat if and only if each Xn is a Ding flat R-module. Proof. Using the above proposition, the proof of Corollary 6.3 carries over. Just replace the word projective with the word flat throughout the proof.   DING MODULES AND COMPLEXES  19  References [AR94]  J. Adámek and J. Rosický, Locally presentable and accessible categories, Number 189 in London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, Cambridge University Press, 1994. [BG15] Daniel Bravo and James Gillespie, Absolutely clean, level, and Gorenstein AC-injective complexes, preprint; arXiv:1408.7089 [BGH13] Daniel Bravo, James Gillespie and Mark Hovey, The stable module category of a general ring, submitted. [DC93] N. Ding and J. Chen, The flat dimensions of injective modules, Manuscripta Math. vol. 78, no. 2, 1993, pp. 165-177. [DC96] N. Ding and J. Chen, Coherent rings with finite self-FP-injective dimension, Comm. Algebra, vol. 24, no. 9, 1996, pp. 2963-2980. [DM05] N. Ding and L. Mao, Reletive FP-projective modules, Comm. Algebra, vol. 33, no. 5, 2005, pp. 1587-1602. [DM07] N. Ding and L. Mao, Envelopes and covers by modules of finite FP-injective and flat dimensions, Comm. Algebra, vol. 35, no. 3, 2007, pp. 833–849. [DM08] N. Ding and L. Mao, Gorenstein FP-injective and Gorenstein flat modules, J. Algebra Appl. 7 (2008), no. 4, 491–506. [DLM09] N. Ding and Y. Li and L. Mao, Strongly Gorenstein flat modules, J. Aust. Math. Soc. vol. 86, no. 3, 2009, pp. 323-338. [EGR97] E. Enochs and J.R. Garcı́a-Rozas, Tensor products of chain complexes, Math J. Okayama Univ. 39, 1997, pp. 19–42. [EE05] E. Enochs, S. Estrada, and A. Iacob, Gorenstein projective and flat complexes over noetherian rings, Mathematische Nachrichten vol. 285, no. 7, 2012, pp. 834–851. [EJ00] Edgar E. Enochs and Overtoun M. G. Jenda, Relative homological algebra, de Gruyter Expositions in Mathematics, vol. 30, Walter de Gruyter & Co., Berlin, 2000. MR 2001h:16013 [EIJ07] E. Enochs, A. Iacob, and O.M.G. Jenda, Closure under Transfinite Extensions, Illinois Journal of Mathematics vol. 51, no. 2, 2007, pp.561–569. [GR99] J. R. Garcı́a-Rozas, Covers and envelopes in the category of complexes of modules, Research Notes in Mathematics no. 407, Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 1999. [Gil04] James Gillespie, The flat model structure on Ch(R), Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 356, no. 8, 2004, pp. 3369–3390. [Gil07] James Gillespie, Kaplansky classes and derived categories, Math. Zeit. vol. 257, no. 4, 2007, pp.811–843. [Gil10] James Gillespie, Model structures on modules over Ding-Chen rings, Homology, Homotopy Appl. 12 (2010), no. 1, 61–73. MR 2607410 (2011e:18027) [Gil12] James Gillespie, Gorenstein complexes and recollements from cotorsion pairs, preprint; arXiv 1210.0196, 2012. [Gil15] James Gillespie, How to construct a Hovey triple from two cotorsion pairs, Fundamenta Mathematicae, Vol. 230, no.3, 2015, pp. 281–289. [GT06] Rüdiger Göbel and Jan Trlifaj, Approximations and Endomorphism Algebras of Modules, de Gruyter Expositions in Mathematics, vol. 41, Walter de Gruyter & Co., Berlin, 2006. [Hov02] Mark Hovey, Cotorsion pairs, model category structures, and representation theory, Mathematische Zeitschrift, vol. 241, 2002, pp.553–592. [Iwa79] Y. Iwanaga, On rings with finite self-injective dimension, Comm. Algebra, vol. 7, no. 4, 1979, pp. 393-414. [Iwa80] Y. Iwanaga, On rings with finite self-injective dimension II, Tsukuba J. Math. vol. 4, no. 1, 1980, pp. 107-113. [Lam99] T. Y. Lam, Lectures on modules and rings, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 189, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1999. MR MR1653294 (99i:16001) [Sto14] Jan Šťovı́ček,, On purity and applications to coderived and singularity categories, arXiv:1412.1615. [Ste70] Bo Stenström, Coherent rings and F P -injective modules, J. London Math. Soc. (2) 2 (1970), 323–329. MR MR0258888 (41 #3533) [Sten75] Bo Stenström, Rings of Quotients, Die Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften in Einzeldarstellungen Band 217, Springer-Verlag, New York 1975.  20  JAMES GILLESPIE  [Wei94] Charles A. Weibel, An Introduction to Homological Algebra, Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics vol. 38, Cambridge University Press, 1994. [YLL11] Gang Yang, Zhongkui Liu, Li Liang, Ding Projective and Ding Injective Modules, Algebra Colloquium 20 (2013), no. 04, 601–612. [YLL13] Gang Yang, Zhongkui Liu, and Li Liang, Model structures on categories of complexes over Ding-Chen rings, Communications in Algebra, vol. 41, 2013, pp. 50–69. [YL11] Gang Yang and Zhongkui Liu, Cotorsion pairs and model structures on Ch(R), Proc. Edinb. Math. Soc. (2) vol. 54, no. 3, 2011, pp. 783–797. Ramapo College of New Jersey, School of Theoretical and Applied Science, 505 Ramapo Valley Road, Mahwah, NJ 07430 E-mail address, Jim Gillespie: jgillesp@ramapo.edu URL: http://pages.ramapo.edu/~jgillesp/

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 0. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
