Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 0
ArXiv ID: hf_82

Abstract:
arXiv:1803.09301v1 [math.KT] 25 Mar 2018  TATE-BETTI AND TATE-BASS NUMBERS E. ENOCHS AND S. ESTRADA AND A. IACOB Abstract. We define Tate-Betti and Tate-Bass invariants for modules over a commutative noetherian local ring R. Then we show the periodicity of these invariants provided that R is a hypersurface. In case R is also Gorenstein, we see that a finitely generated R-module M and its Matlis dual have the same Tate-Betti and Tate-Bass numbers.  1. Introduction We consider a commutative noetherian local ring (R, m, k). It is known that a module M has a complete projective resolution T → P → M if and only if M has finite Gorenstein projective dimension. We prove that when M is a finitely generated R-module of finite Gorenstein projective dimension we can construct a complete projective resolution T → P → M with both T and P homotopically minimal complexes, and so unique up to isomorphism. Then each of the modules Pn (n ≥ 0) and Tn (n ∈ Z) are free modules of finite ranks. The ranks of the modules Pn are usually denoted βn (M) and are called the Betti numbers of M. The boundedness of the sequence of Betti numbers of a module M, as well as the interplay between the boundedness of the Betti numbers and the eventual periodicity of the module M have been studied intensively (see for example [4], [9], [10], [11], and [2]). We focus here on the invariants βbn (M), where for each n ∈ Z, βbn (M) is the rank of the module Tn . We call these invariants the Tate-Betti numbers of M (see [3] for another way to define these invariants). For an arbitrary module N we can use an analogous procedure to construct a complete injective resolution N → I → U where both I and U are homotopically minimal complexes (and hence unique up to isomorphism). Then we can define the Tate-Bass invariants µ bn (p, N) for n ∈ Z and p ⊂ R a prime ideal of R. 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 13H10,18G25, 18G35, 13D02. key words: Tate-Betti and Tate-Bass number, complete projective resolution, eventually periodic complex, Matlis duality. 1  2  E. ENOCHS AND S. ESTRADA AND A. IACOB  Our main results (Theorem 2 and Theorem 3) give sufficient conditions on the residue field k that guarantee the periodicity of the Tate-Betti numbers βbn (M) (where M is finitely generated of finite Gorenstein projective dimension) and respectively the periodicity of the Tate-Bass numbers µ bn (m, N). We prove (Theorem 2) that if k has an eventually periodic minimal projective resolution with period s, then for every finitely generated R-module M we have that the Tate-Betti invariants of M are periodic of period s. We also prove (Theorem 3) that under the same hypothesis on k we have that the Tate-Bass invariants µ bn (m, N) are periodic of period s, for every module N of finite Gorenstein injective dimension. In the second part of the paper we consider a commutative local Gorenstein ring (R, m, k) and a finitely generated R-module M. We prove that if T → P → M is a minimal complete projective resolution of M, then M ν → P ν → T ν is a minimal complete injective resolution of M ν . It follows that for each n we have µ bn (m, M ν ) = βbn . Also, ν µn (m, M ) = βn (see Section 3 for definitions). 2. Preliminaries We recall that a module G is Gorenstein projective if there is an exact and Hom(−, P roj) exact complex . . . → P1 → P0 → P−1 → P−2 → . . . of projective modules such that G = Ker(P0 → P−1 ). Definition 1. A module R M has finite Gorenstein projective dimension if there exists an exact sequence 0 → Gn → Gn−1 → . . . → G1 → G0 → M → 0 with all Gi Gorenstein projective modules. If the integer n ≥ 0 is the least with this property then M has Gorenstein projective dimension n (in short, G.p.d.R (M) = n). If no such n exists then M has infinite Gorenstein projective dimension. The Gorenstein injective modules, and Gorenstein injective dimension are defined dually. The Tate cohomology modules are defined by means of complete resolutions. We recall the definition: Definition 2. A module M has a complete projective resolution if there u exists a diagram T − → P → M with P → M a projective resolution, T a totally acyclic complex and u : T → P a map of complexes such that un : Tn → Pn is an isomorphism for all n ≫ 0.  TATE-BETTI AND TATE-BASS NUMBERS  3  It is known that a module M has a complete projective resolution if and only if and only if it has finite Gorenstein projective dimension. In particular, when R is Gorenstein, every R M has a complete projective resolution. Complete injective resolutions are defined dually. It is known that a module R N has a complete injective resolution if and only if N has finite Gorenstein injective dimension. Over a Gorenstein ring R, every module N has such a complete injective resolution. 3. Tate-Betti numbers and Tate-Bass numbers Let R be a commutative local noetherian ring, and let M be an Rmodule of finite Gorenstein projective dimension. Then there is a complete projective resolution of M, T → P → M. If M is finitely generated then we can choose P to be a minimal projective resolution of M ([7]). We recall ([8]) that a complex C is said to be homologically minimal if any homology isomorphism f : C → C is an isomorphism in C(R − Mod). A complex C is said to be homotopically minimal if each homotopy isomorphism f : C → C is an isomorphism. So if C is homologically minimal, it is also homotopically minimal. Thus a minimal projective resolution P of M, as above, is homotopically minimal and in fact homologically minimal (see page 78 in chapter 8 of [8]), and so such a P is unique up to isomorphism. We show first of all that when M is finitely generated we can also get T to be homotopically minimal, and so also unique up to isomorphism. We will use the following Lemma 1. Let K be a finitely generated Gorenstein projective reduced R-module (i.e. K has no nontrivial projective direct summands). Then there exists an exact and Hom(−, P roj) exact complex 0 → K → Q0 → Q−1 → Q−2 → . . . with each Qn a finitely generated free module. Proof. Let K be finitely generated, Gorenstein projective and reduced. Then the dual K ∗ = Hom(K, R) is also such. Also if 0 → K ′ → P → K → 0 is exact where P → K is a projective cover of K, then K ′ is also finitely generated, Gorenstein projective and reduced. Since the dual module, K ∗ , is a finitely generated Gorenstein projective module that is also reduced there exists a short exact sequence 0 →  4  E. ENOCHS AND S. ESTRADA AND A. IACOB  L → P → K ∗ → 0 with P → K ∗ a projective cover, and with L Gorenstein projective finitely generated and reduced. This gives an exact sequence 0 → K ∗∗ → P ∗ → L∗ → 0 with P ∗ finitely generated projective, and with L∗ finitely generated Gorenstein projective and reduced. Then K ∗∗ → P ∗ is a projective preenvelope, and therefore if K ∗∗ → Q is the projective envelope then K ∗∗ → Q is an injective map; also, since coker(K → Q) is a direct summand of L∗ , it is finitely generated Gorenstein projective and reduced. So K has a projective envelope K → Q where K → Q is an injection and where coker(K → Q) is also finitely generated, Gorenstein projective and reduced. Also, if 0 → K → Q → K0 → 0 is exact, then Q → K0 is a projective cover ([7], Proposition 10.2.10). So there exists a short exact sequence 0 → K → Q → K0 → 0 with K → Q a projective preenvelope and with K0 a finitely generated reduced Gorenstein projective R-module. Continuing, we obtain an exact and Hom(−, P roj)-exact complex 0 → K → Q → Q−1 → Q−2 → . . . with each Qn a finitely generated free R-module.  We can prove now that when M is a finitely generated R-module of finite Gorenstein projective dimension we can construct a complete projective resolution T → P → M with both T and P unique up to isomorphism. To see this let 0 → Km → Pm−1 → · · · → P0 → 0 be a partial minimal projective resolution of M but where m = G.p.d.R M. Then Km is Gorenstein projective and since the resolution is minimal, Km is also reduced (i.e. has no nontrivial projective direct summands). Using Lemma 1 above it is not hard to see that there exists an exact and Hom(−, P roj) exact complex T with each Tn finitely generated free module, and with Km = Ker(Tm−1 → Tm−2 ). Since for each d, the complex . . . → Td+2 → Td+1 → Kd → 0 is a minimal projective resolution, it follows that T is a homologically minimal complex ([8], page 78). So for a finitely generated M we can construct a complete projective resolution T →P →M  TATE-BETTI AND TATE-BASS NUMBERS  5  where both T and P are homotopically minimal, and so unique up to isomorphism. We call such a diagram a minimal complete projective resolution of M. Then each of Pn (n ≥ 0) and Tn (n arbitrary) are free modules of finite rank. As usual, the ranks of the Pn are denoted βn (M). We denote the ranks of the Tn by βbn (M). The numbers βn (M) are called the Betti invariants of M. We call the invariants βbn (M) the Tate-Betti invariants of M (see [3] for another way to define these invariants). For an arbitrary module N we can use an analogous procedure to construct a complete injective resolution N →I→U where both I and U are homotopically minimal complexes (and hence unique up to isomorphism). Then using Matlis and Bass, we can define the Bass invariants µn (p, N) for n ≥ 0 and p ⊂ R a prime ideal of R, and then the Tate-Bass invariants µ bn (p, N) for arbitrary n and p a prime ideal. Our main results are about the periodicity of these invariants. We recall first the following: Definition 3. A complex C = (Cn ) is said to be eventually periodic of period s ≥ 1 if for some n0 we have that for all n ≥ n0 that (Cn+1 → Cn → Cn−1 ) ∼ = (Cn+s+1 → Cn+s → Cn+s−1) Saying that C is periodic of period s will have the obvious meaning. Remark 1. If T → P → M is a minimal complete projective resolution of a finitely generated M and if P is eventually periodic, then trivially T is also eventually periodic. But using the minimality of T it can be seen that in fact T is periodic. If this is the case where the period is s then we see that βbn (M) = βbn+s (M) for all n. So we can say that the Tate-Betti invariants are periodic of period s. However it may happen that the Tate-Betti invariants of M are periodic without T being periodic. So we can speak of the invariants being periodic without the associated complex being periodic.  6  E. ENOCHS AND S. ESTRADA AND A. IACOB  We prove that when the residue field k has an eventually periodic minimal projective resolution the Tate-Betti numbers of any finitely generated R M of finite Gorenstein projective dimension are periodic. Then we prove that under the same hypothesis on k, the Tate-Bass numbers µ bn (m, N) are periodic, for any R N of finite Gorenstein injective dimension. We will use [6] to deduce the following balance result (see also [3], Section 5). Theorem 1. Let R be any commutative ring. If T → P → M and N → I → U are complete projective and injective resolutions of M and N respectively (equivalently G.p.d.R (M) and G.i.d.R (N) are finite). Then the homologies of Hom(T, N) and of Hom(M, U) are naturally isomorphic. The analogous result for T ⊗ N and M ⊗ U also holds. Proof. Without lost of generality let us assume G.p.d.R (M) = m and G.i.d.R (N) = n and m ≥ n. H i (Hom(T, N)) = H i−m−1 (Hom(T, C−m )) ∼ = ∼ = H i−m−1 (Hom(Km , U)) = H i (Hom(M, U)), where C−m = Ker(U−m → U−m−1 ), Km = Ker(Tm → Tm−1 and ∼ = follows from ([6], Corollary 3.4). Note that if case m > n, we are using the fact that the class of Gorenstein injective modules is closed under cokernels of monomorphisms. The second statement follows in the same way.  We can prove now our main results. Theorem 2. If the residue field k of R as an R-module has an eventually periodic minimal projective resolution (with the period being s) then for every finitely generated module M of finite Gorenstein projective dimension we have that the Tate-Betti invariants of M are periodic of period s. Proof. We let T → P → k be a minimal complete projective resolution of k. Since P is eventually periodic of period s we have that the complex T is periodic of period s. Consequently the complex T ⊗ M is periodic of period s. This gives that for every n Hn (T ⊗ M) ∼ = Hn+s (T ⊗ M). ′ ∼ But by [3], Hn (T ⊗ M) = Hn (k ⊗ T ) for all n, where T ′ → P ′ → M is  TATE-BETTI AND TATE-BASS NUMBERS  7  a minimal complete projective resolution of M. t′n+1  t′  n ′ ′ → Tn−1 → . . . is a homologically Since T ′ = . . . → Tn+1 −−→ Tn′ − minimal complex, it follows (Proposition 8.1.3 of [8]) that Im(t′n ) ⊂ ′ mTn−1 for all n. αn+1 αn ′ −−−→ k ⊗ Tn′ −→ Consider the complex k ⊗ T ′ = . . . → k ⊗ Tn+1 ′ k ⊗ Tn−1 . . .. We have αn ((x + m) ⊗ y) = (x + m) ⊗ t′n (y); by the ′ ′ above tn (y) = rz with r ∈ m and z ∈ Tn−1 . So αn ((x + m) ⊗ y) = (x + m) ⊗ rz = (xr + m) ⊗ z = (0 + m) ⊗ z = 0. Thus Im(αn ) = 0 and Ker(αn ) = k ⊗ Tn′ for all n. Then the n-th homology module of k ⊗ T ′ , b b Ker(αn ) Hn (k ⊗ T ′ ) = Im(α = k ⊗ Tn′ ≃ k ⊗ Rβn ≃ k βn , is a vector space of n+1 ) dimension βbn over k.  Since Hn (k ⊗ T ′ ) ∼ = Hn (T ⊗ M) and since Hn (T ⊗ M) ∼ = Hn+s (T ⊗ M) b b for all n we see that βn (M) = βn+s (M) for all n.  Theorem 3. If the residue field k of R as an R-module has an eventually periodic minimal projective resolution (with period s ≥ 1), then for any module N of finite Gorenstein injective dimension, the invariants µ bn (m, N) are periodic of period s. Proof. Again let T → P → k be a minimal complete projective resolution of k and let N → I → U be a minimal complete injective resolution of N. We have that Hom(T, N) and Hom(k, U) have naturally isomorphic homology modules (Theorem 1). But T is periodic of period s, so Hom(T, N) is periodic of period s. So we get that H n (Hom(k, U)) ∼ = H n+s (Hom(k, U)) for all n. But as in Bass ([1]) we see that H n (Hom(k, U)) is a vector space over k whose dimension is precisely µ bn (m, N).  Remark 2. 1. If M is eventually periodic, then its Betti sequence is bounded. The converse is not true in general. A counterexample was given by R. Schulz in [12], Proposition 4.1. D. Eisenbud proved ([4]) that the converse does hold over group rings of finite groups, and that it also holds in the commutative Noetherian local setting when the rings considered are complete intersections. In fact, it was shown that over a hypersurface (that is, a complete intersection ring of codimension one) any minimal free resolution eventually becomes periodic. So over a hypersurface ring both Theorem 2 and Theorem 3 hold. Remark 3. Our main results hold provided that k has an eventually periodic minimal projective resolution, and so its Betti numbers are  8  E. ENOCHS AND S. ESTRADA AND A. IACOB  bounded. By [10] (Corollary 1), if the Betti numbers of k are bounded then R is a hypersurface. So Theorems 2 and 3 both hold if and only if R is a hypersurface. 4. Matlis duality Let (R, m, k) be a commutative local Gorenstein ring, and let M be a finitely generated R-module. Then there exists a diagram T → P → M as above, with both T and P homotopically minimal, and so unique up to isomorphism. b Then for each n ∈ Z, we have Pn = Rβn and Tn = Rβn . We show that M ν → P ν → T ν is a minimal complete injective resolution of the module M ν , where M ν denotes the Matlis dual HomR (M, E(k)). - Since E(k) is injective, both P ν and T ν are exact complexes of injective modules. Let Mj = Ker(Pj−1 → Pj−2 ); then Mjν ⊂ Pjν is an injective preenvelope with Pjν = Hom(Rβj , E(k)) ≃ E(k)βj . So the injective envelope of Mjν is a direct summand of E(k)βj , so it is E(k)tj for some 1 ≤ tj ≤ βj . Then as in the proof of [7], Corollary 3.4.4, there is an exact sequence Rtj → Mj → 0. Therefore Rtj → Mj is a projective precover. Since Pj → Mj is a projective cover, it follows that Rβj is a direct summand of Rtj . So βj ≤ tj , and so we have βj = tj for all j, and Mjν → Pjν is an injective envelope, for all j. t  t  1 0 Since T = . . . → T1 − → T0 − → T−1 → . . . is exact with each Tj finitely generated free and with each Gj+1 = Ker(tj ) Gorenstein projective, it follows that T ν is an exact complex of injective modules, with ν Ker(Tjν → Tj+1 ) = Gνj Gorenstein injective (we have that each Gj is also Gorenstein flat in this case, so T or1 (Gj , A) = 0, for any injective module A, for each j. Then Ext1 (A, Gνj ) = Ext1 (A, Hom(Gj , E(k)) ≃ Hom(T or1(Gj , A), E(k)) = 0, for any injective module A. It follows that Gνj is Gorenstein injective).  Thus T ν is a totally acyclic injective complex. As above, since . . . → T1 → T0 → G0 → 0 is a minimal projective resolution, it follows that 0 → Gν0 → T0ν → T1ν → . . . is a minimal injective resolution. ν ν Similarly, 0 → Gν−n−1 → T−n−1 → T−n → . . . is a minimal injective ν resolution of G−n−1 . By [7], Theorem 10.1.13, the Gorenstein injective ν module Gν−n−1 is reduced. Thus T−n−1 → Gν−n is in fact an injective cover. Similarly we have that Tjν → Gνj+1 is an injective cover for each  TATE-BETTI AND TATE-BASS NUMBERS  9  j ≤ 0. ν ν Thus . . . T−2 → T−1 → Gν0 → 0 is a minimal left injective resolution.  So we have M ν → P ν → T ν a complete injective resolution of M ν with both P ν and T ν minimal. b We have Pnν = E(k)βn , and Tnν = E(k)βn , for each n. It follows that for each n we have µ bn (m, M ν ) = βbn . Also, µn (m, M ν ) = βn for each n ≥ 0. References [1] H. Bass. On the ubiquity of Gorenstein rings. Math. Zeitschr., 82: 8–28, 1963. [2] P. Bergh. Complexity and periodicity. Colloq. Math., 2:169–191, 2006. [3] L.W. Christensen, and D. Jorgensen. Tate (co)homology via pinched complexes. Transactions of the AMS, 366: 667–689, 2014. [4] D. Eisenbud. Homological Algebra on a complete intersection, with an application to group representations . Transactions of the AMS, 260:35–64, 1990. [5] E.E. Enochs and O.M.G. Jenda. Gorenstein injective and projective modules. Mathematische Zeitschrift, (220):611–633, 1995. [6] E.E. Enochs, and S. Estrada, and A. Iacob Balance with unbounded complexes. Bull. London Math. Soc., 44:439–442, 2012. [7] E.E. Enochs and O.M.G. Jenda. Relative Homological Algebra. Walter de Gruyter, 2000. De Gruyter Exposition in Math; 30. [8] E.E. Enochs and O.M.G. Jenda. Relative Homological Algebra 2. Walter de Gruyter, 2011. De Gruyter Exposition in Math; 54. [9] V. Gasharov, and I. Peeva. Boundedness versus periodicity over commutative local rings. Transactions of the AMS, 320:569–580, 1990. [10] T. Gulliksen. A proof of the existence of minimal R-algebra resolutions. Acta Math., 120:53–58, 1968. [11] I. Peeva Exponential growth of Betti numbers. Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra., 126:317–323, 1998. [12] R. Schultz Boundedness and periodicity of modules over QF rings. Journal of Algebra., 101:450–469, 1986.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 0. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
