Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 1
ArXiv ID: hf_851

Abstract:
1  Interpreting Deep Visual Representations via Network Dissection  arXiv:1711.05611v1 [cs.CV] 15 Nov 2017  Bolei Zhou∗ , David Bau∗ , Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba Abstract—The success of recent deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) depends on learning hidden representations that can summarize the important factors of variation behind the data. However, CNNs often criticized as being black boxes that lack interpretability, since they have millions of unexplained model parameters. In this work, we describe Network Dissection, a method that interprets networks by providing labels for the units of their deep visual representations. The proposed method quantifies the interpretability of CNN representations by evaluating the alignment between individual hidden units and a set of visual semantic concepts. By identifying the best alignments, units are given human interpretable labels across a range of objects, parts, scenes, textures, materials, and colors. The method reveals that deep representations are more transparent and interpretable than expected: we find that representations are significantly more interpretable than they would be under a random equivalently powerful basis. We apply the method to interpret and compare the latent representations of various network architectures trained to solve different supervised and self-supervised training tasks. We then examine factors affecting the network interpretability such as the number of the training iterations, regularizations, different initializations, and the network depth and width. Finally we show that the interpreted units can be used to provide explicit explanations of a prediction given by a CNN for an image. Our results highlight that interpretability is an important property of deep neural networks that provides new insights into their hierarchical structure. Index Terms—Convolutional Neural Networks, Network Interpretability, Visual Recognition, Interpretable Machine Learning.  F  1  I NTRODUCTION  BSERVATIONS of hidden units in large deep neural networks have revealed that human-interpretable concepts sometimes emerge as individual latent variables within those networks. For example, object detector units emerge within networks trained to recognize places [1]; part detectors emerge in object classifiers [2]; and object detectors emerge in generative video networks [3]. This internal structure has appeared in situations where the networks are not constrained to decompose problems in any interpretable way. The emergence of interpretable structure suggests that deep networks may be learning disentangled representations spontaneously. While it is commonly understood that a network can learn an efficient encoding that makes economical use of hidden variables to distinguish the input, the appearance of a disentangled representation is not well understood. A disentangled representation aligns its variables with a meaningful factorization of the underlying problem structure, and encouraging disentangled representations is a significant area of research [4]. If the internal representation of a deep network is partly disentangled, one possible path for understanding its mechanisms is to detect disentangled structure, and simply read out the human interpretable factors. We address the following three key issues about the deep visual representations in this work: • What is a disentangled representation of neural networks, and how can its factors be quantified and detected? • Do interpretable hidden units reflect a special alignment of feature space, or are interpretations a chimera? • What differences in network architectures, data sources, and training conditions lead to the internal representations with greater or lesser entanglement?  O  • •  B. Zhou and D.Bau contributed equally to this work. B. Zhou, D. Bau, A.Oliva, and A. Torralba are with CSAIL, MIT, MA, 02139. E-mail: {bzhou, davidbau, oliva, torralba}@csail.mit.edu  To examine these issues, we propose a general analytic framework, Network Dissection, for interpreting deep visual representations and quantifying their interpretability. Using Broden, a broadly and densely labeled dataset, our framework identifies hidden units’ semantics for any given CNN, then aligns them with human-interpretable concepts. Building upon the preliminary result published at [5], we begin with a detailed description of the methodology of Network Dissection. We use the method to interpret a variety of deep visual representations trained with different network architectures (AlexNet, VGG, GoogLeNet, ResNet, DenseNet) and supervisions (supervsied training on ImageNet for object recognition and on Places for scene recognition, along with various self-taught supervision tasks). We show that interpretability is an axis-aligned property of a representation that can be destroyed by rotation without affecting discriminative power. We further examine how interpretability is affected by different training datasets, training regularizations such as dropout [6] and batch normalization [7], and fine-tuning between different data sources. Our experiments reveal that units emerge as semantic detectors in the intermediate layers of most deep visual representations, while the degree of interpretability can vary widely across changes in architecture and training. We conclude that representations learned by deep networks are more interpretable than previously thought, and that measurements of interpretability provide insights about the structure of deep visual representations that that are not revealed by their classification power alone1 . 1.1  Related Work  Visualizing deep visual representations. Though CNN models are notoriously known as black boxes, a growing number of 1. Code, data, and more dissection results are available at the project page http://netdissect.csail.mit.edu/.  2  techniques have been developed to visualize the internal representations of convolutional neural networks. The behavior of a CNN can be visualized by sampling image patches that maximize activation of hidden units [1], [8], [9], or by using variants of backpropagation to identify or generate salient image features [8], [10], [11]. Back-propagation together with a natural image prior can be used to invert a CNN layer activation [12], and an image generation network can be trained to invert the deep features by synthesizing the input images [13]. [14] further synthesizes the prototypical images for individual units by learning a feature code for the image generation network from [13].These visualizations reveal the image patterns that have been learned in a deep visual representation and provide a qualitative guide to the interpretation and interpretability of units. In [1], a quantitative measure of interpretability was introduced: human evaluation of visualizations to determine which individual units behave as object detectors in a network trained to classify scenes. However, human evaluation is not scalable to increasingly large networks such as ResNet [15], with more than 100 layers. Therefore the aim of the present work is to develop a scalable method to go from qualitative visualization to quantitative interpretation. Analyzing the properties of deep visual representations. Various intrinsic properties of deep visual representations have been explored. Much research has focused on studying the power of CNN layer activations to be used as generic visual features for classification [16], [17]. The transferability of activations for a variety of layers has been analyzed, and it has been found that higher layer units are more specialized to the target task [18]. Susceptibility to adversarial input reveals that discriminative CNN models are fooled by particular image patterns [19], [20]. Analysis of correlation between different random initialized networks reveal that many units converge to the same set of representations after training [21]. The question of how representations generalize has been investigated by showing that a CNN can easily fit a random labeling of training data even under explicit regularization [22]. Our work focuses on another less explored property of deep visual representations: interpretability. Unsupervised learning of deep visual representations. Recent work on unsupervised learning or self-supervised learning exploits the correspondence structure that comes for free from unlabeled images to train networks from scratch [23], [24], [25], [26], [27]. For example, CNN is trained by predicting image context [23], by colorizing gray images [28], [29], by solving image puzzle [24], and by associating the images with ambient sounds [30]. The resulting deep visual representations learned from different unsupervised learning tasks are compared by evaluating them as generic visual features on classification datasets such as Pascal VOC. Our work provides an alternative approach to compare deep visual representations in terms of their interpretability, beyond just their discriminative power.  2  F RAMEWORK OF N ETWORK D ISSECTION  The notion of a disentangled representation rests on the human perception of what it means for a concept to be mixed up. Therefore we define the interpretability of deep visual representation in terms of the degree of alignment with a set of human-interpretable concepts. Our quantitative measurement of interpretability for deep visual representations proceeds in three steps: 1) Identify a broad set of human-labeled visual concepts.  TABLE 1 Statistics of each label type included in the dataset. Category scene object part material texture color  Classes 468 584 234 32 47 11  Sources ADE [32] ADE [32], Pascal-Context [34] ADE [32], Pascal-Part [35] OpenSurfaces [33] DTD [36] Generated  Avg sample 38 491 854 1,703 140 59,250  2) Gather the response of the hidden variables to known concepts. 3) Quantify alignment of hidden variable−concept pairs. This three-step process of network dissection is reminiscent of the procedures used by neuroscientists to understand similar representation questions in biological neurons [31]. Since our purpose is to measure the level to which a representation is disentangled, we focus on quantifying the correspondence between a single latent variable and a visual concept. In a fully interpretable local coding such as a one-hot-encoding, each variable will match exactly with one human-interpretable concept. Although we expect a network to learn partially nonlocal representations in interior layers [4], and past experience shows that an emergent concept will often align with a combination of a several hidden units [2], [17], our present aim is to assess how well a representation is disentangled. Therefore we measure the alignment between single units and single interpretable concepts. This does not gauge the discriminative power of the representation; rather it quantifies its disentangled interpretability. As we will show in Sec. 3.2, it is possible for two representations of perfectly equivalent discriminative power to have very different levels of interpretability. To assess the interpretability of any given CNN, we draw concepts from a new broadly and densely labeled image dataset that unifies labeled visual concepts from a heterogeneous collection of labeled data sources, described in Sec. 2.1. We then measure the alignment of each hidden unit of the CNN with each concept by evaluating the feature activation of each individual unit as a segmentation model for each concept. To quantify the interpretability of a layer as a whole, we count the number of distinct visual concepts that are aligned with a unit in the layer, as detailed in Sec. 2.2. 2.1  Broden: Broadly and Densely Labeled Dataset  To be able to ascertain alignment with both low-level concepts such as colors and higher-level concepts such as objects, we have assembled a new heterogeneous dataset. The Broadly and Densely Labeled Dataset (Broden) unifies several densely labeled image datasets: ADE [32], OpenSurfaces [33], Pascal-Context [34], Pascal-Part [35], and the Describable Textures Dataset [36]. These datasets contain examples of a broad range of objects, scenes, object parts, textures, and materials in a variety of contexts. Most examples are segmented down to the pixel level except textures and scenes, which are given for full images. In addition, every image pixel in the dataset is annotated with one of the eleven common color names according to the human perceptions classified by van de Weijer [37]. Samples of the types of labels in the Broden dataset are shown in Fig. 1. The purpose of Broden is to provide a ground truth set of exemplars for a broad set of visual concepts. The concept labels in Broden are normalized and merged from their original datasets so  3 red (color)  yellow (color)  wrinkled (texture)  meshed (texture)  wood (material)  fabric (material)  foot (part)  door (part)  airplane (object)  waterfall (object)  art studio (scene)  beach (scene)  Fig. 1. Samples from the Broden Dataset. The ground truth for each concept is a pixel-wise dense annotation.  Top activated images  Segmented images using the binarized unit activation map  Semantic segmentation annotations  Segmented annotations  Fig. 2. Scoring unit interpretability by evaluating the unit for semantic segmentation.  that every class corresponds to an English word. Labels are merged based on shared synonyms, disregarding positional distinctions such as ‘left’ and ‘top’ and avoiding a blacklist of 29 overly general synonyms (such as ‘machine’ for ‘car’). Multiple Broden labels can apply to the same pixel: for example, a black pixel that has the Pascal-Part label ‘left front cat leg’ has three labels in Broden: a unified ‘cat’ label representing cats across datasets; a similar unified ‘leg’ label; and the color label ‘black’. Only labels with at least 10 image samples are included. Table 1 shows the number of classes per dataset and the average number of image samples per label class. Totally there are 1197 visual concept classes included. 2.2  Scoring Unit Interpretability  The proposed network dissection method evaluates every individual convolutional unit in a CNN as a solution to a binary segmentation task to every visual concept in Broden, as illustrated in Fig. 3. Our method can be applied to any CNN using a forward pass without the need for training or backpropagation. For every input image x in the Broden dataset, the activation map Ak (x) of every internal convolutional unit k is collected. Then the distribution of individual unit activations ak is computed. For each unit k , the top quantile level Tk is determined such that P (ak > Tk ) = 0.005 over every spatial location of the activation map in the dataset. To compare a low-resolution unit’s activation map to the inputresolution annotation mask Lc for some concept c, the activation map is scaled up to the mask resolution Sk (x) from Ak (x) using bilinear interpolation, anchoring interpolants at the center of each unit’s receptive field.  Sk (x) is then thresholded into a binary segmentation: Mk (x) ≡ Sk (x) ≥ Tk , selecting all regions for which the activation exceeds the threshold Tk . These segmentations are evaluated against every concept c in the dataset by computing intersections Mk (x)∩Lc (x), for every (k, c) pair. The score of each unit k as segmentation for concept c is reported as a the intersection over union score across all the images in the dataset, P |Mk (x) ∩ Lc (x)| IoUk,c = P , (1) |Mk (x) ∪ Lc (x)| where | · | is the cardinality of a set. Because the dataset contains some types of labels which are not present on some subsets of inputs, the sums are computed only on the subset of images that have at least one labeled concept of the same category as c. The value of IoUk,c is the accuracy of unit k in detecting concept c; we consider one unit k as a detector for concept c if IoUk,c exceeds a threshold. Our qualitative results are insensitive to the IoU threshold: different thresholds denote different numbers of units as concept detectors across all the networks but relative orderings remain stable. For our comparisons we report a detector if IoUk,c > 0.04. Note that one unit might be the detector for multiple concepts; for the purpose of our analysis, we choose the top ranked label. To quantify the interpretability of a layer, we count the number unique concepts aligned with units. We call this the number of unique detectors. Figure 2 summarizes the whole process of scoring unit interpretability: By segmenting the annotation mask using the receptive field of units for the top activated images, we compute the IoU for each concept. The IoU evaluating the quality of the segmentation of a unit is an objective confidence score for interpretability that is comparable across networks. Thus this score enables us to compare interpretability of different representations and lays the basis for the experiments below. Note that network dissection works only as well as the underlying dataset: if a unit matches a human-understandable concept that is absent in Broden, then it will not score well for interpretability. Future versions of Broden will be expanded to include more kinds of visual concepts.  3  INTERPRETING DEEP VISUAL REPRESENTATIONS  For testing we prepare a collection of CNN models with different network architectures and supervision of primary tasks, as listed in Table 2. The network architectures include AlexNet [38], GoogLeNet [39], VGG [40], ResNet [15], and DenseNet [41]. For supervised training, the models are trained from scratch (i.e., not pretrained) on ImageNet [42], Places205 [43], and Places365 [44]. ImageNet is an object-centric dataset, which contains 1.2 million images from 1000 classes. Places205 and Places365 are  4  Freeze trained network weights  Upsample target layer  Car  Person  Grass  Door  t Uni e n O tion va Acti  Fabric  Pixel-wise segmentation  Blue  Conv  Conv  Conv  Conv  Network being probed  Conv  Input image  Evaluate on segmentation tasks  Fig. 3. Illustration of network dissection for measuring semantic alignment of units in a given CNN. Here one unit of the last convolutional layer of a given CNN is probed by evaluating its performance on various segmentation tasks. Our method can probe any convolutional layer.  TABLE 2 Tested CNN Models Training none  Supervised  Self  Network AlexNet AlexNet GoogLeNet VGG-16 ResNet-152 DenseNet-161 AlexNet  dataset or task random ImageNet, Places205, Places365, Hybrid. ImageNet, Places205, Places365. ImageNet, Places205, Places365, Hybrid. ImageNet, Places365. ImageNet, Places365. context, puzzle, egomotion, tracking, moving, videoorder, audio, crosschannel,colorization. objectcentric, transinv.  two subsets of the Places Database, which is a scene-centric dataset with categories such as kitchen, living room, and coast. Places205 contains 2.4 million images from 205 scene categories, while Places365 contains 1.6 million images from 365 scene categories. “Hybrid” refers to a combination of ImageNet and Places365. For self-supervised training tasks, we select several recent models trained on predicting context (context) [23], solving puzzles (puzzle) [24], predicting ego-motion (egomotion) [25], learning by moving (moving) [26], predicting video frame order (videoorder) [45] or tracking (tracking) [27], detecting object-centric alignment (objectcentric) [46], colorizing images (colorization) [28], inpainting (contextencoder) [47], predicting cross-channel (crosschannel) [29], predicting ambient sound from frames (audio) [30], and tracking invariant patterns in videos (transinv) [48]. The self-supervised models we analyze are comparable to each other in that they all use AlexNet or an AlexNetderived architecture, with one exception model transinv [48], which uses VGG as the base network. In the following experiments, we begin by validating our method using human evaluation. Then, we use random unitary rotations of a learned representation to test whether interpretability of CNNs is an axis-independent property; we find that it is not, and we conclude that interpretability is not an inevitable result of the discriminative power of a representation. Next, we analyze all the convolutional layers of AlexNet as trained on ImageNet [38] and as trained on Places [43], and confirm that our method reveals detectors for higher-level concepts at higher layers and lower-level concepts at lower layers; and that more detectors for higher-level concepts emerge under scene training. Then, we show that different network architectures such as AlexNet, VGG, and ResNet yield different interpretability, while differently supervised  training tasks and self-supervised training tasks also yield a variety of levels of interpretability. Additionally we show the impact of different training conditions, examine the relationship between discriminative power and interpretability, and investigate a possible way to improve the interpretability of CNNs by increasing their width. Finally we utilize the interpretable units as explanatory factors to the prediction given by a CNN.  3.1  Human Evaluation of Interpretations  Using network dissection, we analyze the interpretability of units within all the convolutional layers of Places-AlexNet and ImageNetAlexNet, then compare with human interpretation. Places-AlexNet is trained for scene classification on Places205 [43], while ImageNet-AlexNet is the identical architecture trained for object classification on ImageNet [38]. Our evaluation was done by raters on Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT). As a baseline description of unit semantics, we used human-written descriptions of each unit from [1]. These descriptions were collected by asking raters to write words or short phrases to describe the common meaning or pattern selected by each unit, based on a visualization of the top image patches. Three descriptions and a confidence were collected for each unit. As a canonical description we chose the most common description of a unit (when raters agreed), and the highest-confidence description (when raters did not agree). Some units may not be interpretable. To identify these, raters were shown the canonical descriptions of visualizations and asked whether they were descriptive. Units with validated descriptions are taken as the set of interpretable units. To compare these baseline descriptions to network-dissectionderived labels, we ran the following experiment. Raters were shown a visualization of top images patches for an interpretable unit, along with a word or short phrase description, and they were asked to vote (yes/no) whether the given phrase was descriptive of most of the image patches. The baseline human-written descriptions were randomized with the labels derived using net dissection, and the origin of the labels was not revealed to the raters. Table 3 summarizes the results. The number of interpretable units is shown for each layer, and average positive votes for descriptions of interpretable units are shown, both for humanwritten labels and network-dissection-derived labels. Human labels are most highly consistent for units of conv5, suggesting that humans have no trouble identifying high-level visual concept detectors, while lower-level detectors are more difficult to label.  5  Fig. 4. The annotation interface used by human raters on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Raters are shown descriptive text in quotes together with fifteen images, each with highlighted patches, and must evaluate whether the quoted text is a good description for the highlighted patches. TABLE 3 Human evaluation of our Network Dissection approach.  Interpretable units Human consistency Network Dissection  conv1 57/96 82% 37%  conv2 126/256 76% 56%  conv3 247/384 83% 54%  conv4 258/384 82% 59%  conv5 194/256 91% 71%  Similarly, labels given by network dissection are best at conv5, and are found to be less descriptive for lower layers. Comparison of the human interpretation and the labels predicted by network dissection is plotted in Fig. 5. A sample of units is shown together with both automatically inferred interpretations and manually assigned interpretations taken from [1]. We can see that the predicted labels match the human annotation well, though sometimes they capture a different description of a visual concept, such as the ‘crosswalk’ predicted by the algorithm compared to ‘horizontal lines’ given by the human for the third unit in conv4 of Places-AlexNet in Fig. 5. Confirming intuition, color and texture concepts dominate at lower layers conv1 and conv2 while more object and part detectors emerge in conv5. 3.2  Measurement of Axis-aligned Interpretability  We conduct an experiment to determine whether it is meaningful to assign an interpretable concept to an individual unit. Two possible hypotheses can explain the emergence of interpretability in individual hidden layer units: Hypothesis 1. Interpretability is a property of the representation as a whole, and individual interpretable units emerge because interpretability is a generic property of typical directions of representation space. Under this hypothesis, projecting to any direction would typically reveal an interpretable concept, and interpretations of single units in the natural basis would not be more meaningful than interpretations that can be found in any other direction. Hypothesis 2. Interpretable alignments are unusual, and interpretable units emerge because learning converges to a special basis that aligns explanatory factors with individual units.  In this model, the natural basis represents a meaningful decomposition learned by the network. Hypothesis 1 is the default assumption: in the past it has been found [19] that with respect to interpretability “there is no distinction between individual high level units and random linear combinations of high level units.” Network dissection allows us to re-evaluate this hypothesis. We apply random changes in basis to a representation learned by AlexNet. Under hypothesis 1, the overall level of interpretability should not be affected by a change in basis, even as rotations cause the specific set of represented concepts to change. Under hypothesis 2, the overall level of interpretability is expected to drop under a change in basis. We begin with the representation of the 256 convolutional units of AlexNet conv5 trained on Places205 and examine the effect of a change in basis. To avoid any issues of conditioning or degeneracy, we change basis using a random orthogonal transformation Q. The rotation Q is drawn uniformly from SO(256) by applying 2 Gram-Schmidt on a normally-distributed QR = A ∈ R256 with positive-diagonal right-triangular R, as described by [49]. Interpretability is summarized as the number of unique visual concepts aligned with units, as defined in Sec. 2.2. Denoting AlexNet conv5 as f (x), we find that the number of unique detectors in Qf (x) is 80% fewer than the number of unique detectors in f (x). Our finding is inconsistent with hypothesis 1 and consistent with hypothesis 2. We also test smaller perturbations of basis using Qα for 0 ≤ α ≤ 1, where the fractional powers Qα ∈ SO(256) are chosen to form a minimal geodesic gradually rotating from I to Q; these intermediate rotations are computed using a Schur decomposition. Fig. 6 shows that interpretability of Qα f (x) decreases as larger rotations are applied. Fig. 7 shows some examples of the linearly combined units. Each rotated representation has exactly the same discriminative power as the original layer. Writing the original network as g(f (x)), note that g 0 (r) ≡ g(QT r) defines a neural network that processes the rotated representation r = Qf (x) exactly as the original g operates on f (x). We conclude that interpretability is neither an inevitable result of discriminative power, nor is it a prerequisite to discriminative power. Instead, we find that interpretability is a different quality that must be measured separately to be understood. We repeat the complete rotation (α = 1) on Places365 and ImageNet 10 times, the result is shown in Fig. 8. We observe the drop of interpretability for both of the network, while it drops more for the AlexNet on Places365. It is because originally the interpretability of AlexNet on Places365 is higher than AlexNet on ImageNet thus the random rotation damages more. 3.3  Network Architectures with Supervised Learning  How do different network architectures affect disentangled interpretability of the learned representations? We apply network dissection to evaluate a range of network architectures trained on ImageNet and Places. For simplicity, the following experiments focus on the last convolutional layer of each CNN, where semantic detectors emerge most. Results showing the number of unique detectors that emerge from various network architectures trained on ImageNet and Places are plotted in Fig. 9. In terms of network architecture, we find that interpretability of ResNet > DenseNet > VGG >  6 h:green sky (object)  Places  veined (texture)  orange (color)  h:color yellow lacelike (texture)  ImageNet  red (color)  h:grid pattern perforated (texture)  h:yellow food (material)  h:red woven (texture)  h:yellow banded (texture)  yellow (color)  h:striped sky (object)  h:blue grid (texture)  sky (object)  conv1  h:corrugated tree (object)  h:black&white banded (texture)  h:pink or red lined (texture)  red (color)  h:grass chequered (texture)  h:sky grass (object)  h:bed  h:tree car (object)  h:car  h:pattern crosswalk (part)  h:horiz. lines mountain (scene)  h:orange muzzle (part)  h:animal face wheel (part)  h:blue sky swirly (texture)  h:round cat (object)  h:nosed head (part)  h:face leg (part)  h:mesh dotted (texture)  conv2  h:windows bed (object)  conv3  h:montain  h:wheels  h:animal faces  h:leg  conv5  conv4  Fig. 5. Comparison of the interpretability of all five convolutional layers of AlexNet, as trained on classification tasks for Places (top) and ImageNet (bottom).Four examples of units in each layer are shown with identified semantics. The segmentation generated by each unit is shown on the three Broden images with highest activation. Top-scoring labels are shown above to the left, and human-annotated labels are shown above to the right. Some disagreement can be seen for the dominant judgment of meaning. For example, human annotators mark the first conv4 unit on Places as a ‘windows’ detector, while the algorithm matches the ‘chequered’ texture. Rotation of Representation  20  30  20  10  0  10  rotate 0.4  rotate 0.6  rotate 0.8  rotate 1  Fig. 6. Interpretability over changes in basis of the representation of AlexNet conv5 trained on Places. The vertical axis shows the number of unique interpretable concepts that match a unit in the representation. The horizontal axis shows α, which quantifies the degree of rotation. Baseline (individual units) car (single unit 87)  skyscraper (single unit 94)  Rotate 1 (linear combinations) IoU 0.16 car (combination, closest to unit 173)  IoU 0.16 skyscraper (combination, closest to unit 94)  IoU 0.06  IoU 0.05  tree (single unit 228)  IoU 0.10 tree (combination, closest to unit 228)  IoU 0.02  head (single unit 3)  IoU 0.09 head (combination, closest to unit 70)  IoU 0.02  closet (single unit 107)  IoU 0.06 closet (combination, closest to unit 34)  IoU 0.02  random combination  AlexNet on ImageNet object scene part material texture color  20 15 10 5 0  baseline  random combination  Fig. 8. Complete rotation (α = 1) repeated on AlexNet trained on Places365 and ImageNet respectively. Rotation reduces the interpretability significantly for both of the networks.  350  Number of unique detectors  rotate 0.2  baseline  25  300 250 200  object scene part material texture color  150 100 50 0  R es N en et se 15 N 2-P e R t16 lac es N 1- es D en et Pla 36 se 15 ce 5 N 2-I s3 et 16 ma 65 1 g VG -Im eNe G ag t -P eN la e VG ces t 20 G V G oo G 5 g G H G LeN -Pla ybr id oo c e gL t- es G eN Pla 36 oo e ce 5 gL t-P s3 eN la 65 et ces VG Ima 205 g Al ex G-I eN N ma et et - ge A Pla Ne Al lex ces t ex Ne 3 N t- 65 Al et-P Hyb ex rid l a N e ce Al t-Im s20 ex a 5 N ge et -ra Net nd om  0 baseline  object scene part material texture color  Number of unique detectors  30  AlexNet on Places365  40  Number of unique detectors  object scene part material texture color  D  Number of unique detectors  40  Fig. 9. Interpretability across different architectures trained on ImageNet and Places. Fig. 7. Visualizations of the best single-unit concept detectors of five concepts taken from individual units of AlexNet conv5 trained on Places (left), compared with the best linear-combination detectors of the same concepts taken from the same representation under a random rotation (right). For most concepts, both the IoU and the visualization of the top activating image patches confirm that individual units match concepts better than linear combinations. In other cases, (e.g. head detectors) visualization of a linear combination appears highly consistent, but the IoU reveals lower consistency when evaluated over the whole dataset.  GoogLeNet > AlexNet. Deeper architectures usually appear to allow greater interpretability, though individual layer structure is different across architecture. Comparing training datasets, we find Places > ImageNet. As discussed in [1], one scene is composed of multiple objects, so it may be beneficial for more object detectors to emerge in CNNs trained to recognize scenes.  AlexNet  VGG-16  GoogLeNet  ResNet-152  DenseNet-161  bi ca cy r cl e po ol ca ai tab t rp le la ho ne us m e ot bu or s bi ke be to d ile s t ho ky rs w e at e do r si g bo nk ttl e se ch a ai bo r o co k st w ov ro e a bo tr d ok ack bu cas i m ld e o in tv unt g m ai on n ito tra r sn in ow bi sh rd e la lf sh mp w e in g ep do ra w ss p ba an e pa thtu in b tin g s cu of sh a sk cu ion ys rta cr in a pe pe rs r o ta n ce ble ilin se g pl at a fe nt w nc si ash e de e st wa r ai lk rw a ﬁ y ﬂo eld w pl er at bo e a ch an tre t si de e gn li bo er ar d  units  Densenet (Imagenet) 26  13  Closet 57 objects  do g ca t ca h ai ors r rp e la ne bu s bi rd b m t ed ot ra or in b bo ike tt to le i po wa let ol te ta r bl c e sh ow pe eep r b so m icy n ou cl nt e ho ain u gr se as ro s a pl d ba an th t tu b se bo a ok ch po a tte si ir n tv dpl k m an on t i si st tor w gn ov in b e do oa w rd pa n sh e sn elf ow ro c ﬁe k ta ld ce ble il ﬂo ing w e tre r e te n s t sk fe ofa ys n cr ce a w pe as r he bo r bo pl at ok at si ca e de se w be p alk dc illo lo w th e ea s ra rth ilin g cu sea sh t io n pa l sa m n co ben d m ch pu t w la er ar m dr p ob e  86  43  62 objects  units  Resnet­152 (Imagenet) ca be r d ai bu rp s la w ne at po d er ol og ta bl e m ou ca t pa nta i in n ti gr ng as ro s a bo d o to k ce ile ilin t tra g in bi sk cy y c ho le sk h rse ys ou cr se ap po e tte so r dp fa la n si t n pl k an m bo t ot tt or le bi k bo e at pe tree rs on se a w tra at ck er fa la ll m p te n bi t rd se s at w tove as he si raili r de n w w st a g or ai lk k rw ch sur ay gr andface an e ds lier t cu and rta ch in ﬂ ai w bu ow r in i er do ld in tv wpa g m n on e i br tor id bo ge ok ba ca ll s ea e r sh th el ca f sw s iv sno e el w ch sh air ee pa p l pi m t p ch gr illow o co un un d t t er ca able bi ne ﬁe t si cra ld be gnb dle o dc a lo rd th fe es nc e co w  units  Densenet (Places) 36  18  73 objects  la n tra e in ca bu r b s ho ed us e c m d at ou o nt g a ho in r w se at gr er a bo ss ttl e tre bo e at bu sof ild a in to g il pl et an m ot bi t o po rb rd ol ike ta bl e sk y te nt se po a b tte o dp ok la fe nt bi nce cy pa c in le tin r g pe oad rs cu on rta in si sn nk ow ta bl e w b she in at l do ht f ch wp ub an an e s de sk tai lier ys rw cr ay ap st er ov ro e c tra k ck w ﬁeld si ash de e w r a ch lk a co ir w or ﬂ ur k ow t su e w rfac r at e e br rfal id l be ge n sh ch ee tv rai p m lin on g i m tor irr bo p or ok alm ca se  rp  ai  37  19  61 objects  units  Resnet­152 (Places)  7  0  0  0  0  Fig. 10. Histogram of the object detectors from the ResNet and DenseNet trained on ImageNet and Places respectively.  layer161 unit 1639 IoU=0.225 layer161 unit 2035 IoU=0.199 layer161 unit 1126 IoU=0.076 layer161 unit 1492 IoU=0.282 layer161 unit 1518  IoU=0.205  layer161 unit 1788 IoU=0.201 layer161 unit 2028 IoU=0.113 layer161 unit 1356 IoU=0.067 layer161 unit 1519 IoU=0.155 layer161 unit 1512 IoU=0.125  res5c unit 2011 IoU=0.171 res5c unit 1573 IoU=0.217 res5c unit 264 IoU=0.125 res5c unit 674 IoU=0.265 res5c unit 1243 IoU=0.172  res5c unit 9 IoU=0.161 res5c unit 1718 IoU=0.195 res5c unit 766 IoU=0.094 res5c unit 74 IoU=0.256 res5c unit 963 IoU=0.156  inception_5b unit 758 IoU=0.159 inception_4e unit 750 IoU=0.203 inception_4e unit 56 IoU=0.139 inception_4e unit 824 IoU=0.168 inception_4e unit 92 IoU=0.164  inception_5b unit 235 IoU=0.136 inception_4e unit 225 IoU=0.152 inception_4e unit 714 IoU=0.105 inception_5b unit 603 IoU=0.154 inception_4e unit 759 IoU=0.144  conv5_3 unit 213 IoU=0.125 conv5_3 unit 142 IoU=0.205 conv5_3 unit 85 IoU=0.086 conv5_3 unit 191 IoU=0.153 conv5_3 unit 151 IoU=0.150  conv5_3 unit 107 IoU=0.065 conv5_3 unit 491 IoU=0.112 conv4_3 unit 336 IoU=0.068 conv5_3 unit 20 IoU=0.149 conv5_3 unit 204 IoU=0.077  conv5 unit 235  IoU=0.017 conv5 unit 180  IoU=0.090 conv5 unit 55  IoU=0.087 conv5 unit 10  IoU=0.040 conv5 unit 13  IoU=0.101  conv3 unit 255  IoU=0.015 conv5 unit 250  IoU=0.051 conv5 unit 16  IoU=0.062 conv5 unit 174  IoU=0.029 conv5 unit 28  IoU=0.049  Dog  Plant  Bus Airplane  Fig. 11. Comparison of several visual concept detectors identified by network dissection in DenseNet, ResNet, GoogLeNet, VGG, and AlexNet. Each network is trained on Places365. The two highest-IoU matches among convolutional units of each network is shown. The segmentation generated by each unit is shown on the four maximally activating Broden images. Some units activate on concept generalizations, e.g., GoogLeNet 4e’s unit 225 on horses and dogs, and 759 on white ellipsoids and jets.  8  147  50  13  25 textures 1 color  39 textures 1 color  37  2 colors  units  airplane train car bus bed house cat dog mountain horse water grass bottle tree boat sofa building toilet plant bird motorbike pool table sky tent sea book pottedplant fence bicycle painting road person curtain sink snow table shelf bathtub windowpane chandelier stairway skyscraper stove rock track ﬁeld washer sidewalk chair court ﬂower work surface waterfall bridge bench sheep railing tvmonitor mirror palm bookcase highway closet nursery art gallery skyscraper corridor reception airport terminal cockpit shoe shop attic classroom lighthouse playground bakery-shop youth hostel dining room volleyball court-outdoor jacuzzi-indoor conference room sauna landing deck ofﬁce mountain snowy auditorium alley castle bowling alley laundromat gas station windmill 160 scenes game room subway interior operating room playroom sandbox staircase pantry escalator-indoor ﬁre escape forest-broadleaf parking garage-indoor bathroom carrousel gymnasium-indoor 14 parts badlands cubicle-ofﬁce cemetery butchers shop 4 materials rope bridge dinette-vehicle beauty salon amusement arcade forest-needleleaf street waiting room airplane cabin dolmen golf course bus interior corn ﬁeld ice skating rink-indoor beach poolroom-home elevator-door home theater greenhouse-indoor zen garden gazebo-exterior art studio park theater-indoor procenium martial arts gym coast ﬁeld-cultivated living room bullring slum balcony-interior television studio catwalk water tower ice cream parlor bank vault creek desert-sand  19  21 textures  139  10 textures 1 color  Resnet­152 (Places) 0  9  5  0  1 object 1 scene  8 parts 1 material  creek desert-sand vineyard supermarket kindergarden classroom locker room warehouse-indoor building facade bridge aqueduct pasture river 29 objects ﬂorist shop-indoor waterfall-block car interior-backseat orchard boxing ring music studio crevasse ball pit amusement park archive galley cloister-indoor fountain hayﬁeld lobby topiary garden garage-indoor jewelry shop bar temple-east asia earth ﬁssure amphitheater home ofﬁce desert-vegetation batters box parlor rubble shopfront clothing store kasbah kitchen junkyard bookstore shopping mall-indoor museum-indoor cavern-indoor swimming pool-outdoor natural history museum greenhouse-outdoor dam barn doorway-outdoor apartment building-outdoor medina ﬁeld-wild hot spring mountain campsite ballroom market-outdoor arrival gate-outdoor driveway inn-indoor excavation window seat construction site library-indoor clean room utility room hangar-indoor artists loft basketball court-outdoor football ﬁeld roundabout screen crosswalk body headboard wheel head hair roof shop window coach back pillow balcony torso monitor food tile carpet paper dotted 83 scenes cracked stratiﬁed lined cobwebbed potholed 5 parts chequered 1 material spiralled ﬂecked interlaced zigzagged freckled polka-dotted veined frilly banded striped perforated grooved ﬁbrous grid lacelike scaly porous meshed swirly pleated gauzy 21 textures crystalline crosshatched matted paisley studded pitted bubbly sprinkled bumpy marbled braided red  Resnet­152 continued ...  units  17 objects 1 scene  44  14  Alexnet (Egomotion)  8  8 textures  dog cat grass tree bicycle sea sky water road car painting windowpane mountain motorbike book sidewalk bus mountain snowy wheel hair head ear muzzle arm leg screen food zigzagged dotted chequered banded cobwebbed wafﬂed perforated striped polka-dotted frilly spiralled studded honeycombed grid meshed sprinkled veined porous cracked interlaced crosshatched red yellow  4  4 objects 1 scene 1 part  92  units  0  6  0 sky ceiling grass tree forest-broadleaf head banded lined dotted perforated grid chequered crosshatched spiralled  12  units  bus airplane bed train pool table dog car horse house road boat motorbike tree grass water seat cat shelf ground sea skyscraper stove fence work surface toilet bottle sofa sink building cockpit conference room street closet poolroom-home classroom nursery ball pit highway corridor airport terminal attic bathroom castle art gallery alley dining room ofﬁce kitchen bar mountain snowy living room staircase shoe shop skyscraper lighthouse water tower gazebo-exterior subway interior bowling alley 60 objects bakery-shop waiting room cathedral-indoor landing deck laundromat auditorium gas station crevasse ice skating rink-indoor windmill bus interior pantry greenhouse-indoor amphitheater supermarket casino-indoor utility room cloister-indoor building facade bookstore reception viaduct car interior-backseat rope bridge cubicle-ofﬁce airplane cabin warehouse-indoor gymnasium-indoor bridge park sauna escalator-outdoor badlands pagoda waterfall-fan playroom galley waterfall-block lake-natural apartment building-outdoor jacuzzi-indoor campsite library-indoor kindergarden classroom artists loft bullring carrousel 47 scenes junkyard bow window-outdoor creek hayﬁeld ski slope mountain crosswalk screen head shop window coach food 12 parts potholed paisley 2 materials striped cobwebbed lined sprinkled interlaced studded banded dotted frilly stratiﬁed spiralled woven grooved ﬁbrous meshed crystalline bumpy scaly braided  22  21  Alexnet (Imagenet)  0  72  13 textures  Alexnet (Puzzle Solving)  sky ball pit veined chequered meshed striped dotted perforated studded lacelike frilly cobwebbed red  units 8  2 parts  units  airplane bus car road grass plant windowpane person bed train motorbike horse tree house water pool table table toilet boat mountain dog painting book curtain ﬂower building grandstand bridge railing swimming pool tent signboard chair work surface skyscraper bottle chandelier seat stove shelf track cabinet cushion 44 objects sofa snow waterfall pillow sink sea rock desk sidewalk plate palm ground sky 13 scenes swivel chair ﬂoor fence ceiling ball pit skyscraper mountain snowy bakery-shop laundromat closet cockpit shoe shop corridor 13 parts conference room 1 material castle forest-needleleaf ﬁeld-cultivated windmill staircase classroom escalator-indoor playground pantry ofﬁce bowling alley cemetery desert-sand highway street amusement park lighthouse creek nursery corn ﬁeld 20 textures wheat ﬁeld 1 colorshopping mall-indoor attic cavern-indoor youth hostel sandbox bar reception childs room casino-indoor bookstore pagoda gymnasium-indoor waterfall-fan slum art gallery butchers shop hair wheel drawer screen head crosswalk roof balcony seat cushion pot shop window hand carpet food chequered striped wafﬂed meshed paisley dotted banded swirly cracked stratiﬁed lined polka-dotted perforated grid sprinkled lacelike ﬁbrous interlaced frilly spiralled potholed woven freckled studded veined red  4  9  5  0  5 objects 1 scene  units  car grass airplane mountain painting tree ceiling dog bus road pool table water horse skyscraper plant motorbike cat bed sea track sink ﬁeld stairway shelf work surface building house waterfall ground sidewalk book chair 32 objects sky windowpane ﬂoor toilet person railing 6 scenes washer signboard table ﬂower chandelier bird 6 parts ball pit skyscraper 2 materials mountain snowy closet swimming pool-outdoor stadium-baseball coast corridor auditorium creek highway conference room jacuzzi-indoor hair head screen wheel roof headboard crosswalk seat cushion drawer leg arm body shop window food 25 textures chequered 1 color perforated striped grid spiralled dotted swirly lined meshed studded paisley banded polka-dotted cobwebbed grooved stratiﬁed porous honeycombed woven interlaced red  0  units car tree grass sea mountain highway head hair banded lined chequered studded zigzagged striped perforated ﬂecked grid cracked meshed gauzy dotted  units  10  35  Alexnet (Ambient Sound)  Googlenet (Places)  5  7 colors  VGG­16 (Places)  0  17 textures  AlexNet­GAPWide (Places) 6  5 scenes  water grass tree car plant windowpane road mountain airplane skyscraper dog sea ceiling building person horse bed track book pool table cabinet chair painting waterfall sidewalk sink shelf sky house stove ﬂoor bus mountain snowy ball pit pantry building facade skyscraper street hair wheel head screen crosswalk shop window food wood lined dotted banded studded grid honeycombed paisley zigzagged wafﬂed meshed cracked stratiﬁed chequered perforated sprinkled potholed grooved pleated matted freckled swirly spiralled woven ﬁbrous cobwebbed red  Alexnet (Places) 3  6 objects  0  20  grass road sky water tree dog ball pit forest-broadleaf mountain snowy building facade highway chequered lined banded porous lacelike veined grid frilly ﬂecked perforated cracked stratiﬁed potholed freckled studded woven polka-dotted purple orange red yellow blue pink green  10  units 0  Fig. 12. Comparison of unique detectors of all types on a variety of architectures. More results are at the project page.  Alexnet (Video Tracking)  61 objects  279  9  20  10  60  40  20  0  80  2 nv  co  3 nv co  4  nv  co  nv  co  5  nv  co  3-3  co  nv  4-3  co  5-1  nv  -2  v5  n co  60 40 20 0 c e a 2 b b -s2 n-4 n-4 n-5 n-5 n-3 orm x7 tio tio tio tio tio 2-n ep ep ep ep ep nv inc inc inc inc inc co  -3  v5  n co  c  ResNet152 on Places365  200  object scene part material texture color  100  0  1  nv  co  GoogLeNet on Places365  120  object scene part material texture color  Number of unique detectors  Number of unique detectors  Number of unique detectors  30  VGG16 on Places365  80  object scene part material texture color  Number of unique detectors  AlexNet on Places365  40  object scene part material texture color  150  100  50  0  -1  BN  -7 v1 on  16  -1 ise  w Elt  8  -23 ise  8  5 e-3  wis Elt  w Elt  8  7 e-4  wis  Elt  Elt  10 e-5 wis  10  5  0  80  1  10  0  2 nv  co  3 nv co  4  nv  co  nv  co  5  nv  co  3-3  co  nv  4-3  co  5-1  nv  -  v5  n co  object scene part material texture color 2  -3  40  scene part material texture color  80  60  colorization tracking 0.091 dotted (texture) 40  10  0.140 chequered (texture) 0.167  20  0.063 perforated (texture) 0.085 head (part)  0 a e c 2 2 b b 7-s n-5 n-4 n-4 n-5 n-3 orm tio tio tio tio tio -7x 2-n ep ep ep ep ep v1 nv n inc inc inc inc inc co co  head (part)  0.061 sky (object)  0.056 grass (object)  0  -1  16  BN  0.069 sky (object)  Elt  e-1 wis  8  Elt  3 e-2 wis  0.120  58 78 10 e-3 e-4 e-5 wis wis wis Elt Elt Elt  0.048 red-c (color)  0.100  20  la c et es -Im 36 ag 5 eN e t ob rac t je kin ct ce g nt r tra ic ns in v au di o m co ovi n lo riz g at io n p cr os uz sc zle ha eg nn om el ot io co n nt f r e a Al ex me xt or N e co t-r der nt an ex do te m nc od er  et -P  N  N  ex  Fig. 15. The top ranked concepts in the three top categories in four selfsupervised networks. Some object and part detectors emerge in audio. Detectors for person heads also appear in puzzle and colorization. A variety of texture concepts dominate models with self-supervised training.  Al  ex Al  puzzle  20  car (object)  v5  n co  scene part material texture color  chequered (texture) 0.102 head (part)  0  Fig. 14. Semantic detectors emerge across different supervision of the primary training task. All these models use the AlexNet architecture and are tested at conv5.  Fig. 10 shows the histogram of object detectors identified inside ResNet and DenseNet trained on ImageNet and Places respectively. DenseNet161-Places365 has the largest number of unique object detectors among all the networks. The emergent detectors differ across both training data source and architecture. The most frequent object detectors in the two networks trained on ImageNet are dog detectors, because there are more than 100 dog categories out of the 1000 classes in the ImageNet training set. Fig. 11 shows the examples of object detectors grouped by object categories. For the same object category, the visual appearance of the unit as detector varies not only within the same network but also across different networks. DenseNet and ResNet has such good detectors for bus and airplane with IoU > 0.25. Fig. 12 showcases the unique interpretable units of all types on a variety of networks. Fig. 13 shows the unique interpretable detectors over different layers for different network architectures trained on Places365. We observe that more object and scene detectors emerge at the higher layers across all architectures: AlexNet, VGG, GoogLeNet, and ResNet. This suggests that representation ability increases over layer depth. Because of the compositional structure of the CNN layers, the deeper layers should have higher capacity to represent concepts with larger visual complexity such as objects and scene parts. Our measurements confirm this, and we conclude that higher network depth encourages the emergence of visual concepts with higher semantic complexity. 3.4  40  audio 30  20  60  nv  co  30  50  Number of unique detectors  100  scene part material texture color  40  Number of unique detectors  15  Number of unique detectors  scene part material texture color  20  Number of unique detectors  Number of unique detectors  AlexNet on ImageNet VGG16 on ImageNet GoogLeNet on ImageNet ResNet152 on ImageNet Fig. and ResNet152 trained on Places365. All five conv layers of 25 13. Comparison of interpretability of 50 the layers for AlexNet, VGG16, GoogLeNet, 100 60 object the selected layers of VGG, GoogLeNet, object object object AlexNet and and ResNet are included.  CNNs to predict the neighborhoods of two image patches, while [28] trains networks by colorizing images. Totally we investigate 12 networks trained for different self-supervised learning tasks. How do different supervisions affect those internal representations? Here we compare the interpretability of the deep visual representations resulting from self-supervised learning and supervised learning. We keep the network architecture the same as AlexNet for each model (one exception is the recent model transinv which uses VGG as the base network). Results are shown in Fig. 14. We observe that training on Places365 creates the largest number of unique detectors. Self-supervised models create many texture detectors but relatively few object detectors; apparently, supervision from a self-taught primary task is much weaker at inferring interpretable concepts than supervised training on a large annotated dataset. The form of self-supervision makes a difference: for example, the colorization model is trained on colorless images, and almost no color detection units emerge. We hypothesize that emergent units represent concepts required to solve the primary task. Fig. 15 shows some typical visual detectors identified in the self-supervised CNN models. For the models audio and puzzle, some object and part detectors emerge. Those detectors may be useful for CNNs to solve the primary tasks: the audio model is trained to associate objects with a sound source, so it may be useful to recognize people and cars; while the puzzle model is trained to align the different parts of objects and scenes in an image. For colorization and tracking, recognizing textures might be good enough for the CNN to solve primary tasks such as colorizing a desaturated natural image; thus it is unsurprising that the texture detectors dominate.  Representations from Self-supervised Learning  Recently many work have explored a novel paradigm for unsupervised learning of CNNs without using millions of annotated images, namely self-supervised learning. For example, [23] trains deep  3.5  Representations from Captioning Images  To further compare the representations from supervised learning and self-supervised learning, we train a CNN from scratch using  10 COCO captioning dataset:  AlexNet on Places205 Number of unique detectors  Train from Scratch  40 30 20  object scene part material texture color  10 0 10 0  10 2  10 4  10 6  10 4  10 6  Validation accuracy  0.6  Fig. 16. Example images in the COCO captioning dataset, the CNN+LSTM image captioning model, and the network dissection result. Training ResNet18 from scratch using the supervision from captioning images leads to a lot of emergent object detectors. Number of unique detectors  100  object scene part material texture color  80 60  200  Number of detectors object scene part material texture color  150 100  0.4  0.2  0 10 0  10 2  Training iteration  Fig. 18. The evolution of the interpretability of conv5 of Places205AlexNet over 3,000,000 training iterations. The accuracy on the validation at each iteration is also plotted. The baseline model is trained to 300,000 iterations (marked at the red line).  40 50  20 0  ba se lin re e pe at re 1 pe at re 2 pe N oD at3 ro Ba po u tc hN t or m  ba  se lin e re pe at 1 re pe at 2 re pe a N oD t3 ro Ba pou t tc hN or m  0  Fig. 17. Effect of regularizations on the interpretability of CNNs.  the supervision of captioning images, which generates natural language sentence to describe the image contents. Specially we use the image captioning data from COCO dataset [50], where the images in COCO dataset are annotated with five image captions. Then we train a CNN plus LSTM as the image captioning model similar to [51]. Features of ResNet18 are used as input to the LSTM for generating image captions. The CNN+LSTM architecture and the network dissection results on the last convolutional layer of the ResNet18 are shown in Fig.16. We can see that many object detectors emerge in the CNN, and conclude that supervision from natural language captions contains high-level semantics to train the CNN. 3.6  Training Conditions  Training conditions such as the number of training iterations, dropout [6], batch normalization [7], and random initialization [21], are known to affect the representation learning of neural networks. To analyze the effect of training conditions on interpretability, we take the Places205-AlexNet as the baseline model and prepare several variants of it, all using the same AlexNet architecture. For the variants Repeat1, Repeat2 and Repeat3, we randomly initialize the weights and train them with the same number of iterations. For the variant NoDropout, we remove the dropout in the FC layers of the baseline model. For the variant BatchNorm, we apply batch normalization at each convolutional layer of the baseline model. Repeat1, Repeat2, Repeat3 all have nearly the same top-1 accuracy 50.0% on the validation set. The variant without dropout has top-1 accuracy 49.2%. The variant with batch norm has top-1 accuracy 50.5%.  Fig. 17 shows the interpretability of units in the CNNs over different training conditions. We find several effects: 1) Comparing different random initializations, the models converge to similar levels of interpretability, both in terms of the unique detector number and the total detector number; this matches observations of convergent learning discussed in [21]. 2) For the network without dropout, more texture detectors emerge but fewer object detectors. 3) Batch normalization seems to decrease interpretability significantly. The batch normalization result serves as a caution that discriminative power is not the only property of a representation that should be measured. Our intuition for the loss of interpretability under batch normalization is that the batch normalization ‘whitens’ the activation at each layer, which smooths out scaling issues and allows a network to easily rotate axes of intermediate representations during training. While whitening apparently speeds training, it may also have an effect similar to random rotations analyzed in Sec. 3.2 which destroy interpretability. As discussed in Sec. 3.2, however, interpretability is neither a prerequisite nor an obstacle to discriminative power. Finding ways to capture the benefits of batch normalization without destroying interpretability is an important area for future work. Fig. 18 plots the interpretability of snapshots of the baseline model at different training iterations along with the accuracy on the validation set. We can see that object detectors and part detectors begin emerging at about 10,000 iterations (each iteration processes a batch of 256 images). We do not find evidence of transitions across different concept categories during training. For example, units in conv5 do not turn into texture or material detectors before becoming object or part detectors. In Fig. 19, we keep track of six units over different training iteration. We observe that some units start converging to the semantic concept at early stage. For example, unit138 starts detecting mountain snowy as early as at iteration 2446. We also observe that units evolve over time: unit74 and unit108 detect road first before they start detecting car and airplane respectively.  11  Fig. 19. The interpretations of units change over iterations. Each row shows the interpretation of one unit.  Fine-tuning a pre-trained network to a target domain is commonly used in transfer learning. The deep features from the pre-trained network show good generalization across different domains. The pre-trained network also makes the training converge faster and results in better accuracy, especially if there is not enough training data at the target domain. Here we analyze what happens inside the representation and how the interpretation of the internal units evolve during the transfer learning. We run two sets of experiments: fine-tuning Places-AlexNet to ImageNet and fine-tuning ImageNet-AlexNet to Places. We want to see how individual units mutate across domains. The interpretability results of the model checkpoints at different fine-tuning iteration are plotted in Fig. 20. We can see that the training indeed converges faster compared to the network trained from scratch on Places in Fig. 18. The interpretations of the units also change over finetuning. For example, the number of unique object detectors first drop then keep increasing for the network trained on ImageNet being fine-tuned to Places365, while it is slowly dropping for the network trained on Places being fine-tuned to ImageNet. Fig. 21 shows some examples of the individual unit evolution happening in the network trained from ImageNet to Places365 and the network trained from Places365 to ImageNet. For each network, we show six units with their interpretation at the beginning of finetuning and at the end of fine-tuning. For example, in the network fine-tuned from ImageNet to Places365, unit15 which detects the white dogs first, mutates to detect waterfall; unit136 and unit144 which detect dogs first, mutate to detect horse and cow respectively, as a lot of scene categories in Places such as pasture and corral contain such animals. On the other hand, in the network fine-tuned from Places365 to ImageNet, a lot of units mutate to various kinds of dog detectors. Interestingly though those units mutate to detect different concepts, those concepts share low-level similarity such as colors and textures. In Fig. 22, we zoom into two units from each of the two finetuning processes and plot the history of concept evolution. We can see that some units switch its top ranked label several times before converging to some concept: unit15 in the fine-tuning of ImageNet to Places365 flipped to white, crystalline, before reaches the waterfall concept. On the other hand, some units switch faster, for example unit132 in the fine-tuning of Places365 to ImageNet switches from hair to dog at early stage of fine-tuning. 3.8  Layer Width vs. Interpretability  From AlexNet to ResNet, CNNs for visual recognition have grown deeper in the quest for higher classification accuracy. Depth has been shown to be important to high discrimination ability, and we have seen in Sec. 3.3 that interpretability can increase with depth as well. However, the width of layers (the number of units per  Number of unique detectors  Transfer Learning between Places and ImageNet  Validation accuracy  3.7  Places365 to ImageNet  50  ImageNet to Places365  40 object scene part material 30 texture color  40 30  20  20 10  10 0 10 0  10 2  10 4  10 6  0 10 0  0.6  0.6  0.4  0.4  0.2  0.2  0 0 10  10  2  10  4  10  6  10 2  0 0 10  10  Training iteration  2  10 4  10  4  10 6  10  6  Training iteration  Fig. 20. a) Fine-tune AlexNet from ImageNet to Places365. b) Fine-tune AlexNet from Places365 to ImageNet.  ImageNet to Places365 Before  After  Places365 to ImageNet Before  After  Fig. 21. Units mutate from a) the network fine-tuned from ImageNet to Places365 and b) the network fine-tuned from Places365 to ImageNet. Six units are shown with their semantics at the beginning of the finetuning and at the end of the fine-tuning.  layer) has been less explored. One reason is that increasing the number of convolutional units in a layer significantly increases computational cost while yielding only marginal improvements in classification accuracy. Nevertheless, some recent work [52] shows that a carefully designed wide residual network can achieve classification accuracy superior to the commonly used thin and deep counterparts. To explore how the width of layers affects interpretability of CNNs, we do a preliminary experiment to test how width affects emergence of interpretable detectors. We remove the FC layers of the AlexNet, then triple the number of units at the conv5, i.e., from 256 units to 768 units, as AlexNet-GAP-Wide. We further triple the number of units for all the previous conv layers except conv1 for the standard AlexNet, as AlexNet-GAP-WideAll. Finally we put a global average pooling layer after conv5 and fully connect the  12 ImageNet to Places365 before  before  after  unit15  after  unit100  Places365 to ImageNet after  before  before  after  unit132  unit31  Fig. 22. The history of one unit mutation during the fine-tuning from ImageNet to Places365 (top) and Places365 to ImageNet (low).  Number of unique detectors  140 object scene part material texture color  120 100 80 60 40  3.10  20  AlexNet  AlexNet-GAP-Wide  nv 1 nv 2 co nv 3 co nv 4 co nv 5 co  co  v3 nv 4 co nv 5 co  v2  co n  v1  co n  co n  co  co  nv 1 nv 2 co nv 3 co nv 4 co nv 5  0  AlexNet-GAP-WideAll  Fig. 23. Comparison of the standard AlexNet, AlexNet-GAP-Wide, and AlexNet-GAP-WideAll. Widening the layer brings the emergence of more detectors. Networks are trained on Places365.  pooled 768-feature activations to the final class prediction. After training on Places365, the AlexNet-GAP-Wide and the AlexNet-GAP-WideAll obtain similar classification accuracy on the validation set as the standard AlexNet (∼ 0.5% top1 accuracy lower and higher), but it has many more emergent unique concept detectors at conv5 for AlexNet-GAP-Wide and at all the conv layers for AlexNet-GAL-WideAll, as shown in Fig. 23. We have also increased the number of units to 1024 and 2048 at conv5, but the number of unique concepts does not significantly increase further. This may indicate a limit on the capacity of AlexNet to separate explanatory factors; or it may indicate that a limit on the number of disentangled concepts that are helpful to solve the primary task of scene classification. 3.9  the performance on the test split. We compute the classification accuracy averaged across classes. We include the event8 [53], action40 [54], indoor67 [55], sun397 [56], caltech101 [57], and caltech256 [58]. The classification accuracies on six image datasets using the deep features are plotted in Fig. 24. We can see that the deep features from supervised trained networks perform much better than the ones from the self-supervised trained networks. Networks trained on Places have better features for scene-centric datasets such as sun397 and indoor67, while networks trained on ImageNet have better features for object-centric datasets such as caltech101 and action40. Fig. 25 plots the number of the unique object detectors for each representation over that representation’s classification accuracy on three selected datasets. We can see there is positive correlation between them. Thus the supervision tasks that encourage the emergence of more concept detectors may also improve the discrimination ability of deep features. Interestingly, on some of the object centric dataset, the best discriminative representation is the representation from ResNet152-ImageNet, which has fewer unique object detectors compared to the ResNet152-Places365. We hypothesize that the accuracy on a representation when applied to a task is dependent not only on the number of concept detectors in the representation, but on how well the concept detectors captures the characteristics of the hidden factors in the transferred dataset.  Discrimination vs. Interpretability  Activations from the higher layers of pre-trained CNNs are often used as generic visual features (noted as deep features), generalizing very well to other image datasets [16], [43]. It is interesting to bridge the generalization of the deep visual representation as generic visual features with their interpretability. Here we first benchmark the deep features from several networks on six image classification datasets for their discriminative power. For each network, we feed in the images and extract the activation at the last convolutional layer as the visual feature, then train a linear SVM with C = 0.001 on the train split and evaluate  Explaining the Predictions for the Deep Features  After we interpret the units inside the deep visual representation, we show that the unit activation along with the interpreted label can be used to explain the prediction given by the deep features. Previous work [59] uses the weighted sum of the unit activation maps to highlight which image regions are most informative to the prediction, here we further decouple at individual unit level to segment the informative image regions. We first plot the Class-specific units. After the linear SVM is trained, we can rank the elements of the feature according to their SVM weights to obtain the elements of the deep features which contribute most to that class. Those elements are units that act as explanatory factors, and we call those top ranked units associated with each output class class-specific units. Fig. 27 shows the classspecific units of ResNet152-ImageNet and ResNet152-Places365 for one class from action40 and sun397 respectively. For example, for the Walking the dog class from action40, the top three classspecific units from ResNet152-ImageNet are two dog detection unit and one person detection unit; for the Picnic area class from sun397, the top three class-specific units from ResNet152-Places365 are plant detection unit, grass detection unit, and fence detection unit. The intuitive match between visual detectors and the classes they explain suggests that visual detectors from CNNs behave as the bag-of-semantic-words visual features. We further use the individual units identified as concept detectors to build an explanation of the individual image prediction given by a classifier. The procedure is as follows: Given any image, let the unit activation of the deep feature (for ResNet the GAP activation) be [x1 , x2 , ..., xN ], where each xn represents the value summed up from the activation map P of unit n. Let the top prediction’s SVM response be s = n wn xn , where [w1 , w2 , ..., wN ] is the SVM’s learned weight. We get the top ranked units in Figure 26 by ranking [w1 x1 , w2 x2 , ..., wN xN ], which are the unit activations weighted by the SVM weight for the  event8 0.973 0.966 0.963 0.955 0.946 0.933 0.928 0.927 0.923 0.920 0.918 0.916 0.904 0.904 0.897 0.875 0.852 0.838 0.836 0.829 0.825 0.806 0.782 0.739 0.688 0.621 0.551  0.5  0.766 0.748 0.708 0.691 0.691 0.674 0.563 0.555 0.555 0.527 0.527 0.520 0.498 0.492 0.485 0.484 0.353 0.351 0.347 0.346 0.329 0.299 0.271 0.241 0.208 0.187 0.177  1  Accuracy  Accuracy  1  13  action40  0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0  R  es R Net es 1 N 52 e R es t50 Ima -Im g N e et 15 VG ag Ne e t 2 VG -P G-H Ne G la t o G og VG G-I ce ybr oo Le G m s3 id gL N -P ag 65 e l e Al ex eNe t-Imace Ne N V t-P a s3 t et G l ge 6 -P G ac N 5 Al la -P e e ex ce la s3 t N s3 ce 65 e G Al Al t-P 65- s20 oo ex ex la G 5 gL N Ne ce AP s e Al Al eN t-I t-H 20 ex ex et ma yb 5 N N -P g rid et et la eN -P -P ce e la la s2 t ce ce 0 s2 s3 5 05 65 -B co cr lo au N os riz d sc at io ha ion tr nn ob ack el je co ing ct nt ce ex n t eg p tric om uz ot zle Al ex fra m ion N m ov et eo in -ra rd g nd er om R es R Ne G esNt15 o 2 R og et5 -Im es Le 0 a N N -Im ge et et a N 15 -I g e 2- ma eN t Pl ge e t a VG VG ce Ne s t G VG - G-H 36 G 5 oo G Im y gL VG -P ag bri eN G la eN d G et -Places et oo gL Ale -Pl ce 20 a A A eN xN ce s3 5 Al lex lex et- et- s3 65 ex Ne N Pl Hy 65 N t-P et- ac br et l Im es id Al Pla ace ag 205 e c s e Al xN es 20 Ne ex et 36 5- t N -P 5- BN et la G -P ce A la s3 P ce 6 s 5 co co 20 lo n 5 riz te cr at xt os io sc au n ha di tra nn o c el ob je p king c u eg tce zzl n e Al ex om tric N m oti et o - o n fra ran vin m do g eo m rd er  0  indoor67  0.4  Accuracy  0.6  1 0.8 0.6 0.4  0.2  0.2  0  0  R es R Net e 1 G 15 oo sNe 52 Accuracy gL t5 -Im VG2-P eN 0-I ag l G ac G et ma eN -P es oo -Im g e R e t es G gL VG VGlac 36 oo e G G es 5 VG VG ag Ne N 0.690 et G G eN t R gL Ne -P -H 36 es e t- la y 5 Al 15 -I -H e 0.666 N P b ex 2- m y t Al ReNet et- lacces rid N Pl ag bri 0.657 ex s 15 P e 20 e a Al Al t-Im ce eN d N Ne 2- lac s3 5 0.655 ex ex a s3 et et t5 Im e 65 A -P 0 a s2 A N le le e Ne ge 65 0.649 G la -Im ge 05 xN xN t-P t-H Ne Al oog V ces ag Ne 0.629 et et la yb t ex L GG 36 e t -P -P ce ri 0.605 N eN - 5- Ne la la s3 d e I ce ce 6 0.597 Al t-P et-I ma GA t s2 s2 5 ex la m ge P 05 05 a 0.515 Al N ce g N A e ex et s2 eN t co co -BN l e 0.513 N P 05 e xN cr lo n et la - t et VG os riz tex 0.513 Al Al -P ce BN -P G sc at t ex ex la s2 la -P ha ion 0.472 N Ne ce 05 ce la n et t- s3 0.460 s3 ce ne -Im H 6 VG 65 s3 l ag ybr 5 G 0.454 -G 65 oo eN id cr G A gL 0.447 os co e eN Pla puz P sc nt t G 0.381 c ha ex es zle e oo t t n 20 P gL Number of unique nobject detectors 0.287 e eN lac au 5 co tra aud l 0.271 es di et lo ck io -P tr 36 o 0.268 r i ob lacack 5 ob izat ng 0.250 je es ing je p ion ct 2 ct u 0.250 ce 05 c z Al ego ent zle n 0.208 ex m ric eg mo tric o A N m ti om vi 0.188 l f et e r xN am o ng -ra ov on 0.160 fra n in et eo tion -ra rd m do g 0.142 eo m nd er rd 0.105 om er 0.102 R es R es G N o e R Ne G ogL t15 oo e 2 G es t15 oo Ne 2 Accuracy gL Ne -Pl gL t5 Im eN t-P ac eN 0- ag e l es I et ma eN VG t-P ace 36 R 5 l g e I m es eN t VGG- aces20 a V 0.827 V N G G g e R G Pla s365 e e t -P ce 5 R esN 0.809 Al t15 G- G-H Ne Al es e V la s ex 2- Im y t ex N t5 G ce 20 0.782 N Pl ag br N et1 0- G s3 5 et 5 Im -H 6 Al et-I ace eN id 0.766 - 2 m e e y 5 s3 t Al x a V G Pla -Im age bri 0.754 N g 65 ex G o e e N V G t- N Al og V ces ag Ne d 0.732 et G -P H e G ex L G 36 eN t t Gunique la yb object N eN -I 5- e Number detectors 0.585 Al -Plof e t e ac -P ce rid Al t-P et-I ma GA 0.571 G Al xN es lac s36 e l m g P oo ex et 36 es 5 Al xN ace ag eN Al g N -P 5 2 0.519 ex et s2 eN et e L e l - 0 N -P 05 e 0.515 G xN eN t-P ace GA 5 e la t oo et et la s P Al Al t-P ce -BN 0.494 gL -P -P ce 20 ex ex lac s2 eN lac lac s3 5 0.493 N Ne es 05 et t- 3 et es2 es3 65 -Im H 6 -P 0 6 0.489 la 5- 5 a yb 5 ce B 0.483 cr geNrid cr s2 N os co e 0.476 os co 0 sc nt t 5 co sch nte 0.433 ha ex lo an xt nn t co 0.387 riz n lo au el at el riz d 0.380 io a n a tr ti io tr u 0.377 ob ack on ob ack dio 0.343 je p ing je p ing c u c u 0.322 eg tce zzl eg tce zz om ntr e om ntr le 0.319 ic ic A Al o 0.255 le fra m otio ex fra m tio xN m o n N m ov n 0.229 et eo vin et eo in -ra rd g -ra rd g 0.221 nd er nd er om om 0.190 0.148  Accuracy  1 0.8  0.827 0.797 0.792 0.788 0.785 0.768 0.756 0.750 0.674 0.672 0.664 0.615 0.607 0.580 0.574 0.510 0.430 0.424 0.402 0.392 0.362 0.339 0.335 0.285 0.259 0.206 0.178  0.934 0.926 0.919 0.918 0.889 0.862 0.861 0.854 0.798 0.785 0.750 0.743 0.737 0.728 0.713 0.704 0.678 0.669 0.650 0.649 0.622 0.576 0.546 0.517 0.511 0.466 0.343  caltech101  sun397  caltech256  0.8  1  0.8  0.6  0.6  0.4  80  0  60  AlexNet-Places365-GAP  et  20  frameorder AlexNet-random  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  VGG-Places365  VGG-Hybrid  AlexNet-Places365  AlexNet-Places205  0  objectcentric tracking puzzle moving audio crosschannel frameorder context 0 egomotion colorization AlexNet-random  0.1  ResNet152-Places365  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  60 40 20  VGG-Hybrid  AlexNet-Places365-GAP AlexNet-Places365 AlexNet-Hybrid  VGG-Places205 VGG-Places365  VGG-ImageNet GoogLeNet-Places365 GoogLeNet-Places205 GoogLeNet-ImageNet  AlexNet-Places205  AlexNet-ImageNet  audio tracking moving crosschannel colorization frameorder puzzle context 0 AlexNet-random egomotion 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 objectcentric  AlexNet-Places205-BN  Accuracy on indoor67  0.8  1  0.7  0 0.3  0.8  ResNet50-ImageNet  60  VGG-ImageNet GoogLeNet-Places365 GoogLeNet-Places205 GoogLeNet-ImageNet AlexNet-Places205  AlexNet-Places365-GAP AlexNet-Places365  40  AlexNet-Hybrid  AlexNet-ImageNet objectcentric tracking puzzle moving audio crosschannel frameorder context 0 AlexNet-random egomotion colorization  20  0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  Accuracy on sun397  AlexNet-Places205-BN  0.5  0.6  VGG-Hybrid  VGG-ImageNet  AlexNet-Places365-GAP GoogLeNet-ImageNet AlexNet-Places365 AlexNet-Places205 AlexNet-Hybrid  AlexNet-Places205-BN  objectcentric tracking audio puzzle crosschannel context egomotion colorization frameorder  AlexNet-ImageNet  moving  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  Accuracy on caltech101  100  ResNet152-ImageNet VGG-Places205 VGG-Hybrid VGG-Places365  80  ResNet50-ImageNet ResNet152-ImageNet  GoogLeNet-Places365  GoogLeNet-Places205  20  ResNet152-Places365  100  Number of unique object detectors  Number of unique object detectors  80  ResNet152-ImageNet  ResNet50-ImageNet  40  AlexNet-random  Fig. 24. The classification accuracy datasets. Accuracy on event8 of deep features on the six image Accuracy on action40 100  60  AlexNet-Places205-BN AlexNet-ImageNet  20  ResNet152-Places365  VGG-Places205  80  VGG-Places365  GoogLeNet-Places365 VGG-ImageNet GoogLeNet-Places205 GoogLeNet-ImageNet AlexNet-Hybrid  AlexNet-Places365-GAP  40  1  ResNet152-ImageNet  VGG-Places205  VGG-ImageNet  GoogLeNet-ImageNet AlexNet-Places365 AlexNet-Places205 AlexNet-Hybrid AlexNet-Places205-BN AlexNet-ImageNet objectcentric tracking moving puzzle audio crosschannel colorization egomotion context  100  ResNet152-Places365  0.2ResNet50-ImageNet  60  GoogLeNet-Places365  GoogLeNet-Places205  40  0 0.5  0.4  100  ResNet50-ImageNet VGG-Places205 ResNet152-ImageNet 80 VGG-Hybrid VGG-Places365  es N  Number of unique object detectors R  0.2  Number of unique object detectors  ResNet152-Places365  100  VGG-Places205  80  VGG-Places365  40 20  0.7  1  ResNet152-Places365 ResNet50-ImageNet  60  0.9  VGG-ImageNet  AlexNet-Places365-GAP GoogLeNet-Places205 AlexNet-Places365  AlexNet-Places205 AlexNet-Places205-BN  ResNet152-ImageNet  VGG-Hybrid  GoogLeNet-Places365 GoogLeNet-ImageNet AlexNet-Hybrid  objectcentric AlexNet-ImageNet tracking moving audio crosschannel frameorder context puzzle 0 egomotion colorization 0 AlexNet-random 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8  Accuracy on caltech256  1  Fig. 25. The number of unique object detectors in the last convolutional layer compared to each representations classification accuracy on three datasets. Supervised (in red) and unsupervised (in green) representations clearly form two clusters.  top predicted class. Then we simply upsample the activation map of the top ranked unit to segment the image. Image segmentations using individual unit activation are plotted in Fig. 26a. The unit segmentation explain the prediction explicitly. For example, the prediction for the first image is Gardening, and the explanatory units detect plant, grass, person, flower, and pot. The prediction for the second image is Riding a horse, the explanatory units detect horse, fence and dog. We also plot some incorrectly predicted samples in Figure 26b. The segmentation gives the intuition as to why the classifier made mistakes. For example, for the first image the classifier predicts cutting vegetables rather than the true label gardening, because the second unit incorrectly  considers the ground as table.  4  C ONCLUSION  Network Dissection translates qualitative visualizations of representation units into quantitative interpretations and measurements of interpretability. We have found that the units of a deep representation are significantly more interpretable than expected for a basis of the representation space. We have investigated the interpretability of deep visual representations resulting from different architectures, training supervisions, and training conditions. Furthermore, we have shown that interpretability of deep visual representations is  14  relevant to the power of the representation as a generalizable visual feature. We conclude that interpretability is an important property of deep neural networks that provides new insights into their hierarchical structure. Our work motivates future work towards building more interpretable and explainable AI systems.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was partially funded by DARPA XAI program to A.T.; This work was also partly supported by the National Science Foundation under Grants No. 1524817 to A.T., and No. 1532591 to A.T. and A.O.; the Vannevar Bush Faculty Fellowship program sponsored by the Basic Research Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and funded by the Office of Naval Research through grant N00014-16-1-3116 to A.O.; the MIT Big Data Initiative at CSAIL, the Toyota Research Institute MIT CSAIL Joint Research Center, Google and Amazon Awards, and a hardware donation from NVIDIA Corporation. B.Z. is supported by a Facebook Fellowship.  R EFERENCES B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Object detectors emerge in deep scene cnns,” International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015. [2] A. Gonzalez-Garcia, D. Modolo, and V. Ferrari, “Do semantic parts emerge in convolutional neural networks?” arXiv:1607.03738, 2016. [3] C. Vondrick, H. Pirsiavash, and A. Torralba, “Generating videos with scene dynamics,” arXiv:1609.02612, 2016. [4] Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent, “Representation learning: A review and new perspectives,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1798–1828, 2013. [5] D. Bau, B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Network dissection: Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations,” in Proc. CVPR, 2017. [6] N. Srivastava, G. E. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting.” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1929–1958, 2014. [7] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” arXiv:1502.03167, 2015. [8] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks,” Proc. ECCV, 2014. [9] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and J. Malik, “Region-based convolutional networks for accurate object detection and segmentation,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 2016. [10] A. Mahendran and A. Vedaldi, “Understanding deep image representations by inverting them,” Proc. CVPR, 2015. [1]  [11] K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising image classification models and saliency maps,” International Conference on Learning Representations Workshop, 2014. [12] A. Mahendran and A. Vedaldi, “Understanding deep image representations by inverting them,” in Proc. CVPR, 2015. [13] A. Dosovitskiy and T. Brox, “Generating images with perceptual similarity metrics based on deep networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016, pp. 658–666. [14] A. Nguyen, A. Dosovitskiy, J. Yosinski, T. Brox, and J. Clune, “Synthesizing the preferred inputs for neurons in neural networks via deep generator networks,” In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016. [15] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in Proc. CVPR, 2016. [16] A. S. Razavian, H. Azizpour, J. Sullivan, and S. Carlsson, “Cnn features off-the-shelf: an astounding baseline for recognition,” arXiv:1403.6382, 2014. [17] P. Agrawal, R. Girshick, and J. Malik, “Analyzing the performance of multilayer neural networks for object recognition,” Proc. ECCV, 2014. [18] J. Yosinski, J. Clune, Y. Bengio, and H. Lipson, “How transferable are features in deep neural networks?” In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2014. [19] C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. Goodfellow, and R. Fergus, “Intriguing properties of neural networks,” arXiv:1312.6199, 2013. [20] A. Nguyen, J. Yosinski, and J. Clune, “Deep neural networks are easily fooled: High confidence predictions for unrecognizable images,” in Proc. CVPR, 2015. [21] Y. Li, J. Yosinski, J. Clune, H. Lipson, and J. Hopcroft, “Convergent learning: Do different neural networks learn the same representations?” arXiv:1511.07543, 2015. [22] C. Zhang, S. Bengio, M. Hardt, B. Recht, and O. Vinyals, “Understanding deep learning requires rethinking generalization,” International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. [23] C. Doersch, A. Gupta, and A. A. Efros, “Unsupervised visual representation learning by context prediction,” in Proc. CVPR, 2015. [24] M. Noroozi and P. Favaro, “Unsupervised learning of visual representations by solving jigsaw puzzles,” in Proc. ECCV, 2016. [25] D. Jayaraman and K. Grauman, “Learning image representations tied to ego-motion,” in Proc. ICCV, 2015. [26] P. Agrawal, J. Carreira, and J. Malik, “Learning to see by moving,” in Proc. ICCV, 2015. [27] X. Wang and A. Gupta, “Unsupervised learning of visual representations using videos,” in Proc. CVPR, 2015. [28] R. Zhang, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Colorful image colorization,” in Proc. ECCV. Springer, 2016. [29] ——, “Split-brain autoencoders: Unsupervised learning by cross-channel prediction,” in Proc. CVPR, 2017. [30] A. Owens, J. Wu, J. H. McDermott, W. T. Freeman, and A. Torralba, “Ambient sound provides supervision for visual learning,” in Proc. ECCV, 2016. [31] R. Q. Quiroga, L. Reddy, G. Kreiman, C. Koch, and I. Fried, “Invariant visual representation by single neurons in the human brain,” Nature, vol. 435, no. 7045, pp. 1102–1107, 2005.  a)  b)  Correct label: gardening  Correct label: brushing  Fig. 26. Segmenting images using top activated units weighted by the class label from ResNet152-Places365 deep feature. a) the correctly predicted samples. b) the incorrectly predicted samples.  15 Images from Walking the dog (action40)  ResNet152-ImageNet  ResNet152-Places365  Images from Picnic area (sun397)  ResNet152-ImageNet  ResNet152-Places365  Fig. 27. Class-specific units from ResNet152-ImageNet and ResNet152Places365 on one class from action40 and sun397. For each class, we show three sample images, followed by the top 3 units from ResNet152ImageNet and ResNet152-Places365 ranked by the class weight of linear SVM to predict that class. SVM weight, detected concept name and the IoU score are shown above each unit.  [32] B. Zhou, H. Zhao, X. Puig, S. Fidler, A. Barriuso, and A. Torralba, “Scene parsing through ade20k dataset,” Proc. CVPR, 2017. [33] S. Bell, K. Bala, and N. Snavely, “Intrinsic images in the wild,” ACM Trans. on Graphics (SIGGRAPH), 2014. [34] R. Mottaghi, X. Chen, X. Liu, N.-G. Cho, S.-W. Lee, S. Fidler, R. Urtasun, and A. Yuille, “The role of context for object detection and semantic segmentation in the wild,” in Proc. CVPR, 2014. [35] X. Chen, R. Mottaghi, X. Liu, S. Fidler, R. Urtasun, and A. Yuille, “Detect what you can: Detecting and representing objects using holistic models and body parts,” in Proc. CVPR, 2014. [36] M. Cimpoi, S. Maji, I. Kokkinos, S. Mohamed, and A. Vedaldi, “Describing textures in the wild,” in Proc. CVPR, 2014. [37] J. Van De Weijer, C. Schmid, J. Verbeek, and D. Larlus, “Learning color names for real-world applications,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1512–1523, 2009. [38] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2012, pp. 1097–1105. [39] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with convolutions,” in Proc. CVPR, 2015. [40] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition,” arXiv:1409.1556, 2014. [41] G. Huang, Z. Liu, K. Q. Weinberger, and L. van der Maaten, “Densely connected convolutional networks,” Proc. CVPR, 2017. [42] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein et al., “Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge,” Int’l Journal of Computer Vision, 2015. [43] B. Zhou, A. Lapedriza, J. Xiao, A. Torralba, and A. Oliva, “Learning deep features for scene recognition using places database,” In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2014. [44] B. Zhou, A. Lapedriza, A. Khosla, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Places: A 10 million image database for scene recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2017. [45] I. Mikjjsra, C. L. Zitnick, and M. Hebert, “Shuffle and learn: unsupervised learning using temporal order verification,” in Proc. ECCV, 2016. [46] R. Gao, D. Jayaraman, and K. Grauman, “Object-centric representation learning from unlabeled videos,” arXiv:1612.00500, 2016. [47] D. Pathak, P. Krahenbuhl, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and A. A. Efros, “Context encoders: Feature learning by inpainting,” in Proc. CVPR, 2016. [48] X. Wang, K. He, and A. Gupta, “Transitive invariance for self-supervised visual representation learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.02901, 2017. [49] P. Diaconis, “What is a random matrix?” Notices of the AMS, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 1348–1349, 2005. [50] T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan, P. Dollár, and C. L. Zitnick, “Microsoft coco: Common objects in context,” in European conference on computer vision. Springer, 2014, pp. 740–755. [51] O. Vinyals, A. Toshev, S. Bengio, and D. Erhan, “Show and tell: A neural image caption generator,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2015, pp. 3156–3164. [52] S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Wide residual networks,” arXiv:1605.07146, 2016. [53] L.-J. Li and L. Fei-Fei, “What, where and who? classifying events by scene and object recognition,” in Proc. ICCV, 2007.  [54] B. Yao, X. Jiang, A. Khosla, A. L. Lin, L. Guibas, and L. Fei-Fei, “Human action recognition by learning bases of action attributes and parts,” in Proc. ICCV, 2011. [55] A. Quattoni and A. Torralba, “Recognizing indoor scenes,” in Proc. CVPR, 2009. [56] J. Xiao, J. Hays, K. A. Ehinger, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Sun database: Large-scale scene recognition from abbey to zoo,” in Proc. CVPR, 2010. [57] L. Fei-Fei, R. Fergus, and P. Perona, “Learning generative visual models from few training examples: An incremental bayesian approach tested on 101 object categories,” Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 2007. [58] G. Griffin, A. Holub, and P. Perona, “Caltech-256 object category dataset,” 2007. [59] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Learning deep features for discriminative localization,” in Proc. CVPR, 2016.  Bolei Zhou is a Ph.D. Candidate in Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab (CSAIL) at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He received M.Phil. degree in Information Engineering from the Chinese University of Hong Kong and B.Eng. degree in Biomedical Engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2010. His research interests are computer vision and machine learning. He is an award recipient of Facebook Fellowship, Microsoft Research Asia Fellowship, and MIT Greater China Fellowship. David Bau is a PhD student at the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL). He received an A.B. in Mathematics from Harvard in 1992 and an M.S. in Computer Science from Cornell in 1994. He coauthored a textbook on numerical linear algebra. He was a software engineer at Microsoft and Google and developed ranking algorithms for Google Image Search. His research interest is interpretable machine learning.  Aude Oliva is a Principal Research Scientist at the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL). After a French baccalaureate in Physics and Mathematics, she received two M.Sc. degrees and a Ph.D in Cognitive Science from the Institut National Polytechnique of Grenoble, France. She joined the MIT faculty in the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences in 2004 and CSAIL in 2012. Her research on vision and memory is cross-disciplinary, spanning human perception and cognition, computer vision, and human neuroscience. She received the 2006 National Science Foundation (NSF) Career award, the 2014 Guggenheim and the 2016 Vannevar Bush fellowships. Antonio Torralba received the degree in telecommunications engineering from Telecom BCN, Spain, in 1994 and the Ph.D. degree in signal, image, and speech processing from the Institut National Polytechnique de Grenoble, France, in 2000. From 2000 to 2005, he spent postdoctoral training at the Brain and Cognitive Science Department and the Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT. He is now a Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Prof. Torralba is an Associate Editor of the International Journal in Computer Vision, and has served as program chair for the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition conference in 2015. He received the 2008 National Science Foundation (NSF) Career award, the best student paper award at the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) in 2009, and the 2010 J. K. Aggarwal Prize from the International Association for Pattern Recognition (IAPR).

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 1. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
