Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 2
ArXiv ID: hf_876

Abstract:
Action and perception for spatiotemporal patterns Martin Biehl1,2 and Daniel Polani 2 1 2  Araya, Tokyo, 151-0001  University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield, AL10 9AB  arXiv:1706.03576v1 [cs.AI] 12 Jun 2017  martin@araya.org Abstract This is a contribution to the formalization of the concept of agents in multivariate Markov chains. Agents are commonly defined as entities that act, perceive, and are goal-directed. In a multivariate Markov chain (e.g. a cellular automaton) the transition matrix completely determines the dynamics. This seems to contradict the possibility of acting entities within such a system. Here we present definitions of actions and perceptions within multivariate Markov chains based on entitysets. Entity-sets represent a largely independent choice of a set of spatiotemporal patterns that are considered as all the entities within the Markov chain. For example, the entityset can be chosen according to operational closure conditions or complete specific integration. Importantly, the perceptionaction loop also induces an entity-set and is a multivariate Markov chain. We then show that our definition of actions leads to non-heteronomy and that of perceptions specialize to the usual concept of perception in the perception-action loop.  1 Introduction The perception-action loop (PA-loop) has been used to formalize, in mostly information theoretic terms, various properties associated to agents. These include empowerment Klyubin et al. (2005), autonomy (Bertschinger et al., 2008), decisions (Tishby and Polani, 2011), and embodiment (Zahedi and Ay, 2013). In the literature agents are usually seen as entities that act, perceive, and are in some way goal-directed (cmp. Barandiaran et al., 2009). The PA-loop assumes that the entities that make up agents as well as their environments can be captured by interacting stochastic processes. This is a convenient assumption since actions and perceptions can then be easily identified with the interactions (see Section 3). Further requirements (e.g. autonomy) can then be introduced to distinguish stochastic processes that actually constitute agents. It has not been formally established whether the assumption that the set of entities that contains agents can be represented by stochastic processes is justified. We have argued in previous work, that (naively) using stochastic processes to capture entities within a given multivariate Markov chain (for example cellular automata like the Game of Life) fails  to account for essential proporties of agents irrespective of chosen additional conditions. Instead, we have argued for the use of spatiotemporal patterns (STPs, previously employed by Beer, 2014b,a) to represent entities. The immediate advantage is that STPs are a superset of structures like gliders in the game of life, spots in reaction diffusion systems (Virgo, 2011; Froese et al., 2014; Bartlett and Bullock, 2015), and particle based systems exhibiting individuation into multi-particle “cells” (Schmickl et al., 2016). Formally capturing these structures then becomes a matter of selecting the according subsets of STPs i.e. the entity-sets (see below). A disadvantage of the STP based entities is that they lack the formal construction/interpretation of actions and perceptions that the PA-loop provides. As far as we know, no formal definitions of actions and perception exists for STP based entities. The first contribution of this paper are proposals of such formal definitions called entity action (Section 4) and entity perception (Section 5). The second contribution is a formal connection between the PA-loop and our STP-based entity actions and perceptions (Section 6). This connection is achieved via the notion of entity-sets. This is just the set of those STPs in a multivariate Markov chain that are considered as entities according to an independently specified criterion (e.g. organizational closure (Beer, 2014a) or complete local integration (Biehl et al., 2017, 2016)). Importantly, we can quite naturally identify an entity-set for the PA-loop and use our definitions of entity action and entity perception for this entity-set. The result is that our entity perception coincides with the standard notion of perceptions in the PA-loop and that entity actions are a necessary and sufficient condition for nonheteronomy. Non-heteronomy (i.e. not being determined by the environment) was proposed in Bertschinger et al. (2008) as part of an information theoretic measure of autonomy. The most closely related work is that of Beer (2014b). Apart from a generalization to stochastic systems our set of entity perceptions seems to be a straightforward (but surprisingingly tedious) formalization of the cognitive domain of STPs described for the glider in game of life. We use “perceptions” instead of “cognitive domain” only because  our motivation came more from the PA-loop and unlike Beer (2014b) not directly from autopoiesis. Concerning the entity actions we deviate from Beer (2014b) by requiring more from an action than just the continuation of the entity. We note that Ikegami and Taiji (1998) propose to use possible/compatible counterfactual trajectories of game players as signs of autonomy. We construct the capability to act from the counterfactual trajectories and find that they imply non-heteronomy which is a related to autonomy.  E0  E1  E2  M0  M1  M2  Figure 1: First timesteps of the PA-loop BN. The processes represent environment tEt utPT , and agent memory tMt utPT .  2 Notation We restrict ourselves to finite, time-discrete, multivariate Markov chains. These are unrolled in time and can then be formally described as Bayesian networks (BNs). We index the random variables in the BN via the index set V “ J ˆ T where T is the set of all timesteps and J is the set of (spatial) degrees of freedom. If i P V is an index we also write i “ pj, tq P J ˆ T where convenient. The BN is then a set tXi uiPV of random variables together with a set of edges determining the parents papiq “ papj, tq of each node i P V , and associated mechanisms ppj,tq pxj,t |xpapj,tq q. We assume that the parents of any node are a subset of the nodes at the previous timestep papj, tq Ď pJ, tq :“ tpj, tq|j P Ju. We write XA :“ pXi qiPA for the joint random variable consisting of random variables indexed by elements of A Ď V . We also sometimes write At :“ tpj, tq|j P Au for the elements in A that correspond to indices at timestep t. We refer to At as the time-slice of A at t. The state space of random variable Xi is denoted as Xi and the specific values are denoted by lower case letters xi , yś i , x̂i , ... P Xi . For joint random variables we write XA :“ iPA Xi and xA , yA , x̂A , ... P XA . A spatiotemporal pattern (STP) is a value xA P XA of a joint random variable XA with A Ď V . Since A Ď V is an arbitrary subset of V a STP can specify the values of random variables at multiple timesteps Ť and multiple spatial locations. The set of all STPs is: AĎV XA “ txA P XA |A Ď V u . It is important to envision the difference between the set of all STPs and the set of all subsets of random variables of tXi uiPV . The latter Ť is isomorphic to the power set of V and can be written as AĎV tXA u “ tXA |A Ď V u and is a set of random variables not a set of values of random variables. A trajectory is a STP xV that occupies all random variables in the BN tXi uiPV . We then say that a STP yA P XA occurs within trajectory xV if yA “ xA . An entity-set EptXi uiPV q is a subset of all STPs. One choice would be to use the entire set of STPs as the entity set. Other choices include using organizational closure conditions like in Beer (2014b) or the complete specific integration criterion (Biehl et al., 2016, 2017). The following definitions and theorems all assume that tXi uiPV is a multivariate Markov chain with V “ J ˆ T and E is a given entity-set.  3  Perception-action loop  Given two interacting stochastic processes (e.g. Fig. 1) we can always extract random stochastic process that explicitly represent the interactions. If we see one of the processes as the agent’s memory process tMt utPT and the other as the environment process tEt utPT then these extracted random variables can be seen as the perceptions and actions of the agent. Perceptions tSt utPT then capture exactly all the influence of the environment on the agent and actions tAt utPT capture the influence of the agent on the environment. This means we introduce another BN containing two more processes, the action process tAt utPT and the sensor process tSt utPT . The result of this extraction is an extended BN (Fig. 2) with identical joint probability distribution over the two initial stochastic processes tMt utPT and tEt utPT . This perception action loop is used for example in Bertschinger et al. (2008). The idea behind the extraction of perceptions tSt utPT (and conversely actions tAt utPT ) is to partition the state space Et of the environment at t into blocks having identical influence on the next memory state Mt`1 . These blocks are then the possible perceptions i.e. the states of St . Formally: Definition 1. For each time t P T and êt , ēt P Et let êt ”ǫt ēt ô @mt`1 P Mt`1 , mt P Mt : pMt`1 pmt`1 |mt , êt q “ pMt`1 pmt`1 |mt , ēt q.  (1)  Then: (i) The sensor partition1 ǫt is then defined as the set of equivalence classes of the equivalence relation ”ǫt . (ii) The set of sensor values is defined as St :“ ǫt and an element st P St (which is also a block in ǫt is called a perception of a sensor value. In the symmetrical way we define actions via a partition of Mt and arrive at the extended PA-loop of Fig. 2. It is then straightforward to prove the following theorem: 1 The construction of the sensor partition is not new. It is also used for example in Balduzzi (2011) to obtain coarser states (alphabet) of joint random variables. The authors thank Benjamin Heuer for originally pointing them to this construction.  E0  M0  E1  E2  S0  S1  A0  A1 M1  M2  Figure 2: First time-steps of the BN of the extended PA-loop. The processes tAt utPT and tSt utPT mediate all interactions between tMt utPT and tEt utPT without changing the probability distributions over the latter (see Theorem 1).  Theorem 1 (Invariant extension theorem). Given a perception action loop tXi uiPV “ tMt , Et utPT and its extended PA-loop tXi uiPW “ tMt , At , St , Et utPN` . Let pV “ pMT ,ET be the probability distribution over the entire perception action loop tXi uiPV and let pw MT ,ET be the marginal probability distribution over the memory and environment process obtained from the probability distribution pw W over the entire extended PA-loop. Then pMT ,ET “ pw MT ,ET .  (2)  Proof. This is probably fairly well known but see Biehl (2017) for an explicit proof. This shows that the introduction of action and sensor process in the above way only makes the interactions between agent and environment processes explicit and does not introduce any additional dynamics. The theorem also shows that the sensor process (and conversely the actions) captures all influences from the environment on the agent. Else the dynamics of the original processes could not remain identical. In Section 5 we want to capture all influences of the environment on a set of STPs / entities instead of on a stochastic process like tMt utPT . This will require a generalization of the perception extraction procedure in Definition 1.  4 Entity action We now define a concept of actions for a given entity-set in a multivariate Markov chain. First we briefly sketch the main ideas behind the definition. Due to our setting of a given multivariate Markov chain that actions have to occur within our concept of actions differs from other approaches. Paraphrasing Wilson and Shpall (2012) only slightly, what distinguishes actions among events is that they do not merely happen to individuals but rather that they are made to happen by the individuals. This is problematic in our setting where STPs (as entities) take the role of individuals. What “happens” in a multivariate Markov chain are the trajectories and the STPs occurring  within them. The Markov chain’s dynamics are determined by its mechanisms pj,t with j P J, t P T . These in turn determine (possibly stochastically) what is going to happen at all times anywhere within the chain. Therefore, it is impossible that a multivariate Markov chain contains an STP or entity that can make something happen beyond what happens anyway due to the mechanisms. This means we have to explain and define actions in a different way. We should also note that unlike other accounts of actions (Wilson and Shpall, 2012) we do not require actions to be necessarily purposeful or goal-directed in any way. The way we conceive agency an entity with actions will be considered goal-directed if its actions are goal-directed in some sense. To get to our own definition of actions we note that events called actions are usually attributed to a limited or bounded region or part of the universe e.g. the body of a living organism or sometimes just its brain if it has one. These parts usually contain mechanisms or configurations of matter that are either aq not directly observable to a human observer e.g. hidden in an opaque container, or bq not well understood by the human observer, or cq both. These factors inevitably lead to unpredictability of such events. In other words, events that are attributed to well understood and therefore predictable mechanisms, e.g. sunrises, are not considered actions. From this point of view actions are not, beyond their possibly complex and unobserved origin, special events but may appear as special to observers that lack the sensory and computational capacity to resolve or understand them. In our approach we construct actions as events in such a way that they are fundamentally unpredictable by any observer within the system. As we will see this can be done without the need for a definition of an observer. Note that this approach remains compatible with observer-dependent notions of apparent or as-if actions (cmp. McGregor, 2017). The “fundamental” actions are apparent actions for every possible observer while other events are actions for some observers and plain, predictable events for others. Up to now we have ignored randomness. True randomness (in the sense of stochastic independence of the event from any other event in the universe), if it exists in a system, can never be explained, predicted, or understood. Combined with our reasoning above this suggests that all random events are actions and fundamentally so. This is against our intuition, random events should not be seen as actions of agents. However, we place the burden of ruling out random events from being interpreted as actions of agents on the entity-set and/or goal-directedness. We expect useful notions of entities not to consist of (completely) independent events which would prevent such events from becoming actions in our approach. Furthermore independent events seem not to be useful in order to achieve a particular  goal. However, the usefulness of random number generators might be seen as a counterexample. As of now we have no formal definition of goal-directedness such that answering these questions is future work. When we want to define actions for entities the first issue we run into is that entities are already fixed STPs. Therefore each entity xA P E already consists of the consequences of whatever actions (if any) it took. It is in this sense the result of its own actions. There is no freedom left. In order to investigate the actions we therefore have to deconstruct the entity and see what other actions it could have taken time-slice by time-slice. For this we look for counterfactual entities yB whose time-slice at t can occur in exactly the same environment xVt zAt and has a different immediate future. Requiring the co-occurrence with the same environment makes the different futures unpredictable for anything part of that environment. No observer can therefore predict these futures either. Even an observer that distinguished the two entities in the past is in the same state at t independent of the entity it is faced with. Therefore it must have forgotten their difference. In this way we get a definition of actions as unpredictable events for observers without needing to formally define observers. For the formal definition we first define: Definition 2 (Environment of an STP). Let xA be a STP. Then the environment of xA at time t is the spatial pattern xVt zAt . We now state the definition of an action of an entity at a time t in a particular trajectory formally. Definition 3 (Action and co-action of an entity). Let xV P XV with pV pxV q ą 0. Also let xA be an entity with nonempty time-slices at t, t ` 1. Then xA performs an action xAt`1 at time t in trajectory xV if there exists an entity yB with non-empty time-slices at t, t ` 1 such that (i) yB occurs in yV ‰ xV with pV pyV q ą 0, (ii) at t the entities xA and yB occupy the same random variables: Bt “ At , (iii) at t the trajectories xV and yV are otherwise identical: xVt zAt “ yVt zAt , (iv) at t ` 1 the entities are different: xAt`1 ‰ yBt`1 . We also call yB a co-action entity, yV a co-action trajectory, and yBt`1 a co-action. Note that all requirements are symmetric. Therefore, if xA performs an action then its co-action also performs an action. Also, the notion of co-action entities can easily be extended to more than one co-action entity. We only have to make sure that all entities in a set of co-action entities are mutually different at t ` 1. Furthermore, it is easy to generalise the definition of actions to situations where xA and yB must occupy the same variables for an interval of time rt ´ m : ts before the action. In that case, the environment xVrt´m:ts zArt´m:ts must be identical during this interval.  Finally, note that the condition that the two acting entities differ at time t ` 1 can be fulfilled in two ways. If At`1 ‰ Bt`1 then we call these actions extent actions. Else, if the actions differ only in value i.e. we have At`1 “ Bt`1 so that xAt`1 ‰ yAt`1 then we call these actions value actions. The difference between value actions and extent actions is made possible due to our definition of entities as STPs. An intriguing question for the future is whether the capabilities of agents to act both in value and extent are truly superior to agents that only act in value such as those modelled by PA-loops. As we will see in Section 6 probabilistic and information theoretic expressions are easy to formulate for actions in value only. However, for actions in extent this has not been done yet.  5  Entity perception  In this section we formally define perception for (STP-) entities. We make no distinction here between perception, experience, and sensory input. In the tradition of modelling agent-environment systems using dynamical systems or their probabilistic generalisations as stochastic processes in PA-loops we define perception as all effects that the environment has on an individual/agent (Beer, 1995). We run into a similar problem as with the actions. An entity is already a fixed STP that contains all influence that it may have been subjected to. It is in this sense the result of influence (or no influences) from its surroundings. In order to investigate these influences we therefore have to deconstruct the entity and see how it was “formed” by external influences / perceptions time-slice by time-slice. The idea is to fix the past of the entity up to t and use the set of counterfactual entities with the same past as the alternative futures. We can then partition the possible environments of these counterfactual entities according to their influence on the probability distribution over the entities’ futures. This is done in basically the same way as we defined perception in the PA-loop in Definition 1. However, there are some technical issues to overcome. The set of entities with identical pasts up to time t can be interpreted as the set of entities that are the most like xA up to t. These are different entities but they only differ in the future. Their futures (including their next time-slices) are therefore a close analogue to the next states mt`1 of agent memories in the PA-loop. To make sure however that the entities have a next time-slice we also require that they have non-empty next time-slice. These requirements together define the notion of the co-perception entities of an entity xA at time t. These are entities that also perceive something (maybe the same thing) at t (in their trajectories) if xA perceives something at t. Definition 4 (Co-perception entities of an entity at t). Let xA P E be an entity with non-empty time-slices at t and t ` 1. The set of co-perception entities SpxA , tq of entity xA at t is the set of entities with non-empty time-slices at t and  t ` 1, and that are identical up to t: SpxA , tq :“ tyB P E : Bt , Bt`1 ‰ H, yBĺt “ xAĺt u. (3) Next we want to define a conditional probability distribution over these co-perception entities similar to pMt`1 pmt`1 |et , mt q. For this we need a random variable that ranges over all the possible futures of the co-perception entities. The naivest way to do this would be to use for xkAk P SpxA , tq: pS pxkAk |xVt zAt , xAĺt q :“ ąt  pAk ,Vt zAt pxkAk , xVt zAt , xAĺt q ąt  pVt zAt ,Aĺt pxVt zAt , xAĺt q  .  (4) However, this has two problems. The first is that in general the denominator may vanish for some environments xVt zAt P XVt zAt . The second is that it is not a conditional probability since the sum over all co-perception indices is not necessarily one. These problems can be solved by restricting the set of environments and by introducing a mutual-exclusivity condition on the futures of the coperception entities. To restrict the environments we therefore define the coperception environments in the following way. Definition 5 (Co-perception environments). Let xA P E be an entity with non-empty time-slices at t and t ` 1 and SpxA , tq its co-perception entities. Then define the associated co-perception environments XVSt zAt Ď XVt zAt by XVSt zAt :“ tx̄Vt zAt : DyB P SpxA , tq, pB,Vt zAt pyB , x̄Vt zAt q ą 0u. (5) The co-perception environments of a co-perception set SpxA , tq are then the spatial patterns XVt zAt at t that can co-occur with at least one co-perception environment. By definition of the co-perception environments the denominator of Eq. (4) cannot vanish anymore if we require that the construction only allows co-perception environments. However, in order for the sum over all co-perception entities to equal one (for all co-perception environments) we need to have ÿ pAk ,XVt zAt pxkAk , xVt zAt , xAĺt q ąt k (6) “ pVt zAt ,Aĺt pxkAk , xVt zAt , xAĺt q. ąt  This is the case in general if for all xVt zAt P XVSt bsAt and all co-perception entities’ futures are mutually exclusive, i.e. for all xkAk ‰ xlAl P SpxA , tq we have PrpxkAk , xlAl , xVt zAt , xAĺt q “ 0.  (7)  This condition can be guaranteed if we require a form of non-interpenetration. This condition on entity-sets states that there cannot be two different entities which are identical up to some point in time t and then, in the same single trajectory (with positive probability), at some point “reveal” their difference. If entities with identical pasts ever reveal their difference they must be in different trajectories i.e. they must be mutually exclusive. Definition Ť 6 (Non-interpenetration). An entity-set E Ď BĎV XB satisfies non-interpenetration or is non-interpenetrating if for all yB , zC P E we have Dt P T : yBĺt “ zCĺt and yBtă ‰ zCtă ñ PrpXBtă “ yBtă , XBtă “ zCtă |yBĺt q “ 0.  (8)  Non-interpenetration implies that co-perception entities are mutually exclusive: Theorem 2. Let xA P E be an entity with non-empty timeslices at t and t ` 1 and SpxA , tq its co-perception entities. If E satisfies non-interpenetration then SpxA , tq is mutually exclusive. Proof. Let yB , zC P SpxA , tq with yB ‰ zC . Then they have identical pasts and so we have yBĺt “ zCĺt . From non-interpenetration we then get PrpXB “ yB , XC “ zC q “ 0.  (9)  This is stronger than Eq. (7). This means that under non-interpenetration Eq. (4) is a well defined conditional probability distribution . However, this conditional probability distribution is still quite different from pMt`1 pmt`1 |et , mt q since it ranges over the entire futures xkAk of the co-perception entities and not just next ąt timesteps. At each transition from time-step t to t ` 1 the coperception entities SpxA , tq split up into sets of entities that are identical up to t`1 (we will call these sets the branches). Only one of these sets is the set SpxA , t ` 1q. For example an entity yB P SpxA , tq with the same past up to t but with a different time-slice at t ` 1 i.e. yBt`1 ‰ xAt`1 is part of a different branch. In that case this branch is SpyB , t ` 1q and we have SpyB , t ` 1q X SpxA , t ` 1q “ H. In summary then the dynamics of the system split up the co-perception entities of xA up to t into disjoint sets (the branches) of entities with identical pasts up to t ` 1. We can then interpret the branches at the time t ` 1 as the distinctions among the co-perception entities that are revealed at time t ` 1. Further distinctions among the co-perception entities are only revealed at later times. This also means that these are all differences that could possibly be due to the influence of the environment at t and that show their effect at t`1 (not later). In this way the perceptions at t should also be defined with  respect to these branches. We call the partition that is defined via the identification of entities in SpxA , tq that are identical up to t ` 1 the branching partition. Definition 7 (Branching partition). Let xA P E be an entity with non-empty time-slices at t and t ` 1 and SpxA , tq its co-perception entities. Then define the branching partition ηpxA , tq of SpxA , tq as the partition induced by the equivalence classes of the equivalence relation yB „zC ô yBt`1 “ zCt`1 ,  (10)  where yB , zC P SpxA , tq. We note that the definition of the branching partition can easily be generalised to more than one time-step into the future. Instead of requiring equality at t ` 1 we can require equality for the next r time-steps. Given the branching partition ηpxA , tq for a noninterpenetrating entity set we can then define a conditional probability distribution over the branches by just summing up the probabilities of all entities in each branch (remember that they are all mutually exclusive) to get the probability of a branch. This gives us the branch-morph defined below.2 Definition 8 (Branch-morph). Let tXi uiPV be a multivariate Markov chain with index set V “ J ˆ T and entity set E. Let xA P E be an entity with non-empty time-slices at t and t`1 and SpxA , tq its co-perception entities and ηpxA , tq the branching partition. Furthermore, let XVSt zAt Ď XVt zAt be the associated co-perception environments. Also write for every block b P ηpxA , tq: ÿ ppb|x̂Vt zAt , xAĺt q :“ pBtă ,Vt zAt pyBtă |x̂Vt zAt , xAĺt q. yB Pb  (11) Then for each x̂Vt zAt P XVSt zAt we define the branchmorph over ηpxA , tq as the probability distribution pηpxA ,tq p.|x̂Vt zAt , xAĺt q : ηpxA , tq Ñ r0, 1s with pηpxA ,tq pb|x̂Vt zAt , xAĺt q :“ ř  ppb|x̂Vt zAt , xAĺt q , cPηpxA ,tq ppc|x̂Vt zAt , xAĺt q (12)  for all b P ηpxA , tq. With the branch-morph we can then define, as expected, the perceptions as equivalence classes of the co-perception environments with respect to the associated branch-morph. First we define a partition of the co-perception environments called the co-perception environment partition. The perceptions are then the blocks of this partition.  Definition 9. Let tXi uiPV be a multivariate Markov chain with index set V “ J ˆ T and entity set E. Let xA P E be an entity with non-empty time-slices at t and t`1 and SpxA , tq its co-perception entities and ηpxA , tq the branching partition. Furthermore, let XVSt zAt Ď XVt zAt be the associated co-perception environments. Then define the co-perception environment partition π S pxA , tq of XVSt zAt as the partition induced by the equivalence classes of the equivalence relation x̂Vt zAt „ x̄Vt zAt ô @b P ηpxA , tq : pηpxA ,tq pb|x̂Vt zAt , xAĺt q “ pηpxA ,tq pb|x̄Vt zAt , xAĺt q. (13) This means all associated co-perception environments in the same block of π S pxA , tq have the same branch-morph. In other words they lead to the same branch of entity futures (i.e. the same future branch) with the same probabilities. Then all elements of these environment blocks have identical effects on the future branches and these branches cannot distinguish between environments within the blocks. Definition 10 (Perceptions). Let tXi uiPV be a multivariate Markov chain with index set V “ J ˆ T and entity set E. Let xA P E be an entity with non-empty time-slices at t and t ` 1 and SpxA , tq its co-perception entities. Furthermore, let XVSt zAt Ď XVt zAt be the associated co-perception environments and π S pxA , tq its co-perception environment partition. Then the blocks of π S pxA , tq are called the perceptions of xA at t.  6 Entity action and perception in the PA-loop We now show that agent-environment systems as modelled by the PA-loop are multivariate Markov chains containing a specific choice of entity sets. In the PA-loop each trajectory xV is considered to consist of a time-evolution mT of the agent and a time-evolution of the environment eT . The agent therefore occurs in every trajectory and occupies the same degree of freedom in every trajectory. Each of the time-evolutions mT is a STP in the PA-loop. Since for us entities are STPs we define the entityset EP A of a PA-loop as the set of time-evolutions of the agent process i.e. ź EP A :“ tmT P Mt u. (14) tPT  Similarly, we can define entities for the environments and add them to EP A .  2  We note here that for entity-sets that exhibit interpenetration we can still define branch-morphs for mutually-exclusive subsets of the co-perception entities. Since the choice of these subsets is arbitrary however this does not lead to a uniquely defined notion of perception. For more details see Biehl (2017).  Entity actions in the PA-loop We can write every trajectory as a pair pmT , eT q where mT is an entity. The entity mT then performs an entity action at time t in trajectory  pmT , eT q with pMT ,ET pmT , eT q ą 0 if there is an entity m̄t such that • m̄T occurs in pm̄T , ēT q ‰ pmT , eT q with pMT ,ET pm̄T , ēT q ą 0, • at t entities mT and m̄T occupy the same random variables, which is the case for all entities in EP A , • at t environments of mT and m̄T are identical: et “ ēt , • at t ` 1 the entities are different: mt`1 ‰ m̄t`1 . Since all entities occupy the same random variables we can only have value actions in the PA-loop. If we assume that these conditions are fulfilled at some time t for two entities mT , m̄T we can derive that the conditional entropy HpMt`1 |Et q of the next agent state given the current environment state is greater than zero. To see this note that from pMT ,ET pmT , eT q ą 0 and pMT ,ET pm̄T , ēT q ą 0 it directly follows that pMt`1 pmt`1 |et q ą 0, pMt`1 pm̄t`1 |et q ą 0 and pEt pet q ą 0. Plugging this into the definition we get HpMt`1 |Et q ą 0. It can also be seen that the more different co-action entities there are for a time t the higher the conditional entropy HpMt`1 |Et q can get. The final value of HpMt`1 |Et q depends on the actual probabilities but the maximum value for n co-actions is log n. Also note that if there are no actions at t i.e. no co-action entity in no co-action trajectory at t then HpMt`1 |Et q “ 0. Entity actions of entities in EP A are therefore necessary and sufficient for HpMt`1 |Et q ą 0. The conditional entropy HpMt`1 |Et q measures the uncertainty about the next agent state when the current environment state is known. It has been proposed as part of an autonomy measure as a measure of non-heteronomy in Bertschinger et al. (2008). Non-heteronomy means that the agent is not determined by the history of the environment. In this terminology entity actions are a necessary and sufficient condition for non-heteronomy. Entity perception in the PA-loop We now look at how entity perception as defined in Section 5 specialises to the case of the PA-loop. This argument in effect constitutes a proof that our Definition 8 of the branch-morph is a generalisation of the conditional probability distributions pMt`1 p.|mt , et q : Mt`1 Ñ r0, 1s to non-interpenetrating arbitrary sets of co-perception entities This result is not surprising since we set out to do just this but it is also instructive to work through the recovery of the original expression of the conditional probability distribution starting from the general branch-morph. We pick an entity mT from the entity set EP A and consider its perceptions at an arbitrary time-step t P T . In order to get the perceptions at t we need 1. the co-perception entities SpmT , tq of mT at t, 2. the branching partition ηpmT , tq with its branches, 3. the co-perception environments, 4. the branch-morphs for each environment,  5. and the co-perception environment partition π S pxA , tq with its blocks, the perceptions. These can be identified in the following way. 1. The co-perception entities SpmT , tq are the entities in EP A that have non-empty time-slices at t, t ` 1, and that are identical to mT up to t. All entities in EP A have non-empty time slices at all times. So we have: SpmT , tq “ tm̄T P EP A : m̄ĺt “ mĺt u  (15)  PA  2. First note that the entity set E satisfies noninterpenetration since they all occupy the same set tMt utPT of random variables. The branching partition ηpmT , tq is composed out of blocks (the branches) of co-perception entities that are identical up to t ` 1 i.e. m̂T „m̄T ô m̂t`1 “ m̄t`1 .  (16)  We can therefore identify the blocks of ηpmT , tq i.e. the future branches by the values that the entities take at t ` 1. Define the branch bpm̄t`1 q associated to m̄t`1 P Mt`1 via bpm̄t`1 q :“ tm̂T P SpmT , tq : m̂t`1 “ m̄t`1 u.  (17)  The branching partition is then: ηpmT , tq “ tbpm̄t`1 q Ď SpmT , tq : m̄t`1 P Mt`1 u. (18) 3. The co-perception environments are the STPs xVt zAt compatible with at least one co-perception entity. For the PA-loop and entity mT at t we have XVt zAt “ Et and therefore XVSt zAt “ EtS . Where EtS is EtS “ tet P Et : Dm̄T P SpmT , tq, pMT ,Et pm̄T , et q ą 0u. (19) If we marginalize over Mąt we can see that this is equivalent to (20) EtS “ tet P Et : pMt ,Et pm̄t , et q ą 0u. 4. The branch-morphs are the probability distributions pηpmT ,tq p.|et , mĺt q : ηpmT , tq Ñ r0, 1s over the branches for each co-perception environment et P EtS . These are defined using Eq. (11) which for the perception-loop becomes ÿ ppbpm̄t`1 q, et |mĺt q :“ pMtă ,Et pm̂tă , et |mĺt q. m̂T Pbpm̄t`1 q  (21) We can rewrite the sum on the right hand side using Eq. (17) for bpm̄t`1 q and then SpmT , tqtă “ Mtă : ppbpm̄t`1 q, et |mĺt q “ pMt`1 ,Et pm̄t`1 , et |mĺt q.  (22)  The definition of the branch-morph for the PA-loop is ppbpm̄t`1 q, et |mĺt q pηpmT ,tq pbpm̄t`1 q|et , mĺt q : “ ř bPηpmT ,tq ppb, et |mĺt q (23)  which can be rewritten (with some work) as pηpmT ,tq pbpm̄t`1 q|et , mĺt q “ pMt`1 pm̄t`1 |et , mĺt q (24) “ pMt`1 pm̄t`1 |et , mt q  (25)  where we used the BN of the PA-loop. 5.The co-perception environment partition π S pmT , tq of S Et “ is induced by Eq. (13) which, using the PA-loop and Eq. (24) becomes êt „ ēt ô @mt`1 P Mt`1 :  (26)  pMt`1 pmt`1 |êt , mt q “ pMt`1 pmt`1 |ēt , mt q which is just the equivalence relation of Eq. (1) used to extract the sensor-values in Section 3. So we have seen that our definitions of Section 5 specialise in the case of the PA-loop to the same concept of perception as in Section 3.  7 Conclusion We have defined actions and perceptions for entity-sets and therefore for sets of spatiotemporal patterns. This provides a formally defined way to associate gliders and similar spatiotemporal patterns in reaction-diffusion systems with actions and perceptions. This is a step towards a foramization of agency of such patterns. Here a notion of goaldirectedness is still missing and future work. We have also shown how our definitions specialize to a necessary and sufficient condition for non-heteronomy and the standard notion of perceptions of the agent process in the PAloop. For future research it is interesting to note that the branch-morphs are generalisations of the conditional probability distribution pMt`1 p.|et , mt q. These conditional probability distributions play a role in various information theoretic concepts formulated for the PA-loop. This suggests we might be able to translate bakc and forth between PA-loop concepts and those for spatiotemporal patterns in the future. We noted that a unique definition of entity perception is dependent on the condition of non-interpenetration of the entity-set.  Beer, R. D. (1995). A dynamical systems perspective on agentenvironment interaction. Artificial Intelligence, 72(1-2):173– 215. Beer, R. D. (2014a). Characterizing autopoiesis in the game of life. Artificial Life, 21(1):1–19. Beer, R. D. (2014b). The cognitive domain of a glider in the game of life. Artificial Life, 20(2):183–206. Bertschinger, N., Olbrich, E., Ay, N., and Jost, J. (2008). Autonomy: An information theoretic perspective. Biosystems, 91(2):331–345. Biehl, M., Ikegami, T., and Polani, D. (2016). Towards information based spatiotemporal patterns as a foundation for agent representation in dynamical systems. In Proceedings of the Artificial Life Conference 2016, pages 722–729. The MIT Press. Biehl, M., Ikegami, T., and Polani, D. (2017). Specific and Complete Local Integration of Patterns in Bayesian Networks. Entropy, 19(5):230. Biehl, M. A. (2017). Formal Approaches to a Definition of Agents. PhD thesis, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield. Froese, T., Virgo, N., and Ikegami, T. (2014). Motility at the origin of life: Its characterization and a model. Artificial Life, 20(1):55–76.  Ikegami, T. and Taiji, M. (1998). Uncertainty, possible worlds and coupled dynamical recognizers. http://sacral.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp/pdf/ikegami_polytechn Klyubin, A., Polani, D., and Nehaniv, C. (2005). Empowerment: a universal agent-centric measure of control. In The 2005 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, 2005, volume 1, pages 128–135 Vol.1. McGregor, S. (2017). The Bayesian stance: Equations for ‘as-if’ sensorimotor agency. Adaptive Behavior, page 105971231770050. Schmickl, T., Stefanec, M., and Crailsheim, K. (2016). How a lifelike system emerges from a simplistic particle motion law. Scientific Reports, 6:37969. Tishby, N. and Polani, D. (2011). Information Theory of Decisions and Actions. In Cutsuridis, V., Hussain, A., and Taylor, J. G., editors, Perception-Action Cycle, Springer Series in Cognitive and Neural Systems, pages 601–636. Springer New York. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4419-1452-1 19.  References  Virgo, N. (2011). Thermodynamics and the Structure of Living Systems. University of Sussex. Unpublished PhD thesis.  Balduzzi, D. (2011). Detecting emergent processes in cellular automata with excess information. Advances in Artificial Life, ECAL, abs/1105.0158.  Wilson, G. and Shpall, S. (2012). Action. In Zalta, E. N., editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Summer 2012 edition.  Barandiaran, X. E., Paolo, E. D., and Rohde, M. (2009). Defining agency: Individuality, normativity, asymmetry, and spatiotemporality in action. Adaptive Behavior, 17(5):367–386.  Zahedi, K. and Ay, N. (2013). Quantifying morphological computation. Entropy, 15(5):1887–1915. arXiv:1301.6975 [cs, math].  Bartlett, S. and Bullock, S. (2015). Emergence of Competition between Different Dissipative Structures for the Same Free Energy Source. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Artificial Life, pages 415–422. The MIT Press.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 2. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
