Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 4
ArXiv ID: hf_901

Abstract:
arXiv:1612.03492v1 [math.GR] 11 Dec 2016  Lipschitz 1-connectedness for some solvable Lie groups. David Bruce Cohen February 19, 2018  Abstract A space X is said to be Lipschitz 1-connected if every Lipschitz loop γ : S 1 Ñ X bounds a OpLippγqq-Lipschitz disk f : D2 Ñ X. A Lipschitz 1-connected space admits a quadratic isoperimetric inequality, but it is unknown whether the converse is true. Cornulier and Tessera showed that certain solvable Lie groups have quadratic isoperimetric inequalities, and we extend their result to show that these groups are Lipschitz 1-connected.  1  Introduction.  Lipschitz 1-connectedness. Consider a complete, simply connected Riemannian manifold X which is homogeneous in the sense that some Lie group acts on X transitively by isometries. It is well known that in such a manifold, every loop admits a Lipschitz filling (see Proposition 3.5; for a much stronger result see [9, Corollary 1.4]). A classical way to study the large scale geometry of X is by asking how hard it is to fill loops in X. Definition. Let γ : S 1 ÑX be a loop. The filling span of γ denoted Spanpγq, is defined to be inftLippf q|f : D 2 ÑX; f |S 1 “ γu. We say that X is Lipschitz 1-connected if there exists a constant C such that Spanpγq ď C Lippγq for all Lipschitz loops γ : S 1 ÑX. For instance, Euclidean n-dimensional space En is Lipschitz 1-connected because one may “cone off” loops in En : given a loop γ : S 1 ÑX with γp1q “ 0, we may take f preiθ q “ rγpeiθ q to obtain a 1-Lipschitz filling. A similar argument shows that all CAT(0) manifolds are Lipschitz 1-connected. 1  Solvable groups. In this paper, we will be interested in the case where X is some solvable real Lie group G equipped with a left invariant metric. To motivate this, note that Lipschitz 1-connectedness is a QI-invariant (Proposition 3.6), and that every Lie group is quasi isometric to a solvable Lie group. We will further assume that G has the form U ¸ A, where the following conditions hold. • A is abelian Lie group. • U is a closed subgroup of the group of real n ˆ n upper triangular matrices with diagonal entries equal to 1 (for some n). • A and U are contractible. We will now see some examples of groups which are not Lipschitz 1-connected. Groups of Sol type. Fix real numbers t2 ą 1 ą t1 ą 0 and consider the group G of matrices of the form »s ﬁ t1 0 x – 0 ts2 y ﬂ 0 0 1  where s, x, y P R. Note that G decomposes as U ¸ A as above if we take A to be the diagonal matrices of G and U to be the matrices with diagonal entries equal to 1. It is known [5][Theorem 8.1.3] that there exists loops γ in G such that the minimal area of any filling of γ is on the order of exppLippγqq. Hence, G is not Lipschitz 1-connected. Groups of this form are called groups of Sol type. More generally, Cornulier and Tessera have shown that if a group G “ U ¸ A as above surjects onto a group of Sol type, then it has loops of exponentially large area, and hence cannot be Lipschitz 1-connected [4, Theorem 12.C.1]. If G surjects onto a group of Sol type we say that G has the SOL obstruction. Tame groups. On the other hand, if the conjugation action of some a P A contracts U , then G “ U ¸ A will be Lipschitz 1-connected (Proposition 5.2). For a to be a contraction means that there is some compact subset Ω of U such that for any compact subset K of U , some positive power of a conjugates K into Ω. If such a and Ω exist, G is said to be tame.  2  The theorem of Cornulier and Tessera. It is clear that a space which is Lipschitz 1-connected admits a quadratic isoperimetric inequality—i.e., any loop of length ℓ must bound a disk of area Opℓ2 q. Cornulier and Tessera have given a large class of solvable Lie groups admitting quadratic isoperimetric inequalities, and we shall extend their result to show that these groups are Lipschitz 1-connected. Given an action of the abelian group A on a vector space V , let V0 Ă V n v} Ñ0 as nÑ8 for be the subspace consisting of vectors v such that log }a n all a P A. Their theorem [4, Theorem F] states that G “ U ¸ A satisfies a quadratic isoperimetric inequality if the following conditions hold. • pU {rU, U sq0 “ 0. (G is said to be standard solvable if this condition holds.) • G does not surject onto a group of Sol type. • H2 puq0 “ 0, where u is the Lie algebra of U and H2 denotes second Lie algebra homology—see Definition 5.1. • Killpuq0 “ 0, where the killing module Killpuq is the quotient of the symmetric square u d u of u by the A-subrepresentation spanned elements of the form rx, ys d z ´ y d rx, zs. Main Theorem. Our primary objective in this paper is to establish the following theorem, proved as Theorem 6.1, improving Cornulier and Tessera’s result to show Lipschitz 1-connectedness. Theorem 1.1. Let G be a group of the form U ¸ A where U and A are contractible real Lie groups, A is abelian, and U is a real unipotent group (i.e., a closed group of strictly upper triangular real matrices.) If pU {rU, U sq0 , H2 puq0 and Killpuq0 are all trivial and G does not surject onto a group of Sol type, then G is Lipschitz 1-connected. Quadratic isoperimetric inequality versus Lipschitz 1-connectedness. As noted above, if X is Lipschitz 1-connected, then it has a quadratic isoperimetric inequality. It is not known whether the converse is true—that is, there are no known examples where X has a quadratic isoperimetric inequality but is not Lipschitz 1-connected. Recently, Lytchak, Wenger, and Young[8] have shown some results about the existence of Holder fillings in spaces admitting quadratic isoperimetric inequalities.  3  1.1  Organization.  This paper is organized as follows. §3 recalls some known results about Lipschitz filling in homogeneous manifolds. §4 develops a combinatorial language for describing fillings in Lie groups. §5 specializes to solvable Lie groups and reviews the theory of tame groups and Abels’s multiamalgam. Finally, we prove our main theorem in §6.  2  Acknowledgments.  We wish to thank Robert Young and Yves Cornulier for productive conversations. This work has been supported by NSF award 1148609.  3  Preliminaries.  3.1  Filling.  In this section, X will be a complete, simply connected Riemannian manifold admitting a transitive Lie group action by isometries. We will collect several facts about filling loops in X. Everything in this section is both trivial and well known, but it seems easier to write the proofs than to find them in the literature. The key facts we will prove are as follows. • Proposition 3.3 shows that X is Lipschitz 1-connected on a small scale. That is, there is some constant D such that Spanpγq “ OpLippγqq when Lippγq ă D. • Corollary 3.4 shows that all loops in X have Lipschitz fillings. • Proposition 3.5 proves the existence a “filling span function”—meaning that there is a function CpX, Rq such that Spanpγq ă CpX, Lippγqq for all Lipschitz loops γ : S 1 ÑX. • Proposition 3.6 shows that Lipschitz 1-connectedness is a QI-invariant in this setting.  3.2  Templates.  Let D 2 be the unit disk, equipped with the Euclidean metric. Purely as a matter of convenience, we will think of D 2 and the unit circle S 1 as subsets of C. We will need some convenient cellular decompositions of D 2 .  4  Figure 1: On the right, a decomposition of the unit disk into Opǫ´2 q triangles uniformly bilipschitz to Dǫ2 as in Proposition 3.1. On the right, a decomposition of D 2 into a central disk together with Opǫ´1 q “sectors” uniformly bilipschitz to Dǫ2 as in Proposition 3.2 Definition. Let Dǫ2 be the Euclidean disk of radius ǫ. Proposition 3.1. There exists a constant C such that for any 0 ă ǫ ă 1 there is a triangulation of D 2 into at most Cǫ´2 triangles which are Cbilipschitz to Dǫ2 . See the left side of Figure 1 for a decomposition of this type. The proof of Proposition 3.1 is left to the reader. Using templates. Proposition 3.1 will help us fill loops in the following way. Suppose that C is a class of loops in X such that Spanpγq “ OpLippγqq for γ P C—typically, C will consist of loops with small Lipschitz constant. Now, given some other loop γ : S 1 ÑX, we may wish to find a OpLippγqqLipschitz filling f : D 2 ÑX of γ. We can often use the following abstract strategy to construct f . • For some sufficiently small ǫ, take a decomposition of D 2 as in Proposition 3.1. For a 2-cell ∆ of this decomposition, let ψ∆ : ∆ÑDǫ2 be a C-bilipschitz map, where C is the universal constant guaranteed by the proposition. • Take f to be γ on BD 2 , and extend f over the 1-skeleton of the decomposition in such a way that Lippf q “ OpLippγqq and the restriction of f to the boundary of each 2-cell represents an element of C. That is, 5  we want f to be such that for every 2-cell ∆, the map γ∆ : S 1 ÑX given by ´1 pǫeiθ q γ∆ : eiθ ÞÑ f |B∆ ˝ ψ∆ satisfies γ∆ P C. • For each 2-cell ∆, observe that Lippγ∆ q “ Opǫ Lippγqq, so there exists a Opǫ Lippγqq-Lipschitz filling f∆ : D 2 ÑX of γ∆ . • Extend f over ∆ with Lipschitz constant OpLippγqq by taking, for each 2-cell ∆, ˆ ˙ 1 f |∆ pzq “ f∆ ψ∆ pzq . ǫ The nontrivial part of this type of argument comes when we try to extend f over the 1-skeleton with the desired properties, so we will typically suppress the other details. Proposition 3.2. There exists a constant C such that, for each 0 ă ǫ ă 1, the unit disk D 2 may be cellularly decomposed into an inner disk of radius 1 ´ ǫ, surrounded by an annular region divided into 2-cells (we call these sectors) with the following properties. • Each sector is bounded by two radial line segments, an arc of BD 2 , and an arc of the boundary of the inner disk. • Sectors are C-bilipschitz to Dǫ2 . • The number of sectors is between  1 Cǫ  and  C ǫ.  See the right side of Figure 1 for a decomposition of this type. The proof of Proposition 3.2 is left to the reader. This proposition will typically used to convert a filling of a loop γ̃ to a filling f of a nearby loop γ, by taking f restricted to the inner disk to be a slightly rescaled filling of γ̃.  3.3  Basic results on filling in homogeneous manifolds.  Proposition 3.3. Let X be a simply connected, complete homogeneous Riemannian manifold. There exist constants CpXq and DpXq such that the following hold. • If x, y P X and dpx, yq ď DpXq, then there is a unique geodesic in X connecting x to y.  6  • Suppose γ : S 1 ÑX is such that 0 ă Lippγq ă DpXq. Then Spanpγq ă CpXq Lippγq. Proof. It is clear that there is a uniform upper bound on sectional curvatures of X, since X is homogeneous. Therefore, X is a CAT(κ) space for some κ ě 0 [3][Theorem 1A.6]. This implies [3][Proposition 1.4(1)] that there is some constant Dpκq depending only on κ such that points of X separated by less than Dpκq are connected by a unique geodesic, so taking DpXq ă Dpκq ensures unique geodesics. By the existence of normal coordinates in Riemannian manifolds [7, Proposition 8.2], there exists a bilipschitz map ψ : U ÑV where U is a neighborhood in X and V a neighborhood in RdimpXq . Take D ą 0 small enough that there is some x P U with U Ą BD pxq and ψpBD pXqq Ă V0 Ă V for some convex set V0 . Now let γ : S 1 ÑX be D-Lipschitz with γp1q “ x. Without loss of generality, ψpxq “ 0, and we may fill ψ ˝ γ by coning off– that is, we define a Lippψq Lippγq-Lipschitz filling f0 : D 2 ÑV0 of ψ ˝ γ by letting f0 preiθ q “ rψpγpeiθ qq. If we let f “ ψ ´1 ˝ f0 , then f is a filling of γ and Lippf q ď Lippψ ´1 q Lippψq Lippγq. Taking DpXq ă D and CpXq ą Lippψ ´1 q Lippψq, the result follows. Corollary 3.4. For all Lipschitz maps γ : S 1 ÑX, we have Spanpγq ă 8. Proof. Let f˜ : D 2 ÑX be a (continuous) filling of a Lipschitz γ : S 1 ÑX. We must find a Lipschitz filling f of γ. For ǫ ą 0, let τǫ be the triangulation of D 2 given in Proposition 3.1, and for each 2-cell ∆ of τǫ , let ψ∆ : ∆ Ñ Dǫ2 be the C-bilipschitz map guaranteed by the proposition. Let F pǫq be the largest value of dpf˜pxq, f˜pyqq such that x, y are adjacent vertices of τǫ . If F pǫqÑ0 as ǫÑ0, then Proposition 3.3 lets us produce a Lipschitz filling f of γ as follows. Set f pxq “ f˜pxq for each vertex x of τǫ , where ǫ is small enough that CF pǫq ă DpXq where C is the constant given by Proposition 3.1 and DpXq is the constant given by Proposition 3.3. Set f to be a constant speed geodesic on each edge of τǫ , so that the map S 1 ÑX given by ¯¯ ´ ´ ´1 ǫeiθ eiθ ÞÑ f ψ∆  is DpXq-Lipschitz. By Proposition 3.3, f now admits a Lipschitz extension over 2-cells. On the other hand, if F pǫq does not go to 0 as ǫÑ0, then for every natural number n, we may find points xn , yn P D 2 such that dpxn , yn q ă n1 but dpf˜pxn q, f˜pyn qq ą δ for some fixed δ ą 0. Because D 2 ˆ D 2 is compact, we know that pxn , yn q must subconverge to some point px, xq in the diagonal 7  of D 2 ˆ D 2 . But pf˜pxn q, f˜pyn qq cannot subconverge to pf˜pxq, f˜pxqq because dpf˜pxn q, f˜pyn qq ą δ. This contradicts continuity of f˜. Proposition 3.5. Let X be a simply connected, complete homogeneous Riemannian manifold. For any L ą 0, there exists CpX, Lq ą 0 such that if γ : S 1 ÑX is L-Lipschitz, then Spanpγq ď CpX, Lq. Gromov [6, §5] refers to CpX, Lq as the filling span function of X. Proof. Fix L (all constants from here on will be presumed to depend uncontrollably on L). Let CL denote the L-Lipschitz loops in X with some fixed basepoint x, and equip CL with the uniform metric. By Arzela-Ascoli, CL is compact. Certainly, Span is not continuous on CL , but we will show that it is bounded. Because CL is compact, for every ǫ ą 0, CL may be covered by a finite number of ǫ balls. Hence, it suffices to find a constant C ą 1 such that for γ0 , γ P CL with dpγ, γ0 q ă C1 we have Spanpγq ă C maxt1, Spanpγ0 qu. To do this, let DpXq be as in proposition 3.3 (assuming without loss of generality that DpXq ă 1), and let γ0 , γ P CL with dpγ0 , γq ă DpXq. Let and decompose f0 : D 2 ÑX be a Lipschitz filling of γ0 . Let ǫ “ DpXq L 2 D into an inner disk and sectors as in Proposition 3.2. We will produce 0q a filling f : D 2 ÑX of γ which is Lippf 1´ǫ -Lipschitz on the inner disk and Op1q-Lipschitz on the annular region as desired. Define f |S 1 to be equal to γ. Let R “ 1´ǫ be the radius of the inner disk and define f to be a rescaled copy of f0 on the inner disk—i.e., f preiθ q “ 0q f0 p Rr eiθ q for r ď R. This implies that f is Lippf R -Lipschitz on the inner disk. If x and y are the images under f of the endpoints of a radial segment separating two sectors, then dpx, yq ă DpXq because dpγ, γ0 q ă DpXq. Define f to be a minimal speed geodesic on each of the radial segments separating two sectors, so that f is Op1q-Lipschitz on the boundary of each sector (considering L as fixed). Since sectors are uniformly bilipschitz to Dǫ2 , f admits a Op1q-Lipschitz extension over each sector by Proposition 3.3. 0q We see that f is Op1q-Lipschitz on the annular region and Lippf 1´ǫ -Lipschitz on the inner disk, implying the desired bound for Spanpγq, taking any sufficiently large C. Proposition 3.6. Let X and Y be simply connected, complete, homogeneous Riemannian manifolds, and suppose that X is quasi-isometric to Y . If Y is Lipschitz 1-connected, then so is X. 8  It seems likely that X and Y are bilipschitz if they are quasi-isometric. Proof. Let ψ : XÑY be a quasi isometry, and Ψ : Y ÑX a quasi inverse to ψ. Let γ : S 1 ÑX be an L-Lipschitz loop, where L ą 1 without loss of generality, and let ǫ “ L1 . To obtain a OpLq-Lipschitz filling for γ, we proceed as follows. Using Proposition 3.1, subdivide D 2 into OpL2 q triangles bilipschitz to 2 Dǫ , so that adjacent vertices on the boundary are mapped to within Op1q of each other by ψ ˝ γ. Let γ̃ : S 1 ÑY be a OpLq-Lipschitz loop in Y which agrees with ψ ˝ γ on vertices of our triangulation. By assumption, Y is Lipschitz 1-connected, so γ̃ admits a OpLq-Lipschitz filling f˜ : D 2 ÑY . We wish to convert Ψ ˝ f˜ into a filling f : D2 ÑX of γ. Let f0 : 2 D ÑX be a OpLq-Lipschitz map which agrees with Ψ ˝ f˜ on vertices of our triangulation—such a map exists because we may fill edges with constant speed geodesics and then fill triangles in X by Proposition 3.5, as Ψ ˝ f˜ maps adjacent vertices to within Op1q of each other. This gives us a OpLq-Lipschitz filling of f0 |S 1 . Note that the distance from γ to f0 |S 1 in the uniform metric is Op1q because on f0 |S 1 agrees with Ψ ˝ ψ ˝ γ on vertices. Now we take a new subdivision of D 2 , using Proposition 3.2 to subdivide D 2 into an inner disk surrounded by OpLq sectors which are uniformly bilipschitz to Dǫ2 . We build our filling f of γ as follows. On the inner disk, let f be given by a rescaled copy f0 . On radial segments, take f to be a constant speed geodesic, and fill sectors using Proposition 3.5.  4  Lipschitz moves.  We now specialize to the case where X is equal to some simply connected Lie group G equipped with a left-invariant Riemannian metric. Our main goal in this section is to reduce questions about filling loops in G to questions about manipulating words in some compact generating set for G. Notation. Any simply connected Lie group G admits a compact generating set S. The set S ˚ consists of all words s1 s2 . . . sℓ where s1 , . . . , sℓ P S and ℓ P N, together with the empty word ε. The length of a word w P S ˚ will be ´1 denoted ℓpwq. Given w “ s0 . . . sℓ P S ˚ , w´1 denotes the word s´1 ℓ . . . s1 . If w P S ˚ represents the identity element 1G of G, w is said to be a relation. If w, w1 P S ˚ represent the same element of G, we write w “G w1 . The word norm with respect to S will be denoted by | ¨ |S . That is for g P G, we define |g|S to be inftℓpwq : g “G w P S ˚ u.  9  Assumptions. Any time we take a compact generating set S for G, we assume without loss of generality that S is symmetric—meaning s P S ô s´1 P S—and that 1G P S, unless otherwise indicated. It suffices to fill over the unit square. It will be convenient to consider loops as maps r0, 1sÑX rather than S 1 ÑX and fillings as maps from the unit square r0, 1s ˆ r0, 1sÑX rather than D 2 ÑX. Definition. Given β : r0, 1sÑX with βp0q “ βp1q, a filling of β over the unit square is a map f : r0, 1s ˆ r0, 1sÑX with the following properties: • f agrees with β on the bottom edge of the unit square, meaning that f pt, 0q “ βptq for all t P r0, 1s. • f is constant on the set on the other three edges of the unit square, meaning that f px, yq “ βp0q for all px, yq P pr0, 1s ˆ 1q Y p0 ˆ r0, 1sq Y p1 ˆ r0, 1sq. We define Spanpβq to be the infimum of Lippf q as f ranges over Lipschitz fillings of β over the unit square. Similarly, given β, γ : r0, 1sÑX, a homotopy from β to γ is a map r0, 1s ˆ r0, 1sÑX such that f pt, 1q “ γptq, f pt, 0q “ βptq and the restrictions f |0ˆr0,1s and f |1ˆr0,1s are constant. We will now see that it makes no difference whether we consider loops as maps from r0, 1s or S 1 . The key tool is the following lemma. Lemma 4.1. There exists a constant C such that, given loops β : S 1 ÑX and γ : S 1 ÑX such that γ is a reparameterization of β, and given a filling f : D 2 ÑX of γ, we have Spanpβq ď C maxtLippf q, Lippβqu. Proof. An equivalent statement is proved in [10, Lemma 8.13]. Corollary 4.2. There is a universal constant C ą 0 with the following property. Suppose that γ : S 1 ÑX is a Lipschitz loop and β : r0, 1sÑX a Lipschitz path with βptq “ γpe2πit q for all t P r0, 1s. Then Spanpβq ă Spanpγq ă C Spanpβq. C 10  Proof. Let β0 : Bpr0, 1s2 qÑX be equal to β on the bottom edge and βp0q on the other three edges, and fix a bilipschitz map ψ : D 2 Ñr0, 1s ˆ r0, 1s. Observe that γ is a reparameterization of β0 ˝ ψ : S 1 ÑX. If f : D 2 ÑX is a Lipschitz filling of γ, then by Lemma 4.1 there is some OpLippf qq-Lipschitz filling f˜ : D 2 ÑX of β0 ˝ ψ, so f˜ ˝ ψ ´1 is a OpLippf qq-Lipschitz filling of β. We see that Spanpβq “ OpSpanpγqq. The reverse inequality is proved similarly.  4.1  Filling relations.  It suffices to fill words. Let S be a compact generating set for G. For each s P S choose a Lipschitz curve γs : r0, 1sÑG connecting 1 to s, such that the following properties hold. • There is some uniform bound on Lippγs q as s ranges over S. • γ1G is constant. • γs p1 ´ tq “ γs´1 ptq for all s P S and t P r0, 1s. Given a word w “ s1 s2 . . . sℓ P S ˚ , let γw : r0, 1sÑG denote the concatenation of the paths γs1 , s1 γs2 , . . . , s1 . . . sℓ´1 γsℓ , reparameterized so that the i i-th of these paths is used on r i´1 ℓ , ℓ s. That is, for 0 ď t ď 1 and i “ 1, . . . ℓ, we have ˙ ˆ i´1`t “ s1 s2 . . . si´1 γsi ptq. γw ℓ Proposition 4.3. Suppose that there exists a constant C such that for every w P S ˚ with w “G 1G , there exists a Cℓpwq-Lipschitz filling of γw over the unit square. Then G is Lipschitz 1-connected. Ť k k Proof. Note that G “ 8 k“1 S , and each S is compact. Hence, by the Baire category theorem, some power S k must contain an open neighborhood, so S 2k contains some open neighborhood of the identity, which in turn contains the r-ball around the identity for some r ą 0. Take K to be a natural number K contains the 1-ball around the identity in G. larger than 2k r , so that S Given a loop γ : r0, 1sÑG, we produce a OpLippγqq-Lipschitz filling f : r0, 1s2 ÑG of γ as follows. Let n “ rLippγqs—by Propositions 3.3 and 3.5 it suffices to only consider γ such that n is“ at least 2. Cellularly decompose ‰ 1 , 1 together with the collection the unit square into the rectangle r0, 1s ˆ n “ i i`1 ‰ “ 1 ‰ of squares n , n ˆ 0, n as i runs from 0 to n ´ 1. Define f to be constant on all the vertical edges. Note that for each i, ` ˘´1 ` i`1 ˘ the element γ ni γ n lies in the 1-ball in G, so it may be represented 11  ` i 1˘ ` i`1 1 ˘ by some wi P S K . On the horizontal edge connecting , to n n n ,n , `i˘ let` f be ˘a copy of γ translated by γ —that is for 0 ď t ď 1, take w i n `i˘ 1 , “ γ γ ptq. Letting w “ w . . . w , observe that f agrees with f i`t wi 1 “ n‰ n n n γw the the bottom of the rectangle r0, 1s ˆ n1 , 1 , so f may be extended over this rectangle with Lippf q “ OpLippγw qq “ Opℓpwqq “ OpLippγqq where the first bound comes from our hypothesis. Finally, f admits a OpLippγqq-Lipschitz extension over each square by Proposition 3.5. Definition. Suppose C is a collection of pairs pv, wq where v, w P S ˚ are words in S. We say that v w for pv, wq P C if there exists some constant C depending only on C with the following property: given pv, wq P C, the map from Bpr0, 1s ˆ r0, 1sq to X which is equal to γv on the bottom edge, γw on the top edge, and constant on the sides admits a Cℓpvq-Lipschitz filling. We now give some basic rules for manipulating fillings. Often, the set C will be inferred from context. Lemma 4.4. The following rules hold in any simply connected Lie group G. • Suppose C Ă S ˚ ˆS ˚ . Then v w for pv, wq P C if and only if vw for pv, wq P C and Lippwq “ OpLippvqq for each pair pv, wq P C.  ε  • Fix n, and suppose given sets Ci Ă S ˚ ˆ S ˚ for i “ 1 to n. If, for each i “ 1 to n, we have v w for pv, wq P Ci , then v1 . . . vn w1 . . . wn for all pv1 , w1 q P C1 , . . . , pvn , wn q P Cn . • Given C, C 1 Ă S ˚ ˆ S ˚ , if v1 v2 for pv1 , v2 q P C and v2 v3 for 1 pv2 , v3 q P C , then v1 v3 for pairs pv1 , v3 q such that there exists v2 P S ˚ with pv1 , v2 q P C and pv2 , v3 q P C 1 . • ww´1  ε for w P S ˚ .  • Let U Ă G be an bounded neighborhood of the identity in G. If D is the collection of relations w “ w1 . . . wℓ P S ˚ such every prefix w1 . . . wi represents an element of U , then w ε for w P D. • G is Lipschitz 1-connected if and only if and v  12  ε for v P S ˚ .  Proof. The first item follows immediately from Lemma 4.1. To prove “the second item, subdivide the unit square into rectangles ‰ i of the form i´1 , ˆ r0, 1s for i “ 1, . . . , n. Suppose given pv1 , w1 q P n n C1 , . . . , pvn , wn q P Cn . By hypothesis, there exists a homotopy fi : r0, 1s ˆ r0, 1sÑG from vi to wi with Lippfi q “ OpLippv “ i´1i qq.i ‰ Define a map f : r0, 1s ˆ r0, 1s by putting a rescaled copy of fi in n , n ˆ r0, 1s—that is, for 0 ď t ď 1 and i “ 1, . . . , n, we take ˙ ˆ i´1`t , y “ fi pt, yq. f n Thus Lippf q “ Opmaxtn Lippfi q : i “ 1 . . . nuq “ OpLippvqq because n is fixed. Since f restricted to the top of the unit square is a reparameterization of v1 . . . vn , and f restricted to the bottom of the unit square is a reparameterization of w1 . . . wn , we are done. The proof of the ‰ divide the unit square into two ‰ item is similar: “ “ third rectangles r0, 1s ˆ 0, 21 and r0, 1s ˆ 21 , 1 and put a rescaled copy of the homotopy from v1 to v2 into the bottom rectangle and a rescaled copy of the homotopy from v2 to v3 into the top rectangle to get the desired homotopy v1 to v3 . To prove the fourth item, let w P S ˚ , and let f : r0, 1s ˆ r0, 1s be defined by f pt, sq “ γw p2 maxt0, mintt ´ s, 1 ´ t ´ suuq. The reader may check that f is a Lippγww´1 q-Lipschitz filling of γww´1 . To prove the fifth item, let K be such that S K contains U . Given w P D, let ℓ “ ℓpwq so that we can write w “ s1 . . . sℓ . We will find a Opℓq f of ‰ “ 1 filling , 1 together γw as follows. Subdivide r0, 1sˆr0, 1s into the rectangle r0, 1sˆ ℓ “ i´1 i ‰ “ 1 ‰ , ˆ 0, . Define f to be constant on with the“ squares of the form ℓ ℓ ℓ ‰ r0, 1s ˆ 1ℓ , 1 . For each i, choose wi P“ S K ‰such that wi “G s1 . . . si and take f to be γwi on the vertical edge ℓi ˆ 0, 1ℓ —that is ˆ ˙ i 1´t f , “ γwi ptq ℓ ℓ for 0 ď t ď 1 and i “ 0, . . . , n. We may extend f over each square with Lipschitz constant Opℓq by Proposition 3.5. The sixth item is a consequence of Proposition 4.3.  4.2  Normal form triangles.  We now discuss normal forms ω and ω-triangles. Using a technique of Gromov, we shall see that G is Lipschitz 1-connected if ω-triangles are Lipschitz 13  1-connected. Definition. A normal form for a compactly generated group G equipped with compact generating set S is a map ω : GÑS ˚ such that ℓpωpgqq “ Op|g|S q for g P G. If ω is a normal form, then an ω-triangle is a word in S ˚ of the form ωpg1 qωpg2 qωpg3 q where g1 g2 g3 “G 1. Lemma 4.5. Let ω : GÑS ˚ be a normal form. If ∆ ∆, then G is Lipschitz 1-connected.  ε for ω-triangles  Proof. This is proved in [10, Proposition 8.14]. The proof is sketched in Figure 2.  5  Tame subgroups and the multiamalgam.  Assumptions. From here on, we specialize to the case where G “ U ¸ A, where U and A are contractible Lie groups, with A abelian and U a closed group of strictly upper triangular real matrices. Standard solvable groups. Observe that A acts on the abelianization U {rU, U s. Fix a norm on the vector space U {rU, U s. If there is no vector X such that limnÑ8 n1 log }an ¨ X}Ñ0 for all a P A, we say that G is standard solvable. In this section we will be interested in the structure and geometry of standard solvable groups. §5.1 will describe the so-called standard tame subgroups of a standard solvable group. Lemma 5.6 will show that how to find Lipschitz fillings for words which already represent the identity in the free product of the standard tame subgroups. Theorem 5.8—quoted from [4]—will give conditions under which G may be presented as the free product of its standard tame subgroups modulo certain easily understood amalgamation relations.  14  γωpγp 21 qq  γωpγp 14 qq  γωpγp 12 q´1 q  γωpγp 41 q´1 γp 21 qq  γωpγp 12 q´1 γp 43 qq  γωpγp 43 q´1 q  Figure 2: This figure indicates how to fill γ “ γw for an arbitrary relation w P S ˚ given that one knows how to fill ω-triangles. The top edge and all the vertical edges are taken to be constant, and each horizontal edge is understood to be an appropriate translate of its label, so that each rectangle represents an ω-triangle, except the bottom row. The bottom edge is taken to be γw , and there is a row of squares along the bottom which may be filled by Proposition 3.5  5.1  Weights.  Let G “ U ¸ A be standard solvable, and let u be the Lie algebra of U , identified as usual with the tangent space of U at 1U , and fix any norm } ¨ } on u. For a P ˇA we denote the conjugation action of a on u by Adpaq, so that dˇ a´1 expptXqa. Observe that HompA, Rq is a vector space. AdpaqX “ dt t“0  Definition. (See [4, §4.B]). For a homomorphism α : AÑ R, define the αweight space uα Ă u to consist of 0 together with all X P u such that for all a P A, 1 lim log } Adpaqn X} “ αpaq. nÑ8 n Define the set of weights W to consist of all α P HompA, Rq for which 15  dim uα ą 0. By a conic subset, we mean the intersection of W with an open, convex cone in HompA, Rq that does not contain 0. Denote the set of all conic subsets by C. For C P À C, let UC denote the closed connected subgroup of U whose Lie algebra is αPC uα , and let GC “ UC ¸ A. These groups GC are referred to as standard tame subgroups of G (see remarks in §5.2). As an exercise, the reader may wish to compute the weights and À weight spaces for a group of Sol type. We have that C is finite, that u “ αPW uα , and that ruα , uβ s Ă uα`β for α, β P W [4, §4.B]. We now define H2 puq and recall the definition of Killpuq so that we will be able to state Theorem 6.1, our main theorem. Ź2 Ź Ź3 uÑu be the maps of AuÑ 2 u and d2 : Definition. Let d3 : modules induced by taking d3 px ^ y ^ zq “ rx, ys ^ z ` ry, zs ^ x ` rz, xs ^ y d2 px ^ yq “ ´rx, ys. Define H2 puq “ kerpd2 q{ imagepd3 q. Define Killpuq to be the quotient of the symmetric square u d u by the subspace spanned by elements of the form rx, ys d z ´ y d rx, zs. H2 puq and ŹKillpuq are A-representations. Observe that the natural Aaction on 3 u descends to an A-action on H2 puq because, by the Jacobi-like identity AdpaqrX, Y s “ rAdpaqX, Y s`rX, AdpaqY s, the subspaces imagepd3 q and kerpd2 q are preserved by the action of A. Similarly, Killpuq is also an A-representation. Recall that, for an A-representation V we define V0 to consist of 0 together with vectors X such that limnÑ8 n1 log }an ¨ X} “ 0 for all a P A. We thus define the subspaces H2 puq0 and Killpuq0 .  5.2  Tame subgroups.  Definition. Given a P A, a vacuum subset for a is a compact Ω Ă U such that for every compact K Ă U , there is some n ą 0 with Adpaqn K Ă Ω. We say that G is tame if there exists a P A with a vacuum subset. G is tame if and only if there is some a P A with αpaq ă 0 for all α P W, so GC is tame for C P C [4, Proposition 4.B.5]. We now wish to show that if G is tame, then it is Lipschitz 1-connected. Our starting point is the following. 16  Proposition 5.1. Suppose G is tame, then there is some a P A and a compact generating set S Ă U for U such that AdpaqS 2 Ă S. Proof. By hypothesis, there is some b P A with a vacuum subset Ω. Let S0 be a compact generating set for U . As in the proof of Proposition 4.3, we see that some power of S0 contains an open ball around the identity, hence for some M ą 0, the set S0M contains Ω. As Ω is a vacuum set for b, there exists L such that AdpbqL S02M Ă Ω. Taking a “ bL and S “ S0M , we have that S is a generating set because it contains S0 (because 1 P S0 by our standing assumption that generating sets contain the identity), and AdpaqS 2 “ AdpbqL S02M Ă Ω Ă S as desired. Proposition 5.2. If G “ U ¸ A is tame, then G is Lipschitz 1-connected. Remark. Probably, a tame group G is CAT(0) for some choice of metric, but we do not know how to prove this, so we give a combinatorial proof using Lemma 4.5. Proof. Fix a P A and a compact generating set SU Ă U such that AdpaqSU2 Ă SU as in Proposition 5.1, let SA be a generating set for A with a P SA , and let S “ SU Y SA , so that S is a generating set for G. Note that Adpaqpsq “ s for s P SA , and observe that if ℓ ą rlog2 js ą 0, then ˆ j ˙ ˆ 1 j ˙ ´ ¯ r s r r ss Ă Adpaqℓ SUj Ă Adpaqℓ´1 SU2 Ă Adpaqℓ´2 SU2 2 . . . Ă Adpaqℓ´rlog2 js pSU q Ă SU , because the function f : j ÞÑ r 2j s satisfies f rlog2 js j “ 1 for natural numbers j. In other words, given u P U , there exist k ď rlog2 |u|SU s and s P SU such that u “G ak sa´k . It follows, letting φA : GÑA denote projection, that we may define a normal form ω : GÑS ˚ such that • for any g P G, the word ωpgq is given by ωpφA pgqqωpφA pgq´1 gq, ˚ is a minimal length word representing • for g P A, the word ωpgq P SA g,  • and for g P U zt1u, ωpgq is of the form ak sa´k where s P SU and 0 ď k “ Oplog |g|SU q.  17  To check that this is a normal form—i.e., that ℓpωpgqq “ Op|g|S q, note that |φA pgq|S ď |g|S , and |φA pgq´1 g|SU “ Opexp |g|S q, so that |φA pgq´1 pgq|S “ OplogpOpexp |g|S qqq “ Op|g|S q because U is at most exponentially distorted in G [4, Proposition 6.B.2]. It will suffice to show that ∆ ε for ω-triangles ∆ P S ˚ . An ω-triangle ∆ has the form a1 ωpu1 qa2 ωpu2 qa3 ωpu3 q, ˚ with the a and u where for i “ 1, 2, 3, we have ui P U and ai P SA i i satisfying pAdpa3 a2 qu1 qpAdpa3 qu2 qu3 “ 1. To show that ∆ ε, it thus suffices to establish the following two facts.  • ωpuqb  ˚. bωpb´1 ubq for u P U and b P SA  • ωpu1 qωpu2 qωpu3 q  ε for u1 , u2 , u3 P U such that u1 u2 u3 “ 1.  Lemma 4.4 will be crucial for showing the first fact—in particular, we use the Lemma to provide homotopies between words which stay inside a bounded neighborhood of the identity. ˚, Conjugation. To show that ωpuqb bωpb´1 ubq for u P U and b P SA k ´k note that ωpuq may be written as a sa for some s P SU and k ě 0. Because AdpaqS 2 Ă S, there is some C ě 1 such that, for all a1 P SA , we have AdpaqC Adpa1 qS Ă S. Let K “ Cℓpbq ` k, so that AdpaqK´k Adpb1 qS Ă S ˚ with ℓpb1 q ď ℓpbq, and let s1 , s2 P S be given by for any word b1 P SA 1 K´k s “ Adpaq s and s2 “ b´1 s1 b. We homotope as follows, liberally using Lemma 4.4. ωpuqb “ ak sa´k b aK ak´K saK´k a´K b  aK s1 ba´K  aK bb´1 s1 ba´K  baK s2 a´K  bωpb´1 ubq.  Filling ω-triangles in U . To show that ωpu1 qωpu2 qωpu3 q ε for u1 , u2 , u3 P U such that u1 u2 u3 “ 1, write ωpui q as aki si a´ki for i “ 1, 2, 3, with ki ě 0 and si P SU . Let K “ k1 ` k2 ` k3 and let s1i “ Adpaki ´K qsi P SU . We homotope as follows. ωpu1 qωpu2 qωpu3 q “ pak1 s1 a´k1 qpak2 s2 a´k2 qpak3 s3 a´k3 q paK ak1 ´K s1 aK´k1 a´K qpaK ak2 ´K s2 aK´k2 a´K qpaK ak3 ´K s3 aK´k3 a´K q paK s11 a´K qpaK s12 a´K qpaK s13 a´K q  18  aK s11 s12 s13 a´K  aK a´K  ε.  5.3  Filling freely trivial words.  We now return to the case where the standard solvable group G “ U ¸ A is not necessarily tame. Recall that the collection of conic subsets C is finite. For C P C, let GC be the tame group UC ¸ A, and let SGC be a compact generating set for this group. Let H “ ˚CPC GC , and let SH Ă H be the union of the SGC . There is a natural map from H to G. Lemma ˚ represents the identity in H, then its image in 5.6 will show that if w P SH G admits a Opℓpwqq-Lipschitz filling. We will need the following auxiliary results first—the reader should probably skip directly to the proof of Lemma 5.6 to understand the point of these propositions. ˚ representing the identity • Proposition 5.3 shows that a word w P SH in H may be reduced to the identity by repeated deletion of subwords ˚ such that rj represents the identity in GCj . rj P SG C j  • Proposition 5.5 describes an appropriately Lipschitz rectangular homotopy between words obtained by these deletions. • Proposition 5.4 describes a part of the homotopy given in Proposition 5.5. ˚ such that w “ 1, there exists a Proposition 5.3. Given a word w P SH H ˚ with natural number n ď ℓpwq and, for j “ 0, . . . , n, words aj , rj , bj P SH the following properties.  • w “S ˚ a0 r0 b0 . H  • an , rn , bn “ ε. ˚ and • For all j “ 0, . . . , n, there is some Cj P C such that rj P SG Cj rj “GCj 1.  • aj bj “S ˚ aj`1 rj`1 bj`1 for j “ 0, . . . , n ´ 1. H  Proof. Note that each element of SH lies in some GC . If w ‰ ε represents the identity, then by the theory of free products, w has a (nonempty) subword which is comprised of elements of some SGC and represents the identity ˚ in GC . Thus, we may write w “S ˚ a0 r0 b0 where r0 P SG as desired. C0 H Applying this argument recursively, we obtain aj , rj , bj as desired. ˚ Proposition 5.4. Given a natural number ” k andı w P SH , there exists a k Opk ` ℓpwqq Lipschitz map f : r0, 1s ˆ 0, k`ℓpwq ÑG with the following properties.  19  • Along the bottom, f is given by 1k w, meaning f pt, 0q “ γ1k w ptq for 0 ď t ď 1. ´ ¯ k • Along the top, f is given by w1k , meaning f t, k`ℓpwq “ γw1k ptq for 0 ď t ď 1. • f is constant on the sides, so f p0, sq and f p1, sq do not depend on s. Proof. Let γ : R ÑG be given as follows. γptq “ 1G for t ď 0, γptq “ γ1k w ptq for 0 ă t ď 1, and γptq “ γ1k w p1q for t ą 1. Observe that Lippγq “ Opk ` ℓpwqq Then we may take f pt, sq “ γpt ` sq as our desired filling. ˚ , r P S˚ Proposition 5.5. Given a, b P SH GC a relation in GC for some  C P C, and any natural number k, let ℓ “ ℓparb1k q and h “ ℓprq ℓ . There exists a Opℓq-Lipschitz map f : r0, 1s ˆ r0, hs ÑG with the following properties. • Along the bottom, f is given by arb1k , meaning f pt, 0q “ γarb1k ptq for t P r0, 1s. • Along the top, f is given by ab1k`ℓprq , meaning f pt, hq “ γab1k`ℓprq ptq for t P r0, 1s. • f is constant on the sides, so f p0, sq and f p1, sq do not depend on s. Proof. (See the right hand side of Figure 3.) Subdivide the rectangle into r0, 1sˆr0, h{2s and r0, 1sˆrh{2, 1s. Define f to be a1ℓprq b1k on r0, 1sˆth{2u— i.e., f pt, h{2q “ γa1ℓprq b1k ptq. First, we extend f over the top rectangle r0, 1s ˆ rh{2, 1s. For   „ „ k ℓpaq ˆ rh{2, 1s Y 1 ´ , 1 ˆ rh{2, 1s pt, sq P 0, ℓ ℓ we have that γa1r b1k ptq “ γab1ℓprq`k ptq, so we can just set f to be constant vertically—i.e., we define f pt, sq “ γab1ℓprq`k ptq for these pt, sq. To extend f to  „ k ℓpaq ,1 ´ ˆ rh{2, 1s, pt, sq P ℓ ℓ 20  we simply apply Proposition 5.4. Thus, we have given a Opℓq-Lipschitz extension of f over the top rectangle. Now we extend over the bottom rectangle r0, 1s ˆ r0, h{2s. For „   „ ℓpaq ℓparq pt, sq P 0, , 1 ˆ r0, h{2s ˆ r0, h{2s Y ℓ ℓ ”define f pt,ısq “ γarb1k ptq. Finally, we apply Proposition 5.2 to extend f over ℓpaq ℓparq ˆ r0, h{2s, since this is equivalent to filling r. ℓ , ℓ  Lemma 5.6. Recalling the notation introduced at the start of §5.3, we have ˚ such that w “ 1 w ε (in G) for all w P SH H ˚ be a relation in H and take a sequence of Proof. (See Figure 3.) Let w P SH words aj , rj , bj , j “ 0, . . . , n as in Proposition 5.3. We will define ř a OpℓpwqqLipschitz filling f : r0, 1s ˆ r0, 1sÑG of γw as follows. Let ℓk “ jăk ℓprj q, so that ℓ0 “ 0 and ℓn “ ℓpwq, and subdivide r0, 1s ˆ r0, 1s into rectangles r0, 1s ˆ rℓj , ℓj`1 s for j “ 0, . . . , n ´ 1. Set  f pt, ℓj q “ γa  ℓj j rj bj 1  ptq,  noting that ℓpaj rj bj 1ℓj q “ ℓpwq. Proposition 5.5 now shows that f may be extended over each rectangle r0, 1s ˆ rℓj , ℓj`1 s with Lipschitz constant Opℓpwqq. Distortion. We now see that if G is standard solvable, then elements of U may be expressed much more efficiently in the generators of G than in the generators of U . Proposition 5.7. Suppose G “ U ¸ A is standard solvable, S is a compact generating set for G, and SU is a compact generating set for U . There exists C ą 1 such that if u P U zt1U u, then 1 logp1 ` |u|SU q ď |u|S ď C logp1 ` |u|SU q. C Proof. This follows, with some effort, from [4, Proposition 6.B.2].  21  1 ℓn  rn´1  1k`ℓprq  1ℓn´1  a  ...  a1  a2  r2 b2  r1  b1  a0  Proposition 5.4 1 ℓ2 1 ℓ1  r0  b  a  1r Prop. 5.2  b  r  b  1k  b0  Figure 3: The figure on the left depicts our strategy for filling of the freely trivial word w “ a0 r0 b0 , where the aj , rj , bj are as in Proposition 5.3. The figure on the right depicts the proof of Proposition 5.5 which allows us to fill in each rectangle in the left hand figure.  5.4  The multiamalgam.  In this subsection, we will define the multiamalgam Ĝ of a standard solvable group G “ U ¸ A (first introduced by Abels [1]), and quote a key theorem of Cornulier and Tessera, which states that certain conditions under which G – Ĝ—this means that G is put together from its standard tame subgroups in a nice way, which will eventually let us build fillings in G from fillings in standard tame subgroups. In order to state this theorem in the proper generality, we must briefly discuss the theory of unipotent groups. Unipotent groups. For a commutative R-algebra P, and a real unipotent group U (i.e., a closed group of upper triangular real matrices with diagonal entries equal to 1), the theory of algebraic groups allows us to define a group U pPq [2, §1.4]. In particular, if U Ă GLpn; Rq consists of all upper triangular matrices with diagonal entries equal to 1, then U pPq consists of all upper triangular n ˆ n matrices over P with diagonal entries equal to 1—such matrices are certainly invertible, having determinant equal to 1. Suppose P “ RY , so that P consists of all functions f : Y Ñ R. Then there is an obvious bijection U pPq Ø U Y , and for y P Y and ũ P U pPq we may speak of ũpyq P U .  22  Definition. (See [4, §10.B]). Let G “ U ¸ A be real standard solvable. The multiamalgam Ĝ of the standard tame subgroups GC is defined by Ĝ “ ˚CPC GC {xxRG yy where RG “ tiC puq´1 iC 1 puq : u P GC X GC 1 u and iC denotes the inclusion of GC in the direct product. Similarly, the multiamalgam Û is defined by Û “ ˚CPC UC {xxRU yy where RU “ tiC puq´1 iC 1 puq : u P UC X UC 1 u and iC denotes the inclusion of UC in the direct product. For any commutative R-algebra P, we define Û pPq and ĜpPq similarly, where GC pPq is understood to be UC pPq ¸ A. Of course, Û ¸ A – Ĝ. Recall that G admits the SOL obstruction if it surjects onto a group of SOL type. Cornulier and Tessera give conditions under which Û is isomorphic to U . Theorem 5.8. Let G “ U ¸ A be a standard solvable real Lie group. If H2 puq0 “ 0, Kill2 puq0 “ 0, and G does not admit the SOL obstruction then Û pPq – U pPq for all commutative R-algebras P. Proof. This follows from Corollary 9.D.4 of [4]. The 2-tameness hypotheses of the corollary is satisfied because of Proposition 4.C.3 of [4].  6  Proof of the main theorem.  The rest of this paper is devoted to the proof of the following theorem. Theorem 6.1. Let G “ U ¸ A where U and A are contractible real Lie groups, A is abelian, and U is a real unipotent group (i.e., a closed group of strictly upper triangular real matrices.) If G is standard solvable and does not surject onto a group of Sol type, and H2 puq0 and Killpuq0 are trivial, then G is Lipschitz 1-connected. Proof. Lemma 6.2 will show that there exists a generating set S for G and normal form ω : GÑS ˚ with certain properties. Lemma 6.6 will show that if ω has these properties, then ∆ ε for ω-triangles ∆. By Lemma 4.5, this will suffice to prove the theorem.  23  6.1  Defining ω.  Standing assumptions. Throughout the rest of this paper, we assume that G satisfies the hypotheses of the theorem. That is, G “ U ¸ A is a standard solvable group such that H2 puq0 “ 0, Kill2 puq0 “ 0, and G does not surject onto a group of Sol type. Notation. Let H “ ˚CPC GC and HU rPs “ ˚CPC UC pPq for any commutative R algebra P, and let iC : UC pPqÑHU rPs denote inclusion. We will write HU for HU rRs. Let SA be a compact generating set Ťfor A. For C P C, let SC be a compact generating set for UC . Let SU “ CPC SC —by Theorem 5.8 this is a compact generating set for U . Let S “ SA Y SU , this is a compact generating set for G. Let SH be a generating set for H which is equal to the union of compact generating sets for GC as C ranges over C, and let SHU Ă HU be the union of the SC —this is a generating set for HU . Given C P C and x P UC , let x P pSA Y SC q˚ be a minimal length word representing x. Let φA : GÑA be projection. Let the set theoretic map φU : GÑU be defined by φU pgq “ φA pgq´1 g, so that g “ φA pgqφU pgq. Lemma 6.2. Under our standing assumptions, there exists a finite sequence C1 . . . Ck of conic subsets and a normal form ω : GÑS ˚ such that ω has the following properties. • For any g P G, ωpgq “ ωpφA pgqqωpφU pgqq. ˚ is a minimal length word representing a. • For a P A, ωpaq P SA  • For u P U , ωpuq has the form x1 . . . xk , where xi P UCi . Proof. This follows from Proposition 6.B.2 of [4], but we will now give a different proof in order to introduce a trick that will be used later. The Cornulier-Tessera trick. For a set Y , define the commutative Ralgebra PY as the collection of all functions f : Y ˆr1, 8qÑ R such that there is some β P N with |f py, tq| ă p1 ` tqβ . Note that an element of U pPY q may be identified with a function from Y ˆ r1, 8q to U . Alternatively, one may think of an element of U pPY q as a family of functions r1, 8qÑU , indexed by Y with matrix coefficients uniformly bounded by some polynomial p1 ` tqβ . Choose Y to have at least continuum cardinality, and let g̃ P U pPY q be such that for every g P U , there is some y P Y and t “ Op|g|SU q such that g̃py, tq “ g. It is certainly possible to do this—for instance, one might take Y “ U and set g̃py, tq to be 1U for t ă |y|SU and y for t ě |y|SU . In claiming 24  that g̃ P U pPY q, we have used the fact that the matrix coefficients of g P U are at most polynomial in |g|SU . Since, by Theorem 5.8, U pPY q is generated by the union of the UC pPY q, we may write g̃ “ x̃1 . . . x̃k where each x̃i is an element of some UCi pPY q. Observe that there exists some α P N such that |x̃i py, tq|SCi ď p1 ` tqα for all i “ 1, . . . , k, y P Y , and t ě 1. Now, let g be an element of U . By definition of g̃, there exist y P Y and t “ Op|g|SU q such that g̃py, tq “ g. For i “ 1, . . . , k, let xi “ x̃i py, tq. We have that g “ g̃py, tq “ x̃1 py, tq . . . x̃k py, tq “ x1 . . . xk , and xi P UCi pPY q with |xi |SCi “ Optα q “ Op|g|αSU q. Take ωpgq to be x1 . . . xk , and note that |ωpgq|S “ Oplog |g|SU q because |xi |SA YSCi “ Oplog |xi |SCi q “ Oplog |g|SU q by 5.7. We have thus defined ω on elements of U , with the desired properties. ˚ representing Define ω on A by taking ωpaq to be the shortest word in SA a P A. Extend ω to all of g by setting ωpgq “ ωpφA pgqqωpφU pgqq. We must show that ω is a normal form—i.e., that, for g P G, ℓpωpgqq “ Op|g|S q. We have ℓpωpφA pgqqq “ |φA pgq|S “ Op|g|S q, so it suffices to show that ℓpωpφU pgqqq “ Op|g|S q. If w P S ˚ is a minimal length word representing some g P G, note that ωpφA pgqq´1 w represents φU pgq. By 5.7, there is some constant C ą 1 not depending on g such that 1 log |φU pgq|SU . C Thus, since |ωpφU pgqq|S “ Oplog |φU pgq|SU q, we have that |ωpφA pgqq´1 w|S ě  ωpφU pgqq “ Op|φA pgq|S ` |w|S q “ Op|g|S q as desired.  6.2  Filling ω-triangles.  We wish to show that we may fill ω triangles, where ω is a normal form produced by Lemma 6.2. Proposition 6.5 will allow us to homotope ωtriangles into relations of the form xi . . . xK where each xi is a word in SA Y SCi efficiently representing an element xi of UCi , where C1 , . . . , CK is some fixed sequence of conic subsets. In order to fill such relations, recall from Theorem 5.8 that under our standing assumptions, U pPq – Û pPq for any commutative R-algebra P. Consequently, the kernel of HU rPsÑU pPq is normally generated by elements of the form iC puq´1 iC 1 puq  ru P UC pPq X UC 1 pPq.s 25  In order to fill x1 . . . xK in Corollary 6.4, we will need to factor x1 . . . xK in the free product HU as a product of a bounded number of elements of the form g´1 iC puq´1 iC 1 puqg, where each g P HU is a product of a bounded number of elements living ř in some factors UC , with |g|SU and |u|SU controlled by some polynomial of K j“1 |xj |SCj . Lemma 6.3. (See [4, Lemma 7.B.1]). Suppose that our standing assumptions are satisfied. Given a sequence of conical subsets C1 , . . . CK , there exist natural numbers N, µ, β such that for any sequence xi P UCi with x1 x2 . . . xK “U 1U there is an equality of the form ´1 x1 . . . xK “HU pg1 r1 g1´1 q . . . pgN rN gN q  satisfying • gj “HU gj1 . . . gjµ where gjk P UCjk for some Cjk P C. • Each rj is of the form iCj1 puj qiCj2 puj q´1 for some conical subsets Cj1 , Cj2 and some uj P UCj1 X UCj2 . • |gjk |SCjk “ Opℓβ q, |uj |SC 1 “ Opℓβ q, and |uj |SC 2 “ Opℓβ q where ℓ “ j j ř 1` K |x |. i i“1  Proof. This is a special case of [4, Lemma 7.B.1], but we will reprise most of the details here. We will use the same Cornulier and Tessera trick we used to prove Lemma 6.2. Take PY as in the proof of Lemma 6.2. Recall that x̃ P UC pPY q may be thought of as a function from Y ˆ r0, 8q to UC . Let Y be a set with at least continuum cardinality, so that there exists px̃1 , . . . , x̃K q P UC1 pPY q ˆ . . . ˆ UCK pPY q which has the following strong surjectivity property: for any px1 . . . xK q P UC1 pPY q ˆ . . . ˆ UCK pPY q with x1 . . . xK “U 1 there exists y P Y and t “ Op|x1 |SC1 ` . . . ` |xK |SCK q with x̃i py, tq “ xi . By Theorem 5.8, we know that there is some equality of the form ´1 r̃N g̃N q x̃1 . . . x̃K “HU rPY s pg̃1´1 r̃1 g̃1 q . . . pg̃N  where g̃ P ˚UC pPY q and each r̃j has the form iCj1 pũj q´1 iCj2 pũj q for some conical subsets Cj1 , Cj2 and ũj P UCj1 pPY q X UCj2 pPY q. Since the UC pPY q generate HU rPY s, there must be some µ such that for all j “ 1, . . . , N , g̃j “ g̃j1 . . . g̃jµ , 26  where each g̃jk lives in UCjk for some Cjk P C. Note that by definition of PY , there is some β such that all |g̃jk py, tq|SU and |ũj py, tq|SC 1 are Optβ q. j ř Given, x1 , . . . , xK P UC1 ˆ . . . ˆ UCK , let ℓ “ K |x | i“1 i SCi and choose y P Y and t “ Opℓq such that x̃i py, tq “ xi for i “ 1, . . . , K. For j “ 1, . . . , N and k “ 1, . . . , µ, let gj “ g̃j py, tq, gjk “ g̃jk py, tq, uj “ ũj py, tq, and rj “ iC 1 puj q´1 iC 2 puj q. It follows that ´1 q, x1 . . . xK “HU pg1 r1 g1´1 q . . . pgN rN gN  and the gj and rj satisfy the desired conditions. Corollary 6.4. Suppose that our standing assumptions are satisfied. Given a sequence of conical subsets C1 , . . . CK , we have, in G, that x1 . . . xK  ε.  for any sequence xi P UCi with x1 x2 . . . xK “U 1U . Proof. By Lemma 6.3, we have (for β, N, µ independent of the xj ), ´1 q x1 . . . xK “HU pg1 r1 g1´1 q . . . pgN rN gN  where gj “HU gj1 . . . gjµ for gjk P UCjk , each rj is of the form i1C puj q´1 iC 2 puj q for some conical subsets Cj1 , Cj2 and some uj P UCj1 XUCj2 , and |gjk |SCjk , |uj |SC 1 “ j ř Opℓβ q where ℓ “ 1 ` K |x |. i“1 i For each j “ 1, . . . , N , let gj P S ˚ be gj1 . . . gjµ . Let rj P S ˚ be equal to pu1j q´1 u2j , where u1j P SA Y SCj1 is a minimal length word representing uj in GCj1 and u2j P SA Y SCj2 is a minimal length word representing uj in GCj2 —this implies that rj represents rj in H. First we show that rj ε. Note that Cj1 X Cj2 is itself a conic subset, so there is some uj P pSA Y SCj1 XCj2 q˚ which represents uj in GCj1 XCj2 with ℓpuj q “ Opℓprj qq. Thus we have (by Proposition 5.2), rj “ pu1j q´1 u2j  uj ´1 uj  ε.  Next, observe that ℓpgj q “  µ ÿ  k“1  ˜  ˜  µ ÿ  ℓpgjk q “  “ O β log 1 `  Oplog |gjk |SCjk q  k“1 K ÿ  i“1  ¸¸  |xi |  27  “ Opℓpx1 . . . xK qq,  by Proposition 5.7, and ℓpri q “ Opℓpx1 . . . xK qq similarly. Because x1 . . . xK “H pg1 r1 g1 ´1 q . . . pgN rN gN ´1 q, and ℓppg1 r1 g1 ´1 q . . . pgN rN gN ´1 qq “ Opℓpx1 . . . xK qq, we have by Lemma 4.4 and Lemma 5.6 that x1 . . . xK  pg1 r1 g1 ´1 q . . . pgN rN gN ´1 q  pg1 g1 ´1 q . . . pgN gN ´1 q because rj  ε  ε as noted above.  We need one more proposition before we can fill ω-triangles. Given a, x P G, let a x denote axa´1 . Proposition 6.5. Fix a sequence of conical subsets C1 , . . . , CK P C. We have that a x . . . a x ωpaq ωpaqx1 . . . xK 1 2 for all a P A and xi P UCi . Proof. ωpaqx1 . . . xK  pωpaqx1 ωpaq´1 qpωpaqx2 ωpaq´1 q . . . pωpaqxK ωpaq´1 qωpaq ax  1...  ax  K ωpaq,  by Proposition 5.2. We now conclude the proof of our main theorem by showing that we may fill ω-triangles. Lemma 6.6. Under our standing assumptions, if g1 , g2 , g3 P G with g1 g2 g3 “G 1G , we have ωpg1 qωpg2 qωpg3 q ε. Proof. Recall that ωpgq has the form ωpaqx1 . . . xk where ui P SA Y SCi for some fixed sequence C1 , . . . Ck of conical subsets. Let g1 , g2 , g3 P G with g1 g2 g3 “ 1G , and let ai “ φA pgi q for i “ 1, 2, 3. Let ωpφU pg1 qq “ x1 . . . xk , ωpφU pg2 qq “ x11 . . . x1k and ωpφU pg3 qq “ x21 . . . x2k . Expanding and applying Proposition 6.5 repeatedly, we slide the a-words to the right to see that ωpg1 qωpg2 qωpg3 q “ ωpa1 qx1 . . . xk ωpa2 qx11 . . . x1k ωpa3 qx21 . . . x2k a1 x  1...  a1 x a2 a1 x1 . . . a2 a1 x1 a3 a2 a1 x2 . . . a3 a2 a1 x2 ωpa qωpa qωpa q 1 1 1 2 3 k k k a1 x  1 ...  a1 x a2 a1 x1 . . . a2 a1 x1 a3 a2 a1 x2 . . . a3 a2 a1 x2 . 1 1 k k k  This resulting word admits a Lipschitz filling by Corollary 6.4. 28  References [1] Herbert Abels. Finite presentability of S-arithmetic groups. Compact presentability of solvable groups, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 1261, 1985. [2] Armand Borel. Linear algebraic groups, volume 126. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012. [3] Martin R Bridson and André Haefliger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature, volume 319. Springer Science & Business Media, 2011. [4] Yves Cornulier and Romain Tessera. Geometric presentations of Lie groups and their Dehn functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1310.5373v2, 2013. [5] David Epstein, Mike S Paterson, James W Cannon, Derek F Holt, Silvio V Levy, and William P Thurston. Word processing in groups. AK Peters, Ltd., 1992. [6] Mikhail Gromov. Geometric group theory, vol. 2: Asymptotic invariants of infinite groups. 1996. [7] Shoshichi Kobayashi and Katsumi Nomizu. Foundations of differential geometry, volume 1. New York, 1963. [8] Alexander Lytchak, Stefan Wenger, and Robert Young. Dehn functions and Hölder extensions in asymptotic cones. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.00082, 2016. [9] Ayato Mitsuishi and Takao Yamaguchi. Locally lipschitz contractibility of alexandrov spaces and its applications. Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 270(2):393–421, 2014. [10] Robert Young. The dehn function of SLpn, Zq. Annals of Mathematics, 177(3):969–1027, 2013. David Bruce Cohen Department of Mathematics University of Chicago 5734 S. University Avenue, Room 208C Chicago, Illinois 60637 E-mail: davidbrucecohen@gmail.com  29

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 4. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
