Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 9
ArXiv ID: hf_943

Abstract:
Journal of Machine Learning Research ()  Submitted 1/16; Published  Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces Žiga Sajovic (corresponding author)  arXiv:1610.07690v4 [cs.FL] 5 Feb 2017  ziga.sajovic@gmail.com University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Computer and Information Science, Večna pot 113, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia XLAB d.o.o., Pot za Brdom 100, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia  Martin Vuk  martin.vuk@fri.uni-lj.si University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Computer and Information Science, Večna pot 113, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia  Editor:  Abstract In this paper we develop operational calculus on programming spaces that generalizes existing approaches to automatic differentiation of computer programs and provides a rigorous framework for program analysis through calculus. We present an abstract computing machine that models automatically differentiable computer programs. Computer programs are viewed as maps on a finite dimensional vector space called virtual memory space, which we extend by the tensor algebra of its dual to accommodate derivatives. The extended virtual memory is by itself an algebra of programs, a data structure one can calculate with, and its elements give the expansion of the original program as an infinite tensor series at program’s input values. We define the operator of differentiation on programming spaces and implement a generalized shift operator in terms of its powers. Our approach offers a powerful tool for program analysis and approximation, and provides deep learning with a formal calculus. Such a calculus connects general programs with deep learning, through operators that map both formulations to the same space. This equivalence enables a generalization of the existing methods for neural analysis to any computer program, and vice versa. Several applications are presented, most notably a meaningful way of neural network initialization that leads to a process of program boosting. Keywords: programming spaces, operational calculus, deep learning, neural networks, differentiable programs, tensor calculus, program analysis  1. Introduction Programming holds the power of algorithmic control ﬂow and freedom of expression, whose abstinence severely limits descriptiveness of closed form methods of pen and paper mathematics, thus ﬁrmly cementing programming as the language of modern problem solving. Yet, a vibrant tradition of mathematics has existed since the dawn of mind, that remains, with the exception of combinatorics, largely untapped by computer science. Just as the discrete nature of physical reality is studied through analytic means, so can the nature of digital phenomena. Studying these procedures as objects undergoing change in some virtual space, has partially been attempted in some ﬁelds, such as Hamiltonian Monte © Žiga Sajovic and Martin Vuk.  Sajovic and Vuk  Carlo methods of Bayesian predictors, that Girolami and Calderhead (2011) studied as manifolds to great success, using unfortunately impractical methods of hard-coding derivatives of distributions. This of course stiﬂes the freedom of algorithmic expression programming is embraced for. The way evaluation of algorithmic expressions diﬀers from evaluation of symbolic expressions of standard analysis, lies at the very core of this dissonance. The disconnect was partially mitigated by methods of automatic diﬀerentiation utilized today in machine learning, engineering, simulations, etc. (see Baydin and et. al., 2015). Yet under the lack of a proper formalism the model collapses (see Pearlmutter and Siskind, 2008b) when one tries to generalize to such notions as a diﬀerentiable program p1 operating on (diﬀerentiable) derivatives of another program p2 (where only coding of p2 is required within p1 ), while retaining the famed expressive freedom. Models allowing for nested diﬀerentiation as in Pearlmutter and Siskind (2008a), still fail in providing algorithms with an algebra enabling study and formulation of programs with analytic equations. Existing models remain nothing more than eﬃcient means to calculating derivatives, void of any meaningful algebraic insight, lacking the true power the vast ﬁeld of analysis is endowed with. The aim of this paper is bridging the gap between programming and analysis left behind by previous models. By generalizing them, they are shown to be speciﬁc views of the same great elephant. Employing tensor algebra a virtual memory is constructed, whose data structures one can calculate with. In Section 5, an exact deﬁnition and construction of an analytic virtual machine is presented, capable of implementing inﬁnitely-diﬀerentiable programming spaces and operators acting upon them, supporting actions on multiple memory locations at a time. These programming spaces are shown to be a subalgebra, giving rise to symbolic manipulations of programs, while attaining construction by algorithmic control ﬂow. Operators expanding a program into an inﬁnite tensor series are derived in Section 5.2. The operator of program composition is constructed in Section 5.3, generalizing both forward (e.g., Khan and Barton, 2015) and reverse (e.g., Hogan, 2014) mode of automatic diﬀerentiation to arbitrary order under a single invariant operator. The problem of nested diﬀerentiation is resolved in Section 5.5. Theory grants us the ability to choose programs’ complexity through approximations in the virtual space. The tensor algebra model of virtual memory consists of multi-linear maps which are tailor made for eﬃcient implementation by GPU parallelism (Abdelfattah and et al., 2016). In Section 5.6 functional transformations of programs in an arbitrary function basis are derived. As diﬀerent hardware is optimized for running with diﬀerent sets of functions, this proves useful with adapting code to ﬁt speciﬁc hardware. Branching and discontinuity are discussed in Section 5.8. where we show that analytic virtual machines fully integrate control structures, retaining algorithmic control ﬂow. Theory grants a generalization from neural networks to general tensor networks in Section 6, revealing their connection with programs in Section 6.1. The historic Taylor series are modernized in Section 6.1.1 by deriving Neural tensor series, establishing an equivalence between general tensor networks and programming spaces. This has direct implications to the study and understanding of differentiable neural computers (Graves and et al., 2016) through operational calculus. By this equivalence, transformations of arbitrary programs to general tensor networks are derived. The transformation to a Neural Tensor series serves as a great initialization point of a general tensor network to be trained. This can be seen as 2  Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces  a process of boosting (Freund and et al., 1999), converting a weaker learner to a strong one, which proves fruitful, as currently neural networks give best results to many problems. All such constructs are trainable (as is their training process itself) and adhere to the operational calculus. This is demonstrated in Section 6.2, enabling analytic study through the theory. Theory oﬀers new insights into programs, as we demonstrate how to probe their inner structure in Section 7, revealing what actions properties of the domain most react to in Section 7.1. This enables us to alter data by imposing some property it lacks upon it. State of the art methods for analyzing neural networks (Mordvintsev et al., 2015) are generalized for the use on programming spaces in Section 7.1.1, providing a framework for analysis of machine learning architectures and other virtual constructs, as actions on the virtual space.  2. Computer Programs as Maps on a Vector Space We will model computer programs as maps on a vector space. If we only focus on the real valued variables (of type float or double), the state of the virtual memory can be seen as a high dimensional vector1 . A set of all the possible states of the program’s memory, can be modeled by a ﬁnite dimensional real vector space V ≡ Rn . We will call V the memory space of the program. The eﬀect of a computer program on its memory space V, can be described by a map P : V → V. (1) A programming space is a space of maps V → V that can be implemented as a program in speciﬁc programming language. Definition 1 (Euclidean virtual machine) The tuple (V, F) is an Euclidean virtual machine, where • V is a finite dimensional vector space over a complete field K, serving as memory2 • F < V V is a subspace of the space of maps V → V, called programming space, serving as actions on the memory.  3. Differentiable Maps and Programs To deﬁne diﬀerentiable programs, let us ﬁrst recall some deﬁnitions from multivariate calculus. Definition 2 (Derivative) Let V, U be Banach spaces. A map P : V → U is differentiable at a point x ∈ V , if there exists a linear bounded operator T Px : V → U such that lim  h→0  kP (x + h) − P (x) − T Px (h)k = 0. khk  (2)  The map T Px is called the Fréchet derivative of the map P at the point x. 1. We assume the variables of interest to be of type float for simplicity. Theoretically any field can be used instead of R. 2. In most applications the field K will be R  3  Sajovic and Vuk  For maps Rn → Rm Fréchet derivative can be expressed by multiplication of vector h by the Jacobi matrix JP,x of partial derivatives of the components of the map P Tx P (h) = JP,x · h. We assume for the remainder of this section that the map P : V → U is diﬀerentiable for all x ∈ V . The derivative deﬁnes a map from V to linear bounded maps from V to U . We further assume U and V are ﬁnite dimensional. Then the space of linear maps from V to U is isomorphic to tensor product U ⊗ V ∗ , where the isomorphism is given by the tensor contraction, sending a simple tensor u ⊗ f ∈ U ⊗ V ∗ to a linear map u ⊗ f : x 7→ f (x) · u.  (3)  ∂P  : V →U ⊗V∗  (4)  ∂P  : x 7→ Tx P.  (5)  The derivative deﬁnes a map  One can consider the diﬀerentiability of the derivative itself ∂P by looking at it as a map (4). This leads to the deﬁnition of the higher derivatives. Definition 3 (higher derivatives) Let P : V → U be a map from vector space V to vector space U . The derivative ∂ k P of order k of the map P is the map ∂k P k  ∂ P  : V → U ⊗ (V ∗ )⊗k   : x 7→ Tx ∂ k−1 P  (6) (7)  Remark 4 For the sake of clarity, we assumed in the definition above, that the map P as well as all its derivatives are differentiable at all points x. If this is not the case, definitions above can be done locally, which would introduce mostly technical difficulties. Let e1 , . . . , en be a basis of U and x1 , . . . xm the basis of V ∗ . Denote by Pi = xi ◦ P the i − th component of the map P according to the basis {ei } of U . Then ∂ k P can be deﬁned in terms of directional(partial) derivatives by the formula ∂k P =  X ∀i,α  ∂ k Pi ei ⊗ dxα1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ dxαk . ∂xα1 . . . ∂xαk  (8)  3.1 Differentiable Programs We want to be able to represent the derivatives of a computer program in an Euclidean virtual machine again as a program in the same euclidean virtual machine. We deﬁne three subspaces of the virtual memory space V, that describe how diﬀerent parts of the memory inﬂuence the ﬁnal result of the program. Denote by e1 , . . . en a standard basis of the memory space V and by x1 , . . . xn the dual basis of V ∗ . The functions xi are coordinate functions on V and correspond to individual locations(variables) in the program memory. 4  Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces  Definition 5 For each program P in the programming space F < V V , we define the input or parameter space IP < V and the output space OP < V to be the minimal vector subspaces spanned by the standard basis vectors, such that the map Pe , defined by the following commutative diagram P  V  (9)  prOP  ~i 7→ ~i + f~  IP  V  Pe  OP  does not depend of the choice of the element f~ ∈ FP = (IP + OP )⊥ . The space FP = (IP + OP )⊥ is called free space of the program P . The variables xi corresponding to standard basis vectors spanning the parameter, output and free space are called paramters or input variables, output variables and free variables correspondingly. Free variables are those that are left intact by the program and have no inﬂuence on the ﬁnal result other than their value itself. The output of the program depends only on the values of the input variables and consists of variables that have changed during the program. Input parameters and output values might overlap. The map Pe is called the effective map of the program P and describes the actual eﬀect of the program P on the memory ignoring the free memory. The derivative of the eﬀective map is of interest, when we speak about diﬀerentiability of computer programs. Definition 6 (Automatically differentiable programs) A program P : V → V is automatically diﬀerentiable if there exist an embedding of the space OP ⊗ IP∗ into the free space FP , and a program (1 + ∂P ) : V → V, such that its effective map is the map Pe ⊕ ∂Pe : IP → OP ⊕ (OP ⊗ I ∗ ).  (10)  A program P : V → V is automatically diﬀerentiable of order k if there exist a program τk P : V → V, such that its effective map is the map  k⊗  Pe ⊕ ∂Pe ⊕ . . . ∂ k Pe : IP → OP ⊕ (OP ⊗ I ∗ ) ⊕ . . . OP ⊗ Ip∗ . (11)  If a program P : V → V is automatically diﬀerentiable then it is also diﬀerentiable as a map V → V. However only the derivative of program’s eﬀective map can be implemented as a program, since the memory space is limited to V. To be able to diﬀerentiate a program to the k-th order, we have to calculate and save all the derivatives of the orders k and less.  4. Differentiable Programming Spaces Motivated by the Deﬁnition 6, we deﬁne virtual memory for diﬀerentiable programs as a sequence of vector spaces with the recursive formula (12)  V0 = V ∗  Vk = Vk−1 + (Vk−1 ⊗ V ) . 5  (13)  Sajovic and Vuk  Note that the sum is not direct, since some of the subspaces of Vk−1 and Vk−1 ⊗ V ∗ are naturally isomorphic and will be identiﬁed3 . The space that satisﬁes the recursive formula (13) is   (14) Vk = V ⊗ K ⊕ V ∗ ⊕ (V ∗ ⊗ V ∗ ) ⊕ . . . (V ∗ )⊗k = V ⊗ Tk (V ∗ ),  where Tk (V ∗ ) is a subspace of tensor algebra T (V ∗ ), consisting of linear combinations of tensors of rank less or equal k. This construction enables us to deﬁne all the derivatives as maps with the same domain and codomain V → V ⊗ T (V ∗ ). Putting memory considerations aside, we propose an universal model of the memory for diﬀerentiable programs. Definition 7 (Virtual memory) Let (V, F) be an Euclidean virtual machine and let V∞ = V ⊗ T (V ∗ ) = V ⊕ (V ⊗ V ∗ ) ⊕ . . . ,  (15)  where T (V ∗ ) is the tensor algebra of the dual space V ∗ . We call V∞ the diﬀerentiable virtual memory of a virtual computing machine (V, F). The term virtual memory is used as it is only possible to embed certain subspaces of V∞ into memory space V, making it similar to virtual memory as a memory management technique. We can extend each program P : V → V to the map on universal memory space V∞ by setting the ﬁrst component in the direct sum (15) to P , and all other components to zero. Similarly derivatives ∂ k P can be also seen as maps from V to V∞ by setting k-th component in the direct sum (15) to ∂ k P and all others to zero. 4.1 Differentiable Programming Spaces Let us deﬁne the following function spaces: Fn = {f : V → V ⊗ Tn (V ∗ )}  (16)  All of these function spaces can be seen as sub spaces of F∞ = {f : V → V ⊗ T (V ∗ )}, since V is naturally embedded into V ⊗ T (V ∗ ). The Fréchet derivative deﬁnes an operator on the space of smooth maps in F∞ 4 . We denote this operator ∂. The image of any map P : V → V by operator ∂ is its ﬁrst derivative, while the higher order derivatives are just powers of operator ∂ applied to P . Thus ∂ k is a mapping between function spaces (16) ∂ k : F n → F n+k .  (17)  Definition 8 (Differentiable programming space) A diﬀerentiable programming space P0 is any subspace of F0 such that ∂P0 ⊂ P0 ⊗ T (V ∗ )  (18)  The space Pn < Fn spanned by {∂ k P0 ; 0 ≤ k ≤ n} over K, is called a differentiable programming space of order n. When all elements of P0 are analytic, we call P0 an analytic programming space. 3. The spaces V ⊗ (V ∗ )⊗(j+1) and V ⊗ (V ∗ )⊗j ⊗ V ∗ are naturally isomorphic and will be identified in the sum. 4. The operator ∂ may be defined partially for other maps as well, but we will handle this case later.  6  Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces  The deﬁnition of higher order diﬀerentiable programming spaces is justiﬁed by the following theorem. Theorem 9 (Infinite differentiability) Any differentiable programming space P0 is an infinitely differentiable programming space, meaning that ∂ k P0 ⊂ P0 ⊗ T (V ∗ )  (19)  for any k ∈ N. Proof By induction on order k. For k = 1 the claim holds by deﬁnition. Assume ∀P ∈P0 , i the component of the k-th derivative for a multiindex ∂ n P0 ⊂ P0 ⊗ T (V ∗ ). Denote by Pα,k ∗ α denoting the component of T (V ) and an index i denoting the component of V. i ∂ n+1 Pα,k = ∂(∂ n Pαi )k ∧ (∂ n Pαi ) ∈ P0 =⇒ ∂(∂ n Pαi )k ∈ P0 ⊗ T (V ∗ )  (20)  =⇒ ∂ n+1 P0 ⊂ P0 ⊗ T (V ∗ ) Thus by induction, the claim holds for all k ∈ N.  Corollary 10 A differentiable programming space of order n, Pn : V → V ⊗ T (V ∗ ), can be embedded into the tensor product of the function space P0 and the space Tn (V ∗ ) of multitensors of order less than equal n: Pn < P0 ⊗ Tn (V ∗ ).  (21)  By taking the limit as n → ∞, we consider P∞ < P0 ⊗ T (V ∗ ), where T (V ∗ ) = tensor series.5  Q∞  k=0 (V  ∗ )⊗k  (22)  is the tensor series algebra, the algebra of the inﬁnite formal  5. Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces By Corollary 10 we may represent calculation of derivatives of the map P : V → V, with only one mapping τ . We deﬁne the operator τn as a direct sum of operators τn = 1 + ∂ + ∂ 2 + . . . + ∂ n  (23)  The image τk P (x) is a multi-tensor of order k, which is a direct sum of the map’s value and all derivatives of order n ≤ k, all evaluated at the point x: τk P (x) = P (x) + ∂x P (x) + ∂x2 P (x) + . . . + ∂xk P (x).  (24)  The operator τn satisﬁes the recursive relation: τk+1 = 1 + ∂τk , that can be used to recursively construct programming spaces of arbitrary order. 5. The tensor series algebra is a completion of the tensor algebra T (V ∗ ) in suitable topology.  7  (25)  Sajovic and Vuk  Proposition 11 Only explicit knowledge of τ1 : P0 → P1 is required for the construction of Pn from P1 . Proof The construction is achieved following the argument (20) of the proof of Theorem 9, allowing simple implementation, as dictated by (25).  Remark 12 Maps V ⊗ T (V ∗ ) → V ⊗ T (V ∗ ) are constructible using tensor algebra operations and compositions of programs in Pn . Definition 13 (Algebra product) For any bilinear map · : V × V → V we can define a bilinear product · on V ⊗ T (V ∗ ) by the following rule on the simple tensors: (v ⊗ f1 ⊗ . . . fk ) · (u ⊗ g1 ⊗ . . . gl ) = (v · u) ⊗ f1 ⊗ . . . fk ⊗ g1 ⊗ . . . gl  (26)  extending linearly on the whole space V ⊗ T (V ∗ ) Theorem 14 (Programming algebra) For any bilinear map · : V × V → V an infinitelydifferentiable programming space P∞ is a function algebra, with the product defined by (26). 5.1 Analytic Virtual Machine We propose an abstract computational model, a virtual machine capable of constructing diﬀerentiable programming spaces. Such a machine provides a framework for analytic study of algorithmic procedures by algebraic means. Definition 15 (Analytic virtual machine) The tuple M = hV, P0 i is an analytic, infinitely differentiable virtual machine, where • V is a finite dimensional vector space • V ⊗ T (V ∗ ) is the virtual memory space • P0 is an analytic programming space over V When P0 is a differentiable programming space, this defines an infinitely differentiable virtual machine. Remark 16 The tuple (V, P0 ) and the structure of the tensor series algebra T (V ∗ ) are sufficient to construct inﬁnitely diﬀerentiable programing spaces P∞ by linear combinations of elements of P0 ⊗ T (V ∗ ). An illustrative example of the implementation of an analytic virtual machine is available on GitHub (Žiga Sajovic, 2016a). Implementation closely follows theorems and derivations of this paper and is intended as an educational guide for those transitioning from automatic diﬀerentiation to this theory. A paper (Žiga Sajovic, 2016b) explaining the process of implementation accompanies the source-code.  8  Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces  5.2 Tensor Series Expansion There exists a space spanned by the set D n = {∂ k ; 0 ≤ k ≤ n} over a ﬁeld K. Thus, the expression ∞ X (h∂)n h∂ e = n! n=0  is well deﬁned. In coordinates, the operator eh∂ can be written as a series over all multiindices α ∞ X hn X ∂n eh∂ = ei ⊗ dxα1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ dxαn . (27) n! ∂xα1 . . . ∂xαn n=0  ∀i,α  The operator eh∂ is a mapping between function spaces (16) eh∂ : P → P∞ . It also deﬁnes a map eh∂ : P × V → V ⊗ T (V ∗ ),  (28)  by taking the image of the map eh∂ (P ) at a certain point v ∈ V. We may construct a map from the space of programs, to the space of polynomials using (28). Note that the space of multivariate polynomials V → K is isomorphic to symmetric algebra S(V ∗ ), which is in turn a quotient of tensor algebra T (V ∗ ). To any element of V ⊗ T (V ∗ ) one can attach corresponding element of V ⊗ S(V ∗ ) namely a polynomial map V → V. Thus, similarly to (22), we consider the completion of the symmetric algebra S(V ∗ ) as the formal power series S(V ∗ ), which is in turn isomorphic to a quotient of tensor series algebra T (V ∗ ), arriving at eh∂ : P × V → V ⊗ S(V ∗ )  (29)  For any element v0 ∈ V, the expression eh∂ (·, v0 ) is a map P → V ⊗ S(V ∗ ), mapping a program to a formal power series. We can express the correspondence between multi-tensors in V ⊗ T (V ∗ ) and polynomial maps V → V given by multiple contractions for all possible indices. For a simple tensor u ⊗ f1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ fn ∈ V ⊗ (V ∗ )⊗n the contraction by v ∈ V is given by applying co-vector fn to v 6 u ⊗ f1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ fn · v = fn (v)u ⊗ f1 ⊗ . . . fn−1 . (30) By taking contraction multiple times, we can attach a monomial map to a simple tensor by u ⊗ f1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ fn · (v)⊗n = fn (v)fn−1 (v) · · · f1 (v)u,  (31)  Both contractions (30) and (31) are extended by linearity to spaces V ⊗ (V ∗ )⊗n and further to V ⊗ T (V ∗ ).7 For a multi-tensor M = m0 + m1 + . . . + mn ∈ V ⊗ Tn (V ∗ ), where mk ∈ 6. For order two tensors from V ⊗ V ∗ the contraction correspons to matrix vector multiplication. 7. Note that the simple order one tensor u ∈ V can not be contracted by the vector v. To be consistent we define u · v = u and attach a constant map v 7→ u to order zero tensor u. The extension of (31) to V ⊗ T (V ∗ ) can be seen as a generalzation of the affine map, where the zero order tensors account for translation.  9  Sajovic and Vuk  V ⊗ (V ∗ )⊗k , applying the contraction by a vector v ∈ V multiple times yields a polynomial map M(v) = m0 + m1 · v + . . . + mn · (v)⊗n . (32) Theorem 17 For a program P ∈ P the expansion into an infinite tensor series at the point v0 ∈ V is expressed by multiple contractions ∞   X hn n P (v0 + hv) = (eh∂ P )(v0 ) (v) = ∂ P (v0 ) · (v⊗n ) n! n=0  =  ∞ X hn X  n=0  n!  ∂ n Pi ei · dxα1 (v) · . . . · dxαn (v). (33) ∂xα1 . . . ∂xαn  ∀i,α  n  n  d d Proof We will show that dh n (LHS)|h=0 = dhn (RHS)|h=0 . Then LHS and RHS as functions of h have coinciding Taylor series and are therefore equal. =⇒  dn P (v0 + hv) dhn ⇐=   dn  h∂ (e )(P )(v ) (v) 0 dhn ∂ n eh∂  h=0  =  = ∂ n P (v0 )(v) h=0  h=0    = (∂ n eh∂ )(P )(v0 ) (v)  h=0  ∧ ∞ X i=0  hi ∂ i+n i!  = ∂n h=0  =⇒  (∂ n (P )(v0 )) · (v⊗n ) It follows trivially from the above theorem that the operator eh∂ is an automorphism of the programming algebra P∞ , eh∂ (p1 · p2 ) = eh∂ (p1 ) · eh∂ (p2 )  (34)  where · stands for any bilinear map. Remark 18 (Generalized shift operator) The operator eh∂ : P × V → V ⊗ T (V ∗ ) evaluated at h = 1 is a broad generalization of the shift operator (Wiener, 1926). The theory presented in this section offers more than a mere shift, which will become apparent in the coming sections. For a speciﬁc v0 ∈ V, the generalized shift operator is denoted by e∂ |v0 : P → V ⊗ T (V ∗ ) When the choice of v0 ∈ V is arbitrary, we omit it from expressions for brevity. 10  Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces  Remark 19 Independence of the operator (28) from a coordinate system, translates to independence in execution. Thus the expression (33) is invariant to the point in execution of a program, a fact we explore in Section 5.8. Remark 20 Corollary 10 through (22) implies eh∂ (P0 ) ⊂ P0 ⊗T (V ∗ ) which enables efficient implementation by operator τ . 5.3 Operator of Program Composition In this section both forward (e.g, Khan and Barton, 2015) and reverse (e.g., Hogan, 2014) mode of automatic diﬀerentiation are generalized to arbitrary order under a single invariant operator in the theory. We demonstrate how to perform calculations on operator level before they are applied to a particular programming space, condensing complex notions to simple expressions. Theorem 21 (Program composition) Composition of maps P is expressed as (35)  eh∂ (f ◦ g) = exp(∂f eh∂g )(g, f )  where exp(∂f eh∂g ) : P × P → P∞ is an operator on pairs of maps (g, f ), where ∂g is differentiation operator applied to the first component g, and ∂f to the second component f . n  n  d d Proof We will show that dh n (LHS)|h=0 = dhn (RHS)|h=0 . Then LHS and RHS as functions of h have coinciding Taylor series and are therefore equal. =⇒ d lim ( )n e∂ (f ◦ g) = lim ∂ n eh∂ (f ◦ g) khk→0 khk→0 dh =⇒  (36)  ∂ n (f ◦ g) ⇐= h∂g  exp(∂f e  ) = exp ∂f  ∞ X (h∂g )i  i!  i=0  !  =  ∞ Y i=1  e∂f  (h∂g )i i!    e∂f  =⇒ X X Y  ∂f ∂gl (g) k 1    exp(∂f eh∂g )(g, f ) = hn e∂f f l! k! ∀n  λ(n) k·l∈λ  where λ(n) stands for the partitions of n. Thus lim (  khk→0  X Y  ∂f ∂gl (g) k 1    d n e∂f f ) exp(∂f eh∂g ) = n! dh l! k!  (37)  k·l∈λ  λ(n)  taking into consideration the fact that e∂f (f ) evaluated at a point v ∈ V is the same as evaluating f at v, the expression (37) equals (36) by Faà di Bruno’s formula. lim (  khk→0   X Y  ∂f ∂gl (g(v)) k 1  d n f (g(v)) ) exp(∂f eh∂g ) = n! dh l! k! λ(n)  k·l∈λ  11  (38)  Sajovic and Vuk  The Theorem 21 enables an invariant implementation of the operator of program composition in Pn , expressed as a tensor series through (35) and (37). By ﬁxing the second map g in exp(∂f eh∂g ) : P × P → P∞ ,  (39)    exp(∂f eh∂g )(·, g) = g∗ eh∂  (40)  the operator is the pullback through g of the generalized shift operator eh∂ . While by ﬁxing the ﬁrst map f in (39), the operator   (41) exp(∂f eh∂g )(f, ·) = f∗ eh∂ is the push-forward through f of the generalized shift operator eh∂ .  Remark 22 (Unified AD) If a program is written as P = Pn ◦ . . . P1 , than applying the operators exp(∂f eh∂g )(·, Pi ) from i = 1 to i = n and projecting onto the space spanned by {1, ∂} is equivalent to forward mode automatic differentiation, while applying the operators exp(∂f eh∂g )(Pn−i+1 , ·) in reverse order (and projecting) is equivalent to reverse mode automatic differentiation. Both forward and reverse mode (generalized to arbitrary order) are obtainable using the same operator (39), by fixing the appropriate map f or g. This generalizes both concepts under a single operator. Remark 23 The operator (35) can be generalized for the notion of a pullback to arbitrary operators. Thus, through (35) and all its’ descendants (exponents), the operator (40) grants invariance to the point in execution of a program, which is important when proving algorithm’s correctness. This is analogous to the principle of general covariance (see section 7.1 in a book by O’Hanian et al., 1994) in general relativity, the invariance of the form of physical laws under arbitrary diﬀerentiable coordinate transformations. Corollary 24 The operator eh∂ commutes with composition over P eh∂ (p2 ◦ p1 ) = eh∂ (p2 ) ◦ eh∂ (p1 ) Proof Follows from (29) and Theorem 21.  Remark 25 With explicit evaluations in Corollary 24 eh∂ |v0 (pn ◦ · · · ◦ p0 ) = eh∂ |vn (pn ) ◦ · · · ◦ eh∂ |v0 (p0 ) the wise choice of evaluation points is vi = pi−1 (vi−1 ) ∈ V.  12  Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces  With this we turn towards easing such calculations, completing them on the level of d of (40) is operators. The derivative dh d exp(∂f eh∂g )(g) = ∂f (∂g g)eh∂g exp(∂f eh∂g )(g) dh  (42)  We note an important distinction to the operator eh∂g , the derivative of which is d h∂g e = ∂g eh∂g dh  (43)  We may now compute derivatives (of arbitrary order) of the pullback operator. 5.4 Example of an Operator Level Computation As an example we compute the second derivative.   d dh  2       d  ∂f (∂g g)eh∂g exp ∂f eh∂g (g) exp ∂f eh∂g (g) = dh  which is by equations (42) and (43), using algebra and correct applications  ∂f (∂g2 g) eh∂g exp(∂f eh∂g )(g) + (∂f2 (∂g g)2 )e2h∂g exp(∂f eh∂g )(g)  (44)  The operator is always shifted to the evaluating point (28) v ∈ V, thus, only the behavior in the limit as h → 0 is of importance. Taking this limit in the expression (44) we obtain the operator  ∂f (∂g2 g) + ∂f2 (∂g g)2 exp(∂f ) : P → ∂ 2 P(g)  Thus, without imposing any additional rules, we computed the operator of the second derivative of composition with g, directly on the level of operators. The result of course matches the equation (37) for n = 2. As it is evident from the example, calculations using operators are far simpler, than direct manipulations of functional series, similar to how it was done in the proof of Theorem 21. This enables a simpler implementation that functions over arbitrary programming (function) spaces. In the space that is spanned by {∂ n P0 } over K, derivatives of compositions may be expressed solely through the operators, using only the product rule (34), the derivative of the composition operator (42) and the derivative of the general shift operator (43). Thus, explicit knowledge of rules for diﬀerentiating compositions is unnecessary, as it is contained in the structure of the operator exp(∂f eh∂g ) itself, which is diﬀerentiated using standard rules, as shown by this example. Similarly higher derivatives of the composition can also be computed on the operator level:  n   d n exp ∂f eh∂g (g, f ) . (45) ∂ (f ◦ g) = dh h=0  13  Sajovic and Vuk  5.5 Order Reduction for Nested Applications It is useful to be able to use the k-th derivative of a program P ∈ P as part of a diﬀerent diﬀerentiable program P1 . As such, we must be able to treat the derivative itself as a diﬀerentiable program P ′k ∈ P, while only coding the original program P . Theorem 26 (Order reduction) There exists a reduction of order map φ : Pn → Pn−1 , such that the following diagram commutes φ  Pn  Pn−1  ∂  (46)  ∂ φ  Pn+1  Pn  satisfying   k  ∀P1 ∈P0 ∃P2 ∈P0 φ  ◦ e∂n (P1 )  =    e∂n−k (P2 )  for each n ≥ 1, where e∂n is the projection of the operator e∂ onto the set {∂ n }. Corollary 27 (Differentiable derivative) By Theorem 26, n-differentiable k-th derivatives of a program P ∈ P0 can be extracted by n  P k′ = φk ◦ e∂n+k (P ) ∈ Pn  We gained the ability of writing a diﬀerentiable program acting on derivatives of another program, stressed as crucial (but lacking in most models) by Pearlmutter and Siskind (2008a). Usage of the reduction of order map and other constructs of this Section are demonstrated in Section 7. 5.6 Functional Transformations of Programs Let’s suppose a hardware H is optimized for the set of functions F = {fi : V → V}. The set F is speciﬁed by the manufacturer. With technological advances, switching the hardware is common, which can lead to a decline in performance. Thus, we would like to employ transformations of a program P ∈ P in basis F . It is common to settle for a suboptimal algorithm, that is eﬃcient on hardware H. Sub-optimality of the algorithm depends on the set F , whether it spans P or not. A classic example of a transformation of basis is the Fourier transform. Using the developed tools, the problem is solvable using linear algebra. Let e∂n denote the projection of the operator e∂ , onto the ﬁrst n basis vectors {∂ i }. By Theorem 17 a map (29) from the space of programs, to the space of polynomials, with unknowns in V k , can be constructed using the operator e∂ . Let X = {pi } denote a basis of the space of polynomials V → V 8 . We can interpret e∂n (P ∈ P) as a vector of linear combinations of X . 8. One choice would be the monomial basis, consisting of elements ei ⊗  Q α,∀j  V ∗ and α multi-index  14  xαj , where ei span V, xi span  Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces  We deﬁne the tensor TX F of basis transformation F → X by TX F = p1 ⊗ e∂n (f1 )∗ + p2 ⊗ e∂n (f2 )∗ + . . . + pn ⊗ e∂n (fn )∗ .  (47)  The tensor of basis transformation X → F is the inverse TF X = TX−1F .  (48)  For a speciﬁc set F (and consequentially a hardware H, upon which the set F is conditioned), the tensor (48) only has to be computed once, and can then be used for transforming arbitrary programs (while using the same operator e∂n ). The coordinates of program P ∈ P in basis F are PF = TF X · e∂ (P )  (49)  The expression (49) represents coordinates of program P in basis F . Thus, the program is expressible as a linear combination of fi , with components PF as coeﬃcients. P =  n X  PF i fi  i=0  If F does not span P, or we used the projection of the operator e∂n<N , the expression PF still represents the best possible approximation of the original program, on components {∂ n }, in basis F . Remark 28 It makes sense to expand the set F , by mutual (nested) compositions, and gain mappings before computing the tensor (48) and increase the power of the above method. 5.7 Special Case of Functions V → K We describe a special case when P0 = V ⊗ P−1 and P−1 < K V is a subspace of the space of functions V → K. This is useful, if the set F only contains functions V → K. It is very common, that basic operations in a programming language change one single real valued variable at a time. In that case, the value of changed variable is described by the function f˜ : V → K, while the location, where the value is saved is given by a standard basis vector ei . The map f : V → V is then given as a tensor product f = ei ⊗ f˜. We can start the construction of the diﬀerentiable programming spaces by deﬁning diﬀerentiable programming space of functions V → K instead of maps V → V as in deﬁnition 8. Analog to the the Theorem 9 and Corollary 10 it is easy to verify, that ∂ k P−1 < P−1 ⊗ Tk (V ∗ ).  (50)  Since tensoring with elements of V commutes with diﬀerentiation operator ∂ ∂ k P0 < V ⊗ ∂ k P−1  (51)  and analytic virtual machine can be deﬁned in terms of functions P−1 , enabling more eﬃcient implementation of the operators ∂ and e∂ . The functional transformation becomes much more eﬃcient, since the set of functions F can be generated by the functions of the form f = ei ⊗ f˜j , where F−1 = {f˜j : V → K}. 15  Sajovic and Vuk  Theorem 29 Suppose that P0 = V ⊗ P−1 where P−1 is a subspace of functions V → K. Suppose that F = {ei ⊗ f˜j } and X = {el ⊗ p˜k } is the basis of the space of polynomial maps V → V while X−1 = {pk } is the basis of polynomial functions V → K. Then the matrix TX F is block diagonal with the same block along the diagonal X TX−1 F−1 = pk ⊗ e∂n (f˜j ). (52) k,j  Corollary 30 When the tensor TX F (48) of basis transformation F → X is block diagonal as by Theorem 29, the tensor TF X = TX−1F (47) of basis transformation X → F is found by simply inverting each block (52). Note however, that this special case can not model basic operations that change several memory locations at once, while the general model presented in this paper can. Also note that the main goal of this work is to develop methods for analysis of computer programs, making the programming spaces of maps V → V much more appropriate than the programming spaces of functions. 5.8 Control Structures Until now, we restricted ourselves to operations, that change the memories’ content. Along side assignment statements, we know control statements (ex. statements if, for, while, ...). Control statements don’t directly inﬂuence values of variables, but change the execution tree of the program. This is why we interpret control structures as a piecewise-deﬁnition of a map (as a spline). Each control structure divides the space of parameters into diﬀerent domains, in which the execution of the program is always the same. The entire program divides the space of all possible parameters to a ﬁnite set of domains {Ωi ; i = 1, . . . k}, where the programs’ execution is always the same. As such, a program may in general be piecewise-deﬁned. For ~x ∈ V  Pn1 1 ◦ P(n1 −1)1 ◦ . . . P11 (~x); ~x ∈ Ω1     Pn 2 ◦ P(n −1)2 ◦ . . . P12 (~x); ~x ∈ Ω2 2 2 (53) P (~x) = . ..  .. .    Pnk k ◦ P(nk −1)k ◦ . . . P1k (~x); ~x ∈ Ωk  The operator e∂ (at some point) of a program P , is of course dependent on initial parameters ~x, and can also be expressed piecewise inside domains Ωi  e∂ Pn1 1 ◦ e∂ P(n1 −1)1 ◦ . . . ◦ e∂ P11 (~x); ~x ∈ int(Ω1 )     e∂ Pn 2 ◦ e∂ P(n −1)2 ◦ . . . ◦ e∂ P12 (~x); ~x ∈ int(Ω2 ) 2 2 (54) e∂ P (~x) = . .. ..   .    ∂ e Pnk k ◦ e∂ P(nk −1)k ◦ . . . ◦ e∂ P1k (~x); ~x ∈ int(Ωk )  Theorem 31 Each S program P ∈ P containing control structures is infinitely-differentiable on the domain Ω = int(Ωi ). ∀i  16  Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces  e∂  P1  TF X  e∂ (P1 )  TF X · e∂ (P1 )  Branching  e∂  P2  P3  e∂  e∂ (P2 )  e∂ (P3 )  TF X  TF X · e∂ (P2 )  TF X  TF X · e∂ (P3 )  Figure 1: Transformation diagram  Proof Interior of each domain Ωi is open. As the entire domain Ω =  S  int(Ωi ) is a union of  ∀i  open sets, it is therefore open itself. Thus, all evaluations are computed on some open set, eﬀectively removing boundaries, where problems might have otherwise occurred. Theorem follows directly from the proof of Theorem 9 through argument (20). Branching of programs into domains (53) is done through conditional statements. Each conditional causes a branching in programs’ execution tree. Proposition 32 Cardinality of the set of domains Ω = {Ωi } equals |{Ωi }| = 2k , where k is the number of branching point within the program. Remark 33 Iterators, that do not change exit conditions within its’ body, do not cause branching. This section concerns itself with employing the derived theorems to propose a linear treatment of branchings and avoid the exponential threat of Proposition 32 to applications of the theory. Theorem 34 A program P ∈ P can be equivalently represented with at most 2n + 1 applications of the operator e∂ , on 2n + 1 analytic programs, where n is the number of branching points within the program. Proof Source code of a program P ∈ P can be represented by a directed graph, as shown in Figure 1. Each branching causes a split in the execution tree, that after completion returns 17  Sajovic and Vuk  to the splitting point. By Theorem 21, each of these branches can be viewed as a program pi , for which it holds e∂ (pn ◦ pn−1 ◦ · · · ◦ p1 ) = e∂ (pn ) ◦ e∂ (pn−1 ) ◦ · · · ◦ e∂ (p1 ) by Theorem 21. Thus, the source code contains 2n diﬀerentiable branches, from its’ ﬁrst branching on, not counting the branch leading up to it, upon which the application of the operator e∂ is needed. Total of 2n + 1. By Theorem 9, each of these branches is analytic.  Remark 35 Images of the operator e∂ and TF X are elements of the original space P, which may be composed. Thus for P = p3 ◦ p2 ◦ p1 , the following makes sense   P = p3 ◦ e∂ (p2 ) ◦ TF X e∂ (p1 ) ∈ P The same holds true for all permutations of applications of operators e∂ , TF X and id, as visible in Figure 1. Remark 36 In practice, we always use projections of the operator e∂ to some finite order n, resulting in e∂n . Therefore, we must take note that the following relation holds e∂m (P2 ) ◦ e∂n (P1 ) = e∂k (P2 ◦ P1 ) ⇐⇒ 0 ≤ k ≤ min(m, n) when composing two images of the applied operator, projected to different subspaces. The transformation tensor TF X is needed to be computed only once and can then on be applied to any program running on said hardware. The same holds true for each branch pi , which can, by Theorem 24, be freely composed amongst each other. Remark 37 Images of the operator e∂ (P ∈ P0 ) are elements of V⊗T (V ∗ ) by (28), consisting of multi-linear maps. As such, their evaluation and composition (e∂ (P1 ) ◦ e∂ (P2 )) is tailor made for efficient implementation by methods of parallelism (e.g., Abdelfattah and et al., 2016), with computable complexities.  6. Generalized Tensor Networks Let W =  n P  (wi ∈ V ⊗ V ∗⊗i ) be an element of the virtual memory V ⊗ Tn (V ∗ ) in an analytic  i=0  machine of Deﬁnition 15. The element W can be seen as a map v 7→ W(v) as deﬁned by (31): n X wi · v⊗i ∈ V. W(v) = i=0  Definition 38 A general tensor network N is a sequence of maps Li : V → V called layers, defined recursively by the equation L0 = id;  Li+1 = Φi ◦ Wi ◦ Li 18  Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces  where Wi ∈ function.  n L  V ⊗ V ∗k⊗ are the weights (and the bias) and Φi ∈ P0 is the activation  k=0  We may look at a general tensor network with n layers as a map. In that case we mean N = Ln ∈ P0 . Remark 39 The common neural network is a tensor network with bi + Wi ∈ V ⊕ V ⊗ V ∗ as weight multi-tensors. Generalizations of recurrent (Socher et al., 2011), convolutional (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and deep residual (He et al., 2015) neural networks, and mechanisms such as long short term memory (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997), are easily generated by this model, as they are all elements of a diﬀerential programming space P0 . A general tensor network N can be represented by a deeper common neural network. This equivalence means, that a general tensor network with fewer layers can provide the same results as a deeper common neural network, while mitigating the vanishing gradient problem described by Pascanu et al. (2013) that occurs in training due to the depth of the network coupled with machine precision. Remark 40 Existing architectures like Theano by Theano Development Team (2016), TensorFlow by Abadi and et al. (2015) and others could be easily adapted to handle general tensor networks. 6.1 Programs as General Tensor Networks Let P = Pn ◦ · · · ◦ P0 ∈ P0 be the procedure of interest, with Pi ∈ P0 being the source code between two branching points, like shown in Figure 1. By Theorem 17 we have P (v0 + v ∈ V) = e∂ |v0 P (v ∈ V)  (55)  P (v0 + v ∈ V) = e∂ |vn Pn ◦ · · · ◦ e∂ |v0 P0 (v ∈ V)  (56)  and through Corollary 24  which is the transformation hereon denoted by e∂ P . Proposition 41 The image of the application of the operator e∂ to a program P ∈ P0 as in (56), is a general tensor network, with the activation function Φi being the identity map, at each layer. 6.1.1 Transformations of Programs to General Tensor Networks The transformed program (55) equals the original program by Theorem 17 and Corollary 24. But in practice, we are always working with a ﬁnite virtual memory V ⊗ Tn (V ∗ ) and the equality becomes an approximation. Thus we treat the transformation of the original program, as the initialization of the weights (and the bias) of a general tensor network to be trained. This motivates modernizing the historic Taylor series and evolving the generalized shift operator (18). 19  Sajovic and Vuk  Definition 42 (Neural tensor series) Assume the program P ∈ P0 can be written as a composition P = Pn ◦ · · · ◦ P0 ∈ P0 . A general tensor network NΦ |v0 P defined with a set of activation functions Φ = {Φk ∈ P0 : V → V; 0 ≤ k ≤ n} and weights Wk = e∂N |vk Pk ;  vk = Pk ◦ · · · P0 (v0 )  is called neural tensor series of order N for a program P at a point v0 with activation functions Φ with final layer NΦ |v0 P = Φn ◦ e∂N |vn Pn ◦ · · · ◦ Φ0 ◦ e∂N |v0 P0 .  (57)  Remark 43 Neural tensor series transforms a common program to a trainable general tensor network, naturally extending Theorem 34 and the Transformation diagram of Figure 1. For example, by setting N = 1 in (57) a program can be transformed to a common neural network. Deﬁnition 42 has wide applications to diﬀerent ﬁelds. In practice if a sub-optimal algorithm providing an approximate solution is available, the neural tensor series serves as a great initialization point for further training, leading to a process of boosting (Freund and et al., 1999) converting a weaker learner to a strong one. As currently neural networks give best results to many problems, the described method is likely to provide improvements to existing methods. As each general tensor network is a neural tensor series of some program, it provides an elegant way of expressing neural computations through operational calculus. This has direct implications to the study and understanding of concepts such as differentiable neural computers (Graves and et al., 2016) and neural programmer-interpreters (Reed and de Freitas, 2016). Interchanging neural processes and programming spaces reveals new directions to explore, as we might gain insight on one by identifying it with the other. By this equivalence, the relation between a computer program and a general tensor network is that of a function and its Taylor series enhanced by activations. Thus, they may be appropriately employed to the purpose of analysis in computer science, a path well walked by other ﬁelds. Remark 44 All coefficients Wi ∈ V ⊗ T (V ∗ ) are multi-linear maps allowing efficient implementation through GPU parallelism as by Claim 37. Thus, general tensor networks may employ it, just as the common neural networks they generalize do. 6.1.2 Compositions of Tensor Networks with General Programs Methods for control structures and branching presented in Section 5.8 apply to general tensor networks. Proposition 45 An arbitrary P ∈ P0 can be composed with general tensor networks Ni P̃ = N2 ◦ P ◦ N1 ∈ P∞  (58)  and P̃ is an element of a differentiable programming space P∞ , and can thus be treated by the operational calculus.  20  Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces  Remark 46 Any layer Li ∈ Pn can be composed with an arbitrary element of the differentiable programming space P0 . This allows algorithmic coding of trainable memory managers, generalizing concepts such as long short term memory (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) and easing the implementation of networks capable of reading from and writing to an external memory (Graves and et al., 2016), by freeing semantics of their design process. 6.2 Training of General Tensor Networks All transformed programs NΦ |v0 P are elements of a diﬀerentiable programming space P∞ . As such, the operational calculus, and the operators it oﬀers can freely be applied to them. By Corollary 24 we have e∂n (Li+1 ) = e∂n (Φi ) ◦ e∂n (Wi ◦ Li ) ∈ Pn  (59)  Thus by Corollary 27, the n-diﬀerentiable k-th derivatives can be extracted by n k′ Li+1  = φk ◦ e∂n+k (Li+1 ) ∈ Pn  from (59), where φ is the reduction of order map of Theorem 26. Derivatives of speciﬁc order are extracted by projecting on components of Pn , and can be used in any of the well established training methods in the industry. Proposition 47 Using the operator exp(∂f eh∂g ) of Theorem 21, both forward and reverse mode automatic differentiation (generalized to arbitrary order) can be implemented on general tensor networks. Remark 48 The operational calculus can be applied to the training process T ∈ P0 of a general tensor network itself, as it is an element of a differentiable programming space P0 . Thus, hyper-parameters of the training process can be studied (e.g., Bengio, 2000), analyzed and trained (e.g., Thornton and et al., 2013), as to be adapted to the particulars of the problem being solved. By Proposition 45, any training methods enabled by the operational calculus presented in this paper apply to all compositions of general tensor networks Ni with arbitrary programs P ∈ P. This allows seamless trainable transitions between code formulations, naturally extending the Transformation diagram of Figure 1.  7. Analysis Operational calculus oﬀers new approaches to program analysis that are the object of study in this section. We demonstrate how to intertwine algorithmic control ﬂow, operational calculus and algebra. 7.1 Study of Properties We will denote the fact, that some object v has the property X, by v ∈ X. Suppose we have v∈ / X, and desire a procedure P ∈ P0 , that in some way modiﬁes v to have the property X, changing the element v as little as possible: P ∈ P0 : v ∈ / X → P (v) ∈ X 21  (60)  Sajovic and Vuk  Usually such procedures are diﬃcult to construct and may not even explicitly exist. An easier task is to construct a procedure T ∈ P0 , whose output allows deduction of whether v has the property X or not. We propose an algorithm A:T ∈P →P ∈P (61) transforming a procedure T testing for a property Xj , to a procedure P ∈ P0 : v ∈ / Xj → P (v) ∈ Xj imposing that property onto any object in the domain Ω ⊂ V. We employ operational calculus as we probe procedures’ inner structure and explore how it interacts with the elements of the domain. 7.1.1 Activity Profiles and Property Measures To be able to determine which conceptual steps are the most important for the result of the testing procedure T , we have to somehow measure the activity at that step. A simple example of the measure of activity A could simply be the norm of the appropriate derivative, as it measures the rate of change. Let’s assume T = Tn ◦ Tn−1 ◦ · · · ◦ T1 for simplicity9 . The part Ti is called a conceptual step in the procedure. Definition 49 (Activity profile) The function Ai : Ω → [0, 1] is called a measure of activity in the conceptual step Ti . The value Ai ◦ e∂Ti T (v) is the activity level of Ti for a given element of the domain v ∈ Ω taken as the input of T 10 . The vector A = (A1 , A2 , . . . , An ) : Ω → [0, 1]n represents the activity profile of the procedure T . Definition 50 (Property measure) A function MX ∈ P0 : [0, 1]n → [0, 1] is called the property measure, measuring the amount of property X in an object v ∈ Ω, if there exists c ∈ (0, 1) such that v ∈ X ⇐⇒ Mx ◦ A(v) ≥ c. 9. The procedure T could also be piecewise-differentiable as in (53), by specific Ti containing a control structure as is ilustrated in Figure 1 10. The operator e∂Ti considers only the variable parameters of the sub-procedure Ti as variables  22  Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces  Algorithm 1 Construct property measure 1: procedure Construct property measure 2: for each vk ∈ Ω do 3: for each Ti do 4: extract aik = Ai ◦ e∂Ti T (vk ) 5: end for 6: end for 7: initialize set I 8: for each Xj do 9: generate property measure MXj from aik 10: add MXj to I 11: end for 12: return I 13: end procedure Once the activity proﬁles and property measures are generated, starting with an element, without the property Xj , we can use any established optimization technique, to optimize and increase the measure MXj . When the increase of the measure MXj is suﬃcient, this results in an new object possessing the property Xj . Theorem 51 With an appropriate choice of the activity profile A, the Algorithm 2 transforms a procedure T ∈ P, testing for a property Xj , to a procedure P , that increases the property measure of any object in the domain. Corollary 52 By Theorem 51, existence of a procedure testing an object for validity is sufficient for constructing a procedure transforming a non-valid object to a valid one P ∈ P0 : v ∈ / Xj → P (v) ∈ Xj under the assumption that the increase of the property measure is sufficient. When T serves as a simulation, with v modeling a real-life object of study, the procedure opens new doors in analyzing real-life phenomena. We may observe how v evolves through iterations and study stages of change, which serves as a useful insight when designing procedures causing change in real-life phenomena.  23  Sajovic and Vuk  Algorithm 2 Appoint property Xj to v ∈ Ω 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13: 14:  procedure Appoint property Xj to v ∈ Ω initialize path γ with v for each step do for each Ti ∈ TXj do extract Ti′ = φ ◦ e∂2v (Ti ◦ · · · ◦ T1 ) ∈ P1 compute the energy Ei = e∂1v (MXj ) ◦ Ti′ ∈ P1 extract the derivative ∂v Ei = pr{∂} (Ei ) add ∂v Ei to ∂v E end for update v by step(∂v E, v) insert v to γ end for return γ end procedure  7.1.2 Example The derived procedures P given by Algorithm 2 are generalizations of methods already present in practice. This example demonstrates how the method can be employed. We take the measure of activity to be the norm of the derivative with respect to the variable parameters in sub-procedure Ti .   ∂ T k∂Ti T k = pr{∂} e1 i (T )  Then for each property Xj we select the set of sub-procedures  TXj = {Ti ∈ TXj ⇐⇒ k∂Ti T k ≥ c} that have the highest measure of activity at the elements of Xj . The property measure for the property Xj is then simply the sum of squares of norms of the derivatives of selected sub-procedures T1i = Ti ◦ · · · ◦ T1 . This completes Algorithm 1. By Corollary 27, n-diﬀerentiable k-th derivatives n Tik′ ∈ Pn with respect to the input v ∈ Ω are computed by n  v (T1i ) ∈ Pn Tik′ = φk ◦ e∂n+k  where φ is the reduction of order map of Theorem 26. Using k·k2 ∈ P1 as the norm map, the property measure is MXj =  X  Ti′  2  ∈ P1  Ti ∈TXj  assuming it only needs to be once diﬀerentiable. Optimization of the property measure completes Algorithm 2. When T ∈ P0 represents a neural network, Ti stands for a speciﬁc layer in the network, with neurons being its variable parameters, the Algorithm 2 gives a procedure, that acts 24  Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces  similarly to Google’s Deep Dream Project (see Mordvintsev et al., 2015) and Neural Algorithm of Artistic Style by Gatys et al. (2015), as they are special cases of Algorithm 2. However Algorithm 2 may be applied to any program T ∈ P0 , not just neural networks.  8. Conclusions Existence of a program is embedded in a virtual reality, forming a system of objects undergoing change in a virtual space. Just as the reality inhabited by us is being studied by science, revealing principles and laws, so can the virtual reality inhabited by programs. Yet here lies a tougher task, as the laws of the system are simultaneously observed and constructed; the universe is bug-free, up to philosophic precision, while our programs are not. This reinforces the need for a language capable of not only capturing, but also constructing digital phenomena, a feat demonstrated by analytic virtual machines and operational calculus. Inspired by the endeavors of Feynman (1951) and Heaviside (see Carson, 1922) in physics before us, we applied operational calculus to programming spaces, allowing analytic conclusions through algebraic means, easing implementation. It yielded the operator of program composition, generalizing both forward and reverse mode of automatic diﬀerentiation to arbitrary order, under a single operator in the theory. Both the use of algebra and operational calculus were demonstrated, as calculations and manipulations were performed on the operator level, before the operator is applied to a particular program. The language presented in this work condenses complex notions into simple expressions, enabling formulation of meaningful algebraic equations to be solved. In doing so, functional transformations of programs in arbitrary function basis’ were derived, a useful tool when adapting code to the speciﬁcs of a given hardware, among other. All such formulations are invariant not only to the choice of a programming space, but also to the point in execution of a program, introducing the principle of general covariance to programming. Oﬀerings of this principle were exploited in designing methods on how transformations are to be interchangeably applied in practice in Section 5.8. These methods allow seamless transitions between transformed forms and original code throughout the program. Operational calculus provides more than mere means to calculating derivatives. Its depth allows merging modern discoveries with known old truths in the form of Neural Tensor series. A construct most useful when coming to terms with the ﬁnite horizon beyond which theoretical truths become pragmatic approximations. It allows us to treat the idealistic case deprecated by the ﬁnite, as an initial prediction of a model to be trained. This has widespread applicability, as it can be seen as a process of boosting, which already enriched other ﬁelds of science. As each general tensor network is a Neural tensor series of some program, we might gain insight on one by identifying it with the other, hopefully further bridging the gap in understanding between continuous and discrete computation. Operational calculus provides a rigorous framework for such discussion, as was brieﬂy explored in the ﬁnal section, and will be the authors’ next subject of study.  25  Sajovic and Vuk  Acknowledgments First author extends his gratitude to dr. Jure Kališnik for proofreading the proofs, and prof. Borut Robič for general guidance through the academia.  References Martín Abadi and et al. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems, 2015. Software available from tensorﬂow.org. A. Abdelfattah and et al. High-performance tensor contractions for {GPUs}. Procedia Computer Science, 80:108 – 118, 2016. ISSN 1877-0509. International Conference on Computational Science 2016, {ICCS} 2016, 6-8 June 2016, San Diego, California, {USA}. Atilim Gunes Baydin and et. al. Automatic differentiation in machine learning: a survey. 2015. Yoshua Bengio. Gradient-based optimization of hyperparameters. Neural computation, 12 (8):1889–1900, 2000. John R. Carson. The heaviside operational calculus. Bell System Technical Journal, 1(2): 43–55, 1922. ISSN 1538-7305. Richard P. Feynman. An operator calculus having applications in quantum electrodynamics. Phys. Rev., 84:108–128, Oct 1951. Yoav Freund and et al. A short introduction to boosting. Journal-Japanese Society For Artificial Intelligence, 14(771-780):1612, 1999. Leon A. Gatys, Alexander S. Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. A neural algorithm of artistic style. arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1508.06576, 2015. Mark Girolami and Ben Calderhead. Riemann manifold Langevin and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo methods. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 2011. Alex Graves and et al. Hybrid computing using a neural network with dynamic external memory. Nature, advance online publication, Oct 2016. ISSN 1476-4687. Article. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. arXiv e-prints, 2015. Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997. Robin J. Hogan. Fast reverse-mode automatic diﬀerentiation using expression templates in c++. ACM Trans. Math. Softw., 40(4):26:1–26:16, July 2014. ISSN 0098-3500. Kamil A. Khan and Paul I. Barton. A vector forward mode of automatic diﬀerentiation for generalized derivative evaluation. Optimization Methods and Software, 30(6):1185–1212, 2015. 26  Operational Calculus on Programming Spaces  Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoﬀrey E Hinton. Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 1097–1105, 2012. Alexander Mordvintsev, Christopher Olah, and Mike Tyka. Inceptionism: Going deeper into neural networks, 2015. URL https://research.googleblog.com/2015/06/inceptionism-going-deeper-into-neural.html. O’Hanian, Hans C., Ruﬃni, and Remo. Gravitation and Spacetime (2nd ed.). W. W. Norton, 1994. ISBN 0-393-96501-5. Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. On the diﬃculty of training recurrent neural networks. ICML (3), 28:1310–1318, 2013. Barak A. Pearlmutter and Jeﬀrey M Siskind. Putting the Automatic Back into AD: Part II, Dynamic, Automatic, Nestable, and Fast (CVS: 1.1). ECE Technical Reports., May 2008a. Barak A. Pearlmutter and Jeﬀrey M Siskind. Putting the Automatic Back into AD: Part I, What’s Wrong (CVS: 1.1). ECE Technical Reports., 2008b. Scott Reed and Nando de Freitas. ternational Conference on Learning http://arxiv.org/pdf/1511.06279v3.  Neural programmer-interpreters. Representations (ICLR), 2016.  In InURL  Richard Socher, Cliﬀ C Lin, Chris Manning, and Andrew Y Ng. Parsing natural scenes and natural language with recursive neural networks, 2011. Theano Development Team. Theano: A Python framework for fast computation of mathematical expressions. arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1605.02688, May 2016. Chris Thornton and et al. Auto-weka: Combined selection and hyperparameter optimization of classiﬁcation algorithms. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 847–855. ACM, 2013. Norbert Wiener. The operational calculus. Mathematische Annalen, 95:557–584, 1926. Žiga Sajovic. dcpp, 2016a. URL https://github.com/zigasajovic/dCpp. Žiga Sajovic. Implementing operational calculus on programming spaces for diﬀerentiable computing. arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1612.0273, 2016b.  27

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 9. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
