Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 5
ArXiv ID: hf_939

Abstract:
Near-optimal planning using approximate dynamic programming to enhance post-hazard community resilience management Saeed Nozhatia,1,∗, Yugandhar Sarkaleb,1 , Bruce Ellingwooda , Edwin K.P. Chongb , Hussam Mahmouda a Dept.  arXiv:1803.01451v1 [math.OC] 5 Mar 2018  b Dept.  of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1372 of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1373  Abstract The lack of a comprehensive decision-making approach at the community-level is of significant importance that must be garnered immediate attention. Network-level decision-making algorithms need to solve largescale optimization problems that pose computational challenges. The complexity of the optimization problems increases when various sources of uncertainty are considered. This research introduces a sequential discrete optimization approach, as a decision-making framework at the community-level for recovery management. The proposed mathematical approach leverages approximate dynamic programming along with heuristics for the determination of recovery actions. Our methodology overcomes the curse of dimensionality and manages multi-state, large-scale infrastructure systems following disasters. We also provide computational results which suggest that our methodology not only incorporates recovery policies of responsible public and private entities within the community, but also substantially enhances the performance of their underlying strategies with limited resources. The methodology can be implemented efficiently to identify near-optimal recovery decisions following a severe earthquake based on multiple objectives for an modeled Electrical Power Network of a testbed community coarsely modeled after Gilroy, California, United States. The proposed optimization method supports risk-informed community decision-makers within chaotic posthazard circumstances. Keywords: Community Resilience, Electrical Power Network, Combinatorial Optimization, Rollout Algorithm, Approximate Dynamic Programming  1. Introduction In the modern era, the functionality of infrastructure systems is of significant importance in providing continuous services to communities and in supporting their public health and safety. Natural and anthropogenic hazards pose significant challenges to infrastructure systems and cause undesirable system malfunctions and consequences. Past experiences show that these malfunctions are not always inevitable despite design strategies like ∗ Corresponding  author Email addresses: saeed.nozhati@colostate.edu (Saeed Nozhati ), yugandhar.sarkale@colostate.edu (Yugandhar Sarkale), bruce.ellingwood@colostate.edu (Bruce Ellingwood), edwin.chong@colostate.edu (Edwin K.P. Chong), hussam.mahmoud@colostate.edu (Hussam Mahmoud) 1 Contributed equally, listed alphabetically. Preprint submitted to Reliability Engineering & System Safety  increasing system redundancy and reliability [1]. Therefore, a sequential rational decision-making framework should enable malfunctioned systems to be restored in a timely manner after the hazards. Further, post-event stressors and chaotic circumstances, time limitations, budget and resource constraints, and complexities in the community recovery process, which are twinned with catastrophe, highlight the necessity for a comprehensive riskinformed decision-making framework for recovery management at the community-level. A comprehensive decision-making framework must take into account indirect, delayed consequences of decisions (also called the post-effect property of decisions), and thus requires foresight or planning. Such a comprehensive decision-making system must also be able to handle large-scale scheduling problems that encompass large combinatorial decision spaces to make the most rational plans at the communityMarch 7, 2018  level. Developing efficient computational methodologies for sequential decision-making problems has always been a thought-provoking subject [2, 3]. In the context of civil engineering, several studies have utilized the framework of dynamic programming for management of bridges and pavement maintenance [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Typical methodological formulations employ principles dynamic programming that utilize state-action pairs. In this study, we show a powerful and relatively unexplored methodological framework of formulating large infrastructure problems as a string-actions, will be described in Section 5.1.2. Our formulation does not require an explicit state-space model, and is therefore shielded against the common problem of state explosion when such methodologies are employed. The sequential decision-making methodology presented here not only manages network-level infrastructure but also considers the interconnectedness and cascading effects in the entire recovery process that have not been addressed in past studies. Dynamic programming formulations frequently suffer from the curse of dimensionality. This problem is further aggravated when we have to deal with large combinatorial decision spaces characteristic of community recovery. Therefore, using approximation techniques in conjunction with the dynamic programming formalism is essential. There are several approximation techniques available in the literature [9, 10, 11, 12]. Here, we use a promising class of approximation techniques called as rollout algorithms. We show how rollout algorithms blend naturally with string-action formulation. Together, they form a robust tool to overcome some of the limitations faced in the application of dynamic programming techniques to massive real-world problems. The proposed approach is able to handle the curse of dimensionality in its analysis and management of multi-state, large-scale infrastructure systems and data sources. The proposed methodology is also able to consider and improve the current recovery policies of responsible public and private entities within the community. Among infrastructure systems, Electrical Power Networks (EPNs are particularly critical inasmuch as the functionality of most other networks, and critical facilities depend on EPN functionality and management. Hence, the method is illustrated in an application to recovery management of the modeled EPN in Gilroy, California following a severe earthquake. The illustrative example shows how the pro-  posed approach can be implemented efficiently to identify near-optimal recovery decisions. The computed near-optimal decisions restored the EPN of Gilroy in a timely manner, for residential buildings as well as main food retailers, as an example of critical facilities that need electricity to support public health in the aftermath of hazards. The remainder of this study is structured as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the background of system resilience and the system modeling used in this study. In Section 3, we introduce the case study used in this paper. In Section 4, we describe the earthquake modeling, fragility and restoration assessments. In Section 5, we provide mathematical formulation of our optimization problem. In Section 6, we demonstrate the compatibility of the rollout algorithm with the string action formulation through multiple simulations. In Section 7, we present a brief conclusion of this research. 2. System resilience The term resilience is defined in a variety of ways. Generally speaking, resilience can be defined as “the ability to prepare for and adapt to changing conditions and withstand and recover rapidly from disruptions”[13]. Hence, resilience of a community (or a system) is usually delineated with the measure of community functionality, shown by the vertical axis of Fig.1 and four attributes of robustness, rapidity, redundancy, and resourcefulness [14]. Fig.1 illustrates the concept of functionality, which can be defined as the ability of a system to support its planned mission, for example by providing electricity to people and facilities. The understanding of interdependencies among the components of a system is essential to quantify system functionality and resilience. These interdependencies produce cascading failures where a large-scale cascade may be triggered by the malfunction of a single or few components [15]. Further, they contribute to the recovery rate and difficulty of the entire recovery process of a system. Different factors affect the recovery rate of a system, among which modification before disruptive events (ex-ante mitigations), different recovery policies (ex-post actions), and nature of the disruption are prominent [16]. Fig.1 also highlights different sources of uncertainty that are associated with community functionality assessment and have remarkable impacts in different stages from prior to the event to the end of the recovery process. Therefore, any employed model to assess the recovery pro2  Figure 2: The map of Gilroy’s population over the defined grids  Figure 1: Schematic representation of resilience concept (adopted from [18, 14])  resolution that is sufficient to study the methodology at the community-level under hazard events. Gilroy contains 13 food retailers, but six main retailers, each of which has more than 100 employees, provide the main food requirements of Gilroy inhabitants [21], as shown in Fig.3 and summarized in Table 1.  cess ought to be able to consider the impacts of the influencing parameters. In this study, the dependency of networks is modeled through adjacency matrix A = [xij ], where xij ∈ [0, 1] and indicates the magnitude of dependency between components i and j [17]. In this general form, the adjacency matrix A can be a timedependent stochastic matrix to capture the uncertainties in the dependencies and probable timedependent variations. According to the literature, the resilience index R for each system is defined by the following equation [14, 19]: Z te +TLC Q(t) R= dt (1) TLC te  Table 1: The main food retailers of Gilroy Food Retailer Number of Employees  Walmart 395  Costco 220  Target 130  Mi Pueblo Food 106  Nob Hill Foods 100  Safeway 130  In order to assign the probabilities of shopping activity to each urban grid, the gravity model [22] is used. The gravity model identifies the shopping location probabilistically, given the location of residences. These probabilities are assigned to be proportional to food retailers' capacities and inversely corresponding to retailers' distances from centers of urban grids. Consequently, distant small locations are less likely to be selected than close large locations. If the center of an urban grid is c, then food retailer r is chosen according to the following distribution [22]: P (r|c) ∝ wr ebTcr (2)  where Q(t) is the shaded area underneath the functionality function of a system at time t, TLC is the control time of the system, and te is the time of occurrence of event e, as shown in Fig. 1. 3. Description of case study In the case study of this paper, the community in Gilroy, California USA is used as an example to illustrate the proposed approach. Gilroy is located approximately 50 kilometers (km) south of the city of San Jose with a population of 48,821 at the time of the 2010 census (see Fig.2) [20]. The study area is divided into 36 grids to define the properties of community and encompasses 41.9 km2 area of Gilroy. All characteristics of Gilroy are not covered in this study, but the adopted model has a  in which wr is the capacity of food retailer r, determined by Table 1, b is a negative constant, and Tcr is the travel time from urban grid c to food retailer r. Googles Distance Matrix API was called from within R by using the ggmap package [23] to provide distances and travel time for the assumed transportation mode of driving. Fig.4 represents the Electrical Power Network 3  Figure 5: The map of shear velocity at Gilroy area  the Loma Prieta earthquake [24]. The spatial estimation of ground-motion amplitudes from earthquakes is an essential element of risk assessment, typically characterized by ground-motion prediction equations (GMPEs). GMPEs require several parameters, such as earthquake magnitude Mw , fault properties (Fp ), soil conditions (i.e. the average shear-wave velocity in the top 30 m of soil, Vs30 ), epicentral distances (R) to compute the seismic intensity measure (IM) at any point. Modern GMPEs typically take the form:  Figure 3: Gilroy’s main food retailers  ln(IM) = f (Mw , R, Vs30 , Fp ) + ε1 σ + ε2 τ (3) ln(IM) = ln(IM) + ε1 σ + ε2 τ where σ and τ reflect the intra-event (within event) and inter-event (event-to-event) uncertainty respectively [25]. In this study, the GMPE proposed by Ambrahamson et al. [26] is used and a ground motion similar to the Loma Prieta earthquake, one of the most devastating hazards that Gilroy has experienced [24], with epicenter approximately 12 km of Gilroy downtown on the SAF projection is simulated. Figs.5 and 6 show the map of Vs30 and ground motion field for Peak Ground Acceleration (PGA), respectively.  Figure 4: The modeled electrical power network of Gilroy  (EPN) components, located within the defined boundary. Llagas power substation, the main source of power in the defined boundary, is supplied by an 115kv transmission line. Distribution line components are positioned at 100 m and modeled from the substation to the urban grids centers, food retailers, and water network facilities. In this study, the modelled EPN has 327 components.  4.2. Fragility Function and Restoration The relations between ground-motion intensities and earthquake damage relationships are pivotal elements in the quantification of structures and infrastructure systems functionality and loss estimation and the risk analysis of a community. So-called fragility curves describe the probability of experiencing or exceeding a particular level of damage as  4. Hazard and Damage assessment 4.1. Earthquake Simulation The seismicity of Gilroy region of California is mainly controlled by the San Andreas Fault (SAF) that caused numerous destructive earthquakes like 4  5. Optimization of EPN Recovery for Gilroy 5.1. Problem Description 5.1.1. Introduction After an earthquake event occurs, each EPN component experiences in one of the damage states as shown in Table 2. Let the total number of damaged components be M . Note that M ≤ 327. Both M and N ∈ Z≥ , and N ≤ M . Also, in this study, N  M . This assumption is justified by the availability of limited resources with the planner where large number of components are damaged in the aftermath of a severe hazard. A decision maker or planner has the task of assigning units of resources to these damaged components. A decision maker has a heuristic or expert policy on the basis of which he can make his decisions to maximize some objective. The precise nature of the objective of the planner can vary, will be described in details in Section 5.1.2. Particularly, at the 1st decision epoch, the decision maker or a resource planner deploys N unit of resources at N out of M damaged components. Each unit of resources is assigned to a distinct damaged component. In this study, we assume that the outcome of the decisions is fully predictable [35]. We consider a separate article to address the relaxation of this assumption, i.e., when outcome of decisions exhibits uncertainty. The modified methods to deal with the general problem will form a part of a separate paper [36]. The planner must have an option of reassigning some or all of the resources to new locations based on his heuristics and objectives. It is possible to not preempt assignment of the unit of resources to the damaged locations; however we choose to solve the more general problem of preemptive assignment, where non-preemption at few or all the locations is a special case of our problem. The preemptive assignment problem is a richer decision problem than the non-preemptive case in the sense that the process of optimizing the decision actions is a more complex task since the size of decision space is bigger. We improve upon the solutions offered by heuristics of the planner by formulating our optimization problem as a dynamic program and solving it using the rollout approach.  Figure 6: The simulation of median of peak ground acceleration field  a function of hazard intensity. It is customary to model component fragilities with lognormal distributions [27]. The conditional probability of being in or exceeding, a particular damage state (ds), conditioned on a particular level of intensity measure IM = im, is defined by:  P (DS ≥ ds|IM = im) = Φ  ln(im) − λ ξ   (4)  in which Φ is the standard normal distribution. λ and ξ are the mean and standard deviation of ln(im). The fragility curves can be obtained based on a) post-earthquake damage evaluation data (empirical curves) [28] b) structural modeling (analytical curves) [29] c) expert opinions (heuristics curves) [30]. In the present study, the seismic fragility curves included in HAZUS-MH [31] and the study of Xie et al. [32] are used for illustration. In order to restore a network, a number of available resource units, N , as a generic single number including equipment and replacement components, repair crews are considered for assignment to damaged components, and each damaged component is assumed to require only one unit of resources [33]. The restoration times based on the level of damage, used in this study, are presented in Table 2, based on [31] [34].  5.1.2. Optimization Problem In this section, we provide a formal representation of our optimization problem. Lets say that the decision maker starts making decisions and assigning repair locations to different units of resources. The number of such non-trivial decisions to be  Table 2: Restoration times based on the level of damage Component Electric sub-station Transmission line component Distribution line component  Damage States Undamaged 0 0 0  Minor 1 0.5 0.5  Moderate 3 1 1  Extensive 7 1 1  Complete 30 2 1  5  made is ≤ M − N . When M becomes ≤ N (because of sequential application of repair actions to the damaged components), the assignment of units of resources becomes a trivial problem in our setting, because each unit of resources can be simply assigned one to one, in any order, to the damaged components. Consequently, a strict optimal assignment can be achieved in the trivial case. The size of this trivial assignment problem reduces by one for every new decision epoch until all the remaining damaged components are repaired. The additional units of resources retire because deploying more than one unit of resource to the same location does not decrease the repair time associated with that damaged component. Henceforth, we focus on the non-trivial assignment problem. Let the variable t denote the decision epoch and let Dt be the set of all damaged components before a repair action xt is performed. Let tend denote the decision epoch at which |Dtend | − N = 1. Note that t ∈ A := {1, 2, . . . , tend }. After all the components are repaired, let X = {x1 , x2 . . . , xtend } represent the set of string actions. We say that a repair action is completed when at least 1 out of the N damaged components is repaired. Let P(Dt ) be the powerset of Dt . Let, PN (Dt ) = {C ∈ P(Dt ) : |C| = N }  Objective 1 is to compute the optimal solution X1∗ given by: X1∗ = arg min F1 (X1 ). X1 ∈Θ  We explain the precise meaning of restoration of electricity to people in more detail in Sec.6.1. To sum up, in objective 1, our aim is to find a set of string actions that minimizes the number of days needed to restore electricity to certain fraction (γ) of the total population of Gilroy. • Objective 2: We define the mapping F2 in terms of number of people who have electricity per unit of time; our objective is to maximize this mapping over a string of repair actions. Let the variable kt denote the total time elapsed between completion of repair action xt−1 and xt , ∀t ∈ A\{1}, in which k1 is the time elapsed between the start and completion of repair action x1 . Let ht be the total number of people who have electricity after the repair action xt is complete. Let Ω = PN (D1 ) PN (D2 ) . . . PN (Dtend ). Then,  ×  × ×  F2 (X) =  (5)  1  tX end  ktend  t=1  ht × kt .  (8)  We are interested in the optimal solution X ∗ given by:  then, xt ∈ PN (Dt ). Let Rt be the set of all repaired components after the repair action xt is completed. Note that Dt+1 = Dt \Rt , ∀t ∈ A, where |Dtend +1 | = 0 and the decision making problem moves into the trivial assignment problem previously discussed. We wish to calculate a string of repair actions X that optimizes our objective functions F (X). We deal with two objective functions in this study denoted by mapping F1 and F2 .  X ∗ = arg max F2 (X). X∈Ω  (9)  Note that our objective function in the 2nd case F2 (X) mimics the resilience index, and can be interpreted in terms of Eqn.(1), in which integral is replaced by a sum because of discrete decision epochs, Q(t) is replaced by the product ht × kt , and TLC is analogous to ktend , and the integral limits are also changed to represent the discrete decision epochs. Also, note that the decision maker may apply the repair actions sequentially at different decision epochs to maximize or minimize a cumulative objective function. The string of actions as represented in X or X1 are an outcome of this sequential decision making process. This is particularly relevant in the context of dynamic programming.  • Objective 1: Let the variable p represent the population of Gilroy and γ represent a constant threshold. Let X1 = {x1 , . . . , xi } be the string of repair actions which results in restoration of electricity to γ × p number of people. Here, xi ∈ PN (Di ), where Di is the number of damaged component at the ith decision epoch. Let n represent the time required to restore electricity to γ × p number of people, as a result of repair actions X1 . Let Θ = PN (D1 ) PN (D2 ) . . . PN (Di ). Formally, F1 (X1 ) = n. (6)  ×  (7)  × ×  5.2. Approximate Dynamic Programming It is possible to use the dynamic programming formalism to represent our optimization problem, 6  but here we accomplish this by starting from first principles, as in Ref. 37. Let’s focus our attention on objective 1. The extension of this methodology to objective 2 is straightforward; we need to adapt notation used for objective 2 in the methodology presented below, and a maximization problem replaces a minimization problem. Recall that we are interested in the optimal solution X1∗ given by Eqn.(7). This can be calculated in the following manner: First calculate x∗1 as follows: x∗1 ∈ arg min J1 (x1 ) x1  this is called as the curse of dimensionality. If, we consider objective 2 and we wish to calculate Jα  α = M − N then, for 50 damaged components and 10 unit of resources the table size is ≈ 10500 . In practice, in Eqn.14 Jα is replaced by an approximation denoted by J˜α . This approximation is constructed with a aid of a heuristic. There are several ways to utilize a heuristic to approximate Jα . All such approximation techniques fall under the category of approximate dynamic programming. The technique of rollout is one such heuristic in the approximation process. Let’s say we have heuristic H available which is used to approximate the minimization of Eqn.15. Let Hα (x1 , . . . , xα ) denote the corresponding approximate optimal value; then rollout yields the suboptimal solution by replacing Jα with Hα in Eqn.(14):  (10)  where the function J1 is defined by J1 (x1 ) = min F1 (X1 ). x2 ,...,xi  (11)  Next, calculate x∗2 as:  x̃α ∈ arg min Hα (x̃1 , . . . , x̃α−1 , xα ). xα  x∗2  ∈  arg min J2 (x∗1 , x2 ) x2  (12)  Rollout results a significant improvement over just applying base heuristic to solve the approximate dynamic programming problem [38].  where the function J2 is defined by J2 (x1 , x2 ) = min F1 (X1 ). x3 ,...,xi  (13) 5.3. Rollout Algorithm When the problem is discrete and deterministic, as in our case, the base policy is a base heuristic (in dynamic programming sense, see [38]). Let’s call this as a base heuristic H, which can be defined in several ways:  Similarly, we calculate the α solution as follows: x∗α ∈ arg min Jα (x∗1 , . . . , x∗α−1 , xα ) xα  (14)  where the function Jα is defined by Jα (x1 , . . . , xα ) =  min  xα+1 ,...,xi  F1 (X1 ).  (15)  (i) The current recovery policy of regionally responsible public and private entities,  The functions Jα are called the optimal cost-to-go functions and are defined by the following recursion: Jα (x1 , . . . , xα ) = min Jα+1 (x1 , . . . , xα+1 ), xα+1  (ii) The importance analyses that prioritize the importance of components based on the considered importance factors [39],  (16)  (iii) The greedy algorithm that computes the greedy heuristic [40, 41],  where the boundary condition is given by: Ji (X1 ) = F1 (X1 ).  (18)  (17)  (iv) A random policy without any pre-assumption,  Note that J is a standard notation used to represent cost-to-go functions in the dynamic programming literature. The approach discussed above to calculate the optimal solutions is the dynamic programming formulation. However, except for very special problems, such a formulation cannot be solved exactly because calculating and storing the optimal cost-to-go functions Jα can be numerically intensive. Particularly, for our problem let |Θ| be denoted by β, then the storage of Jα requires a table of size β α . In dynamic programming literature  (v) A pre-defined empirical policy; e.g., base heuristic based on the maximum node and link betweenness (shortest path), as for example used in the studies of [33, 42]. While there is no restriction to define a base heuristic to use the proposed formulation, a wiser base heuristic can potentially enhance further the computed rollout policy. Two different base heuristics are considered in this study. The first base heuristic is a random heuristic denoted by H. The 7  idea behind consideration of this heuristic is that in actuality there are cases where there is no thoughtout strategy or the computation of such Ĥ is computationally extensive. We will show that the rollout formulation can accept a random base at the community-level from a decision maker and improve it significantly. The second base heuristic is called a smart heuristic since it is computed based on the importance of components and expert judgment connoted by Ĥ. The more important components based on their contribution in the community are repaired first. This type of base heuristic determination can be similar in spirit to the items (ii) and (v) above. The proposed formulation should improve both bases. The rollout policy is obtained by the repeated use of this base heuristic. This approach was used by the authors of Ref. 38 where they repeatedly used the base heuristic to improve the solution. The term rollout was first coined by Tesauro in Ref.[43], in reference to creating computer programs that play backgammon. An approach similar to rollout was also shown in Ref.[44]. Let H generate the string actions (j̃1 , j̃2 , . . . , j̃i ), where j̃α = (x̃1 , . . . , x̃α ). Let Hα (j̃α ) denote the cost-to-go starting from the α-solution j̃α = (x̃1 , . . . , x̃α ), generated because of applying H (i.e., H is used to evaluate the cost-to-go). The cost-togo due to the algorithm H is equal to the terminal reward, i.e., H̃α (j̃α ) = F1 (X1 ). Therefore, we have: H̃1 (j̃1 ) = H̃2 (j̃2 ) = . . . = H̃i (j̃i ). We use this heuristic cost-to-go in (14) to find an approximate solution to our problem. This approximation algorithm is termed as “Rollout on H” (RH) due to its structure, which is similar to rollout algorithms. The RH algorithm generates the string actions (j1 , j2 , . . . , ji ) as follows: jα = arg  min  ¯ J(δ), α = 1, . . . , i  repair action for the next two steps by minimizing the cost-to-go given the repair actions for the next two steps. This can be viewed as a two-step lookahead approach. Note the similarity of this approach with the dynamic programming approach described above, except for the difficulty of estimating the cost-to-go values J exactly. Also, note that a twostep lookahead approach is computationally more intensive than the one-step approach. In principle, it is possible to extend it to an arbitrarily large step size λ, where 1 ≤ λ ≤ i. However, as λ increases, the computational complexity of the algorithm increases exponentially. Particularly, when m = i, the RH algorithm finds the exact optimal solution by exhaustively searching through all possible repair actions/repair string combinations, with computational complexity O(β i ). Also, note that RH provides a tighter upper bound on the optimal objective value compared to the bound obtained from the original heuristic approach. At any decision epoch, the explanation is same for objective 2, except we maximize the cost-to-go at any step given the repair action. 6. Results 6.1. Discussion We show simulation results for 2 different cases. In Case 1, we assume that people have electricity when their household units have electricity. Household units of people will have electricity when all the components of the EPN network serving their household units are either undamaged or repaired post-hazard (functional). Recall, that the city is divided into different grids according to population heat maps (Fig.2), and different components of the EPN network serving these grids are depicted in Fig.4. In essence, the entire population living in a particular grid will not have electricity until all the EPN components serving that grid are functional. Therefore, the probability that a critical facility like a food retailer or an urban grid Gl has electricity is: ! n̂ \ P (Gl ) = P El (21)  (19)  δ∈N (jα−1 )  where, jα−1 = (x1 , . . . , xα−1 ), and N (jα−1 ) = {(x1 , . . . , xα−1 , x)|x ∈ Θ}, α = 1, . . . , i. (20) The algorithm RH is both sequentially improving with respect to H and outperforms H [45]. The RH algorithm described above is a one-step lookahead approach. For objective 1, at every decision epoch, the repair action at any step is optimized by minimizing the cost-to-go given the repair action for that step. It is possible to generalize this approach to incorporate multi-step lookahead. Particularly, let us say that we optimize the  l=1  where n̂ is the number of EPN component from the source to the destination, and El is the lth EPN component within the defined boundary. In Case 2, along with household units, we incorporate food retailers into the analysis. We say that people 8  Figure 7: Electrical Power Network of Gilroy  have benefit of electric utility only when the EPN components serving their grids are functional and they go to food retailer that is functional. A food retailer is functional (in the electric utility sense) when all EPN components serving the retailers are functional. The mapping of number of people who access a particular food retailer is done at the grid level and follows the gravity model explained in Sec.3. For all simulation results provided henceforth, the number of units of resources available with the planner is fixed at 10. We consider 2 base heuristics in our simulation study: base heuristic H which is random and a smart base heuristic Ĥ.  Figure 8: Electrical Power Network Tree  any other form of base heuristic. Also, note that in each stream or branch of the EPN network, each successive node is dependent upon the prior node for electricity. Furthermore, the root components of different branches are dependent on the leaf component of other branches, i.e one branch is dependent on another one. We exploit this serial nature of an EPN by representing the EPN network as a tree structure as shown in Fig.8. In the non trivial assignment problem (M > N ), if the number of damaged components in the root node of EPN tree are greater than N , then it would be unwise to assign a unit of resources at first decision epoch to the fringe nodes of our EPN tree, since we do not get any benefit until we repair damaged components in the root node. As soon as the number of damaged components in the root node of EPN tree less than N , only then we explore the assignment problem at the further locations. 1-step Heuristic: We increase the pool of possible candidate locations, where the assignment of units of resources must be considered, to all the damaged locations of the next level of EPN tree if and only if the number of damaged locations at the current level of the EPN tree less than N . Even after considering the next level of the EPN tree, if  6.1.1. Case 1: Repair Action Optimization of EPN for Household units Since we consider EPN for only household units in this section, it is possible to come up with heuristics to reduce the size of search space for our rollout algorithm. Note that these heuristics are not the same as the base heuristic H. They are formulated to reduce the size of |Θ| and |Ω|. We present two such heuristics. We will motivate them by giving an example. Let us say we have access to H of the decision maker. This heuristic has a preordained method of assigning units of resources to the damaged locations. Let us name each of the components of the EPN with serial numbers from 1 to 327 as shown partially in Fig.7, as per the base heuristic of the decision maker. So, if the component number 21 and 22 are both damaged, the decision maker will assign one unit of resources to component # 21 first and then schedule repair of component #22, contingent on availability of resources. Note that the base heuristic in Fig.7 is assumed only for illustration of our method; our method can incorporate 9  Figure 9: Electrical power network recovery due to base heuristic H  Figure 10: Comparison of base heuristic (H) vs. rollout algorithm with 1-step heuristic vs. rollout algorithm with N-step heuristic for multiple scenarios for objective 2.  the number of damaged components less than N , we take one more step and account for all damaged locations two levels below the current level. We repeat this until the pool of candidate locations greater than or equal toN , or the levels of EPN tree are exhausted. N-step Heuristic: Note that it might be possible to ignore a few nodes at each level altogether and assign units of resources to promising nodes below the current explored level of EPN tree. This is achieved in the N-step heuristic. Specifically, if the number of damaged components at the current level of EPN tree less than N , then the algorithm searches for a node at the next level that has the least number of damaged components, add these damage components to the pool of damaged components and check if the total number of damaged components at all explored levels less than N . This process is repeated until the pool of damaged components greater than or equal to N , or the levels of the EPN tree are exhausted. Essentially, we do not consider a set of all damaged components at each decision epoch (Dt ), but only a subset of Dt denoted by D̃t1 (1-step heuristic) and D̃tN (N-step heuristic). Therefore, 1\N  Θ̃ = PN (D̃1 Ω̃ =  1\N PN (D̃1  ×P )×P )  plot of EPN recovery for multiple scenarios when H is used for decision making. Here the objective pursued by the decision maker is objective 2. The black line shows the mean of all the recovery trajectories and the red lines show the standard deviation. Henceforth, in various plots, instead of plotting the recovery trajectories for all scenarios we compare the mean of the different trajectories. Fig.10 shows  Figure 11: Histogram of F2 (X) with Base (H), rollout with 1-step and rollout with N-step heuristic for multiple scenarios  ×. . .×P )×. . .×P  1\N ) N (D̃2  1\N ), N (D̃i  1\N N (D̃2  1\N N (D̃tend ).  the performance of RH algorithm with respect to H. Our simulation results demonstrate significant improvement over algorithm H when RH is used, for both the 1-step case and the N-step case. Another result is the performance shown by the 1-step heuristic with respect to the N-step heuristic. Even though, the N-step heuristic considers more candidate locations than the 1-step case, for the assignment problem at each decision epoch, the performance improvement shown is minimal. Sacri-  Note that, |Ω̃| ≤ |Ω|, |Θ̃| ≤ |Θ| and D̃t1 ≤ D̃tN . We simulate multiple damage scenarios following an earthquake with the models discussed previously in Sec.4. On average, the total number of damaged components in any scenario is ≥ 60%. We show the performance of the base heuristic, used in our rollout algorithm, in Fig.9. This figure shows the 10  works are considered simultaneously in the analysis. This is due to the fact that any such heuristic would have to simultaneously balance the pruning of damaged locations in Fig.8 serving both food retailers and household units. There is no natural/simple way of achieving this as in the case of 1-step and N-step heuristic where only household units were considered. Whenever we consider complex objective functions and interaction between networks, it is difficult to prune the action space in a physically meaningful way just by applying heuristics. For our case, any such heuristic will have to incorporate the gravity model explained in Sec.3. The heuristic must also consider the network topology and actual physical position of important EPN components within the network. As previously seen, our methodology works well even if we select only a small subset of Dt (Dt1 and DtN ) to construct Θ and Ω to avoid huge computational cost. Moreover, the degradation in performance by choosing Dt1 over DtN is minimal, despite |D̃t1 | ≤ |D̃tN |. This is because our methodology leverages the use of one step lookahead property with consistent and sequential improvement over algorithm H or Ĥ, to overcome any degradation in performance as a result of choosing D̃t  Dt . This is further justified  Figure 12: Comparison of base heuristic (Ĥ) vs. rollout algorithm with 1-step heuristic vs. rollout algorithm with N-step heuristic for multiple scenarios for objective 2.  ficing numerous candidate locations in the 1-step case (limited EPN Tree search) has minimal impact on the performance of the rollout algorithm. This is because approximating Dt with a small subset of Dt , is only a small part of the entire rollout algorithm. Further explanation for such behavior is suitably explained in Sec.6.1.2. Fig.11 shows the histogram of values of F2 (X), for multiple scenarios, as a result of application of string actions due to H and RH (1-step and N-step heuristic). Clearly, the rollout algorithms show significant improvement over H, for our problem. Fig.12 shows simulation result for multiple scenarios when objective 2 is optimized, but when a smart base heuristic Ĥ is considered instead of H. This simulation study highlights extremely interesting behavior exhibited by the rollout algorithm. In the initial phase of decision-making, the algorithm Ĥ competes with the rollout algorithm, slightly outperforming the rollout algorithm in many instances. However, after a period of 10 days, rollout algorithm (both 1-step and N-step heuristic) comprehensively outperforms Ĥ. Since the rollout has the lookahead property, it offers conservative repair decisions initially (despite staying competitive with Ĥ), in anticipation of overcoming the loss suffered due to initial conservative decisions. Optimizing with foresight is an emergent behavior exhibited by our optimization methodology, which can offer significant advantages in critical decision-making scenarios.  Figure 13: Cumulative moving average plot for objective 1 where γ = .8 with base heuristic (H) and rollout algorithm  in the simulation results shown in Figs.13 to 16. In Figs.13 and 14, H is used as the base heuristic. This base heuristic is same as the one used in the simulations shown in Case 1, which is not particularly well tuned for Case 2. Despite this, our algorithm shows a stark improvement over H after repeated application of the rollout algorithm. Fig.13 shows that the rollout algorithm, with random selection of candidate damaged locations (D̃t ), significantly outperforms H for objective 1. For the rollout al-  6.1.2. Case 2: Repair Action Optimization of EPN for Household units & Retailers It is difficult to come up with meaningful heuristics to reduce the size of Θ and Ω when multiple net11  Figure 14: Comparison of base heuristic (H) vs rollout algorithm  Figure 16: Comparison of base heuristic (Ĥ) vs. rollout algorithm for multiple scenarios for objective 2.  the string actions provided by algorithm Ĥ. 6.2. Computational Efforts We provide a brief description of computational efforts undertaken to optimize our decision-making problem. The |Ω̃| and |Θ̃| is huge because of the combinatorial nature of the assignment problem. Furthermore, we have simulated multiple damage scenarios for each different simulation result provided in this work. The modeling of the optimization problem and the solution methodology were implemented in MATLAB. The rollout algorithm gives multiple calls to the base heuristic function and searches for string actions over the sets Ω̃ and Θ̃. This is akin to giving millions of calls to the simulator. Therefore, our implementation of the code had to achieve a run time on the order of few micro seconds(µs) so that millions of calls to the simulator are possible. A single call to the simulator will be defined as evaluating some repair action xt ∈ Ω̃ or Θ̃ and completing the rollout process until all the damaged components are repaired (complete rollout[46]). Despite the use of best software practices, to mitigate large action spaces by coding fast simulator, it is imperative to match it with good hardware capability for simulations of humongous size. It is possible to parallelize the simulation process to fully exploit modern day hardware capability. We ran our simulations on the Summit super computer 8. Specifically, (100/376) Poweredge C6320 Haswell nodes were utilised, where each node has 2x e5-2680v3 (2400/9024) cores. In Case 1, we never encountered the |Ω̃|, |Θ̃| > 106 for any damage scenario, whereas for case 2 we limited the |Ω̃|, |Θ̃| < 105 , for all damage scenarios. On this system, with a simulator call run time of 1µs,  Figure 15: Comparison of base heuristic (Ĥ) vs. rollout algorithm for multiple scenarios for objective 1.  gorithm, the mean number of days, over multiple damage scenarios, to provide electricity to γ times the total number of people is ≈ 8 days, whereas for the base heuristic it is ≈ 30. Similarly, Fig.14 shows that for objective 2 the benefit of EPN recovery per unit of time with rollout algorithm is significantly better than H. Figs.15 and 16 provide the synopsis of the results for both the objectives when the smart base heuristic Ĥ is considered. In Fig.15 the number of days to reach a threshold γ = 0.8 as a result of Ĥ algorithm is better than H. However, note that the number of days to achieve objective 1 is still lesser using the rollout algorithm. The key inference from this observation is that rollout might not always significantly outperform the smart heuristic, but will never perform worse than any heuristic. Fig.16 shows a behaviour similar to Fig.12 (Case 1) where Ĥ might outperform rollout in the shortterm (as a result of myopic decision-making), but in the long run rollout compressively improves upon 12  we managed to run 1011 simulator calls per node for different simulation plots. Our computational efforts emphasize that for massive combinatorial decision-making problems, it is possible to achieve near-optimal performance with our methodology by harnessing powerful present day computational systems and implementing sound software practices.  9. References References [1] J. A. Nachlas, Reliability engineering: probabilistic models and maintenance methods, Crc Press, 2017. [2] M. J. Kochenderfer, Decision making under uncertainty: theory and application, MIT press, 2015. [3] D. P. Bertsekas, D. P. Bertsekas, D. P. Bertsekas, D. P. Bertsekas, Dynamic programming and optimal control, Vol. 1, Athena scientific Belmont, MA, 1995. [4] H. Meidani, R. Ghanem, Random markov decision processes for sustainable infrastructure systems, Structure and Infrastructure Engineering 11 (5) (2015) 655–667. [5] D. M. Frangopol, M.-J. Kallen, J. M. Van Noortwijk, Probabilistic models for life-cycle performance of deteriorating structures: review and future directions, Progress in Structural Engineering and Materials 6 (4) (2004) 197–212. [6] H. Ellis, M. Jiang, R. B. Corotis, Inspection, maintenance, and repair with partial observability, Journal of Infrastructure Systems 1 (2) (1995) 92–99. [7] R. B. Corotis, J. Hugh Ellis, M. Jiang, Modeling of riskbased inspection, maintenance and life-cycle cost with partially observable markov decision processes, Structure and Infrastructure Engineering 1 (1) (2005) 75–84. [8] E. Fereshtehnejad, A. Shafieezadeh, A randomized point-based value iteration pomdp enhanced with a counting process technique for optimal management of multi-state multi-element systems, Structural Safety 65 (2017) 113–125. [9] D. P. Bertsekas, J. N. Tsitsiklis, Neuro-Dynamic Programming, 1st Edition, Athena Scientific, 1996. [10] K. D. Kuhn, Network-level infrastructure management using approximate dynamic programming, Journal of Infrastructure Systems 16 (2) (2009) 103–111. [11] A. Medury, S. Madanat, Incorporating network considerations into pavement management systems: A case for approximate dynamic programming, Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 33 (2013) 134– 150. [12] L. Busoniu, R. Babuska, B. De Schutter, D. Ernst, Reinforcement learning and dynamic programming using function approximators, Vol. 39, CRC press, 2010. [13] P. P. Directive, Critical infrastructure security and resilience. ppd-21, released february 12, 2013 (2013). [14] M. Bruneau, S. E. Chang, R. T. Eguchi, G. C. Lee, T. D. ORourke, A. M. Reinhorn, M. Shinozuka, K. Tierney, W. A. Wallace, D. Von Winterfeldt, A framework to quantitatively assess and enhance the seismic resilience of communities, Earthquake spectra 19 (4) (2003) 733–752. [15] S. V. Buldyrev, R. Parshani, G. Paul, H. E. Stanley, S. Havlin, Catastrophic cascade of failures in interdependent networks, Nature 464 (7291) (2010) 1025. [16] A. Barabadi, Y. Ayele, Post-disaster infrastructure recovery: Prediction of recovery rate using historical data, Reliability Engineering & System Safety 169 (2018) 209–223. [17] D. J. Watts, S. H. Strogatz, Collective dynamics of small-worldnetworks, nature 393 (6684) (1998) 440. [18] T. McAllister, Research needs for developing a riskinformed methodology for community resilience, Journal of Structural Engineering 142 (8) (2015) C4015008.  7. Concluding Remarks In this study, we proposed an optimization formulation based on the concept of rollout, for the identification of near-optimal community recovery actions, following a disaster. Our methodology utilizes approximate dynamic programming algorithms along with heuristics to overcome the curse of dimensionality in its analysis and management of large-scale infrastructure systems. It has been shown that the proposed approach can be implemented efficiently to identify near-optimal recovery decisions following a severe earthquake for the Electrical Power serving Gilroy. Different base heuristics, used at the community-level recovery, are defined to show the applicability of our approach. The intended methodology and the rollout policies significantly enhanced different base heuristics. Further, the efficient performance of the rollout formulation in optimizing different common objective functions in the community resilience is demonstrated. We believe that the methodology is adaptable to other infrastructure systems and hazards.  8. Acknowledgement The research herein has been funded by the National Science Foundation under Grant CMMI1638284. This support is gratefully acknowledged. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations presented in this material are solely those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. This work utilized the RMACC Summit supercomputer, which is supported by the National Science Foundation (awards ACI-1532235 and ACI1532236), the University of Colorado Boulder and Colorado State University. The RMACC Summit supercomputer is a joint effort of the University of Colorado Boulder and Colorado State University. 13  [19] G. P. Cimellaro, D. Solari, V. Arcidiacono, C. S. Renschler, A. Reinhorn, M. Bruneau, Community resilience assessment integrating network interdependencies. [20] The association of bay area governments (city of gilroy annex). (2011). URL http://resilience.abag.ca.gov/wp-content/ documents/2010LHMP/Gilroy-Annex-2011.pdf [21] M. Harnish, Housing element policy document and background report (2014). URL http://www.gilroy2040.com/documents/ [22] A. Adigaa, A. Agashea, S. Arifuzzamana, C. L. Barretta, R. Beckmana, K. Bisseta, J. Chena, Y. Chungbaeka, S. Eubanka, E. Guptaa, et al., Generating a synthetic population of the united states. [23] D. Kahle, H. Wickham, ggmap: Spatial visualization with ggplot2., R Journal 5 (1). [24] N. R. C. U. G. Board, E. E. R. Institute, Practical lessons from the Loma Prieta earthquake: report from a symposium sponsored by the Geotechnical Board and the Board on Natural Disasters of the National Research Council: symposium held in conjunction with the Earthquake Engineering Research Institute...[et al.]., National Academies Press, 1994. [25] N. Jayaram, J. W. Baker, Correlation model for spatially distributed ground-motion intensities, Earthquake Engineering & Structural Dynamics 38 (15) (2009) 1687–1708. [26] N. A. Abrahamson, W. J. Silva, R. Kamai, Update of the AS08 ground-motion prediction equations based on the NGA-West2 data set, Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research Center, 2013. [27] R. Kennedy, M. Ravindra, Seismic fragilities for nuclear power plant risk studies, Nuclear Engineering and Design 79 (1) (1984) 47–68. [28] M. Colombi, B. Borzi, H. Crowley, M. Onida, F. Meroni, R. Pinho, Deriving vulnerability curves using italian earthquake damage data, Bulletin of Earthquake Engineering 6 (3) (2008) 485–504. [29] A. Singhal, A. S. Kiremidjian, Method for probabilistic evaluation of seismic structural damage, Journal of Structural Engineering 122 (12) (1996) 1459–1467. [30] K. Jaiswal, W. Aspinall, D. Perkins, D. Wald, K. Porter, Use of expert judgment elicitation to estimate seismic vulnerability of selected building types, in: Proc. 15th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering, Lisbon, Portugal, 24-28 Sep 2012, 2012. [31] H. MRl, Multi-hazard loss estimation methodology: Earthquake model, Department of Homeland Security, FEMA, Washington, DC. [32] L. Xie, J. Tang, H. Tang, Q. Xie, S. Xue, Seismic fragility assessment of transmission towers via performance-based analysis, in: Proceedings of the 15th world conference on earthquake engineering, Lisbon, Portugal Google Scholar, 2012. [33] M. Ouyang, L. Dueñas-Osorio, X. Min, A three-stage resilience analysis framework for urban infrastructure systems, Structural safety 36 (2012) 23–31. [34] S. Nozhati, B. Ellingwood, H. Mahmoud, J. van de Lindt, Identifying and analyzing interdependent critical infrastructure in post-earthquake urban reconstruction, in: Proceedings of the eleventh National Conference in Earthquake Engineering, Earthquake Engineering Research Institute, Los Angeles, CA, June, 2018. [35] S. Nozhati, B. Ellingwood, H. Mahmoud, Y. Sarkale, E. K. P. Chong, N. Rosenheim, An approximate dy-  [36]  [37]  [38]  [39] [40]  [41]  [42]  [43]  [44]  [45]  [46]  14  namic programming approach to community recovery management, in: Engineering Mechanics Institute, 2018. Y. Sarkale, S. Nozhati, E. K. P. Chong, B. Ellingwood, H. Mahmoud, Solving markov decision processes for network-level post-hazard recovery via simulation optimization and rollout, in: submitted for publication (Invited Paper), 2018. D. P. Bertsekas, Rollout Algorithms for Discrete Optimization: A Survey, Springer New York, New York, NY, 2013, pp. 2989–3013. doi:10.1007/ 978-1-4419-7997-1_8. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-7997-1_ 8 D. P. Bertsekas, J. N. Tsitsiklis, C. Wu, Rollout algorithms for combinatorial optimization, Journal of Heuristics 3 (3) (1997) 245–262. doi:10.1023/A: 1009635226865. URL https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1009635226865 N. Limnios, Fault trees, John Wiley & Sons, 2013. Y. Ouyang, S. Madanat, Optimal scheduling of rehabilitation activities for multiple pavement facilities: exact and approximate solutions, Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 38 (5) (2004) 347–365. Y. Liu, E. K. Chong, A. Pezeshki, Bounding the greedy strategy in finite-horizon string optimization, in: Decision and Control (CDC), 2015 IEEE 54th Annual Conference on, IEEE, 2015, pp. 3900–3905. H. Masoomi, J. W. van de Lindt, Restoration and functionality assessment of a community subjected to tornado hazard, Structure and Infrastructure Engineering 14 (3) (2018) 275–291. G. Tesauro, G. R. Galperin, On-line policy improvement using monte-carlo search, in: M. C. Mozer, M. I. Jordan, T. Petsche (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 9, MIT Press, 1997, pp. 1068–1074. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/ 1302-on-line-policy-improvement-using-monte-carlo-search. pdf B. Abramson, Expected-outcome: a general model of static evaluation, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 12 (2) (1990) 182–193. doi:10.1109/34.44404. S. Ragi, H. D. Mittelmann, E. K. P. Chong, Directional sensor control: Heuristic approaches, IEEE Sensors Journal 15 (1) (2015) 374–381. doi:10.1109/JSEN. 2014.2343019. D. P. Bertsekas, Lids 2646 rollout algorithms for constrained dynamic programming, 2005.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 5. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
