Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 8
ArXiv ID: hf_98

Abstract:
Polylogarithmic Approximation Algorithms for Weighted-F-Deletion Problems∗ Akanksha Agrawal†  Daniel Lokshtanov‡  Pranabendu Misra§  Saket Saurabh¶  Meirav Zehavik  Abstract  arXiv:1707.04908v1 [cs.DS] 16 Jul 2017  Let F be a family of graphs. A canonical vertex deletion problem corresponding to F is defined as follows: given an n-vertex undirected graph G and a weight function w : V (G) → R, find a minimum weight subset S ⊆ V (G) such that G − S belongs to F. This is known as Weighted F Vertex Deletion problem. In this paper we devise a recursive scheme to obtain O(logO(1) n)-approximation algorithms for such problems, building upon the classic technique of finding balanced separators in a graph. Roughly speaking, our scheme applies to those problems, where an optimum solution S together with a well-structured set X, form a balanced separator of the input graph. In this paper, we obtain the first O(logO(1) n)approximation algorithms for the following vertex deletion problems. • We give an O(log2 n)-factor approximation algorithm for Weighted Chordal Vertex Deletion (WCVD), the vertex deletion problem to the family of chordal graphs. On the way to this algorithm, we also obtain a constant factor approximation algorithm for Multicut on chordal graphs. • We give an O(log3 n)-factor approximation algorithm for Weighted Distance Hereditary Vertex Deletion (WDHVD), also known as Weighted Rankwidth-1 Vertex Deletion (WR-1VD). This is the vertex deletion problem to the family of distance hereditary graphs, or equivalently, the family of graphs of rankwidth 1. Our methods also allow us to obtain in a clean fashion a O(log1.5 n)-approximation algorithm for the Weighted F Vertex Deletion problem when F is a minor closed family excluding at least one planar graph. For the unweighted version of the problem constant factor approximation algorithms are were known [Fomin et al., FOCS 2012], while for the weighted version considered here an O(log n log log n)-approximation algorithm follows from [Bansal et al. SODA 2017]. We believe that our recursive scheme can be applied to obtain O(logO(1) n)-approximation algorithms for many other problems as well.  ∗  The research leading to these results received funding from the European Research Council under the European Unions Seventh Framework Programme (FP/2007-2013) / ERC Grant Agreement no. 306992. † University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. akanksha.agrawal@uib.no. ‡ University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. daniello@ii.uib.no. § Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Chennai, India. pranabendu@imsc.res.in. ¶ University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. The Institute of Mathematical Sciences HBNI, Chennai, India. saket@imsc.res.in. k University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. meirav.zehavi@uib.no.  1  Introduction  Let F be a family of undirected graphs. Then a natural optimization problem is as follows. Weighted F Vertex Deletion Input: An undirected graph G and a weight function w : V (G) → R. Question: Find a minimum weight subset S ⊆ V (G) such that G − S belongs to F. The Weighted F Vertex Deletion problem captures a wide class of node (or vertex) deletion problems that have been studied from the 1970s. For example, when F is the family of independent sets, forests, bipartite graphs, planar graphs, and chordal graphs, then the corresponding vertex deletion problem corresponds to Weighted Vertex Cover, Weighted Feedback Vertex Set, Weighted Vertex Bipartization (also called Weighted Odd Cycle Transversal), Weighted Planar Vertex Deletion and Weighted Chordal Vertex Deletion, respectively. By a classic theorem of Lewis and Yannakakis [29], the decision version of the Weighted F Vertex Deletion problem—deciding whether there exists a set S weight at most k, such that removing S from G results in a graph with property Π—is NP-complete for every non-trivial hereditary property1 Π. Characterizing the graph properties, for which the corresponding vertex deletion problems can be approximated within a bounded factor in polynomial time, is a long standing open problem in approximation algorithms [43]. In spite of a long history of research, we are still far from a complete characterization. Constant factor approximation algorithms for Weighted Vertex Cover are known since 1970s [5, 32]. Lund and Yannakakis observed that the vertex deletion problem for any hereditary property with a “finite number of minimal forbidden induced subgraphs” can be approximated within a constant ratio [30]. They conjectured that for every nontrivial, hereditary property Π with an infinite forbidden set, the corresponding vertex deletion problem cannot be approximated within a constant ratio. However, it was later shown that Weighted Feedback Vertex Set, which doesn’t have a finite forbidden set, admits a constant factor approximation [2, 6], thus disproving their conjecture. On the other hand a result by Yannakakis [42] shows that, for a wide range of graph properties Π, approximating the minimum number of vertices to delete in order to obtain a connected graph with the property Π within a factor n1−ε is NP-hard. We refer to [42] for the precise list of graph properties to which this result applies to, but it is worth mentioning the list includes the class of acyclic graphs and the class of outerplanar graphs. In this paper, we explore the approximability of Weighted F Vertex Deletion for several different families F and design O(logO(1) n)-factor approximation algorithms for these problems. More precisely, our results are as follows. 1. Let F be a finite set of graphs that includes a planar graph. Let F = G (F ) be the family of graphs such that every graph H ∈ G (F ) does not contain a graph from F as a minor. The vertex deletion problem corresponding to F = G (F ) is known as the Weighted Planar F -Minor-Free Deletion (WPF -MFD). The WPF -MFD problem is a very generic problem and by selecting different sets of forbidden minors F , one can obtain various fundamental problems such as Weighted Vertex Cover, Weighted Feedback Vertex Set or Weighted Treewidth η-Deletion. Our first result is a randomized O(log1.5 n)-factor (deterministic O(log2 n)-factor) approximation algorithm for WPF -MFD, for any finite F that contains a planar graph. We remark that a different approximation algorithm for the same class of problems with a 1 A graph property Π is simply a family of graphs, and it is called non-trivial if there exists an infinite number of graphs that are in Π, as well as an infinite number of graphs that are not in Π. A non-trivial graph property Π is called hereditary if G ∈ Π implies that every induced subgraph of G is also in Π.  1  slightly better approximation ratio of O(log n log log n) follows from recent work of Bansal, Reichman, and Umboh [3] (see also the discussion following Theorem 1). Therefore, our first result should be interpreted as a clean and gentle introduction to our methods. 2. We give an O(log2 n)-factor approximation algorithm for Weighted Chordal Vertex Deletion (WCVD), the vertex deletion problem corresponding to the family of chordal graphs. On the way to this algorithm, we also obtain a constant factor approximation algorithm for Weighted Multicut in chordal graphs. 3. We give an O(log3 n)-factor approximation algorithm for Weighted Distance Hereditary Vertex Deletion (WDHVD). This is also known as the Weighted Rankwidth-1 Vertex Deletion (WR-1VD) problem. This is the vertex deletion problem corresponding to the family of distance hereditary graphs, or equivalently graphs of rankwidth 1. All our algorithms follow the same recursive scheme, that find “well structured balanced separators” in the graph by exploiting the properties of the family F. In the following, we first describe the methodology by which we design all these approximation algorithms. Then, we give a brief overview, consisting of known results and our contributions, for each problem we study. Our Methods. Multicommodity max-flow min-cut theorems are a classical technique in designing approximation algorithms, which was pioneered by Leighton and Rao in their seminal paper [28]. This approach can be viewed as using balanced vertex (or edge) separators2 in a graph to obtain a divide-and-conquer approximation algorithm. In a typical application, the optimum solution S, forms a balanced separator of the graph. Thus, the idea is to find an minimum cost balanced separator W of the graph and add it to the solution, and then recursively solve the problem on each of the connected components. This leads to an O(logO(1) n)-factor approximation algorithm for the problem in question. Our recursive scheme is a strengthening of this approach which exploits the structural properties of the family F. Here the optimum solution S ∗ need not be a balanced separator of the graph. Indeed, a balanced separator of the graph could be much larger than S ∗ . Rather, S ∗ along with a possibly large but well-structured subset of vertices X, forms a balanced separator of the graph. We then exploit the presence of such a balanced separator in the graph to compute an approximate solution. Consider a family F for which Weighted F Vertex Deletion is amenable to our approach, and let G be an instance of this problem. Let S be the approximate solution that we will compute. Our approximation algorithm has the following steps: 1. Find a well-structured set X, such that G − X has a balanced separator W which is not too costly. √ 2. Next, compute the balanced separator W of G − X using the known factor O( log n)approximation algorithm (or deterministic O(log n)-approximation algorithm) for Weighted Vertex Separators [12, 28]. Then add W into the solution set S and recursively solve the problem on each connected component of G − (X ∪ S). Let S1 , · · · , S` be the solutions returned by the recursive calls. We add S1 , · · · , S` to the solution S. 3. Finally, we add X back into the graph and consider the instance (G − S) ∪ X. Observe that, V (G − S) can be partitioned into V 0 ] X, where G[V 0 ] belongs to F and X is a well-structured set. We call such instances, the special case of Weighted F Vertex Deletion. We apply an approximation algorithm that exploits the structural properties of the special case to compute a solution. Now consider the problem of finding the structure X. One way is to enumerate all the candidates for X and then pick the one where G − X has a balanced vertex separator of least cost — this 2  A balanced vertex separator is a set of vertices W , such that every connected component of G − W contains at most half of the vertices of G.  2  separator plays the role of W . However, the number of candidates for X in a graph could be too many to enumerate in polynomial time. For example, in the case of Weighted Chordal Vertex Deletion, the set X will be a clique in the graph, and the number of maximal cliques n in a graph on n vertices could be as many as 3 3 [31]. Hence, we cannot enumerate and test every candidate structure in polynomial time. However, we can exploit certain structural properties of family F, to reduce the number of candidates for X in the graph. In our problems, we “tidy up” the graph by removing “short obstructions” that forbid the graph from belonging to the family F. Then one can obtain an upper bound on the number of candidate structures. In the above example, recall that a graph G is chordal if and only if there are no induced cycles of length 4 or more. It is known that a graph G without any induced cycle of length 4 has at most O(n2 ) maximal cliques [11]. Observe that, we can greedily compute a set of vertices which intersects all induced cycles of length 4 in the graph. Therefore, at the cost of factor 4 in the approximation ratio, we can ensure that the graph has only polynomially many maximal cliques. Hence, one can enumerate all maximal cliques in the remaining graph [41] to test for X. Next consider the task of solving an instance of the special case of the problem. We again apply a recursive scheme, but now with the advantage of a much more structured graph. By a careful modification of an LP solution to the instance, we eventually reduce it to instances of Weighted Multicut. In the above example, for Weighted Chordal Vertex Deletion we obtain instances of Weighted Multicut on a chordal graph. We follow this approach for all three problems that we study in this paper. We believe our recursive scheme can be applied to obtain O(logO(1) n)-approximation algorithms for Weighted F Vertex (Edge) Deletion corresponding to several other graph families F. Weighted Planar F -Minor-Free Deletion. Let F be a finite set of graphs containing a planar graph. Formally, Weighted Planar F -Minor-Free Deletion is defined as follows. Weighted Planar F -Minor-Free Deletion (WPF -MFD) Input: An undirected graph G and a weight function w : V (G) → R. Question: Find a minimum weight subset S ⊆ V (G) such that G − S does not contain any graph in F as a minor. The WPF -MFD problem is a very generic problem that encompasses several known problems. To explain the versatility of the problem, we require a few definitions. A graph H is called a minor of a graph G if we can obtain H from G by a sequence of vertex deletions, edge deletions and edge contractions, and a family of graphs F is called minor closed if G ∈ F implies that every minor of G is also in F. Given a graph family F, by ForbidMinor(F) we denote the family of graphs such that G ∈ F if and only if G does not contain any graph in ForbidMinor(F) as a minor. By the celebrated Graph Minor Theorem of Robertson and Seymour, every minor closed family F is characterized by a finite family of forbidden minors [39]. That is, ForbidMinor(F) has finite size. Indeed, the size of ForbidMinor(F) depends on the family F. Now for a finite collection of graphs F , as above, we may define the Weighted F -Minor-Free Deletion problem. And observe that, even though the definition of Weighted F -Minor-Free Deletion we only consider finite sized F , this problem actually encompasses deletion to every minor closed family of graphs. Let G be the set of all finite undirected graphs, and let L be the family of all finite subsets of G . Thus, every element F ∈ L is a finite set of graphs, and throughout the paper we assume that F is explicitly given. In this paper, we show that when F ∈ L contains at least one planar graph, then it is possible to obtain an O(logO(1) n)-factor approximation algorithm for WPF -MFD. The case where F contains a planar graph, while being considerably more restricted than the general case, already encompasses a number of the well-studied instances of WPF -MFD. For example, when F = {K2 }, a complete graph on two vertices, this is the Weighted Vertex 3  Cover problem. When F = {C3 }, a cycle on three vertices, this is the Weighted Feedback Vertex Set problem. Another fundamental problem, which is also a special case of WPF MFD, is Weighted Treewidth-η Vertex Deletion or Weighted η-Transversal. Here the task is to delete a minimum weight vertex subset to obtain a graph of treewidth at most η. Since any graph of treewidth η excludes a (η + 1) × (η + 1) grid as a minor, we have that the set F of forbidden minors of treewidth η graphs contains a planar graph. Treewidth-η Vertex Deletion plays an important role in generic efficient polynomial time approximation schemes based on Bidimensionality theory [16, 17]. Among other examples of Planar F -Minor-Free Deletion problems that can be found in the literature on approximation and parameterized algorithms, are the cases of F being {K2,3 , K4 }, {K4 }, {θc }, and {K3 , T2 }, which correspond to removing vertices to obtain an outerplanar graph, a series-parallel graph, a diamond graph, and a graph of pathwidth 1, respectively. Apart from the case of Weighted Vertex Cover [5, 32] and Weighted Feedback Vertex Set [2, 6], there was not much progress on approximability/non-approximability of WPF -MFD until the work of Fiorini, Joret, and Pietropaoli [13], which gave a constant factor approximation algorithm for the case of WPF -MFD where F is a diamond graph, i.e., a graph with two vertices and three parallel edges. In 2011, Fomin et al. [14] considered Planar F -Minor-Free Deletion (i.e. the unweighted version of WPF -MFD) in full generality and designed a randomized (deterministic) O(log1.5 n)-factor (O(log2 n)-factor) approximation algorithm for it. Later, Fomin et al. [15] gave a randomized constant factor approximation algorithm for Planar F -Minor-Free Deletion. Our algorithm for WPF -MFD extends this result to the weighted setting, at the cost of increasing the approximation factor to logO(1) n. Theorem 1. For every set F ∈ L , WPF -MFD admits a randomized (deterministic) O(log1.5 n)factor (O(log2 n)-factor) approximation algorithm. We mention that Theorem 1 is subsumed by a recent related result of Bansal, Reichman, and Umboh [3]. They studied the edge deletion version of the Treewidth-η Vertex Deletion problem, under the name Bounded Treewidth Interdiction Problem, and gave a bicriteria approximation algorithm. In particular, for a graph G and an integer η > 0, they gave a polynomial time algorithm that finds a subset of edges F 0 of G such that |F 0 | ≤ O((log n log log n)· opt) and the treewidth of G − F 0 is O(η log η). With some additional effort [4] their algorithm can be made to work for the Weighted Treewidth-η Vertex Deletion problem as well. In our setting where η is a fixed constant, this immediately implies a factor O(log n log log n) approximation algorithm for WPF -MFD.3 While the statement of Theorem 1 is subsumed by [3], the proof gives a simple and clean introduction to our methods. Weighted Chordal Vertex Deletion. Formally, the Weighted Chordal Vertex Deletion problem is defined as follows. Weighted Chordal Vertex Deletion (WCVD) Input: An undirected graph G and a weight function w : V (G) → R. Question: Find a minimum weight subset S ⊆ V (G) such that G − S is a chordal graph. The class of chordal graphs is a natural class of graphs that has been extensively studied from the viewpoints of Graph Theory and Algorithm Design. Many important problems that are NP-hard on general graphs, such as Independent Set, and Graph Coloring are solvable in polynomial time once restricted to the class of chordal graphs [21]. Recall that a graph is chordal if and only if it does not have any induced cycle of length 4 or more. Thus, Chordal Vertex Deletion (CVD) can be viewed as a natural variant of the classic Feedback Vertex Set 3  One can run their algorithm first and remove the solution output by their algorithm to obtain a graph of treewidth at most O(η log η). Then one can find an optimal solution using standard dynamic programming.  4  (FVS). Indeed, while the objective of FVS is to eliminate all cycles, the CVD problem only asks us to eliminate induced cycles of length 4 or more. Despite the apparent similarity between the objectives of these two problems, the design of approximation algorithms for WCVD is very challenging. In particular, chordal graphs can be dense—indeed, a clique is a chordal graph. As we cannot rely on the sparsity of output, our approach must deviate from those employed by approximation algorithms from FVS. That being said, chordal graphs still retain some properties that resemble those of trees, and these properties are utilized by our algorithm. Prior to our work, only two non-trivial approximation algorithms for CVD were known. The first one, by Jansen and Pilipczuk [25], is a deterministic O(opt2 log opt log n)-factor approximation algorithm, and the second one, by Agrawal et al. [1], is a deterministic O(opt log2 n)-factor √ approximation algorithm. The second result implies that CVD admits an O( n log n)-factor approximation algorithm.4 In this paper we obtain the first O(logO(1) n)-approximation algorithm for WCVD. Theorem 2. CVD admits a deterministic O(log2 n)-factor approximation algorithm. While this approximation algorithm follows our general scheme, it also requires us to incorporate several new ideas. In particular, to implement the third step of the scheme, we need to design a different O(log n)-factor approximation algorithm for the special case of WCVD where the vertex-set of the input graph G can be partitioned into two sets, X and V (G) \ X, such that G[X] is a clique and G[V (G) \ X] is a chordal graph. This approximation algorithm is again based on recursion, but it is more involved. At each recursive call, it carefully manipulates a fractional solution of a special form. Moreover, to ensure that its current problem instance is divided into two subinstances that are independent and simpler than their origin, we introduce multicut constraints. In addition to these constraints, we keep track of the complexity of the subinstances, which is measured via the cardinality of the maximum independent set in the graph. Our multicut constraints result in an instance of Weighted Multicut, which we ensure is on a chordal graph. Formally, the Weighted Multicut problem is defined as follows. Weighted Multicut Input: An undirected graph G, a weight function w : V (G) → R and a set T = {(s1 , t1 ), . . . , (sk , tk )} of k pairs of vertices of G. Question: Find a minimum weight subset S ⊆ V (G) such that for any pair (si , ti ) ∈ T , G − S does not have any path between si and ti . For Weighted Multicut on chordal graphs, no constant-factor approximation algorithm was previously known. We remark that Weighted Multicut is NP-hard on trees [19], and hence it is also NP-hard on chordal graphs. We design the first such algorithm, which our main algorithm employs as a black box. Theorem 3. Weighted Multicut admits a constant-factor approximation algorithm on chordal graphs. This algorithm is inspired by the work of Garg, Vazirani and Yannakakis on Weighted Multicut on trees [19]. Here, we carefully exploit the well-known characterization of the class of chordal graphs as the class of graphs that admit clique forests. We believe that this result is of independent interest. The algorithm by Garg, Vazirani and Yannakakis [19] is a classic primal-dual algorithm. A more recent algorithm, by Golovin, Nagarajan and Singh [20], uses total modularity to obtain a different algorithm for Multicut on trees. √ 4 If opt ≥ n/ log n, we output a greedy solution to the input graph, and otherwise we have that opt log2 n ≤ √ n log n, hence we call the O(opt log2 n)-factor approximation algorithm.  5  Weighted Distance Hereditary Vertex Deletion. We start by formally defining the Weighted Distance Hereditary Vertex Deletion problem. Weighted Distance Hereditary Vertex Deletion (WDHVD) Input: An undirected graph G and a weight function w : V (G) → R. Question: Find a minimum weight subset S ⊆ V (G) such that G − S is a distance hereditary graph. A graph G is a distance hereditary graph (also called a completely separable graph [22]) if the distances between vertices in every connected induced subgraph of G are the same as in the graph G. Distance hereditary graphs were named and first studied by Hworka [24]. However, an equivalent family of graphs was earlier studied by Olaru and Sachs [40] and shown to be perfect. It was later discovered that these graphs are precisely the graphs of rankwidth 1 [33]. Rankwidth is a graph parameter introduced by Oum and Seymour [36] to approximate yet another graph parameter called Cliquewidth. The notion of cliquewidth was defined by Courcelle and Olariu [9] as a measure of how “clique-like” the input graph is. This is similar to the notion of treewidth, which measures how “tree-like” the input graph is. One of the main motivations was that several NP-complete problems become tractable on the family of cliques (complete graphs), the assumption was that these algorithmic properties extend to “clique-like” graphs [8]. However, computing cliquewidth and the corresponding cliquewidth decomposition seems to be computationally intractable. This then motivated the notion of rankwidth, which is a graph parameter that approximates cliquewidth well while also being algorithmically tractable [36, 34]. For more information on cliquewidth and rankwidth, we refer to the surveys by Hlinený et al. [23] and Oum [35]. As algorithms for Treewidth-η Vertex Deletion are applied as subroutines to solve many graph problems, we believe that algorithms for Weighted Rankwidth-η Vertex Deletion (WR-ηVD) will be useful in this respect. In particular, Treewidth-η Vertex Deletion has been considered in designing efficient approximation, kernelization and fixed parameter tractable algorithms for WPF -MFD and its unweighted counterpart Planar F -Minor-Free Deletion [3, 14, 16, 17, 18]. Along similar lines, we believe that WR-ηVD and its unweighted counterpart will be useful in designing efficient approximation, kernelization and fixed parameter tractable algorithms for Weighted F Vertex Deletion where F is characterized by a finite family of forbidden vertex minors [33]. Recently, Kim and Kwon [26] designed an O(opt2 log n)-factor approximation algorithm for Distance Hereditary Vertex Deletion (DHVD). This result implies that DHVD admits an O(n2/3 log n)-factor approximation algorithm. In this paper, we take first step towards obtaining good approximation algorithm for WR-ηVD by designing a O(logO(1) n)-factor approximation algorithm for WDHVD. Theorem 4. WDHVD or WR-1VD admits an O(log3 n)-factor approximation algorithm. We note that several steps of our approximation algorithm for WR-1VD can be generalized for an approximation algorithm for WR-ηVD and thus we believe that our approach should yield an O(logO(1) n)-factor approximation algorithm for WR-ηVD. We leave that as an interesting open problem for the future.  2  Preliminaries  For a positive integer k, we use [k] as a shorthand for {1, 2, . . . , k}. Given a function f : A → B and a subset A0 ⊆ A, we let f |A0 denote the function f restricted to the domain A0 . 6  Graphs. Given a graph G, we let V (G) and E(G) denote its vertex-set and edge-set, respectively. In this paper, we only consider undirected graphs. We let n = |V (G)| denote the number of vertices in the graph G, where G will be clear from context. The open neighborhood, or simply the neighborhood, of a vertex v ∈ V (G) is defined as NG (v) = {w | {v, w} ∈ E(G)}. The closed neighborhood of v is defined as NG [v] = NG (v)∪{v}. The degree of v is defined as dG (v) = |NG (v)|. We can extend the definition of the to a set of vertices as follows. Given S neighborhood of a vertexS a subset U ⊆ V (G), NG (U ) = u∈U NG (u) and NG [U ] = u∈U NG [u]. The induced subgraph G[U ] is the graph with vertex-set U and edge-set {{u, u0 } | u, u0 ∈ U, and {u, u0 } ∈ E(G)}. Moreover, we define G − U as the induced subgraph G[V (G) \ U ]. We omit subscripts when the graph G is clear from context. For graphs G and H, by G ∩ H, we denote the graph with vertex set as V (G) ∩ V (H) and edge set as E(G) ∩ E(H). An independent set in G is a set of vertices such that there is no edge in G between any pair of vertices in this set. The independence number of G, denoted by α(G), is defined as the cardinality of the largest independent set in G. A clique in G is a set of vertices such that there is an edge in G between every pair of vertices in this set. A path P = (x1 , x2 , . . . , x` ) in G is a subgraph of G where V (P ) = {x1 , x2 , . . . , x` } ⊆ V (G) and E(P ) = {{x1 , x2 }, {x2 , x3 }, . . . , {x`−1 , x` }} ⊆ E(G), where ` ∈ [n]. The vertices x1 and x` are called the endpoints of the path P and the remaining vertices in V (P ) are called the internal vertices of P . We also say that P is a path between x1 and x` or connects x1 and x` . A cycle C = (x1 , x2 , . . . , x` ) in G is a subgraph of G where V (C) = {x1 , x2 , . . . , x` } ⊆ V (G) and E(C) = {{x1 , x2 }, {x2 , x3 }, . . . , {x`−1 , x` }, {x` , x1 }} ⊆ E(G), i.e., it is a path with an additional edge between x1 and x` . The graph G is connected if there is a path between every pair of vertices in G, otherwise G is disconnected. A connected graph without any cycles is a tree, and a collection of trees is a forest. A maximal connected subgraph of G is called a connected P component of G. Given a function f : V (G) → R and a subset U ⊆ V (G), we denote f (U ) = v∈U f (v). Moreover, we say that a subset U ⊆ V (G) is a balanced separator for G if for each connected component C in G − U , it holds that |V (C)| ≤ 23 |V (G)|. We refer the reader to [10] for details on standard graph theoretic notations and terminologies that are not explicitly defined here. Forest Decompositions. A forest decomposition of a graph G is a pair (F, β) where F is forest, and β : V (T ) → 2V (G) is a function that satisfies the following: S (i) v∈V (F ) β(v) = V (G); (ii) for any edge {v, u} ∈ E(G), there is a node w ∈ V (F ) such that v, u ∈ β(w); (iii) for any v ∈ V (G), the collection of nodes Tv = {u ∈ V (F ) | v ∈ β(u)} is a subtree of F . For v ∈ V (F ), we call β(v) the bag of v, and for the sake of clarity of presentation, we sometimes use v and β(v) interchangeably. We refer to the vertices in V (F ) as nodes. A tree decomposition is a forest decomposition where F is a tree. For a graph G, by tw(G) we denote the minimum over all possible tree decompositions of G, the maximum size of a bag minus one in that tree decomposition. Minors. Given a graph G and an edge {u, v} ∈ E(G), the graph G/e denotes the graph obtained from G by contracting the edge {u, v}, that is, the vertices u, v are deleted from G and a new vertex uv ? is added to G which is adjacent to the all the neighbors of u, v previously in G (except for u, v). A graph H that is obtained by a sequence of edge contractions in G is said to be a contraction of G. A graph H is a minor of a G if H is the contraction of some subgraph of G. We say that a graph G is F -minor free when F is not a minor of G. Given a family F of graphs, we say that a graph G is F-minor free, if for all F ∈ F, F is not a minor of G. It is well known that if H is a minor of G, then tw(H) ≤ tw(G). A graph is planar if it is {K5 , K3,3 }-minor free [10]. Here, K5 is a clique on 5 vertices and K3,3 is a complete bipartite graph with both sides of bipartition having 3 vertices. 7  Chordal Graphs. Let G be a graph. For a cycle C on at least four vertices, we say that {u, v} ∈ E(G) is a chord of C if u, v ∈ V (C) but {u, v} ∈ / E(C). A cycle C is chordless if it contains at least four vertices and has no chords. The graph G is a chordal graph if it has no chordless cycle as an induced subgraph. A clique forest of G is a forest decomposition of G where every bag is a maximal clique. The following lemma shows that the class of chordal graphs is exactly the class of graphs which have a clique forest. Lemma 1 ([21]). A graph G is a chordal graph if and only if G has a clique forest. Moreover, a clique forest of a chordal graph can be constructed in polynomial time. Given a subset U ⊆ V (G), we say that U intersects a chordless cycle C in G if U ∩ V (C) 6= ∅. Observe that if U intersects every chordless cycle of G, then G − U is a chordal graph.  3  Approximation Algorithm for WPF -MFD  In this section we prove Theorem 1. We can assume that the weight w(v) of each vertex v ∈ V (G) is positive, else we can insert v into any solution. Below we state a result from [37], which will be useful in our algorithm. Proposition 2 ([37]). Let F be a finite set of graphs such that F contains a planar graph. Then, any graph G that excludes any graph from F as a minor satisfies tw(G) ≤ c = c(F ). We let c = c(F ) to be the constant returned by Proposition 2. The approximation algorithm for WPF -MFD comprises of two components. The first component handles the special case where the vertex set of input graph G can be partitioned into two sets C and X such that |C| ≤ c + 1 and H = G[X] is an F -minor free graph. We note that there can be edges between vertices in C and vertices in H. We show that for these special instances, in polynomial time we can compute the size of the optimum solution and a set realizing it. The second component is a recursive algorithm that solves general instances of the problem. Here, we gradually disintegrate the general instance until it becomes an instance of the special type where we can resolve it in polynomial time. More precisely, for each guess of c + 1 sized subgraph M of G, we find a small separator S (using an approximation algorithm) that together with M breaks the input graph into two graphs significantly smaller than their origin. It first removes M ∪ S, and solves each of the two resulting subinstances by calling itself recursively; then, it inserts M back into the graph, and uses the solutions it obtained from the recursive calls to construct an instance of the special case which is then solved by the first component.  3.1  Constant sized graph + F -minor free graph  We first handle the special case where the input graph G consists of a graph M of size at most c + 1 and an F -minor free graph H. We refer to this algorithm as Special-WP. More precisely, along with the input graph G and the weight function w, we are also given a graph M with at most c + 1 vertices and an F -minor free graph H such that V (G) = V (M ) ∪ V (H), where the vertex-sets V (M ) and V (H) are disjoint. Note that the edge-set E(G) may contain edges between vertices in M and vertices in H. We will show that such instances may be solved optimally in polynomial time. We start with the following easy observation. Observation 3. Let G be a graph with V (G) = X ] Y , such that |X| ≤ c + 1 and G[Y ] is an F -minor free graph. Then, the treewidth of G is at most 2c + 1. Lemma 4. Let G be a graph of treewidth t with a non-negative weight function w on the vertices, and let F be a finite family of graphs. Then, one can compute a minimum weight vertex set S such that G − S is F -minor free, in time f (q, t) · n, where n is the number of vertices in G and q is a constant that depends only on F . 8  Proof. This follows from the fact that finding such a set S is expressible as an MSO-optimization formula φ whose length, q, depends only on the family F [15]. Then, by Theorem 7 [7], we can compute an optimal sized set S in time f (q, t) · n. Now, we apply the above lemma to the graph G and the family F , and obtain a minimum weight set S such that G − S is F -minor free.  3.2  General Graphs  We proceed to handle general instances by developing a d · log2 n-factor approximation algorithm for WPF -MFD, Gen-WP-APPROX, thus proving the correctness of Theorem 1. The exact value of the constant d will be determined later. Recursion. We define each call to our algorithm Gen-WP-APPROX to be of the form (G0 , w0 ), where (G0 , w0 ) is an instance of WPF -MFD such that G0 is an induced subgraph of G, and we denote n0 = |V (G0 )|. Goal. For each recursive call Gen-WP-APPROX(G0 , w0 ), we aim to prove the following. Lemma 5. Gen-WP-APPROX returns a solution that is at least opt and at most Moreover, it returns a subset U ⊆ V (G0 ) that realizes the solution.  d 2  · log2 n0 · opt.  At each recursive call, the size of the graph G0 becomes smaller. Thus, when we prove that Lemma 5 is true for the current call, we assume that the approximation factor is bounded by 2 d b · opt for any call where the size n b of the vertex-set of its graph is strictly smaller than n0 . 2 · log n Termination. In polynomial time we can test whether G0 has a minor F ∈ F [38]. Furthermore, for each M ⊆ V (G) of size at most c + 1, we can check if G − M has a minor F ∈ F . If G − M is F -minor free then we are in a special instance, where G − M is F minor free and M is a constant sized graph. We optimally resolve this instance in polynomial time using the algorithm Special-WP. Since we output an optimal sized solution in the base cases, we thus ensure that at the base case of our induction Lemma 5 holds. Recursive Call. For the analysis of a recursive call, let S ∗ denote a hypothetical set that realizes the optimal solution opt of the current instance (G0 , w0 ). Let (F, β) be a forest decomposition of G0 − S ∗ of width at most c, whose existence is guaranteed by Proposition 2. Using standard arguments on forests we have the following observation. Observation 6. There exists a node v ∈ V (F ) such that β(v) is a balanced separator for G0 −S ∗ . From Observation 6 we know that there exists a node v ∈ V (F ) such that β(v) is a balanced separator for G0 − S ∗ . This together with the fact that G0 − S ∗ has treewidth at most c results in the following observation. Observation 7. There exist a subset M ⊆ V (G0 ) of size at most c+1 and a subset S ⊆ V (G0 )\M of weight at most opt such that M ∪ S is a balanced separator for G0 . This gives us a polynomial time algorithm as stated in the following lemma. Lemma 8. There is a deterministic (randomized) algorithm which in polynomial-time finds M ⊆√V (G0 ) of size at most c + 1 and a subset S ⊆ V (G0 ) \ M of weight at most q · log n0 · opt (q ∗ · log n0 · opt) for some fixed constant q (q ∗ ) such that M ∪ S is a balanced separator for G0 .  9  0 ) of size at most c + 1 in time O(nc ). For Proof. Note that we can enumerate every M ⊆ V (G√ each such M , we can either run the randomized q ∗ · log n0 -factor approximation algorithm by Feige et al. [12] or the deterministic q · log n0 -factor approximation algorithm by Leighton and Rao [28] to find a balanced separator SM of G0 − M . Here, q and q ∗ are fixed constants. By Observation 7,√there is a set S in {SM : M ⊆ V (G0 ) and M ≤ c+1} such that w(S) ≤ q·log n0 ·opt (w(S) ≤ q ∗ · log n0 · opt). Thus, the desired output is a pair (M, S) where M is one of the vertex subset of size at most c + 1 such that SM = S.  We call the algorithm in Lemma 8 to obtain a pair (M, S). Since M ∪ S is a balanced separator for G0 , we can partitionSthe set of connected components of G0 − (M ∪ S) into two sets, S A1 and A2 , such that for V1 = A∈A1 V (A) and V2 = A∈A2 V (A) it holds that n1 , n2 ≤ 23 n0 where n1 = |V1 | and n2 = |V2 |. We remark that we use different algorithms for finding a balanced separator in Lemma 8 based on whether we are looking for a randomized algorithm or a deterministic algorithm. Next, we define two inputs of (the general case of) WPF -MFD: I1 = (G0 [V1 ], w0 |V1 ) and I2 = (G0 [V2 ], w0 |V2 ). Let opt1 and opt2 denote the optimal solutions to I1 and I2 , respectively. Observe that since V1 ∩ V2 = ∅, it holds that opt1 + opt2 ≤ opt. We solve each of the subinstances by recursively calling algorithm Gen-WP-APPROX. By the inductive hypothesis, we thus obtain two sets, S1 and S2 , such that G0 [V1 ] − S1 and G0 [V2 ] − S2 are F -minor free graphs, and w0 (S1 ) ≤ d2 · log2 n1 · opt1 and w0 (S2 ) ≤ d2 · log2 n2 · opt2 . We proceed by defining an input of the special case of WPF -MFD: J = (G0 [(V1 ∪ V2 ∪ M ) \ (S1 ∪ S2 )], w0 |(V1 ∪V2 ∪M )\(S1 ∪S2 ) ). Observe that G0 [V1 \ S1 ] and G0 [V2 \ S2 ] are F -minor free graphs and there are no edges between vertices in V1 and vertices in V2 in G0 − M , and M is of constant size. Therefore, we resolve this instance by calling algorithm Special-WP. We thus b such that G0 [(V1 ∪ V2 ∪ M ) \ (S1 ∪ S2 ∪ S)] b is a F -minor graph, and w0 (S) b ≤ opt obtain a set, S, 0 (since |(V1 ∪ V2 ∪ M ) \ (S1 ∪ S2 )| ≤ n and the optimal solution of each of the special subinstances is at most opt). Observe that any obstruction in G0 − S is either completely contained in G0 [V1 ], or completely contained in G0 [V2 ], or it contains at least one vertex from M . This observation, along with b is a F -minor free graph, implies that G0 − T the fact that G0 [(V1 ∪ V2 ∪ M ) \ (S1 ∪ S2 ∪ S)] b Thus, it is now sufficient to show that is a F -minor free graph where T = S ∪ S1 ∪ S2 ∪ S. d 0 0 2 w (T ) ≤ 2 · (log n ) · opt. By the discussion above, we have that b w0 (T ) ≤ w0 (S) + w0 (S1 ) + w0 (S2 ) + w0 (S) d 0 2 ≤ q · log n · opt + 2 · ((log n1 ) · opt1 + (log n2 )2 · opt2 ) + opt Recall that n1 , n2 ≤ 32 n0 and opt1 + opt2 ≤ opt. Thus, we have that w0 (T ) < q · log n0 · opt + d2 · (log 23 n0 )2 · opt + opt < d2 · (log n0 )2 · opt + log n0 · opt · (q + 1 + d2 · (log 32 )2 −  d 2  · 2 · log 32 ).  · log2 n0 · opt, it is sufficient to ensure that 2 · (q + 1). q + 1 + d2 · (log 32 )2 − d2 · 2 · log 32 ≤ 0, which can be done by fixing d = 3 2 log 2 − (log 32 )2 √ If we use the O( log n)-factor approximation algorithm by Feige et al. [12] for finding a balance separator in Lemma 8, then we can do the analysis similar to the deterministic case and obtain a randomized factor-O(log1.5 n)approximation algorithm for WPF -MFD. Overall, we conclude that to ensure that w0 (T ) ≤  10  d 2  4  Weighted Chordal Vertex Deletion on General Graphs  In this section we prove Theorem 2. Clearly, we can assume that the weight w(v) of each vertex v ∈ V (G) is positive, else we can insert v into any solution. Roughly speaking, our approximation algorithm consists of two components. The first component handles the special case where the input graph G consists of a clique C and a chordal graph H. Here, we also assume that the input graph has no “short” chordless cycle. This component is comprised of a recursive algorithm that is based on the method of divide and conquer. The algorithm keeps track of a fractional solution x of a special form that it carefully manipulated at each recursive call, and which is used to analyze the approximation ratio. In particular, we ensure that x does not assign high values, and that it assigns 0 to vertices of the clique C as well as vertices of some other cliques. To divide a problem instance into two instances, we find a maximal clique M of the chordal graph H that breaks H into two “simpler” chordal graphs. The clique C remains intact at each recursive call, and the maximal clique M is also a part of both of the resulting instances. Thus, to ensure that we have simplified the problem, we measure the complexity of instances by examining the maximum size of an independent set of their graphs. Since the input graph has no “short” chordless cycle, the maximum depth of the recursion tree is bounded by O(log n). Moreover, to guarantee that we obtain instances that are independent, we incorporate multicut constraints while ensuring that we have sufficient “budget” to satisfy them. We ensure that these multicut constraints are associated with chordal graphs, which allows us to utilize the algorithm we design in Section 5. The second component is a recursive algorithm that solves general instances of the problem. Initially, it easily handles “short” chordless cycles. Then, it gradually disintegrates a general instance until it becomes an instance of the special form that can be solved using the first component. More precisely, given a problem instance, the algorithm divides it by finding a maximal clique M (using an exhaustive search which relies on the guarantee that G has no “short” chordless cycle) and a small separator S (using an approximation algorithm) that together break the input graph into two graphs significantly smaller than their origin. It first removes M ∪ S and solves each of the two resulting subinstances by calling itself recursively; then, it inserts M back into the graph, and uses the solutions it obtained from the recursive calls to construct an instance of the special case solved by the first component.  4.1  Clique+Chordal Graphs  In this subsection we handle the special case where the input graph G consists of a clique C and a chordal graph H. More precisely, along with the input graph G and the weight function w, we are also given a clique C an a chordal graph H such that V (G) = V (C) ∪ V (H), where the vertex-sets V (C) and V (H) are disjoint. Here, we also assume that G has no chordless cycle on at most 48 vertices. Note that the edge-set E(G) may contain edges between vertices in C and vertices in H. We call this special case the Clique+Chordal special case. Our objective is to prove the following result. Lemma 9. The Clique+Chordal special case of WCVD admits an O(log n)-factor approximation algorithm. We assume that n ≥ 64,5 else the input instance can be solve by brute-force. Let c be a fixed constant (to be determined). In the rest of this subsection, we design a c · log n-factor approximation algorithm for the Clique+Chordal special case of WCVD. Recursion. Our approximation algorithm is a recursive algorithm. We call our algorithm CVD-APPROX, and define each call to be of the form (G0 , w0 , C, H 0 , x). Here, G0 is an induced 5  This assumption simplifies some of the calculations ahead.  11  subgraph of G such that V (C) ⊆ V (G0 ), and H 0 is an induced subgraph of H. The argument x is discussed below. We remark that we continue to use n to refer to the size of the vertex-set of the input graph G rather than the current graph G0 . Arguments. While the execution of our algorithm progresses, we keep track of two arguments: the size of a maximum independent set of the current graph G0 , denoted by α(G0 ), and a fractional solution x. Due to the special structure of G0 , the computation of α(G0 ) is simple: Observation 10. The measure α(G0 ) can be computed in polynomial time. Proof. Any maximum independent set of G0 consists of at most one vertex from C and an independent set of H 0 . It is well known that the computation of the size of a maximum independent set of a chordal graph can be performed in polynomial time [21]. Thus, we can compute α(H 0 ) in polynomial time. Next, we iterate over every vertex v ∈ V (C), and we b + 1 for the graph H b = H 0 \ NG0 (v) in polynomial time (since H b is a chordal compute αv = α(H) 0 graph). Overall, we return max{α(H ), maxv∈V (C) {αv }}. The necessity of tracking α(G0 ) stems from the fact that our recursive algorithm is based on the method of divide-and-conquer, and to ensure that when we divide the current instance into two instances we obtain two “simpler” instances, we need to argue that some aspect of these instances has indeed been simplified. Although this aspect cannot be the size of the instance (since the two instances can share many common vertices), we show that it can be the size of a maximum independent set. A fractional solution x is a function x : V (G0 ) → [0, ∞) such that for every chordless 0 cycle Q of that x(V (Q)) ≥ 1. An optimal fractional solution minimizes the weight PG it holds 0 w (x) = v∈V (G0 ) w0 (v) · x(v). Clearly, the solution to the instance (G0 , w0 ) of WCVD is at least as large as the weight of an optimal fractional solution. Although we initially compute an optimal fractional solution x (at the initialization phase that is described below), during the execution of our algorithm, we manipulate this solution so it may no longer be optimal. Prior to any call to CVD-APPROX with the exception of the first call, we ensure that x satisfies the following invariants: n+9 δ • Low-Value Invariant: For any v ∈ V (G0 ), it holds that x(v) < ( c·log c·log n ) · δ is the depth of the current recursive call in the recursion tree.6  1 c·log n .  Here,  • Zero-Clique Invariant: For any v ∈ V (C), it holds that x(v) = 0. Goal. The depth of the recursion tree will be bounded by q · log n for some fixed constant q. The correctness of this claim is proved when we explain how to perform a recursive call. For each recursive call CVD-APPROX (G0 , w0 , C, H 0 , x) with the exception of the first call, we aim to prove the following. Lemma 11. For any δ ∈ {1, 2, . . . , q · log n}, each recursive call to CVD-APPROX of depth δ ≥ 2 c·log n δ−1 returns a solution that is at least opt and at most ( c·log · c · log(α(G0 )) · w0 (x). Moreover, n+9 ) it returns a subset U ⊆ V (G0 ) that realizes the solution. At the initialization phase, we see that in order to prove Lemma 9, it is sufficient to prove Lemma 11. Initialization. Initially, the graphs G0 and H 0 are simply set to be the input graphs G and H, and the weight function w0 is simply set to be input weight function w. Moreover, we compute an optimal fractional solution x = xinit by using the ellipsoid method. Recall that the following claim holds. 6  The depth of the first call is defined to be 1.  12  Observation 12. The solution of the instance (G0 , w0 ) of WCVD is lower bounded by w0 (xinit ). Thus, to prove Lemma 9, it is sufficient to return a solution that is at least opt and at most c · log n · w0 (x). We would like to proceed by calling our algorithm recursively. For this purpose, we first need to ensure that x satisfies the low-value and zero-clique invariants, to which end we use the following notation. We let h(x) = {v ∈ V (G0 ) : x(v) ≥ 1/(c · log n)} denote the set of vertices to which x assigns high values. Moreover, given a clique M in G0 , we let (x \ M ) : V (G0 ) → [0, ∞) denote the function that assigns 0 to any vertex in M and (1 + 3 · max {x(u)})x(v) to any other vertex v ∈ V (G0 ). Now, to adjust x to be of the desired u∈V (G0 )  form both at this phase and at later recursive calls, we rely on the two following lemmata. 0 x) + b = G0 − h(x), w b = x|V (G) Lemma 13. Define G b = w0 |V (G) b and x b . Then, c · log n · w (b w0 (h(x)) ≤ c · log n · w0 (x).  Proof. By the definition of h(x), it holds that w0 (b x) ≤ w0 (x) − w0 (b x) + w0 (h(x)) ≤ c · log n · w0 (x).  1 c·log n  · w0 (h(x)). Thus, c · log n ·  0 0 Thus, it is safe to update G0 to G0 − h(x), w0 to w0 |V (G) b , H to H − h(x) and x to x|V (G) b , 0 where we ensure that once we obtain a solution to the new instance, we add w (h(x)) to this solution and h(x) to the set realizing it.  Lemma 14. Given a clique M in G0 , the function (x \ M ) is a valid fractional solution such that w0 (x \ M ) ≤ (1 + 3 · maxv∈V (G0 ) {x(v)})w0 (x). Proof. To prove that (x \ M ) is a valid fractional solution, let Q be some chordless cycle in G0 . We need to show that (x \ M )(V (Q)) ≥ 1. Since M is a clique, Q can contain at most two vertices from M . Thus, since x is a valid fractional solution, it holds that x(V (Q) \ V (M )) ≥ 1 − 2 · maxu∈V (G0 ) {x(u)}. By the definition (x \ M ), this fact implies that (x\M )(V (Q)) = (x\M )(V (Q)\V (M )) ≥ (1+3·maxu∈V (G0 ) {x(u)})(1−2·maxu∈V (G0 ) {x(u)}) ≥ 3 2 2 min{(1 + c·log n )(1 − c·log n ), 1} = min{1 + 1/(c · log n) − 6/((c · log n) ), 1} ≥ 1, where the last inequality relies on the assumption n ≥ 64. For the proof of the second part of the claim, note that w0 (x \ M ) = (1 + 3 · maxv∈V (G0 ) {x(v)}) w0 (x|V (G0 )\V (M ) ) ≤ (1 + 3 · maxv∈V (G0 ) {x(v)})w0 (x). Next, it is possible to call CVD-APPROX recursively with the fractional solution (x \ C). In the context of the low-value invariant, observe that indeed, for any v ∈ V (G0 ), it now holds that c·log n+9 δ 3 1 1 (x \ C)(v) = (1 + 3 · maxu∈V (G0 ) {x(u)})x(v) < (1 + c·log n ) · c·log n < ( c·log n ) · c·log n for δ = 1. n+9 δ 0 0 Similarly, by Lemma 14, w0 (x \ C) ≤ ( c·log c·log n ) · w (x) for δ = 1. It is also clear that α(G ) ≤ n. Thus, if Lemma 11 is true, we return a solution that is at least opt and at most c · log n · w(x) as desired. In other words, to prove Lemma 9, it is sufficient that we next focus only on the proof of Lemma 11. The proof of this lemma is done by induction. When we consider some recursive call, we assume that the solutions returned by the additional recursive calls that it performs, e such that α(G) e ≤ 3 α(G0 ), comply with the demands of the which are associated with graphs G 4 lemma.  Termination. Once G0 becomes a chordal graph, we return 0 as our solution and ∅ as the set that realizes it. Clearly, we thus satisfy the demands of Lemma 11. In fact, we thus also ensure that the execution of our algorithm terminates once α(G0 ) < 24: Lemma 15. If α(G0 ) < 24, then G0 is a chordal graph.  13  C  M  G1  G2  Figure 1: Subinstances created by a recursive call Proof. Suppose, by way of contradiction, that G0 is not a chordal graph. Then, it contains a chordless cycle Q. Since G0 is an induced subgraph of G, where G is assumed to exclude any chordless cycle on at most 48 vertices, we have that |V (Q)| > 48. Note that if we traverse Q in some direction, and insert every second vertex on Q into a set, excluding the last vertex in case |V (Q)| is odd, we obtain an independent set. Thus, we have that α(G) ≥ 24, which is a contradiction. Thus, since we will ensure that each recursive calls is associated with a graph whose independence number is at most 3/4 the independence number of the current graph, we have the following observation. Observation 16. The maximum depth of the recursion tree is bounded by q · log n for some fixed constant q. Recursive Call. Since H 0 is a chordal graph, it admits a clique forest (Lemma 1). In particular, it contains only O(n) maximal cliques, and one can find the set of these maximal cliques in polynomial time [21]. By standard arguments on trees, we deduce that H 0 has a maximal clique b 1 and M such that after we remove M from G0 we obtain two (not necessarily connected) graphs, H 2 0 b 2 , such that α(H b 1 ), α(H b 2 ) ≤ α(H ), and that the clique M can be found in polynomial time. H 3 0 b 1 ) ∪ V (M ) ∪ V (C)], H1 = H 0 [V (H b 1 ) ∪ V (M )], G2 = G0 [V (H b 2 ) ∪ V (M ) ∪ V (C)] Let G1 = G [V (H 2 0 0 b and H2 = H [V (H2 ) ∪ V (M )], and observe that α(G1 ), α(G2 ) ≤ 3 α(G ) + 2 ≤ 34 α(G0 ). Here, the last inequality holds because α(G0 ) ≥ 24, else by Lemma 15, the execution should have already terminated. We proceed by replacing x by (x\M ). For the sake of clarity, we denote x∗ = (x\M ). By Lemmata 13 and 14, to prove Lemma 11, it is now sufficient to return a solution that is at least opt and c · log n + 9 δ 1 c · log n δ−1 at most (1/(1 + 3 · ( ) · )) · ( ) · log α(G0 ) · w(x∗ ), along with a c · log n c · log n c · log n + 9 c · log n + 9 δ set that realizes it. Moreover, for any v ∈ V (G0 ), it holds that x∗ (v) < (1 + 3 · ( ) c · log n 1 c · log n + 9 δ 1 )·( ) · · . Note that by Observation 16, by setting c ≥ 9q, we have c · log n c · log n c · log n c · log n + 9 δ c · log n + 9 δ 1 c · log n + 9 that ( ) ≤ e < 3, and therefore 1 + 3 · ( ) · ≤ . In c · log n c · log n c · log n c · log n particular, to prove Lemma 11, it is sufficient to return a solution that is at least opt and at c · log n δ most ( ) · log α(G0 ) · w(x∗ ). c · log n + 9 14  C  M  Q  G2  G1  Figure 2: An illustration of a bad cycle Next, we define two subinstances, I1 = (G1 , w|V (G1 ) , C, H1 , x∗ |V (G1 ) ) and I2 = (G2 , w|V (G2 ) , C, H2 , x∗ |V (G2 ) ) (see Figure 1). We solve each of these subinstances by a recursive call to CVD-APPROX (by the above discussion, these calls are valid — we satisfy the low-value and zero-clique invariants). Thus, we obtain two solutions, s1 to I1 and s2 to I2 , and two sets that realize these solutions, S1 and S2 . By the inductive hypothesis, we have the following observations. Observation 17. S1 ∪ S2 intersects any chordless cycle in G0 that lies entirely in either G1 or G2 . c·log n δ ∗ Observation 18. Given i ∈ {1, 2}, si ≤ ( c·log n+9 ) · c · log(α(Gi )) · w(xi ).  Moreover, since x∗ (V (C) ∪ V (M )) = 0, we also have the following observation. Observation 19. w(x∗1 ) + w(x∗2 ) = w(x∗ ). We say that a cycle of G0 is bad if it is a chordless cycle that belongs entirely to neither G1 nor G2 (see Figure 2). Next, we show how to intersect bad cycles. Bad Cycles. For any pair (v, u) of vertices v ∈ V (C) and u ∈ V (M ), we let P1 (v, u) denote the set of any (simple) path P1 between v and u whose internal vertices belong only to G1 and which does not contain a vertex v 0 ∈ C and a vertex u0 ∈ M such that {v 0 , u0 } ∈ E(G0 ). Symmetrically, we let P2 (v, u) denote the set of any path P2 between v and u whose internal vertices belong only to G2 and which does not contain a vertex v 0 ∈ C and a vertex u0 ∈ M such that {v 0 , u0 } ∈ E(G0 ). We note here that when {v, u} ∈ E(G0 ) then P1 (v, u) = P2 (v, u) = ∅. We first examine the relation between bad cycles and pairs (v, u) of vertices v ∈ V (C) and u ∈ V (M ). Lemma 20. For any bad cycle Q there exist a pair (v, u) of vertices v ∈ V (C), u ∈ V (M ), a path P1 ∈ P1 (v, u) such that V (P1 ) ⊆ V (Q), and a path P2 ∈ P2 (v, u) such that V (P2 ) ⊆ V (Q). Proof. Let Q be some bad cycle. By the definition of a bad cycle, Q must contain at least one vertex a from H1 \ V (M ) and at least one vertex b from H2 \ V (M ). Since C and M are cliques, Q can contain at most two vertices from C and at most two vertices from M , and if it contains two vertices from C (resp. M ), then these two vertices are neighbors. Moreover, since the set V (C) ∪ V (M ) contains all vertices common to G1 and G2 , Q must contain at least one vertex v ∈ V (C) and at least one vertex u ∈ V (M ) with {v, u} ∈ / E(G0 ). Overall, we conclude that the subpath of Q between v and u that contains a belongs to P1 (v, u), while the subpath of Q between v and u that contains b belongs to P2 (v, u). 15  In light Lemma 20, to intersect bad cycles, we now examine how the fractional solution x∗ handles pairs (v, u) of vertices v ∈ V (C) and u ∈ V (M ). Lemma 21. For each pair (v, u) of vertices v ∈ V (C) and u ∈ V (M ) with {v, u} ∈ / E(G0 ), there ∗ exists i ∈ {1, 2} such that for any path P ∈ Pi (v, u), x (V (P )) ≥ 1/2. Proof. Suppose, by way of contradiction, that the lemma is incorrect. Thus, there exist a pair (v, u) of vertices v ∈ V (C) and u ∈ V (M ) with {v, u} ∈ / E(G0 ), a path P1 ∈ P1 (v, u) such that ∗ x (V (P1 )) < 1/2, and a path P2 ∈ P2 (v, u) such that x∗ (V (P2 )) < 1/2. Since x∗ is a valid fractional solution, we deduce that G0 [V (P1 ) ∪ V (P2 )] does not contain any chordless cycle. Consider a shortest subpath Pb1 of P1 between a vertex a1 ∈ V (C) and a vertex b1 ∈ V (M ), and a shortest subpath Pb2 of P2 between a vertex a2 ∈ V (C) and a vertex b2 ∈ V (M ). Since neither P1 nor P2 contains any edge such that one of its endpoints belongs to V (C) while the other endpoint belongs to V (M ), we have that |V (Pb1 )|, |V (Pb2 )| ≥ 3. Furthermore, since vertices common in P1 and P2 must belong to V (C) ∪ V (M ), we have that Pb1 does not contain internal vertices that belong to Pb2 or adjacent to internal vertices on Pb2 . Overall, since C and M are cliques, we deduce that G0 [V (Pb1 ) ∪ V (Pb2 )] contains a chordless cycle. To see this, let a be the vertex closest to b2 on Pb2 that is a neighbor of a1 . Observe that a exists as a1 and a2 are neighbors, and a 6= b2 . Moreover, we assume without loss of generality that if a = a2 , then a2 has no neighbor on Pb1 apart from a1 . Now, let b be the vertex closest to a on the subpath of Pb2 between a and b2 that is a neighbor of b1 . If b = 6 b2 , then the vertex-sets of Pb1 and the subpath b of P1 between a and b together induce a chordless cycle. Else, let b0 be the vertex closest to a1 on Pb1 that is a neighbor of b2 . Then, the vertex-sets of the subpath of Pb1 between a1 and b0 and the subpath of Pb1 between a and b2 together induce a chordless cycle. Since G0 [V (Pb1 ) ∪ V (Pb2 )] is an induced subgraph of G0 [V (P1 ) ∪ V (P2 )], we have reached a contradiction. Given i ∈ {1, 2}, let 2x∗i denote the fractional solution that assigns to each vertex the value b 1 = G1 \ (V (C) ∪ V (M )) and G b 2 = G2 \ (V (C) ∪ V (M )). assigned by x∗i times 2. Moreover, let G b b Observe that G1 and G2 are chordal graphs. Now, for every pair (v, u) such that v ∈ V (C), u ∈ V (M ), we perform the following operation. We initialize T1 (v, u) = ∅. Next, we consider every pair (v 0 , u0 ) such that v 0 ∈ V (C), u0 ∈ V (M ), {v, v 0 } ∩ NG1 (u0 ) = ∅ and {u, u0 } ∩ NG1 (v 0 ) = ∅, b 1 ), b ∈ NG (u0 ) ∩ V (G b 1 ), G b 1 has a path between and insert each pair in {(a, b) : a ∈ NG1 (v 0 ) ∩ V (G 1 a and b} into T1 (v, u). We remark that the vertices in a pair in T1 (v, u) are not necessarily distinct. The definition of T2 (v, u) is symmetric to the one of T1 (v, u). The following lemma translates Lemma 21 into an algorithm. Lemma 22. For each pair (v, u) of vertices v ∈ V (C), u ∈ V (M ) and {v, u} ∈ / E(G0 ), one can compute (in polynomial time) an index i(v, u) ∈ {1, 2} such that for any path P ∈ Pi (v, u), 2x∗i (V (P )) ≥ 1. Proof. Let (v, u) be a pair of vertices such that v ∈ V (C), u ∈ V (M ) and {v, u} ∈ / E(G0 ). If there is i ∈ {1, 2} such that P ∈ Pi (v, u) = ∅, then we have trivially obtained the required index which is i(v, u) = i. Otherwise, we proceed as follows. For any index j ∈ {1, 2}, we perform the following procedure. For each pair (a, b) ∈ Ti (v, u), we use Dijkstra’s algorithm to b i where the weights are compute the minimum weight of a path between a and b in the graph G ∗ given by 2xi . In case for every pair (a, b) the minimum weight is at least 1, we have found the desired index i(v, u). Moreover, by Lemma 21 and since for all v 0 ∈ V (C) ∪ V (M ) it holds that x∗1 (v 0 ) = x∗2 (v 0 ) = 0, for at least one index j ∈ {1, 2}, the maximum weight among the minimum weights associated with the pairs (a, b) should be at least 1 (if this value is at least 1 for both indices, we arbitrarily decide to fix i(v, u) = 1). At this point, we need to rely on approximate solutions to Weighted Multicut in chordal graphs (in this context, we will employ the algorithm given by Theorem 5 in Section 5). Here, 16  a fractional solution y is a function y : V (G0 ) → [0, ∞) such that for every pair (si , ti ) ∈ T and any path P between si and Pti , it holds that y(V (P )) ≥ 1. An optimal fractional solution minimizes the weight w(y) = v∈V (G0 ) w(v) · y(v). Let fopt denote the weight of an optimal fractional solution. By first employing the algorithm given by Lemma 22, we next construct two instances b 1 , w1 , T1 ) and the second instance is of Weighted Multicut. The first instance is J1 = (G b 2 , w2 , T2 ), where the sets T1 and T2 are defined as follows. We initialize T1 = ∅. Now, J2 = (G for every pair (v, u) such that v ∈ V (C), u ∈ V (M ), i(v, u) = 1 and P1 (v, u) 6= ∅, we insert each pair in T1 (v, u) into T1 . The definition of T2 is symmetric to the one of T1 . By Lemma 22 and since for all v ∈ V (C) ∪ V (M ) it holds that x∗1 (v) = x∗2 (v) = 0, we deduce that 2x∗1 and 2x∗2 are valid solutions to J1 and J2 , respectively. Thus, by calling the algorithm given by Theorem 5 with each instance, we obtain a solution r1 to the first instance, along with a set R1 that realizes it, such that r1 ≤ 2d · w(x∗1 ), and we also obtain a solution r2 to the second instance, along with a set R2 that realizes it, such that r2 ≤ 2d · w(x∗2 ), for some fixed constant d. By Observation 17 and Lemma 20, we obtained a set S ∗ = S1 ∪ S2 ∪ R1 ∪ R2 for which we have the following observation. Observation 23. S ∗ intersects any chordless cycle in G0 , and it holds that w(S ∗ ) ≤ s1 + s2 + r1 + r2 . c·log n δ−1 Recall that to prove Lemma 11 we need to show that s1 + s2 + r1 + r2 ≤ ( c·log ·c· n+9 ) c·log n δ 0 0 log(α(G0 )) · w0 (x) and we have δ ≥ 2. Furthermore, we have ( c·log n+9 ) · c · log(α(G )) · w (x) ≤ c·log n δ−1 ( c·log · c · log(α(G0 )) · w0 (x). This together with Lemma 14 implies that it is enough n+9 ) c·log n δ 0 ∗ to show s1 + s2 + r1 + r2 ≤ ( c·log n+9 ) · c · log(α(G )) · w(x ). Recall that for any i ∈ {1, 2}, ri ≤ 2d · w(x∗i ). Thus, by Observation 18 and since for any i ∈ {1, 2}, α(Gi ) ≤ 34 α(G0 ), we have that  w(S ∗ ) ≤ (  c · log n δ 3 ) · c · log( α(G0 )) · (w(x∗1 ) + w(x∗2 )) + 2d · (w(x∗1 ) + w(x∗2 )). c · log n + 9 4  By Observation 19, we further deduce that   c · log n δ 3 w∗ (S ∗ ) ≤ ( ) · c · log( α(G0 )) + 2d · w(x∗ ). c · log n + 9 4 c log n δ c log n δ 3 0 0 Now, it only remains to show that ( c log n+9 ) · c · log( 4 α(G )) + 2d ≤ ( c log n+9 ) · c · log α(G ), c log n δ 4 which is equivalent to 2d ≤ ( c log n+9 ) · c · log( 3 ). Recall that δ ≤ q · log n (Observation 16). Thus, c log n q·log n c log n q·log n it is sufficient that we show that 2d ≤ ( c log ·c·log( 43 ). However, the term ( c log n+9 ) n+9 ) 9q 9q is lower bounded by 1/e . In other words, it is sufficient that we fix c ≥ 2 · e · d · 1/ log( 43 ).  4.2  General Graphs  In this subsection we handle general instances by developing a d · log2 n-factor approximation algorithm for WCVD, Gen-CVD-APPROX, thus proving the correctness of Theorem 2. The exact value of the constant d ≥ max{96, 2c} is determined later.7 This algorithm is based on recursion, and during its execution, we often encounter instances that are of the form of the Clique+Chordal special case of WCVD, which will be dealt with using the algorithm CVD-APPROX of Section 4.1. 7  Recall that c is the constant we fixed to ensure that the approximation ratio of CVD-APPROX is bounded by c · log n.  17  Recursion. We define each call to our algorithm Gen-CVD-APPROX to be of the form (G0 , w0 ), where (G0 , w0 ) is an instance of WCVD such that G0 is an induced subgraph of G, and we denote n0 = |V (G0 )|. We ensure that after the initialization phase, the graph G0 never contains chordless cycles on at most 48 vertices. We call this invariant the C48 -free invariant. In particular, this guarantee ensures that the graph G0 always contains only a small number of maximal cliques: Lemma 24 ([11, 41]). The number of maximal cliques of a graph G0 that has no chordless cycles on four vertices is bounded by O(n0 2 ), and they can be enumerated in polynomial time using a polynomial delay algorithm. Goal. For each recursive call Gen-CVD-APPROX(G0 , w0 ), we aim to prove the following. Lemma 25. Gen-CVD-APPROX returns a solution that is at least opt and at most Moreover, it returns a subset U ⊆ V (G0 ) that realizes the solution.  2 0 d 2 · log n · opt.  At each recursive call, the size of the graph G0 becomes smaller. Thus, when we prove that Lemma 25 is true for the current call, we assume that the approximation factor is bounded by 2 d b · opt for any call where the size n b of the vertex-set of its graph is strictly smaller than n0 . 2 · log n Initialization. Initially, we set (G0 , w0 ) = (G, w). However, we need to ensure that the C48 -free invariant is satisfied. For this purpose, we update G0 as follows. First, we let C48 denote the set of all chordless cycles on at most 48 vertices of G0 . Clearly, C48 can be computed in polynomial time and it holds that |C48 | ≤ n48 . Now, we construct an instance of Weighted 48-Hitting Set, where the universe is V (G0 ), the family of 48-sets is C48 , and the weight function is w0 . Since each chordless cycle must be intersected, it is clear that the optimal solution to our Weighted 48-Hitting Set instance is at most opt. By using the standard c0 -approximation algorithm for Weighted c0 -Hitting Set [27], which is suitable for any fixed constant c0 , we obtain a set S ⊆ V (G0 ) that intersects all cycles in C48 and whose weight is at most 48 · opt. Having the set S, we remove its vertices from G0 . Now, the C48 -free invariant is satisfied, which implies that we can recursively call our algorithm. To the outputted solution, we add w(S) and S. If Lemma 25 is true, we obtain a solution that is at most d2 · log2 n · opt + 48 · opt ≤ d · log2 n · opt, which allows us to conclude the correctness of Theorem 2. We remark that during the execution of our algorithm, we only update G0 by removing vertices from it, and thus it will always be safe to assume that the C48 -free invariant is satisfied. Termination. Observe that due to Lemma 24, we can test in polynomial time whether G0 consists of a clique and a chordal graph: we examine each maximal clique of G0 , and check whether after its removal we obtain a chordal graph. Once G0 becomes such a graph that consists of a chordal graph and a clique, we solve the instance (G0 , w0 ) by calling algorithm CVD-APPROX. Since c · log n0 ≤ d2 · log2 n0 , we thus ensure that at the base case of our induction, Lemma 25 holds. Recursive Call. For the analysis of a recursive call, let S ∗ denote a hypothetical set that realizes the optimal solution opt of the current instance (G0 , w0 ). Moreover, let (F, β) be a clique forest of G0 − S ∗ , whose existence is guaranteed by Lemma 1. Using standard arguments on forests, we have the following observation. Observation 26. There exist a maximal clique M of G0 and a subset S ⊆ V (G0 ) \ M of weight at most opt such that M ∪ S is a balanced separator for G0 . The following lemma translates this observation into an algorithm. Lemma 27. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that finds a maximal clique M of G0 and a subset S ⊆ V (G0 ) \ M of weight at most q · log n0 · opt for some fixed constant q such that M ∪ S is a balanced separator for G0 . 18  Proof. We examine every maximal clique of G0 . By Lemma 24, we need only consider O(n0 2 ) maximal cliques, and these cliques can be enumerated in polynomial time. For each such clique M , we run the q · log n0 -factor approximation algorithm by Leighton and Rao [28] to find a balanced separator SM of G0 − M . Here, q is some fixed constant. We let S denote some set of minimum weight among the sets in {SM : M is a maximal clique of G0 }. By Observation 26, w(S) ≤ q · log n0 · opt. Thus, the desired output is a pair (M, S) where M is one of the examined maximal cliques such that SM = S. We call the algorithm in Lemma 27 to obtain a pair (M, S). Since M ∪ S is a balanced separator for G0 , we can partitionSthe set of connected components of G0 − (M ∪ S) into two sets, S A1 and A2 , such that for V1 = A∈A1 V (A) and V2 = A∈A2 V (A) it holds that n1 , n2 ≤ 23 n0 where n1 = |V1 | and n2 = |V2 |. We remark that we used the O(log n)-factor approximation algorithm by Leighton and Rao [28] in Lemma 27 to find the balanced separator instead of the √ O( log n)-factor approximation algorithm by Feige et al. [12], as the algorithm by Feige et al. is randomized. Next, we define two inputs of (the general case of) WCVD: I1 = (G0 [V1 ], w0 |V1 ) and I2 = 0 (G [V2 ], w0 |V2 ). Let opt1 and opt2 denote the optimal solutions to I1 and I2 , respectively. Observe that since V1 ∩ V2 = ∅, it holds that opt1 + opt2 ≤ opt. We solve each of the subinstances by recursively calling algorithm Gen-CVD-APPROX. By the inductive hypothesis, we thus obtain two sets, S1 and S2 , such that G0 [V1 ] − S1 and G0 [V2 ] − S2 are chordal graphs, and w0 (S1 ) ≤ d2 · log2 n1 · opt1 and w0 (S2 ) ≤ d2 · log2 n2 · opt2 . We proceed by defining an input of the Clique+Chordal special case of WCVD: J = 0 (G [(V1 ∪V2 ∪M )\(S1 ∪S2 )], w0 |(V1 ∪V2 ∪M )\(S1 ∪S2 ) ). Observe that since G0 [V1 ]−S1 and G0 [V2 ]−S2 are chordal graphs and M is a clique, this is indeed an instance of the Clique+Chordal special case of WCVD. We solve this instance by calling algorithm CVD-APPROX. We thus obtain a b such that G0 [(V1 ∪ V2 ∪ M ) − (S1 ∪ S2 ∪ S)] b is a chordal graphs, and w0 (S) b ≤ c · log n0 · opt set, S, 0 (since |(V1 ∪ V2 ∪ M ) \ (S1 ∪ S2 )| ≤ n and the optimal solution of each of the subinstances is at most opt). Observe that since M is a clique and there is no edge in E(G0 ) between a vertex in V1 and a vertex in V2 , any chordless cycle of G0 − (S ∪ S1 ∪ S2 ) entirely belongs to either G0 [(V1 ∪ M ) \ S1 ] b or G0 [(V2 ∪ M ) \ S2 ]. This observation, along with the fact that G0 [(V1 ∪ V2 ∪ M ) \ (S1 ∪ S2 ∪ S)] 0 b is a chordal graphs, implies that G − T is a chordal graphs where T = S ∪ S1 ∪ S2 ∪ S. Thus, it is now sufficient to show that w0 (T ) ≤ d2 · log2 n0 · opt. By the discussion above, we have that b w0 (T ) ≤ w0 (S) + w0 (S1 ) + w0 (S2 ) + w0 (S) 2 ≤ q · log n0 · opt + d2 · (log n1 · opt1 + log2 n2 · opt2 ) + c · log n0 · opt. Recall that n1 , n2 ≤ 23 n0 and opt1 + opt2 ≤ opt. Thus, we have that w0 (T ) ≤ q · log n0 · opt + d2 · (log2 32 n0 ) · opt + c · log n0 · opt ≤ d2 · log2 n0 · opt + (q + c − d2 log 23 ) · log n0 · opt. · log2 n0 · opt, it is sufficient to ensure 2 ≤ 0, which can be done by fixing d = · (q + c). log 32  Overall, we conclude that to ensure that w0 (T ) ≤ that q + c −  5  d 2  log 32  d 2  Weighted Multicut in Chordal Graphs  In this section we prove Theorem 3. Let us denote c = 8. Recall that for Weighted Multicut, a fractional solution x is a function x : V (G) → [0, ∞) such that for every pair (s, t) ∈ T and any path P between s and t, it holds that x(V (P )) ≥ 1. An optimal fractional solution minimizes 19  P the weight w(x) = v∈V (G) w(v) · x(v). Let fopt denote the weight of an optimal fractional solution. Theorem 3 follows from the next result, whose proof is the focus of this section. Lemma 28. Given an instance of Weighted Multicut in chordal graphs, one can find (in polynomial time) a solution that is at least opt and at most 4c · fopt, along with a set that realizes it. Preprocessing. By using the ellipsoid method, we may next assume that we have optimal fractional solution x at hand. We say that x is nice if for all v ∈ V (G), there exists i ∈ {0} ∪ N such that x(v) = ni . Let h(x) = {v ∈ V (G) : x(v) ≥ 1/c} denote the set of vertices to which x assigns high values. b : V (G) → [0, ∞) as follows. For all v ∈ V (G), if x(v) < 1/2n Lemma 29. Define a function x b(v) = 0, and otherwise x b(v) is the smallest value of the form i/n, for some i ∈ N, that is then x b is a fractional solution such that w(b at least 2x(v). Then, x x) ≤ 4w(x). b is a fractional solution, consider some path P between s and t such that Proof. To show that x P b(V (P )) = v∈V (P )\`0 (x) x b(v) ≥ (s, t) ∈ T . Let `0 (x) = {v ∈ V (G) : x(v) < 1/2n}. We have that x P b(V (P )) ≥ 1, it is sufficient to show that 12 ≤ 2P v∈V (P )\`0 (x) x(v). Thus, to show that x P v∈V (P )\`0 (x) x(v). Since x is a fractional solution, it holds that x(V (P )) = v∈V (P )∩`0 (x) x(v) + P P 1 0 (x)|+ x(v) x(v). ≥ 1. Thus, 1 ≤ |V (P )∩` Since |V (P )∩`0 (x)| ≤ n, v∈V (P )\`0 (x) v∈V (P )\`0 (x) 2n P we conclude that 12 ≤ v∈V (P )\`0 (x) x(v). b(v) ≤ The second part of the claim follows from the observation that for all v ∈ V (G), x 4x(v). b. Our preprocessing step also relies on the following standard Accordingly, we update x to x lemma. b = G − h(x), w b = x|V (G) Lemma 30. Define G b = w|V (G) x) + w(h(x)) ≤ b and x b . Then, c · w(b c · w(x). Proof. By the definition of h(x), it holds that w(b x) ≤ w(x)− 1c w(h(x)). Thus, c·w(b x)+w(h(x)) ≤ 1 c · (w(x) − c · w(h(x))) + w(h(x)) = c · w(x). b w to w b, where we ensure that once we obtain a We thus further update G to G, b and x to x solution to the new instance, we add w(h(x)) to this solution and h(x) to the set realizing it. Overall, we may next focus only on the proof of the following lemma. Lemma 31. Let (G, w) be an instance of Weighted Multicut in chordal graphs, and x be a nice fractional solution such that h(x) = ∅. Then, one can find (in polynomial time) a solution that is at least opt and at most c · w(x), along with a set that realizes it. The Algorithm. Since G is a chordal graph, we can first construct in polynomial time a clique forest (F, β) of G (Lemma 1). Without loss of generality, we may assume that F is a tree, else G is not a connected graph and we can handle each of its connected components separately. Now, we arbitrarily root F at some node rF , and we arbitrarily choose a vertex rG ∈ β(rF ). We then use Dijkstra’s algorithm to compute (in polynomial time) for each vertex v ∈ V (G), the value d(v) = min x(V (P )), where P(v) is the set of paths in G between rG and v. P ∈P(v)  We define n + 1 bins: for all i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}, the bin Bi contains every vertex v ∈ V (G) for which there exists j ∈ {0}∪N such that d(v)−x(v) < ( ni +2j) 1c ≤ d(v) (i.e., 0 ≤ d(v)−( ni +2j) 1c < 20  x(v)). Let Bi∗ , i∗ ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}, be a bin that minimizes w(Bi∗ ). The output consists of w(Bi∗ ) and Bi∗ . br be the set that contains every vertex v ∈ V (G) Approximation Factor. Given r ∈ [0, 1], let B for which there exists j ∈ {0} ∪ N such that 0 ≤ d(v) − (r + 2j) 1c < x(v). We start with the following claim. br∗ ) ≤ c · w(x). Lemma 32. There exists r∗ ∈ [0, 1] such that w(B Proof. For any d ≥ 0, observe that there exists exactly one j ∈ {0} ∪ N for which there exists r ∈ [0, 1] such that 0 ≤ d − (r + 2j) 1c < 1c , and denote it by j(d). Suppose that we choose r ∈ [0, 1] uniformly at random. Consider some vertex v ∈ V (G). Then, since h(x) = ∅, the probability that there exists j ∈ {0} ∪ N such that 0 ≤ d(v) − (r + 2j) 1c < x(v) is equal to the probability that 0 ≤ d(v) − (r + 2j(d(v))) 1c < x(v). Now, the probability that 0 ≤ d(v) − (r + 2j(d(v))) 1c < x(v) br ) is c · P is equal to c · x(v). The expected weight w(B v∈V (G) x(v) · w(v) = c · w(x). Thus, there ∗ br∗ ) ≤ c · w(x). exists r ∈ [0, 1] such that w(B Now, the proof of the approximation factor follows from the next claim. br∗ . Lemma 33. There exists i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n} such that Bi ⊆ B Proof. Let i be the smallest index in {0, 1, . . . , n} such that r∗ ≤ ni . Consider some vertex v ∈ Bi . Then, for some j ∈ {0} ∪ N, d(v) − x(v) < ( ni + 2j) 1c ≤ d(v). Since r∗ ≤ ni , we have that (r∗ + 2j) 1c ≤ d(v). Since x is nice, it holds that there exists t ∈ {0} ∪ N such that d(v) − x(v) = nt . Thus, for any p < n1 , it holds that d(v) − x(v) < ( ni + 2j − p) 1c . By the choice of i, ni − r∗ < n1 , br∗ . and therefore d(v) − x(v) < (r∗ + 2j) 1c , which implies that v ∈ B Feasibility. We need to prove that for any pair (s, t) ∈ T , G − Bi∗ does not have any path between s and t. Consider some path P = (v1 , v2 , · · · , v` ) between s and t. Here, v1 = s and v` = t. Suppose, by way of contradiction, that V (P ) ∩ Bi∗ = ∅. Then, for all vi ∈ V (P ), it holds ∗ that there is no j ∈ {0} ∪ N such that 0 ≤ d(vi ) − ( in + 2j) 1c < x(vi ). Let s ∈ V (F ) be the closest node to rF that satisfies β(s) ∩ V (P ) 6= ∅ (since F is a clique tree and P is a path, the node s is uniquely defined). Let vbi be some vertex in β(s) ∩ V (P ) 6= ∅. For the sake of clarity, let us denote the subpath of P between vbi and v` by Q = (u1 , u2 , · · · , ut ), where u1 = vbi and ut = v` . Let j ∗ be the smallest value in {0} ∪ N that satisfies d(u1 ) − x(u1 ) < ∗ ∗ ( in + 2j ∗ ) 1c . Note that d(u1 ) < ( in + 2j ∗ ) 1c . It is thus well defined to let p denote the largest ∗ index in [t] such that d(up ) < ( in + 2j ∗ ) 1c . ∗ First, suppose that p ∈ [t − 1]. We then have that ( in + 2j ∗ ) 1c ≤ d(up+1 ). For all 2 ≤ i ≤ t, it ∗ holds that d(ui ) ≤ d(ui−1 ) + x(ui ). We thus obtain that d(up+1 ) − x(up+1 ) ≤ d(up ) < ( in + 2j ∗ ) 1c . This statement implies that up+1 ∈ Bi∗ , which is a contradiction. ∗ Now, we suppose that p = t. Note that ( in + 2j ∗ − 2) 1c ≤ d(u1 ) − x(u1 ) (by the minimality ∗ of j ∗ ), and d(ut ) < ( in + 2j ∗ ) 1c . We get that d(ut ) < d(u1 ) − x(u1 ) + 2c . In other words, d(ut ) − d(u1 ) + x(u1 ) < 2c . Let des(s) denote the set S consisting of s and its descendants in F . Since F is a clique tree, we have that V (Q) ⊆ s0 ∈des(s) β(s0 ). Thus, any path from rG to ut that realizes d(ut ) contains a vertex from β(s). Since there exists a path from rG to ut that realizes d(ut ), we deduce that there exists a path, Pt , from rG to ut that realizes d(ut ) and contains a vertex x ∈ NG [u1 ]. Let Pt∗ denote the subpath of Pt between x and ut , and let P ∗ denote the path that starts at u1 and then traverses Pt∗ . Then, x(V (P ∗ )) ≤ x(u1 ) + x(V (Pt∗ )) = x(u1 ) + d(ut ) − d(x) + x(x). Note that d(u1 ) ≤ d(x) + x(u1 ), and therefore x(V (P ∗ )) ≤ x(u1 ) + d(ut ) − (d(u1 ) − x(u1 )) + x(x) = x(u1 ) + x(x) + (d(ut ) − d(u1 ) + x(u1 )). Since h(x) = ∅ and d(ut ) − d(u1 ) + x(u1 ) < 2c , we get that x(V (P ∗ )) < 4c . The symmetric analysis of 21  House  Gem  Domino  Cycle on at least 5 vertices  Figure 3: Obstruction set for distance hereditary graphs the subpath of P between u1 = vbi and v1 shows that there exists a path P ∗∗ between u1 and v1 such that x(V (P ∗∗ )) < 4c . Overall, we get that there exists a path, P 0 , between v1 = s and v` = u` = t such that x(V (P 0 )) < 8c . Since c ≥ 8, we reach a contradiction to the assumption that x is a fractional solution.  6  Distance-Hereditary Vertex Deletion  In this section we prove Theorem 4. We start with preliminaries. Preliminaries. A graph G is distance hereditary if every connected induced subgraph H of G, for all u, v ∈ V (H) the number of vertices in shortest path between u and v in G is same as the number of vertices in shortest path between u and v in H. Another characterization of distance hereditary graphs is the graph not containing an induced sub-graph isomorphic to a house, a gem, a domino or an induced cycle on 5 or more vertices (refer Figure 3). We refer to a house, a gem, a domino or an induced cycle on at least 5 vertices as a DH-obstruction. A DH-obstruction on at most 48 vertices is a small DH-obstruction. A biclique is a graph G with vertex bipartition X, Y each of them being non-empty such that for each x ∈ X and y ∈ Y we have {x, y} ∈ E(G). We note here that, X and Y need not be independent sets in a biclique G. Clearly, we can assume that the weight w(v) of each vertex v ∈ V (G) is positive, else we can insert v into any solution. Our approximation algorithm for WDHVD comprises of two components. The first component handles the special case where the input graph G consists of a biclique C and a distance hereditary H. Here, we also assume that the input graph has no “small” DH-obstruction. We show that when input restricted to these special instances WDHVD admits an O(log2 n)-factor approximation algorithm. The second component is a recursive algorithm that solves general instances of the problem. Initially, it easily handles “small” DH-obstruction. Then, it gradually disintegrates a general instance until it becomes an instance of the special form that can be solved in polynomial time. More precisely, given a problem instance, the algorithm divides it by finding a maximal biclique M (using an exhaustive search which relies on the guarantee that G has no “small” DH-obstruction) and a small separator S (using an approximation algorithm) that together break the input graph into two graphs significantly smaller than their origin.  6.1  Biclique+ Distance Hereditary Graph  In this subsection we handle the special case where the input graph G consists of a biclique C and a distance hereditary graph H. More precisely, along with the input graph G and the weight function w, we are also given a biclique C and a distance hereditary graph H such that V (G) = V (C) ∪ V (H), where the vertex-sets V (C) and V (H) are disjoint. Here, we also assume that G has no DH-obstruction on at most 48 vertices, which means that every DH-obstructionin G is a chordless cycle of strictly more than 48 vertices. Note that the edge-set E(G) may contain 22  edges between vertices in C and vertices in H. We call this special case the Biclique + Distance Hereditary special case. Our objective is to prove the following result. Lemma 34. The Biclique + Distance Hereditary special case of WDHVD admits an O(log2 n)factor approximation algorithm. We assume that n ≥ 212 , else the input instance can be solve by brute-force 8 . Let c be a fixed constant (to be determined later). In the rest of this subsection, we design a c · log n-factor approximation algorithm for the Biclique + Distance Hereditary special case of WDHVD. Recursion. Our approximation algorithm is a recursive algorithm. We call our algorithm DHD-APPROX, and define each call to be of the form (G0 , w0 , C, H 0 , x). Here, G0 is an induced subgraph of G such that V (C) ⊆ V (G0 ), and H 0 is an induced subgraph of H. The argument x is discussed below. We remark that we continue to use n to refer to the size of the vertex-set of the input graph G rather than the current graph G0 . Arguments. While the execution of our algorithm progresses, we keep track of two arguments: the number of vertices in the current distance hereditary graph H 0 that are assigned a non-zero value by x, which we denote by α(G0 ) and the fractional solution x. Observation 35. The measure α(G0 ) can be computed in polynomial time. A fractional solution x is a function x : V (G0 ) → [0, ∞) such that for every chordless cycle Q of G0 on at least 5 vertices it holds that x(V (Q)) ≥ 1. An optimal fractional solution P minimizes the weight w0 (x) = v∈V (G0 ) w0 (v) · x(v). Clearly, the solution to the instance (G0 , w0 ) of WDHVD is at least as large as the weight of an optimal fractional solution. Although we initially compute an optimal fractional solution x (at the initialization phase that is described below), during the execution of our algorithm, we manipulate this solution so it may no longer be optimal. Prior to any call to DHD-APPROX with the exception of the first call, we ensure that x satisfies the following invariants: • Low-Value Invariant: For any v ∈ V (G0 ), it holds that x(v) < 1/ log n. • Zero-Biclique Invariant: For any v ∈ V (C), it holds that x(v) = 0. We note that the Low-Value Invariant used here is simpler than the one used in Section 4.1 since it is enough for the purpose of this section. Goal. The depth of the recursion tree will be bounded by ∆ = O(log n), where the depth of initial call is 1. The correctness of this claim is proved when we explain how to perform a recursive call. For each recursive call to DHD-APPROX(G0 , w0 , C, H 0 , x), we aim to prove the following. Lemma 36. For any δ ∈ {1, 2, . . . , ∆}, each recursive call to DHD-APPROX of depth δ ≥ 2 n δ returns a solution that is at least opt and at most ( loglogn+4 ) · c · log n · log(α(G0 )) · w0 (x). Moreover, it returns a subset U ⊆ V (G0 ) that realizes the solution. At the initialization phase, we see that in order to prove Lemma 34, it is sufficient to prove Lemma 36. Initialization. Initially, the graphs G0 and H 0 are simply set to be the input graphs G and H, and the weight function w0 is simply set to be input weight function w. Moreover, we compute an optimal fractional solution x = xinit by using the ellipsoid method. Recall that the following claim holds. 8  This assumption simplifies some of the calculations ahead.  23  Observation 37. The solution of the instance (G0 , w0 ) of WDHVD is lower bounded by w0 (xinit ). Moreover, it holds that α(G0 ) ≤ n, and therefore to prove Lemma 34, it is sufficient to return a solution that is at least opt and at most c · log n · log(α(G)) · w(x) (along with a subset that realizes the solution). Part of the necessity of the stronger claim given by Lemma 36 will become clear at the end of the initialization phase. We would like to proceed by calling our algorithm recursively. For this purpose, we first need to ensure that x satisfies the low-value and zero-biclique invariants, to which end we use the following notation. We let h(x) = {v ∈ V (G0 ) : x(v) ≥ 1/ log n} denote the set of vertices to which x assigns high values. Note that we can assume for each v ∈ h(x), we have x(v) ≤ 1. Moreover, given a biclique M in G0 , we let (x \ M ) : V (G0 ) → [0, ∞) denote the function that assigns 0 to any vertex in M and (1 + log4 n )x(v) to any other vertex v ∈ V (G0 ). Now, to adjust x to be of the desired form both at this phase and at later recursive calls, we rely on the following lemmata. 0 b = G0 − h(x), w b b = x|V (G) Lemma 38. Define G b = w0 |V (G) b and x b . Then, c · log n · log(α(G)) · w0 (b x) + w0 (h(x)) ≤ c0 · log n · log(α(G)) · w0 (x), where c0 ≥ 1.  b is an x) ≤ w0 (x) − log1 n · w0 (h(x)). Since G Proof. By the definition of h(x), it holds that w0 (b b ≤ α(G0 ). Thus, c0 · log n · log(α(G)) b · w0 (b induced subgraph of G0 , it also holds that α(G) x) + 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 w (h(x)) ≤ c ·log n·log(α(G ))·(w (x)− log n ·w (h(x)))+w (h(x)) ≤ c ·log n·log(α(G))·w0 (x). 0 0 Thus, it is safe to update G0 to G0 − h(x), w0 to w0 |V (G) b , H to H − h(x) and x to x|V (G) b , 0 where we ensure that once we obtain a solution to the new instance, we add w (h(x)) to this solution and h(x) to the set realizing it.  Lemma 39. Let Q be a chordless cycle on at least 5 vertices and M be a biclique in G0 with vertex partitions as V (M ) = M1 ]M2 such that V (Q)∩V (M ) 6= ∅. Then there is a chordless cycle Q0 on at least 5 vertices that intersects M in at most 3 vertices such that E(Q0 \ M ) ⊆ E(Q \ M ). Furthermore, Q0 is of one of the following three types. • Q0 ∩ M is a single vertex • Q0 ∩ M is an edge in G[M ] • Q0 ∩ M is an induced path on 3 vertices in M . Proof. Observe that no chordless cycle on 5 or more vertices may contain two vertices from each of M1 and M2 , as that would imply a chord in it. Now, if the chordless cycle Q already satisfies the required conditions we output it as Q0 . First consider the case, when Q ∩ M contains exactly two vertices that don’t have an edge between them. Then the two vertices, say v1 , v2 , are both either in M1 or in M2 . Suppose that they are both in M1 and consider some vertex u ∈ M2 . Let P1 is the longer of the two path segments of Q between v1 and v2 , and note that it must length at least 3. Then observe that G0 [P1 ∪ {u, v1 , v2 }] contains a DH-obstruction, as v1 , v2 have different distances depending on if u is included in an induced subgraph or not. And further, it is easy to see that this DH-obstruction contains the induced path v1 , u, v2 . However, as all small obstructions have been removed from the graph, we have that Q0 is a chordless cycle in G0 on at least 5 vertices. Furthermore, Q0 ∩ M is the induced path (v1 , u, v2 ), in G0 and E(Q0 \ M ) ⊆ E(Q \ M ). Now consider the case when Q ∩ M contains exactly three vertices. Observe that it cannot contain two vertices of M1 and one vertex of M2 , or vice versa, as Q doesn’t satisfy the required conditions. Therefore, Q ∩ M contains exactly three vertices from M1 (or from M2 ), which 24  again don’t form an induced path of length 3. So there is an independent set of size 2 in Q ∩ M , and now, as before, we can again obtain the chordless cycle Q0 on at least 5 vertices with E(Q0 \ M ) ⊆ E(Q \ M ). Before we consider the other cases, we have the following claim. Claim 1. Let M be a biclique in G0 with vertex partition as V (M ) = M1 ] M2 . Then G0 [M ] has no induced P4 . Proof. Let P be any induced path of length 4 in G0 [M ]. Then, either V (P ) ⊆ M1 or V (P ) ⊆ M2 . Now consider any such path P in M1 and some vertex u ∈ M2 . Then G0 [P ∪ {u}] contains a DH-obstruction of size 5 which is a contradiction to the fact that G0 has no small obstructions. Next, let Q ∩ M contain 4 or more vertices. Note that in this case all these vertices are all either in M1 or in M2 since otherwise, Q would not be a chordless cycle in G0 on at least 5 vertices. Let us assume these vertices lie in M1 (other case is symmetric). Let v1 , v2 , v3 , · · · , v` ∈ M1 ∩ Q be the sequence of vertices obtained when we traverse Q starting from an arbitrary vertex, where ` ≥ 4. By Claim 1 they cannot form an induced path on 4 vertices, i.e. G0 [V (Q) ∩ M1 ] consists of at least two connected components. Without loss of generality we may assume that v1 and v` are in different components. Observe that the only possible edges between these vertices may be at most two of the edges (v1 , v2 ), (v2 , v3 ), and (v3 , v` ). Hence, we conclude that either v1 , v3 or v2 , v` are a distance of at least 3 in Q. Let us assume that v2 , v` are at distance 3 or more in Q, and the other case is symmetric and P23 , P3` be the paths not containing v1 in Q between v2 and v3 , and v3 and v` , respectively. Notice that for any u ∈ M2 the graph G0 [{u} ∪ V (P23 ) ∪ V (P3` )] contains a DH-obstruction. Since the graph is free of all small obstruction, this DH-obstruction, denoted Q̂, must be a chordless cycle on at least 5 vertices. Furthermore this obstruction can contain at most 2 vertices from {v2 , v3 , v` }, as otherwise there would be a chord in it. Hence Q̂ ∩ M contains strictly fewer vertices than Q ∩ M . Moreover, we have E(Q̂ \ M ) ⊆ E(Q \ M ). Now, by a recursive application of this lemma to Q̂, we obtain the required Q0 . A consequence of the above lemma is that, whenever M is a biclique in G0 , we may safely ignore any DH-obstructionthat intersects M in more than 3 vertices. This leads us to the following lemma. Lemma 40. Given a biclique M in G0 , the function (x \ M ) is a valid fractional solution such that w0 (x \ M ) ≤ (1 + log4 n )w0 (x). Proof. To prove that (x \ M ) is a valid fractional solution, let Q be some chordless cycle (not on 4 vertices) in G0 . We need to show that (x \ M )(V (Q)) ≥ 1. By our assumption Q can contain at most 3 vertices from M . Thus, since x is a valid fractional solution, it holds that x(V (Q) \ V (M )) ≥ 1 − log3 n . By the definition of (x \ M ), this fact implies that (x \ M )(V (Q)) = (x \ M )(V (Q) \ V (M )) ≥ (1 + log4 n )(1 − log3 n ) = 1 + log1 n − (log12n)2 ≥ 1, where the last inequality relies on the assumption n ≥ 212 . For the proof of the second part of the claim, note that w0 (x\M ) = (1+ log4 n ) w0 (x|V (G0 )\V (M ) ) ≤ (1 + log4 n )w0 (x). We call DHD-APPROX recursively with the fractional solution (x \ C), and by Lemma 40, \ C) ≤ (1 + log4 n )w0 (x). If Lemma 36 were true, we return a solution that is at least opt  w0 (x  n and at most ( loglogn+4 ) · c · log n · log(α(G)) · w(x \ M ) ≤ c · log n · log(α(G)) · w(x) as desired. In other words, to prove Lemma 34, it is sufficient that we next focus only on the proof of Lemma 36. The proof of this lemma is done by induction. When we consider some recursive call, we assume that the solutions returned by the additional recursive calls that it performs, which are e such that α(G) e ≤ 3 α(G0 ), complies with the conclusion of the lemma. associated with graphs G 4  25  Termination. Once G0 becomes a distance hereditary graph, we return 0 as our solution and ∅ as the set that realizes it. Clearly, we thus satisfy the demands of Lemma 36. In fact, we thus also ensure that the execution of our algorithm terminates once α(G0 ) < log n. Lemma 41. If α(G0 ) < log n, then G0 is a distance hereditary graph. Proof. Suppose that G0 is not a distance hereditary graph. Then, it contains an obstruction Q. Since x is a valid fractional solution, it holds that x(V (Q)) ≥ 1. But x satisfies the low-value invariant therefore, it holds that x(V (Q)) < |V (Q)|/ log n. These two observations imply that |V (Q)| > log n. Furthermore, at least log n of these vertices are assigned a non-zero value by x, i.e. α(G0 ) ≥ log n. Therefore, if α(G0 ) < log n, then G0 must be a distance hereditary graph. The fact that, the recursive calls are made onto graphs where the distance hereditary subgraph contains at most 3/4 the number of vertices in the current distance hereditary subgraph, we observe the following. Observation 42. The maximum depth of the recursion tree is bounded by q · log n for some fixed constant q. Recursive Call. Since H 0 is a distance hereditary graph, it has a rank-width-one decomposition (T , φ), where T is a binary tree and φ is a bijection from V (G0 ) to the leaves of T . Furthermore, rank-width of T is 1, which means that for any edge of the tree, by deleting it, we obtain a partition of the leaves in T . This partition induces a cut of the graph, where the set of edges crossing this cut forms a biclique M , with vertex partition as V (M ) = M1 ] M2 in the graph. By standard arguments on trees, we deduce that T has an edge that defines a partition such that after we remove the biclique edges between M1 and M2 from G0 we obtain two (not necessarily connected) graphs, H1 and H2 , such that |V (H1 )|, |V (H2 )| ≤ 43 |V (H 0 )| and M1 ⊆ H1 , M2 ⊆ H2 . Note that the bicliques M and C are vertex disjoint. We proceed by replacing the fractional solution x by (x \ M ). For the sake of clarity, we denote x∗ = (x \ M ). Let G1 = G0 [V (H1 ) ∪ V (C) ∪ V (M )], G2 = G0 [V (H2 ) ∪ V (C) ∪ V (M )]. We adjust the current instance by relying on Lemma 38 so that x∗ satisfies the low-value invariant (in the same manner as it is adjusted in the initialization phase). In particular, we remove h(x∗ ) from G0 ,H 0 , G1 , H1 , G2 and H2 , and we let (G∗ , w∗ , C, H ∗ , x∗ ), G∗1 , H1∗ G∗2 and H2∗ denote the resulting instance and graphs. Observe that, now we have α(G∗1 ), α(G∗2 ) ≤ 34 α(G0 ). n δ+1 We will return a solution that is at least opt and at most ( loglogn+4 ) · c · log n · log(α(G0 )) · w∗ (x∗ ), along with a set that realizes it.9 In the analysis we will argue this it is enough for our purposes. Next, we define two subinstances, I1∗ = (G∗1 , w∗ |V (G∗1 ) , C, H1∗ , x∗ |V (G∗1 ) ) and I2∗ = (G∗2 , w∗ |V (G∗2 ) , C, H2∗ , x∗ |V (G∗2 ) ). We solve each of these subinstances by a recursive call to DHD-APPROX, and thus we obtain two solutions of sizes, s∗1 to I1∗ and s∗2 to I2∗ , and two sets that realize these solutions, S1∗ and S2∗ . By the inductive hypothesis, we have the following observations. Observation 43. S1∗ ∪ S2∗ intersects any chordless cycle on at least 6 vertices in G∗ that lies entirely in either G∗1 or G∗2 . n δ+1 Observation 44. Given i ∈ {1, 2}, s∗i ≤ ( loglogn+4 ) · c · log n · log(α(G∗i )) · w(x∗i ).  Moreover, since x∗ (V (C) ∪ V (M )) = 0, we also have the following observation. Observation 45. w∗ (x∗1 ) + w∗ (x∗2 ) = w∗ (x∗ ). 9  log n log n Here, the coefficient ( log )δ has been replaced by the smaller coefficient ( log )δ+1 . n+4 n+4  26  We say that a cycle in G∗ is bad if it is a chordless cycle not on four vertices that belongs entirely to neither G∗1 nor G∗2 . Next, we show how to intersect bad cycles. Bad Cycles. Let us recall the current state of the graph G0 . G0 is partitioned into a biclique C and a distance hereditary graph H 0 . Furthermore, there is a biclique M with vertex bipartition as M1 and M2 so that deleting the edges between M1 and M2 , gives a balanced partition of H 0 into H1 and H2 . Now, by Lemma 39, we may ignore any chordless cycle that intersects either of the two bicliques C and M in more than three vertices each, and this allows us to update our fractional feasible solution to x∗ = (x/M ). Then we recursively solve the instances G∗1 and G∗2 and remove the returned solution. Now consider the remaining graph, and any obstructions that are left. As the graph no longer contains small obstructions, it is clear that any remaining obstruction is a chordless cycle on at least 6 vertices and is a bad cycle. We first examine the relation between bad cycles and pairs (v, u) of vertices v ∈ V (C) and u ∈ V (M ). Lemma 46. If a bad cycle exists, then there must also be a bad cycle Q such that Q \ (M ∪ C) is a union of two internally vertex disjoint and non-adjacent path-segments, P1 and P2 such that, P1 ⊆ G1 and P2 ⊆ G2 , and each of them connect a pair of vertices in M × C. Proof. Let Q0 be a bad cycle. Let us recall that the input graph G0 can be partitioned into the biclique C and a distance hereditary graph H 0 . Hence Q0 ∩ C 6= ∅. Furthermore, if Q0 ∩ M = ∅, then Q0 is preserved in G0 − M . This means that Q0 is either present in G∗1 , or in G∗2 , and hence it cannot be a bad cycle, which is a contradiction. Hence Q0 ∩ M = 6 ∅ as well. Finally, Q0 contains 0 0 vertices from both H1 and H2 , which implies Q ∩ G1 and Q ∩ G2 are both non-empty as well. Now, by applying Lemma 39 to Q0 and C, we obtain a bad cycle Q̂ such that Q̂ ∩ C is either a single vertex, or an edge or an induced path of length three. Since, M ∩ C = ∅, we can again apply Lemma 39 to Q̂ and M , and obtain a bad cycle Q such that each of Q ∩ C and Q ∩ M is either a single vertex, or, an edge or an induced path of length three. Hence, Q − (V (M ) ∪ V (C)) is a pair of internally disjoint paths, whose endpoints are in M × C. Furthermore, one of these paths, denoted P1 , is contained in G1 , and the other, denoted P2 , is contained in G2 . The above lemma (Lemma 46) implies that it is safe to ignore all the bad cycles that don’t satisfy the conclusion of this lemma. We proceed to enumerate some helpful properties of those bad cycles that satisfy the above lemma. We call P1 , P2 the path segments of the bad cycle Q. Lemma 47. Suppose P1 , P2 are path segments of a bad cycle Q where P1 ⊆ G1 − S1∗ and P2 ⊆ G2 − S2∗ , where S1∗ and S2∗ are a solution to G∗1 and G∗2 , respectively. Then for any P10 which is an induced path in G1 − S1∗ with the same endpoints as P1 we have that Q0 = G0 [(Q ∩ (M ∪ C)) ∪ V (P10 ) ∪ V (P2 )] is also a bad cycle. Proof. Observe that, P1 and P10 are paths between the same endpoints in G1 − S1∗ , which is a distance hereditary graph. Therefore, P10 is an induced path of the same length as P1 . Furthermore, no vertex in P10 is adjacent to a vertex in Q − P1 . Hence Q0 is also a bad cycle. The above lemma allows us to reduce the problem of computing a solution that intersects all bad-cycles, to computing a solution for an instance of Weighted Multicut. More formally, let Q be a bad cycle with path segments P1 and P2 , the feasible fractional solution x∗ assigns a total value of at least 1 to the vertices in Q. As x∗ assigns 0 to every vertex in M ∪ C, we have that at least one of P1 or P2 is assigned a total value of at least 1/2. Suppose that it were P1 then 2x∗ assigns a total value 1 to P1 in G1 . This fractional solution is a solution to the Weighted Multicut problem defined on the pairs of vertices in C × M , which are separated by 2x∗ in G0 (whose description is given below). Given i ∈ {1, 2}, let 2x∗i denote the fractional solution that assigns to each vertex the value assigned by x∗i times 2. For a pair (v, u) of vertices such that v ∈ V (C) and u ∈ V (M ) we call 27  (v, u) an important pair if there is a bad cycle Q with path segments P1 and P2 that connects v and u. Let S1∗ and S2∗ be a solution to G∗1 and G∗2 , respectively (obtained recursively). For an important pair (v, u) we let P1 (v, u) denote the set of any (simple) path P1 between v and u whose internal vertices belong only to G1 − S1∗ and which does not contain any edge such that one of its endpoints belongs to V (C) while the other endpoint belongs to V (M ). Symmetrically, we let P2 (v, u) denote the set of any path P2 between v and u whose internal vertices belong only to G2 − S2∗ and which does not contain any edge such that one of its endpoints belongs to V (C) while the other endpoint belongs to V (M ). Lemma 48. For an important pair (v, u) of vertices where v ∈ V (C) and u ∈ V (M ), in polynomial time we can compute an index i(v, u) ∈ {1, 2} such that for any path P ∈ Pi (v, u), 2x∗i (V (P )) ≥ 1. Proof. Let (v, u) be an important pair of vertices with v ∈ V (C) and u ∈ V (M ). We start by arguing that such an index exists. Assuming a contradiction, suppose there exists P1 ∈ P1 (v, u) and P2 ∈ P2 (v, u) such that 2x∗1 (V (P1 )) < 1 and 2x∗2 (V (P2 )) < 1. Recall that we have a bad cycle bad cycle Q in G0 − (S1∗ ∪ S2∗ ) with paths segments as P1 and P2 which connects v and u. But this implies that 2x∗ (Q) < 1, contradicting that x∗ was a feasible solution to G0 − (S1∗ ∪ S2∗ ). Therefore, such an index always exists. For any index j ∈ {1, 2}, we use Dijkstra’s algorithm to compute the minimum weight of a b ∗ where the weights are given by 2x∗ . In case the minimum path between v and u in the graph G i i weight is at least 1, we have found the desired index i(v, u). Moreover, we know that for at least one index j ∈ {1, 2}, the minimum weight should be at least 1 (if the minimum weight is at least 1 for both induces, we arbitrarily decide to fix i(v, u) = 1). We say that an important pair (u, v) is separated in Gi , if the index assigned by Lemma 48 assigns i to Pi (u, v). Now, for every important pair (v, u) such that v ∈ V (C), u ∈ V (M ) and {v, u} ∈ / E(G0 ), we perform the following operation. We check if this pair is separated in G1 , and if so, then we initialize T1 (v, u) = ∅. Then for each pair of neighbors of x of v and y of u, we add the pair (x, y) to T1 (u, v). The set T2 (u, v) is similarly defined. At this point, we need to rely on approximate solutions to the Weighted Multicut problem which is given by theorem below (Theorem 5). Theorem 5 ([19]). Given an instance of Weighted Multicut, one can find (in polynomial time) a solution that is at least opt and at most d · log n · fopt for some fixed constant d > 0, along with a set that realizes it. Here, a fractional solution y is a function y : V (G) → [0, ∞) such that for every pair (si , ti ) ∈ T and any path P between si and P ti , it holds that y(V (P )) ≥ 1. An optimal fractional solution minimizes the weight w(y) = v∈V (G) w(v) · y(v). Let fopt denote the weight of an optimal fractional solution. By employing the algorithm given by Lemma 48, we next construct two instances of b ∗ , w∗ , T1 = {T1 (v, u) : v ∈ V (C), u ∈ Weighted Multicut. The first instance is J1 = (G 1 1 b ∗ , w∗ , T2 = V (M ), i(v, u) = 1, and (v, u) is an important pair}) and the second instance is J2 = (G 2 2 {T2 (v, u) : v ∈ V (C), u ∈ V (M ), i(v, u) = 2, and (v, u) is an important pair}). By Lemma 48, 2x∗1 and 2x∗2 are valid solutions to J1 and J2 , respectively. Thus, by calling the algorithm given by Theorem 5 with each instance, we obtain a solution r1 to the first instance, along with a set R1 that realizes it, such that r1 ≤ 2d · log |V (G∗1 )| · w∗ (x∗1 ), and we also obtain a solution r2 to the second instance, along with a set R2 that realizes it, such that r2 ≤ 2d · log |V (G∗2 )| · w∗ (x∗2 ). Now by Observation 43 and Lemma 46, we have obtained a set S ∗ = S1∗ ∪ S2∗ ∪ R1 ∪ R2 for which we have the following observation. 28  Observation 49. S ∗ intersects any chordless cycle in G∗ , and it holds that w∗ (S ∗ ) ≤ s∗1 + s∗2 + r1 + r2 . n δ+1 We start by showing that s∗1 +s∗2 +r1 +r2 +w(h(x)) ≤ ( loglogn+4 ) ·c·log n·log(α(G0 ))·w∗ (x∗ ). Recall that for any i ∈ {1, 2}, ri ≤ 2d · log |V (G∗i )| · w∗ (x∗i ). Thus, by Observation 44 and since for any i ∈ {1, 2}, |V (G∗i )| ≤ n and α(G∗i ) ≤ 34 α(G0 ), we have that  w∗ (S ∗ ) ≤ (  3 log n δ+1 ) · c · log n · log( α(G0 )) · (w∗ (x∗1 ) + w∗ (x∗2 )) + 2d · log n · (w∗ (x∗1 ) + w∗ (x∗2 )). log n + 4 4  By Observation 45, we further deduce that   log n δ+1 3 ∗ ∗ 0 w (S ) ≤ ( ) · c · log( α(G )) + 2d · log n · w∗ (x∗ ). log n + 4 4 n δ+1 n δ+1 · c · log( 34 α(G0 ))+2d ≤ ( loglogn+4 · c · log α(G0 ), Now, it only remains to show that ( loglogn+4 ) ) n δ+1 which is equivalent to 2d ≤ ( loglogn+4 ) · c · log( 43 ). Observe that δ ≤ q · log n − 1 for some fixed constant q. Indeed, it initially holds that α(G) ≤ n, at each recursive call, the number of vertices assigned a non-zero value by x∗ decreases to at most a factor of 3/4 of its previous value, and the execution terminates once this value drops below (log n)/2. Thus, it is sufficient to choose n q·log n n q·log n · c · log( 43 ). As the term ( loglogn+4 the constant c so that 2d ≤ ( loglogn+4 ) ) is lower bounded 4 4q 4q by 1/(e ), it is sufficient that we fix c = 2 · e · d · 1/ log( 3 ). n q·log n n q·log n Note that 2d ≤ ( loglogn+4 ) · c · log( 43 ), where d ≥ 1. Therefore, ( loglogn+4 ) · c ≥ 1. This n δ together with Lemma 38 and 40 implies that w0 (S ∗ ) + w0 (h(x)) ≤ ( loglogn+4 ) · c · log(α(G0 ))w0 (x), which proves Lemma 36.  6.2  General Graphs  In this section we handle general instances by developing a d · log2 n-factor approximation algorithm for WDHVD, Gen-DHD-APPROX, thus proving the correctness of Theorem 4. The Recursive Algorithm. We define each call to our algorithm Gen-DHD-APPROX to be of the form (G0 , w0 ), where (G0 , w0 ) is an instance of WDHVD such that G0 is an induced subgraph of G, and we denote n0 = |V (G0 )|. We ensure that after the initialization phase, the graph G0 never contains a DH-obstruction on at most 50 vertices. We call this invariant the O50 -free invariant. In particular, this guarantee ensures that the graph G0 always contains only a small number of maximal bicliques, as stated in the following lemma. Lemma 50 (Lemma 3.5 [26]). Let G be a graph on n vertices with no DH-obstruction on at most 6 vertices. Then G contains at most (n3 + 5n)/6 maximal bicliques, and they can be enumerated in polynomial time. Goal. For each recursive call Gen-DHD-APPROX(G0 , w0 ), we aim to prove the following. Lemma 51. Gen-DHD-APPROX returns a solution that is at least opt and at most d2 ·log3 n0 ·opt. Moreover, it returns a subset U ⊆ V (G0 ) that realizes the solution. Here d is a constant, which will be determined later. At each recursive call, the size of the graph G0 becomes smaller. Thus, when we prove that Lemma 51 is true for the current call, we assume that the approximation factor is bounded by 3 d b · opt for any call where the size n b of the vertex-set of its graph is strictly smaller than n0 . 2 · log n 29  Initialization. We are given (G, w) as input, and first we need to ensure that the O50 -free invariant is satisfied. For this purpose, we update G as follows. First, we let O50 denote the set of all DH-obstruction on at most 50 vertices of G. Clearly, O50 can be computed in polynomial time and it holds that |O50 | ≤ nO(1) . Now, we construct an instance of Weighted 50-Hitting Set, where the universe is V (G), the family of all setsof size at most 50 in O50 , and the weight function is w0 . Since each DH-obstruction must be intersected, therefore, the optimal solution to our Weighted 50-Hitting Set instance is at most opt. By using the standard c0 -approximation algorithm for Weighted c0 -Hitting Set [27], which is suitable for any fixed constant c0 , we obtain a set S ⊆ V (G) that intersects all the DH-obstruction in O50 and whose weight is at most 50 · opt. Having the set S, we remove its vertices from G to obtain the graph G0 , and w0 = w|G0 . Now that the O50 -free invariant is satisfied, we can call Gen-DHD-APPROX on (G0 , w0 ) and to the outputted solution, we add w(S) and S. We note that during the execution of the algorithm, we update G0 only by removing vertices from it, and thus it will always be safe to assume that the O50 -free invariant is satisfied. Now, by Lemma 51, we obtain a solution of weight at most d2 · log3 n · opt + 50 · opt ≤ d · log3 n · opt, then combined with S, it allows us to conclude the correctness of Theorem 4. Termination. Observe that due to Lemma 50, we can test in polynomial time, if our current graph G0 is of the special kind that can be partitioned into a biclique and a distance hereditary graph: we examine each maximal biclique of G0 , and check whether after its removal we obtain a distance hereditary graph. Once G0 becomes such a graph that consists of a biclique and a distance hereditary graph, we solve the instance (G0 , w0 ) by calling algorithm DHD-APPROX. Observe that this returns a solution of value O(log2 n · opt) which is also O(log3 n · opt). Recursive Call. Similar to the case for WCVD, instead computing a balanced separators with a maximal clique and some additional vertices, here we find a balanced separator that comprises of a biclique and some additional, but small number of vertices. Existence of such a separator is guaranteed by Lemma 52. From Lemma 50, it follows that the graph with no DH-obstruction of size at most 50 contains at most O(n3 ) maximal bicliques and they can enumerated in polynomial time. We use the weighted variant of Lemma 3.8 from [26] in Lemma 52. The proof of Lemma 52 remains exactly the same as that in Lemma 3.8 of [26]. Lemma 52 (Lemma 3.8 [26]). Let G0 be a connected graph on n0 vertices not containing any DH-obstruction of size at most 50 and w : V (G) → R be a weight function. Then in polynomial time we can find a balanced vertex separator K ] X such that the following conditions are satisfied. • K is a biclique in G or an empty set; • w(X) ≤ q · log n0 · opt, where q is some fixed constant. Here, opt is the weight of the optimum solution to WDHVD of G. We note that we used the O(log n0 )-factor approximation algorithm by Leighton and Rao √ [28] in Lemma 52 to find the balanced separator, instead of the O( log n0 )-factor approximation algorithm by Feige et al. [12], as the algorithm by Feige et al. is randomized. Let us also remark that if K is a biclique, then there is a bipartition of the vertices in K into A ] B, where both A and B are non-empty, which will be crucially required in later arguments. Next, we apply in Lemma 52 to (G0 , w0 ) to obtain a pair (K, X). Since K ∪ X is a balanced separator for G0 , we can partitionSthe set of connected components of G0 \ (M ∪ S) into two sets, S A1 and A2 , such that for V1 = A∈A1 V (A) and V2 = A∈A2 V (A) it holds that n1 , n2 ≤ 23 n0 where n1 = |V1 | and n2 = |V2 |. We then define two inputs of (the general case) WDHVD: I1 = (G0 [V1 ], wV0 1 ) and I2 = (G0 [V2 ], wV0 2 ). Let opt1 and opt2 denote the optimal solutions to 30  I1 and I2 , respectively. Observe that since V1 ∩ V2 = ∅, it holds that opt1 + opt2 ≤ opt. We solve each of the two sub-instances by recursively calling algorithm Gen-DH-APPROX. By the inductive hypothesis, we obtain two sets, S1 and S2 , such that G0 [V1 ] \ S1 and G0 [V2 ] \ S2 are both distance hereditary graphs, and w0 (S1 ) ≤ d2 · log3 n1 · opt1 and w0 (S2 ) ≤ d2 · log3 n2 · opt2 . Now, if K were an empty set then it is easy to see that X ∪ S1 ∪ S2 is a feasible solution to the instance (G0 , w0 ). Now let us bound the total weight of this subset. w0 (X ∪ S1 ∪ S2 ) ≤ w0 (X) + w0 (S1 ) + w0 (S2 ) ≤ q · log n0 · opt + d2 · (log3 n1 · opt1 + log3 n2 · opt2 ) Recall that n1 , n2 ≤ 23 n0 and opt1 + opt2 ≤ opt. < q · log n0 · opt + < d2 · log3 n0 · opt  d 2  · log3 23 n0 · opt  The more interesting case is when K is a biclique. Then, we first remove X ∪ S1 ∪ S2 from the graph, and note that the above bound also holds for this subset of vertices. Now observe that the graph G00 = G0 − (X ∪ S1 ∪ S2 ) can be partitioned into a biclique K and a distance hereditary graph H = G[(V1 ∪ V2 ) \ (S1 ∪ S2 )], along with the weight function w00 = wV0 (G00 ) . Thus we have an instance of the Biclique + Distance Hereditary Graph spacial case of WDHVD. Furthermore, note that we retained a fractional feasible solution x to the LP of the initial input G0 , w0 , which upperbounds the value of a fractional feasible solution x00 to the LP of the instance G00 , w00 . We apply the algorithm DHD-APPROX on (G00 , w00 , K, H, x00 ) which outputs a solution S such that w00 (S) = w0 (S) = O(log2 n · opt). Observe that, any obstruction in G0 \ S is either completely contained in G0 [V1 \ S], or completely contained in G0 [V2 \ S] or it contains at least one vertex from K. This observation, b is a distance hereditary graph, implies along with the fact that G0 [(V1 ∪ V2 ∪ K) \ (S1 ∪ S2 ∪ S)] 0 b Thus, it is now sufficient that G \ T is a distance hereditary graph where T = X ∪ S1 ∪ S2 ∪ S. d 0 0 3 to show that w (T ) ≤ 2 · (log n ) · opt. By the discussion above, we have that DHD-APPROX returns a solution of value c log2 n · opt, where c is some constant. w0 (T ) ≤ w0 (S) + w0 (S1 ) + w0 (S2 ) + w0 (Sb1 ) + w0 (Sb2 ) ≤ q · log n0 · opt + d2 · (log3 n1 · opt1 + log3 n2 · opt2 ) + c · log2 n0 · opt. Recall that n1 , n2 ≤ 23 n0 and opt1 + opt2 ≤ opt. Thus, we have that w0 (T ) ≤ q · log n0 · opt + d2 · (log3 23 n0 ) · opt + c · log2 n0 · opt ≤ d2 · log3 n0 · opt + (c − d log 32 ) · log2 n0 · opt. Overall, we conclude that to ensure that w0 (T ) ≤ that c − d log 32 ≤ 0, which can be done by fixing d =  7  d 2  · log3 n0 · opt, it is sufficient to ensure  c . log 32  Conclusion  In this paper, we designed O(logO(1) n)-approximation algorithms for Weighted Planar F Minor-Free Deletion, Weighted Chordal Vertex Deletion and Weighted Distance Hereditary Vertex Deletion (or Weighted Rankwidth-1 Vertex Deletion). These algorithms are the first ones for these problems whose approximation factors are bounded by O(logO(1) n). Along the way, we also obtained a constant-factor approximation algorithm for Weighted Multicut on chordal graphs. All our algorithms are based on the same recursive scheme. We believe that the scope of applicability of our approach is very wide. We would like to conclude our paper with the following concrete open problems. 31  • Does Weighted Planar F -Minor-Free Deletion admit a constant-factor approximation algorithm? Furthermore, studying families F that do not necessarily contain a planar graph is another direction for further research. • Does Weighted Chordal Vertex Deletion admit a constant-factor approximation algorithm? • Does Weighted Rankwidth-η Vertex Deletion admit a O(logO(1) n)-factor approximation algorithm? • On which other graph classes Weighted Multicut admits a constant-factor approximation?  References [1] A. Agrawal, D. Lokshtanov, P. Misra, S. Saurabh, and M. Zehavi, Feedback vertex set inspired kernel for chordal vertex deletion, in Proceedings of the 28th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2017, pp. 1383–1398. [2] V. Bafna, P. Berman, and T. Fujito, A 2-approximation algorithm for the undirected feedback vertex set problem, SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 12 (1999), pp. 289–297. [3] N. Bansal, D. Reichman, and S. W. Umboh, LP-based robust algorithms for noisy minor-free and bounded treewidth graphs, in Proceedings of the 28th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2017, pp. 1964–1979. [4] N. Bansal and S. W. Umboh, Personal communication., 2017. [5] R. Bar-Yehuda and S. Even, A linear-time approximation algorithm for the weighted vertex cover problem, Journal of Algorithms, 2 (1981), pp. 198–203. [6] R. Bar-Yehuda, D. Geiger, J. Naor, and R. M. Roth, Approximation algorithms for the feedback vertex set problem with applications to constraint satisfaction and Bayesian inference, SIAM Journal on Computing, 27 (1998), pp. 942–959. [7] R. B. Borie, R. G. Parker, and C. A. Tovey, Automatic generation of linear-time algorithms from predicate calculus descriptions of problems on recursively constructed graph families, Algorithmica, 7 (1992), pp. 555–581. [8] B. Courcelle, J. A. Makowsky, and U. Rotics, Linear time solvable optimization problems on graphs of bounded clique-width, Theory of Computing Systems, 33 (2000), pp. 125–150. [9] B. Courcelle and S. Olariu, Upper bounds to the clique width of graphs, Discrete Applied Mathematics, 101 (2000), pp. 77–114. [10] R. Diestel, Graph Theory, 4th Edition, vol. 173 of Graduate texts in mathematics, Springer, 2012. [11] M. Farber, On diameters and radii of bridged graphs, Discrete Mathematics, 73 (1989), pp. 249–260. [12] U. Feige, M. Hajiaghayi, and J. R. Lee, Improved approximation algorithms for minimum weight vertex separators, SIAM Journal on Computing, 38 (2008), pp. 629–657.  32  [13] S. Fiorini, G. Joret, and U. Pietropaoli, Hitting diamonds and growing cacti, in Proceedings of the 14th Conference on Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimization (IPCO), vol. 6080, 2010, pp. 191–204. [14] F. V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, N. Misra, G. Philip, and S. Saurabh, Hitting forbidden minors: Approximation and kernelization, SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 30 (2016), pp. 383–410. [15] F. V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, N. Misra, and S. Saurabh, Planar f-deletion: Approximation, kernelization and optimal fpt algorithms, in Proceedings of IEEE 53rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2012, pp. 470–479. [16] F. V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, V. Raman, and S. Saurabh, Bidimensionality and EPTAS, in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2011, pp. 748–759. [17] F. V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, and S. Saurabh, Bidimensionality and geometric graphs, in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2012, pp. 1563–1575. [18] F. V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, S. Saurabh, and D. M. Thilikos, Bidimensionality and kernels, in Proceedings of the 21st ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2010, pp. 503–510. [19] N. Garg, V. V. Vazirani, and M. Yannakakis, Approximate max-flow min-(multi)cut theorems and their applications, SIAM Journal on Computing, 25 (1996), pp. 235–251. [20] D. Golovin, V. Nagarajan, and M. Singh, Approximating the k-multicut problem, in ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2006, pp. 621–630. [21] M. C. Golumbic, Algorithmic Graph Theory and Perfect Graphs, Academic Press, New York, 1980. [22] P. L. Hammer and F. Maffray, Completely separable graphs, Discrete applied mathematics, 27 (1990), pp. 85–99. [23] P. Hlinený, S. Oum, D. Seese, and G. Gottlob, Width parameters beyond tree-width and their applications, The Computer Journal, 51 (2008), pp. 326–362. [24] E. Howorka, A characterization of distance-hereditary graphs, The quarterly journal of mathematics, 28 (1977), pp. 417–420. [25] B. M. P. Jansen and M. Pilipczuk, Approximation and kernelization for chordal vertex deletion, in Proceedings of the 28th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2017, pp. 1399–1418. [26] E. J. Kim and O. Kwon, A Polynomial Kernel for Distance-Hereditary Vertex Deletion, ArXiv e-prints, (2016). [27] J. Kleinberg and E. Tardos, Algorithm design, Addison-Wesley, 2005. [28] T. Leighton and S. Rao, Multicommodity max-flow min-cut theorems and their use in designing approximation algorithms, Journal of the ACM, 46 (1999), pp. 787–832. [29] J. M. Lewis and M. Yannakakis, The node-deletion problem for hereditary properties is NP-complete, Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 20 (1980), pp. 219–230. 33  [30] C. Lund and M. Yannakakis, The approximation of maximum subgraph problems, in Proceedings of the 20nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), vol. 700, 1993, pp. 40–51. [31] J. W. Moon and L. Moser, On cliques in graphs, Israel journal of Mathematics, 3 (1965), pp. 23–28. [32] G. L. Nemhauser and L. E. Trotter, Jr., Properties of vertex packing and independence system polyhedra, Mathematical Programming, 6 (1974), pp. 48–61. [33] S. Oum, Rank-width and vertex-minors, Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 95 (2005), pp. 79–100. [34]  , Approximating rank-width and clique-width quickly, ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 5 (2008).  [35]  , Rank-width: Algorithmic and structural results, CoRR, abs/1601.03800 (2016).  [36] S. Oum and P. D. Seymour, Approximating clique-width and branch-width, Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 96 (2006), pp. 514–528. [37] N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour, Graph minors. v. excluding a planar graph, Journal of Combinatorial Theory Series B, 41 (1986), pp. 92–114. [38] N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour, Graph minors .xiii. the disjoint paths problem, Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 63 (1995), pp. 65–110. [39]  , Graph minors. XX. wagner’s conjecture, Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 92 (2004), pp. 325–357.  [40] H. Sachs, On the berge conjecture concerning perfect graphs, Combinatorial Structures and their Applications, 37 (1970), p. 384. [41] S. Tsukiyama, M. Ide, H. Ariyoshi, and I. Shirakawa, A new algorithm for generating all the maximal independent sets, SIAM Journal on Computing, 6 (1977), pp. 505–517. [42] M. Yannakakis, The effect of a connectivity requirement on the complexity of maximum subgraph problems, Journal of the ACM, 26 (1979), pp. 618–630. [43]  , Some open problems in approximation, in Proceedings of 2nd Italian Conference on Algorithms and Complexity, Second (CIAC), 1994, pp. 33–39.  34

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 8. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
