Title: 

Authors: Unknown
Published: 
Categories: 3
ArXiv ID: hf_997

Abstract:
Time-Varying Control Scheduling in Complex Dynamical Networks Erfan Nozari1,* , Fabio Pasqualetti2 , and Jorge Cortés1  arXiv:1611.06485v2 [math.OC] 11 Nov 2017  1  Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California, San Diego 2 Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Riverside * Corresponding author (email: enozari@ucsd.edu)  Abstract: Despite extensive research and remarkable advancements in the control of complex networks, time-invariant control schedules (TICS) still dominate the literature. This is both due to their simplicity and the fact that the potential benefits of time-varying control schedules (TVCS) have remained largely uncharacterized. Yet, TVCS have the potential to significantly enhance network controllability over TICS, especially when applied to large networks. In this paper we study networks with linear and discrete-time dynamics and analyze the role of network structure in TVCS. Through the analysis of a new scale-dependent notion of nodal communicability, we show that optimal TVCS involves the actuation of the most central nodes at appropriate spatial scales at all times. Consequently, we show that it is the scale-heterogeneity of the central-nodes in a network that determine whether, and to what extent, TVCS outperforms conventional policies based on TICS. Several analytical results and numerical examples support and illustrate this relationship.  Many natural and man-made systems, ranging from the nervous system to power and transportation grids to societies, exhibit dynamic behaviors that evolve over a sparse and complex network. The ability to control such network dynamics is not only a theoretically challenging problem but also a barrier to fundamental breakthroughs across science and engineering. While multiple studies have addressed various aspects of this problem, several fundamental questions remain unanswered, including to what extent the capability of controlling a different set of nodes over time can improve the controllability of large-scale, complex networked systems. Controllability of a dynamical network (i.e., a network that supports the temporal evolution of a well-defined set of nodal states) is classically defined as the possibility of steering its state arbitrarily around the state space through the application of external inputs to (i.e., actuation of) certain  control nodes [1]. This raises a fundamental question: how does the choice of control nodes affect network controllability? Hereafter, we refer to this as the control scheduling problem [2–4]. Notice that in this classical setting, attention is only paid to the possibility of arbitrarily steering the network state, but not to the difficulty and energy cost of doing so. This has motivated the introduction of several controllability metrics to quantify the required effort in the control scheduling problem [5–9]. While a comprehensive solution has remained elusive, these works have collectively revealed the role of several factors in the control scheduling problem such as the network size and structure [6], nodal dynamics [3] and centralities [2, 7], the number of control nodes [6], and the choice of controllability metric [8]. The majority of the above literature, however, implicitly relies on the assumption of TICS, namely, that the control node(s) is fixed over time. Depending on the specific network structure, this assumption may come at the expense of a significant limitation on its controllability, especially for large-scale systems where distant nodes inevitably exist relative to any control point. Intuitively, the possibility of TVCS, namely, the ability to control different nodes at different times, allows for targeted interventions at different network locations and can ultimately decrease the control effort to accomplish a desired task. On the other hand, from a practical standpoint, the implementation of TVCS requires the ability to geographically relocate actuators or the presence of actuation mechanisms at different, ideally all, network nodes, and more sophisticated control policies. This leads to a critical trade-off between the benefits of TVCS and its implementation costs which has not received enough, if any, attention in the literature. The significant potential of time-varying schedules for control (and also sensing, which has a dual interpretation to control) has led to the design of (sub)optimal sensor and control scheduling algorithms in recent years [10–13]. While constituting a notable leap forward and the benchmark for the methods developed in this paper, these works  are oblivious to the fundamental question of whether, and to what extent, TVCS provides an improvement in network controllability compared to TICS. Our previous work [14] has studied the former question (i.e., whether TVCS provides any improvement over TICS) in the case of undirected networks, but did not consider general controllability metrics or, more importantly, addressed the latter question of how large the relative improvement in network controllability is. Given the trade-off between benefits and costs of TVCS, a clear answer to this question is vital for the practical application of TVCS in real-world complex networks. In this paper, we address these two questions in the context of directed discrete-time linear network dynamics. We show that 2k-communicability, a new notion of nodal centrality that we define here, plays a fundamental role in TVCS. This notion measures the centrality of each node in the network at different spatial scales. Based on the distinction between local and global nodal centralities, we show that the optimal control point at every time instance is the node with the largest centrality at the appropriate scale (i.e., the node with the largest 2k-communicability at an appropriate k). Accordingly, our main conclusion is that the benefit of TVCS is directly related to the scaleheterogeneity of central nodes in the network: the most benefit is gained in networks where the highest centrality is attained by various nodes at different spatial scales, while this benefit starts to decay as fewer nodes dominate the network at all scales. We provide analytical results and extensive case studies of synthetic and real networks to support and illustrate this conclusion.  1  Results  Model  time according to x(k + 1) = Ax(k) + b(k)u(k),  k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}, (1)  where u(k) ∈ R is the control input and b(k) ∈ Rn is the time-varying input vector (both at time k) and K is the time horizon. For simplicity of exposition, we consider only one control input at a time, but the discussion is generalizable to multi-input networks (Supplementary Note 6). If ιk ∈ {1, . . . , n} is the index of the node to which the control signal u(k) is applied at time k, then b(k) is equal to the ιk ’th column of the identity matrix. The purpose of applying the control input {u(k)}K−1 k=0 is to steer the network state from its initial state x(0) = x0 to a desired state x(K) = xf . If this is possible for any x0 and xf , (1) is called “controllable”. It is well-known [15] that this is the case if and only if the “controllability Gramian”  WK =  K−1 X  Ak b(K−1−k)b(K−1−k)T (AT )k ,  (2)  k=0  is invertible, in which case the minimal energy required for steering the network from the origin x0 = 0 to any xf equals xfT WK−1 xf (Methods, xfT and WK−1 denote the transpose of the vector xf and the inverse of the matrix WK , respectively).1 Therefore, the unit-energy reachable set (namely, the set of all xf such that xfT WK−1 xf ≤ 1) is a hyper-ellipsoid, the direction and length of the axes of which are given by the eigenvectors and (square root of) the eigenvalues of WK , respectively (Methods). Intuitively, the “larger” the reachability hyper-ellipsoid, the “more controllable” the network dynamics (equation (1)) are. To quantify how large the hyper-ellipsoid is, several measures based on the eigenvalues of WK have been proposed in the literature [6, 8, 16], including the trace of WK (denoted as tr(WK ), measuring average squared length of hyper-ellipsoid axes), the trace of WK−1 (denoted as tr(WK−1 ), measuring average control energy over random target states), the smallest eigenvalue of WK (denoted as λmin (WK ), measuring worst-case controllability), and the determinant of WK (denoted as det(WK ), measuring the hyper-ellipsoid volume). Each metric has its own benefits and limitations, on which we elaborate more in the following section.  We consider a network of n nodes that communicate, in discrete time, over a weighted (in general directed) graph G = (V, E, A), where V = {1, . . . , n} and E ⊆ V × V denote the set of nodes and edges, respectively, and A is the adjacency matrix such that for any i , j ∈ V , aij ≥ 0 denotes the weight of the edge from node j to node i (see Supplementary Note 2 for methods of obtaining A from network connectivity structure). Each node i has a state value xi ∈ R that evolves over time through the interaction of node i with its neighbors in G. We assume each node has linear and time-invariant dynamics and one node can 1 Similar expression holds for arbitrary x , but it is customary to 0 be controlled exogenously at each time. Therefore, the evaluate control energy starting from the network’s unforced equiliboverall network state x = [x1 . . . xn ]T ∈ Rn evolves over rium x = 0.  Time-Varying vs. Scheduling  Time-Invariant Control all the measures rely heavily on this least-controllable direc-  Assume f (WK ) ≥ 0 is any of the aforementioned controllability measures. We seek to choose the control nodes K−1 {ιk }K−1 k=0 (or, equivalently, {b(k)}k=0 ) optimally. The conventional approach in the literature [2–9] to this problem is to reduce the search space to constant choices of the control node (i.e., ι0 = ι1 = · · · = ιK−1 = i ) and then choose i such that f (WK ) is maximized. This, namely, the time-invariant control scheduling (TICS) problem, can be formally specified as max  f (WK )  s.t.  ι0 = · · · = ιK−1  ι0 ,...,ιK−1 ∈V  (3a)  tion, while tr(WK ) trades this off for average controllability in all directions in the state space. Despite the significant increase in size and complexity, the same core principles outlined above apply to controllability of real-world networks. The large size of these networks, however, imposes new constraints on the choice of the controllability measure f that make the use of f (·) = λmin (·), tr((·)−1 )−1 , and det(·) numerically infeasible and theoretically over-conservative (Methods). As a result, we resort to the particular choice of controllability measure f (WK ) = tr(WK ),  (6)  (3b) for networks beyond n ' 15. Since this measure has the smallest sensitivity to the choice of {ιk }K−1 k=0 (Figure 1(b)), The main advantage of TICS is its simplicity, from thewe expect any network that benefits from TVCS using the oretical, computational, and implementation perspectives. choice of equation (6) to also benefit from it using other However, this simplicity comes at a possibly significant cost Gramian-based measures (while the converse is not necesin terms of network controllability, compared to the case sarily true, i.e., there are networks that significantly benewhere the control nodes {ιk }K−1 k=0 are independently chofit from TVCS using other measures but show no benefit sen, namely, in terms of tr(WK )). Figure 1(c) illustrates an air transmax f (WK ). (4) portation network among the busiest airports in the United ι0 ,...,ιK−1 ∈V States, comprising of n = 500 nodes. The size of the This approach, namely, time-varying control scheduling network makes the use of f (·) = λmin (·), tr((·)−1 )−1 , and (TVCS), is at least as good as TICS, but has the potential det(·) infeasible, but using the choice of equation (6) we to improve network controllability. Figure 1(a-b) illustrates see a χ ' 20% improvement in the controllability of the a small network of n = 5 nodes together with the optimal network, verifying our expectation about the benefits of values of equations (3) and (4) and the relative advantage TVCS. of TVCS over TICS, defined as In spite of this potential benefit, TVCS has usually higher TV TI f −f computational and implementation costs that need to be χ = max TI max . (5) fmax taken into account. These include the higher computaThree observations are worth highlighting. First, the value tional cost of computing the optimal TVCS, and that of of χ is extremely dependent on the choice of controllability installing an actuator at several (ideally all) nodes of the measure f , and different choices lead to orders of magni- network. Further, not all networks benefit from TVCS tude change in χ. Second, the relative advantage of TVCS alike. A simple directed chain network with the same size over TICS is significant for all choices of the controllabil- as that of Figure 1(a) gains absolutely no benefit from ity measure, with the minimum improvement of χ = 35% TVCS, independently of the choice of controllability meafor the choice of f (·) = tr(·).2 Finally, even with opti- sure f (Figure 1(d-e)). Similarly, χ values of 0 are also mal TVCS, λmin (WK ) is orders of magnitude less than 1, observed in larger, complex networks, indicating that the indicating the inevitable existence of very hard-to-reach di- optimal TVCS involves the control of a single node at all rections in the state space.3 Note that except for tr(WK ), times (Figure 1(f)). These observations collectively raise a fundamental ques2 The fact that f (·) = tr(·) results in the smallest value of χ relation: which networks do and which networks do not benefit tive to other measures is consistently observed in synthetic and realworld networks, and stems from the fact that tr(WK ) has the smallest from TVCS, and how can one distinguish between them? For ease of reference, we call these networks as class V and sensitivity (greatest robustness) to the choice of control schedule. 3 It is well-known [6] that worst-case controllability improves if a I, respectively. In other words, a network belongs to class larger number of nodes can be simultaneously controlled. However, V if it has χ > 0 and to class I otherwise. In the followthis examples shows that efficient controllability cannot be maintained in all directions in the state space even using TVCS in very small ing, we restrict our attention to the choice of controllability measure in equation (6) due to its applicability to all netnetworks with control over 1/5 = 20% of the nodes.  work sizes, and carry a thorough analysis of its properties in ease of reference, let r (k) ∈ V denote the index of the order to address the aforementioned fundamental question node that has the largest value Ri (k). Formally, r (k) = arg maxi Ri (k). Then, according to the discussion above, in the theory of dynamical networks. the relation ι∗k = r (K − 1 − k),  2k-Communicability in Dynamic Networks We introduce here a new notion of nodal communicability which plays a pivotal role in distinguishing between class I and class V networks. It can be shown that the solution to TVCS (equation (4)) with f (·) = tr(·) consists of the indices of the largest diagonal entries of (Ak )T Ak (Methods). In other words, for any k, the optimal control node ι∗K−1−k at time K −1−k is precisely the index of the largest diagonal entry of (Ak )T Ak . This motivates our definition of the 2k-communicability of a node i as Ri (k) = ((Ak )T Ak )ii ,  i ∈ V,  k ≥ 0.  (7)  It can be shown that as k → ∞, Ri (k) results in the same rankings of the nodes as the left eigenvector centrality squared, which is thus taken as the definition of Ri (∞) (Methods and Supplementary Note 1). Figure 2(a-b) illustrates the evolution of Ri (k) as a function of k for all i ∈ V for a sample network of n = 20 nodes. Perhaps the most salient property of 2k-communicability is the extent to which it relies on the local interactions among the nodes. Recall, cf. [17], that for any k, the (i , j) entry of Ak equals the total number of paths of length k from node i to j (if the graph is weighted, each path counts as its weight, equal to the product of the weights of its edges). From equation (7), we see that Ri (k) then equals the sum of the squares of the total (weighted) number of paths of length k ending in node i . In other words, Ri (k) only depends on connections of node i with its k-hop outneighbors, and is independent of the rest of the network. Therefore, Ri (k) is a local notion of centrality for small k and it incorporates more global information as k grows. In particular, Ri (k) is closely related to • the out-degree centrality of node i for k = 1; • the left eigenvector centrality of node i for k → ∞; (Methods and Supplementary Note 1). This scaling property of 2k-communicability is illustrated in Figure 2(a-d) for an example network of n = 100 nodes.  is the core connection between 2k-communicability and TVCS. From this, we see that the optimal TVCS involves the application of u(0) to the node r (K − 1) with the highest global centrality and gradually moving the control point until we apply u(K − 2) to the node r (1) with the highest local centrality.4 The intuition behind this procedure is simple. At k = 0, the control input has enough time to propagate through the network, which is why the highest globally-central node should be controlled. As we reach the control horizon K, the control input has only a few time steps to disseminate through the network, hence the optimality of locally-central nodes. The role of Ri (k) in TVCS has an immediate implication for distinguishing between class V and I networks: a network belongs to class V if the nodes with the highest Ri (1) and Ri (K − 1) are distinct (Supplementary Note 3). Consider again the networks of Figure 1(c and f). Here, the color intensity of each node indicates its value Ri (1) while its size corresponds to its value Ri (K − 1). Clearly, the first few largest and darkest nodes are distinct in Figure 1(c), while there is a close correlation between nodal size and darkness in Figure 1(f), illustrating the root cause of their difference in benefiting from TVCS. If a network has r (0) = r (K − 1), it is still possible that the network belongs to class V. In fact, about half of the networks with r (0) = r (K − 1) still belong to V (Figure 3(a)). However, these networks have a value of χ of no more than 3% on average, and in turn this value quickly decreases with the dominance of the node r (0) over the rest of the network nodes (Figure 3(b)). This is a strong indication that, for most practical purposes, the test based on 2k-communicability is a valid indicator of whether a network benefits from TVCS. Furthermore, in the case of undirected networks, it is possible to analytically prove that a network belongs to class I (χ = 0) if certain conditions based on the eigen-decomposition of the adjacency matrix A are satisfied. As shown in Supplementary Note 4, these conditions include:  Distinguishing Between Class V and I Net(i) Networks where the eigenvector centrality of one node is significantly higher than the rest of the network, and works Based on 2k-Communicability 4 Notice that the control node at time K −1 is arbitrary as R (0) = We next use the scaling property of 2k-communicability i to unveil network structures that benefit from TVCS. For 1 for all i.  (a) TV TI χ fmax f (·) fmax tr(·) 2.00 2.70 0.35 tr((·)−1 )−1 1.26×10−7 8.22×10−4 6.5×103 det(·) 9.90×10−11 7.42×10−10 6.49 λmin (·) 1.27×10−7 1.10×10−4 8.7×102  (b)  (c)  (d)  TV χ TI fmax f (·) fmax tr(·) 5 5 0 tr((·)−1 )−1 0.2 0.2 0 det(·) 1 1 0 λmin (·) 1 1 0  (e) (f)  Figure 1: Advantage of TVCS in dynamic networks. (a) A small example network of n = 5 nodes. The thickness of each edge (i , j) illustrates its weight aij . (b) The optimal values of TICS and TVCS (equations (3) and (4), respectively) and the relative TVCS advantage (equation (5)) for the network in (a). (c) An air transportation network among the busiest airports in the United States (see ’air500’ in Table 1 for details). The network is undirected, and the dynamical adjacency matrix A is computed from static connectivity using the transmission method (Supplementary Note 2). This is an example of a network that significantly benefits from TVCS with χ ' 20%. (d) A small example network of the same size as (a) but with no benefit from TVCS. (e) The optimal values of TICS and TVCS (equations (3) and (4), respectively) and the relative TVCS advantage (equation (5)) for the network in (d). We see that the network does not benefit from TVCS independently of the choice of controllability metric. (f) A social network of students at the University of California, Irvine (see ’UCI Forum’ in Table 1 for details). Similar to (c), the network is undirected and the adjacency matrix is computed using the transmission method (Supplementary Note 2). This network, however, does not benefit from TVCS (χ = 0). In (c) and (f), the controllability measure of equation (6) is used due to the large size of the network. In both cases, the color intensity and size of nodes represent their values of Ri (1) and Ri (K − 1), respectively (K = 10). While there is a close correlation between nodal size and color intensity in (f) (i.e., the darkest nodes are also the largest), this is not the case in (c), which is the root cause for the difference in their χ-values.  (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)  (f)  Figure 2: 2k-communicability of dynamical networks. (a) An example network of n = 20 nodes for illustration of the dependence on k of nodal 2k-communicabilities. The thickness of the edges is proportional to their weights. (b) The evolution of the functions {Ri (k)}ni=1 . Although these functions are originally only defined over integer values of k, we have extended their domain to real numbers for better illustration of their crossings and oscillatory behavior. Oscillatory behavior only arises when A has complex-valued eigenvalues (otherwise, Ri (k) is strictly convex). (c) An example network of n = 100 nodes for illustration of the scaling property of 2k-communicability. The node whose 2k-communicabilities are to be computed (i.e., “node i ”) is depicted in red. (d-f) The 2-, 4-, and 14-communicability of the node depicted in red, as determined by its 1-, 2-, and 7-hop incoming paths. We see that Ri (1) only depends on the immediate (out-)neighbors of i , but as k grows, Ri (k) encodes more global information.  A fair concern, however, exists regarding the minimum the network dynamics is dominated by the largest eigenvalue of A. A totally disconnected network (with nonzero size of the manipulation needed to make the TVCS allmanifest. If this is excessively high, the prescribed approach self-loops) is the extreme case of such networks. may be infeasible in practice. Nevertheless, among net(ii) Networks where the eigenvector centrality of all works of various size and structure, random manipulations nodes is determined by the weight of their link to the most with norm of about 10% of the norm of A are on average central one. The canonical example is a star network with sufficient (Figure 4). Here, we see that the largest manipuno (or small) self-loops. lations are needed for manifest subnetworks of about 10% (iii) Networks where A has three distinct eigenvalues the total size of the network. This is because when the (e.g., complete bipartite networks, connected strongly reg- size of the manifest subnetwork is extremely small, manipular networks, and some cones on strongly regular graphs) ulations are focused on this small subset of nodes and thus and r (0) = r (∞). Star networks are also the canonical more efficient, while with extremely large manifest subnetworks, the majority of the nodes are accessible for control example here. and there is little restriction on the TVCS. The general abstraction from these cases is that a network Finally, Figure 4 also shows the comparison, in terms of belongs to class I if it contains a sufficiently distinct central controllability, of the manipulation-based approach against node, which reinforces our main conclusion that V is the the alternative approach of selecting an optimal TVCS with class of networks with multiple scale-heterogeneous cen- the additional constraint that control nodes must be mantral nodes.The inclusion relationships between the various ifest (without any manipulation of the dynamics), which classes of networks introduced in this section are summa- results in a sub-optimal all-manifest TVCS. For the comrized in Figure 3(c). parison to be fair, we normalize each network by its spectral radius (largest magnitude of its eigenvalues), and then The Effects of Network Manipulation on Op- compare the optimal value of their TVCS (equation (4)). We see that the amount of relative advantage produced timal Control Scheduling by manifest subnetwork manipulation is comparable to the In many real-world applications of control scheduling, not relative size of the manipulation, except for medium-sized all the nodes are available/accessible for control. In this manifest subnetworks (5 ∼ 20% of nodes), where the macase, only a “manifest” subset of the nodes are available for nipulation advantage is about two times its size. the application of control inputs, while the remaining nodes are “latent” to the controller. The natural solution would TVCS in Synthetic and Real Networks then be to choose the control nodes optimally among the manifest nodes. Another solution, however, is to manipu- Here, we discuss the benefits of TVCS and its relation to late the dynamics among the manifest nodes such that the network structure for several examples of synthetic and real optimal control nodes (when computed without any restric- networks. We start with the classical deterministic examtions on control scheduling) lie among the manifest nodes ples of undirected line, ring, and star networks (Figure 5). Due to their simple structure, the 2k-communicabilities of for all time, provided that such manipulation is possible. Analytically, we can guarantee that the latter scheme these networks can be analytically computed in closed form (manipulating the manifest-manifest dynamics) can always (Supplementary Note 7). Using these results, it follows enforce an all-manifest (i.e., entirely composed of man- that for the line and star networks, the optimal control ifest nodes) optimal TVCS, provided that the manipula- node is always the center node (or any of the two center tion is sufficiently strong and not acyclic (Supplementary nodes if a line has even number of nodes), while the optiNote 5). Both requirements have clear interpretations. mal control node is arbitrary in a ring network. Notice that First, depending on how large the size of the manifest in all cases, it is the homogeneity of these networks that subnetwork is and how central its nodes already are (pre- results in a single node having the greatest centrality at manipulation), larger manipulation may be necessary to all scales (see Supplementary Note 5 for examples of nonturn them into central nodes at various scales (i.e., r (k) homogeneous star networks that have scale-heterogeneous for k = {0, . . . , K − 1}). Second, for the manifest nodes central nodes and thus belong to class V). Next, we analyze the role of TVCS in three classes of to become central at arbitrarily global scales (i.e., r (k) for k ∼ K → ∞), the manipulation must contain paths of ar- probabilistic complex networks that are widely used to capbitrarily long lengths, which are absent in acyclic networks. ture the behavior of various dynamical networks. These  Dynamical Networks  I  V r(0) = r(K - 1) ( Thm. S3.1)  Thm. S4.2 Benefit from TVCS  (a)  (b)  (c)  Figure 3: The role of 2k-communicability in distinguishing between networks of class V (χ > 0) and I (χ = 0). (a) The proportion of networks in V and I for 104 randomly generated networks. While more than 80% of all networks belong to class V, this number drops to less than 50% among networks with r (1) = r (K − 1) (i.e., networks where the same node has the greatest local and global centralities). (b) The average χ-value of networks with r (1) = r (K − 1) as a function of the dominance of the node r (0). The vertical bars represent one standard deviation intervals. For the node r (0), its dominance (over the rest of the network) is a measure of how distinctly Rr (0) (1) and Rr (0) (K − 1) are larger than Ri (1) and Ri (K − 1), respectively, for i 6= r (0) (Methods). In both (a) and (b), 104 random connectivity matrices are generated with logarithmically-uniform n in [101 , 103 ], uniform sparsity p in [0, 1], and uniform pairwise connectivity in [0, 1], and then transformed to adjacency matrices A using the transmission method (Supplementary Note 2), and K = 10. (c) A Venn diagram illustrating the decomposition of dynamical networks based on the extent to which they benefit from TVCS. The color gradient is a depiction of this extent, as measured by χ (equation (5)), where darker areas correspond to higher χ. As shown in (a) and (b), the class of networks for which r (0) 6= r (K − 1) is only a subset of V but provides a good approximation for it.  include the Erdös-Rényi (ER) random networks, BarabásiAlbert (BA) scale-free networks, and Watts-Strogatz (WS) small-world networks. Each network has its own characteristic properties, and these properties lead to different behaviors under TVCS. The average χ-values of these networks are computed for various values of n and network parameters (Figure 6). For ER networks, χ is in general small, and decays with n. This is because ER networks, especially when n is large, are extremely homogeneous. This homogeneity is further increased during the transmission method, leading to a network matrix A that is extremely insensitive to the choice of control nodes. The connectivity structure of BA networks, in contrast, is extremely inhomogeneous, with one (sometimes 2) highly central nodes and a hierarchy down to peripheral leafs. As one would expect, this implies a small χ-value since the center node has the highest centrality at all scales (Supplementary Figure S1). However, when the connectivity matrix is transformed to A using the transmission method, the incoming links to all nodes are made uniform (adding up to 1). This in turns make the centrality levels of all the nodes comparable, leading to high χ-values observed (notice that the underlying connectivity structures are still highly inhomogeneous, distinguishing them from the ho-  mogeneous ER networks). Notice that as the growth rate ma is increased, smaller networks tend towards complete graphs and high χ values shift to larger n. As our last class of probabilistic networks, WS networks have the broadest range of size-parameter values with significant χ. As one would expect, χ is low near β = 0, 1, corresponding to regular ring lattice and ER networks, respectively. For β ∼ 0.2, there is a sufficiently high probability of having multiple nodes that are close to many rewired links (increasing their centrality), yet there is a low probability that these nodes, and the nodes close to them, are rewired all alike, resulting in heterogeneous central nodes and high χ-values. This heterogeneity is increased with n as larger networks have more possibilities of rewiring every edge. Finally, we used the tools and concepts introduced so far to analyze TVCS in several real-world dynamical networks (Table 1). These networks are chosen from a wide range of application domains, from neuronal networks to transportation and social networks. According to the type of dynamics evolving over each network, we have used either the transmission or induction method to obtain its dynamical adjacency matrix from its static connectivity (Supplementary Note 2).  a a  a a  a  a  a  a  a  a  a a a a  (a)  (b)  a  a a a a  a  a a  (c)  Figure 5: Simple networks with closed-form 2kcommunicabilities. (a) A line network, (b) a ring network, and (c) a star network. All networks are undirected and have homogeneous edge weights a. The 2kcommunicabilities of these networks are analytically computed (Supplementary Note 7), concluding that all networks belong to class I, with the optimal control node depicted in red in each case (the optimal control node is arbitrary in a ring network due to its symmetry).  Figure 4: Manipulation of manifest subnetworks in order to obtain an all-manifest optimal TVCS. The horizontal axis represents the percentage of manifest nodes in the network. In red, we show the minimum size of manipulation needed for the optimal TVCS to only include manifest nodes, relative to the size of the initial adjacency matrix (both measured by induced matrix 2-norm). In blue, we depict the optimal (i.e., maximal) value of tr(WK ) for the case where the minimal manifest manipulation is applied, relative to the maximal value of tr(WK ) subject to the constraint that all the control nodes are manifest (the former is with manipulation and without constraints on the control nodes, while the latter has no manipulation but control node constraints). Results are for 103 random networks of logarithmically-uniform sizes in [101 , 103 ] but otherwise similar to Figure 3. Markers (circles/squares) represent average values and bars represent one standard deviation intervals. In both cases, the overall adjacency matrix is normalized by its spectral radius for fairness of comparison. We see that medium-sized manifest subnetworks (5 ∼ 20%) are the hardest yet most fruitful to manipulate.  We have computed the χ-value for each network using a variable time horizon K ≤ 50, with the results ranging from 0 to more than 30% for different networks. These large variations even within each category signifies both the potential benefits of TVCS and the possibility of its redundancy, a contrast that has been pivotal to our discussion. In the last column, we have also indicated whether the most local and most global central nodes coincide in each network. Recall that this is a sufficient but not necessary condition for a network to be in class V (Figure 3 and Supplementary Note 3). Though only sufficient, this simple metric can correctly classify class members of V from I among these networks, except for the WesternUS power network, for which r (0) = r (K − 1) only marginally holds (the dominance of r (0) is 0) (cf. Figure 3(b)).  Discussion Despite the breadth and depth of existing literature on the controllability of complex networks and control scheduling, the significant potential of TVCS has been greatly overlooked. This work strives to explore the advantages of TVCS in linear dynamical networks and obtaining theoretical and computational relationships between these advantages and network structure. Using Gramian-based measures of controllability, we showed that TVCS can significantly enhance the controllability of many but not all synthetic and real networks. This motivated the pursuit of identifying properties based on network structure that explain when, why, and by how much TVCS is beneficial. Using the newly introduced notion of 2k-  Table 1: Characteristics of the real-world networks studied in the paper n  |E|  Directed  C→A  χ(%)  r (0) = r (K − 1)  Dominance of r (0) (×10−3 )  ref.  BCTNet fMRI Cocomac BCTNet Cat C. elegans  638 58 95 306  37250 1078 2126 2345  N Y Y Y  T T T T  1.8 5.5 1.9 0  N N N Y  N/A N/A N/A 0  [18] [19] [18] [20]  Transportation  air500 airUS airGlobal Chicago  500 1858 7976 1467  5960 28236 30501 2596  N Y Y N  T T T T  22.4 0 0 0  N Y Y Y  N/A 0 0 0  [21] [22] [22] [23, 24]  Gene Regulatory  E. coli  4053  127544  N  T  0  Y  0  [25]  PPI  Yeast Stelzl Figeys Vidal  2361 1706 2239 3133  13828 6207 6452 12875  N Y Y N  T T T T  0 0 0 0  Y Y Y Y  0 0 0 0  [26] [27] [28] [29]  Power  WesternUS  4941  13188  N  T  33.7  Y  0  [20]  Food  Florida LRL  128 183  2106 2494  Y Y  T T  34.6 27.3  N N  N/A N/A  [30] [31]  Social  Facebook group E-mail Southern Women UCI P2P UCI Forum Freeman’s EIES Dolphins  4039 1005 18 1899 899 48 62  176468 25571 278 20296 142760 830 318  N Y N Y N Y N  I I I I I I I  0.4 0 0 0 0 0 0  N Y Y Y Y Y Y  N/A 40.5 1.6 5.5 2.8 1.4 0.7  [32] [33, 34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39]  Trust  Physicians Org. Consult Advice Org. Consult Value Org. R&D Advice Org. R&D Aware  241 46 46 77 77  1098 879 858 2228 2326  Y Y Y Y Y  I I I I I  8.8 0 0 6 × 10−3 0  N Y Y N Y  N/A 0.1 1.2 N/A 0.3  [40] [41] [41] [41] [41]  Category  Name  Neuronal  For each network, we have reported the number of nodes n, number of edges |E| (with each bidirectional edge counted twice), whether the network is directed, the method used for obtaining dynamical adjacency matrix A from static connectivity C (A → C), the χ value (equation (5)), and whether the most local and global central nodes coincide (r (0) = r (K − 1)). Since the value of χ is a function of K, we have chosen the value of K ≤ 50 that has the largest χ for each network. Detailed descriptions of these datasets are provided in Supplementary Note 8.  (a)  (b)  (c)  Figure 6: The average χ-value for (a) ER, (b) BA, and (c) WS probabilistic networks. The horizontal axis determines the size of the network n in all cases, while the vertical axis determines the values of the corresponding parameters for each network: edge probability p for ER, growth (link attachment) rate ma for BA, and rewiring probability β for WS. After constructing the unweighted connectivity according to each algorithm (ER, BA, or WS), standard uniformly random weights are assigned to each edge, which is then converted to A using transmission method (Supplementary Note 2). For each value of n and network parameter over a coarse mesh (∼ 100 points), 100 networks are generated and the average of their χ-value is computed, which is then smoothly interpolated over a fine mesh (MATLAB csaps). communicability, we showed that the scale-heterogeneity of central nodes in a network is the main cause and correlate of TVCS advantages. If a network has several distinct central nodes and different scales, the optimal TVCS involves starting the control from the most global central nodes and gradually moving towards most local ones as the time horizon is approached. If, on the other hand, a single node acquires the highest centrality at all scales, optimal TVCS prescribes the sole control of this node over the entire horizon, leading to optimality of TICS. A striking finding that defied our expectations is the effect of network dynamics, beyond its raw connectivity structure, on TVCS. Here, we differentiated between the raw connectivity structure of a network (obtained using specific field knowledge and measure the relative strength of nodal connections) and its dynamical adjacency matrix which determines the evolution of network state over time. Depending on the nature of network state, we proposed two methods, transmission and induction, for obtaining the dynamical adjacency matrix from static connectivity. The effects of these methods, however, is noteworthy on the benefits of TVCS, even though the underlying network connectivity is the same (Table 1 and Supplementary Figure S1). While the transmission method significantly enhances the merit of TVCS, the induction method depresses it (both compared to raw connectivity). We believe the reason for the former is the additional homogeneity that the transmission method introduces among the nodes, while the latter is  due to the conversion from continuous to discrete-time dynamics, which enables long-distance connections even over small sampling times (due to the fact that interactions occur over infinitesimal intervals in continuous time). These results suggest that controllability of network dynamics is not only a function of its structural connectivity, but also greatly relies on the type of dynamics evolving over the network, an aspect that has received little attention in the existing literature and warrants future research. The focus of our discussion has so far been on single input networks where one node is controlled at a time, in order to enhance the simplicity and clarity of concepts. Nevertheless, our results have straightforward generalizations to multiple-input networks (Supplementary Note 6). If m denotes the number of control inputs, the optimal TVCS involves applying these control inputs to the m nodes with the highest centralities at the appropriate scale at every time instance (i.e., the m nodes with the largest Ri (K−1−k) have to be controlled at every time instance k). It is clear that the additional flexibility due to the additional inputs makes V larger, i.e., more networks have χ > 0. Nevertheless, this additional flexibility also makes TICS significantly more efficient. Therefore, it is not immediately clear whether this enlargement of V also entails larger χ for networks with the same size and sparsity. In fact, increasing m reduces average χ for all the classes of ER, BA, and WS networks (Supplementary Figure S2), suggesting that the additional flexibility is more advantageous for TICS than TVCS. Regardless of the number of inputs (1 or more), an im-  portant implicit assumption of our work is that this number is limited, i.e., no more than m nodes can be controlled at every time instance. This may at first seem over-conservative since TVCS requires, by its essence, the installation of actuators at all (or many) nodes of the network. Therefore, one might wonder why limit the control to only m nodes at every time instance when all the nodes are ready for actuation. The answer lies within the practical limitations of actuators. For ideal actuators, distributing the control energy over as many nodes as possible is indeed optimal. However, this is not possible in many scenarios, including when (i) actuators exhibit nonlinear deadzone behaviors, so that each one requires a sizable activation energy, (ii) actuators are controlled via communication channels with limited capacity, so that only a small number of devices can be simultaneously operated, (iii) actuators are geographically disperse so that precise coordination becomes difficult or time-consuming, and (iv) simultaneous control of proximal nodes results in actuator interference. Although the dynamics of all real networks have some degrees of nonlinearity, the analysis of linear(ized) dynamics is a standard first step in analysis of dynamical properties of complex networks [2–13]. This is mainly due to the fact that stability and controllability of linearized dynamics of a nonlinear network implies the same properties locally for the original nonlinear dynamics, making linear dynamics a powerful tool in analyzing many dynamical properties that are in general intractable for nonlinear dynamics. The local validity of linearization, however, is a main limitation of this work, particularly in networks where the change of state is significant relative to the size of the domain over which the linearization is valid. The generalization of this work to linear time-varying dynamics (namely, A(k) instead of A in equation (1)) is a warranted next step for future exploration of the role of TVCS in general nonlinear networks.  Methods Optimal Control of Linear Networks and the Reachability Ellipsoid Assume the linear network dynamics in equation (1) are controllable at time K, i.e., WK is invertible (equivalently, positive definite). While for any xf ∈ Rn , there are usually infinitely many choices of {u(k)}K−1 k=0 that take the network from x(0) = 0 to x(K) = xf , the one that has the smallest energy is given by [15, Thm 6.1] ∗  T  T K−1−k  u (k) = b(k) (A )  WK−1 xf  ,  k ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}.  It is immediate to verify that this gives the minimal energy PK−1 ∗2 T −1 k=0 u (k) = xf WK xf . Therefore, the unit-energy reach-  ability set is given by {xf ∈ Rn | xfT WK−1 xf < 1}. Since WK−1 is positive definite, this is a hyper-ellipsoid in Rn , with axes aligned with the eigenvectors of WK . Let (λi , vi ) be an eigen-pair of WK and xf = cvi . Then, xfT WK−1 xf < 1 ⇔ c 2 λ−1 < 1 ⇔ |c| < λ1/2 i i , showing that the axis lengths of this hyper-ellipsoid are given by the square roots of the eigenvalues of WK .  Gramian-based Measures of Controllability Gramian-based measures are the most common measures of network controllability. Due to the relationship between Gramian eigenvalues and minimal control energy (as outlined above), these measures quantify how large the eigenvalues of WK are in different ways. Let λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ · · · ≥ λn ≥ 0 denote the eigenvalues of WK . The most widely used Gramian-based measures are • tr(WK ) = λ1 + λ2 + · · · + λn , −1 −1 −1 • tr(WK−1 )−1 = (λ−1 1 + λ2 + · · · + λn ) ,  • det(WK ) = λ1 λ2 · · · λn , • λmin (WK ) = λn . It is clear from these relationships that all these measures, except for tr(WK ), approach 0 if λn → 0. This property, i.e., the behavior of a measure as λn → 0, is the most critical difference between tr(WK ) and the other three measures. For the rest of this discussion, let fc (·) be any of tr((·)−1 )−1 , det(·), or λmin (·). Since the network is (Kalman-) controllable if and only if λn > 0, having fc (WK ) > 0 guarantees network controllability while tr(WK ) > 0 does not. This is a major disadvantage of tr(WK ) for small networks, where controllability in all directions in state space is both achievable and desirable. As the size of the network grows, however, λn typically decays exponentially fast to zero [6], irrespective of network structure. This exponential decay of worst-case controllability is even evident in the example network of Figure 1(a) comprising of only n = 5 nodes. Computationally, this means that λn (and in turn fc (WK )) quickly drops below machine precision as n grows. In fact, for K = 10 and double-precision arithmetics, this happens for n ∼ 15, making the TVCS (equation (4)) with f = fc numerically infeasible (as it involves the comparison of fc (WK ) for different {bk }K−1 k=0 , which are all zero up to machine accuracy). Further, notice that the computational complexity of TVCS for f = fc grows as nK due to the NP-hardness of TVCS, enforcing the use of sub-optimal greedy algorithms even if machine precision was not a concern (see [12] and the references therein for details). In addition to the computational aspects of TVCS, the exponential decay of λn also has theoretical implications for the choice of f . When using f = fc , TVCS seeks to assign the control nodes {ιk }K−1 k=0 such that controllability is maintained in all directions in the state space, with special emphasis on the  hardest-to-reach directions. The use of tr(WK ), on the other hand, involves maximizing the average of Gramian eigenvalues, which usually strengthens the largest eigenvalues and spares the few smallest ones. In large networks, the latter is in general more realistic as controllability is hardly needed in all n directions of the state space. As discussed in detail in [42], this seems to be the case in the resting-state structural brain networks: this paper shows that tr(WK ) is maximized by controlling specific brain regions that have long been identified as the structural “core” or “hubs” of the cerebral cortex, while the Gramian is itself close to singular. Finally, due to the same strong dependence of fc (WK ) but not tr(WK ) on λn , we often observe that tr(WK ) is significantly less sensitive to the choice of the control nodes {ιk }K−1 k=0 , leading to orders of magnitude smaller χ than that of fc (WK ) (Figure 1(b)). This means that V is only a small subclass of networks that benefit from TVCS measured by fc . This also has a clear interpretation, since maintaining controllability in all directions in the state space requires a broader distribution of the control nodes that facilitates the reach of the control action {u(k)}K−1 k=0 to all the nodes in the network.  Optimal TVCS and TICS Consider the TVCS problem in equation (4) with f (·) = tr(·). Using the definition of the controllability Gramian (equation (2)) and the invariance property of trace under cyclic permutations, we can write tr(WK ) =  K−1 X  b(K−1−k)T (Ak )T Ak b(K−1−k).  k=0  Therefore, max tr(WK ) =  ι0 ,...,ιK−1  K−1 X k=0  max b(K−1−k)T (Ak )T Ak b(K−1−k),  (see Supplementary Note 1 for the definitions of various eigendecomposition based notions of network centrality). Recall that the out-degree centrality and 2-communicability of a node i ∈ V are defined as, respectively, diout =  n X  aji ,  j=1  Ri (1) =  n X  aji2 .  j=1  Therefore, if the network is unweighted (i.e., all the edges have the same weight), then Ri (1) ∝ diout , so 2-communicability and out-degree centrality result in the same ranking of the nodes (in particular, r (1) is the node with the largest out-degree). As edge weights become more heterogenous, these two rankings become less correlated, with 2-communicability putting more emphasis on stronger weights. A similar relation exists between ∞-communicability and left eigenvector centrality, as we show next. Let v1 , u1 ∈ Rn be the right and left Perron-Frobenius eigenvectors of A, respectively, normalized such that v1T v1 = u1T v1 = 1. Since the network is by assumption strongly connected and aperiodic, we have  1 k lim A = v1 u1T . k→∞ ρ(A) Thus for any i ∈ V ,  1 2k  1 2k  lim Ri (k) = lim (Ak )T Ak ii k→∞ ρ(A) k→∞ ρ(A) 2 = (u1 v1T v1 u1T )ii = u1,i .  Given that dividing Ri (k) by ρ(A)2k for all i does not change the 2 ranking of nodes, we define Ri (∞) = u1,i for all i. Since squaring non-negative numbers preserves their order, nodal rankings based on ∞-communicability and left eigenvector centrality are identical.  ιK−1−k  where each term b(K−1−k)T (Ak )T Ak b(K−1−k) is the ιK−1−k ’th diagonal entry of (Ak )T Ak . Therefore, the optimization in equation (4) boils down to finding the largest diagonal element of (Ak )T Ak and applying u(K−1−k) to this node. On the other hand, for the TICS problem (equation (3)), we have ! K−1 X k T k T tr(WK ) = b (A ) A b, k=0  so one has to instead find the largest diagonal entry of PK−1 k T k k=0 (A ) A , and apply all the controls inputs u(0), . . . , u(K− 1) to this same node, which is clearly sub-optimal with respect to TVCS.  2k-Communicability, Degree, and Eigenvector Centrality The notion of 2k-communicability introduced in this article has close connections with the degree and eigenvector centrality in the limit cases of k = 1 and k → ∞, respectively  Nodal dominance Among the networks where the nodes with the greatest Ri (1) and Ri (∞) coincide (i.e., r (0) = r (∞)), there is a higher chance (than in general) that any network belongs to class I. However, about half of these networks still belong to class V, meaning that there exists 1 < k < ∞ such that r (k) 6= r (0). To assess the importance of this time-variation of optimal control nodes, we define the dominance of the node r (0) (over the rest of the network) as follows. Let r 0 (0) be the index of the node with the second largest Ri (1) (largest after removing r (0)). Similarly, let r 0 (∞) be the index of the second largest Ri (∞). We define n R (0) − R 0 (0) r (0) r (0) Dominance of r (0) = min , Rr (0) (0) Rr (0) (∞) − Rr 0 (∞) (∞) o . Rr (0) (∞) A small dominance indicates that another node has very similar value Ri (0) or Ri (∞) to r (0), while a large dominance is an indication of a large gap between Rr (0) (k) and the next largest Ri (k) for both k = 0 and k → ∞.  References [1] R. E. Kalman, “Mathematical description of linear dynamical systems,” Journal of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Series A: Control, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 152–192, 1963. [2] Y. Y. Liu, J. J. Slotine, and A. L. Barabási, “Controllability of complex networks,” Nature, vol. 473, no. 7346, pp. 167–173, 2011. [3] N. J. Cowan, E. J. Chastain, D. A. Vilhena, J. S. Freudenberg, and C. T. Bergstrom, “Nodal dynamics, not degree distributions, determine the structural controllability of complex networks,” PLoS ONE, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 1–5, 06 2012. [4] A. Olshevsky, “Minimal controllability problems,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 249–258, 2014. [5] G. Yan, J. Ren, Y. Lai, C. Lai, and B. Li, “Controlling complex networks: How much energy is needed?” Physical Review Letters, vol. 108, no. 21, p. 218703, 2012.  [14] E. Nozari, F. Pasqualetti, and J. Cortés, “Time-invariant versus time-varying actuator scheduling in complex networks,” in American Control Conference, Seattle, WA, May 2017, pp. 4995–5000. [15] C. T. Chen, Linear System Theory and Design, 3rd ed. New York, NY, USA: Oxford University Press, Inc., 1998. [16] P. C. Müller and H. I. Weber, “Analysis and optimization of certain qualities of controllability and observability for linear dynamical systems,” Automatica, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 237–246, 1972. [17] C. D. Godsil and G. F. Royle, Algebraic Graph Theory, ser. Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, 2001, vol. 207. [18] M. Rubinov and O. Sporns, “Complex network measures of brain connectivity: uses and interpretations,” Neuroimage, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 1059–1069, 2010. [19] R. Bakker, T. Wachtler, and M. Diesmann, “CoCoMac 2.0 and the future of tract-tracing databases,” Frontiers in neuroinformatics, vol. 6, 2012. [20] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, “Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks,” Nature, vol. 393, pp. 440–442, 1998.  [6] F. Pasqualetti, S. Zampieri, and F. Bullo, “Controllability metrics, limitations and algorithms for complex networks,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 40–52, 2014.  [21] V. Colizza, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Vespignani, “Reaction–diffusion processes and metapopulation models in heterogeneous networks,” Nature physics, vol. 3, pp. 276–282, 2007.  [7] T. H. Summers and J. Lygeros, “Optimal sensor and actuator placement in complex dynamical networks,” in IFAC World Congress, Cape Town, South Africa, 2014, pp. 3784–3789.  [22] T. Opsahl, “Why anchorage is not (that) important: Binary ties and sample selection,” 2011, available at http: //wp.me/poFcY-Vw.  [8] T. H. Summers, F. L. Cortesi, and J. Lygeros, “On submodularity and controllability in complex dynamical networks,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 91–101, 2016. [9] V. Tzoumas, M. A. Rahimian, G. J. Pappas, and A. Jadbabaie, “Minimal actuator placement with bounds on control effort,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, vol. 3, pp. 67–78, 2016. [10] L. Zhao, W. Zhang, J. Hu, A. Abate, and C. J. Tomlin, “On the optimal solutions of the infinite-horizon linear sensor scheduling problem,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2825–2830, 2014. [11] S. T. Jawaid and S. L. Smith, “Submodularity and greedy algorithms in sensor scheduling for linear dynamical systems,” Automatica, vol. 61, pp. 282–288, 2015. [12] Y. Zhao, F. Pasqualetti, and J. Cortés, “Scheduling of control nodes for improved network controllability,” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control, Las Vegas, NV, 2016, pp. 1859–1864. [13] D. Han, J. Wu, H. Zhang, and L. Shi, “Optimal sensor scheduling for multiple linear dynamical systems,” Automatica, vol. 75, pp. 260–270, 2017.  [23] R. W. Eash, K. S. Chon, Y. J. Lee, and D. E. Boyce, “Equilibrium traffic assignment on an aggregated highway network for sketch planning,” Transportation Research Record, vol. 994, pp. 30–37, 1983. [24] D. E. Boyce, K. S. Chon, M. E. Ferris, Y. J. Lee, K.-T. Lin, and R. W. Eash, “Implementation and evaluation of combined models of urban travel and location on a sketch planning network,” Chicago Area Transportation Study, pp. xii+169, 1985. [25] H. Kim, J. E. Shim, J. Shin, and I. Lee, “Ecolinet: a database of cofunctional gene network for Escherichia coli,” Database, vol. 2015, 2015. [26] D. Bu, Y. Zhao, L. Cai, H. Xue, X. Zhu, H. Lu, J. Zhang, S. Sun, L. Ling, N. Zhang, G. Li, and R. Chen, “Topological structure analysis of the protein–protein interaction network in budding yeast,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 2443–2450, 2003. [27] U. Stelzl, U. Worm, M. Lalowski, C. Haenig, F. H. Brembeck, H. Goehler, M. Stroedicke, M. Zenkner, A. Schoenherr, S. Koeppen, J. Timm, S. Mintzlaff, C. Abraham, N. Bock, S. Kietzmann, A. Goedde, E. Toksz, A. Droege, S. Krobitsch, B. Korn, W. Birchmeier, H. Lehrach, and E. E. Wanker, “A human protein-protein interaction network: A resource for annotating the proteome,” Cell, vol. 122, pp. 957–968, 2005.  [28] R. M. Ewing, P. Chu, F. Elisma, H. Li, P. Taylor, S. Climie, L. McBroom-Cerajewski, M. D. Robinson, L. O’Connor, M. Li, R. Taylor, M. Dharsee, Y. Ho, A. Heilbut, L. Moore, S. Zhang, O. Ornatsky, Y. V. Bukhman, M. Ethier, Y. Sheng, J. Vasilescu, M. Abu-Farha, J. P. P. Lambert, H. S. Duewel, I. I. Stewart, B. Kuehl, K. Hogue, K. Colwill, K. Gladwish, B. Muskat, R. Kinach, S. L. L. Adams, M. F. Moran, G. B. Morin, T. Topaloglou, and D. Figeys, “Large-scale mapping of human protein-protein interactions by mass spectrometry,” Molecular Systems Biology, vol. 3, 2007. [29] J. Rual, K. Venkatesan, T. Hao, T. Hirozane-Kishikawa, A. Dricot, N. Li, G. F. Berriz, F. D. Gibbons, M. Dreze, and N. Ayivi-Guedehoussou, “Towards a proteome-scale map of the human protein-protein interaction network,” Nature, no. 7062, pp. 1173–1178, 2005. [30] R. E. Ulanowicz, J. J. Heymans, and M. S. Egnotovich, “Network analysis of trophic dynamics in South Florida ecosystems, FY 99: The graminoid ecosystem,” Annual Report to the United States Geological Service Biological Resources Division Ref. No.[UMCES] CBL 00-0176, Chesapeake Biological Laboratory, University of Maryland, 2000. [31] N. D. Martinez, J. J. Magnuson, T. Kratz, and M. Sierszen, “Artifacts or attributes? effects of resolution on the Little Rock Lake food web,” Ecological Monographs, vol. 61, pp. 367–392, 1991. [32] J. Leskovec and J. J. Mcauley, “Learning to discover social circles in ego networks,” in Advances in neural information processing systems (NIPS), 2012, pp. 539–547. [33] H. Yin, A. R. Benson, J. Leskovec, and D. F. Gleich, “Local higher-order graph clustering,” in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 2017, pp. 555– 564. [34] J. Leskovec, J. Kleinberg, and C. Faloutsos, “Graph evolution: Densification and shrinking diameters,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 1, no. 1, 2007. [35] A. Davis, B. B. Gardner, and M. R. Gardner, Deep South. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1941. [36] T. Opsahl and P. Panzarasa, “Clustering in weighted networks,” Social Networks, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 155–163, 2009. [37] T. Opsahl, “Triadic closure in two-mode networks: Redefining the global and local clustering coefficients,” Social Networks, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 159–167, 2013. [38] S. C. Freeman and L. C. Freeman, The Networkers Network: A Study of the Impact of a New Communications Medium on Sociometric Structure, ser. Social sciences research reports. School of Social Sciences University of Calif., 1979. [39] D. Lusseau, K. Schneider, O. J. Boisseau, P. Haase, E. Slooten, and S. M. Dawson, “The bottlenose dolphin  community of Doubtful Sound features a large proportion of long-lasting associations,” Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, vol. 54, pp. 396–405, 2003. [40] J. Coleman, E. Katz, and H. Menzel, “The diffusion of an innovation among physicians,” Sociometry, pp. 253–270, 1957. [41] R. L. Cross and A. Parker, The Hidden Power of Social Networks: Understanding how Work Really Gets Done in Organizations. Harvard Business School Press, 2004. [42] S. Gu, F. Pasqualetti, M. Cieslak, Q. K. Telesford, A. B. Yu, A. E. Kahn, J. D. Medaglia, J. M. Vettel, M. B. Miller, S. T. Grafton, and D. S. Bassett, “Controllability of structural brain networks,” Nature Communications, vol. 6, pp. 8414 EP–, 10 2015.  Author Contributions All authors designed and did the research, and wrote the paper. E.N. gathered and analyzed the data of real-world networks.  Additional Information Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.

---
This paper, "", authored by Unknown, was published in the categories 3. The research contributes to the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
